AN ANSWER TO MASTER IVELLES CHALLENGE, BY DOCTOR HARDING.

1. Cor. 14. An a vobis verbum Dei processit? aut in vos solos peruenit?

Has the word of God proceeded from you? Or has it come among you only?

john bogard's device? COR RECTVM INQVIRIT SCIENTIAM


Imprinted in Louaine by John Bogard at the Golden Bible, with privilege. Anno.
1564.

PRIVILEGIVM.
CAutum est Regiae May. Priuilegio, ne quis sex proximis annis, praeter
Ioannem Bogardum Typographu^ Louaniensem iuratum, in his hereditarijs Ditionis
Regiae terris, imprimat, aut alibi impressam distrahat, Responsionem ad
Articulos Ioannis Iuelli authore Thoma Hardingo Doctore Theologo, in catholicae
fidei defensionem Anglica lingua conscriptam, sub poena in priuilegio co^tenta.

Datum Bruxellae. 15. September. Anno. 1563. Subsig. FacuWez.

The table of the Articles here treated, and of the chief points in the same
touched, is put in the end, after the Exhortation to M. Iuell.

TO THE READER.
Where as Horace says, they that run over the sea, change the air, not
the mind: it is so reader, that I passing over the sea out of England in to
Brabant, have in some part changed also my mind. For where as being there, I
minded to send this treatise but to one friend, who required it for his private
instruction, and never to set any thing abroad: now being arrived here in
Louaine, I have thought good, by putting it in printe, to make it common to
many. Yet to say the trowth, hereto I have been prickte more by zelouse
persuasions of others, then induced by mine own lyking. For though duty
require, be it with shame, or be it with fame, 2. Cor. 6.
to employe all endeavor to the defense of the Catholic faith, in these most
perilouse times much impugned: yet partly by a certain cowardly judgment,
and specially by natural inclination, I have ever lyked more that old
counsel uttered by the Greeks in two words, (...).
which advises a man so to live secretly, as it be not known, he has lived.
Wherefore as this labor in that respect deserves less thank, so for my
part it ought less to be blamed. If ought be fownde amysse, the blame thereof
rightly divided between my friends and me, the greater portion shall redownde to
them, the lesser to me, as on whom the spotte of vnskille only shall cleave,
but the note of vndiscretion shall remain to them. For as the defectes be mine
and none others, so oversight of setting forth that, which was of less
sufficiency, is to be imputed to them, not to me. How so ever it be, the
meaning of us both is only this Christen reader, hereby to minister unto thee,
matter of comfort in these sorrowful, of stay in these wavering, of
understanding the truth, in these erroneouse times: withal, to call him back,
who in denying these articles, has ouerrunne him self. Wherein I am not all
together void of hope. Our lord grant, the spirit of heresy, pride,
stoutenes of heart in gainesaying, estimation of him self, and regard of this
world, stop not from him the holy ghostes working. Would god he may weigh
this my doing so indifferently, as my meaning toward him is right, holesom,
and friendly. But in case that deep woonde may not be cured with such salve,
yet my trust is, it shall do thee good, reader, who art either yet hole, or
not so desperately woonded which if it do, I shall think my labor well
requitted, and my self to have acheued that reward, which I sought.

Now this much I have thought good here to warn the of, that where as at the
first, I appointed this to my private friend only, and not to all in common,
(though in sundry places I follow the manner of such as mind to publish their
writings) I have so both ordered the matter and tempered the style, as I judge
it might have been liked of my friend at home, and doubt whether it may bear
the light abroad. I see men's stomakes of our time to be very delicate and
diverse. Some require sweet iunkettes, some sower and sharp sawces, some
esteem the curiosity of cookerye, more then the holesomnes of viandes, some
can like no dishe, be it never so well dighte. In this diversity no man can
please all. Who so ever seeks it, shall find him self deceived. I wene the
best way is, if a man herein mind to do ought, to make his provision of the
things only, which be wholesome. So shall he displease many, hurt none, and
please all the good. Who so ever in doing this directs his whole purpose and
endeavor to this end, that he may profit and help all: in my judgment, he
does the duty of an honest and a good man. Verily in this treatise this has been mine only purpose, and the mean to bring the same to effect, has been
such, as whereby I studied to profit holesomely, not to please delicately. How
much good I have performed, I know not, my conscience (which is enough) bears
me witness of good will. What the Apostles have planted, in this great
barraynesse and drowth of faith, I have desired again to water. God give
encreace.

If the multitude of allegations brought for confirmation of some these
Articles, shall seem tediouse, no merueile. I should mislike the same in an other
my self. I grant herein I have not always kept due comlynes. For symply to
say, what I think (having leave to return to my former metaphore) soothly
in some courses, I have over charged the board with disshes. Merueile not, I
have done that, I disco^mend my self, to avoid a more reproufe in greater
respect, I have wittingly done a thing, in some degree reproueable. Neither
think I greatly to offend, if in this time of spiritual famine, I follow the
wont of some feastemakers. who of their neighbors twited with nyggardnes, to
show their largess and bounty, feast the^ with lauishe. The adversary, as
here thou may see* has not spared to irke us with reproach of penury, of
scarcity, of lacked mean of proufes for maintenance of some good part of
our religion. In this case to me it seemed a part of just defense, to utter
some good store. And the nyggardes feast by old proverb is well commended,
thou know pardie. Neither yet have we empted all our spence, as hereafter it
shall appear, if need require.

If some do not allow this consideration, who so ever the same shall blame,
him here co^cluding, shortly I answer with Alexander king of Macedons. who to
Leonidas one of his Mynnions fynding fault with spending much frankencense in
sacrifices, wrote thus in few. Frankencense and myrre to the we have sent
plenty, that now to the Gods thou be no more a nyggard. Fare well, at
Louaine: 14. of June: 1563.

Thom. Harding.

A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN PLACES OVT OF MASTER IVELLES BOOK CONTAINING HIS
SERMON, HIS answers and Replies to Doctor Cole: in which he makes his
Challenge, avaunteth himself, hoasteth of the assurance of his doctrine,
pretends and lowdely affirms, the Catholics to have nothing for their
part, over peartly, as to sober wits it seems, egging and provoking them,
to bring somewhat in their defense.
O Merciful God, Iuell. In the sermon folio. 43.
who would think there could be so much vvilfulnes in the heart of man? O
Gregory, O Augustine, O Hierome, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionise, O Anacletus,
O Sistus, O Paul, O Christ. If we be deceived herein, ye are they that have
deceived us. You have taught us those schisms and divisions, ye have taught us
these heresies. Thus ye ordered the holy communion in your time, the same we
received at your hand, and have faithfully delivered it unto the people. And
that ye may the more meruel at the vvilfulnes of such men, they stand this
day against so many old fathers, so many Doctoures, so many examples of the
primitive church, so manifest and so plain words of the holy scriptures and
yet have they here in, not one father, not one Doctor, not one allowed
example of the primitive church, to make for them. And when I say, not one,
I speak not this in vehemency of spirit, or heat of talk, but even, as
before God, by the way of simplicity and truth: least any of you should
happily be deceived, and think, there is more weight in the other side, then
in conclusion there shall be fovvnde. And therefore once again I say, of all
the words of the holy scriptures, of all the examples of the primitive
church, of all the old fathers, of all the ancient Doctoures in these causes
they have not one.

Here the matter it self, that I have now in hand, puts me in remembrance
of certain things that I uttered unto you, to the same purpose, at my last
being in this place. I remember I laid o^^ then here before you, a number of
things that are n^vv in controuer^^e where unto our adversaries vvil not
yield. And I said perhaps boldly, as it might then seem to sum man, but as I
my self, and the learned of our adversaries the^ selves do well know,
syncerely and truly: that none of all them, that this day stand against us,
are hable or shall ever be hable to prove against us, any one of all these
points, either by the scriptures or by example of the primitive church, or by
the old ^o^^^^res, or by the ancient general councel^^ Syn^^ that time, it
has been reported in places, that I spoke then more, then I was hable to
justify and make good. How be it, these reports were only made in corners,
and therefore ought the less to trouble me. B^^ if my sayings had been so
vveake, and might so easily have than reproved, I marvel that the pa^ie^
never come to the light, to take the advantage. For my promise was, and that
openly, here before you all: that if any man were able to prove the contrary,
I would yield and subscribe to him, and he should depart with the victorie^
Loath I am to trouble you, with rehersall of such things, as I have spoken
before, and yet because the case so requires, I shall desire you, that have all
ready heard me, to bear the more with me in this behalf. Better it were, to
trouble your ears with twice hearing of one thing, then to betray the truth
of God. The words that I then spoke, as near as I can call them to mind,
were these.

If any learned man of all our adversaries, or if all the learned men that be
alive, be hable to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old catholic
Doctor or father, out of any old general council, out of the holy
scriptures of God, or any one example of the primitive church: whereby it may
be clearly and plainly proved*































If any man a live were hable to prove any of these Articles, by any one
clear or plain clause or sentence, either of the scriptures, or of the old
doctoures, or of any old general council, or by any example of the primitive
church: I promised then, that I would give over and subscribe unto him.

These words or the very like I remember I spoke here openly before you all.
And these be the things, that sum men say I have spoken, and can not
justify.

But I for my part, will not only not call in any thing, that I then said,
(being well assuted of the truth there in) but also will lay more matter to
the same. That if they that seek occasion have any thing to the contrary, they
may have the larger scope to replye against me.

VVherefor beside all that I have said already, I vvil say farther, and yet
nothing so much as might be said.

If any one of all our adversaries be hable clearly and plainly to prove by
such authority of the scriptures, the old Doctoures and councelles, as I
said before,









opere operato, that is, even for that it is said and done, is hable to
remove any part of our sin:







Hoe est corpus meum. This word Hoc, points not the bread, but indiuiduum
vagum, as sum of them say:







These be the highest mysteries and greatest keys of their Religion, and with
out them, their doctrine can never be maintained and stand upright. If any one
of all our adversaries be hable to avouch any one of all these articles, by
any such sufficient authority of scriptures, doctoures or councelles, as I
have required: as I said before, so say I now again, I am content to yield
unto him and to subscribe.

But I am well assured, they shall never be hable truly to allege one
sentence. And because I know it, therefore I speak it, lest ye happily should
be deceived.

They that have auaunted them selves of doctoures and councelles and
continuance of time in any of these points, Fol. 51.
when they shall be called to trial, to show their proufes: they shall open
their hands, and find nothing. I speak not this of arrogancy (thou lord
know it best, that know all things) But for as much as it is gods
cause, and the truth of God: I should do God great injury, if I should concele
it.

THE WORDS OF MASTER THE SAME CHALLENGE AND offer and imputing to the
catholics of vnhablenes to defend their doctrine, uttered by M. Iuell in other
places of his book, as follows.
MY offer was this (he means in the sermon which he made in the court) that
if any of all those things that I then rehearsed, In the first answer to D.
Coals letter. fol. 4.
could be proved of your side by any sufficient authority other of the
scriptures, or of the ancient Councelles, or by any one allowed example of
the primitive church, that then I would be content to yield unto you. I say
you have none of all those helps, nor scriptures, nor councelles, nor doctors,
another any other antiquity, and this is the negative. Now it stands you
upon, to prove but one affirmative to the contrary, and so to require my
promise. The Articles that I said could not be proved of your part, were
these. That it can not appear by any authority other of the old doctors, or
of the ancient Councelles, that there was any private Mass in the whole
church of Christ at that time: Or that there was then any communion
ministered, etc. the articles rekened, there it follows.

And if any one of all these articles can be sufficiently proved by such
atuhoritie as I have said, Fol. 5.
and as ye have borne the people in hand ye can prove them by: I am well
content to stand to my promise.

After in the first answer to D. C. fol. 6. In the end there. fol. 7.
I thought it best to make my entree with such things, as where in I was
well assured, ye should be able to find not so much as any color at all.

But to conclude, as I begane, I answer, that in these Articles I hold only
the negative, and therefore I look how you vvil be able to affirm the
contrary, and that, as I said before, by sufficient authority, which if ye
do not, you shall cause me the more to be resolved, and others to stand the
more in doubt of the rest of your learning.

In my Sermon at poules and else where, I required you to bring forth on your
part either sum scripture, sn the second answer to D. C. fo. 13
or sum old doctor, or sum ancient council, or else some allow example of
the primiue churche^. For these are good grovvndes to buyld upon. And I would
have marueiled that you brought nothing all this while, saving that I knevv ye
had nothing to bring.

As truly as god is god, if ye would have vouchesaued to follow either the
scriptures, or the ancient doctors, In the 2. answer. fol. 15.
and councelles, ye would never have restored again the Supremacy of Rome,
after it was once abolished, or the private Mass, or the communion under one
kind etc. Now if ye think ye have vvrong, There fol. 17.
show your evidence out of the doctors, the councels or scriptures, that you
may have yout right and reentre. I require you to no great pain. one good
sentence shall be sufficient.

You would have your private Mass, the bishop of Romes supremacy, the comme^
prayer in an unknown tongue: Fol. 18.
and for defense of the same ye have made no small a do. Me thinks it
reasonable ye bring sum one authority beside your own, to auouche the same
with all. Ye have made the unlearned people believe, ye had all the doctors,
all the councelles, and fiften hundred years on your side. For your credites
sake, let not all these great vauntes comme to naught.

Ye desire ye may not be put of, Fol. 18.
but that your suite may be considered. And yet this half year long, I have
desired of you, and of your brethren but one sentence, and still I know not
how, I am cast of, and can get nothing at your hands.

You call for the special proufes of our doctrine, Fol. 21.
which would require a whole book, where as if you of your part could
vouchesafe to bring but two lines, the whole matter were concluded. We only
tell the people, as our devvtie is, that you vvithstand the manifest truth, and
yet have neither doctor, nor council, nor scripture for you, and that ye have
shevved such extremity, as the like has not be^ seen, and now ca^ give no
rekening why. Or if ye can, let it appear.

Fol. 23.
You are bovvnde ye say, and may not dispute, etc. But I would vvish the
queen's Majesty would not only set you at liberty in that behalf, but also
command you to shevve your grovvndes. Where as you say, you would have the
sainges of both parties weighed by the balance of the old doctors, ye see,
that is our only request, and that in the matters ye write of, I desire eue^
so to be tried. But why throvv you away these balance, and being so
earnestly required, why be ye so loath to show forth but one old doctor of
your side? ye make me believe ye would not have the matter comme to trial. etc.

26
What think ye is there now judged of you, that being so long time required,
yet can not be vvonne to bring one sentence in your own defense?

Fol. 26.
I protest before God, bring me but one sufficient authority in the matters I
have required, and afterward I vvil gentilly and quietly confer with you
farther at your pleasure. Wherefore for as much as it is gods cause, if ye
mean simply, deal simply, betraie not your right, if ye may save it by the
speaking of one word.

The people must needs muse some what at your silence, and mistrust your
doctrine, if it shall appear to have no grovvnde, neither of the old
councelles, nor of the doctors, nor of the scripture, nor any alovved example
of the primitive church, to stand upon. and so fiften hundred years, and the
consent of antiquity and generality, that ye have so long and so much talkte
of, shall comme to nothing. For think not that any wise man will be so much
your friend, that in so weighty matters, will be satisfied with your silence.

Here I leave, putting you, In the end of the 2. answer to D. C. fol. 27.
eftsoon gently in remembrance, that being so oste^ and so openly desired to
show forth one doctor, or Council etc. in the matters a fore mentioned, yet
hitherto ye have brought nothing: and that if ye stand so still, it must needs
be thought, ye do it conscientia imbecillitatis, for that there was nothing
to be brought.

You say we lack stuff to prove our purpose. In the reply to D. Coals last
letter. fol. 43.
O would to God your stuff and ours might be laid together, then should it
sone appear, how true it is that ye say, and how faithfully ye have used
the people of God.

Me thinks both reason and humanity would, Fol. 44.
ye should have ansvvered me sumvvhat, specially being so often and so openly
required, at the least you should have alleged Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Hierome. etc. Whereas a man has nothing to say, it is good reason, he keep
silence, as you do.

You know that the matters that lie in question betvve^ us, have been taught,
as we now teach them, Fol. 53.
both by Christ him self, and by his Apostles, and by the old doctors, and
by the ancient general Councelles: and that you having none of these or like
authorities: have set up a religion of your own, and built it only upon your
self. Therefore I may justly and truly ^^^nclude, that you now teach and of
long time have taught the people, touching the Mass, the Supremacy, the
commen prayers, etc. is naught: For neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the
old Doctors, Tertulliane, Cypriane, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S.
Chrisostom etc. ever taught the people, so as you have taught them. Not
vvithstanding your great vavvntes that ye have made, ye see now ye are
discomfyted, Fol. 62.
ye see the field is almost lost, where ar now your crakes of doctors, and
councelles? Why stamp ye not your books why comme ye not forth with your
evidence? Now ye stand in need of it, now it will serve and take place, if
ye have any.

Fol. 65.
As I have offered you oftentimes, bring ye but two lines of your side, and the
field is yours.

Fol. 110.
Hilarious says unto the Arians, cedo aliud Euangelium, show me some other
gospel, for this that ye bring, helps you not. Even so will I say to you,
Cedo alios doctores, show me some other doctors, for these that ye bring, are
not worthy the hearing. I hoped ye would have comme in with some fressher
band. It must needs be some miserable cause, that can find no better patrones
to cleave unto. I know it was not for lack of good will of your part, ye
would have brought other doctors, if ye could have fovvnd them.

Fol. 112.
O Master Doctor, deal simply in Gods causes, and say ye have doctors, when
ye have them in deed: and when ye have them not, never lay the fault (of not
alleging them to the defense of your doctrine) in your recognisaunce.

Fol. 114.
But alas small rhetorike would suffice, to show how little ye have of your
side to allege for your self.

In the conclusion of the replies to D. Cole fol. 129.
Here once again I conclude as before, putting you in remembrance, that this
long I have desired you to bring forth some su^^^^ent authority, for prouf of
your party, and yet hitherto can obtain nothing. Which thing I must needs
now pronounce simply and plainly, because it is true, with out if, or and,
ye do conscientia imbecillitatis, because as ye know, there is nothing to be
brought.

THE PREFACE TO Master Iuell.
THIS heap of Articles, which you have laid to gether: Master Iuell, the
greater it ryseth, the less is your advantage. For whereas you require but one
sentence for the auouching of any one of them all: the more grows your
number, the more enlarged is the liberty of the answerer. It seems you have
conceived a great confidence in the cause, and that your adversaries (so it
likes you to term us whom God has so stayde with his grace as we can not
bear you company in departing from his catholic church) have little or
nothing to say in their defense. Else what should move you both in your printed
Sermon, and also in your answers and Replies to Doctor Cole, to show such
courage, to use such amplification of words, so often and with such
vehemency, to provoke us to encounter, and as it were at the blast of a
trumpet, to make your challenge? What, feared you reproach of dastardnes, if you
had called forth no more but one learned man of all your adversaries, and
therefore to show your hardynesse, added more weight of words to your
proclamation, and challenged all the learned men that be a live? In the sermon
fol. 46


Among cowardes perhaps it serves the turn some times, to look fiercely,
to speak terribly, to shake the weapon furiously, to threaten bloudily, no
less then cutting, hewing and killing but among such we see many times sore
frayes foughten, and never a blow given. With such bragges of him self, and
reproach of all others, Homer the wisest of all poets sets forth Thersites,
for the fondest man of all the Grecians, that came to Troy. Goliath the giaunt
so stout as he was, made offer to fight but with one Israelite. 1. Reg. 17.
Eligite ex vobis vitu^, and descendat ad singular certamen.
Choose out a man amongst you (quoth he) and let him come and fight with me man
for man. But you Master Iuell in this quarrel, ask not the combat of one
catholic man only, but as one suer of the victory before proof of fight, cast
your glove as it were, and with strange defyaunce, provoke all learned me^
that be a live to camp with you.

Now if this matter shall so fall out, as thouerthrowe appear evidently on our
side, and the victory on youres, that is to wit, if we can not bring one
sentence for proof of any one of all these articles, out of the scriptures,
ancient councelles, doctors, or example of the primitive church: yet wise
and grave men, I suppose, would have lyked you better, if you had meekely and
soberly reported the truth. For truth as it is plain and simple, so it needs
not to be set forth with brag of high words. You remember that old saying of
the wise, Simplex veritatis oration. the vtteraunce of truth ought to be simple.

But if the victory (loath I am to use this insole^t word were it not to follow
the metaphore which your challenge has driven me unto) fall to our side, that
is to say, if we shall be hable to allege some one sufficient sentence for
proof of some one of all these articles: yea if we shall be hable to allege
diverse and sundry sentences places and authorities for confirmation of sundry
these articles: In this case I wene, you shall hardly escape among sober me^,
the reproach of rashness, among humble men, of presumption, among godly men, of
wickedness. Of rashness, for what can be more rash, then in so weighty matters,
as some of these articles import, so boldly to affirm that, the contrary where
of may sufficiently be proved? of presumption, for what can be more
presumptuouse, then in matters by you not thoroughly seen and weighed, to
impute ignorance and unableness to auouche things approved and received by the
church, to all learned men a live? Of wickedness, for what is more wicked, then
(the former case standing) so to remove the hearts of the people from devotion,
so to bring the church in to contempt, so to set at naught the ordinances of
the holy ghost?

As you follow the new and strange doctrine of Theodorus Beza and Peter Martyr,
the prolocutours of the Caluinian churches in France, whose scolar a long time
you have been: so you diuerte far from that prudencie, sobriety, and
modesty, which in their owtward demeanor, they showed in that solemn and
honorable assemble at Poyssi in September 1561. as it appareth by the oration
which Beza pronunced there in the name of all the Caluinistes. In which oration
with humble and often protestation, they submit them selves, if cause shall
so appear, to better advise and judgment, as thoug they might be deceived,
uttering these and the like words in sundry places. If we be deceived, we
would be glad to know it.] Item, [For the small measure of knowledge that it
has pleased God to impart unto us, it seems that this transubstantiation,
etc.] Item, [if we be not deceived,] Item, [In case we be deciued, we would be
glad to understand it, etc.] But you Master Iuell, as though you had readde
all that ever has been written in these points, and had borne a way all that
euer-hath ben taught, and were ignorant of nothing touching the same: and none
other beside you had seen ought, and were hable to say ought: say meruelouse
confidently, and that in the most honorable and frequent audience of this
Realm, that you are well assured, that none of your learned adversaries, no
nore all the learned men a live, shall ever be hable to allege one sentence
for any one of these Articles, In the sermon fol. 49
and that because you know it, therefore you speak it, least happily your
hearers should be deceived.

Likewise in your answer to Doctor Coals first letter, you say, speaking of
these Articles, you thought it best to make your enter in your preaching with
such things, Fol 6.
as where in you were well assured, we should be hable to find not so much as
any color or shadow of Doctors at all. Where in you withdraw your self from
plainness, so much as you do in your presumptuouse challenge, from modesty.
For being demanded of D. Cole, why you treat not rather of matters of more
importance, then these Articles be of, which yet lie in question betwixt the
church of Rome and the protestants, as of the presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament, of Justification, of the value of good works, of the
sacrifice of the Mass, and of such other: not unwitting how much and how
sufficient authority may be brought against your side for proof of the
catholic doctrine there in, least all the world should espy your weakness in
these points, you answer, that you thought it better to begin with smaller
matters, as these Articles be, because you assure your self, we have nothing
for confirmation of them. Thus craftily you shifte your hands of those greater
points, wherein you know scriptures, councelles, doctors, and examples of the
primitive church to be of our side, and cast unto us, as a bone to gnaw upon,
this number of Articles of less weight, a few excepted, to occupy us
withal. Which be partly concerning order, rather then doctrine, and partly
sequeles of former and confessed truths, rather the^ principal points of
faith, in th'exact treaty of which, the ancient doctors of the church have
not employed their study and travail of writing. For many of the^ being
sequeles depending of a confessed truth, they thought it needelesse to treat
of them. For as much as a principal point of truth granted, the granting of
all the necessary sequeles is employed. As in a chain, Epist. ad Gregoriu^
fratrem.
(which comparison S. Basile makes in the like case) he that draws the first
lynk after him, draws also the last lynke. And for this cause in deed the
less number and weight of such ancient auctorities may be brought for
th'auouching of the^. And yet the things in them expressed be not justly
improued by any clause or sentence, you have said or uttered hitherto.

Verily M. Iuell if you had not be^ more desyrouse to deface the catholic
church, then to set forth the truth: you would never have rehearced such a
long roll of articles, which for the more part be of less importance: whereby
you go about to discredit us, and to make the world believe, we have nothing to
show for us in a great part of our Religion, and that you be to be taken for
zelouse men, right reformers of the church, and undoubted restorers of the
gospel. As touching the other weighty points, whereupon almost only your
scoolemaisters of Germany, Suityerland and Geneua, both in their preachinges
and also in their writings treat, you will not yet adventure the trial of
them with making your match with learned men, and in the mean time set them
forth by sermons busyly among the unlearned and simple people, until such
time, as you have won your purpose in these smaller matters.

Thus you seem to follow a slight, which king Alexander the great used, to
further the course of his conquestes. In vita Alexa^dri Magni.
Who as Plutarche writes, where as he thought verily, that he was begoten of a
God, showed him self toward the Barbarians very haute and proud. Yet among the
Greeks he used a more modesty, and spoke little of his godhead. For they being
rude and of small understanding, he doubted not but by ways and means to
bring them to such believe. But the Greeks, whom he knew to be men of excellent
knowledge and learning, of them he judged, as it proved in deed, the matter
should be more subtyly skanned, then symply believed. Right so you M. Iuell
persuading your self to have singular skille in divinity, among the simple
people you utter the weighty and high points of Christen Religion that be now
in question, in such wise, as the protestants have written of them, and with
vehement affirmations, with misconstrewed and falsefied allegations, and with
pitiful exclamations, you lead the seely souls in to dangerouse errors. But
in your writings, which you knew should pass the judgment of learned men, the
points of greater importance you coouer with silence, and utter a number of
Articles of less weight for the more part in respect of the chief, though for
good cause received and used in the church, (I speak of them as they be
rightly taken) denying them all, and requyring the catholics your adversaries
to prove them. Where in you show your self not to fear controlment of the
ignorant, but to mistrust the trial of the learned.

Likewise in the holy Canon of the Mass you find faults, where none are, as
it may easily be proved, thinking for defense thereof, we had little to say.
But of the prayer there made to the virgin Mary, the Apostles and martyrs, of
the suffrages for the departed in the faith of Christ: in your whole book you
utter never a word, though you mislike it, and otherwheres speak against it,
as all your sect does. And why? Forsooth because you know right well, we have
store of good authorities for proof thereof. And by your will, you will not
yet strive with us in matters, wherein by the judgment of the people, to whom
you lene much, you should seem ouermatched. And therefore you search out small
matters in comparison of the greatest, such as the old doctors have passed
over with silence, and for that can not of our part by aunciet authorities be
so amply affirmed, at least way as you think your self assured. And in this
respect you lay on lode of blame, contumelies and sclaunders upon the
church, for mainteining of them. Where in the mark you shoot at, every man
perceives what it is even that when you have brought the catholic church in
to contempt, and borne the people in hand, we are not hable to prove a number
of things by you denied, for lack of such proufes, as your self shall allow,
in certain particular points of small force (which falsely you report to be
the greatest keys and highest mysteries of our Religion): then triumphing
against us and despysing the ancient and catholic Religion in general, you
may set up a new Religion of your own forging; a new church of your own
framing, a new gospel of your own devise. Well may I further say, cathedram
contra cathedram, but not I trow, as S. Augustine terms such state of
Religion; altar contra alture. For what so ever ye set up, if ye set up any
thing at all, and pull not down only all manner of aulters must needs be
thrown down.

Now being sorye to see the catholic church by your stout and bold bragges
thus attempted to be defaced, the truth in manner outfaced, and the seely people
so dangerously seduced: Imbarred of liberty to preach by Recognisance, and
yet not so discharged in conscience of duty apperteyning to my calling: I have
now thought good to set forth this treatise in writing, whereby to my power to
save the honor of the church, which is our common mother, to defend the truth
in whose quarrel none adventure is to be refused, and to reduce the people from
deceit and error, which by order of charity we are bownde unto.

For the doing here of if you be offended, the conscience of good and right
meaning shall sone ease me of that grief. Verily mine intent was not to hurt
you, but to profit you, by declaring unto you that truth, which you seem
hitherto not to have known. For if you had, I wene you would not have preached
and written, as you have. Your years, your manner of study, and the party you
have joined your self unto considered, it may well be thought you have not
thoroughly seen, how much may be said in defense of the catholic doctrine
touching these Articles, which you have denied.

For the manner of doing, I am verily persuaded, that neither you, nor any of
your fellows, which of all these new sects by your side professed, so ever he
lyketh best, shall have just cause to complain. The whole treatise is written
with out choler, with out gaull, with out spite. What I mislike in you, and in
them of your side, I could not allow in my self. Where truths cause is
treated, human affections, where by the clear light is dymmed, ought to be
laid a part. Glykes, nyppes and scoffs, bittes, cuttes and gyrdes, become not
that stage. Yet if I shall perhaps sometimes seem to scarre or lawnce a
festered bunche, that deserves to be cut of, you will remember I doubt not,
how the meekest and the holiest of the ancient fathers in reproving heretics,
oftery m^^ have showed them selves zelouse, earnest, eager, seue^^, sharp and
bitter.

Whose taste so ever lo^geth most after such sauce, in this treatise he shall
find small lyking. For it is occupied more about the fortifying of the
Articles denied, then about disprouing of the person, who has denied them.
Wherein I have some deal followed the latter part of Chilo the wise man his
counsel, which I allow better then the first. Ama, tanquam osurus, oderis,
tanquam amaturus. love, as to hate, hate, as to love.

If any man that shall read this, be of that humor, as shall mislike it, as
being cold, low, flat and dull, and require rather such verder of writing,
as is hot, lofty, sharp and quycke, which pleases best the taste of our time:
understand he, that before I intended to put this forth in printe, I thus
tempered my style for these consyderations. First, where as a certain exercise
of a learned man of five or six sheets of paper spredde abroad in the Realm
in defense of some of these Articles by M. Iuell denied, was fathered upon me,
which in deed I never made sentence of, and therefore a storm imminent was
mystrusted: that by changing the hew, which many know me by, that know me
familiarly, in case it should come to the hands of many, as it was likely, I
might escape the danger of being charged with it, and never the less satisfye
my friends request, and in some part also my conscience, and do good.
Secondly, that I thought meek, sober and cold demeanor of writing to be most
sitting for such kind of argument.

Thirdly and specially that my heart served me not to deal with M. Iuell mine
old acquainted, fellow and countreyman other wise, then swetly, gentilly and
courteouslye. And in deed here I protest, that I love M. Iuell, and detest his
heresies.

And now Sir, as I love you, right so I am desyrouse of your soul health, which
you seem either to forgete, or to procure by a wrong way. Bethink your self I
pray you, whether the way you walk in, be not the same, and you the man,
that Solomon moved with the spirit of God, speaks of. There is a way,
Prouer. 26
that seems to a man right, and the end of it leads to damnation. Certain
it is, you are deceived, and maineteine untruth, as it shall appear by this
treatise. Here in you sustain the evil of human infirmity. Mary, when
deceit is by plain truth detected, then to dwell and continewe in error,
that proceeds not of human weakness, but of deuilish obstinacy. But you M.
Iuell as many men think, and I trust, are not yet swallowed up of that gulf.
Feign would I do you good, if I wist how. I fear me your sore is putrifyed so
far, as oil and lenitiues will not serve now, but rather vinegre and
corosiues. You remember I doubt not, what Cicero says. that medicine to
profit most, which causes the greatest smarte, And what Solomon also, Prouer.
27
The woondes of a friend, to be better then the kisses of an enemy.

The best salve any man can minister unto you, verily I think, is, to exhort
you to humility, and to denying of your self. For if you could be brought to
humble your self, and to deny your self, doubtless you should see in your
self, that you see not. If you were humble, you would not be so pufte up, and
swell against your mother the church, you would not contemn her, whom you
ought to honor. Genes. 9.
You would not rejoice like the accursed Cham, to show her vnsemelynesse, if by
corruption of times, any perhaps be grown. For by authority and public
consent, say what ye will, none is maineteined. If you would deny your self,
to be the man you be not, you should better see, who and what you be in deed.
Deny your self to be so well learned, as you seem to esteem your self, and
you will be a shamed to make such strange crakes and vauntes of your being well
assured of that you have preached and written touching these Articles, where in
you are deceived. Deny your self to be a bishop, though you have put on the
bishop of Salesbury his white Rochet, and you shall be content and think it
meet also, to give a rekening of the doctrine which you preach openly before
the high estates, and therefore confer with D. Cole, and with meaner men
also, In the beginning of the first answer to D. Cole
which more insolently, then reasonably, you refused to do. And by such
conference, you shall be advertised of your error. Deny your private
judgment and estimation of your long study in divinity, which you
acknowledge in your replies, and of your great cunning in the same, and you
shall evidently see and remember, that your time has been most bestowed in the
study of humanity and of the latin tongue, and concerning divinity, your
most labor has been employed to find matter against the church, rather then
about seriouse and exact discussing of the truth: and that in comparison of
that holy and learned father B. Fissher and others, whom you geste and scoff
at, In the sermon fol. 3^
and seek to discredit by fond arguments of your own framing upon them by
you fathered, you are, touching the sownde and diepe knowledge of divinity,
skantly a smatterer.

Again deny your self to be so great a man, but that you may take
advertisement of a man of meaner calling, deny your self to be so honorable,
but that it may stand with your honesty, to abide by your promise in a most
honest matter by your own prepensed offer made: you may easily learn how to
redress, that has been done amiss, you may see your own infirmities,
defectes, ouersightes and ignorances plainly, as it were in a glass, all
self love and blind estimation of your self set a part: you may with the
favor of all good men, with the wynning of your own soul and many others,
whom you have perelously deceived, and to the glory of God, be induced to yield
to the truth, to subscribe to the same, and to recant your errors. Where in
you should do no other thing, then these Articles, which you deny, by us with
sufficient proufes and testimonies avouched, you have already freely and
largely offered. Which thing that it may be done, God give you the grace of his
holy spirit, to humble your heart, to deny your self, and to make a greater
account of your everlasting salvation, then of your worldly interest.

Thomas Harding.

BECAUSE M. IVELL OFFERS TO BE TRIED NOT ONLY BY THE SCRIPTVRES AND EXAMples
of the primitive Church, but also by the Councelles and fathers that were
within syx hundred years after Christ: here is set forth a true note of the
time of both for the most part, such, as be in this treatise alleged.
ABdias. about the year of our lord. 50. Anacletus. 93. Arnobius presbyter.
300. Athanasius. 379. Ambrosius. 380. Amphilochius. 380. Augustinus. 430.
B
Basilius. 380.
C
Clemens Papa. 80. Cyprianus. 249. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus. 300 Chrysostomus.
411. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. 436.
D
Dionysius Areopagita. 96. Dionysius Alexandrinus. 255. Damasus Papa 1. 369.
E
Egesippus. 160. Eusebius Caesarien. 320. Eusebius Emisenus. 350. Ephrem. 380.
Epiphanius. 383. Eutropius. 550.
F
Flauius Josephus. 60.
G
Gregorius Nyssenus. 380. Gregorius Nazianzenus. 380. Gelasius. 490. Gennadius
Massiliensis. 490. Gregorius Romanus. 590.
H
Hippolytus. 220. Hilarious Pictauiensis. 371. Hieronymus. 422. Hilarious Papa.
448. Hesychius secundum Lycosth. 490. secundum alios. 600.
I
Ignatius. 111. Justinius Martyr. 150. Irenaeus. 175. Julius Apricanus. 220.
Julius primus Papa. 340. Innoce^tius primus Papa. 470. Isidorus Hispalensis.
600.
L
Leo Papa 1. 442.
M
Martialis Burdegalensis episcopus. 50. Melciades Papa. 30^.
O
Origenes. 261.
P
Pontianus Papa. 232. Palladius. 420. Prudentius. 465.
S
Sixtus Papa. 129. Soter Papa. 174. Symmachus Papa. 500.
T
Tertullianus. 200. Theodoritus. 390.
V
Victor Vitensis episcopus. 500.
Concilia.
Concilium Nicenum 1. 326. Concilium Laodicenum. 368. Cancilium Antiochenu^
temporibus Athanasij. Concilium Constantinopol. 1. temporibus Damasi Papae.
Concilium Agathense. 430. Concilium Ephesinum 1. 433. Concilium Chalcedonen.
453. Concilium Constantinopo. in Trullo. 535. Concilium Antisiodore^se. 613.
After these followed.
Oecumenius. Beda. Ioannes Damascenus. Theophylactus. Bernardus. Concilium
Nicenum 2. Concilium Constantien. Concilium Basileen. Concilium Florentin. sub
Eugenio 4.
AN ANSWER TO MASTER IVELLES CHALLENGE BY D. HARDING.
IF any learned man of our adversaries, Iuell.
or if all the learned men that be alive, be hable to bring any one sufficient
sentence out of any old catholic doctor or father, or out of any old
general council, or out of the holy scriptures of God, or any one example of
the primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be proved, that
there was any private Mass in the whole world at that time, for the space of
syx hundred years after Christ: etc. The conclusion is this, as I said before,
so say I now again, I am content to yield and to subscribe.
Of Mass with out a number of others receiving the Communion with the priest
at the same time and place, which the gospellers call private Mass.
ARTICLE. I.
EVERY Mass is public, No Mass private in it self, but in respect of
circu^sta^ces.
concerning both the Oblation, and also the communion, and none private. For
no man offers that dreadful Sacrifice privately for him self alone, but for
the whole Church of Christ in common. The Communion likewise of the Sacrament,
is a public feast by Christ through the ministry of the priest in the same
prepared for every faithful person: from partaking whereof none is excluded,
that with due examination having before made him self ready, demands the
same. And so being common by order of the first Institution, and by will of the
ministers, it ought to be reputed for common, not private.

That others do so commonly forebeare to communicate with the priest, it is
through their own defaulte and negligence, not regarding their own salvation.
Whereof the godly and careful rulers of faithful people, have since the
time of the primitive Church, always much complained. Therefore in this
respect we do not acknowledge any private Mass, but leave that term to
Luthers school, where it was first devised, and so termed by Satan him self
seeking how to withdraw his nouice Luther from the love and estimation of that
most blessed Sacrifice, by reasoning with him against the same in a night
vision, as him self records in a little book, which he made, De Missa
angulari and unction sacerdotali. Yet we deny not but that the Council. Vasen.
c. 4 Council. Triburie^. Decretal. li. 3. tit. 41. c. 2. De consecrat. did. 1
ex Augusti. quod quida^ Gregorio tribuunt. Gregor. ex Regist. li. 2. ad
Casteriu^ c. 9.
fathers of some ancient Councelles, and since likewise 3. part summae. q.
83. respo^sione ad 12. argumentu articuli. 5. What the Lutheranes call private
Mass.
S. Thomas, and certain other school doctors, have called it sometimes a
private Mass, but not after the sense of Luther and his scolers: but only as
it is contrary to public and solemn, in consideration of place, time,
audience, purpose, rites, and other circumstances. The variety and change of
which being things accidentarie, can not vary or change the substance or
essential nature of the Mass. Master Iuell an earnest professor of the new
doctrine of Luther and of the Sacramentaries, calls, as they do, that a
private Mass, whereat the priest having no company to communicate with him,
receives the Sacrament alone.

Against this private Mass, as he terms it, he inueigheth sore in his
pri^ted Sermon, which he preached at Poules Cross the second Sundaye before
Easter in the year of our lord, 1560. as he entituleth it, shunning the
accustomed name of Passion Sundaye, least (as it seems) by using the term of
the catholic church, he should seem to fauer any thing that is catholic. In
which Sermon he has gathered together as it were in to one heap, all that
ever he could find written in derogation of it, in their books, by whom it
has been impugned. And though he pretend enemitie against private Mass in
word, yet in deed who so ever reads his Sermon, and discerns his sprite,
shall easily perceive, that he exte^deth his whole wit and cunning, utterly
to abolishe the unbloody and daily Sacrifice of the Church, commonly called
the Mass. Which, as the Apostles them selves affirm in Pro sacrificio
crue^to, rationale and incrue^tu^ ac mysticum sacrificiu^ instituit, quod in
morte^ domini per symbola corporis and sanguinis ipsius celebratur. Clemens
co^stitutionu^ Apostolicaru^ lib. 6 cap. 23. Proufes for the Mass briefly
touched.
Clement their scoler and fellow, being unbloody, has succeeded in place of the
bloody sacrifices of the old law, and is by Christ's commandment frequented
and offered in remembrance of his passion and death, and to be used all times
until his coming. But what so ever he, or all other the forerunners of
Antichrist, speak or work against it, all that ought not to overthrow the
faith of good and true Christen men, having for proof thereof beside many
other places of holy scripture, the figure of Melchisedech, that was before the
law, the prophecy of Malachie in the law, and lastly and most plainly the
Institution of Christ in the new testament. Which he left to the Apostles, the
Apostles to the Church, and the Church has continually kept and used
through the whole world until this day.

Touching doctors, they have with one consent in all ages, in all parts of
the world, from the Apostles time foreward, both with their example, and also
testimony of writing confirmed the same faith. They that have been brought up
in learning, and yet through corruption of the time stand doubtefull in this
point: let them take pains to travail in study, and they shall find by good
ancient witness of the priests and deacons of Achaia, that Saint Androw the
Apostle, touching the substance of the Mass, worshipped God every day with
the same service, as priests now do in celebrating the external Sacrifice of
the Church. They shall find by witness of Abdias first bishop of Babylon,
Abdiae li. 7. historiae Apostol.
who was the Apostles scoler and saw our Savior in flesh, and was present at
the passion and martyrdom of S. Androw, that S. Matthew the Apostle celebrated
Mass in Aethiopia a little before his Martyrdom. They shall find by report of
an ancient Council general, Conciliu^ Constantinopol. in Trullo cap. 32.
Epistol. ad Burdega. Lib co^stitut. apostolicaru^ 8. cap. vlt.
that S. James wrote a liturgy or a form of the Mass. They shall find that
Martialis one of the lxxij. disciples of Christ, and Bishop of Bourdeaulx in
France, sent thither by S. Peter, served God in like sort. They shall find
in Clement, the whole order and form of the Mass, set forth by the Apostles
them selves, and the same celebrated by them after our lord was assumpted,
before they went to the ordering of bisshops, priests, and the vij. deacons,
according to his Institution, and the same right so declared by Cyrillus bishop
of Jerusalem In mystagogicis orationibus. They shall find the same most
plainly treated of, and a form of the Mass much agreeable to that is used in
these days in writing set forth by S. Dionyse, In eccles. hierarch. cap. 3.
Act. 17.
whom S. Paul converted to the faith, of whom it is mentioned in the acts of
the Apostles, who had conference with Peter, Paul, and Ihon th'euangelist, and
much acquaintance with Timothe.

Thus do I give thee good Christen reader but a taste as it were of proufes,
with out allegation of the words, for confirmation of thy faith, concerning
the blessed Mass out of the Scriptures, Apostles, and Apostolic men. I do
further refer the to Justinius the martyr and philosopher, Lib. 4. co^tra
haeres. cap. 32.
to Irenaeus the martyr and bishop of Lions, who lived with the Apostles
scholars. To the old bishop and Martyr Hippolytus, that lived in Origens time,
who in his oration De Consummatione mundi extant in Greek, makes Christ thus
to say at the general judgment unto bishops. Venite Pontifices, qui pure
mihi Sacrificium die nocteque ohtulistis, ac praetiosum corpus and sanguine^
meum immolastis quotidie. Come ye Bishops, that have purely offered sacrifice
to me day and night, and have sacrificed my precious body and blood daily.
Finally I refer them instead of many, to the two worthy fathers Basile and
Chrysostom, whose Masses be left to the posterity at this time exta^t. In
mystagogicis orationibus.
Amongst all Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus is not to be passed over lightly, who
at large expounds the whole Mass used in Jerusalem in his time, the same,
which now we find in Clement, much like to that of Basile and Chrysostom, and
for the Canon and other principal parts, to that is now also used in the
Latin Church.

As for the other doctoures of the church, that followed the Apostles and those
Apostolic me^, many in number, excellent in learning, holy of life, to show
what may be brought out of their works for proof of this matter, that
th'oblation of the body and blood of Christ in the Mass is the sacrifice of
the Church, and proper to the new testament, it would require a whole volume:
and therefore not being moved by M. Iuelles Challenge to speak specially
thereof, but as it is private after their meaning, and many good treatises in
defense of this sacrifice being set forth already in printe: at this present, I
will say nothing, thinking hereof, as Salust did of Carthago that great city,
that it were better to keep silence, then to speak few.

Now this presupposed, that the Mass stands upon good and sufficient
grounds for the stay of all true christen men's belief: let us come to our
special purpose, and say somewhat of private Mass, as our adversaries call
it.

The chief cause why they storm so much against private Mass, is, for that
the priest receives the Sacrament alone: which thing they express with great
vilanie of words. Now in case the people might be styrred to such devotion, as
to dispose them selves worthily to receive their housell every day with the
priest, as they did in the primitive church, when they looked hourly to be
caught and done to death in the persecution of Paynimes, that they departed not
hence, Sine Viatico, without their viage provision: what should these men have
to say? In this case perhaps they would find other defaultes in the Mass,
but against it in this respect only that it is private, they should have
nothing to say at all. So the right of their cause depends of the misdooing
of the people, which if they would amend, these folk should be driven either
to recant, or to hold their peace. To other defaultes of the Mass by them
untruly surmysed, answer shall be made hereafter. Now touching this.

Where no defaulte is committed, there no blame is to be imputed. That
oftentimes the priest at Mass has no comparteners to receive the sacrament
with him, it proceeds of lack of devotion of the peoples part, not of envy
or malice of his part.

The feast is common, all be invited, they may come that list, they shall be
received that be disposed and proved: None is thrust away, that thus comes:
it may be obtruded to none violently, ne offered to none rashely. Well, none
comes. This is not a sufficient cause, why the faithful and godly priest
enflamed with the love of God, feeling him self hungry and thirsty after that
heavenly food and drink, should be kept from it, and imbarred from
celebrating the memoire of our lords death according to his commandment,
from his duty of giving thanks for that great benefit, from taking the cup
of salvation, and calling upon the name of God: Psalm. 115.
for these things be done in the Mass.

But the enemies of this holy sacrifice say, that this is against the
Institution of Christ. God forbydde, the Institution of Christ should not be
kept. But it is a world to see, how they cry out for the Institution of
Christ, by whom it is most wickedly broken. For where as in Christ's
Institution concerning this Sacrament, three things are contained, which he
him self did, and by his commandment gave authority to the Church to do
the same, the Consecration, Three essentials of the Mass.
the oblation, and the participation, wherein consists the substance of the
Mass: they having quite aborogated the other two, and not so much as once
naming them in their books of service, now have left to the people nothing
but a bare Communion, and that after their own sort: with what face can they
so busely cry for Christ's Institution, by whom in the chief points the same
is violated?

Of Consecration and Oblation although much might be said here against them, I
will at this time say nothing. Concerning participation the number of
communicantes together in one place that they iangle so much of, as a thing so
necessary, that with out it, the Mass is to be reputed unlawful: is no part
of Christ's Institution. For Christ ordained the Sacrament, after consecration
and oblation done, to be received and eaten. And for that end he said:
Accipite, Number of co^municants, place, time, with other rites, be not of
Christ's institution
manducate, bibite: take, eat, drink. Here in consists his Institution.

Now as for the number of the communicantes, how many should receive together in
one place, and in what place, what time, sitting at table (as some would have
it) standing or kneeling, fasting, or after other meats: and whether they
should receive it in their hands, or with their mowthes, and other the like
orders, manners and circumstances: all these things perteine to the ceremony
of eating. the observation whereof depends of the churches ordinance, and not
of Christ's Institution. And therefore S. Augustine writing to Ianuarius
says: Saluator non praecepit, Epist. 118.
quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis, per quos dispositurus erat
Ecclesiam, seruaret hunc locum. Our Savior gave not commandment in what
order it should be received, meaning to reserve that matter to the Apostles, by
whom he would direct and dispose his church. Wherefore the receiving of the
Sacrament being the Institution of Christ, and the manner, number, and other
rites of the receiving not fixed nor determined by the same, but ordered by the
Churches disposition: whether many or few, or but one, in one place receive:
for that respect the ministration of the priest is not made unlawful.

But if they allege against us the example of Christ, saying that he received
it not alone, but did communicate with his twelve Apostles, and that we ought
to follow the same: I answer, that we are bound to follow this example, quo ad
substantiam, no^ quo ad externam ceremoniam. for the substance, not for the
outward ceremony, to the which pertains the number and other rites, as is a
fore said. Christ's example imports necessity of receiving only, the other
rites, as number, place, time etc. be of congruence and order. In which things
the church has taken order, willing and charging, that all shall communicate,
that be worthy and disposed. And so it were to be wished, as oftentimes as the
priest does celebrate this high sacrifice, that there were some, who worthily
disposed, might receive their rightes with him, and be partakers sacrame^tally
of the body and blood of Christ with him. But in case such do lack, as we
have seen that lack commonly in our time yet therefore the continual and
daily sacrifice ought not to be intermitted. For since this is done in
remembrance of Christ's oblation once made on the Cross for the Redemption of
all mankind, therefore it ought daily to be celebrated thorough out the whole
church of Christ, for the better keeping of that great benefit in
remembrance: and that though none receive with the priest. And it is
sufficient in that case, if they that be present, be partakers of those holy
mysteries spiritually, and communicate with him in prayer and thanks giving,
in faith and devotion, having their mind and will to communicate with him also
facramentally, when time shall serve.

M. Iuell and many other of that side, think to have an argument against
private Mass, of the word Communio, as though the sacrament were called a
communion, in co^syderation of many receivers together. So he calls that a
Communion, In his sermon. fo. 41.
which is for the whole congregation to receive together. And therefore in his
sermon oftentimes he makes an opposition between private Mass and communion,
and alleging diverse places where mention is of a communion, infers of each
of them an argument against private Mass. But this argument is weak and
utterly unlearned, as that which proceeds of ignorance. For it is not so
called, because many, Why the sacrament is called a communion.
or as M. Iuell teaches, the whole congregation, communicates to gether in
one place: but because of the effect of the Sacrament, for that by the same we
are joined to God, and many that be diverse, be united together, and made one
mystical body of Christ, which is the church, of which body by virtue and
effect of this holy Sacrament, all the faithfuls be members one of an other,
and Christ is the head. Thus diverse ancient doctoures do expound it, and
specially Dionysius Areopagita, Ecclesias. hierarch. cap. 3.
where speaking of this sacrament, he says Dignissimum hoc Sacramentum sua
praestantia reliquis sacramentis long antecellit. atque ea causa illud merito
singulariter communio appellatur. Nam quanuis vnumquodque sacramentum id agat,
vt nostras vitas in plura diuisas, in vnicum illum statum, quo Deo iungimur,
colligat, attamen huic Sacramento Communionis vocabulum praecipue ac
peculiariter congruit. This most worthy Sacrament is of such excellency, that
it passes far all other sacraments. And for that cause it is alonely called
the communion. For albe it every Sacrament be such, as gathers our lives that
be divided a sunder many ways in to that one state, whereby we are joined to
God: yet the name of communion is fit and convenient for this sacrament
specially and peculiarly, more then for any other. By which words and by the
whole place of that holy father, we understand, that this sacrament is
specially called the communion, for the special effect it works in us,
which is to join us nearely to God, so as we be in him, and he in us, and all
we that believe in him, one body in Christ. And for this in deed we do not
communicate alone. For in as much as the whole church of God is but one house,
De coena domini.
as Saint Cyprian says, Vna est domus ecclesiae, in qua agnus editur. There
is one house of the church, wherein the lamb is eaten: and S. Paul says to
Timothe, ^. Tim. 3.
that this house of God, is the church of the living God: who so ever does
eat this lamb worthily, does communicate with all christen men, of all places
and countries, that be in this house, and do the like. And therefore S. Hierom
a priest showing him self loath to contend in writing with S. Augustine a
bishop, calls him a bishop of his communion. Inter epistolas Augustini.
epist. 14.
His words be these. Non enim conuenit, vt ab adolescentia vsque ad hanc
aetatem, in monasteriolo cum sanctis fratribus labor desudans, aliquid contra
Episcopum communionis meae scribere audeam, and eum Episcopu^, quem ante coepi
amare, quam nosse. It is not meet (says he) that I occupied in labor from
my yowth until this age, in a poor monastery with holy brethren, should be so
bold as to write any thing against a bishop of my communion, yea and that
bishop, whom I began to love, er that I knew him. Thus we see, that S.
Hierom and S. Augustine were of one communion, and did comunicate together,
though they were far a sunder, the one at Bethlehem in Palestina, the other
at Hippo in Aphrica. Thus there may be a Communion, though the communicantes be
not together in one place. What if four or five of sundry houses in a sickness
time being at the point of death in a parrish, require to have their rightes
er they depart? The priest after that he has received the sacrament in the
church, takes his natural sustenaunce and dines. and then being called upon,
carries the rest a mile or two to the sick, in each house none being disposed
to receive with the sick, he does that he is required. Does he not in this
case communicate with them, and do not they communicate one with an other,
rather having a will to communicate together in one place also, if opportunity
served? Else if this might not be accounted as a lawful and good communion,
and therefore not to be used: the one of these great inconveniences should
wittingly be committed. That either they should be denied that necessary
vitayle of life at their departing hence, which were a cruel injury, and a
thing contrary to the examples and godly ordinances of the primitive church:
Or the priest rather for companies sake then of devotion, should receive that
holy meat, after that he had served his stomach with common meats, which
likewise is against the ancient decrees of the church. Even so the priest
that receives alone at Mass, does communicate with all them that do the
like, in other places and countries.

Now if either the priest, Necessity of many co^municants together, contrary
to the liberty of the gospel.
or every other christen man or woman might at no time receive this blessed
Sacrament, but with mo together in one place: then for the enjoying of this
great and necessary benefit, we were bound to condition of a place. And so
the church delivered from all bondage by christ and set at liberty, should yet
for all that be in seruitute, and subjection under those outward things, which
S. Paul calls, infirma and egena elementa, Galat. 4.
weak and beggarly ceremonies after the English Bibles translation. Then where
S. Paul blamyng the Galathians says, Ye observe days and months and times,
For this bondage he might likewise blame us, and say, ye observe places. But
S. Paul would not we should return again to these, which he calls
eleme^tes, for that were Iewishe. And to the Colossians he says, we be dead
with Christ from the elements of this world. Colos. 2.
Now, if we except those things, which be necessaryly required to this
Sacrament by Christ's institution, either declared by written scriptures, or
taught by the holy ghost, Similiter and calicem misce^s ex vino and aqua, and
sanctifica^s, tradidit eis, dice^s, bibite etc. Cleme^s in Canone Liturgiae
lib. 8. apostol. co^sti. c. 17 1. Cor. 3.
as bread and wine mingled with water for the matter, the due words of
Consecration for the form, and the priest rightely ordered, having intention
to do as the church does, for the ministry: all these elements and all
outward things be subject to us, and serve us being members of Christ's
church. In consideration whereof S. Paul saves to the Corinthians, Omnia enim
vestra sunt, etc. All things are yours, whether it be Paul, either Apollo,
either Cephas: whether it be the world, either life, either death, whether
they be present things, or things to come, all are yours, and ye Christ's,
and Christ is Gods.

Again where as the ancient and great learned Bishop Cyrillus teaches
plainly and at large, the meruelouse uniting and joining together of us with
Christ, and of our selves in to one body by this sacrament: seeing that all so
united and made one body, be not for all that brought together in to one place,
for they be dispersed abroad in all the world: thereof we may well conclude,
that to this effect the being together of communicantes in one place is not of
necessity. His words be these, much agreeable to Dionysius Areopagita a fore
mentioned. In Joan. lib. 11. c. 16
Vt igitur inter nos and Deum singulos vniret, quanuis corpore simul and anima
distemus, modum tamen adinuenit, consilio patris and sapientiae suae
conuenie^tem. Suo enim corpore credentes per communionem mysticam benedicens,
and secum, and inter nos, vnum nos corpus efficit. Quis enim eos, qui vnius
sancti corporis union in vno Christo unity sunt, ab hac naturali union
alienos putabit? Nam si omnes vnum panem manducamus, vnum omnes corpus
efficimur: diuidi enim atque seiungi Christus non patitur.

That Christ might unite every one of us within our selves, and with God,
although we be distant both in body and also in soul, yet he has devised a
mean conuenable to the counsel of the father, and to his own wisdom. For in
that he blesses them that believe, with his own body through the mystical
Communion, he makes us one body both with him self, and also between our
selves. For who will think them not to be of this natural union, which with
the union of that one holy body, be united in one Christ? For if we eat all of
one bread, then are we made all one body: for Christ may not be divided, nor
done asunder.

Thus we see after this ancient fathers learning grounded upon the scriptures,
that all the faithfulles blessed with the body of Christ through the mystical
communion, be made one body with Christ, and one body between them selves.
Which good blessing of Christ is of more virtue, and also of more necessity,
then that it may be made frustrate by condition of place, specially where as is
no wylfull breach nor contempt of most semely and conuenable order. Many may
communicate together, not being in one place together. Sermon fol. 51.
And therefore that one may communicate with an other, though they be not
together in one place, (which M. Iuell denies with as peevish an argument of
the use of excommunication, as any of all those is, that he scoffeth at some
catholic writers for) and that it was thought lawful and godly by the fathers
of the ancient church near to the Apostles time, it may be well proved by
diverse good auctorities.

Irenaeus writing to Victor Bishop of Rome concerning the keeping of Easter,
Ecclesias. hist. lib. 5. cap. 24.
As Eusebius Caesariensis recites, to the intent Victor should not refrain
from their communion, which kept Easter after the custom of the churches in
Asia fownded by S. John th'Euangeliste, shows, that when bishops came from
foreign parties to Rome, the bishops of that see used to send to them, if
they had been of the catholic faith, the Sacrament, to receive, whereby mutual
communion between them was declared. Irenaeus his words be these. Graeca sic
habe^t, aliter quam Rufini versio vulgata.
Qui fuerunt ante te presbyteri, etiam cum non ita obseruarent, presbyteris
ecclesiarum, (cum Romam acc^derent) Eucharistiam mittebant. The priests (by
which name in this place bishops are understood) that were a fore thy time,
though they kept not Easter as they of Asia did, yet when the bishops of the
churches there came to Rome, did send them the sacrament. Thus those bishops
did communicate together, before their meeting in one place.

Justinius the Martyr likewise describing the manner and ^^der of christen
Religion of his time touching the use of the Sacrament, says thus. Finitis ab
eo, Apolog. 2.
qui praef^ctus est, gratijs and orationibus, and ab vniuerso populo facta
^ccl^matione, Diaconi, quo^ ita vocamus, vnicuique tum temporis prasenti, pa^is
et aquae and vini co^secrati da^t participationem, and adeos, qui non adsunt,
deferunt. When the priest has made an lend of thanks and prayers, and all
the people thereto have said amen. They, which we call deacons, give to every
one then present, bread and water and wine consecrated, to take part of it for
their housell, and for those that be not present, they bear it home to them.
Thus in that time they that served God together in the common place of prayer,
and some others that were absent, let from coming to their company by
sickness, business, or other wise: communicated together, though not in one
place. and no man cried out of breaking the Institution of Christ.

And because M. Iuell is so vehement against private Mass, for that the priest
receives the Sacrament alone, and triumphs so much, as though he had won
the field, making him self merry with these words, In his sermon. fo. 43
in deed with out cause Where then was the private Mass? where then was the
single Communion all this while? he means for the space of syx hundred years
after Christ, as there he expresses: I will bring in good evidence and witness,
that long before S. Gregory's time that he speaks of, yea from the beginning
of the church, faithful persons both men and women received the sacrament
alone, and were never therefore reproved, as breakers of Christ's Institution,
And or (...) to the r^h^^rsall of the place with^l: 4. (...)
and (...) to shew^ for this purpose, one question (...) of M. Iuell. if they
which r^mained at ^o^e, of whom (...) writes received the communion by
themselves alone laufully, why may not the priest do the (...) in the church
serving God in most deuou^e wife in the holy sacrifice of the Mass, ^^^king
compar^^^^^ with out any his defaulte? Have the Sacramentaries any Religion to
condemn it in the priest, and to allow it in lay folk? What is in the
priest, that should make it unlawful to him, more then to the people? Or may a
lay m^n or woman receive it kep^e a long time, and may not a priest receive it
forth with, so sone as he has consecr^^ed and offered? And if case of
necessities be alle^ged for ^^e lay, the same may no less be ^aged for the
prieste^ also wanting compartners with out their defaulte. For other wi^^ the
memory and (...) lords death should not according to his commandem^^ be
celebrated and done. Well now to these places.

Proufes for private Mass.
Tertullian (...) his wife, that if he dyed before hea^^e (...) not a^ain^^
specially to an Infidel, showing th^^^^f (...) did, it would be hard for her
to observe her Religion with out great inconvenience, says thus. Lib. 2. ad
vxorem.
Non sci^^^^^ritus, quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? Et si seiueri^
p^n^^^, non illu^ credet esse, qui dicit^r, Will not thy husband know what
thou ^^rest secretly before all other meat? And if he do know, he will
believe it to be bread, and not him, who it is called. He has the like saying
in his book, De corona militis. Which place plainly declares unto us the
belief of the church then in three great points by M. Iuell and the rest of
our Gospellers utterly denied. The one, that the communion may be kept, the
second, that it may be received of one alone with out other company, the
third, that the thing reverently and devoutly before other meats received, is
nor bread, as the infidels then, and the Sacramentaries now believe: but he who
it is said to be of Christen people, or who it is called, that is, our maker
and Redemer, or, which is the same, our lords body. And by this place of
Tertullian, as also by diverse other ancient doctoures, we may gather, that in
the times of persecution the manner was, that the priests delivered to devout
and godly men and women the Sacrament consecrated in the church, to carye home
with them, to receive a part of it every morning fasting, as their devotion
served them, so secretly as they might, that the infidels should not epsy them,
nor get any knowledge of the holy mysteries. And this was done, because they
might not assemble them selves in solemn congregation, for fear of the
infidels amongst whom they dwelte. Neither should the case of necessity have
excused them of the breach of Christ's commandment, if the sole communion had been expressly forbidden, Origin i^ Exodus homilia. 13. Aug. homil. 26. in lib.
50. homil. and sermon. 252 de te^pore.
as we are borne in hand by those that uphold the contrary doctrine. And
Origin that ancient doctor and likewise S. Augustine does write of the great
reverence, fear, and warenes, that the men and women used in receiving the
Sacrament in a clean lynnen cloth to carry it home with them for the same
purpose.

Saint Cyprian, writes of a woman that did the like though unworthily after
this sort. In sermon de laps^a.
Cum quadam ^^cam suam, in qua domini sanctum s^it, ma^ibuti^^ignis tentasset
aperere, igne i^de surgent^, deterrita est, ut auderet attingere. When a
certain woman, went about to open her cheste wherein was the holy thing of our
lord, with unworthy hands she was fra^ed with fire that rose from thence that
she durst not touch it. This place of S. Cypriane reports the manner of
keeping the Sacrament at home, to be received of a devout christen person alone
at convenient time. The example of Sera^ion of whom Dionysius Alexandrinus,
writes, Ecclesias. hist. lib. 6. cap. 34.
recited by Eusebius, confirms our purpose of the single communion. This
Serapion one of Alexandria, had committed idolatry, and lying at the point of
death, that he might be reconciled to the church, before he departed sent to
the priest for the Sacrament the priest being him self s^^ke and not hable to
come, g^^e to the ladde that came of that errant, parum Eucharistiae, quod
i^fusum iussit seni proeberi. a little of the Sacrament, which he commanded to
be powered in to the old manes mowth. And when this sole^nitie was done,
(says the storye) as though he had broken certain chains and gives, he gave
up his ghost cherefully.

Of keeping the sacrament secretly at home, and how it might he received of
devout persons alone with out other company, I wene none of the ancient
doctors wrote so plainly, as S. Basile, in an epistle, that he wrote to a
noble woman called Caesaria, which is extant in greek, where he says further
that this manner began not first in his time, but long before, his words be
these. Illud autem in persecutionis temporibus necessitate ^ogi quempiam, non
praesente sacerdote aut ministro co^munioni propria manu sumere, nequ^quam esse
grave, superuacaneum est demonstrare, propterea quod longa consuetudine, and
ipso rerum vsu confirmatum est. Omnes enim in eremis solitariam vitam agen^es,
vbi non est sacerdos, communionem domiseruantes, a seipsis communicant. In
Alexandria vero and in Aegypto, vnusquisque eorum qui sunt de populo, plurimum
habet communionem in domo sua. Sem^l enim sacrificium sacerdote consecrante and
distribuente, merito participare and suscipere, credere oportet. Etenim and in
Ecclesia sacerdos dat partem et accipiteamis qui suscipit, cum omni liberate
et ipsam admouet er^ propria manu Idem igitur est virtute, sieve vnam pertem
accipiat quisquam a socerdote sieve plures parts simul.

As concerning this, that it is no greuouse offense, for one to be driven by
necessity in the times of persecution to receive the communion with his own
hand, no priest nor deacon being present: it is a thing superfluouse to declare
for that by long custom and practice it has been confirmed and taken place.
For all they which live a solitary life in wilderness, where no priest is to be
had, keeping the communion at home, do communicate with them selves alone. And
in Alexandria and in Egypt, every one of the people for the most part has
the communion at home in his house. For when as the priest does once consecrate
and distribute the host, it is reason we believe, that we ought to be partakers
of it, and he that takes it, receives it with out all scruple of conscience,
and puts it to his mowth with his own hand. And so it is of one virtue,
whether any body take one part of the priest, or mo parts together.
This-farre S. Basile. In this saying of Basile, it is to be noted,

Reservation of the Sacrament.
By which authority reservation is avouched. Doubteles where he speaks so
precisely and particularly of sundry cases touching the order of receiving, if
he had been of M. Iuelles opinion, that the Sacrament may not be received of one
with out a certain number of communicantes together, he would not so have
passed over that matter in silence, much less written so plainly of the
contrary. Now that the communion thus kept in wilderness and in Egypt, places
of extreme heat, where wine in small quantie as is for that purpose
convenient, can not be long kept from sowring and changing his nature, was in
the form of bread only, and not also of wine: I differ to note it here,
because it pertineth to the treatise of the next Article.

It appears evidently by witness of saint Hierome also, that this custom of
receiving the communion privately at home co^tynewed among Christen men at Rome
not only in time of persecution, but also afterward when the church was at
rest and peace, so as the case of necessity can not here serve them for
mainetenaunce of their strange negative in this point. These be his words. In
Apologia aduersus Iouinianum. Romans 1^
Scio Romae hanc esse consuetudinem, vt fideles semper Christi corpus
accipiant, quod nec reprehendo, nec probo. Vnusquisque enim in suo sensu
abundat. Sed ipsorum conscientiam conuenio, qui eodem die post coitum
communicant, and iuxta Persium, noctem flumine purgant: quare ad Martyrs ire
non audent? Quare non ingrediuntur Ecclesias? An alius in publico, alius in
domo Christus est? Quod in Ecclesia non licet, nec domi licet. Nihil Deo
clausum est, and tenebrae quoque lucent apud Deum. Probet se vnusquisque, and
sic ad corpus Christi accedat. I know this custom is at Rome, that Christen
folk receive the body of Christ daily, which I do neither reprove, nor
allow. For every man has enough in his own sense. But I appose their
conscience, which do communicate that same day, as they have done wedlock
work, and as Persius says, do rynce night filth with running water: why dare
not they go to Martyrs Shrynes? Why go not they in to churches? what, is
there one Christ abroad, and an other Christ with in the house? what so ever
is not laufull in the church, neither at home is it laufull. To God nothing is
hydde^: yea darkness also shyneth before God. Let every one examine him self,
and so come to the body of Christ. S. Hierome reproves this in the Romans,
that where as S. Paul ordained, that for cause of prayer married folk should at
times forbear their carnal imbracinges, they not withstanding that, though
they had had doing with their wives, yet received their rightes neuertelesse
daily. And yet what day they had so done they durft not go to churches, where
martyrs tou^bes were, there to receive our lords body. For it is to be
understood for better knowledge hereof, that such as knew the^ selves to
have done any uncleanness, were afraid in the old time to comme to the Martyrs
Sepulchers. For there commonly by miracle such things were bewrayed, Hereof
speaks S Hierom ad Vigila^tiu^, and S. Aug. epistola. 137. and Seuerus
Sulpitius in vita S. Martini. dial. 3. cap. 7.
and many times by open confession of the parties, whether they would or no.
Erasmus in his Scholles upon this place of S. Hierome says thus. Of this
place we gather, that in the old time every one was wont to receive the body
of Christ at home in his house, that would. He says further; Idem videtur
innuere Paulus, cum ait: an domos non habetis ad manducandu^? S. Paul says
he, seems to mean the same thing, where he says, have you not houses to
eat in? Thus Erasmus gathers proof of private, or as M. Iuell gesteth,
Single Communion, out of the scriptures, and he was as well learned in them as
M. Iuell is. Yet here in I leave Erasmus to his own defense. By this we may
understand, that in the ancient times of the Church, the receiving of the
Communion of one by self alone, was well allowed. And though it was done but
by one faithful person at once in one place, yet was it called a communion
both of S. Basile, and also of S. Hierom, clean contrary to M. Iuelles sense.
It is to be judged that they knew the Institution of Christ, so well as he, or
any other of these new Masters, and that their conscience was such, as if
Christ's ordinance therein had been broken, they would not have winckte at it,
ne with their ungodly silence confirmed such an ungodly custom. Verily for
excuse of this sole receiving, necessity can not justly be alleged.

Damasus Bishop of Rome in S. Hieromes time writes in libro Pontificali, that
Milciades Pope and Martyr, ordained that the Sacrament in sundry portions
consecrated by a bishop, should be sent a broad among the churches for cause of
heretics, that the catholic people of the churches (which word here
signifies as the greek word (...) does, so as it is not necessary to
understand that the sacrament was directed only to the material churches, but
to the people of the parrishes) might receive the catholic communion, and not
communicate with heretics. Which doubteles must be vndestanded of this private
and single communion in each catholic man's house, and that where heretics
bare the swea, and priests might not be suffered to consecrate after the
catholic usage. Else if the priests might with out let or disturbance have
so done, then what need had it ben for Milciades, to have made such a provision
for sending abroad hosts sanctified for that purpose by the consecration of a
Bishop? The place of Damasus has thus. Milciades fecit, vt oblationes
consecratae per Ecclesias ex consecratu Episcopi (propter haereticos)
dirigerentur. Milciades ordained that consecrated hosts should be sent abroad
amongst the churches, prepared by the consecration of a bishop. The two words
propter haereticos, for heretics, added by Ado the writer of Martyrs lives,
opens the meaning and purporte of that decree.

Here have I brought much for proof of private and single communion, and that
it has not only ben suffered in time of persecution, but also allowed in
quiet and peaceable times, even in the Church of Rome it self, where true
Religion has ever ben most exactly observed above all other places of the
world, and from whence all the churches of the West has taken their light. As
the Bishops of all Gallia that now is called France, do acknowledge in an
epistle sent to Leo the Pope, with these words. Vnde religionis nostrae
propicio Christo, Epistola proxima post 51. inter epistolas Leonis
fons and origo manauit. From that Apostolic see by the mercy of Christ, the
fontaine and spring of our Religion has come.

More could I yet bring for confirmation of the same, as the example of S.
Hilaria the virgin in the time of Numerianus, of S. Lucia in Diocletians time
done to martyrdom, of S. Maria Aegyptiaca, and of S. Ambros: of which every
one, as ancient testimonies of ecclesiastical histories, and of Paulinus do
declare, at the hour of their departure hence to God, received the holy
Sacrament of th'aulter for their viage provision, alone: But I judge this is
enough, and if any man will not be persuaded with this, I doubt whether with
such a one a more number of autorities shall any thing priuaile.

Now that I have thus proved the single communion, I use their own term, I
desire M. Iuell to reason with me soberly a word or two. How say you Sir? do
you reprove the Mass, or do you reprove the private Mass? I think what so
ever your opinion is herein, your answer shall be, you allow not the private
Mass. For as touching that the Oblation of the body and blood of Christ done
in the Mass, is the sacrifice of the church, and proper to the new testament,
commanded by Christ to be frequented according to his institution: if you
deny this, make it so light as you list: all those authorities, which you
deny us to have for proof of your great number of articles, will be fownde
against you: I mean doctoures, general councelles the most ancient,
the example of the primitive church, the scriptures, I add further reason,
consent universal and uncontrolled, and tradition. If you deny this, you must
deny all our Religion from the Apostles time to this day, and now in the end
of the world, when iniquity abou^deth, and charity waxes cold, when the
son of man coming shall scarcely find faith in the earth, begin a new.
And therefore you M. Iuell knowing this well enough, what so ever you do in
deed, in word, as it appears by the little book you have set forth in
printe: you pretend to disallow, yea most vehemently to improve the private
Mass. Upon this resolution, that the Mass, as it is taken in general, is to
be allowed: I enter further in reason with you, and make you this argument. If
private Mass in respect only of that it is private after your meaning, be
reproueable, it is for the single communion, that is to say, for that the
priest receives the Sacrament alone. But the single communion is laufull, yea
good and godly: ergo the private Mass in this respect that it is private, is
not reproueable, but to be allowed, holden for good and holy, and to be
freque^ted. If you deny the first proposition, or mayor, then must you show
for what else you do reprove private Mass in respect only that it is
private, then for single communion. If you show any thing else, then do you
digress from our purpose, and declare, that you reprove the Mass. The minor
you can not deny, seeing that you see how sufficiently I have proved it. And so
the private Mass in that respect only it is private, is to be allowed for
good, as the Mass is. Mary I deny not but that it were more comme^dable, and
more godly on the churches part, if many well disposed and examined, would be
partakers of the blessed Sacrament with the priest. But though the Clergy be
worthily blamed for negligence herein, through which the people may be thought
to have grown to this slaknes and indeuocion: yet that notwithstanding, this
part of the catholic Religion remains sownde and faultles. For as touching
the substance of the Mass it self, by the single communion of the priest, in
case of the peoples coldenes and negligence, it is nothing impaired. Else if
the public sacrifice of the church might not be offered with out a number of
communicantes receiving with the priest in one place: then would the ancient
fathers in all their writings some where have complained of the ceasing of
that, which every where they call quotidianum and judge sacrificium, the daily
and continual sacrifice: of which their opinion is, that it ought daily to be
sacrificed, that the death of our lord and the work of our Redemption might
always be celebrated and had in memory, and we thereby show our selves
according to our bounden duty myndefull and thankful. But verily the
fathers no where complain of intermitting the daily sacrifice, but very much
of the slaknes of the people, for that they came not more often unto this holy
and wholesome banquet: and yet they never compelled them thereto, but exhorting
them to frequent it worthily, left them to their own conscience.

S. Ambros witnesses that the people of the East, had a custom in his time to
be houseled but once in the year. And he rebukes sharply such as follow them,
after this sort. Si quotidianus est cibus, Lib. 6. de sacra. ca. 4
cur post annum illum sumis, quemadmodum Graeci in Orient facere consueuerunt?
If it be our daily meat (says he) why take it but once in the year, as the
Greeks are wont to do in the East? De verbis domini secu^du^ Luca^. ho. 28.
S. Augustine utters the same thing almost with the same words. And in the
second book, De sermon Domini in monte the twelfth chapter, expownding the
fourth petition of our lords prayer, Give us this day our daily bread,
showing that this may be taken either for material bread, either for the
sacrament of our lords body, or for spiritual meat, which he allows best:
would that concerning the sacrament of our lords body, they of the East should
not move question, how it might be understood to be their daily bread, which
were not daily partakers of our lords supper, where as for all that, this
bread is called daily bread: There he says thus: Vt ergo illi taceant, neque
de hac re sententiam suam defendant, vel ipsa auctoritate Ecclesiae sint
contenti, quod sine scandalo ista faciunt, neque ab eis qui ecclesiis praesunt,
facere prohibentur, neque non obtemperantes condemnantur. Wherefore that they
hold their peace, and stand not in defense of their opinion, let them be
content at least way with the authority of the church, that they do these
things with out offense thereof taken, neither be forbidden of those that be
over the churches, neither be condemned, when they disobeye. Here we see by S.
Augustine, that they of the Orient, who so seldom received the sacrament, were
holden for all that, for Christian people by the authority of the church, none
offense thereof was taken, neither were they inhibited of their custom, and
though they obeyed not their spiritual governors moving them to receive more
often, yet were they not condemned, nor excommunicated.

In 10. cap. ad Hebr. hom. 17.
S. Chrysostom many times exhorting his people to prepare them selves to
receive their rightes at least at Easter, in one place says thus. What
means this? The most part of you be partakers of this sacrifice but once in
the year, some twyse, some oftener. Therefore this that I speak, is to all,
not to them only that be here present, but to those also that live in
wilderness. For they receive the sacrament but once in the year, and
peradventure but once in two years. Well what then? whom shall we receive?
those that come but once, or that come often, or that come seldom? Soothly we
receive them that come with a pure and a clean conscience, with a clean
heart, and to be short, with a blameless life. They that be such, let them
come always, and they that be not such, let not them come not so much as
once. Why so? because they receive to them selves judgment, damnation, and
punishment. The ancient doctoures, specially Chrysostom and Augustine, be
full of such sentences.

Now to this end I drive these allegations, leaving out a great number of the
same sense. Although many times the people forbear to come to the communion, so
as many times none at all were found disposed to receive, yet the holy
fathers, The peoples forebearing the communion, is no cause why the priest
should not say Mass In 10. cap. ad Hebr. homil. 17.
bishops and priests thought not that a cause why they should not daily offer
the blessed sacrifice, and celebrate Mass. Which thing may sufficiently be
proved, whether M. Iuell, that makes him self so sure of the contrary, will
yield and subscribe, according to his promise, or no. Of the daily sacrifice
these words of Chrysostom be plain. Quid ergo nos? Nonne per singulos dies
offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius, and
vna est hostia, non multae. etc. Then what do we? do we not offer every day?
yeas verily we do so. But we do it for recording of his death. And it is one
host, not many. Here I hear M. Iuell say, though against his will, I grawnt
the daily sacrifice, but I stand still in my negative, By order of the last
communion book, no communion may be said or had, with out three do
communicate with the minister at least, of how small number so ever the
parrishe be. De co^sec. did. 1. can. hoc quoque statutu^.
that it can not be showed, there was ever any such sacrifice celebrated, with
out a communion, that is, as they will have it, with out some convenient number
to receive the sacrament in the same place with the priest. For proof of this,
these be such places as I am persuaded with all. The better learned men that be
of more reading then I am, have other I doubt not.

Soter Bishop of Rome a bout the year of our lord. 170. who suffered martyrdom
under Antoninus Verus the Emperor, for order of celebrating the Mass, made
this statute or decree. Vt nullus presbyterorum solennia celebrare praesumat,
nisi duobus praesentibus, sibique respondentibus, and ipse tertius habeatur,
quia cum pluraliter ab eo dicitur, Dominus vobiscum, and illud in secretis:
Orate pro me: apertissime conuenit, vt ipsius respondeatur salutationi. This
has been ordained, that no priest presume to celebrate the sole^nitie of the
Mass, except there be two present, and answer him, so as he be the third. For
whereas he says (as by way of speaking to many) our lord be with you: and
likewise in the Secrets, Pray you for me: it seems evidently convenient,
that answer be made to his salutation accordingly. Which ancient decree
requires not, that all people of necessity be present, much less that all so
oftentimes should communicate sacramentally, which thing it requires neither of
those two, that ought to be present. If of the bare words of this decree a
sufficient argument may not be made for our purpose, inducing of
th'affirmation of that one thing there specified, the denial of that other
thing we speak of, which manner of argument is commonly used of our
adversaries: the^ more weight may be put unto it in this case: for that where
as the receiving of Christ's body is a far greatter matter, then to answer
the priest at Mass, if that holy bishop and Martyr had thought it so
necessary, as that the Mass might not be done with out it: doubteles of very
reason and conuenience, he would and should have specially spoken of that,
rather then of the other. But for that he thought other wise, Ex concilio
Agathe^. can. 31 Missas die dominico secularibus totas andire, speciali ordine
praecipimus: ita vt ante been dictione^ sacerdotis egredi populus non
praesumat: quod si sec^rim, ab Episcopo public confundantur.
he required only of necessity, the presence of two, for the purpose above
mentioned.

In a council holden at Agatha a city of France then called Gallia, about
the time of Chrysostom, an old decree of Fabianus Bishop of Rome and Martyr,
and also of the council Elibertine in the time of saint Syluester, anno Domini
314. was renewed, that all secular christian folk should be houseled three times
every year, at Easter, Witsontide, and Christmasse. It was there also decreed,
that they should hear the whole Mass every Sunnedaye, and not depart, before
the priest had given blessing. So they were bownde to hear Mass every
Sunnedaye, and to receive the communion but thrice in the year. The self same
order was decreed in the De co^se, did. 1. cu^ ad celebra^ das Missas.
Council of Orleance. Then of like, specially in small towns and villages,
they had Mass without the communion of many together, some times.

In that Council of Agatha we find a decree, made by the fathers assembled
there, whereof it appears, that priests oftetymes said Mass with out others
receiving with them. And this much it is in English. Cap. 21.
If any man will have and oratorie or chapel abroad in the country, beside
the parrish churches, in which laufull and ordinary assemble is: for the rest
of the holidays, that he have Masses there, in consideration of weerynesse of
the household, with just ordinance we permit. But at Easter, Christ's Birth,
Epiphanie, the Ascension of our lord, Witsunnedaye, and Nativity of Saint John
Baptist, and if therebe any other special feasts: let them not keep their
Masses, but in the cities and parishes. And as for the clerks, if any will do
or have their Masses at the a fore said feasts in chappelles, unless the
bishop so command or permit: let them be thrust out from commnion. By this
decree we learn, that then Masses were commonly said in private chappelles at
home, at such times, as the people were not accustomed to be howseled. For when
by commandment and common order they received their rightes, as in the before
named feasts: then were the priests prohibited to say Masses in private
oratories or chappelles with out the parish churches. And hereof we may
plainly understand, that in such places, priests customeably said Masses of
their own and of the householders devotion, when none of the household were
disposed to receive with them The like decree is to be fownde, Co^cilij
Aruernensis, cap. 14. Council. Constantinop. generalis in Trullo. cap. 31.

Now let us see what examples of the old fathers we have for the private
Mass. Leontius a Greek bishop of a Cirie in the East Church called Neapolis,
writing the life of Saint John the holy Patriarch of Alexandria, who for his
great charity was commonly called eleemosynarius, that is, th'almose geuer,
tells this story, whereby it appears that at that time private Mass was
used. Though the translatour through ignorance of the time he lived in, turned
this life in to latin of mean eloquence, yet for truths sake, I will not let
to recite that, which I take for my purpose, as I find it. Malitiam
reseruantem quendam industrium contra alium principem, audiens hic Magnus
Ioannes, monuit eum saepe, and suasit ad concordiam, and non potuit eum
conuertere ad pacem. Semel ergo ad eum mittit and adducit eum sanctus, quasi
pro republica, and facit missas in oratorio suo, nullum habens secum nisi
ministrum suum. Cum ergo sancta benedixisset Patriarcha, and orationem
Dominicam inchoasset, coeperu^t dicere tantum tres illi, Pater noster, Et cum
peruenissent ad sermonem quo dicitur, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and
nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: Innuit domestico Patriarcha, vt taceret.
Siluit ergo and Patriarcha, and remansit Princeps solus dicens versum, dimitte
nobis, sicut and nos dimittimus. Et statim conuersus sanctus, dicit ei mansueta
voce. Vide in quam terribili voce dicas Deo, quoniam sicut ego dimitto, ita and
tu dimitte mihi. Et tanqua^ ab igne statim cruciatu^ ferens praedictus
princeps, cecidit in faciem ad pedes sancti, dicens: Quaecunque iusseris
domine, fafaciet seruus tuus. Et reconciliatus est inimico suo cum omni
veritate. This story sounds thus in English. This great patriarch John,
hearing that a noble man bare malice to an other noble man, warned him
oftentimes of it, and treated with him, to be at accord, but he could not
bring him to be at peace. Wherefore on a day this holy father sent for the
noble man, and causes him to come to him, as though it were about some matter
of the common weal. At that time he says Mass in his chapel, having none
other body with him, but his servant. When the Patriarch had consecrated the
sacrament, and had begone to say our lords prayer, they three only begone
to say Our father, and so forth. When they were come to those words, Forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against us: the Patriarch
made a beck to his servant, to hold his peace. then the Patriarch held his
peace also. and the noble man remained alone, saying forth the verse, Forgive
us, as we forgive: Then the holy father tourning him self toward him, by and
by says with a mild voice. Consider with how terrible words thou say to
God, that as I forgive, so sorgeue thou me also. Whereat the said noble man,
as though he had felt the torment of fire, forth with fell down on his face
at the holy fathers feet, saying: My lord, what so ever thou byddest me thy
servant to do, I will do it. And so he was reconciled unto his enemy, with
out all dissembling.

Here M. Iuell I trow, will grawnt that this was a private Mass. The place
was private, the audience not public nor common, the purpose touching the
noble man, was private: The communion also private, I mean for the patriarchs
part alone, for beside that the story makes no mention of any other
communicantes, he could not be assured of that noble man to communicate with
him. For whereas he could by no means before bring him to forgive his enemy,
he had but a small conjecture he should bring it to pass now. And again though
he had conceived no distrust of his reconciliation upon this holy policy, yet
we may doubt, whether the patriarch forth with, with out further and more
mature probation and examination, which Saint Paul in this case requires: 1.
Cor. 11.
would have admitted him to receive our lords body so upon the suddeine. Now
for the servant, it is a straight case that so holy and so great a Patriake and
bishop of so populouse a city, as Alexandria was, understanding that Mass can
not be celebrated with out breach of Christ's Institution (as M. Iuell holds
opinion) except he have a number to communicate with him in the same place:
should have none of his spiritual flock with him at so weighty a matter of
conscience, but one only, and him his own household servant. He was not so
simple as not to think, that the servant might be let from receiving by
some suddeine pange coming upon him, or with some cogitation and conscience of
his own unworthiness suddeinly coming to his mind. If either this, or any
other let had chanced, in what case had the patriarch ben then? He had been
like, by M. Iuelles doctrine, to have broken Christ's Institution, and so Gods
commandment, through an others defecte, which were strange. But I judge,
that M. Iuell, who harpeth so many iarring arguments against private Mass
upon the very word Communion, will not allow that for a good and lawful
communion, where there is but one only to receive with the priest. Verily it
appears by his sermon that all the people ought to receive, or to be driven
out of the church. Now therefore to an other example of the private Mass.

Amphilochius bishop of Iconium the head city of Lycaonia, to whom S. Basile
dedicated his book De Spiritu sancto, and an other book entitled Ascetica,
writing the life of saint Basile, or rather the miracles through Gods power by
him wrought, which he calls, Memorabilia, and vera ac magna miracula, in
praefatione.
worthy of record, true, and great miracles: specially such as were not by the
three most worthy men Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, and holy Ephrem,
in their Epitaphicall or funeral treatises before mentioned: among other
things, reports a notable story, wherein we have a clear testimony of a
private Mass. And for the thing that the story shows, as much as for any
other, of the same Amphilochius he is called, Coelestium virtutum collocutor,
and angelicorum ordinum comminister, a talker together with the heavenly
powers, and a fellow servant with orders of Angels. The story is this. This
holy bishop Basile besoughte God in his prayers, he would give him grace,
wisdom and understanding, so as he might offer the sacrifice of Christ's
blood sheding, proprijs sermonibus, with prayers and service of his own
making: and that the better to atcheue that purpose, the holy ghost might come
upon him. After syx days, he was in a trance for cause of the holy ghostes
coming. When the seventh day was come, he began to minister unto God, that
is to wit, he said Mass, every day. After a certain time thus spent,
through faith and prayer he began to write with his own hand, mysteria
ministrationis, the Mass, or the service of the Mass. On a night our lord
came unto him in a vision with the Apostles, and laid bread to be consecrated
on the holy altar, and stirring up Basile, said unto him. Secundum
postulationem tuam repleatur os tuum laud, etc. According to thy request, let
thy mowth be filled with praise, that with thine own words, thou may offer
up to me sacrifice. He not able to abide the vision with his eyes, rose up with
trembling, and going to the holy altar, began to say, that he had written
in paper, thus. Repleatur os meum laud, and hymnum dicat gloriae tuae domine
Deus, qui creasti nos, and adduxisti in vitam hanc, and caeteras orationes
sancti ministerij. Let my mowth be filled with praise, to utter an hymn to thy
glory, Lord God, which have created us, and brought us in to this life, and so
forth the other prayers of the Mass. It follows in the story. Et post finem
orationum, exaltauit panem, sine intermissione orans, and dicens: Respice
domine Jesus Christ, etc. After that he had done the prayers of Consecration,
he lyfted up the bread, praying continually and saying, Look upon us lord
Jesus Christ out of thy holy tabernacle, and come to sanctify us, that sit
above with thy father, and art here present inuisibly with us, vouchesafe with
thy mighty hand to deliver to us, and by us to all thy people, Sancta Sanctis,
thy holy things to the holy. The people answered, one holy, one our lord Jesus
Christ, with the holy ghost, in glory of God the father, Amen.

Now let us consider, what follows perteining most to our purpose. Et diuidens
panem in tres parts, vnam quidem communicauit timore multo, alteram autem
reseruauit consepelire secum, tertiam vero imposuit columbae aureae, quae
pependit super altar. He divided the bread in to three parts, of which be
received one at his communion, with great fear and reverence, the other he
reserved, that it might be buried with him, and the third part he caused to be
put in a golden pyxe, that was hanged up over the altar, made in form and
shape of a dooue. After this, a little before the end of this treatise, it
follows, how that S. Basile at the hour that he departed out of this life,
received that part of the host him self, which he had purposed to have
enterred with him in his grave, and immediately as he lay in his bed, gave
thanks to God, and rendered up the ghost.

That this was a private Mass, no man can deny. Basile received the sacrament
alone, for there was no earthly creature in that church with him. The people
that answered him, were such, as Christ brought with him. And that all this was
no dream, but a thing by the will of god done in deed, though in a vision, as
it pleased Christ to exhibit, Amphilochius plainly witnesses, declaring how
that one Eubulus, and others the chief of that clergy, standing before the
gates of the church, whiles this was in doing, saw lights with in the
church, and men clothed in white, and heard a voice of people glorifying god,
and beheld Basile standing at the altar, and for this cause at his coming
forth fell down prostrate at his feet.

Here M. Iuell and his consacramentaries do staggar I doubt not, for grant
to a private Mass they will not, what so ever be brought for proof of it. and
therefore some doubt to avoid this authority must be devised. But whereof they
should doubt, verily I see not. If they doubt any thing of the bri^ging of the
bread and other necessaries to serve for consecration of the host: let the^
also doubt of the bread and flesh, that Elias had in the ponde of Carith. 3.
Reg. 17. 3. Reg. 19.
Let them doubt of the bread and pot of water, he had under the Juniper tree
in Bersabee. Let them doubt of the pot of potage brought to Daniel for his
dinner, Daniel. 14
from Iewerie in to the cave of lions at Babylon, by Abacuk the prophet. But
perhaps they doubt of the authority of Amphilochius, that wrote this story.
It may well be, that they would be glad to discredit that worthy bishop. For
he was that vigilant pastor and good governor of the church, Theodorit. in
hist. eccles. lib. 4. cap. 11. (...) precatores.
who first with Letoius bishop of Melite, and with Flauianus bishop of
Antioche, ouerthrewe and utterly vanquished the heretics called Messaliani,
otherwise, euchitae, the first parents of the Sacramentarie heresy. Whose
opinion was, that the holy Eucharistie, that is the blessed Sacrament of
th'aulter, does neither good, nor evil, neither profits ought, nor hurts.
even as our sacramentaries do ascribe all to faith only, and call the most
worthiest sacrament, none other, but tokening bread, which of it self has no
divine efficacy or operation. Therefore, I wonder the less, I say, if they
would Amphilochius his authority to be diminished. But for this I will match
them with great Basile, who esteemed him so much, who loved him so intierly,
who honored him so highly with the dedication of so excellent works. I will
join them also with the learned Bishop Theodoritus, Theodor. lib. 5.
ecclesiast. hist. c. 16.
who seems to give him so sovereign praise, as to any other Bishop, he
writes his stories of, never naming him with out preface of great honor, now
calling him admirandum, the wonderful, at an other time, sapientissimum, the
most wise, and most commonly laudatissimum, most praise worthy.

If they doubt of Basile him self, whether he were a man worthy to obtain by
his prayer of God such a vision, it may please them to peruse what Gregorius
Nyssenus, what holy Ephre^ of Syria, and specially, what Gregory Nazianzene
wrote of him, In monodia.
which two Gregory's be not affrayed to compare him with Elias, with Moses,
with S. Paul, and with who so ever was greatest, and for virtue of most renome.
Whereby without all envy he has obtained of all the posterity, to be called
Magnus, Basile the great, much more for deserte of virtue and learning, then
those other for merit of chivalry, the great Charles, the great Pompey, the
great Alexander.

If they deny the whole treatise, and say that it was never of Amphilochius
doing, that were a shifte in deed, but yet the worst of all, and farthest from
reason and custom of the best learned, and much like the fact of king
Alexander, who being desyrouse to undo the fatal knotte, at Gordium a town
in Phrygia, hearing that the Empier of the world was boded by an old
prophecy to him, that could vnknitte it, not fynding out the ends of the
strenges, nor perceiving by what means he could do it, drew forth his
sword, and hewed it in pieces, supplying want of skill, with wilful violence.
For the authority of his treatise, this much I can say. Be side that it is
set forth in a book of certain holy men's lives printed in Colen, and beside
very great likelyhode appearing in the treatise it self: it is to be seen in
the library of Saint Nazarius, in the city of Verona in Italy, written in
veleme for three hundred years past, bearing the name of Amphilochius bishop of
Iconium.

Now one place more for proof of private Mass, at the wyneding up of this
matter, and then an end of this article. This place is twyse fownd in
Chrysosto^, in an homily upon the epistle to the Ephesia^s, and more plainly
in an homely ad populum Antiochenu^. Where he has these very words. Hom. 61.
ad popul. Antioch.
Multa^ video reru^ inaequalitate^. In alijs quidem temporibus cum puri
frequenter sitis, non acceditis, In Pascha vero licet sit aliquid a vobis
patratum, acceditis. O consuetudinem, o praesumptionem. Sacrificium frustra
quotidianum. In cassum assistimus altari. nullus qui communicetur. I see great
inequality of things among you. At other times, when as for the more part ye
are in clean life, ye come not to receive your rightes. But at Easter, though
ye have done some thing amysse, yet ye come. O what a custom is this: O what a
presumption is this: The daily sacrifice is offered in vain. We stand at the
altar, for naught. There is not one, that woll be houseled. Here is to be
noted, A true declaration of Chrystomes place.
whereas Chrysostom says, the daily sacrifice was celebrated in vain, and
the priests stood at th'aulter in vain: it is not to be understood of the
sacrifice in it self, as though it were in vain and frustrate: but this is to
be referred to the people, it was in vain for their part, that should have
received their communion with the priests, who waited daily for them, and
cried out as the manner was, Sancta sanctis, holy things for the holy. and
after that they had received the bread the^ selves, showing the chalice to the
people, In Missa Chrysostom.
said: Cum timore Dei, and fide, and dilectione accedite. Come ye up to receive
with the fear of God, with faith and charity. But all was in vain. For none
came, so cold was their devotion in that behalf. Now if Chrysostom had cause
to complain of the peoples slaknes in coming to the communion, in that great
and populouse city of Antioche, where the scriptures were daily expownded and
preached, where discipline and good order was more streightely exacted, where
in so great number some of likelyhode were of more devotion then others: what
is to be thought of many other little towns and villages through the world,
where little preaching was heard, where discipline slaked, where the number of
the faithfuls being small, and they occupied all together in worldly affayeres,
few gave good ensample of devotion to others? Doubtless in such places was much
less resort of the people at the Mass time, to receive the Sacrament with
their priests. And whereas, least this place might seem plainly to auouche
the having of Mass without a number communicating with the bishop or priest,
for avoiding of this authority, the gospellers answer by way of conjecture,
that in Chrysostomes time the priests and deacons communicated together daily
with the party that offered the Sacrifice, though none of the people did: we
tell the^, that this poor shifte will not serve their purpose. For though they
say, some sufficient number ever communicated with him that celebrated the
daily sacrifice in that great and famous church of Antioche, where many
priests and deacons were, which neither being denied they shall never be able
to prove: what may be said or thought of many thousand other lesser churches
through the world, where the priest that said Mass, had not always in redynes
a sufficient number of other priests and deacons to receive with him, so to
make up a communion? Of such churches it must be said, that either the
Sacrifice ceased, and that was not done which Christ commanded to be done in
his remembrance, which is not to be grawnted: or that the memory of our lords
death was oftentimes celebrated of the priests in the daily oblation with out
tarying for others to co^municat with them, and so had these churches private
Masses, as the churches now a days have. Now to conclude, of this most evident
place of Chrysostom, every child is hable to make an invincible argument
against M. Iuell for the private Mass, as they call it, in this sort. By
report of Chrysostom, the sacrifice in his time was daily offered, that is to
say, the Mass was celebrated, but many times no body came to communicate
sacramentally with the priests, as it is before proved: ergo there were Masses
done with out other receiving the Sacrament with the priests. And then
further, ergo private Masses in Chrysostomes days were not strange, and then
yet one step further, there to stay: Ergo M. Iuel according to his own
promise and offer, must yield, subscribe and recant.

Iuell.
Or that there was then any communion ministered unto the people under one kind.
Of communion under one kind.
ARTICLE. II.
THis being a Sacrament of unity, every true christen man ought in receiving
of it, to consider, how unity may be acheued and kept, rather the^ to show a
streightnes of conscience about the outward forms of bread and wine, to be
used in the administration of it: and that so much the more, how much the end
of every thing, is to be esteemed more, then that, which serves to the end.
Otherwise herein the breach of unity is so little recompensed by the exact
kepinge of the outward ceremony, that according to the saying of S. Augustine,
who so ever takes the mystery of unity, and keeps not the bond of peace,
he takes not a mystery for him self, but a testimony against him self.

Therefore they have great cause to weigh with them selves, what they receive
in this sacrament, who moved by sle^der reasons made for both kinds, do
rashely and dangerously condemn the church, for giving of it under one kind,
to all, that do not in their own persons consecrate and offer the same in
remembrance of the sacrifice once offered on the cross. And that they may
think the church to stand upon good growndes herein, may it please them to
understand, that the fruit of this sacrament, which they enjoy that worthily
receive it, depends not of the outward forms of bread and wine, but
redoundeth of the virtue of the flesh and blood of Christ. And whereas under
either kind whole Christ is verily present, (for now that he is risen again
from the dead, his flesh and blood can be sundred no more, Romans 6.
because he dies no more) this helthfull sacrament is of true christen people
with no less fruit received under one kind, then under both. And as this
spiritual fruit is not any thing diminished to him that receives one kind,
so it is not any whitte increaced to him, that receives both. The
Sacramentaries that believe not the truth of Christ's body and blood in this
holy Sacrament, I remitte to sundry godly treatises made in defense of the
right faith in that point. I think it not necessary here, to treat thereof,
or of any other matter, which M. Iuell has not as yet manifestly touched in
his sermon.

Now concerning the outward forms of bread and wine, their use is employed in
signification only, and be not of necessity, so as grace may not be obtained
by worthy receiving of tbe Sacrament, unless both kinds be ministered.
Therefore in consecrating of the Sacrament, according to Christ's institution,
both kinds be necessary, for as much as it is not prepared for the receiving
only, but also for renewing and stirring up of the remembrance of our lords
death. So in as much as the sacrament serves the sacrifice, by which the death
and oblation of Christ is represented, both the kinds be requisite: that by
diverse and sundry forms, the blood of Christ shed for our sins, and
separated from his body, may evidently be signified. But in as much as the
faithful people do receive the sacrament, thereby to atteine spiritual grace
and salvation of their souls, diversity of the forms or kinds, that be used
for the signification only, has no further use ne profit. But by one kind,
because in it whole Christ is exhibited, abundance of all grace is once given:
so as by the other kind thereto over added (which gives the same and not an
other Christ) no further augmentation of spiritual grace, may be atteined.

In consideration of this, the catholic church taught by the holy ghost all
truth, whiles in the daily sacrifice the memory of our lords death and
passion is celebrated, for that it is necessary therein to express most
plainly the shedding and separating of the blood from the body, that was
crucified: has always to that purpose, diligently used both kinds of bread
and wine. But in distributing of the blessed sacrama^t to christen people, has
used her liberty (which Christ never imbarred by any commandment to the
contrary) so as it has ever ben most for the behoufe and commodity of the
receivers: and has ministered sometimes both kinds, sometimes one kind
only, as it has been thought most expedient, in regard of time, place, and
persons. Matthew. 26 Christ's words bind not the laity to receive both kinds.

Ante passione^ nobis solis praecepit hoc facere inquiu^t Apostoli apud
Clementem. lib. 8. constitu. Apostolicaru^. cap. vlt.




As touching the words of Christ, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of this:
they perteine to the Apostles only, and to their successors. For to them only
he gave commandment to do that, which he did in his supper, as Clement
says: To them only saying, do this in my remembrance, he gave commission to
consecrate, offer, and to receive the sacrament in remembrance of his death and
passion, by the same words ordeining the^ priests of the new testament.
Wherefore this belongs not to the lay people, neither can it be justly
gathered by this place, that they are bound of necessity, and under pain of
deadly sin, to receive the sacrament under both kinds.

And this understood they, which above an hundred years past, changing the
old custom of the church of receiving the communion under one kind, by
their private authority, would needs usurp the cup also. For seeing them
selves not to have sufficient proof and warrant for their doing of these
words, drink ye all of this: the better to bolster up their new flangled
attempt, Joan. 6.
they thought it better to allege the words of Christ in S. John: Except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have
life in you: which words for all that our new masters of these xl. years
past, will to be understood of the spiritual and not of the sacramental
eating. Which place although it be taken for the sacramental eating, as it may
be, and is taken for both of the doctors vewed a part: yet in all that
chapter there is no mention of the cup, nor of wine at all. Wherefore they
that cry so much on the Institution and commandment of Christ, can not find
in all the scriptures, neither commandment, where he gave charge the
sacrament so to be given, neither so much as any example, where Christ gave it
under both kinds, to any other, then to the Apostles. Where as contrary wise
it may be showed of our part, that the sacrament was given under one kind
only to the two disciples, that went to Emaus. Luc. 24.
For that the bread, which Christ there took, blessed, brake, and gave to
them, was not simple and common bread, but the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ. For so In Matthaeu^ homil. 17.
Chrysostom, De consensu Evangelist. li. 3. cap. 25.
Augustine, In Luc.
Bid, and In Luca^. Act. 2.
Theophylacte with one accord do witness. It appears also that the
communion under one kind was used at Jerusalem among christ's disciples, by
that S. Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles of the breaking of the bread.
If M. Iuell here think to avoid these places by their accustomed figure
synecdoche, among his own sect happily it may be accepted, but among men of
right and learded judgment, that shifte will seem over weak and vain. Now to
conclude touching the sixth chapter of S. Ihon, as thereof they can bring no
one word mentioning the cup or wine, for proof of their both kinds: so it
shows and not in very obscure wise, that the form of bread alone is
sufficient, where as Christ says, Qui manducat panem hunc, viuet in aeternum,
He that eats this bread, shall live for ever.

Thus our adversaries have nothing to bring out of the scriptures against the
use of the catholic church in ministering the communion under one kind. And
yet they cease not crying out upon the breach of christ's express
commandment, and M. Iuell for his part in his first answer to D. Cole,
says, that the council of Constance pronounced openly against Christ him
self. But for as much as they are so hot in this point, I will send them to
Martin Luther him self their patriarch, that either by his sobriety in this
matter they may be some what colded, or by his, and his scolers inco^stancie
herein, be brought to be a shamed of them selves. Though the places be well
known, as oftentimes cited of the catholic writers of our time against the
gospellers, yet here I think good to rehearse them, that the unlearned may
see, how them selves make not so great a matter of this Article, as some seem
to bear the people in hand it is.

Luther writes to them of Bohemia these very words. Quoniam pulchrum quidem
esset, Luther and his ofspryng does not necessitate Communion under both kinds.
vtraque specie eucharistiae vti, and Christus hac in re nihil tanquam
necessarium praecepit: praestaret pacem and vnitatem, quam Christus vbique
praecepit, sectari, quam de speciebus Sacrame^ti co^tendere. Whereas it were a
fair thing (says he) to use both kinds of the sacrament, yet for that
Christ herein has commanded nothing as necessary: it were better to keep
peace and unity, which Christ has every where charged us withal, then to
strive for the outward kinds of the sacrament. Again his words be these in a
declaration that he wrote of the sacrament. Non dixi, neque consului, neque est
intentio mea, vt vnus aut aliquot Episcopi propria authoritate alicui incipiant
vtramque speciem porrigere, nisi ita constitueretur and mandaretur in concilio
generali. Neither have I said nor counseled, nor my mind is, that any one or
more bishops, begin by their own authority, to give both kinds (of the
sacrament) to any person, unless it were so ordained and commanded in
general council.

Thus he wrote before that he had conceived perfect hatred against the church.
Of his conference with the devil, he vvriteth libello de Missa angulari.
But after that he had been better acquainted with the devil, and of him
appearing unto him sensibly, had been instructed with arguments against the
sacrifice of the Mass, that the memory of our redemption by Christ wrought
on the cross, might utterly be abolyshed: he wrote hereof far otherwise. Si
quo casu concilium statueret, minime omnium nos vellemus vtraque specie potiri,
imo tunc primu^ in despectum concilij vellemus aut vna, aut neutra, and
nequaqua^ vtraque potiri, and eos plane anathema habere, quicu^que talis
co^cilij auctoritate, potirentur vtraque. If in any case the council would so
ordeyne, we would in no wise have both the kinds, but even then in dispite of
the council, we would have one kind, or neither of them, and in no wise
both, and hold them for accurfed, who so ever by authority of such a
council, would have both. These words declare what sprite Luther was of.
They show him like him self. Who so ever reads his books with indifferent
judgment, shall find, that sythens the Apostles, time never wrote man so
arroga^tly ne so dispitefully against the church, nor so contraryly to him
self. Which marks be so evident, that who so ever will not see them, but
suffers him self to be carried a way in to error, hatred of the church, and
contempt of all godlynes, either by him, or by his scolers: except he repent
and return, he is gyltie of his own damnation, utterly overthrown, Tit. 3.
and synneth inexcusably, as one condemned by his own judgment. But for
excuse hereof, in his book of the captivity of Babylon, he confesses that he
wrote thus, not for that he thought so, nor for that he judged the use of one
kind unlawful, but because he was stirred by hatred and anger so to do. His
words do sound so much plainly. Prouocatus, imo per vim raptus. I wrote
this (says he otherwise then I thought in my heart, provoked, and by violence
pulled to it, whether I would or no. Here I doubt not, but wise men will
regard more that Luther wrote, when his mind was quiet and calm, then when
it was enraged with blustering storms of naughty affections.

Now to put this matter, that Luther judged it a thing indifferent, whether one
receive the sacrament under one kind or both, more out of doubt: Philip
Mela^chthon his scoler, and nearest of his counsel, writes: Sicut edere
suillam, aut abstinere a suilla, In locis co^munibus.
sic alterutra signi part vti medium esse. That as it is a thing indifferent,
to eat swines flesh, or to forbear swines flesh, so it is also, to use
which part of the sign, a man lysteth. By the word sign, he means the
Sacrament, lyking better that strange word, then the accustomed word of the
church, least he might perhaps be thought of the brethren of his sect, in
some what to join with the catholics.

Bucer also is of the same opinion, who in the conference that was had between
the catholics and protestants for agreement in controversies of Religion at
Ratisbone, confirmed and allowed this article by his full consent, with these
words. Ad controuersiam quae est de vna aut vtraque specie, tollendam, cum
primis conducturum, vt sancta Ecclesia liberam faceret potestatem sacramentum
hoc in vna vel in vtraque specie sumendi. Ea tamen lege, ^r nulli per hoc detur
occasio, quem vsum tantopere retinuit Ecclesia, temere condemnandi, aut inuicem
iudicandi.

That the controversy for the one or both kinds may be taken away, it shall
be very well done, that holy church made it free, to receive this sacrament in
one or both kinds: yet under such condition, as hereby no occasion be given
to any body rashely to condemn the use, which the church has so long time
kept, nor to judge one an other. Soothly he which would have it free and at
liberty, to receive the sacrament under one or both kinds, and holds
opinion, that the old custom of the one kind only is not to be condemned,
seems plainly enough to confess, that nothing has been instituted or
commanded of Christ touching this matter, as necessary to salvation.

Thus we may see plainly, that they which have divided them selves from the
mystical body of Christ, that is his church, who were of greatest learning
and judgment, make it a matter indifferent (as it is in deed of it self left
to the liberty of the church) whether the sacrament be ministered under one
kind or both.

And this much has been confessed against M. Iuell and his sect, not only by
the learned adversaries of the church in our time, but also by a learned man
of Bohemia above six score years past. His name is John Przybxam, of whose
writings some are set forth in printe. This learned man whereas he endeavored
to prove the use of both kinds of the words of Christ written by S. John:
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you: at length utters these words according to the
eloquence of his time. In libr. de professione fidei catholieae cap. 19.
Veruntamen hic Deum timens, and mores impios aliorum praecauens, fateor quod
quaslibet personas de ecclesia communion, fidelium sub vtraque specie
repugnantes, damnare aut haereticare non intendo. But here having the fear of
god before mine eyes, and being well ware, I follow not the wicked conditions
of others, I grawnt, that what persons so ever of the church repine against
the communion of the faithful people under both kinds, I entend not to
condemn them, nor to hold them for heretics. But if it be the commandment
of God, that the Sacrament be received of all under both kinds, why should he
be forbidden by the fear of God to condemn those, that wythsta^d that order
of communion? Seeing that who so ever goes against Gods commandment, is
worthy to be condemned? Therefore by his testimony the use of one or both
kinds, is indifferent.

Thus we are able to allege Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, and that learned
Bohemian, for the Indifferency of the communion to be minister either under
one kind, or both. Whereby I mean not that the use of the sacrament is so
left to every man's liberty, as he that lists, may require both kinds,
and an other may content him self with one kind: not so, every man is bownde
to follow the order of the church, but the church is not bownde of necessity
by Gods commandment, to minister it under both kinds to the laity.

And whereas it was ministered in both kinds at Corinth, as it appears by S.
Paul, and in sundry other places, Causes moving the church to communicate
under one kind.
as we find most evidently in the writings of diverse ancient fathers: yet
the church has been moved by diverse and weighty causes, to take order, that
the people should receive their communion under one kind, not only in the
council of Basile, but also in that of Consta^ce, and long before them above a
thousand years, in the first council of Ephesus, as many do probably gather,
and mamely Vrbanus Regius a doctor of Luthers scoole, confesses, in his
book, De locis communibus. One cause and not the least, was, that thereby the
heresy of Nestorius might the rather be extinguished, who emonges other
errors, held opinion, that under the form of bread in the Sacrament is
contained the body of Christ with out his blood, and under the form of the
wine, his blood only without his body. Many other causes moved those fathers
to take that order, for th'auoyding of many inconveniences, dangers, and
offenses, which might happen in the use of the cup: as irreverence of so high
a Sacrament, whereof christen people at the beginning had a meruelouse care and
regard, the lothsomnes of many, that can not brook the taste of wine, the
difficulty of getting, and impossibility of keeping wine from corruption in
countries situated near to the north Pole, in that clime, where is known to
be great extremity of cold, beside a number of the like. So that it had been
beside reason to have bound all to the necessity of both kinds.

Now in very deed if we would grant to our adversaries, which in no wise we
do not grant, that it has been commanded of Christ, the lay people should
communicate under both kinds, by these words: Drink ye all of this: yet
this notwithstanding, the exact streightnes of gods ordinance may without
sin in cases be omitted, in such things which be not necessaryly to be
observed of them selves, or of the prescripte of the law of nature: so that
great and weighty causes (the rule of charity exactely observed) require the
same. For evident proof of this, we have examples both of the old and also
of the new testament. Leuit. 24.
Did not God command that none should eat of the shewebread, but the priests
only? 1. Reg. 21.
David eat thereof, and yet Christ clears him of all blame. Mar. 2.
The law of circuncisio^ so straightly commanded, Genes. 17. and 34.
was for the space of forty years by the people of Israel quite omitted, whiles
they passed from Egypt to the land of promise, and God fownde no fault with
them for it. God gave the law of keeping holy the Saboth day with out
exception. Exodus 20. 1. Match. 1.
The Machabes notwithstanding stickte not to arm them selves against
Antiochus, and to spend that day in the field in their defense, having no
scruple of conscience for breach of that law. Many the like examples we find
in the old testament. But let us come to the new testament, and to the
Sacraments of the time of grace. In due consideration of which, we may find,
that Christ has scarcely commanded any outward thing, the moderation,
qualifying, and ordering whereof, he has not left to his church, as
according to the condition of the time, it has been seen most expedient for the
common preferme^t and edifying of the same. So that notwithstanding there be no
swaruing from the scope, and principal intent, and no creature defrauded of
that good, which by the outward things is to be atteined. Touching the
Sacrament of baptism, though nothing be said of the teaching of them, that
should be baptized, neither of the dipping of them in to the water, Matt. 28.
which Christ's charge in this behalf given, seems plainly to require, go
you (says he to his Apostles) and teach all nations, baptizing them etc: and
yet the church has not feared to baptize infantes that be with out capacity
of teaching, and for the due administration of this Sacrament, to many, has
thought pouring or sprinkling of water upon them sufficient: though this be
not spoken of I say, it is much to be considered to this purpose, that the
Apostles stickte not for a time to alter and change the very essential form
of words, with which Christ would this sacrament to be ministered. For where as
he commanded them to baptize in the name of the father, and of the son, Act.
8.
and of the holy ghost: they baptized in the name of Jesus Christ only,
intending thereby to make that to be of more fame and celebritie.

So to return to the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, whereof we
treat, no man can deny, but many things were at th'institution of it done by
the example of Christ, and by him commanded, which now be not observed, and
yet in that respect no fault is fownde. Christ washed the Apostles feet, and
gave them an express commandment to do the same with these most plain
words. If I that am your Master and lord, Joan. 6.
have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one an others feet. For I
have given you an example, that as I have done, you do so likewise. Which
commandment of Christ according to the outward letter, verily binds no
less, then these words: Drink ye all of this: yet this commandment is not
kept, but clean grown out of use. Though it appear by Saint Bernard, In
ser. de coena do.
who calls it Magnum Sacramentum, a great Sacrament, and long before, by
report of S. Cyprian, In sermon. de unction chrismatis.
that Christ did not only wash his Apostles feet, but commanded also by
solemn request, and ordained that the apostles afterward should do the same.
Whether this ordinance of Christ has been abolished, for that it should not be
thought a rebaptization, as it may be gathered of S. Augustine, Ad Ianuarium.
c. 18
or for any other cause, it forces not greatly. But this is much to be
merueiled at, that this so earnestly commanded, is so quietly and with such
silence suffered undone, and in the ministration of the Sacrament, the use of
the cup so factiously and with so much crying out required. Neither in many
other rites and ceremonies we do not as Christ did. Christ celebrated this
sacrament after that he had supped, we do it in the morning, and fasting.
Christ sat at the table with his twelve Apostles, neither sytte we at a table,
neither think we it necessary to observe such number. Christ brake the bread,
we think it not necessary to break the host, that is to be delivered to the
faithful participantes. Here is to be noted, that saint Cyprian rebuking them
which thought sprinkling or pouring of water not to be sufficient for baptism,
declares, that the saraments be not to be esteemed according unto their extreme
and rigorouse observation or administration of all the externe elements: but
rather according to the integrity and soundnes of faith of the geuer and of
the receiver, and that divine things used in a compendious sort, confer and
give nevertheless to the right beleuers their whole virtue. lib. 4. epist. 7.
Many other commandments of God concerning outward things might here be
rehearsed, which notwithstanding by little and little in the church have been
omitted, as the forebearing of strangled things and blood: which was
commanded by God in the old testament, and according to the pleasure and
advise of the holy ghost, decreed by the Apostles in the new testament: yet for
as much as concerns outward things, both this, and many other the like, have
in process of time grown out of observation, and have with out any scruple of
conscience ben abrogated.

I trust no man will gather of that I have said here, that it is none offense
to do against Gods commandment. My meaning is far otherwise. Neither say
I, that this saying of Christ in Matthew, Drink ye all of this, or that in
Ihon, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye
shall not have life in you: or other commandments of Christ, be not to be
kept: but this is that I say, and that every catholic man says: that the
universal church does better understand, which are the commandments of
Christ, and how they ought to be kept, then Berengarius, Wiclef, Hus, Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmare, Peter Martyr, or any their scolers, and folowers,
which now be sundry sects. As for example: God has thus commanded, Matthew. 5.
Exodus 20.
thou shall not swear, and, thou shall not kylle, and if thine eye cause the
to offend, pull him out, and cast him away from the. Whereas certain sects
of heretics, as namely they which be called Waldenses, and Picardi, by their
construction hereof, have maintained opinion, that no oath ought to be given or
made in no case or respect: like wise that in no case or respect a man may
do an other to death, and also that after the outward letter of the gospel,
sometime a man is bound to pull out his eye, and cast it from him: which thing
has be^ done by some of the Picardes, as it is reported, as though else Gods
commandment were not kept: this has so ben understood by the catholic
church, confessing nevertheless these to be gods commandments, as in time,
in place, and in certain cases, a man might and ought without breach of
commandment, both swear, and kylle, and likewise keep his eye in his head,
and therein offend God nothing at all. So the catholic church understands,
Drink ye all of this, to be Christ's commandment, and of necessity to be
observed, but of priests only, I mean of necessity, and that, when in the
sacrifice of the church, is celebrated the memory of Christ's death, which in
that degree be the successors of the Apostles, to whom that commandment was
specially given, when they were consecrated priests of the new testament, who
so did drink in deed, as S. Mark witnesses: Et biberunt ex eo omnes. Mar. 14.
And they drank all of it. To these only, and to none other, the catholic
church has ever referred the necessity of that commandment. Else if the
necessity of it should perteine to all, and because Christ said, Drink ye
all of this, if all of every state and condition of necessity ought to drink
of the cup: how is it come to pass, that our adversaries them selves, (who
prete^de so straight a conscience herein) keep from it infantes and young
children, until they come to good years of discretion: specially where as the
custom of the primitive church was, that they also should be partakers of
this sacrament, as it may plainly be seen, in S. Dionyse, Cyprian, Augustine,
Innoce^tius, Zosimus, and other ancient fathers? what better reason have they
to keep the infantes from the cup, then the Anabaptists have, to keep them
from their baptism? If they allege their impotencie of remembering our lords
death, the Anabaptists will lihewise allege their impotencie of receiving and
understanding doctrine, that Christ's institution in this behalf seems to
require.

Thus th'aduersaries of the church them selves do agnise, that the use of the
cup in the Sacrament pertains not to all of necessity. So have they
neither godly charity to join with the church, neither sufficient reason to
impugn the church. And although herein we could be content, infantes not to
be spoken of, yet it may easily be proved, that the communion under both
kinds, has not ever ben general. And as we do not condemn it, but confess
it might be restored again by th'auctoritie of the church lawfully assembled
in a general council, upon mature deliberation before had, and a wholesome
remedy against the inconveniences thereof provided: even so are we hable to
show good authority for the defense of the one kind, now used in the
church. And because M. Iuell bears the world in hand, nothing can be brought
for it of our side: some places I will allege here, that seem to me very
evidently to prove, that the use of both kinds has not always ben thought
necessary to all persons, and that the communion under one kind has been
practiced and holden for good within the six hundred years after Christ, that
he would so feign bind us unto.

Proufes for communion under one kind
Here may be alleged first the example of our lord him self, out of the 24.
chapter of S. Luke, which is spoken of before: where it is declared, that he
gave the Sacrament to the two disciples at Emaus, under the form of bread
only, which place ought to have the more weight of authority in a catholic
man's judgment, because it is brought by the council of Constance, and also
by the council of Basile, for proof of the communion under one kind. That it
was the Sacrament, the ancient doctors do affirm it plainly, and the
words co^ferred with the words of our lords supper, do agree: and that it
is not nedeful of our own head to add thereto the administration of the
cup, as our adversaries do by their figure synecdoche: it appears by that
those two disciples declared to the twelve Apostles assembled together in
Jerusalem, how they knew our lord, in fractione panis, in breakinge of the
bread to them, which can not be taken for the wine. and as soon as they knew
him in breaking of the bread, he vanished away from their sight, er that he
took the cup in to his hands, and blessed it, and gave it unto them, as it
appears evidently enough to S. Augustine, to Bid, and to all other that be
not wilfully opinatiue.

Again what need is it to use violence in this scripture, and join unto it a
patche of our own devise, by so simple a warrant of a figure, since that
according to the mind of the learned fathers, Christ gave here to the two
disciples not a piece of the sacrament, but the whole Sacrament, as it is
proved by th'effecte of the same: and th'effecte presupposes the cause. For
saint Augustine confesses by that Sacrament of bread (so he calls it. De
co^sensu Euangelistaru^. li. 3. ca. 25.
) Vnitate corporis participata, remoueri impedimentum inimici, vt Christus
posset agnosci. that thereby they were made partakers of the unity of Christ's
body, that is to say, made one body with Christ, and that all impediment or
let of the ennemie the devil, was taken away, so as Christ might be
acknowleged. What more should they have gotten, if they had received the cup
also?

Here might be alleged the place of the Acts in the 2. chapter, where mention
is made of the communion of breakinge of the bread, the cup not spoken of,
which the heretics called Walde^ses, did confess, that it must be
understood of the Sacrament, in confessione ad Vladislau^. and likewise the
place of the twentieth chapter, and specially that of the seven and twentieth
chapter of the Acts. Where Chrysostom and other fathers understand the bread
that saint Paul in perile of shipwreck took, gave thanks over, brake, and
eat, to be the holy Sacrament.

It is not to be merueiled at, albe it S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians the
institution of our lords supper under hothe kinds, that yet upon occasion
given, and when condition of time so required, he ministered the communion under
one kind, since that with out doubt he took that holy mystery under one
kind, for the whole Sacrament, as we perceive by his words, 2. Cor. 10.
where he says, Vnus panis et vnum corpus multi sumus omnes, qui de vno pane
participamus. One bread and one body we being many are, all that do
participate of one bread. Where he speaks nothing of the cup. And likewise
by his words, where he speaks disiu^ctiuely, as the greek, and the true
latin text has, Quicunque manducauerit panem, 1. Cor. 11.
vel biberit calicem domini indigne, reus erit corporis et sanguinis domini.
Who so ever eats the bread, or drynketh of the cup of our lord unworthily,
he shall be gylty of the body and blood of our lord. Whereon depends an
argument of the contrary, that who so ever either eats this bread worthily,
or drinks this cup worthily, he eats and drinks righteousness and life.

For this purpose we have a notable place in the hebrew gospel of S. Matthew,
which S. Hierome says, he saw in the library of Caesarea, and translated
it. This place is cited by S. Hierome in his book de ecclesiasticis
scriptoribus, in Iacobo fratre domini. The words touching the communion, that
S. Hierome rehearses, agree thoroughly with those of S. Luke 24. chapter.
Matthaeus sic refert. Dominus autem etc. Matthew reports thus. When our
lord had given his shrowde unto the bishopes servant, he went to James, and
appeared unto him: for James had made an oath, that he would not eat bread,
from that hour he drank of the cup of our lord, until he saw him raised
from the dead. It follows a little after. Afferte ait dominus mensam, and
panem. Statimque addit: Tulit panem, and benedixit, ac fregit, and dedit Iacobo
iusto, and dixit ei: frater comede panem tuum, quia resurrexit filius hominis a
dormientibus. Bring the table and set on bread quoth our lord, and by and by
it is added: he took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to James
the just, and said unto him: my brother eat thy bread, for the son of man
is risen again from the dead. No man can doubt but this was the Sacrament.
And wine was there none given, for any thing that may be gathered. For it is
not likely that S. James had wine in his house then, for as much as Egesippus
who was not long after him, witnesses of him, that he never drank wine, but
at our lords supper.

But because perhaps our adversaries will cast some myste over these
allegations, to darken the truth with their clowdy gloses, which be clear
enough to quiet and sobre wits, that give ear to the holy ghost speaking to
us by the mowth of the church: I will bring forth such witnesses and proufes
for this purpose out of ancient fathers, as by no reason or Sophistical
shifte, they shall be hable to avoid. Many of the places that I alleged in the
article before this for private communion, may serve to his purpose very well,
and therefore, I will not let to recite some of them here also.

Milciades that constant martyr of Christ, and bishop of Rome, ordained, that
sundry hosts prepared by the consecrating of a bishop, should be sent abroad
among the churches and parishes, that christen folk, who remained in the
catholic faith, might not through heretics be defrauded of the holy
Sacrament. Which can none other wise be taken, then for the form of bread
only, because the wine can not conveniently be so carried abroad from place to
place in small quantity for such use, much less any long time be kept with
out corruption. The council of Nice decreed, Can. 14.
that in churches, where neither bishop nor priest were present, the deacons
them selves bring forth and eat the holy communion. Which likewise can not be
referred to the form of wine, for cause of sowring and corruption, if it be
long kept. Where oftentimes we find it recorded of the fathers, that christen
people in time of persecution received of the priests at church in fine linen
clothes the sacrament in sundry portio^s, to bear with them, and to receive it
secretly in the morninge before other meat, as their devotion served the^: for
the same cause, and in respects of other circumstances, it must of necessity
be taken only for the kind or form of bread.

The places of Tertullian, and saint Cyprian be known. Lib. 2. ad vxorem.
Tertullian writing to his wife, exhorts her, not to marye again, specially
to an infidel, if he dye before her, for that if she do, she shall not be
hable at all times for her husband, to do as a christen woman ought to do.
Will not thy husband know (says he) what thou eatest secretly before all
other meat? and in case he do know it, he will believe it to be bread, not
him, who it is called-Saint Cyprian writes in his sermon de lapsis, that when
a woman had gonne about with unworthy hands to open her cofer, where the holy
thing of our lord was laid up, she was made affrayde with fire that rose up
from thence, as she durst not touch it. Which doubteles must be taken for that
one kind of the Sacrament.

The examples of keeping the holy Sacrament under the form of bread only, to
be in a redines for the sick, and for others in time of danger, that they
might have their necessary vitaile of life, or viage provision with them, at
their departure hence, be in manner infinite. Here one or two may serve instead
of a number. For though M. Iuell makes his vaunt, that we have not one
sentence or clause for proof of these articles, which he so defaceth with his
negative: yet I will not accumulat this treatise with tediouse allegation of
auctorities. S. Ambrose at the hour of death, received the communion under one
kind, kept for that purpose, as it appears by this testimony of Paulinus,
who wrote his life. And because it may be a good instruction to others to dye
well, I will here recite his words. At the same time as he departed from us to
our lord, from about the eleue^th hour of the day, until the hour that he
gave up the ghost, stretching abroad his hands in manner of a cross, he
prayed. We saw his lips move, but voice we heard none. Horatus a priest of
the church of Vercelles, being gonne up to bed, heard a voice three times of
one calling him, and saying to him, arise, and haste the, for he will depart
hence by and by. Who going down, gave to the saint our lords body, which
taken, and swalowed down, he gave up the ghost, having with him a good voyage
provision, so as the soul being the better refreshed by the virtue of that
meat, may now rejoice with the company of Angels, whose life he lead in
the earth, and with the fellowship of Elias.

Ecclesias. hist. lib. 6. cap. 44.
Dionysius Alexandrinus about the year of our lord 200. as Eusebius
Caesariensis recites, manifestly declares, how that an old man called
Serapion, was houseled under one kind at his end. This Serapion after that he
had layen speacheles three days, sent for the Sacrament. The priest for
sickness not hable to come him self, gave to the ladde that came of that
errant, a little of the sacrament, commanding him to weate it, and so being
moisted to power it in to the oldes man's mowth. (...).
this much is expressed by the words there as the greek is to be constrewed.
The ladde being returned home, moisted with some liquour that divine meat, to
serve the old man with all, lying now panting for desire to be dimissed hence,
and to haste him away to heaven. and powered it in to his mowth. For that this
old man's mowth and throat had long ben dry by force of his sikenes, the
priest, who had experience in that case, prouidently gave warning, to moist
the Sacrament with some liquoure, and so together to power it in to his mowth.
Which was so done by the ladde, as Dionysius expresses. Now if the form of
wine had then also ben brought, by the ladde to be ministered, there had been no
need of such circumstance, to procure the old man a moisture to swallowe down
that holy food.

And that this was the manner of ministering the Sacrament to old men at their
departing, it appears by record of Theodoritus, who writes in his
ecclesiastical storye, how one Bassus an archepriest ministered unto an old man
called Simeones of great f^me for his holiness. Bassus (says he as he visited
his churches, chanced upon holy Simeones that wonder of the world, lying
sick, who through feebleness was not hable to speak nor move. When Bassus saw
he should dye, he gives him his rightes before. But after what sort, it is to
be marked. Spongia petita Simeoni os humectat, atque eluit, ac tum ei diuinum
obtulit Sacramentum. He calls for a sponge (says Theodoritus) and therewith
moysteth and washes Simeones mowth, and then gives him the holy Sacrament.
If at that time the receiving of the sacred cup had been in use, such
procuring of moisture, for the better swallowing down of the Sacrament under
the one kind, had been needles.

Amphilochius that worthy bishop of Iconium in Lycaonia, of whom mention is
made in the article before this, writes in the life of saint Basile, that a
little before he gave up his ghost: he received a portion of the holy Sacrament,
which long before he had willed to be kept, to the intent it might be put in
his grave with him at his burial. Which no man can cauille to be any other,
then the form of bread only.

It has been a custom in the latin church from the apostles time to our
days, that on good Fridaye as well priests as other christen people, receive
the Sacrament under the form of bread only, consecrated the day before,
called the day of our lords supper, commonly Maunde thursdaye, and that not
without signification of a singular mystery. And this has ever ben judged a
good and sufficient communion.

And that in the greek church also even in the time of Chrysostom, the
communion under the form of bread only, was used and allowed, it appears by
this notable storye of Sozomenus a greek writer. Historiae ecclesiast. lib. 8.
ca. 5. in graeco.
which because it is long, I will here rehearse it only in english, remitting
the learned to the greek.

When Ihon otherwise named Chrysostom, governed the church of Constantinople
very well, a certain man of the Macedonian heresy, had a wife of the same
opinion. When this man had heard Ihon in his sermon declare, how one ought to
think of god, he praised his doctrine, and exhorted his wife to conform her
self to the same judgment also. But when as she was leadde by the talk of
noble women, rather then by her husbands good aduertiseme^tes, after that he
saw council took no place: except, (quoth he) thou will bear me company
in things touching god, thou shall have no more to do with me, nor live any
further with me. The woman hearing this, promysing faynedly, that she would
agree unto it, conferreth the matter with a woman servant that she had, whom
she esteemed for trusty, and uses her help to deceive her husband. About the
time of the mysteries, she holding fast that which she had received, stouped
down, making resemblance to pray. Her servant standing by, gives to her
secretly that which she had brought with her in her hand. That, as she put her
teeth to it, to byte it, hardneth in to a stone. With that, the woman sore
astoyned, fearing leastsome evil should happen unto her, therefore, which came
by the power of God: ran forthwith to the bishop, and bewraying her self,
shows him the stone, having yet in it the printes of her bitte, representing
a strange matter, and a wonderouse color: and so with tears of her eyes,
besought forgeuenes, promising her husband, she would consent and agree to him.
If this seem to any incredible (says Sozomenus) that stone is witness, which
to this day is kept among the iewelles of the church of Constantinople. By
this storye it is clear, (...).
the Sacrament was then ministered under one kind only. For by receiving that
one form, this woman would have persuaded her husband, that she had
communicated with him, and with that holy bishop. Else if both kinds had
then ben ministered, she should have practiced some other shifte, for the
avoiding of the cup. Which had not ben so easy.

The place of S. Basiles epistles ad Caesariam, can not be avoided by no shifte
nor sophistry of the gospellers. These be his words. All they which live the
solitaire life in wilderness, where is no priest, keeping the communion at home,
communicate them selves. And in Alexandria and in Egypt, each one of the
people for the most part has the communion in his house.

Here I might ask M. Iuell how they could keep wine consecrated in small
measures, as should serve for every man's housel a part, in those countries of
extreme heat, specially in wilderness, where they had neither priest, nor
deacon, as in that place S. Basile writes. For lack of whom, they kept it in
store a long time, that they might not be destitute of it, at need. Again
here I might ask him, whether it was the form of bread only, or of wine also,
which christen men and specially women, were wont deuoutely to receive of the
priests, Vide articulu^ priorem.
in their clean lynnen, or napkyns, to bear home with them, taking great
heed, that no fragments of it fell down on the grownde, as both Origin, and
also S. Augustine, do witness. I think he will confess, that lynnen cloth
is not a very fytte thing, to keep liquour in.

Though I might bring a great number of other places for the use of one kind,
which after the most common rule of the church, was the form of bread: yet
here I will stay my self, putting the reader in mind, that the communion
has been ministered to some persons, under the form of wine only, and has been
taken for the whole Sacrament, specially to such, as for dryness of their
throat, at their death, could not swallow it down, under the form of bread.
Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
Whereas it appears by S. Cyprian, and also by S. Augustine, that the
sacrament was given to infantes in their time, we find in S. Cyprian, that
when a deacon offered the cup of our lords blood to a little maid child,
which through defaulte of the nource, had tasted of the sacrifices that had been
offered to deuilles: the child turned away her face by the instincte of the
divine majesty (says he) closed fast her lips, and refused the cup. but
yet when the deacon had forced her to receive a little of the cup, the yeax
and vomit followed, so as that sanctified drink in the blood of our lord,
gowshed forth of the polluted boilles. If the Sacrament had been given to this
infant under the form of bread before, she would have resused that no less,
then she did the cup, that the deacon then would not have given her the
cup. De co^sec. distinct. 4 can. 4. si qui apud illos haereticos.
And that this may seem the less to be wondered at, Ioannes Teutonicus that
wrote scholies upon Gratian, witnesses, that even in his time the custom was
in some places, to give the Sacrament to infantes, not by delivering to them
the body of Christ, but by pouring the blood in to their mowthes: which
custom has been upon good confyderation abrogated in the church of Rome, and
kept in the greek church, as Lyre writes upon S. Ihon.

The fourth council of Carthago decreed, Can. 76.
if a man in sickness (who was enjoined public penance) do demand his
housel, and er he dye fall in a phrenesie, or becomme speacheles that the
Sacrament be powered in to his mowthe. To take this for the form of wine, we are
moved by the decree of the eleventh council Toletane. Where it is said, Can.
11.
that the weak nature of man is wont at the point of death to be so far
oppressed with drowth, that it may be refreshed by no meats, uneath sustained
with comfort of drink. Then it follows. Which thing we see to be so, at
departing of many, who being very desyrouse to receive their viage provision of
the holy communion, when the Sacrament was given them, have cast it up again:
not that they did this through infidelity, but for that they were not hable to
swallow down the Sacrament delivered to them, but only a draught of our
lords cup.

How so ever this be taken, it is plain by this council, as by many other
ancient councelles and doctors, that the manner of the catholic church has been, to minister the Sacrament to the sick, under one kind.

Now where as some say, that the Sacrament to be given under the form of
bread, was first dipte in the blood of our lord, and would have so used now
also for the sick, and that it is so to be taken for the whole and intiere
Sacrament, as though the Sacrament under form of bread were not of it self
sufficient: let them understand, that this was an old error condemned above
twelve hundred years past, by Julius the first, that great defender of
Athanasius. who hereof in an epistle to the bishops through Egypt, De conse.
distinct. 2. can. cum omne crimen.
wrote thus. Illud vero quod pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt
eucharistiam populis, nec hoc prolatum ex euangelio testimonium receperunt, vbi
Apostolis corpus suum dominus commendauit and sanguinem. Seorsum enim panis,
and seorsum calicis commendatio memoratur. Where as some deliver to the people
the sacrament dipte, for the full and whole communion, they have not received
this testimony pronounced out of the gospel, where our lord gave his body
and his blood. For the giving of the bread is recorded aparte by it self, and
the giving of the cup aparte likewise by it self. And where as some
afterward in the time of Vitellianus, would have brought in again this
abrogated custom, it was in like manner condemned and abolished, in tertio
Concilio Braccarensi. Can. 1.

Now I refer me to the judgment of the reader, of what opinion so ever he
be, whether for proof of the communion under one kind, we have any word,
sentence, or clause at all, or no: and whether these words of M. Iuell in his
sermon, Fol. 16. in the end.
be true or no, where he says thus: it was used through out the whole
catholic church six hundred years after Christ's ascension, under both
kinds, with out exception. That it was so used, yea six hundred years, and
long after, we deny not: but that it was so always, and in every place used,
and with out exception, that we deny. and upon what growndes we do it, let M.
Iuell him self be judge.

If some of our allegations may be with violence wrested from our purpose,
verily a great number of them can not, the authority of the ancient fathers,
who wrote them, remaining inuiolated. Where of it follows, that after the
judgment of these fathers, where as Christ instituted this blessed Sacrament,
and commanded it to be celebrated, and received in remembrance of his death:
he gave no necessary commandment, either for the one, or for both kinds,
(beside and without the celebration of the Sacrifice) but left that to the
determination of the church. Now that the church for th'auoyding of
vnreuere^ce, periles, offenses, and other weighty and important causes, has
decreed it in two general councelles, to be received of the lay people under
one kind only, we think it good with all humblenes to submite our selves to
the church herein: Matthew. 18.
which church, Christ commands to be heard and obeyed, saying, he that
hears not the church, let him be to the, as a heathen, and as a publican. In
doing whereof we weigh advisedly with our selves, the horrible danger that
remains for them, who be auctoures of schism, and breakers of unity.

Now for answer to M. Iuelles place alleged out of Gelasius, which is the
chief that he and all other the adversaries of the church have to bring for
their purpose in this point, this much may be said. First, Gelasius his
canon guilefully by M. Iuel alleged, truly examined.
that he alleges Gelasius untruly, making him to sownde in english otherwise,
then he does in latin. M. Iuelles words be these. Gelasius an old father of
the Church and a bishop of Rome, says that to minister the communion under
one kind, is open sacrilege. But where says Gelasius so? this is no sincere
handeling of the matter. And because he knew, the words of that father
imported not so much: guilefully he recites them in latin, and does not
english them: which he would not have omitted, if they had so plainly made for
his purpose. The words of Gelasius be these. Diuisio vnius eiusdemque
mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire. The division of one and
the same mystery, can not come with out great sacrilege. Of these words he
can not conclude Gelasius to say, that to minister the communion under one
kind, is open sacrilege.

Gelasius rebukes and abhors the division of that high mystery, which
under one form, and under both, is vnum idemque, one and the same, not one
under the form of bread, and an other under the form of wine, not one in
respect of the body, and an other in respect of the blood: but vnum
idemque, one and the self same. The words before recited be taken out of a
fragment of a Canon of Gelasius, which is thus, as we find in Gratian. De
consecrat. distin. 2. can. co^perimus.
Comperimus autem, quod quidam sumpta tantum corporis sacri portione, a calice
sacrati cuoris abstineant. Qui proculdubio (quoniam nescio qua superstitione
docentur adstringi) aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris
arceantur: quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non
potest peruenire. Which may thus be englished. But we have found, that some
having received only the portion where in is the holy body, abstain, from
the cup of the sacred blood: who with out doubt (for as much as I know not
with what superstition they be taught to be tied) either let them receive the
whole Sacraments, or let them be kept from the whole: because the division of
one and the same mystery, can not comme without great sacrilege.

Here might be said to M. Iuell, show us the whole epistle of Gelasius, from
whence this fragme^t is taken, that we may weigh the circumstance, and the
causes why he wrote it, conferring that goes before, and that follows, and we
will frame you a reasonable answer. But it is not extant. and therefore your
argument in that respect, is of less force. But for avoiding of that, our
adversaries would hereof conclude, it is to be understood, that this canon
speaks against the heretics named Manichaei: who in the time of Leo the
first, about forty years before Gelasius, went about to spredde their heresy
in Rome, and in the parties of Italy. Their heretical opinion was, that
Christ took not our flesh and blood, but that he had a pha^tasticall body,
and dyed not, ne rose again truly and in deed, but by way of fantasy. And
therefore at the communion, they absteined from the cup, and the better to
cloak their heresy, came to receive the Sacrament in the form of bread with
other catholic people. Against whom Leo says thus. Sermon. 4. de quadra gesima.
Abdicant enim se sacramento salutis nostrae, etc. They drive the^ selves away
from the Sacrament of our salvation. And as they deny, that Christ our lord
was borne in truth of our flesh, so they believe not that he dyed, and rose
again truly. And for this cause, they condemn the day of our salvation and
gladness (that is the sunnedaye) to be their sad fasting day. And where as
to cloak their infidelity, they dare to be at our mysteries: they temper
them selves so in the communion of the Sacraments, as in the mean time they
may the more safely keep them priuye. With unworthy mowth they receive Christ's
body, but to drink the blood of our redemption, utterly they will none of
it. Which thing we would advertise your holiness of, that both such men may be
manifested by these tokens unto you, and also that they whose deuilish
simulatio^ and fayning is fownde, being brought to light, and bewrayed of the
fellowship of saints, may be thrust out of the church, by priestly
authority. Thus far be Leo his words.

Gelasius that succeeded forty years after Leo, employed no less diligence
then he did, utterly to vanquish and abolish that horrible heresy. of whom
Platina writes, that he banished so many maniches, as were fownde at Rome, and
there openly burned their books. And because this heresy should none else
where take root and spring, he wrote an epistle to Mai^ricus and Ioannes two
bisshops, amongst other things warning them of the same. Out of which
epistle, this fragment only is taken, whereby he does both briefly show what
the Maniches did for cloking of their infidelity, as Leo says: and also in
as much as their opinion was, that Christ's body had not very blood, as
being fantastical only, and therefore superstitiously absteined from the
cup of that holy blood: gives charge and commandment, that either
forsaking their heresy they receive the whole Sacraments, to wit, under
both kinds, or that they be kept from them wholly.

Here the words of Leo before mentioned, and this canon of Gelasius conferred
together, specially the storye of that time known: it may sone appear to any

Iuell.
Or that the people had their commen prayers then in a strange tongue, that they
understood not.
Of the Church Service in learned tongues, which the unlearned people in old
time, in sundry places understood not.
ARTICLE. III.
IF you mean Master Iuell by the peoples common prayers, such as at that time
they commonly made to God in private devotion: I think, they uttered them in
that tongue, which they understood, and so do Christen people now for the most
part. and it has never ben reproved by any catholic doctor. But if by the
common prayers you mean the public Service of the church, whereof the most
part has been pronounced by the bishops, priests, deaco^s and other
ecclesiastical ministres, the people to sundry parts of it saying Amen, or
otherwise giving their assent: I grant, some understood the language thereof,
and some understood it not, I mean, for the time you refer us unto, even of
syx hundred years after Christ's conversation here in earth. For about nine
hundred years past, it is certain, the people in some countries had their
Service in an unknown tongue, as it shall be proved of our own country of
England.

But to speak first of antiquity, and of the compass of your first syx
hundred years, it is evident by sundry ancient records both of doctors and
of councelles, specially of the council Laodicene in Phrygia Pacatiana, holden
by the bishops of the lesser Asia, about the year of our lord. 364. that the
Greek churches had solemn Service in due order and form, set forth with
exact distinction of psalms and lessons, of hours, days, feasts and times
of the year, of silence and open pronouncing, of giving the kiss of peace to
the bishop, first by the priests, then by the lay people, of offering the
Sacrifice, of the only ministers coming to the altar to receive the
communion, with diverse other semely observations.

As for the Latin churches, they had their prayers and Service also, but in
such fixed order, long after the Greeks. For Damasus the Pope first ordained,
that psalms should be long in the church of Rome, alternatim,
enterchaungeably, or by course, so as now we sing them in the quyere, and that
in the end of every psalm, should be said, Gloria Patri and Filio and
Spiritui sancto, sicut erat etc. Which he caused to be done, by counsel of S.
Hierome, In rescripto Hieronymi ad 2. epist. Damasi Papae ad Hieronymu^
presbyterum.
that the faith of the 318. bishops of the Nicene council, might with like
fellowship be declared in the mowthes of the Latins. To whom Damasus wrote by
Bonifacius the priest to Jerusalem, that Hierom would send unto him psallentiam
Graecorum, the manner of synging of the Greeks, so as he had learned the same,
of Alexander the bishop in the East. In that epistle complaining of the
simplicity of the Roman church, he says, that there was in the Sunnedaye
but one epistle of the Apostle, and one chapter of the Gospel rehearsed, and
that there was no synging with the voice heard, nor the comelynes of hymns
known among them.

About the same time, S. Ambrose also took order for the Service of his
church of Millane, and made holy hymns him self. Lib. Confessionu^.
In whose time (as S. Augustine writes) when Iustina the young Emperor
Valentinians mother, for cause of her heresy, wherewith she was seduced by the
Arianes, persecuted the catholic faith, and the people thereof occupied them
selves in devout watches, more then before time, ready to dye with their
bishop in that quarrel: it was ordained, that hymns and psalms should be song
in the church of Millane, after the manner of the east parties: that the good
folk thereby might have some comfort and spiritual relief, in that
lamentable state and continual sorrows. Thereof the churches of the West,
forthwith took example, and in every country they followed the same. In his
second book of Retractations, Cap. 11.
he shows that in his time such manner of synging began to be received in
Aphrica. Before this time had Hilarious also the bishop of Poiters in France,
made hymns for that purpose, of which S. Hierom makes mention. In 2. prooemio
co^mentariorum epist. ad Galat.


Much might be alleged for proof of having Service in the Greek and in the
Latin churches, long before the first syx hundred years were expired, which is
not denied. The thing that is denied by M. Iuell, is this. That for the space
of syx hundred years after Christ, any Christen people had their Service or
common prayers, in a tongue they understood not. Which they of his side bear
the world in hand, to be a haynouse error of the church, and a wicked
deceit of the papists. And I say, as I said before, that the Service was
then in a tongue, which some people understood, and some understood not. I
mean, Usage of church service in any vulgar tongue with in 600. years after
Christ, ca^ not be proved.
the Greek tongue and the Latin tongue. For that it was with in the syx hundred
years in any other barbarous or vulgar tongue, I never read, neither I think
M. Iuell, nor any the best learned of his side, is able to prove. To be the
better understood, I call all tongues barbarous and vulgar, beside the
Hebrewe, Greek and Latin.

The gospel and the faith of Christ, was preached and set forth in Syria and
Arabia, by Paul, in Egypt by Mark, in Ethiopia by Matthew, in Mesopotamia,
Persia, Media, Bactra, Hyrcania, Parthia and Carmania, by Thomas, In Armenia
the greater, by Barthelemew, in Scythia by Androw, and likewise in other
countries, by Apostolic men, who were sent by the Apostles and their next
successors, as in France, by Martialis sent by Peter, by Dionysius sent by
Clement, by Crescens, as Co^stitutionu^ apostolicaru^ li. 7. c. 46.
Clement and Lib. de scriptori. ecclesiast.
Hierome writes, and by Trophimus S. Paul's scholar, and by Nathanael Christ's
disciple, of whom he at A relate, and this at Bourges and Treueres, preached
the gospel, as some record. In our countries here of Britain, by Fugatius,
Damianus, and others, sent by Eleutherius the Pope and Martyr, at the request
of king Lucius, as Damasus writes in Pontificali. Temporibus Antonini Comodi.
anno do. 182
Other countries, where the Greek and Latin tongue was commonly known, I pass
over of purpose. Now if M. Iuell, or any of our learned adversaries, or any man
living could show good evidence and proof, that the public Service of the
church, was then in the Syriacall or Arabike, in the Egyptian, Ethiopian,
Persia^, Armenia^, Scythian, French or Britain tongue: then might they justly
claim prescription against us in this Article, then might they charge us with
the example of antiquity, then might they require us to yield to the manner and
authority of the primitive church. But that doubteles can not appear. Which
if any could show, it would make much for the Service to be had in the vulgar
tongue.

Wherefore M. Iuell in his sermon, which he uttered in so solemn an audience,
and has set forth in print to the world, says more the^ he is able to
justify, Folio. 16.
where he speaks generally thus. Before the people grew to corruption,
(whereby he means the first syx hundred years after Christ) all christen men
through out the world, made their common prayers, and had the holy communion in
their own common and known tongue. This is sone spoken Sir, but it will not by
you be so sone proved. In deed we find, that where as holy Ephrem deacon of
the church of Edessa, wrote many things in the Syriacall tongue, he was of so
worthy same and renome, Lib. de scriptori. ecclesiast.
that (as S. Hierome witnesses) his writings were rehearsed in certain
churches openly, post lectionem scripturaru^, after the scriptures had been
read. Whereof it appears to Erasmus, that nothing was wont then to be read
in the churches, beside the writings of the Apostles, or at least of such men,
as were of Apostolic authority. But by this place of S. Hierome, it seems
not, that Ephrems works were used as a part of the common Service: but rather
as homelies or exhortations to be read after the Service, which consisted in
manner wholly of the scriptures. And whether they were turned in to greek or no
so sone, it is uncertain.

Neither S. Hieromes translation of the scriptures in to the Dalmaticall tongue
(if any such was by him made at all) proves, that the Service was then in that
vulgar tongue. That labor may be thought, to have served to an other purpose.
But of the translation of the scriptures into vulgar tongues, I shall speak
hereafter, when I shall come to that peculiar Article. Verily the handeling of
this present and of that, has most things common to both. Thus that the
people of any country had the church Service in their vulgar and common
tongue, beside the Greek and the Latin tongue, we leave as a matter stowtly
affirmed by M. Iuell, but faintly proved, yea nothing at all proved.

Now concerning the two learned tongues, Greek and Latin, and first the Greek.
That the Service was in the greek tongue, and used in the greek church, I
grant. And to show what is meant by the Greek church, the learned do
understand, all the christen people of that country, which properly is called
Graecia, of Macedonia, Thracia, and of Asia the lesser, and the countries
adjoining. The provinces that were allotted to the Patriarch of Alexandria in
Egypt, and to the patriarch of Antiochia in Syria, are of the old writers
called sometime, by the name of the Oriental or East church, sometime, of the
Greek church.

This much by us both confessed M. Iuell and agreed upon: I say, that if I
can show, that the people of some countries of the Greek church, which all
had their common prayers and Service in the Greek tongue, for the more part
understood not the greek tongue, more then English men now understand the
Latin tongue: then I have proved, that I promised to prove: that some peoples,
I mean whole nations, understood not their Service, for that they had it in
an unknown tongue.

Now how well I am able to prove this, I refer it to your own consideration.
The lesser Asia being a principal part of the greek church, All people of
the Greek church understood not the greek service.
had then the Service in the greek tongue. But the people of sundry regions and
countries of the lesser Asia then understood not the greek tongue: Ergo the
people of sundry regions and countries had then their Service in an unknown
tongue. The first proposition or mayor, is confessed as manifest, no learned man
will deny it, and if any would, it may easily be proved. The second
proposition or minor, may thus be proved. Strabo who travailed over all the
countries of Asia, for perfect knowledge of the same, near about the time of
S. Paul's peregrination there, who also was borne in the same: in his 14. book
of Geographie writes, that where as with in that Cherronesus, that is, the
straight between sea and sea, there were syxten nations by report of Ephorus:
of them all only three were greeks, all the rest barbarous. Likewise Plinius
in the syxth book natural. histor. cap. 2. declares, that with in the
circuit of that land, were three greek nations only, Doors, Jones, Eoles, and
that the rest were barbarous, amongst whom the people of Lycaonia was one,
who in S. Paul's time spoke before Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.
in the Lycaonical tongue.

The scripture it self reports a diversity of language there, and
thereabout, as it appears by the second chapter of the Acts. Where the Jews
gathered together in Jerusalem for keeping of the feast of Pentecoste, wondering
at the Apostles for their speaking with so many sundry tongues, emonges other
provinces different in language, they rekon Pontus and Asia, Cappadocia,
Phrygia and Pamphylia. Which two provinces are of all attributed unto the
lesser Asia. Which makes a good argument, that all Asia the lesser had not one
only the greek tongue. and therefore so many of them as were of other language,
having the Service in greek, had it in a tongue they understood not.

They that will seem to search the cause why that land had so great diversity
of languages, impute it to the often change of conquestes, for that it was
overcome and possessed of diverse nations: of which every one coueted with
enlarging their Empire, to bring into the countries subdued, their laws, their
customs, and their language. Now this being proved by good and sufficient
authority, that in Asia, of xvj. nations three only were Greeks, it follows,
that the other thirtene having their Service in greek, had it not in their
own, but in a strange tongue. For else if they had all naturally spoken
greek, why should not they have been called greeks? Thus we see it is no new
thing proceeding of a general corruption in the church, some peoples to have
the Service in an unknown tongue.

Here perhaps M. Iuell, or some other for him, replyeth and says, that the
people of Asia commonly beside their own proper language, spoke the greek
tongue also, and alleges for that purpose S. Hierome, In prooemio 2. lib.
comment. epist. ad Galatas.
who, says, Galatas, excepto Sermon Graeco, quo omnis Oriens loquitur,
propriam linguam eandem habere, quam Treuiros. That the Galathians, beside the
greek language, which all the Orient or the East speaks, have their own
peculiar tongue, the very same, that they of Treueres have. Lo, says this
replyer, S. Hierome affirms all the Orient to speak the greek tongue. Ergo
the Service in greek to them was not strange and unknown.

To this I answer S. Hierome means, that some of all countries of the Orient
or east, spoke greek, as the learned men, gentle men, merchantes, all of
liberal education, and such other, as had cause to travail those countries.
To be short, it was with out doubt very common, as being their only learned
tongue for all sciences, and the tongue that might best serve to travail with
all from country to country with in the East, right so as the Latin tongue
serves to the like intentes, for all nations of the West. And he means not
that all and singular persons, of what degree or condition so ever they were,
all vplandish people, tillers of the grownde, herdmen and women, spoke greek.
For if it had been so, then had they not had peculiar and proper tongues. For it
is not for their simple headdes (for the most part) to bear a way two
languages. In that S. Hierome calls the Galathians tongue propriam linguam, a
proper and peculiar tongue to that nation, he does us to understand, the same to
perteine to all in particular, that is, to every one of that province, and the
greek, to all in general, in respect of other nations there, so as not of
necessity it be understood of every one.

S. Augustine speaking of the title written by Pilate on the cross, says
thus. It was in Hebrew, Tracta. in Joan. 117.
Greek, and Latin, Rex Iudaeorum. For these three tongues were there in
preeminence before all other. Hebraea, propter Iudaeos in Dei lege gloriantes,
Graeca, propter gentium Sapientes, Latina, propter Romanos multis ac pene
omnibus iam tunc gentibus imperantes. The, Hebrewe, for the Jews, that gloried
in the law of God, the greek, for the wise men of the gentiles, the Latin,
for the Romans bearing rule at that time over many, and almost over all
nations. Now where he says here, that the greek tongue was in preeminence,
propter gentium Sapientes, for the wise men of the gentiles: he discusseth
fully the doubt, that might seem to rise of S. Hieromes saying, and shows,
that the greek tongue was common, not to all the vulgar people of the whole
Orient, but to the wise men only, and that for the atteyning of learning. And
for this it is to be noted, that the scripture reports the vulgar tongue of
the Lycaonians to have been uttered in hearing of Paul and Barnabas, not by the
Magistrates, or other the chief, but by the vulgar people. Turbae leuauerunt
vocem suam Lycaonice dicentes, etc. Act. 2. And so S. Hierome is to be
understood to speak in that place, not of all men of the nations of the
East, but rather of a great number, and of some persons of all nations. For
else if all the East had spoken greek, the soldiers that buried Gordianus the
younger, Emperor, apud Circeium Castrum, at Circey castle, near to the land
of Persie: would not have written his title of honor upon his sepulcher, in
greek and latin, in the Persians, Jews, and the Egyptians tongues, vt ab
omnibus legeretur, that it might be read of all, In Gordij^.
as Julius Capitolinus writes. Which is an argument, that all the East spoke
not ne understood not the greek tongue. As likewise that Epiphanius writes,
Lib. 2. haeresi. 66.
where he says thus. Most of the Persians after the persicall letters, use
also the Syrianes letters. As with us many nations use the greek letters, yea
where as in every nation in manner, they have letters of their own. And others
some much esteem the most profownde tongue of the Syrians, and the tongue that is
about Palmyra, both the tongue it self, and also the letters of the same.
Books also have been written of Manes in the Syrianes tongue. Again if all the
East had spoken greek, sundry the holy fathers would not have been so enuiouse
to the common weal of the church, as to hyde their singular works from the
reading of all, which they wrote in barbarouse and vulgar tongues, to the
commodity only of their brethren that understood the same. Antonius, that
wrote seven notable epistles to diverse monasteries, Lib. de ecclesiast. script.
of apostolic sense and speech, as S. Hierome witnesses, in the Egyptian
tongue. Likewise holy Ephrem of Edessa, Bardesanes of Mesopotamia, who wrote
very excellent works in the Syriacall tongue. Even so did Isaac of Antioche,
and Samuel of Edessa priests, write many goodly works against the ennemies of
the church, in the same tongue, as Gennadius records.

But what shall we speak of all the East? neither all the lesser Asia, and the
countries there adjoining, spoke not greek one generation before the coming of
Christ. For if all had spoken greek, Mithridates that renoumed king of Pontus,
had not neded to have learned two and twenty languages of so many nations he
was king over, to make answer to suitors, to appoint them orders and laws, and
in open audience to speak to them in so many languages with out an
interpreter, as Pliny writes. Natural. hist. lib. 7. cap. 24.
Here if these 22. nations of 22. sundry tongues, had also beside their own
language spoken greek, and understood the same: Pliny would not have uttered
that word, sine interpret, without an interpreter. And likewise that king had
taken vain labor in learning those tongues, where one might have served his
turn.

Near to this kings dominion in the shore of the sea Euxinus, in the land of
Colchis, Li. 6. not. hist. ca. 5.
there stood a city named Dioscurias, so much haunted of strangers, that as
Pliny writes by record of Timosthenes, it was resorted unto of three hundred
nations of distinct languages, and that the Romans for the better expeditio^
of their affairs there, had at lenghth lying in the same, cxxx. interpreters.
Now if all the Orient had spoken greek, as S. Hieromes words seem to importe:
the Romans should not have neded to have maineteyned there to their great
charges, so great a number of interpreters, to be their agentes there. But for
proof that all the Orient spoke not greek, what need we allege profane
writers? the known place of the Acts, makes mention of sundry nations there,
that had distinct languages, the Parthians, Medians, and Elamites etc. Act. 2.

To conclude, they that to maineteine their strange opinion of the universal
understanding of the Service used of old time in the East Church, say and
affirm, that all the Orient spoke greek: seem much to diminishe the majesty,
utility, and necessity of the miraculouse gift of tongues, which the holy
ghost gave in the primitive church, for the better furtherance of the gospel.
For if all in those parties had spoken greek, the gift of tongues had been in
that respect nedeles. Hitherto of the greek, and of the Service in that
language.

Now concerning the Latin tongue, which is the learned tongue of the West. That
the Latin church, or the West church, for so it is called, had the Service
in Latin, I grant. The chief Regions and countries of the Latin church,
with in the foresaid syx hundred years, were these. Italy, Aphrike, Illyrike,
both Pannonies, now called Hungary and Austria, Gallia, now France, and
Spain. The countries of Germany, Pole, and Swethen, and those north parts,
received the faith long since. The countries of Britain here had received
the faith in most places, but were driven from the open profession of it
again, by the cruel persecution of Diocletian the Emperor, at which
persecution, S. Albane with many others, suffered martyrdom.

After that these countries had been instructed in the faith, as things grew
to perfection, they had their Service accordingly: no doubt such, as was used
in the churches, from whence their first Apostles and preachers were sent. And
because the first preachers of the faith came to these west parties from Rome,
directed some from S. Peter, some from Clement, some others afterward from
other bishops of that See Apostolic: they planted and set up in the countries
by them converted, the Service of the church of Rome, or some other very like,
and that in the Latin tongue only, for ought that can be showed to the
contrary. Wherein I refer me only to the first syx hundred years. Now that
such Service was understood of those peoples, that spoke and understood
Latin, no man denies. For to some nations that was a native and a mother
tongue, as the greek was to the Grecians.

M. Iuell alleging for the having of the prayers and Service in a vulgar
tongue (as for England in the English, for Ireland in the Irishe, for doucheland
in the douche tongue, etc) authorities and examples of the churches, where in
the time of the primitive church the greek and Latin tongue was the usual and
common tongue of the people: brings nothing for proof of that, which lies in
controversy. Arnobius (says he) called the latin tongue, M. Iuelles
allegatio^^ soluted.
sermonem Italu^. S. Ambrose in Millane, S. Augustine in Aphrike, S. Gregory
in Rome, preached in Latin, and the people understood them. What then? no man
denies you this. Hexaeme ro^. hom. 4
S. Basile also speaks of a sownde, which the men, women and children made in
their prayers to God, like the sownde of a wave stryking the sea banks. What
can you conclude of this necessaryly M. Iuell? All this may be understood of
the sownding that one word, Amen, answered at the prayers end, which is done
now by the quyer, and may be done by the people also in the lower part of the
church. For S. Hierome leads us so to think. Who commending the devotion of
the people of Rome, In 2. prooemio comment. ad Galatas.
says in like manner. Vbi sic ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui, amen
reboat, and vacua idolorum templa quatiuntur? Where else are the churches and
the sepulchers of Martyrs, with so fervent devotion, and with so great company
resorted unto? (which words go before) Where does Amen give so loud a sownde,
like the thunderclappe out of the air, so as the temples empted of idols,
shake with it, as at Rome?

The people speaks with the priest, at the mystical prayers, says
Chrysostom, alleged by M. Iuell. What then? So was it long before, even in
the Apostles time, Co^stitut. apostolicaru^ li. 8. cap. 16.
as we read in Clement, and likewise in S. Cyprian, in In orationibus
mystagogicis.
Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, and many others, so is it now. For he shall find
in the old fathers, that to Per omnia secula seculoru^ (which Chrysostom
speaks of) to Dominus vobiscum, so light as they make of it, to Sursum corda,
and to Gratias agamus domino Deo nostro, the people answered, as now also they
answer, Amen, and cum Spiritu tuo, hahemus ad dominum, dignum and iustum est.

As for the place he alleges out of S. Augustine upon the psalms, it makes
nothing for his purpose. S. Augustines words be these, other wise then he
reports them. Quid hoc sit; intelligere debemus, In Psalm 18 in expositione
secunda.
vt humana ratione, non quasi auium voce cantemus. Nam and merulae, and
psittaci, and corui, and picae, and huiuscemodi volucres, saepe ab hominibus
docentur sonare, quod nesciunt. Having prayed to God (says S. August.) that
he make us clean of our privy sins, etc. we ought to understand, what this
is, that we may singe with man's reason, not with voice, as birds do. For
owselles, popiniayes, ravens, and pyes, and such the like birds, oftetymes be
taught of men to sownde, they know not what. These words are to be taken of
th'understanding of the sense, not of the tongue which the Service is song in.
For the people of Hippo, where he was bishop, understood the latin tongue
meanly. Which sense can not rightly and safely be atteined of the common
people, De ecclesiasticis diuersis capitulis. Constitutione 123. Greg.
Haloa^dro interpret. Na^ in veteri translatione nihil tale habetur.
but is better, and more holesomly taught by the preaching of the learned
bishops and priests.

The commandment of Justinian the Emperor, which M. Iuell alleges, that
bishops and priests should celebrate the holy oblation or Sacrifice, which we
call the Mass, not closely, (...)
but with vttera^ce and sownde of voice, that they might be heard of the
people: makes nothing for the Service to be had in the English tongue, in the
church of England, or in any other vulgar tongue, in the church of any other
nation: but requires only of the bishops and priests open pronouncing,
Iustinianes ordinance truly declared.
vocal not mental speaking, not whispering with the breath only in the
celebration of the holy Sacrifice and other Service. Wherein he agrees with S.
Augustine, who in his book de Magistro, Cap. 1.
says, that when we pray, there is no need of speaking, unless perhaps we
do as priests do. Who when they pray (in public assemble) use speaking for
cause of signifying their mind, that is, to show, that they pray, not to
th'inte^t God, but men may hear, and with a certain consent through
putting in mind (by sownde of voice) may be lyfted up unto God. This much S.
Augustine there. And this is the right meaning of that Constitution. And thus
he ordained for the greek church only, and thereto only it is to be referred,
for that some thought the Sacrifice should be celebrated rather with silence,
after the manner of the church of Rome, specially at the consecration. And as
that constitution perteined to the Greeks, and not to the Latins, so was it
not fownde in the Latin books, until Gregorius Haloander of Germany of late
years translated the place. And where M. Iuell alleges this commandment of
Justinian against the having of the Service in a learned tongue, unknown to the
common people: it is to be noted, how he demeaneth him self, not uprightly,
but so as every man may thereby know a scholar of Luther, Calvin and Peter
Martyr. For whereas by th'allegation of that ordinance, he might seem to bring
somewhat, that makes for the blessed Sacrifice of the church, commonly named
the Mass, he dissembleth the word of the sacrifice, which Justinian puts
expressly, (...), id est, diuinam oblationem, the divine or holy oblation: and
terms it other wise, in his replies, by the name of common prayers, and in
his Sermon, by the name of the words of the ministration, refusing the word
of the church, no less, then he refuses to be a member of the church. Thus
through fooysting and coggyng their dye, and other false play, these new
perilouse teachers deceive many poor souls, and rob them of the suer
simplicity of their faith.

And where was this commandment given? In Constantinople the chief city of
Greece, where the greek tongue was commonly known. That Emperor had dominion
over some nations, that understood not the greek commonly. Yet no man can tell
of any constitution, that ever he made for Service there to be had in their
vulgar and barbarous tongue. So many nations having ben converted to the faith,
the common people whereof understood neither greek nor latin: if the having
of the Service in their vulgar tongue, had be^ thought necessary to their
salvation: the fathers that stickte not to bestow their blood for their
flocks, would not have spared that small pain and travail, to put their
Service in vulgar tongues. If it had been necessary, it had been done: if it had been done, it had been mentioned, by one or other. Psalm. 104. Lib. 1 co^tra
haeres. haeresi 39.


It appears by Arnobius upon the Psalms, by Epiphanius writing against
heresies, and by S. Augustine in his books De Doctrina Christiana, that by
account of th'antiquitie, there were 72. tongues in the world. In Tuscul. q.
Cicero says that they be in number infinite. Of them all, neither M. Iuell,
nor any one of his side, is able to show, that the public Service of the
church in any nation, was ever for the space of syx hundred years after
Christ, in any other, then in greek and latin.

For further answer to the authority of Iustinianes ordinance, we hold well
with it. Good men think it meet, the Service be uttered now also, with a
distinct and audible voice, that all sorts of people, specially so many as
understand it, may the more be stirred to devotion, and thereby the rather be
moved to say Amen, and give their assent to it, through their obedience and
credit, they bear to the church, assuring them selves, the same to be good
and helthfulll, and to the glory of God. And for that purpose, we have commonly
seen the priest, when he spedde him to say his service, to ring the Sawnce
bell, and speak out a loud, Pater noster. By which token the people were
commanded silence, reverence, and devotion.

Now to say somewhat touching the common prayers or Service of the curches of
Aphrica, where S, Augustine preached in Latin, as you say, and I deny not,
and thereof you seem to conclude, that the common people of that country
understood and spoke latin, as their vulgar tongue. That the Aphricane
churches had their Service in Latin, it is evident by sundry places of S.
Augustine, in his exposition of the Psalms, in his books De Doctrina
Christiana, and in his sermons, and most plainly in an epistle that he wrote
to S. Hierome, in which he shows, that the people of a city in Aphrica was
greatly moved and offended with their bishop, for that in reciting the
scriptures for part of the service to them, he read out of the fourth chapter
of Jonas the Prophet, not cucurbita, after the old text, which they had been
accustomed unto, but hedera, after the new translation of S. Hierome. All
people of the latin church understood not the latin Service. Lib. 3.2.
belli punici.
Now as I grant, that some understood it, so I have cause to doubt, whether
some others understood it, or no. Nay rather I have great probability to
tkinke, they understood it not. For the bewraying of Hannibals Ambassadoures
to the Romans, by their Punicall language, whereof Titus Liuius writes: and
likewise the conference betwixt Sylla the noble man of Rome, and Bocchus king
of Numidia, had by mean of interpreters adhibited of both parties, as Saluste
records in bello Iugurthino, declares, that the tongue of Aphrica was the
punicall tongue before the Romans conqueste. Now the same people remaining
there until S. Augustines time, what should move us to judge, that they forgate
their own native and mother tongue, and learned a new the latin tongue? I
confess that many understood and spoke latin, by reason of the Romans
common resort thither, of their laws there executed, of their garnisons there
abiding, and specially of the great multitude of latin people thither sent to
inhabit, deductis colonijs, by August the Emperor first, then by Adrianus,
and afterward by Comodus, who would have had the great city Carthago newly
reedified, to be called after his own name, Alexandria Comodiana, as
Lampridius writes. These Roman colonies, that is to wit, multitudes of
people sent to inhabit the country, placed them selves about the sea costs,
in the chief cities, in Carthago, Vtica, Hippo, Leptis, etc. and thereabout.
And by this means the Roman or Latin speech spread abroad there, and
became to be very common, as that which remained still among the inhabitants,
that were of the Roman kind, and was learned by long use and custom of
others dwelling amongst them, specially in the cities, where the Romans bare
the swea and government. For these consyderations, I think the Latin tongue
was there very common. But that it was common to the inward parties of the
country also, and to the vpla^dishe people, amongst whom the old accustomed
language is longest kept, as experience teaches: it is not likely. For though
the nobility and cities change their language, to be the more in estimation,
yet the common and base people of the country, fall not so sone to a change.
In this realm of England after William Conqueroures time, by occasion of great
resortes of Frencheme^ hither, and of our country men in to France, also of
the French laws, and special favor by the princes borne, and prefermentes
bestowed upon those that spoke French: the most part of the nobility,
lawyeres, merchantes, capitaines, soldiers and welthy folk, had skill in the
understanding and speaking of the French tongue, but yet the common and
vplandish people spoke little or naught at all. Whereof grew this proverb in
England of old time, lack would be a gentilman, but lack can no french. The
like may be thought of the Latin tongue of Aphrica.

What shall we think of the vplandish people there, when as Septimius Seuerus
the Emperor, yea after the Apostles time, had not very good skill in the
Latin tongue, but in the punicall tongue, and that being borne at Leptis? of
whom Aurelius Victor says thus in Epitome. Latinis literis sufficienter
instructus, Punica lingua promptior, quippe genitus apud Leptim Prouinciae
Aphricae. Seuerus was learned in the latin lettres sufficiently, but in the
punicall tongue he was redyer, as being borne at Leptis, within the province of
Aphrica. Here the Latin tongue is attributed to instruction and teaching, and
the punicall tongue to nature. Aelius Spartianus writing the life of this
Seuerus to Diocletian, shows, that when his sister a woman of Leptis, came to
Rome to him, vix latin loquens, her brother the Emperor was a shamed of her,
and blushed at her, for that she could scantly speak Latin, and therefore
commanded her a way home again to her country, for these be the very words
of Spartianus. Now if such noble personages lackte the latin speech in the
chief part of Aphrica, it is sone understood, what is to be demed of the
common and vulgar people abroad in the country. Let us come down lowgher
even to S. Hieromes time. S. Hierome writing to a noble young Roman virgin
called Demetrias, being in Aphrica, exhorting her to keep her self in that
holy state of virginity, says thus. Vrbs tua quondam orbis caput, etc. Thy
city once the head of the world, is becomme the sepulcher of the Roman
people, and will thou take a banished husband, thy self being a banished
woman, in the shore of Libya? what woman shall thou have there, to bring thee
too and fro? Stridor Punicae linguae procacia tibi fescennina cantabit. The
iarryng punical tongue shall sing thee bawdy songs at thy weddyng. Lo, in S.
Hieromes time they of Aphrica spoke the punicall tongue, and that by the sea
side, where the Romans of long time had made their abode. Of this may be
gathered, that the latin speech was not in the farther parties within the
country, very common.

S. Augustine in sundry places of his works shows, that the people of
Aphrica called punikes, spoke the punicall tongue, De verbis domini secu^du^
Luc. Sermon. 35.
acknowledging a likeness and coosynage, as it were, to be between that and the
Hebrew tongue. But most evident witness for the punicall tongue, is to be fownde
in his 44. epistle ad Maximum Madaurensem. In which he answers him soberly,
for his scoffing and jesting at certain punicall words, in derogation of the
Christianes. After wondering that he being an Aphricane borne, and writing to
Aphricanes, should find fault with the punicall names and words, and after
commendation of the tongue, for that many things have right wisely ben
commended to memory by great learned men in books of the punicall language:
at length concluded against him thus. Poeniteat te certe ibi natum, vbi
huiusmodi linguae cunabula recalent. In good footh thou may be sorye in thy
heart, that thou were borne there, where the cradelles of such a tongue, be
warm again. By which words he seems to charge him with an unnatural grief
and repenting, that he was borne in that country, where they speak punike, er
they creape out of their cradelles. Whereby it appears, the mother tongue of
those parties of Aphrica which he speaks of, to be the punicall, and not the
latin. To conclude, if they had all spoken latin, and not some the punicall
tongue, S. Augustine would never have written, Lib. 1. de peccatoru^ meritis et
remissione. ca. 24.
Punici Christiani baptismum, salutem, Eucharistiam, vitam vocant: That those
Christianes which speak the punicall tongue, call baptism in their language,
health or Salvation, and the Eucharist, life. Wherefore we see that there were
Latin christianes, and punicall christianes in Aphrica, of whom all
understood not the latin service.

And whereas S. Augustine, as you allege him, without showing the place (as
your manner is, whereby you may easily deceive the reader) has these words in
his sermons to the common people diverse times: Nunc loquar latin, vt omnes
intelligatis, now will I speak latin, that you may all understand me: of
that saying, if any such be, may be gathered, that sometimes he spoke in the
punicall tongue to the punicall christianes, not understanding the latin: but
now among the Latin Aphricanes, that were of the Roman kind, and
understood not the punike, he would speak latin, that all such should
understand him.

Who so desires further to be persuaded, that the people of Aphrica called
Poeni, spoke and understood their own punicall tongue, and not the latin
tongue, as likewise the people of Spaigne, named Iberi, spoke that language
which was proper to them: let him read Titus Liuius de bello Macedonico. For
there he records, that when those of Aphrica, or of Spaigne and the Romans
came together for parle and talk: they used an interpreter.

And Vlpianus the Lawier a great officer about Alexander Seuerus the Emperor,
at the beginning of Christen Religion, In l fideicommissa ff. d. leg. 3.
writes, that fidei commissa may be left in all vulgar tongues. and puts
for examples, the Punicall and the French, or rather Gallicall tongue.

This much or more might here be said of the language of the people of Gallia,
now called France; which the^ was barbarouse and vulgar, and not only
latin, and yet had they of that nation their Service then in Latin: as all
the West church had. That the common language of the people there was vulgar,
the use of the latin serving for the learned, as we must needs judge: we have
first, the authority of Titus Liuius. Ab vrbe condita. lib. 7.
Who writes, that a Galloes, or as now we say, a French man of a notable
stature, provoked a Roman to fight with him man for man, making his challenge
by an Interpreter. Which had not ben done, in case the latin tongue had been
common to that nation: Next, the place of Vlpianus before mentioned: Then, the
record of Aelius Lampridius, who writes, that a woman of the order of the
Druides, In vita Alexandri Mamaeae.
cried out a loud to Alexander Seuerus Mammaea her son the Emperor, as he
marched foreward on a day with his army, gallico sermon, in the gallicall
tongue, these words, boding his death. which right so shortly after followed:
Vadas, nec victoriam speres, ne militi tuo credas. Go thy way, and look not
for the victory, trust not thy soldier. Lastly, the witness of S. Hierom, who
having travailed over that region, and therefore being skilful of the whole
state thereof; In prooemio 2. comment. ad Galatas.
acknowlegeth the people of Treueres and of that territory, to have a peculiar
language, diverse from latin and greek.

If all that I have brought here touching this matter, be well weighed, it
will seem probable, I doubt not, that all sorts of people in Aphrica,
understood not the Service, which they had in the latin tongue. And no less
may be thought of Gallia and Spaigne. And so far it is proved against M.
Iuelles stowte assertion, that within his syx hundred years after Christ, some
Christen people had their common prayers and Service, in a tongue they
understood not.

And thus all his allegations brought for proof of his saying in this
behalf, be answered, the place of S. Paul to the Corinthians excepted. Which
er I answer, I will according to my promise prove, The antiquity of the latin
Service in the church of England.
that about nine hundred years past, yea a thousand also, and therefore some
deal within his syx hundred years, even in S. Gregory's time, the Service was
in an unknown tongue in this land of England, then called Britain, and
begone to be called England, at least for so much, as since, and at these
days, is called by the name of England.

Beda an English man, that wrote the ecclesiastical storye of the English
nation, in the year of our lord 731. and of their coming in to Britain, about
285. records, that S. Augustine and his company, who were sent hither to
convert the English people to the faith of Christ, which the Britons here had
professed long before having a safe conducte granted the by king Ethelbert, to
preach the gospel, where they would: said and song their service in a
church builded of old time in the honor of S. Martine, adjoining on the east
side of the head city of Kent, whiles the Romans dwelt in Britain. The
words of Beda be these. Lib. 1. hist. ecclesiast. cap 26.
In hac (ecclesia) conuenire primo, psallere, orare, missas facere, praedicare
and baptizare coeperunt. In this church they began first to assemble them
selves together, to sing, to pray, to say Mass, to preach and to baptize.
It is plain, that this was the Service. And no doubt they resorted to it, who
believed and were of them baptized, wondering (as Bede says) at the
simplicity of their innocent life, and swetnes of their heavenly doctrine. In
English it was not, for they had no skille of that tongue, as Bedo shows, lib.
1. cap. 23. And therefore er they entered the land, they took with them by
commandment of S. Gregory, Lib. 1. c. 25.
interpreters out of france. Which interpreters served for open preaching and
private instruction, exhortation and teaching. In synging and saying the
Service, there was no use of the^. Whereas S. Augustine, after that the English
nation had received the faith, and he had been made Archbishop over them,
having fownde, the faith being one, diversity of customs in diverse churches,
one manner of Masses in the holy Roman church, an other in that of France:
for this and certain other purposes, sent two of his clergy, Laurence and
Peter to Rome, to be advertised amongst other things, what order, manner and
custom of Masses it liked S. Gregory, the churches of the English nation
should have: hereunto that holy father answered, that what he espied either in
the Roman or French, or any other church, that might be most acceptable to
almighty god, he should choose out, and gather together, and comme^de the same
to the church of England, there to be left in custom to continewe. lib. 1.
cap. 27. If it had then ben thought necessary, the Service of the Mass to be
in English, or if it had been translated in to the English tongue: it is not to
be thought, that Bid, who declares all things concerning matters of Religion
so diligently, specially professing to write an ecclesiastical storye, would
have passed over that in silence. And if the Mass had been used in the English
tongue, the monumentes and books so much multiplied among the churches, would
have remained in some place or other. And doubteles some mention would have been
made of the time and causes of the leaving such kind of Service, and of
beginning the new latin Service. As certain of S. Gregory's works turned
in to English by Bid him self, have been kept, so as they remain to this
day. S. Gregory him self is a witness of right good authority unto us, that
this land of England, which he calls Britain, in his time, that is almost a
thousand years past: had the common prayers and Service in an unknown tongue,
without doubt in Latin, much in like sort, as we have of old time had, till
now. His words be these. Ecce (omnipotens dominus) pene cunctarum iam gentium
corda penetrauit, Expositionis in Job li. 27. ca. 6
ecce in vna fide Orientis limitem Occidentisque coniunxit. Ecce lingua
Britanniae, quae nil aliud nouerat, quam Barbarum frendere, iam dudum in
diuinis laudibus Hebraeum coepit Halleluia resonare. Behold our lord almighty
has now pierced the hearts almost of all nations. Behold he has joined the
borders of the East and the West in one faith together. Behold the tongue of
Britain, that could nothing else but gnashe barbarously, has begone now of
late in divine service to sownde the Hebrewe Halleluia.

Bid in the end of his second book, shows, that one James a deacon of the
church of York, a very cunning man in song, sone after the faith had been
spread abroad here, as the number of beleuers grew, began to be a master or
teacher of synging in the church, after the manner of the Romans. The like he
writes of one Eddi surnamed Stephanus, that taught the people of
Northumberland to sing the Service after the Roman manner, and of Putta a holy
man, bishop of Rochester, commending him much for his great skille of synging
in the church, after the use and manner of the Romans, which he had learned
of the disciples of S. Gregory.

These be testimonies plain and evident enough, that at the beginning the
churches of England had their divine Service in Latin, and not in English. One
place more I will recite out of Bid, most manifest of all other, for proof
hereof. In the time of Agatho the Pope, there was a reverent man called John,
Archicantor, that is chief chaunter or synger of S. Peter's church at Rome,
and Abbot of the monastery of S. Martin there. Benedicte an abbot of Britain,
having builded a monastery at the mowth of the River Murus, (Bid so calls
it) sued to the Pope for co^firmations, liberties, fraunchesies, privileges,
etc. as in such case has been accustomed. Among other things, he obtained this
cunning Chaunter John, to come with him into Britain, to teach song.

Because Bedes ecclesiastical storye is not very common, I have thought good,
here to recite his own words, thus englished. This Abbot Benedicte took with
him the foresaid John, to bring him in to Britain, that he should teach in his
monastery, the course of service for the whole year, so as it was done at S.
Peter's in Rome. John did as he had commandment of the Pope, both in teaching
the synging men of the said monastery the order and rite of synging and
reading with utterance of their voice, and also of writing and prycking those
things, that the compass of the whole year required, in the celebration and
keeping of the holy days. Which be kept in the same monastery, till this
day, and be copied out of many rownde about on every cost. Neither did that
John teach the brethren of that monastery only, but also many other made all
the means they could, to get him to other places, where they might have him
to teach. This far Bid. I trow no man will think, that this Roman
taught and wrote the order and manner of synging and pronouncing the Service of
the churches of this land, in the English tongue.

If it had been demed of the learned and godly governors of Christen people
then a necessary point to salvation, to have had the service in the english:
no man had been so apt and fit to have translated it, as he, who in those
days had by special grace of God, a singular gift to make songs and sonets
in english meter, to serve religion and devotion. His name was Cednom. Cednom.
of whom Bid writes merueilouse things. How he made diverse songs
containing matter of the holy scripture, with such exceeding swetenes, and with
such a grace, as many feeling their hearts compuncte and prickte with hearing
and reading of the^, withdrewe them selves from the love of the world, and were
enke^dled with the desyer of the heavenly life. Many says Bid of the english
nation attempted after him to make religiouse and godly poetries, but none
could do comparably to him. For he was not (says he alluding to S. Paul's
words) taught of men, Galat. 1.
neither by man, that art of making godly songs: but received from God that
gift freely. And therefore he could make no wanton, tryfling, or vain ditties,
but only such, as perteined to godly Religion, and might seem to proceed of a
head guyded by the holy ghost. lib. 4. cap. 24. This divine poet Cednom, though
he made many and sundry holy works, having their whole argument out of holy
scripture, as Bede reports: yet never made he any piece of the Service to be
used in the church. Thus the faith has continewed in this land among the
English people, from the 14. year of the reign of Mauritius the Emperor,
almost these thousand years, The first entree of the English Service.
and until the late king Edwardes time, the English Service was never heard
of, at least way never in the church of England by public authority
received and used.

Now touching the scripture by M. Iuell, and by all them of that side alleged,
for the Service to be had in the vulgar tongue. In the 14. chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians, S. Paul treats of the use of tongues, so as it was
in the primitive church a special gift. As the faithful folk came together
to pray and to hear gods word, some one man suddeinly stood up, and spoke in
the congregation with tongues of many nations, Spiritu insusurrante, as
Chrysostom says, that is, by inspiration or prompting of the spirit, so, as
neither others that were present, neither him self, after the opinion of
Chrysostom, understood, what he said: That gift the Apostle did not forbid.
For that every gift of God is good, and nothing by him done in vain: but
dehorted the Corinthians from the vain and ambitiouse use of it, and therefore
did much extenuate the same, and preferred prophesying, that is the gift to
interpret and expound scriptures, far before it. It was not in the church,
but in the Apostles time, or a very short while after them, and that all
together by miracle, the holy ghost being the worker of it.

The place of S. Paul to the Corinthians makes not for the Service in the
English tongue.
As concernig the order of the common prayers and public Service, in such sort
as we have now, and that age had not: S. Paul mentions nothing, neither
speaheth one word in that whole chapter, but of the use of the miraculouse
gift, as is said before. And therefore his sayings out of that chapter, be
not fittely alleged of M. Iuell and the rest of our adversaries, against the
manner of prayers and Service of the church now received and of long time used,
which in the West is uttered in the latin tongue, not by way of miracle or
peculiar gift, but according to the institution and ordinance of the church.
Profecto enim coelu^ Ecclesia tu^ fuit. In 1. Cor. 14. ho. 37.
In very deed says Chrysostom, the church then was a heaven, when as the
holy ghost administered all things, moderated all the headdes of the church,
caughte each one with his inspiration. As for now, we keep but the steps
only of those things. We speak two or three of us, and that a sundre, and
one holding his peace, an other begins. But these be but signs only and
memorials of things. And so when we have begone, (he means Dominus
vobiscum) and cum spiritu tuo, the people answers: meaning to signify
thereby, that so in old time they spoke, not of their own wisdom, but of
the instincte of the spirit of God. This much Chrysostom of the heavenly
manner of the primitive church in the Apostles time. Now if in these days the
manner were like, if it pleased the holy ghost to power upon us the like
abundance of grace, as to do all things for us, to rule the headdes of all
faithful people, to carry each one of us with his divine inspiratio^, and
when we came to church together for comfort and edifying, to give in to our
hearts and put in to our mowthes by daily miracle, what we should pray, and
what we should preach, and how we should handle the scriptures: In this case no
catholic christen man would allow the unfruitful speaking with strange and
unknown tongues without interpretation, to the let and hinderance of gods
word to be declared, and to the keeping of the people only in gasing and
wondering, from saying Amen, and giving their assent to the godly blessing and
thanks giving. But the order of the church now is far otherwise. We have
not those miraculouse gifts, and right well may we do with out them. For the
speaking with tongues, was instead of a sign or wonder, not to them that
believed, but to the unbelievers. And signs be for the unfaithful, the
faithful have no need of them. In churches, I mean where ancient order is
kept, whiles the Service is song or said, the ministers do not speak with
tongues, or with a tongue, in such sort as S. Paul understood: but they do
read and rehearse things set forth and appointed to them. S. Paul rebukes
them, who speaking with tongues, let the preachers, so as the people present
might not be edifyed. The Latin Service is not so done in the church, as the
exposition of the scriptures be thereby excluded. In the Apostles time, they
came to church, to the intent they might profitably exercise the gifts God
gave them, and by the same, specially by the gift of prophesying, edify one
an other, and teach one an other. Now adays they come not to church together
one to teach an other, and to expound the scriptures in common: but to pray,
and to hear the opening of Gods word, not one of an other with out order, but
of some one, to wit, the bishop, priest, curate, or other spiritual
governor and teacher. And for as much as all the people can not hear the
priests prayers at th'aulter (which has from the Apostles time hitherto ever
ben a place to celebrate the holy oblation at) tourning him self for the most
part to the East, according to Apostolic tradition, in what tongue so ever
they be uttered, for distance of the place they remain in: it is no
inconvenience, such admitted in to the quyer, as have better understanding of
that is said or song: that the rest remain in semely wise in the nether
part of the church, and there make their humble prayers to God, by them
selves in silence, in that language, they best understand, conforming them
selves to the priests blessing and thanks giving through faith and obedience
with their brethren in the quyer, and giving assent to the same, understanding
some good part of that is done, as declared by often preaching, and by holy
outward ceremonies, perceiueable to the senses of the simplest.

Fol. 15.
Where as you M. Iuell allege S. Paul for your purpose, and make him to say
thus, otherwise then he wrote: 1. Cor. 14.
If thou make thy prayer in the congregation with thy Spirit or noise of
strange words, how shall the unlearned man thereunto say amen? for he
knows not what thou say: you bombaste this text with your own
counterfeit stuffing. The tra^slatio^ auctorised by king Edward and his
counsel, is truer, and follows the greek nearer, which has thus. When thou
blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the rome of the
unlearned, say amen at thy geuyng of thanks, seeing he vndestandeth not, what
thou say? Here the Apostle saint Paul speaks of blessing or thanks giving
with the spirit, which spirit what it is, it is not easy to declare, after
the judgment of your own patriarch John Calvin. Saint Ambrose takes it for
the spirit we have received in baptism, that does incline and move us to
prayer. S. Thomas for the holy ghost given to us, for reason, and for the
power imaginatiue. Erasmus for the voice it self. Isidorus Clarius for the
power of pronouncing or utterance. some for the breath that passes the throat,
some for the intention, S. Augustine very subtily, pro apprehensione quae ideas
concipit and signa rerum. Calvin in his Institutions, De Oratione cap. 15. for
the sownde of the mowth, that is caused of the breath of a man's throat and
rebownding of the air. Chrysostom for the spiritual gift, or the gift of
the holy ghost to speak with tongues. Which Calvin him self sytting in
judgment as it were upon this doubtefull matter, allows best, and condemns
the mind of all others, and also his own, though unawares, as it seems and so
he would condemn your noise of strange words likewise, if he heard it. This
text being so doubtefull of it self in sense, so put out of tune by your
noise of strange words, wherewith you descant upon the word Spirit, so
violently applied by your new fangled exposition, makes little to the
condemnation of the latin Service in the latin church: specially seeing that
S. Paul means by that miraculouse speaking with tongues, used or rather abused
among the Corinthians, a far different manner of speaking from that speaking,
whereby the priest utters the common Service.

The priest (I grant) saying his Service to his parish, speaks with a tongue,
but such manner of speaking is not that, which S. Paul meant. For the priest
understands it for the better part, if he be learned, and the people be not
utterly ignorant, because of often preaching, long custom, solemn feasts and
sundry ceremonies. And therefore your argument gathered out of that text,
concludes nothing against having the Service in the learned latin tongue not
perfitely understood of the unlearned people.

Verily if you admit the exact judgment of S. Augustine concerning this
place of S. Paul, vide Aug. lib. 12. de Genesi ad litera^. c. 7. 8. and 9. to. 3
then must you seek for other scriptures and proufes of your English Service.
For as he discusseth this point learnedly, by the tongue S. Paul means not the
Latin, Greek, or Hebrewe among the unlearned people, or any other alien or
strange tongue: but only, and that by way of metaphore, any manner of
vttera^ce, whereby the signs of things are pronounced, before they be
understood. And by the Spirit, he understands not a noise of strange
words, after your strange interpretation, but, as it is here in a certain
proper and peculiar manner taken, a power of the soul inferior to the mind,
which conceiueth the similitudes of things, and understands them not. And
things so uttered, be uttered with the tongue and spirit, whether it be in
English or Latin, or any other language.

And Sir, although the people understand not in most exact wise, what the
priest says in the Latin service, yet have they commodity and profit
thereby, so far as it pleases God to accept the common prayer of the
church, pronounced by the priest for them.

But S. Paul (say they) requires that the people give assent, and conform
them selves unto the priest, by answering Amen to his prayer made in the
congregation. Verily in the Primitive church this was necessary, when the
faith was a learning. And therefore the prayers were made then in a common
tongue known to the people, for cause of their further instruction who being of
late converted to the faith, and of paynimes made christians, had need in all
things to be taught. But after that the faithful people was multiplied and
increaced in great numbers, and had been so well instructed in all points of
Religion, as by their own accord they conformed them selves to the ministers
at the common prayers: in the Latin church the Service was set out in Latin,
and it was thought sufficient, part of the people in the quyer, to answer for
the whole people. And this has been esteemed for a more expedite and convenient
order, then if it were in the vulgar tongue of every nation.

I grant they can not say Amen to the blessing or thankes-geuing of the
priest, so well as if they understood the Latin tongue perfitely. Yet they
give assent to it, and ratify it in their hearts, and do conform them selves
unto the priest, though not in special, yet in general: that is to wit,
though not in every particular sentence of praise and thankes-geuing, or in
every several petition, yet in the whole. For if they come to church with a
right and good intent, as the simple do, no less then the learned: their
desire is to render unto god glory, praise and honor, and to thank him for
benefits received, and with all, to obtain of him things behofull for them
in this life, and in the life to come. And without doubt this godly affection
of their minds, is so acceptable to God, as no understanding of words may be
compared with it. This requysite assent and conforming of them selves to the
priest, they declare by sundry outward tokens and gestures: as by standing up
at the gospel and at the preface of the Mass, by bowing them selves down and
adoring at the Sacrament, by kneeling at other times, as when pardon and mercy
is humbly asked, and by other like signs of devotion, in other parts of the
Service.

And whereas S. Paul seems to disallowe praying with tongues in the common
assemble, because of want of edifying, and to esteem the utterance of five
words or sentences with understanding of his meaning, that the rest might be
instructed thereby, more then ten thousand words in a strange and unknown
tongue: all this is to be referred to the state of that time, which was much
unlike the state of the church we be now in. The tongue of the prayers which S.
Paul speaks of, was utterly strange and unknown, and served for a sign to
the unbelievers. The latin tongue in the latin church is not all together
strange and unknown. For beside the priest, in most places some of the rest
have understanding of it, more or less, and now we have no need of any such
sign. They needed instruction: we be not ignorant of the chief points of
Religion. They were to be taught in all things: we come not to church
specially and chiefly to be thaught at the Service, but to pray, and to be
taught by preaching. Their prayer was not vaileable for lack of faith, and
therefore was it to be made in the vulgar tongue, for increace of faith. Our
faith will stand us in better stead, if we give our selves to devout prayer.
They for lack of faith, had need of interpretation, both in prayers, and also
in preaching, and all other spiritual exercises. We having sufficient
instruction in the necessary rudimentes of our faith, for the rest, have more
need by earnest and fervent prayer, to make suit unto God, for an upright pure
and holy life, then to spend much time in hearing for knowledge. Concerning
which thing, Chrysostom has this saying. Profecto si orare cum diligentia
insuescas, Contra Anomaeo^ homil. 3.
nihil est quod doctrinam tui conserui desideres, quum ipse Deus sine vllo
interpret mentem abunde luce asficiat. Verily if thou use to pray diligently,
there is nothing, why thou should desire teaching of thy fellow servant,
seeing God him self does abundantly lighten thy mind without any interpreter.

I would not here that any man should lay to my charge the defense of
ignorance, as though I enuyed the people any godly knowledge. I wish them to
have all heavenly knowledge, and to be ignorant of nothing necessary to their
Salvation. Yea even with my very heart I wish with Moses. Number. 11.
Quis tribunt vt omnis populus prophetet, and det dominus illis spiritum suum!
O that all the people could prophecy, and were learned in gods holy word, and
that our lord would give them his spirit! But all the common people to
understand the priest at the Service, I think wise ad godly men judge it not a
thing so necessary, as for the which the ancient order of the church with no
little offense, public and universal authority not consulted, should be
condemned, broken, and quite abrogated by private advise of a few.

If defaulte were in this befalse justly fownde, it is known, to whom the
redress pertains. Concerning the state of Religion, in all ages the general
Council representing the universal church, for all sores has ordained
holesom remedies. Where they be not heard, Luc. 10.
of whom Christ said, He that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth
you, dispiseth me: it is to be feared, that concerning the service, the new
learned boldness is not so acceptable to God, as the old simple humility. It
were good the people having humble and reverent hearts, understood the
Service, I deny not. Yet all stands not in understanding. S. Augustine
says notably, Co^tra Manichaeos. epist. Fundamenti. cap. 4.
turba^ non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi simplicitas, tutissimam facit.
That as for the common people, it is not the quiknesse of understanding, but
the simplicity of believing, that makes them safest of all. And in an other
place, Ad Enodiu^ epist. 102.
Si propter eos solos Christus mortuus est, qui certa intelligentia possunt
ista discernere, pene frustra in Ecclesia laboramus. If Christ (says he) dyed
only for them which can with certain or suer understanding discern these
things (concerning God) then is the labor we take in the church, in manner in
vain. God requires not so much of us, how much we understand, as how much we
believe, and through belefe, how much we love. And when we shall all appear
before Christ in that dreadful day of judgment, when shall not be required to
give an account of our understanding, but faith presupposed, of our charity.

Now though the people know not the Latin tongue, and albeit it were better,
The benefit of prayer uttered in a tongue not understood.
they had the Service in their own vulgar tongue, for the better understanding
of it: yet as it is, for as much as it consists in manner all together of the
scriptures, that great profit comes both to the reader and to the hearer of
it: Origin shows at large, in the twe^tith homily upon Iosue. Because it
were over long to bring all that he says there to this purpose, the sum of
the whole may thus be abbridged.

First that the heavenly powers and angels of God, which be with us, have
great lyking in our vttera^ce of the words of the scripture. Though we
understand not the words we utter with our mowth, yet those powers (says he)
understand them, and thereby be invited, and that with delight, to help us. And
speaking of the powers that be within us, to whom charge of our souls and
bodies is committed, he says, that if the scriptures be read of us, they have
pleasure therein, and be made the stronger toward taking heed to us, yea and
that if we speak with tongues, and our spirit pray, and our sense be with out
fruit. And there he alleges to that purpose, the common place of S. Paul to
the Corinthia^s, calling it merueilouse, and in manner a mystery, showing how
the spirit prays, the sense being with out fruit. After this he declares
the evil powers and our ghostly ennemies the devil, by our reading and
hearing of the scriptures, to be driven from us. As by enchauntements says
he, snakes be stayed from doing hurt with their venyme, so if there be in us
any serpent of contrary power, or if any snake wait privily to mischief us:
by virtue of the holy scripture rehearsed (so that for weariness thou turn
not away thy hearing) he is put away. S. Augustine confirms the same
doctrine, where he says, In prologo Psalmorum.
psalmus daemones fugat, angelos in adiutorium inuitat. The psalm (read
devoutly or heard) puts deuilles to flight, and provoke angels to help.
At lenght Origin showing how by meat or drink we find remedy for sore eyes,
though we feel no benefit forthwith in eating or drynking (he concludes his
special part of the comparison with these words): In this wise we must
believe also of the holy scripture, that it is profitable, and does good to the
soul, etiamsi sensus noster ad praesens intelligentiam non capit, although
presently our sense do not atteine the meaning or understanding, because our
good powers by these words be refreshed and fed, and the contrary, that is,
our adversary powers, are weakened and put to flight. At lenght making
objection to him self on the behalf of his hearers, as though they should lay
this doctrine to his charge for excuse of taking further pains in preaching
and expounding the scriptures to them: thereto he answers and says. No no,
we have not said these to you for that cause, neither have we uttered these
things to you for excuse, but to show you, in Scripturis sanctis esse vim
quandam, quae legenti etiam sine explanatione sufficiat: that in the holy
scriptures there is a certain power or strength, which is sufficient for one
that reads it, yea without any expounding of it. This sufficiency he
refers (I think) to the procuring of the good powers to help us, and to
the dryuing away the malice of the evil powers our ghostly enemies, that they
hurt us not.

I trust wise godly and steadfast men, who be not carried about with every wind
of doctrine, will be moved more with the authority of Origin, a man always
in the judgment of all the christian world accounted most excelle^tly learned,
the^ with the scorning of Calvin, who speaking of the ancient latin Service
used in England and France, says: In Institutionib.
ad Ecclesia^ ex sono non intellecto, nullus penitus fructus redit: that of the
sownde not understood no fruit at all retourneth to the church: using that
word of dispite, that might better be spoken by a mynstrell of his pype and
taburrette, then by a preacher, of the divine Service. Neither hereof with any
milder spirit speaks his disciple and subminister Theodore Beza, the hot
minister of the deformed churches of France. Confessionis. ca. 4. Sectio^e. 16
Quaecunque preces ab aliquo concipiuntur eo idiomate, quod ipse non
intelligat, pro Dei ludibrio sunt habendae. What prayers so ever be made
(says he) of any man in a tongue that he understands not, they be to be
taken for a mockery of God. Who so ever here allows Calvin and Beza
condemned of the church, must condemn Origin, for this point never reproved
nor touched of any, that have not spared him, where so ever they could charge
him with any error. If all prayers made in an unknown tongue be a mocking of
God, as Beza says: then were the prayers uttered by miracle in the primitive
church with tongues (which the vtterers them selves understood not, after the
mind of Chrysostom) a mocking of god: for I see nothing, whereby they are
excluded from his general saying and universal proposition. Verily this
teaching of Beza is not sownde. I wene, if he were out of the protection of his
deformed churches, and co^uented before a catholic bishop to give an account
of this doctrine, he would step back and revoke that rash saying again.
For else he should seem to grant, that God gave at the beginning of the church,
the gift of tongues to be mokte withal, which were very absurd and
blasphemouse. S. Paul wishes that all the Corinthians spoke with tongues, but
rather that they prophesied.

If our new masters condemn the Latin Service in the Latin church, for
that the people understand it not, thereof must it follow, that the English
service, so much of it as consists of Dauides psalms, which is the most
part, be also condemned. The like may besayde of other nations. For how many
shall we find not of the people only, but also of the best learned me^, that
understand the meaning of them, in what tongue so ever they be set forth? S.
Hilarie co^pareth the book of psalms to a heap of keys, Praesat. in Psalmos.
that be to open the doors of every house of a great city, laid together.
Among who^ it is hard to find, which keye serves which lock, and without the
right keye, no door can be opened. S. Augustine lykeneth the people of Aphrica
synging the Psalms which they understood not, to owselles, popiniayes,
ravens, pyes, and such other birds, which be taught to sound, they know not
what, and yet they understood the tongue they sang them in. And therefore he
exhorts them to learn the meaning of them at his preaching, least they should
sing not with human reason, (as is before recited) but with voice only, as
birds do.

The rest of the scriptures whereof the Service consists, is, though not all
together so obscure as the psalms, yet verily darker and harder, then that the
common peoples gross and simple wits may pearce the understanding of it, by
hearing the same pronounced of the minister in their mother tongue. And by this
reason we should have no Service at all gathered out of the scriptures, for
defaulte of understanding. And whereas of the Service in the vulgar tongue, the
people will frame lewd and perverse meanings of their own lewd senses: So of
the Latin Service, they will make no constructions either of false doctrine,
or of evil life. And as the vulgar Service pulls their minds from private
devotion to hear, and not to pray, to little benefit of knowledge, for the
obscurity of it: so the latin giving them no such motion, they occupy them
selves, whiles the priest prays for all, and in the person of all, in their
private prayers, all for all, and every one for him self.

Such nations as use church Service in their own tongue, continevve in
schisms. In epistola ad graecos.
The nations that have ever had their Service in their vulgar tongue, the people
thereof have continewed in schisms, errors, and certain Judicial
obseruances, so, as they have not ben reckened in the number of the catholic
church. As the Christians of Moschouia, of Armenia, of Prester John his land
in Ethiopia. Bessarion asking by way of a question, of the Greeks his country
men, what church that is, against the which hell gates shall never prevail:
answers him self, and says: Aut Latina, aut Greca est Ecclesia, tertia
enim dari non potest. Siquidem aliae omnes haeresibus sunt plenae, quas sancti
patres and generales Synodi condemnarunt. Either it is the Latin, or the Greek
church, for there is no third, that can be granted. For all other churches be
full of heresies, which the holy fathers and general councelles, have
condemned. Wherefore of these churches no example ought to be taken for Service
in the vulgar tongue, as neither of the churches of Russia and Morauia, and
certain other, to whom above syx hundred years past, it was granted, to have
the Mass in the Sclauons tongue, through special license thereto obtained of
the Sea Apostolic, by Cyrullus and Methodius, that first converted them to the
faith. Which manner of service, so many of them as be catholic, for good causes
have left, and use the Latin, as other Latin churches do. Concerning the
rest yet keeping their Sclauon tongue, beside other errors and defaultes, for
which they are not herein to be esteemed worthy to be followed: we may say of
them, the words of Gregory Nazianzene. Priuilegia paucorum, non faciunt legem
communem: The privileges of a few, make not a thing laufull in common.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing in syx hundred years after Christ, the Service of
the church was not in any other, then in the Greek and Latin tongue, for that
any man is able to show by good ptoufe, and the same not understood of all
people: seeing the auctorities by M. Iuell alleged, importe no necessary
argument nor direct commandment of the vulgar tongue, but only of plain
and open pronouncing, and that where the tongue of the Service was understood:
seeing the church of the English nation had their Service in the Latin tongue
to them unknown, well near a thousand years past: seeing the place of S. Paul
to the Corinthians either pertains not to this purpose, or if it be so
granted, for the diversity of states of that and of this our time, it
permits a diversity of observation in this behalf, though some likeness and
resemblance yet reserved: seeing great profit comes to the faithful people
having it so as they understand it not: Finally seeing the examples rehearsed
herein to be followed, be of small authority, in respect either of antiquity,
or of true Religion: As the bold assertion of M. Iuell is plainly disproued,
so the old order of the Latin Service in the Latin church, whereof England
is a province, is not rashly to be condemned: specially whereas being first
committed to the churches by the Apostles of our country, and the first
preachers of the faith here, it has been auctorised by continuance almost of a
thousand years without control or gaynesaying, to the glory of God, the wealth
of the people, and procuring of help from heaven, always to this land.

And to add hereunto this much last of all, though it might be granted, that
it were good, the Service were in the vulgar tongue, as in English for our
country of England: yet doubteles good men and zelouse kepers of the catholic
faith, will never allow the Service devised in king Edwardes time now restored
again, not so much for the tongue it is in, as for the order it self and
disposition of it, lacking some things necessary, and having some other
things repugnant to the faith and custom of the catholic church.

Or that the bishop of Rome was then called an universal bishop, or the head
of the universal church.
Of the Popes Primacie.
ARTICLE 4.
BY what name so ever the bishop of Rome was called within syx hundred years
after Christ's ascension, this is clear, that his Primacie, that is to say,
supreme power and authority over and above all bishops, and chief government
of all Christ's flock, in matters perteining to faith and Christen religion,
was then acknowleged and confessed. Which thing being so, whether then he
were called by either of those names, that you deny, or no: it is not of great
importance. And yet for the one of them somewhat, and for the other, an
infinite number of good authorities may be alleged. But thereof hereafter.

Now concerning the chief point of this article, which is the Primacie of the
Pope, Peter's successor. First, it has been set up and ordained by God, so as
it Iure diuino, by gods law, and not only by man's law, the scriptures
leadinge thereto. Next, commended to the world, by decrees of councelles, In
this treatise seeking to avoid prolixitie, having purposed to say somewhat to
this number of the other Articles, and knowing this matter of the Primacie to
be already largely and learnedly handeled of others: will but trippe as it
were lightly over at this time, and not set my fast footing in the deep
debating and treating of it.

The Popes Primacie not of Man, but of gods ordinance. The first proof of the
Popes primacie, scripture expounded Matthew. 16.
First, as concerning the right of the Popes primacie by gods law, by these
ancient autorities it has been avouched. Anacletus that holy bishop and martyr
S. Peter's scholar, and of him consecrated priest, in his epistle to the bishops
of Italy, writes thus. In nouo testamento post Christum, etc. In the new
testament the order of priests began after our lord Christ, of Peter,
because to him bishoprike was first given in the church of Christ, where as
our lord said unto him. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and unto thee I
will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore this Peter received of
our lord first of all, power to bind and to lowse, and first of all, he
brought people to the faith, by virtue of his preaching. As for the other
Apostles, they received honor and power in like fellowship with him, and willed
him to be their prince, or chief governor.

In an other epistle to all bishops, alleging the same text, for the
Primacie of the Sea of Rome, speaking of the disposition of churches committed
to Patriarchs and Primates, says thus most plainly. This holy ad Apostolic
church of Rome, has obtained the Primacie, not of the Apostles, but of our
lord Savior him self, and has gotten the preeminence of power over all
churches, and over the whole flock of Christen people, even so as he said to
blessed Peter The Apostle: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock etc.

S. Gregory writing to Mauritius the Emperor Cunctis euangelium scientibus,
liquet etc. Epist. 32.
It is evident to all that know the gospel, that the cure and charge of the
whole church, has been committed by the word of our lord, to the holy Apostle
Peter prince of all the Apostles. for to him it is said. Peter, Joan. 21. Luc.
22.
love thou me? feed my sheep. to him it is said: Behold Satan has
desired to syfte you, as it were wheat, and I have prayed for thee Peter, that
thy faith fail not. And thou being once converted, strengthen thy brethren. To
him it is said. Thou art Peter, Matthew. 26
and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And unto the I will give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. And what so ever thou byndest upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven,
and what so ever thou lowsest on earth shable lovvsed also in heaven. Behold
he receives the keys of the heavenly kingdom: Cura ei totius Ecclesiae and
principatus committitur.
the power of bynding and lowsing is given to him: the charge of the whole
church and principality is committed to him. Thus far Gregory. But because
our adversaries though without just cause, refuse the witness of the Bishops of
Rome in this article, as unlawful witnesses in their own cause, were they
never so holy martyrs or learned confessors: they may understand, we are able
to allege sundry other authorities to the confirmation hereof, that be above
all exception.

Neque enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, etc. Neither have heresies or
schisms risen of any other occasion, then of that, the Priest of God is not
obeyed, and that one Priest for the time in the church, and one judge for the
time instead of Christ, is not thought upon. To whom if the whole brotherhed
(that is, the whole number of Christian people which be brethren together and
were so called in the primative church) would be obedient according to gods
teachinges: Secu^dum magisteria diuina
then no man would make adoo against the college of priests, no man would
make him self judge, not of the bishop now, but of God, after gods judgment,
after the favor of the people declared by their voices at the Election, after
the consent of his felowbishops: no man through breach of unity and strife,
would divide the church of Christ: no man standing in his own conceit and
swelling with pride, would set up by him self abroad without the church, a
new heresy.

Of all other authorities, that of Athanasius, and of the bishops of Egypt and
Libya gathered together in a Synod at Alexandria, is to be regarded. Who
making humble suit to Felix then bishop of Rome, for aid and succor against
the Arianes, through the whole epistle confessing the supreme authority of
that Apostolic See, utter these very words. Vestrae apostolicae sedis
imploramus auxilium etc. In primo tomo Co^ciliorum.
We humbly beseech you of the help of your Apostolic See. Because (as verily
we believe) God has not despised the prayers of his servants offered up to him
with tears, but has constituted and placed you and your predecessors, who
were Apostolic Prelates, in the highest tower or supreme state, In summitatis
arce constituit.
and commanded them to have cure and charge of all churches, to the intent, you
help and succor us, and that defending us (as to whom judgment of bishops is
committed) you forslowe not through negligence, to deliver us from our enemies.

Now if the Apostolic church of Rome has obtained the Primacie and
preeminence of power over all churches, and over the whole flock of Christen
people, of our lord Savior him self, as Anacletus says: If it be evident to
all that know the gospel, that the cure and charge of the whole church, has been committed to the holy Apostle Peter, Prince of all the Apostles, by the
word of our lord, as Gregory witnesses: If the whole brotherhed (that is to
say all christen folk) ought to obey the one high Priest or bishop of God,
and the one Judge that is Christ's Vicare, or in the steed of Christ for the
time, according to the precepts and teachinges of God, as Cyprian writes: If
it be God, that has placed and ordained the bishop of Rome in the highest
state of the church, as Athanasius with all the fathers of that Alexandrine
council records: If this I say be true: then is it easily seen, upon how
good grownde this doctrine stands, whereby it is affirmed, that the bishop of
Rome his Primacie has his force by gods law, and not only by man's law,
much less by unjust usurpation. The scriptures, by which as well these, as all
other holy and learned fathers were leadde to acknowledge and confess the
Primacie of Peter and his successors, were partly such, as Anacletus and
Gregory here alleges, and Cyprian means, as it appears by his third
treatise De simplicitate praelatorum, and sundry mo of the new testament, as
to the learned is known: of which to treat here largely, and piththely, as
the weight of the matter requires, at this time I have no leisure, neither if
I had, yet might I conveniently perform it in this treatise, which otherwise
will amount to a sufficient bigness, and that matter thoroughly handeled, will
fill a right great volume. Wherefore referring the readers to the credit of
these worthy fathers, who so understood the scriptures, as thereof they were
persuaded the Primacie to be attributed to Peter's successor by God him self:
I will proceed, keeping my prefixed order.

The 2. proof, cou^celles.
Whereas the preeminence of power and authority, which to the bishop of Rome by
special and singular privilege God has granted, is commended to the world
by many and sundry councelles: for avoiding of tediousness I will rehearse the
testimonies of a few. Among the canons made by the three hundred and eighten
bishops at the Nicene Council, which were in number 70. and all burnt by
heretics in the East church save xx. and yet the whole number was kept
diligently in the church of Rome in the original it self, sent to Syluester
the bishop there from the council, subscribed with the said 318. fathers
hands: Vide Fra^cisc. Turrianu^. lib. 3. charact. dogmat.
the 44. canon which is of the power of the patriarch over the Metropolitanes
and bishops, and of the Metropolitan over bishops, in the end has this
decree. Vt autem cunctis ditionis suae nationibus etc. As the patriarch bears
rule over all nations of his jurisdiction, and gives laws to them, and as
Peter Christ's vicare at the beginning set in authority over religion, over
the churches, and over all other things perteining to Christ, was Master and
ruler of christen princes, provinces, and of all nations: So he whose
principality or chieftie is at Rome, like unto Peter, and equal in
authority, obteineth the rule and souerainetie over all patriakes. After a
sewe words it follows there. If any man repine against this statute, or dare
resist it, by the decree of the whole council he is accursed.

Julius that worthy bishop of Rome not long after the council of Nice, in his
epistle that he wrote to the 90. Ariane bishops assembled in council at
Antioche, against Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, reproving them for their
unjust treating of him, says of the canons of the Nicene council, then fresh
in their remembrance: that they command, Non debere praeter sententia^ Romani
pontificis vllo modo concilia celebrari, nec episcopos damnari. That without
the authority of the Bishop of Rome, neither Councelles ought to be kept, nor
bishops condemned. Again, that nothing be decreed without the Bishop of Rome.
Cui haec and maiora ecclesiarum negotia, tam ab ipso domino, quam ab omnibus
vniuersorum conciliorum fratribus, speciali priuilegio contradita sunt. To whom
these and other the weighty matters of the churches be committed by special
privilege, as well by our lord him self, as by all our brethren of the whole
universal councelles. Among other principalle points, which he recites in
that epistle out of the Nicene councelles canons, this is one. Vt omnes
episcopi etc. That all bishops who sustain wrong, in weighty causes, so often
as need shall require, make their appeal freely to the Sea Apostolic, and
fly to it for succor, as to their mother, that from thence they may be
charitably sustained, defended, and delivered. To the disposition of which See,
the ancient authority of The Apostles, and their successors, and of the
canons, has reserved all weighty, or great ecclesiastical causes, and
judgments of bishops.

Athanasius and the whole company of bishops of Egypt, Thebaida and Libya,
assembled together in council at Alexandria, complaining in their epistle to
Felix the Pope of the great injuries and griefs they sustained at the Arianes:
alleges the determination of the Nicene council, touching the supreme
authority and power of that See Apostolic over all other bishops. Similiter
and a supradictis patribus est definitum consonanter etc. Likewise (say they)
it has been determined by common assent of the foresaid fathers (of Nice) that
if any of the bishops suspecte the Metropolitan, or their felowbishops of the
same province, or the judges: that then they make their appeal to your holy
See of Rome, to whom by our lord him self, power to bind and louse, Matt. 16.
by special privilege above other has been granted. This much alleged out
os the canons of the Nicene council, gathered partly out of Julius epistle,
who wrote to them that were present at the making of them, (which takes away
all suspicion of untruth) and partly out of Athanasius and others, that were a
great part of the same council. For further declaration of this matter, it
were easy here to allege the council of Sardica, the council of Chalcedon,
Ca. 4. ca. 9
certain councelles of Aphrica, yea some councelles also holden by heretics,
and sundry other, but such store of auctorities commonly known, these may
suffice.

The Christen princes that ratified and confirmed with their proclamations and
edictes, The 3. proof, Edictes of Emperors.
the decrees of the canons, concerning the Popes Primacie, and gave not to him
first that authority, as the adversaries do untruly report, were Justinian
and Phocas the Emperors. The words of Iustinianes edicte, be these. In
authe^t. de Eccles. tit.
Sancimus secundum canonum definitiones, sanctissimum senioris Romae Papam,
primum esse omnium sacerdotum. We ordeine according to the determinations of
the canons, that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome, be formest, and chief
of all priests,

About three score and ten years after Justinian, Phocas the Emperor in the
time of Bonifacius, to repress the arrogancy of the bishop of Constantinople,
Lib. 4. historiae lo^gobardicae cap. 36.
as Paulus Diaconus writes, who vainly, and as Gregory says, contrary to
our lords teachinges, and the decrees of the canons, and for that wickedly,
took upon him the name of the universal or oecumenicall bishop, and wrote him
self chief of all bishops: made the like decree and ordinance, that the holy
See of the Roman and Apostolic church should be holden for the head of all
churches.

The 4. proof, doctoures.
Of the doctors what shall I say? verily this matter is so often and so
commonly reported of them, that their sainges laid together, would scantly be
comprised within a great volume. The recital of a few shall here give a
taste, as it were, of the whole, and so suffice.

Lib. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus having much praised the church of Rome, at length utters these
words, by which the souerainetie thereof is confessed. Ad hanc Ecclesiam
propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem conuenire ecclesiam, hoc
est, eos qui vndique sunt fideles. To this church (of Rome) it is necessary,
all the church, that is to say, all that be faithful any where, to repair and
come together, for the mightier principality of the same, that is to wit,
for that it is of greater power and authority, then other churches, and the
principallest of all. Androw followed our Savior before that Peter did, and
tamen primatum non accepit Andreas, sed Petrus: and yet Androw received not the
Primacie, but Peter, In 2. Corinthians. 12.
says Ambrose. In the epistle of Athanasius and the bishops of Egipte to
Liberius the Pope, in which they sue for help against the oppressions of the
Arianes: we find these words. Huius rei gratia vniuersalis vobis a Christo
Jesus commissa est ecclesia etc. Even for this cause the universal church has been committed to you of Christ Jesus, that you should travail for all, and not
be negligent to help every one. Luc. 11.
for whiles the strong man being armed keeps his house, all things that he
possesses, are in peace.

Hilarious speaking much to th'extolling of Peter and his successor in that
See, says: De Trinita. lib. 6.
Supereminentem beatae fidei suae confessione locum promeruit: Matt. 16.
that for the confession of his blessed faith, he deserved a place of
preeminence above all other. S. Ambros confessing him self to believe, that the
largeness of the Roman Empire was by gods providence prepared, that the
gospel might have his course, and be spredde abroad the better, says thus of
Rome: De vocatione ge^tium. li. 2. cap. 6.
Quae tamen per Apostolici sacerdotij principatum, amplior facta est arce
religionis, quam solio potestatis. Which for all that, has been advanced more
by the chieftie of the Apostolic priesthod in the tower of Religion, then in
the throne of temporal power.

Saint Augustine in his 162. epistle, says: In Ecclesia Romana semper
apostolicae cathedrae viguit principatus. The primacie or principality of the
Apostolic chaier, Lib. 1. co^tra 2. epistolas Pelagianorum ad Bonifaciu^. cap.
1. Quamuis ipse in eo preemi^ celsiore fastigio speculae pastoralis. Lib. 2. de
baptismo, co^tra Donatistas.
has evermore ben in force in the Roman church. The same saint Augustine
speaking to Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, this care (says he complaining of the
Pelagians) is common to us all, that have the office of a bishop, albe it
therein, thou thy self have the preeminence over all, being on the top of
the pastoral watchetower. In an other place he has these words. Caeterum
magis vereri debeo, ne in Petrum contumeliosus existam. Quis enim nescit, illum
apostolatus principatum, cuilibet episcopatui praeferendum? But I ought rather
to be afraied, least I be reprochefull toward Peter. For who is he that
knows not, that that principality of Apostleship, is to be preferred before
any bishoprike that is?

An other most evident place he has in his book, De vtilitate credendi, Cap.
17.
ad Honoratum. Cum tantum auxilium Dei etc. Whereas (says he) we see so great
help of God, so great profit and fruit, shall we stand in doubt, whether
we may hide our selves in the lap of that church, which (though heretics
bark at it in vain rownde about, condemned partly by the judgment of the
people them selves, Culmen auctoritatis obtinuit. Cui primas dare nolle, vel
summae profecto impietatis est, vel praecipitis arrogantiae. Co^tra Luciferianos
partly by the sadness of Councelles, and partly by the majesty of miracles
even to the confession of mankind) from the Apostolic See by successions of
bishops, has obtained the top or highest degree of authority? to which
church, if we will not give and grant the Primacie, soothly it is a point
either of most high wickedness, or of hedlong arrogancy.

The notable saying of S. Hierome may not be let pass. Ecclesiae salus a summi
sacerdotis dignitate pendet. cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens
detur potestas, tot in ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes. The
saftie of the church hangs of the worship of the high Priest (he means the
Pope Peter's successor) to whom if there be not given a power peerless and
surmonting all others, in the churches we shall have so many schisms, as there
be priests.

There is an epistle of Theodoritus bishop of Cyrus exta^t in greek, written to
Leo bishop of Rome. Wherein we find a worthy witness of the Primacie of the Sea
Apostolic. His words may thus be englished. If Paul (says he) the preacher
of truth, and trumpet of the holy ghost, ran to Peter, to bring from him a
determination and declaration, for them who at Antioche were in argument and
contention concerning living after Moses law, much more we, who are but
small and vile, shall run unto your throne Apostolic, that of you we may
have salve for the sores of the churches, (there follow these words. (...), id
est, per omnia enim vobis conuenit primas tenere, that is to say: (...). The
5, proof, Reason.
For in all things (perteining to faith or religion (so he means) it is
meet, that you have the chief dooinges, or that you have the Primacie. For
your high seat or throne is endewed with many prerogatives and privileges.

Now let us see, whether this chief authority may be fownde necessary by
reason. That a multitude which is in it self one, can not continewe one,
unless it be contained and holden in by one, both learned philosophers have
declared, and the common nature of things teaches. For every multitude of
their own nature goes a sunder in to many: and from an other it comes, that
it is one, and that it contineweth one. And that whereof it is one, and is
kept in union or oneness, it is necessary that it be one, else that self
also shall need the help of an other, that it be one. For which cause that
saying of Homere was alleged by Aristotle as most notable, It is not good to
have many rulers, (...).
let one be ruler. Whereby is meant, that plurality of sovereign rulers, is
not fit, to contain and keep unity of a multitude of subjects. Therefore
since that the church of Christ is one, (for as there is one faith, one
baptism, one calling, so there is one church, yea all we are one body, and
members one of an other, as S. Paul says: and in our Creed we all profess to
believe one holy catholic and Apostolic church) therefore I say, it has
need of one prince and ruler, to be kept and holden in. If it be other wise,
unity must needs forthwith be sparkled and broken a sunder. And therefore it
behooved that the rule and government of the church, should be committed to one.

And whereas these Gospellers say, that Christ is the governor of the
church, and that he being one, keeps the church in unity, we answer, that,
although the church be first and principally governed by Christ, as all other
things are, yet gods high goodness has so ordained, as each thing may be
provided for, according to his own condition and nature. Therefore whereas
mankind depends most of sense, and receives all learni^g and institution of
sensible things, therefore it has need of a man to be a governor and ruler,
whom it may perceive by outward sense. And even so the Sacraments, by which
the grace of God is given unto us, in consideration of man's nature being so
made of God, as it is, are ordained in things sensible. Therefore it was
behoofull this government of the church to be committed to one man, which at
the first was Peter, and afterward each successor of Peter for his time, as is
before declared. Neither can this one man have this power of any consent or
company of men, but it is necessary he have it of God. For to ordeine and
appointe the vicare of Christ, it pertains to none other, then to Christ. For
where as the church, and all that is of the chuch, is Christ's, as well for
other causes, as specially for that we are bought with a great price, even with
his blood as S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 3.
how can it perteine to any other, then to him, to institute and appoint to him
self a vicare, that is, one, to do his steed? Wherefore to conclude, except
we would wickedly grant, that gods providence has lacked, or does lack to
his church, for love of which he has given his only begotten son, and
which he has promised never to forgete, so as the woman can not forgete the
child she bare in her womb: Reason may sone enduce us to believe, that to one
man, one bishop, the chief and highest of all bishops, the successor of
Peter, the rule and government of the church, by God has been deferred. For
else if God had ordained, that in in the church should be sundry heads and
rulers, and none constituted to be over other, but all of equal power, each one
among their people: then he should seem to have set up so many churches, as he
has appointed governors. And so he shall appear to have brought in among his
faithful people, that unruly confusion, the destruction of all commonweals,
so much abhorred of princes, which the greeks call Anarchian, which is a state
for lack of order in governors, without any government at all. Which thing,
since that the wise and politic men of this world do shun and detest in the
government of these earthly kingdoms, as most perniciouse and hurtful, to
attribute to the high wisdom of God, and to our lord Christ, who is the auctor
of the most ordinate disposition of all things in earth and in heaven: it were
heinous and profane impiety. Wherefore if the state of a kingdom can not
continue safe, unless one have power to rule, how shall not the church spredde
so far abroad, be in danger of great disorders, corruption, and utter
destruction, if, as occasion shall be given, among so great strifes and debates
of men, among so many fyerbrandes of discord tossed to and fro by the devils,
enemies of unity: there be not one head and ruler, of all to be consulted, of
all to be heard, of all to be followed and obeyed? If strife and contention be
stirred about matters of faith, if controversy happen to rise about the sense
of the scriptures, shall it not be necessary, there be one supreme judge, to
whose sentence the parties may stand? If need require (as it has been often
seen) that general councelles be kept, how can the bishops, to whom that
matter belongs, be brought together, but by commandment of one head
governor, whom they owe their obedience unto? For else being summoned
perhaps they will not come. Finally how shall the contumacie, and pertinacie
of mischeuous persons be repressed, specially if the bishops be at discension
with in them selves: if there be not a supreme power, who toward some may use
the rod, toward other some the spirit of lenity, with such discrete
temperament, as malice be vanquished, right defended, and concord procured:
least, if the small sparks of strife be not quenched by authority at the
beginning, at length a great flame of schisms and heresies flashe abroad, to
the great danger of a multitude? Therefore as there is one body of Christ, one
flock, one church, even so is there one head of that his mystical body, one
shepeherd and one chief servant made steward, ouerseer, and ruler over
Christ's householde in his absence, until his coming again. The 6. proof,
practice of the church, syxfolde.


But here perhaps some will say, it can not appear by the euente of things
and practice of the church, that the Pope had this supreme power and authority
over all bishops, and over all Christ's flock in matters touching faith, and
in causes ecclesiastical. Verily who so ever peruseth the ecclesiastical
stories, and vieweth the state of the church of all times and ages, ca^ not but
confess this to be most evident. And here I might allege first, certain
places of the new testament, declaring that Peter practiced this preeminence
among the disciples at the beginning, and that they yielded the same, as of
right apperteining unto him. Act. 1.
As when he first and only moved them to choose one in the stead of Judas, and
demeaned him self, as the chief autctor of all that was done therein: when he
made answer for all, Act. 2.
at what time they were gased and wondered at, and of some mockte, as being
dronken with new wine: for that in the fistith day they spoke with tongues of
so many nations: when he used that dreadful severity in punishing the falshed,
Act. 5.
and hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphira his wife: Act. 15.
when varia^ce being risen about the observation of certain points of Moses
law, he as chief, and head of the rest, said his mind before all others.
Among many other places left out for brevity, that is not of least weight,
that Paul being returned to Damasco out of Arabia, Galat. 1.
after three years went to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and abode with him fiften
days.

But because our adversaries do wreath and wreste the scriptures (be they
never so plain) by there private, and strange constructions, to an
understanding quite contrary to the sense of the catholic church: I will
refer the reader for further proof of this matter, to the stories bearing
faithful witness of the whole state and condition of the church in all ages. In
which stories, the practice of the church is plainly reported to have been
such, as thereby the Primacie of Peter's successor, may seem to all men
sufficiently declared. For perusing the ecclesiastical stories with writings
of the fathers, beside many other things perteining hereto, we find these
practices, for declaration of this special authority and power. the malice of
wicked persons has been repressed and chastised of that authority by
excommunication, eiection, and expulsion out of their dignities and romes, and
by other censures of the church. Furthermore,

First, Appellations the Pope.
for the appellation of bishops to the Sea Rome, and caused the reverent
Athanasius to be cited to judgment, regulariter, after the order of the
canons. He came. The false accusers went not to Rome, knowing right well that
their forged lie might easily be deprehended.

In the cause and defense of Ihon Chrysostom, these bishops came from
Constantinople, to Innocentius the Pope, Pansophus B. of Pisidia, Pappus of
Syria, Demetrius of the second Galatia, and Eugenius of Phrygia. These were
suitors for Chrysostom. He him self treated his matter with Innocentius by
writing. In his epistle among other things, he writes thus. Least this
outrageous confusion run over all, and bear rule every where, write (I pray
you) and determine by your authority, such wicked acts done in our absence,
and when we withdrewe not our selves from judgment, to be of no force, as by
their own nature truly they be voied, and utterly none. Furthermore who have
committed these euilles, put you them under the censure of the church. And as
for us, since that we are innocent, neither conuicte, neither fownde in any
defaulte, nor proved gyltie of any crime: give commandment, that we be
restored to our churches again, that we may enjoy the accustomed charity and
peace with our brethren. Innocentius after that he understood the whole
matter, pronounced and decreed the judgment of Theophilus, that was against
Chrysostom, to be voyed, and of no force. This whole tragedy is at large set
forth by Palladius B. of Helenopolis, in vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, who lived at
that time. By this appeal of Chrysostom, and by the whole handeling of the
matter, and specially by the purporte of his epistle to Innoce^tius, the
superiority of the Pope, is evidently acknowleged. And so is it plainly
confessed by Athanasius, and the bishops of Egipte, Thebais and Libya,
assembled in council at Alexandria, by these words of their epistle to Felix.
Vestru^ est enim nobis manum porrigere, etc. It is your part (say they) to
stretche forth your helping hand unto us, because we are committed unto you.
It is your part to defend us, and deliver us, it is our part to seek help
of you, and to obey your commandments. And a little after. For we know that
you bear the cure and charge of the universal church, and specially of
bishops, who in respect of their co^templation and speculation, are called the
eyes of our lord, as always the prelates of your See, first the Apostles, then
their successors, have done.

Theodoritus that learned B. of Cyrus, beside the epistle he wrote to Leo for
succor and help in his troubles, in an other, that he wrote to Renatus a
priest near about Leo, says thus. Spoliarunt me sacerdotio etc. They have
violently robbed me of my bishoprike, they have cast me forth of the cities,
neither having reverenced mine age spente in religion, nor my hoare hears.
Wherefore I beseech thee, that thou persuade the most holy Archbishop (he
means Leo) to use his apostolic authority, and to command us to come unto
your council or consistory. For this holy See holds the rudther, and has
the government of the churches of the whole world, partly for other
respects, but specially, for that it has evermore co^tinewed clear from
stintche of heresy, and that none ever sat in it, who was of contrary
opinion, but rather has ever kept the apostolic grace, undefiled. In which
words of Theodoritus, this is chiefly to be marked, that the holy See of Rome
(as he says) has the government of the churches of all the world, most for
this cause, that it was never infected with heresy, as all other churches
fownded by the Apostles were.

For which cause, that See has ever hitherto of all christen nations, and now
also ought to be heard and obeyed in all points of faith. For that See though
it has failed sometimes in charity, and has been in case as it might truly
say the words of the gospel, spoken by the foolish virgins, Matthew. 25.
our lamps be without light: yet it never failed in faith, as Theodoritus
witnesses, and S. Augustine affirms the same. Which special grace and
singular privilege, is to be imputed unto the prayer of Christ, by which he
obtained of God for Peter and his successors, Evil life of the B. of Rome:
ought not to sever us from the faith of the church of Rome.
that their faith should not fail. Therefore the evil life of the bishops of
Rome ought not to withdraw us from believing and following the doctrine preached
and taught in the holy church of Rome.

For better credit hereof, that is earnestly to be considered, which S.
Augustine writes epistola 165. where, after that he has rehearsed in order
all the Popes that succeeded Peter, even to him that was Pope in his time, he
says thus. In illum ordinem episcoporum etc. In to that rewe of bishops, that
reaches from Peter him self to Anastasius, which now sits in the same
chaier, if any traitor had crepte in, it should nothing hurt the church, and
the innocent christen folk, over whom our lord having providence, says of
evil rulers: what they say unto you, Matthew. 23.
do ye, but what they do, do ye not, for they say, and do not: to the
intent the hope of a faithful person may be certain, and such, as being set
not in man, but in our lord, be never scattered abroad with tempest of wicked
schism. And in his 166. epistle, (he says) our heavenly Master has so
far forewarned us, to be ware of all evil of dissension, that he assured the
people also of evil rulers, that for their sakes, the Seat of holesom
doctrine should not be forsaken, in which Seat, even the very evil men be
compelled to say good things. For the things which they say, be not
theires, but gods, who in the Seat of unity, has put the doctrine of verity.

By this we are plainly taught, that albe it the successors of Peter Christ's
vicares in earth, be fownde blameworthy for evil life, yet we ought not to
dissente from them in doctrine, nor sever our selves from them in faith. For as
much as, notwithstanding they be evil, by gods providence for the suertie of
his people, they be compelled to say the things that be good, and to teach
the truth, the things they speak, not being theirs, but gods, who has put
the doctrine of verity in the Seat or chaier of unity: which singular grace
comes specially to the Sea of Peter, either of the force of Christ's prayer,
as is said before, or in respect of place and dignity, which the bishops of
that See hold for Christ, as Balaam could be brought by no means to curse
that people, whom God would to be blessed. And Caiphas also prophesied, because
he was high bishop of that year, and prophesied truly, being a man otherwise
most wicked. And therefore the evil doings of bishops of Rome make no argument
of discrediting their doctrine. To this purpose the example of Gregory
Nazianzene may very fittely be applied, of the golden, syluerne, and leadden
seal. As touching the valewe of metalles, gold and silver are better, but for
the goodness of the seal, as well does leadde imprint a figure in wax, as
silver or gold. For this cause, that the Sea of Rome has never ben defiled
with stinking heresies, as Theodoritus says, and god has always kept in
that chaier of unity, the doctrine of verity, as Augustine writes: for this
cause (I say) it sits at the stern, and governs the churches of the
whole world, for this cause bishops have made their appellations thither,
judgment in doubts of doctrine, and determination in all controversies and
strifes, has been from thence always demanded.

Now that the B. of Rome had always cure and rule over all other bishops,
specially of them of the East (for touching them of the West church it is
generally confessed) beside a hundred other evident arguments, this is one
very sufficient, that he had in the East to do his stead, three delegates or
vicares, now commonly they be named legates. And this for the commodity of the
bishops there, whose churches were far dista^t from Rome. The one was the
bishop of Constantinople, as we find it mentioned in epistola Simplicij ad
Achatium Constantinopolitanum. The second was the bishop of Alexandria, as the
epistle of Bonifacius the second to Eulalius, records. The third was the
bishop of Thessalonica, as it is at large declared in the 82. epistle of Leo ad
Anastasium Thessalonicensem. By perusing these epistles every man may see, that
all the bishops of Greece, Asia, Syria, Egite, and to be short of all the
Orient, rendered and exhibited their humble obedience to the B. of Rome, and to
his arbitreme^t referred their doubts, co^plaintes and causes, and to him
only made their appellations.

Of the B. of Rome his punishing of offenders by Correctio^s from the Pope.
as by excommunications, eiection, deposition, and enioyning penance for
transgressions: we have more examples, then I think good to recite here. They
that have knowledge of the ecclesiastical stories, may remember, how Timotheus
B. of Alexandria was excommunicated with Peter his deacon, by Simplicius the
Pope: Nestorius B. of Constantinople, by Celestinus: Theophilus B. of
Alexandria with Arcadius the Emperor and Eudoxia the Empreresse, by
Innocentius, for their wicked demeanor toward Chrysostom: How Dioscorus B. of
Alexandria was deposed, though the whole second Ephesine council stood in
his defense: how Peter B. of Antioche was not only put out of his bishoprike,
but also of all priestly honor: How Photius was put out of the Patriarkeship
of Constantiple, into which he was intruded by favor of Michael the Emperor,
at the suit of his wicked uncle, by Nicolaus the first.

Lib 3. epist. 13.
For proof of this authority, the epistle of Cyprian, which he wrote to
Stephanus Pope in his time against Martianus the B. of Arelate in Gallia,
makes an evident argument. For that this Martianus became a maineteyner of the
heresy of Nouatianus, and therewith seduced the faithful people, Cyprian
having intelligence of it by Faustinus from Lions, advertised Stephanus of it,
and moved him earnestly to direct his letters to the people of Arle, by
authority of which Martianus should be deposed, and an other put in his rome,
to the intent (says he there) the flock of Christ, which hitherto by him
scattered abroad and woonded is contemned, may be gathered together. Which S.
Cyprian would not have written, had the B. of Rome had no such authority.

Co^firmations by the Pope.
For the Popes authority concerning confirmation of the ordinations and
elections of all bishops, many examples might easily be alleged, as the
request made to Julius by the 90. Ariane bishops assembled in council as
Antioche against Athanasius, that he would wouchesafe to ratify and confirm
those that they had chosen in place of Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus and
others, whom they had condemned and deprived. Also the earnest suit, which
Theodosius the Emperor made to Leo for confirmation of Anatolius, and likewise
that Martianus the Emperor made to him, for confirmation of Proterius both
bishops of Alexandria, as it appears by their letters written to Leo in
their favor. And as for Anatolius, Leo would not in any wise order and
confirm him, unless he would first profess, that he believed and held the
doctrine, Vide Leonis epis. 1^
which was contained in Leo his epistle to Flauianus, and would further by
writing witness, that he agreed with Cyrillus and the other catholihe fathers,
against Nestorius. For this, if nothing else could be alleged, the testimony
of holy Gregory were sufficient to make good credit. Who understanding that
Maximus was ordered bishop of Salonae a city in Illyrico, without the
authority and confirmation of the Sea Apostolic, standing in doubt least
perhaps that had been done by commandment of Mauritius the Emperor, who did
many other things wickedly: thereof writes to Constantina the Emperesse thus.
Salonitanae ciuitatis episcopus me ac responsali meo nesciente, ordinatus est.
Et facta est res, quae sub nullis anterioribus principibus euenit. The bishop
of the city of Salonae (says he) is ordered, neither I, nor my depute made
priuye to it. And herein that thing has been done, which never happened in the
time of any princes before our days. Thus it appears, that before a thousand
years past, bishops had their ordination and election confirmed by the Sea
Apostolic. The Popes approving of cou^celles.


That the bishops of Rome by accustomed practice of the church, had authority
to approve or disprove councelles, I need to say nothing for prouse of it, Li.
4. c. 19.
seeing that the ecclesiastical rule (as we read in the Tripartite story)
commands, that no council be celebrate and kept without the advice and
authority of the Pope. Verily the councelles holden at Ariminum, at Seleucia,
at Sirmium, at Antiochia, and at the second time at Ephesus, for that they
were not summoned, nor approved by the authority of the B. of Rome, have not
ben accounted for laufull councelles: but as well for that rejected, as also
for their heretical determinatio^s. The fathers assembled in the council of
Nice, sent their epistle to Siluester the Pope, beseching him with his consent
to ratify and confirm, Quas Romana suscipie^s co^firmauit Ecclesia. In
praefatione Niceni concilij.
what so ever they had ordained. Isidorus witnesses, that the Nicene council
had set forth rules, the which (says he) the church of Rome received and
confirmed. The second general council holden at Constantinople, was likewise
allowed and approved by Damasus, specially requested by the fathers of the
same, thereto. So was the third council holden at Ephesus, ratified and
confirmed by Celestinus, who had there for his vicares or deputes, Cyrillus the
famous B. of Alexandria, and one Arcadius a bishop out of Italy. As for the
fouerth council kept at Chalcedon, the fathers thereof also in their epistle
to Leo the Pope, subscribed with the hands of 44. bishops, made humble
request unto him, to establish, fortify and allow, the decrees and
ordinances of the same. This being fownde true for the four first chief
councelles, we need not to say any thing of the rest, that followed. But for
the suer proof of all this, that chiefly is to be alleged, that Constantius
the Arian Emperor made so importune and so earnest suit to Liberius the Pope,
to confirm the acts of the council holden at Antioche by the 90. Ariane
bishops, wherein Athanasius was deprived, and put out of his bishoprike. For he
beleved, as Ammianus Marcellinus writes, Lib. 15.
that what had been done in that council, should not stand and take effect,
unless it had been approved and confirmed by the authority of the B. of Rome,
which he terms the eternal city.

Now what authority the bishops of Rome have Absolutio^s from the Pope.
and in restoring of them again to their churches, of which they were
wrongfully thruste out by heretics, or other disorder: it is a thing so well
known of all that read the stories, in which the ancient state of the church
is described, that I need not but rehearse the names only. Athanasius of
Alexandria, and Paulus of Constantinople, deprived and thrust out of their
bishoprikes by the violence of the Arianes assisted with the Emperor
Constantius, appealed to Rome, to Julius the Pope and bishop there, and by his
authority were restored to their romes again. So Leo assoiled Flauianus the
B. of Constantinople, excommunicated by Dioscorus. So Nicolaus the first
restored Ignatius to the sea of Constantinople, though Michael the Emperor
wroughte all that he could against it. Many other bishops have been in all ages
assoiled and restored to their churches by the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, who have been without deserte excommunicated deprived, and put from
all their dignities. But to have rehearsed these few it may suffice.

Reconciliatio^s to the Pope.
whereby his primacie is acknowleged and confessed, I need not say much, the
matter being so evident. After that the whole churches of Aphrica had
continewed in schism, and withdrawn them selves from the obedience of the Sea
Apostolic, through the entisement of Aurelius archbishop of Carthago, for the
space of one hundred years, during which time by gods punishment they came in
to captivity of the barbarous and cruel Vandales, who were Arians: at the
length, when it pleased God of his goodness to have pity on his people of that
province, sending them Bellisarius the valiant captain, that vanquished and
destroyed the Vandales, and likewise Eulalius that godly archbishop of
Carthago, that brought the churches home again, and joined the divided members
unto the whole body the catholic church: A public instrument containing the
form of their repentance, and of their humble submission, was offered and
exhibited solemly to Bonifacius the second then Pope, by Eulalius, in the name
of that whole province, which was joyfully received, and he thereupon forthwith
reconciled. Of this reconciliation and restoring of the Affricane churches to
the catholic church, the mystical body of Christ, Bonifacius writes his
letters to Eulalius bishop of Thessalonica, requiring him, with the churches
there about, to give almighty God thanks for it.

But here if I would show what bishops dividing them selves through heresy,
schism, or other enormitie, from the obedience of the Sea of Rome, have upon
better advise submitted them selves to the same again, and thereupon have been
reconciled: I had a large field to walk in. As inferior bishops of sundry
provinces have done it, so have the great patriarchs done likewise. Among them
that to satisfy the maliciouse mind of Eudoxia the Emperesse, practiced their
wicked conspiracy against Chrysostom, through which he was deposed, and
carried away in to banishment, Alexander B. of Antioche and primate of the
orient, was one: who at length strooken with repentance, for that he had been
both a co^senter and a promotour of that wicked act, submitted him self humby
to Innoce^tius the Pope, and by all means sought to be assoiled and
reconciled. And therefore sent his legates to Rome, to exhibit to Innocentius a
solemn instrument of his repentance and lowly submission, and to accept what
should be enjoined. By which his hu^blenes Innoce^tius moved, granted to his
petitions, received him in to the lap of the catholic church again, and
thus was he reconciled. Sundry the like reconciliations of the patriarchs of
Alexandria and Jerusalem to the Sea of Rome in like cases, might easily be
recited, which for avoiding of tediousness I pass over, as likewise of the
patriarchs of Constantinople, which as we read in ancient stories, have
forsaken the church of Rome twelve times, and have been reconcilied to the same
again.

Thus having declared the supreme authority and primacie of the Pope by the
common practice of the church. I need not to show further, how in all
questions, doubts, and controversies touching faith and religion, the Sea of
Rome has always ben consulted, how the decision of all doubtefull cases, has been referred to the judgment of that See, and to be short, how all the world
has ever fetched light from thence. For the proof whereof because it can not
be here declared briefly, I remitte the learned reader to the ecclesiastical
stories, where he shall find this matter amply treated.

Now for a brief answer to M. Iuell, who denies that within six hundred
years after Christ, the bishop of Rome was ever called an universal bishop, or
the head of the universal church, and makes him self very suer of it.
Although it be a childish thing to stick at the name any thing is called by,
the thing by the name signified being sufficiently proved: yet to the intent
good folk may understand, that all is not truth of the old gospel, which our
new gospellers either affirm or deny: The Pope above a thousand years
since called universal bishop, and head of the universal churthe.
I will bring good and sufficient witness, that the B. of Rome was then called
both universal bis^op, or oecumenicall patriarch, which is one, to wit,
bishop or principal father of the whole world, and also head of the church.
Leo that worthy B. of Rome, was called the universal Bishop and universal
patriarch, of syx hundred and thirty fathers assembled together from all parts
of the world in general council at Chalcedon. Which is both expressed in that
council, and also clearly affirmed by S. Gregory in three sundry epistles, to
Mauricius the Emperor, to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, and to Anastasius
Patriarch of Antioche. Thus that name was deferred unto the Pope by the fathers
of that great council, which by them had not ben done, had it ben unlawful.
In very deed neither Leo him self, nor any other his successor ever called or
wrote himself, by that name, as S. Gregory says, much less presumed they
to take it unto them. But rather used the name of humility, calling them
selves each one Seruum seruorum Dei, the servant of the servants of God. Yet
sundry holy martyrs bishops of Rome used to call them selves bishops of the
universal church, which in effect is the same, as the fathers of Chalcedon
understood. So did Sixtus in the time of Adrianus the Emperor in his epistle
to the bishops of all the world. So did Victor writing to Theophilus of
Alexandria. So did Pontianus writing to all that believed in Christ before 1300.
years past. So did Stephanus in his epistle to all bishops of all provinces in
the time of S. Cyprian. And all these were before Constantine the great, and
before the council of Nice, which times our adversaries acknowledge and
confess to have been without corruption. The same title was used likewise after
the Nicene council, by Felix, by Leo, and by diverse others, before the first
six hundred years after Christ were expired. Neither did the bishops of Rome
use this title and name only the^ selves to their own aduaunceme^t, as the
adversaries of the church charge the^, but they were honored therewith also
by others: as namely Innoce^tius by the fathers assembled in council at
Carthago, and Marcus by Athanasius and the bishops of Egypt.

Head of the church.
Concerning the other name (Head of the church) I meruell not a little, that M.
Iuell denies, that the bishop of Rome was then so called. Either he does
contrary to his own knowledge, wherein he must needs be condemned in his own
judgment and of his own conscience, Peter and consequently the Pope Peter's
successor called head of the church, both in terms equiuale^t, and also
expressly. Matthew. 10.
or he is not so well learned, as of that side he is thought to be. For who
so ever traueileth in the reading of the ancient fathers, finds that name
almost every where attributed to Peter the first B. of Rome, and co^seque^tly
to the successor of Peter, that name (I say) either in terms equiuale^t, or
expressly. First, the scripture calls Peter primu^, the first among the
Apostles. The names of the twelve Apostles (says Matthew) are these. Primus
Simon, qui dicitur Petrus. First Simon, who is called Peter. And yet was not
Peter first called of Christ, but his brother Androwe before him, as is before
said. Dionysius that ancient writer calls Peter sometime, De diuinis
nominibus. c. 3.
supremu^ decus, the highest honor, for that he was most honorable of all the
Apostles, sometime, summum, sometime, verticalem, the chiefest and the highest
Apostle. Origin upon the beginning of John says: Let no man think, that we
set John before Peter. Who may fo do? for who should be higher of the Apostles
then he, Lib 1. epistola 3.
who is, and is called the top of them? Cyprian calls the church of Rome,
in consideration of that bishops supreme authority, Ecclesiam principale^,
vnde vnitas sacerdotalis exorta est. The principal or chief church, from
whence the unity of priests is spronge. Eusebius Caesariensis speaking of
Peter sent to Rome by gods providence, to vanquish Simon Magus, (...).
calls him potentissimum and maximum Apostolorum, and reliquorum omnium
principem: the mightiest of power and greatest of the Apostles, and prince of
all the rest. Augustine commonly calls Peter, primum apostolorum, first or
chief of the Apostles. Hierome, Ambrose, Leo, and other doctors, Prince of
the Apostles. Chrysostom upon the place of John cap. 21. sequere me, follow
me, among other things says thus. Homil. 87
If any would demand of me, how James took the sea of Jerusalem, that is to
say, how he became bishop there: I would answer, that this (he means
Peter) Master of the whole world, made him governor there. In Matthew. homil.
55. Ierem. 1.
And in an other place bringing in that God said to Jeremy, I have set thee
like an iron pillour, and like a brazen wall: But the father (says he) made
him over one nation, but Christ made this man (meaning Peter) ruler over the
whole world. etc. And least these places should seem to attribute this supreme
authority to Peter only, and not also to his successors: it is to be
remembered, that Irenaeus and Cyprian acknowledge and call the church of Rome,
chief and principal. And Theodoritus in an epistle to Leo, calls the same
in consideration of the bishop of that See his primacie, orbi terrarum
praeside^tem, (...).
president or bearing rule over the world. Ambrose upon that place of Paul, 1.
Timoth. 3. where the church is called the pillour, and stay of the truth,
says thus. Cum totus mundus Dei sit, ecclesia tamen domus eius dicitur, cuius
hodie rector est Damasus. Where as the whole world is gods, yet the church is
called his house* the ruler whereof at these days is Damasus.

I would not weery and trouble the reader with such a number of allegations,
were not that M. Iuell bears the world in hand, we have not one sentence nor
clause for us, to prove either this, or any other of all his Articles.

But perhaps some one will replye and say, yet I hear not the B. of Rome
called Head of the universal church. What forces it, whether that very term
be found in any ancient writer or no? Other terms of the same virtue and
power be oftentimes found. Is it not one to say, Head of the universal
church, and to say ruler of gods house, which Ambrose says? whereof this
argument may be made. The church, yea the universal church is the house of
God: but Damasus B. of Rome, is ruler of the house of God, after Ambrose: ergo
Damasus is ruler of the universal church, and by like right and title is the
Pope, who is B. of Rome now also, ruler of the same. What other is it to call
the church of Rome the principal church, respect had to the bishop there,
and not otherwise (wherein a figure of speech is used) as Ireneus and Cyprian
do, and president or set in authority over the whole world, as Leo does: then
to call the bishop of Rome, In locum Ioa^. 21 homil. 87. ex pone^s illud,
sequere me. In Matthew. homil. 55.
Head of the universal church? what means Chrysostom calling Peter totius
orbis magistrum, the Master and teacher of all the world, and saying in an
other place, that Christ made Peter not ruler over one nation, as the father
made Jeremy over the Jews, but over the whole world? what other (I say)
means he thereby, then that he is head of the whole world, and therefore of
the universal church?

But to satisfy these men, and to take away occasion of cauille, I will
allege a few places, where the express term (Head) is attributed to Peter
the first B. of Rome, and by like right to his successors, Peter and his
successor called head of the church, expressly
and to the Sea Apostolic. Chrysostom speaking of the virtue and power of
Peter, and of the stedfastnes of the church, in the 55. Homily upon Mathewe,
has these words among other. Cuius Pastor and caput, homo piscator, atque
ignobilis etc. By which words he affirms, that the pastor and head of the
church, being but a fisher, a man, and one of base parentage, passes in
firmnes the nature of the diamant. Again in an homily of the praises of Paul,
he says thus. Neither was this man only such a one, but he also which was
the head of the Apostles, who oftentimes said, he was ready to bestow his
life for Christ, and yet was full sore afraid of death. If he were head of the
Apostles, then was he head of the inferior people, and so Head of the
universal church.

Hierome writing against Iouinian, says, propterea inter duodecim vnus
eligitur, vt capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio. for that cause
among the twelve on is specially chosen out, that the Head being ordained,
occasion of schism may be taken away. Whereby it appears that Peter was
constituted head, for avoiding of division and schism. Now the danger of the
inconvenience remaining still, yea more then at that time, for the greater
multitude of the church, and for sundry other imperfections: the same remedy
must be thought to continewe, unless we would say, that Christ has less
care of his church now, that it is so much encreaced, then he had at the
beginning, when his flock was small. For this cause except we deny Gods
providence toward his church, there is one Head for avoiding of schism also
now, as well as in the Apostles time. Which head is the successor of him, that
was head by Christ's appointment then, the B. of Rome sitting in the seat that
Peter sat in.

Cyrillus says, Petrus vt princeps, caputque caeteroru^, primus exclamauit,
tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Peter as prince and Head of the rest, first
cried out, thou art Christ the son of the living God. Sermon. 124. de te^pore
Augustine also in a sermon to the people, calls him head of the church,
saying. Totius corporis membrum in ipso capite curat ecclesiae, and in ipso
vertice componit omnium membrorum sanitatem. He heals the member of the whole
body, in the Head it self of the church, and in the top it self he orders
the health of all the members. And in an other place, Li. quaest. vet. and no.
testam. q. 75.
Saluator quando pro se and Petro exolui iubet, pro omnibus exoluisse videtur.
Quia sicut in saluatore erant omnes causa magisterij, ita post saluatorem in
Petro omnes continentur, ipsum enim constituit Caput omnium. Our savior says
Augustine, when as he commands paime^t (for the Emperor) to be made for
him self and for Peter, he seems to have paid for all. Because as all were
in our savior for cause of teaching, so after our savior, all are contained
in Peter, for he ordained him Head of all.

Here have these men the plain and express term Head of the rest, Head of
the church, Head of all, and therefore of the universal church. What will they
have more? Neither here can they say, that although this authority and title
of the Head be given to Peter, yet it is not derived and transferred from him
to his successors. For this is manifest, that Christ instituted his church
so, as it should continewe to the worlds end, Cap. 9.
according to the saying of Esaie the prophet. Super solium David etc. Upon
the seat of David, and upon his kingdom, shall Messiah sit to strengthen it,
and to establish it in judgment and righteousness: from this day for evermore.
And thereof it is evident, that he ordained those, who then were in ministry,
so as their authority and power should be derived unto their aftercommers for
the utility of the church for ever, specially, where as he said, Matt vlt.
behold I am with you until the end of the world. And therefore as Victor
writes in his story of the persecution of the Vandales, Eugenius B. of
Carthago, Lib. 2.
conuented of Obadus a great captain of Hunerike king of the Vandales, about
a council to be kept in Aphrica for matters of the faith, betwixt the Arians
supported by the king, and the catholics: said in this wise. Si nostram fidem
etc. If the kings power desire to know our faith, which is one and the true,
let him send to his friends. I will write also to my brethren, that my
fellowebishops come, who may declare the faith, that is common to you and us,
(there he has these words) and praecipue ecclesia Romana, quae Caput est
omnium ecclesiarum. and specially the church of Rome, which is the Head of all
the churches. Naming the church of Rome, he means the bishop there, or his
legates to be sent in his stead.

Thus it is proved by good and ancient auctorities, that the name and title of
the Head, ruler, president, chief and principal governor of the church, is
of the fathers attributed not only to Peter, but also to his successors
bishops of the Sea Apostolic. And therefore M. Iuell may think him self by
this charitably admonished, to remember his promise of yelding and subscribing.

I will add to all that has been hitherto said of this matter, a saying of
Martin Luther, that such as do little regard the gravity of ancient fathers
of the old church, may yet somewhat be moved with the lightness of the young
father Luther, Patriarch and fownder of their new church. Lightness I may well
call it, for in this saying which I shall here rehearse, he does not so soberly
allow the Popes Primacie, The popes primacie acknovvleged by Martin Luther.
as in sundry other treatises he does rashly, and furiousely inueigh against
the same. In a little treatise entitled, Resolutio Lutheriana super
propositione sua 13. de potestate papae: his words be these, Primum quod me
mouet Romanum pontificem esse alijs omnibus, quos saltem nouerimus se
pontifices gerere, superiorem, est ipsa voluntas Dei, quam in ipso facto
videmus. Neque enim sine voluntate Dei in hanc monarchiam vnquam venire
potuisset Romans Pontifex. At voluntas Dei quoquo modo nota fuerit, cum
reuerentia suscipienda est, ideoque non licet temere Romano pontifici in suo
primatu resistere. Haec autem ratio tanta est, vt si etiam nulla scriptura,
nulla alia causa esset, haec tamen satis esset ad compescendam temeritatem
resistentium. Et hac sola ratione gloriosissimus martyr Cyprianus per multas
epistolas confidentissime gloriatur contra omnes episcoporum quorumcunque
aduersarios, sicut 3. Regum legimus, quod dece^ tribus Israel discesserunt a
Roboam filio Salomonis, and tamen quia voluntate Dei sieve auctoritate factum
est, ratum apud Deum fuit. Nam and apud theologos omnes voluntas signi, quam
vocant operationem Dei, non minus quam alia signa voluntatis Dei, vt praecepta
prohibitiua etc. metuenda est. Ideo non video, quomodo sint excusati a
schismatis reatu, qui huic voluntati contrauenie^tes, sese a Romani pontificis
auctoritate subtrahunt. Ecce haec est vna prima mihi insuperabilis ratio, quae
me subijcit Romano pontifici, and Primatu^ eius confiteri cogit. The first
thing that moves me to think the B. of Rome to be over all other, that we
know to be bisshops, is the very will of God, which we see in the fact or
deed it self. for without the will of God, the B. of Rome could never have
commen unto this monarchy. But the will of God, by what mean so ever it be
known, is to be received reverently. And therefore it is not lawful rashly to
resist the B. of Rome in his primacie. And this is so great a reason for the
same, that if there were no scripture at all, nor other reason: yet this were
enough to stay the rashness of them, that resist. And through this only reason
the most gloriouse martyr Cyprian in many of his epistles vaunteth him self
very boldly against all the adversaries of Bishops, what soever they were. As
in the third book of the kings we read, that the ten tribes of Israel
departed from Roboam Salomons son. Yeat because it was done by the will or
authority of God, it stood in effect with God. For among all the divines,
the will of the sign, which they call the working of God, is to be feared no
less, then other signs of Gods will, as commandments prohibitiue, etc.
Therefore, I see not, how they may be excused of the gilte of schism, which
going against this will, withdraw them selves from the authority of the B. of
Rome. Lo this is one chief invincible reason, that makes me to be under the
bishop of Rome, and compels me to confess his Primacie. This far Luther.

Thus I have briefly touched some deal of the scriptures, of the canons and
counsels, of the edictes of Emperors, of the fathers sayings, of the
reasons, and of the manifold practices of the church, which are wont to be
alleged for the Popes Primacie and supreme authority. With all, I have proved
that, which M. Iuell denies, that the B. of Rome within six hundred years
after Christ, has been called the universal bishop, of no small number of men
of great credit, and very oftentimes Head of the universal church, both in
terms equivalent, and also expressly. Now to the next article.

Or that the people was then taught to believe, Iuell.
that Christ's body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or
naturally, in the Sacrament.
Of the terms really, substantially, corporally, carnally, naturally, fovvnde
in the Doctors treating of the true being of Christ's body in the blessed
Sacrament.
ARTICLE. V.
CHristen people has ever ben taught, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ
by the unspeakable working of the grace of God and virtue of the holy Ghost,
is present in this most holy Sacrament, and that verily and in deed. This
doctrine is fownded upon the plain words of Christ, which he uttered in the
institution of this sacrament, expressed by the Evangelists, and by S. Paul.
As they were at supper (says Matthewe) Jesus took bread and blessed it, and
brake it, Matthew. 26
and gave it to his disciples, and says: Take ye, eat ye, this is my body.
And taking the cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying: Drink ye
all of this: For this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed
for many in remission of sins. With like words almost Mark, Luke and Paul,
Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
do describe this divine institution. Neither said our lord only, This is my
body, but least some should doubt, how his words are to be understood: for a
plain declaration of them, he adds this further, ( Which is given for you.
Luc. 22.
Likewise of the cup he says not only, This is my blood, But also, as it
were to put it out of all doubt: Which shall be shed for many.

Now as faithful people do believe, that Christ gave not a figure of his body,
but his own true and very body in substance, and like wise not a figure of his
blood, but his very pretiouse blood it self at his passion and death on the
cross for our Redemption: so they believe also, that the words of the
institution of this Sacrament, admit no other understanding, but that he
gives unto us in these holy mysteries, his self same body, and his self same
blood in truth of substance, which was crucified and shed forth for us.
Thus to the humble beleuers scripture it self ministers sufficient argument
of the truth of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament against the
sacramentaries, who hold opinion, that it is there but in a figure, sign, or
taken only.

Again, we can not find where our lord performed the promise he made in the
syxth chapter of John, The bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world: but only in his last supper. where if he gave
his flesh to his Apostles, and that none other, but the very same, which he
gave for the life of the world: it follows that in the blessed Sacrament is
not mere bread, but that same his very body in substance. For it was not mere
bread, but his very body, that was given and offered up upon the cross.

If the words spoken by Christ in S. John of promise, that he performed in his
holy supper, The bread that I will give, is my flesh, had been to be taken not
as they seem to mean plainly and truly, but metaphorically, tropically,
symbolically and figuratively, so as the truth of our lords flesh be
excluded, as our adversaries do understand them: then the Capernaites had not
had any occasion at all of their great offense. Then should not they have had
cause to murmour against Christ, as the Evangelist shows: The Jews (says
S. John) Strove among them selves, Cap. 6.
saying: how can he give us his flesh to eat? And much less his dear
disciples, to whom he had showed so many and so great miracles, to whom he had
before declared so many parables and so high secrets, should have had any
occasion of offense. And doubteles if Christ had meant, they should eat but the
sign or figure of his body, they would not have said, Durus est hic sermo,
this is a hard saying, and who can abide to hear it? For then should they have
done no greater thing, then they had done oftentimes before in eating the
Easter lamb. And how could it seem a hard word or saying, if Christ had meant
nothing else, but this, the bread that I will give, is a figure of my body,
that shall cause you to remember me?

To conclude shortly. If Christ would so have been understood, as though he
had meant to give but a figure only of his body, it had been no need for him to
have alleged his omnipotency and almighty power to his disciples, thereby the
rather to bring them to belief of his true body to be given them to eat. Hoc
vos scandalizet? does this offend you, says he. what if ye see the son of
man ascend where he was before? it is the Spirit that gives life, etc. As
though he had said: ye consider only my humanity, that seems weak and
frail, neither do you esteem my divine power by the great miracles I have
wrought: But when as ye shall see me by power of my godhed ascend in to heaven,
from whence I came unto you, will ye then also stand in doubt, whether ye-may
believe, that I give you my very body to be eaten? Thus by signifyyng his divine
power, Christ confownded their unbelief, touching the verity and substance of
his body, that he promised to give them in meat.

What occasioned the fathers to use these terms really, substantially,
corporally, etc.
These places of the scripture, and many other reporting plainly, that Christ
at his supper gave to his disciples his very body, even that same which the
day following suffered death on the Cross, have ministered just cause to the
godly and learned fathers of the church, to say, that Christ's body is
present in this Sacrament really, substantially, corporally, carnally, and
naturally. By use of which aduerbes, they have meant only a truth of being,
and not a way or mean of being. And though this manner of speaking be not
thus expressed in the scripture, yet is it deduced out of the scripture. For if
Christ spoke plainly, and used no trope, figure, nor metaphore, as the
scripture it self sufficiently declares to an humble beleuer, and would his
disciples to understand him, so as he spoke in manifest terms, when he said,
This is my body, which is given for you: The^ may we say, that in the
sacrament his very body is present, yea really, that is to say in deed,
substantially, that is, in substance, and corporally, carnally, and naturally:
by which words is meant, that his very body, his very flesh and his very
human nature is there, not after corporal, carnal, or, natural wise, but
inuisibly, unspeakably, miraculousely, supernaturally, spiritually, divinely,
and by way to him only known.

And the fathers have been driven to use these terms for more ample and full
declaration of the truth, and also for withstanding and stopping objections
made by heretics. And because the catholic faith touching the verity of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, was not impugned by any man for the space of a
thousand years after Christ's being in earth, and about that time Berengarius
Berengarius.
first began openly to sow the wicked sede of the sacramentarie heresy,
which then sone confuted by learned men, and by the same first author abiured
and recanted, now is with no less wickedness, but more busely and more
earnestly set forth again: the doctoures that sythe^s have written in defense
of the true and catholic faith herein, have more often used the terms a fore
mentioned, then the old and ancient fathers, that wrote within M. Iuelles syx
hundred years after Christ. who doubteles would no less have used the^, if
that matter had been in question or doubt in their time. And albeit these
terms were strange and new, as used within these five hundred years only,
and that the people were never taught for syx hundred years after Christ, as M.
Iuell says, more boldly then truly, and therefore more rashely then wisely:
yet the faith by them opened and declared, is universal and old, verily no
less old, then is our lords supper, where this Sacrament was first
instituted.

Here before that I bring in places of ancient fathers reporting the same
doctrine, and in like terms, as the catholic church does hold concerning
this article: least our opinion herein might happily appear over carnal and
gross: I think it necessary, briefly to declare, what manner a true body and
blood of Christ is in the sacrament. Christ in him self has but one flesh
and blood in substance, which his godhed took of the virgin Mary once, and
never afterward left it of. The flesh and blood of Christ is of double
consyderation.
But this one flesh and blood in respect of double quality, has a double
consideration. For at what time Christ lived here in earth among men in the
shape of man, his flesh was thrall and subject to the frailty of man's
nature, sin and ignorance excepted. That flesh being passible until death,
the soldiers at the procurement of the Jews crucified. And such manner blood
was at his passion shed forth of his body, in sight of them which were then
present. But after that Christ rose again from the dead, his body from that
time forward ever remains immortal and lively, in danger no more of any
infirmity or suffering, much less of death: but is become by divine gifts
and endowme^tes, a spiritual and a divine body, as to whom the godhed has
communicated divine and godly properties and excellencies, that been above all
man's capacity of understanding. This flesh and body thus considered, which
sundry doctors call corpus spirituale and deificatum, a spiritual and deified
body, is given to us in the blessed sacrament.

This is the doctrine of the church uttered by S. Hierome, in his commentaries
upon th'Epistle to the Ephesians, where he has these words. Lib. 1. ca. 1.
Dupliciter vero sanguis and caro intelligitur, vel spiritualis illa atque
diuina, de qua ipse dixit, Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est
potus: Et, nisi manducaueritis carne^ meam, and sanguinem meum biberitis, non
habebitis vitam aeternam: vel caro, quae crucifixa est, and sanguis, qui
militis effusus est lancea. that is. The blood and flesh of Christ is
understood two ways, either that it is that spiritual and divine flesh, of
which he spoke him self, My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily
drink, And, except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood ye shall not have
life in you: Or, that flesh, which was crucified, and that blood, which was
shed by pearcing of the soldiers spear. And to the intent a man should not
take this difference according to the substance of Christ's flesh and blood,
but according to the quality only: S. Hierome brings a similitude of our
flesh, as of which it has been in double respect said: Iuxta hanc diuisionem
and in sanctis etiam diuersitas sanguinis and carnis accipitur, vt alia sit
caro, quae visura est salutare Dei, Luc. 3.
alia caro and sanguis, quae regnum Dei no^ queant possidere. 1. Cor. 15.
According to this division diversity of blood and flesh is to be
understood in saints also, so as there is one flesh which shall see the
salvation of God, and an other flesh and blood, which may not possess the
kingdom of God. Which two states of flesh and blood, seem (as it appears to
the unlearned) quite contrary.

But Saint Paul dissolueth this doubt, in the fiftenth chapter of his first
epistle to the Corinthians, saying, that flesh of such sort as we bear about
us in this life, earthly, mortal, frail, and bourthenouse to the soul, can
not possess the kingdom of God, because corruption shall not possess
incorruption. But after resurrection we shall have a spiritual, gloriouse,
incorruptible and immortal flesh, and like in figure to the gloriouse body of
Christ, as S. Paul says: This corruptible body must put on incorruption,
and this mortal, immortality, Then such flesh, or our flesh of that manner
and sort, shall possess the kingdom of God, and shall behold God him self.
And yet our flesh now corruptible, and then incorruptible, is but one flesh
in substance, but diverse in quality and property. Even so it is to be
thought of our lords flesh as is before said. The due weghing of this
difference, gives much light to this matter, and ought to stay many horrible
blasphemies wickedly uttered against this most blessed Sacrament.

Now whereas M. Iuell denies that Christen people were of old time taught to
believe, that Christ's body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally, or
naturally in the Sacrament, I do plainly affirm the contrary. Yet I
acknowledge, that the learned fathers which have so taught, would not thereby
seem to make it here outwardly sensible or perceptible. Hom. 83. in Matt and 60
ad popul. Antiochen.


For they confess all with Saint Chrysostom, that the thing which is here
given us, is not sensible, but that under visible signs, invisible things be
delivered unto us. But they thought good to use the aforesayed terms, to put
away all doubt of the being of his very body in these holy mysteries, and to
exclude the only imagination, fantasy, figure, sign, token, virtue, or
signification there of.

For in such wise the Sacramentaries have uttered their doctrine in this
point, as they may seem by their manner of speaking and writing, here to
represent our lords body only, in deed being absent, as kings oftentimes
are represented in a Tragedy, or mean persons in a Comedy. Verily the manner
and way by which it is here present and given to us, and received of us, is
secret: not human ne natural, true for all that. And we do not atteine it
by sense, reason, or nature, but by faith. For which cause we do not over
basely consider and attend the visible elements, but as we are taught by the
council of Nice, lifting up our mind and spirit, we behold by faith on that
holy table put and laid (so for the better signification of the real presence
their term sowndeth) the Lamb of God, (...).
that takes away the sins of the world. And here (say they) we receive
his pretiouse body and blood, (...) that is to say, verily and in deed,
which is no other wise, nor less, then this term really imports.

And touching these terms, first Verily, or which is all one Really, and
substantially: me thinks M. Iuell should bear the more with us for use of the
same, since that Bucer him self one of the greatest learned men of that side
has allowed them: yea and that after much writing against Luther in defense of
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius by him set forth, and after that he had assured him
self of the truth in this article by divine inspiration, as most constantly he
affirms with these words: In responsione ad Lutheru^.
Haec non dubitamus diuinitus nobis, and per scripturam reuelata de hoc
sacramento. We doubt not (says he) but these things concerning this
sacrament, be reveled unto us from god, and by the scripture. If you demand
where this may be fownde: in the acts of a Council holden between the
Lutheranes and Zuinglianes for this very purpose in Martine Luthers house at
Wittenberg, in the year of our lord. 1536. you shall find these words.
Audiuimus D. Bucerum explicantem suam sententiam de Sacramento corporis and
sanguinis Domini, hoc modo. Cum pane and vino vere and substantialiter adest,
exhibetur and sumitur corpus Christi and sanguis. Et sacramentali union panis
est corpus Christi, and porrecto pane vere adest and vere exhibetur corpus
Christi. We have heard M. Bucer declare his mind touching the sacrament of the
body and blood of our Lord, in this sort. With the bread and wine the body of
Christ and his blood is present, exhibited, and received verily and
substantially. And by Sacramental union, the bread is the body of Christ, and
the bread being given, the body of Christ is verily present, and verily
delivered.

Though this opinion of Bucer, by which he recanted his former Zuinglian
heresy, be in sundry points false and heretical, yet in this he agrees with
the catholic church against M. Iuelles negative assertion, that the body and
blood of Christ is present in the sacrament verily, that is, truly, and really
or in deed, and substantially. Where in he speaks, as the ancient fathers
spoke long before a thousand years past.

Let Chrysostom for proof of this, be instead of many that might be
alleged. His words be these. Nos secum in vna^ (vt ita dicam) massam reducit,
In 26. ca. Mat. hom. 83.
neque id fide solum, sed re ipsa nos corpus suum efficit. By this sacrament
(says he) Christ reduces us (as it were) in to one loumpe with him self,
and that not by faith only, but he makes us his own body in very deed,
reipsa, which is no other to say, then Really. The other aduerbes corporally
Carnally, Naturally, be fownde in the fathers not seldom, specially where they
dispute against the Arianes. And therefore it had be more convenient for M.
Iuell to have modestly interpreted them, then utterly to have denied them.

The old fathers of the greek and latin church, deny that faithful people
have an habitude or disposition, union or conjunction with Christ only by
faith and charity, or that we are spiritually joined and united to him only
by hope, love, religion, obedience, and will: yea further they affirm, that by
the virtue and efficacy of this sacrament duly and worthily received, Christ
is really and in deed communicated by true communication and participation of
the nature and substance of his body and blood, and that he is and dwells in
us truly, because of our receiving the same in this sacrament. The benefit
whereof is such, as we be in Christ, and Christ in us, ^oan. 6.
according to that he says, qui manducat mea^ carne^, manet in me, and ego in
illo. Who eats my flesh, he dwells in me, and I in him. The which dwelling
union and ioinyng together of him with us, and of us with him, that it might
the better be expressed, and reco^mended unto us: they thought good in their
writings to use the aforesaid aduerbes.

Hilarious writing against the Arianes alleging the words of Christ. 17. John.
Vt omnes vnum sint, sicut tu pater in me, and ego in te, vt ipsi in nobis vnum
sint, that all may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us: going about by those words to show that the son and
the father were not one in nature and substance, but only in concord and
unity of will: among other many and long sentences for proof of unity in
substance, both between Christ and the father, and also between Christ and us,
De Trinitate, lib: 8.
has these words. Si enim vere verbum caro factum est, and nos vere verbum
carnem cibo Dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter manner in nobis
existimandus est, qui and naturam carnis nostrae iam inseparabilem sibi homo
natus assumpsit, and naturam carnis suae ad naturam aeternitatis sub sacramento
nobis communicandae carnis admiscuit: If the word be made flesh verily, and we
receive the word being flesh in our lords meat verily: how is he to be
thought not to dwell in us naturally, who both has taken the nature of our
flesh now inseparable to him self, in that he is borne man, and also has
mengled the nature of his own flesh to the nature of his euerlastingnesse
under the sacrament of his flesh to be received of us in the communion? There
afterward this word naturaliter, in this sense that by the sacrament worthily
received, Christ is in us, and we in Christ naturally, that is in truth of
nature, is sundry times put and rehearsed. Who so lists to read further his
eight book de trinitate, he shall find him agnise manentem in nobis
carnaliter filium, that the son of God (through the sacrament) dwells in us
carnally, that is in truth of flesh, and that by the same sacrament we with
him, and he with us are united and knitte together corporaliter, and
inseperabiliter, corporally and inseparably, for they be his very words.

Gregory Nyssene speaking to this purpose says, In lib. de vita Mosi^
Panis qui de coelo descendit, non incorporea quaeda^ res est, quo enim pacto
res incorporea corpori cibus fiet? res vero quae incorporea non est, corpus
omnino est. Huius corporis panem non aratio, non satio, non agricolarum opus
effecit, sed terra intacta permansit, and tamen pane plena fuit, quo
famescentes, mysterium virginis perdocti, facile satura^tur. Which words
report so plainly the truth of Christ's body in the sacrament, as al manner of
figure and signification must be excluded. And thus they may be englished. The
bread that came down from heaven, is not a bodilesse thing. For by what mean
shall a bodilesse thing be made meat to a body? And the thing which is not
bodylesse, is a body, without doubt. It is not earing, not sowing, not the
work of tillers, that has brought forth the bread of this body, but the earth
which remained untouched, and yet was full of the bread, whereof they that wax
hungry, being thoroughly taught the mystery of the virgin, sone have their
fylle. Of these words may easily be inferred a conclusion, that in the
sacrament is Christ and that in the same we receive him corporally, that is, in
verity and substance of his body, for as much as that is there, and that is of
us received, which was brought forth and borne of the virgin Mary.

Cyrillus that ancient father and worthy bishop of Alexandria, for
confirmation of the catholic faith in this point, In Joan. lib. 10. cap. 13.
says thus. Non negamus recta nos fide, charitateque syncera Christo
spiritaliter coniungi: sed nullam nobis coniunctionis rationem secundum carnem
cum illo esse, id profecto pernegamus, idque a diuinis scripturis omnino
alienum dicimus. We deny not but that we are joined spiritually with Christ by
right faith and pure charity: but that we have no manner of joining with him
according to the flesh (which is one as to say carnaliter carnally) that we
deny utterly, and say, that it is not aggreable with the scriptures. Again
least any man should think this joining of us and Christ together to be by
other means then by the participation of his body in the Sacrament, in the
same place afterward he says further. An fortassis putat ignotam nobis
mysticae benedictionis virtutem esse? Quae cum in nobis fiat, no^ne
corporaliter quoque facit communicatione corporis Christi, Christum in nobis
haebitare? what troweth this Ariane heretic perhaps, that we know not the
virtue of the mystical blessing? (whereby is meant this sacrament) which when
it is become to be in us, does it not cause Christ to dwell in us corporally by
receiving of Christ's body in the communion? And after this he says as
plainly, that Christ is in us, non habitudine solum, quae per charitatem
intelligitur, verumetiam and participatione naturali. not by charity only,
but also by natural participation.

The same Cyrill says in an other place, Lib. in Joan 11. cap. 26.
that through the holy communion of Christ's body, we are joined to him in
natural union. Quis enim eos, qui vnius sancti corporis union in vno Christo
unity su^t, ab hac naturali union alienos putabit? who will think (says he)
that they, which be united together by the union of that one holy body in one
Christ, be not of this natural union? He calls this also a corporal union in
the same book, and at length after large discussion how we be united to
Christ, not only by charity and obedience of religion, but also in substance,
concludes thus. Sed de union corporali satis. But we* have treated enough of
the corporal union. Yet afterward in diverse sentences he uses these aduerbes
(for declaring of the verity of Christ's body in the sacrament) naturaliter,
substantialiter, secundum carnem or carnaliter, corporaliter, as most
manifestly in the 27. chapter of the same book. Corporaliter filius per
benedictionem mysticam nobis vt homo vnitur, spiritualiter autem vt Deus. The
son of God is united unto us corporally as man, and spiritually as God.

Again where as he says there: Filium Dei natura Patri vnitum corporaliter
substantialiterque accipientes, clarificamur, glorificamurque, etc. We
receiving the son of God united to the father by nature corporally and
substa^tially, are clarifyed and glorified or made glorious, being made
partakers of the supreme nature: The like saying he has. lib. 12. ca. 58.

Now this being and remaining of Christ in us, and of us in Christ naturally
and carnally, and this uniting of us and Christ together corporally,
presupposes a participation of his very body, which body we can not truly
participate, but in this blessed sacrament. And therefore Christ is in the
Sacrament naturally, carnally, corporally, that is to say, according to the
thruth of his nature, of his flesh, and of his body. For were not he so in the
Sacrament, we could not be joined unto him, nor he and we could not be joined
and united together, corporally.

Diverse other ancient fathers have used the like manner of speech, but none
so much as Hilarious, and Cyrillus, whereby they understand, that Christ is
present in this sacrament as we have said, according to the truth of his
substance, of his nature, of his flesh, of his body and blood. And the
catholic fathers that since the time of Berengarius have written in defense
of the truth in this point, using these terms sometimes for excluding of
metaphores, allegories, figures, and significations only, whereby the
sacrame^taries would defraude faithful people of the truth of Christ's
pretiouse body in this Sacrament: do not thereby mean that the manner, mean,
or way of Christ's presence, dwelling, union and coniunctio^ with us, and of
us with him, is therefore natural, substanciall, corporal, or carnal: but
they, and all other catholic men confess the contrary, that it is far
higher and worthier, supernatural, supersubstantiall, invisible, unspeakable,
special and propre to this sacrament, true, real, and in deed
notwithstanding, and not only tropicall, symbolicall, metaphorical,
allegorical, not spiritual only, and yet spiritual, not figurative or
significatiue only. And likewise concerning the manner of the presence and
being of that body and blood in the sacrament, they and we acknowledge and
confess, that it is not local, circumscriptiue, diffinitiue, or subiectiue,
or natural, but such, as is known to God only.

Or that his body is or may be in a thousand places, Iuell.
or mo, at one time.
Of the being of Christ's body in many places at one time.
ARTICLE VI.
AMong the miracles of this bleshed Sacrament, one is, that one and the same
body may be in many places at once, to wit, under all consecrated hosts.
As for God, it is agreeable to his godhed to be every where, simpliciter, and
proprie. But as for a creature, to be but in one place only. But as for the
body of Christ, it is after a manner between both. For where as it is a
creature, it ought not to be made equal with the Creator in this behalf, that
it be every where. But where as it is united to the Godhed, herein it ought to
excelle other bodies, so, as it may in one time be in mo places under this
holy Sacrament. For the uniting of Christ's natural body unto the almighty
godhed duly considered, brings a true Christian man in respect of the same,
to forsake reason, and to lean to faith, to put aparte all doubts and
discourses of human understanding, and to rest in reverent simplicity of
belief.

Thereby through the holy ghost persuaded he knows, that although the body of
Christ be natural and human in deed, yet through the union and coniunctio^,
many things be possible to the same now, Matt. 14. Luc. 24. Matt. 17. Luc. 24.
Act. 1. Matt. 28. Joan. 20.
that to all other bodies be impossible: as to walk upon waters, to vanishe
away out of sight, to be transfigured and made bright as the sun, to ascend
up through the clouds: and after it became immortal, death being conquered,
to rise up again out of the grave, and to enter through doors fast shut.
Through the same faith he believes and acknowlegeth, that according unto his
word, by his power it is made present in the blessed sacrament of th'aulter
under the form of bread and wine, where so ever the same is duly consecrated,
according unto his institution in his holy supper, and that not after a gross
or carnal manner, but spiritually, and supernaturally, and yet substantially,
not by local, but by substantial presence, not by manner of quantity, or
fylling of a place, or by changing of place, or by leaving his sitting on the
right hand of the father, but in such a manner, as God only knows, and yet
does us to understand by faith, the truth of this very presence, far passing
all man's capacity, to comprehend the manner how.

Where as some against this point of belief do allege the article of
Christ's Ascension, and of his being in heaven at the right hand of God the
father, bringing certain textes of scriptures perteining to the same, and
testimonies of ancient doctors signifying Christ's absence from the earth:
Christ's being in heaven and in the Sacrament at one time, implies no
co^tradiction.
it may be-rightly understood, that he is verily both in heaven at the right
hand of his father, in his visible and corporal form, very God and man, after
which manner he is there, and not here, and also in the Sacrament inuisibly, and
spiritually, both God and Man in a mystery, so as the granting of the one
may stand without denial of the other, no co^tradiction fownde in these
beinges, but only a distinction in the way and manner of being.

And how the ancient fathers of the church have confessed and taught both
these beinges of Christ in heaven and in the sacrament together, contrary to
M. Iuelles negative, by witness of their own words we may perceive. Basile in
his liturgy, that is to say service of his Mass, says thus in a prayer.
Look down upon us lord Jesus Christ our God from thy holy tabernacle, Qui
supra cum patre seeds, and hic inuisibiliter versaris.
and from the throne of glory of thy kingdom, and come to sanctify us, which
sit above with thy father, and art conversant here inuisibly: And
vouchesaufe to imparte unto us thine undefiled body, and pretiouse blood, and
by us to all thy people. S. Chrysostom prays with the very same words also
in his Liturgy or Mass. Where we read further that the priest and the deacon
do adore and worship, saying three times secretly, Et populus similiter oe^s
cu^ pietate adorant.
God be merciful to me a sinner, and that the people do all likewise devoutly
adore. Now since he will adoration to be made, he acknowlegeth Christ present,
whom he grants to be also at the same time in heaven. Which he utters more
plainly in these words. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. l. 3.
O miraculum, o Dei benignitatem, etc. O miracle, o the goodness of God, who
sytteth above with the father, at that very instant of time, is handeled with
the hands of all, and gives him self to those that will receive and embrace
him. And that is done by no crafty sleightes, but openly in the sight of all
that stand about. How say thou, seem these things to thee no better then
to be contemned and despised? By which words of S. Chrysostom we may see, that
Christ's being in heaven, makes no proof that he is not in earth, since both
these verities may well stand together.

Christ's body in many places at once. Hom. 2.
The same father confesses the body of Christ to be in diverse places likewise
in his homilies ad populu^ Antiochenum most plainly alluding to Elias. Elias
(says he) melotem quide^ discipulo reliquit, filius autem Dei ascendens suam
nobis carnem dimisit: sed Elias quide^ exutus, Christus autem and nobis
reliquit, and ipsam habens ascendit. Elias (when he was carried up in the fyery
chariot) left to his disciple Eliseus his ma^tell of sheep skynnes: but the
son of God when he ascended, left to us his flesh: but Elias did put of his
ma^tel, and Christ both left his flesh to us, and also ascended having it
with him. Nothing can be spoken more plainly, whereby to show that we have
the same flesh here in earth, that was received into heaven, which Christ has
not put of to give it to us. By which doctrine of S. Chrysostom we are taught
to believe, that Christ's flesh or his body is both in heaven and also in the
earth, in how many places so ever this blessed Sacrament is rightely celebrated.

And whereas many measuring all things by the common order and laws of
nature, believe nothing can be done above nature, and therefore think that the
body of Christ, for as much as it is of nature finite, can not by power of God
be in many places at once of which opinion M. Iuell seems to be him self: it
shall not be beside the purpose, though the places already alleged prove the
contrary, to recite the testimonies of an old doctor or two, wherein they
confess most plainly that, which by this article is most untruly denied.

Saint Ambrose has these words. In Psalm. 38
Et si Christus nunc no^ videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertur in terris, qua^do
Christi corpus offertur. Imo ipse offerre manifestatur in nobis, cuius sermo
sanctificat sacrificium quod offertur. If Christ now be not seen to offer, yet
he is offered in earth, when the body of Christ is offered. yea it is manifest
that him self offers in us, whose word sanctifies and consecrateth the
sacrifice, that is offered. Now if Christ's body be offered in earth, as this
father affirms, and that of Christ him self, in respect that the sacrifice
which is offered, is by his word consecrated: then it follows, Christ's body
to be in so many places, as it is offered in. Where by the way, this may be
noted, that the sacrifice of the church, Sacrificiu^ incruentu^ and viuificum.
is not thanks giving (as our new Masters do teach) but the body of Christ
it self, which of the fathers is called an unbloody and quikning or life
giving sacrifice.

We find in Chrysostom a most manifest place for the being of Christ's body
in many places at once, so as though he be offered in many places, yet is he
but one Christ, not many Christ's. his words be these. Vnum est hoc
sacrificium, In epist. ad Heb. homil. 17.
alioquin hac ratione, quoniam multis in locis offertur, multi Christi sunt?
nequaquam, sed vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic
plenus. Vnum corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique offertur vnum corpus est, and non
multa corpora: ita etiam and vnum sacrificium. This sacrifice is one, else by
this reason, since it is offered in many places, be there many Christ's? Not
so, but there is but one Christ every where, being both here fully, and there
fully also, one body. For as he that is offered every where, is but one body,
and not many bodies, so likewise it is but one sacrifice. By this place of
Chrysostom we see, what has been the faith of the old fathers touching this
article, even the same, which the catholic church professes at these days,
that one Christ is offered in many places, so as he be fully and perfitely
here, and fully and perfitely there. And thus we perceive, what force their
arguments have in the judgment of the learned fathers, by which they take
away from Christ power to make his body present in many places at once.

Sermo. in coena Domini.
S. Bernard utters the faith of the church in his time agreeable with this, in
these words. Sed vnde hoc nobis pijssime Domine, vt nos vermiculi repta^tes
etc. From whence comes this most loving lord, that we seely worms creaping
on the face of the earth, yea we, that are but duste and ashes, be admitted to
have thee present in our hands, and before our eyes, which all and whole
sit at the right hand of thy father, which also art present to all in one
moment of time from the east to the west, from the north to the sowth, one in
many, the same in diverse places! from whence (I say) comes this? soothly
not of our duty or deserte, but of thy good will, and of the good pleasure of
thy swetnesse, for thou have prepared in thy swetnesse for the poor one o God.
In the same sermon exhorting the church to reioise of the presence of Christ,
he says, In terra sponsum habes in Sacramento, in coelis habitura es sine
velamento: and hic and ibi veritas, sed hic palliata, ibi manifestata. In the
earth thou have thy spouse in the sacrament, in heaven thou shall have him
without veil or covering. both here and also there is the truth, (of his
presence) but here covered, there opened.

Thus all these fathers as likewise the rest, confess as it were with one
mowth, that Christ sits at the right hand of his father, and is here
present in the sacrament the same time, that he is in heaven and in earth at
once, in many and diverse places one, and that the same is every where offered,
the one true sacrifice of the church. And this article is by them so clearly
and plainly uttered, that figures, significations, tropes, and metaphores can
find no appearaunce nor color at all. Whereby the new Masters reasons seem
very peeuishe: Christ is ascended, ergo he is not in the sacrament. Christ is
in heaven sitting at the right hand of his father, ergo he is not in earth.
Christ's body is of nature finite, ergo it is contained in a place
circu^scriptiuely, ergo it is not in many places. In making of which slender
arguments, they will not seem to acknowledge whose body it is, even that,
which is proper to God, whose power is over all, and to whom all things obey.

But because M. Iuell and they of that sect, seem to set little by these
fathers, though very ancient, S. Bernard excepted, and of the church holden
for saints, I will bring forth the authority of Martin Bucer, a late doctor
of their own side, though not canonizate for a saint as yet, Truth confessed
by the enemy of truth.
for that I know. This new father whom they esteem so much, and was the
reader of divinity in Ca^bridge in king Edwardes time, very vehemently, and
for so much truly, affirms the true real presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament. For he says. Christ said not, This is my spirit, this is my
virtue, but this is my body: wherefore we must believe says he, Christ's body
to be there, even the same that did hang upon the cross, our lord him self.
Which in some part to declare, he uses the similitude of the sun for his
purpose, contrary to M. Iuelles negative, to prove Christ's body present, and
that really and substa^tially, in what places so ever the sacrament is rightly
ministered. His words be these. In co^me^t. in 16. cap. Matthaei.
Vt sol vere vno in loco coeli visibilis circu^scriptus est, radijs tame^ suis
praesens vere and substa^tialiter exhibetur vbilibet orbis: Ita Dominus, etia^
si circu^scribatur vno loco coeli, arcani et diuini, id est gloriae Patris,
verbo tame^ suo, and sacris symbolis, vere et totus ipse Deus et homo praesens
exhibetur in sacra coena, eoque substantialiter, quam praesentia^ no^ minus
certo agnoscit men's crede^s verbis his Domini and Symbolis, qua^ oculi vident,
et habe^t solemn presente^ demonstratu^ and exhibitu^ sua corporali luce. Res
ista arcana est, and noui testame^ti, res fidei, no^ sunt igitur huc
admitte^dae cogitationes de praesentatione corporis, quae constat ratione huius
vitae etiam patibilis and fluxae. Verbo Domini simpliciter in haerendum est,
and debet fides sensuum defectui praebere supplementum. Which may thus be
englished.

As the sun is truly placed determinatly in one place of the visible heaven,
and yet is exhibited truly and substantially by his beams every where abroad
in the world: So our lord although he be contained in one place of the secret
and divine heaven, that is to wit, the glory of his father: yet for all that
by his word and holy tokens, he is exhibited present in his holy supper truly
and him self whole God and man, and therefore substa^tially or in substance.
Which presence the mind giving credit to these our lords words and tokens,
does no less certainly acknowledge, then our eyes see and have the sun
present showed and exhibited with his corporal light. This is a secret
matter, and of the new testament, a matter of faith, therefore herein thoughes
be not to be admitted of such a presentatio^ of the body, as consists in the
manner of this life passible and transitory, We must symply cleave to the word
of our lord, and where our senses fail, there must faith help to supply.
Thus we see, how Bucer in sundry other points of faith both deceived and also
a deceiuour, confirms the truth of this article pyththely and plainly. Such
is the force of truth, that oftentimes it is confessed by the very enemies of
truth.

Fight not with the church M. Iuell, but fight with the enemy of the church.
fight with him, who^ you have followed in departing from the church, who never
the less by force of truth, is driven against you to confess the truth in
those most plain words, Vere and totus ipse Deus and homo praesens exhibetur
in sacra coena, eoque substantialiter. in this holy supper him self God and
Man is exhibited present truly and whole, and therefore substantially.

Now to be short, whereas the chief arguments that be made against the being
of Christ's body in many places at once, be deduced of nature, in respect that
this article seems to them to abolishe nature, it may please them to
understand, God vvorking above nature destroys not nature
that God who is auctour of nature, can by his power do with a body that,
which is above the nature of a body, nature not destroyed, but kept and
preserved whole. Which Plato the hethen philosopher would sone have been induced
to believe, if he were alive. Who asked what was nature, answered, quod Deus
vult, that which God will.

And therefore we believe, that Enoch and Elias yet mortal by nature, do by
power of God live in body, and that above nature. Abacuc was by the same power
caught up, and in a moment carried from Iewrie to Babylon, his nature reserved
whole. Saint Peter by God according to nature walked on the earth, the same by
God beside nature, walked upon the waters. Christ after condition of nature
assumpted, suffered death in body, the same Christ by his divine power entered
with his body in to his disciples through doors closed. Christ at his last
supper according to nature sat down with his twelve disciples, and among them
occupied a place at the table visibly, by his divine power there he held his
body in his hands inuisibly. In expositione psalm. 13.
For (as S. Augustine says) ferebatur manibus suis, he was borne in his own
hands, where nature gave place, and his one body was in mo places then one.
Verily non est abbreuiata manus domini, the hand of our lord is not shortened,
his power is as great, as ever it was. And therefore let us not doubt, but he
is able to use nature finite, infinitely, specially now, the nature of his body
being glorified after his resurrection from the dead. And as the living is not
to be sought among the dead, so the things that be done by the power of God
above nature, are not to be tried by rules of nature.

And that all absurdities and carnal grosnes be severed from our thoughts,
where true christen people believe Christ's body to be in many places at once,
they understand it so to be in a mystery. Being in a mystery.
Now to be in a mystery, is not to be comprehended in a place, but by the
power of God to be made present in sort and manner, as him self knows,
verily so, as no reason of man can atteine it, and so, as it may be showed by
no examples in nature. Whereof that notable saying of S. Augustine may very
well be reported, Aug. epis. ad Volusianu^. Ite^. Ser. 159. de tempore.
O homo si rationem a me poscis, non erit mirabile: exemplum quaeritur, non
erit singular. that is, O man if (herein) thou require reason, it shall not be
marueilouse: seek for the like example, and then it shall not be singular. If
Gods working be comprehended by reason (says holy Gregory) it is not
wonderouse: neither faith has meede, Gregorius in homil.
whereto man's reason gives proof.

Iuell.
Or that the priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his head.
Of the Elevation or lifting up of the Sacrament.
ARTICLE. VII.
OF what weight this ceremony is to be accounted, catholic Christian men, whom
you call your adversaries M. Iuell, know no less then you. Verily whereas it
pleases you thus to ieste, and like a Lucian to scoff at the sacraments of
the church, and the reverent use of the same, calling all these articles in
general the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of our religion without
which our doctrine can not be maineteined and stand upright: understand you
that this, a sundry other articles, which you deny, and requyr^ proof of, is
not such, ne never was so esteemed. The priests lifting up or showing of the
Sacrament, is not one of the highest mysteries or greatest keys of our
Religion: and the doctrine of the catholic church may right well be
maineteined and stand without it. But it appears, you regard not so much
what you say, as how you say somewhat for color of defacing the church:
which whiles you go about to do, you deface your self more then you seem to
be ware of, and do that thing, whereby among good christen men, specially the
learned, you may be a shamed to show your face. For as you have over rashely,
yea I may say wickedly, affirmed the negative of sundry other articles, and
stowtely craked of your assurance thereof, Eleuatio^ of the sacrament.
so you hau^ likewise of this. For perusing the ancient father writings, we
find record of this Ceremony used even from the Apostles time foreward.

Saint Dionyse, that was S. Paul's scholar, shows, that the priest at his
time after the consecration was wont to hold up the dreadful mysteries, so as
the people might behold them. His words be these according to the greek.
Ecclesias. hierarch. cap. 3.
Pontifex diuina munera laud prosecutus, sacrosancta and augustissima mysteria
conficit, and collaudata in conspectum agit per symbola sacre proposita. The
bishop after that he has done his service of praising the divine gifts,
consecrateth the holy and most worthy mysteries, and brings them so praised
in to the sight of the people by the tokens set forth for that holy purpose.
On which place the ancient greek writer of the scholies upon that work,
says thus. (...). loquitur de vnius benedictionis, nimirum panis diuini
eleuatione, quem Pontifex in sublime attollit, dicens, Sancta sanctis. This
father speaks in this place, of the lifting up of the one blessing, (that is
to say of the one form or kind of the sacrament) even of that divine bread,
which the bishop lifts up on high, saying, holy things for the holy. In
saint Basiles and Chrysostomes Mass we find these words. Sacerdos eleuans
sacrum panem, dicit, Sancta Sanctis. The priest holding up that sacred bread,
says: Holy things for the holy. In Saint Chrysostomes Mass we read, that,
as the people is kneeling down after the example of the priest and of the
deacon, the deacon seeing the priest stretching forth his hands, and taking up
that holy bread, (...), ad sacram eleuationem peragendam palam edicit,
attendamus, to do the holy elevation, speaks out a loud, let us be attent
and (then) the priest says (as he holds up the sacrament) holy things for
the holy.

Amphilochius, of whom mention is made before in the life of S. Basile, speaking
of his wonderouse celebrating the Mass, among other things says thus. Et
post finem orationum, exaltauit panem, sine intermissione orans, and dicens:
Respice domine Jesus Christ, etc. And after that he had done the prayers of
consecration, he lyfted up the bread, without ceasing praying and saying, Look
upon us lord Jesus Christ etc. The same saint Basile meant likewise of the
Elevation and holding up of the sacrament after the custom of the Occide^tall
church, Cap, 27.
in his book de Spiritu sancto, where he says thus. Inuocationis verba, dum
ostenditur panis eucharistiae and calix benedictionis, quis sanctorum nobis
scripto reliquit? Which of the saints, has left unto us in writing, the
words of Invocation, whiles the bread of Eucharistia (that is to wit the
blessed sacrament in form of bread) and the consecrated chalice, is showed in
sight? He speaks there of many things that be of great authority and weight
in the church, which we have by tradition only, and can not be avouched by
holy scripture. Of showing the holy mysteries to them that be present in the
sacrifice, In epist. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 3. in moral.
the old doctors make mention not sildom. S. Chrysostom declares the manner
of it, saying that such as were accounted unworthy and heynouse sinners, were
put forth of the church, whiles the sacrifice was offered, whiles Christ and
that lamb of our lord was sacrificed. Which being put out of the church, then
were the vailes (of the altar) taken away, to th'entent the holy mysteries
might be showed in sight, doubteles to stir the people to more devotion;
reverence, and to the adoration of christ's body in them present. And thus for
the Elevation or holding up of the sacrament, we have said enough.

Or that the people did then fall down, and worship. Iuell. the Sacrament with
godly honor.
Of the worshipping or adoration of the Sacrament.
ARTICLE. VIII.
IF the blessed Sacrament of the altar were no other, then M. Iuell and the
rest of the Sacramentaries think of it: then were it not well done the people
to bow down to it, and to worship it with godly honor. For then were it but
bare bread and wine, how honorably so ever they speak of it, calling it
symbolicall, that is, tokening, and sacramental bread and wine. But now this
being that very bread, which god the father gave us from heaven, as Christ
says: Joan. 6.
This bread being the flesh of Christ, which he gave for the life of the world
this being that bread and that cup, 1. Cor. 11.
whereof who so ever eats or drinks unworthily, shall be gylty of the body
and blood of our lord: in this Sacrament being contained the very real and
substantial body and blood of Christ, as him self says expressly in the
three first evangelists, and in S. Paul: this being that holy Eucharistia,
which Ignatius calls the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, In epistola
quada^ ad Smyrnenses, vt citatur a Theodori to in Polymorph. Lib. 4. co^tra
haereses. ca. 34.
that has suffered for our sins, which the father by his goodness has raised
up to life again: This being not common bread, but the Eucharistia, after
consecration consisting of two things, earthly and heavenly, as Irenaeus
says, meaning by the one, the outward forms, by the other, the very body and
blood of Christ, who partly for the godhed inseparably thereto united, and
partly for that they were conceived of the holy ghost in the most holy virgin
Mary, are worthily called heavenly: This being that bread, which of our lord
given to his disciples, not in shape, but in nature changed by the almighty
power of the word, In Ser. de coena do.
is made flesh, as S. Cyprian terms it: This being that holy mystery,
wherein the invisible priest tourneth the visible creatures (of bread and wine)
in to the substance of his body and blood, by his word with secret power,
Homil. 5. de Pascha.
as Eusebius Emisenus reports: This being that holy food, by worthy
receiving whereof Christ dwells in us naturally, that is to wit, is in us
by truth of nature, and not by concord of will only, Lib. 8. de trinitate.
as Hilarious affirms: Again this being that table, whereat in our lords
meat we receive the word truly made flesh of the most holy virgin Mary, as
the same Hilarie says: This being that bread which neither earing nor sowing
nor work of tyllers has brought forth, but that earth which remained
untouched, and was full of the same, that is the blessed virgin Marye, as
Gregory Nyssene describes: Lib. de vita Mosis. cap. 48. Co^stitut. Apostol.
li. 8. c. vlt. In Leuit. lib. 1. ca. 4.
This being that supper, in the which Christ sacrificed him self, as Clemens
Romanus, and as Hesychius declares: Who furthermore in an other place writes
most plainly, that these mysteries, meaning the blessed sacrament of
th'aulter, are sancta sanctorum, the holiest of all holy things, because it is
the body of him self, of whom Gabriel said to the virgin, Luc. 1.
the holy ghost shall come upon the, and the power of the highest shall
ouershaddowe the, therefore that holy thing which shall be borne of the, shall
be called the son of God, and of whom also Esaie spoke, Holy is our lord, and
dwells on high, verily even in the bosom of the father: On the holy table
where these mysteries are celebrated, the lamb of God being laid and
sacrificed of priests vnbloudely, as that most ancient and worthy council of
Nice reports: Briefly in this highest Sacrament under visible shape invisible
things, soothly the very true, real, lively, natural and substantial body
and blood of our Savior Christ being contained, as the scriptures, doctoures,
councelles, yea and the best learned of Martin Lutheres school do most
plainly and assuredly affirm: This (I say in conclusion) being so, as it is
undoubtedly so: we that remain in the catholic church, and can by no
persecution be removed from the catholic faith, whom it likes M. Iuell and
his fellows to call papists, believe verily, that it is our bownden duty to
adore the Sacrament, and to worship it with all godly honor. By which word
Sacrament notwithstanding in this respect, we mean not the outward forms,
that properly are called the sacrament, but the thing of the sacrament, the
invisible grace and virtue therein contained, even the very body and blood of
Christ.

And when we adore and worship this blessed Sacrament, we do not adore and
worship the substance it self of bread and wine, because after consecration
none at all remains. Neither do we adore the outward shapes and forms of
bread and wine which remain, for they be but creatures that ought not to be
adored: What Christen people adore in the Sacrament.
but the body it self and blood of Christ, under those forms verily and
really contained, lowly and devoutly do we adore. And therefore to speak more
properly, and according to skill, least our adversaries might take advantage
against us through occasion of terms, where right sense only is meant: we
proteste and say, that we do and ought to adore and worship the body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament.

And here this much is further to be said, that in the Sacrament of the
altar, the body of Christ is not adored by thought of mind sundred from the
word, but being inseparably united to the word. For this is specially to be
considered, that in this most holy Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ are
not present by them selves alone, as being separated from his soul and from
the godhed: but that there is here his true and living flesh and blood joined
together with his godhed inseparably, and that they be as him self is,
perfect, whole and inseparable Which is sufficiently confirmed by sundry his
own words in S. John. I am (says he) the bread of life. Again, this is
bread coming down from heaven, that if any eat of it, he dye not. I am the
lively bread that came down from heaven, if any eat of this bread, he shall
live everlastingly. And to show what bread he meant, he concludes with these
words: And the bread which I shall give, is my flesh, which I shall give for
the life of the world. By which words he assures us plainly, that his flesh
which he gives us to eat, is full of life, and joined with his godhed, which
brings to the worthy receivers thereof, immortality as well of body as of
soul. Which thing flesh and blood of it self could not perform, as our lord
him self declares plainly, where he says, as there it follows: It is the
spirit that quikneth or gives life, the flesh profits nothing. The words
which I have spoken to you, be spirit and life. As though he had said thus.
The flesh of it self profits nothing, but my flesh which is full of godhed
and spirit, brings and works immortality and life euetlasting to them
that receive it worthily. Thus we understand in this blessed Sacrament not
only the body and blood of Christ, but all and whole Christ, God and man, to
be present in substance, and that for the inseparable unity of the person of
Christ: and for this cause we acknowledge our selves bownden to adore him, as
very true God and man.

For a clearer declaration hereof, I will not let to recite a notable sentence
out of S. Augustine, where he expounds these words of Christ: In Joan.
tractat. 27
Then if ye see the son of man go up, where he was before. There had been no
question (says he) if he had thus said: if ye see the son of God go up,
where he was before. But whereas he said, the son of man go up, where he
was before, what was the son of man in heaven, before that he began to be
in earth? Verily here he said, where he was before, as though then he were not
there, when he spoke these words. And in an other place he says, No man has
ascended in to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, the son of man,
which is in heaven. He said not was, but the son of man (says he) which
is in heaven. In earth he spoke, and said him self to be in heaven. To what
pertains this, but that we understand Christ to be one person, God and man,
not two, least our faith be not a trinity, but a quaternitie? Wherefore Christ
is one, the word, the soul and the flesh, one Christ: the son of God, and
the son of man, one Christ. The son of God ever, the son of man in time:
yet one Christ according to th'unitie of person was in heaven, when he spoke in
earth. So was the son of man in heaven, as the son of god was in earth. The
son of god in earth in flesh taken, the son of man in heaven in unity of
person. This far saint Augustine.

Hereupon he expounds these words, it is the spirit that quikneth or gives
life, the flesh avails nothing, thus: The flesh profits nothing, but the
only flesh. Come the spirit to the flesh, and it profits very much. For
if the flesh should profit nothing, the word should not be made flesh to dwell
amongst us. For this unity of person to be understood in both natures
(says the great learned father Leo) we read that both the son of man came
down from heaven, Epist. ad Flauianu^ Constantinopolitanu^ epis. cap. 5.
when as the son of god took flesh of that virgin, of whom he was borne:
and again, it is said, that the son of god was crucified and buried,
whereas he suffered these things, not in the godhed it self, in which the
only begote^ is coeuerlasting and consubstantiall with the father, but in the
infirmity of human nature. Wherefore we confess all in the Creed also, the
only begoten son of god crucified and buried, according to that saying of
the apostle: For if they had known, 1. Cor. 2.
they would never have crucified the lord of Majesty.

According to this doctrine Cyrillus writing upon S. John, says, In Joan. li.
4. ca. 15.
he that eats the flesh of Christ has life everlasting. For this flesh
has the word of god, which naturally is life. Therefore he says: I will
raise him again in the last day. For I, said he, that is, my body, which
shall be eaten, will raise him again. For he is not other, then his flesh. I
say not this because by nature he is not other, but because after incarnation
he suffers not him self to be divided in to two sons. By which words he
reproves the heresy of wicked Nestorius, that went about to divide Christ,
and of Christ to make two sons, the one the son of god, the other the son
of Marye, and so two persons. For which Nestorius was condemned in the first
Ephesine council, and also specially for that he said, we receive in this
Sacrament only the flesh of Christ in the bread, and his blood only in the
wine without the godhed, because Christ said, he that eats my flesh, and
said not, he that eats or drinks my godhed, because his godhed can not be
eaten, but his flesh only. Which heretical cauille Cyrillus does thus avoid.
Vide Anathematismum. xi. Item ad Theodos. de recta fide. and li. 2. ad Reginas,
de recta fide.
Although (says he) the nature of the godhed be not eaten, yet we eat the
body of Christ, which verily may be eaten. But this body is the Words own
proper body, which quikneth althinges. and in as much as it is the body of
life, it is quikning or life giving.

Now he quikneth us or gives us life, as God, the only fonteine of life.
Wherefore such speeches uttered in the scriptures, of Christ, whereby that
appears to be attributed to the one nature, which apperteineth to the other,
and contrary wise: according to that incomprehe^sible and unspeakable
conjunction and union of the divine and human nature in one person, are to be
taken of him inseparably, in as much as he is both god and man: and not of this
or that other nature only, as being severed from the other. For through cause
of this inseparable union, what so ever is apperteining or peculiar to either
nature, it is rightly ascribed, yea and it ought to be ascribed to the whole
person. And this is done, as the learned divines term it, per communicationem
idiomatum. And thus Cyrillus teaches, how christ may be eaten, not according
to the divine, but human nature, which he took of us, and so likewise he is
of Christen people adored in the Sacrament according to his divine nature. And
yet not according to his divine nature only, as though that were separated
from his human nature, but his whole person together God and man. And his
precious flesh and blood are adored for the inseparable conjunction of both
natures into one person, which is Jesus Christ God and man. Whom God has
exalted, (as S. Paul says) and has given him a name, Philip. 2.
which is above all name, that in the name of Jesus every knee be bovved of
the heavenly and the earthly things, and of things beneathe, and that every
tongue confess, that our lord Jesus Christ is in glory of God the father, that
is, of equal glory with the father, Heb. 10. Psalm. 96.
And when God (says S. Paul) brings his first begoten in to the world, he
says, and let all the Angels of God adore him. S. John writes in his
revelation, that he heard all creatures say, blessing honor, Apoc. 5.
glory and power be to him which sits in the throne, and to the lamb for
ever. And the fouer and twenty elders fell down on their faces, and adored
him that lives until worlds of worlds.

But it shall be more tediouse then needful, to recite places out of the
scriptures for proof of th'adoratio^ of Christ, there may of the^ be fownde so
great plenty. Contrariety in the first diuisers of the nevve gospel.
Yet because Luther was either so blind or rather so deuilishe, as to deny
th'adoration, where notwithstanding he confessed the presence of Christ's true
and natural body in the Sacrament: I will here recite what the Sacramentaries
of Zurich have written against him therefore. What (say they) is the bread the
true and natural body of Christ, and is Christ in the supper (as the Pope and
Luther do teach) present? Wherefore then ought not the lord there to be
adored, where ye say him to be present? Why shall we be forbidden to adore
that, which is not only sacramentally, but also corporally the body of Christ?
Thomas touches the true body of Christ raised up from the dead, and falling
down on his knees adoreth saying: My God and my lord. The disciples adore the
lord as well before as after his Ascension. Matthew. 28. Act. 1. And the lord in
S. John says to the blind man, Joan. 9.
beleuest thou in the son of God? and he answered him saying, Lord who is he,
that I may believe in him? And Jesus said to him. Thou have both seen him, and
who speaks with thee, he it is. Then he says, lord I believe. and he adored
him. Now if we taught our lords bread to be the natural body of Christ, verily
we would adore it also faithfully with the papists. This much the Zuinglians
against Luther. Whereby they prove sufficiently th'adoration of Christ's body
in the Sacrament, and so consequently of Christ him self God and man, because
of the inseparable conjunction of his divine and human nature in unity of
person, so as where his body is, there is it joined and united also unto his
godhed, and so there Christ is present perfitely, wholly, and substantially,
very god and man.

For the clear understanding whereof the better to be atteined, the
scholastical Divines have profitably devised the term concomitantia, plainly
and truly teaching that in this Sacrament after consecration under the form of
bread is present the body of Christ, and under the form of wine his blood ex
vi sacramenti, and with the body under form of bread also the blood, the
soul, and godhed of Christ, and likewise with the blood, under the form of
wine, the body, soul, and godhed, ex concomitantia, as they term it, in
shorter and playner wise uttering the same doctrine of faith, which the holy
fathers did in the Ephesme council against Nestorius. Whereby they mean, that
where the body of Christ is present, by necessary sequel, because of the
indivisible copulation of both natures in the unity of person, (for as much
as the Word made flesh never left the human nature) there is also his
blood, his soul, his godhed, and so whole and perfect Christ God and man. And
in this respect the term is not to be misliked of any godly learned man,
though some new Masters scoff at it, who fill the measure of their
predecessors, that likewise have been offended with terms for the apter
declaration of certain necessary articles of our faith, by holy and learned
fathers in general councelles holesomly devised. Of which sort ben these,
homousion, humanatio, incarnatio, transubstantiatio, etc. Now here is to be
noted, how the Zuinglians, whom M. Iuell follows, in th'article of adoration
confute the Lutherans, as on the other side, the Lutherans in th'article of the
presence, confute the Zuinglians. As though it were by gods special providence
for the better stay of his church so wrought, that both the truth should be
confessed by the enemies of truth, and also for uttering of untruth, the one
should be condemned of the other, that by the war of heretics the peace of
the church might be established, and by their discord the catholic people
might the faster grew together in concord.

Now having sufficiently proved by the scriptures, and that with the Zuinglia^s
also, adoration and godly honor to be due unto Christ's body, where so ever it
please his divine majesty to exhibit the same present: let us see, whether we
can find the same doctrine affirmed by the holy and ancient fathers.

What the Apostles taught in their time concerning this Article, we may judge
by that we read in Dionysius, that was S. Paul's scholar, and for that is to
believed. He adoreth and worshippeth this holy mystery with these very words.
Ecclesias. hierarch. cap. 3.
Sed o diuinum penitus sanctumque mysterium, etc. But o divine and holy
mystery, which vouchesafest to open the cooueringes of signs laid over the,
utter thy light to us openly and plainly, and fill our spiritual eyes with
the singular and evident brightness of thy light.

Origin teaches us how to adore and worship Christ in the Sacrament, before we
receive it, after this form of words. Hom: 5. in diuersos Euangelij locos.
Qua^do sanctum cibum, etc. when thou receiuest the holy meat and that
vncorrupt banquet, when thou enioyest the bread and cup of life, thou eatest
and drinkest the body and blood of our lord: then our lord enters in under thy
roof. And therefore thou also humbling thy self follow this Ce^turion or
captain, and say: Lord I am not worthy that thou enter under my roof. For
where he enters in unworthily, there he enters in to the condemnation of the
receiver.

What can be thought of S. Cyprian, but that he adored the invisible thing of
this Sacrament, which is the body and blood of Christ, seeing that he confesses
the godhed to be in the same, nolesse then it was in the person of Christ,
which he utters by these words. In Ser. d^ coena do.
Panis iste quem dominus discipulis porrigebat, etc. This bread which our lord
gave to his disciples, changed not in shape, but in nature, by the almighty
power of god is made flesh. And as in the person of Christ the manhood was
seen, and the godhed was hydden, even so the divine essence has unspeakably
infused it self into the visible sacrament.

Chrysostom has a notable place for the adoration of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, in his commentaries upon S. Paul, In 10. cap. prioris ad Corinth.
where he affirms also the real presence and the sacrifice. Let us not, let
us not (says he) be willing impudently to kill our selves. And when thou
see that body set forth, say with thy self, for cause of this body I am no
longer earth and ashes, no longer captive, but free. This body fastened (on the
Cross) and beaten, was not overcome with death. After this he exhorts all to
adore and worship our lords body in the Sacrament. This body (says he) the
wise men worshipped in the stalle, and having taken a long journey, being both
wicked and aliantes, with very great fear and trembling adored him. Wherefore
let us follow at least those aliants, us I say, that are citizens of heaven.
For they, whereas they saw but that stalle and cabben only, and none of all
the things thou see now, came notwithstanding with the greatest reverence
and fear, that was possible. But thou see it not in a stalle of beasts, but
on the altar, not a woman to hold it in her arms, but a priest present, and
the holy ghost plentyfully spredde upon the sacrifice. This father in his
Mass makes a prayer in presence of the blessed Sacrament, almost with the
same words, that S. Basile did. Atte^de domine Jesus Christ Deus noster, etc.
Look upon us o lord Jesus Christ our God, from thy holy habitacle, and from
the throne of the glory of thy kingdom, and come to sanctify us, who sit
on high with the father, and art here inuisibly with us, and make us worthy by
thy mighty hand, that we may be partakers of thy unspotted body and pretiouse
blood, and through us, all the people.

In the same Chrysostomes liturgy or Mass, a most evident testimony of
adoration of the Sacrament is thus uttered. Sacerdos adorat, et diaconus in eo
in quo est loco, ter secreto dice^tes: Deus propitius esto, etc. The priest
adoreth, and the deacon likewise in the place he stands in, saying three
times secretly: God be merciful to me a sinner. So the people, and likewise
all make their adoration deuoutely and reverently.

In the same father is an other prayer, which the greek priests do use to
this day at their adoration of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and it is
expressed in these words. Domine non sum dignus etc. Lord I am not worthy that
thou enter under the filthy roof of my soul. But as thou tookest in good
part to lie in the den and stall of brute beasts, and in the house of Simon
the leprouse, receiuedst also a harlot and a sinner like me coming unto thee:
vouchesafe also to enter into the stalle of my soul void of reason, and into
my fylthy body being dead and leprouse. And as thou dydst not abhor the foul
mowth of a harlot, kissing thine undefiled feet: So my lord God abhor not me
though a sinner, but vouchesafe of thy goodness and benignity, that I may be
made partaker of thy most holy body and blood.

S. Ambrose after long search and discussion, De spirit^ sancto. li. 3. cap.
12. Psalm. 96.
how that saying of the prophet might be understood, Adore and worship ye
his footestoole, because it is holy: At length concludes so, as by the
footestoole he understands the earth, because it is written, Esa. 66.
Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole: And because, the earth is
not to be adored, for that it is a creature, by this earth he understands
that earth, which our lord Jesus took in the assumption of his flesh of the
virgin Marye, and hereupon he utters those plain words for testimony of
the adoration. Iraque per scabellum terra intelligitur, per terra^ autem caro
Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysterijs adoramus, and quam Apostoli in domino
Jesus adorarunt. And thus by the footestoole earth may be understood, and by
earth the flesh of Christ, which even now adays also we adore in the
mysteries, and the Apostles adored in our lord Jesus.

S. Augustines learned handling of this place of the psalm, adore ye his
footestoole, because it is holy: makes so evidently for this purpose, that of
all other auctorities, which in great number might be brought for prouse of the
same, it ought least to be omitted. The place being long, I will recite it in
English only. His words be these. Adore ye his footestoole, In Psalm. 98
because it is holy. See ye brethren, what that is, he byddeth us to adore.
^sa. 66.
In an other place the scripture says: heaven is my seat, and the earth is
my footestoole. What does he then bydde us adore and worship the earth, because
he said in an other place, that it is the footestoole of God? And how shall we
adore the earth, whereas the scripture says plainly, Deuteronomy. 6.10
Thou shall adore thy lord thy God, and here he says, adore ye his
footestoole? But he expounds to me, what his footestoole is, Matthew. 4.
and says And the earth is my footestoole. I am made doubtefull, afraid I am
to adore the earth, least he damn me, that made heaven and earth. Again I am
afraid not to adore the footestoole of my lord, because the Psalm says to
me, Adore ye his footestoole. I seek what thing is his footestoole, and the
scripture tells me, The earth is my footestoole. Being thus wavering, I
turn me to Christ, because him I seek here, and I find how without impiety
the earth may be adored. For he took of earth, earth, because flesh is of
earth, and of the flesh of Marye, he took flesh. And because he walked here
in flesh, and that very flesh he gave us to eat to Salvation, and no man
eats that flesh, except first he adore it: it is fownde out how such a
footestoole of our lord may be adored, and how we not only sin not by
adoring, but sin by not adoring. Does not the flesh quicken and give life?
Our lord him self said, when he spoke of the commendation it self of that
earth: Joan. 6.
it is the spirit that quikneth, but the flesh, profits nothing. Therefore
when thou bowest thy self and fallest down to every such earth, behold it
not as earth, but that holy one, whose footestoole it is, that thou do
adore, for because of him thou do adore. And therefore here he added: Adore
ye his footestoole, because it is holy. Who is holy? he for whose love thou
adorest his footestoole. And when thou adorest him, remain not by cogitation
in flesh, that thou be not quikned of the spirit. For the spirit (says he)
quikneth, and the flesh profits nothing. And then when our lord commended
this unto us, he had spoken of his flesh, and had said: Except a man eat my
flesh, he shall not have in him life everlasting.

Again S. Augustine shows the manner and custom of his time touching the
adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, writing thus ad Honoratum, Epist. 120.
cap. 21.
upon the verse of the xxj. psalm, Edent pauperes and saturabuntur, that is,
the poor shall eat and be filled, and upon that other, Manducauerunt and
adorauerunt omnes diuites terrae, all the rich of the earth have eaten and
adored. It is not without cause (says he) that the rich and the poor be so
distincted, that of the poor it was said before, the poor shall eat and be
filled: and here (of the rich) they have eaten and adored all that be the
rich of the earth. For they have be^ brought to the table of Christ, and do
take of his body and blood, but they do adore only, and be not also filled,
for as much as they do not follow him.

Likewise in his exposition upon that Psalm: In Psalm. 2^
All the rich also (says he there) of the earth have eaten the body of the
humblenes of their lord, neither have they ben filled as the poor, until the
following. But yet they have adored and worshipped it, that is, by adoration
they have acknowleged Christ their lord there present.

Furthermore writing against Faustus the heretic of the Maniches sect,
amongst other things he shows, how the Ethnikes thought that christian
people for the honor they did before the blessed Sacrament, that is of the
bread and wine consecrated, did honor Bacchus and Ceres, which were false
gods honored of the Gentiles for the invention of wine and corn. Whereof
may justly be gathered an argument, that in those days faithful people
worshipped the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, under the forms of
bread and wine. For else the infidelles could not have suspected them of doing
idolatry to Bacchus and Ceres.

One other most evident place touching this honor and adoration, we find in
him rehearsed by Gratian. lib. Sent. Prosperi. De consecrat. did 2 can. Nos
autem.
we do honor (says he) in form of bread and wine, which we see, things
invisible, that is to faye, flesh and blood. Neither take we likewise these
two forms, as we took them before consecration. Since that we do faithfully
grant, that before consecration it is bread and wine, which nature has
shapte, but after consecration, flesh and blood of Christ, which the blessing
(of the priest) has consecrated.

Leaving a number of places that might be alleged out of the ancient fathers
for the confirmation of this matter, to avoid tediousnes, I will conclude with
that most plain place of Theodoritus. Who speaking of the outward signs of
the Sacrament, says, that notwithstanding they remain after the mystical
blessing in the propriety of their former nature, as those that may be seen
and felt nolesse then before: yet they are understood and believed to be the
things, which they are made by virtue of co^secratio^, and are worshipped with
godly honor. His words be these. Intelligu^tur ea esse, quae facta sunt,
Dialogo 2
and creduntur, and adora^tur, vt quae illa sint, quae credu^tur. These
mystical signs (says he) are understood to be those things which they
are made, and so they are believed, and are adored, as being the things which
they are believed to be. With which words Theodoritus affirms both the real
presence, and also the adoration. The real presence, in that he says these
outward signs or tokens after consecration to be made things, which are not
seen, but understood and believed, whereby he signifies the invisible thing
of this Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ. Adoration he teaches with
express terms, and that because through power of the mystical blessing the
signs be in existence and in deed the things which they are believed to be,
soothly the body and blood of Christ. For otherwise god forbydde, that christen
people should be taught to adore and worship the insensible creatures bread and
wine. Of which he says, that they are adored not as signs, not so in no
wise, but as being the things which they are believed to be. Now I report me
to the Christen reader, whether this Adoration of the Sacrament, whereby we
mean the godly worship of Christ's body in the Sacrament, be a new devise or
no, brought into the church but lately, about three hundred years past, Fol. 20.
as M. Iuell makes him self sure of it in his sermon. And whereas utterly to
abolishe this adoration, Fol. 26.
he alleges great danger of idolatry, in case the priest do not truly
consecrate: thereto may be answered, Genesis 29.
that Jacob stood in no danger of conscience, for that by the procurement of
Laban, he lay with Lya instead of Rachel, neither for the same was he to be
charged with aduowtrie, because he mea^t good faith, and thought him self to
have had the company of his wife Rachel. So idolatry is not to be imputed
unto him, that worshippeth Christ with godly honor in the bread not
consecrate, which of good faith he thinks to be consecrate. Touching this
case S. Augustine has this notable saying. Inchi. 60
We have need (says he) to put a difference in our judgment, and to know
good from evil, for as much as Satan changing his shape, shows him self
as an angel of light, least through deceit he lead us a side to some
perniciouse things. For when he deceives the senses of the body, and
remoueth not the mind from true and right meaning, wherein each man leads a
faithful life there is no peril in religion. Or if when he fayneth him self
good, and does or says those things, that of congruence perteine to good
angels, although he be thought to be good, this is not a perilouse or sickely
error of Christian faith. But when as by these things he begins to bring
us to things quite contrary, then to know him from the good Spirit, and not
to go after him, it stands us much upon diligently to watch and take heed.
Thus S. Augustine. This much for th'adoration of the Sacrament, or rather of
Christ in the Sacrament, may suffice.

Or that the Sacrament was then, or now ought, Iuell.
to be hanged up under a Canopie.
Of the reverent hanging up of the Sacrament under a Canopie.
ARTICLE. IX.
IF M. Iuell would in plain terms deny the reseruatio^ and keeping of the
blessed Sacrament, for which purpose the Pyxe and Canopie served in the
Churches of England, as of the professors of this new gospel it is both in
word and also in deed denied: it were easy to prove the same by no small number
of auctorities, such as him self can not but allow for good and sufficient.
But he knowing that right well, guilefully refrayneth from mention of that
principal matter, and the better to make up his heap of Articles for some
show against the Sacrament, by denial reproves the hanging up of it under
the Canopie, thereby showing him self like to Momus, who espying nothing
reproueable in fayer Venus, fownde fault with her slypper. Whereto we say,
that if he with the rest of the Sacramentaries would agree to the keeping of the
Sacrament, the^ would we demand, why that manner of keeping were not to be
liked. And here upon proufes made of defaulte in this behalf, and a better
way showed, in so small a matter conformity to the better would sone be
persuaded.

Diverse manners of keeping the blessed Sacrament.
In other christen countries (we grant) it is kept otherwise, under lock and
keye, in some places at the one end or side of the altar, in some places in a
chapel builded for that purpose, in some places in the vestrie or in some
inward and secret rome of the church, In epistola ad Innocentiu^.
as it was in the time of Chrysostom at Constantinople. In some other places we
read, that it was kept in the bishops palais near to the church, and in
the holy days brought reverently to the church, and set upon th'aulter,
which for abuses committed was by order of councelles abrogated. In Council.
Braccare^. 3. Can. 5.
Thus in diverse places diuersely it has been kept, every where reverently and
surely, so as it might be safe from injury and villainie of miscrea^tes and
dispysers of it. The hanging up of it on high has been the manner of England, as
Lindewode notes upon the constitutions provincial on high, that wicked
dispite might not reach to it, under a Canopie, for show of reverence and
honor.

If princes be honored with cloth of estate, bishops with solemn thrones in
their churches, and deanes with canopies of tapistrie, sylke and arras (as we
see in sundry cathedral churches) and no man find fault with it: why should
M. Iuell mislike the Canopie that is used for honor of that blessed Sacrament,
wherein is contained the very body of Christ, and through the inseparable
joining together of both natures in unity of person, Christ him self very
God and man? With what face speaks he against the Canopie used to the honor
of Christ in the Sacrament, that sytting in the bishops seat at Salesburie,
can abide the sight of a solene canopie made of paineted bourdes spredde over
his head? If he had been of counsel with Moses, David and Solomon, it is like
he would have reproved their judgments for the great honor they used and
caused so to be continewed toward the Arc, wherein was contained nothing but
the tables of the law, Aarons rod, and a pottefull of Manna.

King David thought it very unsitting, 2. Reg. 7.
and felt great remorse in heart, that he dwelte in a house of Cedres, and the
Ark of God was put in the mids of skynnes, that is, of the tabernacle,
whose outward parts were covered with beasts skynnes. And now there is one
fownde among other monstrouse and strange forms of creatures, manners and
doctrines, who being but duste and ashes, as Abraham said of him self,
promoted to the name of a bishop, and not chosen (I wene) to do high service
of a man according to Gods own heart, as David was: thinks not him self
unworthy to sytte in a bishopes chayer under a gorgeouse testure or Canopie of
gilted bourdes, and can not suffer the pretiouse body of Christ, whereby we are
redeemed, to have for remembrance of honor done of our part, so much as, a
little Canopie, a thing of small price. Yet was the Arc but a shadow, and this
the body, that the figure, this the truth, that the type or sign, this the
very thing it self. As I do not envy M. Iuell that honor, by what right so
ever he enjoys it, So I can not but blame him for bereuing Christ of his
honor in this blessed Sacrament.

Now concerning this article it self, if it may be called an article, wherein
M. Iuell thinks to have great advantage against us, as though nothing could
be brought for it (though it be not one of the greatest keys nor of the
highest mysteries of our Religion as he reports it to be the more to deface
it) of the Canopie what may be fownde, I leave to others, neither it forces
greatly. Hanging up of the Sacrament in a pixe over the altar is ancient.
But of the hanging up of the Sacrament over the altar, we find plain
mention in S. Basiles life written by Amphilochius that worthy bishop of
Iconium. Who tells that S. Basile at his Mass having divided the Sacrament
in three parts, did put the one in to the golden dooue (after which form the
Pyxe was then commonly made) hanging over the altar, His words be these,
Imposuerit columbae aureae pendenti super altar. And for further evidence,
that such pyxes made in form of a dooue in remembrance of the holy ghost,
that appeared like a dooue, were hanged up over th'aulter, we find in the
acts of the General council holde^ at Constantinople, that the clergy of
Antioche accused one Seuerus an heretic, before John the patriarch and the
council there, that he had ryfled and spoiled the holy aulters, and molted the
consecrated vessels, and had made away with some of them to his companions,
praesumpsisset etiam columbas aureas and argenteas in formam Spiritus sancti
super diuina lauacra et altaria appensas vna cum alijs sibi appropriare,
dicens, non oportere in specie columbae Spiritum sanctum nominare. Which is to
say, that he had presumed also to convert to his own use beside other
things, the golden and syluerne dooues, made to represent the holy ghost,
that were hanged up over the holy fontes and aulters, saying that no man ought
to speak of the holy ghost in the shape of a dooue.

Neither has the Sacrament ben kept in all places and in all times in one
manner of vessels. So it be reverently kept for the viage provision for the
sick, no catholic man will maineteine strife for the manner and order of
keeping. Symmachus a very worthy bishop of Rome in the time of Anastasius the
Emperor, as it is written in his life, made two vessels of silver to reserve
the Sacrament in, and set them on the aulters of two churches in Rome, of S.
Syluester, and of S. Androw. These vessels they call commonly, ciboria. We
find likewise in the life of S. Gregory, that he also like Symmachus made
such a vessel which they call ciborium for the Sacrament, with fouer pillours
of pure silver, and set it on the altar at S. Petres in Rome.

In a work of Gregorius Turonensis, this vessel is called, turris in qua
mysterium dominici corporis habebatur, a tower wherein our lords body was
kept. In an old book de poenitentia of Theodorus the greek of Tarsus in
Cilicia, sometime archbishop of Cantorbury, before Beda his time, it is called
pixis cum corpore Domini ad viaticum pro infirmis. The pyxe with our lords
body for the viage provision for the sick. In that book, in an admonition of
a bishop to his clergy in a synod, warning is given, that nothing be put
upon th'aulter in time of the Sacrifice, but the cofer of Relikes, the book
of the fouer Eua^gelistes, and the pyxe with our lords body.

Thus we find that the blessed Sacrament has always ben kept in some places
in a pyxe hanged up over the altar, in some other places otherwise, every
where and in all times safely and reverently, as is declared, to be alwaile in
readynes for the viage provision of the sick. Which keeping of it for that
godly purpose, and with like due reverence, if M. Iuell and the Sacramentaries
would admit, no man will be either so scrupulouse or so contentiouse, as to
strive with them either for the hanging up of it, or for the Canopie.

Iuell.
Or that in the Sacrament after the words of Consecration there remains only
the accidents and shows without the substance of bread and wine.
Of the remaining of the Accidents without their substance in the Sacrament.
ARTICLE. X.
IN this Sacrament after consecration, nothing in substance remains that was
before, neither bread nor wine, but only the Accidents of bread and wine:
as their form and shape, savor, smell, color, weight, and such the like,
which here have their being miraculously without their subject: for as much as
after consecration, there is none other substance, then the substance of the
body and blood of our lord, which is not affected with such accidents, as the
scholasticall doctors term it. Which doctrine has always though not with
these precise terms, ben taught and believed from the beginning,
Transubstantiation affirmed.
and depends of the Article of Transubstantiation. For if the substance of
bread and wine be changed in to the substance of the body and blood of our
lord (which is constantly affirmed by all the learned and ancient fathers of
the church) it follows by a necessary sequel in nature and by drifte of
reason, that then the accidents only remain. For witness and proof whereof,
I will not let to recite certain most manifest sayings of the old and best
approved doctors.

S. Cyprian that learned bishop and holy martyr says thus in sermon de coena
domini. Panis iste quem dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura
mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. This bread which our lord gave to
his disciples, changed not in shape, but in nature, by the almighty power of
the word (he means Christ's word of Consecration) is made flesh. Lo he
confesses the bread to be changed not in shape or form, for that remains,
but in nature, that is to say, in substance. And to signify the change of
substance, and not an accide^tarie change only, to wit, from the use of
common bread to serve for Sacramental bread, as some of our new Masters do
expound that place for a shifte he adds great weight of words, whereby he
far ouerpeiseth these men's light devise, saying that by the almighty power
of our lords word, it is made flesh. Verily they might consider, as they
would seem to be of sharp judgment, that to the performance of so small a
matter, as their sacramental change is, the almighty power of gods word is
not needful. And now if here this word factus est may signify an imaginatiue
making, then why may not verbum caro factum est, likewise be expounded to the
defense of sundry old haynouse heresies against the true manhod of Christ?
Thus the nature of the bread in this sacrament being changed, and the form
remaining, so as it seem bread, as before consecration, and being made our
lords flesh by virtue of the word, the substance of bread changed into that
most excellent substance of the flesh of Christ: of that which was before, the
accidents remain only, without the substance of bread. The like is to be
believed of the wine.

De consecrat. did. 2 ca^ omnia quaecu^que.
Nothing can be playner to this purpose, then the sayings of S. Ambros. Licet
figura panis and vini videatur, nihil tamen aliud, quam caro Christi et sanguis
post consecrationem credendum est. Although (says he) the form of bread and
wine be seen, yet after consecration we must believe, they are nothing else,
but the flesh and blood of Christ. After the opinion of this father the show
and figure of bread and wine are seen, and therefore remain after
co^secratio^. And if we must believe that which was bread and wine before, to
be no other thing, but the flesh and blood of Christ: then are they no other
thing in deed. For if they were, we might so believe. For belief is grownded
upon truth, and what so ever is not true, it is not to be believed. Hereof it
follows, that after consecration the accide^tes and shows only remain
without the substance of bread and wine. De Sacrame^tis lib. 4. cap. 4.
In an other place he says as much. Panis iste, etc. This bread before the
words of the Sacraments, is bread, as soon as the co^secratio^ comes, of
bread is made the body of Christ. Again in an other place he says most
plainly. De ijs qui initia^tur.
That the power of consecration is greatter then the power of nature, because
nature is changed by consecration. By this father it is evident, that the
nature, that is to say, the substance of bread and wine by consecration being
changed into the body and blood of Christ, their natural qualities, which be
accidents contynewing unchanged for performance of the Sacrament, remain
without the substance of bread and wine.

According unto the which meaning Theodoritus says, videri and tangi possunt
sicut prius, Dialog. 2.
Intelligu^tur autem ea esse, quae facta sunt, and creduntur. The bread and
wine may be seen and felt as before co^secratio^, but they are understood to
be the things, which they are made, and believed. We do not in like sort
(says S. Augustine) take these two forms of bread and wine after
co^secratio^, as we took them before. In lib Se^tent. Prosperi. de co^se.
dict. 2. ca. Nos autem.
Since that we grant faithfully that before consecration it is bread and wine
that nature has shapte, but after consecration, that it is the flesh and
blood of Christ, that the blessing has consecrated. De verbis domini. Secundu^
Luca^. Sermon 28.
In an other place he says, that this is not the bread which goes in to the
body (meaning for bodily sustenance) but that bread of life, qui animae nostrae
substantiam fulcit, which susteineth the substance of our soul.

No man can speak more plainly hereof then Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus an old
auctor, who wrote in greek, and is extant, but as yet remaining in written
hand, and commen to the sight of few learned men. His words be not much
unlike the words of the scole-doctoures. Praebetur corpus (...). in specie
sieve figura panis. Item praebetur sanguis (...). Christ's body (says he) is
given us in form or figure of bread. Again his blood is given us in form of
wine. A little after these words he says thus.(...), etc. Ne mentem adhibeas
quasi pani and vino nudis, sunt enim haec corpus and sanguis, vt Dominus
pronunciauit. Nam tametsi illud tibi sensus suggerit, esse scilicet panem and
vinum nudum, tamen firmet te fides, and ne gustatu rem dijudices, quin potius
pro certo ac comperto habe, omni duhitatione relicta, esse tibi impartitum
corpus and sanguinem Christi. Consider not (says this father) these as bare
bread and wine. For these are his body and blood, as our lord said. For
although thy sense report to thee so much, that it is bare bread and wine, yet
let thy faith stay thee, and judge not thereof by thy taste, but rather be
right well assured all doubt put a part, that the body and blood of Christ is
given to thee. Again he says thus in the same place. Haec cum scias, and pro
certo and explorato habeas, qui videtur esse panis, no^ esse, sed corpus
Christi, item quod videtur vinum, non esse, quanquam id velit sensus, sed
sanguinem Christi, ac de eo prophetam dixisse, panis cor hominis confirmat:
firma ipse cor, sumpto hoc pane, vtpote spirituali. Where as thou know this
for a very certainetie, that that, which seems to be wine, is not wine, albeit
the sense makes that account of it, but the blood of Christ, and that the
prophet therereof said, bread strengthens the heart of man: strengthen thou
thy self thy heart by taking this bread, as that which is spiritual. And in
3. Catechesi this father says, Panis Eucharistiae post inuocationem sancti
Spiritus non amplius est panis nudus and simplex, Sed corpus etc. The bread of
the Sacrament after prayer made to the holy ghost, is not bare and simple
bread, but the body of Christ.

Now since that by this doctors plain declaration of the catholic faith in
this point, we ought to believe, and to be verily assured, that the bread is no
more bread after consecration, but the very body of Christ, and the wine no
more wine, but his pretiouse blood, though they seem to the eye otherwise,
though taste and feeling judge otherwise, and to be short, though all senses
report the contrary, and all this upon warrant of our lords word, who said
these to be his body and blood: and that (as he teaches) not in the bread and
wine: And further since we are taught by Eusebius Emisenus in his homilies of
Easter, to believe, terrena co^mutari and transire, the earthly things to be
changed and to pass, again, creaturas conuerti in substantiam corporis
Christi, the creatures of bread and wine to be turned in to the substance of
our lords body and blood, which is the very tra^substantiation:
Transubstantion. In Liturgia.
And since Chrysostom says Panem absumi, that the bread is consumed away by
the substance of Christ's body: And Damascen, Lib. 4. de orthodoxa fi. c. 14.
In Mar. 14
bread and wine tra^smutari supernaturaliter, to be changed above the course
of nature: and Theophylact, the bread transelementari in carnem domini, to be
quite turned by changing of the elements, that is the matter or substance it
consists of, into the flesh of our lord: and in an other place, In Matthew.
26.
ineffabili operatione tra^sformari, etiamsi panis nobis videatur, that the
bread is tra^sformed or changed into an other substantial form (he means
that of our lords body) by unspeakable working, though it seem to be bread.

The treatises of these greek vvriters have been set forth of late by one
Claudius de Saints.
Finally, since that the greek Doctors of late age affirm the same doctrine,
among whom Samona uses for persuasion of it the similitude, which Gregory
Nyssene and Damascen for declaration of the same used before: which is, that in
consecration such manner transubstantiation is made, as is the conversion of the
bread in nourrishing, in which it is turned into the substance of the
nourrished: Methonensis, like S. Ambrose, would not men in this matter to look
for the order of nature, seeing that Christ was borne of a virgin beside all
order of nature, and says, that our lords body in this Sacrament, is
received under the form or shape of an other thing, least blood should cause it
to be horrible: Nicolaus Cabasila says that this bread is no more a figure of
our lords body, Cap. 27.
neither a gift bearing an image of the true gift, nor bearing any
description of the passions of our Savior him self, as it were in a table,
but the true gift it self, the most holy body of our lord it self, which
has truly received reproaches, contumelies, stripes, which was crucified, which
was killed: Marcus Ephesius though otherwise to be rejected, as he that
obstinatly resisted the determination of the Council of Florence concerning
the proceeding of the holy ghost out of the son, yet a sufficient witness of
the Greek churches faith in this point, affirming the things offered to be
called of S. Basile antitypa, that is, the samplers and figures of our lords
body, because they be not yet perfitely consecrated, but as yet bearing the
figure and image, refers the change or transubstantiation of them to the
holy ghost, donec Spiritus sanctus adueniat, qui ea muter. these gifts offered
(says he) be of S. Basile called figures, until the holy ghost come upon
them, to change them. Whereby he shows the faith of the Greek church, that
through the holy ghost in consecration the bread and wine are so changed, as
they may no more be called figures, but the very body and blood of our lord
it self, as into the same changed by the coming of the holy ghost. Which
change is a change in substance, and therefore it may rightly be termed
tra^substa^tiation, Transubsta^tiatio^.
which is nothing else, but a tourning or changing of one substance into an
other substance: Since for this point of our religion, we have so good
authority, and being thus assured of the infallible faith of the church
declared by the testimonies of these worthy fathers of diverse ages and
quarters of the world: we may well say with the same church against M.
Iuell, that in this Sacrament after consecration there remains nothing of
that which was before, but only the accidents and shows, without the
substance of bread and wine.

And this is a matter to a Christen man not hard to believe. For if it please
God the almighty Creator, in the condition and state of things thus to
ordeine, that substa^ces created bear and sustain accide^tes, why may not he
by his almighty power co^serue and keep also accide^tes without substance, since
that the very hethen philosophers repute it for an absurdity to say, primam
causam non posse id praestare solam, quod possit cum secunda, that is to say,
that the first cause (whereby they understand God) can not do that alone,
which he can do with the second cause, where by they mean a creature?

And that this being of accidents without substance or subject in this
Sacrament, under which, the bread not remaining, the body of Christ is
present, may the rather be believed: it is to be considered, that this thing
took place at the first creation of the world, Basilius hexaemero^. hom. 6
Damas. li. 2. cap. 7. Paulus Burgensis. Gene. 1.
after the opinion of some Doctoures. Who do affirm that that first light,
which was at the beginning until the fourth day, was not in any subject, but
sustained by the power of God, as him lyked. For that first light and the sun
were as whiteness and a body withed, says S. Basile. Neither then was Wiclef
yet borne, who might teach them, that the power of God can not put an accide^t
without a subject. Lib. 2. histor. hussitarum.
For so he says in his book de apostasia cap. 5. as Cochlaeus reports.
Hereof it appears, out of what root the Gospellers of our country spring.
Who smatching of the sape of that wicked tree, and hereby showing their kind,
appoint bowndes and borders to the power of God, that is infinite and
incomprehe^sible. And thus by those fathers we may conclude, that if God can
sustain and keep accidents with substance, he can so do without substance.

Or that the priest then divided the Sacrament in three parts, and afterward
received him self all alone. Iuell.

Of dividing the Sacrament in three parts.
ARTICLE. XI.
OF the priests receiving the Sacrament him self alone, enough has been said
before. This term All, here smatcheth of spite. For if any devout person
require to be partetaker with the priest, being worthily disposed and examined,
he is not turned of, but with all gentleness admitted. And in this case the
priest is not to be charged with receiving all alone. Albeit respect had to
the thing received, how many so ever receive, it is all of all, and all of
every one received. Concerning the breaking of the Sacrament, and the dividing
of it in three parts, first, it is broken by the priest, that we may know our
lord in fractione panis, in the breaking of the bread, as the two disciples
acknowleged him, to whom Jesus appeared in the day of his Resurrection, Luc.
24.
as they were going to Emaus. And also that thereby the passion of Christ may
be represented to our remembrance, at which his pretiouse body was for our
sins broken, rent and torn on the cross. And this manner was used at the
Sacrifice in the Apostles time, as it is witnessed by Dionysius S. Paul's
scoler. Ecclesias. hierarch. cap. 3.
Opertum panem Pontifex aperit, in frusta concidens etc. The bishop (says he)
opens the covered bread, dividing it in pieces etc. Now touching the
dividing of the Sacrament in three parts, The dividing of the Sac. in three
parts, a tradition of the Apostles.
it may appear to be a Tradition of the Apostles, or otherwise a custom very
ancient, for as much as Sergius the bishop of Rome, who lived within lxxx.
years of the syx hundred years after Christ, that M. Iuell refers us unto,
wrote of the mystery of that breaking or dividing the outward form of bread,
and declared the signification of the same.

It is no small argument of the antiquity of this observation, that S. Basile,
as Amphilochius writes of him, divided the Sacrament in three parts at his
Mass, as is above rehearsed. De consecrat. did. 2 can. Triforme.
And where as Sergius says, that the portion of the host which is put in to
the chalice, betokens the body of Christ that is now risen again, and the
portion which is received and eaten, shows his body yet walking on the earth,
and that other portion remaining on the altar signifies his body in the
sepulcher: what I pray you is there herein, that any man should be offended
with all? I acknowledge that the mystery hereof is otherwise of some declared,
and of all to this end, to put us in mind of the benefits purchaced to us by
Christ in his body. Now that this custom or mystical ceremony was not first
ordained by Sergius, for ought that can be gathered, but of him expounded only
touching the mystery of it, as used before his time from the beginning of the
church, no one ancient council or author fownde upon whom it may be
fathered, of good reason, since it has generally ben observed, we may refer
the first institution of it to the Apostles: and that according to the mind of
S. Augustine, whose notable saying for that behalf is this. Quod vniuersa
tenet Ecclesia, nec in concilijs constitutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
auctoritate Apostolica traditu^ rectissime creditur. What (says he) the
universal church keeps, neither has been ordained in councelles, but has
always ben observed: of good right we believe it has been delivered (to the
church) as a Tradition by the authority of the Apostles.

To conclude, if any spark of godlynes remain in our deceived country men
and brethren, they will not scorn and dispyse this ancient ceremony of
dividing the Sacrament in three parts at the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass,
whereof any occasion of evil is not only not ministered, but rather
contrariwise, whereby we are admonished and stirred to tender our own soul
health and to render thanks to God, for the great benefit of our redemption.

Or that who so ever had said the Sacrament is a figure, Iuell.
a pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ's body, had therefore ben
judged for an heretic.
Of the terms figure, figne, token, etc. by the fathers applied to the
Sacrament.
ARTICLE XII.
IN this article we do agree with M. Iuell in some respect. For we confess,
it can not be avouched by scripture, ancient council, doctor or example of
the primitive church, that who so ever had said, the Sacrament is a figure, a
pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ's body, had therefore ben judged
for an heretic. No man of any learning ever wrote so unlearnedly. Much less
to impute heresy to any man for saying thus, has been any of the highest
mysteries or greatest keys of our Religion, with which untruth M. Iuell goes
about to deface the truth. Wherefore this article seems to have been put in
either of malice toward the church, or of ignorance, or only to fill up the
heap, for lack of better stuff. Perusing the works of the ancient and
learned fathers we find, that oftentimes they call the Sacrament a figure, a
sign, a token, a mystery, a sampler. The words of them used to this purpose
in their learned tongues, are these. Figura, Signum, Symbolum, Mysteriu^,
Exemplar, (...), Imago, etc. By which they mean not to diminish the truth of
Cristes body in the Sacrament, but to signify the secret manner of his being
in the same.

For the better understanding of such places, where these terms are used in
the matter of the Sacrament, the doctrine of S. Augustine in sententijs
Prosperi, may serve very well. De consecrat. did. 2 can. hoc est quod dicimus.
Which is thus. Hoc est quod dicimus, quod omnibus modis approbare contendimus,
sacrificium Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare, visibili elementorum
specie, and inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi carne and sangnine:
Sacramento, (id est externo sacro signo) et re sacramenti, id est, corpore
Christi, etc. This is that we say (says he) which by all means we go about
to prove, that the Sacrifice of the church is made of two things, and
consists of two things, of the visible shape of the eleme^tes (which are
bread and wine) and the invisible flesh and blood of our lord Jesus Christ,
of the Sacrament, (that is the outward sign) and the thing of the sacrament,
to wit, of the body of Christ, etc. By this we understand, that this word
(Sacrament) is of the fathers two ways taken. First for the whole substance of
the Sacrament, as it consists of the outward forms, and also with all of the
very body of Christ verily present, as saint Augustine says the Sacrifice of
the Church to consist of these two. Secondly, it is taken so, as it is
distinct from that hydden and divine thing of the Sacrament, that is to say,
for the outward forms only, which are the holy sign of Christ's very body
present under them contained. How the fathers are to be understood calli^g
the Sacrament a figure, sign, token, etc.
Whereof we must gather, that when so ever the fathers do call this most
excellent Sacrament a figure, or a sign, they would be understood to mean
none otherwise, then of those outward forms, and not of Christ's body it
self, which is there present not typically, or figuratively, but really and
substa^tially, unless perhaps respect be had not to the body it self
present, but to the manner of presence, as sometimes it happens.

So is Saint Basile to be understood in Liturgia, calling the sacrament
antitypon, that is, a sampler or a figure, and that after consecration, as the
copies, that be now abroad, be found to have. So is Eustathius to be taken
that great learned father of the Greek church, who so constantly defended the
catholic faith against the Arians, cited of Epiphanius in 7. Synodo. Albe it
concerning S. Basile, E^. 4. c. 14. in caput Matthew. 26
Damascen and Euthymius, likewise Epiphanius in the second Nicene council
action 6. and Marcus Ephesius, who was present at the council of Florence,
would have that place so to be taken before consecration. As S. Ambrose also,
calling it a figure of our lords body and blood. lib. 4. de sacram. cap. 5.
And if it appear strange to any man, that S. Basile should call those holy
mysteries antitypa after consecration, let him understand, that this learned
father thought good by that word to note the great secret of that mystery,
and to show a distinct condition of present things, from things to come.
And this consideration the church seems to have had, which in public prayer
after holy mysteries received, makes this humble petition, vt quae nunc specie
gerimus, Sabbato 4. te^poru^ me^sis September.
certae reru^ veritate capiamus: that in the life to come we may take that in
certain truth of things, which now we bear in shape or show. Neither do
these words importe any prejudice against the truth of the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament: but they signify and utter the most principal
truth of the same, when as all outward form, shape, show, figure, sampler and
coouer taken away, we shall have the fruitio^ of God him self in sight face
to face, not as it were through a glass, but so as he is, in truth of his
Majesty. So this word antitypon thus taken in S. Basile, furthereth nothing at
all the Sacramentaries false doctrine against the truth of the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament.

And because our adversaries do much abuse the simplicity of the unlearned,
bearing the^ in hand, that after the judgment and doctrine of th'auncient
fathers, the Sacrament is but a figure, a sign, a token, or a badge, and
contains not the very body it self of Christ, for proof of the same
alleging certain their sayings uttered with the same terms: I think good
by the recital of some the chief such places, to show, that they be untruly
reported, and that touching the verity of the presence in the Sacrament, they
taught in their days the same faith, that is taught now in the catholic
church.

Holy Ephrem in a book he wrote to those that will search the nature of the
son of God by man's reason, Cap. 4.
says thus. Inspice diligenter, quomodo sume^s in manibus panem, benedicit ac
frangit in figura immaculati corporis sui, calicemque in figura pretiosi
sanguinis sui benedicit, and tribuit discipulis suis. Behold (says he)
diligently, how taking bread in his hands, he blesses it and breaks it in
the figure of his unspotted body, and blesses the cup in the figure of his
pretiouse blood, and gives it to his disciples. By these words he shows
the partition, division, or breaking of the Sacrament, to be done no otherwise,
but in the outward forms, which be the figure of Christ's body present and
under them contained. Which body now being gloriouse, is no more broken nor
parted, but is indivisible, and subject no more to any passion. and after the
Sacrament is broken, it remains whole and perfect under each portion. Again,
by the same words he signifies, that outward breaking to be a certain holy
figure and representation of the crucifying of Christ and of his blood
shedding. Which thing is with a more clearnes of words set forth by saint
Augustine, in Sententijs Prosperi. Dum frangitur hostia, De consecrat. did 2
can. dum frangitur.
dum sanguis de calice in ora fidelium funditur, quid aliud quam Dominici
corporis in cruce immolatio, eiusque sanguinis de latere effusio designatur?
Whiles the host is broken, whiles the blood is powered in to the mowthes of the
faithfulles, what other thing is thereby showed and set forth, then the
sacrificing of Christ's body on the cross, and the shedding of his blood out
of his side? And by so doing the commandment of Christ is fulfilled, Do
this in my remembrance.

That it may further appear, that these words, figure, sign, image, token,
and such other the like sometimes used in ancient writers, do not exclude the
truth of things exhibited in the Sacrament, but rather signify the secret
manner of th'exhibiting amongst all other, the place of Tertullian in his
fouerth book contra Marcionem, is not to be omitted, specially being one of
the chief and of most appearaunce, that the Sacramentaries bring for proof of
their doctrine. Tertullianes words be these. Acceptum panem and distributum
discipulis suis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc esse corpus meum dice^do, id est,
figura corporis mei. The bread that he took and gave to his disciples, he
made it his body, in saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my body.

The double taking of the word Sacrament, before mentioned remembered, and
consideration had, how the sacraments of the New testament comprehend two
things, the outward visible forms, that be figures, signs and tokens, and
also, and that chiefly a divine thing under them according to christ's
promise covertly contained, specially this being weyed, that this most holy
Sacrament consists of these two things, to wit, of the visible form of
the outward eleme^tes, and the invisible flesh and blood of Christ, that is to
say, of the Sacrament, and of the thing of the sacrament: Tertullian may seem
to speak of these two parts of the sacrament jointly in this one sentence.
For first, he speaks most plainly of the very body of Christ in the
Sacrament, and of the maruelouse tourni^g of the bread into the same. the
bread (says he) that he took and gave to his disciples, he made it his
body. Which is the divine thing of the sacrament. Then forthwith he says,
that our lord did it by sayng, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body.
By which words he shows the other part, the sacrament only, that is to
say, that holy outward sign of the form of bread, under which form
Christ's body, into the which the bread by gods power is turned, is
contained: which outward form is verily the figure of Christ's body present,
which our lord under the same contained delivered to his disciples, and now is
likewise at that holy table to the faithful people delivered, where the order
of the catholic church is not broken.

That Tertullian in this place is so to be understood, we are taught by the
great learned bishop saint Augustine, and by Hilarious, who was bishop of Rome
next after Leo the first. Saint Augustines words be these. De co^sec. did.
2. canon. vtru^sub figura
Corpus Christi and veritas, and figura est. Veritas, dum corpus Christi and
sanguis in virtute Spiritus sancti, ex panis and vini substantia efficitur.
Figura vero est, quod exterius sentitur. The body of Christ is both the truth,
and the figure. The truth, whiles the body of Christ and his blood by the power
of the holy ghost, is made of the substance of bread and wine. And it is the
figure, that is with outward sense perceived.

Where S. Augustine here says, the body and blood of Christ to be made of
the substance of bread and wine, beware thou unlearned man, thou think not
them thereof to be made, as though they were newely created of the matter of
bread and wine, neither that they be made of bread and wine, as of a matter:
but that where bread and wine were before, after consecration there is the very
body and blood of Christ borne of the virgin Mary, and that in substance, in
sort and manner to our weak reason incomprehensible.

Did 2. cano. corpus Christi.
The words of Hilarious the Pope utter the same doctrine. Corpus Christi quod
sumitur de altari, figura est, dum panis and vinum videtur extra: Veritas
autem, dum corpus Christi interius creditur. The body of Christ which is
received from the altar, is the figure, whiles bread and wine are seen
outwardly: And it is the truth, whiles the body and blood of Christ are believed
inwardly. Thus the fathers call not only the sacrament, but also the body and
blood of Christ it self in the sacrament, sometimes the truth, sometimes a
figure. the truth, that is to wit, the very and true body and blood of Christ
a figure, in respect of the manner of being of the same there present, which is
really and substantially, but inuisibly, under the visible form of the outward
elements. And so Tertullian means by his, that is the figure of my body, as
though Christ had showed by the word (Hoc) that which was visible, which verily
is the figure of the body, right so as that which is the invisible inward
thing, is the truth of the body. Which interpretation of Tertullian in deed is
not according to the right sense of Christ's words, though his meaning swerve
not from the truth. For where as our lord said, this is my body, he meant not
so as though he had said, the outward form of the Sacrament, which here I
deliver to you, is a figure of my body under the same contained, for as much as
by these words, Hoc est, he showed not the visible form of bread, but the
substance of his very body, in to which by his divine power he turned the
bread. And therefore none of all the fathers ever so expownded those words of
Christ, but contrary wise, namely Theophylacte, and Damascen. He said not
(says Theophylact) This is a figure, In Matthew. cap. 26. Lib. 4. ca. 14.
but this is my body. The bread, nor the wine (meaning their outward forms)
says Damascen is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ: Not so, in no
wise. But it is the body it self of our lord deificated, since our lord him
self says, This is my body, not the figure of my body, but my body, and not
the figure of my blood, but my blood. etc.

And the cause why Tertullian so expownded these words of Christ, was, that
thereby he might take advantage against Marcion the heretic, as many times the
fathers in heat of disputation do handle some places, not after the exact
signification of the words, but rather follow such way, as serves the^ best
to confut their adversary. Which manner not reporting any untruth, S. Basile
does excuse in the setting forth of a disputation, not in prescribing of a
doctrine. Epist. 64.
As he defends Gregorius Neocaesariensis against the Sabellianes, for that in
a contention he had with Aelianus an Ethnike, to declare the mysteries of the
trinity, he used the word (...), instead of (...). And the learned men that
be well seen in the fathers, know they must use a discretion and a sundry
judgment between the things they write agonistics, that is to say, by way of
contention or disputation, and the things they utter dogmatics, that is by
way of setting forth a doctrine or matter of faith. Neither in that contention
did Tertullian so much regard the exact use of words, as how he might win
his purpose, and drive his adversary denying that Christ took the true body
of man, and that he suffered death in deed, to confess the truth, which he
thought to bring to pass, by deducing an argument from the figure of his body,
which consists in that which is visible in the sacrament, to prove the
verity of his body. and therefore in framing his reason by way of illation he
says, Figura autem non esset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. There were not a
figure, unless there were a body of truth or a very body in deed.

And whereas Tertullian uses this word figure in this place, it is not to be
understood to be such, The words figure, sign, token, etc. exclude not the
truth.
as the figures of the old testament be, as though it signified the showing
of a thing to come, or of a thing absent, which is wont to be set against the
truth, as contrary to the same: but it is such a kind of figure, as does cover
the truth present, and so as it were joined with the truth, as it is wont to
be taken in the new testament, where it shows rather the manner of a thing to
be exhibited, then that it takes away the truth of presence of the thing
which is exhibited. For else concerning the truth of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, if any man doubt what opinion he was of, he shows him self
plainly so to judge of it, as ever has been taught in the catholic church.
Whereof he gives evidence in many other places, but specially in his second
book to his wife, exhorting her not to marye again to an infidel, if she
ouerlyued him, least if she did, she should not have opportunity to observe the
Christen Religion, as she would. Speaking of the blessed Sacrament, which was
then commonly kept of devout men and women in their houses, and there in times
of persecution received before other meats, when devotion styrred them, he
says thus. Shall not thy husband know, what thou eatest secretly before other
meat? And if he know it, he will believe it to be bread, not him who it is
called. the latin is recited before. I omit many other places, which show
him to acknowledge Christ's body in the Sacrament, because I would not be
tediouse, which verily by no wresting can be drawn to the signification of a
mere figure. The like answer may be made to the objection brought out of S.
Augustine, contra Adimantum Manichaeum. cap. 13. Non dubitauit dominus dicere,
Hoc est corpus meum, cum tamen daret signum corporis sui: our lord stickte not
to say, This is my body, when notwithstanding he gave the sign of his body.
For this is to be considered, that S. Augustine in fighting against the
Maniches, ofte^tymes uses not his own sense and meaning, but those things,
which by some mean, how so ever it were, might seem to give him advantage
against them, so as he might put them to the worst. as he witnesses him self
in his book de bono perseuerantiae cap. 11. and 12.

Gregory Nazianzene oratione 4. in sanctum Pascha, showing difference between
the passover of the law, which the Jews did eat, and that which we in the
New testament do eat in the mystery of the Sacrament, and that which Christ
shall eat with us in the life to come in the kingdom of his father, utters
such words, as whereby he calls that we receive here, a figure of that shall
be received there. Caeterum iam Paschae fiamus participes, figuraliter tamen
adhuc, etsi Pascha hoc veteri sit manifestius. Siquide^ Pascha legale, audenter
dico, figurae figura erat obscurior: at paulo post illo perfectius and purius
fruemnr, cum Verbum ipsum biberit nobiscum in regno patris nouum, detegens et
docens, quae nunc mediocriter ostendit. Nouum enim semper existit id, quod
nuper est cognitu^. But now (says he) let us be made partetakers of this
passover, and yet but figuratively as yet, albe it this passover be more
manifest, then that of the old law. For the passover of the law (I speak
boldly) was a dark figure of a figure: but er it be long, we shall enjoy it
more perfitely and more purely, when as the Word (that is the son of God)
shall drink the same new with us in the kingdom of his father, opening and
teaching the things, that now he shows not in most clear wise. For that ever
is new, which of late is known. Where as this learned father calls our
passover that we eat a figure, whereof the law passover was a figure,
terming it the figure of a figure, he asks leave, as it were, so to say, and
confesses him self to speak boldly, alluding as it seems to S. Paul, or at
least having fast printed in his mind his doctrine to the Hebrews: Heb. 10.
where he calls the things of the life to come, res ipsas, the very things
the^ selves, the things of the New testament, ipsa^ imagine^ reru^, the very
image of things: and the Old testament, imaginis vmbra^, the shadow of the
image. Which doctrine Nazianzene applies to the Sacrament of the altar. And
his meaning is this, that although we be gotten out of those darkness of the
law, yet we are not come to the full light, which we look for in the world to
come, where we shall see and behold the very things them selves clearly, and
we shall know as we are known. To be short, by his report the sacraments
of the old testament be but figures and shadows of things to come, the
Sacraments of the New testament, not shadows of things to come, but figures
of things present, which are contained and delivered under them in mystery,
but yet substantially at the end all figures in heaven shall cease and be
abolished, and there shall we see al those things that here be hydden,
clearly face to face. And where Christ says, that he will drink his
passover new with us in the kingdom of his father, Nazianzen so expowndeth
that word (New) as it may be referred to the manner of the exhibiting, not to
the thing exhibited. not that in the world to come we shall have an other body
of our lord, which now we have not, but that we shall have the self same body,
that now we have in the Sacrament of the altar in a mystery, but yet verily
and substantially, after an other sort and manner, and in that respect new.
for so had without mystery or couerture in clear sight and most joyful
fruitio^, it is new in comparison of this present knowledge.

Thus the word figure reports not always the absence of the truth of a
thing, as we see, but the manner of the thing either promised, or exhibited.
that for as much as it is not clearly and fully seen, it be called a figure. so
of Origin it is called imago rerum, In Psalm. 38 homil. 2.
an image of the things, as in this place. Si quis vero transire potuerit ab
hac vmbra, veniat ad imaginem rerum, and videat aduentum Christi in carne
factum, videat cum pontificem offerentem quidem and nunc patri hostias, and
post modum oblaturum, and intelligat haec omnia imagines esse spiritualium
rerum, and corporalibus officijs coelestia designari. Imago ergo dicitur hoc
quod recipitur ad praesens, and intueri potest humana natura. And if any man
(says he) can pass and depart from this shadow, let him come to the image
of things, and see the coming of Christ made in flesh, let him see him a
bishop that both now offers sacrifice unto his father, and also hereafter
shall offer. And let him understand, that all these things be images of
spiritual things, and that by bodily services heavenly things be resembled
and set forth. So this which is at this present received, and may of man's
nature be seen, is called an image. In this saying of Origin this word image
does not in signification diminishe the truth of things, so as they be not the
very things in deed, for the things that Christ did in flesh, were true
things: but when they are termed the image of things, thereby is signified,
so far, as the condition and nature of man can behold and see them.

This is most plainly uttered by Oecumenius a Greek writer, upon these words
of saint Paul to the Hebrews. Non ipsam imaginem rerum. Hebr. 10.
Not the image it self of things, id est, veritatem rerum, that is the truth
of things, says he. and adds further. Res appellat futuram vitam, imaginem
aute^ rerum, Euangelicam politiam, vmbram vero imaginis rerum, vetus
Testamentum, imago enim manifestiora ostendit exemplaria: adumbratio autem
imaginis obscurius haec manifestat, nam haec veteris testamenti exprimit
imbecillitatem. The sense of which words may thus be uttered in English. S.
Paul calls the life to come, the things, and the ordinance or disposition of
the things in the gospel, he calls the image of things, and the old
testament, he names the shadow of the image of things. For an image shows
samples more manifest: but the adumbration or shadowing of the image shows
these things but darkely, for this does express the weakness of the old
testament. By this place of Oecumenius we see, that although it be proper to an
image to exhibit the truth of things, and therefore by interpretation he
says, Imaginem, id est, veritatem, the image, that is, the truth yet the
proper and right taking of the word, signifies the way or manner of a thing to
be exhibited, not the thing it self: that what the image has less then the
thing it self, it is to be understood in the manner of exhibiting, not in the
thing it self exhibited.

Hitherto we have brought examples to declare that the words, figure and
image, signify the truth of things exhibited in deed, though in secret and
privy manner. Certain fathers use the words signum and sacramentum, that is,
sign and Sacrament, in the same signification. Saint Augustine in libro
Sententiaru^ Prosperi, De consecra. did. 2. can. Vtru^ sub figura
says thus. Caro eius est, quam forma panis opertam in sacramento accipimus,
and sanguis eius, quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus, car^ videlicet
carnis, and sanguis est sacramentum sanguinis, carne and sanguine, vtroque
inuisibili, spirituali, intelligibili, signatur visibile domini nostri Jesus
Christi corpus, and palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtu^um and diuina
maiestate. It is his flesh that we receive do ^^^ered with the form of bread
in the Sacrament, and his blood, that under the shape and savor of wine we
drink, soothly flesh is a sacrament of flesh, and blood is a sacrament of
blood: by the flesh and the blood both invisible, spiritual, intelligible,
our lord Jesus Christ his visible and palpable body full of the grace of all
virtues and divine Majesty, is signified, or as it were with a sign noted.

In these words of Saint Augustine we see the flesh of Christ called a
sacrament of his flesh, and the blood a Sacrament of his blood, in as much as
they be coouered with the form of bread and wine, yet verily and in substance
present, and likewise he lets not to call this verity or truth of the
things them selves thus covertly exhibited, a sign of Christ's visible and
palpable body: so that the naming of a sign does not importe a separation from
the truth, but shows a distinct manner of the truth exhibited: And therefore
according to the truth of the manner of exhibiting, it is not the flesh of
Christ, but the sacrament of the flesh of Christ, for that the flesh does not
exhibit it self in his own shape, but in a Sacrament. And therefore in an
other place he writes thus. Sic^t erg^ coelestis panis, De consecra. did. 2.
can. Hoc est quod dicimus.
qui caro Christi est, suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum re vera sit
sacramentum corporis Christi, illius videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile,
mortale in cruce positum est, vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotis
manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed
significante mysterio: Sic Sacramentum fidei, quod Baptismus intelligitur,
Fides est. As the heavenly bread (says Saint Augustine) which is the flesh of
Christ in his manner is called the body of Christ, when as in very deed it is
the sacrament of Christ's body, even of that which is visible, which is
palpable, and being mortal was put on the cross, and the sacrificing it self
of his flesh, which is done by the priests hands, is called the passion, the
death, the crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in mystery
signifying: So the Sacrament of faith, which is understood to be baptism, is
faith. By heavenly bread he understood not wheaten bread, but that heauely
meat, which he says to be the flesh of Christ, and this far he affirms
the truth of his flesh it self; which he says to be called suo modo in his
manner the body of Christ: as who should say, whose truth notwithstanding if ye
behold on the behalf of the manner of exhibiting, in very deed it is a
Sacrament of Christ's body, which is in visible shape, so as he speaks of
Christ's body, that has suffered.

In Psa. 98. In 1. cap. Ephesians.
Again S. Augustine says in an other place. Non hoc corpus quod videris
comestari estis. Not this body which ye see, shall ye eat. And Saint Hierom
says, diuinam and spiritualem carne^ manducandam dari, aliam quide^ ab ea
quae crucifixa est. that divine and spiritual flesh is given to be eaten,
other beside that, which was crucified. Wherefore in respect of the exhibiting,
the flesh is divided, that in it self is but one: and the flesh exhibited in
mystery, is in very deed a Sacrament of Christ's body visible and palpable,
which suffered on the cross. And thus it follows of conuenience, whereas the
flesh is not the same according to the qualities of the exhibiting, which was
crucified, and which now is sacrificed by the hands of a priest: again where
as the passion, death and resurrection are said to be done not in truth of the
thing, but in mystery signifying: it follows (I say) that the flesh is not
the same in qualities, so as it was on the cross, though it be the same in
substance.

Many mo auctorities might be alleged for the opening of this matter, but
these for this present are enough, if they be not too many, as I fear me they
will so appear to the unlearned reader, and to such as be not given to earnest
study and diligent search of the truth. By these places it is made clear and
evident, that these names figure, image, sign, token, sacrament, and such
other the like, of force of their signification, do not allwaies exclude the
truth of things: but do only show and note the manner of presence. Wherefore
to conclude this matter, that is somewhat obscure to senses little exercised,
the figure of the body, or the sign of the body, the Image of the body, does
note the coouertnesse and secretnes in the manner of the exhibiting, and does
not diminishe any whitte the truth of the presence. So we do accord with M.
Iuell in this article, touching the form of words, but withal we have
thought it necessary, to declare the true meaning of the same, which is contrary
to the doctrine of the Sacramentaries.

Iuell.
Or that it was lawful then to have xxx.xx.xv.x. or.v. Masses said, in one
church in one day.
Of plurality of Masses in one church in one day.
ARTICLE XIII.
AS M. Iuell here desce^deth by diverse proportions and degrees, from.xxx.
to.v. first by taking away.x. the third part of the whole, and then.v. from
the rest three times: So it might have pleased him also to have taken away
three from live the last remanent, and so to have left but two in all. Which
if he had done, then should we so have made up that number, as in this audi^e he
might not other wise do, in regard of his own free promise, but allow our
account for good and sufficient. For that number we are well able to make
good. And what reason has moved the ancient fathers governors of the
church, to think it a godly and a necessary thing, to have two Masses in one
church in one day, the same reason in cases either has, or might have moved
them and their successors after them likewise, to allow three or fouer
Masses, and in some cases five or mo.

Now if that rekening could duly be made of our part, M. Iuell perhaps
would then say, as commonly they say that confess their error in numbering,
that he had mistolde him self. Albe it here it is to be marueiled, that he
appoints us to prove a number of Masses in one church in one day, that
utterly denies the Mass, and would have no Mass in any church any day at
all. And standing in the denial of the whole so peremptorely as he does, it
may seem strange, that he should thus frame this Article. For what reason is it
to challenge us for proof of so great a number, since he takes away all
together?

It appears that being not unwitting how good proufes we have for the Mass
it self, he thinks to blanke us by putting us to the proof of his number of
xxx.xx.xv.x. or.v. Verily this kind of me^ fares with the church much like
unto strong thieves, who having robbed an honest welthy man of all his mo^ney,
say afterward unto him discourteously, ah carle how came thou by so much
old gold? Lydford law used by the gospellers.
Or if it like not them to be compared with thieves, in regard of the Rome they
have shuffled them selves into, they may not vnfittely be likened to a Judge of
the Stemerie at Lidford in Devonshire, who (as I have heard it commonly
reported) hanged a felone among the Tynners in the forenoone, and sat upon
him in judgment at afternoon. And thereof to this day such wrongful dealing
in a common proverb is in that country called Lidford law. Since that you M.
Iuell and your fellows that now sit on the benche, require of us the proof
of mo Masses in one church in one day, as it were a verdite of twelve men: of
equity and right, ye should have heard our verdite, er ye had given sentence
and condemned the Mass. Plurality of Masses in one church in one day.


Now touching the number and iteration of the Mass, first we have good and
ancient authority for two Masses in one church in one day.

That eloquent and holy father Leo the first, writes thus to Dioscorus bishop
of Alexandria. Volumus illud quoque custodiri, vt cu^ solennior festiuitas
conuentu^ populi numerosioris indixerit, and ad eam tanta multitudo conuenit,
quae recipi basilica simul vna no^ possit, Sacrificij oblatio indubitanter
iteretur ne ijs tantu^ admissis ad hanc deuotionem, qui primi aduenerint,
videatur ij qui postmodu^ confluxerint, non recepti. Cu^ plenum pietatis atque
rationis sit, vt quoties basilica^, in quae agitur, praesentia nouae plebis
impleuerit, toties sacrificiu^ subseque^s offeratur. This order we will to be
kept, that when a number of people comes to church together at a solemn
feast, if the multitude be so great as may not well be received in one
church at once, that the oblatio^ of the Sacrifice hardely be done again
least if they only should be admitted to this devotion who came first, they
that come afterward may seem not to be received: for as much as it is a thing
full of godliness and reason that, how oftetymes the church where the service
is done, is filled with a new company of people, so ofte^tymes the Sacrifice
there eftesones be offered,

By this father, who^ the great General Council of Chalcedon agnised for
supreme governor of the church of Christ, and honored with the singular
title of the Universal Bishop, it is ordained, that if anywhere one church
could not conuenie^tly hold all the people together at one time they that came
after the first company, should have their devotion served by having an other
Mass celebrated again. And least perhaps some might doubt wether that were
laufull so to be done or no, or be cause the^ some doubted thereof, as now
likewise some seem to doubt of it to put the matter out of doubt, he says
assuredly, Sacrificij oblatio indubitanter iteretur. Let them not stick to
iterate or do again the oblatio^ of the Sacrifice, that is to say, let the
Mass be celebrated again, indubita^ter, without casting peril, without
sticking, staggaring, or doubting. In that epistle he shows two great causes,
why mo Masses then one, may be done in one church in one day. The one is,
least the afterco^mers should seem rejected, no^ recepti, not received, the
other is, that the one part of the people be not defrauded of the benefit of
their devotion* As him self says, Necesse est aute^ vt quaeda^ pars populi
sua deuotio^e priuetur si vnius tantu^ Missae more seruato, sacrificiu^ offerre
non possint, nisi qui prima diei part conuenerint. It must needs be that a
part of the people be berefte of their devotion, if the custo^ of having one
Mass only kept, none may offer the sacrifice, but such as came to church
together in the morning, or first part of the day. Now the people may neither
be rejected, who^ God has chosen, nor sparkled abroad, whom our lord has
gathered together, neither ought they to be defrauded of their devotion, by
withdrawing the Mass from them, but rather to be styrred thereunto by their
devout presence at the celebration of the same, where the death and passion of
our lord is lively represented before their eyes, the very same body that
suffered on the cross, of them by the ministry of the priest offered to the
father, in a mystery, but truly, not to be a new Redemption, but in
co^memoration of the redemption already performed.

By this testimony we find, that it was laufull within syx hundred years
after Christ, (for Leo lived about the year of our lord 450.) to have two
Masses in one church in one day, for so much the word iteretur does importe
at least, and if there where mo, the case so requyring, the word will bear it
well enough.

Now by this holy bishops godly will, the custom of having one Mass only
in one day was abrogated, and this decreed, that in time of two sundry
resortes of people to church, two sundry Masses should be celebrated, for the
avoiding of these two inconveniences, least the aftercommers should seem not
received, but rejected like excommunicate persons, and that a part of the
faithful people should not be put beside their devotion. Whereupon I make this
reason. The causes standing, the effects follow: But the danger of the peoples
seeming to be rejected, and the defrauding of their devotion, which are causes
of iterating the Mass in one day, did in that age in some holy days of
likelyhod thrice, yea iiij. or v. times happen, and in our time most certainly
does commonly so often, or oftener happen: wherefore the Mass may so many
times be said in a day in one church.

Where great multitude of Christen people is, as in towns, we see some resort
to church early in the morning, making their spiritual oblations to the intent
to serve God, or they serve man in their worldly affairs. All can not come so
early. others come at their convenient opportunity, some at syx, some at seven,
some at eight, some at nine or ten of the clock. If they which through laufull
lettes can not come at the first hours, coming afterward be rowndly told by
the priest, come ye at such or such hours, or else ye get no Mass here
shall not they according to Leo his saying seem to be rejected, and defrauded
of their devotion? All well disposed people about Powles can not come to
postelles Mass at fouer or five of the clock in the morning, neither at high
Mass there. Shall all such in a Term or Parliament time, when great resort
is, be denied that spiritual conforte? And if they be, shall not they seem
rejected and put from their devotion?

Which inconvenience that it might not happen, Leo wills not only two, but
three, fouer, or mo Masses to be done on a day, for his words report no
less. Cum plenum pietatis atque rationis sit, vt quoties basilicam, in qua
agitur, praesentia nouae plebis impleuerit, toties sacrificium subsequens
offeratur. Let there be no sticking at the iterating of the Mass. For as much
as (says he) it is a thing full of godliness and reason, that how often the
church where the service is done, is filled with a new company of people, so
often the Sacrifice there eftesones be offered. Here he wills plainly that
Mass be done, toties quoties, at every new resort of the well disposed
people, and that for these weighty causes, least part of the people should seem
not received, and that they be not defrauded of their devotion. Wherefore, they
that reprove the plurality of Masses in one church in one day, after the
judgment of this worthy father, be reiectours of the faithful people and
robbers of their devotion. But they that have utterly abrogated the Mass,
which is the outward and the ever enduring Sacrifice of the new testament, by
verdite of Scripture, be no less then the foreru^ners of Antichrist.

Non licet super vno altario in vna die duas Missas celebrare: nec in altario,
vbi Episcopus Missas dixerit presbyter illa die Missas dicat. Council.
Antisioren. ca. 10. an. domini. 613.
Here that I may add somewhat more for proof of this article, If the
plurality of Masses in one church in one day had be^ utterly unlawful, the
fathers of the council of Antisiodoru^, would not have decreed, that it should
not be lawful to celebrate two Masses upon one altar in one day: neither
where the Bishop had said Mass, that a priest might not say the same day at
the same altar. For beside that the prohibition presupposes the thing
prohibited to have been before used, (else prohibitio^ had been superfluouse,
and so far forth it appears that before the making of that decree mo Masses
were said at one altar in one day) the argument of this decree serves very
well for proof, that by force of this council, it was then lawful to say mo
Masses in one church in one day. For this prohibition of the council is not
general but special, restricted to a particular place of the church, in vno
altario, at one altar, which includes not of any reason a more general and
larger matter then it self, as, neither at any other altar in the same church
the same day it shall be lawful to say Mass: But of co^sequent this being
but one special case forbidden infers a permission and good leave in the
rest eiusdem generis and subiecti, that be of the same kind, and about the
same matter, and not included by words of reason in that prohibitio^. So that
we may not argue by reason in this sort, it is forbidden to say mo Masses at
one altar in one day, ergo it is forbidden to say many Masses at all in one
church in one day upon diverse aulters: but the contrary reason follows,
ergo ye may say many Masses upon diverse aulters in one day. And likewise ye
may not say Mass that day on th'aulter, where the bishop has said, ergo ye
may lawfully say that day at an other altar. For other wise the law would
have forbidden generally, ye shall not say Mass in the church where the
bishop has said that day: and then ye had been forbydde^ that altar and all
aulters there at one word. but in forbidding the one altar, the law
grawnteth you the use of the rest there.

And this kind of reasoning and arguing of the law, that forbyddeth one case
specially, to affirm the rest, that is not mentioned in the prohibition, the
lawyers will defend by their pri^ciples against M. Iuell, who I think will
not wade far, to stand against them in this match. For they say, In genere
permissorum, omnia intelligu^tur permissa, quae specialiter non reperiuntur
prohibita^
an edicte prohibitorie in such things which are not wholly in their kind
unlawful, forbydding special cases, grants the rest, and does permit
all that, which is not specially forbidden. And by that, all may be witnesses
which are not specially forbydde^, all may make their proctoures to answer for
the^ in judgment, which are not forbydde^ in the special prohibitio^, for
that the edictes of proctoures and witnesses are prohibitorie. L. Iulia. ff. de
testibus.
And because Lex Iulia did forbydde a woman condemned for adultery to bear
witness in judgment, thereof the text of the Civil law concludes, that
women may bear witness in judgment.

Exceptio co^firmat regulam, in no^ exceptis.
And they say further that exception in one case, confirms the general rule,
and makes the rest that is not excepted, more sure and stable, and to be in
force in contrary sense to the exception.

But I will not bring M. Iuell out of his professed study to far to seek
laws. For in deed we need not go to law for these matters, wherein the church
has given sentence for us, but that our adversaries refuse the judge after
sentence. Which if they had done, when order permits it at the beginning,
and had plainly (as I fear me some of them think) denied them selves to be
Christians, or at least of Christ's court in his catholic church: we should
not have stryued so long about these matters. We would have embraced the truth
of God in his church quietly, whiles they sought an other judge according to
their appetites and fantasies, as Turks and infidelles do.

Now if M. Iuell be not so precise in his judgment of allowing the first six
hundred years after Christ, as to condemn the church that followed in the
next generation: then we may allege unto him the twelfth council of Toledo
in Spain, holden in the year of our lord. 680. for proof that many Masses
were celebrated in one church in one day. For the same appears plainly by
this decree of the fathers there.

Can. ^.
Relatum nobis est quosdam de sacerdotibus non tot vicibus communionis sanctae
gratiam sumere, quot sacrificia in vna die videntur offerre: sed in vno die, si
plurima per se Deo offerant sacrificia, in omnibus se oblationibus a co^munione
suspendunt, and in sola tantum extrema sacrificij oblatione communionis sanctae
gratiam sumunt. quasi non sit toties illis vero and singulari sacrificio
participandum, quoties corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi
immolatio facta constiterit. Nam ecce Apostolus dicit: Nonne qui edunt hostias,
participes sunt altaris? 1. Cor. 10.
Certu^ est quod hi qui sacrificantes non edunt, rei sunt dominici sacramenti.
Quicunque ergo sacerdotum deinceps diuino altario sacrificium oblaturus
accesserit, and se a co^munione suspenderit, ub ipsa qua se indece^ter
priuauit, gratia communionis anno vno repulsum se nouerit. Nam quale erit illud
sacrificium, cui nec ipse sacrificans particeps esse cognoscitur? Ergo modis
omnibus est tenendum, vt quotiescunque sacrificans corpus and sanguinem Jesus
Christi Domini nostri in altario immolat, toties perceptionis corporis and
sanguinis Christi se participem praebeat.

It is showed unto us, that there be certain priests, who do not receive the
grace of the holy communion so many times, how many sacrifices they seem to
offer in one day. But if they offer up to God many facrifices by them selves
in one day, in all those oblatio^s they suspend them selves from the
communion, and receive the grace of the holy communion only at the last
oblation of the sacrifice, as though they ought not so ofte^tymes to be
partakers of that true and singular sacrifice, as the sacrifice of the body and
blood of our lord Jesus Christ has been done. For behold the Apostle says:
1. Cor. 10.
Be not they which eat sacrifices partakers of the altar? It is certain,
that they, who doing sacrifice do not eat, be gylty of our lords sacrament.
Wherefore what priest so ever hereafter shall come unto the holy altar to offer
sacrifice, and suspend him self from the communion, be it known unto him,
that he is repelled and thrust away from the grace of the communion, whereof
he has unseemly bereued him self, (whereby is meant that he stands
excommunicate) for the space of one year. For what a sacrifice shall that be,
whereof neither he him self that sacrifices, is known to be partaker?
wherefore by all means this is to be kept, that how oftentimes so ever the
priest does sacrifice the body and blood of Jesus Christ our lord on the
altar, so oftentimes he receive and make him self partaker of the body and
blood of Christ.

Sacrifice taken for the Mass.
Here by the word Sacrifice and offering of the sacrifice, the fathers
understand the daily sacrifice of the church, which we call the Mass. For
though the word Missa be of great antiquity and many times fownde in the
fathers, yet they use more commonly the word Sacrifice. Neither can the enemies
of this sacrifice, expound this canon of the inward sacrifices of a man's
heart, but of that sacrifice, which the priest comes to the holy altar to
offer, of the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ our lord offered on
the altar, (for so be their words) where he receives the grace of the holy
communion, which is the participation of the body and blood of our lord.

This much granted, as by any reasonable understanding it can not be drawn,
nor by racking can be stretched to any other sense: we have here good
authority for the having of many Masses in one church in one day. And where
as the fathers of that council allowed many Masses in one day said by one
priest, there is no reason, why they should not allow the same said by sundry
priests in one day. If our adversaries say, this might have been done in
sundry places, whereby they may seem to frustrate our purpose touching this
article: we answer, that beside th'approuing of the Mass by the^ so
confessed, it were vain and fryuolouse to imagine such gadding of the priests
from church to church for saying many Masses in one day. Doubtelesse the
fathers of that Toletane Council meant of many Masses said in one place in a
day, as Leo did, for serving the faithful peoples devotion, that resorted to
church at sundry hours, as we see the people do now, that so all might be
satisfied. Which should not have been, if one Mass only had been said.

If M. Iuell agnise and accept for good the authority of this Council, as
the church does, then must he allow these many things, which he and the
Sacramentaries to the uttermost of their power and cunning, labor to disprove
and deface. First, the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, which the body and blood
of Jesus Christ our lord, which the plurima sacrificia. Lastly, private
Masses. For the words nec ipse sacrificans, rightly co^strewed and weighed,
importe no less. For where as no word in this decree is uttered, whereby it
may appear the people to be of necessity required to receive, if the
priests had received them selves at every Mass, no fault had been fownde. And
if the people had received without the priests, in this case it had been
reason, this decree should other wise have been expressed. And so it is clear,
that at that time private Masses were said and done.

Now if M. Iuell refuse and reiecte the authority of the church represented
in that council, then he gives us a manifest notice, what mark we ought to
take him to be of. Then may we say unto him the words of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.
Nos talem confuetudinem non habemus, nec ecclesia Dei. We have no such
custom, neither the church of God has not, to condemn the church. And in
this case he must pardon us, if according to the precepte of Christ, Matthew. 18.
for that he will not hear the church, we take him for no better, then a
hethen and a publican.

Or that Images were then set up in the Churches, Iuell.
to the intent the people might worship them.
Of Images.
ARTICLE. XIIII.
THat Images were set up in churches within syx hundred years after Christ, it
is certain, but not specially either then, or since to the intent the people
might worship them. The intent and purpose has been far other, but right
godly, as shall be declared. Wherefore the imputing of this intent to the
catholic church, is both false, and also sclaunderouse. And because for the
use of images, these new masters charge the church with reproach of a new
devise, breach of Gods commandment, and idolatry: I will here show, first,
the Antiquity of Images, and by whom they

Concerning the Antiquity and original of images, they were not first
invented by man, Antiquity of Images.
but commanded by God, brought into use by tradition of the Apostles, allowed
by authority of the holy fathers and all councelles, and by custom of all
ages since Christ's being in the earth. When God would the Tabernacle with all
fourniture thereto belonging to be made, to serve for his honor and glory, he
commanded Moses among other things to make two Cherubins of beaten gold,
Exodus 25.
so as they might cover both sides of the propitiatory, spreading abroad
their whinges and beholding them selves one an other, their faces turned
toward the propitiatory, that the Arc was to be covered with all. Of those
Cherubins S. Paul speaks in his epistle to the Hebrews. Cap. 9. Exodus 37.
Which images Beseleel that excellent workman, made at the commandment of
Moses, according to the instructions by God given. Again Moses by the
commandment of God made the brazen Serpent, Number. 21.
and set it up on high for the people that were hurt of serpents in wilderness
to behold, and so to be healed. In the temple also that Solomon builded, ^.
Reg. 6. ^. Paral. 3.
were images of Cherubins, as the scripture shows. Of Cherubins mention is
made in sundry places of the scriptures, specially in Ezechiel the prophet.
cap. 41. Josephus writes of the same in his third and eight book antiquitatum
Iudaicarum. The image of Cherubins represents angels, and the word is a word
of angelical dignity, as it appears by the third chapter of Genesis, where
we read that God placed Cherubins before paradise, after that Adam was cast
forth for his disobedience.

It were not much beside our purpose here to rehearse the place of Ezechiel the
prophet, Ezechi. 9.
where God commanded one that was clothed in lynnen, and had an ynkhorne by
his side, to go through the mids of Jerusalem, and to prynt the sign of
Tau, In co^me^tar. in Ezechielem. The sign of the Cross co^me^ded to men by
gods providence.
that is the sign of the Cross (for that letter had the similitude of the
Cross, among the old Hebrewe letters as Saint Hierom witnesses) in the
foreheddes of the men, that moorned and made move over all the abominations of
that city.

Touching the sign, Image, or figure of the Cross in the time of the new
testament, God femeth by his providence and by special warninges, in sundry
reuelatio^s and secret declaratio^s of his will, to have commended the same to
men, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. 9. ca. 9
that they should have it in good regard and remembrance. When Constantine the
Emperor had prepared him self to war against Maxentius the tyrant, casting
in his mind the great dangers that might thereof ensue, and calling to God
for help, as he lookte up, beheld (as it were in a vision) the sign of the
cross appearing unto him in heaven as bright as fire, and as he was astonished
with that strange sight, (...). Sozomen. tripart. hist. lib. 5. cap. 50.
he heard a voice speaking thus unto him. Constantine in this ouercomme.

After that Julian the Emperor had forsaken the profession of Christen
Religion, and had done sacrifice at the temples of painyms, moving his
subjects to do the like as he marched forward with his army on a day, the
drops of rain that fell down out of the air in a shewer, fourmed and made
tokens and signs of the cross, both in his, and also in the soldiers
garments. Eccles. histor. lib. 10 in fine.


Rufinus having declared the strange and horrible plages of God, whereby the
Jews were frayed and let from their vain attempt of buylding up again
the temple at Jerusalem, leave thereto of the Emperor Julian in despite of
the christians obtained: in the end says, that least those earthquakes and
terrible fyers which he speaks of raised by God, whereby as well the work
houses, and preparations toward the buylding, as also great multitudes of the
Jews were throwe^ down, cast abroad, and destroyed, should be thought to
happen by chance: the night following these plages, the sign of the cross
appeared in every one of their garments so evidently, as none to cloak their
infidelity, was able by any kind of thing to scowre it out and put it away.

Histo. tripart. li. 9. Cap. 29.
When the temples of the painims were destroyed by the christians in Alexandria,
about the year of our lord 390. in the chief temple of all, which was of the
Idol Serapis, the holy and mystical letters called (...), (...).
by Gods providence, were fownde graven in stones, representing the figure of
the cross, the signification whereof after their interpretation was, life to
come. Which thing espied by the christians and by the painimes present at the
spoil, served maruelously to furtheraunce of the christen faith, no less then
the inscription of the altar at Athens, Ignoto Deo, Actor. 17.
unto the unknown God, served to the same purpose through S. Paul's preaching.
Which all together was before wrought by Gods holy providence, as Socrates, one
of the writers of the ecclesiastical stories, reports.

Thus it appears plainly, how Gods providence has commended unto true
beleuers, the sign of the cross. For which cause and for remembrance of our
Redemption, it has been in old time and always since, much frequented and
honored. For beside that we read hereof in Tertullian, who was near the
Apostles time in Apologe^ico, Cap. 16.
we find in the writers of the ecclesiastical stories, that the Christen
people of Alexandria, Eccl. hist. lib. 11. ca. 29. autore Rufino
after they had pulled down and taken away the arms and monuments of Serapis
the Idol, every man caused the sign of our lords cross in place of them to
be paineted and set up in their posts, entreis, windows, walls and pillours,
that where so ever the eye was turned, it should light on the holy sign of the
cross.

Constantine the Emperor loved and honored this sign so much, Histo.
tripart. li. 1. Cap. 9.
that he caused the same to be paineted in all his flagges and banners of
war, to be stricken in his coins and monneys, to be purtraited in his arms,
stutchins and targets. Of this Aurelius Prudentius makes mention. Lib. 1.
co^tra Symmachum.


Christus purpureum gemmanti textus in auro,
Signabat labarum, clypeorum insignia Christus
Scripserat, ardebat summis crux addita cristis.
The sense whereof is this much in English. The chief ba^ner which was of
purple, had the image of Christ in it wrought in gold and stones. The targets
were paineted all over with Christ. The Cross shyned fyerbright in the crestes
of their helmettes. That the banner commonly borne before the Emperor in
war, in Latin called Labarum, was of this sort, it appears by an epistle,
that S. Ambrose, wrote to Theodosius the Emperor. Lib. 5. epistol. 29.
Neither was the figure of the cross then only in flagges and banners,
paineted, wouen, embrodered, or otherwise wrought, in gold or pretiouse
stones: but also made in whole gold and set upon a long staff or pole, and
borne before men, (as the manner is now in processions) as it seems plainly by
these verses of Prudentius.

Agnoscas Regina lubens mea signa necesse est,
In quibus effigies crucis aut gemmata refulget,
Aut longis solido ex auro praefertur in hastis.
It houeth you Madame, that gladly you acknowledge mine enseignes, in which the
figure of the Cross is either glittering in stones, or of whole gold is borne
on long staves before us. This much have I gathered out of the ancient fathers
writings concerning the sign of our lords cross, the fight whereof the
professors of this new gospel can not abide, to the intent the diversity of
our time and of old time may appear, to the manners of which fos a perfect
reformation, these preachers would seem to bring the world again.

Images from the Apostles time.
Concerning the images of Christ and of his saints, that they have been greatly
esteemed and used in houses, churches, and places of prayer from the Apostles
time foreward, it is so evident, that it can not be denied. Athanasius writes
that Nicodeme, who came to Jesus by night, made an image of Christ with his
own hands, and that when he lay in his death bed, he delivered it to
Gamaliel, who was S. Paul's scoolemaister. Gamaliel when he saw he should dye,
left it to James, James left it to Simon and Zachaeus. This image came from
hand, to hand by succession, and continewed a long time in Jerusalem. From
Jerusalem it was carried into Syria, and at length it was brought to the city
Berytus, not far from Tire and Sydon. Where how despitefully it was used of
the Jews, and what wonders ensued thereupo^, who list to know, may he read
it largely declared in a little book written by Athanasius of that matter.
Eusebius Caesariensis in the seventh book of his ecclesiastical story, Cap.
14.
writes of the ancient image of Christ made in brass, and of the woman, that
was healed by our Savior of her bloody flixe, in the city of Phoenicia called
Caesarea Philippi, whereof that woman was a citizen. Which image he says he
saw, as likewise the images of Peter and Paul kept by some of old time. And
there he confesses, that the images of Peter and Paul and of our Savior were
in his time made, and painted in tables and set forth. After Eusebius death
Julian the renegate took down this image of Christ, Lib. 6. tripart. cap. 41.
and set up his own in the same place. Which with violent fire that fell from
heaven, was clefte asunder in the breast, the hedde broken of with a piece of
the neck, and stickt in the grownde. The rest of it so remained long after, as
a token of lightning and gods displeasur might be reserved. That image of
Christ after that the painimes had haled, pulled, broken, and mangled it
villainously, by the christians was taken up, set together, and placed in the
church, where it is yet reserved, says Socrates of his time. Of the
miraculouse herb that grew at the foot of this image, which after that id
had grown, so high, as it touched the images skirtes, taken and ministered was
a medecin and present remedy for all diseases, as Eusebius writes: because
it pertains not specially to the matter of images, I rehearse nothing.

It is evident by Chrysostomes Mass, that there was some use of images in the
church of Constantinople in his time, for he speaks of the image of the
crucifixe. Who so ever is desirous to see testimonies of the fathers for prouf
of images, let him read the seventh general council holden in Nicea the city
of Bithynia against Imagebreakers, and there he shall find no small number.

I will not let here to recite some, which, so far as I remember, be not
fownde there, every one, one only excepted, which is of S. Basile, of right
good and ancient authority.

Simeon Metaphrastes a greek writer, describing the life of S. Luke
th'euangelist, says that he made the images of Christ and of his mother Mary.
Saint Ambrose witnesses, that in his time the Images of the Apostles were
used in pictures, for where he declares the marvelous appearing of the holy
martyrs Geruasius and Protasius unto him in a vision, In vita Geruasij et
Protasij
he says, that a third person appeared with them, that told him where their
bodies lay, which seemed like to S. Paul the Apostle, as he understood his
face by view of his picture.

Gregory Nyssene S. Basiles brother writing the life of Theodorus the martyr,
bestows much eloquence in the praise of the church, where his holy relikes
were kept, commending the shape of living things wrought by the keruer, the
smoothenes of marble poolished like silver by the mason, the lively
resemblaunce of the martyr him self, and of all his worthy acts, expressed
and excellently set forth to the eye in imagerie with the image of Christ, by
the paynter. In which images he acknowlegeth the fightes of the martyr to be
declared no less, then if they were described and written in a book.

Paulinus the bishop of Nola, in his book that he made in verses of the life
of Felix the martyr, prayseth the church which the martyrs body was laid in,
In decimo Natali.
for the garnishing of it with painted images in both sides, of both kinds
men and women, the one kind on the one side, and the other kind on the other
side. Where he speaks expressly by name of the Images of scabbed Job, and
blind Tobye, of fayer Judith, and great queen Hesther, for so he names them.

Athanasius has one notable place for having the Image of our Savior Christ,
which is not common, where he makes Christ and the church, to talk together
as it were in a dialoge, in sermon de sanctis patribus and prophetis. The
greek may thus be translated. Age (inquit) dic mihi, cur oppugnaris? Oppugnor,
(inquit Ecclesia) propter doctrinam Euangelij, quam dilige^ter and accurate
teneo, and propter verum and firmum Pascha quod agito, and propter religiosam
and puram imaginem tuam, quam mihi Apostoli reliquerunt, vt haberem depictam
arram humanitatis tuae, in qua mysterium redemptionis operatus es. Hic
Christus, Si propter hoc (inquit) te oppugnant, ne grauiter feras, neve animum
despo^deds, cum scias, si quis Pascha neget, aut imaginem, me eum negaturum
coram patre meo, and electis angelis. Rursus vero qui compatitur mecum propter
Pascha, conglorificaturum. an non audisti quid Moysi praeceperim? Facies,
inquam, mihi duos Cherubinos in tabernaculo testimonij, scilicet ad
praefigurandam meam imaginem, etc.

The English of this Latin or rather of the Greek is this. Come on (quoth
Christ to the church) tell me, wherefore art thou thus invaded and vexed?
declare me the matter. Forsooth lord (quoth the church) I am invaded and vexed
for th'exacte observing of the gospel, and for the keeping of the feast of the
true and firm Easter, and for thy reverent and pure Image, which thy holy
Apostles have left to me by tradition, to have and keep for a representation
of thine incarnation. Then (quoth our lord) if this be the matter for which
thou art invaded and set against, be not dismayed, be of good confort in heart
and mind, being assured hereof, that who so denies Easter, or my (...)
clean image, I shall deny him before my heavenly father and his chosen
Angels. And he that suffers persecution with me for keeping of Easter, the
same shall also be glorified with me. Have not thou heard, what I commanded
Moses the lawegeuer to do? Make me (said I) two Cherubins in the tabernacle
of the testimony, to be a prefiguration or foretokening of my image. etc.

Of all the fathers none has a playner testimony both for the use and also
for the worshipping of Images, then S. Basile, whose authority for learning,
wisdom, and holiness of life, beside antiquity, is so weighty in the judgment
of all men, that all our new masters laid in balance against him, shall be
fownde lighter then any fether. Citatur ab Adriano Papa in epistola Synodica ad
Consta^tinu^ and Irenen.
Touching this matter, making a confession of his faith in an epistle inueghing
against Julian the renegate, he says thus. Even as we have received our
Christian and pure faith of God, as it were by right of heretage: right so I
make my confession thereof to him, and therein I abide. I believe in one God
father almighty, God the father, God the son, God the holy ghost. One God
(in substance) and these three (in persons) I adore and glorify. I confess
also the sons incarnation. Then afterward saint Mary, who according to the
flesh brought him forth, calling her Deiparam. I reverence also the holy
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, which make supplication to god for me: that
by their mediation our most benign god be merciful unto me, and grant me
freely remission of my sins. Then this follows. Quam ob causam and historias
imaginu^ illorum honoro. and palam adoro: hoc enim nobis traditum a sanctis
Apostolis, non est prohibendum, sed in omnibus ecclesijs nostris eorum
historias erigimus. For the which cause I do both honor the stories of their
images, and openly adore them. For this being delivered unto us of the holy
Apostles by tradition, is not to be forbidden. And therefore we set up in all
our churches their stories. Lo M. Iuell here you see a sufficient testimony,
that Images were set up in the churches long before the end of your syx
hundred years, and that they were honored and worshipped not only of the
simple christian people, but of bishop Basile, who for his excellent learning
and wisdom, was renoumed with the name of Great.

Now that there has been enough alleged for the Antiquity, orginall and
approbation of Images, Three causes why images haven ben used in the church.
it remayeth, it be declared, for what causes they have been used in the church.
We find that the use of images has been brought into the church for three
causes. The first, is the benefit of knowledge. For the simple and unlearned
people, which be utterly ignorant of letters, in pictures do as it were, read
and see nolesse then others do in books, the mysteries of christen Religion,
the acts and worthy deeds of Christ and of his saints. What writing
performs to them that read, the same does a picture to the simple beholding
it, Ad Serenu^ episcopu^ Massilien. li. 9. epistol. 9.
says S. Gregory. For in the same the ignorant see, what they ought to
follow, in the same they read, which can no letters, therefore Imagerie serves
specially the rude nations instead of writing, says he.

To this S. Basile agrees in his homily upon the forty martyrs. Both the
writers of stories (says he) and also paineters do show and set forth noble
deeds of arms and victories, the one garnishing the matter with eloquence, the
other drawing it lively in tables, and both have styrred many to valiant
courage. For what things the vttera^ce of the story expresses through
hearing, the same does the stille picture set forth through imitatio^. In the
like respect in old time the work of excellent poets was called a speaking
picture, Pictura loque^s, poema tace^s.
and the work of payneters, a stille poetry. And thus the use and profit of
writing and of pictures, is one. For things that be read, when as they come to
our ears, then we conueigh them over to the mind, and the things that we
behold in pictures with our eyes, the same also do we embrace in our mind.
And so by these two, reading and painting, we acheue one like benefit of
knowledge.

The second cause of the use of Images, is the styrring of our minds to all
godlynes. For whereas the affecte and desire of man is heavy and dull in divine
and spiritual things, Sapient. 9
because the body that is corruptible weighs down the mind when it is set
forth before our eyes by images, what Christ has done for us, and what the
Saints have done for Christ: then it is quickened and moved to the like will
of doing and suffering, and to all endeavor of holy and virtuous life. As when
we hear apt and fit words uttered in a sermon or an oration: so when we
behold looks and gestures lively expressed in images, we are moved to pity,
to weeping, to joy, and to other affectes. Wherein verily it has always ben
thought, that paineters have had no less grace, then either orators or poets.

Who lists to see examples hereof, he may peruse the second Nicene council,
Action. 4.
where he shall find among other most notable things concerning this point,
one of saint Euphemia the martyr, an other of Abraham sacrificing his son
Isaac worthy of everlasting memory; that of Asterius the holy bishop, this of
Gregory Nyssene, very elegantly described. Virgil makes Aeneas to weep, to
hope for better fortune, to gather courage of mind, to take good advise and
order for redress and help of his great calamities, by occasion of beholding
a painters work at Carthago, wherein the bataile of Troy was expressed. Which
that wise poet would not have done, were not that pictures have great force to
move men's hearts.

Ouide likewise in the epistle of Laodamia to Protesilaus her husband being
forth at wars, makes her so to write of his image, which she had caused to
be made of wax for her conforte in his absence, as it may well appear, that
images have a meruelouse power to stir vehement affectes, and to represent
things absent, as though in manner they were present, in the minds of the
beholders.

Among all other examples for this purpose, that seems to me most notable,
which Appianus writes of C. Julius Caesar. lib. 2. de bellis ciuilib. After
that Caesar had been murdered of the Senators in the counsel house, one of
his fre^des to show the cruelty of the fact to the people, laid Caesar's
bed in the open market place, and took forth of it his image made of wax,
which represented three and twenty woondes after a beastly sort stabde in to
his face and all the rest of his body, yet gaping and as it were fresh
bleeding. Whith which show he styrred the people to more wrath and rage, then
he could have done with any oration or gesture. Which was declared forth with.
For as soon as the people saw it, not able to bear their grief nor stay
their fury any longer, wrought great and strange cruelties against them, that
were fownde to have committed that murder.

The third cause why images have been set up in Churches, is the keeping of
things in memory necessary to our salvation. For when we cast our eyes on
them, our memory which otherwise is frail and weak, gathers together and
embraces the benefits and merits of our Savior Christ, and the virtuous
examples of saints, which we ought to follow: that if we be such as they
were, we may by gods grace through Christ atteine the bliss they be in, and
with the^ enjoy life everlasting. And verily they that have images in regard
and reverence, must be so minded, as they behold not only the things by them
represented, but also perform the same in deed with most diligent imitation.

And now we are come to declare, how Images may he worshipped and honored
without any offense. How images may be worshipped without offense.
That godly worship which consists in spirit and truth inwardly, and is
declared by signs outwardy in recongnizing the supreme dominion, which
properly of the divines is called Latria: is deferred only to the blessed
Trinity. As for the holy images, to them we do not attribute that worship at
all, but an inferior reverence or adoration, for so it is named. Which is
nothing else, but a recognizing of some virtue or excellency protested by
outward sign, as reverent kissing, bowing down, kneeling, and such the like
honor. Which kind of adoration or worship, we find in the scriptures
oftentimes given to creatures. The whole act whereof is notwithstanding
referred not to the images principally, but to the things by them represented,
as being the true and proper obiectes of such worship. For although the honor
of an image passes over to the original or first sampler, which the learned
call archetypum, as S. Basile teaches: Li. ad Amphiloch. cap. 18.
yet that high worship called Latria, belongs only to the blessed Trinity,
and not to the reverent images, least we should seem to be worshippers of
creatures and of matters, as of gold, silver, stones, woodde, and of such
other the like things. For we adore not images as God, In questionib. ad
Antiochu^ Principe^.
says Athanasius, neither in them do we put hope of our salvation, ne to
them do we give godly service or worship, for so did the gentiles: but by such
adoration or reverence, we declare only a certain affection and love, which
we bear toward the originalles. And therefore if it happen their figure and
shape to be defaced and undone, we let not to burn the stocks, as very
woodde, and being of other stuff, to convert the same to any use, it may
serve best for.

S. Gregory praising much one Secundinus, for that he desired the Image of our
Savior to be sent unto him, to th'entent by having his image before his eyes,
he might the more be stirred to love him in his heart after a few words
uttered in this sense, he says further. We know thou demaundest not the
image of our Savior to th'entent to worship it, as God: but for the
remembrance of the son of God, that thou might be enkendled with the love
of him, whose image thou desyrest to behold. And verily we fall not down
before it, as before God. But we adore and worship him, whom through occasion
of the image, we remember either borne, or done to death for us, or sitting in
his throne. And whiles we reduce the son of God to our memory by the picture
no less then by writing, it brings either gladness to our mind by reason of
his Resurrection, or confort by reason of his Passion. And if men pray
kneelyng before any image or triumphant sign of the holy Cross, they worship
not the woodde or stone figured, but they honor the highest God. And whom they
can not behold with senses, they reverence and worship his image representing
him according to ancient Institution, not resting or staying them selves in
the image, but tra^sferring the adoration and worship to him that is
represented. Thus far S. Gregory.

Much might be alleged out of the fathers concerning the worshipping of
Images, but this may suffice. And of all this one sense redowndeth, that what
reverence, honor, or worship so ever is applied to Images, it is but for
remembrance, love and honor of the primitiues or originalles. As when we kiss
the gospel book, by that token we honor not the parchement, paper and incke,
wherein it is written, but the gospel it self. And as Jacob, Genesis 37.
when he kyssed his son Iosephes cote embrewed with kyddes blood, holding and
embracing it in his arms, and making heavy moan over it, the affection of his
love and sorrow rested not in the cote, but was directed to Joseph him self,
whose infortunat death (as he thought) that blouddy cote represented: So
Christen men showing tokens of reverence, love and honor before the Image of
Christ, of an Apostle, or Martyr, with their inward recognition and devotion of
their hearts, they stay not their thoughts in the very Images, but defer
the whole to Christ, to the Apostle, and to the Martyr, giving to each one in
dew proportion, that which is to be given, putting difference between the
almighty Creator and the creatures, finally rendering all honor and glory to
God alone, who is marvelous in his saints. Such worshipping of Images is
neither to be accounted for wicked, nor to be dispysed, for the which we have
the testimonies of the ancient fathers, both Greeks and Latins: unto which
further authority is added by certain general Councelles, that have
condemned the brekers and impugners of the same.

Iuell.
Or that the lay people was then forbidden to read the word of God in their
own tongue.
Of the peoples reading the Bible in their own tongue.
ARTICLE. XV.
THat the lay people was then forbidden to read the word of God in their own
tongue, I find it not. Neither do I find, that the lay people was then, or
at any other time commanded to read the word of God in their own tongue being
vulgar and barbarous. By vulgar and barbarous tongues, I understand, as
before, all other, beside the three learned and principal tongues, Hebrewe,
Greek and Latin. Which as they were once native and vulgar to those three
peoples, Three sundry opinions concerning the scriptures to be had in a vulgar
tongue.
so now to none be they native and vulgar, but common to be atteined by
learning for meditation of the scriptures, and other knowledge.

They that treat of this Article, concerning the having of the scriptures in a
vulgar tongue for the laytie to read, be of three sundry opinions.

be translated into any tongue of the common people. Some think it good it be
translated, so that respect

That the scriptures be not to be set forth in the vulgar tongue to be read of
all sorts of people, Five considerations why the scriptures are not to be set
forth for all sorts of people to read the^ with out limitation.
every part of them, without any limitation of time, place, and persons, they
seem to be moved with these co^syderatio^s. First, that it is not necessary.
next, that it is not convenient. thirdly, that it is not profitable.
Fouerthly, that it is dangerous and hurtefull. And lastly, although it were
accorded the common people to have liberty to read the Bible in their own
tongue, yet that the translations of late years made by those that have divided
them selves from the catholic church, be not to be allowed as worthily
suspected, not to be sownde and assured.

Lib. 3. aduersus haereses. ca. 4
Irenaeus writes, that the Apostles preached to the alia^tes and barbarous
people the faith of Christ, eue^ to those, that were alia^tes and barbarous in
language, and says that having heard the gospel preached, they believed in
Christ, and keeping the order of tradition which the Apostles delivered unto
them, had their salvation and faith written in their heart without prynte,
pen, or ynke, and utterly without letters. And further he shows, that if
the Apostles had left to us no scriptures at all, yet we should be saved by the
tradition, which they left to the^, who^ they committed their churches unto,
as many nations of aliantes be saved by the same.

Prologo in explationem Psalm.
Hilarious likewise declaring that the mystery of Gods will, and th'expectatio^
of the blessed kingdom, is most and chiefly preached in the three tongues, in
which Pilate wrote on the Cross, our lord Jesus Christ to be king of the
Jews: confesses notwithstanding that many barbarous nations have atteined and
gotten the true knowledge of God, by the preaching of the Apostles, and the
faith of the churches remaining amongst them to that day. Whereby he does us
to understand, that the unlearned barbarous peoples had their faith without
letters or writing, whereof they had no skill, by tradition and preaching, as
well as the other nations, who were helped by the benefit of the learned
tongues, Hebrewe, Greek and Latin.

That it is not convenient nor semely, all sorts of Lib. 1. Theologiae.
whom the greeks called the divine, says, moved with great considerations,
that it is not the part of all persons to reason of God and of godly things,
neither behoofull the same be done in all times and places, nor that all
things touching God be meddled withal. Which advertisement takes no place,
where all be admitted to the curiouse reading of the scriptures in their own
vulgar tongue.

And the scripture it self (say they) shows plainly, that of couenience
the scriptures ought not be made common to all persons. For Christ affirms
the same with his own words, where he says to his Apostles. Lucae. 8.
Unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God: but to other
in parables, that when they see, they should not see, and when they hear, they
should not understand. They to whom it is given to know these secrets, be
none other then the Apostles and their successors or disciples. They to whom
this is not given, but must learn parables, be they, for whom it were better
to be ignorant of the mysteries, then to know them, least they abuse them, and
be the more grievously condemned, if they set little by them, which we see
commonly done among the common people.

Vide Hilarium in Psalm. 2.
It is reported by sundry ancient writers of great authority, that among the
people of Israel, the seventy Elders only could read and understand the
mysteries of the holy books, that we call the Bible. For whereas the letters
of the Hebrewe tongue have no vocalles, they only had the skill to read the
scripture by the consonantes: and thereby the vulgar people were kept from
reading of it, by special providence of God, as it is thought, that pretiouse
stones should not be cast before swyne, that is to say, such as be not called
thereto, as being for their vnreuerent curiosity and impure life, unworthy.

Bernard. Super ca^tica.
is not very profitable. As the light shyneth in vain upon blind eyes (says
a holy father) so to no purpose or profit is the labor of a worldly and
natural man taken for the atteining of things that be of the spirit. Verily
emo^ges other, this inco^moditie is seen by daily experience hereof to proceed,
that of the people, such as ought of right to take lest upon them, be now
becomme censours and judges of all, despysers of the more part, and which is
common to all heretics, mockers of the whole simplicity of the church, and
of all those things, which the church uses as pappe or milk to nourrishe
her tender babes withal that it were better for them not to read, then by
reading so to be pufte up and made insolent. Which evil comes not of the
scripture, but of their own malice and evil disposition.

The dangers and hurtes which the common peoples

Again if heresy spring of wrong understanding, De trinitate li. 2.
not of the scriptures, (as Hilarious says, heresy is of understanding, not
of scripture, and the sense not the word is a crime) who shall sooner fall
into heresy, then the common people, who can not understand that they read?
verily it seems a thing hard to believe, that the unlearned people should
understand that, which the best learned men with long study and great
trauaill can scarcely at length atteine.

Whereas Luther would the scriptures to be translated into every vulgar tongue,
for that they be light and easy to understand, he is confuted by the
scripture it self. For both S. Peter, and also S. Paul, acknowlegeth in them
to be great difficulties, by occasion whereof some misconstrue the^ to their
own damnation, 2. Pet. 3. 1. Tim 1. 2. Cor. 4.
some understand not what things they speak, nor of what things they
affirm, and to some the gospel that S. Paul preached is hydden, even to them
which perish. If the scriptures were plain, how erred Arius? how Macedonius?
how Eunomius? how Nestorius? how many mo, men of great learning? specially
seeing they all took occasion of their errors of the scripture not rightly
understood?

Luther says that S. Hierome was ouerseen in the understanding of the
scripture, that S. Augustine erred in the same, that S. Ambrose, Cyprian,
Hilary, Basile, and Chrysostom, the best learned doctors of Christ's church,
were oftentimes deceived. And yet in the preface of his book de captiuitate
Babilonica, he speaks of them very honorably, and grants, that they have
labored in the lords vineyarde worthily, and that they have employed great
diligence in opening the scriptures. If these being of so excellent learning
after long exercise in the holy letters, after long study and watch, after
long and fervent prayer, after mortification of them selves, and purgation of
carnal affections were deceived, as he witnesses: how can he say they are
clear, plain and easy to be understood? And if these worthy fathers were
deceived in one point or two, is it not likely the common people may be
deceived in many, specially their diligence and study not being comparable to
theirs, and their lives not being such, as the cleanness of their inward
affectes might lighten their understanding, and the anointing of god might
teach them.

And least all the unlearned lay people should seem hereby utterly rejected
from hope of understanding gods word without teaching of others, it may be
granted, that it is not impossible, a man (be he never so unlearned) exercised
in long prayer, accustomed to fervent contemplation, being brought by God into
his inward cellares, may from thence obtain the true understanding and
interpretation of the holy scriptures, no less then any other always brought
up in learning. Of what sort S. Antony that holy and perfect man the Eremite
of Egypt, was. Who, as saint Augustine writes, Prologo in libros de doctrina
Christiana.
without any knowledge of letters, both canned the scriptures by heart with
hearing, and understood them wisely with thynking. And that holy man, whom S.
Gregory speaks of, who lying bedred many years for siknes of body, through
earnest prayer and devout meditation, obtained health of mind, and
understanding of the scriptures never having learned letters, so as he was able
to expound them to those that came to visit him, who coming unto him with
pretense to bring conforte, through his heavenly knowledge, received conforte.
But among the people how great number is there of lewed loselles, glutto^s and
dronckerds, whose bealy is their God, who follow their unruly lusts: is it to
be thought this sort of persons may without meditation and exercise of prayer
pearse the understanding of the scriptures, and of those holy mysteries, which
god has hidden (as Christ confesses) from the learned and wise men?

Matthew. 11. The gospellers divided in to contrary sects
And whereas learned men of our time be divided into contrary sects, and write
bitterly one against an other, each one imputing to other mistaking of the
scriptures, if amongst them who would seem to be the leaders of the people, be
controversies and debates about the understanding of the scriptures: how may
the common people be thought to be in safe case out of all danger of errors,
if by reading the Bible in their own tongue, they take the matter in hand?

If any man think, I sclaunder them, for that I say they be divided into
contrary sects, let him understand, their own country men, I mean them of
Germany, and special setters forth of this new doctrine, report it in their
books, and complain lamentably of it. Namely Nicolaus Amsdorffius in his
book entitled, Publica confessio purae doctrinae euangelij etc. Also Nicolaus
Gallus, in his book of Theses and Hypotyposes: who acknowlegeth the strifes
and debates that be amongst them, to be not of light matters, but of the high
articles of christian doctrine. For even so be his words in Latin. Non sunt
leaves inter nos concertationes, de rebus leuibus, sed de sublimibus doctrinae
Christianae articulis, de lege and euangelio, etc. The same man in the last
leaf of his forsayde book, with great vehemendie reports, haereses
permultas esse prae manibus, plerasque etiamnum h^rere in calamo, that very
many herelies be already in hand, and many as yet stick in the pen, as
though he meant, they were ready to be set forth.

Of late there have been put out in printe two great books, one by the Princes
of Saxony, the other by the Earls of Mansfeld, chief maineteiners of the
Lutheranes: in which be recited eleven sects, and the same as detestable
heresies condemned they are contained in this cataloge or roll. Anabaptistae,
Seruetiani, Antinomi, Iesuitae, Osia^drini, Mela^chthonici, Maioristae,
Adiaphoristae, Suencfeldiani, Sacramentarij. Albeit the Jesuits have wrong to
be numbered among them. This much is confessed of the sects and controversies
of our new gospellers by their own princes, that stand in defense of the
confession of Auspurg, and by two of the Lutherane superintendentes.

No man has so exactly declared to the world the number and diversity of the
sects of our time, Fridericus Staphylus.
which has sprung of Martin Luther, as Fridericus Staphylus, a man of
excellent learning, one of the Emperors counsel that now is, who might well
have knowledge herein, for as much as he was a diligent student ten years at
Wittenberg among the chief doctors of them, and for that time was of their
opinion, and afterward by consyderation of their manifold disagreeinges and
conte^tions within the^ selves, induced to discredit the^, and through the
grace of God reduced to a whole mind, and to the catholic faith, and now
remains a perfect member of the church. This learned man in his Apology
shows, that out of Luther have sprung three diverse heresies or sects. the
Anabaptists, the Sacramentaries, and the Confessionistes, Protestants.
who made confession of their faith in open diete before the Emperor Charles,
the princes and states of Germany at Auspurg, anno domini. 1530. and for
protestation of the same there, are called Protestants. Now he proves further
by testimony of their own writings, that the Anabaptists be divided into
syx sects, the Sacramentaries into eight sects, the Confessionistes and they
which properly are called protesta^tes, Protestants divided into twenty
Sects.
into twenty sects, every one having his proper and particular name to be
called and known by. This lamentable division of learned men into so many
sects in the countries where the gospel (as they call it) has these forty
years and is yet most busely handled, may be a warning to the governors of
Christendom, that they take good aduisement, how they suffer the rude and
rash people, to have the scriptures common in their own tongue.

The peril of it is known by sundry examples both of times past, and also of
this present age. For out of this root has sprung the sect of the Valdenses,
Valdenses
otherwise called Pauperes de Lugduno. For Valdo a merchant of Lions their
first author, of whom they were named Valdenses, being an unlearned lay man,
procured certain books of the scripture to be translated into his own
language, which when he used to read and understood not, he fell into many
errors. Of the same wellspring issued the fylthie puddels of the sects called
Adamitae or Picardi, Begardi, and Turelupini, and of late years beside the same
sect of Adamites newly revived, also the Anabaptists, and Suenkfeldians.
Wherefore that edicte or proclamation of the worthy Princes Ferdinando and
Elizabeth king and Queen of Spain, is of many much commended, by which they
gave straight commandment, that under great penalties, no man should translate
the Bible into the vulgar Spanish tongue, and that no man should be fownde, to
have the same translated in any wise. These and the like be the reasons and
consyderations, which have moved many men to think, the setting forth of the
whole Bible, and of every part of the scripture in the vulgar tongue, for all
sorts of persons to read without exception or limitation, to be a thing not
necessary to salvation, nor otherwise convenient, nor profitable, but
contrariwise dangerous and hurtefull.

Yet it is not meant by them, that the people be kept wholly from the
scripture, so as they read no part of it at all. As the whole in their
opinion is too strong a meat for their weak stomakes, so much of it they may
right holesomely receive and brook, as that which pertains to piety and
necessary knowledge of a christen man. What parts of the scriptures apperteine
to the people to know.
Wherein they would the examples of the old holy fathers to be followed. S.
Augustine has gathered together into to one book, all that makes for good
life out of the scriptures, which book he entitled Speculu^, that is to say,
a myrrour or a looking glass, as Possidonius witnesses in his life. S. Basile
has set forth the like argument almost in his fouerscore moral rules
perteining all together to good manners. S. Cyprian also has done the like in
his three books ad Quirinum. Such godly books they think to be very
profitable for the simple people to read. But how much and what parts of the
scripture the common people may read for their conforte and necessary
instruction, and by whom the same may be translated: it belongs to the
judgment of the church. Which church has already condemned all the vulgar
tra^slations of the Bible of late years, for that they be found in sundry
places erroneous, and parciall in favor of the heresies, which the
translatours maineteine. And it has not only in our time condemned these late
translations, but also hitherto never allowed those few of old time. I mean
S. Hieromes translation into the Dalmaticall tongue, if ever any such was by him
made, as to some it seems a thing not sufficiently proved: And that, which
before S. Hierome Vlphilas an Arian bishop made and commended to the nation of
the Goths, who first invented letters for them, and proponed the scriptures to
them translated into their own tongue, and the better to bring his Ambassade to
the Emperor Valens to good effect, was persuaded by the heretics of
Constantinople and of the court there, to forsake the catholic faith, and to
communicate with the Arians, making promise also to travail in brynging the
people of his country to the same sect, which at length he performed most
wickedly.

As for the church of this land of Britain, the faith has continewed in it
thirten hundred years until now of late, without having the Bible translated
into the vulgar tongue, to be used of all in common. Our lord grant, we yield
no worse souls to God now having the scriptures in our own tongue, and talking
so much of the gospel, then our auncesters have done before us. This Island
says Beda (speaking of the estate the church was in at his days) at this
present, according to the number of books that Gods law was written in, does
search and confess one and the self same knowledge of the high truth, and of
the true highte, with the tongues of five nations, of the English, the Britons,
the Scotts, the Pightes, and the Latins, Quae meditatione scripturorum
caeteris omnibus est facta co^munis. Which tongue of the Latins (says he) is
for the study and meditation of the scriptures made common to all the other.
Verily as the Latin tongue was then common to all the nations of this land
being of distinct languages, for the study of the scriptures, as Beda
reports: so the same only has always until our time, ben common to all
the cowntries and nations of the Occidentall or West church for the same
purpose, and thereof it has been called the Latin church.

Wherefore to conclude, they that show them selves so earnest and zealous for
the translation of the scriptures into all vulgar and barbarous tongues, it
behooves the^ after the opinion of wise me^ to see, first, that no faults be
fownde in their translations, as hitherto many have been fownde. And a small
fault committed in the handling of Gods word, is to be taken for a great
crime. Next, that for as much as such translations perteine to all christen
people, they be referred to the judgment of the whole church of every
language, and commended to the layetie by the wisdom and authority of the
clergy having charge of their souls. Furthermore that there be some choice,
exception, and limitation of time, place, and persons, and also of parts of
the scriptures, after the discrete ordinance of the Jews. Amongst whom it
was not laufull, that any man should read certain parts of the Bible, before
he had fullfilled the time of the priestly ministry, which was the age of
thirty years, Praefatione in Ezechielem.
as S. Hierome witnesses. Lastly, that the setting forth of the scriptures in
the common language, be not commended to the people as a thing utterly
necessary to salvation, least thereby they condemn so many churches, that
hitherto have lackt the same, and so many learned and godly fathers, that have
not procured it for their flocks, finally, all that have gonne before us, to
whom in all virtue, innocence, and holiness of life, we are not to be compared.
As for me, in as much as this matter is not yet determined by the church,
whether the common people ought to have the scriptures in their own tongue to
read and to hear, or no, I defyne nothing. As I esteem greatly all godly and
wholesome knowledge, and wish the people had more of it, then they have, with
charity and meekness: so I would, that these hot talkers of gods word, had
less of that knowledge, which makes a man to swell, and to be proud in his
own conceit: and that they would depely weigh with them selves, whether they
be not contained within the lystes of the saying of S. Paul to the Corinthians,
1. Cor. 8.
If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know. God grant all our knowledge be so joined with meekness,
humility and charity, as that be not justly said of us, which S. Augustine in
the like case said very dr^dfully, to his dear friend Alipius. Surgunt
indocti, and coelum rapiunt, Confess. lib. 8. ca. 8
and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine cord, ecce vbi volutamur in carne and
sanguine? The unlearned and simple arise up, and catch heaven away from us,
and we with all our great learning voyed of heart, lo where are we wallowing in
flesh and blood?

Or that it was then lawful for the priest, Iuell.
to pronounce the words of Consecration closely and in silence to him self.
Of secret pronouncing the Canon of the Mass.
ARTICLE XVI.
THe matter of this article is neither one of the highest mysteries, nor one of
the greatest keys of our religion. how so ever Master Iuell pleases him
self with that report, thinking thereby to impair the estimation of the
catholic church. The diversity of observation in this behalf, shows the
indifferency of the thing. For else if one manner of pronouncing the words of
consecration had been thought a necessary point of religion, it had been every
where uniform and inuariable. That the bread and wine be consecrated by the
words of our lord, pronounced by the priest, as in the person of Christ, by
virtue of which through the grace of the holy ghost, the bread and wine are
changed into our lords body and blood: this thing has in all times, and in
all places, and with consent of all inuariably ben done, and so believed. But
the manner of pronouncing the words, concerning silence or open vtteraunce,
according to diversity of places, has been diverse.

The manner of pronouncing the consecration in the Greek and latin churches
diverse. In libello de Sacramento Eucharistiae.
The greeks in the East church have thought it good to pronounce the words of
consecration, clara voce, as we find in Chrysostomes Mass, and as Bessarion
writes, alta voce, that is, plainly, out alowde, or with alowde voice.
Sacerdos alta voce iuxta Orientalis Ecclesiae ritum verba illa pronunciat, hoc
est corpus meum, etc. The priest (says Bessarion) after the rite or manner of
the east church pronounces with a loud voice those words, this is my body,
etc. Which manner of loud pronouncing was thought good to be used in the Greek
church, as it may be gathered by that Bessarion writes (who being a Greek
borne and brought up in learning amongst the Greeks knew rightwell the order
of that church) to the intent the people might thereby for the better
mainetenaunce of their faith, be styrred and warned to give toke^ of consent
and of belief thereto: when the priest (says he) pronounces those words
with a loud voice, the people standing by, in vtraque part, that is, first,
at the consecration of the body, and again at the consecration of the blood,
answers amen: as though they said thus, truly so it is, as thou say. For
where as Amen is an aduerbe of affirmyng in Hebrew, in Greek it signifies so
much as truly. And therefore the people answering Amen, to those words, verily
say they, these gifts set forth are the body and blood of Christ. So we
believe, so we confess. This far Bessarion.

It is declared by Clement, lib. 8. constitut. Apostolicarum, that the people
said Amen, when the words of consecration had been pronounced. Whereby we
understand, that order to have been taken by the Apostles. The same custom
also may be gathered out of S. Ambrose, who says thus. Dicit tibi sacerdos,
corpus Christi, and tu dicis, Amen, hoc est verum, quod confitetur lingua
teneat affectus. de sacrame^tis lib. 4. ca. 5. The priest says, the body of
Christ, and thou say, amen, that is to say, true. Hold with thy heart,
that which thou confessest with thy tongue. He says hereof likewise, de ijs
qui initiantur mysterijs. cap. 9. Frustra ab illis respondetur Amen, etc. Sermon.
6. de ieiunio 7. mensis.
Amen is answered in vain by them, who dispute against that, which is
received, says Leo.

And that the people should give their consent and apply their faith to this
truth without error and deceit, and that by saying Amen, they should then
believe and confess the bread and wine to be made the body and blood of
Christ, when it was made in deed, and not else, for so were it a great
error: De ecclesiasticis diuersis capitulis. co^stitut. 123.
for this cause Justinian the Emperor made an ordinance, that the bishops
and priests should to this intent pronounce their service plainly, distinctly,
and so, as it might be understood, that the people might answer Amen, (which
is to be referred to each part of the service, but specially to the
consecration) that they might believe and confess it was the body and blood of
Christ, when it was in deed, and not so confess, when it was not, which might
happen, if they heard not the words of consecration plainly pronounced. And
hereunto specially that Constitution of Justinian is to be restrained, as
perteining only to the Greek church, wherein he lived, and not to be
stretched further to serve for proof of all the service to be had and said in
the vulgar tongue in the West church, as to that purpose of our new teachers
it is untruly alleged.

Now in this West church, which is the latin church, the people having ben
sufficiently instructed touching the belief of the body and blood of our lord
in the Sacrament: it has been thought by the fathers convenient, the words of
consecration to be pronounced by the priest closely and in silence, rather then
with open voice. Wherein they had special regard to the dignity of that high
mystery. And doubteles for this point they understood, Lib. de spiritu
sancto. ca. 27.
as Saint Basile writes, that the Apostles and the fathers which at the
beginning made laws for the order of Ecclesiastical things, maineteined the
mysteries in their due authority, by keeping them secret and in silence. For
it is not (says he) any mystery at all, which is brought forth to the
popular and vulgar ears, whereof he wrote very truly before. Ei quod
publicatum est, and per se apprehendi potest, imminere contemptum. Ei vero quod
remotum est ac rarum, etiam naturaliter quodammodo esse coniunctam
admirationem. That, what is done openly and made common, and of it self may
be atteined, it is like to come in contempt and be dispysed. But what is kept
far of, and is sildom gotten, that even naturally in manner is never without
wondering at it. And in such respect Christ gave warning, that pretiouse
stones be not strewed before hogs.

If in the old law priests were chosen (as Saint Ambrose writes) to coouer
the arc of the Testament, because it is not lawful for all persons to see
the deapth of mysteries: If the sons of Caath by Gods appointment did only
bear the arc and those other holy things of the Tabernacle, Nume. 4. Vide
Origene^ homil. 5. in Numer. cap. 4.
on their shulders, when so ever the children of Israel removed and marched
foreward in wilderness, being closely folded, and lapte within vailes,
courteines and palles, by the priests: and might not at no time touch nor see
the same upon pain of death, which were but figures of this: how much more is
this high and worthy mystery to be honored with secretnes, closenes, and
silence?

For this cause as they report, In fragme^to Caroli Mag. de ritib. veteris
ecclesiae.
says Carolus Magnus that noble, virtuous and learned Emperor, writing to
his Schoolemaister Alcuinus our cowntrie man, and first teacher of Philosophy
in Paris, it is become a custom in the church, that the Canon and consecration
be said by the priest secretly, that those words so holy and perteining to so
great a mystery, should not grow in conte^pte, whiles all in manner through
common use bearing them away, would sing them in the high ways, in the
streets, and in other places, where it were not convenient. Whereof it is
told, that before this custom was received, shepherdes, when they sang them
in the field, were by Gods hand strooken. Luther him self in praeceptorio,
is much against them, that would have the Canon of the Mass to be pronounced
with a loud voice for the better understanding.

what persons the primitive church excluded from presence of the sacrament.
The fathers of the primitive church had this Sacrament in such reverence and
honor, that they excluded some sorts of faithful people, from being present
at the celebration of it, thinking them unworthy not only to hear the
mystical words of consecration pronounced, but also to see the forms of the
outward elements, and to be in the church, whiles that most holy Sacrifice
was offered. They were these, Cathechumeni, Energumeni, and poenitentes. The
first were learners of our belief, who as they were daily instructed, believed
in Christ, and as Saint Augustine writes, Tractatu in Joan. 11
bare Christ's cross in their forehead, and marked them selves with the same.
The second were such, as notwithstanding they had been christened, yet for the
inconstancy of their mind, were vexed with unclean sprites. The third sort
were they, who for their sins committed, had not yet made an end of doing
their open penance. All these were judged by the gouernoures of the church at
the beginning unworthy to be present at these holy mysteries.

Now if this great reverence toward the ho y things, in them was justly
praised, the admitting of all sorts of people not only to be present and to
behold the same, but also to hear and understand the words of consecration,
(that has thus allwaies ben honored with silence and secretnes) can not seem
to wise, zelouse and godly men a thing commendable: specially in these times,
in which the holy Christen discipline of the church, is loosed and utterly
shaken of, and no difference nor account of any diversity made between the
perfect and godly people, and them, that ought to do open penance, that be
possessed with deuilles, and be infamouse for heynouse and notoriouse crimes
committed. Where as in old times, when by holesom discipline the faithful
people were kept in godly awe and obedience, that prayer also which was said
over the oblation before consecration, was pronounced closely and in silence,
and therefore it was called of the latins, secreta, of the Greeks mystica
oration, meaning thereby, that it ought not to be uttered openly and made common.

Iuell.
Or that the priest had then authority, to offer up Christ unto his father.
Of the priests authority to offer up Christ to his father.
ARTICLE XVII.
Threefold oblation of Christ.
CHRIST is offered up to his father after three manners. figuratively, truly with
blood shedding, and sacramentally or mystically. In figure or signification, he
was offered in the sacrifices made to God both in the time of the law of
nature, and also in the time of the law written. And therefore Saint John
calls Christ the lamb, which was killed from the beginning of the world,
meaning in figure. The sacrifices of Abel, Agnus occilus est ab origin mudi.
Apoca. 13. Heb. 10. Lib. 6. ca. 5
Noe, and Abraham, and all those of the people of Israel commanded by the law
of Moses, figured and signified Christ. For which respect chiefly, the law is
reported of Saint Paul, to have the shadow of the good things to come. S.
Augustine writing against Faustus the heretic, says: Testamenti veteris
sacrificia omnia multis and varijs modis vnum sacrificium, cuius nunc memoriam
celebramus, significauerunt. All the sacrifices of the old testament, signified
by many and sundry ways this one sacrifice, whose memory we do now
celebrate. And in an other place he says, De fide ad Petru^ diaconum, cap. 16.
that in those fleshely sacrifices, there was a signification of Christ's
flesh, which he should offer for sins, and of his blood, which he should
shed for the remission of our sins.

Truly and with blood shedding, Christ was offered on the Cross in his own
person. where of S. Paul says: Christ gave him self for us, Tit. 2. Ephesians.
5.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity: And again: Christ has loved us,
and has delivered him self for us an oblation and sacrifice to God into a
sweet savor.

Sacramentally or in mystery, Christ is offered up to his father in the daily
sacrifice of the church under the form of bread and wine, truly and in deed,
not in respect of the manner of offering, but in respect of his very body and
blood really (that is in deed) present, as it has been sufficiently proved
here before.

The two first manners of the offering of Christ, our adversaries acknowledge
and confess. The third they deny utterly. And so they rob the church of
the greatest treasure it has or may have, the body and blood of our Savior
Christ once offered upon the cross with painful suffering for our
redemption, and now daily offered in the blessed Sacrament, in remembrance.
For which we have so many proufes, as for no one point of our Christen religion
more. And herein I am more encombred with store, then straighted with lack, and
doubt more what I may leave, then what I may take.

Wherefor thinking it shall appear to the wise more skylle to show discretion
in the choice of places, rather then learning in recital of number, thoug we
are over peartely thereto provoked by M. Iuelles vaunting and insolent
challenge: I intend herein to be short, verily shorter, then so large a matter
requires: and to bring for proof a few such autorities, I mean a few in
respect of the multitude that might be brought) as ought in every man's
judgment to be of great weight and estimation.

The scripture it self ministering evident proof for the oblation of Christ to
his father by the priests of the new testament, in the Institution of this
holy Sacrament, in the figure of Melchisedech, and in the prophecy of Malachie
the prophet: the autorities of the fathers neded not to be alleged, were not
the same scripture by the ouerthwarte and false interpretations of our
adversaries wrested and turned to a contrary sense, to the horrible seducing
of the unlearned. For where as the holy Evangelists report, that Christ at
his last supper took bread, gave thanks, brake it, and said, this is my
body, which is given for you: Luc. 22.
Again, this is my blood which is shed for you in remission of sins: By
these words, being words of sacrificing and offering, they show and set
forth an oblation in act and deed, though the term it self of oblation or
sacrifice be not expressed. Albe it to some of excellent knowledge, datur here
sowndeth no less, then offertur or immolatur, that is to say, is offered or
sacrificed, specially the addition pro vobis, withal co^sydered. For if Christ
said truly, (as he is truth it self, and guile was never fownde in his mowth)
then was his body presently given and for us given, at the time he spoke the
words, that is, at his supper. For he said, datur, is given, not dabitur,
shall be given: And likewise was his blood shed in remission of sins, at
the time of that supper: for the text has funditur, is shed. But the giving
of his body for us, and the shedding of his blood in remission of sins, is an
oblatio^ of the same: ergo Christ offered his body and blood at the supper.
And thus datur, signifies here as much as offertur.

Now this being true, that our lord offered him self unto his father at his
last supper, having given commandment to his Apostles to do the same that he
there did, who^ then he ordained priests of the new testament, saying do
this in my remembrance, as Clement does plainly show. lib. 8. Apostolicarum
co^stitut. cap. vltimo: the same charge perteining no less to the priests
that be now the successors of the Apostles in this behalf, then to the
Apostles them selves: it does right well appear, how so ever M. Iuell assures
him self of the contrary, and what so ever the devil has wrought and by his
ministers taught against the sacrifice of the Mass, that priests have
authority to offer up Christ unto his father.

That Christ offered him self to his father in his last supper, and that
priests by those words, Do this in my remembrance, have not only
authority, but also a special commandment, to do the same, and that the
figure of Melchisedech, and the prophetie of Malachie pertains to this
sacrifice, and makes proof of the same: let us see by the testimonies of the
fathers, what doctrine the Apostles have left to the church.

Eusebius Caesariensis has these words. De demo^strat. Eua^geli. lib. 1. cap.
10.
Horrorem afferentia mensae Christi sacrificia supremo Deo offerre, per
eminentissimum omnium ipsius Pontificem edocti sumus. We are taught (says he)
to offer unto our supreme God the sacrifices of Christ's table, which cause us
to tremble and quake for fear, by his bishop highest of all. Here he calls
Christ in respect of his sacrifice, Gods bishop highest of all bisshops, the
sacrifices of Christ's table he calls, the body and blood of Christ, because
at the table in his last supper he sacrificed and offered the same, and for
that it is his very body and very blood, imagination only, fantasy, and
figure set aparte, he terms these sacrifices, as commonly the ancient
fathers do, horrible, causing trembling and fear. And where as he says we
have been taught to offer these sacrifices to God, doubteles he means by these
words of Christ: Do this in my remembrance, this is my body, which is given
for you: this is my blood, which is shed for you. Clement in his eight book
often cited, speaking of the sacrifice offered by the Apostles, commonly adds
these words, secundum ipsius ordinationem, or, ipso ordinante: Whereby he
confesses it to be Christ's own ordinance.

That Christ sacrificed him self at his supper, Hesychius affirms with these
words. Quod Dominus iussit (Leuit. 4.) vt sacerdos vitulum pro peccato
oblaturus, ponat manum super caput eius, and iugulet eum coram Domino, Christum
significat, quem nemo obtulit, sed nec immolare poterat, Joan. 10.
nisi semetipsum ipse ad patiendum tradidisset. Propter quod non solum dicebat,
Potestatem habeo ponendi animam meam, and potestatem habeo iteru^ sume^di eam:
sed and praeueniens semetipsum in coena Apostoloru^ immolauit, quod sciunt, qui
mysteriorum percipiunt virtute^. That our lord commanded (says he the priest
which should offer a calfe for sin, to put his hand upon his hedde, and to
stick him before our lord, it signifies Christ, whom no man has offered,
neither could any man sacrifice him, except he had delivered him self to
suffer. For the which he said not only, I have power to lay down my soul,
Joan. 10.
and I have power to take it again: But also preventing it, he offered up him
self in sacrifice in the supper of the Apostles, which they know, that
receive the virtue of the mysteries. By these words of Hesychius we learn,
that Christ offered and sacrificed his body and blood twice. First in that holy
supper vnbloudely, when he took bread in his hands and brake it, etc. Without
division of the sacrifice, for it is but one and the same sacrifice: And
afterward on the cross, with shedding of his blood, and that is it he means
by the word preventing.

And at the same very instant of time, (which is here further to be added as a
necessary point of Christen doctrine) when must understand, that Christ offered
hem self in heaven inuisibly (as concerning man) in the sight of his hauenly
father, and that from that time foreward that oblation of Christ in heaven was
never intermitted, but continewed allwaies for our atonement with God, and
shall without ceasing endure until the end of the world. For as S. Paul
says, Heb. 9.
Jesus has not entered into temples made with hands, the samplers of the true
temples, but into heaven it self, to appear now to the cowntenance of God for
us. Now as this oblation and sacrifice of Christ endures in heaven
continually, for as much as he is risen from the dead and ascended in to heaven
with that body which he gave to Thomas to feel, bringi^g in thither his blood,
as Hesychius says, and bearing the marks of his woondes, and there appears
before the face of God, with that thorn prikte, naileboared, sperepearsed, and
other wise woonded, rent, and torn body for us: (whereby we understand the
virtue of his oblation on the cross ever enduring, not the oblation it self
with renewing of pain and sufferaunce continewed) so we do perpetually
celebrate this oblation and sacrificing of Christ's very body and blood in the
holy Mass, in remembrance of him, commanded so to do until his coming.

Wherein our adversaries so foolishly as wickedly, scoff at us, as though we
sacrificed Christ again, so as he was sacrificed on the cross, that is, in
bloody manner. But we do not so offer or sacrifice Christ again, but that
oblation of him in the supper, and ours in the Mass, is but one oblation, the
same sacrifice, for this cause by his divine ordinance left unto us, that as
the oblation once made on the cross continually endures and appears before
the face of God in heaven for our behalf, continewed not by new suffering,
but by perpetual intercession for us: So the memory of it may ever until his
second coming be kept amongst us also in earth, and that thereby we may
apply and bring unto us through faith the great benefits, which by that one
oblation of him self on the cross, he has for us procured, and daily does
procure.

Now for further proof of the offering and sacrificing of Christ, of those
words of our lord, Do this in my remembrance, to recite some testimonies of
the fathers: First, Dionysius Saint Paul's scoler, and bishop of Athenes,
writes thus. Ecclesias. hierarch. cap. 3.
Quocirca reuerenter simul and ex Pontificali officio, post sacras diuinorum
operum lauds, quod hostiam salutarem, quae super ipsum est litet, se excusat,
ad ipsum primo decenter exclamans, Tu dixisti: Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Wherefore the bishop (says he) reverently, and according to
his bishoply office, after the holy praises of Gods works, he excuses him
self, that he takes upon him to offer that helthfull sacrifice, which is
above his degree and worthynes, crying out first unto him in seemly wise, lord
thou have commanded thus, saying, Do this in my remembrance. By these words
he confesses, that he could not be so hardy, as to offer up Christ unto his
father, had not Christ him self so commanded, when he said, Do this in my
remembrance. This is the doctrine touching this article that S. Paul taught
his scolers, which M. Iuell denies.

Irenaeus received the same from Saint John the Evangelist by Polycarpus Saint
John's scoler. He declares it with these words. Eum, qui ex creatura punis
est, accepit, and gratias egit, dicens, Libro 4. cap. 32.
Hoc est corpus meum. Et calicem similiter, qui est ex creatura, quae est
secundum nos, suum sanguinem confessus est, and noui testamenti nouam docuit
oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo.
De quo in duodecim prophetis Malachias sic praesignificauit, Non est mihi
voluntas in vobis dicit Dominus exercituum: Malac. 1.
and munus non suscipiam de manu vestra. He took that which by creation is
bread, and gave thanks, saying, this is my body. And likewise the cup, full
of that creature, which is here with us, and confessed it to be his blood, and
thus taught the new oblation of the new testament, which the church
receiving of the Apostles, does offer to God through the whole world, whereof
Malachie one of the twelve prophets did prophecy thus. I have no lyking in
you, says our lord almighty, neither will I take sacrifice of your hands:
because from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same, my name is
glorified among the nations, and incense is offered to my name in every place,
and pure sacrifice, for that my name is great among the nations. What can be
understood by this new oblation of the new testament other, then the
oblation of that, which he said to be his body, and confessed to be his
blood. And if he had offered bread and wine only, or the figure of his body
and blood in bread and wine, it had been no new oblation. for such had been made
by Melchisedech long before. Neither can the prophecy of Malachie be
understood of the oblation of Christ upon the cross, for as much as that was
done but at one time only, and in one certain place of the world, in
Golgoltha a place without the gates of Jerusalem near to the walls of that
city. Concerning the sacrifice of a contrite and an humbled heart, and all
other Sacrifices of our devotion, that be mere spiritual, they can not be
called the new oblation of the New testament, for as much as they were done
as well in the old testament as in the new, neither be they all together
pure. Wherefore this place of Irenaeus, and also the prophecy of Malachie,
wherewith it is confirmed, must needs be referred to the sacrifice and oblation
of the body and blood of Christ daily throughout the whole world offered to God
in the Mass, which is the external Sacrifice of the church and proper to the
new testament: which, as Irenaeus says, the church received of the Apostles,
and the Apostles of Christ.

Now let us hear what S. Cyprian has written to this purpose. Because his
works be common, Lib. 2. epist. 3.
to be shorter, I will rehearse his words in English. If in the Sacrifice,
which is Christ, none but Christ is to be followed, soothly it behooves us to
obey and do that, which Christ did, and commanded to be done. For if Jesus
Christ our lord and God, very he him self be the high priest of God the
father, and him self first offered sacrifice to God the father, and commanded
the same to be done in his remembrance: verily that priest does occupy the
office of Christ truly, who does by imitation the same thing that Christ did.
And then he offers to God the father in the church a true and a perfect
sacrifice, if he begin to offer, right so as he sees Christ him self to
have offered. This far S. Cyprian. How can this Article be avouched in more
plain words? he says that Christ offered him self to his father in his
supper, and likewise commanded us to do the same.

Here we have proved, that it is lawful, and has always from the beginning
of the new t^stament ben lawful for the priests to offer up Christ unto his
father, by the testimonies of three holy martyrs, two Greeks, and one Latin,
most notable in sundry respects, of antiquity, of the rome they bare in
Christ's church, of learning, of constancy, of faith steadfastly kept to
death, suffered in places of fame and knowledge, at Paris, at Lions, at Carthage.

Our adversaries crake much of the sealing up of their new doctrine with the
blood of such and such, who be written in the book of lies, not in the book
of life, whom they will needs to be called martyrs. Verily if those Moonkes and
freres, Apostates and renegates, wedded to wives, or rather (to use their own
term) yoked to sisters, be true martyrs: then must our new Gospellers pull
these holy fathers, and many thousands mo, out of heaven. For certainly the
faith, in defense of which either sort dyed, is utterly contrary. The worst
that I wish to them, is, that God give them eyes to see, and ears to hear,
and that he shut not up their hearts, so as they see not the light here, until
they be thrown away into the owtward darkness, Matt. 15.
where shall be weeping and grynting of teeth.

Leaving no small number of places, that might be recited out of diverse other
doctors, I will bring two of two worthy bishops, one of Chrysostom, the other
of S. Ambrose, confirmig this truth. Chrysostomes words be these. Pontifex
noster ille est, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit: ipsam offerimus and nunc,
Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. Homil. 17.
quae tunc oblata quidem, consumi non potest. Hoc autem quod nos facimus, in
commemorationem fit eius, quod factum est. Hoc enim facite, inquit, in mei
co^memorationem. He is our bishop, that has offered up the host, which
cleanses us. The same do we offer also now, which though it were then
offered, yet can not be consumed. But this that we do, is done in remembrance
of that, which is done. For do ye this says he, in my remembrance. S.
Ambrose says thus. In Psalm. 38.
Vidimus principem Sacerdotum ad nos venientem, vidimus et audiuimus offerentem
pro nobis sanguinem suum: sequamur vt possumus, Sacerdotes, vt offeramus pro
populo sacrificium, etsi infirmi merito, tamen honorabiles sacrificio. Quia
etsi Christus non videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertur in terris, quando
Christi corpus offertur. We have seen the prince of priests come to us, we
have seen and heard him offer for us his blood: Let us that be priests follow
him, as we may, that we may offer sacrifice for the people, being though weak
in merit, yet honorable for the sacrifice. Because albeit Christ be not seen
to offer, yet he is offered in earth, when the body of Christ is offered. Of
these our lords words, which is given for you, and, which is shed for you
and for many, Here S. Ambrose exhorts the priests, to offer the body and
blood of Christ, for the people. And wills them to be more regarded, then
commonly they be now a days, for this sacrifices sake, though otherwise they
be of less deserte.

Now for proof of the sacrifice and oblation of Christ, by the doctoures mind
upon the figure of Melchisedech: Lib. 2. epist. 3.
first S. Cyprian says thus. Qui magis sacerdos Dei summi, quam Dominus
noster Jesus Christus, qui sacrificium Deo patri obtulit, et obtulit hoc idem,
quod Melchisedech, id est, panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem.
Who is more the priest of the highest God, then our lord Jesus Christ, who
offered a sacrifice to God the father, and offered the self same, that
Melchisedech did, that is, bread and wine, that is to say, his own body and
blood. S. Hierome in an epistle that he wrote for the virtuous women Paula and
Eustochium, to Marcella, has these words, Recurre ad Genesim and Melchisedech
regem Salem. Huius principem inuenies ciuitatis, qui iam in typo Christi panem
and vinum obtulit, and mysterium christianum in Saluatoris sanguine and corpore
dedicauit. Return to the book of Genesis, and to Melchisedech the king of
Salem. And thou shall find the prince of that City, who even at that time in
the figure of Christ offered bread and wine, and dedicated the mystery of
Christians in the body and blood of our Savior. Here this learned father
makes a plain distinction between th'oblation of the figure, which was bread
and wine, and the oblation of the truth, which is the mystery of Christen
people, the blood and the body of Christ our Savior. Of this. S. Augustine
speaks largely in his first sermon upon the 33. Psalm. and in the 17. book
de ciuitate Dei, cap. 20.

Of all other Oecumenius speaks most plainly to this purpose upon this place
of S. Paul alleged out of the Psalm, Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum
^rdinem Melchisedech. Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech his words be these. Significat sermo, quod non solum Christus
obtulit incruentam hostiam (siquidem suum ipsius corpus obtulit) verum etiam
qui ab ipso furgentur sacerdotio, quorum Deus Pontifex esse dignatus est, sine
sanguinis effusione offerent. Nam hoc significat (in aeternum.) Neque enim de
ea quae semel a Deo facta est oblatio et hostia, dixisset in aeternum, sed
respicie^s ad praesentes sacrificos, per quos medios Christus sacrificat and
sacrificatur, qui etiam in mystica coena modum illis tradidit huiusmodi
sacrificij. The meaning of this place is (says he) that not only Christ
offered an unbloody sacrifice, for he offered his own body, but also that they
which after him shall do the office of a priest (whose bishop he vouchesaueth
to be) shall offer without shedding of blood. For that signifies the word (for
ever.) For concerning that oblation and sacrifice which was once made by God,
he would never say, (in aeternum) for ever. But (he said so) having an eye to
those priests that be now, by the mediation of whom Christ sacrifices and is
sacrificed, who also in his mystical supper taught them by tradition the manner
of such a sacrifice.

Concerning the prophecy of Malachie for proof of this oblation, though the
place of Irenaeus above recited may stand instead of many auctorities, yet I
will not let to rehearse the sayings of a father or two, for confirmation of
this Article. Chrysostom says very plainly, In Psalm. 95
In omni loco sacrificium offertur nomini meo, and sacrificium purum. Vide quam
luculenter quanque dilucide mysticam interpretatus est mensam, quae est
incruenta hostia. In every place a sacrifice shall be offered to my name, and
that a pure sacrifice. See how plainly and clearly he interpreted the
mystical table, which is the unbloody sacrifice.

Saint Augustine has many evident sayings touchig this matter in his works.
One shall suffice for all which is in a little treatise he made contra Iudaeos,
uttered in these words. Cap. 9.
Aperite oculos tandem aliquando, and videte ab Orient sole vsque ad
Occidentem, non in vno loco, vt vobis fuit constitutum, sed in omni loco
offerri sacrificium christianorum, non cuilibet Deo, sed ei, qui ista
praedixit, Deo Israel. Open your eyes at last you Jews, and see that from the
rising of the sun to the setting, not in one place, as it was appointed to
you, but in every place the sacrifice of the Christen people is offered, not to
every God, but to him that prophesied of these things before, the God of
Israel. And even so with that protestation which saint Augustine made to the
Jews, I end this tediouse matter consisting in manner altogether in
allegations to M. Iuell. Open open your eyes at last M. Iuell, and see how all
the holy and learned fathers, that have preached the faith of Christ from the
rising of the sun to the setting, have taught this doctrine, by word and
writing left to the posterity, that they which under Christ do use the
of^^ce of a priest after the order of Melchisedech, have not only authority,
but also express commandment, to offer up Christ unto his father. The proof
of which doctrine, although it depend of the weight of one place, yet I have
thought good to fortify it with some good number, that it may the better
appear to be a most undoubted truth, not moved greatly with the blame of
tediousnes, where no thanks are sought, but only defense of the catholic
Religion is intended.

Or that the priest had then authority to communicate and receive the
Sacrament for an other, as they do. Iuell.

Of the priests saying Mass for an other.
ARTICLE XVIII.
What you would say M. Iuell, I wot not, what you say, well I wot. The
priest receives not the Sacrament for an other.
Verily we do not communicate ne receive the Sacrament for an other. Neither
has it ever ben taught in the catholic church, that the priest receive the
Sacrament for an other. We receive not the Sacrament for an other, no more then
we receive the Sacrament of Baptism, or the Sacrament of penance, or the
Sacrament of Matrimony, one for an other. In deed the priest says Mass for
others, where he receives that he has offered, and that is it you mean I
guess: In which Mass being the external sacrifice of the New testament,
according unto Christ's institution, the thing that is offered, is such, as
makes our petitions and requests acceptable to God, as S. Cyprian says, In
sermon de coena domini.
In huius (corporis) praesentia non superuacue mendicant lachrymae venia^. In
the presence of this body tears crave not forgeuenes in vain.

That the oblatio^ of the Mass is done for others then for the priest alone
which celebrateth, it may sufficiently be proved by an hundred places of the
fathers, the matter being undoubted, two or three may suffice. First Chrysostom
writes thus in an homely upon the Acts. In Acta. homil. 21.
Quid dicis? in manibus est hostia, and omnia proposita sunt been ordinata:
adsunt angeli, adsunt archangeli, adest filius Dei, cum tanto horrore adstant
omnes, adstant illi clamantes omnibus silentibus, and putas simpliciter haec
fieri? Igitur and alia simpliciter, and quae pro ecclesia, and quae pro
sacerdotibus offeruntur, and quae pro plenitudine ac vbertate? absit. Sed omnia
cum fide fiunt.

What say thou hereto? the host is in the priests hands, and all things
set forth are in due order. The Angels be present, the Archangels be present,
the son of God is present. Whereas all stand there with so great fear,
whereas all they stand there crying out to god, and all other hold their
peace, think thou these things be done simply and without great cause? Why
then be those other things done also simply, both the things which are
offered for plenty and abundaunce? God forbydde, but all things are done with
faith. Saint Ambrose in his funeral oration made of the death of Valentinian
the Emperor, calling the Sacrament of th'aulter the holy and heavenly
mysteries, and the oblation of our mother (by which term he understands the
church) says, that he will prosecute the godly soul of that Emperor with
the same. This father writing upon the 38. Psalm, exhorts priests to follow
Christ, that as he offered for us his blood, so priests offer sacrifice for
the people his words be these, Vidimus principem sacerdotum, etc. We have seen
the prince of priests coming unto us, we have seen and heard him offering
for us his blood. Let us that be priests, follow as we can, so as we offer
sacrifice for the people, though weak in merit, yet honorable for the
sacrifice, etc.

That the oblatio^ of the Mass is profitably made for others, S. Gregory
witnesses very plainly, homilia, 37. expounding the place of S. Luke. cap.
14. alioqui legationem mittens, ea quae pacis sunt postulat. Else he sends
forth an ambassade, and sueth for peace. Hereupon he says thus. Mittamus ad
Dominum legationem nostram, flendo, tribuendo, sacras hostias offerendo.
Singulariter namque ad absolutionem nostram, oblata cum lachrymis and
benignitate mentis, sacri altaris hostia suffragatur. Let us send to our lord
our Ambassade, with weeping, giving almose, and offering of holy hosts. For
the host of the holy altar (that is the blessed Sacrament) offered with
tears and with the merciful bounty of our mind, helps us singularely to
be assoyled. In that homily he shows, that the oblation of Christ's body in
this Sacrament present, which is done in the Mass, is help and comfort not
only to them that be present, but also to them that be absent, both quycke
and dead, which he proves by examples of his own knowledge. Who so lists to
see antiquity for proof hereof, and that in the Apostles time bishops and
priests in the dreadful sacrifice offered and prayed for others, as for every
state and order of men, and also for holesomnesse of the air, and for
fertility of the fruits of the earth, etc. Let him read the eight book of
the constitutions of the Apostles set forth by Clement.

Iuell.
Or that the priest had then authority to apply the virtue of Christ's death
and Passion to any man by the mean of the Mass.
Of the application of the benefits of Christ's death to others by mean of
prayer in the Mass.
ARTICLE. XIX.
THe virtue of Christ's death and passion is grace and remission of sins, the
appeacing of Gods wrath, the reco^ciliation of us to God, delyueraunce from the
devil, hell and everlasting damnation. Our adversaries imputing to us, as
though we said and taught, that the priest applies this virtue, effect and
merit of Christ's death to any man by the mean of the Mass, either belie us
of ignorance, or sclaunder us of malice. Verily we say not so. Neither does
the priest apply the virtue of Christ's passion to any man by the mean of the
Mass. what applies the priest unto us in the Mass
He does but apply his prayer and his intent of oblation, beseching almighty
God to apply the merit and virtue of his sons death, (the memory whereof
he celebrateth at the Mass) to them, for whom he prays.

It is God and none other, that applies to us remission of sin, the priest
does but pray for it, and by the commemoration of his sons death, moves him
to apply. So as all that the priest does, is but by way of petition and
prayer, leaving all power and authority of applying to God, which prayer is to
be believed to be of most force and efficacy, when it is worthily and devoutly
made in the Mass: in the which the priest bears the person of the whole
church, and offers his prayer in the sacrifice, wherein the church offers
Christ, and it self through Christ to God. Which his prayer and devout service
he besecheth to be offered up by the hands of Angels unto the high altar of
God, in the sight of the divine majesty. Sermon^ de coena Domini.
Of what strength prayer made at the Mass is, the holy bishop and martyr S.
Cyprian witnesses, where he says. In the presence of this Sacrament tears
crave not in vain, and the sacrifice of a co^trite heart, is never denied his
request.

Or that it was then thought a sound doctrine, Iuell.
to teach the people, that the Mass ex opere operato, That is, even for that
it is said and done, is able to remove any part of our sin.
Of opus operatum, what it is, and whether it remove sin.
ARTICLE. XX.
IN deed the doctrine uttered in this Article is false, and derogatorie to the
glory of our Savior Christ. For thereby the honor of Christ's sacrifice,
whereby he has once satisfied for the sins of all, should be tra^sferred to
the work of the priest, which were great wickedness and detestable blasphemy.
And therefore we will not require M. Iuell to yield and subscribe unto this
Article. For we grant, this was never thought a sound doctrine within syx
hundred years of Christ's Ascensio^, nor shall be so thought within syx
thousand years after the same of any man of sound belief. Neither has it ben
at any time taught in the catholic church, how so ever it likes our
adversaries to charge the scolasticall doctors with the sclaunderous report
of the contrary. For it is Christ only and none other thing, that is able to
remove our sins, and that has he done by the sacrifice of his body once done
upon the cross. Of which sacrifice once performed upon the cross with
shedding of his blood, this unbloody sacrifice of the altar, which is the
daily sacrifice of the church, commonly called the Mass, is a samplar, and a
commemoration, in the which we have the same body that hanged on the cross.
And whereas we have nothing of our selves, that we may offer up acceptable to
God: we offer this his sons body as a most acceptable sacrifice, beseching
him to look not upon our worthynes, our act or work: but upon the face of
Christ his most dear son, and for his sake to have mercy upon us.

How the Mass is vaileable ex opere operato.
And in this respect we doubt not this blessed sacrifice of the Mass to be
vaileable and effectual, ex opere operato, that is, not as M. Iuell
interprets, for that the Mass is said and done, referring opus operatum to
the act of the priest, not so: but for the work wrought it self, which god
him self works by the ministry of the priest, without respect had to his
merit, or act, which is the body and blood of Christ. Which when it is
according to his commandment offered up to god, is not in regard of our
work, but of it self, and of the holy Institution of his only begoten son,
a most acceptable sacrifice to him, both for quick and dead, where there is
no stop nor let to the contrary on the behalf of the receiver. The dead,
I mean such only, as through faith have recommended them selves to the
rede^ptio^ wrought by Christ, and by this faith have deserved of God, that
after their departure hence, as S. Augustine says, this sacrifice might
profit them.

But to speak of this matter more particularly and more distinctly, the term
Mass may be taken two ways. Mass taken two vvayes.
Either for the thing it self which is offered, or for the act of the priest
in offering of it. If it be taken for the thing it self that is offered, which
is the body of Christ, and is in this respect of the scolasticall doctors
called opus operatum: no man can justly deny, but that it remoueth and takes
away sin. For Christ in his flesh crucified is our only sacrifice, our
only price, our only redemption, 1. Cor. 6 et 7. Tit. 2. Apoc. 14. 1. Joan.
2. In 3. cap. ad Romanos.
whereby he has merited to us upon the cross, and with the price of his blood
has bought the remission of our sins. and S. John says, he is the
propitiatio^ for our sins. So Oecumenius says. Caro Christi est
propitiatorium nostrarum iniquitatum. The flesh of Christ is the propitiatio^
for our iniquities. And this not for that it is offered of the priest in the
Mass specially, but for that he offered it once him self with sheddi^g of his
blood upon the cross for the redemption of all. Which oblation done upon the
Cross, is become a perpetual and continual oblation not in the same manner of
offering, but in the same virtue and power of the thing offered. For since that
time the same body of Christ appearing always before the face of God in
heaven, presents and exhibiteth it self for our reconciliation. And likewise
it is exhibited and offered by his own commandment here in earth, in the
Mass, where he is both priest and sacrifice, offerer and oblation, though in
mystery and by way of commemoration, that thereby we may be made partetakers
of the reconciliation performed. And so it is a sacrifice in very deed
propitiatory, not for our act or work, but for his own work already done
and accepted. To this only we must ascribe remission and removing of our
sins.

If the term Mass be taken for the act of the priest, in respect of any his
only doing, it is not able to remove sin. For so we should make the priest
gods peer, and his act equal with the passion of Christ, as our adversaries
do unjustly sclaunder us. Yet has the Mass virtue and effect in some
degree, and is acceptable to god, by reason of the oblation of the sacrifice,
which in the Mass is done by the offerer, without respect had to Christ's
institution, even for the faithful prayer and devotion of the party that
offers, which the scoole doctors term ex opere operantis. For then the
oblation seems to be most acceptable to god, when it is offered by some that
is acceptable. Now the party that offers is of two sorts. The one offers
immediately and personally. the other offers mediatly, or by mean of an
other, and principally. The first is the priest that consecrateth, offers and
receives the Sacrament, who so does these things in his own person, yet by
gods authority, as none other in so offering is concurrent with him. The
party that offers mediately or by mean of an other and principally, is the
church militant, in whose person the priest offers, and whose minister he is
in offering. For this is the Sacrifice of the whole church. The first party
that offers, is not always acceptable to God, neither always pleases him,
because oftentimes he is a sinner. The second party that offers, is evermore
acceptable to God, because the church is always holy, beloved, and the only
spoose of Christ. And in this respect the Mass is an acceptable service to
god, ex opere operantis, and is not without cause and reason called a sacrifice
propitiatory, not for that it deserves mercy at gods hand of it self, as
Christ does, who only is in that principal and special sort a sacrifice
propitiatory: but for that it moves god to give mercy and remission of sin
already deserved by Christ. In this degree of a sacrifice propitiatory, we may
put prayer, a co^ttite heart, almose, forgeuing of our neighbor, etc. This may
easily be proved by the holy fathers.

Origens words be very plain. In Leuit. Hom. 13.
Si respicias ad illam commemorationem, de qua dicit Dominus, Hoc facite in
meam commemorationem, inuenies, quod ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium
faciat Deum. If thou look to that commemoration, whereof our lord says, Do
this in my remembrance, or in commemoration of me: thou shall find, that this
is the only commemoration, that makes god merciful. Saint Augustine says
thus. Nemo melius praeter martyrs meruit ibi requiescere, vbi and hostia
Christus est, and sacerdos, scilicet, vt propitiationem de oblatione hostiae
consequantur. Sermon 11. de Sa^ctis.
No man has deserved better, then the martyrs to rest there, where Christ is
both the host and the priest, (he means to be buried under the altar) to
the intent they might atteine propitiation by the oblation of the host. But
here to avoid prolixitie in a matter not doubtefull, I leave a number of
places, whereby it may be evidently proved, that the Mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory in this degree of propitiation, both for the quick and the
dead, the same not being specially denied by purporte of this Article. And this
is the doctrine of the church, touching the valor of the Mass ex opere
operato, whereby no part of Christ's glory is impaired.

Iuell.
Or that then any Christian man called the Sacrament his lord and God.
Of calling the Sacrament lord and God.
ARTICLE. XXI.
Sacrament two vvayes taken.
THis word Sacrament (as is declared before) is of the fathers taken two ways.
Either for the only outward forms of bread and wine, which are the holy sign
of the very body and blood of Christ present and under them contained: Or for
the whole substance of the Sacrament, as it consists of the outward forms,
In sent. Prosperi. de conse. did. 2. lib. 4. cap. 34.
and also of the very body and blood of Christ verily present, which S.
Augustine calls the invisible grace and the thing of the Sacrament, And
Irenaeus, calls it rem coelestem, the heavenly thing as that other, rem
terrenam, the earthly thing. Taken the first way, no Christen man ever
honored it with the name of lord and God. For that were plain Idolatry, to
attribute the name of the Creator, to the creature. But taken in the second
signification, it has always of Christen people and of the learned fathers of
the church, ben called by the name of lord and God. And of right so ought it
to be, for else were it impiety and a denial of God, not to call Christ the
son of God, by the name of lord and God, who is not only in truth of flesh
and blood in the Sacrament, after which manner he is there ex vi Sacramenti, but
also for the inseparable conjunction of both natures in unity of person, ex
necessaria concomitantia, whole Christ, God and man. That the holy fathers
called the Sacrament taken in this sense, lord and God, I might prove it by
many places, the rehearsal of a few may serve for many. Origin in an homily
speaking reverently of this blessed Sacrament, says, In diuerfos Euangelij
locos. homil. 5.
that when a man receives it, our lord enters under his rooffe, and exhorts
him that shall receive it, to humble him self and to say unto it: Domine non
sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum. Lord I am not worthy that thou enter
under my rooffe.

S. Cyprian in Sermon de lapsis, tells, how a man, who had denied God in
time of persecution, having notwithstanding (the sacrifice by the priest done)
privily with others received the Sacrament, not being able to eat it nor to
handle it, opening his hands, fownde that he bare ashes. Where he adds
these words. Documento vnius ostensum est, dominum recedere, cum negatur. By
this example of one man it is showed, that our lord departs away, when he is
denied. The same S. Cyprian in th'exposition of the Pater noster, declaring the
fourth petition of it, Give us this day our daily bread: understands it to
contain a desire of the holy communion in this blessed Sacrament, and says.
Ideo panem nostrum, id est, Christum dari nobis quotidie petimus, vt qui in
Christo manemus and viuimus, a sanctificatione and corpore eius non recedamus.
Therefore we ask our daily bread, that is to say, Christ, to be given unto
us, that we which abide and live in Christ, depart not from the state of
holiness, and communion of his body. Here S. Cyprian calls the Sacrament
Christ, as he is in deed there present really, so as in the place alleged
before he calls it lord. And I wene our adversaries will imbarre the
Sacrament of the name of Christ, no less then of the name of lord or God.

Unless they make less of Christ, then of lord and God. Verily this holy
martyr acknowlegeth this sacrament not for lord and Christ only, but also for
God, by these words in his sermon de coena Domini. Sicut in persona Christi
humanitas videbatur, and latebat diuinitas, ita sacramento visibili
ineffabiliter diuina se infudit essentia. As in the person of Christ, the
manhood was seen, and the godhed was hydden, so the divine essence (or
substance of God) has infused it self into the visible sacrament
unspeakably.

Chrysostom doubts not to call the Sacrament God in this plain saying.
Nolimus obsecro, nolimus impudentes nos ipsos interimere, In priore^ ad Cor.
Homil. 24
sed cum honor and munditia ad Deum accedamus. and quando id propositum
videris, dic tecum: propter hoc corpus non amplius terra and cinis ego sum, non
amplius captiuus, sed liber. Let us not, let us not for gods sake be so
shameless, as to kill our selves (by unworthy receiving of the sacrament) but
with reverence and cleanenesse let us come to God. And when thou see the
sacrament set forth, say thus with thy self: by reason of this body, I am no
more earth and ashes, no more captive, but free.

And least this sense taken of Chrysostom should seem over strange, this place
of S. Ambrose, who lived in the same time, and agrees with him thoroughly in
doctrine, may seem to lead us to the same. Quid edamus, quid bibamus, De ijs
qul mysterijs initiantu^ cap. 9. Psalm. 33.
alibi tibi per propheta^ Spiritus sanctus expressit, dicens: gustate and
videte, quoniam suauis est Dominus, beatus vir qui sperat in eo, in illo
Sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi. What we ought to eat, and
what we ought to drink, the holy ghost has expressed by the prophet in an
other place, saying: Taste and see, how that our lord is sweet, blessed is the
man that trusts in him. In that Sacrament is Christ, because there is the
body of Christ. Here S. Ambrose referring those words of the psalm to the
sacrament, calls it lord, and that lord, in whom the man that trusts, is
blessed, who is God.

Agreeably to this says S. Augustine, In collectaneis in 10. cap. prioris ad
Corinth.
in a sermon de verbis Euangelij, as Beda recites. Qualem vocem Domini
audistis inuitantis nos? Quis vos inuitauit? Quos inuitauit? Et quis
praeparauit? Inuitauit Dominus seruos, and praeparauit eis cibum seipsum. Quis
audeat ma^ducare Dominum suum? Et tamen ait, qui manducat me, viuet propter me.
What manner a uoice is that ye have heard of our lord inuiting and bydding us to
the feast? who has invited? whom has he invited? And who has made
preparation? The lord has invited the servants, and has prepared him self
to be meat for them. Who dares be so bold as to eat his lord? And yet he
says, he that eats me, shall live for cause of me.

In Joan. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Cyrillus accompteth the sacrament for Christ, and God the word, and for God, in
this saying. Qui carnem Christi manducat, vitam habet aeternam. Habet enim haec
caro Dei verbum, quod naturaliter vita est. Propterea dicit: Quia ego
resuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. Ego enim dixit, Joan. 6.
id est, corpus meum quod comedetur resuscitabo eum. Non enim alius ipse est,
quam caro sua, etc. He that eats the flesh of Christ, has life everlasting.
For this flesh has the word of God, which naturally is life. Therefore says
he, that I will raise him in the last day. For I, quoth he, that is to say,
my body which shall be eaten, shall raise him up again, for he is no other,
then his flesh, etc.

No man more expressly calls the Sacrament by the name of God, then S.
Bernard in his godly sermon de coena Domini ad Petrum presbyterum. where he
says thus. Comedunt angeli Verbum de Deo natum, Comedunt homines Verbum
foenum factum. The angels eat the Word borne of God, men eat the Word made
hay, meaning hereby the sacrament, which he calls the Word made hay, that
is to wit, the Word incarnate. And in an other place there, he says. Haec
est vere indulgentia coelestis, haec est vere cumulata gratia, haec est vere
superexcellens gloria, sacerdotem Deum suu^ tenere, and alijs dando porrigere.
This is verily an heavenly gift, this is verily a bountiful grace, this is
verily a passing excellent glory, the priest to hold his God, and in giving
to reach him forth to others. In the same sermon speaking of the meruelouse
sweetness that good bishopes and holy religiouse men have experience of, by
receiving this blessed Sacrament, he says thus. Ideo ad mensam altaris
frequentius accedunt, omni tempore candida facientes vestimenta sua, id est,
corpora, prout possunt, melius, vtpote Deum suum manu and ore co^trectaturi.
For this cause they come the oftener unto the bourd of the altar, at all times
making their garments that is to say, their bodies, so white, as they can
possibly, as they, who shall handle their God with hand and mowth. An other
place of the same sermon, for that it co^teineth a holesom instruction, beside
the affirming of our purpose, I can not omit. I remitte the learned to the
Latin. the English of it is this.

They are marvelous things brethren, that be spoken of this Sacrament. faith
is necessary, knowledge of reason is (here) superfluous. This, let faith
believe, let not understanding require, least that either not being fownde, it
think it incredible, or being fownde out, it believe it not to be singular and
alone. And therefore it behooves it to be believed symply, that can not be serched
out profitably. Wherefore search not search not, how it may be, doubt not,
whether it be. Come not unto it irreverently, least it be to you to death.
Deus enim est, and quanquam panis mysteria habeat, mutatur tamen in carnem. For
it is God, and thoug it have mysteries of bread, yet is it changed into
flesh. God and man it is that witnesses bread truly to be made his flesh.
The vessel of election it is, 1. Cor. 11.
that threatens judgment, to him that puts no difference in judging of
that so holy flesh. The self same thing think thou o Christen man of the
wine, give that honor to the wine. The creator of wine it is, that promoteth
the wine to be the blood of Christ. This far holy Bernard.

Here let our adversaries touching this Article, consider and weigh with them
selves, whether they be Lutheranes, Zuinglianes, or Geneuians, what english
they can make of these words used by the fathers, and applied to the Sacrament
in the places before alleged. Dominus, Christus* Diuina essentia, Deus,
Seipsum, Verbum Dei, Ego, Verbum foenum factum, Deum suum. The number of the
like places that might be alleged to this purpose, be in manner infinite. Yet
M. Iuell promyseth to give over and subscribe, if any one may be fownde. Now we
shall see, what truth is in his word.

In the weighing of this doctrine of the church, little occasion of wicked
scoffs and blasphemies against this blessed sacrament shall remain to them,
that be not blinded with that gross and fond error, that denies the
inseparabilitie of Christ, but affirms in this mystery to be present his
flesh only, with out blood, soul, and godhed. Which is confuted by plain
scriptures. Christ raised from the dead, now dies no more. Romans 6. He
suffers him self no more to be divided, 1. Cor. 1. Every sprite that loses
Jesus, this is Antichrist. 1. Joan. 4. Hereof it follows, that if Christ be
verily under the form of bread in the Sacrament, as it is other where is
sufficiently proved: then is he there entier and whole: flesh, blood, and
soul, whole Christ, God and man, for the inseparable union of both natures in
one person. Which matter is more amply declared in the Article of the adoration
of the sacrament.

Or that the people was then taught to believe, Iuell.
that the body of Christ remains in the Sacrament, as long as the Accide^tes
of the bread remain there with out corruption.
Of the remaining of Christ's body in the sacrament so long as the accidents
be entier and whole.
ARTICLE. XXII.
THese five articles here following are Scoole points, the discussio^ whereof
is more curiouse, then necessary. Whether the faithful people were then, that
is to say, for the space of six hundred years after Christ, taught to believe
concerning this blessed Sacrament precisely according to the purporte of all
these articles or no, I know not. Verily I think, they were taught the truth
of this matter simply and plainly, yet so as nothing was hydden from them,
that in those quiet times, (quiet I mean touching this point of faith) was
thought necessary for them to know. If sithe^s there has been more taught, or
rather if the truth has in some other form of words ben declared for a more
evidence and clearness in this behalf to be had, truth it self always
remaining one: this has proceeded of the diligence and earnest care of the
church, to repress the pertinacie of heretics, who have within these last
syx hundred years impugned the truth herein, and to meet with their perverse
and froward obiectio^s: as has been thought necessary to find out such wedges,
as might best serve to ryue such knotty blocket. Yet this matter has not so
much ben taught in open audience of the people, as debated privately between
learned men in scooles, and so of them set forth in their private writings.
Wherein if some perhaps through contention of wits have been either over
curiouse, or over bold, and have ouershotte the mark, or not sufficiently
confirmed the point they have taken in hand to treat of, or through
ignorance, or favor of a part, have in some thing swarued from reason, or
that meaning which holy church holds it is great vncourtesie to lay that to
our charge, to abuse their ouersightes to our discredit, and to reprove the
whole church for the insufficiency of a few.

Now concerning this Article, whether we are able to auouche it by such
authorities as M. Iuell requires, or no, it shall not greatly force. The
credit of the catholic faith depends not of old proufes of a few new
co^trouersed points, that been of less importance. As for the people, they
were taught the truth plainly, when no heretic had assaulted their faith
craftily. The doctrine of the church.
The doctrine of the church is this. The body of Christ after due consecration
remains so long in the Sacrament, as the Sacrament endures. The Sacrament
endures so long as the forms of bread and wine continewe. Those forms
continewe in their integrity, until the other accidents be corrupted ad
perish. As if the color, weight, savor, taste, smell, and other qualities of
bread and wine be corrupted and quite altered, then is the form also of the
same annichilated and undone. And to speak of this more particularly, since
that the substance of bread and wine is turned into the substance of the body
and blood of Christ, as the scriptures, ancient doctors, the necessary
consequent of truth, and determination of holy church leads us to believe: if
such change of the accidents be made, which should not have suffised to the
corruption of bread and wine, in case of their remaindre: for such a change
the body and blood of Christ cease not to be in this Sacrament, whether the
change be in quality, as if the color, savor, and smell of bread and wine
be a little altered, or in quantity, as if thereof division be made into such
portions, in which the nature of bread and wine might be reserved. But if there
be made so great a change, as the nature of bread and wine should be corrupted,
if they were present: then the body and blood of Christ do not remain in this
Sacrament, as when the color and savor and other qualities of bread and wine
are so far changed, as the nature of bread and wine might not bear it: or on
the qua^tities side, as if the bread be so small cro^med into dust, and the
wine dispersed into so small portio^s, as their forms remain no longer the^
remains no more the body and blood in this Sacrament. Thus the body and blood
of Christ remains in this sacrament, so long as the forms of bread and wine
remain. And when they fail and cease to be any more, then also cease the
body and blood of Christ to be in the Sacrament. For there must be a
conuenience and resemblaunce between the Sacraments and the things whereof they
be sacraments, which done away and lost at the corruption of the forms and
accidents, the sacraments also be undone and perish, and consequently the
inward thing and the heavenly thing in them contained, leaves to be in them.

Here because many of them, which have cut them selves from the church,
condemn the reservation of the Sacrament, Of reservation of the Sacrament.
and affirm that the body of Christ remains not in the same, no longer then
during the time whiles it is received, alleging against reservation the
example of the Paschall lamb in the old law, Exodus 12.
wherein nothing ought to have remained until the morning, and likewise of
manna: I will rehearse that notable and known place of Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
Ad Colosyriu^ Arsenoiten Episcopu^. citat Thomas part 3. q. 76.
his words be these: Audio quod dicant mysticam benedictionem, si ex ea
remonserint in sequentem diem reliquiae, ad sanctificationem inutilem esse. Sed
insaniunt haec dicentes. Non enim alius fit Christus, neque sanctum eius corpus
immutabitur: Sed virtus benedictionis, and viuifica gratia manet in illo. It is
told me, they say, that the mystical blessing (so he calls the blessed
Sacrament) in case portions of it be kept until the next day, is of no
virtue to sanctification. But they be mad, that thus say. For Christ
becomes not an other, neither his holy body is changed: but the virtue of
the consecration and the quickening or life giving grace, abides still in it.
By this saying of Cyrillus we see that he accompteth the error of our
adversaries in this Article, no other then a mere madness. The body of Christ
(says he) which he terms the mystical blessing, because it is a most holy
mystery done by consecration, once consecrated is not changed, but the virtue
of the consecration and the grace that gives life, whereby he means that
flesh assumpted of the word, remains in this sacrament, also when it is
kept: verily even so long, as the outward forms continewe not corrupt.

Or that a Mouse or any other worm or beast may eat the body of Christ,
Iuell.
for so some of our adversaries have said and taught.
What is that the Mouse or worm eats.
ARTICLE. XXIII.
Whereas M. Iuell imputes this vile asseueratio^ but to some of the
adversaries of his side, he seems to acknowledge, Iuell co^trarieth him self.
that it is not a doctrine universally taught and received. The like may be
said for his next Article. And if it has been said of some only, and not
taught universally of all, as a true doctrine for Christen people to believe:
how agrees he with him self, saying after the rehearsal of his number of
Articles, the same, none excepted, to be the highest mysteries and greatest
keys of our religion. For if that were true, as it is not true for the
greatest part, then should this Article have been affirmed and taught of all.
For the highest and greatest points of the catholic Religion be not of
particular, but of universal teaching.

Concerning the matter of this Article, what so ever a mouse worm, or beast
eats, the body of Christ now being impassible and immortal, susteineth no
violence, injury, no villainy. As for that which is gnawen, bytten, or eaten
of worm or beast, whether it be the substance of bread, as appears to
sense, which is denied, because it cease through virtue of consecration: or
the outward form only of the Sacrament, as many hold opinion, which also
only is broken and chawed of the receiver, the accidents by miracle remaining
without substance: In such cases happening contrary to the intent and end the
sacrament is ordained and kept for, it ought not to seem unto us incredible,
the power of God considered, that God takes away his body from those outward
forms, and permits either the nature of bread to return, as before
consecration, or the accidents to supplye the effects of the substance of
bread. As he commanded the nature of the rod, which became a serpent, to
return to that it was before, when God would have it serve no more to the
uses it was by him appointed unto.

The grave authority of S. Cyprian adds great weight to the balance for this
judgment in weighing this matter, who in his sermon de lapsis, by the report
of certain miracles shows, that our lords body made it self away from
some, that being defiled with the sacrifices of idols, presumed to come to the
communion, er they had done their due penance. One (as he tells there)
thinking to have that blessed body, which he had received with others in his
hand, when he opened the same to put it into his mowth, fownde that he held
ashes. And thereof S. Cyprian says, Documento vnius ostensum est, dominum
recedere, cum negatur. By the example of one man it was showed, that our lord
departs away, when he is denied. It is neither wicked, nor a thing unworthy
the majesty of that holy mystery, to think our lords body likewise done
away, in cases of negligence, villainy, and profanation.

Or that when Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum: Iuell.
this word Hoc, points not the bread, but Indiuiduum vagum, as some of them
say.
What this pronoune Hoc points in the words of consecration.
ARTICLE XIIII.
What so ever hoc points in this saying of Christ after your judgment, M.
Iuell, right meaning and plain christen people, 2. These. ^
(who through gods grace have received the love of truth, and not the efficacy
of illusion to believe lying) believe verily, that in this sacrament after
consecration, is the very body of Christ, and that upon credit of his own
words, The benefit of the Geneuian Communion
Hoc est corpus meum. They that appoint them selves to follow your Geneuian
doctrine in this point, deceived by that ye teach them (hoc) to point the
bread, and by sundry other untruths, instead of the very body of Christ, in
the Sacrament rightly ministered verily present, shall receive nothing at your
communion, but a bare piece of bread not worth a point. As for your some say,
who will have Hoc to point indiuiduum vagum, first learn you well, what they
mean. and if their meaning be naught, who so ever they be, handle them as you
list, therewith shall we be offended never a deal. How this word Hoc in that
saying of Christ, is to be taken, and what it points, we know who have more
learnedly, more certainly, and more truly treated thereof, then Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Cranmer, Peter Martyr, or any their offspring.

Iuell.
Or that the accidents, or forms, or shows of bread and wine, be the
Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, and not rather the bread and wine it
self.
Who are the Sacramen^tes of Christ's body and blood, the accidents, or the
bread and wine.
ARTICLE. XXV.
FOr as much as by the almighty power of gods word pronounced by the priest in
the consecration of this Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ are made
really present, the substance of bread turned into the substance of the body,
and the substance of wine into the substance of the blood: the bread (which is
consumed away by the fire of the divine substance, as Chrysostom says, In
homil. Paschali.
and now is beco^me the bread which was formed by the hand of the holy ghost
in the womb of the virgin, and decocted with the fire of the passion in the
altar of the cross, as S. Ambrose says: De conse. did 2. ca. omnia.
) can not be the sacrament of the body, nor the wine of the blood. Neither can
it be said that the bread and the wine which were before, are the
sacraments, for that the bread is becomme the body, and the wine the blood,
and so now they are not, and if they be not, then neither be they sacraments.
Therefore that the outward forms of bread and wine which remain, be the
sacraments of Christ's body and blood, and not the very bread and wine it
self: it follows by sequel of reason, or consequent of understanding,
deduced out of the first truth, which of S. Basile in an epistle ad
Sozopolitanos, Epist. 65.
speaking against certain that went about to raise up again the old heresy
of Valentinus, is called, (...). Of which sequel of reason in the matter of
the Sacrament, many conclusions may be deduced in case of want of express
scriptures. Which way of reasoning Basile used against heretics, as also
sundry other fathers where manifest scripture might not be alleged.

And whereas there must be a likeness between the sacrament and the thing of
the sacrament, (for if the sacraments had not a likeness of things whereof
they are sacraments, Aug. epis. 22. ad Bonifacium Episcopu^.
properly and rightely they should not be called sacraments: as the sacrament
of baptism, which is the outward washing of the flesh, has a likeness of
the inward wasshing of the soul) and no likeness here appears to be between
the forms that remain, and the thing of the Sacrament, for they consist not,
the one of many corns, the other of grapes, for thereof comes not accident,
but substance: hereto may be said, it is enough, that these sacraments bear
the likeness of the body and blood of Christ, for as much as the one
represents the likeness of bread, the other the likeness of wine, De
conse. did. 2. ca. hoc est quod dicimus.
which S. Augustine calls visibilem speciem elementorum, the visible form of
the elements.

Thus the forms of bread and wine are the sacraments of the body and blood
of Christ, not only in respect of the thing signified, which is the unity of
the church, but also of the thing contained, which is the very flesh and
blood of Christ, whereof the truth it self said: Joan. 6.
The bread that I shall give, is my flesh for the life of the world.

Iuell.
Or that the Sacrament is a sign or token of the body of Christ, that lies
hydden underneath it.
Of the unspeakable manner of the being of Christ's body and blood under the
forms of bread and wine.
ARTICLE XXVI.
THat the outward form of bread, which is properly the sacrament, is the sign
of the body of Christ, we confess, yea of that body, which is covertly in, or
under the same, In libro Sentent. Prosperi.
which S. Augustine callet, carnem domini forma panis opertam: the flesh of
our lord covered with the form of bread. But what is meant by this term
(Lies) we know not. As through faith grounded upon gods word, we know that
Christ's body is in the Sacrament, so that it lies there, or underneath it,
by which term it may seem a scoff to be uttered, to bring the catholic
teaching in contempt, or that it sits, or stands, we deny it. For lying,
sitting, and standing, notes situatio^ of a body in a place, according to
distinction of members and circunscriptio^ of place, so as it have his parts
in a certain order correspondent to the parts of the place. But after such
manner the body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, but without circumscription,
order, and habitude of his parts to the parts of the body or place
enuironning. Which manner of being in, is above all reach of human
understanding wonderouse, strange and singular, not defined and limited by the
laws or bonds of nature, but by the almighty power of God. To conclude, the
being of Christ's body in the Sacrament, is to us certain, the manner of his
being there to us uncertain, and to God only certain.

Iuell.
Or that Ignorance is the mother and cause of true devotion and obedience.
Master Iuell had great need of Articles, for some show to be made against
the catholic church, when he advised him self to put this in for an Article.
Verily this is none of the highest mysteries, nor none of the greatest keys of
our Religion, as he says it is, but untruly, and knows that for an untruth.
For him self imputes it to D. Cole, Fol. 77.
in his replies to him, as a strange saying by him uttered in the disputation
at Westminster, to the wondering of the most part of the honorable and
worshipful of this realm. If it were one of the highest mysteries and
greatest keys of the catholic religion, I trust the most part of the
honorable and worshipful of the realm, would not wonder at it. Concerning the
matter it self, I leave it to D. Cole. He is of age to answer for him self.
Whether he said it or no, I know not. As he is learned, wise, and godly, so I
doubt not, but, if he said it, therein he had a good meaning, and can show
good reason for the same, if he may be admitted to declare his saying, as wise
men would the laws to be declared, (...).
so as the mind be taken, and the word spoken not always rigorously exacted.

August. de Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 4. Haec mea fides est, quoniam haec est
catholica fides.
This is my faith, for as much as this is the catholic faith.
THE CONCLUSION EXHORting M. Iuell to stand to his promise.
THus your Challenge M. Iuell is answered. Thus your negatiues be avouched. Thus
the points you went about to improve, by good authority be proved, and many
others by you over rashely affirmed, clearly improued. Thus the catholic
Religion with all your forces laid at and impugned, is sufficiently defended.
The places of prouses, which we have here used, are such, as your self allow
for good and lawful. The scriptures, examples of the Primitive church,
ancient Councelles, and the fathers of syx hundred years after Christ. You
might and ought likewise to have allowed, Reason, Tradition, Custom, and
authority of the Church, without limitation of time. The manner of this dealing
with you, is gentle, sober, and charitable. Put away all mystes of blind
self love, you shall perceive the same to be so. The purpose and intent
toward you, right good and loving, in regard of the truth, no less then,
due, for behoof of Christen people, no less then necessary. That you hereby
might be enduced to bethink your self of that, wherein you have done
unadvisedly, and stayde from hasty running forth, prickte with vain favor and
praise of the world, to everlasting damnation, appointed to be the reward at
the end of your game: that truth might thus be tried, set forth and defended:
and that our brethren be leadde, as it were by the hand, from perilous
erroures and danger of their souls, to a right sense and to suertie.

Now it remains, that you perform your promise. Which is, that, if any one
clear sentence or clause be brought for proof of any one of all your negative
Articles: you would yield and subscribe. What has been brought, every one, that
wilfully will not blindefold him self, may plainly see. If some happily, who
will seem to have both eyes and ears, and to be right learned, will say
hereof, they seen hear nothing: no marueill. The favor of the part, whereto
they cleave, having cut of them selves from the body, the dispite of the
catholic religion, and hatred of the church, has so blinded their hearts, as
places alleged to the disproufe of their false doctrine being never so
evident, they see not, ne hear not, or rather they seeing see not, Matt. 13.
ne hearing hear not. Verily you must either refuse the balance, which your
self have offered and required for trial of these Articles, which be the
scriptures, examples, councelles, and doctors of antiquity: or, the better
weight of authority sweaing to our side, that is, the truth found in the
ancient doctrine of the catholic church, and not in the mangled dissensions
of the Gospellers: advisedly return, from whence unadvisedly you have
departed, humbly yield to that you have stubbernly kickte against, and embrace
holesomly that, which you have hated damnably.

you call private Mass, within the compass of your syx hundred years after
Christ: That the communion

As for your twelve last Articles, which you put courage and confidence of the
cause, and to seem to the ignorant to have much matter to charge us withal, as
it appears: they report matter (certain excepted) of less importance. Some
of them contain doctrine, true, I grant, but over curiouse, and not most
necessary for the simple people. Some others be through the manner of your
utterance perverted, and in terms drawn from the sense they have been uttered
in by the church. Which by you being denied, might of us also be denied in
regard of the terms they be expressed in, were not a sleight of falsehed,
which might redounde to the prejudice of the truth, therein worthily suspected.
Verily to them all we have said so much, as to sober, quiet and godly wits,
may seem sufficient.

Now this being so, what you mind to do, I know not, what you ought to do,
I know right well. I wish you to do that, which may be to your own and to
the peoples soul health, that being by you and your fellows deceived, depend
of you, to the setting forth of the truth, to the procuring of a godly concord
in Christ's church, and finally, to the glory of God. This may you do, by
forsaking that, which perhaps seems to you truth, and is not: that, which
seems to you learning, and is but a floorishe or vernishe of learnig: that
which seems to you clear light, and is profounde darkness, and by retourning
to the church, where concerning the faith of a christian man, is all truth, and
no deceit, right learning, Joan. 1.
and the very light, even that, which lightneth every man coming into this
world, which is there to be fownde only, and not else where, for as much as
the head is not separated from the body.

O that you would once mind this seriously M. Iuell. As for me, if either
speaking, writing, or expending might further you thereto, I should not spare
tongue nor pen, nor any portion of my necessary things, were it never so
dear. I would gladly power out all together, to help you to atteine that
felicity. But o lord what lettes see I, whereby you are kept from that good!
Shame, wealth of your estate, your worldly acquaintance, beside many others. But
Sir, touching shame, which always irketh those, that be of any generositie of
nature, if you call your better philosophy to counsel, you shall be taught,
not to acco^pte it shameful, to forsake error for love of truth, but rather
wilfully to dwell in error, after that it is plainly detected. As for the
wealth of your estate, which some assure you of, so long as you maineteine that
part: I can not judge so evil of you, but that you think, how fickle and
frail these worldly things be, and how little to be esteemed, in respect of
the heavenly estate, which remains to the obedient children of the church, as
the contrary to the rebels, Apostates, and renegates. Touching your
acquaintance, what shall the familiarity of a few deceived persons stay you
from that felicity, which you shall acheue with the love and friendship of all
good men, of whose good opinion only ryseth fame and renome, Luc. 15.
and also with the reioising of the Angels in heaven?

This your happy change, the better and wiser sort of men will impute to
grace mightily by gods power in you wrought, Genes. 1. 2. Cor. 4.
which sundreth light from darkness, and makes light shine out of darkness.
Neither shall they judge that inconstancy, where is no change in will, but
only in understanding. Where the will remaining one, always bent to the
glory of God, the deceived understanding is by better instruction corrected
and righted: there is not inconstancy to be noted, but amendment to be
praised. Neither shall you in this godly enterprise be alone. Many both of old
time, and of our days, have gone this way, and have broken the yse before
you. Eusebius of Caesarea in Palaestina, Beryllus of Bostra in Arabia, and
Theodoritus of Cyrus in Persie: who forsook haynouse heresies against Christ,
and by grace returned to the catholic faith again. So have done in our time,
Georgius wicelius, Fridericus Staphylus, Franciscus Balduinus, and many mo.

Thus having called to my mind the consyderations, that are like to withholde
you from yelding to the catholic faith, from retourning to the church, and
from performing your promise: I find no bands so strong, to keep you fast in
the chayer of pestilence, which this long time you have sitten in: that through
Gods grace working humility and denial of your self in your heart, whereof I
spoke in my preface, you should not easily loose and be in liberty, where you
might clearly see the light spredde abroad over the whole Church, and epsy the
darkness of the particular sects of your new gospel, which you lived in
before.

But all this notwithstanding, peradventure your heart serves you to stand
stowtly according to the purport of your challenge, in the defense of the
doctrine you have professed, and for which you have obtained a bishoprike,
thinking great skorne, to be removed from the same, by any such means, as
these to you may seem. And now perhaps you enter into meditation with your
self and conference with your brethren, to frame an answer to this treatise,
and by contrary writing to fortify your negatiues. Well may you so do. But to
what purpose, I pray you? Well may you make a smoke and a smooder, to darken
the light for a time, as men of war are wont to do, to work a feate
secretly against their enemies. But that can not long continewe. The smoke will
sone vanishe away, the light of the truth will eftesones appear. Well may you
shut the light out of a few houses, by closing doors and windows, but to
keep away the bright sun from that great City which is set on high upon a
hill, do what ye can, Matt. 5.
therein all your trauaill, your devises and endeavors, shall be vain and
frustrate.

As iron by scowring is not only not consumed, but kept from ruste and
canker, and is made brighter: so the church by the armures and hostility of
heretics is not wounded, but through occasion strengthened, styrred to
defense, and made invincible. When it is opressed, then it ryseth, when it is
invaded, then it ouercometh. When by the adversaries objections it is chekte
and controlled, then it is acquitted and prevails. Wherefore talk, preach,
and write against the doctrine of the church whiles ye will, ye shall but
spurn against the stone, where at ye may break your shynnes and be crushed to
pieces, Matt. 21. Act. 9.
the same not moved. Ye shall but kick against the prick. Ye shall but
torment your own conscience condemned in your own judgment, Tit. 3.
as witting that ye resist the church, and for the life to come encreace the
heap of everlasting damnation. All the reward ye shall win hereby, is the
vain favor of a few light and unstable persons by you deceived. Whom the
blastes of your mutable doctrine, shall move and blow away from Gods floor
the church, Matt. 3.
like chafe, the good and constant people remaining still, like weighty and
sownde wheat.

The arguments and reasons you shall make against the doctrine of the church,
may happily persuade some of the worldly wise, who be fools in Gods judgment,
as the reasons of them, that have commended infamouse matters, Phauorinus.
Synesius. Glaucus apud Platonem. Cornelius Agrippa. Erasmus.
have persuaded some. Of whom one praised the fever quartane, an other
dro^kennes, an other baldnes, an other unrighteousness: and in our time one,
ignorance, and an other foolishnes. Which by the authors has been done only
for an exercise of wits, and rather to the wondering, then corrupting of the
Readers, Would God of all the writings of your sect against the catholic
faith, which be no less beside reason and truth, the intent were no worse, the
danger ensuing no greater. And as for commendation of those unseemly and
unworthy things, those Rhetoricians have not brought good and true reasons,
but only a probability of talk: right so for confirmation of your negative
divinity, and of many new strange and false doctrines, you have no suer
proufes, but shadows, colors, and shows only, that perhaps may dasell
bleare eyes, and deceive the unlearned: but the learned wise, and by any ways
godly wise, will sone contemn the same, For they be assured, how probably so
ever you teach or write, that the church always assisted and prompted by the
holy Ghost the spirit of truth, in points of faith erreth not, and that
against truth already by the same spirit in the universal church taught and
received, no truth can be alleged.

As he is very simple, who, being borne in hand by a Sophister, and driven by
force of sophistical arguments to grant, that he has horns, thinks so in
deed, and therefore puts his hand to his forehed: So who so ever through
your teaching fall from the catholic Church into the errors of our time, from
the streightnes of Christian life, into the carnal liberty of this new
gospel, from devotion into the insensibilitie which we see the people to live
in, from the fear of God, to the desperate contempt of all virtue and goodness:
hereby they show them selves to be such, as have unstable hearts, which be
given over to the lusts of their flesh, which have no delight ne feeling of
God, which like Turks and Epicures seeking only for the commodities and
pleasures of this world, have no regard of the life to come. But the godly
sort, whose hearts be established with grace, who pant and labor to live
after the spirit, continually mortifying their flesh, whose delight is to
serve God, who be kept and holden within the fear of God: though they give
you their hearing, and that of constraint not of will, yet will not they give
you their lyking nor consenting.

Wherefore M. Iuell seeing we have performed that, which you have over boldly
said, we were not able to do: seeing for proof of these Arcicles we have
brought more, then you bare your hearers in hand, we had to bring: seeing you
perceive your self herein to have done more, then stands with learning,
modesty, or good advise: seeing in case of any one clause or sentence for our
part brought, you have with so many protestations promised to yield and to
subscribe unto us: seeing by performing your promise, you may do so much good to
the people and to your self: seeing nothing can be justly alleged for keeping
of you from satisfying your promise, and retourning to the church again: seeing
so great respects both of temporal and of heavenly prefermentes inuit you
and call you from parts and sects, where you remain with most certain
danger of your soul, to the safe port of Christ's church: seeing by so doing,
you should not do that which were singular, but common to you with many others,
men of right good fame and estimation: finally seeing if you shall, as always
for the most part heretics have done, continue in the profession of your
untrue doctrine, and trauaill in setting forth erroneouse treatises for defense
of the same, you shall gaigne thanks of no other, but of the lightest and
worst sort of the people, and persuade none but such as be of that mark: we
trust you will upon mature deliberation, in your sadder years change the
counsel which you lyked in your youth: we trust you will examine better by
learning the new doctrine, which you with many others were drawn unto by swea
of the time, when by course of age you wanted judgment: we trust you will call
back your self from errors and heresies advisedly, which you have
maineteined rashly, and set forth by word and write busyly, and therein assured
your self of the truth confidently. Thus shall your error seem to proceed of
ignorance, not of malice. Thus shall you make some recompense for hurt done.
thus shall you in some degree discharge your self before God and men, thus
shall you be received into the lap of the church again, out of which is no
salvation: whether being restored, you may from hence forth in certain
expectation of the blessed hope, Tit. 2.
lead a life more acceptable to God, to whom be all praise, honor, and
glory, Amen.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES UTTERED Affirmatively, against M. Iuelles Negatiues.
opus operatum, what it is, and whether it remove sin. fol. 174. Hoc
points in the words of consecration. fol. 185.
A TABLE OF THE CHIEF points in these Articles uttered. The number shevvth
the leaf a, the first side, b, the second side of the leaf. etc, notes the
matter further prosecuted in that as follows.
ATTICLE. I.
NO Mass private in it self, but in respect of circumstances. 9. a. The
term Private in respect of the Mass after the sense of the Gospellers,
nevve, and used by Satan. 9. b. In what sense and consideration the Mass
called Private of some Doctors. 9. b. What the Lutherans call Private Mass.
9. b. Private Mass in word, but in deed the sacrifice of the church,
impugned by M. Iuell. 10. a. Proufes for the Mass briefly touched. 10. a. The
chief cause why the Gospellers storm against private Mass. 11. b. Three
essentials of the Mass. 12. b. Number of communicantes, place, time, with
other rites be not of Christ's Institution. 12. b. Why the Sacrament is
called a communion. 14. a. There is a communion between the faithful, though
they be not together. 14. b. Necessity of many communicantes together,
contrary to the liberty of the gospel. 15. a. For mengling water with the
wine in the Sacrament, a place alleged out of Clement. 15. b. Many may
communicate together, not being in one place together. 16. a. etc. Proufes for
private communion, and consequently for private Mass. 17. b. etc. Reservation
of the Sacrament. 19. b. Unclean doings bevvrayed at Martyrs toumbes. 20. b.
Light of the west churches taken from Rome. 21. b. The fathers oftentimes
complain of the peoples forebearing the communion, but no where of the
priests ceasing from offering the Sacrifice. 23. a. The peoples forebearing
the communion, is no cause why the priest should not say Mass. 24. a. Mass
done without a number of communicantes in the same place. 24. b. 25. 26. etc.
A true declaration of Chysostomes place, nullus qui co^municetur. 30. b.
2.
Christ's words drink ye all of this, bind not the laity to the use of the
cup. 33. a. Luther and his offspring does not necessitate communion under both
kinds. 34. a. etc. Lutheres co^fere^ce with the Devil against the Mass. 34.
b Causes moving the church to communicate under one kind. 36. b. The exact
streightnes of certain Gods ordinances may vvhithout offense in cases be
omitted. 37. a. b. etc. Proufes for Communion under one kind. 40. b. 41. etc.
Our lords cup only in certain cases ministered. 46. a. b The administration
of the bread styped or dipte in the cup, unlawful. 46. b. The Canon of
Gelasius guilefully by M. Iuell alleged, truly examined. 47. b. 48. etc.
3.
Church Service in due order disposed in the Greek churches before the latin
churches. 51. a. Usage of church Service in any vulgar barbarouse tongue with
in 600. years after Christ, can not be proved. 52. a All people of the Greek
church understood not the greek Service. 53. b. 54. etc. M. Iuelles
allegations soluted. 57. a. etc. Iustinianes ordinance truly declared. 58. b.
M. Iuell noted of insinseritie and halting. 58. b. 59. a. The number of
la^guages by acco^pte of the antiquity. 59. a. b All people of the Latin
church understood not the Latin Service. 60. a. 61. 62. etc. The antiquity
of the Latin Service in the church of England. 63. a. Cednom the divine poet
of England. 65. b. The first entree of the English Service. 66. a. The place of
S. Paul to the Corinthians makes not for the Service in the English tongue.
66. b. 67. etc. The word Spirit in s. Paul diuersely taken of diverse. 68. a
The benefit of prayer uttered in a tongue not understood. 71. a. Such nations
as use church Service in their own tongue, continevve in schisms. 73. b.
4.
Of syx grovvndes that the Popes Supreme authority stands upon, the first
and chief, Gods ordinance according to the scripture expounded. 75. b. etc.
The 2. Councelles. 77. b. The 3. Edictes of Emperoures. 79. a. The 4. Doctors.
79. b. etc. The 5. Reason. 81. a. The 6. practice of the church syxfolde. 83.
a. etc. 1. Appellations to the Pope. 84. a. Evil lyse of the b. of Rome, ought
not to sever us from the faith of the church of Rome. 85. b. The 2. practice,
corrections from the Pope. 87. a. 3. Confirmations by the Pope. 78. b. 4. The
Popes approving of Councelles. 88. a. 5. Absolutions from the Pope. 89. a 6.
Reconciliations to the Pope. 89. b The Pope above a thousand years since
called Universal bishop, and head of the universal church. 90. b. Peter, and
consequently the Pope Peter's successor called head of the church, both in
terms equivalent, and also expressly. 91. b. etc. Peter and his successor
called head of the church, expressly. 93. a. etc. The Popes Primacie
acknovvleged and confessed by Martin Luther. 94. b.
5.
What occasioned the fathers to use these terms really, substantially,
corporally, etc. 97. b. Berengatius the first Sacramentarie. 98. a. The flesh
and blood of Christ of double consideration 98. b. Bucer confesses the body of
Christ to be in the Sacrament, in deed, and substantially. 100. b.
6.
Christ's being in heaven and in the Sacrament at one time, implies no
contradiction. 105. a. Christ's body in many places at once. 105. b. 106. etc.
Truth confessed by the enemy of truth. 107. b. God vvorking above nature,
distroyeth not nature. 108. b Being in a mystery, what it is. 109. a.
7.
Elevation of the Sacrament proved. 109. b. 110. etc.
8.
What Christian people adore in the Sacrament. 112. b. 113. etc. Contrariety
in the first deuysers of the Nevve Gospel. 115. a. Adoration proved by the
scripture, and that according to the Zuinglians against luther. 115. a. etc.
The term concomitantia, by the Divines profitably devised. 115. b. Adoration
of Christ in the Sacrament avouched by the fathers. 116. b. etc.
9.
Sundry manners of keeping the blessed Sacrament. 121. b. Hanging up of the
Sacrament in a pyxe over the altar is ancient. 122. b.
10.
The remaining of the only Accidents without substance in the Sacrament
depends of the Article of transubstantiation. 124. a. Transubstantiation and
the truth of our lords body and blood avouched. 124. 125. etc.
Transubstantiation taught by the old fathers, and by the Doctors of the Greek
church of late age. 126. 127. Accidents believed of some learned fathers to
remain without substance at the beginning. 127. b.
11.
What the dividing of the Sacrament in three parts signifies. 128. a. The
dividing of the Sacrament in three parts probably thought to be a Tradition of
the Apostles. 128. b. 129. a.
12.
How the fathers are to be understood calling the Sacrament a figure, sign,
token, etc. 130. a. etc. The words, figure, sign, token, remembrance, etc.
exclude not the truth of being. 134. a. 135. etc.
13.
Lydford law used by the Gospellers. 139. a. Plurality of Masses in one
church in one day. 139. a. etc. This word Sacrifice taken for the Mass.
143. b.
14.
Antiquity of Images. 145. a. The sign of the Cross commended to men by Gods
providence. 145. b. Literae Hieroglyphicae. 146. b. Images from the Apostles
time. 147. b. Three causes why Images have been used in the church. 150. a.
Pictura loquens, poema tacens. 150. b. How Images may be worshipped without
offense. 152. a
15.
Three sundry opinions concerning the scriptures to be had in a vulgar tongue.
153. b. Five considerations, why the scriptures are not to be set forth for
all sorts of people to read them without limitation. 154. a. Some through
holiness of life may understand the scriptures without learning. 157. a. The
Gospellers divided into contrary sects. 157. b. Fridericus Staphylus. 158. a.
Protestants whereof so called. 158. b. Protestants divided into xx. sects.
158. b. Valdenses, Adamitae, Begardi, Turelupini, etc. sects. 158. b. A
proclamation of Ferdinando and Elizabeth against the translation and having of
the Bible in the Spanish tongue. 159. a. What parts of the scriptures perteine
to the people to know. 159. a. No translation of the Bible into any vulgar
tongue ever allowed by public authority of the church. 159. b. That S. Hierom
translated the whole Bible into the Dalmatike tongue, it seems not
sufficiently proved. 159. b. Vlphilas an Arian bishop first invented letters
for the Goths, and translated the Bible into their tongue, and brought them to
the heresy of the Arians, moved through ambition. 159. b. Five nations of five
sundry tongues confessed Christ in this Island in Bedes time. and to them all the
Latin tongue was common for study and reading of the scriptures. 160. a
16.
The manner of pronouncing the Consecration in the Greek and Latin churches
diverse. 161. b For what cause the Canon is pronounced secretly in the West
church, after the mind of Carolus Magnus. 163. a. What persons the primitive
church excluded from presence of the Sacrament. 163. b.
17.
Threefold oblation of Christ. 164. b. Proufes for the oblation of Christ to
his father in the daily Sacrifice of the church out of the scriptures. 165. b.
Testimonies of the fathers alleging scripture for this oblation of Christ to
his father. 166. 167. etc. The oblatio^ of Christ in the Mass and that in the
supper, one and the same, and to what intent. 167. b. The oblation spoken of
by Malachie must be understood of the daily sacrifice of the church only.
168. b. A manifest place for the priests offering up of Christ to his father
out of S. Cyprian. 169. a. The same proved by sundry ancient fathers. 170.
etc.
18.
The priest receives not the Sacrament for an other. 172. a Proufes for the
oblation of the body and blood of Christ to be done for others, then for the
priest only that offers or says Mass. 172. b. For what persons, and
what things, Mass is said, that holy sacrifice offered, and prayers made,
proufes out of Chrysostom, Ambrose, Gregory, Clement. 172. 173.
19.
What applies the priest unto us in the Mass. 173. b. Of what strength
prayer is, made at the Mass. 174. a.
20.
Christ only remoueth sin. 174. b. How the Mass is vaileable, ex opere
operato. 174. b. Mass taken two way. 175. a. How, and in what sense the
Mass is a Sacrifice propitiatory. 175. a. b. In what degree the Mass is
vaileable ex opere operantis, and may be called a sacrifice propitiatory. 176.
a. Sundry Sacrifices propitiatory in some degree. 176. a.
21.
Sacrament two vvayes taken. 176. b. In what sense the Sacrament called lord
and God. 179. a. Proufes out of the fathers for calling the Sacrament lord and
God. 179. 180. etc. A holesom lesson touching the blessed Sacrament, out of S.
Bernard. 181. a. The inseparabilitie of both Christ's natures in unity of
person duly considered, takes away occasion of many vile and wicked scoffs
and blasphemies against the b. Sacrament. 181. b.
2.
The doctrine of the Sacrament within these last six hundred years more amply,
clearly, and subtely handled, then before in quiet times, to meet with the
objections of heretics. 182. b. The doctrine of the church concerning the
remaining of Christ's body in the Sacrament. 183. a. Reservation of the Sa
cramen 183. b.
23.
M. Iuell contrarieth him self. 184. a. The body of Christ susteineth no
violence, injury ne villainy. 184. b. When a Mouse eats the Sacrament,
either the nature of bread retourneth the body of our lord done away, or the
accide^tes supply the effects of the substance. 184. b
24.
The benefit of the Geneuian communion. 185. b.
25.
The bread and wine by consecration changed into an other more excellent
substance, leave to be, and therefore neither be they the Sacraments of the
body and blood of Christ. 186. a. That the forms of bread and wine remaining
be the Sacraments, it follows by sequel of reason. 186. a. Where manifest
scripture wants, sequel of reason used by S. Basile against heretics. 186.
a.
26.
Christ's body is in the Sacrament, it lies not there hidden underneath it.
neither is it there, as in a place, but after manner unspeakable, and to God
only known. 187. a.
Liber hic Anglicano idiomate conscriptus ab eximio Doctore Theologo, Anglo. D.
Thoma Hardingo, examinatus est diligenter a viris doctis and probis Anglicani
idiomatis peritis. Qui mihi attestati sunt, catholicam fidem and religionem,
quae grauissime in Anglia oppugnatur hac tempestate, solid, erudite and
streuue in eo propugnari, and magnum fructum popularibus Angliae hominibus
allaturum.

Ita attestor Iudocus Tiletanus Doctor Theologus and Praepositus Walcurien.
haereticae prauitatis inquisitor.


