THE GREAT brag and challenge of M. Champion a Jesuit, co^monlye called
Edmunde Campion, latelye arrived in England, contayninge nine articles here
seuerallye laid down, directed by him to the Lords of the Counsel, confuted
and answered by Meredith Hanmer, M. of Art, and Student in Divinity.

INPRINTED, at London in Fletstreate nere unto Sayncte Dunstons Church by
Thomas Marsh. 1581.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABL SIR THOMAS Bromley Knight lord Chaunceler of England*
William L. Burleigh, and Lord Treasorer, Rob, ert* Earl of Leicester, Edward,
Earl of Lyncolne with the rest of her Maiestyes most honorable Counsel,
continuance of health, increase of honor, and all Heavenly wisdom.
WHereas (Right Honorable) there came lately into my hands an insole^t brag
or challe^ge containing nine points, or articles, and subscribed by M.
Champion a Jesuit and (as he calls himself) a Priest of the Catholic
faith, latelye arrived here in England, and the same directed vnto-your
Honors by way of humble suit and petition: I thought it my duty under your
Lordships favor, and correction, to peruse the same, to scanne his drift, and
to answer his bragges and challenge, as far forth as it concerns my
degree, and the common weal of the Clergy of England. His petition is to your
honors for favor, his quarrel is to the Clergy for Religion, and his drift
(as farforth, as yet, it may be perceived) is to seduce her Maiestyes loving
and faithful Subjects, with show of Catholic Priesthood and profession.
Unto your honors he directed the Challenge to be received: and unto your
honors with all humility I send it answered submitting my self and the whole
to your wisdoms* and favorable interpretations. It is no new devise, but an
old practice of Satan, thus to send forth his wicked spirits, to sow tares
among the wheat, who waiting all opportunity, not daring in the clear light and
broad day to work his feats, does it by stelth, and in the night season, when
men sleep in the security of Sin* wherefore the King rules, the Priest
prays, the husbandman ploweth, every one in his calling, is to serve the
Lord, and that in watchfulnes. My self as the simplest, together with my
brethren of the Clergy we (I say) ioyntlye are greatly bound to render unto
God hearty thanks, and praises, for the virtuous, peaceable, and prosperous
reign of our soueraygne Lady the Queen's* majesty, in whose blessedness we are
blessed, in whose peace we enjoy quietness, and of whose virtue and piety we are
partakers. Her temperall swerd aduaunceth the swerd of the Spirit, which is
the word of God, and the messengers thereof are shielded under her shadow and
countenance. As Daniell said of his Lord and Master the King, so say we
daily and hourly of our Lady and Mistres the Queen: O noble Queen live for
ever. Secondlye we bless God for your honors, and instantly crave the
continuance of your health, with the increase of all heavenly knowledge in your
calling to countenance under her Majesty the preaching of Gods word, to
command the buildinge of his church, and to root out those that go about to
destroy the vineyarde of the Lord. And presently touching the challenge of this
bragging Champion, in the name of my fellow laborers, and brethren of the
Clergy: I refer the determination thereof unto your Lordships* so that if you
grant it either privately or publicly, he shall be disputed withal. His
brag is but bumbast, their religion is in show not in substance, they have
words and not truth. I will not presume to crave license for him, but heartily
wish with the Apostle, that they were cut of which molest us, and the quiet
state of the Church of England. Thirdly in brotherly love I am to desire of her
Majesty's loving subjects, not lightly to credit such insole^t brags: not
unadvisedly to receive such wandrers from Rome: but in the fear of God to
behold, what is and has been said for the truth, and to cleave fast unto the
word of God. And so I cease further to trouble your Lordships, but with
remembrance of my humble duty I pray unto the lord long to bless and preserve
your Honors.

From London the second of January. 1580. Your L. most humble at commandment
Meredith Hanmer.

TO M. CHAMPION THE Challenger, Meredith Hanmer the Answerer sends greetinge.
YOur scroles of less credit (in mine opinion) the^ sybilles leaves lately
flowen abroad, fell upon an hollow Reed and sounded the contents and
secrecy thereof: Antichrist Romans Midas.
Rex Midas habet aures Asininas. We know you well enough, and your profession
better. We see by your method how ye handle your matter: we gather by your
Pilgrimage your profit in study. Stultus populus quaerit Romam. I would wish
ye dealte plainly, Fond people fleet to Rome
cast of the Popes pelte, discover the son of Semiramis who was a natural I
would hear not a Romanist, but an Englishman speak. Your person in brotherly
love I am to embrace, but the dregs of idolatrye you drank at Rome, I
utterly deteste. Leave of that which your own friends will mislyke in you,
put on modestye, come not to confute, but to be confirmed, and when ye have
said all, confess: Nihil est iam dictum quod non sit dictum prius. Proceed
not in wilfulnes, Nothing now said that has not been already spoken.
it is hard to kick against the prick, the truth is great and it preuayleth
if ye will struggle in the limetwigge of follye, you will be the further from
flying: if ye swim against the stream, ye shall but labor in vain* if ye
play the Champion and thus challenge all the Protestants, yt passes your
strength, ye must needs fall* you know: ne Hercules contra duos* and yet
Champion against all? No not Hercules against two.
if it would please ye to construe these few lives together with mine
answer, in the better part, I shall have the better cause to like of you, if
otherwise, well I may take thought, but it shall grieve me not a Jot: if ye
have license to dispute ye shall be disputed withal: if ye write, ye shall be
answered: If ye recant ye shall be joyfully received.

VALE.
M. Hanmer the aunswerer unto the Christian Reader.
THe means that Satan uses to deceive Gods people are infinite (good
christian Reader) his illusions are strong, his chain has many linkes and
runs to great length. he transformeth himself to an Angel of Light, and
al to delude the simple christians. His power is over the children of
unbelief, his kingdom wide and his subjects many. An Egyptian Sorcerer
drevv after him (as Luke writes) four thousand Jews (as Josephus says)
thirty thousand: Act. 21. Joseph. bell. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 12. Eusebius. ecel. hist.
lib. 4. cap. 6*
Barchochebas calling himself a stare, had (as Eusebius writes) fiftye
thousand followers: There are heathens and infidels, that cannot be numbered:
The number of Turks and Saracens is in finite: the Arrians deceived thousands
and the Church of Rome at this day with the golden cup of idolatry and
abomination, makes drunk the inhabitants of the earrh* And whereas these
Romanistes of a long time having received honor, reverence, and good opinion,
because of their holy orders, now being bewrayed, and stripped of this
pharisaicall show and counterfaite weed, least their kingdom should fall,
they have found out a new order, and society, commonly called of Jesuits,
Eusebius. Ecel. hist. lib. 5. cap. 13. lib. 7. cap. 30.
as the last refuge and only shift to uphold their ruinous walls. Montanus
with his prophetisses sent disciples to sow his heresye throughout Asia and
Phrygia. Manes chose twelve Apostles, and sent the^ throughout Persia* with the
Eastern parts of the world* Sleidan lib. 10
The Family of Love have their prophets and disciples. The Anabaptists out of
Munster the head city of Westphalia, sent abroad (as Sleidan reports) in
the evening 28. Apostles. And the Pope has lately about 40. years past
confirmed the sect of Jesuits, and sends the^ abroad in the evening of the
world with the Anabaptists, and in the night season, with the enemy of God and
man, to sow tares among the wheat. And to further the credit of this new found
order they father the same upon Jesus, and call themselves Jesuits, having
their original of one Ignatius a maimed Souldioure, as is declared at large in
the answer. August. de haeres. Epiphan. haeres. 61.
There were heretics called Angelici, who worshipped Angels: others called
Apostolici arrogating in great pride, that title unto themselves: others
Humiliati, croaching fryiers, that pretended humility: others called Iesuati,
and they the veriest varlets of all: others of the familye of Love, and as they
affirm deifyed in God. The Carpocratian heretics said, they were like unto
Jesus, Irenaeus^ lib. 1 cap. 24.
and excelled the Apostles. The Massilian heretics called also Euchitae being
corrected for their lewdnes called them selves Martyrianos, yet (says
Epiphanius) for all their holiness, Theodoret. eccle. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11.
they worshipped the devil and were called Sataniani. If ye called any of the^
Christ, a Patriarch, a Prophet, or an Angel, they said they were so. But as
touching this late order of Jesuits, August. de haeres.
this society passes all other sects in Hypocrisy and outward show of
holiness. In weed monkish frierish, priestly and Pharisaicall: in discipline
austere, much like the Heretics Flagellefiers, Epiphan. haeres, 80.
or Circumcellions, or Baals priests, whipping and launcing themselves: in
words humble, lowlye, dowking, and ready to kiss your foot, but in heart
proud, arrogant, bragging and bosting as this Jesuit does, and challenging the
combat with countries and kingdoms. I will at this present no more but warn
thee: Beware of false Prophets: Math. 7 Math. 10.
we are commanded to be wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves. Peruse the
whole, and try the spirits: give the praise unto God, let the pains be mine,
and the profit thine own.

Farewell.
M. Champion, a Jesuit lately arrived here in England has laid down as
follows: by way of chall^ng.
RIght Honorable whereas I have come out of Germany and Boh^^me land, being sent
by my superiors and adventured my self, into this realm, my dear country
for the glory of God and benefit of souls: I thought it good little enough, in
this busy, watchful and suspicious work, I should either sooner or later be
intercepted and stopped of my course. Wherefore providing for all doubt, and
incertenties which may soon come o^ me when God shall happily deliver my body
into durence: I suppose it needful to put this writing in a readiness,
desiring your L. to geeue it the reading and to know my cause. Thus doing I
trust I shall ease you of your labor* for that which otherwise you must have
sought by practice of Wit. I do now lay into your hands my plain
confession. And to thentent this whole matter may be conceived in order and so
the better understood and remembered, I make hereof nine poyncts, or articles,
directly, truly and resolutely opening my full enterprice and purpose.

The answer.
IT should appear by your preamble and entrance that your person were not
lightly to be regarded, neither your message to be rejected, neither your
travel to be vnco^sidered: seeing that mean personages may not be acquainted
with your arrival, neither saluted in your style. You begin with Right
honorable, as one sent in Embassage from some great state, not vouchsafing the
presence of the meaner sort, before you have accomplished your intent with ye
superiors, and yet withdraw your self, that neither the one nor the other shall
view your person, but from hand to hand, and in hucker mucker, receive in
scrowles and torn papers, your drift and enterprise. By your Preface I gather
five things. First to whom you direct these your scattered devises, to the
right honorable, her Majesty's most noble Cou^sailers, the Pieres, and state
of ye Realm. Weygh with your self before ye presume further they are no
Babes. Secondly I perceive whence ye come, you traueled Germany, passed through
Bohoemia, rested at Rome, took counsel of your Provost, obeyed your Superior,
took your voyage northwarde, and arrived in England. In few words, out of
England ye went, and into England ye are come again: you are welcome home.
Thirdly, I gather your dryft and purpose is, as ye say, to set forth Gods
glory, to win erring and wandering souls: if you mean plainly, none better
welcome. For the harvest is great and the laborers fevve. Fourthly, me
thinks ye bewraye your self, Math. 9.
where you confess this your enterprise to appertain to a busy body, the
travel to require vigilance and the work to be suspicious, mistrusting what
will befall to your person, the peril and danger which hereby ye may incur
Fifthly, not forgettinge ye slye conueyaunce of Rhetorical insinuations* you
would subtlely creep into ye favor of your Readers, by protesti^g an open
show of plain, sincere, and unfeigned ^e^^ing, by promising to co^triue into
order and method for ease and memories sake ye principal poincts of your drift,
and purpose. This is ye sin of your preface ye which I thought good thus to
repeat, yt ye may perceive we find you, and yt the reader be not over
hastily carried away with your fair show and gloriouse flourish. Substance as
yet I find not, longer to stay my pe^ne. But in ye poincts following,
delivered by your self in their several numbers, I purpose with Gods help,
mildly and brotherly to confer with you, both being of one country, fellow
students sometime in the famous Uniuersity of Oxenford, professor^ (as you
would bear us in hand) of one faith, though varyinge in form and manner:
Fellow Laborers (as you would make us believe) in the Uineyard of Christ
Jesus, planting virtue, plucking up vice, graffing the penitent, croppinge of,
the fruictlesse and withering branches, drying with comfort the dropping eyes
of the sorrowful and watering with the dew of Gods word the dry consciences of
the ignorant. Whatsoever I lay down, take before hand my meaning, that
nothing be spoken neither co^strued of you in the worse sense, as derogating
from your study, blemishing of your person, nor diminishinge of your credit:
but all in the Zeal of Gods cause in the defense of my Princes proceedings, in
the quarrel of my Country, and in the love of my dear brethren, and that with
as much modesty as lies in me. Let the spirits be tried. Helia^ being
commanded to wait the Lords coming on ye Mount, 3. Reg. 19.
as the story says: The Lord went over and a great mighty wind* shauing the
Mountains and renting the Rocks, but the Lord was not in the Wynd: after the
Wynd came there an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake: and
after the Earthquake there ca^e a Fire, but the Lord was not in the Fire: and
after the fire there came a still, soft, or mylde hissing, and there was the
Lord. My mind I doubt not but you perceive, and now to ye poyncts in order as
you have placed them.

The Jesuit.
I Confess that I am (albeit unworthy) a Priest of the Catholic church, and
through the great mercy of God vowed now this eight years, into the Society of
Jesus, and thereby have taken upon me a special kind of warrefare under the
Banner of obedience, and eke resigned all my interest, and possibility of
wealth, honor and pleasure with other worldly Felicities.

The answer.
IN these words ye give us to understand, your ^yr^e, your Order, your state,
and condition. You begin with Confiteor, yielding a show of modesty, by
confessinge your unworthiness. The (...) infer a vehement suspicion, and lest
that your reader should long stand in suspe^ce, you display your banner and
uncover your nakedness. We find you a Priest: no ^orce. Of the Catholic
church: not amiss if it be true. A Jesuit, as you write Of the Society of
Jesus.

You bewray your self, when as under the fair name of Jesus you have together
with your accomplices lately found out a fond order never heard of, the space of
fifteen hundred and odd years after Christ. Here I am to warn my Brethren
and Country men, that they take heed they be not deceived by means of you,
and such as you are, entitli^g your self a Priest of the Catholic faith, and
for the further aduau^cement of your credit, to father your fellowship upon
Jesus. We know that Waspes have Honye Combs as well as Bees: wicked men have
companies like to the Church of God: your brethren of the societye or Family of
Love have a Glorious title* but we find them a detestable sect of Heretics, of
like antiquity with your order they are not straight way the people of God,
which are called the people of God, Romans 9.
neither be they all Israelites as many as are come of Israel, the Father. The
Arrians were Heretics, yet bragged, Socrat.
that they alone were Catholics calling the true professors, Ambrosians,
Athanasians, Ioha^nits, as you do now call the professors of the Gospel,
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists etc. Nestorius ye Heretic (sayith Theodoret)
cloked his falsehoode with the color of truth. Theodoret.
Ebion being in opinion a Samaritane, yet says Epiphanius, Epiphan haeres. 30.
would he be called a Christian. The Turks coming by lineall descent of Agar
the bondwoman, yet says Sozomenus, Sozom. eccl. hist. lib. 6. cap. 38.
will they be called Saracens of Sara, Abraham's true and lawful wife. The
Spirit in the Revelation reports of some, how they call themselves Jews,
yet testifyeth he, they are the Synagoge of Satan. The Pharisees told Christ,
Apocalyp. 2. John. 8.
they had Abraham to their father: yet affyrmeth Christ, they were of their
father the Devil. Look unto your self, that ye be not in a wrong box, for
assure your self, unless we find your doctrine Catholic, we will not allow
of your title. You bleare the eyes of ye simple with mouthing the Church, the
Catholic Church, our holy mother the Church: Not unlike the vain guyse of
Hipocriticall professors in the time of Jeremy, Ierem. 7
who had in their mouths, The Temple of the Lord The Temple of the Lord, but
in their hearts the idol grove of the devil. you are therein to be aduysed
with them: trust not in false lying words, saying: (...) is the temple of the
Lord etc. they shall not avail you. Here you tell us of your order, a fair
show without, but a foul shame when the secrecy thereof is opened. It is a new
order, new masters* new men, new laws, new leaders, the devil is an old
knave, and now he has put on a new coat: we are forewarned that if an Angel
from Heaven should bring unto us any other Gospel, any other Christ or
christian order, Galat. 1
the^ we have already received, we should shun him Bevvare of false Prophets
(says Christ) for many vvil come in my name, saying: I am Christ (or as you
say of the society of Jesus) and deceive many if any say unto you, Math 7.
Math. 24. Marc. 13. Luc. 21
here is Christ (in this order or that order) believe them not. If they say
unto you: behold, he is in the desert (in this Cell or yt Cell, in this rock
or that rock, in this vale, or that vale) go not after them. or if they say,
behold, he is in the secret closet or inner chamber, (in City, Tower, Temple,
Chapel, I Will, Altar, Shryne etc.) believe them not. And now with your patience,
I will blaze the arms of your order, the antiquitye of your house, the
original of your line, and progress of your society, whom your selves call
Jesuits, the Printer shall play the crier, and publish the same (if ye please in
our native soil and sweet country of England) to the knowledge of ye
posterity, and yet for more indifferency let an other speak for us both. There
was (says Martinus Che^nizius) a certain Soldier by name Ignatius Layola (as
Pantaleon writes) Ca^taber, a spaniard of Biskay who being at ye siege,
Martin. Chemnizius exam. council. Trident in praefat.
of Pompeiopolis was shot through both shankes with a Gunne, and returning
into his country made away with that little which he had, and determined with
himself the^ceforth to lead a straict and austere kind of life: Pa^tal.
Chronograph,
and consideringe with himself that Learning and knowledge auayled much to
further his enterprise and purpose, he got him to Paris, where he studied (as
it is reported) the space of ten years, and linked unto him, in that space,
ten associats or companions of his new-founde order and devised trade of life.
At the tenth years end with his ten co^panio^s he returned into Spain in
the year of our Lord 1536. The year followinge, to wit: 1537. they came to
Rome, craving the Popes Bull a faculty to go a pilgrimage to Jerusalem there to
visit (as they signified) ye holy places. They took their voyage to Venice,
and then as stories record, the Turks warred with the Venetians, and
trauaylinge was so dangerous, that they were disappoynted of their journey.
Immediatlye they alter their minds and determine to give them selves to
preaching. Whereupon the Popes Legate, oyled after the Romish manner, and
shore Priests seven of them, and gave them license freely and in all places to
preach, to hear confession, and to minister the Sacraments. In the year 1540.
through the help of Cardinal Contarenus they made suit unto Pope Paulus 3.
that, that order of theirs might by his authority be confirmed. Paulus 3.
granted their request ratifyed their order, with this prouiso, that the number
of their society exceeded not 60. This Pope afterward being given to
understand how avayleable this order was for the vpholdinge of his kingdom,
and the repayring of the ruinous walls of his pontifical authority, esteemed
of this society as excelling all others, so that in the year 1543. he decreed,
yt the society of Jesus, should not be tied to any one place of abode, neither
limited to any certain number of brethren. So far, Mart. Che^nizius. To be
short, they prevailed so much yt they got them a place at Rome, where (as this
Pilgreme confesses) their Provost is always resident, and sends abrod his
Pupills, as I may justly say to deceive the people of God. Lastly, after ye
Ignatius, and Cardinal Moronius, had co^sulted together, means was found that
in the year 1553. there was a College builded at Rome for the trayning up of
youth to go abroad to seduce the Inhabitaunts of the earth. Now sir will it
please you to behold your Coat. The first of your gentry was Ignatius Layola
the creeple, he standing under Pompeiopolis tower geues the Pellet out of his
tail: the supporters be two Cardinals: your Crest is a shaue^ crown: your
prerogatives and royalties (if you may be believed) are great: your lyberties
reach far, ye may go whither ye will you being such a man, as ye say: Of the
Sosciety of Jesus, why hide ye your self in hucker mucker? Why come ye not
forth? why repair you not to ye temple and sit among ye Doctors? but as
touching your order, I see ye fulfilled which long ago has been foretold to
happen in the latter days, concerning Teachers and Hearers. Men have itching
ears, 2. Timoth. 3.
endeavoring to procure themselves teachers after their fond humors. Men are
high minded, self willed, 2. Timoth. 4.
lovers of them selves, being wedde to their own ways and devises, leaving ye
law of God, Math. 15.
and following after the traditions of men. What moved you to forsake your
native Soil, and the famous Uniuersities of England, florishinge with all
kind of good litterature? the scriptures are in this land lernedly expounded:
the fathers alleged: the cou^cells examined: the hystories divine, and
profane, moral, and natural, thoroughly perused: ye laws Civil, Canon,
Statute, and temperal diligently scanned: justice is put in ure: and yt which
confirms the right usage of all ye premises, God has blessed this Land with
peace these many years. Blessed be his name therefore. I hope ye are come home
to taste with us, Psalm. 33.
how svveete the Lord is. But this long time you have neglected al ye
aforesaid, and whereas there are many orders and sects under Abadon King of
Locustes as Mo^ckes, Apocalyp. 9.
Anachoretes, Eremits, Friars, Carmelits, the order of Basil, Augustine,
Benedict, Dominike, Frauncis, Ord^ Cluntace^sium, Grandimontensium, Volaterran.
Anthropolog. lib. 21.
Carthusiensium, Cisterciensium, Clarevallensium, Praemonstratensium,
Camaldulensium, vallis vmbrosae, humiliaetorum, Guilielmitarum, seruorum beatae
Mariae, Sanctae Brigittae, Coelestinorum, Canonicorum regularium, montis
^liueti, Militum sancti Iohannis Baptistae, Templarorium, Sanctae Mariae
Teutonicoru^, sancti Iacobi, de Calatraue, militum Jesus Christi, Militu^
Alcant^rae, de rede^ptione captiuoru^, monte^siae, sancti Sepulchri, and
infinite other Locusts, having their original, success, and confirmation, by
southsaying, coniuring, dreams, visions, fantasies, lies, illusions and feigned
Miracles: you for novelties sake have found out a new rule, and ye lousiest
order of all. They had some color, either they fathered their invention upon
the virgin Mary, or upon some saint. You addict your self to a maimed
soldier, and bring forth unto us an haulting religion. It should appear you
repose therein holiness. Deceive no longer your self, go not about to delude
Gods People, and her Majesty's loving and obedient Subjects It is neither the
place, nor the habit, that makes a man the holier. Gregory says: Gregor. in
Ezech. lib. 1. Homil. 9.
Si desit spiritus no^ adiuuat locus etc. If the spirit be wanting the place
helps not. Lot was holy in Sodom, yet sinned he in the Mount. And that the
places guard not the minds, let our great graundfather Adam testify for he fell
in Paradise* For if the place could have succored, Satan had not fallen from
Heaven. The same words in manner has Ambrose. Jerome also writes: Non
sanctorum filij sunt, Did. 40. cap. Non est.
qui tenent loca sanctoru^. They are not the sons of Saints which enjoy the
rowme of Saints. Chrysostom tells us: Chrysostom. in Math. homil. 43.
No^ locus sanctificat hominem, sed homo sanctificat locum, the place makes
not the man holy, but the man makes the place holy. Again. Gregory says: Non
loca vel ordines, creatori nostro nos proximos faciunt. Did. 40. cap. Non loca.
It is not the places nor the orders that makes us nearer or more acceptable
unto God our Creator. It was Symmachus, that poisoned the streams which you
dranck of, where he says of the Pope: Si desint bona acquisita per meritum,
Ibidem cap. Non no^*
sufficient quae a loci praedecessore praestantur. If there want good things
gotten by his own Merittes, the good things which he has gotten of his
Predecessor are sufficient. Here the treasor house of the church, and the
merit Cell of orders, Munkry, fratry, and societies is established. In the
judgment of this Pope, as it also gathered by the gloss, Gloss. ad cap. Non
nos.
Peter has granted his Successors (vt essent haeredes bonitatis suae) that
they should be heirs of his virtue and worthynes. Again: Gloss. ad cap. sic
nos. did. 19.
Papa Sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra, the Pope receaueth holiness of his Chair.
Pontifical. in benedic: ad vest. sacerdo^.
In hallowinge the Priests vestiments ye say: that thy Priests wearing this
holy vesture, may deserve to be shielded and defended from all assaults, and
temptations of the wicked spirits.

Pestilent is that opinion of Thomas of Aquine, who says that the wearing of
Frauncis or Dominickes cowle, has power to remove sin, as well as the
sacrament of baptism. Alphons. aduer. Haeres. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Alphonsus de Castro a Minorit reports, that in his hearing, a certain
Thomist preached: Whosoever forsakes the judgment of Thomas of Aquine, must
be taken as suspected of Heresy. Here is a dilemma. Either put no holiness
therein and so follow no choice of order: or else put holiness therein, and
therefore according unto the premises you are justly to be condemned. This
supersticious Opinion of your fantastical orders, Sleidan. lib. 12.
has be witched not only mean Personages, but also great Princes. For
Franciscus Marquis of Mantua, ye second of that name, Albertus Pius Prince of
Zeugitana lying at Paris, and Christophorus Longolius yt great Clerk buried at
Padua, charged their executors, to bury the^ in Saint Francis Weed. They
hoped (says the Story) to obtain Remission of sin, if they were buried in
a graye Friars Coat. It appears unto ye World how shameful and vile was
the romish Religion in those days. For men were led into that palpable
ignorance and blindness that to be buried in Muncke, or Friars Weed was
thought enough to bring a man to eternal Life. These your devised dreams do
naught else, but lead to the Devil, and damn as many as drinck of your Cup.

Chrysostom exclaimeth against you, and your Pharisaicall sects. O the
wickedness hereof, Crysost. in Math. Homil. 43.
(says he) they will shevve more holiness in their apparel, then in the body
of Christ etc. that he, which despayreth in Gods mercy, should put his trust
in the garment of a man. The ancient council of Gangra has decreed: Council.
Gangrens. cap. 12.
Si quis virorum putauerit, sancto proposito, id est, continentiae conuenire,
vt pallio vtatur tanquam ex eo iustitiam habiturus etc. Anathema sit. If any
man think it agreeable to his holy purpose, to wit, of co^tinent life, to
wear a cloak, as though thereby he were to have righteousness etc. let him be
accursed. And look what is here spoken of the cloak, may be understood of
other habits and garments. Many learned and Godly men, from time to time, have
lamented the miserable state of the Church, seeing the infinite number that in
show profess religion, the diversity of orders, their varing in service, their
addictyng unto Saynctes, seruinge as it is written, rather the Creature then
then the Creator. Romans 1.
In this respect the complaynt is made: My people (says the Lord) have done
two euilles. They have forsaken me the well of the water of life, and dug
them pittes, Jerome. 2.
yea vile and broken pittes that hold no water. Kingdoms have been bepestred
with these swarms of locusts, eating the fat of the earth, and making as it
were heaven of this world, Anno. 1279. there was a council summoned at Lions
where the pope being present, order was taken for the suppressing of Friars and
religious me^, that thenceforth there should but only four orders be received
About the year 1392. Henry Crumpe an Irishman wrote a great volume: contra
religiosos mendica^tes. Richard Fitz Rafe. Archbishop of Armach. wrote xvi.
Books, De Religios. domib. capit. Ne nimia.
contra fratres mendicantes. Innocentius. 3. decreed: Lest that the overmuch
diversity of orders in religion, bring great confusion into the church of God,
we straightly forbid, that none henceforth do invent a nevve order: but
whosoever vill vow or profess, let him take one of the orders allowed.

I will not presentlye stand longer in recitinge either grave fathers, or
learned men, who from time to time, misliked not only with the varying orders
of Munkery and Fratrye, but also with the vain and unconstant heads of the
deuysers and founders thereof. Your Cannon law lays down, what opinion we
should conceive of you and such as you are in so doing: quisquis co^temptis
hijs cum quibus viuit, Did. 41. cap. clericus.
Lautiora sibi, vel austeriora prae caeteris indumenta, vel alimenta quaerit,
aut inte^perans sui, aut superstitiosus est. Whosoever dispisinge his ordinary
trade of living procures unto himself beyond others a more delicate or a
more austere kind of raiment, or diet, he is either intemperate or
superstitious. Now I come to tender your state and condition where ye say that:
ye have resigned your interest and possibillity of wealth, honor and
pleasure, with other vvorldly felicityes. Have you sold your annuitye? but ye
made not the buyer priuye unto your desperate enterprise. Have ye done away
your possibility? why did ye so? ye might have been a bishop: you would make us
peradventure believe: you care not for preferment, no more then Theatinus the
Jesuit, who had vowed as well as you, but played the egregious hypocrite, Ioh.
Balaeus Anglic. script. Centur. 8.
he pleaded poverty, but practiced the fillyng of the poke. quam secta^ (says
Caelius) postea deseruit, cum quod venabatur accepisset. which order he
afterward forsook, who he had gotten that which he gaped for. He found
means to be Cardinal, and afterward Pope. When he should go to Rome to be
stalled in his Pontificalibus his brethren the begginge Jesuits asked him
whither he went, his answer was, as Christ sometimes answered his
disciples: Ioh. 1^.
vvhither I go, thither cannot ye come: meaning that he went to be Pope, that
he would play the Jesuit no more, and that they should go a ^^ging about
the Country such is the holiness of your societye in renouncinge the
possibilitye of worldly preferment.

The Jesuit.
AT the voice of our general Provost which is to me a vvarrant from Heaven,
and an oracle from Christ, I took my voyage from Prage to Rome where our said
Father General is alvvaye resident, and from Rome to England, as I might and
would have gone ioyouslye into any part of Christendom or heathens had I
been thereunto assigned.

The Aunsweare.
BY your words I gather first your obedience to your general Provost.
Secondlye your affiance and opinion of him and his auctority, being as ye say:
a vvarrant to you from heaven, and an oracle from Christ. Thirdly your
pilgrimage from Prage to Rome, from Rome to England. Touching your obedience
and tyinge your self to that order and trade of life (being an Englishma^) to
a foreign and a stranger (whom ye call your Provost) enemy to god, as we
find by examininge your religion, and as it were a sworn aduersarye to our
soueraygne Lady, the Queens majesty the Crown and Dignity (in yt he se^deth
such pilgrims as rebellious skoutes into her Dominions) what scripture have ye
for your wara^t? ye are commanded to give unto Caesar that which is due unto
Caesar, Math 22. Romans 13*
and unto God, that which is Gods: tribute to vvho^ tribute belongs custom
to whom custom belongs: fear to whom fear belongs, and honor to vvho^
honor belongs. ^* Pet. 2 Romans 13.
Again: Fear God, honor the King. Again: Let every Soul be subject unto the
higher Powers. Paul means not here your subjection either to Pope or
Provost, and so forget your duty to your Prince. Will ye be tried by Peter?
be ye subject (says he) unto all manner ordinance of men, ^ Pet. 2.
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the chief head,
either unto rulers as unto the^ that are sent by him. Hereupon Chrysostom,
that the Apostle shows, quod ista imperentur omnibus, and Sacerdotibus, and
Monachis, Chysost in. 13. Romans homil. 23.
no^ solum secularibus. That these ordinances have a^tority over all, both
Priests, and Moncks, not only over seculer, and lay persons. Again says he,
be subject, (etiam si Apostolus sit, si Euangelista, si Propheta, Ibidem.
sieve quisquis tandem fueris) yea if thou be an Apostle, if thou be an
Evangelist, if thou be a Prophet, ye whosoever thou be. and again, least you
should think this any prejudice to Christian order, he says: Neque enim
pietatem, subuertit ista subiectio* neither does this obedience (to your
Prince) overthrow piety or religion. He asks the question: seeing then thou
may have a Prince that commends thy well doing, and furthereth thine
affairs, why becomest thou not obedient? lastly he preuenteth an objection,
which is most commonly rise in the mouths of Romish Rebels, saying: I
will in no wise hear thee say, that oftentimes the Prince abuses his
authority, but behold thou the goodlines or decency of this ordinance, and
thou shall see the great wisdom of him that ordained it from the beginning.
The Apostle lays before us the peril of disobedience saying: They verily
which resist, Romans 13.
purchase unto themselves damnation. Notwithstanding all the premises and the
strayct injunctions of ye holy Ghost, you have left your native soil,
neglected your obedience unto the truth of Gods word, and forgotten your
loyalty and subjection unto her Royal majesty, and her godly proceedinges. Do
ye not know that power, ordinance, Romans 13.
and government is of God? the Prince sits in Gods chair, the prince
bears not the svvord in vayn. As God is a Ielous God, so he will not have ye
honor, Exodus 20. Malach. 1.
love, fear, and service due unto him, done to any other. Have you forgotten
that ever ye read of the Ielousy of Princes over their Subjects? What? is ye
pope a friend to England? is your Provost a fauorer of her majesty? were your
companions her lovers? What are you your self, with your patience be it
demanded? had ye license to pass over? now ye are comebacke, what obedience
do you show? Let it not grieve you yt I thus examine your estate. Ye are as
you say a Jesuit, your Provost and Controller is at Rome. You are as it may
be gathered become his servant and sworn subject. 1. Corinthians. 7.
Saint Paul gives good counsel if ye would follow it. Ye are bought with
price make not your selves slaves unto men. Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 7.
Saynct Ambrose expounds ye same: serui hominum hij sunt, qui humanisse
subijciunt superstitionibus. They are the slaves of men, that make themselves
subject to men's superstitions. This holy father gives yet a further light unto
the Apostles words, saying: The Apostle now reme^breth that which he rebuked
in the beginning of his Epistle, because they would say: I hold of Paul, an
other: I hold of Apollo, and you hold of your Provost, he of the Pope, and
the Pope of ye devil. Alphonsus de Castro one of your own crew, calls ye
like obedience: Alphons. aduers. haeres. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Miserimam seruitutem, a most vvretched slavery, where some addict them selves
to Thomas, some to Scotus, some to Occam, so that thereof they are called
Thomists, Scotists, Occamists, and you with ye Turks, refusing Agar, and
choosing Sara, take skorne to be called Ignatians, of Ignatius your lame leader,
call your selves Jesuits, and swear fealty to your Romish Provost. The
judgment of Alphonsus in this poinct is grounded upon the Apostle where he
says: Ibidem.
Paul has commanded us (says he) to submit our understanding, but unto the
obedience of Christ, 2. Corinthians. 10.
not unto the obedience of men.

Secondly, as touching the opynion you have in your general, your vvarrant (as
ye say) from heaven, and Oracle from Christ: Deceive not your self in
trustinge to a rotten staff. Cause. 11. quaest. 3. si quis hominem.
Harken what Jerome says: Si quis hominem qui sanctus non est, sanctum esse
crediderit, and dei cum iunxerit societati, christum violat cuius membra sumus.
If any man believe that man to be holy, that is not holy, and will join him to
Gods company, he does villainy to Christ whose members we are. He is no
Iuppiter Hammon, Dodonaeus, Heliopolitanus, Nicephorius of Mesopotamia, he is
no Oracle of Apollo in Delphis, Branchida, Larissa, Lycia, the I Will Delos, nor
Daphne yt deceived thousands: he sits not to give answers in the temple of
Serapis in Canopus, neither in the temple of Pasiphae, neither in ye temple of
Aesculapius among ye Pergamits Narbaca of the Hyrcans, Aridalus of the
Traezenians, Apis in Egypt. All these Oracles are silent and now only does
yours give answers? If the reader look that philosophy should yield him the
cause of their silence, I refer him to Plutarch who discourses thereof in
his book: Plutarch.
de Oraculis quae obmutueru^t, and again in his book: Cur Pythia versibus non
respondeat amplius.

But leaving him to his philosophical conclusions, chrystian Relligion
directs us, and fully resolves that the power of Gods word prevailed so
much, that (as a great light expellinge Mist and darkness) the mouths of all
wicked spirits were stopped, heathen Oracles ceased, and in steed thereof,
Satan now sends forth Romish spirits, under color of Religion, to carry
away in ignorance as many as will credit their lyinge Oracles. Your Provost is
no seer of Israel, he is no Samuel under the Ephod, he is no Moses on the
Mount, he is no Aaron with Vrim and Thummim, he is no Arc with the Tables of
God, the rod of Aaron, neither with the golden Pot of Manna, that you should
put such confidence in him. We perceive welinough what he is, one sitting in
the synagoge of Satan, and offering sacrifice in the temple of Antichrist at
Rome. Moreover you signify unto us that he is not only your Oracle, but also
your warrant from heaven. This you barely affirm without warrant of Gods word.
This dealing infers a vehement suspicion, it has been Satan's practice of
old, for the further advancement of his purpose. Mercurius gave the
Egyptians laws, received (as he says) of the God Mena: Zamolxis to yt Getae,
and Thracians from the Goddess Vesta: Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians from
Appollo Delphieus: Solon to the Athenians, Zaleucus to the Locretians,
Philolaus to the Thebans, Minos to the Cretians from Iuppiter: Lactant.
Diuinar. Instit. Lib. 1. cap. 15.
Numa Pompilius had conference with the Goddess Aegeria: the Lady Pallas
directed the Trojans: and as Lactantius writes, Cabyrius ye Macedonians, Vrana
the Carthaginians, Faunus ye Latins, Saucus the Sabinians, Juno the Samnites,
Venus ye Paphites, and all as they would make us believe proceeded from some
God or Goddess. The Turk also (as he says) received his Alcoran from heaven.
In like sort has your Provost his authority from heaven. The Pope deceived him,
he deceived you, and now you go about to deceive others. The gift of
prophesying in the judgment of the learned is done away: extraordinary calling
is either very rare or not at all: working of miracles is ceased and in the
judgment of Chrysostom: If there be any such, Chrysostom. in Math. homil. 49.
it is rather found among the false christians. Wherefore if either your
Provost, or you, have any warrant from heaven, for the establishing of any such
order, bring it forth out of Gods word, or else ye are not to be believed.
Chrysostom tells us flatly: Ibidem.
Antea enim multis modis oste^debatur quae esset Ecclesia christi and quae
Gentilitas: nunc autem nullo modo cognoscitur, volentibus cognoscere quae sit
vera ecclesia christi nisi ^antummodo per scripturas. In times past it was
showed by many ways which was the church of Christ, and what paganism, but
now it is known no manner of way, of them that will understand which is the
true church of Christ, but only by the scriptures. Your brethren of ye romish
church have fathered their orders upon visions, dreams, miracles, and
apparitions, and thereby deluded thousands. Nauclerus writes of Pope
Hildebrand called Gregory the seventh, Naucler*
how that lying at the poinct of death: Protestatus est cora^ omnibus, vt
cauerent ab hominibus sieve viris sieve mulieribus, sub specie religionis,
loquentibus visiones sui capitis, quia per tales ipse seductus. He made a
solemn protestation before all that were present that they should take heed
of people, were they men, or were they women, that gave forth the dreams
and visio^s of their own brain, for by such he him self had been deceived.
Old father Gerson Chaunceler sometimes of Paris tries out against the abuse of
that corrupt time which received, John Gerson.
sects and orders by dreams and visions without warrant of gods word. Friar
Alphonsus is in a pelting chafe with such as give credit to men's works,
Alphons. aduers. Haeres. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
as if they were Oracles from above, and give them that honor which is due unto
the sacred scriptures. Non enim iurauimus (says he) in verba hominis, sed in
verba dei. We have not vowed the truth of man's word, but of gods word.
Thirdly in this vain hope and confidence you repose in your fained order, you
travel from country to country (which is greatly to be lamented) as ye report
your self from Prage to Rome, from Rome to England. I am afraid lest the
story of the wicked spyrit in the Gospel, be fulfilled in you where it is
said: Math. 12. Luke. 11.
When the unclean spyrit is gone out of a man, he walks through d^y
places, seeking rest and finds none. Then says he: I will turn again
into my house from whence I vve^t out, and when he comes, he finds it
empty, svvepte, and garnished. Then goes he his way and takes unto him seven
other spirits worse then himself, and when they are entered in, they dvvell
there, and the end of that man is worse then the beginning. Ye have wandered
far and nigh and passed through dry places, Chrysostom. in. 1^ Math. hom. 30.
as Chrysostom expounds: homines aridos qui nondum pluuiam euangelicae
doctrinae susceperunt in se: dry men who as yet have not received into their
breasts the deavv of gods word in the gospel. You have visited that Romish
babylon, Apocalypse. 17
that great city which bears rule over the kings of the earth You have
beheld her seven hills described in the revelation: I doubt not but you shaked
hands with Antichrist and swore unto him obedyence ( saluo vestro ordine, as
the manner is) upon the sole of his foot. What need I repeat unto you the
abominations which you have seen, report them your self, tell the truth and
shame the devil. Johannes Sarisburiensis says: In ecclesia Romana sedent
Scribae et Pharisae: Ioh. Sa^isbu. in Polycrat.
The scribes and pharisees sit in the church of Rome. It is a very dry soil,
Lyra in. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
for Nicolaus Lyra above two hundred and fifty years ago said of that Seea: Ab
ecclesia Romana, iam diu est, quod recessit gratia. It is long sithence the
grace of god is departed from the church of Rome. Cornelius bishop of Bitonto
lamented that the clergy of Rome was fallen from christ to Antichriste.
Cornel. episc. Bitonto in Council. Tride^t.
Franciscus Petrarcha calls Rome: the whore of Babylon, the mother of all
Idolatry and Fornication, and says further: Francis. Petrarch. Cant. 92.
that all shame and reverence is quite departed from thence. That it is become
a schole of error and a temple of heresy. Johannes Episcopus Cheme^sis one of
your own says: Ioh. Chemens. Lib. intitul. Onus Eccles. Cap. 19*
Ecce Roma nunc est vorago et mammon inferni, vbi diabolus totius auaritiae
capitaneus residet.

Behold Rome is now the gulf and Mammon of the infernal lake, Where the
Deuell head and general or chieftaine of all avarice is resident. Again: Seeds
bestiae, id est ecclesiae peruersae, est in curiae Romana. The seat of the
beast that is of the wicked church, is in the court of Rome. O miserable Rome
(says a bishop of your own) Which in the time of our elders have brought
forth the lights of worthy fathers, In council. Rhemes.
but in our days have brought forth monstrous darkness, shameful and
slanderous to the time to come. Petrus Be^bus says: Petr. Bembus.
Romae est sentina pessimoru^ hominu^ and totius orbis. Rome is a sink of most
pestilent varlets, and of the whole World. Luther confesses: I would not for a
great sum of Money, but that I had seen Rome, otherwise I should have stood
in great fear, Henric. Petr. Rebenstock. in Colloq. and Medit. etc* Luth.
least that I had misreported ought of them. But what I saw that speak I, and
testify, and cry out with Mantuan.

Viuere qui sancte cupitis discedite Romae,
Baptist. Mantuan.
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
Fly Rome all ye that mean a life
in holiness to lead
Though all ye may, yet bard is this:
the godly way to tread.
Again.

Sanctus ager scurris venerabilis ara Cynaedis
Seruit: honorandae diuum Ganymedibus Aedes.
The substance of these later verses is such yt with modesty they may not be
englished. The shame I refer to the favorers of the cause, and the clokers of
the filth. What say you to these reports? The Well of your religion is there,
the Pillars of your faith are at Rome, and your self made a Pilgrimage
thither. We are to take heed of poisoned Raiment, and rotten Sheep, least
they infect the flock, and you also warely to tender your state least that
according to the Storye of the Evangelist: Math. 12.
the end be worse (with you) then the beginning. The practice of such
adversaries and patrons of the Romish sect is very pernicious. Chrysostom
writes: Crysost in Math. Homil. 30.
Christianus si malus euaserit peior fit quam si fuisset gentilis. A Christian
if he revolt, proves worse then if he were a Gentile, or Heathen.
Therefore I am to warn my Brethren that they take heed of you. Now I will
hear you further.

The Jesuit.
MY charge is free to preach the Gospel, to minister the Sacraments, to
instruct the simple, to reform sinners, to confute errors, and in brief to
try all armoure spiritual against foul vice and proud ignorance, wherewith
many of my dear Countrymen are abused.

The answer.
NOw ye publish your commission, is your calling ordinarye or extraordinary?
extreme ordinary. who made you a Preacher? your Provost of Rome. Are yea
preacher of the Gospel? I pray ye of what Gospel? there have been many
heretics that rejected the true gospel (that is) of Jesus Christ, and
delivered into the world the Gospels of Peter, Thomas, Mathias, Andrew, and
yet would they be counted preachers of the Gospel. Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib. 3
cap. 22^ lib. 6. cap. 37. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom 3. haeres. 38.39.40.
Helcesaitae had among them (as they said) a Gospel fallen from Heaven.
Sethiani had their Iobelaea, the revelation of Seth, and Abraham. Archo^tici
had their Symphoniam. Cayni, the heretics of Cayn the murderer, worshipped
Judas the traitor as you do the Pope, and alleged his Gospel, The Ebionits
had a gospel secundum Ebraeos, Eusebius. eccle. hist. lib. 3. cap. 24.
and yours is secundum Romanos. Let as many as fear God, and syncerely embrace
the gospel of Jesus Christ, under the globe, mantel, or cope of heaven bear
witness, and judge between you and us. you preach the popes supremacy, canons of
Councils, decrees of fathers, co^stitutions of men, rites and ceremonies,
pardons and indulgences, invocation of Saints, merits by works, pilgrimage,
purgatory, masses, diriges, trentalles, images, pictures, relics, alters,
shrines, lives of feigned saints, false miracles, visions, dreams, fantasies
and such other trashes without warrant of gods word, as it appears unto the
world in your sermons, and Romish postilles. and in fine ye are justly to be
charged, as companions of the Pharisees* that ye set light by the gospel of
Jesus Christ, that ye forsake the law and follow after the traditions of men.
Unto the Pharisees far worse then the heathen Iebusits, a fitter name for you
then Jesuits, Math. 15.
it is said: In vain do they serve me, while they teach such doctrines as are
nothing but the commandments of men. What sacraments do ye minister? the
church of God receives two: numero paueissima, August. ad Ianuar. epist. 118.
of the smallest number (as Augustine writes) which are: baptismus trinitatis
nomine consecratus and co^municatio corporis and sanguinis ipsius. Baptism,
hallowed in the name of the Holy Trinity, and the communicating of his blessed
body and blood, fygured in the old testament by the circumcision and the
pascal lamb. But you of your own brain, have added thereunto five more, such
is your dealing. Are ye an instructor of the simple? and yet at the first
iumpe, ye take the lords of the counsel in hand you would have to your audience
not only their honors, but the doctors, masters, and chose^ men of both
universities. Are ye come to reform sinners? Why turn ye not your face to the
fountain of your religion, where the water is troubled, muddye, and noisome, I
mean the synagoge of Rome, full of deformities? As for this realm of England
(the Lord of hosts be praised therefore) gods word is here planted, we have a
gracious princes (whose life God bless and long continue) our supreme head
next and immediately under god: her majesty has counsailers that be noble,
wise, virtuous, and learned: we have flourishing universities and schools of
learning of great fame: we have good magistrates, and good government, and
godly laws established: Antichrist of Rome is aba^doned: idolatry and
superstition rooted out: the dregs and filth of heresies detested and abhorred:
every one in his calling with all endeuer serving god, obeying his Prince and
embracing brotherly love, and now are ye come to be a reformer? I vehementlye
suspect your dealing. We have a president of the late hypocritical practice of
your brother Theatinus the Jesuit. He pretended reformation in the church of
Rome, as you do here in England, and wrote unto Paulus the third a book (as
Vergerius says) de emendanda Ecclesia. Although (says he) he reformed it
nothing at all. Peter Paulus verger. citat* a balaeo. Anglic, script. Centur.
8.
Luther profecied of the reformation, then wished and pretended by the Pope and
his Cardinals. (I mean at the late Council of Trent) by the picture which was
set before his book as an argument of their doings. For (says Sleidan) the
bishop was placed in an high seat and certain Cardinals standing about him,
Sleidan lib. 12.
which with Foxes tails tied to staves like besomes svvept al things vpside
down. This Theatinus aforesaied having gotten unto himself thereby some
credit, crept on so fast, that he attained unto the papacy, and being Pope
look what he had preached against before, that he practiced himself. This was
the first of your worthies, and the famousest of your order, such examples we
have of your pretended reformation. Are ye a confuter of errors? They are
infinite in the church of Rome. What a number of Popes have been heretics,
schismatikes, blasphemers of God, and polluters of peter's chair? are ye come
to England to confute errors? Why turn ye not to them that disobey their
prince, thrusting in forreyne power, gaping after the Pope and the fleshpots of
Egypt? Why turn ye not to your countrymen here, that will not repair to the
church, to here Gods word and deuyne service, that will not be pertakers of the
blessed communion, that mislike with her maiestyes procedinges, that secretly
conspyre, that practice treason, coniuringe, calculating, southsaying, sorcery,
and witchcraft, with other abominable dealinges? reform first your self,
then confute these errors, and you shall do God good service, and great
commodity to your native country. Are ye a trier of all armor spiritual, and
a deliverer of your Countriemen? a proper Champion* your skill therein, and the
proof thereof will appear in your practice. but I am now to deal with you an
other way. Me thinks the liberty of your society, and the ranging abroad of
your brethren seems contrary to good order, and the course of your own cannon
law. August. de haeres. ad Quod* uult.
Africa in the time of S. Augustine has been bepestred with two sorts of
heretics, Donatists, and wandering Circumcellions, passing from Affrike to Rome
and from Rome to Affrik, as you do from England to Rome, and from Rome to
England. There was a grievous complaint made unto the council of Calcedon
against religious men that passed from city to city, as you do: Causa 16.
quest. 1. quida^.
et perturbationes paci ecclesiasticae infereba^t, and diuersorum domos
corru^pebant, and disturbed the quiet estate or peace of the Church, and
corrupted the houses of diverse men. when complaynt was made unto Pope Pelagius,
of Probinus, Milianus, Ibidem cap. probinum.
and Probinianus, who leaving their cloister, loitred about, he charged John
the governor of that regio^ to banish them the soil, and you may think ye
speade well, if so ye ca^ escape. The council of Calcedon, Did. 71. cap.
extraneo
and the council of Antioch have decreed, and S. Agustine likewise requesteth
his colleags the bishops about him, to receive no priest without testimonial
and commendatorye letters. Cap. hortamu^ Cap nullum. and did. seq. did. 98.
per tot.
Also touching Transmarinos: that is such as pass over sea, it is decreede:
that they be not received without the testimonies of five bishops at least, and
that under their hands and seals, the reason thereof is, thereby to shun the
Maniches, and such as were rebaptized with other Heretics, which thrust
themselves into ye church (as you do now) under the name of Catholic
priests* now sir where is your pasport, and the testimonial of your soundnes
in religion? Causa 2. quest. 1. legum,
your law says no priest is to be received without his letters of orders* Did
23. ecclesiastica. Cansa 12. quest. 1. dno.
show them if ye have any* your law makes mention of your stole to be worn
on both shoulders, in token of adversity and prosperity, and shaven crown in
token of the kingdom which is hoped in Christ. Let us see the character of
your order, that consequently we may be the better acquainted with your
person. The order of the Church is that none do preach unless he be orderly
called, licensed, and sufficiently autorized thereunto. This custom began of
old, because of Arius the heretic, who being but an inferior priest,
presumed to reprehend the manner of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, his
expounding of scriptures and to Preach errors himself, being not thereunto
licenced. If ye be a preacher, bring forth your license, and consider with your
self whether your provost of Rome ca^ license preachers in England. The
liberties of your priesthode (by your own confession) stretch not only to
preach, but also to minister ye sacraments I hope ye will justify the whole by
your own law. he that is shorn Priest by your own decrees, first must have
a title, to wit, he must be entitled to some proper place, cure, or living
without ranginge Circumcellion wise abroad. I will not here stand to
distinguishe of titles. The council of Calcedon has decreede. Neminem absolute
iubemus ordinari presbyterum, neque diaconu^, Did. 69, neminem.
neque que^libet in ecclesiastica ordinatione constitutu^, nisi manifest in
ecclesia* sieve ciuitatis, sieve possessionis aut in martyrio, aut in monasterio,
hic qui ordinatur, mereatur ordinationis publicae vocabulum* eos autem qui
absolute ordinantur, decreuit Sancta Synodus, vacuam habere manus impositionem
and nullum tale factum valere ad iniuria ipsius qui eu^ ordinauit* we command
that none be made priest absolutelye (as your order is) neither deacon,
neither any other within Ecclesiastical orders, unless that manifestly in
the Church either of city, or of patrimonye, or in the martyrie, or in the
mo^asterie, he which is ordered by publicly entitled* as touchig the^ yt are
absolutely ordered, the Holy Synod has decreed, that their laing on of hands
be void, and that no such act henceforth should be of force to the reproach
of him that ordered such a one* Again, ye cou^cyll su^moned at Place^tia, by
pope Vrba has contrary to your order established, as Gratian the Rapsodist
has alleged, saying: sa^ctoru^ canonu^statutis, co^sona sa^ctione decernimus
vt sine titulo facta ordinatio irrita habeatur, (...) cap. sanctorum.
and in qua ecclesia quilibet intitulatus est, in ea perpetuo perseueret.
According unto the rules of holy canons with like consent we deeree, that the
ordering of priests without title be void, Causa. 21. quest. 1. Clericus.
and that every one continually be resident in the church where he is
entitled. Again: Vnusquisque secundu^ Apostolica^ vocem in quo vocatus est, in
hoc debet manner and in vna locari ecclesia. Every one according unto the
saying of the Apostle, must abide wherein he is called, and be placed in one
Church, The reason of this title, is that every priest should have somewhat to
stick unto, if it pleased god to visit him with infirmity or blindness, that he
became not a burden unto the church: the which in my simple opinion you should
deeply consider. For if God laid blindness upon you who should lead you out of
the land. Secondly the ecclesiastical law forbids one bishop to intermedle
with an others diocese, one pastor may not busy himself with an others flock,
one vicar or curat may not examine an others charge, and are ye come from your
provost in Rome to play the priest and the preacher here in England without
orderly admission? Causa. 16. quest. 1. cap. adij cimus.
your law says: nulli sacerdotum licet alterius parochianum ligare vel
soluere. It is not lavvfull for any priest to bynd or loose (that is to
excommunicate or absolve) an others parishioner. The ancient ecclesiastical
histories do record the great whurliburly at Constantinople between
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and all about the breach of the breach of the
canons of the Church in this behalf not observed; when as Epiphanius bishop of
Co^stantia in Cyprus, encroched upon ye jurisdiction of Chrysostom archbishop
of Constantinople. Epiphanius in the name of Chrysostom is thus charged: Multa
contra canones agis Epiphani: Socrat. eccle. hist. lib. 6. cap. 11.13.
primum quod ministros ecclesiae ordinas in ecclesijs quae sunt in mea diocesi:
deinde quod antequam erat tibi a me potestas permissa, tua ipsius autoritate
sacra mysteria celebrasti: contra cum eras a me inuitatus renuisti, ac rursus
iam tibi, ipse facis potestate^. Thou do many things o Epiphanius contrary
to the canons of the church: first in that thou made Ministers in the
Churches which are within my diocese: secondly in that before I had licensed
thee, of thine own authority, thou have celebrated the holy mysteries: of the
other side, when I offered thee curtesy thou did refuse it, and now again
of thine own head, thou geuest authority to thy self. The conclusion directed
unto him, I refer presently to you to consider of: Vide igitur ne situmultus
ob eam causam in populo oboriatur, periculu^ inde in tuum ipsius caput
redundet. Take heed therefore, least thereof rise any tumult among the people,
and the peril or danger there hence light upon thine own pate. Take wtall
the behavior of Epiphanius, for says the story: quae cum Epiphanius
audiuisset, perculsus metu decedit ab ecclesia. Which things when Epiphanius
had heard, he was stricken with fear, and departed out of the church. I
would wish here that ye learned wit of Epiphanius.

The Jesuit.
I Never had mind and I am straightly forbidden by our said Father that sent me
to deal in any respect with matters of state or policy of this realm as
things appertayning not to my vocation, and from which I do gladly restrain
and sequester my thoughts.

The answer.
IF you be wise hold you there. But yet I fear me they are but words full
of falsehoode and deceit, where one thing is said in word, and the contrary
found in practice and in deed. In religion I take you for a Romanist, a
fauorer of ye Pope, and a furthrer of his practices. He has set ye mother
against her own son, Sigebert. Abbas vspergens^ Antonin. Platina. Sabellicus.
the son to take armor against his own Father, the Subject against the
Prince, and the Princes together at mortal wars. He has deposed Kings and
Emperors, he translated Empires, he treades upon Princes Necks, he takes
Scepters and Crowns from Kings heads, and tra^pleth them under foot, he
takes from others yt which is their right, and gives away yt which is none of
his own: the late enterprise in Ireland is a witness of part thereof. Either
renounce the Pope and these his wicked dealings, or confess your self a
dissembler. But you will say ye come as a private man, to co^ferre in matters
of religion, to preach, to teach, and to dispute, you wish the Prince would
give ye the ear, you crave ye Counsel to be attentive, ye masters, Doctors
and chosen men of both Uniuersities, you cull for your auditors What would ye
entreat of, without impayring of the state? what discourse will ye use without
prejudice to the government? what Religion, would ye establishe without
derogatio^ to the Laws of ye Realm and policy of the Land? If ye persuade
her Majesty's loving Subjects to a mislikinge of ye Religion received, you
cause Schism, Tumult, co^spiracy, and Rebellion: if ye plead the Popes
supremacy, it is the Price of your head: if ye deface the truth of the
Gospel preached here in England, you will be found a blasphemer of God, and an
enemy of his word. Now I would hear what message ye can bring without
intermedling with matters of state and policy. If ye have found beyond the
Seas a platform for government which you think expedient to be established
in this Realm in matters Civil and Temperall, ye may attend upon the
Parliament, and exhibit it to the body of ye Realm. But you tell me ye are
a Priest, then it appertaynes not to your profession to intermedle with such
affairs. And to conclude, though ye promise never so fair, not to deal in
matters of state and policy, believe ye who list. Your profession is not to
be credited, the practices of Rome are known, too too well.

The Jesuit.
I Ask to the glory of God with all humility and under your correction three
sorts of indifferent audience. The first before your honors wherein I would
discourse of Religion so far as is the common wealth of your Nobilities* The
second, whereof I make more account, before the Doctors, Masters, and chosen
men of both Universities, wherein I undertake to vow the faith of our
Catholic church, by proofs invincible, scriptures, counsels, fathers,
hystories, natural and moral reasons. The third by the force of the law
spiritual, and temperall. Wherein I will justify the same faith by the common
wisdom of the laws standing in force, and practiced.

The answer.
Now you crave patience, ye plead humility, and pretend the glory of God.
You crave audience and them indifferent. Will no meaner please you then the
Lords of the counsel, no baser then Doctors, and Masters, and chosen men? I
perceive Aquila non capit Muscas. Fly lower or else your humility will be taken
for hypocrisy. You say ye will undertake to vow ye faith (as you write) of
our Catholic church* your words seem to infer a certain singularity. Have
ye a Catholic church of your own? you are deceived if ye take Rome for the
Catholyke church* In the judgment of all the learned and godly, the Catholic
church is dispersed over the Face of ye Earth, not tied, neither united, to any
proper place, or person. The Council of Nice committed of old the charge of
the Catholic church, to three principal Patriarchs, Rome, Alexandria,
Antioch, and afterward came in Constantinople. Nilus de primat. Romans Pontific.
Nilus says: For as much as certain countries are limited to the Church of
Rome, certain to the Bishop of Alexandria, and certain to the Bishop of
Constantinople, they are now no more under him, then he under them.

Athanasius says: Athanas.
Roma est Metropolis Romanae Ditionis. Rome is the Mother church (not of ye
whole world, but) of the Province of Rome. I will not speak of England,
Ireland, Scotland, France, Denmark, Polonia, Suecia, Bohoemia, the noble
states and Co^mo^weales of Germany, Heluetia, Prussia, Russia, Lituania,
Pomerania, Austria, Rhetia, Vallis Tellina, etc where ye Gospel florisheth:
but is your church the mother church and has your Pope government and
jurisdiction over ye Churches in Asia, and Affricke? David Cytraeus in
Apocalypse. Ioh* Manlius Collectan. Henric. Petr. Rebenstock. in Colloq. et
medit. Lu^h.
It is well known that there is Chrystianitie in Asia, Affricke, Armenia,
Aethiopia, Cyprus, Constantinople, Bassa, Buola, with other places where the
Pope dares not once peep, for all his Pontificalitye at Rome.

And in respect of all christian assemblies and faithful members wheresoever,
the church is called Catholic, that is universal, so yt your church and all
churches are to be known and tried, not by your erring councels, Irenaeus.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
canons, co^stitutio^s, decrees, and glosses, but by ye word of God which is
the touchstone of truth. Therefore Irenaeus says: columna and firmamentum
ecclesiae est euangelium and spiritus vitae. The pillar and buttresse of the
church is the gospel and the spirit of life. Augustine says unto ye
Donatists: Sunt certe libri dominici, August. de vnitate eccle. cap. 3.
quoru^ autoritati vtrique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus: ibi
quaer^mus ecclesia^, ibi discutiamus causam nostra^. There are verily books of
our lord, unto the authority whereof each part agrees, each part belieueth and
each part regards, there let us seek for the church and thereby let us
examine and try our matters. This I thought good here to note lest the reader
should be carried away with the bare name of Your catholic Church. But as
touching your florishe in repeating the names of scriptures, Counsels,
fathers, histories, natural and moral reasons, laws spiritual and temporal
whom you call proufs invincible, it makes a fair show to bleare the eyes of
the simple, containing in it no substance at al So have Piggius, Eckius*
Staphilus, Hosius, Harding, Saunders, Dorman and Rascal bragged of heretofore,
and being examyned were found contrary. Have ye red more the^ all your
predecessors and Companyons have? or have ye found new scriptures, new
councelles, new fathers, new hystories, new reasons, new laws, at the erection
of your new order? of your company they were that to face and boulster out a
bad matter found out new petyte doctors, Abdias, Amphilochius, Clemens,
Hyppolitus, ^eontius and such others. It should appear you have some good
lyking in your self, you have forgotten the counterbuffs which quayled the
hautie minds of your accomplices, your books are answered, your fathers,
counsels, and historyes are examined, ye truth apertly has been laid before
you. There passes not a scrole from your fistes but is fully perused and
returned unto you. Leave of bragging in words, show forth substance in
deed, and know ye for certainty there shall neither authority nor reason escape
neither pass our hands unsatisfied.

The Jesuit.
I Would be loath to speak any thing that might sound of any insolent brag
or challenge, specially being now as a dead man under this world and vvilling
to cast my head under every man's feet and to kiss the ground they tread
upon. Yet have I such courage in aduauncing the majesty of Jesus my king, and
such affiaunce in his gracious favor, and such assurance in my cause, and my
evidence so impugnable (that because I know perfectly) none of the
protestants, nor all the protestants living, nor any sect of our adversaries,
how so ever they fray men down in their pulpits, and ouerrule them in their
kyngedome of Gramarrians and unlearned ears, can maintain their doctrine in
disputation. I am to sue most humbly and instantly for the combat with them,
and every of them.

The Answer.
YEt again I see there is much a do with you. Ye are a lofte in bragging,
and bosting, then suddenly down ye fall into a vain of hypocrisy. Again ye
skippe and mount into the Skies, displaying your Banner of defiaunce to all the
Protestants living, and like a jolly Champion ye challeng the Combat. I
marvel that one, being (as you say ye are) a dead man, willing to cast his
head under every man's foot, and to kiss the ground they trade upon, can play
such pageants. Now ye show your self a disciple of Ignatius the maimed
soldier, as it were one begging, coming from the wars: or rather me
thinks you play Skoggan, with the King: or ye express (as Sozomenus writes)
the Story of the Beggars which went about to deceive Epiphanius. Sozome^. eccl.
Hist. lib. 7. Cap. 26.
The one being well, begged, the other lay down and feigned himself dead, when
the Bishop had done his devotion and passed by, the counterfeit dead man was
stirred, and he was found dead in deed. Deal not with your country men in
jest, I fear me in faith, you will be found dead in earnest. Of Ecebolius ye
Sophist of Constantinople it is written, that in the time of Constantius he was
hot in religion, in the time of Julian, cold: again in the days of Iouinian,
earnest. And in these his changes he would prostrate him self at the church
Porche, saying: me quasi salem insipidum pedibus conculcate: Socrat. ecel.
Hist. lib. 3. Cap. 11.
tread upon me, or trample me underfoot as unsavory Salt. The Pope who is
accepted among your professors as prince of Prelates, head of the Church, gods
liuetenaunt on earth, christ's vicar general, writes him self: the servant
of servant. Your docter Bonner said sometimes of him (and as I hope your eyes
will be opened to see the same) Notvvithstanding the pope be a very ravening
wolf in sheep clothing, In prefac. ad lib. Stephan. Guard. de vera. obed.
yet he calls him self the servant of servant. In him is the saying of
Irenaeus, Irenaeus lib. 5
found true: Antichristus cum sit seruus, tamen adorari vult vt deus.
Antichrist being but a servant, yet vvil be vvorshiped as god. The aungel
enfourmeth Vguentinus the monk, in a vision of the Romish priests, Vguentini
Monach. lib. vision.
saing, In quibusdam videtur ceruicis inflexio, sed no^ deponitur in eis cordis
erectio. In certene religious persons, Douking or bowing of the neck is
seen, but in them the lifting up of the heart is not laid down. Now sir do
ye see your self? Behold ye are again in the clouds with your courage,
affiance, assurance, perfect knowledge, evidence impugnable against al
protestants living, such an other Champion was Golias the great bastard of the
Philistines. 1. Reg. 17.
As ioly a Champion as ye are, take heed ye ouermatch not your self. There
happily may meet you a simple curate who with the flinge of David's confidence
and the stone of gods word, may pearce your Lions pelt, Ruffin. eccl. hist.
lib. 1. ca. 3*
and ouerturne you with all the Bombast of your Romysh religion. Ruffinus
reports of the like brag made at ye counsel of Nice by a subtle philosopher
who set himself against all the bishops there, where a seely poor Christian,
the symplest of all the number took him in hand, so that in the end, this
Bragger (says the story) ita obstupefactus virtute dictorum, mutus ad omnia,
hoc solum potuit respondere, ita sibi videri, nec aliud verum esse, quam quod
dixerat, was so astonished with the force of those things that were spoken,
he had not a word, this only could he answer, that it seemed so unto him,
and that there was no other truth then the christian had spoken. And now to
consider of your challenge, I say unto you, if there were no wyser then my
self, you should be disputed withal, as long as ye were able to turn your
tongue in your mouth. if ye conform your self (otherwise I am not to bolden
you) and become a civil subject, and a student in any of the Uniuersityes
within her majesty's Dominions, as ye know the manner, the Schools are open, set
up your questions, appoint the day, let every thing be don in order, and ye
shall be disputed withal. Or if unto the wise and discrete this way seem not
best, take your pen, call your five senses and wits together, allege what
ye can, ye shall be answered. And whereas ye charge us that: we fraye men in
our pulpittes, ouerrule them in our Kingdom of Grammarians and unlearned
ears, we are no bugges, the Pope with his pupilles is he that frayeth men with
the terror of the Lions pelt much like Xerxes king of Persia, who having
brought over his huge army into Graecia, sent his letters of defiance unto the
great mount Athos in Macedonia, commaundinge him to stand still, not to stir
a foot, not to work any displeasure, either to him or his army upon pain of
his high indignation. For ye Pope, with as good discretion sends out his
precepts, and princely summons, to command Angels, Archaungels, all the
powers of heaven, to go, to fetch, to carry at his will. Antoninus Archbishop
of Florence sets forth the bugge where he writes: Anton. summae Part. 3.
tit. 22. cap. 5 ante..
Potestas papae mayor est omni alia creata, post potestatem christi, aliquo
modo extendens se ad coelestia, terrestria and infernalia, vt de ^o possit
illud verificari, dictum de christo in psalmis: omnia subiecisti sub pedibus
eius. The popes power is greater the^ any other power, that god ever made
after christ, after a sort stretching it self to things in heaven, earth, and
hell, so that of him the words may be verifyed which the prophet David spoke
of christ, in the psalms: thou haste made all things subject under his
feet. Here is the bugge that fraieth and amazeth the hearts of the simple by
cursing with bell, book, and candle. The histories record that when Gregory
the.7. had cursed the emperor Henry.3. the Princes of Almayne fearing the
popes thunderbolt went about to chose an other emperor and again when he came
to be reconcylde to the Pope, not one of his nobility durst accompany him.
Moreover when Calixtus.2. required Henry.5. to surre^der unto the Pope and his
successors the inuestyng of bishops, the princes of Germany trembling at the
Popes banning and cursyng persuade him to yield.

I will not presently trouble the reader with the words and form of ye Devils
pater noster, and the Popes black sanctus. But now God be praised the Ass
may ^et up and down in the Lions skin with more ease and less terror, for
he is stripped of his counterfaite weed and now appears as he is. It
pleases you lastly to term our sway the kingdom of Grammarrians and our
auditorie unlearned ears. As for the teachers join when ye will, you shall
find such as shall answer all the wandering Jesuits of your order, not only
in humanity which ye call Gammar, but in any the lyberall sciences or noble
faculties, with good skill and knowledge in the learned languages flourishing at
this day in ye famous Uniuersities of Oxenford and Cambridge. Our auditors whom
your predecessors in that your Romish profession and companions have
heretofore termed Pigges, and swyne and now ye call unlearned ears (be it
spoken to the glory of God, and the comfort of their fellow Brethren in
Christ) are so instructed in Gods word, and so trained up in Religion, that
many of them being but lay men ate able not only to confirm their own
doctrine, and faith with sufficient proofs and allegations out of holy
Scripture, but also to confute your errors and superstition and blanke in their
language the greatest bragger of your Society.

The Jesuit.
ANd because it has pleased God to enritch the Queen my soueraygne Lady with
noble gifts of nature and princely education: I do verily trust, that (if her
highness would voutchsafe in her Royal person to hear and give good attention
to such a conference as in the second part of my Articles I have me^cioned and
requested, or to a few Sermons within her or your hearing I am to utter) such
manifest and fair light by good method and plain dealing as may be cast upon
these controversies, that possible her zeal of truth and love of her people
shall incline her noble grace to disfauore from proceeding hurtful to the
Realm and procure toward us oppressed more equity.

The answer.
THe sum of this your seventh division is contained in a wish, where you not
only desire the presence of the nobility and Lords of ye counsel, but also
her Royal Majesty to give attention unto your preaching and moreover ye hope
yt by cunning method, and plain dealing (as ye say) being cast (as it were a
mist) upon these controversies, yea and ye doubt not but ye shall be able to do
some good, etc. Princes sitti^g in thrones of great majesty, have not to harke^
unto each pilgrims suit, their affairs being great and causes weighty, neither
is it expedient yt every sort of private persons should have access unto
their presence, neither that their sacred ears, should be abused with the
hearing of such ^rasse as commonly such pedlers (as you are), do bring in
their packes and fardels from Rome. The Lords, her majesty's most honorable
counsel, the nobles, pieces, and state of the realm, being me^ of great
wisdom, learning, zeal, and Godly religion, busilye occupied in their
several callynges, prudently governing under her highness, and ministringe unto
her majesty (by direction of the spirit of wisdom received from above)
wholesome advise and counsel, are not to be troubled with hearing of any such
message, as ye bring from the provost of your order, unless you will minister
occasion unto them to examine you of your loyalty, and subjection unto her
royal majesty, and Godly procedinges. Lastly discretion and wisdom in mine
opinion are to direct you not to attempt in open audience (in ye hearing of
the lay and common sort of people) the publishinge of any deuyse, discourse or
doctrine that is not agreeable with the word of God, that is not already
established, that is repugnant unto her Maiestyes proceedinges. The manner of
old and the use received in the Church has been, that none unlicensed,
unexamined, untried, and unknown, should be permitted to preach, neither in
open assemblies to set any doctrine abroch, that is not received. Any
heretic, be he an Arrian, Macedonian, Eunomian, Nestorian, Pelagian,
Libertine, Anabaptist, or of the Family of Love, may be a suter as ye are, but
whether you, are any of the aforesaid is to be permitted to discourse in open
audience, I refer it to the wise to consider of. I know not what favor in the
premises ye shall obtain, as for mine own part, I submit herein my censure
to the learned, wise, and pollityke magistrates, and superiors. Look to whom
ye have made your suite and petition, they are in this point further to
resolve you. What diuinitye is may sone be laid down, for there is here no
great occasyon ministered of discourse or answer.

The Jesuit.
Moreover I doubt not but you her highness counsel being of such wisdom and
discretion in cases most important, when you shall have heard these questions
of religion opened faithfully, which many times of our adversaries are hudled
up and confounded, will see upon what substantial ground our catholic faith
is builded, and how feeble that side is which by sway of the time preuayleth
against us, and so at the last for your own souls and for many thousands
that depend upon your government, will discountenance error when it is
bewrayed and harken to those which would willingly spend the best blood in
their bodies for your salvation. Many innocent hands are lift to heaven for you
daily and hourly by the English students whose posterity shall never dye.
Which beyond the seas gathering virtue and sufficyent knowledge for their
purpose are determined never to give you over, but either to win you heaven
or to die upon your pikes. As touching our society be it known unto you that
we have a league all the Jesuits in the world whose succession and multitude
must ouerreach the practice of England, chearefully to carry the cross which
god shall lay upon us and never to despair your recouerye whiles we have a
man left to enjoy your tyburne, or to be racked with your torments or to be
consumed with your prisons. The expense is reckoned the enterprise is begun it
is of god it cannot be withstoode, so the faith was planted so it must be
restored.

The Answer.
YOu are still in hope of good success. No doubt their honors will yield credit
unto that which is faithfully delivered according unto Gods word but where ye
charge us with hudling up and confounding of questions in divinity and matters
in controversy I return ye same unto you and the shame to light upon their
pates that deserve it. Your accomplices of the Romish religion have defended your
holyewater by the example of Elizaeus and by the words of the prophet Ezechiel*
4. Reg. 4. Esaias. 40. Exodus 25. 3. Reg. 6. Number. 21. In compendio* Theolog.
your pardons by the prophet Esaias: your images by the Cherubins and brazen
serpent your seven sacraments by the seven seals, seven trumpets, seven
stars, seven golden candelstickes, seven eyes: your service in an unknown
language without translating of ye scriptures into ye vulgar tongue by that
which Peter reports that there are some things hard to be understood in
Paul: 2. Pet. 3. de vot. and voti. redempt. cap. magnae.
your vowed pilgrimage by that where it is commanded, that none puttyng his
hand to the plough must look backward: de celeb. missa. cap. cum marthae
Anacletus epist. 1.
your eleuatio^ in the sacrament by the story of Lazarus, where it is said that
Christ lyfted up his eyes: your superiority of ye church of Rome by the words
of our savior unto Peter, thou art Peter and upon this rock (our savior
meaning his faith, no say you, upon the Sea of Rome) I will build my Church:
your right of both swords by the answer of Peter in the garden, Paralip^
vspergens. de maiorit. and obed. cap. solitae.
behold here are two swords: your popes primacy above the emperor, by
comparing the Pope to the sun and the emperor to the moon. such is the
practice of your side, such is your confusion in matters of divinity, and such
is your hudlyng up of Scriptures. you proceed on further and hope to crepe
into favor by declaring that many hands are lift up for the State of England,
by the English Students beyond the Seas. This is right Frierish, Limit or
like, God save my good master and my good dame, the scrip be like is empty,
and are ye now come to fill it? their flying declares their disposition,
their absence shows their love, and their practices open unto us what prayers
they make. You tell us of your league and that you are determined never to give
us over. No more as I think then the Jews which vowed neither to eat nor to
drink before they had killed Paul. Act. 23.
But that God which delivered Paul out of the hands of the Jews has and
undoubtedly will defend England from all Romish co^spiracies. And me thinks by
your words you are at a desperate poinct, ye wey neither cross, nor rack,
nor torment, nor prison, nor pikes, nor tyburne, nor Stories tippet. Now I see
in you the lively pattern of the Circumcellion Haeretickes, of whom Sayncte
Augustine writes that they were a sauadge and a rude sort of people, August.
de Haeres. ad Quod vult.
of notorius rashness, not only in practicing horible acts against others, but
also in not sparing themselves from extreme cruelty. For they were wont to
destroy themselves by sundry sorts of death, as by drowning, burning, and
breaking of their Necks. Also they seduced as many others of both sects as
they could, to fall into this fury, sometimes threatening them death unless
they provoked others to dispatch them. My counsel is that you favor your
self, without running upon the pykes. Behold the fall of your Mates in
Ireland and such as the Pope had blessed in a bad hour and directed thither to
his great shame and their utter destruction, as it is manifestly known. Have
ye not heard of their great bragges, their rejoicing, and bonfyres they made at
Biskay upon the return of the news of their safe arriual in Ireland? they
triumphed before the conquest. The godly in the psalms sovv in tears but
reap in joy. they go on their way weeping and bear forth good feed, Psalm.
125.
they come again with joy and bring their sheaues with them. what is become
of their mirth, they began with the laughing game, and past by the weping
cross, and so tasted of the whip. Beware Trophonius den. you know the
proverb, he was a headchopper. Erasmus writes of patriks pit, Eras. Chil. 1.
Centur. 7. in Trophon. Antro.
commonly called Saint Patriks purgatory in Ireland. Qui descenderunt (aiunt)
sibi ridendi libidinem in omni vita adempta^. They which go down, say, that
their laughing for ever is taken away from them. Luke. 16.
You were best warn your brethren that they come not into the like place of
torment Beware of rebellion in Ireland. It is ill saying mass in Patriks pit.
You say the expense is rekoned and the enterpryce is begone. It is wisdom not
only to behold the beginning but to respect the endyng, experience of the fall
of Romish practices heretofore may make you faint in your purposes. you
pronounce sentences, Ye say, it is of God it ca^ not be vvithstode. I fear me
your doings are from ye pope and his practices from the devil, therefore will
they come to naught.

Coel. Rhod. ex philostr.
The head of Orpheus has given forth for an Oracle, that Troy can not be won
without the arrows of Hercules. Anton. Gueuar. in vita. Commod.
The image of the goddess Pallas being fallen from heaven upon the walls of
this Troy and now discovered is the cause according unto the old prophecy of
the change and wrecke daily befalling to the prosperity of Rome. Ye conclude
so the faith was planted so it must be restored. The faith was not here
planted by runnyng upon the pykes, neither was it the Pope that first preferred
christian religion into this Land, and now the word of God being purely taught
here and received, Rome is not to restore hither the rags of your Idolatry
now of a long time rooted out.

The Jesuit.
IF these my offers be refused and my endeavor can take no place and I having
come thousands of miles to do you good shall be rewarded with rigor: I have no
more to say but recomme^d your cause to almighty god the searcher of all hearts
who send us of his grace and set us all at concord before the day of payment to
the end at the last we may be friends in Heaven where all injuries shall be
forgotten.

Q. M. Champion.

The answer.
YOu do well to consider of the worst as well as ye comforted your self with
the best. Even now you would run upon the Pikes, there was no staying of you,
you said: it cannot be vvithstoode, it must be restored. Are ye quailed
since, do ye begin to reken your miles? and are you now affraide of rigor?
as you confess your self, have you no more to say? then yield your self,
become a good subject, and pray unto God that your Eyes may be opened, yt ye
may see the clear light of his word, that ye may see and taste how svveete
the Lord is, Psalm. 33.
that you may know how to esteem of Sion, and to prefer her liberty before
the captivity of Babylon. O how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to
dvvell together in unity. Psalm. 13^.
Let us jointly embrace this unity, that we may be received into one fold,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head. God grant it.

FINIS.

