THE THREEFOLD STATE OF MAN UPON EARTH; CONTAINING. The glory of his Creation,
The misery of his Fall, And The sweet mystery of his Reparation.


DISCVSSED IN three several Sermons at the COURT, BY CHRISTOPHER HAMPTON,
DOCTOR of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chapleines in Ordinary.

Now Lo: Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all IRELAND.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of STATIONERS. Anno Dom. M.DC.XX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR OLIVER SAINT-IOHN Knight, Lord Deputy of IRELAND.
MOst honored Lord: I have taken boldness to dedicate unto your Lordsh. these
Meditations concerning the Creation, Fall, and Restitution of Man, for the
honor I bear to your high place: and to testify my humble and thankful
acknowledgements of your manifold, noble, and ready favors done both to my
self in particular, and to this poor Church of Ireland in general: She,
being in the quality of a Pupil (as that condition is fatal to the Church)
and severed with vast Seas from the comfortable sight of her gracious Guardian,
was forced to fly to your defense that bear his Sword. has often been
refreshed by it, and seldom implored aid in vain. Proceed with diligence
and constancy, in this honorable protecting of Christ his Ministers. The
cheerful respects or entertainements given in that kind, make you resemble
him the better which puts you in trust: they will make true Religion shine
in the Church, piety, obedience, tranquillity flourish in the land, and
accumulate God his blessings, the Churches, and Commonweals upon your person
and Government: which no man can wish more cordially then

Your Lordsh. most affectionate, to do you honor, ARMAGH.

THE GLORY OF MAN'S CREATION.
GENESIS 1. VER. 26. Furthermore God said, Let Us make man in our own Image,
according to our likeness.


TWo things are considerable in this Text: first, the Creator: secondly, the
Creature. And so it will help us in the knowledge of God, and of our selves.

Concerning the former, S. Hilarie says, Perfecta scientia est sic Deum scire,
vt licet non ignorabilem, tamen inenarrabilem scias. creden^dus est,
intelligendus est, adorandus est, and his officijs eloquendus est; This is a
perfect knowledge so to know God, not as one that could not be known at all,
but as one that cannot be expressed. he must be believed, he must be
understood, he must be worshipped, and with these offices he must be spoken
of.

Poets write that Prometheus made man of clay; Res eos non fefellit, sed nomen
artificis, mistaking not the thing it self, but the artificers name: 1. Cor.
15.47.
for the first man was of the earth earthie. Prometheus was not the Architect
in this building; for the Holy Ghost teaches us here, by the pen of Moses,
that it was God which said, Let us make man, therefore it is he that has made
us and not we our selves. Psalm. 100.3.


Yet he might have the concurrence and aid of others with him, No help in our
creation.

Esa 44. I am the Lord that made all things that spread out the heavens alone,
and stretched out the earth by myself.

Romans 11.34.35 He spoke not to the Angels.


because he says, Let Us make man; as if many were joined together in the
business. Not so neither: for, Who has known the mind of the Lord? or was
his Counsailor, and has taught him? who has given him first, and he shall be
recompensed? When he said, Let Us make man, he spoke not unto the Angels. Are
they not all ministering Spirits? and then how should they be creating powers?
They are our fellow servants, creatures as we are, and beneficiaries of God his
graces with us; not consorters or companions of his glory. They are sent forth
to minister for their sake that be heirs of salvation, not to be founders or
coadiutors of our creation. They cannot be servants in the one, and master
workmen in the other: they cannot be creatures and creators: they cannot be
Gods messengers and his compeeres too.

So man should be created in the likeness of Angels; for he says, Let us make
man in our Image. That Moses confuteth in the next verse. In the Image of God
he made man, God and Angels have not one image.
not in the image of Angels; unless any should be so vain to imagine that
there is one and the same image common to God and Angels. Some of them did
affect to be like unto the Almighty, and it was adjudged robbery, for a
document of instruction to terrify every creature from such presumptuous
comparisons, and to contain all sorts within the lists of their vocation.
Verily none but God is like unto God: the Son unto the Father: the Holy Ghost
unto them both. He only has the character and image of the invisible God, that
is the first begotten of all creatures. Philip, he that sees me, sees the
Father: again, Ioh. 14 9. Ioh. 10.30.
I and the Father are one; without inequality, without dissimilitude: When he
says, Let us make man, he leaves no inequality. reddidisti authorem cum
socium professus es. When he adds, in our image, where can be dissimilitude?

Est enim Dei filius Deo patri natura aequalis, habitu minor: In forma serui
quam accepit, minor est patre: Aug. de Trinit lib. 1. cap. 7.
In forma Dei in quo erat etiam antequam hanc accepisset, aequalis est patri:
In forma Dei, verbum per quod facta sunt omnia: In forma serui factus ex
muliere, factus sub lege, vt eos qui sublege erant redimeret. Proinde in forma
dei fecit hominem, in forma serui factus est homo, nam si pater tantum sine
filio fecisset hominem, non scriptum esset faciamus hominem ad imaginem and
similitudinem nostram For the Son of God is equal to the Father in nature,
inferior by habit: In the shape of a servant which he did take, he was less
then the Father: In the form of God which he had before he took that shape,
he was equal to the Father: in the form of God, he was that Word by whom all
things were made: in the shape of a servant he was made of the substance of a
woman, made under the law, to redeem those that were under the law. Therefore
being in the form of God he made man, and being in the shape of a servant was
himself made a man: for if the Father alone had made man without the Son,
our Text would not have set it down in these terms, Let us make man in our
own image, according to our likeness.

Seeing then that here a Noune singular, dixit Deus, is joined with a Verb
plural, faciamus hominem; and that the Scripture speaks of God in the one
number, and the other particularly as of one, and by the name of a multitude,
as of many: I need not trouble you with further search to whom he speaks
when he says, Faciamus hominem: Many persons in the unity of the Godhead.
Let us make man, but may rather call you to observe, that there be many
persons in this unity of Godhead, and yet but one substance in this plurality
of persons.

The Father eternal makes and preserves all things by his coeternall
Wisdom, with his substantial virtue. Christ teaches us this cooperation of
Father and Son: Ioh. 5.17.
My Father works as yet, and I work. Now Father and Son work not without
their love, their gladness and essential power, which is the Holy Ghost. If
all these persons do concur and join together in the work of man's
creation, we see the persons that are spoken unto, and the plurality
comprehended under faciamus. Again, by the conclusion of their decree, that
this excellent creature should be stamped with the print of their own image,
you may discern the unity of their substance; because all three have but one
image, ad imaginem nostram.

But one God.
And indeed there can be but one thing that is infinite. Will you make more then
one? Consider first where they shall be contained: for one infinite must be
contained every where, and fill all places; But God is infinite, therefore
there can be but one God. Other things increase by multiplication; so does not
the Godhead: whatsoever is added to it, does not multiply, but diminish it.

It is not good for man to be alone, therefore God made him a help meet for
him. Genesis 1.18.
With God it is contrary, good for him to be alone, and necessary too:
otherwise he cannot be such as the Scripture describes him: three sacred
persons without confusion, and one blessed Deity without division. Noli
intellegere vt credas, sed creed vt intelligas: intellectus enim est merces
fidei. Understand not that you may believe, but believe that you may
understand; for understanding is thereward of faith.

The work of creation belongs to none but to this Godhead alone. Ierem. 10.
The work of creation belongs to the Godhead alone.

Ierem. 10.11. Revel. 14.7.


Let the gods perish that made not heaven and earth. And on the other side, he
that did it, the Angel would have adored, Worship him that made heaven and
earth.

It is attributed to the Father partcularly, How it is attributed to the Father.

Act. 4.24.27.


Act. 4. Thou O Lord God which have made heaven and earth etc. doubtless
against thy holy Son Jesus, Herod and Pontius Pilate gathered. The like is
ascribed to him also in the articles of our faith, where we profess a Belief
in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and yet we hold
firmly that the works of the Godhead Quoad extra, be (...), actions common to
the whole Trinity, wherein all three persons do so concur, and keep
correspondencie, that every one has neuertheless some peculiar operation
apart. As for example: The incarnation of the Son of God, was an action or
common work of the whole Trinity; yet the Father had a peculiar part in it,
namely, to send his Son: And the Son again had his part, to take flesh,
and to combine it into the unity of his person; which is not communicable to
either of the other two persons: for neither Father nor Holy Ghost could be
incarnate. It was not the Nature of God that did take the Nature of man, for
then all three persons must have been incarnate. The Word only, being the
second person in Trinity, was made flesh, and took the seed of Abraham; the
person only was incarnate, which is peculiar to the Son alone, and cannot
be communicated to the Father or Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost had another part in that business; he came upon the blessed
Virgin, ouershadowed her, and by purifying that part of her substance, built up
a body fit for the Word.

So we do say in this work of creation, It was a common action of the whole
Trinity; and nevertheless for distinction and order sake, we say, That there
was one operation of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy
Ghost. The Father, as Basil writes, is (...), the Son (...), the Holy Ghost
(...). The Father the commanding cause, the Son the working cause, and the
Holy Ghost the finisher. The Father creates by his will, the Son by his
operation and work, the Holy Ghost by giving life and motion. The beginning of
the work is in the Father, and he creates all things by his Wisdom or
Word, and the Holy Ghost nourishes, hatcheth, houereth over the creatures to
infuse life and motion into them. The Father does not exclude Son or Holy
Holy Ghost.
In the Creed and wheresoever else the Father is called creator of heaven and
earth, it does not exclude the Son and Holy Ghost out of this business, but
shows the manner and order of the action, and which person has precedence.

The first work of the Godhead fitly attributed to the first person
Is not the creation, which was the first outward work of the Godhead, fitly
attributed to the first person, that is of himself and of no other? Surely
this work sorteth best with the Majesty of the Father. But that does not
exclude the other two persons, as if they had no part in the matter of
creation. 1. Cor. 8. 1. Cor. 8.6.
the Son is called the only Lord. How? Surely not to infringe the Fathers
power, but to exclude Idols and fained gods. So is the creation given to the
Father, to exclude creatures and vain gods; not for derogation of any thing
from Son and Holy Ghost. Act. 14. We preach unto you, Act. 14.15.
that you should turn from these vain idols, unto the living God that made
heaven and earth.

They were joined therefore in the creation of all things else. Three persons
joined together in creation of all things.
But the Holy Ghost did so direct the Secretary of this business, that here it
is conspicuous: the first revelation of the Trinity appears in the creation
of man, First revelation of Trinity in the creation of man.
that he might so worship and acknowledge God.

Besides other things that be extraordinary here, and different from his
former course: there he spoke the word and they were made; he commanded and
all things else were created: here he takes a greater work in hand, because
he orders all above the vulgar: there he left the beasts and trees unto the
earth to be fashioned; here he takes the work into his own hands, and
frames man himself: he performs the office of a true parent; he made the
body, he infused the soul, Illius est totum quicquid sumus. There he biddes
other things come out of the earth alive instantly; here the producing of man
has a privilege, and is not done so suddenly: there was nothing but producat
terra; here the business is not passed over with a bare mandate, but we have
the summons of a Council, Faciamus homine^. O the deepenesse of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of this Council! O great Senate, where all
things were determined! Circumspect, where every occurrent was foreseen!
Holy, where nothing was done upon advantage! Just, where place is not left for
any complaint!

What could escape such a consultation, where the Father advises with his
Wisdom, considers seriously with his holy Spirit? not for difficulty that
was found in this business, more then in the rest: Naturae imperat,
possibilitati non obtemperat: What was hard to him, cui velle est fecisse,
whose will was powerful, that has done whatsoever he pleases both in heaven
and earth? Whereto then serves this deliberation? Verily to teach us that our
creation was eminent.

The skillful hand of great Besaleel the cunning artificer of all the world,
makes it eminent: the devise held by these three sacred persons for the
adorning of it, makes it eminent: the arrest and resolution of their
conference, that they would make man according to their own image and
similitude, makes it most eminent. Can any thing be more excellent then the
image of him that is author of all excellencies? Nothing certainly but the
pattern it self. And if he be magnified of all things else, there is yet more
cause that his praise should never go out of our mouths: Aug. in Psa. 70.
In prosperity, because he does comfort us: in adversity, because he does
correct us: before we were, because he has made us: afterward, because he
adorned us: when we sin, because he forgiueth us: when we turn again,
because he helps us: when we persist, because he crowns us. To him be all
honor and glory both here and throughout all generations. Amen.

Thus I leave the Creator, with thanksgiving, and come now to treat of the
creature.

In the next Chapter Moses records man's creation; The Lord God also made man
of the dust of the earth: Genesis 2.7.
That none should please themselves too much in the flesh, it was made of dust,
and returns to dust again. Why man was made of dust and turns to dust
again.
But this Text calls us to consider of the quality, ornament, and fashion,
rather then of the matter or substance of our creation, Let us make man
according to our image.

The Scripture gives this Image, both to the Son of God, and unto man; not
alike: The Son of God and man bear the image of God.
for man is not the whole image of God; the Son is: Man is not the essential
image, nor coeternall, nor of equal Majesty with God, as Christ is: man is
the created, finite, and image of gratuitie; not the natural or engraven image
made unto the image of God: the Son is the very image of God, not made, nor
created, but begotten.

In the beginning God made man right; He looked upon all that he had made, and
they were very good. Genes. 1.31.
Besides this general goodness; Man had some extraordinary perfection.
it seems here that in particular man had some extraordinary perfection, as
it were a Sun of brightness shining in him: for Moses relates not a bare
creation, but a creation accomplished with the image of God.

I see you are not unwilling to hear my poor meditation and discourse hereof:
let me beg the assistance of your prayers also; then I trust God will guide
it to his glory, and your better satisfaction: otherwise it is a hard province
that I take in hand. For what experience can we have of this light, that feel
nothing but darkness within our selves? We can have no knowledge of this
image by fruition, but by want of it. And what if the light of Scripture
fails too? Verily either my eyes be dim or there is not much set down in
precise terms, wherein Adam his perfection did consist; Yet we may happily
espy aglimpse thereof in the darkness that possesses us. Contraries set
together, do clear one another: and by the reparation of mankind, some
estimate will be made, what dignity it was from whence he fell.

Flaccius Illiricus, a man otherwise notably learned; when he comes to consider
the nature and condition, as well of original righteousness (which is
certainly a great part of the image we seek for) as of original sin: dares
not say they be accidents, lest he should extenuate them. So by Flaccius his
implication, this image must be the very substance of man, and then necessarily
either body or soul. Sure not the body; that is but a lump of earth, The
body of man is not the image of God.
and has no representation of God at all: unless we should make him a muddie
God, as we are called earthie by reason of these bodies of clay.

Again, when the image of God is defaced, yet we see the body remains
whole and entire. Anthropomorphites and Jews may entertain such opinions:
Christians will easily conceive that the body can be no image of God.

Neither is it the soul of man; so when a man has lost the image of God, The
soul is not the image of God.
he should loose his soul withal: and after his fall man should have no soul
until his regeneration and new birth.

Are not the souls of many wicked ones in hell? Surely the image of God shall
never come into hell, but that substance of man only, which is destitute of
Gods image. The image of God shall be with God in life, and everlasting joy.

Let no man imagine that this image is any part of the soul now destroyed, and
lost by man's fall: No part of the soul is the image of God.
the other powers of the soul remaining safe and without hurt. Forseeing the
soul is Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, it cannot be that any part
of the soul should be lost, but that the whole substance must perish with it;
yea, and this inconvenience would follow (for contraries must be sub eodem
genere) that original sin, which is opposite to this image, should be
reckoned only for a part of man's soul: and so the corruption thereof should
not spread it se^fe to the whole man, but be restrained only to one part of
him, and the rest abide sound without infection.

You see that the image of God, is neither body nor soul, nor any part of one
or other. What then? Verily the rightnesse and perfection, connaturall and
concreated in both.

A faithful Secretary says here, that man was made to the image of God;
therefore it was no one portion of him that was made to that image, but the
whole man. If the soul only had been made to the image of God, then must it
be the soul alone that offended, The soul only not made to the image of God.
the soul only that is punishable for the guilt of sin: But the Scripture
testifies that it was not the soul alone, that offended in eating the
forbidden fruit; for the eyes also were in that trespass, the ears, the
hands, the heart, and the whole body, as we see by the sequel.

The soul certainly is the fayrer subject, The body is not incapable of the
image of God. 1. Cor. 6.19.
and the more beautiful harbor: but the body was not incapable of the image
of God; then how should it be the Temple of the Holy Ghost? That which
receives God, is capable of his image.

I will not be contentious in the cause, for the Church of God has no such
custom: but it seems very reasonable, for that to carry the image of God
before man's fall, That bare the image before man's fast, which is redeemed and
sanctified to bear ^t again, 1. Cor. 6.20.
which is redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and sanctified to
bear this image again. And Christ has redeemed the whole substance of man,
body and soul; Know ye not that ye are bought with a price? glorify God
therefore in your bodies, and in your spirits, which are Gods: therefore the
image of God was in both.

What shall I say of our Regeneration? Does it not show where the image of God
was placed? Is it not a restitution and reparation of that which was decayed or
lost? And we are regenerate both in body and soul; therefore the image of God
was in both. If the body be renewed, if it be redeemed, if it be the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, if it look to be glorified; why should it be unworthy to
beat some portion of Gods image?

The image of God.
The image of God in my understanding, is that high perfection of whole Adam,
and the integrity of all the powers both of his body and of his soul, and
that conformity or congruitie that he had with God his founder and Architypus.

In that which follows you do expect, and I will endeavor to show, what
things they be that this image does comprehend.

Theodoret.
Some say that man was made to the image of God, in that dominion and power
which was given him. The words following our Text, do favor that opinion; Let
us make man in our image, and let him rule over the fish of the Sea, Image of
God in dominion.
and over the foul of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth,
and over every thing that creeps and moves under the earth.

S. Basil. Mox atque creatus es, princeps creatus es: As Soon as thou wast
created, thou wast made a Prince. again, Illud, Faciamus et Dominetur, declarat
ibi esse imaginem Dei vbi potentia est dominandi: Those terms, Let us make,
and, Let him have rule, declares the image of Cod to be, where the power of
government is. And who can doubt of this in Adam, that reads how the beasts
came to do their homage and fealty to him, as to the Lord and great master
of all the world?

The Apostle would have the man to pray bare headed, for as much as he is the
image and glory of God: 1. Cor. 11.7.
but the woman is the glory of the man, and not the image of God. This may not
be understood of the integrity and rightnesse of the inner man; thereof the
woman was partaker as well as the man: in the Lord there is neither male nor
female. Therefore it must be understood of the glory of dominion; that
ecclesiastical and oeconomicall power was given to the man, and denied to the
woman.

So then, to be created to the image of God, is to be placed in authority and
government. Hereupon the Magistrates in Scripture are called gods, Psalm. 82.
Psalm. 82.6.
because of their power.

Behold one portion, not the whole image of God; whereunto unless inward
rightnesse be added, that power may soon degenerate into cruelty; and then it
is so much the more dangerous in man then in any other creature, because his
injustice is armed with reason. Therefore in the image of God, we do join,
with that power which I have spoken of, knowledge and righteousness, as
guardians and moderators of his power.

Ephesians. 4.24.
S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. places the image of God in righteousness and holiness,
figuratively by Synecdoche. For albeit these be principal and special parts
of the image of God, yet more is requisite: they are not all, but such as we
ought chiefly to seek, because the rest do follow them. And now if you please
to make trial, you may find them both very plentiful in Adam.

First of his knowledge: if it may be esteemed by the objects, it will be
plain that he knew God, the creatures, and himself. Was it possible that he,
carrying the image of God, receiving rules of his life immediately from God,
having most sweet and familiar conference and conversation with God, should be
ignorant of any thing that pertayned to God, and meet for him to know? Again,
knowing God truly and rightly, what could he want in the knowledge of the
creatures? He that gave names to every beast, according to their disposition
and nature, and he that received charge from God to dress the Garden; needed
no Gesner, no Pliny, no Aristotle to instruct him de Historia animalium, or to
inform him of the natures of any of the creatures. And was his knowledge like
hypocrites eyes, that see, extramittendo, non intromittendo, quick abroad and
dull at home; able to discern moates in others, and not beams in themselves?
No, Adam was not so; he understood as much of himself, as he did of any thing
else.

Though he was in a deep sleep when Eve was taken out of him, and felt
nothing; though the rib which she was made of, was closed up again, and flesh
put into the place thereof, that he missed nothing; yet as soon as the woman
was brought unto him, he cried out by and by, This is flesh of my flesh, and
bone of my bone: which he could never have done, without an admirable light and
knowledge of himself and his own nature.

I have given you a taste of his knowledge: consider now, and look if it were
eclipsed by any waywardnes or indisposition of his will. Genesis 2.17.
The fashion of the commandment proves the contrary; At what day soever thou
eatest the fruit, thou shall die the death. Sure the justice of God is so
unreprovable, that he would never have mentioned, much less inflicted
penalty, had not the will of man been most free to perform all that was
required.

God made man right; and what rightnesse could he have without a free will? He
was created to the image of God; and is any thing more agreeable thereunto,
then true and perfect liberty? He was crowned with glory and honor; and
what honor can there be, where liberty and freedom wants?

To conclude this point then: As Adams mind did rightly know God, that he would
be worshipped with fear and love; so did his heart and will accord to do it
affectionately with all their power. Neither was there any thing at all in the
whole nature of man (for then he did not so much as think of sin) but that
his mind might understand all righteousness, and that which he understood the
whole man might desire, and that which he desired, he might perform also,
without any interruption or let. Mark then the righteousness of that blessed
man: As God was all (...), and embraced man with a fatherly affection; so Adam
in a kind of interchange of piety, was all (...), and interteyned the love of
God with true love again.

Oh that he had been as firm and constant to the end as he was staight and
right in the beginning. Improbitas illo fuit admirabilis aeuo. He was created
to the image of God, and therefore also to immortality and perpetual society
with God.

If man had been mortal by his creation, he had not then been made to the
image of God: Mortal nature is not the image of God immortal; neither is the
immortal God a pattern of a mortal creature.

Besides, death and mortality came of sin, and are the rewards of sin. And
then Adam was so free from sin, that he thought not of it before his fall;
therefore no place left for death: and where death cannot enter, there must be
immortality. You will ask then, how he should have bin preserved from age,
from infirmity, and from death? Well enough, if nothing had come to procure
them.

Si enim vestibus Israelitarum praestitit Deus per annos quadraginta sine vllo
detrimento proprium statum: Aug. de bono Coniugal. c. 2.
quanto magis praestaret corporibus obedientium praecepto suo foelicissimum
quoddam temperamentum certi status: donec in melius conuerterentur, non morte
hominis qua corpus ab anima deseritur, sed beata commutatione ab animali ad
spiritualem vitam: For if God by the space of forty years gave a continuance
to the Israelites attire, without any hinderance or wearing them out; how much
more would he have given a most happy temperature of a certain perpetuity to
their bodies, obeying his commandment, until they had received a better
change; not by death, wherein the soul does forsake the body, but by a
blessed change from the natural to the spiritual life.

This is the received opinion of Divines; That if Adam had not sinned, then
as soon as the number of Saints had been accomplished, men should have been
translated from earth to heaven; Heb. 11.^. 2. Reg. 2.11.
from their natural life to the spiritual life, as we read of Henoch and
Elias.

Immortality is the last beam, and as it were the close of Adams brightness,
to give continuance to the rest of his endowments; and by them also
immortality it self is illustrated. For if it be severed from the rest, then
is it a detriment, and no benefit: as in the wicked and damned, immortality
shall be no radiant beam of light, but a perpetuity of darkness. This is
one point to be considered in Adams immortality.

Another, that his immortality must not be measured by the extent thereof: for
so you shall find it but short, narrow, diarie; an immortality peradventure
of one days continuance. But look upon it in the foundation, and there you
may find matter to prove it. For if Adam, after he was made infirm and
bruised by sin, adjudged to death, and expulsed out of Paradise, did yet for
all that linger in the earth, Genesis 5.5. and 27.
after it was cursed too, nine hundredth and thirty years; Iared nine hundredth
sixty two years, Methusalem nine hundredth and sixty nine years: might they
not have lived more easily so many thousands or millions of years, in their
healthful Park, if they had persisted with integrity? No doubt they might.
That holy place which cast out sinners, would never have admitted death. For
assurance hereof, he had an infallible pawn and pledge in the Tree of life,
as a Sacrament that consigned immortality to him: So he had this compleme^t of
Gods image, because it was in his power not to die.

Farewell then mortal and immortal Adam: immortal from God, and mortal by
your self: immortal in creation, and mortal in trespass, mortal in act,
but immortal in possibility and power.

Now you have, according to the slenderness of my understanding, the whole
quadrant of man's perfection; the height, and depth, and length, and breadth,
even all the dimentions of the image of God: squared on one side with absolute
authority over all the creatures, on the other side with the perspicacie of
knowledge, on the third, with sincerity of righteousness, on the fourth, with
possession of immortality; that which way soever he be placed, you may find
him a perfect and happy man.

And who could have desired more? I guess what you think; but so it would not
have bin well: I would have all Praedicatores, non argumentatores, Magnifiers
rather then disputers of Gods works.

Peradventure you wish that these rich jewels might have been so fastened to
our parents, that they should not have lost them; and that man when he had all
this honor, might have been no changling. If the creature had received this,
what should the Sovereign have reserved for himself? Immutabilitie is so
peculiar to God alone, that it cannot be communicated to any other. Esa. 42.8.
Does he not say, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo? I will not give my glory to
another? Does he not say, Mal. 3.6.
Ego Deus, and non mutor? I am God, and in me is no change? Does he not
therein plainly let us understand, that all things else must be variable? Does
not our Text tell us, that his purpose was to make a man, and not a God? Was it
not sufficient that God made him right? I, but he left man power to sin
also. True: yet in that he sinned, the fault was not in God that left him
power, but in the man himself, that abused this power, and converted it to the
use of sin, which he received for the glory of not sinning. Albeit he sinned
by means of the freedom which he received, yet did he sin, not because he
could, but because he would sin: will you have that proved?

When the Devil and his accomplices transgressed, the holy Angels did not
transgress: Why? Not because they could not, (for they had free will too) but
because they would not. O malum liberum arbitrium, quod adhuc incolume parum
habuit firmitatis: O unhappy free will, which had so little constancy when it
was sound.

Let us put the case, that God had given man such a light as he could not
extinguish: What praise? what glory? what retribution should he have expected
for doing well, if he could not have done otherwise? what then? If God made man
right, and afterward left him in the hand of his own counsel; was it not that
his well doing should be the more glorious, when he had power to do otherwise?

When the kind father had given one moytie of his goods to an unthrifty
son, Luc. 15.12.13.
which wasted it by prodigality, Where was the fault, in the father that gave
it, or in the son that spent it to his overthrow?

Cur ergo non faceret Deus hominem, quamvis eum peccaturum praenosceret: cum
and stantem coronaret, Aug. de catechis. rudib. cap. 18.
and cadentem ordinaret, and surgentem adiuvaret, semper and vbique gloriosus
bonitate, iustitia, clementia? Wherefore then should not God make man, although
he had a foreknowledge that the man would sin? when as he crowned the man
standing, ordered his fall, and did help his rising; even God that is always
and every where glorious in goodness, righteousness and clemency. So let
him be acknowledged and praised in the Church through all generations. AMEN.

FINIS.
THE MISERY OF MAN'S FALL.
ROMANS 5. VERSE. 9. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous.


THE obedience of Christ is much magnified, and very justly: it failed not in
the least tittle; it continued to the last period of humane, things, even unto
death: he preferred it above life, and was content to lose his life rather then
his obedience; therefore it was great every way. But how we may reckon so
securely of it, as if we had performed it our selves; or how one man's obedience
may serve so many thousand believers, even good consciences sometimes waver;
others that have not been instructed, wonder, and certain scoff at it as a
Paradox. For satisfaction of all, the Apostle here makes the matter plain, by
a golden comparison of the ruin and restitution of mankind. These two, being
contraries, must follow one rule: But there is no other course taught, no
manner delivered for the restitution, save that which happened before in the
ruin of mankind; Therefore all doubts, wonderments, and scoffs may cease.
Christ is no less effectual to bring righteousness into the world, then Adam
was to bring sin: But by one, that is, by Adam alone, sin entered over all;
And is it possible then that Christ's righteousness should be defective? The
Apostle says no to it: As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: So
by the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous.

Quem supplantavit aliena malitia, prodesse ei potest charitas aliena. If one
man's disobedience wounded me, may not another man's obedience heal me? Yes
verily: Even so then (sweet Lord) let it be thy good pleasure to deliver me.
For I was taken by theft out of the land of the Ebrewes, Genesis 40.15.
and cast into this dungeon, if not altogether guiltless, yet in respect of
him that seduced me, somewhat innocent. Is not this Naomie, that beautiful
creature, that was like a little god upon earth? adorned with his image, armed
with his authority, inspired with his righteousness, furnished with an
ability and power of immortality? Yes verily But the voice of the Turtle dove
is now he^ (...) our land: Cant. 2.12.
a voice of sorrow and heaviness, therefore call him not Naomie, Ruth. 1.20.
that is, beautiful (as she says in Ruth) but call him Mara, that is, bitter.
For he that might have perpetuated our glory, in stead thereof has left us
much bitterness.

Is it not a grievous necessity, that he has conveyed guiltiness sooner then
life? that we should be sinful before we have sinned? transgressors ere we
have trespassed? that one man should eat of the sour grape, and all our teeth
be set on edge? Iere. 31.29.


But complaints are not pleasing, when they be necessary: and I would not begin
my tunes with a dump. The consideration of Gods purpose and counsel herein is
of sweeter consequence. And yet the holy One of Israel is so free from any
charge in Adams fall, or other heavy occurrents in the dispensation of the
Old Testament, that his principal intents are only in the New. Here is the
body, there be but shadows: here is the acco^plishme^t, there is but the A,
B, C, and beginnings. the truth is here, there are but figures: or if truth be
there too, it is so muffled up with ceremonies, that it cannot be easily
discerned, without some luster from hence. For the Law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Ioh. 1.17.


Adams revolt, and the contagion thereof, registered in the Old Testament, are
not the principal matters of God his intendment: if we should rest there and
go no further, what can they yield us but astonishment, horror, and sad
impressions?

The chief decree, purpose, and counsel of God from all eternity, was to
elect men to salvation for his glory. In the execution of this decree Adam
fell, not without the foresight of God, who in his unspeakable bounty would
never have suffered it, as S. Augustine writes, unless he had been also of
omnipotent wisdom, to extract good out of evil, and to bring light out of
darkness. Therefore he subordinated it, made it serve his purpose, and set
Adam for a sign. So our Apostle writes, that he is a figure of him that is
to come, Verse. 14.

The first man did shadow out the second: the earthy man represented the
heavenly: that which should be performed in the one, was foreshewed in the
other. Adams disobedience was a typical prophecy of Christ his obedience: the
propagation of his sin, and the punishment thereof a prophetical testimony
of the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the efficacy thereof.

Seeing then that it pleased God in our very fall to reveal the goodness of
his counsel, for our restitution: to propound Adam as a type of Christ, and by
woeful experience of that we feel come from the former, sweetly to forewarne
and instruct us comfortably, what to expect from the other; we have the more
encouragement to attend to this comparison, that is auowed with so good
authority: Psalm. 126.5.
If we begin in tears, we shall reap in joy. If the entrance, propagation,
and punishment of sin be tragical and sorrowful; the profligation of it,
and the reentry, diffusion, certainty and glory of righteousness will exceed
in comfort.

The comparison offers us a view of both: of the beginning and progress of
sin, and righteousness too. The Apostle begins first with sin; not for
order, or any original prioritie that it had in the beginning: he says, that
by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners; at the first therefore
was nothing but righteousness.

Now the course is preposterous: for that is not first which is spiritual, 1.
Cor. 15.46.
but that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual.

Even so the Apostle proceeds; not to righteousness, which was first in
order, but to sin, which has gotten to be the first by disorder: Esau got
precedence, but Jacob has the blessing.

As by one man's disobedience etc. It is spoken indefinitely: therefore for this
one man, if we make search and enquire who he was, it is not altogether without
cause. In the Epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.14.
Saint Paul qualifieth Adam his offense: for he says that Adam was not
deceived, but the woman was deceived, and was in the transgression.
Ecclesiasticus cap. 25. A muliere initium factum est peccati, and per illam
omnes morimur: Ecclus. 25.24.
Sin had beginning from the woman, and by her means we do all die.

In like sort S. Augustine writes also, lib. 4. de ciuit. Dei cap. 11. Non
existimavit Satan. The Devil did not think that the man would be easily
credulous, or soon to be beguiled, but by yielding to the error of another. As
it was with Aaron, who in likelihood would not consent to the peoples error,
for making of an Idol, by inducements of persuasion; but was feign to yield
to the importunity of their sway. As also it is not credible that Solomon did
serve idols of ignorance, but that he was drawn to such sacrilege by feminine
flatteries and inticements: So S. Aug. conceiueth of Adam, that he believed not
the Serpent, but consented to his wife of matrimonial indulgence, and would
not be severed from his only consort and companion, not in the communion of
her sin. Etsi credendo non sunt ambo decepti, peccando tamen ambo capti sunt
and Diaboli laqueis implicati: Although man and woman both were not deceived in
believing the Serpent; yet both of them were catched and entangled in the
Devils snares.

But when God says in Genesis, Genesis 3.22.
Behold Adam is become like to one of us, knowing good and evil, it confuteth
S. Augustines conjecture, and shows manifestly that Adam also was
circumvented with error, and overtaken in fraud: else why is this work put
upon him? Wherefore does God vpbraid him so ironically, that he is now like
unto God? This Sarcasmus, in my understanding, is a taxation of his credulous
temeritie, in believing the Serpents promise. Irridens vtique Deus non
approbans hoc dixit, quod putabas te similem fore nostri; ergo quia voluisti
esse quod non eras, desijsti esse quod eras. S. Ambr. de Elia and ieiun. For
God speaks it by derision, not by allowance: Thou had a conceit to become
like unto us; therefore in affecting to be more then thou wast indeed, thou
have lost even that excellency which thou did receive.

1. Tim. 2.14.
When S. Paul writ to Timothy, that Adam was not deceived, but the woman; he
meant not to extenuate the man's offense, or to exempt him from the fraud or
imposture of the Devil: but to show whether sex was more credulous, infirm,
and like to be seduced. Herein he concludes the woman to be the weaker
vessel, and forbids her to teach in the Church, because that when she was
yet perfect and sound, the Serpent began with her as the easier to be deceived.

Saint Paul did think that the Serpent would resort to his former instrument,
and so hold the ministry in less regard, for the weakness of their sex.
Behold S. Paul's project in the words to Timothy.

Here in this Text another matter is in hand. No question here, whether the man
or woman was first in preuarication: were that the point, the Devil in his
pride would have the start of both; He was a sinner from the beginning. The
propagation of sin is the thing now considerable, and what person it was that
brought a succession of sin throughout all mankind. And as well here, as in
all other places, the Scripture attributes the matter of propagation, not to
women but to men.

Therefore we will dismiss Eve, if you please, as our Savior Christ dismissed
the woman taken in adultery; Ioh. 8.11.
not for an innocent, but because she is not here impleaded: Adam is the man
which the Apostle now charge. Wherewith is it? For gluttony, or intemperance
of his throat? No: there was affluence of all other delicacies in Paradise to
satisfy such desires. Is it for his curiosity and vain love of knowledge?
Neither: For although that be a fault, to be wise beyond sobriety, yet could
it not have brought so heavy a sequel. What was it then? He affected that
fruit, Non vescendi libidine, sed animositate exultandi; not in any lingering
desire to the meat, but in a kind of lustiness to break out. What greater
lustiness, then that this child of the earth was not content to be like unto
God, unless he might also be equal with him?

Quid huic deerat, quem misericordia custodiebat, docebat veritas, regebat
iustitia, pax fouebat. Sed heu ad multam insipientiam and perniciem sibi ac
posteris suis descendit de Jerusalem in Hiericho. Siquidem incidit in latrones
a quibus legitur despoliatus. Annon despoliatus qui domino veniente nudum se
esse conqueritur. nec vero poterat revestiri, vel ablata sibi recipere
vestimenta, nisi Christus amitteret sua. O venenum quod non curatur nisi
veneno.

Saint Paul here frames two inditements against him: the one for
disobedience; the other for transmitting his sin. By one man's disobedience
many were made sinners. Observe the right valuation, and true quality of Adam
his trespass: that it was not any light error, but an absolute prevarication
of both Tables; a disobedience to God, and a grieuance unto men.

Primordialis lex est data in paradiso quasi matrix omnium praeceptorum: That
first Law (says Tertullian) given in Paradise, was the sum and comprehension
of the whole divine Law, that was published afterward. Therefore in the breach
thereof, all manner of offenses are contained.

But if the fruit were good, why should it not be tasted? if it were evil,
what did it in paradise? The fruit certainly was good, but obedience better;
because the whole law is performed with obedience.

Indeed nothing is more expedient for the soul then obedience. And if it
behooue every soul to obey: the servant his Lord, the child his father, the
wife her husband; all to obey the Prince: how much imports it man to obey
God? 1. Sam. 15.23.
for rebellion is as execrable as witchcraft, which is a manifest revolt and
disauowing of God: and he hates nothing more then the disobeence of his
commandments. That now is this one man's case.

As by the disobedience of one man etc. If I should here discuss, where his
disobedience began first; whether in his mind, or in his body: some happily
would say, Hieron. ep. 29.
as S. Augustine writes, That it were more worth our labor, to seek remedy
to get out, then to argue how or by what part we came first into the pit of
sin. And that, God willing, shall not be omitted in the fit place, but
reserved to another time. In the mean while, Quod si quisquam dicat, If any
man think (says S. Augustine) that the body is the first cause of all
sins, certainly he has not well considered the whole nature of mankind.
Indeed the body that is corruptible, aggrauateth the soul, and the earthy
mansion keeps down the mind. Vt vidi, vt perij, vt me malus abstulit error?

Oftentimes our right eyes offend us, because they roll, they wander; they are
regenerate but in part, and death enters into the soul (...) that window.
Matthew. 6.23.
Si oculus tuus fuerit nequam, totum corpus est tenebrosum: If thine eye be
evil, thy whole body is full of darkness.

Shut that window in the name of God, make a covenant with it, turn it away
that it behold not vanity; Romans 6.13.
Give not your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin.

Surgit ira: noli dare irae linguam ad maledicendum, noli dare manum aut pedem
ad feriendum. non surgeret ista ira irration abilis, nisi peccatum esset
interius, sed toll illi regnu^, non habeat arma vnde contra te pugnet: discet
etiam non surgere, cum arma non coeperit inuenire. S. Aug. Tract. in Ioh. 41.

The bodily members are the instruments, they are not the original of sin.
Will you have a proof thereof in the matter we handle? It is not to be
doubted, but this one man, and the woman too, had seen the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil formerly without any lust or desire to taste the
fruit: the faith that he then bare to God, was a guardian to his heart; and
that to all his senses. But after his heart had once revolted from faith and
loyalty, all the outward senses were corrupted with it instantly.

Every man is tempted, Iam. 1.14.
when he is drawn away by his own Concupiscence, and is entised. Then when
lust has conceived, it brings forth the act of sin, but the beginning is
from the mind within. Matthew. 15.19.
Out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false testimonies, slanders. Non potest fieri (says S. Augustine) vt
habeat mala facta, qui habet cogitationes bonas; facta enim de cogitationibus
procedunt: It is not possible that a man exercised in good thoughts, should be
much tainted with ill actions; for all actions proceed from our thoughts. Then
keep thine heart with all diligence, Prou. 4.23.
for thereout comes life.

Therefore I cannot hold with them, that make all the sins of the soul to
proceed from the body: so the wicked Angels wanting bodies, should want sin
too; and the spirits of the damned as soon as they be sequestered from their
bodies, should cease also from their sin. It is but a Poets opinion
concerning souls purity: Igneus est ollis vigor and Coelestis origo
Aeneid. lib. 6.
Seminibus: quantum non noxia corpora tardant;
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
Virgil is no classical author in matters of doctrine: the Fathers of the
Church are more authentical S. Bernard speaking of the soul, says otherwise;
Prior reparanda est, quam constat corruisse priorem. Anima siquidem corrupta in
culpam, fecit quoque vt corpus corrumperetur in poenam. So S. Augustine
resolves the doubt; that the corruption of the flesh, which ladeth the soul,
was not the cause, but the punishment of the first sin: and it was not the
corruptible flesh that made the soul sinful, but it was the sin of the
soul that made the body corruptible. Est men's primum veteris hominis membrum,
and primus peccati administer, nativa prauitate infecta, and suggestionum
Sathanae capax; hinc motus praui, mali and de malo, quamvis nihil accesserit
vltra his men's impellit voluntatem, quae tunc altera peccati ministra
efficitur, and concupiscentias parit, tunc tandem corpus ab animo impulsum
totum accenditur, huc atque illuc transuersum rapitur; omnes sensus adeoque
omnia corporis tyranni arbitrio se sistunt, Gal. 5.19.20.
ad perpetranda omnia quae imperat. hinc fructus amari qui Gal. 5. recensentur.
The mind is the first member of the old man, and minister of sin, infected
certainly with original prauitie, and capable of Satan's suggestions; from
hence come ill motions which are evil, and proceed from evil, if there were
nothing else: but with these the mind stirs the will, which is then made
another minister of sin, and brings forth concupiscence: then the body,
being summoned by the mind, is kindled,is transported hither and thither; so
the senses, and all parts of the body, offer themselves at the tyrants
pleasure to do all his commands: thereout spring those bitter fruits that are
rehearsed in the fifth of the Galathians.

Whether it were the one or the other: that the body were in disobedience
before the soul, or the soul before the body: whether the blind did lead
the lame, or the lame were guide to the blind; behold now both are fallen into
the ditch, and ouershadowed, not with a cloud, but with a very night of
darkness.

In this one man's disobedience we see that verified, which Christ says in the
Gospel, Ioh. 3.20.
They that do evil shun the light, because their works are evil. He is no
sooner fallen, then he becomes Lucifuga, affects darkness, and flies to
the covert to hide himself. His body and the parts thereof, are the same that
they were before; but then they were seen with glory, and now they are
covered with shame: his will is auerse, his heart is full of fear and distrust,
his very mind is darkened, which should be the light, the watchman, the
Sentinel both of body and soul; and if the light thereof be turned into
darkness, Matthew. 6.23.
O how great must that darkness be? Greater verily then the darkness of
Egypt, which was not so universal, but that there was light left in the land
of Gosen, Exodus 10.23.
where the children of Israel were.

But here, after man's disobedience darkness prevailed over all. No power of
the mind, no part of the body free or clear: he is not absolutely deprived
of natural faculties, and endowments of reason, judgment, will, as if he were
become a block; but they are depraved and decayed: he knows still, marie it
is but in part; and what part? his mind does understand, but humane things, and
not divine; earthly, and not heavenly business: his will does affect also and
desire; and what? sure bodily pleasures or delights, not spiritual joys.

Wist ye not that when the fountain of all goodness was forsaken, nothing would
remain but sin? when the father of lights was left, that darkness would
cover all?

Sine tua luce o lux beatissima non est veritas, adest error, adest vanitas:
Aug. Soliloq. ca. 3.
non est discretio, adest confusio: adest ignorantia, non est scientia: adest
caecitas, non est visio: adest invium, non est via: adest mors, non est vita.
S. Aug. Solil. cap.3. Without thy light, o blessed light, there is no truth,
all is error, all is vanity: there is no distinction, all is confusion: all is
ignorance, there is no knowledge: all is blindness, there is no sight: all
impassible, there is no way: all is death, there is no life. When he believed
that which the Devil promised, was he not very worthy to find that which
God threatened?

You have heard the man's disobedience to God: It rests now to show, how also
he offended his neighbor therein, namely, by transmitting sin to his
posterity. By his disobedience many were made guilty: Here I do willingly
call you to remembrance, that Adam did not sin as an ordinary person; for so
his sin had rested in himself, and determined there. It was Jobs persuasion
in his own particular: Job 19.4.
Though I had indeed erred, mine error remains with me. Does it not hold
good correspondencie with the rule of Justice? Ezech. 18.20.
The soul that sins, that soul shall die. Adams case is not so, it is
extraordinary.

As God had beautified the whole nature of mankind with excellent gifts in this
one man, upon the condition of his loyalty and obedience: so was he resolute
to bereave it of them all in him again, as soon as he began to be refractorie
or disobedient.

Who can distaste this justice, or find any harshnes in it, when both were
propounded unto the man upon equal terms?

Hereby also it may appear that Adam sinned, not as a private man: but as the
common root or stock of mankind; as a public person, and father of us all.
When sin had once got hold of his person, must it not needs taint us all
that are partakers of his nature? Because we were all enclosed in his loins
when he sinned, he branded us all with the prints and tincture of his
rebellion. So this disobedience rested not in Adam, but became hereditarie: it
was not personal in him alone, but natural to us all, and a matter of
succession. It made him a trespasser, and us all sinners with him; whether
Pelagius will or no. (...). None is free, not a child of a day old, though
Anabaptists be mad for it.

We do all die; neither does there live a man upon earth, which shall not see
death: and therefore we do all sin, For death is the reward of sin; or
else some should be equal unto Christ, Romans 6.23.
and die without guiltines. It is clear and manifest that many die before any
act of guiltiness be committed; as infants: therefore they must have the
guiltiness of their death derived from others: That the Apostle auoweth here
to be originally from Adam. As in one person there be diverse members, which be
all guilty when the person is convicted: so in the nature of mankind, there be
many persons, as it were several members and parts thereof, and when the whole
was corrupted, every particular, communicating therewith, must needs have the
same tainture. And as a cankred root, does send forth cankred boughs; a
mass of leaven, leuened loaves; the eggs of a Cockatrise, venomous serpents:
so Adam entering into disobedience, begets disobedient children. (...); of an
ill bird, worse chickins.

Genesis 5.3.
The holy Ghost is my warrant, that Adam did beget a son, not according to the
image of God, whereunto he was created himself; for that was then abolished,
but in his own image, when it was fowly degenerated.

Judge now whether we do bear the punishment of another man's transgression,
or are guilty in our own faults. If one man's disobedience brought such an
Iliade of sorrows; what must our guiltiness be that have added many, and many
actual transgressions to his original corruption? Much every way, and too too
much.

Let no man then qualify Adams sin, or his own, with vain excuses; as if
his disobedience had not been capital, but venial, and a trifle to eat of an
apple. The less the thing was that God did forbid, the more easily he might
have forborne, and kept the commandment. No, no, there is not any thing light,
not any thing little, not any thing of small regard in disobedience, and
disobedience of God, and of such a God as he had showed himself to Adam: all
is heinous, all horrible, all heavy, all a talent of lead.

Yet in this passage I will commend a caution unto you, and wish diligent heed
to be taken of two extremities; That we neither extend our corruption too
far, lest we deprave the glory of our Creator: nor eleuate it too much, lest
we depresse the benefit of our Redeemer.

The Scholemen and Church of Rome, run too much on the left hand, and offend
in the latter; whilst they go about to make original sin (that is, the
venom which Adam has conveyed unto us) to be but a light and superficial
accident, easily removed; and, as they termed it in their late Council of
Trent, not true sin, but only the froth and scumme of sin, Session. 5. can.
6.

When original sin is thus extenuated, consider (I beseech you) what, and
how little it is that they leave to the redemption and benefit of Christ? Not
actual, not any great or enormious sin; such must be help by our own
penance, prayers, alms, and satisfaction: Nor my foul spots of original
sin; that they account to be but an ability, or disposition to sin, and a
matter of nothing. So by their doctrine, the Son of God watched and prayed,
and fasted, was tempted with hunger, thirst, buffets, scourges, indignities,
and with a most painful and shameful death, for a matter of nothing.

What is contumelious to the gracious benefit of our redemption, if this be
not? Is not this to give a thousand to our Redeemer, and ten thousand to our
selves?

Illyricus runs upon the rock, which is on the other side, and goes too
far on the right hand; persuading that the sin which Adam has conveyed to
us, to be our very substance.

Sure there cannot be any thing added to the disease in this kind, but that
which must detract from the Creator: our substance is of his building. And is
it not a strange amplification of the disease, that brings dishonor, instead
of glory to the Physician? If original sin be of man's substance, must it not
needs have tainted Christ? it is most certain that he took our whole
substance: how could he be true man, without the substance of man?

This sin which is transmitted to us all, is no part of man's nature, but a
deprauation of it, spreading it self over all, and creeping into our marrow
and most hidden entrails.

There is a secret poison within us, like unto the grains of Mustard seed,
little in the beginning, but grows to a great tree. There want no subtle
practices without us, according to the depthes of Satan, insinuated so
covertly, that they are scarce marked from whence they come, nor whither they
tend.

I would I were able to distinguish them unto you: but I cannot deliver that
which I have not received. There is morbus Mentis, and morsus Serpentis: malum
innatum, and malum seminatum: pactus Cordis, and seminarium hostis. They are
not one, but agree in one: both are the sower fruits of this man's fatal
disobedience. Thereby he received the one, admitted the other, and transmitted
both unto us all: And they are sufficient, either for conception or production
of sin. So by one man's disobedience we are all made sinners.

Peradventure some will say, that this man, by whom sin came, was received
into favor again. And what question soever others may make, my opinion is
verily according to charity, that Adam was saved, and had present forgiveness
of his sin. Then you will ask, how he should transmit that sin to his
posterity, that was remitted to himself?

Saint Augustine answers, that the Saints children descend from their parents
by carnal generation, not by spiritual regeneration. But Adams sin was
forgiven: I grant it, yet that was not a matter of nature, where the fountain
of generation rested; the forgiveness of his sin was a matter of Grace, in
the power of GOD, not in Adams flesh.

For how was his sin forgiven? not by taking sin absolutely away from him,
but by not imputing it unto him. This imputation was not in Adams power, but in
Gods good pleasure; therefore he could not transmit it to his posterity: He
transmitted only his own tainture and mortality.

You know how the Husbandman does purge and cleanse the seed that he casts
into the ground; he thresheth it from the straw, winnoweth it from the chafe,
siftieth it from all hoore, and so sows bare and clean corn: yet it comes
up not pure corn, but joined with straw, and covered with ears. How so?
Because it had these purifications, not naturally, but outwardly, by the pains
and endeavors of the Husbandman. And as it was amongst the circumcised Jews;
their children were borne with the foreskin again uncircumcised, because their
circumcision was not inward or naturally in the parent, but added outwardly by
humane violence: So it stood with Adam; though his sin were forgiven, yet
because his righteousness was altogether in Gods imputation, not in his own
nature, he transmitted sin and mortality, which he had in himself: and could
not transmit righteousness or immortality, because they were altogether
outward, in the power of God.

Another Item the Apostle gives us, that seeing our sin comes from our
selves, God is not author thereof. David speaks truly of the holy One of
Israel; Psalm. 5.4.
Thou art not a God that love wickedness, Psalm 5. Were it not strange then
for him to be author of that which he does not love?

S. John reduces all the sins in the world to three heads, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
the concupiscence of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.
These, the same Apostle says, are not of the father, but of the world.

Sin is a thing repugnant to the nature of God, and contrary to all his
properties. It cannot stand with his goodness: for being the chief and
sovereign good, he cannot be author of evil; seeing every one affects,
not that which is opposite, but that which is conformable and agreeable to his
nature, 1. Ioh. 1.5.
And God is light, and in him dwells no darkness at all.

Again, it were some impeachment of his power, to be author of sin: for
without any evil God is able to do what good he will.

The wisdom of God will not admit him to be author of sin. Good is the
proper object that draws every one his desire (as the Philosopher disputes
truly) and evil is never desired nor sought after, but through error, when
that which has but the face and outward appearance of good, is mistaken for
it, which has the true nature of good indeed. So God cannot be the author of
sin, unless you derogate some thing from his wisdom; And O Lord thine eyes
be clear, Hab. 1.13.
thou can not see evil.

If he were author of sin, he should divert and turn men away from
himself; and that were a plain denial of himself, not fit, not possible to
comply with his truth.

Neither can it hold correspondencie with his mercy: for he pittieth and is
merciful to them that sin; therefore he cannot be author thereof.

To be short, it will not sort with his justice: for he punishes sin,
because he is just; and then he cannot be author of it, but he must needs be
unjust. And is there any unrighteousness with God? That is an absurdity to be
detested, not confuted. God forbid. God forbid, Job. 34.10.
says Elihu unto Job, that wickedness should be in God, or iniquity in the
Almighty. He sent his son to take away the sins of the world, and to
dissolve the works of the Devil; therefore he creates them not: for if I
build again the things which I have destroyed, I make my self a trespasser.

Inventor vitij non est Deus, Angelus illud
Degener infami conceptum mente creavit.
1. Ioh. 3.4.
Sin, as S. John defines it, is (...), that is to say, a deprivation of that
rightnesse which the law requires in our actions: Exodus 3.14.
and God which calls himself (...), i. Ens, is causa essendi, non
deficiendi, of being, and not of failing. Seeing God is Ens, men of indifferent
judgment may see that non esse ad Deum non pertinet.

Lux non potest gignere tenebras: Sol illuminat sua natura sed non inducit
tenebras; recedente vero Sole sponte sequuntur tenebrae. Ita Deus qui natura
sua bonus est, si recedat a nobis, hoc est, justice de causis gratiam suam nobis
subtrahat, vel vt puniat nos, vel vt alijs gratia sua magis sit conspicua,
sponte peccatum sequitur. Nec necesse est vt causam peccati alibi inquiramus,
quum interiorem habeamus malam voluntate^, ad quam accedit suggestio Diaboli.
Light cannot breed darkness, the Sun lightneth properly, and induces not
darkness; but when the Sun goes away, darkness follows of their own
accord. So it is with God, who is good in himself; when he withdraws his
graces from us upon just causes, either for our punishment, or to make his
goodness more conspicuous unto others: when God has retired himself from us
upon any occasion, sin is at hand by and by to take place of it self. Let us
therefore lay the blame of sin upon the Devil that devised it, and upon our
selves that consented unto him: let us not charge God foolishly, but magnify
and praise him for his infinite goodness and mercies, in abolishing the works
of the Devil, and beseech him to beat down that crooked Serpent more and
more under our feet, even for his Christ his sake. AMEN.

FINIS.
THE SWEET Mystery of man's Reparation.
ROMANS 5. VERSE. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by
the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous.


THE last Sabbath I discussed the former part of this Text unto your most
honorable household, and now, by the assistance of God his holy Spirit, and
your Princely patience, do purpose to unfold the second.

Three points are here to be cleared; first, who this obedient person was;
secondly, the manner of his obedience; thirdly, the validity. As to the first:
This age does not afford such plenty of obedience, as may make the person
here spoken of, doubtful or ambiguous. If bare profession were good obedience,
Christ would never have told the Jews, Matthew. 21.31.
that Publicans and Harlots should go into the Kingdom of God before them:
Saul, never intending obedience, pretends it all in vain. 1. Sam. 13.13.
Some Philosophers left all they had that when they were rid of worldly cares,
they might have the more liberty to follow vanity: Et nolebant censu abundare
terreno, vt abundarent magis sensu suo. S. Bern.

If some certain religious people, have devoted themselves to obedience, their
vows make the title fayrer, but not the obligation stronger. S. Bernard
decyphered such vanities long ago, Sine defectu pauperes, sine despectu
humiles, sine labor diuites esse volunt: Holy and obedient people indeed, that
will be poor without want, humble without contempt, rich without labor, and
obedient without any reknowledgement of allegiance. They will not be like unto
other men; therefore saving our Aphorism against retaliation and Christian
charity, that nothing be done in revenge, if other men will be as peremptory
again, not to be like unto them, there shall be no great cause left (as I
suppose) for Church or Commonwealth to complain.

Difference in the obedient.
The importunity of their challenges, makes me to put difference in those that
be obedient: the person that our Text speaks of, is obedient unto God; these
pretenders, are obsequious unto men, to S. Frauncis, Benedict, Dominick,
Ignatius Loyola, and their superiors. But why should Christians, that are
borne of God, take names from men? Non ad hominis nomen ambulo, Christi nomen
teneo. Perirem si essem de part Pauli; quomodo non perirem, si essem de part
Donati. His obedience stood in performing his fathers will; theirs is exercised
in upholding man's inventions, or if they labor in obeying God, it is but in
part, and he was obedient perfectly: his person was infinite, theirs is finite;
his innocent, theirs sinful: his obedience is applicable, and beneficial unto
others: if theirs be memorable for imitation, it is well; it can never be
applicable for expiation.

The obedience that makes others righteous, Complete obedience.
must be complete, absolute, continual; so was never any humane obedience: it
is interrupted often, it has many intermissions, therefore I marvel what
security they can find, that follow after it. I should be the more afraid for
such a help: without it, I have nothing to fear but my cause alone; if I
should repose my self upon this broken staff, I must fear it, and my cause
too. Refugium nostrum non est tale: The obedience of Jesus Christ, is perfect
obedience, full of security, void of fear. He is the person then, by whose
obedience many are made righteous.

His obedience was admirable, and it suits well with his person, which is
wonderful, singular, and not to be matched: David's son, and David's Lord; the
son of Mary, and the father of eternity; the son of man, and the son of
God, Who being in the form of God, Phil. 2. v. 6, 7, 8.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but he made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made like unto
men, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himself, and became obedient
unto the death, even the death of the Cross. Two entyre and perfect natures,
combined and glewed together in one person, Emmanuel, God and man.

This makes another doubt, whether his obedience was performed in the
humanity, or in the divinity, or in both together: I answer, that he was
obedient in the humane nature alone, not in the divine. If the divine nature
could have yielded obedience, had not his incarnation been superfluous? If the
divinity had been obedient, it must have died too; for he was obedient unto
death: and is it possible to have a mortal divinity? There was no congruitie,
that one nature should undertake the obedience imposed on the other: behold a
confusion, for the Godhead to entertain and handle the business of the
manhood.

Ioh. 2.19.
Therefore his obedience was performed in the humanity; Destroy this Temple,
and I will raise it up in three days: 1. Pet. 2.24.
This he spoke of his body. So S. Peter says, That he bare our sins in his
body; and our Text teaches us, That it was the obedience of one man. It was
not then diminutio diuinitatis, no abatement of his godhead, but depositio
corporis, an humiliation of his body alone. And that had not auayled without
an union, and concurrence of both natures in one person.

Tolerare passiones nunquid posset nisi homo? Mori and crucifigi and humiliari
posset nisi homo? S. Aug. in Psalm. 90. If he had been God only, he could not
have been obedient if man only, he had not been sufficient. But when the same
person that was creator of all things, became obedient, and obedient unto
death: what is it that his obedience could not work? the death of all the
creatures of the world, is not equivalent: it is preponderant, and preferred in
the balance of Gods justice. Leo epist. 41.
Tam potens fuit ad priuilegium, tam dives ad pretium, vt si vniuersitas
captiuorum in redemptorem suum crederet, nullum tyra^nica vincula retinerent.
The obedience that the son of God performed in his humanity, was so potent
for privilege, so rich for price, that if the whole multitude of captives had
belief in him, none could remain in the tyrants bands. But of the validity
more hereafter: now we are confined to the affairs of his person.

If man had not overcome the enemy, he had not been overcome justly. Again,
if God had not given salvation, we could not hold it firmly, Psalm. 60.11.
vana salus hominis. And if this man had not been God, he should not have been
partaker of incorruptibilitie, and then he could not transmit it to us: hunc
hominem Deus, non vt alios regebat, sed gerebat. This man, as Saint Augustine
says excellently, had a prerogative above all others: God did not govern him
barely, as he does every one else, but he bare him too.

His manhood was inseperably conjoined and supported in the unity of the
godhead; so as death it self, that seuereth man and wife asunder, that
deuideth body and soul, and parts all things else, could yet make no
separation here: but then, even in the death of his body, the divinity did
adhaere, and was coupled with it in the grave; otherwise it had followed the
condition of all flesh else, seen corruption, and abid in death.

Seeing then that there is so firm an union of the Godhead and manhood in one
person, the obedience which the manhood performed, may rightly be valued at an
infinite rate, as if it had been done by the Deity it self.

If David thought he did Saul wrong, 1. Sam. 24.5.
and was touched at the heart, when he had cut off the lap of Saul's garment;
and yet the garment was not himself, but near unto him: then may the Godhead
much more justly reckon every thing done unto himself, that was done unto
this flesh, which cannot be severed from himself.

Concerning the manner of his obedience, Spontanea obedientia.
many things are of profitable consideration, which I suppose you have heard
lately: but none more memorable, then the alacrity and cheerfulness of his
obedience; which I purpose to insist on. Luc. 22.15.
Desiderio desideraui, I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with
you: He was sure that he himself should then also be made a Passover, and be
offered up as the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: he
knew then that he should suffer a most painful and ignominious death; which
any man else would have desired as earnestly to avoid, as he did vehemently
long to undertake. Not that death was any way pleasing to him in it self, but
to declare his affectionate readiness in obedience to his father, and his
great thirst of our salvation. You may read of the like profession that he
makes in the Psalms: Sacrifice and meat offering thou would not have, but
have fitted me up a body. Psa. 40. v. 6, 7, 8.
Then said I, lo, I come. In the beginning of the book it is written of me,
that I should fulfill thy will: O my God I am content to do it. In which
words, I may commend three things to your observation:

1. That God never appointed the sacrifices of the Old Testament for ransomes
of sin, but for figures of the true Sacrifice. 2. That the obedience of his
Son, is a full propitiation to appease his wrath. 3. That the Son offers
that sweet smelling sacrifice of his obedience, with all cheerfulness. In
this point, the Metaphor wherewith the Son of God does express the
voluntary addiction of his obedience, is emphaticall, and worthy of reuiew.
Aures perforasti mihi: He alludeth to the civil ordinance, Exodus 21.5, 6.
Exodus 21. If a servant care not for his freedom, and say, I love my Master,
and will not go out of his house: Then his Master shall bring him to the
Judges, and set him to the door, or to the post, and his Master shall bore his
ear through with an awle, and he shall serve him forever. I say too little,
when I say Christ obliged himself to such obedience. He professes more in the
Psalm, Psalm. 40.6.
aures perforasti mihi, that both his ears were bored through, and the
obligation of his obedience doubled above all others. How? Sure he addicted
himself not to outward obsequies alone, as voluntary servants used to do; but
to obey the very inward thoughts, and intendments of his fathers will, he left
no tittle unperformed. Where shall we find the like? Genesis 22.9.
Isaac his obedience is commendable: he was not refractorie when his father
would offer him up in sacrifice, but yet he was bound: And, O Lord, thine hands
needed no bands, nor thy feet to be tied in fetters of brass.

Joseph would not contend with his brethren, when they had agreed to put him to
death: but did he not use deprecations? They acknowledge it, Genesis 42.21. Genesis
42.21.
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him.

Me thinks I see how pitifully he stood in the midst of them, when they began
to strip him out of his coat; how his color went away with the apprehension
and fear of death; how his cheeks were all to be raied with tears; how his
eyes were turned every way: sometimes to one brother, sometimes to another,
sometimes to all at once; sometimes to the ground where his body should fall,
sometimes to the heavens, that should receive his soul. Did not these woeful
looks plead for him? were they not vocal? Yes indeed, and patheticall
Orators. And after that with beating his breast, he had gained passage for his
voice, he added words to this effect: Alas! what have I done worthy of this
that you go about? If I told any thing of you, it was but truth, and tended
to your reformation: if my dreams be offensive, they came by the instinct of
God: if you mislike my coming, it was my fathers pleasure; I came to see how
you did, and shall I now die? O spare my life for the respect you have to your
own blood: spare it (I beseech you) for the reverence you bear to my fathers
age; is he not also yours? Spare it, if you regard not men, yet for the fear
you have of God: or if none of all these can move your bowels, for my life; let
me have my coat, this partie-coloured coat, the ornament of my youth, and the
pledge of my fathers love, for an hearse to shroude and cover me when I am dead.

Marvel not at Joseph's obtestations; he was but a figure of obedience, and
the figure must ever be inferior to the truth. Christ himself used no
tergiuersation, no deprecation: Mat. 27.12.14.
he is accused, and holds his peace; he is charged, Isa. 53.7.
and says nothing to it. But as a sheep led to the slaughter, so opened he
not his mouth. He died willingly.

Saint Peter, and the rest that dyed for the testimony of this obedience, did
it patiently, but not altogether willingly: I have warrant and authority
enough for it, Ioh. 21.18.
When thou art old, another shall gird thee, and lead thee whither thou
would not. If there were any other means for us to come to Christ, who would
die?

Indeed (says another great Apostle) we that are in this tabernacle, 2. Cor.
5.4.
sigh and are burdened, because we would not be unclothed, but be clothed upon.

Saint Paul would be like Henoch, Elias, 1. Cor. 15.51.
or those that be alive at the day of judgment: they shall not die, but they
shall be changed. So S. Paul desires, not to be unclothed, but to be clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

Although we go from labor to rest; from expectation to possession; from the
race to the jail; from faith to fruition; from a pilgrimage to our country;
from the world to God: yet the passage being rugged, mingled with asperitie,
having some of the gall and vinegar in it, that the Jews gave unto Christ,
Matt. 27.34.
makes it unpleasing unto us: But these lets and rubbs, could neither hinder
nor abate any thing of his cheerfulness.

Oblatus est quia voluit: if he had been unwilling, he was not unable to hold
his life against all the world. When the Jews sent their Sergeants to
apprehend him, he meets his adversaries in the midway; he offers himself,
and asks them whom they seek. When they said, Jesus of Nazareth, he denied
not, Ioh. 18.5.
but acknowledged himself, and said, I am he.

No persuasions could divert him from this obedience: his disciples say,
Master, the Jews did seek for thee of late to stone thee, and will thou go to
Jerusalem again? Ioh. 11.8, 9, 10.
He answers roundly, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk
in the day time, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world.
God his calling is like this day light, which suffers not a man to wander, or
to go astray out of his way: in obedience of this calling, he goes on to
Jerusalem courageously, and fears no swords, nor staves, but offers
himself the second time, and asks them, whom they seek? Ioh. 18.7.
Here is no unwillingness or pusillanimitie; that was rat her with his
adversaries: Verse. 6.
they did shrink, go back, and fell to the ground.

Where is the terror and defense of their armed men? forsooth with one word,
and acknowledgment of himself, and with his bare voice, saying nothing, but, I
am he; the whole multitude that came against him, fierce in hatred, and
terrible in power, were smitten, repelled, and overthrown without any weapon
at all: Was there ever such a He?

You may easily account what this He will do, when he judges, that did so
much when he was judged: what he may do when he reigns, that could do this
when he obeyed. When he saw the wrath of God stirred up against all creatures
for our sin, I cannot tell you whether it was with more piety or wisdom;
with greater mercy or justice (for I think all the virtues in the world, did
concur together in this one action) but I am sure that it was with great
willingness, Ion. 1.12.
and powerful success that he cried, Si propter me haet tempestas orta sit,
tollite me, and mittite me in mare.

And what tempest could be raised for his sake? that I will also show. It was
not without a robbery of the Son of God, that Lucifer did affect his
greatness: it was not without a robbery of the Son of God, that our first
parents did affect that knowledge, eritis sicut dij: Genesis 3.5.
And the Father would not dissemble, nor pass over his sons injuries without
revenge; Ioh. 3.35.
For the Father loves the Son always. For him he destroyed many Angels,
and sentenced all men: What did the Son when he saw the Father so jealous for
him, that he spared no creature? To the intent that it may be known (says he)
that I also love the Father, behold, by me he shall receive again many of
those, that form he had in a manner lost.

Therefore seeing this tempest is risen for my sake, Ion. 1.12.
take me and cast me into the sea, and you shall have a great calm. Indeed he
did see the assault of the ravening Wolf, and tarrieth not until he had
surprised the sheep, but maturely interposeth himself in the gap. Ioh. 10.11.
O good sheapheard, that gives his life for his sheep.

Peccat iniquus, and punitur iustus, delinquit reus, Aug. med. ca. 7.
and vapulat innocent, offendit impius, and damnatur pius: Quod meretur malus,
patitur bonus: Quod perpetrat servus, exoluit dominus, quod committit homo,
sustinet Deus.

It was not nothing that God gave, when he sent his Son unto us, but gave us
all things with him, who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, 1.
Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption. And the other three graces may serve for other
subjects; the gift of righteousness belongs properly to the obedience of
Christ, as our Text witnesses.

By the obedience of one, many are made righteous. His obedience is not like
the oil which the wise Virgins had, that would not serve themselves and
others. Matthew. 25.9.
Whosoever drinks thereof shall thirst again, Ioh. 4.13. Hab. 2.4. Ioh. 4.14.
For the just shall live by his own faith. But he that drinks of the water
that I give unto him, shall never thirst.

The soul that receives Christ, is content with him only; for his obedience
is like the widows oil, 2. King. 4.6.
that did run as long as there was any vessel to receive it; Tam pleno fonti
vas inane admouendum. It is no short or narrow mantell; for that, according to
the Prophet, Psalm. 119.142.
cannot cover two; His righteousness is an everlasting righteousness; and
what is larger then eternity? Nothing. Then it will cover him and us. Et in
nobis quidem operit multitudinem peccatorum: In te aute^ domine, quid nisi
pietatis thesauros, diuitias bonitatis?

Christ being man, was mortal also, and capable of death; but being just, he
needs not do it freely. One sinner cannot die for another; but he that had no
cause to do it for himself, does it not for another in vain: No, no, the
more unworthily that he dyed, that deserved no death, the more justly we live,
for whom he dyed.

Magna res anima, quae Christi sanguine redempta est, grauis animae casus, qui
non nisi Christi cruce potuit reparari: Si rursum corruerit peccato duntaxat ad
morte^, vnde iam reparabit? nunquid aut alter Christus, aut idem iterum habet
crucifigi pro ea? He held his peace before Pilate, Matthew. 27.14.
because that Court held plea for his death only, which the Son of God would
not decline. Pilate had no competent tribunal, to enquire of the validity of
his death, or what retaliation and amends should be given for it: that was to
be determined in the high court of his fathers justice. And do you think that
he is silent there too? Romans 8.34. and Heb. 7.25. Hebr. 12.24.
No beloved, There he makes intercession continually; and speaks better
things then the blood of Abel. That cried for vengeance, this for indulgence;
that for justice, this for mercy; that for punishment, this for remission of
sins.

So Lord Jesus, so continue thy piety still, and we shall never be forced to
pay that again, which thou have paid for us already. If his obedience be
sufficient, there needs no more; if it be not, where is the defect? Is there
any invaliditie in the Fathers acceptance? None at all. You remember what the
good father says in Genesis 27. when he touched Jacob and sented Christ, Behold,
the smell of my son is like the smell of a field, Genesis 27.27.
which the Lord has blessed. The father may accept that of favor, that is no
competent satisfaction. Nay, nay, so the father might have accepted any part of
his obedience; and then there had been no full, no real, but a formal
satisfaction for sin, and as they say, dicis causa. The forgiveness of our
sin is not for fashion sake: Ephesians. 1.7.
S. Paul calls it not (...), but (...), that is to say, an absolute remission,
as in the year of Iubile. And we have it by this obedience that was complete
and perfect, even unto death, which is the period and last line of all things.

Whilst Joseph lived, there is no express mention that the Israelites
increased, but after his death, as appears Exodus 1. So it stood with our
Joseph; Exodus 1.6.7.
before he dyed there was but few Israelites: The dew fell upon Gideons fleece
only, and all the floor was dry; Judge. 6.39, 40.
but after his death, the dew fell upon all the floor: the fleece alone is now
dry, and the Israelites of God are increased and multiplied over all the
world, by the heavenly dew and influence of this obedience. 1. Cor. 15.36.
Indeed except the grain of Wheat fall into the ground, and dye, it abides
alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit* you may judge of his cause
by the words of his mouth: for after this precious grain dyed in obedience,
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness: Judge. 14.14.
out of the obedience of his death, the harvest of the Church, shoots up
plentifully in every quarter. O virtus occulta! vnam animam emissam in
tormento innumerabiles extrahere de inferno: hominem mortem corporis suscipere,
and animarum mortem perimere.

2. Cor. 5.14.
The Apostle gives a reason of it, If one dyed for all, then all dyed in that
one: and it is certus sermo, a sure saying, Romans 6.8. Romans 8.17.
that if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him.

Adversaries may quarrel this imputation, but they will never be able to
disprove it: for by the same means that Christ was made sin for us, are we
made the righteousness of God in him. Now it is out of doubt, that he was made
sin for us, not by inherence, but by imputation of our sins: therefore are
we also made righteous, not by any inherent righteousness, but by imputation
of his obedience. This is the righteousness that was prefigured in the old
Testament.

What signified the sweet treitment that was given to Jacob and his children
in Egypt? Genesis 47.
Why did the gracious King, that knew them not before they were brought unto
him, make them Denizens of strangers; and Citizens of aliens? Why did he
receive them, not only into his commonwealth, but also into his near
familiarity, and love? Was it for any respect of themselves? Alas, they
brought nothing with them, but poverty and famine: Was it not altogether for
Joseph's sake, whom he loved? If Pharaoh were entreated for those that he never
knew, the Father of mercies will not be inexorable for the people that he has
made: If Joseph could prevail with a King, for his parentage and friends, the
only begotten Son shall never be refused for the children that God has
given him.

Two things in Joseph were eminent and perspicuous; He deserved well, and
suffered ill: but if comparison be made, you shall find Joseph and all things
he had, inferior to Jesus Christ. Genesis 39.17, 18.
Joseph was innocent in one particular imputation objected; Christ was innocent
in all things else. Verse. 21.
Joseph found favor with him that kept the prison, and so his punishment was
the easier; Christ could turn no way to receive commiseration. The son of
Jacobs wrongs went no further then to bands and prison; the son of God had
the whip, and buffets, and a crown of thorns, and spittings, and contumelies,
and all the gall of the Cross it self: vae tibi amaritudo peccatoru^
nostrorum propter quae soluenda tanta amaritudo necessaria est. S. Bernard.
Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo: If the father, to
redeem servants, spared not his only son: if the son, for satisfaction of
his father, offered his life in obedience: if both send the Holy Ghost to apply
the mercies of the father, and obedience of the son; and the spirit makes
intercession for us, Romans 8.26.
with groans that cannot be expressed, raising us up to God with confident
piety, and bowing God unto us, in the clemency of his mercy: if every person
of the Trinity, confer some thing to our justification, who shall disanull it,
or lay any thing to our charge? Shall Satan? Indeed he is an implacable
adversary, and cannot endure that poor man, made of the dust of the earth,
should obtain that place which he could not hold that was created in heaven.
But in this cause we have his own stipulation against himself.

When he came to the Son of God with swords and staves, did not the innocent
Lamb ask them whom they sought? did not they answer, Jesus of Nazareth? Did
not he condition with them, that if they sought him, they should let his
disciples go? Ioh. 18.5.
did not they admit of this condition, and let them all escape? S. Matt. is
clear in this point, Matthew. 26.56.
The Disciples all left him, and fled away. That (gracious Lord) was thy good
meaning; even that was thy sweet condition: and the adversaries consent
appears manifestly by the seal of their fact. For that which was done by his
Attorneys, is reputed to be done by himself: Verse. 57.
so when Christ was left alone, he only was taken, bound, led away, put to
death, that the chastisement of our peace might be upon him only; Isa. 53.5.
for of all people there was none with him. Where be they then that will needs
be ioynt-purchasers with Jesus Christ? where be they that implore aid of S.
Peter, or S. James, or S. John, or any Saint in these affairs?

When this matter was in hand, no creature did assist the Son of God; all did
forsake him, every man. Judge then what injustice it is to transfer any honor
of the battle, to them that sat at the baggage, and were never in the field.

1. Sam. 30.24.
We read that David did divide the spoil indifferently, and said, As his part
is that goes down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the
stuff: they shall part alike. That David made a law, and a statute in Israel
unto this day: But it is against law and reason, that he which puts on his
harneis, 1. King. 20.11.
should boast himself, as he that puts it off.

Are we not liberally dealt withal, to have the fruit of the victory, and to
be exempted from the hazard of fight? Liberally brethren; liberally O
bountiful Jesus. Therefore we accept of thy condition with thanks; because they
sought thee, we go away contented abundantly with the prey, and shall ever
ascribe the glory of the victory, and all our righteousness to thine obedience

If Laban pursue us, and accuse us, that we went privily from him: our answer
is ready, That we came privily to him; and therefore went privily from him
again. A secret cause of sin brought us to his subjection, and a more secret
course of justice has withdrawn us from him: if we were sold to him for
grammercie, yet were we not redeemed for naught: if he say, Our father has
enthralled us; may we not answer, Our brother has redeemed us? Why should not
righteousness come from another, when guiltiness comes from another?

It was one that made us sinners; it is one that makes us righteous: prior in
semine, alter in sanguine: it was man that forfeited, it is man that satisfied;
the head for the members, Christ for his own bowels. But the righteousness of
the righteous, shall be upon himself: what is that to thee? Be it. Then must
the sin of the sinner be upon himself too: and what is that to me? Shall
the righteousness of the righteous be upon himself? and shall not the sin of
the sinner be upon himself too? There is no congruity that the son should
bear the iniquity of the father, and be debarred from the righteousness of
his brother. Let there be indifferency both ways: and then by man comes
sin; by man comes righteousness: in Adam all are made sinners; in Christ
many are made righteous. And I do not belong so to the former, but that I have
a dependancie also on the latter: if I pertain to the one by the flesh, I
reach also to the other by faith. Why should I have any surplusage from the
sinner? if it be for my generation; behold my regeneration to oppose against
it, and there is no odds, save that the former is carnal, the latter
spiritual: that more conspicuous to the flesh, this more certain because of
faith.

Amongst other properties of Faith this is not the least, Matthew. 13.
that it never varieth, as the parable of the seed teaches us. If true faith
could fail, the elect might perish, Ioh. 10.28.
which is impossible; for Christ says, That none can take them out of his
hand. If faith should fail, the elect might be often regenerated, who are
borne of incorruptible seed; and as the seed is, so must the regeneration be:
therefore once a new creature, and ever a member of Christ. 1. Ioh. 3.9. and
5.18.
Faith cannot fail, because He that is borne of God sins not, neither can
he, because the seed of God abides in him, Ioh. 5.18.

How should faith be variable, that has Gods promise, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not go from me: that
has the efficacy of Christ's prayer, Keep them in thy truth, Ioh. 17.11.
Ioh. l7. and, I have prayed for thee, Luc. 22.32.
that thy faith fail not? Luc. 23.

Montes mouebuntur, and colles nutabunt, misericordia autem mea a te non
recedet, et faedus pacis meae non nutabit dicit miserator tuus Jehovah.

Ioh. 15.16.
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you go
and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain.

Christo sic eos ponente vt eant, and fructum offerant, and fructus eorum
maneat: quis audeat dicere, forsitan non manebit? Romans 11.29.
The gifts and graces of God are without repentance.

Of David's faith, and Peter's, and others that fell into enormious sins, I say
with Tertullian, Caepit arescere, sed non exaruit: mota fuit, sed non amota:
concussa, sed non excussa.

Adam peradventure may be thought to have lost faith and grace wholly, till he
was restored again: but if it were so, his loss infers not ours; because
we have gained a better estate by Christ, then we lost in Adam: for his Garden
and Paradise, we have heaven; for his mutable felicity, we have an
unchangeable inheritance; for his image of God, we have the same image again
in more glorious fashion; not severed from God, as it was in him formerly, but
now inseperably coupled to the Son of God: O necessarium Adae peccatum: o
felix Adae culpa, quae talem ac tantum meruerit habere redemptorem.

Here is all the advantage that Adam has (if there be any advantage in that
which is evil) his disobedience is general and universal, not in power
alone, but in act too: it makes all sinners. The obedience of Christ has a
potentiall universality, and is sufficient to make all righteous; but
actually, it justifies the faithful only.

By the obedience of one many are made righteous. The reason of this difference
is manifest: Adams disobedience is derived by propagation, and so reaches unto
all: Christ his obedience is beneficial to so many as have their hearts open
to receive it by faith; because it comes of grace. And that is not common unto
all: for then it should be turned into nature. Communis est omnibus natura, non
gratia: natura non putetur gratia sed si putetur gratia, ideo putetur gratia,
quia and ipsa gratis concessa est. Saint Augustine allows no universality of
grace. The wind blows, not every where, Ioh. 3.8.
but, where it lists. Neither can all hear, but those that have an ear to
hear: Neither have all faith, 2. These. 3.2. Romans 9.16.
but those that are predestined unto life: neither is it in him that wills,
or in him that runs, but in God that has mercy. Quare hunc trahit and non
illum: noli iudicare, si non vis errare.

This continuance and soliditie of faith, sorts well with S. Peter, with S.
Paul, and such as were guides: we are far inferior to those shining lights,
and may not expect the like grace of righteousness. Thus some Rabbis of the
Society, would bear the world in hand; that where sanctification is not
alike, there justification cannot be equal: and so rob poor sinners of
comfort that need it most. Do they not withal steal one moletie of our
justification from God, and transfer it to works? It was a harlot, and not the
true mother, that cried, 1. King. 3.26.
Nec mihi, nec tibi, sed diuidatur. Tutiores viuimus, si totum deo damus. If
Christ were a changeling; if he were one to S. Peter, and another to S. Paul:
favorable to the Centurion, Matt. 8.13.
Matthew. 8. and difficult to the Ruler, Ioh. 4. Ioh. 4.50. Matthew. 15.28.
Flexible to the woman of Canaan for her faith that was heroical; and
immoucable to the faint faith of the father, that cried, Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24.
Marc. 9. there were some color for this inequality of justification; because
he is made of God righteousness unto us.

Hebr. 13.8.
But seeing Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.
seeing he is God, and does not alter, Mal. 3 the same, Mal. 3.6. Psalm. 102.27.
and his years do not fail, Psalm. 102. seeing he is everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9. And that which is eternal, must needs be free from all
variation: Let no man imagine his justification to be greater or less,
according to the strength or imbecilitie of his faith. The poor lost sheep,
Luc. 15.5.
that was brought home upon the shepherds back, had no great strength of faith
to walk. And they that did look unto the brazen Serpent, Number. 21.8.
were not all alike sighted, yet they all had one and the same benefit of
health.

The difference of degrees and measure, neither increases nor abateth the
nature or being of any thing. A small drop is as well and truly water, as
the maine Sea: a little spark, is as truly fire, as the mightiest flame: the
hand of a little child may receive a pearl, as well as the pawe of great
Goliath; and a weak faith, even a grain of Mustard seed, may be a true
justifying faith, as well as the full persuasion and height of assurance.

It is not the quality of faith that makes us righteous, that is but the work
of one commandment, that is inherent in us; that would give us matter of
boasting: But the object of faith, namely, Christ imputed unto us, is that
which makes us righteous.

A counter that is not worth three pence of it self, when it stands in the
right line, is reckoned for ten thousand pounds: so is the valuation of our
righteousness taken, not for the perfection of faith; that is but a three
penny counter, in respect of righteousness, but from the line of Christ's
obedience.

The Publicans righteousness stood not in the perfection of virtues; fot he
cried, Luc. 18.13.
Lord be merciful unto me a sinner, and he went home justified. How? S.
August. Nihil boni fecisti and datur tibi remissio peccatoru^: It stood in
remission of sin: And is not forgiveness of sin granted to all alike? If
there be any difference, they should have greatest justification, that have
most forgiven. What is it then that can make inequality in our justification?
Is it the less for the multitude of sins? No, S. Paul gives us sweeter
divinity, Where sin does abound, Romans 5.20.
there grace exceeds it in abundance. Or is it less for the infirmity of our
faith? Neither: there S. Peter relieueth us, when he says, We have obtained
(...), 2. Pet. 1.1.
2. Pet. 1. like precious faith with the Apostles. Do you think that the
strangers which dwelt here and there thoroughout Pontus, Galatia. Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bythinia; had purity of faith, either amongst themselves, or with S.
Peter? No sure, there will ever be a diversity in graces. Why then does he
call their faith like precious? Forsooth because that by faith we do all
possess the same Jesus Christ, with his righteousness and obedience. So he
says we have obtained like precious faith, by the righteousness of our God
and Savior Jesus Christ. If Jesus Christ his righteousness, his obedience
make our faith like precious; then God puts no difference, as touching adoption
and justification, between them and us: And therefore, for conclusion, we
believe thorough the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be saved even as they
do.

It is plain by the Text, that all righteousness is enclosed in the obedience
of Christ: His doctrine is the fountain of wisdom; his justice the work of
righteousness; his life the mirror of temperance; his death the standard of
fortitude. And in vain do ye labor in the pursuit of any virtue, Ioh. 15.5.
if you seek it any where but from the Lord of virtue. Sine me nihil potestis
facere. Without him, all the virtues of the heathen, were like golden Nutts
that wanted kernells. Currebant (says S. Augustine) tanquam athletae
validissimi, sed praeter metas and carceres: They did run like valorous
Champions, b(...) was without the lists, and far from the jail.

Those gifts were not vulgar and common, but bestowed upon certain of the
Heathen, as the special graces and favors of God, not sanctifying, but
adorning and perfusing them: as he did with Besaleel and ^holiab, for the work
of his Tabernacle. Exodus 3(...)
Their exercises were ciuilly good, commendable for men of their fashion, and
in respect of the outward work, worthy of imitation: such is the power of
honesty, that ther^ is a shining brightness in the very shadow of it bu^
(...) is so far from true righteousness, that all their wor^^ were nothing
else but glistering sins. For what righteousness could they have, that knew
not Christ's obedience, which is the righteousness of God?

God gave civil graces to them here and there, for the conservation of this
present life: If all knowledge of God had been extinguished, and difference of
good and evil taken away; what could this life be but a barbarous immanitie
and brutish confusion? secondly, these glimmerings remained to make them
inexcusable: thirdly, God used them as the Shoemaker does his bristle, not to
sow withal, but to draw in his thread.

Nos vnius Christi participes ad vitam: ad mortem vero particeps ille multorum.
FINIS.

