THE Baptizing of a Turk.

A Sermon preached at the Hospital of Saint KATHERIN, adjoining unto her
Majesty's Tower the 2. of October 1586. at the Baptizing of one Chinano a
Turk, borne at Nigropontus:

By MEREDITH HANMER, D. of Divinity.

Printed by Robert Walde-graue dwelling without Temple-barre.

To the Right Worshipful RAPHE ROKEBY Esquier, Master of the Hospital of S.
Katherine, and also one of the Masters of her Majesty's Court of Requests,
health and wealth in the Lord Jesus.
IT has been the manner of old (Right worshipful) that if any strange or new
thing happened, within any man's charge, the same as ancient histories record,
was immediately showed unto the superiors. The Lieuetenant of Iudaea, certified
the Emperor Tiberius, and the Senate of Rome, of the fame of Christ, and
especially his reion, then rife in the mouths of most men throughout
Palaestina. Least I should seem forgetful of good manners (being of diverse
entreated to publishe this exercise) I have thought good to show unto you the
good news here happened through the mercy and goodness of our gracious God, which
has brought home to his fold an erring sheep, by birth a Turk, borne at
Nigropontus, hertofore by profession a Saracen, addicted unto the superstitious
law of Mahomet, but now by the ministry of our hands (not of worthiness, but
of favor called to the function) after public confession of his true faith in
Jesus Christ, received into the congregation of the faithful, marked by
Baptism for a vowed professor, and sealed up in your Hospital of S. Katherine,
(where the divine providence has allotted you, under her Majesty, head
governor) for the child of God. Manners being not forgotten, and duty thus
remembered, the beholder and hearer have ioynte cause to be joyful, for the
pearl espied in the field, for the coin found after searching, for the sheep
called home from straying, according unto the parables in the Gospel, and to
praise our God, whose mercy endures for ever. Of the other side we have
cause to sorrow, when we behold the face of the earth in manner all covered
with heathens, idolatrers and false worshippers. Asia in greatness half the
world, (though of old reckoned for the third part) with the most famous
governors Zambei of Arabia, the king of Narsinga, great Cham of Tartaria, and
the Indian Islands, (if we may credit Marcus Paulus Venetus) amounting to the
number of twelve thousand and seaue^ hundred, all at this day (excepting a few
Christians here and there scattred) are either Infidels, living as brute
beasts without God, or followers of Mahomet, joining with the Turk in false
worship, yet not fearing his power: the which places have been of old
acquainted with the voice of Christ, and with the sound of the Apostles feet.
Affrike (excepting the dominions of Presbiter John the great king of
Aethiopia, who professes the faith in Christ, though not so purely as it is to
be wished) has many Infidels, the rest are Moors, Saracens, Nigroes,
Barbarians, addicted to Mahomet, and obedient to the great Turk. In these
countries there are few Christians seen. This triangle of East, South, and
West, have shaken off the faith, which of old has there been professed.
Europe remains, though more peopled, yet a lesser part then Affrike, neither
is this part clear from Mahomet. The great Turk has taken Greece away, and
seated himself at Constantinople. Christian religion is now couched in the
North parts of the world, and so far that it seems (if we look for fruits)
all frozen. The professors (according unto the words of our Savior) are now a
little flock. It is high time we should earnestly pray unto God, that he will
enlarge his kingdom, that he will open the eyes of Infidels, that he will
direct Idolatrers in the true woorship, that they which call upon him in
word, may follow him in deed, that his name may be glorified upon earth,
and that al may be gathered together into one fold, to sing holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Sabbath. And here withal I suppose it needful to certefie your
worship what moved this Turk to become a Christian: not holy words, but works,
not the name of faith, but the view of fruits, not the learning of Clarks,
but the lives of certain good Christians, whose love and kindness did so ravish
him (as he said of himself) that he confessed the God of the christians to be
the only true God. And among others he named Sir F. Drake that worshipful
knight, and W. Haukins that worthy Captain. The tree is known by the fruits,
Gods children are known by their holiness, the true professors are known by
their love. Hereby (says our Savior) shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye love one another. The Jews gloried they were of God, their
behauior declared the^ (our savior gave sentence) to be of the devil: they
said they were of the seed of Abraham, their works denied them to be such.
This is the course that Christ took with the Scribes and Pharisees for the stay
of his credit: If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. Again:
though ye believe not me, believe the works, This is the rule that Jew and
Gentile. that Turk and Saracene, and every good Christian now marketh and
beholds, but at this day nothing rifer the^ sayyng, nothing rarer then doing.
Where be the almes-houses, Hospitals, Colleges, and Churches now a days
founded and builded? No doubt God has his people, and they have their fruits,
though the same be very few. If we were so desirous to have our lights (I mean
our fruits) so shine upon the earth in these North parts of the world, where
Christianity is professed, as we are gredily bent to get the earthly
commodities of Affrike, Asia, and the hid treasures of the far Indies, we
should no doubt provoke them out of the said countries to seek after our God,
and to be ravished with the conversation and steps of the Christians, as
they allure us with fame of their commodities, to seek after their foreign
riches. And whereas now one silly Turk is won, ten thousands no doubt would
receive the faith. The heathens in far countries do wonder at the covetousness
of the christians, and the cruelty among other nations of the Spaniard.
Presbiter John in Affrike cries out upon the Christian Princes for their
division and discord. The great Turk at Constantinople laugheth the pope and
his prelates to scorn for their pride, the Christian churches he reuileth, and
not without cause for their idols and images. Reformation is to be sought for
of al men not only in Religion (wherein some ouer-busie themselves, never
satisfied until they have overthrown all) but in lives and manners, that they
which are without seeing our good works, may glorify our father which is in
heaven. Thus occasioned by these circumstances, my pen has ouer-ruled me, I
fear less over tedious. May it please you to accept this remembrance
proceeding from a willing mind, though other-wise not furnished to gratify
your kindness. From Shordich the xii. of October, 1586.

Yours in the Lord, Meredith Hanmer.

Math. 5. Verse.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father, which is in heaven.


THe present occasion here offered, has moved me (good people and beloved
in our savior Christ) among other places of holy Scripture at this time, to
deliver unto you the words of our Savior Christ, written by the Evangelist
Saint Matthew: in the fifth Chapter, which put us in remembrance of our
way, our walk, our works, our lights and Christian fruits, a mean to win
them that are without, and to move men to sound forth the glory and praise of
God. It is high time to speak, the matter concerns the Majesty of God, the
good success and furtheraunce of the Christian faith. Fulgentius writing unto
Trasimund king of Vandals, of the mystery of the incarnation and
mediatorshippe between God and manne then called into question, says:
Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Trasimund.
Cum de Deo res agitur non leuis reatus est, si quod ad salutem pertinet,
taceatur. When the matter concerns God, it is no small offense to be silent
in that which touches salvation: Ephesians. 2.
We are created (says the Apostle) in Christ Jesus ad bona opera to show
forth good works to the honor and glory of God. I have just cause together
with you (laying other things aside) greatly to praise God, Psalm. 66.
whose watchefull eye beholds continuallye the wretched wights of the world,
who calls into the vinearde again, Math. 20.
and again, the idle persons standing in the market place of the world, who
graffeth of his mere mercy and favor, the wild Olive, in the true and
natural Olive, Romans 11.
who fetches home, with his power, and carries home as it were upon his
shoulder, Luke. 15.
the wandering and lost sheep into the fold, and at this present this silly
Turk and poor Saracene upon his confession to be matriculated in the book of
the faithful, and by Baptism to be sealed up for the child of God, and
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. I have again to commend for example, to
others of christian light and conversation, certain worthy persons of this
land, whom this Saracene termed most worthy christians, whose light and
behavior, this sillye Turk beholding was (as he confesses) the rather moved
to be of their faith and religion, but of them in the end, when I shall open
unto you the things that moved this Turk to receive the christian faith.
Moreover by occasion that the Sacrament of Baptism is presently to be
ministered, the time requires I should speak of the principles of christian
religion, the rock and foundation of this spiritual building and the corner
stone, that closes up the whole, our Lord Jesus christ. But for yt my speech
is to be directed unto you (good people) that are therein as I hope
sufficientlye persuaded, and that this Saracene understands not the english
tongue, but as hertofore upon private conference, and at this present also by
an interpretor in the spanish tongue, he is ready, and shall deliver before
you all, a true confession of the faith in Jesus Christ, therefore happily of
these things by the way in the sowing of the seed of Gods word. And at this
time I have purposed by Gods help, to lay before you, first the original of
Mahomet, that false Prophet with the nations of Mores, Saracens, and Turks:
secondly their false doctrine and wicked religion, wherewith they have bewitched
infinite souls: with a brief confutation thereof. Lastly that which
concerns our selves, how we may please God, with the way and mean to win
them that are without, according unto the rule of our Savior: Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your
father which is in heaven. That this may be done to the glory of God, and
comfort of our souls and consciences: I beseech you join with me in prayer
etc.

Our father etc.

According unto promise I am to lay before you these three parts. 1 The
original of Mahomet the false Prophet of the Turk, with the nations of
Moors, Saracens, and Turks. 2 The false doctrine and wicked religion of
Mahomet and these erring nations with a brief confutation thereof. 3 The way
to please God, and mean to win them etc.


Let your light so shine etc. In the year of our Lord 597. (says Mathaeus
Palmer, Math. Palmer. Massaeus chron. lib. 13 Volfgang-Drechsler. Chronic. de
Saracen. and Turc. origin.
Massaeus and Drechslerus) and in the reign of Mauricius the Emperor when as
Gregorius magnus was Bishop of Rome, one Mahomet was borne of the line of
Ismaell the son of Abraham by Agar the bondwoman, having to his father one
Abdara, and to his mother one Emma being very obscure and base Parents, in
Mecha a City of Arabia. His Parents deceased and left him a very young Orphane,
who in short time by misaduenture was taken captive, this being known unto
his kindred, Volaterran. Geogr. lib. 12.
one Abdemonaples (says Volaterran) an Ismaelite, bearing him great good will
for his favor, and forwardnes of wit, paid his ransom, made him his servant,
and factor in all his marchaundize. Not long after his master dies without
issue, his servant Mahomet, matched with his mistres a widow of 50. Paul. Diac.
rer. Romans lib. 18.
years of age called Eadigam and (says Paulus Diaconus) his own kinswoman, so
yt his master being of great credit and substance and his mistres (afterward
his wife) of no less account and also shortly after departing this life,
Sabellicus. Enead. 8. lib. 6.
he succedeth the^ both in credit and all their substance and by this means
grew of great power. Sabellicus doubts though he were borne in Arabia,
whether he were an Arabian or a Persian, he affirms yt both is received, and
yt his father was an heathen, and his mother an Ismaelite, and consequently not
ignorant in the hebrew tongue, not only this, but I find it reported by
Ludouicus Carrettus a convert Jew yt India, Aethiopia, Ludouicus Carrett. ad
Iudaeos. lib. diuinorum visorum.
ye ki^gdo^ of Presbyter John, and Arabia has many Hebrews since ye time yt
king Solomon furnished ye Queen of Saba into her country with twelve thousand
of all the tribes of Israel, which being dispersed throughout these countries
multiplied and increased exceedingly, retaining for remembrance among them,
the Standard and Ensign of their several Tribe and family. Paulus Diaconus.
Rer. Com. lib. 18. Math. Paris. hist. Anglor. in Henric. 3.
Paulus Diaconus and Matthew Paris, deriueth his pedigree lineally from Ismaell,
the recital whereof I will omit.

This Diaconus says further, that this Mahomet for the space of ten years,
gave him self secretly by perswation to bewitch the people, and other ten
years after, together with Rognes and Vagabonds that repaired unto him with
force of Arms, with Sword and shedding of blood, he spent in subduing of
Countries. And lastly nine years, he openly and manifestly inioyed as a
deceiuer, a false Prophet, and King over those whom he had already infected and
conquered throughout Arabia, and the adjoining Regions, his reign began in
Arabia, the 15. year of Heraclius, the Emperor, about the year of our Lord
617. ye Ismaelites of which line he was, inhabited the wilderness of Madian,
feeding of cattle, and lying in Tents. Isidor. Etymolog. lib. 14. cap. 3.
Sabellic. Enead. 6. lib. 4.
Isidor writes that the country of the Ismaelites was called Nabathaea, of
Nabaioth the son of Ismael, situate between Iudaea, and Arabia, and commonly
accounted for part of Arabia, of ye same opinion is Sabellicus. He had the
falling sickness, which took him extremely, so that he groueled along the
ground, and fomed piteously at the mouth, his wife being of great honor and
substance bewailed her hard hap, in matching with a beggarly Rascal, and a
diseased creature, as Diaconus writes. But he together with his wily
companions (of whom I shall have occasion to speak herafter) having taught a
Dove to feed at his ear, wherein he was wont to put grains of Corn)
persuaded his wife and others that he was a Prophet, that the spirit of God
fell upon him and that the Angel Gabriel, in the form of a Dove came to his
ear, and revealed him secrets, whose presence he was not able to abide,
therefore he prostrated him self and lay in a Trance, his wife, in a while
being therein satisfied, chatted the same among her Gossippes saying: say
nothing, my Husband is a Prophet. The women after their manner, whereof some
of them all ^anne keep no counsel, blased abroad that Mahomet was a Prophet.
Et taliter ex foeminis, fama ( says Diaconus) peruenit ad viros,

and so by women men came to know thereof.

This once being broched they flocked unto him from all parts of Arabia. He
being thoroughly schooled in Satan's subteltyes and well seen in Magic
observed the present oportunitye, says Auentinus. The Romans, Auentin. Annal.
lib. 3.
and Persians, warred together, Mahomet, with his Arabians, taking at the
first, part with the Romans (for the Emperor had granted him, Zonaras. Annal.
tom. 3.
says Zonaras, a Region to inhabit) forsook them, and thereby weakened that
side. In a while after he espied the Persians go to wrack, and having
despised the Romans, he sets less by the Persians, and sets him self
forth with might and main together with his Captains, and Lieuetenauntes
called Amiraei, to subdue Nations, and to destroy the Christians, to the end
he might establishe that false Religion devised by him and his wicked
confederates. He prevailed wonderfully, and in short time after his decease
(when as the great Earthquake in Palaestina, Paul. Diac.
and the sign (...) in heaven foreshewed the success of the Arabians, Et
omnes extimuerunt: And all men trembled for fear) in the time of Ebubezer, and
Haumar that successively reigned after him in Arabia, the Region of Gaza, the
City Bostra, in Arabia, Damascus, Phoenicia, Egypt, Palaestina, the City
Jerusalem, all Syria, Antioch, Edessa, Mesopotamia, all Persia, (Chosroes the
King being driven away to save his life) yea and in manner all Asia, was
subdued by the Arabians, in the Reign of the Emperor Heraclius. I may not
forgette the end of Mahomet. About forty and odd years of his age, and in
the year of our Lord Jesus 632. Volater. lib. Sigebert. Cronic. Elor. histor.
Sabellic. Enead 8. lib. 6.
after the supputation of Sigebertus and Sabellicus this false Prophet departed
this life after a shameful manner. Matthew of Westmonaster writes, that this
Mahomet in an evening sitting up late in his palace, and having taken his fill
of wine wherein one of his companions had poured some poison, felt his wonted
sickness approaching, made have forth, saying to them that were present he must
needs depart, to confer with the Angel Gabriell, and go aside lest his
glorious presence would be an occasion of their death. Forth he went and
remembering that a soft place was best for his falling sickness, down he went
upon a dunghill, groueling along with great pain, foming at the mouth, and
gnashing with the teeth. And whereas he to please the Jews, forbade the
eating of swines-flesh, the swine about the donghill, fell upon him, wounded
him sore, and had eaten him up: had not his wife, and others of his house,
heard the noise of the Hogs, and rescued the false Prophet. Anton. Cropart.
2. tit. 13 cap. 5.
Antoninus reports that he was not without sundry diseases, which his
intemperate diet brought him to: namely the Pleuresie and a kind of Letargie,
for oftentimes his senses seemed to be taken away from him. He continued
drooping ye space of 14. days at length he departed this life, his belly had
such a swelling, that it seemed ready to burst, and his little finger bowed
backwardes. In the time of his sickness he commanded them that were about him,
that when breath departed his body they should not straight way bury him,
for he said that within three days he would ascend into heaven, but ye wicked
spirit therein failed him. They kept him with a watch above ground the third
and fourth day: Flor histor.
yea says Flores Histor. the space of 30. days, in great hope he would rise,
and ascend according to promise but they saw nothing, saving that they felt, an
intolerable stinche so yt in great disdain (says Antoninus) Antoninus.
Eum long a domibus proijecerunt,

They cast him far from any dwelling.

In a while after, his companions such as concealed his falsehood and
treachery, remembering themselves, and judging that the disdain of Mahomet would
be their discredit, and the fall of his sect their foil, and shame, and the
beastly end and death of him their destruction, they fetch him again,
Sabellic. Enead. 8. lib. 6. Naucler. generat. 22.
they chest him in an Iron Cophin (says Sabellicus, and Nauclerus) they bring
him to the famous temple of Mecha, in which City he was borne, with great
solemnitte as if he had never been scared upon the dunghill with swine, they
convey to the roufe of the temple mighty lodestones, they lift up the Iron
Cophin, where the lodestones according to their nature draw to them the Iron,
and hold it up and there hanges Mahomet on high. Ludouicus Romanus, Ludouic.
Roman. Patritius nauigat. lib. 1. cap. 12.
describes at large a certain Tomb below, builded for him as if he lay
below. All this while you hear nothing of the Moors, the Saracens, and the
Turks, but al of Mahomet. Now good people hear their original. The Moors
called Mauri inhabit Mauritania in Affricke, they are (says Isidor) of the
progeny of Cham, Isid. Aetym. lib. 14. cap. 5.
whose posterity Noe accursed, and no maruail cursed people receive the cursed
doctrine of Mahomet. Sabellic. Enead. 1. lib. 5.
Sabellicus writes there were some which thought that Mauri was corruptly
readde for Medi, but I take that a corrupt opinion. These people inhabiting
Mauritania in Affricke, are because of their hew and color of the Latins
called Nigritae, in our vulgar speech Nigros, and of the Grecians in the same
sense for their adust, and black color called (...) and (...) Moors. These
receiving the corruptions of Mahomet, are called Saracens, and why so, I am
ready to declare. Stephan.
Stephanus thinks that the people in Asia are called Saracens, of Sarracca, a
country in Arabia: This may stand for a bare conjecture and no more. Anton.
cron part. 2. cap. 5.
But the pride of Mahomet it was, that first found out the name of Saracen, to
advance his faith and profession. He knew himself Lineally to have
descended of Ismaell, the Son of Agar, the Bonde-woman, yet bare he the
world in hand that he came of Sara the freewoman the wife of Abraham, and
called himself and his followers Saracens. Sabellicus writes: Sabellicus
Enead. 8. lib. 6. Volfgang. Drechsler. Cronic.
The Grecians of spite are wont to call the Saracens, Agarens, for that they
came not of Sara, but of Agar.

But Mahomet (says Drechslerus) Seducing the Arabians and the people of Asia
called them Saracens. The like has Nauclerus: Nauclerus Generat. 22.
The Persians having received the Law of Mahomet, at his commandment laid
aside their old wonted name and were called Saracens. In this sense all
Nations who soever that embrace the law of Mahomet are called Saracens. Lastly
it remains that we speak of the Turks. Theodorus Gaza epist. ad francisc.
philelph. Strabo. lib. Laonicus Chalcondyl. de reb. Turc. lib. 1. Mathias a
Michou de Satmat. Asiatic. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Theodorus Gaza, is of opinion with Strabo, that these whom we call Turks,
were of old called Cyrtij, and Curti, a Scythian nation about the mount
Caucasus. Laonicus ye Athenian, who wrote at large the history of the Turks,
alleges sundry opinions of their original. Some held they had their
beginning of the Tartarians, and the reason yt lead them thereto is, that they
use the same manners and have the same language, for they all (says Volatteran)
speak the Arabike tongue. Volater. lib. 12.
Some other think they come of the Parthians. Again, there are that affirm
them to be of Caelosyria and Arabia. And others, that they issued forth of
Turca a great and a wealthy City of Persia. But all confess that at their
first breaking forth they were rude, savage, and fieldish people. Andreas a
Lacuna. de Turc. orig. cap. 1.
Solymannus the Tartarian gloried (says Andreas a Lacuna) that he came of the
Trojan blood. Hereby some gather, that whereas the Trojans were called Teucri,
the word might be corrupted, and the posterity called Turci, Turks, The
consent of ye best historiographers is, that these Turks came from ye upper
Scythia, being (as it has been always noted of them) an unquiet nation,
living upon ye spoil breaking forth in great troops to rob and steal, and
seek adventures. So writes Mathias a Michou of them, Mathias a Michou, cap
11.13. Laonicus lib. 1. Otho Frisingensis.
and sundry other Scythian nations. Laonicus says, that Turca signifies a
Savage and fieldish man: Otho Frisingensis reports, that in the year 760.
long after the death of Mahomet, there came of them out of Scythia, a great
number into Asia and Arabia, and being heathens, they joined with the Saracens
in league, and received the Law of Mahomet. After these came others, so that
the Saracens by their aid grew to a wonderful power, and the great terror of
all Christendom. There reigned from Mahomet the false Prophet, Bullinger in
Apocalyp. concione. 41
as kings in Arabia, to the number of 25. Amiraei, so are their Princes called:
the last Amiras, being the 25. called Mahumet, being king of Persia and Media,
in the year 870. conceived displeasure against Imbrael prince of Babylon, a
Saracene of his own sect and wickedness, so that he endeavored to subdue
him, and conquer his country. Here Satan against Satan, Saracene against
Saracene, the kingdom divided within it self is ready to come to naught.
Volater. Geogr. lib. 7
This Mahumet, or (as Volateran writes) Maugmet, sent to Scythia for aid
against Imbrael, but it turned to his own confusion, for he providing sorrow
for an other, endured it himself. There came aid from Scythia one Muchulet,
with an infinite number of Turks, rude and savage people, ready of themselves
to any mischief whatsoever. They are no sooner come, but they vanquished
Imbrael of Babylon, and immediately after they set upon him that sent for
them, namely Maugmet king of Arabia, Persia, and Media, they conquer his
country, and reign in his stead. Thus were the Saracens subdued, and became
subject to the Turks of Scythia. In a while after they wanted a governor,
they would no Persian or Arabian over them: So that in the year 900. Andreas
a Lacuna de orig. Turc. cap. 1.
as ( Andreas a Lacuna writes) one Solymannus a valiant and mighty warrior,
chosen by consent of them all, leaving his native soil, brake forth with a
great host out of Scythia, invaded Persia, and Asia the less. In the same
place again he says: Post Solymannum extinctum duce aliquo insigni diu ipsi
Turcae caruerunt.

After Solomon was dead, the Turks of a long time were without any famous
governor.



Johannes Ramus writes, Johannes Ramus rer. Turc. lib. 3.
that among these Turks or Scythians there were 4 families, called Asambici,
Candelori, Caramini, Othomanni, in the year 1280. which after the wearing out
of the ancient houses and nobility, contended among themselves for the
principality, and in the civil wars destroyed one another. The last of
them, and yt which prevailed, was one Othomannus, which in the year 1300.
began to bear rule. He was the first Emperor of the Turks, of him lineally
unto this day the Emperors of the Turks descend. Thus the kingdom of
Mahomet, and reign of the Saracens, these Turks (says Ramus) having received
the Law of Mahomet: fatali quadam ambitione de se, Regnum Turcicum
appellauerunt.

By a fatal kind of ambition, called it of themselves the kingdom or empire
of the Turks.

So that now the Calipha or Amiras of Babylon, the Sultan of Egypt, the
Sophie of Persia, with the Tartarians, and sundry other nations, together with
the great Emperor of the Turks (whose seat is at Constantinople) do worship
the false Prophet Mahomet. And this great Turk at this day (whom God
suffers to reign for the sins of his people) has all Affrike (excepting
the dominions of Presbyter John) a great part of Asia, and a piece of Europe
subject unto him. Thus much of these nations. Now in the second place
according unto promise (beloved in our Savior Christ) of the false doctrine
and detestable religion of Mahomet, and these erring nations. We must be wise
as serpents, and simple as doves, Math. 10.
we must be cunning exchaungers, we must be able to discern the spiritual
leprosy of Mahomet, Leuitic. 13.
we must be skillful in trying of the spirits, 1. John. 4. Iudic. 12.
we must learn to know Shiboleth from Siboleth (as the Apostle Jude writes)
diiudicantes, putting difference, Iud. Epist.
we must pray unto God with Solomon, 3. Reg. 3.
that of his goodness he will give us a wise and an understanding heart to
discern between good and bad. This false Prophet Mahomet, having (as some
write) an Heathen to his father, and an Hebrew to his mother, and urged of both
sides (as Sabellicus writes) received nor the one law nor the other thoroughly,
Sabellic. Enead. 8. lib. 6
but a smack of both. He used the company of Christians, of Jews, and
Infidels. Et vt popularior esset eius lex, ex omnium gentium sectis aliquid
assumpsit.

And to the end his law might be the more favored, he borrowed somewhat of
every sect.

Satan furnished him with three instruments, Fascicul. Temporum
as helpers, to bring his mischievous intent about. The first (says Were nerus
Roleuinke) was a Jew, a great Astronomer, and a Magitian, who opened unto him
at large the Jewish follies. The second, one John of Antioch. The third, one
Sergius a Monk, both abominable heretics. Sabel. Enead. 8. lib. 6.
Every one played his part. Sabellicus writes, that to flatter the Christians,
he was baptized of Sergius, and that of these Heretics he learned with the
Sabellians to deny the Trinity, with the Manichees to establish two
beginnings, with Eunomius to deny the equal power of the father, and the son,
with Macedonius to call the holy Ghost a creature, and with the Nicolaites to
allow the number of wives, and wandering lust. Anton. cron part. 2. tit. 13
cap. 5.
Sergius the Monk (says Antoninus) persuaded Mahomet in his Alcoran, (so is
the book of his law termed) to commend the humility of Christian Monks and
priests. He made him deliver the Saracens a monks coule, which they use unto
this day. Also: Instarmonachorum multas genu-flexiones:

Many duckings and crouchings after the manner of Monks,

which is seen in their kind of salutation. Mathias a Michou adds, Mathias a
Michou de Sarmat Asiana. lib. 1. lib. 7. Laonicus de reb. Turc lib. 3.
that the sect of Mahomet, use also shauing, and this no doubt was the Monks
doctrine Laonicus the Athenian reports that the Turks confess God to be ye
governor of all things, and that Jesus was the Apostle of GOD, begotten by
the Angel Gabriell upon Marie the Virgin, which never knew man, and that
he was greater or woorthier then manne. Sabellicus adds: Sabellic. Enead.
lib. 6.
they commend the blessed Virgin, they allow the miracles, and approve the
Gospel, as far forth as it agrees with the Alcoran. This is but a shadow
of Religion, and a cloak covering a number of blasphemies. In confessing a
God, they deny the trinity of persons, in speaking of Jesus, they most
wickedly with the Arrians deny his Godhead, and that he is the Son of God.
Al, that is spoken of the virgin, the miracles, and the Gospel, by those
blasphemous Turks, though to seem a praise, yet is it a dispraise, when as
the truth is not plainly and absolutely delivered, but maimed and mingled with
falsehood. The Apostle S. James says: Jacob. 2.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty
of al. The Saracens jest at the Christians, for affirming that Jesus the great
friend of God, would suffer coutumely, reproach, and endure death by the hands
of the Jews, they deny that he suffered, or that he died, but that he
ascended into heaven, and that the Jews took an other in his stead, Naucler.
Generat. 22. Anton. cron part. 2. tit. 13 cap. 5.
and executed him (which is an old heresy) so write Nauclerus and Antonimus,
with others. Mahomet forgot here to deliver unto his people the testimony of
the Prophet Esaias, which opened the truth of Christ: Esaias. 53.
He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: he is
brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer is
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. It follows: And who shall declare his
age? It passes man's reach, for he is God from everlasting. Our Savior
testifies of himself, the willing mind he had to suffer, and to die, that
sinners might live. John. 6.
The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. Again: John. 11.
I am the good shepherd, the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, I
lay down my life for my sheep. Therefore does the Father love me, because I
lay down my life that I may take it again. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self. S. Paul yields testimony also to the truth,
saying: Hebr. 9.
He offered up himself without spotte to God. When Peter went about to
withstand such as came to apprehende him, he forbadde him, saying: Math. 26.
What think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will give me
more then twelve legions of Angels? how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled,
that it must be so? Here he shows his yielding and consenting mind.
Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23.25. Epipan. here is. 24.28.
That another suffered in his stead is an old damned heresy which Mahomet
revived after the death of Cerinthus, and Basilides. He has forbidden his
followers al pictures and images in their temples, mingling (says Matthew
Paris) some honey with his poison, Math. Paris hist. Angl. in Henric. 3.
Sabellic. Enead. 8. lib. 6.
yt rather to deceive the drinker. He receives the old testament correcting
therein (so presumptuous is this spirit) certain errors, he allows after his
manner of three Prophets, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, whom he calls Razales.
Yet immediately he is found contrary to himself. The Christians pray toward the
East, Jacob. de Vorag. in vita Pelag. legend. 177.
the Jews (says Iacobus de Voragine) toward the West, Mahomet commands his
people to pray toward ye south, he might have turned himself for all his
religion to ye devil toward ye north. The christians have sunday for their
sabbath, the Jews Saturday, Laonic. lib. 3. Volater. lib. 12.
and Mahomet Friday (as Laonicus writes) to dissent from ye Hebrews and
Christians (as Volateran writes) for yt he was made king upon that day,
Anton. cron part. 2. tit. 13. cap. 5. Naucler. Generat. 22.
or (as Antoninus writes) in ye honor of Venus, the Goddess of Arabia,
thereby the rather to win that country people, and so it may very well be, for
most of his religion stands upon venerie, as I shall deliver unto you ano^.
He taught Circumcision, although (says Antoninus) it is not found yt he
himself was circumcised. He forbad ye eating of swines flesh, blood, and
strangled, he commanded washings and purifyings, ad similitudinem Iudaeorum,
after the manner of the Jews. He called himself a Prophet, and that he was sent
of God to supply ye imperfection of al laws, to lace ye remiss, and to
mittigate the severe law. The Jews hearing the name of Moses, ye aba^doning of
pictures, ye receiving of ye old testament, ye using of purifications ye
doctrine of circumcision and swines flesh, Flor. Hist.
and that he said unto them (as Flores historiarum writes) he was ye promised
Messiah, they flocked about him, and 10 of the^ continued with him to his dying
day, Paul. Diac. rer. Romans lib. 18.
(as Paulus Diaconus writes.) When they had heard his doctrine, and seen ye
manner of his diet and conversation, they espied that he eat Camels flesh, and
thereby perceived he was not the man they looked for. Then they imagined what
was to be done, to be driven to forsake him and his religion for altogether,
yt they judged a disgracing unto them. They kept him company, and fearing least
the Christian religion, by the mean of Sergius, should take much root (after
their old manner, showing whose children therein they were) they continually
prick him forwards against the Christians. There are six points chiefly,
wherein the Jews differ from the Christians. Ludouicus Carettus ad Iudaeos,
lib. diuinorum visor.
Ludouicus Carettus, a Jew converted to the christian faith, shall
indifferently report them for both sides, for there-upon he stood, before he
was thoroughly persuaded in the truth. The first is the trinity, which they
deny, acknowledging one God, but denying ye three persons. The second: the
incarnation of the word, which is the divinity of Christ, which they confess
not. Thirdly the manner of Christ's coming (as they dream) to destroy
kingdoms, Esaias. 62. Zachar 9.
and to reign here upon earth, but he came poor and meek, riding upon an Ass
accounted among the wicked, whose sins he bare, Math. 21. Esaias. 53. John. 18.
for his kingdom was not of this world. The fourth is in the observation of the
law of Moses, ye ceremonies and traditions of the elders, in the which they are
too much and superstitiously addicted. The Christians affirm the law to be
fulfilled in Christ, and the ceremonies which were but for a time, to be
abrogated, and that there are no more precepts to be kept, then concern the
love of God and their neighbor. The fifth consists in the salvation of the
soul. The Jews say, that man is to be saved by good works, and that God will
reward every man according unto his works. The manner they mistake: here the
Papists show whose children they are. Act. 4. Abacuk. 2. Act. 3. Luke 17.
The Christians confess no salvation, but by Jesus Christ, and that the just
lives by faith in him, and that they are taught, when they have done all
which they are commanded to say, they are unprofitable servants, and that ye
virtues and works which God crowns or rewards in them, are not theirs, but
his, that gave them, and when he crowns them, he extolleth his own mercy where
by they are saved. The sixth and the last is the time of Christ, the Messiah his
coming. The Jews allege many prophesies at his coming not to have been
fulfilled, the reduction of ye exile, the reedifiyng of the temple, the
restoring of Sodom and Samaria into their former state, ye whole earth to be
filled with his glory, with many other things. The Christians justify them all
to be fulfilled, and that the Jews understanding all the promises, grosely,
earthly, and literally, 2. Corinthians. 3
do therein err, and deceive themselves: For the letter kills, but the spirit
it is that gives life. Naucler. Generat. 22. Sabellic. Enead. 8. lib. 6 Suidas.
Mahomet espied the blindness of this nation, and among other things rebuked
them for denying, that Jesus was borne of the Virgin Marie, as the prophets had
foreshewed. Suidas reports an history, which he learned of a Jew, that the
pharisees at Jerusalem called a counsel to find out the father of Jesus. They
inioined certain women to search his mother, ye women affirmed they found her
a virgin, then was it recorded in ye famous register book of the temple, Jesus
the son of God, and of Mary the Virgin. This condemns both Jew and Saracen,
Laonic. de reb. Turc. lib. 3.
furthermore this false Prophet joins with the Rechabits, he forbids the
drinking of wine, yet I find that he drank him self drunk therewith, and
his people do it by stealth: If they be taken they are set alonge upon a
planke with a gagge in their mouth, and a ladell of boiling lead poured
therein. Jeremy. 35 Math. 26. 1. Timoth. 5. Ephesians. 5.
After the example of our savior Christ, the Christians drink wine, but
according unto ye rule prescribed: wherein there is no excess. It is permitted
the Saracens by this law to have four wives, Jacob. de Vorag. legend. 177.
Laonic. de reb. Turc. lib. 3. Anton. cron
though they be of nigh kin (says Jacob) yea five (says Laonicus) marrying
them virgins, and to take beside as many, emptitias and captiuas. Of them which
they have bought and taken captives, as their ability will serve to maintain
contrary to ye ordinance of God, there shall be two in one flesh. Volaterran
writes. Volater. lib. 12. Genes.
Voluptates corporis futurae foelicitati minime officere arbitra^tur:

They think that the pleasurs of the body hurt not nether hinder at all the
foelicity of the life to come.

This doctrine is the sink of Sodom, the flesh is the matter, ye burning lust
is a preamble of the fire falling from heaven, and the justice of God
threatens everlasting fire and torments for such Mahometical Sodomits. They
are ielous over their wives, whose faces, when they go abroad are covered,
least these fiery people be therewith inflamed. Mahomet (says Coelius) had 40.
Coelius.
wives, and further he gloried of himself, Nicol. Clenard. 1. Epist. Anton.
cron part. 2. tit. 13 cap. 5.
yt it was given him from above to exceed (says Clenard) 10. me^ (says
Antoninus) 50. men in carnal lust and venerie. An other abominable fact he
committed, yt which a Christian pen is loath to write, and a chaste mouth loath to
utter, and modest ears are loath to hear, yet ye filthiness of this false
Prophet may not be concealed, he committed buggerie with an Ass. Bonfin. lib.
8 decad. Bernard in Rosar. part. 1. sermon 14. Anton. vt supra
Bonfinius writes it. Again, he committed adultery with another man's wife,
which was upon displeasure from her husband, and fearing ye murmur of ye
people, he fained yt he received a paper from heaven, wherein it was permitted
him so to do, to ye end he might beget prophets and worthy me^. And herevpo^
the foolish law of divorce used this day among the Saracens, is grounded, that
a man may put away his wife three times, and so many times receive her again,
after that she has been so many times known by an other man. The Paradise this
prophet devised for his people, bewraieth his lewd disposition. He promises
them garments of silk, with all sorts of colors, bracelets of gold and
Amber, parlours and banqueting houses upon floods and rivers, vessels of gold
and silver, Angels serving them, bringing in gold milk, in silver wine,
lodginges furnished, cushings, pillows, and down beds, most beutiful women to
accompany the^, maidens and virgins with twinkling eyes, garde^s and orchards
with harbors, fountains springs, and al manner of pleasant fruit, rivers of
milk, honey, and spiced wine, al manner of sweet odors, perfumes, and fragra^t
sents, and to be short, Anton. Chronic.
quicquid carnes ad edendum concupiscunt,

whatsoever the flesh shall desire to eat.

Thus fleshly people have a fleshly religion, Iacobus de Vorag. legend. 177.
and a fleshly paradise to inhabit. One thing I may not ouership which I
refer to your selves either for the strangenes thereof to cast you into a
dumpe or wonder, or else at the folly of the Prophet to move you to a
laughter. he says they shall see in Paradise goodly Angels and these shall have
goodly eyes, and one Angel shall have as much space between both his eyes as
is in ye heavens between sun rising, and sun setting. I have not as yet
said any thing of their fasting, the same is continued the space of one month
in every year, and precisely kept from morning to night, Laonic. Volaterr.
Anton. Math. Paris. in Henric. 3. Bernard.
the Stars no sooner appear, but they fall to feasting, they sit up all
night, they give themselves to surfeting, drunkenness, and venerie: this is to
wash (says Bernard) Laterem crudam, a green tile, the more water ye pour
thereon, the more dirt ye make. To be short (least these extreme follies,
be over tedious unto you) this false Prophet dies, and such service,
ceremonies, and superstition, he enjoined his people, the same they observed,
He that succeeded him, commanded Mahomets Tomb to be adorned, the corpse to
be worshipped, his anniuersary or yearly remembrance to be sole^nized,
pilgrimage from all places to be made to the temple of Mecha, where he lies
chested, the Saracenicall pilgrims have promise of santitye and righteousness
by visiting his: Sepulcher Putantes se ( says Laonicus) hinc maxim colligere
Religione^,

Thinking that by this chiefly they gather Religion.

Many repair thither yearly from Asia, Affricke, and Europe, for to worship,
and many others staying at home, deliver them money, to offer for them, and
therein repose no less holiness. There is provision made for these passingers
two famous receptacles which we call Hospitalles not far from Mecha, with all
manner of Officers and Priests to pray for the founders Souls: The manner of
their worship you shall also hear. The Arabians received and learned of the
Indians, to worship the Goddess Venus, Mahomet confirmed the same with a law
so that in the honor of Venus, the Saracens, to this day (as I said before)
keep friday for their Sabbath. As the Indians worshipped Venus naked, so
Mahomet commanded the Saracens, men and women yearly to worship in the Temple
of Mecha all naked, excepting a brieth or apporne to cover that which nature
commanded to be kept in secret, and therein to carry stones to throw about ye
temple, and to stone the devil. Omitting these heathenish abomination and not
forgetting the superstition mentioned a little before. I would have the church
of Rome to behold here in the law of Mahomet her founder in superstition, and
shameful enormities borrowed either of Mahomet, or of the Heathens his
associats. The flocking to Tombs and sepulchers, ye worshipping of dead
corpses, bones, and relics, ye visiting Limina Petri, diriges, anniuersaries,
or yearly service over the dead, praying for souls pilgrimages to saints,
and shrines of the dead, sending of money in their absence, the opinion of
holiness and religion therein, we need not say it is popish, nay it is
Turkish and Mahometicall. And to the end they may be therein, the better
persuaded let them, Laonic. rer. Turc. lib. 3. Antoninus Cron. part. 2. tit.
13. cap. 5. Cuspinian. Ludouicus Romans patritius. Nauigat. lib. 1. cap. 8. and
13.
peruse Laonicus, Antoninus, and Cuspinianus with others that write thereof.

Also as in the year one thousand five hundred and three, one Ludouicus
Romanus with a great number of Merchants passing by Mecha, found the
experience of Mahometicall Illusions, for when the Idolatrous Priests of
Mahomet understood of the number of passingers which harbored not far of (to
the end there might be an opinion of holiness conceived of this false Prophet)
with certain devices they cast fire into the Aere, and at midnight ran about
like mad men, crying: Mahomet the Prophet of God is a rising, O Prophet: O
God. Mahomet will rise. Pardon me O God. In like sort of late years, we have
been acquainted with feigned miracles, of Romish Idolatry showed at the Tombs
of the dead being the feats of Satan: winking, smiling, sweating, frowning,
moving, with other Illusions, yea speaking, and giving of aunswers. Bernarde
came to a Church of Spire in Germany, whereas he lifted up his eyes to behold
the Images of the Church, ye Image of our Lady said unto him: Good morrow
Bernard, He perceiving (says the history) Praestigias Demonis, the falsehood of
Monks by the instigation of the Devil, made this answer: Paul forbids a
woman to speak in the Congregation. Ludouic. Romans lib. 1. cap. 1. and 18. Lib.
2. cap. 6.
The Saracens use invocation of mediators to make intercession for them. They
call upon Abraham, and Isaac, They honor Nabi, Bubacar, Othomar, Aumar, Fatoma,
the followers of Mahomet with others. They have Herenutes, and solitary men,
such as vowed chastity in the service of Mahomet, in whom there is great
opinion of holiness, but what is holiness, and chastity, without knowledge of
the true God and faith in Jesus Christ? all without Christ is to no purpose,

Now (good people, and believed in our Savior Christ) as the dear children of
God, who is jealous over you and your service, have great regard unto
yourselues and the foundation ye build upon: least your building fall. The wise
builder builds upon the Rock, Jesus Christ, and that is unremovable. Let
your faith be fixed in Jesus Christ, the true and only Savior of the world,
Math. 7.
then hell-gates shall not be able to prevail against you. Math. 16.
Mahomet unwisely has builded upon the sand, his doctrine has no sure
warrant, he has rejected the true corner stone, that closes the building,
Jesus Christ, he has lewdly mingled together his lome, and mortar of Heathens,
Jews, and false Christians, his timber warpeth, and shrinketh, being not
seasoned with antiquity of the truth, but with the sap of late invention,
his walls are but painted papers, a show of religion, his lights are but
darkness, wherein his followers stumble, and stumbling they fall, and falling,
they plunge in everlasting perdition. There are reasons and arguments to settle
our minds, and stay our consciences in the faith of Jesus Christ, and to prove
that Mahomets law is no true religion. First Mahomets law is not warranted, or
grounded upon the only true and pure word of God, therefore Mahomets law is no
true religion, he patched together his Alcoron of the laws and doctrines of
Heathens, Indians, and Arabians, of superstitious Jews, of Rechabits, of false
Christians and Heretics, as Nestorians, Sabellia^s, Manichees, Arrians,
Cerinthians, Macedonians, Eunomians, and Nicolaits, of illusions, and
inventions of his own brain: and lastly for further credit he borrowed some
out of the old and new Testament. God will not be thus served, he delivered his
mind of old unto Israel in this sort: and he continues the same God still:
Deuteronomy. 12.
Ye shall not do every man what seems him good in his own eyes. Whatsouer I
command you take heed ye do it, thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take
ought therefrom. Deuteronomy. 22.
Again: Thou shall not plough with an Ox and an Ass together, thou shall
not sow thy Vineyard with diverse kinds of seeds, thou shall not wear a
garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen, and linen together. We have
commandment not so eat the pascal Lamb, boiled or sodden in water: Exodus 12.
Christ Jesus is our pascal Lamb, the water is man's traditions wherewith he may
not be mingled, 1. Corinthians. 5
we may not Math. 6. Eccle. 13.
serve God and Mammon. What fellowship ( says Syrach) has Hyena with a dog.
2. Corinthians. 6
saint Paul advises the Corinthians: Be not unequally yoaked with the
Infidels By reason he shows this may not be: For what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with darkness?
and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has the believer with
the Infidel? and what agreement has the temple of God with Idols? for ye are
the temple of the living God. Our Savior rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees
for transgressing the commandments of God, Math. 15.
by mean of their traditions, he pronounces their worship vain, in teaching
the doctrines and precepts of men, the judicial sentence he gives thereof is
this: Every plant (yt is all manner of doctrine) which my heavenly father has
not planted shall be rooted up. Secondly the religion of Mahomet Mahomet is a
most wicked and false religion, the heathen Philosophers by ye rule of natural
reason have found this an absurd opinion. Auicenna Metaphysic.
Auicenna one of Mahomets own sect has misliked with this, saying, The law
which our Mahomet has given us shows the perfection of felicity to consist
in those things which concern the body but there is an other promise which is
comprehended only by understanding, and therefore the wise and sages of old
had a greater desire to express the felicity of the soul then of the body,
the which bodily felicity though it were granted them, yet they regarded not,
neither esteemed it in comparison of the felicity which is coupled with the
principal verity: His loose doctrine of marriages, his abuse of fasting, and
his description of Paradise (spoken of before) deliver unto us that there is
herein small difference between Epicurisme, Atheism, and Mahometisme, Luke. 16.
The glutton in the gospel that was clothed in purple and fine white and fared
delitiously every day, shows unto us how God favors and accepts of such
people. Romans 14.
The kingdom of God (says the Apostle) Is not meat, nor drink but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, for whosoever in these
things serves Christ (herein the true felicitye consists) is acceptable unto
God, and approved of men. Math. 4.
Satan the schoolmaster of Mahomet showed a glotonous disposition when he
would have had the stones to be made bread. His disciple must content himself
with the answer made unto ye master: Deutr. 8.
Man lives not by bread only but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of the Lord. Our savior says: Ioh. 4.
the true worshippers shall worship the father (not in corporal delights and
pleasurs) In spirit and truth, (this is ye manner) For the father requires even
such to worship him. Again an argument reduced of ye nature of God God is a
spirit and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. And
yt I may deliver the whole unto you in few words, perfect felicity
consists in knowing of God, in believing in God, in loving of God, and
enjoying of God, warraunted by the words of our Savior. John. 17.
This is life everlasting that they know thee to be the only very God and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Mahomet was established through wiles,
deceit, subteltie, and lies, therefore ye law of Mahomet is a most wicked
religion. First he having ye falling sickness persuaded his wife and others yt
it was the power of God and the presence of the Angel Gabriell that fell him.
Sergius the heretical Monk was at hand and bare false witness to ye same,
says Zonaras. Ioh. Zonar. Annal. tom. 3.
He told them yt the tame Dove which he taught to feed at his ear was
sometime an Angel, and sometime the holy ghost. He had three leude companions
to devise and face out lies with him. When he perceived ye me^ gave ear unto
him, he framed that the Angel Gabriell had carried him to Jerusalem, and thence
to have lifted him up to heaven, and there to have learned the secrets of his
law. Anton. cron. part. 2. tit. 13. cap. 5.
He made ye Saracens believe (says Antoninus) yt before God made ye world
there was written in the throne of God: there is no god but ye god of Mahomet.
when he had framed his Alcoran and bound it up fair he caused secretly a wild
Ass to be taken and the book to be bound about his neck, and as he preached
unto ye people, upon a sudden he stood amazed as if some great secretie were
revealed unto him from above. He brake out and told ye people: Behold god has
sent you a law from heaven, go to such a desert there ye shall find an Ass, and
a book tied about his neck. The people ran in great have they found it so as he
had said. They take the Ass, they bring the book, they honor the prophet.
Touching divorced, Auierus lib. 2. cap. 12. Ioh. Leo. lib. 3. cap. 23. Aphric.
and separated wives, he told ye Saracens he had received a paper from heaven.
He used south-saying and divination the which at Fessa, a City of Mauritama
unto this day is called Zarragia. Bernard in. Rosar. part. 1. sermon. 14
He persuaded his folowers that at ye end of ye world he should be tra^sformed
into the form of a mighty Ram full of locks and long fleeces of wool. And
that all that held of his Law should be as fleas shrooding themselves in his
fleeces, and that he would iumpe into heaven and so convey them all thither.
These and such like were his sleightes and untruths without warrauntize of
Gods word, without reason and probable show of truth. Fascicul. temporum.
Satan being coniured to deliver the truth of the Alcoran of Mahomet said,
that therein were comprised twelve thousand lies, and the rest was truth, by all
likelihood very little: Deutr. 18.
In the like respect God threatens Israel, saying: The Prophet that shall
presume to speak, a word many name, which I have not commanded him to speak,
or that speaks in the name of other Gods, even the same Prophet shall die.
And if thou think in thine heart: how shall we know the word which the Lord
has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to pass that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken,
but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously. If we apply this rightly unto
Mahomet we shall not find any one thing in verity and truth the which he
spoke that came to pass but whatsoever he wroughte was thorough wiles,
fraud, and subteltie, let his prophecy of his assention after his death be a
president for all which was Mahomet was thrust in by secular power and force
of arms, by battles and bloodshed, therefore the law of Mahomet is a most
wicked religion, Paulus Diaconus writes yt he spent ten years in Arms
subduing to his reign, Paul. Diac. rer. Romans lib. 18.
and compelling to his religion, thereof writes Matthew Paris in this sort:
Math. Paris histor. Angl. Henric. 3.
The law of the Saracens (the devil inditing the same by the ministry of
Sergius the Monk and heretic) Mahomet wrote in the Arabike tongue, and taught
them. A gladio cepit, per gladium tenetur, and in gladio terminatur:

It began of the sword, it is held by the sword, and it is finished or ended
in the sword.

Idem.
Mahomets own words unto ye Sarace^s are these Non sum cu^ miraculis aut
indicijs ad vos missus sed in gladio rebels puniturus etc.

I am not sent unto you with miracles and signs, but with the sword to punish
such as resist me. If any therefore receive not my prophecy and precept, and
will not willingly enter into this our faith, if he be under our jurisdiction he
shall die or be compelled to pay tribute the price of his incredulity and so
live. They that are not of this faith and dwell in other countries I charge and
commau^d that open wars be proclaimed and armor taken against them until they
be constrained to turn unto the faith. They that will not consent unto our
doctrine shall die the death, their wives and children shall be committed to
perpetual slavery to our Galleys.

The Scythians from whence these Turks came, are an impatient kind of people.
Naucler. generat. 22.
When they warred under Heraclius the Emperor against the king of Persia they
were too too ernest for their pay. The Clark of the band, in their greedines
called the^ doogs, thereof rose a mutine, they made their moan unto the better
sort of their country, they forsook their Emperor. This was their first fall
from Christian kings and Emperors whereof there ensued great mischief. Fulgos.
Egnat. Sabell.
This furious and cruel disposition an other of ye same name with this false
prophet, an Emperor of ye Turks showed at Constantinople. Missing an aple upon
a certain tree in his Orchard, he gave commandment that the bowels of three
pages that were about him should be ripped that it might be known which of them
had eaten it. The time at this present will not serve to show the infinite
streams of Christian and Innocent blood these enemies of God most cruelly
shed. There comes to my remembrance among other histories their doings in
Poland, John Herburt. hist. Polon. lib. 7. cap. 4.
where at one battle they slew of Christians as many, as their single ears
did fill nine great sackes. These people are wild, savage, and cruel, Mahomet
made them a law accordingly, saying: Paul. Diac. rer Romans lib. 18.
He that slays his enemy, or is slain of his enemy. let him enter and
possess paradise. This is contrary to Gods word, in the old and new testament,
this is contrary to the rule of charity, which slays not, but forgiueth the
enemy. The Paradise of Mahomet must then be the bottomless pit of Hell. Of
the contrary, the true word of God, 1. Corinthians. 2
and the Gospel of Jesus Christ was not planted neither by force of arms,
neither by eloquence of words, neither by enticing speech of man's wisdom,
but by the work of the blessed spirit and power of God. S. Paul puts the
Corinthians in remembrance thereof, saying: 1. Cor. 1.
Brethren, you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble, but God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the mighty things. And vile things of the world, and things which
are despised has God chosen, and things which are not to bring to naught things
that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence. It might seem very
strange, that 12. men, the servants of any king or emperor, being abject
persons, without weapon or armor, should subdue unto themselves from the king
or emperor, the whole dominion. It might seem very strange, that a few
unlearned and unlettered men should confound and put to silence all subtle
Logitians, al sage philosophers, al skilful Astronomers, and profound Divines.
It might seem very strange, yt a few men naked and friendless, should conquer
the whole world. The 12 Apostles are sent forth to preach according unto the
institution of our savior) and commanded they shall possess neither gold nor
silver, Math. 10.
nor money in their purses, nor a scrip for their iurney, nor two coats, nor
shoes nor a staff, being simple men, unlearned, and of one language, yet have
they confounded the wise, confuted the learned, converted all languages, and
conquered ye whole world unto their master Christ. This is it which Chrysostom
calls: Chrysostom. in 1. cap. Act. apost. hom. 1
Maximu^ miraculu^, the greatest miracle: orbe^ terraru^ absque miraculis, a
duodecim pauperibus and illiteratis hominibus attractu^.

That the whole world should be carried away without miracles (alone) by 12.
poor and unlearned men.

They woar no armor, Math. 10.
they proclaim no wars, they were authors of no sedition, our savior
bequeathed unto the^ peace, they preached peace when they came to city or
house, their salutatio^ was, peace be in this house, and ye spirit of peace was
resiant among the^. They compelled no man, as Mahomet and his disciples did.
Tertullian writes: Tertul. ad scapulam.
Sed nec religionis est cogere religionem, quae spo^te suscipi debeat, no^ vi:
cu^ and hostiae ab animo lubenti expostule^tur. But it is not the nature of
religion to co^train religion, which ought to be received willingly, not by
co^pulsion, when as sacrifices are required of a willing mind. Lactantius has
ye like, Lactant. institut. lib. 5. cap. 20.
reasoning with ye infidels yt compelled ye christians to sacrifice. No^ opus est
vi and iniuria, quia religio cogi no^ potest.

Ye need not use force and violence, for religion may not be constrained.

He shows ye practice of ye Christians, and the reason thereof.

Nemo a nobis retinetur inuitus, invtilis est enim Deo qui fide ac deuotione
caret.

We hold no man against his will, for he is unprofitable to God that wants
faith and devotion.

This compulsion is to be understood of Christian toward Heathen, or Heathen
toward Christian, but when as any receive the Christian faith, vow their
service unto the only true GOD, matriculate their names in the congregation of
the faithful, and afterward decline, giving themselves unto carnalitie,
raising of schism, broaching of heresies, and falshoode, the whippe of Christ
must be taken in hand to purge the house of God, the ^^^^e of discipline and
correction must be used the magistrate must draw the sword, and execute
Justice according unto the laws of God, and Christian Princes, established and
decreed for the aduauncing of piety, and rooting out of sin, August. ad
Bonifac. Epist. 50.
and all iniquity. Augustine discourses hereof at large, and shows how
heretics and schismatikes by imperial laws and constitutions, are forcibly to
be reformed. Of old the Christians gave alms and relief unto the poor of
themselves (charity dies) they are now taxed and seized: of old Christian
devotion moved men to fast (devotion dies) they have now days and times
assigned them: of old they repaired to the Church of great zeal, (zeal
dies) they are now enioined by penal Laws: of old being mindful of Christ's
death, they frequented sundry times to the Lords Table (forgetfulness is come
in place) they are now called upon, certain times in the year: of old Christ
was sincerely and faithfully served, his word purely taught, Christian Princes
dutifully obeyed (the fear of God was before their eyes) but now a days
there is corruption crept in, papisme, idolatry, treason and conspiracy,
practiced by false Christians. They fall within compass of the Laws, they
have justice showed them, they are severely punished and chastised, this is no
persecution, this is no compulsion to the faith, but correction for falling
from the faith, this is the rule of godliness, which Mahomet observed not.
Fifthly, the law of Mahomet is not witnessed and confirmed by signs wonders,
and miracles, therefore the Law of Mahomet is a must false religion. He said
unto the Saracens of himself: Math. Paris hist. Angl. in Henric. 3.
Non sum cum miraculis aut indiciis ad vos missus.

I am not sent unto you with miracles and signs.

There was no divine power showed in all his practice. This Law was not
revealed unto himself, he confessed himself to be altogether unlearned, he
had three helpers, as I said before, he called himself a prophet, when as
the Law and prophets end in John the baptist. And after him we are to look
for no mo Prophets, The prophets of old arrogated not any such name or title
unto themselves, but by long tract of time, their holiness of lifs, the
wonders they wrought, and the truth of Gods word which they delivered, declared
them to be no less. As for this false prophet, his beastlines of life, his
want of testimony from above, his untruths and absurdities, deliver his
doctrine to be most damnable. Exodus 19.20. Deutr.
The law of God which Moses received, was delivered after a most wonderful
manner. God stood upon mount Sinai, there was fire, there was thunder, there
was lightening, there was darkness, there was the sound of the trumpetes
heard, the voice of the Lord was mighty, the foundations of the earth shook,
the mountain smoaked, and the people trembled. The prophets and servants of
God successively in the times and ages following, confirmed their message and
embasies with strange signs and tokens. The birth of our Savior Christ, the
preaching of the Gospel, the sealing up of the same with his blood after most
strange and marvelous sightes, declared him to be ye only true Messiah, and
savior of the world, authorized his doctrine, and confirmed ye faith of ye
Christians. A virgin to bring forth, Angels singing glory, shepherds running
to search a stra^g star appearing, wisemen coming from far, the heavens
opening, ye holy ghost desce^ding, the father sou^ding, this is my Son, John ye
baptist pointing with ye finger, Behold the lamb of God: The blind, ye deaf, ye
dumb, the lame, the sick, all cured, and the dead raised to life. These
deliver unto us the power of the most high and mighty God. Again at his
passion, palpable darkness, the veil of the temple renting, the earth
shaking, the rocks cleaving, the graves opening, the dead rising, and
yielding testimony to the living of the truth in Christ. Last of all, his
rising from the dead, his instructing of the Apostles, his visible Ascension
into the Heavens, and his sending of the holy Ghost according unto promise,
persuades sufficiently in all respects, that his doctrine is the most sacred
truth of the only true and everlasting Mahomet is a confused kind of
doctrine, patched together of contraries, dissenting and varying within it
self, therefore the Law of Mahomet is a most wicked Religion. Sergius the
Monk, John of Antioch, and the superstitious Jew, patched together, according
unto their variyng minds, diverse doctrine, but in this they agreed, in
setting down lies and falsehood. Anton. cron part. 2. tit. 13 cap. 5.
After the death of Mahomet (says Antoninus) the disciples of this false
Prophet could not agree in the reading, Ludouic. Romans Patritius. nauigat. lib.
1. cap. 12.
pointing understanding and expounding of the Alcoran. Some added, some
diminished some maimed, and some corrupted the Law. The Jews put in what
pleased them best, the Heretics urged their opinions, the Heathens also
pleaded for themselves, so that the Alcoran was despised, and of no reputation,
and woorthely. In process of time, after great dissension, one Elehege being
chosen to rain over them, commanded all coppyes should be brought unto him,
of them all he made one book, which is the Alcoran, that they have at this
day, and the rest he caused to be burned to ashes. There are yet three things
to be considered in this false Religion, which I will briefly run over.
First, what Mahomet to work mischief. Heraclius the Emperor, and Chosdroes
King of Persia, were at deadly enmity, warring one against the other. The
Scythian Nation fell from them both, and found Mahomet to their ringe-leader.
Again, the Church of GOD was then lamentably divided. Peter Archbishop of
Constantinople, fell into a detestable heresy, sucked out of the school of
Valentinus, Marcion, and Manes the Heretics. Iacobus Syrus (of him have the
Iacobits in the East their name) took part with Seuerus: he held that Christ
neither dyed, neither suffered, but an other for him, which opinion Mahomet
followed. So that the Church was troubled with Nestorians Iacobites,
Monothelits, and the Monks of Benedicts order, which then began to swarm like
locustes upon the earth. Not only this, but also ye Church of Rome began to
lift up her self in pride and abomination, the Pope calling himself
universal Bishop. God was highly displeased with this wickedness, and suffered
Mahomet to rise as a rod or scourge to whippe his people. We are now to pray
that GOD at length will be reconciled with his people, and that he will cast
the rod into the fire. The second thing we have to consider, is why this
false religion of Mahomet Flor. Histor.
Matthew of Westmonaster writes: Vnde credo quod si hodie viueret, multos
inueniret discipulos.

Whereupon I believe if Mahomet lived at this day he should find many
Disciples.

Mathias a Michou de Sarmat. Asian. lib. 1. cap. 5.
In the year 1246 Innocentius 4. sent to great Cham the Emperor of the
Tartarians, persuading him to receive the Christian faith, to leave shedding of
Innocent blood, and to serve GOD in Spirit and truth.

At that time also came the Embassadoures of the Saracens, pleadynge and vrgyng
him to the Law of Mahomet, alleging that it was easier, more tolerable,
full of pleasures, and more fit for Warriors, then the Christian faith. Cham
liked of the conditions, he was carnally given, and embraced Mahomet unto this
day. Thirdly and lastly, why is the Religion of Mahomet continued, being known
to be wicked, Anton. cron part. 2. tit. 13. cap. 5.
carnal, and fleshly? Mahomet made it death to dispute thereof. If any speak
against me (says he) proditorie occidatur,

Let him be traiterouslye put to death,

Again: Sine audientia occidatur,

let him be put to death without coming to his answer.

Sabellic. Enead. 8. lib. 6
Qua sanctione (says Sabellicus) palam fecit, nihil sinceri in ea lege esse,
etc.

By which decree he made manifest, that there is nothing sound in that Law,
the which he covered as an hid mysterye, and forbadde to be reasoned of,
that the vulgar sort should not know what was decreed or established.

I am now coming to that which I have lastly promised to deliver unto you,
to wit: that which concerns our selves the way to please GOD, and mean to
win those that are without: Math. 5.
When as our light so shines before men, that they seeing our good woorks, may
glorify our Father which is in heaven.

And I will be the shorter herein, for that I doubt not but you have been here
tofore by me out of this place often exhorted thereto. I fear me (beloved in
our Savior Christ) least that I have been over tedious in the premises, I
have the longer waded therein, not having at othertimes the like occasion
offered me to discourse of the like matter. Christian lights, Christian fruits,
and holy co^uersatio^, has now moved this Saracen to serve the true God in the
faith of Jesus Christ. He is about 40. years of age (as he says himself)
born at Nigropontus, of old called Chalcides, a City of great fame in the
Isle Euboea, and belonging sometime unto the Dukedom of Venice, but taken and
subdued by the Turk, through the treason of one Thomas Liburne, master Gunner
of Nigropontus, in the year 1471. This Turk was taken captive by the
Spaniard, where he continued in great misery the space of 25. years, whom the
most worthy knight S. Frauncis Drake found at Carthaginia. God showed great
mercy unto this poor Turk, in calling him home (with the prodigal child in
the Gospel) by misery, slavery, and captivity, and in sending him a deliverer,
not only for the present sorrows and miserye, but to his endless joy and
solace in Christ Jesus, blessed be his name therefore.

This Saracen being reasoned withal, what should move him at this present to
receive the Christian faith: made answer, that experience of the wicked world,
at Nigropontus his native cuntry, his misery and captivity under the
Spaniards, his travail hither, and the view of this land, had beaten into him
(as he said) the knowledge of the true God. And further he faide, that if
there were not a God in England, there was none no where. Two things (he did
confess) moved him to the Christian faith. The one before his coming to
England, ye other at his arrival. Before his coming, the virtue, the
modesty, the godliness, the good usage, and discrete government of the English
Christians, and among others (as he chiefly noted) he was most beholden unto
the Right worshipful knight S. Frauncis Drake, and the worhty captain W.
Haukins, tearming them most worthy Christians. After his arriual, he saw
courtesy, gentleness, friendly salutations of the people, succor for him and his
cuntrimen, pity and compassion of the English men, and withal he learned that
the poor, the aged, the impotent, ye sick and diseased Christians were
provided for, whereas in his cuntry, and where he had been in captivity, ye
poor, and sick, and diseased were scorned, despised, and accounted of as
dogs. These things moved this sillye Saracene to the Christian faith, and
thereupon it is that I have chosen for my text, the words of our Savior
tending to ye same purpose. Math. 5.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good woorks, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. He was demanded why for the space of
25. years, being the time of his captivity in Spain, he received not the
Christian faith. His answer was: that he had been by a Friar solicited
thereto, and that he heard no more of him but the name of Christ, without
instruction, or opening to his comfort any point of the faith (as he has been
here comfortably instructed.) And again, that there were two things which he
utterly misliked in the Spaniard (which dissuaded him from the faith) his
cruelty in shedding of blood, and his Idolatry in worshipping of Images. He
that will have a view of the cruelty of the Spaniard, let him read The
Spanish Colonie, written in the Castilian tongue by a Friar, afterward Bishop,
one Bartholmew de la Casas, and lately tra^lated into english. As for his
idolatry, I refer ye shame thereof to the founder, ye Antichrist of Rome. I am
not odiously to note any Christian nation more then other, with any particular
vice. If there rise any iar between man and wife, let son and daughter look that
they make it not worse: if discord happen between master and mistres, ye
servants may not blow ye fire of hatred: if unkindness grow between Christian
kings and Princes (as at this day between England and Spain) It is not the
part of subjects to aggrauat ye displeasure but in all dutifulnes to obey their
own princes, and pray unto God to establish peace among the^ we see what ye
Saracen commends, and moves him to glorify the God of the Christians, and
what he discomme^deth, and disswadeth him from the faith. Mahomet himself
confessed (as it is alleged) and therein highly commended the christian
faith: Math. Paris histor. Angl. in Henric. 3
That Jesus was borne of the Virgin Mary, that he lived without sin among
men, that he was a Prophet and more then a Prophet, and that he ascended into
the heavens. Moreover what time the sage and learned among them came to
Jerusalem, and required the Gospel, and new Testament to be showed them they
kissed the book, and had the purity and cleannes of the doctrine which Christ
had taught, in admiration, and specially the Gospel after Luke: The Angel
Gabriell was sent etc. the which the learned sort of them do read, and often
report. The Nigros in the kingdom of Senega, Aloys. Cadamust. Nauigat. cap. 16
being of the faith of Mahomet (says Aloysius Cadamustus) are not malicious
nether stubbornely bent against the Christians: They are delighted with the
behavior of the Christians, and they gather our faith and religion to be the
holier and the better in that we are welthier and richer then they are, drawing
their reason from temporal to eternal things, they add further that we are
highly beloved of our God, and they are so persuaded for that our God gives
his people such great riches, and beatifieth them with so many ornaments and
gifts of body and mind and that such a law cannot possibly be but of a good
law maker. Cap. 25.
The king of Senega was in manner thoroughly persuaded to renounce the law of
Mahomet but he feared his Nobility, and the loss of his Crown. A nephewe of
the kings earnestly entreated Cadamustus to deliver there the word of God,
Mathias a Michou de Sarmat Asian lib. 1. cap. 5. Musda Fa. Beg. ad Elizabeth.
Angl. Reg.
so was he in love with the puritye thereof. Cham the Emperor of the Tartarians
confesses Jesus to be the power and spirit of the great God. Musda fa Beg,
secretary to the great. Turk of Constantinople yt now is writing to the Queen
of England as appears by his letters bearing date the 15. of March, and in
the year of great Jesus (so he writes) 1579. shows the great affection his
master the Turk together with himself bears to this land and of our
religion as it is interpreted he says thus: We know that your sovereign
Majesty among all the Christians have the most sound religion, and therefore the
Christians thoroughout the world envy your highness, who^ if they could, they
would hurt. We hear what the enemy reports of our God, of Jesus our
Savior, and the word of God which we profess, Satan is driven mauger of his
bearde, to confess ye truth, the majesty of our God is so great that the
celestial terrestrial and infernal powers vow thereto, the light, and shine
of this godheade, is so clear, that Satan with his mist and darkness can
not ouershadowe it, the word of God is so clean and pure that the very enemy
can not stayne it. What shall we say of the Professors of the same? we
know what is required at our hands, and it is often repeated in holy Scripture:
be you holy for I am holy says the Lord, learn of me says our Savior,
Again: Let your light shine etc. 1. Peter. 2.
Peter writes: show forth the virtues of him that has called you out of
darkness into his marvelous light. Paul exhorts: Coloss. 4.
walk wisely toward them that are without, Again we are councelled to be
quiet meddling with our own business, working and getting our living with our
own hands to what end? 1 Thessalonians. 4.
That ye may behave your selves honestly toward them that are without. He
also that will be Pastor and governor over the people, must warely walk
least the enemy note any bleamish in him. Therefore the Apostle writes: 1.
Timoth. 3
He must be well reported of, even of them that are without. So that neither
Jew, nor gentile, Turk, nor Saracen, neither Heretic or false Christian
whatsoever, may justly charge the Christian faith with the life of the
professor. Philip. 2.
Saint Paul, exhorts the Philippians: Do all things without murmuring and
reasoning, that ye may be blameless, and pure, and the sons of God without
rebuke in the midst of a naughty, and crooked Nation, among whom ye shine as
lights in the world. This kind of Christian conversation shall bring four
notable things to pass. Heathens, Turks, and Saracens, seeing this holiness
of life, will fall to a great wonder, and admiration, thereof writes Peter: 1.
Peter. 4.
It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of the life after the
lust of the gentiles, in wanto^nes, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, drinkings,
and abominable Idolatries wherein it seems to the^ strange that ye run not
with them unto the same excess of Riotte. 1. Peter. 2.
For so is the will of God that by well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. A little before: Have your conversation honest among
the gentiles that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers may by your
good works which they shall see glorify God in the day of the visitation
Saracen which walked of a long time without knowledge of the true God without
the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, the only savior of the
world, and now having beheld the shine thereof most willingly embraces ye
same, blessed be God for it. Saint Peter exhorts the wives to obedience, his
reason is to great purpose: That even they which obey not the word, 1. Peter.
3.
may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify
your father which is in heaven. Ephesians. 2.
For we are the workmanship of God (says Saint Paul) created in Christ Jesus
unto good works (as I said before) which God has ordained that we should
walk in them: But more is the pittye there are byrds which defile their own
nests, there are loose Christians, Gospellers in word, but Atheistes in deed.
Quali pudore suffu^ditur ecclesia:

what a shame is this to the Church. (Says Cyprian)

there is pride, ambition, coueteousnes, Cyprian.
dissension, debate, simonye, vsurye, oppression, crueltye, bloudshedding,
schism, heresy, and Idolatrye, crept in among Christians. The enemy stands
without, pointing at the Christians with ye finger, Froissart. Cron. 2. vol. cap.
40.
and laughing them to skorne. Froissart writes of the Turks, and Tartarians
in ye time of Clement, 7. and Urban. 6 saying: They do mock the Popes whereof
one is at Rome, and an other at Auignion, they say that the two Gods of
Christendom warreth each against other, whereby they affirm our law to be the
more feeble and the lighter to be destroyed and condemned, they lay thereto a
reason: in that they that should exalt the Christian faith are the first that
minisheth it and destroy it. The Earl of Neuers son to ye Duke of Burgoine,
coming from Turkey delivered unto the french king, and ye Lords of France
this news from Lamorabaqui ye Turk: Cap. 25.
his intent is to see Rome, and to make his horse eat otes upon Saint Peter's
altar, also he said how our christian faith was nothing worth but corrupted
by the headdes that ought to govern them, whereat the Turks made but a mock,
wherefore he said it should be the destruction of Christendom. It made France
amazed, and some of the Nobility then brake out and said of the Popes: It was
time to abate their pompes and to bring them to reason. In the time of Henry
the 3. ye christians had given the Turks a great foil. The Turk offered peace
with most favorable co^ditio^s, and says Matthew Paris. Math. Paris. histor.
Angl. in Henric. 3.
It was then said and affirmed for truth that the Soldane with his Nobility
was fully determined to renounce the Law of Mahomet, which is known to be most
filthy, and faithfully to cleave to the christian faith which appears most
honest so that they might quietly enjoy their lands and possessions. The Pope
by his Legate most arrogantly refused it. Being denied, the Turk gathers a
great power, and says: Nunc demum spero quod pro superbia eorum confundet
Christianos, Dominus ac Deus eorum Jesus Christus amator modestiae and
humilitatis.

Now at length I am in good hope that for their pride their Lord and God Jesus
Christ will confound the Christians, for he is the lover of modesty and
humility.

The Turk prevailed, the Christians went to wrack. Fridericus the Emperor
wrote to Henry 3. bitter letters against the pride, ambition, cruelty,
exaction, usury, with many other enormities of the Church of Rome, calling the
same, the root and fountain of all mischief, the Popes, Insatiabiles
sanguisugas, Insatiable blood suckers, concluding they are to be known by
their fruits, Mathias A. Michou de Sarmat. Asian. Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Cham the Emperor of Tartarie would not receive the Christian faith offered
unto him by Innocentius 4, for that the Ambassadors of the Turk alleged the
same to be: Religionem otiosorum imbecillium, and Idolatrarum, imagines
colentium:

The religion of idle persons, of faint, and weak people, and of Idolatrers,
worshipping of Images.

This is the credit these Images have brought into the Church, this was a
stumbling block in the way of this Saracen that he would not be baptized in
Spain. Fie upon Idolatry, filth, and abomination. Let the Church of God be
swept, then will the Heathens, the Jews, the Turks and Saracens the sooner come
in. About the year 1237. the Greeke-church fell from the church of Rome upon
such an occasion. A certain Archbishop orderly elected in Greece came to Rome
to be confirmed, he could not be dispatched before he had paid a certain
sum of money, the which he refused to do, at his return he made report
unto the Grecians of the abuses of Rome. The two Churches iarred the space of
300. years until the late council of Basil, where there was but a
colorable reconciliation. Germanus Archbishop of Constantinople tells
Gregorius 9. the cause of their departure, in this sort: Math Paris in Henric.
3.
That, great discord, contrariety of doctrine, overthrow of Canons, alteration
of rites which the fathers delivered are causes of this particion which
seperateth those things which at first were united and joined with the
conjunction of peace and concord, let the whole world being made one language
confess etc. A little after: And that we may touch the marrowe of the truth:
Many mighty and noble parsonages would obey you unless they feared your unjust
oppressions, your insolent exactions of riches, your unlawful servitude, the
which you extort of them that are subject unto you. Here hence are crueel
battles one against the other, desolation of Cities, sealing up of
Churchdores, schism of the brethren, the priestly function ceasing, and a stay
that God according unto our duetye be not praised under the Climate of the
Grecians. He writes the like unto the Cardinals, and concludes that the
Aethiopians, Syrians, Hyberians, Lazians, Alanians, Goths, Chazarians, all
Russia, and Bulgary, hold with the Greeke-church, and because of the aforesaid
enormities, have did Rome farewell. The Archbishop of Antioch about the same
time calling unto him a great number of Bishops of Greece excommunicated the
Pope, and the Clergy of Rome. The Patriarch of Constantinople complained at
the council of Lions to Innocentius 4. face, what a great number of Churches
there were in Greece that rejected the Church of Rome for the abominations
thereof. Papa tacuit: The Pope said not a word. He might be justly ashamed,
who glorying in the keys locketh up all, shuts out such as would come and
receive the christian faith, but he will neither enter, neither suffer others
by reason of ye shameful sins and wickedness there reigning. If either
Heathen, or Jew, or Saracen, speak of the christian faith, immediately he has
Rome in his mouth. Rome cannot be excused. And for that they know not the
purity of religion in the reformed Churches being corners, and pingles of
Christendom, with open mouth they revile, and speak ill of al, to the great
dishonor of God, and hinderance of the preaching of the Gospel. There are many
nations no doubt that if the truth were opened unto them they would most
willingly receive the christian faith, many hungring and thirsting after the
knowledge of the true God. In Turkey they may not call into question the
incertainty of Mahomets law it is death: under the dominion of the Pope, they
may not profess what they know for truth. much like them of who^ Augustine
speaks, August. epist. 50.
that being among the schismatickes, and heretics, they durst not confess
the Catholic faith, least they and their houses should be destroyed: Many do
hear and see yet are they stopped with stains, misliking the water for the
puddle of Rome: O what blessings has God poured upon England? blessed be
his name therefore. We may say, as it is in the Gospel: Many Prophets, Luke.
10.
and Kings have desired see those things which England has seen, and have not
seen them. It is to be feared least the unthankfulness of the people, the
rechlesnesse in Gods service, Apocalyp. 2
and the want of Christian lights and works will cause God to remove the
candlestick out of his place, and the light of the Gospel from among us, and
deliver it to such a nation (according unto the parable in the Gospel) as will
bring forth fruits accordingly. Math. 21.
God of his infinite goodness show mercy unto his Church, continue the
Gospel, purge all blemishes, open the eyes of all Infidels, Jews, Turks, and
Saracens, bring into the fold all lost and wandering sheep, make of all
nations one sheepefolde, under the head shepherd and Bishop of our souls
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory now and for ever. Amen

FINIS.
After the Sermon ended, the Turk confessed in the Spanish tongue before the
face of the congregation, the Preacher out of Pulpit propounding the questions
and receiving the answers by skillful Interpretors, in sum as follows.
INprimis, that he was very sorry for the sinful life which he had lead in
times past, in ignorance and blindness, and hoped to obtain pardon in Jesus
Christ.

Mahomet the false Prophet of the Moors, Saracens and Turks, with all his
abominations, and blessed GOD which had opened his eyes to behold the truth
in Jesus Christ.



Jesus Christ was and is the son of God, and God from everlasting, the only
true Messiah, and savior of the world, that he suffered for the sins of all that believe in him, and that there is no way to be saved, but only by the
merits of the death and passion of Jesus Christ.



In the midst of the congregation, there was a comely Table set, covered with
a fair linen cloth, and thereon a Basen with water. After the congregation
had blessed God for his great mercies, and after sundry godly Prayers and
Collects, according unto the reverend order of holy Church, such as brought
him thither, desired his name might be William, so was he baptized: In the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Praise be to God.

