THE CATECHISM, That is to say, ane co^mone and catholic instructioun of the
christin people in materis of our catholic faith and religioun, quhilk na good
christin man or woman should misknaw: set forth be ye may reverend father in
God Iohne Aschbischop of sanct Androus Legatnait and primat of ye kirk of
Scotland, in his prouincial counsale haldin at Edinburgh the xxvi. day of
January, the eir of our Lord 1551. with the advice and counsale of the
bischoippis and vthir prelatis with doctors of Theology and Canon law of the
said realm of Scotland present for the time.

S. Aug. libro 4. de trinitate. cap. 6. Contra rationem nemo sobeius, contra
scripturam nemo christianus, contra ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit.

Agane reasone na sober man, agane scripture na christin man, agane the kirk na
peaceabil or quiet man will judge, or hald opinioun.

AD PIVM LECTOREM.
HIc liber est sacer, diuini dogmata verbi
Continet, ipse pius nocte dieque legas.
Hic disces Christum, pater hu^c tibi misit vt esse^
Iustitia, et vitae regula certa tuae.
Hic tibi tot lucent stellae, tot sydera fulgent,
Haud secus ac si sit gemmea tota domus.
Hunc tu viperea caueas percellere lingua:
Neue Theonino rodere dente velis.
Laudatur merito, multis qui maxima prestat
Commoda, sed detur gloria tota deo.
TOtius legis (fateor) volumen.
Continet summi documenta patris:
Non vacat cunctis tamen immorari sedulo cartis.
Quicquid humane liber hic saluti
Est oportunum tenet, ergo quisquis
Vult fide Christum colere, audiat, vel discat ad vnguem.
Consula^ equi pie lector, atque
Candidae, nostrum precor vt laborem*
Qui tibi monstrat breuiter tenenda
Pectore firmo.
IOHNE BE THE MERCY OF GOD Archbischop of sanct Androus, Metrapolitan and
primat of the hail kirk of Scotland, and of the seit Apostolyck Legatnait, till
all and sindry Personis, Vicars and Curattis, specially within our awin Diocye,
and generally within the boundis of al our hail primacie of Scotland, desyris
grace and peace in Christ Jesus our saluiour.
AFTER that the divine providence of God had promouit us to the office of ane
Archbischop and general primacie of yis kirk of Scotland, we thocht often times,
that na thing culd be to God mair plesand, to the christin pepil mair
expedient, and to our office mair convenient and consonant, than with all
diligence to provide, that the christin pepil (of quhome we have spiritual cure
under God) mycht be instruckit in the faith and law of God, with ane uniform
and concordant doctrine of Christis religioun, aggreabil in all pointis to the
catholyk verity of halie kirk. For sen swa it is (as S. Paul sais) that we are
all regenerat in Christ with ane baptyme, all oblissit to have ane faith, all
redemit with ane blud and deed of our mediator Jesus Christ, all leuand in ane
hoip of the eternal glore, all subieckit to the service of ane lord, all gydit
with ye directioun of ye haly spreit, quhilk is ane daily ^echeour and
governor of ye hail universal kirk. Quhat can be mair convenient, e mair
necessary* yan yat we al both prelatis and subieckis, superiors and
inferiouris, alwais agree and concord togeddir in ye unite of ane catholic
doctrine, concerning al pointis belangand to our christin religioun? Quhat
vthir thing requirit s. Paul of his Corinthianis (quben be so ernestly maid
supplicatioun to them) sayand thus: ^ Cor. ^.
Obsec^o vos fratres, per nomen dn^i nostri Jesus Christi, vt idipsum dicatis
omnes, et no^ sint in vobis scisma^a, sitis aute^ perfecti in eodem sensu et
eadem sente^tia. Brether, I beseik ow for ye reverence yat e aucht to our Lord
Jesus Christ, yat all e say ane thing, and lat na scismes, discord or diuisioun
be amangis ow, bot be e perfect in ane mind and in ane sentence. In yir wordis
e may plainly understand quhow luffingly and tendirly the Apostil exhortis his
Corinthianis, ^ Cor. 14.
and in yame us all, to keip uniformity and concord in setting forth to ye
people the doctrine of our christian faith and religioun, quhen he sais: all e
say ane thing. As he mycht say plainly. In all materis yat co^cernis our
catholyk faith and christin maneris, se yat e be uniform, se yat e agree
togidder in the co^fessioun of our faith* se yat e concord ane with ane vthir
in the form of teching the true word of God, yat as the samyn Apostil writtis
to the Romany: ^ma. xv.
vnanimes vno ore honorificetis deum. Al ye beand of ane mind may with ane mouth
honor God And as he exhortis to concord in doctrine, swa he plainly forbiddis
al scismes and discord in teching, sayand: Let na scismes be amang ovv. Quhat
true christin heart will nocht be discontent, ^ament and sorrow, to se sa money
sectis of doctrine, sa great diversity of opiniouns, sa mekil co^tentioun, and
sa detestabil heresis as we se daily ama^gis ye christin people? swa yat now s.
Paul may trewly say: Phllip 5.
Videte canes videte malos operarios, videte co^cisione^. Behald ye doggis,
behald evil workeris behald co^tentioun and diuisioun. As he mycht say
plainly, quha sa ar geuin to contention and stryif in materis of our christin
religioun, ar mair lik to doggis yan to true christin men, of quhom it is
writtin: Actuum 4
Multitudinis credentiu^ etat cor vnum et aia vna. The multitude of yame yt
beleuit in Christ Jesus was all of ane heart and of ane mind. It is vndoutand ane
sinful and ane da^nabil thing to vary and discord in matters of our faith
seeing yat s. Paul sais: God (sais he) is nocht god of disce^tioun, bot he is
god of piece. i. Cor. 14.
Quhair for it followis ye all good men and women yat wald be ye true serua^dis
of God, should labor with all diligence to eschew and put away all variance and
disce^t^oun, yat occurris or may apperandly occure, in ye materis of our faith,
and to be (as he sais) perfect in the sam mind, and in the samyn sentence. To
yat effect we have exhibet to ow this present Catechism: quhairin is contenit
breuely and trewly, ye sowmme of our christian doctrine, agreand in all pointis
to the wordis of halye scripture, true expositioun of ye auld and catholyk
doctouris, and in materis of co^trauersie, agreand to the decisiouns and
determinatiouns of general counsallis, lauchfully gaderit in the halye spreit,
for the corroboratioun of our faith. Quhair for first we exhort ow, e also
requiris ow as e will answeir to us before God, that e use this present buke to
our awin eruditioun, and als mekil as e may be the grace of God, to our awin
spiritual edificatioun in Christ Jesus our saluiour. For trewly to us and ow ye
words ar spokin, writtin in haly scripture: Nolit^ negligere vos enim elegit
deus vt stetis cora^ eo. 2. Pa. 29.
Be nocht negligent in doing our office, for god hes chosin ow to stand before
him, that is to say, to make ministratioun to his majesty for the saluatioun of
the pepil. And suppose negligence is to be repreuit in all man and woman, it
trewly may of all it is to be repreuit in to yame yat hes cure of christin
pepil, according as s. Augustine ^ais ad Valerium: Did. 40. (...).
Nihil in hac vita facilius, leuius et acceptabilius hoibus episcopi,
presbyteri aut diaconi officio. Sed si perfunctorie id est negligenter res
agatur, nihil apud deu^ miserius, tristius atque da^nabilius. Nathing in yis
life apperis to warldly me^ mair facil, mair esie and mair acceptabil than ye
office of ane bischop, priest or dekin, bot and the samyn office be done
neglige^tly, yair is na thing before God mair miserabil, mair heavy and mair
da^nabil. Heirfor it is to ow expedient to use this present Catechism, first
to our awin instruction, remembering quhat is writtin: Ignora^tia matter
cunctoru^ erroru^ maxim i^ sacerdotibus vita^da est, qui officiu^ doce^di in
populo susceperu^t. Did. 38. ^gnora^tia
Ignorance the mother of al errors should may of al be eschewit in preistis,
quhilk hes ressauit the office of teching amang the christin pepil. Secundly,
acccording to the decreit maid in our prouincial counsale, our will is that e
reid ye samyn Catechism diligently, distinctly and plainly ilk ane of ow to
our awin parochianaris, for their common instructioun and spiritual
edificatioun in ye word of God, necessary of them to be knawin. For as ane
scholar quhilk is to leir any special science, man first leir ye beginning or
rudimentis of yar science, and swa proceed or ascend to ye mair perfect
understanding of ye samyn science. Sa we have thocht it expedient to teache the
christin pepil co^mittit to our cure, the beginning or rudimentis of our
christin doctrine, contenit schortly, trewly and plainly in this present buke,
that thai being sufficiently instruckit in ye samyn, may mair esely cum to ye
understanding of hicar doctrine, co^tenit in ye euangels and epistils vsit to
be proponit and declarit to yame be precheouris of ye word of god.

Exhortand also all them yat is to reid or heir this common instructioun to
follow the counsale quhilk the Wisman geuis them, sayand thus: Eccle. ^^.
Altiora te ne quesieris et fortiora te, ne scrutatus fueris, sed que precepit
tibi deus illa cogita semp and in pluribus operibus eius ne fueris curiosus.
Seik nocht to understand thai thingis yt is above thy intelligence, seik nocht
to ken ya^ thingis quhilk ar above thy capacity, bot euirmair remember of yai
thingis yat god hes co^mandit the to do, and be nocht curious to understand the
werkis of god quhilk is nocht necessary or profitabil to the to know for thy
saluatioun. Pro. 2^.
Remember quhat Solomon sais in his Prouerbis: Perscrutator maiestatis
opprimetur a gloria. He yat inquiris ouir hiely yai thingis yat belangis to the
majesty of God, sall be oppressit be the glore. yat is to say, as ane man yat
lukis directly upon the cleir schi^and son any lang time, hurtis and makis
dy^ the powar of his corporal sycht, sa he yat hiely sekis to know ye haly
misteris and secretis of god, hurtis and dullis his intelligence and powar of
understanding. Thairfor we request all man and woman to keip the rewil yat S.
Paul geuis to the Romany, Roma. xii
sayand: Dico enim per gratiam que data est mihi oi^bus qui sunt inter vos non
plus sapere quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietatem and vnicuique sicut
deus diui sit mensuram fidei. Be that grace of God that is geuin to me, I say
till all yat is amang ow, that na man seik mair than it behoiffs him to seik,
bot to inqueir yai thingis yat ar sufficient for him to know and euerilk man as
God hes geuin ane mesour of faith or ane gift of grace, sa use it to the glore
of God and the edificatioun of him self and of his nychtbouris, that in all
thingis God may be honourit.

And to be schort and plain with ow all yat ar spiritual curattis under us,
our hail intentioun is (as God we tak to our witness) to help als mekil as lyis
in us the christin people our parochionaris out of blind and dangerous
ignorance, and to bring them to knawlege of thai thingis that belangis to
their saluatioun. And thairfor euerilk sunday and principal halydaie, quhen
yair cummis na precheour to them to schaw them the word of God, to have yis
Catechism vsit and reid to yame in steid of preching, quhil God of his gudnes
provide ane sufficient nowmer of catholyk and abil precheouris, quhilk sal be
within few eiris as we traist in God, to quhom be honor and glore for euir.
Amen.

Ane tabil of all the principal materis and common placis ordourly intraitrit
and declarit in the four partis of this present Catechis.
FIrst ye prologe declaris compendiously, how necessare it is to al christin
me^ and women to ken yair awin miserabil stait quhairin thai leif, and agane to
ken ye great gudnes of god towart yame, and all yai thingis quhilk belangis to
their christindome, schawa^d ane convenient cause of the setting forth of this
present Catechis.

The contentis of the first part, quhilk is of the ten commandis.
Quhat is the law or command of God? How we should observe ye co^ma^dis to ye
plesour of god. Ca. i. Co^minatiouns of paynis temporal, spiritual, and
eternal, aganis the brekaris of the co^mandis of God. ca. ii. Promis of
rewardis temporal, spiritual, and eternal, maid to the keparis of Goddis
commandis. cap. iii. Quhairin standis the true knawlege of god quhilk he
requiris of us all in the beginning of ye first command That the beginning of
ye true service of God is to feir him. cap. iiii. Ane declaratioun of ye two
principal vertewis callir Faith and Hoip, quhairwith we aucht to serve God in
our hearts, quhilk service he requiris of us in the first command. ca. v. Of
the true lufe of God, quhilk is ye fourt principal vertew requirit to the true
service of God, quhilk we aw to hi^ in our hearts. ca. vi Of the tra^sgressours
of ye first command. and first of them yat feiris man abone God. Of heretikis.
The discriptioun of ane heretic. How ye verite of our faith may be discernit
fra herely. Of hoip in man abone God Of hoip in our awin strenth, richis, and
wisdom. cap. vii. Of infidelite. Dispiratioun. Presumptioun. Spiritual
ydolatrie. Al kind of witchecraft and superstitiouns. Temptatioun of God.
Elatioun and pride, with ane schort decla^atioun of ye rycht use of ymagis.
cap. viii. Comminatioun of paynis aganis the brekaris of the first command, and
promis of rewardis to the keparis of ye sa^. ca. ix. The co^minatioun of
paynis, and promis of mercy, quhilk is expremit in special, in ye end of the
first command. cap. x. The rycht keeping of ye secund command, standis in v.
pointis. Confessioun of our faith. Loving and thanking of God. Teching the word
of god. Faithful and deuoit prayar. Lauchful swering be ye name of god. cap.
xi. Brekaris of the secund command, with comminatiouns of paynis aganis the
breikaris, and promis of rewardis to the ^e^aris. cap. xii. Declaratioun of the
sabbath day. The ceremonyis of the sabbath day. The morality of the sabbath
day. The translatioun of the sabbath day, to the sunday. The spiritual and
continual rest of our conscience. The rycht keeping of ye third command. Quha
brekis yair haly dais? Vthir halydais to be kepit by the sunday. Co^minatiouns
of paynis aganis the brekaris of ye haly dayis, with promis of rewardis to the
keparis of the samyn. cap. xiii. Expositioun of the command of lufe, quhilk we
aw to our nychtbour. How we should lufe our self and sa our nychtbour, with ane
honest and haly lufe, with ane true and vn^enet lufe, with ane constant and
perseuerent lufe, with ye ordour of cheritie. cap. xiiii Quha is o^r nychtbour?
Of the lufe quhilk we aw to our ennymye. How we should lufe our nychtbouris
person, and het his evil conditiouns. Quhat thingis mouis a man to lufe his
nychtbour as him self. cap. xv. Three manner of fatheris, natural, spiritual and
temporal. Of honor, lufe and obediens dettit til our natural fatheris. Of the
honor, lufe and obediense dettit till our spiritual fatheris. Of honor, lufe
and obediens dettit till our temporal fatheris. Of obedience dettit till our
prelatis. The rycht keeping of ye fourt command. Quha breikis the fourt command,
with punitioun of the breikaris, and reward of the keparis. cap. xvi. The
expositioun of our saluiour, maid to the fifth command. Yat ye law of god is
spiritual. How it is nocht ane thing to be crabit at our brotheris person, and
to be crabit at our brotheris falt. Of lesum crabitnes necessare till Iudgis,
Maisteris, and officeris. The rycht keeping of ye fifth command, is to to forbeir
slauchter, and all occasiouns of the samyn, and to be til our nychtbouris
person pacient, kind, liberal, and mercyful. Thai breik the fifth command that
slais any man or woman in yair heart be wraith malice, hettret or consent to the
samyn. Or yat slais any man with yair tongue be cou^sale or command. Or with yair
deid be writing or violence by the ordour of justice. And be vnmercyfulnes,
quhen thai may saif yair nychtbouris life with help and supply and will nocht.
Temporal Iudgis kepand the ordoure of Justice, in slaing of misdoars synnis
nocht aganis the fifth command. Temporal Iudgis synnis grievously in two pointis.
The punitioun of ye brekaris of the fifth command, and promis of rewardis maid
to the keparis of it. cap. xvii. The expositioun of our saluiour maid the saxt
command. The rycht keeping of ye saxt command is to forbeir all kindis of
lechorie and also all occasiouns of the same. And that ilk man should leiue ane
chaste life according to his stait. Of ye chastity of marriage, wydohed, and
virginity. Brekaris of ye saxt command ar all adulteraris, deflo^^aris of
virginis, rauissa^is of women. Incesteous personis. Co^mittaris of ye syn
aganis nature. Simpil fornicatouris and prouokaris to the sin of lechorie.
cap. xviii. Declaratioun of temporal paynis aganis adulterars and al vthir
lechorus personis. That blindness of the heart is the dochtir of lechorie.
Co^minatioun of paynis eternal aganis al lecherous men and women. Special
rewardis promissit til all them quhilk leiuis ane chaste life. cap. xix. The
rycht keeping of the seuint command is to give al^^us, To len without okkir. And
tik a man to win his awin leiffing with sum convenient labor according to his
stait. Brekaris of the seuint command ar these. Reffaris, resetttaris of theft
and reft. Princis ye fauouris theiuis or reffaris. Iugis quhilk for lufe of
rewardis dois any thing by ye ordour of justice. Patronis of bn^ficis, quhilk
for lufe of warldly geir promotis any man to ane benefice of the kirk.
Co^mittaris of sacrilege. Hurtaris of the common weil for lufe of yair singlar
weil. Vsuraris. Defraudaris of waigis fra seruandis or labouratis. Strikars of
vnlesu^ coune. Merchandis that vsis vnlesu^ wais of bying and selling All kind
of craftis men that vsis any falset or vnlesum wais in their craft. All kind of
benef^cit men quhilk dois nocht their office, another spendis the geir of yair
benefice conform to the word of God and lawis of haly kirk. Gentilmen that
gettis and kepis any heretage be wrangous wais. Taka^is of ouir mekil mail or
farm, to the herschipe of the tenentis. cap. xx. Also thai sin aganis the
seuint command that committis symonye. Quhat is symonye? How monye manner of
wais may symonye be committit. How money manner of way^s may justice be peruertit
be iudgis and men of law? Lykwais yai sin yat fyndis any vthir men's geir and
restoris it nocht agane to ye awner. Quha sa will nocht pay their dettis. Quha
sa will nocht pay yair teindis. Executouris of testamentis that dois nocht their
dewty in fulfyllyng of ye dedis last will. Medicinaris and Chirurgeraris that
begylis the seik and hur^ men, takand wagis fra yame largely, quhen yai can do
them na good. Potegareis that sellis corruppit drogaris. Also how it is Gods
command to make restitutioun of all wrangous geir. Co^minatioun of paynis aganis
the brekaris of ye seuint command. cap. xxi. Promis of rewardis to the keparis
of the seuint command, quhair it is declarit largely how God rewardis all yame
yat giffis a^mdus to their powar for goddis saik, with rewardis temporal,
spiritual and eternal. cap. x^i Ye rycht keeping of ye au^ht command is to speik
al our wordis to ye plesour of god and profit of our nychbour That to the good
gyding of our tongue three thingis ar necessare. Discretioun, quhilk is comparit
to ane bridil of a horse and also to ane Rother of a schip. Consideratioun of
great s^aith that cummis of ane evil tongue, also that reformatioun of our heart
is necessary to the good gyding of our tongue. Brekaris of ye aucht command ar
wrang spekars in judgment quhidder thai be iudgis* accusacis* witnessis,
procuratours or aduocatis. Also lyaris, fla^raris, bakbitars, heiraris of
bakbyting. Quha interpretis on^ vthir mannis wordis or deidis to the worst
part. Quha dissimulis to schaw the verity, quhen and quhair yai ^d schaw it.
The punitioun of them that brekis the aucht command, and the reward of yame
yat keipis the same. cap. xxiii. The rycht keeping of the nynt and tent
co^mandis is to have ane cleir ee and ane clein heart* quhair is declaris the
cleir ee of our intentioun to God, and also the cleir ee of our inten^ioun to
be had to our nychtbour. The discriptioun of ane clein heart? The discriptioun
of ane foul heart. Quha breikis these two last commandis. Yat our carnal
concupiscen^e is to us na dedelie sin* ^a lang as we consent nocht with ane
deliuerit mind to the delectatioun or deid of the sam. cap. xxiiii. Quhat is
the cause yat carnal concupiscence remains in our f^esche ^f^^r Baptyme, quhair
is geuin four rewlis or lessonis, yat techis how we should dant our flesche fra
all vnlauchfull lustis and desyris. The punitioun of them that brekis ye two
last co^mandis, and rewardis of the keparis. cap. xxv. Of the rycht use of the
law or ten commandis of God, declarit plainly be four familiar exempillis
drawin fra ye haly scripture. cap. xxvi.
The contentis of the secund part, quhilk is the expo^itioun of the xii.
a^tikils of the Creed.
Ane introductioun to the Creed contenand ane declaratioun of the necessity of
our christin faith. Of two sortis of faith, general and special. How general
faith is necessary bot nocht sufficient to our sa^uatioun. Yat special faith
(that workis throw lufe) is both necessary and su^ficie^t to our salvation
That the special faith should be lo^it and lust it for money excellent operations,
quhilk it workis in christin men and women. The Creed is deuidit in to iii.
principal partis according to ye faith, quhilk we aucht to have in the blissit
Trinity, the father, the son and the halye spreit, three personis and ane
God. cap i. Yat ilkane christin man and woman should have in yair awin self ane
special faith. How the artikillis of ye creed can nocht be comprehendit be
natural reasone. Yat to trow in God pertenis to the special faith of ane
christin man. How their is goddis be false nominatioun. How their is goddis be
participatioun of Go^s auctorite and Gods grace. How yair is but ane leuand and
eternal God be true nature, and properteis of the godhed. Yat sum knawlege is
geuin to us of ye may excellent majesty of God. Yat our saluiour Jesus
Christ is only the son of God be natural and eternal generatioun. Yat all
faithful and good men and women ar sonnis or barnis of god be the grace of
adoptioun. Of the great confidence quhilk we aucht to have in the help and
providence of our eternal father almychty God. How ye fundatioun and ground of
all our faith, is to trow sicki^ly that God is almychty. How yat trow nocht
fermely that God is almychtye, quhilk denyis that the precious body and blud of
our saluiour Christ is really present in thehaly sacrament of the Altar. That
be yis word creatioun we should also understand the conseruatioun, prouisioun,
protectioun and gouernans quhilk God hes of all his creaturis. cap. ii. The
sense of the first artikil of the Creed. Moral lessonis of vertew gadderit of
the first artikil of the Creed. The first lessone is to ken God be his
creatouris. The secund lessone is to gife thankis to god, because yat he hes
geuin to us all his creatouris. The third lessone is to have patience, because
all adversity cummis of God. The fourt lessone is to use all creatouris to the
plesour of God. cap. iii. The secund part of our Creed contenis vii. artikils
pertenand to ye faith quhilk we aucht to have in our saluiour Christ. Yis word
Jesus, quhilk is the propir name of our saluiour, excellis all names of all
creatouris, in significatioun, vertew and majesty. Yis word Christ betakins
the may excellent dignity and office of our saluiour, quharby he is our hie
king and head bischop. Our saluiour Jesus Christ is the only son of God be
eternal generatioun. All faithful good men ar sonnis of God be grace of
adoptioun. How the halye spreit beris witness to our spreit, yat we are the
sonnis of God. That Jesus Christ is our lord be doubil rycht, both be resone
of creatioun and also of redemptioun. How we should be ye exempil of ye glorious
virgin Mar^ consaue and beir the word of God. cap. iiii. We should trow in the
son of God. How ye haly spreit was workar of ye blissit incarnation.
Declaratioun of the blissit nativity of our saluiour. Of the perpetual
virginity of ye glorious lady Christis mother. How the glorious virgin was the
beginning of our saluatioun. Yat be ye blissit incarnation of Christ we are
mekil inducit to ane ferme faith, we are liftit up in our hoip, our hearts ar
kyndlit in fervent cherite and lufe of God. cap. v. Ane exhortatioun to heir
deuoitly the artikill of the passsioun of Christ. Quhat paynis our saluiour
tholit for our redemptioun. Quha was Judge to him, quhat kind of deed tholit he
for us. Quhat fruit or profit gat we be the meritis of his passioun. Yat his
berissing was honorabil. The sentence of ye fourt artikil. Moral lessones of
vertew gadderit of the fourt artikil o^ the creed. Exempil of perfect lufe and
cheritie. Exempil of perfect patience. Exempil of perfect obediens cap. vi.
Quhait is hell? How money distinct partis or placis is in hell? Quhom deliuerit
our saluiour out of hell. Moral lessonis gadderit of the fifth artikil of the
creed. We should hoip fermely in the help of our saluiour. We should leir to
consaue the feir of god. cap. vii. Yat our saluiour raise fra the deed be his
awin mycht and powar. Yat our saluiour raise to ane life immortal and glorious.
Quhy he raise ye third dai? The sentence of the saxt artikil of the creed.
Moral lessonis of vertew gadderit of the saxt artikil of the creed. Be the
exempil of our saluior we should rise spiritually. We should nocht differ our
spiritual resurrectioun. We should rise to ane new life. Quhen we are ryssing, we
should nocht dee agane be committing dedlie lymme. cap. viii. How bie asce^dit
our saluiour? How we should understand that our saluiour settis at the rycht hand
of god ye father almychty. The sentence of the seuint artikil of the creed.
Moral lessonis gadderit of ye seuint artikil of the creed. How profitabil was
til us the ascentioun of our saluiour. cap. ix. Quha sall be judge in the day
of the extreme judgment. Quha sal be iudgit in the day of extreme judgment.
Quhair of sal all men and women be iudgit? Of all deidis, of all wordis, of all
thochtis. The sentence of this artikil. Ane moral lessone, yat we should leir to
feir the extreme judgment of God. cap. x. Yat ye haly spreit is true god That
the haly spreit is gi^^ar of all halynes. Yat syndry names of ye haly spreit,
declaris syndry operatiouns of the lamyn spreit. The sentence of the nynt
artikil. cap. xi. Yat the haly kirk is callit the mistike body and spouse of
Christ, and also the new city of Jerusalem. The sentence of ye tent artikil
Quhat is the halye catholyk kirk, and quha ar memberis of it? Quha ar outtith
ye haly kirk. Of the unity of halye kirk. Quhat is communioun of sanctis. Quha
ar private the communioun of sanctis. That remissioun of original sin is
gettin be faith and ye sacrament of Baptyme. Yat remissioun of actual syn is
gettin be faith and the sacrament of Penance. That penance is the gift of
god, and thairfor we should ask it at god in our daily prayar. Quha gettis
remissioun of synnis fra god. cap. xii. That the resurrectioun of bodeis sal be
general. Yat all men and women sall rise to ane life immortal. Of the gloir of
the bodeis yat sall be geuin till all good men and women. Of ye glore of ye
saul, quhilk is vntelabil. In heuin we sall fulfill the command of lufe
perfitly. Of the deed eternal, quhairto all evil men and women upon domis day
sall be condemnit. cap. xiii.
The contentis of the third part of the Catechis quhilk is declaratioun of the
seuin sacramentis.
First of all we exhort the christin pepil to tak tent to the declaratioun of
ye seuin sacramentis because yai ar spitual wellis of grace. The hail nowmer of
the sacramentis. The diffinitioun of ane sacrament of the n^w testamentis
declarit. cap. i. Syndre causis of the institutioun of the sacramentis.
Sensibil takins of Christis religioun. Instrume^tis of grace and of our
saluatioun. Tha war ordanit also for our humiliatioun instructioun, and
spiritual exercitioun. Yat ane sacrament is constitute or maid of two principal
partis, the taken is ane sensibil sign, and the the other is the word of god. cap.
ii. Two principal partis of Baptyme. Of the wattir of Baptyme. How the wattir
of Baptyme was figurit be ye flud of Noe and the red see. Of the wordis of
Baptyme. Of the promis of Baptyme. The sentence of the wordis of Baptyme. Of ye
couenand or condition maid in baptyme betwix god and man. Yat circumcisioun was
ane figure of Baptyme. Of the vertew and effect of Baptyme. The first effect of
Baptyme is remissioun of all synnis. The secund effect of Baptyme is ressauing
of the haly spreit. The third effect of baptyme is to be cled with the
rychteousnes of our saluior christ. Yat carnal concupiscence eftir Baptyme is
nocht sin but consent of our free will. The fourt effect of baptyme is
breking and diminution of the violent powar of carnal concupiscence. cap. iii.
Convenient causis and reasonis of the ceremoneis vsit in Baptyme. Quha is
minister of the sament of Baptyme. cap. iiii. How expedient it is to resaue the
sacrament of Confirmatioun. The sacrament of Co^firmatioun is declarit be two
placis of the scripture. Of crisyme, quhilk is ye sensibil sign or matter of
Confirmatioun. Of ye word of Confirmation The sentence of the wordis of
Confirmatioun Of ye vertew and effeck of Confirmatioun. ^cap. v. Of the seuin
giftis of the haly spreit. Of the gift of wisdom. Of ye gift of understanding
Of the gift of counsale. Of the gift of fortitude. Of the gift of science. Of
the gift of piety. Of the gift of feir. cap. vi. Of ye necessare institutioun
of ye sacrament of ye altar. Of the figuris of yis may excellent sacrament.
Of the syndry names of yis precions sacrament. Quhi is yis sacrament callit the
suppar of our Lord. Of ye propir matter and sensibil sign of this haly
sacrament, quhilk is breid and wine. Of the word of God yat belangis to the
consecratioun of this divine sacrament. cap. vii. Of the verity and real
existens of the body and blud of our saluiour in the sacrament of the altar. Of
ye frutis and effectis of yis sam sacrament, quhilk ar spiritual fude of our
saulis. Incorporatioun to our saluiour Christ. Augmentatioun of the meritis of
our faith. Lifting up of our hoip. Augmentatioun of cheritie. Quyck remembrance
of the passioun of Christ. Unity and concord amang ye christin pepil. cap.
viii. How christin men and women should prepare yame self worthily to the
ressauing of yis holy sacrament with ane rycht intentioun, with ane perfect and
hail faith, with ane clein conscience, and with deuote prayar and orisoun. cap.
ix. Of ye necessare institutioun of ye sacrament of pe^nance. The vertew of
Penance. The sacrament of pe^nance. Quha hes powar to forgife synnis in the
sacrament of Penance? Quhat thingis ar requirit to the worthi ressauing of ye
sacrament. That faith is ye ground of ye sacrament of penance. Of contritioun
ye first part of penance. cap. x. Of Confessioun the secund part of penance.
Of satisfactioun the third part of Penance. Quhat remeid quhen we can nocht
get ane confessor a priest, or may nocht make our confession being stoppis with
lauchful impediment cap. xi. How expedient it was to ordane the sacrament of
extreme vnctioun. That our saluiour Christ ordanit ye sacrament of extreme
vnctioun. Sanct James settes forth and declaris the same sacrament. Ye word of
God vsit in yis sacrament. The promis of mercy annexit to the sacrament. The
sensibil sign or matter of this sacrament. The fruitis and effe^tis of this
sacrament. Exhortatio in maid to ye pepil to use this sacrament. cap. xii. Of
the necessary institutioun of the sacrament of Ordour. Yat authority of
ministration of the sacramentis was geuin to the Apostillis, and also to yair
successouris ministeris of the kirk, to endure be continual successioun to ye
end of ye world. Yat ordour is ane sacrament. The promis of grace annexit to
ordour. The ordinatioun of ministers in the kirk of god belangis to bischopis.
The authority of ane priest is to minister five sacramentis, to preiche the
word of God, and to pray for the christin pepil. That the evil life of the
minister stoppis nocht the effect of the sacrament. The authority of ane
bischop is declarit. Powar to curs is geuin to bischoppis. How cursing weil
vsit is ane spiritual medicyne. That our saluiour Christ gef to bischoppis ye
powar of cursing. cap. xiii. Of ye first institutioun of matrimony. Four
convenient causis of ye institutioun of matrimonye. That matrimonye is ane
sacrament. How matrimonye was degenerat fra the first perfetioun. How our
saluiour Christ restorit agane matrimony to the first perfectioun. Two singular
co^diciouns of the matrimony yat is amang christin men and women. Agane how
matrimonye is ane sacrament. The sensibil sign and matter of matrimonye. The
form of wordis vsit in the contrack of matrimonye. The promis of grace annexit
to matrimony. The fruitis and effectis of matrimonye. How a marreit man may syn
with his wife. cap. xiiii.
The co^tentis of the fourt part of yis Catechis, is the expositioun of the
Pater noster. And first the prologe schawis the manner how christin men and
women should make yair prayar to God.
Yat prayar should be maid with ane true faith. That faith techis two thingis
necessare to be had in making of our prayaris. That be the lycht of our faith
we should know our awin great poverty and misery. That be the lycht of our faith
we should behald and see ye great gudnes of God towart us. Hoip is the secund
vertew necessary in prayar. Hoip hes two properteis, sickir confidence in ye
help of god promissit to us. Patience and lang sufferance committand to God
both the manner and time of our helping. Cheritie is the third vertew requirit
to be had in makin our prayar. How we may before our prayar kindil our hartis in
the lufe of God. How we may be ardent in the lufe of our nychtbour. Quha sa
forgiffis nocht to his nychtbour all offensis, sal nocht be hard of God in his
prayar. cap. i. How the prayar of obstinate synnars is nocht hard of god How
the prayar of penitent synnaris is hard of God. Yat fasting and almous deidis
disponis a man to deuot praiar How we may make to god la^g prayaris. Of the
preeminens and excellent dignitiee of the Pater noster. cap. ii. Sen Christ hes
leirit us to call God, father, we should pray to him with great confidence. Quhat
is our dewtie to be doin to God our father. Sen Christ hes leirit us to say to
God, O our father: we should pray to god for our nychtbour as for our self. How
god almychty is in the heuins. How God is in all placis, bot specially in the
heuin empire be manifestatioun and giffin of his glore. Ane deuote prayer maid
upon the first wordis of our lordis Orisone. Cap. iii. Quhate is the name of
God? How the name of god should be sanctifyit. How the name off god is fylit be
iii. sortis of me^: Gentilis, Iowis, and evil, christin men and women. Ane
deuote prayer maid upon the first petitioun. Cap. iiii. Off wardlie kingdoms.
Of ye kingdom of ye Devil. How the devil is ye prince of this world. Of the
kingdom of good in grace and rychteousnes. Off the kingdom of good in glore
and life eternal. Ane deuote prayer maid upon ye secund petitioun. Cap. v.
That the hie way till heuin is to fulfill ye will of god, schawin tows in his
commandis. How it is the will of good that all true seruandis of Jesus Christ
sall have eternal life. That it is the will of god that al men and women keip
his commandis. Ane deuote prayer maid upon ye third petitioun. Cap. vi. We should
ask at god our dalie fude, both for body and saul. We may lesu^lie desire of
god our necessary sustentatioun. We should desire at god yat we may wyn our
necessare suste^tatioun be lauchfull wayis. Yat we should nocht have ouir mekil
cair for our temporal leuing. That suppose we labor for our leiuing, it we
should trow that it is geuin to us be the liberal hand of God. The fude of our
saul is the word of god, and also the precious sacrament of the Altar. Ane
prayar maid upon the fourt petitioun. cap. vii. Yat be our dettis is signifyi^
our synnis. How we are al synnaris in the sycht of God, and thairfor we should be
meik and lawly in our hartis. Ane prayar maid apo^ the fifth petitioun. cap.
viii. Quhat is temptatioun? That their is temptatioun quhairby man temptis God,
and that is alwais evil. That their is temptatioun quhairby God tempis man, and
yat is alwayis good. That their is temptatioun quhairby our spiritual ennemyis
te^pis us to evil, quhair to gif we consent, we are ouircummit, And gif we
consent nocht, we euircu^ and pleasis God. Quhat it is to be led in
temptatioun? Ane prayar maid upon the saxt petitioun: cap. ix. How god almychty
deliueris his seruandis fra temporal troubil three manner of wayis: First quhen
he se^dis to waik personis easy and lytil troubil: secundly quhen he giffis
great patience and consolatioun in great troubil. Thridly quhen ^e causis the
trubil to lest bot ^chort time. Ane deuoit prayar maid apo^ ^he seuint
petitioun. cap. x. Ane preface before the Aue Maria. Ane brief expositioun of
all the wordis contenit in the Aue Maria. In the end is proponit two
questiouns. The first to quhem should we pray? Answeir. We should pray to God only
as giffa^ of all grace and gudnes. We should pray to good men in erd, and
specially to sanctis in heuin as intercessours to god for us, that we may
obtene grace and gudnes fra God. The secund questioun for quheme should we pray.
Answeir. We should pray for all men and women, nocht only for yame yt ar leuand,
bot also for all christin saulis, quhilk ar in Purgatory and may be helpit be
our prayar.
Ane prologe to the Cathecysme.
THE fourt buke of the kingis, 4. Reg^ vltimo.
(o Christian people) makis mentioun, that the sonnis of Israel, vtherwais
callit the people of the Iewis, was led in captivity into Babylone, be ye king
of ye Assyrianis, callit Nebu^hodono^or, (...) their greit misery and
confusioun. The cause quharof is plainly expremit in the fifth cheptour of
Esaie, quhair God almychty sais thus: Esaie. 5^
Propterea capi^s ductus est populus meus, quia non habuit scientia^. Thairfor
is my people (^ais almychty God) led in captivity, because that thai haif
nocht had knawlege or understanding. Gyf espeir, quharof had thai na
understanding or knawlege? Treulie another of yame self nor of their God, for
both thai miskend yame self and yair Lord God, quhilk thing, was the special
cause of their captivity and miserable thirldome in Babylone. That yai miskend
yame self, it is clerlie schawin in the secund cheptour of Jeremy, quhair our
Lord spekis thus to ye same people: Iere. 2.
Si laueris te nitro and multiplicaueris tibi herbam borith, maculata es in
iniquitate tua cora^ me dicit dn^s. Quomodo dicis no^ su^ polluta? Post Baalim
no^ ab^i. Vide vias tuas in conualle and scito quid feceris. Suppoise thou
wesche thy self with saip, and gather a greit heip of ye herb callit Borith
quhilk hais greit virtue of cle^ging et in my sycht you ar fylit be reason of
thy wyckites and syn sais our Lord. Quhy sais thou swa? I am nocht fylit, I
haif nocht gain after Baalim that ydole be ydolatrie. Behald and see thy wais
quhilk thou hes gain in the vail or den quharin you vsit to commit ydolatrie.
Ken quhat thou have don. And eftir hend, in the same cheptour God sais thus to
the same people: Et dixisti absque peccato et innocen^ ego sum er propterea
auertatur furor tuus a me: Ecce ego in iuditio co^tendam tecum, eo quod dixeris
non peccaui: Quam vilis facta es, nimis iterans vias tuas. Thou hes said, I am
an innocent without sin. And thairfor O Lord lat thy wraith be turnit fra me.
Behald sais our Lord, I will strif with the in judgment, because you sais: I
haif nocht synnit. How vile and evil fauorit hes thou made thy self, ouir often
doand evil deidis. Be their wordis e may weil persaif, that the people of ye
Iewis miskend them self, in sa mekil that thai war abhominab^l synnaris, and
it thai thocht yame self innocentis and without sin wharin thai faleit mkeil,
because that the beginning of all perfectioun is, first a man to ken his awin
falt, syne to seik for the mercy of God. And mairowyr the Iewis nocht only
miskend them self, bot alswa yai miskend yair Lord God and his godly lawis
and commandis geuin to them, to ken and keip to ye plesour of God and their
saluatioun, according to ye co^plant that God makis in the first cheptour of
Esaie sayand thus: Esaie. i.
Cognouit bos possessorem suu^ et Asinus presepe domini sui, Israel autem me
non cognouit and populus meus no^ intellexit. The Ox hes knawin the man that
aucht him, and the Ass has knawin the mangier of of his master, bot Israel
hes nocht knawin me, and my people hes nocht hade understanding, that is to say,
suppoise I am their only awner, Lord and master, and my word is the fode of
their saulis, it thai haif nocht knawin me for their awner, Lord and master,
another haif thai had understanding of my word quhilke is the fuode of their
saulis. Will e plainly understand how mekil God requiris of us all to ken his
hie majesty and his haly word? Here quhat he sais in ye sext of Oser?
Misericordiam volui et non sacrificium, Osee. 6^
and scientia^ dei plusquam holocaustu^. I prefer deidis of mercy abone all
corporal and outwart sacrifice, and I prefer the true knawlege of God abone
all brount offeringis, quhilk was wont to be offerit corporally amang the
Iewis in ye auld law. Iere. 9.
Heir alswa quhat he sais in the nynt cheptour of Jeremy: Non glorietur
sapiens in sapientia sua, et no^ glorietur fortis in fortitudine sua et no^
glorietur dives in diuitiis suis, sed in hoc glorietur qui gloriatur scire et
nos^e me, quia ego sum dn^s, qui facio misericordiam and iudicium et iusticia^
in terta. Lat nocht the wisman glore in his wisdom, lat nocht ye ste^k man
glore in his strenth lat nocht the rich man glore in his riches, bot lat him
glore yat gloris, to ken and understand me, that I am ye lord quhilk giffis
mercy and makis judgment and rychteusnes in the erde. Be this it is manifest
and plain, that our Lord God requ^^is of us all, to ken his majesty and his
godly will or lawis and yat with ane perfect knawlege, cle^ and ionit with his
lufe and obediens. Of ye quhilk knawlege ye halie Apos^il S. Ihone sais thus:
In hoc scimus quoniam cognouimus cum, ^. John. 2.
si mandata eius seruamus. Qui dicit se nosse deum et mandata eius non custodit
mendax est et in hoc veritas non est. Be this we understand that we ken God,
gif we keip his commandis, for he that sais yat he kennis God and kepis nocht
his commandis, he is ane lear, and in him yair is na verite. We grant yat part
of evil men hes some knawlege of God, bot because yat yair knawlege is nocht
io^t and cled with sincere affection, lufe and obediens th^rfor their knawlege
is comptit of God as na knawlege, because it is nocht ple^and and acceptable to
him. Now thairfor christin people with all diligens lei^ to ken our self, that
is to say our own miserabil s^ait quha i^^e stand be reason of our sinnis, and
again leir token our Lord God, how gracious and merciful he is to al true
penitent and faithful persons, and how richteous and just he is in his
iugem^tis again al synnaris yat perseueris in their synnis, and will nocht ken
thaime self and their God as we haif schawin to ow. Call to your remembrance
quhat S. Paul sais to the Corinthianis: i. Cor. 14.
Qui ignorant ignorabitur. He yat miskennis salbe miskennit. Quhasumeuer
miskennis thai thingis wylfullie quhilk God requiris of yame to ken and keip
for their saluacioun, salbe mi^kennit of God in ye day of extreme judgment*
^uhen the heavenly judge ^al say to siclike personis, the wordis writtin in S.
Mathewi^ eu^gel: Amen dico vobis nescio vos. Mat. 25.
Veralie I say to ow I ken ow nocht, as he mycht say plainly: because e wald
nocht know and keip my wordis and my commandis, quhilk I spak to ow be my
serua^dis send to ow in my name and autorite tharfor this day I will nocht
admit ow to be of the nowmer of thain^ that sal enter into ye kingdom of heuin.
Let us all bewar of our self and ta^e good tent, that we be nocht siclike
wilful ignorant and mi^kennand men as certane of the Iewis was, of quhome God
said thi^ wordis Ipsi vero no^ cognoueru^t vias meas qui bus iura^i in ira mea
si intro^bunt in requiem me^. Psalm. 904
Thai haif nocht knawin my wayis (that is to say) my mercy and my judgment,
according as it is written in the Psalm: Psalm. 24.
Universe vie domini misericordia and veritas. All the wayis of our Lord is
mercy and verite. Now because yai haif nocht knawin my wayis, to them I haif
sworn in my wraith, that thai sall nocht enter into my rest, as he mycht say,
I haif determit to use agains them the rigor of judgment and w^l nocht admit
them to entir into my land o^ rest quhilk is eternal life. Thairfor christin
people that e may esch^ip the dangerous thirldome and captiui^e of ye devil and
all his powar, that e may haif the knawlege of God quhilk he requiris of ow sa
specially and finally that e may be admittit to ye glorious kingdom of eternal
rest, do as the Apostil S. James counsels ow say and thus: Iaco. i.
Ab^icientes omnem immunditiam and abundantia^ malitie, in ma^suetudine
suscipite insitum verbum quod potest saluare animas ^estras. etc. Quhair for
(sais he) put away all uncleanness and abundance of malice, with meiknes ressaue
the word, that is pla^tit or sawin amongis ow, quhilk is able to sa^f our
saulis. And se that e be doaris of ye word and nocht heraris only, dissauing
our selfs, For gif any heris ye word and do it nocht, he is like unto ane man,
that behaldis his bodaly lace into ane myrrour, for alssone as he hais lukit on
him self, he gais away and incontinent forettis quhat his fassioun was, bot
quha sa lukis on ye law of perfect liberty and perseueris tharin (gif he be
nocht ane foretful herar, bot a doar of ye wark) the same man salbe happy in
his deid. And breuely, as he is nocht worthy to be callit ane craftis man,
quhilk kennis nocht quhat belangis to his craft, na mair is ane man or woman
worthy to be callit ane christin man or ane christin woman, gif he or sche will
nocht ken quhat belangis to their christindome. Thairfor yat al christin men
and women, specially thai that are sympil and vnleirit in haly writ, may haif
true knawlege and plain understanding quhat belangis to their christindome, it
is thocht expidient to propone to yame ane Catethisme, ye is ane common
instruction contenand schortly and plainly thai thingis quhilk ar necessary to
yame to ken and keip, to the plesour of God and their eternal salvation. And
veralie siclike ane Catechism, was had and vsit in the Apostils time. as it is
manifest be ye wordis of s. Paul writand thus to them quhilke else war
instruckit in ye Catechism: Q^apropter intermittontis inchoationis Christi
sermonem ad perfectionem fe^amur, Hebre. 6.
no^ rur sum iacientes fundame^tum penitentie ab operibus mortuis, et fidei ad
de^m, baptismatum doctrine, impositionis quoque manuu^, ac resurrectionis mortu
oru^ et iudicii eterni. Thairfor let us laif the doctrine pertening to ye
beginning of ane christin life, and let us ga unto perfection, and now na mair
laying ye fundatioun of penance fra deed warkis, and of faith toward God and of
doctrine of Baptime. of laying on of handis, of the resurrection of ye deed, and
of general judgment. In their wordis saint Paul declaris that the Catechism
vsit in the beginning of ye kirk, had sax partis: The first declarit penance to
be done for all dedely synnis, quhilke ar transgressionis of Gods commandis.
The secund ^echit faith to be geuin to ye word of God. The third contenit the
doctrine of Baptime. The fourt gaif instruction of ye sacrament of
Confirmation. The fifth declarit the general resurrection of ye deed. And ye
last part schew plainly ye general judgment. Thus christin people e se, yat to
haif ane Catechism or common instruction, to be set forth and declarit
generally to all christin men, is na new thing. bot a thing yat was vsit in ye
beginning of ye kirk. This present Catechism or common instruction, quhilk we
purpose to propone to ow, The division of yis Catechism.
schortly and plainly is reducit and deuidit into four principal partis.
Quharof ye first techis ye law of God contenit in ye X. co^mandis* The secund
declaris ye true faith yat GOD requiris of us all concerning the articles of
the Creed. The third settis forth plainly, the seuin sacramentis of halie
ki^k, institute be our saluiour Christ, to be to us as instrume^tis of our
saluatioun, infallabil signis or takins of grace quhilk thai contene and
betakins. The fourt declaris the true inuocatioun of God, quhilk our saluiour
JESUS CHRIST le^^it us to pray to God in the seuin pe^i^ions of the Pater
noster, and thairfor is propirlie callit the prayer of our Lord. As for the
seuin dedlie synnis yai may be kennit be declaratioun of the X. commandis
because thai ar transgressionis of the same. And the vii. workis of merci, may
be kennit be declaratioun of ^harite, quhilk we aucht to our neychtbour. Sa
that in the four partis of this Catechism, is comprehendit ye soume of our
christin doctrine, necessary and sufficient to al vnleirit men and women,
giffand to yame instructioun, quhat thai should belief and do for the optening of
their saluatioun eternal.

That ilk ane of ow may the better leir and remember ye two first partis of
this instructioun, we think may expedient to proceed be schort questionis,
and plain ansueris to the same, to that effeck that quhen any of ow is sperit
any questioun necessary for ow token, other concerning the law and commandis of
God, or any article of our faith, ye same person sa sperit, may ansuer in
form and manner as is here expremit.

Ane introductioun to the commandis.
The first cheptour.
AFoir we entir to the special declaratioun of ye X. commandis, we think it
expedient to declare in general four points, concerning the law or commandis
of God. First, quhat is the law or commandis of God? Secund how should the
commandis of GOD be obseruit and kepit to ye plesour of GOD and our salvation?
Third quhat punitions ar yai that GOD in haly scripture bostis and schoris
aganis all the brekaris of his commandis? And fourtly, quhat ar the rewardis,
quhilk GOD almychty promissis in haly scripture to all the keparis of his
commandis.

Quhat is the law or command of GOD? Quhat is ye law or command of God.
It is a rewil geuin to us of GOD, for the good gyding of our self, quhilk
declaris and schawis to us quhat the will of GOD is, that we should do, and quhat
we should nocht do in our thochtis, wordis and deidis. Quhy say e yat ye law is a
rewil geuin for ye good giding of our lyif? For as ane biggare ca^ nocht make
ane euin up wall without direction of his line, a Mason can nocht hew ane euin
aislair stain without directioun of his rewill, ane skyppar can nocht gyde his
schip to good heuin without direction of his Compass, sa a man or a woman can nocht
ordour or gyde his lyif euin and strecht to the plesour of GOD without
direction of the commandis. Quhy say e that their commandis is given of GOD? For
without dowe God hais geuin them to us, first in the law of nature quhilk is
prentit in our hartis, secund in the law of Moses written with his own fingar
(that is to say be ye vertew of the haly spirit) in two tables of stayne, and
last of all our saluiour CHRIST both God and man hes ratifeit and exponit
them in ye new law or Euangil. Quharfor with all diligence we should study to
observe and keip their commandis, nocht only because yat yai ar sa expedient and
profitable to us, but specially because yt thai ax geuin to us of God and
declaris to us his godly will, to quhome we and all creturis should be obedient.
Secundly how should we observe and keip ye co^mandis of God to his plesour and
tharby to obtene of him reward in heuin? How should the commandis be obseruit.
Luc. 1.
Trewly we should keip them three manner of wayis. First hailelie in perfect
nowmer. Exempil of zachary and Elizabeth father and mother of saint Ihone
Baptist of quhome saint Luke sais to yair greit co^mendatioun: Incede^tes in
o^bus ma^datis, and iustificatiobus domini sine querela* Thai obseruit all the
commandis and ceremonyis of our Lord but any complaint. For it is nocht yneuch
to keip part of the commandis of God, and leif part of them vnkepit, bot as
ane harper will tune all his stringis, to that effect that he may make ane
plesand sound to ye heraris, sa we man keip all the co^mandis of God, or else
our keeping will nocht be plesand to God. Sa it is declarit be s. James: Qui
totam legem seruauerit, offendit autem in vno, factus est omnium rens. Iaco. 2.
Quhasaeuir sall keip the hail law, and eit fail in ane point, he is guilty in all yat is to say, gif he depart fra this life without true penance, he sal be
condemnit perpetually to want ye glorious sycht of God, alsweil as he that
brekis all the commandis. Nochtheles the ma commandis that a man brekis in this
lyif, and sa dee without penance, he salbe condemnit to mair sensible pain in
hell according to ye gravity of his syn. Secundly we should keip the commandis
of GOD with ane rycht intencioun, and for the lufe of God. Thane we haif ane
rycht inte^cion, quhen we keip yame allanerlie, for the honor and glore of
God, and nocht for any honor and glore to be geuin to us of man in this lyif.
For quhasaeuir in doing of his good deidis intendis principally to get honor,
glore or reward of man, hais ane wrang intencion, and his deid sa doin (suppose
it be co^mandit of god) is nocht plesand and acceptable to God. Of this rycht
intencioun spekis our saluiour Christ sayand: Si oculus tuus fuerit simplex,
totum corpus tuum lucidum erit. Math. 6.
Si autem oculus tuus fuerit nequa^, totu^ corpus tuu^ tenebrosum erit. The
lycht of thy body is thine ee, thane gif thine ee be simpil and clear, al thy
body is clear, but and gyf thine ee be evil, all thy body is myrk, as it
mycht be said plainly: like as the ee of our body quhen it is hail and cleir,
it direckis all the membris of our body in their operatiouns and deidis, and
quhen it is hurt and nocht cleir, all the membris of our body dois yair
deidis as it war in myrknes. Siclik quhen ye intencioun of our mind is cleir
and richt, intending principally the honor, glore and loving of God, yane our
deid being conform to ye law of God and done to ye intencioun is richt and
cleir plesand and acceptable to God, bot and gif our intencion be principally,
to get any favor, loving glore or reward of man thane is our deid sa done
myrke, yat is to say, displesand and nocht acceptable to God. Sa we should keip
the commandis of God with ane rycht intencion according as S. Paul exhortis us
thus saying: i. Cor. ^.
Sieve ma^ducatis sieve bibitis s^ue aliud quid facitis, omnia in gloria^ dei
facite. Quhidder e eit or drink or do any other thing, do al to ye glore of
God, ^o all with that intencion that God may be glorifyit. Thirdly we should keip
the commandis of God with constance and perseverance, for as our saluiour sais:
Math. x.
Qui perseuerauerit in fine^ hic saluus erit Quhasaeuir perseueris to the end,
he sal be ^auf. Sa constantly we should keep Gods co^mandis yt na temporal pain,
bostit or put to us in this world should move us to break them. Sik ane constant
seruand to God was Susa^na, Dani. xiii
of quhome we reid in ye buke of Daniel, that quhen sche was prouok it to the
syn of adultery be two auld Iugis, under na les pain, thane to be accusit in
opin judgment quhilk was deid be the law, sche wald nocht grant to that synful
deid, bot said their wordis: It is bettir for me to fall in ye handis of men
nocht doand evil, than to brak the law of my Lord God. Siclyke, that honorabil
ald man Eleazarus was ane constant kepar of gods law, ^. Mac. 6.
for he chesit earar to thoile ane cruel deid, yane he wald transgres and brek
ane litil command of ye law quhilk was to forbear the eting of Swynis flesche.
Heir quhat he said a litil afoir he deit. I will leif to oung men a stowt
exempil, for I will with ane constant mind, dee ane honest deid, for ye may
haly law of God. To keip the commandis of God with ane constant mind, and nocht
for to brek yame for fear of any temporal pain. We haif ane excellent exempil
of ye vii. brether and their mother, declarit in the buke of Machabeis, quharof
ane ^ayd their wordis to ye tyrrand: Parati sumus magis mori, 2. Mac. 7
quam patrias dei leges preuaricari. We are reddy and content erar to dee than
to brek the lawis of God, quhilk our forfatheris kepit. Mairouer their mother
gaf exhortacio^ to ilkane of yame, erar ^o suffer deid, thane to brek ye
commandis of God. Siclike all the Apostils and Martyris, with other saintis in
heuin kepit the co^mandis of God with consta^ce and perseverance. Thus e may
leir how e should keip the commandis of God to his plesour. First keip them all
in their hail nowmer. Secund keip them all with ane rycht intencion, and for
the lufe of god and eternal reward, quhilk is God himself. And thirdly keip
them al with ane constant mind and perseverance to the end of our life, sa
doand e keip them to the plesour of God, and our eternal saluacioun.

The secund Cheptour.
QVhat panis or punitiones ar thai, Comminatiouns of panys agan^s the brekars
of the commandis. Psalm. 11^.
quhilkis eftir the scripture, God schoris to all the brekars and
transgressouris of his co^mandis? The first punitioun in general, is the curse
or maleson of God, according as the Prophet sais in the Psalm: Maledicti qui
declinant a mandatis tuis. War^it and cursit ar thai quhilk gangis by ye
commandis of God. Deuteronomy. 27
Their cursingis ar expremit in special, in ye buke of Deuteronome, quhare we
reid that the Leuitis, that was the ministeris of Gods lawis, stude on the hill
callit Heball, and be the command of God, pronuncit their wordis. Cursit and
wartit ar thai, The vvaryingis o^ malesonis of god, aganis the brekars of the
commandis.
quhilkis makis a grauin image, as ane God (and giffis any godly honor to it)
for it is abhominabil to God. Nochtwithstanding ymagis may be maid and had swa
thai be weil and lawfully vsit as salbe declarit to ow eftirwart in the
expositioun of ye first command. It folowis in the text of Deuteronome. Cursit
and wariit is he that honouris nocht his father and mother. Cursit and wariit
is he ye transferris or takis away the true marchis or boundis betuix his
neichtbour and him self. Cursit and warryit is he yat causis ane blind man gang
wrang in his journey. Cursit and wariit is he ye peruertis ye judgment of ane
puir strangeir ane freindles man or woman or wedow. Cursit and wariit is he,
that sleipis with his fatheris wif and opinnis up ye covering of his bed, or
that sleipis with his sister, or with his wiffis mother, or with his
neichtbours wife, and he yat strikis his nychtbour. Syne concluding thus:
Maledictus qui non permanet in sermonibus legis huius. Cursit and wariit is
that person quhilk bydis nocht with perseverance* in the wordis of this law.
And to ilkane of their cursingis and waryingis before rehersit, the people ansuerd
Amen. Eftir hend all this, Deuteronomy. 28. Le. xxvi.
yai turnit them to the brekaris of the law, and spak to them mair scharply
saying: Cursit and wariit sall thou be in ye city, and cursit in the field,
cursit is ye barn quharin thou puttis thy corn, cursit is the fruit of thy
wambe, and the fruit of thy erde, cursit is the drift of thine Oxin, and ye
flockis of thy scheip. Thou salbe cursit command in and gangand furrh It war to
lang to rehearse heir all the malesonis waryingis or cursingis, quhilk God in ye
same cheptour schoris to the transgressouris of his commandis. Bot breuelie and
schortelie, their is na calamity, na sorrow or mischief yat may chance to man
or woman in this world, bot it is expremit yare. Sa horribil a sin it is to
disobey wilfully the command of God, and to do our awin will and nocht the will
of God. Bot it tell us mair specially, quhat ar the plaigis quhilk God is wont
and vsis to send to the people for transgressioun of his commandis? Thai ar three
in special, hunger, pestelence, and the suerd, and repetit in syndry placis of
the auld testament. Leu. xxvi. Esaie. i. The temporal plagis send of God aganis
the brekaris of ye commandis.
He that is makar and Lord of heuin and erde sais thus in Esaie: Gif e will
heir me, e sal eit the guddis of the erde, bot and e will nocht, bot provoke me
to anger, the suerd sall deuore ow. Money siclik comminatiouns in Jeremy. Money
in Ezechiel, money in the laif of the Prophetis, full of terribil panys, bostit
be God aganis the transgressouris of his commandis. And that siclike schoringis
of God is nocht spokin in vain testifeis well ye destruction of sa money
excellent citeis, townis, castils: sa money nobil kingis, princis and
Emperouris. Was nocht ye cities of Sodoma and Gomorra, Seboim and Adoma with
Segor utterly destroyit? Quhair is Troia and Babylone? Rome is nocht quarter
samekil now as it was in Julius Cesars dayis. Quhat was the cause that king
Saul tynt his kingdom fra himself and all his posterite, i. Reg. 5:
and efterwart was slain in battall? Quhat was ye cause? Veraly his rebellion
agains God, dispisand to do as the seruand of God Samuel commandit him to do in
Gods behalf. Was it nocht ane miserabil mischance and calamity that fell upon
Sedechias king of Iewrie, quhilke for his rebellioun again the king of
Babylone, 4. Re. 25.
to quhome he was thane subieck it be the ordinatioun of God, he was takin and
bound with cheneis, his sonnis was slain before his eyne, syne was both his
eyne put out, and was led blind in captivity in Babylone. Quharto should we seik
sa far of exempils of this mattir? Nocht lang syne, e and alswa in our awin
dayis, rycht many excellent citeis and cuntreis with money nobil me^, hes bein
distroyit for na other cause bot that thai wald nocht obey the comma^dis of
God. Thus e may clearly se how sair ar the temporal plaigis, quhilk be the hand
of God cummis upon ye tra^sgressouris of his co^mandis, Nochtwithstanding, to
us that are christin pepel, ye spiritual plaigis of God should be mair terribil.
Quhat call e the spiritual plaige of God? The spiritual plaig of God,
Spiritual panis ag^nis the brekars of the commandis.
quhene he be his rychteous judgment withdrawis and takis away his special
grace and favor fra any man or woman. This he schoris in the Cantikil of
Moses, agane the people of Israel: Abscondam faciem mea^ ab eis, e^ considerab^
nouissima eoru^. I sall hyde my face fra them, that is, I sall withdraw my
favor, presence and special protectione fra yame, and thane sal I considder
quhat salbe yat^ end. Eftir this manner, God almychty plaigit ye auld Gentiles
for yair abhominabil ydolatrie, quhen as saint Paul sais: Tradidit illos deus
in desideria cordis eorum in immundiciam. Roma. ^
Tradidit illos deus in passiones ignomin^e. Tradidit illos deus in reprobu^
sensum, vt faciant ea que non conueniunt. God gaif th^me up unto their hartis
lust, that is to say, tholit them to follow the lustis of yair heart into
uncleanness, to defyle yair awin bodies in them self. And a litil eftir, God gaif
them up into schameful lustis. And it again: and as thai regardit nocht to
ken GOD, euin sa GOD gaif them up, that is to say, tholit them to fall into a
peruersit mind to do thai thingis quhilk was nocht cumlie. And nocht only the
Gentilis was strikin with this plaige of subtractioun of grace, bot alswa the
Iewis, as the Prophet sais in the Psalm: Psalm. 80.
Dimisi eos secundu^ desideria cordis eorum. I haif left them to leiue eftir
the desyris and lustis of their heart. And suppoise warldlie and carnal people
quhilk ar geuin allanerli. to the lufe and cure of ye world and of their
flesche, thinks yat this spiritual plaige be subtractioun of grace, is na
plaig nor punicioun of god* it in varai deid, yair is na temporal scurge of God
to be comparit to this spiritual plaig. For it is writtin: Si prestes anime tue
concupiscentia^ eius, Eccle. 18.
faciet te in gaudium inimicis tuis. And thou gif to thy self all thy sensual
desiris and lustis, it sall cause the cum in greit dangeir, to the joy of thy
enemeis. And quhat plaig can be greiter thane the people of God to want ye
spiritual fude of yair saulis? quhilk plaig God schoris be the Prophet Amos:
Ecce dies ueniunt dicit dominus, and mittam famem in terram, Amos. 8.
non fame^ panis, neque sitim aque, sed audiendi verbum domini. Et
co^monebu^tur a mari vsque ad mare, et ab aquilone vsque ad orientem,
circuibunt querentes verbum dn^i and non inuenient. Behald the dayis cummis
sais our Lord, and I sall send hungir upon the erde, nocht the hungir of breed,
nor the thri^t of wattir, bot of hering of the word of our Lord God, and yai
salbe commouit fra the sea to the sea, and fra the North to the Eist thai sall
gang about seik and ye word of our Lord God, and sall nocht find it. We haif
now to ow rehersit temporal and spiritual plaigis, quhair with God strikis his
people for trasgression of his co^mandis. Is yair it na other plaig of god,
quhilk he schoris to the brekaris of his lawis? is trewlie, the may terribil,
cruel and fairest of all without comparison ar ye panis of b^lt, quhilk salbe
eternal without end, quhair of saint* ^one the Baptist makis this comminatioun:
Math. iii.
Ilk tree that bringis nocht forth good fruit, sal be hewin down and cassyn
into ye fire. The eternal panis orda^^t for ye brekaris of the commandis.
And the same sentence our saluiour giffis in the seuint cheptour of saint
Matthew, quhan to a^reis the sentence geuin agane ye unprofitable seruand quhilk
sal be cassyn into the outwart myrknes, their salbe murning and chatering of
teith. Bot abone all the laif the may horrible wordis sall be pronuncit be
our saluiour on the day of extreme judgment, quhen he sall say to all them
that salbe found on his left hand that day, Math. 2^
depart fra me e cursit creaturis into everlasting fire, quhilk is preparit to
the devil and his angels.

The third Cheptour
NOw as we haif declarit syndry kindis of plaigis quhilk God schoris to al ye
tra^sgressouris of his commandis, Te^porall revvardis p^omissit to the kepa^s
of ye co^mandis Leui. 26.
sa na dout God almychty of his liberal gudnes hais promissit in the scripture
greit rewardis to them that kepis his command^s, temporal, spiritual and
eternal. Of the first we reid in the buke of Leuitici: Si in preceptis meis
ambulaueritis, et ma^data mea custodieritis, et feceritis ea, dabo vobis
pluuias temporibus suis, and terra gignet germen suum, et pomis arbores
replebuntur. Gyf that e gang in my lawis, and keip my commandis and do them, I
sal gif ow rain in time convenient, the erde sall bring forth the corn, the
treis sall be full of fruit, e sal eit our bred with fouth, and sall dwell in
our land without feir. I sall gif peace to all our bordouris, e sall sleip and
na man sal inquiat ow. I sal take away evil bestis, and ye sue^d sall nocht pas
throw our cuntrie, e sall persew our enemeis, and thai sall fall down before
ow, v. of ow sal persew ane hundredth aduersareis, and ane hundredth of ow sal
persew ten thousand enemeis, our enemeis sal fall be ye suerd in our sicht. I
sall behald ow and make ow grow and multiply, with money siclyke wordis that
folowis in the same, and money other placis of the auld testament, GOD promissis
temporal prosperity to the people quhilk keipis his commandis. And our saluiour
Christ in ye euangil with ane word co^fermis the same promis saying: Math. ^.
Querite ergo primu^ regnu^ dei, et iusticiam eius, et hec o^a ad^cientus
vobis. Seik first the kingdom of God, and ye rychteusnes thairof, sa sall all
the temporal thingis be ministered to ow Gyf this be true yt we say, how was it
that certane Martyris deit for hunger, and alswa money good men and women leuis
in greit poverty and skantnes of yair necessare sustentation, quhilk S. Paul
affermis of himself? It is true that God sendis to his seruandis, sumtyme greit
skantnes and extreme poverty, and that for yair probatioun and encres of yair
meritis be paciens, quhilk he thinks to them may expedient, bot may
commonly the word is true that is said before: Seik for the kingdom of God,
and ye rychteusnes yair of. Leiue nocht mydilnes, do our deuore and dewtie
exer^e our self in convenient laboris ilk ane man conform to his stait, degree
and vocatioun, and God will nocht those ow want our daily sustentatioun.

Quhat is the spiritual rewardis, quhilk GOD promi^sis to yame yat ar kepars of
his commandis? Spiritual revvardis promissit to the keparis of the commandis.
Eccle. i. Eccle. 6.
First eftir the wisman, he promissis spiritual wisdom: Fili concupiscens
sapientiam conserua iusticiam, and deus prebebit illam tibi. Sone gif you
desiris wisdom keip rychteusnes, and God sall gyf wisdom to the. And in ane
other place he sais. Cogitatum tuum habe in preceptis dei, et in mandatis
illius maxim assiduus esto et ipse dabit tibi cor et co^cupiscentia sapientie
dabitur tibi. Haif thy thocht in the commandis of God, and in his commandis be
you diligent, and God sall gyf the ane heart, and desire of wisdom sall be
geuin to the. This is declarit weil be exempil of king David, saying their
wordis: Super senes intellexi, Psalm cxviii
quia mandata tua quesiui. I haif had understanding above my eldaris because
good Lord I socht thy comma^dis. Secund, he promissis incressing of grace and
vertew, as it is said in the Prouerbis of Solomon: Pro. iii.
Mis^ricordia et veritas te no^ deferent, circundes eas gutturi tuo, et
describe in tabulis cordis tui, et inuenies gratiam et disciplinam bonam coram
deo et hominibus. Lat nocht mercy and verite forsake the, and thou sall find
grace and favor before God and man. And saint Paul exhortand his Corinthianis
to gif almous, sais thus: 2. Cor. 9.
Augebit incrementum iusticio vestre. That is to say, quhen e gyf almous
according to the command of God, God sall make ow grow dalie in grace and
virtue. Thridly, our saluiour promissis to the doars of the commandis the
eternal blis of heuin, Eternal reward promissit for the keeping of ye
co^mandis Math. xix
saying thus: Si vis ad vitam ingredi, serua mandata. Gyf thou will entir into
the lyif, keip the commandis. Now e haif hard quhow that God almychty schoris
to punis the trangressouris of his commandis, with panis temporal, spiritual and
eternal. And all wa quhow that he hais promissit to reward the keparis of his
co^mandis with reward temporal, spiritual and eternal. Quhairfor I can say
nocht ellis to ow at this time, bot the same wordis quhilk Moses ye serua^d of
God said to ye people of Israel: Deuteronomy. xxx
Testes inuoco ho die coelum et terram, quod proposuerim vobis vita^ et mortem,
benedictionem et maledictione^. Elige ergo vita^, vt and tu viua^ et semen
tuu^, and diligas dn^m deu^ tuum atque obedia^ voci eius et illi adhereas. Ipse
est enim vita tua, and lo^gitudo dierum tuoru^. I call to witness this day heuin
and erde, that I haif proponit and schawin to ow, life and deed, blissing and
cursing. Cheis thairfor the lyif yat thou may leiue and thy seid eftir the,
that thou may lufe thy Lord God, and be obedient to his voce, and cleiue to
him, for he is thy lyif and the lenth of al thy dayis.

The fourt cheptour.
The first command.
THe first table of Moses, contenis three co^mandis, quhilk schawis us the
dewtie or seruis quhilk we aucht to God in our hartis, our wordis and deidis.
Wald e know ye first command word be word as God gaif it? The seruand of God
Moses to quhome God spak face for face, rehersis it on this manner. Ego sum
dn^s deus tuus, Exo ^xx.
qui eduxi te de terra Egypti, de domo seruituris. Non habebis deos alienos
cora^ me. No^ facies tibi sculptile, neque omnem similitudine^ que est in coelo
desuper, et que in terra deorsum, nec eorum que sunt in aquis sub terra. Non
adorabis ea, neque coals: Ego sum dn^s deus tuus fortis zelotes, visitans
iniquitatem patrum in filios, in tertiam and quarta^ generationem eorum qui
oderunt me, et faciens misericordia^ in milia, his qui diligunt me, et
custodiunt precepta mea. I am ye Lord thy God, quhilk hais brocht ye fra the
land of Egypt, fra the house of bondage. Thou sall haif na other goddis bot me,
you sal nocht make to ye (as gods) any grauit image, another any similitude of any
thing ye is in the heuin above, or in ye erd beneth, nor of any thing yat is in
the watter under the erd. Thou ^al nocht adorn yame, nor worschip yame (as
goddis). Quhat good dedis ar yai quhilk God biddis us do in this first command?
First the will of GOD is in yir wordis, yt we ken him trewlie in our
understanding, syne yt we serve him perfitly in our hartis and will. How should we
ken god, or quharin standis ye true knawlege of God quhilk he requiris of us
all. The true knawlege of God is techit us in their wordis: Ego sum dn^s deus
tuus, Quhairin standis ye true knavvlege of God, quhilk h^ requi^i^ of us.
qui eduxi te de terra Egypti de domo seruitutis. I am ye lord thy god, quhilk
hais brocht the fra ye land of Egypt, fra the house of bondage. First quhen god
sais this word, I am. We should leir ye God is eternal, quhilk had neuir
begi^ning, nor sal haif endi^g. He is allanerly in verai deid, for be his awin
nature he is, nocht creat or maid of any other thing both him self allanerlie
is makar and former of all other thingis. Exodus iii.
Thus he sais in Exodi: Ego sum qui sum. That is to say, I am he that hais bein
of my self only. And he bade Moses schaw his name on this manner: Qui est,
misit me ad vos. He ye is, send me to ow. Be ye quhilk wordis it is geuin us to
understand, that God allone is be him self, of his awin natural existens, and
that all thingis of this world quhider yai ar visible or vnuisibil, able to be
sein of us, or unable to be sein of us, thai ar al creaturis of God, and hais
their being of him. In ^amekil that thai may nocht be a moment of ane hour bot
gif yat God almychty keip yame in yair being, sustein yame and gyde them.
Secund, quhen he sais this word: Exodus xx.
Ego sum dominus I am the Lord. We should leir to understand ye hie majesty of
God, quhilk is the universal Lord of all this w^rld Lord of all Lordis, and
king of all kingis, quhais power is eternal, to quhom na creature may make
resistens, in quhais hand is our lyif and our deed, our salvation and
damnacion, a Lord of all knawlege and swa na thing can be hyd fra him, a Lord
off all wisdom, and swa misteris na counsellar, a Lord of al mycht power and
authority and sa misteri^ na helpar. Sa he only of rycht may be callit thus in
general, the Lord, the Lord for alsmekil as he dois all thingis according to
the plesour of his will, as saint Pau^ sais to the Ephesianis: Ephe. i.
Qui operatur omnia secundu^ consilium voluntaris sue. He wourkis al things
according to the counsel of his awin will. Thridly, quhen he says: Exodus xx.
Deus tuus. Thy God* we should understand him to be the only giffar of all grace,
the well quhilk can nocht be dryit, and perpetual spring of gudnes, our life,
our lycht, our strenth, our singular defense and protectioun, breuely our only
saluiour and God of al consolacioun and confort, quhilk in all times and in all
placis is ready to be to us (als mekle as lies in him) ge^til, large, liberal,
and mair merciful thane we can think or say. Hais God done any special thing to
us, quhairin he hais schawin him self to be our Lord God? e veraly. He schew
him self to the people of Israel, to be their mychty lord and gracious God,
quhen he brocht yame out fra ye la^d of Egypt, quharin yai dwelt money eiris as
in a house of miserable th^ldome and bondage. Bot unto us all that ar true
christin people specially he schew him self to be our mychty Lord and gracious
God, quhen he deliuerit us fra the dangier of the myrknes of hell, and fra the
miserable captivity of the devil, quharin we war all borne and haldin in. Bot
he saffit us nocht be ye mediation of Moses, bot be the bitter and painful
passion of his awin natural sone our mediator and redemar JESUS CHRIST.
Tharfor be all rycht we should apply all our wittis, power and diligence to ken
and keip all the co^mandis of our mychty and may gracious God quhilk nocht
only in general, The true service of god. quhilkvv^ avv to him in ou^ hartis.
bot alsua in special hais done sa mekle for us. Now eftir yat we haif declarit
to ow the true knawlege of God, we will gang fordwart and tell plainly quharin
standis the true and principal service quhilk we aucht to God in our hartis,
quhilk he requiris of us in the first command? In the first command quhilk is
yis: Non habebis deos alienos coram me: Thou sall haif na other gods bot me
allone. God requiris of us their iiii. vertous, Fear, Faith, Hoip and Lufe to
be geuin to him, as to ane true leifua^d God. And quhen we gif their vertewis or
any of them, mair to any creature than to him, quhilk is our only true and
leifua^d God, than we haif in our hartis strange gods, quhilk is forbiddi^ in
this first command. The first principal vertew quharin standis the true service
of God, The feir of god.
is ye fear of God, as it is writtin in ye buke of Deuteronomi: Dominum deu^
tuum timebis, et illi soli serueis. Thou sall fear thy Lord God, and him only
as thy God sall thou serve. How should we fear our Lord God? Two manner of wayis.
The ane, as ye seruand fearis his master, doand his masters command for feir
of punision. And of this it is writtin in the buke of Prouerbis: Principium
sapientie timor dn^i. Prouer. 9
The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God. Quhat thing should move us may
to fear god on this manner? Trewly to belief sickirly the iugeme^tis of god,
and other panis and punitions quhilk God se^dis to synnaris temporallie,
spirituallie and eternally, as we haif rehersit to ow before in the prologe of
the law. And often times to haif in our mind yis artikil of our Creed: Inde
venturus est iudicare viuos et mortuos. Fra heuin Christ our saluiour sal cum
to judge both quik and deed. Thus the haly prophet and excellent king David
co^sauit in his heart the fear of God, quhen he said in the Psalm: Psalm cxviii
A iudiciis enim tuis timui feci iudiciu^ et iustitia^. I haif had dreddour and
fear throw consideratioun of thy iugementis. And our saluiour Christ in the
euangil of saint Luke biddis us haif this fear sayand: Timete eum qui
postqua^ occiderit corpus, habet potestate^ mittere in gehennam. Luce. xii.
Ita dico vobis hunc timete. Feir him quhilk eftir he hais slain our body,
hais powar to cast ow into hell, I say to ow feir him. Secund* we should feir our
lord God as ye good son feiris his father, doand his command, nocht principally
for feir of punicion, bot may of all, yat he displese him nocht nor offend
him in any sort, lest he put him out of his company. And yis feir of God
springis of lufe, for ye mair we lufe him ye mair we feir to offend him, and to
depart fra his company. And of this feir it is writtin in ye Psalm: Psalm xviii.
Timor domini sanctus permanet in seculu^ seculi. The haly feir of our Lord
enduris for euirmair.

The fifth cheptour.
THe secund principal vertew quharin sta^dis the true service of GOD, The faith
of god. Eccle. 2.
quhilk he requiris of us in this first command is faith, quharof it is
writtin: Qui timetis dominum credit illi, et non euacuabitur merces vestra. e
that feris our Lord haif faith in him, or gif credit to him, and our reward
sall nocht be takin fra ow.

Quhat is faith? Na dout bot the faith quhilk is commendit in the scripture is
ane virtue quharby we belief nocht allanerly that their is ane true leuand God,
quhilk is eternal, almychty, merciful, rychteous and faithful, bot alswa we
gif ferme credit to his word, quhilk is sa true that na thing can be trewar.
Quhat thing should move us to belief the word of God? Trewly two thingis. The ane
is ye eternal and infallible verite of God, fra quhom na lesing may proceed, na
mair than myrknes may cum fra the cleir schenand son. Thairfor it is writtin:
Non est deus quasi homo vt mentiatur, nec vt filius hominis vt mutetur. Nu.
xxiii.
God is nocht as a man yat may make ane lesing, nor it as ye sone of man yat may
be changeit. And our saluiour said spekand as GOD: Ego sum via veritas et vita.
I am the way, ye verite and lyif* Ihon. xiiii
And he sais alswa: Coelum et terra transibunt* Luce. xxi.
verba autem mea non transibunt. Heuin and erd sall pas, bot my word sall nocht
pas. Thus we should gyf ferme credit to the word of GOD, because GOD that spekis
it, is ye eternal and infallible verite. The secund thing ye should move us to
belief ye word of GOD and to know quhilk is the word of GOD, quhilk ar the
haly bukis quharin the word of GOD is contenit, and quhat is the true sense of
the same ^ukis is ye consent and authorite of our mother the haly kirk, fra the
Apostils time hitherto, and specially quhen it is lawfully gadderit be the haly
spirit in ane general counsel, quharof saint Augustine sais thus: Contra
epistolam fu^dame^ti.
Ego non crederem eua^gelio nisi me ammoneret ecclesie authoritas. I wald nocht
gif credence to the euangel except that the universal kirk warnis me sa to do
And tharfor leir their two lessonis. The ane is, quhatsaeuir the haly spirit
reuelis and schawis to us, other in the bukis of haly scripture, or in ye
determinatiouns and diffinitiouns of general counsellis lawfully gadderit for
the corroboracion and maintenans of our faith, we should belief ye same to be ye
true word of God, and thairto gyf ferme credens as to the verite that is
infallible. The secund lesson, e that are simple and vnleirnit men and women
should expressly belief all the artickils of our Creed, as for all vthir hie
mistereis and matteris of the scripture e aucht to belief generally as the kirk
of God beleiffis. And this faith is suffient to ow, for the perfectioun of that
faith quhilk e ar bund to haif, quharof we sal spek mair largely in the
expositioun of the Creed. The hoip of god. Eccle. 2.
The third principal virtue is Hoip, quharof it is writtin: Qui timetis dominum
sperate in illu^, and in oblectationem veniet vobis misericordia. e that feris
our Lord, hoip in him, and his mercy sall cum to ow with plesour. Quhat is
Hoip? It is ane vertew quharby we lippin to get all gudnes fra God, mercy and
grace in this world, and eternal blys in the world to cum. Psalm. 146.
Of the first sais the Prophet in the Psalm: Beneplacitum est domino super
timentes eum, et in eis qui sperant super misericordia eius. Our Lord hais
plesour upon yame yat fearis him, and allwa upon yame yat hoippis upon his
mercy. And quhy should we nocht put all our traist and confidens in the mercy of
God, seand that he biddis us call upon him in time of our need, and promissis
to heir and help us: Psalm. 49.
Inuoca me in die tribulationis, eruam te et honorificabis me. Call upon me
(sais our Lord God) in the day of thy trubil, and I sal delyuir the, and for
that thou sall honor me. And suerly we should nocht mistrest him, for he sais
thus be his Prophet Esaie: Nunquid obliuisci potest mulier infante^ suu^, vt
no^ misereatur filio vteri sui? Esaie. 49
and si illa oblita fuerit, ego tamen non obliuiscar tui. Will a woman foret
her onge barn, and nocht haif pity on the sone of her wambe, and suppois sche
foret, et I sal nocht foret ye, sais our Lord. Of the secund and principal
part quhilk is expectatioun or loking for the blys of heuin to be geuin to us
be ye grace of God principally, and our merittis secundly (quhilk merittis als
ar ye giftis of God eftir saint Augustine.) Saint Paul sais thus: Roma. 5.
Gloriamur in spe glory filiorum dei. We glore and ar blyth throw ye hoip
quhilk we haif to cum to the glore quhilk is promissit to the sonnis of God.
Quhat should move us may to hoip in ye mercy and glore of God? Veraily that God
is true and faithful in keeping of his promis, according as ye Prophet sais in
the Psalm: Psalm. 144
Fidelis dn^s in omnibus verbis suis, and sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.
Faithful is our Lord in all his wordis, and haly in all his deidis. Now as he
hais else fulfillit his promis in giving of his mercy and glore to his sainctis
in heuin, as Patriarchis, Prophetis, Apostils Martyris, Confessors and
Virginis, sa should we traist and hoip, that he will fulfill his promis to us,
gif we feir him and with ane leifua^d faith belief in him.

The vi. Cheptour
QVhat is ye fourt principal vertew quhar in standis the true service of God?
The lufe of god. Eccle. 2.
It is ye may excellent vertew of cherite, quhar of it is writtin be ye
wisman: Qui timetis dominu^ diligite illu^, and illuminabuntur corda vestra. e
yat feris our Lord lufe him, and our hartis salbe lichtit with the licht of
grace in this world, and with the lycht of glore in the world to cum. Quhate is
cherite? It is lufe, quharbywe lufe god for his awin saik, because he is al
gudnes, and fra him cummis al gudnes, and our neichbour for gods saik, or in
God. Quhow should we lufe God? Four manner of wayis, as it is gaderit out of
syndrie placis of the scripture, and al rehersit togidder in saint Lukis
euangil: Luce. x
Diliges dominu^ deum tuum ex toto cord tuo, et ex tota anima tua et ex oi^bus
viribus tuis, et ex tota mente tua. Thou sall lufe thy Lord God with all thy
heart, with all thy saul and with all thy strenth and with all thy mind, That
is to say, lat all thy thochtis, all the partis of thy life, all thy wittis and
understanding, all thy labor strenth and diligence be direckit to God, and
occupied in his lufe and service, of quhom you hais all their thingis geuin to
the. et schaw us plainly quha luffis God with all their heart? Trewly thai that
luffis God with ane true knawlege in yair understanding, haifand ane true faith
in ye word of God without any dout error or herilie. Thairfor quhasaeuir
doutis or erris in ye faith or stiffly haldis any falls opinioun condemnit be the
kirk for herisie, yai lufe nocht God with all yair heart Secund, quha luffis GOD
with all their saul? Thai that luffis GOD with true obediens in yair frewill
without any murmur, rebellioun or contradictioun. Sa yat quhatsaeuir God hais
commandit yame to do, yai ar content to do it willingly with out any
co^pulsioun. And thairfor quhasaeuir dois any deid commandit be God mair for
lufe of temporal geir or for fear of temporal pain than for any lufe thai
haif to God, thai lufe nocht God with all their saul. Thridly quha luffis God
with all their mind? Thai that luffis God with ane perfect remembrance, and
forettis nocht quhat God hais done for them, bot euir mair to yair powar
thinks of ye benefitis of God quhilk he hes geuin to yame in their creatioun*
conseruatioun, redemptiun and dalie prouisiun* both temporal and spiritual in
body and saul. Tharfor quhasaeuir rememberis nocht siclike benefitis of God or
giffis na tha^kis to him for them thai lufe nocht God with all their mind. And
last of all thai lufe God with all their strenth and powar, quhilk ar content
to occupy the strenth of their body and all the powar thairof in ye service of
God, according to his command all the dayis of yair life. Thai lufe nocht God
with all their strenth quhasaeuir occupyis yair stre^th in doing evil dedis or
perseueris nocht in yair good life. Thus we should lufe God with all our heart be
true knawlege, with all our saul be perfect obediens in keeping his commandis,
with all our mind be perfect remembrance, and with all our strenth be
perseverance. Quhat should move us may of all to lufe God? Trewly the lufe of
God towart us. For gif we consider quhat God hes done for us in our creation,
co^seruation and dalie provision, bot specially quhat lufe h^ hes schawin to us
in our rede^ptio^, of necess^ (...) moan conclude yt we are oblissit to lufe
god. Greit is ye lufe quhilk ye natural father and mother hes to yair childer,
great is ye luf quhilk the g^d mar^ man hais to his good wife, greit is the lufe
quhilk ane true friend will haif to ane other, bot as our saluiour sais: Ihon.
15.
Maiorem hac dilectionem nemo habet, quam vt anima^ suam ponat quis pro amicis
suis. Greiter lufe hais na man than yis, yat a man spend his life for his
freindis. Sa hais our saluiour done for us according as saint Paul declaris to
ye Ephesianis sayand thus: Christus dilexit ecclesiam, Ephe. 5.
and seipsum tradidit pro ea, vt illam sanctificaret, mundans eam lauachro aque
in verbo vite, vt exhiberet ipse sibi gloriosam ecclesiam, non habentem maculam
aut rugam, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed vt sit sancta et immaculata. Christ hais
luffit the kirk, that is to say, the congregatioun and company of all faithful
men and women, and hais geuin him self for it, to sanctify it, and clengit it
in the fyuntaine of watter be the word of life, to make it to him self ane
glorious congregacioun, haiffand na spot nor runkil, nor any siclike thing, bot
that it should be haly and without repreif. And our saluiour sais in the euangil
of sanct Ihone. Sic deus dilexit mundumvt filium suum vnigenitum daret, Ihon.
iii.
vt omnis qui credit in eum non pereat sed habeat vitam eternam. Sa God hais
luffit the world, yat he hais ge um his awin sone, that quhasaeuir belei^is in
him can nocht perisch, bot moan haif the lyif eternal. This lufe of GOD toward
us plainly declarit ^aint Ihone the Evangelist saying: In hoc apparuit charitas
dei in nobis, i. Ihon. 4
quoniam filium suum vnigenitum misit deus in mundum, vt viuamus per eum. In
this apperit the greit lufe of GOD towart us, yat he hes send his only natural
sone in yis world, yt we mycht leiue be him. Maicatour ye same Apostle sais
thus: In hoc est charitas, no^ quasi nos dilexerimus deum sed quoniam ipse
prior dilexit nos, et mifit filium suum propitiationem pro peccatis nostris. In
this standis the greit lufe of GOD quhilk he hais schawin to us, yat we
preuenit nocht god with our lufe, luffand him first, bot he preuenit us first
with his lufe schawand his infinite lufe first of all to us, in that, yat he
hais send his awin son^ our saluiour Jesus Christ to us, to make ane perfect
mendis, and just satisfaction for all our synnis. Gyf we will tharfor con^iddir
the greit lufe of GOD syndry wayis schawin to us it will doutles steire and
prouok us to lufe God agane. And thus e haif four principal vertewis sch^rtly
decla^it to ow, quhilk God commandis us to haif in this first command, quhairin
standis the true service, quhilk we aucht to God in our hartis.

The vii. Cheptour.
QVha brekis this first command? The tra^sgressouris of the first command Math.
x.
First al yai yat feiris man mair than God, for ye quhilk yai do money things
wittinglie agane ye command of God for feir of yair king, yair Lord, Lard,
master and siclike, quhilk is forbiddin be our saluiour saying: No lite timere
eos qui occidunt corpus, anima^ aute^ non possunt occidere, sed potius timete
eum, qui potest et anima^ et corpus per^ere in gehenna^. Feir nocht yame yat
slais our body* and may nocht slay our saulis, bot erar feir him quhilk eftir
yt he hais slain our body* Heritykis
hais powar to cast our saul and body into hell. Secund al herityckis, quhilk
stiffly haldis false opinions aganis the true faith of haly kirk, groundit upon
the haly scripture and determinatiouns of the kirk and counsellis of the same.
The description of herisie.


Heir it is expedient to descriue quha is ane herityk, quhilk description we
will nocht make be our awin propir inuencion, bot we will tak it as it is else
made and geuin to us be two of the may excellent doctouris of haly kirk,
Hierome and Augustine. Their ar the wordis of S. Hierome, quhilk he sais in his
Commentary upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Galathianis: Quicunque aliter
scripturam intelligit quam sensus spiritus sancti flagitat quo conscripta est,
licet de ecclesia no^ recesserit, tamen hereticus appellari potest. Quhat
christin man or woman saeuir thai ar, quhilk vnderstandis the haly scripture
vtherwayis than the mind of ye haly spirit requiris, (be quhais inspiracion the
scripture was writtin) suppois he gang nocht ^a the company of the kirk, it he
may be callit ane heretyk. Now heir ye wordis of S. Augustine dis^riuand quha is
ane heretyk: In lib. de vtilitate tredendi ad honoratum.
Hereticus est vt meafert opinio, qui alicuius temporalis co^modi, and maxim
glory principatusque sui gratia, falsas and nouas opiniones vel gignit, vel
sequitur. Eftir my opinion (sais he) he is ane heretyk, quhilk because of any
warldly profeit and may of all, because of his awin glore and promotion
leiffeis ye new ^aith, and other makis or folowis ^als and new opinions. how
may the verite of our faith be discernit fra herisie
Gyf e speir agane at me, how may e know the t^ew sense of ^he (...) be ye haly
spirit, and sa discern ye verite of our faith, fra new and falls opin^^uns
callit hereseis? Trewly this e may know and discern be three wayis. First be
true collat^oun, applicatioun and conferring ane place of (...) scripture til
ane vthir, Collation of ye scripture.
for commonly y^ (...) quhilk is put in ane place of the scripture obscuirly,
the same sente^^e is put in a^ other place of the scripture plainly. Aug de
doctrina christiana lib. 2 ca. 9
Than quha sa hais the ingyne, cunning or knawlege to co^ferre ye obscu^re
place to ye plain place, may cum to ye true understanding of the obscu^e place.
And may o^ al, it helpis us to ye true intelligence of ye scripture, to tak
good tent to the wordis that a^ writtin immediately before the ^e^ ^at ^e ^e^r or
(...), and alswa yat folowis eftir hend ye same* for sum time ye words writtin
before, sum time the wordis writtin eftir hend, sumtyme both ye wordis afort
and eftir oppinnis til us ye true and plain sense of yat tex^ of ye scripture
quhilk we desire to understand. Bot because money men reidis ye scripture, and
hes nocht ye gift of ye haly spirit, call^t interpre^atio sermonu^, the
interpretation of wordis, that is to say (eftir ane exposition) of difficil and
ob^cuire placis, Thairfor it is expedient to cum to ye secu^ way quhilk is ye
exposition of autentyk doctors appreuit be ye auctorite of haly kirk, and
resauit be lang consent of ye christin people, as Hierome, Exposition of the
d^cro^s.
Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory, Chrysostom, with money vthir siclike, to quhome
ye haly spirit gaif ye gift of interpretacion and exposition of ye scripture,
and alsua leirit ye true sense of ye same at yair doctouris and eldaris, quhilk
likwais letrit ye same true sense at their doctouris and eldaris sa ascenda^t
to ye Apostils. Thairfor lat ilkane of us heir and tak tent quhat the wisman
sais: Eccle. 8
Non re pre tereat narratio seniorum ipsi enim didicerunt a patribus suis,
quonia^ ab ipsis disces intellectum, et in te^pore necessitatis dare responsum.
Lat nocht the narration or instruction of thy wise eldaris pas by the, for yai
leirit fra yair fatheris, and of yame thou sall lei^ understanding, and in time
of neide to gif ane wise answer. Sa sanct Augustine writand aganis Iuliane ye
Pellag^ane, Aug co^tra Iulian^ Peligia^ lib. 1. c. ^^
rehersis c^rtane doctouris quhilk was before his time, and sais their word^s:
Quod credunt credo, quod tene^t teneo, quod docent doceo, quod predicant
predico istis cede et mihi cedes*

That thai belief (sais he) I belief, that thai hald, I hald yat yai teache, I
teache, yat yai preche, I preche. gyf place to them and you sal gif place to
me. As he mycht say plainly, and you belief ye auld doctouris before me, you
alswa will belief me, for my doctrine in all pointis is conformit to yair
doctrine. The third way to know quhat ar ye bukis of haly write, quhat is the
true sense of the same, The general counsellis.
quhat ar the articlis quhilk ar herisie, is the declaracioun determinatioun,
diffinitioun and decisionis of general counsellis, gaderit togiddir and
concludit be the inspiratioun of the haly spirit, quhame the father eternal
and our saluiour JESUS CHRIST his natural sone hais geuin to the kirk to be
ledar techar, and direckar of the same kirk, in all matteris concerning our
catholic faith and good maneris of the christin people, quhilk catholic kirk is
trewly representit in all general counsellis lauchfully gaderit in the haly
spirit. Quharfor, he that will nocht heir resait and obey ye diffinitionis and
determinationis of lauchful general counsellis concerning materis of our faith
he is nocht to be acountit a true christin man, according to the wordis of our
saluiour: Math. 18.
Si ecclesiam no^ audierit, sit tibi tanqua^ Ethnicus et Publicanus. Gyf he
will nocht heir the kirk, lat him be to the as ane infidele, vnchristinit, and
ane Publican. Thus e haif quha is ane herityk, and how he brekis the first
command. Of quhome saint Paul sais yi^ wordis to his disciple Titus: Ad titum
vlt^mo.
Hereticu^ homine^ post vnam et secundam correptione^ deuita, sciens quia
subuersus est qui huiusmodi est, et delinquit cum sit proprio iudicio
condemnatus. A man yat is geuin to herisie, eftir the first and secund
monitioun fle and forbeir his company, and know yat he yat is siclike is
subuertit and synnis, euin damnit be his awin judgment, for als me ^le as he
resaiuit the faith as true and catholic, and eftir hend in sum part he gaugis
fra it, and impugnis it. Or we may say yat he is danit be his awin judgment, ye
is to say, he is damnit before God, throw his awin, or for his awin electioun,
wilfulnes and stifnes of his heart, and will nocht leiue his herisie and return
to the catholic faith. Hoip in man abone God. Iere. xvii.
Thridly all thai brekis this command that lippinis mair in in the powar and
help of man than of god, of quhome it is said: Maledictus homo qui confidit in
homine. Cursit and wartit is yat man yat traistis and puttis his hoip in man.
And thairfor the Prophet lais in the Psalm: Nolite confidere in principibus,
psalm. 145.
in filus hominum in cuibus non est salus. Traist nocht principally in princis
nor in ye sonnis of men in quhome is na saluatioun. Fourt all thai quhilkis
^aistis owyr mekle in yair awin wisdom, Hoip in our avvin strenth riches and
vvisdome i. Cor. i. Psalm. 48.
strenth or riches and sa in time of their neid callis nocht to GOD dewly for
help, of quhome God sais thus: Pardam sapientiam sapientium, et prudentiam
prudentium reprobabo. I will distroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast
away ye understanding of the prudent. And ye prophet in the Psalm reprei^is
yame yat lippinnis in yair awin strenth and powar, and gloris in the abundans
of their riches.

The vii. Cheptour.
Infidelite
Fifth, al infidelis quhilk wantis the faith of Christ, and will nocht resaif it,
of quhome it is writtin: Qui incredulus est filio, non videbit vitam, Ihon. iii.
sed ira dei manet super eum. He that will nocht haif faith in ye son of God,
sal nocht se ye lyse, bot the wrath of God bydis upon him because he beleiffis
nochtin ye only sone of God. Sext, Desperatioun. Ephe. 4.
al yai quhilk disparis of ye mercy of God promissit to us in Christ. Of
siclike sanct Paul sais to the Ephesianis: Qui despera^tes, semetipios
tradiderunt impudicitie, in operationem immundi cie omnis in auaricia^. Thai be
desperacion gaif yame self to wa^tones in doing of al vncleinnes and
couatousnes. Presumpcioun.
Seuint, yai yat presumis owyr mekil of their awin nakit frewill and good deidis
doin be the powar of the same, traistis to be saiffit, and nocht principally be
the grace of God, and be the merittis of Christ Jesus. Of quhome sanct Paul
sais: Roma. x.
Ignorantes enim iusticia^ dei, and suam querentes statuere, iusticie dei non
sunt subiecti. Miskenning the rychteousnes of God, and willing to maintene
their awin rychteousnes, thai ar nocht subdewit to the rychteousnes that is of
valor before God. Aucht, quha euir luffis any creature abone god, Spiritual
ydolatrie
or mair yan god, that same man in a manner makis a God of that creature, and
co^mittis spiritual ydolatrie. Sa the couatous man makis a god of his warldly
geir, the glowton makis a god of his wambe, gif a man dois any thing aganis the
command of God for pleasure or lufe of his wife or barnis in a manner he makis a
god of his wife and his barnis. Quhasa also for lufe and pleasour of their
prince, yair Lord, or any vthir friend, hurtis any other man and hareis him out
of house and harbarie, that man forsakis the true God of heuin and in manner
makis a god of his king, his Lord or his Lard.

Alswa thai syn agane this command, Corporal ydolatrie
that committis corporal ydolatrie, quhilk is, quhen men or women, nocht only
giffis till certane creaturis, or their ymagis ye service of yair hartis, yat
is to say, Faith, Hoip and Lufe, quhilk aucht to be geuin to God, bot alswa yai
gif to yame the outwart service of their body, as honor, worschip and
reverence, quhilk aucht to be geuin to God. Thus in ald time the Gentilis throw
the blindness of their hartis, instrunctioun and prouokation of the devil,
co^mittit corporal ydolatrie, to the greit iniure of God and damnation of yair
saulis. Part of them worschippit with godly honor the Sone, Sapi. xiii.
the Moon and the sternis. Part of them worschippit with godly honor the
fire, wind or ane of the elementis. Some of them gaif Gods honor to them
that was mortal men, as Jupiter, Mercurius, Mars, Venus, Diana with money
vthers. And nocht only thai tuke for their goddis siclike mortal men and other
creaturis, bot alswa the ymagis of men and of other creaturis, of quhome S.
Paul sais thus: Roma. i.
Mutauerunt gloriam incorruptibilis dei insimilitudinem imaginis corruptibilis
hominis et volucrum et quadrupidum et serpentum. Thai turnit and gaif the glore
of the immortal GOD unto ane image, made nocht only after the similitude of ane
mortal man, bot alswa of Byrdis and four futtit beistis, and of creping
beistis. And amang all the leife of ye benefitis of God, this is nocht the
leist, that throw the preching of the euangil, he hais deliuerit us fra all
corporal ydolatrie, quhilk in auld time was wont to be vsit amang the people,
Psalm. cxii.
sa that now (thankis be to God) the wordis of the Prophet in the Psalm may be
verifiet: A solis ortu vsque ad occasum, lauda bile nomen domini. Fra the
rising of the Sone to the ganging down of the same, laudable is the name of
our Lord. That is to say, in all partis of ye world ye haly name of ane eternal
god is laudable.

All kind of vvitchcraftis and superstionis.
The nynt, thai brek this command, quha saeuir vsis wichecraft, Nicromansie,
Enchantment, Iuglarie or trastis in them, or seikis their help, quhasa
lippinnis to werdis or dremis, quhasa lippinnis to defend their self or their
beistis, or geir aganis fire, watter, swerd, noy^um beistis, with certene
takinnis or writingis supersticiously.

And gyf any man or woman wald say: Often tymis we se, that thingis cu^mis to
pass, quhilk diumaris sais. Often times men and beistis ar helpit be wytchis
charmis. Often times geir tynt or stowm, is gettin agane be cowngerars, and sa
apperandly, it is nocht evil done to seike for siclike help. O you wretchit and
blind man or woman, yat thinks or sais siclike wordis. Know thou weil and
understand, that quhen sa euir thou speris or seikis for any help, counsel,
remede, consolation or defense at any wytche, socerar cowage^ar or siclike
dissaueris, thou dois greit iniure to thy Lord God, because that thou takis the
honor and service quhilk aucht to be geuin to GOD allanerly, and giffis it to
the devil, quhilk is deidly enemy to thy saul, For without dout, all Wytches,
Nigromanceris and siclike, workis be operatioun of ye devil under a paction,
condition, band or obligation of service and honor to be made to him. Mairouir
you sa doand, Aug. lib. ^. d^ (...) christ^
co^demnis thy awin saul to panis eternal, because that thou forsakis utterly
thy Lord God quhilk hais creat the to his awin image and liknes, and redemit
the with na less price than with ye precious blud of his awin natural sone our
saluiour JESUS CHRIST. Attouir you brekis thy condition and band of service
made to him in the sacrament of Baptyme. Finally you a^t made as ane Pagan,
Saracene or Infidele and sall perische for euirmair, except you amend thy life
be true, (...) c^xli. de tempore.
scharp, and lang penance. Quhat is deidly syn, bot wilful transgressioun of
the command of God? Than, how can you that is ane wytche, or giffis credit to
be helpit be Wytchcraft, excuse the f^a deidly syn and endless damnation s^and
that GOD almychty expressly in his haly law forbiddis al kindis of wytchecraft
and siclike deuilie saiand thus: Leui. xix.
Non augurabimini nec obseruabitis somnia. Use na kind of wytchcraft, and tak
na tent to dremis. And a little after hend: Non declinetis ad Magos, nec ab
ariolis aliquid sciscitemini* vt polluamini per eos, ego dominus deus vester.
Gang nocht to witchis for any help or confort, another seik for counsel at any
socerar, for sa doand, e ar fylit in our saulis be yame, for I am our Lord God.
And to make an answar to thy argument. The devil sumtyme in small matters schawis
to the the verite, bot to yat effeck, y^ finally he may cause ye gif credit to
his lesingis and black falset, in matters of greit wecht concerning thy saul.
Sumtyme he will help the to get agane the guddis of this world, bot his intent
is, yat finally he may cause ye tyne the guddis of the world to cum. Sumtyme he
will help the to recover the health of thy body, bot to that effeck, that finally
he may bring the to eternal deed of thy saul. Quharfor all true christin men
and women, should nocht only be the command of God use na kind of witchcraft, bot
alswa should seik for na help at witchis, because yat all siclik doingis is
iniurius to God, and damnable to man's saul.

Another can thai excuse them self fra transgression of the first command, yat
supersticiously obseruis ane day mair than ane other, as certane craftis men,
quhilk will nocht begin their warke on the saturday, certane schipmen or
marinars will nocht begin to sail on the satterday. certane trauelars will
nocht begin their iornay on ye satterday. quhilk is plane superstition, because
that God almychty made the satterday as well as he made all other dayis of the
wouke. Quharfor all lesum warkis may be begone als well on the Satterday as any
other day of the wouke, quhilk is nocht commandit haly day. Syclik supersticion
is amang them, that will nocht berisch or erde the bodis of their freindis on
the North part of the kirk ard, trowand yat their is mair halynes or vertew on
the South side than on the North. It is nocht unknown to us, that many and
sundry other sinful and damnable kindis of witchecraftis and superstitio^is ar
vsit amang sum men and women, quhilk at this time we can nocht rehearse and
reprove in special, thairfor according to our dewtie we require ow forbeir
them all, because thai ar all damnable to our saulis.

The tent, Temtatio^ of god.
yai break this command yat tempis God, and exponis their body and saul to
perrel, quhen thai may help them self be other lauchful menis and wayis.

The leuint, quha presumis of yame self any thing, or is hilie and proud of
goddis giftis, Elatioun and pride
or makis a vant of yair wisdom or rychteousnes, quha wyrschippis or luffis
God allanerlie for temporal geir.

The twelft, quha lippinnis nocht upon God in all places, in all their lesum
warkis and counsellis, quha doutis in goddis promis, or disparis of his merry.

Finally all kind of unfaithfulness, mistrast and desperation and presumption,
or quhasaeuir is impatient and murmuris aganis aduersite send to them be GOD,
belangis to the breking of this command. And to ye keeping of it pertenis al,
quhat the hal^ scripture spekis of the feir of GOD, Faith, Hoip and Cherite.

Of imagis
Ar ymagis aganis the first command? Na, sa thai be weil vsit. Quhat is the
rycht use of ymagis? Imagis to be made na haly writ forbiddis (sais venerabil
Bid) for the sycht of them, specially of the crucifixe giffis greit
compunction to them quhilk behaldis it with faith in Christ, and to them yat
ar vnletterat it geffis a quik remembrance of ye passion of Christ. 2. Para. 4
iii. Reg. 7 Number. xxi.
Solomon in time of his wisdom, nocht without the inspiration of God, made
ymagis in ye temple. Moses the excellent prophet and true seruand of God, made
and ereckit a brassin image of a serpent (quhilk figurit the liftyng up of our
saluiour Jesus Christ upon the cross) and als, be the command of God, causit
make the ymagis of two angellis callit Cherubinis, quhilk thing their two sa
excellent men in wisdom wald neuir haif done, gif the makin of imagiswar
aganis ye command of god. It is to be thocht, that yair was neuir it any pure
mortal man that had mair and perfitar understanding of this command than had
Moses* to quhome the law was geuin be the Angel of God in Gods behalf. And to
Solomon was giffin mair wisdom yan was geuin to any mortal king. Bot utterly
yis command forbiddis to make ymagis to that effeck, that thai should he adornit
and wirschipp^t as goddis, or with any godly honor, ye quhilk sentence is
expremit be their wordis: Exo. 20.
Non adorabis ea neque coals. Thou sall nocht adorn yame nor wirschip them as
goddis. Now we should nocht gif goddis honor or Christis honor to any image bot
to God allanerly, representit be ane image* And the ymagis of the Apostils and
Martyris with vtheris, representis their true and co^^ta it faith, quharin thai
deit with greit panis for Christis lufe, quhilk quhen we se and reme^beris, we
should beseik God in our praieris to gyf lykwais to us a constant faith and a
fervent lufe of God, quhairby we may be true serua^dis to God as yai war, and
to follow yair good exemple, that finaly we doand as thai did, may cum to be,
quhair thai ar in heuin, Alsua the image of our lady the glorious virgin
Marie, beirand in her arm the bony image of her sone commonly callit the baby
Jesus, representis to us the blissit Incarnatioun and haly birth of our
saluiour, yat he was borne of the glorious virgin Marie, that sche was and is
the mother of ye natural sone of God as concerning his manly nature, thairfor
the samyn image be representatioun techis us to honor and lufe the samyn
glorious virgin as the mother of God.

The ix. Cheptour.
QVhar panis ar thai, Comminatioun of panis aganis the brekaris of the first
command Eccle. 27
quhilk eftir ye scripture God almychty schoris to the brekaris of yis first
command? We sall rehearse them plainly and schortly. First, aganis them quhilk
wantis the feir of God, or that feiris man mair than God, it is writtin thus:
Si non in timore domini tenueris te instanter, cito subuertetur domus tua. Gyf
you hald nocht thy self continually in the feir of God, thy house sall be soine
cassyn down. And in the secund cheptour of Jeremy it is writtin thus: Iere. 2.
Scito et vide quia malum et amarum est, reliquisse te dn^m deum tuu^, et no^
esse timorem mei apud te dicit domiuus deus exercitu^^. Ken and se, yat it is
evil and bitter to ye, because yat thou hais left thy Lord God, and that my
feir is nocht in the sais our Lord God of hostis. And aganis them quhilk will
nocht haif ye true faith of halie kirk, or ye giffis nocht ferme credit to ye
enangil of our saluiour Christ it is writtin in sanct Ihonis euangel: Qui
incredulus est filio, Ihon. iii.
non videbit vitam, sed ira dei mane^ super cum. He that will nocht gif sure
faith to ye sone of God, sall nocht se life, bot the wrath of God, yat is to
say, ye rychteous judgment of god bydis upon him. And to gyfe bot ane example:
quharfor was the fair and excellent city of Jerusalem vterlie destroyit, in
the xlii. eir after the passion of our saluiour, quharin perisched al^uin
hundredth thousand men and women, as it is gaderit fra Josephus, Flauius and
Egisippus? Trewlie for na other cause principally, bot yat thai wald nocht
know the time of their visitation, yat is, ye thai wald nocht resaif the faith
of our saluiour Jesus Christ, quhen he in his awin propir person viseit yame
with his preching and miraculis. Thridly, quha that wantis hoip in the mercy
and help of God, or that lippinnis mair to the help of man, than of God, lat
them heir the maleson that God giffis them be his Prophet Jeremy, Iere. xvii.
quhilk is this: Maledictus homo qui confidit in homine, et ponit carnem
brachium suum, et a dn^o recedit cor eius. Cursit and wariit is that man quhilk
traistis and lippinnis in man mair thane in God almychty, and puttis his hail
defense, and principal succure in time of neid in any flesche (thai is to say)
in mortal men quhilk of yame self is brukkil, revil and waik, and unable to
help us by the will and powar of God. And mekil mair thai fall in the same
maleson of GOD, quhilk puttis their traist and confidence in heip and succure
of the devil quhilk is our perpetual enemy, and fra the beginning hais been a
man slaar and stude nocht in verite, bot ^u^mair is a lear, and the father and
first beginnar of all lelingis. And of them quhilk hais nocht the true lufe of
god and tha^r nychbour sanct Ihone the evangelist sais thus: i. Ihon. iii
Qui non diligit manet in morte. He that hais nocht the lufe of God and his
nychbour, dwellis in deed (that is to say) he remanis in deidly syne, and sa is
guilty of eternal damnation. And thus e may se, that quhasaeuir wantis ye four
principal verteous quhilk God requiris in this first command, incurris the
indignatioun of GOD. Promis of revvardis to the keparsis of this command. Ps
xxxiii. Psalm. xxxii
And quhat rewardis ar promissit in the scripture to them quhilk hes ye
forsaid four verteous, e may soine understand. First it is writtin in the
Psalm: Non est inopia timentibus eum. Commonly thai want na warldly geir,
quhilk feiris God. And agane in the Psalm: Oculi dn^i super timentes eum, et
in eis qui sperant super misericordia eius, vt eruat a morte animas eorum, et
alat eos in fame. The eyne of our Lord behaldis on them that feiris him. and
alswa upon yame quhilk hoipis on his mercy to deliver yair saulis fra deed, and
to feid them in time of hunger and skantnes. And it is said in ane vthir
Psalm: Psalm. cxi.
Beatus vir qui timet dominum. Happy or blissit is yat man quhilk feiris our
Lord, with money siclike autoriteis. And to all yame quhilk hais the true
leiffand and wourkand faith, our saluiour makis this promis as we haif in sanct
Markis Euangil: Mar. xi
Omnia quecunque orantes petitis credit quia accipietis, et euenient vobis.
Veralie I say to ow, quhatsumeuir e desire in our prayer, belief yat e sall
resaif it, and e sall haif it. And in the secund of Abacuk and in the first of
the Romany this promis is maid: Abacuk 2 Roma. i.
Iustus meus ex fide viuit. My rychteous man be faith (sais almychty god) sal
leif. That is to say, ye man or woman quhilk is iustifeit or maid rychteous in
my sycht throw a leiff and faith, and therein is perseuerand, the same man is he
yat sal leiue the life eternal. And it is said expressly in sanct Ihonis
euangil: Qui credit in filiu^ dei, i. Ihon. iii
habet vitam eternam. He yat trowis and fermely beleiffis in the sone of God,
hais euirlastand life, in this world in hoip, and in the world to cum in deid.
Attour, how God almychty rewardis and sall reward all yame yat puttis yair hail
hoip and confidence in his mercy and gloir, it is declarit in sindry placis of
the scripture, specially be sanct Paul writand thus to the Hebrewis: Hebre. x.
No lite amittere confidentiam vestram, que magnam habet remunerationem. Tak
good tent, that e tyne nocht our confidence, our traist or hoip in God, for it
hais greit reward. How can any mortal man haif greitar reward than to be
deliuerit and saffit fra ye devil, syn, and eternal deed and to haif geuin to
him eternal blys and joy that neuir fall end? Roma. 8.
Heir quhat sanct Paul sais to the Romany: Spe enim salui facti sumus. We are
maid saif throw hoip. To quhome agreis the prophet in the Psalm sayand thus:
Psalm. 2.
Beati omnes qui confidu^t in eo. Blissit ar all thai quhilk puttis their
traist in God. The same halie prophet exhortand the people to put yair hail
confidence in God, sais yet wordis: Psalm. 6^.
Sperare in eo omnis congregatio populi O e congregatioun of people hoip in God:
Effundite coram ^o corda vestra. Power out our hartis before him be true and
humyle confession of all our synnis, Deus adiutor noster meternu^. For God is
our helpar and sall neuir leiue us. Shortly, and e will know quhow largely and
diversely God rewardis yame yat hais in him true hoip and confidence, ^eid or
heir with diligence the Psalm that begynnis: (...) habitat in adiu^orio
altissimi, Psalm. 81.
and e sall find ^^ndry g^eit consolacionis, throw special promissis of defens,
help and mercy and of eternal glore quhilk GOD makis in the same Psalm. And
las^ of all quha that lu^is God with perfect cherite, as this first command
requiris, optenis and gettis greit benefittis and giftis fra God temporal,
spiritual and eternal. Roma. 8.
Of the first spekis sanct Paul to the Romany on this manner: Scimus quoniam
dilige^tibus deum, omnia cooperantur in bonum. We know weil (sais sanct Paul)
that all thingis cummis for ye best till all them that luffis God. As he mycht
say plainly, God almychty hais sik ane special cure and prouidens on yame yat
luffis him, yat he pe^mittis na thing ^^ chance and cum to them, quhilk he
(...) not ^t to yair weil and profeit. For quhen he (...) to yame prosperity,
he turnis it to yair co^solatio^^, gi^ thai get adversity, he turnis it to
tha^^ patience, and be his special grace, in time of yair seiknes yai ar
exercit in meiknes, be mennis affliction^s and contradictionis, yai leir
wisdom, be mennis hattred and malice, thai grow in lufe doand good for evil.
Thai use all vertew to the good gyding of their life. Thai use the precious body
of our saluiour Christ being in the sacrament of the Eucharist to yair
spiritual fude and refectioun. Thai use the word of God to their inst^ctioun.
Thai use the knawlege of sanctis and all good men and women to their exemple and
edificatioun. Thai use ye knawlege of evil men to their zeile and compaciens.
Thai use the knawl^ge of yair awin synnis (quharof thai haif true penance) to
their continual humiliatioun.

Thus we may understand, that quhasaeuir luffis God with true lufe vnfenetlie,
be his special grace, all thingis turnis to their weil and profit. Of the
secund our saluiour sais thus in the Euangil of S. Ihone: Ihon. xiiii
Si quis diligit me sermone^ meum seruabit, and pater meus diligit eum, and ad
eum veniemus et mansione^ apud eum faciemus. Quhasaeuir luffis me, he sall keip
my command, and my father sall lufe him, and to him sall we cum, and make our
dwelling with him. Quhat thing can be to ane christin man better, or mair
precious, than to haif the bliss^t Trinity dwelland in the chalmyr of his
heart, for doutles siclike men ma weil say with sanct Paul: Roma. 8.
Si deus pro nobis quis contra nos. Gyf God be with us quha can be aganis us?
And of the third reward quhilk is eternal, the Apostil sanct James writis
plainly on this manner: Beatus vir qui suffert tentationem, Iaco. i
quoniam cum probatus fuerit, accipiet corona^ vite quam repromisit deus
diligentibus se. Happy is ye man that tholis trubil, for quhen he is preuit
knawin, he sall resaif the croune of life, quh^ God hais promissit till them
that luffis him

The x. Cheptour.
ANd to cause all men and women leir and keip this first command with mair
diligens, Ane grievous commination of panis and ane gracious promis of mercy
quhilk God giffis in the end of the first command
almychty God hais e^kit to the same ane grievous commination of panis, and ane
gracious promis of mercy. Their ar goddis wo^dis: Ego sum dominus deus tuus,
fortis, zelotes, visitans iniquitatem patrum in filios, in tertiam et quarta^
generationem, eorum qui oderunt me, et faciens misericordiam in millia his qui
diligunt me, et custodiunt precepta mea. I am the Lord thy God, stark and
iolious or eyndland, visityng or punising the iniquite or synnis of the
fatheris upon their sonnis, into the third and fourt generatioun, of them
quhilk hettis me, and giffis mercy till a thousand of them quhilk luffis me,
and keipis my commandis.

Because their wordis ar verrai excellent, and contenis sum difficulty, we
think it expedient to opin yame to ow at lenth. Quharfor, it is to be notit,
that in yir wordis and in money v^hir placis of the halie scripture, God
requiris verray mekil ane thing of us al, quhilk is to know how he behaiffis
him self towar^ us? Trewlie til them quhilk contemnis, dispysis, and lythleis
him and his godly lawis, he is ane mychty and potent judge, to quhais powar and
will na creature may make resistance. Bot till them yat luffis him and his
commandis, he is ane merciful father. And to cause us understand this ane
thing, he ^epeittis their wordis in the end of the first command, quhilk he
proponit in the beginning of the same quhilk ar exponit and declarit to ow in
the same place. And that e may understand quhy he callis him self ane iolius or
eyndland God, haif in our remembrance, that in syndry placis of the scripture,
God almychty comparis him self to a good man, the saul of man, or the synagoge
of the Iewis or the faithful congregation of christin men and women, till ane
spouse or ane good wife. And the t^ew faith in GOD to a marriage as he sais be
his Prophet Osee: Osee. 4.
Sponsabo te mihi in fide. I sal marie the to my self in faith, and affermis
the same, sayand be his Apostil sanct Paul writand to the Corinthianis:
Dispondi vos vni viro, 2. Cor. xi.
virginem castam exhiber^ Christo. I haif mareit ow to ane man, to be ane chaste
virgin to Christ. Now thairfore, quhen almychty God callis him self ane Iolius
or eyndlande God* he makis ane sair comminacion and grievous bosting of punition
aganis all yame quhilk leiffis his faith, and gangis to idolatry and heresy,
fallis fra his hoip and confidens, to mistraist and disperacioun, and hais na
true lufe of God, bot rather contemptioun. All siclike personis leiffis God the
spiritual husband of their saul, and committis spiritual fornicatioun with ye
creaturis. Aganis quhom the Prophet sais thus in the Psalm: Perdi disti omnes
qui fornicantur abs te. Psalm. 7^*
Thou O good Lord hais destroyit all them quhilkis committis fornicatioun,
luffand any creature mair thane the. As it is plainly knawin, yat man is
properly callit a Ielius or eyndland man, quhilk luffis his wife sa mekil, that
all times with greit cure and diligens, he takis tent, that na man steir or
prouok her till adultrie, that sche be nocht begylit throw fair wordis or
giftis spokin or giffin to that effeck. After siclike manner of speking, GOD
almychty is callit ane Ielius or eyndland god, for als mekil as he will nocht
be content gyf we lufe any creature mair thane him, feir any, or traist in any
creature mair thane in him, quhilk gif we do we commit spiritual fornicatioun
to the displesour of God, and damnatioun of our saulis. And to this effeck, in
the end of yis first command, God giffis a sair comminatioun of rygorous
punitioun aganis them that leiffis him and contemnis him, and alswa ane sweet
and plesand promis of his mercy till al yame quhilk bydis and cleuis fast with
true faith, hoip and cherite to him, to the intent, that the transgressouris,
at the leist for feir of pain, may begin to turn agane to him, and all good
men and women, with joy and blythnes may gang in the way of Gods commandis,
till the kingdom of heuin. The sentence of the comminatioun is this. I will
visit and punis the synnis quhilk the fatheris dois, nocht only on the
fatheris, bot alswa on their sonnis, procedand to the third and fourt
generatioun, gif sa be that the sonnis follow the evil exemple of yair fa^heris
gif yai het me as yair fatheris hettit me, gif yai transgres my commandis as
yair fatheris tra^sgressit, sa that the sonnis kei^and the command of God, be
true lufe as yai aucht to do, sal nocht be punissit with the eternal pain for
t^air fatheris synnis, suppoise sum time the sone is punissit with sum temporal
pain for his fatheris syne, and that be the rychteous permissioun of God, for
sum good cause seyn to his divine majesty, and unknown to us.

Now quhat is the sweet and plesand promis of mercy, quhilk God makis till all
good men? It is this. I will schaw and gif mercy until a thousand, quhilk
luffis me and keipis my command. Behald christin man, how (as ye prophet sais)
the mercy of God is above all his warkis, and as sais sanct James: Iaco. 2.
The mercy of God gangis above his judgment, according as he sais in the
Psalm: Psalm. 88.
Visitabo in virga iniquitate^ eorum, et in verberibus peccata eorum,
misericordiam autem meam non dispergam ab eo. I sall visit and punis their
wyckidnes with a wa^d, and their synnis with strakis, et I will nocht tak^ away
fra yame my mercy. And their wordis ar said to that effeck, that suppose we be
greit synnaris, it we should nocht despair of ye mercy of God, knawand weil and
we will be his grace turn to him, he will haif mercy upon us, and gif we
persevere in his service he sal croune us with the croune of glore in the
kingdom of heuin. And gyf we will nocht turn to him, bot stiflie ganestand
his vocatioun and follow our awin sensual will, let us nocht dout bot GOD sall
be til us ane rychteous judge and ane rygorous punissar of our synnis. Thus we
make ane end of the first command, quhilk we haif declarit to ow sumquhat
largely, because it is the g^und and foundatioun of all perfection, conteynand
the true and perfeit service, quhilk in our heart we aucht to gil til our Lord
God, toquhome be honor and glore for euirmair. Amen.

The secund command.
The xi. Cheptour.
NON assumes nomen Dn^i Dei tui in vanum, Exo. xx.
nec enim habebit inson tem dominus eum, qui assumpserit nomen Domini Dei sui
frustra. Thou sall nocht tak the name of thy Lord God invaine, for thy lord God
sal nocht leif him vnpuni^it, quhilk takis his name in vain. The ordour of y^
secund command.
How folowis the secund command after the first? As the first command techis
the heart to feir god, to belief fermelie his haly word, to t^aist upon God,
lippin all good upon him, to lufe him and to love him thairfore, The rycht
keeping of ye secund command
sa the secund command techis the mouth, how it sal use ye name of God. And
thairfor we sall schaw ow the rycht use of ye name of God, quhilk standis in
(...) pointis specially. Confession of our faith.
First to confess opinly the name of God and of our saluiour JESUS CHRIST,
granting and expreming with our mouth, ye faith of our saluiour before all men,
quhen neid requiris, and nocht to cesse fra confession of the same for any
plesour or panis yat may be doine to us be men. Of this confession our saluiour
sais: Qui me confessus fuerit coram hominibus, Math. x.
confiteb or and ego eum coram patre meo qui in coelis est. He that confessis
me before men, I will confess him before my father quhilk is in heuin. Secundly,
nocht only with our heart, as the first command requiris bot alsua with our
mouth, we should love god and thank him in all times, Loving and thankin of God.
Ps. xxxiii.
both in prosperity and in aduersite, say and with the Prophet in the Psalm:
Benedicam dominum in omni tempore, sempe^ ^aus eius in ore meo. I will blis the
Lord in all time, euirmair his loving be in my mouth. Sayand alswa with Job:
Job. 2.
Si bona suscepimus de man^ dei, mala quare no^ sustineamus. Gyf we haif
resaiuit guddis fra the hand of the Lord, quhy should we nocht thoil pain or
punissioun? Job. i.
Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit, sicut domino placuit, ita factum est, sit
nomen domini benedictum. The Lord hais giffin, the Lord hais takin away, as it
plesit the Lord, sa it is done, blissit is ye name of the Lord. Thridly,
Teching or prechi^g the word of God.
the name of ye Lord God is richteously vsit, quhen his haly word is trewly set
forth, both priuatlie and opinly. Privately quhen ye father techis his childrin
and barnis, the master his seruandis, the scuile master his disciples, how thai
should trow the artikillis of their Creed, how thai should keip and ken the
co^mandis of God, and fle fra all synnis, and how thai should pray to God for
grace, be deuote and faithful prayar and sayng of their Pater noster.

Opinlie, quhen true ministaris of Goddis word declaris it sincerely and
purely, to the edificatioun of the people, in Faith, Hoip and Cherite. Quhilk
office belangis in special to al and syndry prelatis and personis of ye kirk,
to ilkane of yame sanct Paul sais their wordis: Predica verbu^, insta opportune,
importune, argue, obsecra, increpa, 2. Timo. vltimo.
in omni pacientia et doctrina. Preche thou the word, be fervent, quhidder it
be takin in seasson or out of seassoun (that is, quhidder the people be content
or discontent with the true word) ympreif, repreif, exhort with all suffering
and doctrine.

Fourtly, Faithful praying to God.
we use the name of God, as we should do, quhen we make true and faithful
inuocatioun to his name, prayand to him deuotely for his grace, yat we may
ordayn all our thochtis, wordis and deidis to his godly plesour, and that he
wald deliver us fra all our aduersareis according to his plesour.

This is ye true service quhilk God requi^is of us, that we lippin nocht in our
awin powar, wisdom, and g^dnes, bot only in the powar* wisdom, and gudnes
of God euirmair calling for his grace to be with us in all our deidis, quhilk
gyf we do, we sall suerly be sai^fit, according to ye promis of God maid in the
secund of Iohel: Omnis qui inuocauerit nomen Domini, Ioh^l. 2.
saluus erit. Quhasaeuir sall call upon the name of our Lord God, sal be
saiffit.

The fifth point, quharin standis the rycht keeping of yis command, is (quhen
necessite requiris) to sweis lau^hfully be the name of God, according as it is
wri^tin: Deuteronomy. 6.
Dominum deum tuum timebis, et illi sol^ ser^^es et per nomen illius iurabis.
Thou sall ^ei^ thy Lord God and him only (as God) sal thou serve, and be his
name thou sall sweir. Heir it is expedient to schaw quhat is sweiring. and
quhow money verteous conditionis ar requi^it to lauchful sw^i^ing?

As conce^ning the first: Sweiring is nocht else bot inuocatioun or calling on
God to beir witness to us, that our wordis ar true, quhen we a^fe^me any thing
to be true, or that we sall fulfill ou^ promis. For as sanct Augustine sais: it
is all ane thing to say, be God, and to say, God is my wytnes. Secund, quhow
many verteous conditionis ar requirit to ane lauchfull eith? Three, quhilk ar
plainly expremit in the fourt of Jeremy: Iere. 4.
Et iurabis: v^ui^ dominus, in veritate, et in iudicio, and in iustitia. Thou
sal sweir, the Lord le^ffis (that is to say, as true as the Lord lei^fis) in
verite, judgment, and rychteousnes.

The first conditioun requirit to ane lauchfull eith is verite or truth. Thou
should be sikkar that the cause or matter quhilk thou confermis with ane eith is
true. The secund conditioun is rychteousnes. Thou should be sykkar yat the thing
quhilk thou ^ais is just, or yat, quhilk you promi^is to do with ane eith, may
be justly and lauchfully done. The third conditioun is judgment (that is to
say) discretioun For thou should nocht sweir at all times nor for all matteris,
suppose thai be true and just, bot allanerlie quhen greit neid requiris, and
thane with greit deliberatioun, discretion, and auisement. Gyf thou wantis any
of their three conditionis, thy eith is vnlauchful, and (as sanct Heirome sais)
plain perjury or meinsweiring. When thou sweris with out verite, thou makis
ane falls eith. Agane, quhe^ thou sweiris without rychteousnes, thou makis ane
unjust and wi^kit eith. When thou sweiris hastily without the judgment of
discretioun, thou makis ane vain and fulehardie eith. And ^a doand three manner
of wayis you brekis this command ta^ and the name of God in vain. And this
doctrine is conform to the expositioun of this command, quhilk our saluiour
giffis in ye euangil, sayand thus: Math. v.
Audistis quia dictu^ est antiquis, no^ periurabis, reddes autem dn^o iuramenta
tua. Ego autem dico vobis, no^ iurare omnino, nec per coelum, quia thronus dei
est, neque per terram, quia scabellum est pedum eius, neque per hierosolima^,
quia ciuitas est magni regis, neque per caput tuum iuraueris, quia non potes
vnu^ capillum album facere aut nigrum. Sit aute^ sermo vester est est, non non,
quod autem his abundantiu^ est. a malo est. e haif hard quhow it was said to
them of auld time, thou sal nocht forsweir thy self, bot sall perform thy
^ith to God: bot I say to ow, sweir nocht alutterly (that is to say, sweir
nocht without verite, rychteousnes and discretioun as is aforesaid) another be
heuin, for it is goddis sei^, nor it be ye erd, for it is his futstule, another
be Jerusalem for it is the city of ye greit king, another sall thou sweir be
thy heid, because thou can nocht make ane hair quhyt or black. Bot our talking
sal be, e e, na na, for quhat^uir is mair thane this, that cummis of evil.
Qu^ilk should be understand swa, yat nochtheles quhen my nychbouris neid or
profit requiris and the Judge biddis me sweir ye verite, (...) God.
I may sweir lesumlie thane, for that is nocht to tak the name o^ God in vain,
bot to haif it in greit price, and as may halie, quhen ye verite and rycht is
confermit be it, the lesing is confoundit, men is brocht to peace and rest,
obediens aucht to the Iugis, and hear auctoriteis is completit, ye pley
ceissit, Sanct Paul swair often times in his Epistils, Roma. i.
to conferme the verite, saying thus: Testis enim mihi est deus. God is my
witness, or I tak God to witness.

The xii. Cheptour.
Brekaris of the secund command.
QVha brekis the secund command? Thai yat sweris be the name of god fulehardie,
nocht taking tent of ane evil use, thai yat sueris ane lesing, mainsueris yame
self, wariis, bannis and widdillis their saul, to excuse yair fault, or for
any vain matter. Thai that brekis their eith or vow, quhilk was wisely maid,
and mycht be kepit to the loving of God. And that that sweiris lesum marriage
amang yame self and keipis it nocht, ar mainsworne and brekis this command.
Thai that vowis and oblissis their self be ane eith, to any vnlesu^ evil thing.
Thai that tellis their awin fantaseis for Goddis word, or takis Goddis word to
conferme their falls teching or heresy with all. Thai that luffes nocht and
louis nocht the name of God for all thing, both in prosperity and aduersite.
Thai yata^u^^s the name of god to coungeir ye devil be inch^mentis, be express
or private pactio^is with him or waittis on siclike or any of the laif of the
abusis of the name of god, and mendis them nocht to their powar. Thai that
will nocht chasteis or snibe yair barnis fra lesingis, sweiring, banning and
widling, and techis them nocht to lofe GOD and thank him at al times, nocht
allanerly for meit or clayth or temporal geir, bot for all gudnes in saul and
body, and will nocht teache them to call upon the name of God in all
necessiteis and perillis, to defend them fra all their enemeis. For their is
na thing that d^plesis the devil samekil and stoppis all evil, as to call upon
goddis name with faith and deuotioun. Finally, thai brek this command, that are
in their wordis prydful, h^l^* vain glorious, thai that auantis or prysis
them self of their wisdom, rychteousnes, riches, strenth or any other thing,
ascriuand the samyn to them selfis, or yair throw dispysis yair nychtbour, as
did the pridful Pharisiane. For the quhilk and all other good, the glorious name
of God allanerlie should be louit and thankit And (yat should haif bein said first)
all thai abusis the name of God aganis the secund command, quhilk being
ouircummit with fair wordis, giftis or panis, denyis God our saluiour Christ, and
the true catholic faith of haly kirk. Alswa, thai yat with yair evil maneris,
life and conuersatioun, causis the name of Christ to be blasphemit amang ye
Infidelis. Alswa, all negligent and ignorant prelatis and personis quhilk aucht
be their office to set forth the word of God and instruck ye people quhilk
belangis to their cure and negleckis or will nocht do it, yai syne aganis this
command.

Comminatioun of panis to the breka^is of this command.
To the secund command is eikit a grievous co^minatioun of punisioun aganis all
the transgressouris of the same: Nec enim habebit dn^a insontem eum, qui
sumpferit nomen dei sui frustra. Our lord God sall nocht a count him to be ane
innocent, that is sal nocht lat him be vnpunissit, quhilk takis the name of his
Lord God in vain. The sentence of this co^minatioun is this, quhasaeuir yai
ar, quhilk abusis ye name of God, be any unjust, falls or vain eith* sal be
grievously punissit of God other in this world, or ellis in the world to cum.
And suppose their is money greit synnis committit and doine amang the people,
quhilk be the rychteous judgment of God is abil to bring upon us the greit
scurge of God, as the swerd, the post and darth, and ska^tnes of vittallis, it
vndoutandly, the abhominabil abusioun of the name of God amang all the laif, e
and appara^dlie abone all the laif, inducis and bringis upon us the vengeance
of God, and all his scurgis and plaigis. Meinsweiring, vain swering, horribil
blasphematioun of the memberis of our saluiour Christ, vnreuerent swering be
his blude, be his woundis, be his body, quhilk words ar vgsum to any good
christin man or woman to heir, nochtheles, yai ar vsit amang the people without
any sufficient repreif and punischment. Quharfor, lat every christin man and
woman, bot specially al house haldaris, tak good tent to the wordis quhilk the
Wisman sais: Ec. xxiii.
Vir multum iurans implebitur iniquitate, and no^ discedet a domo illius plaga.
The man yat is a greit swerar sal be full of wikitnes, and the plaige of god
sall nocht pas by or gang fra his house. It is expedient thairfor, that ilkane
houshaldar, first to reform him self fra al vnlauchful and vain sweiring,
syne ordand sum honest and scharp punitioun be the manner of ane law in his
house, aganis all them that hais use or custom to tak the name of God in
vain, yat thai may eschaip the plaige of God, and use ye name of God with
deuotioun and reverence, as it becummis ye seruandis of God to do.

The heretik Arrius blasphemit our saluiour Christ denyand his deuinitie, bot
he eschapit nocht the vengeance of God, for quhen he passit to the scheild to
purge his wame, al his bowallis and guttis fell down throw him, and swa deit
miserably. Cerinthus, quhilk likwayis denyit the Godheid of our saluiour, the
house quharin he was bathand and weschand him self, fell down upon him and
slew him. Rapsases, quhilk was lieutenant and chief captane of the greit oist
of the Assyrianis* he blasphemit the Lord God of Israel, for the quhilk, the
angel of God in ane nycht slew him with a hundredth fourscoir and five
thousandis of the Assyrianis army, 4. Reg. ^^
and the king of ye Assyrianis eid hayme and was slain be his awin sonnis.
Quharto should we speik mair of this matter, all the Cronickillis and histories
of ye world beiris witness, yat meinsworne men, greit sweraris, abhominabil
blasphemaris, cheapi^ neuir greit punitioun, other a gait or vthir. Sa horribil
a syn it is to abuse the halie name of our Lord. Promissis of revvardis to the
keparis of this command.
And on the other part, to know quhat greit rewardis ar promissit in the
scripture to all them quhilk kepis this command, we neid nocht to use lang
declaratioun. e hard before be the Prophet I^hel, how that saluatioun is
promissit till them* quhilk faithfully callis on the name of the Lord. And in
the first buke of the kingis it is said thus: Quicunque honorificauerit me
glorificabo eum. i. Reg. 2.
Quhasaeuir sall honor me, I sall glorify him. And the Prophet sais in the
Psalm: Psalm. ^7.
Laudan^ inuocabo dominum, et ab inimicis meis saluus er^. I will lofe and call
on the Lord and sa sal I besa^l fra my enemies. And alswa ane excellent promis
is maid in the Psalm, that quhasa sweiris to his nychbour ane lauchful eith
and begylis him nocht sall dwell in the tabernakil of our Lord, Psalm. xiiii.
and rest in his halie hill. And quhasa prayis deuotly in y^ name of Christ, he
hes ane promis maid to him, Ihon. xvi.
yat quhatsaeuir he ask of God the father eternal, it sall be grantit to him.
Now tak tent I pray ow, quhow greit good to man it is to be saiffit, to be
glorifyit, to be deliuerit fra our enemies, to dwell in ye tabernakil of God*
and to optane fra God all our petitionis, quhat can we de^yre mair? To God
thairfor be honor and glore euirmair. Amen.

The third command.
The xiii. Cheptour.
MEmento vt diem sabba^ sanctifices. etc. Remember that thou hallow the Sabbath
day. How followis this command, Theordo^ of ye third command
in ordour after ye secund and the first? As the first command techis the heart,
ye secund command ye mouth, (...) the third command techis the outwart memberis
how yai should haif yame self in ye rycht worschipping of God. Quhat is the cause
that this command begynnis with this word Remember? As experiens schawis us, we are all ouirmekil geuin to ydelnes, sweirnes and carnal lustis of ye body,
quhilk causis us to be owyr negligent in the true service of God, with our body
and membris thairof. To bring us yarfor fra yis negligens in the beginning of
this third command, God sais Remember, be nocht sweir or negligent, bot tak good
tent token and keip this command. Declaration of ye Sabbath day.
Quhat is the sabbath day, quhilk God commandis to be hallowit? This word
Sabbath day is nocht ellis bot a day of rest, and unto the Iewis it was the
seuint day of ye wouk quhilk we call Satterday, quhat day the Iewis yair self,
their barnis, seruandis and bestis should haif rest fra all bodily service or
servile labouris, quhilk seruandis mycht do or was wont to do. Ar we christin
people oblissit to keip that sabbath day with the Iewis? Quhen we spek of the
sabbath day, we should consider two thingis, The ceremony of the sabbath day.
the taken is ceremonial, ye vthir is moral. As concerning the ceremonial quhilk
was nocht ellis bot yat yai should keip yair sabbath day allanerlie upon the
seuint day of the wouk, we are nocht oblissit to keip it, for our saluiour
Christ be the merittis of his passion, hais deliuerit us al fra ye bondage of
the law of Moses, in takin quharof ye vail of the te^pil raif in pecis in time
of his passioun. Gala. 4.
And the Apostil sanct Paul repreiffis rycht scharply the Galathianis for yat,
that thai obseruit dayis and months, times and eiris after the ryt and
custom of ye Iewis. Sa we are nocht oblissit to keip ye sabbath day upon the
satterday as the Iewis did be command of the law. The morality of ye sabbath
day.
Bot as concerning ye moralite of ye sabbath day; we should keip it on the
Sundayis and vthir halie dayis commandit be the haly kirk to be kepit haly.
Quhy was ye sabbath day translatit and changeit to ye Sunday? First, The
translatioun of ye saboth dai to the Sunday.
yat we christin men should nocht be like Iewis, trowand yat the Sabbath day was
haliar thane any other day of the wouk in the awin nature, bot to christin men
all dayis should he haly. Mairouir, as the sabbath day was co^mandit to be kepit
haly, in resting fra al labouris, in remembrance of that rest quhilk God restit
the seuint day after ye creatioun of the world. Sa we christin pepil be the
ordinatioun of the Apostillis and haly kirk, keipis haly the Sunday, in the
remembrance of yat rest, quhilk our saluiour tuk in his body within the
sepulture after the wark of our redemption, quhen he deliuerit us fra the
dangier of syn, the devil, and hell, and upon the Sunday eirly in the morning,
raise potently in body and saul, owyr came the deed and began a glorious and
immortal life, quharto we hoip to cum be faith and obediens to his law.

Mairouir, Of ye spiritual and continual rest of our conscience.
it is heir to be notit yar the ceremony of the Sabbath day, quhilk the Iewis
kepit, was ane figure be ane moral significatioun of that spiritual rest,
quhilk all we christin men and women should haif in our conscience all the dayis
of our life. For that amang the Iewis, another man nor best mycht work any wark
on ye seuint day, quhilk was callit their Sabbath day, bot all tuik their
temporal and corporal rest fra all labouris, it was ane figure be ane moral
significatioun, yat christin men and women should get rest in yair conscience be
ane leiuand faith in Christ Jesus here in this world, and finally eternal rest
in the world to cum. And yat we should rest fra our awin carnal warkis, that we
should mortify our fleschlie desyris, quhilk, the mair yat thai ar mortifyit, we
haif the mair rest in our conscience. And this spiritual sabbath day should we
keip continually all the dayis of the wouke, and it is callit Judge sabbatum,
that is to say, the continual rest of our conscience, for as concerning the
spiritual rest of our conscience all dayis should be elyk. And to this spiritual
rest of our conscience Christ our saluiour callis us all sayand thus: Math. xi.
Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, et onorati estis, et ego reficiam vos.
Tollite sugum meum super vos, et discite a me quia mitis sum et humilis cord,
et inuenietis requiem animabus vestris. Iugum enim meum suaue est, et onus meum
leave. Cum to me all e that laboris and ar ladin with byrdingis, and I sall
refresche ow. Tak my ok upon ow, and leir fra me, for I am gentil and meik in
heart, and e sall find rest in our saulis, for my oik is sweit and my byrding is
lycht. Quhow should we keip the sunday haliday? Eftir yis manner, The rycht keeping
of this command.
yai yat ar all the wouke in labouris and cummis nocht, or may nocht get leif
to cum the laif of ye wouke to the kirk, on the sunday should haif rest and space
to conuein and gadder with the laif, to thank and loif God, heirand deuotly ye
divine service, and specially the hie Mes, or at the lest ane said Mes, and
alswa heir the word of God prechit gif thai may get it. Offer to god their heart
contrite as ane spiritual sacrifice, gif thai haif maid in the wouke dayis any
falt to yair nychbour, on the sunday to be reconsalit to him agane, and make him
ame^dis at yair powar, loif and thank God for all his benefitis geuin to him
generally or specially, pray to God for his grace and his mercy, for incres
of faith, hoip and cherite amang christin people. That God (gif it be his will
and godly plesour) prosper the fruitis of the ground, ceise all weris, stanche
all pestilent seiknes. Mairouir on the sunday, the father should teache his
barnis, the mastir his seruandis, to ken and feir God* to ken ye artikillis of
our faith, how yai should say their Pater noster to God, with faith and devotion,
to ken and keip the commandis of God, to forbeir all deidly synnis, thus should
thai do als mekil as thai ^an and may, according to the grace of God geuin to
yame. Furthermair, on the sunday men should rest fra bodily labouris in getting
of temporal geir, except sum greit necessite or vtilite of him self or of his
nychbour or of the commen weil, quhilk may nocht be weil postponit may excuse
them. And abone all this, all men and women with diligens, nocht only should
forbeir vice and syn on the Sunday and all other dayis, bot specially on the
sunday, should eschew all ydilnes, vain talking, bakbyting, sclandering,
blasphematioun of the name of God, and contentioun and also all occasionis of
syn, as dansyng, unnecessary drinking, wantones, lecherous sangis and
tweching, hurdome, carting and dysing, and specially carreling and wanton
synging in the kirk, and all vthi^ vice quhilk commonly hes bein may vsit on
the sunday. Agane on the sunday we should nocht only offer our heart to God, bot
alswa we should offer part of our warldly geir, be almous deid to the puir people,
euerilk man and woman mekil almous or litil, as God hes geuin to him warldly
substance. Breuelie, on the Sunday men and women should fulfill (mair thane any
other day) all the deidis of mercy and cherite to the puir.

Quha brekis yair halie day? All thai quhilk will nocht exerce and occupy them
self in their spiritual warkis before rehersit. Quha brekis their haly day.
Thai that will nocht heir the word of God, loif and thank him in company of
the christin people. Thai that will nocht thoil their seruandis to cum to ye
kirk on ye Sunday, bot kepis yame in warldly besines occupeit, for their vile
lucre in doing of their warldly erandis. Thai that cummis to the kirk and
prayis nocht nor worschippis nocht God als well with the spirit as with the
mouth and in wartlie in verite. Thai that beand in the kirk in the time of
goddis word or service, occupeis them self in vain evil or any warldly
talking, lauchhing, scorning, or any siclik doingis.

Vthir hali dayis by ye sunday
Is yair na vthir haly day bot the Sunday? is veralie, the dayis of all the
Apostillis, of ye glorious virgin Mari and other sanctis ordanit to be kepit,
and in use to be kepit be the halie kirk and hail congregatioun of christin
men, quhilk we should keip halie after the manner and form before rehersit. And
quhasa contemnis to keip them, cannocht excuse them fra syn, and breking of
this command.

How mekil almychty God detestis the tra^sgression of this third command,
Comminationis aganis the brekaris of the haly dais. Nume. xv
we may gadder of the buke of Nowmeris. Their was a certane Jew, quhilk on the
sabbath day gadderit a few stikkis, aganis the command of the law, for the
quhilk transgressioun, be the special command of God, he was s^anit to the
deed. Be this history we may understand how grievously the people synnis in
breking of the Sunday and vthir haly dayis, quhilk na dout is ane of the
special causis of the calamiteis and greit plaigis and misereis quhilk we feil
daily amang us send be the hand of God. Sa greit is the wickitnes and
miserable cowatousnes of money men that (as it apperis plainly) thai contempne
all haly dais of the kirk, thai disdein to heir the word of God, yai lychthye
all ceremoneis doin in the kirk, ordanit to steir ye people to deuotioun, yai
despise all ministaris of the same. And quha can deny, bot yat this
transgressioun of halydayis is ane grievous syn, Promissi^ of revvardis to the
keparis of the haly dais.
and is able til induce and bring upon us the wrath of God? And quha yat kepis
yair halydais, forberand temporal warkis and besynes, and exercis and occupeis
them self in fervent prayar amang the laif of the people in the house of
prayar, callit the kirk, heris or seis the Mes deuotly, heris the word of God
diligently, reconseilis them self to God and their nychbour vnfenetly,
fulfillis the dedis of mercy cheritably. Thai and siclik personis can nocht
want their reward, quhilk salbe geuin to them of God, both temporally and
eternally, according as our saluiour promissis sayand thus: Math. ^^
Querite primum regnu^ dei et iusticiam eius, et hec omnia ad^icientur vobis.
First of all seik for the kingdom of God, and the rychteousnes of the same,
and all thai thingis quhilk pertenis to our temporal leuing, salbe minister it
to ow. Na man can sufficiently expreme with tongue, quhat grace and spiritual
good a christin man gettis in diligent hering the word of God. Quhat is mair to
be de^yr^t of a christin man and woman, thane to get the giftis of faith,
compunctioun, ^emi^ioun of synnis, the haly spirit, true knawlege of God and of
th^ne awin self reconciliatioun with God and thy nychbour, piece and rest of thy
conscience, joy in the haly spirit, ye gift of true iustificatioun, and finally
eternal life. All their spiritual giftis of God a^ obtenit and gottin, be
diligent hering and leiring the word of God, praying co^tritioun, with the laif
of spiritual exercitionis, quhilk we declarit before to ow. To God thairfor be
loving and thankis, honor and glore euirmair. Amen.

Heir followis ane introductioun to the commandis of the secund tabil.
The xiiii. Cheptour.
BEcause the seuin Commandis writtin in the secund tabil techis us our dewtie
quhilk we aucht to our nychbour, declaris how we should beir us to him in our
ha^t, word and deid, before we cum to the expositioun of the same commandis, we
think it expedient to expone ye command of lufe quhilk we aw to our nychbour,
for trewly the same (...) is the ground and beginning of al good deidis, wordis
and desyris, quhilk their seuin co^mandis requiris of us towart our nychbour,
another can any man or woman be knawin to lufe their nychbour, bot only be
fulfilling of their co^mandis. Expositi^ of ye command of luf quhilk we avv to
our nychbour. Mat. xxii.
For doutles he lu^is his nychbour in deid, quhilk according to their seuin
commandis, nocht only dois na ^ayth to him, bot also dois al good to him, that
he may and should, be the directioun of their seuin commandis. As we reid in the
euangil of sanct Matthew, their came ane doctor of ye law till our saluiour,
and proponit til him a questioun, tempand him and said: Magister quod est
mandatum magnu^ in lege? Mastir, quhat is the greit command of the law? To this
question our saluiour maid answeir, rehersand two co^mandes of lufe, quharof
the taken was this. Thou sall lufe thy Lord God with all thy heart, and with all
thy saul and with all thy mind. This is the gretest and first command. And of
this command of lufe quhilk we aw to our Lord God, we maid declaratioun in the
exposition of the first command. The secund command is of the lufe quhilk we aw
till our nychbour, quhilk is this: Diliges proximum tuum, sicut teipsu^. Thou
sal lufe thy nychbour as thy self. Mat. xxii.
For the plain understanding of this command of lufe, the wordis is to be notit
quhilk sanct Paul sais to ye Romany: Qui diligit proximu^, legem impleuit.
To. xiii.
He that luffis his nychbour, fulfyllis the hail law. Gyf e merueil how a man
lu^ and his nychbour, fulfillis and kepis the hail law, meruail nocht for the
lufe of God is includit in the lufe of our nychbour. For we aw to lufe our
nychbour in God or for gods lufe, and gif we lufe him principally for any vthir
cause, we lufe him nocht sincerely and purely as we aucht to do, it followis
thane, that quhasa lu^fis their nychbour sincerely and purely, thai lufe God,
and sa thai keip the commandis contenit in ye first tabil, quhilk ordouris and
direckis us to the lufe of God. And quhasa luffis their nychbour, yai keip the
seven comma^dis writtin in ye secund tabil, quhilk ordouris and direckis us to
ye true lufe of our nychbour. Sa we may weil conclude, yat quhasaeuir luffis
their nychbour trewly, thai fulfill the hail law of moral co^mandis. And this is
well declarit be the Apostil sanct Paul, To. xiii.
sayand thus: Nam non adulterabis, non occides, non furaberis, non falsum
testimonium dices, non co^cupisces, et si quod est aliud mandatu^, in hoc verbo
instauratur. Diliges proximum ruum sicut teipsum. Thou sal nocht commit
adultery, thou sall nocht steil, thou sall nocht beir falls witness, thou sall
nocht couit any thing fra thy nychbour, and gif their be any other command it
is comprehendit in this word. Thou sall lufe thy nychbour as yi self. For, sen
lufe of our nychbour is na thing ellis, bot to will and desire good to him,
quhasaeuir luffis yair nychbour as yair self, thai do as thai wald be done to
of resone. Thai will them na skayth with their heart, thai speik na evil to
them with their mouth, thai do na skayth to them in yair deidis, bot
contrary, thai will them all the good yai can, thai spek to them and of them
good wordis, thai do them good in deid at yair powar quhen thai should do it. And
sa the word of sanct Pa^le is true, quhilk he sais, quhasa luffis their
nychbour fulfillis the law. And because that this command biddis us lufe our
nychbour as our self, we should first leir after quhat manner we should lufe our
self, to yat effeck, yat after the same manner we may lufe our nychbour. How
should we lufe our self? How should we lufe our self.
Veraly, three manner of wayis. First we ^uld lufe our self and sa our nychbour
with ane honest and halie lufe, nocht to syn or to persevere in syn, Honest and
haly lufe.
or to foster and nurisch our self or our nichbour in evil, for as the Prophet
sais in the Psalm: Psalm. ^0.
Qui diligit iniquitate^ odit anima^ suam. Quhasa luffis wikitnes or syn, he
hettis his awin saul. And euin sa sais the wisman: Qui sibi nequam est, Eccle.
xix
cui bonus erit? He that is evil to him self, to quhome can he be good? Thane it
followis weil, that another proud man, nor ireful, inuious, swear, cowatous,
licherous or gluton luffis yair awin saul, because yair lufe is nocht honest
and haly, quhilk lufe God requiris of us all, according as the eternal wisdom
of God sais be the mouth of the wisman: Ego matter pulchre dilectionis. Eccle. 24
I am the mother of fair, honest and haly lufe, quhilk is to desire ye
remissioun of synnis and grace of God, quharby our saulis may be saiffit.
According as it is writtin in the wisman:

Eccle. xxx
Miserere anime tuo placens deo. Haif mercy on thy awin saul, that thou may
pleis God. Quhai for quhasa kennis their nychbour to leif in syn, and should and
may reform him and will nocht, thai lufe noht yair nychbour with ane honest
lufe as thai should do.

Secundlie, we aucht to lufe our self and sa our nichtbour, ^evv^nd (...).
with ane affectuous and true lufe vnfenetly For quhe^ we lufe our nychbour
principally for our awin profit and plesour, and nocht to his la^chfull profit
and honest plesour, thane we lufe him nocht with ane true lufe, for than, quhen
our profit ceissis o^^ lufe ceissis, quhen our plesour quhilk we get be (...)
ceissis, thane incontinent we ceis to lufe him. (...) siclike ane lufe it is
writtin in the buke of the ^i^m^n. Eccle. vi.
^st an^cus socius mense, et no^ perman^bit in ^ie necessitatis. The wisman
sais, yat yair is ane and quhilk will beir us company at our bu^de, to tak part
of our meit, bot he will nocht bide with us in time of our need. And ye world
(alace thairfor) is full of siclike luffaris, quhairfor christin m^, leir to
lufe thy ny^hbour as thy self trewly and vnfenetly. That is to say, as thou
luffis thy awin self at all time both in prosperity and aduersite. Sa thou
auht to lufe thy nychbour with perseverance, according as the wisman sais
speikand of a true friend: Pro. xvii*
Omni te^pore diligit qui amicus est and frate^ in angustiis comprobatur. He
that is a friend luffis at al times, and a brother is knawin in time of trubil.
Alswa thou should leir to lufe him effec^uously, nocht with fair wordis
allanerly, bot with word and deid bayth, i. Ihon. iii
according as S. Ihon sais: Non diligamus verbo neque lingua, s^d opere et
veritate. Let us nocht lufe our nychbour allanerly with word and tongue bot with
deid and verite. To quhom agreis sanct Paul sayand: Dilectio sine s^m ^lat^one.
Roma. xii
Lat ou^ lufe be without dissimulatioun or fenetnes. Thairfor all thai quhilk
luffis yair nychbour allanerly in time of their prosperity and nocht in time of
their aduersite, Co^ an^ (...)
or allanerly sa lang as thai get profit be them, or allanerly with yair word
and nocht with their deid at yair powar, thai lufe nocht trewly their nychbour
as them self. Of quhom the Prophet ^ais in the P^alme: L^quuntur pacem c^m
proximo suo, mala autem in cordibus eorum. Psalm. ^
Thai speik peace with their nychbour, bot mekil evil r^manis in yair hartis.
Thridly, The (...) Can^.
we should lu^ ou^ nychbour as our self with just ordour, quhairof it is writ^in:
Ordinauit in me charitatem. God almychty our heuinly spouse, hais ordanit true
lufe in me. And be the just ordour of lufe, we should lufe God above ourself, and
our nychbour as our self, and our warldly gei^ under our self. Thairfore quha
luffis yame self yair nychbour or yair warldly geir above God or mair thane
God, sa that for ye lufe of them self, their nychbour or yair geir, thai cure
no^ht to brek ye command of God, ^ai lufe nocht them self or yair nychbour
with ane just ordour of cherite. Quhairfor our saluiour sais: Math. x.
Qui amar patrem aut matrem plusquam me non est me dignus, ^t qui amat filiu^
aut filia^ super me non est me dignus. He yat luffis his father or mother mai^
tha^e me, he is nocht worthy of me. And he yat luffis his sone or his dochter
above me, he is nocht worthy of me. That is to say, gif the case fortune yat
other thou moan displese thy father or thy mother, thy sone or thy dochter, or
any vthir friend or nychbour, or else you moan displese God, be breking of his
command, sa that thou can nocht bayth plese God and them to gidder at yat
time, thane in this case you should keip the ordour of cherite, and era^ displese
all the freindis thou hes, than that thou should brek ane command of God and sa
displese him. Or gif any of yame wald inty^^ counsel, and draw the to any
vnlesum thing, in sa mekill that gif thou do nocht yair counsel and bidding,
thou fall tyne their favor. In this case cure nocht to tyne their favor, that
thou may haif the favor of God, and sa deand you luffis God above thy
nychbour. Mairouir, gif any man or woman wald counsel or command ye to do any
thing, express agane the command of God, and that under na les pain than
tinsal of all thy warldly geir and landis, e and of thy life, quhilk is derast
to the of all the laif. In this case thou should ^heis to tyne thy life and all
thy geir, erar thane to brek ane command of God, and sa doand, thou luffis God
above thy self according to the dew ordour of Cherite.

The xv. Cheptour.
Quha is our nychbour.
QVhen almychty God sais, lufe thy nychbour as yi self, we should leir to know
quha is our nychbour, quharin the Iewis and also money christin men and women ar
begilit, understanding the command of God in ane wrang sense, think and that na
man is their nychbour, bot thai allanerlie, quhilk ar their carnal and warldly
frendis, yair awin cuntremen, or yai ye dwellis neir hand them. Luce. x.
Bot our saluiour techis in the parabil or similitude quhilk he gaif of ye
wou^dit man yat lay in the hie way, betuix Jerusalem and Hierico half deed half
quik, yat ilk a man is to eueryman a nychbour, quhilk other hais* mercy of ane
vthir, or ellis to quhom another man ma haif mercy. That is to say, al men and
weme^ may be callit my nychbours, quhilk hais mister of my help, and al men and
women may be callit my nychbouris, quhilk may help me, sa all men is nychbour
til every man. For ye Samaritane, suppose he was of ane strange cuntre, and
comptit amangis ye Iewis as ane enemy, it because he come by the woundit Jew
seand him, had compacience on him and helpit him, he was his true nychbour.
Quhairfor, quhen God biddis the lufe thy nychbour as thy self, you should
understand by this word nychbour, all men and women, quhiddir thai dwell neir
hand or far of.

Mairouir, Of ye lufe quhilk we avv to ou^ enemy.
the Iewis understood the same command in ane wrang sense (and lykwais dois
money christin men and women) trowand yat yai should allanerly lufe their friend,
and yat thai may lauchfully het their enemy. Bot our saluiour Christ in the
euangil giffis the true understanding of the same command, techand plainly, and
swa geuand command to lufe bayth friend and fa. Their ar his wordis: Audistis
quia dictum est, Math. 5.
diliges proximum tuum and odio habebis inimicu^ tuum. Ego autem dico vobis
diligite inimicos vestros, benefacite his qui oderu^t vos, et orate pro
persequentibus et calumniantibus vos, vt sitis filii patris vestri qui in
coelis est, qui sole^ suum oriri facit, super bonos et malos, et pluit super
iustos et iniustos. Si enim diligitis eos qui vos diligunt, quam mercedem
habebitis? Nonne et publicam hoc faciunt? Et si salutaueritis fr^es vestros
tantum, quid amplius facitis? Nonne et publicani ho^ faciunt? Estote ergo vos
perfecti, sicut et pater v^ster celestis perfectus est. e haif hard how it was
said: Thou sall lufe thy nychbour and het thine enemy. Bot I say to ow, lufe
our ennemeis; bliss them that curssis ow, do good to them that hettis ow pray
for yame quhilk dois ow wrang and persecutis ow, that e may be the sonnis of
our father quhilk is in heuin, for he causis his son to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendis his rain on the just and unjust. For gif e lufe yame
(allanerly) yat luffis ow, quhat reward sal e haif? dois noch^ the Publicanis
eum sa? And gif e be freindly to our freindes only, quhat singlar thing do e?
dois nocht the Publicanis alswa siclik wais? e sall thairfor be perfect, eum as
our father in heuin is perfect. In their wordis of our saluiour we may understand
that quhasa hettis bot ane man in all the world, Quhasa he^tis ane man, luffis
na man ch^ritablie.
he luffis na man in all ye world, with the lufe of cherite and meritoriously to
the plesour of God, suppose he may lufe yame with anewarldly or natural lufe.
And quhy? For Cherite is excludit and put away fra ye saul of man be ane
deidly syn, than it followis weil, that gif thou beir hettred at any man,
quhatsumeuir he be, friend or fa, nychbour or strangar, thou hais na cherite,
and hai^ and na cherite, thou art in the stait of dampnatioun, according as ye
Apostil sanct Ihon techis: Qui odit fratrem suum, i. Ihon. ii
in tenebris est. He that hettis his brother, he is in myrknes. And gyf any man
wald lay agains this doctrine, allegging that certane sanctis in ald time
hettit yair enemeis, exemple of the h^ly Prophet and excellent king David,
quhilk sais thus of himself: Perfecto odio oderam illos, inimici facti sun^
mihi. Psalm. 138.
I hettit them (sais he) with ane perfect hettrend be cause thai war mine
enemeis. Allwa our saluiour sais in the euangil of sanct Luke: Luce. xiiii
Si quis non odit patrem suum et matrem suam et vxorem etc. Qhasa hettis nocht
his father and his mother etc. Of the quhilk wordis an vnlei^it person mycht
gaddir, that it war lesum to het our enemeis. To the quhilk obiectioun we make
this answeir. That in all our deidis of lufe sa mekil as we may, we should follow
the exemple of God, according to the teching of sanct Paul: Estote imitatores
dei, Ephe. 5.
sicut filii charissimi. Be e followaris of God as deir sonnis. Lufe thy
nychbori^ person, and het his evil co^ditionis. Sapi. xi.^^


Now we find in the haly writ, yat God almychty luffis and hettis. Quhat luffis
God? Trewly the nature, or the person quhilk he hais maid, according as the
wilman sais in the buke of Wisdom: Diligis omnia que sunt, et nihil odisti
eorum que fecisti. Thou luffis all thingis that is, and hettis na thing that
thou hais maid.

Quhat hettis God? Veraily, God hettis al vic^ and syn, quhilk is nocht maid be
the command of God, bot allanerly it is maid be the peruersit will of evil
angellis and evil men and women. Thus the prophet sais, Psalm. 5.
spekand of God: Odisti omnes qui opera^tur iniquitatem. O Lord sais he, thou
hes hettit all yame quhilk wirkis wickitnes and dois evil. Thus tharfor we
aucht to do to all men and women, lufe their person with cherite, and also in
all men and women we should het their vice and their syn, with all their evil
conditionis, and help with all our diligence to bring them fra vice to vertew,
fra syne to grace, yat sa we may lufe bayth them self and their good
conditionis. Quhat thingis modis a mito lufe his nychbo^r.
Now after yat e know how e aucht to lufe our nychbour, and quha is our
nychbour, e should often tymis considdir thai thingis quhilk specially mouis
christin men and women to lufe their nychbour with the true lufe of Cherite.
Quhairof the first motive is, the lufe quhilk we haif to God, for quhasa luffis
hartelie yair lord God above all thing, the same lufe moan neidis steir them
to lufe their nychbour. And as sanct Ihon the evangelist sais: i. Ihon. 4
Si quis dixerit, qu^nia^ diligo deum et fratrem suum odit mandax est. Gyf any
man will say I lufe God, and ^ettis his nychbour, he is ane le^^. And (...) is
nocht possible that a man or woman lufe God, do the same man sall lufe his
nychbour, n^ther may a man lufe his nychbour, b^t also h^ sall lufe his God, sa
mekil is the lufe of God and our nychbour fessinit and linkit togiddir, yat the
taken lufe can nocht be had without the the other. Exemple, gif a man wald say, yat
he luffis the king, and it hertis the kingis sone, or the kingis members, he
may well be callit ane lear. Now al true christin men ar sonnis of God be
adoptioun, and spiritual me^beris of the mistik body of our saluiour Christ.
Quhairfor it is nocht possibil yat a man quhilk hettis his nychbour, may lufe
God sa lang as he hettis his nychbour. The secund thing quhilk should mo^e us to
lufe our nychbour, is ye special command of our saluiour, quhilk a litil before
his departing fra this world be his passioun, amang all vthir co^mandis, in
special gaif to his discipillis the command of lufe, sayand: Hoc est preceptu^
meum, vt diligatis inuicem, Ihon. xv.
sicut dilexi vos. This is my command yat e lufe ane ane vthir, as Ihaif luffit
ow. Mairouir, the special sign and takin quhairby a christin man or woman is
knawin to be Christis disciple, is gif yai lufe ane ane vthir according as he
sais him self: In hoc cognoscent omnes quia discipuli mei estis si dilectionem
habaeritis a dinuicem. Ihon. xiii.
Be this may al men ken yat e ar my disciples, gif e haif lufe ane till ane
vthir. Tak tent, he sais nocht, and e cause blind men to see, and e caus^ deif
men to heir, and e ca^ raise up deid me^ to life agane. Bot ye true and special
takin, to know ou to be my disciples, is gif e haif lufe and cherite ane til
ane vthir Quhairfor christin man lufe thy nychbour, not tharby you may schaw thy
self to be a true christin man.

The third, is communication or participatioun o^ our nature, Eccle. xiii
for as it is said be the wisman: Omn^ animal diligit sibi simile. Ilk a best
naturally luffis the best, that is lyk to the self in nature. Now sen we are al
lik ane til ane vthir, in our nature, al being maid be ane god, to his awin
propir image and liknes, it followis, that quhasaeuir luffis nocht his
nychbour, nocht only is a brekar of ye law of God geuin to Moses and ratifeit
be our saluiour, bot also he is a brekar of the law of nature, quhilk God hais
prentit in ye hartis of all men and women.

Now their for christin people we exhort ow to tak good tent to the declaration
of the seuin commandis contenit in the secund tabil, quhilk is geuin to ow of
God him self, to ordour ow and direk ow in the true lufe of our nychbour,
quhilk eui^mair e aw to haif towa^t him, in our deidis, wordis, and in our
hartis.

The xvi. Cheptour.
The secund tabil of Moses contenis vii. commandis, quhilk techis us how we
should beir us to our nychbour, of the quhilk the first command and fourt in
nowmer is this.
HOnora patrem tuum et matre^ tua^, vt si^ long^uus super terram, qua^ dn^s
deus tuus dabit tibi. Exo. xx. Honor thy father and mother, tha^ thou may haif
lang life and good dais upon the e^d, quhilk thy lord God sall gyf to the.

Quhat is the ordour of the fourt command? As the three commandis of the first
tabil orda^ns us to do our dewtie to almychty God our heuinly father, The
ordour of ^e fourt command.
tech^^d us how we should serve him with our hartis, our wordis and outwart
deidis, sa be convenient ordour followis the fourt command, quhilk gi^fis
instructioun how we should do our dewtie till our parentis fatheris and motheris
and eldaris heir in this world, quhilk be the ordinatioun of God hais reule and
governance ouir us in gods stead, and tharfor ni^t eftir God and above all
other nychbou^is we aw to them honor and obediens. Quhow money manner of
fatheris ar schawin in the haly scripture? Three. The first is our natural
father and mother, Three manner of fatheris, natural, spiritual and temporal.
Eccle. iii.
quhilk be the benefit of GOD brocht us into this world. And of this natural
father and mother, this command is specially geuin. Of quhom it is writtin: Qui
timet dominum honorat parents, and quasi dn^is seruiet his qui se genuerunt.
He that feiris GOD, honouris his father and mother, and will be content to make
service to them quhilk hais brocht him to this world. The secund fatheris ar
thai quhilk hais cure and charge of our saulis, as byschoppis and personis,
quhilk be their office, should, be the seid of gods word, beget us to the faith
of Christ, syne nurisch and bring us up to the perfectioun of a christian life,
and their ar callit spiritual fatheris. Sa the Apostil said to the Corinthianis:
No^ vt confunda^ vos hec scribo, sed vt filios meos charissimos moneo. i. Cor.
4.
I writ nocht yis to schame ow bot as modeir children I warn ow. For suppose e
haif ten thousand instructouris in Christ, it haif e nocht money fatheris, for I
haif begottin ow in Christ Jesus throch the Euangil. And to the Galathianis he
sais thus: Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio, donec formetur Christus in vobis.
Gala. 4.
My litil children of quhom I travel in birth agane, quhil Christ be formit and
fassionit in ow. The third father is all civil magistratis, yat is, al kingis,
princis and temporal reularis of our common weil, quhilk in auld time amang the
Romany was wont to be callit patres patrie, fatheris of ye cuntre. And sa we
reid that quhen a certane prince of Siria callit Naaman, 4. Reg. 5.
came to the Prophet Helyseus to be curit fra his lyppir, his serua^dis callit
him father, saying: Father, gyf the Prophet had said to the a greit mattir,
thou should haif done it. Of ye obedie^^ (...) our natural fatheris.
And schortly all thai that hais cure and charge ouir us under God, generally
may be callit our fatheris, forsamekil that thai should reule us in yair office,
with siclike favor and diligence as the natural father reulis his sone. To
quhome also we should gife honor, service, and obediens as the sone dois to the
father: collo. iii.
Filii obedi^e par^tibus per omnia, hoc enim placitum est domino. Barnis (sais
sanct Paul) obey our father and mother in all pointis, for this is Gods
command. Ephe. 6.
Et vos patres, nelite ad iracundia^ prouocare filios vestros, sed educate
illos in disciplina, et correptione domini. Of honor, obediens, and provision
detti^ til our spiritual fatheris. 1. Timo. 5.
Fatheris provoke noch^ our barnis to crabitnes, bot foster them and teache
them in the dredour of God. Qui been pre sunt presbyteri, duplici honor digni
habeantur, maxim qui laborant in verbo et doctrina. Dicit enim scriptura: non
alligabis os boui trituranti. Et dignus est operarius mercede sua. The priestis
yat reule weil ar worthi of doubil honor, may of all yai yat labouris in the
word of God and teching: for the scripture sais thou sal nocht bind up the
mouth of the Ox that trampis out the corn quhilk was their thresching. And it
is all a thing to say the labourar is worthi of his wagis. Gala. vl^i. Of honor
and obediens dettit till our temporal fatheris.
Communicet autem is qui catechizatur verbo, ei qui se catechizat in oibus
bonis. Lat him yat is techit in the word, minister to him qhuilk techis him in
all good thingis. Serui obedite dominis carnalibus, cum timore et tremore, in
simplicitate cordis vestri sicut Christo, non ad oculu^ seruientes, quasi
hominibus place^tes, sed vt serui Christi, facientes voluntatem dei ex animo,
cum bona voluntate seruientes sicut domino et non hominibus. Ephe. 6.
Seruandis (sais sanct Paul) obey carnal masteris with dredour and reverence,
with a simple heart as to Christ, nocht allanerly to make service to the Ge sycht
for mennis plesour, bot as the seruandis of Christ, doand the will of God fra
the heart with good will euin thinkand as e should serve God. Et vos domini, eadem
facite illis, remit tents minas, scientes quod et illorum et vester dn^s est
in coelis, et personarum acceptio non est apud deum. And e masteris do siclik
to them, Ephe. 6.
be nocht rygorous and bitter to them, knawand weil that our Lord is in heuin,
to quhome all men is lyk in price and all bocht with ane blud of Christ. Omnis
anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit, Roma xiii
no^ est enim potestas nisi a deo, que autem sunt, a deo ordinare sunt. Itaque
qui resistit potestati, dei ordinationi resistit. Euereilk man submit him self
(sais S. Paul) to ye authority of hear powaris, for their is na powar bot of
God, and quha resistis to the powar, resistis to Goddis ordinance. And gif e
wald speir, to quhat powar should I obey? He answeris, to his powar quha beris
the sweird to punis misdoaris, as the officiar of God. ^. Peter. 2
Subiecti igitur estote omni humane creature propter dominum, sieve regi, quasi
precellenti, sieve ducibus tanqua^ ab eo missis ad vindicta^ malefactorum,
laudem vero bonorum. Submit our self to all ordinance of the temporal powar,
quhiddir it be to the king as to the principal, or to the princis and lordis,
as them that are deput be him. Reddite ergo omnibus debita, Roma xiii
cui tributum, tributum, cui vectigal, vectigal, cui timorem, timore^, cui
honorem, honorem. Nemini quicqua^ debeati^ nisi vt inuicem diligatis. Gyf to
all men quhat e a^ awand to them, tribute to quhome it belangis to, custom to
the customaris, reverence, dredour and honor to quhome e ar haldin. Be awand
na thing, bot euereilk man to lufe ane ane other amang our self.

Of obediens dettit til our prelati^.
And of the obediens dettit to be giffin to our spiritual reularis and
prechoris, it is commandit in the Epistil unto the Hebrewis: Obedi^e prepositis
vestris and subiacete eis, ipsi enim peruigila^t quasi rationem pro animabus
vestris reddituri, vt cum gaudio hoc faciant, et non gementes, hoc enim non
expedit vobis. Hebre. x^^
Obey them that hais the reule ouir ou, and submit our self to yame, for thai
walk for our saulis, euin as thai that moan gif a count thairfor. That thai may
do it with joy and nocht with grief. Schortly, this command techis a man how he
should beir him to all men quhilk hais powar ouir him under GOD, as father and
mother, master and hussye, the temporal powar and the spiritual. Quhat is the
rycht keeping of this command? The rycht keeping of this command.
To lufe with thy heart thy father and thy mother, honor them, obey them,
gife them part of thy temporal guddis gif thou hais and thai mistir, e make
them service, gif thai mister for eild or seiknes, schortly, help yame with
thy counsel, consolatioun, service of thy body, and sustentatioun with thy
geir quhensaeuir thai mister. And to honor, obey and supply thy spiritual
father, specially the true minister of the word of God, as we haif schawin
before be S. Paul. Do reverence and true service to yi master, and all them
that giffis the wage. To obey the temporal powar, Kingis, Lordis, Schirriffis,
Prouostis, Baleis, do them reverence and murmur them nocht.

Quha brekis this command? Quha br^kis this command
Thai brek this command, first, that thinkis schame of their natural father and
mother for their poverty, seiknes or mischance. Thai that denies yair
necessary sustentatioun to them of meit and cleyth or harborye in time of
their mister. Bot may of all, thai brek this command quhilk bannis them,
puttis ha^dis into them, bakbytes them, hettis yame, and obeyes them nocht.
Alsua thai that tholis nocht their father and mother, suppose thai do yame
iniuris and be cummersum. Secund, quha honouris nocht and obeyis nocht yair
spiritual heddis, prelatis and pastoris, and will nocht pay their teyndis and
dewteis as thai ar oblissit be the law. Thridly, thai that honouris nocht the
temporal powar, or their awin masteris, quha fulfillis nocht yair co^mandis
faithfully or obeyis yame nocht, suppose yai be evil and thrawart, quhene thai
command na thing aganis Gods command and haly kirk. Thai that makis seditioun
agane their prince, reulmen or reular, or that risis or causis vthir rise
aganis their heidmen, quhasa is false or negligent to do yair bidding and will
nocht obey them with true service, all yai and siclik personis brekkis this
command.

punissioun of the brekaris of ye fourt command. Deuteronomy. xxi. 2. Reg. 16 and.17.
Now we will declare to ow, how the transgressouris of this fourt command ar
punissit, and how the keparis ar rewardit of God. We reid in the auld law, that
the sone quhilk was inobedient, stifhartit and thrawart to his father and
mother, was led to ye port or place of judgment, and be the people was stanit to
the deid. We reid in the buke of the kingis, that Absalon maid seditioun aganis
his awin father king David, quharfor he fled in battle, and in his fleing his
hair fessinit about a stark brance of ane A^k^tre, his Mule eid away fra under
him, and swa he was hangit be his awin hair, and before he deit he was strikin
throw the heart with three pickes or speiris, be the handis of Ioab ane of the
principal captanis of king Dauidis weirris, and sa deit a miserable deid.
Secund, quhasa co^temnis to be obedient to their true and lauchful spiritual
fatheris, prelatis and pastoris of ye kirk, can nocht eschew the punissioun of
God, because that the contemptioun of them is the contemptioun of our saluiour
Christ that ordanit them. Heir quhat he sais to yame: Qui vos spernit, me
spernit. Luce. x.
Quha yat dispysis ow, thai despise me. Chorie, Dathan and Abiron rebellit
aganis Moses and Aaron, Nume. 1^
dispysand to obey yair authority, quhairfor the erd oppinnit and swellit
them, and sa leiuand eid to hell. That terribil vengeance quhilk god tuk on
yame, and sua was writtin for our instructioun, should move and warn all men and
women to honor and obey yair superiouris and reularis, and to abstein fra
scorning, dispysing and rebellioun aganis them.

Thridly, quhat punissioun is ordanit for them quhilk will nocht be obedient
to their temporal fatheris, that is to say, to the king and his Iugis and
officearis, it is plainly declarit be sanct Paul to the Romany, sayand: Roma
xiii
That quhasaeuir resistis the authority of the king, he resistis the
ordinatioun of God. And thai that resistis sall resaif to them self
damnatioun. For reularis ar nocht to be feirit for good warkis, bot for evil,
gyf thou wald be without ^eir of the authority, do well thane, and thou sall
haif commendatioun of the same, for he is ye minister of God for thy weil. Bot
and gif thou do evil, than feir, for he beiris not the sweirde for nocht, for
he is the minister of God, and takar of vengeance to punis them that dois
evil, quhan for e moan neidis obey, nocht only for punischment, bot also
because of conscience, mening that it is deidly syn to rebel or disobey ye
lauchfull auctorite and leful command of ye king and his officiaris. And as for
the reward of them quhilk kepis this command, Promis of revvard maid to the
kepars of this fourt command.
it is plainly promissit in the end of the same command, in their wordis: Et
eris longeuus super terram. Thou sall haif lang life upon the erd. It is ane
convenient reward, that yai may haif la^g life quhilk dois yair dewtie to their
father and mother, quhilk under God giffis to them their life. And be the
promis of lang life, understand nocht only to leiue money dais, bot also
understand peace, tranquilite, prosperity, abundance, or at the lest
sufficient leiuing and sustentatioun in all thai thingis quhilk ar necessary to
the mantening of this life, without the quhilk, lang life is nocht plesand, bot
erar painful and displesand. And this lang life is commonly giffin to all
them that dewlie honouris their father and their mother. Nochtheles, sum time
God almychty for sum causis sein to him expedient, giffis to good barnis bot
schort dais, and that for their weil, suppose it is unknown til us. According
as it is writtin in the buke of wisdom: Sepi. 4.
Raptus est ne malicia mutares intellectum eius. The just man was takin away
fra this life, that malicious or evil men should nocht alter or change his mind
fra God be violent tormentationis. Bot trewlie we that are christin people should
may of all considder, lufe and desire the lang life promissit till us, in the
kingdom of heuin, quhilk the haly Prophet callis the land of life, sayand:
Psalm. 26.
Credo videre bona dn^i, in terra viuentium. I trow (sais he) to se the gudnes
of the Lord, in the land of leuing men. For doutles this present world may weil
be callit the land of dead, bot the world to cum, quhilk salbe in the kingdom
of heuin, should only be callit the land of life, quhair their is life, and neuir
dead. Thus good people, e may be sickir that God will punis the transgressouris
of this command, and largely reward all the keparis of the same. To him
thairfore be honor and tha^kis, loving and gloir for euir and euir. Amen.

The fifth command.
The xvii. Cheptour.
NOn occides. The ordour of the fifth command
Thou sal nocht commit slauchter. Quhat is the ordour of the fifth command? The
man that is content to do his dewtie to God and them that are his reularis
under God, may esely be counsellit to do his dewtie to al his nychbouris. And
be ye contrary he is ready to do skayth to his nychbour quhilk another feiris
God nor man in Gods stead. Thairfor be just ordour after ye three first
commandis, quhilk biddis us do our dewtie to God, and after the fourt command
quhilk biddis us do our dewtie til our fatheris in Goddis stead, followis the
laif of the commandis, quhilk ar six in nowmer, and giffis till us instructioun
how we should ordour our self till our nychbour, in deid, word, and desire of
heart. And because that till our nychbour na temporal or erdly thing is darrar
and mair precious yane is his awin bodylie life, in this fifth command God
almychty forbiddis us to do any skayth till our nychbour in his person,
quharby we may hurt his bodylie life. Quhat is the true exposioun of yis
command? The expositioun of Christ maid to the fifth command Math. 5.
Our heuinly master and saluiour Christ Jesus exponis this command in the
euangil of sanct Matthew on this manner: Audistis quia dictum est anti quis: non
occides. Qui autem occiderit reus erit iudicio. Ego autem dico vobis quia omnis
qui irascitur fratri suo reus erit iudicio. Qui aute^ dixerit fratri suo racha,
reus erit concilio. Qui autem dixerit fatue, reus erit gehe^ne ignis. e haif
hard how it was said to yame of auld time: Thou sall nocht commit slauchter.
For he that slais sal be guilty of the judgment. Bot I say to ow, quhasaeuir
hais hettrent at his brother salbe guilty and in dangeir of the judgment. And
quhasaeuir sais to his brother racha (that is ane lythleful crabit word) he is
guilty and in dangeir of the counsel. And quhasaeuir sais to his brother
fuile, he salbe guilty and in dangeir of the fire of hell. In their wordis our
saluiour techis that the law of God is spiritual. For to fulfill this command:
That the law of Godis spiritual.
thou sall nocht slay or commit slauchter, it is nocht yneuch to keip thy handis
or outwart members fra ^a^ing of any person, bot in yis command a^sua, God
requiris yat thou keip thy mind or thy heart fra al vnlauchfull wraith and
crabitnes, Of vnlauchful crabitnes.
mairatour fra malice and hettred quhilk is the first beginning and occasioun
of all vnlauchful slauchter and vthir hurtis done to our nychbour. Their for he
sais, quhasaeuir is angry at his brother, is guilty in the judgment of God,
according as sanct Ihone sais: i. Joan. iii.
Omnis qui odit fratrem suum homicida est. He that hettis his brother is ane
ma^slaar. Understand in ye judgment of God quhilk seis the heart and the will of
man, and iugis after the samyn. Quhy sais he, quhasa is a^gry at his brother?
It is weil sperit, for it is nocht all ane thing to be crabit at thy brother,
and to be crabit at thy brotheris fault. The first is euirmair vnlauchfull, for
be the command of cheritie we should lufe our nychbour (quhilk is our brother in
Christ) as our self. That is to say, to will and desire als weil good to him in
body and saul as we will and desire to our self. Sa we should nocht be crabit
at ye nature or person of our brother. Of lauchful crabit^es.
Bot it is nocht aganis ye command of God to be crabit agane the falt of our
brother. For we should quhen neid is, angirly repreue the falt of our nychbour,
quhilk gif we do for his instructioun, just correctioun and amendment, it is na
syn, bot a co^mendit vertew, specially to al yame that hes cure and charge of
any other, according as it is said in the Psalm: Psalm. 4.
Irascimini et nolite peccare. Be crabit and syn nocht. And the same Prophet
sais: Psalm. 118.
Iniquos odio habui. I haif hettit the wickit men. Without this halie crabitnes
another can judgment stand, nor vertew incres, nor synnis be refrenit, as sais
the doctor Chrysostom. The rycht keeping of this command.
Tell us thane the rycht keeping of this command. Almychty God in all commandis
negative includis ane affirmative, that is, quhene God forbiddis syn, in ye
same command he biddis us haif the vertewis quhilk ar contrary to the same
forbiddin syn. Sa in yis command quhen he forbiddis slauchter and all
occasionis of the same, as hettrent of the heart, indignatioun of ye voce
signifyit be Racha, manifest injurious wordis signifyit be this word fuile, he
biddis us be pacient, meik and sweit, kind and merciful nocht to hald in our
mind hettred, inuye, nor it to foster it onyway agane our enemeis, another to
hurt yame in body or saul be word or deid, art, part or counsel, bot to help
and deliver our nychbour be word and deid, fra perel of saul and body to the
vtermaist of our powar.

Quha bre^es this command
Quha brekis this command? Thai brek this command that flytis and fechtis with
their nychbour, quha sais any word that cummis of vnlauchfull Ire and
crabitnes, quha callis ane other fuile of malice, or sais any injurious words
to him, nyknamis, banning, bakbyting or scorning, quha lattis his nychbour dee
of hungir, thrist, called, seiknes, presone, and helpis him noht to his powar,
quha will nocht forgif to al yair nychbouris their offencis and will nocht pray
for their enemeis, luffis yame nocht or helpis yame nocht at the le^t in time
of their extreme neid, quha of crabitnes committis slauchter or murthour,
mutilation, or lais on his nychbour any violent ha^dis, quha inuyis yair
nychbouris good fortune, quha sawis discord and fosteris it, quha rasis pley
amang nychbouris, alswa thai that may make concord amang nychbouris or betuix
fayis and dois it nocht, and puttis nocht away al evil occasionis thairof.
Quhiddir gif kingis and temporal Iugis synnis aganis this command, quhen be
ordour of the law thai condemn to dead theiffis, menslaaris and murtheraris,
reuareis, tratouris, and siclyk misdoaris, perturbatouris, and destroiaris of
the common weil? Na. For this command is giffin to private personis and takis
nocht the temporal powar away, that thai may nocht punis misdoaris, for thai
haif authority of God and ar Gods seruandis ordanit to do yat. Nochttheles,
yai syn grievously in two pointtis. First, Temporal Iugis syns grievously in tvva
pointtis.
gif yai lauchfully ken any siclike misdoars wtin yair bou^dis quhairof yai
haif authority and tholis yame, lukis at yame throw yair fingaris, and will
nocht punis yame, other for lufe of geir or carnal affection or sum other daft
opinioun, be resone quharof misdoars takis mait baldnes to persevere in evil,
and the common weil is hurt. Siclik cowatousnes, carnal affection, and fuilis
mercy can nocht be excusit fra syn.

Secund, gif yai in judgment punis misdoaris, nocht for the lufe of justice and
the common weil, bot rathir of ire malice or hettret aganis the person or his
freindis* or for lu^e of his landis or geir, lykwais thai syn grievously ^a
doand.

The punition (...) of (...) of (...) Gene. ^.
Quhat panis ar ordanit for the brekaris of yis fifth command? And quhat rewardis
ar promissit to the keparis of the samyn? The temporal pain ord^ be the will
of God, for the punitioun of all (...) of men and women by the ordour of
justice, is to be slain, as it is decretit in the buke of Gene^is: Quicunque
effuderit humanum sanguinem, funde t^r sangu^s illius, ad imaginem quipp^ dei
factus est homo Quhasaeuir scheddis the blud of man, by ye ordour of justice,
his blud sal be sched, be y^ ordour of justice, because yat man is maid to ye
image of God. And in ye law of Moysis it is writtin thus: Qui (...) et
occiderit homine^, Le^i. 2^.
morte moriatur. He that st^^kkis and slais a man or a woman, lat him dee the
deed* that is to say, he should be slain for it him self. And our saluiour hais
the same sentence in the euangil of sanct Matthew: Qui gladium accipit, Math. 26
gladio peribit. He that takis the sweirde, sall perers with the sweirde.
Understand their wordis, and all siclis* of them that takis a sweirde to slay
his nychbour* nocht kepand the ordour of justice, he is worcht to (...) and to
be same, be ye ordour of justice. And the Apostil sanct Paul rehe^sand the
deidis of the (...) rec^ins manslauchter amang them: (...) eftir hend them
all, quha sa d^is them and siclik, sall nocht get the kingdom of God. Our
Lord God his awin self is a special defe^dar of this command, and will nocht
thoile mens^aaris to eschape punitioun. He said to Cayn that slew his brother,
quhair is Abell thy brother? Vox sanguinis fratris tui, clamat ad me de terra.
Gene. 4.
The voce of yi brothers blude, cries vengeance to me fra the erd. Quhat will e
mair? All menslaaris leiuis alwais in feir quhairsaeuir thai dwell, because
their conscience commonly is neuir in rest and tranquillity. Quhairto should we
spek of the reward that is promissit to the keparis of this command? Is it
nocht perfect lufe and cherite (quhilk kepis, helpis, and defendis our
nychbouris body, wife, and geir) the perfectioun of the law? And thairfor
quhasaeuir helpis and defe^dis their nychbouris life, thai sall get reward in
the kingdom of heuin, quhairto he bring us quhilk hais bocht us with his
precious blude Amen.

The saxt command.
The xviii. Cheptour.
NOn Mechaberis. Exodus xx. The ordour of ye saxt command.
Thou sall nocht commit adultery. With quhat ordour followis ye saxt command
after the fifth? As the greitest iniure quhilk a man may do to his nychbour is
slauchter, quharby he takis away his life fra him, sa the n^xt iniure of wra^g
is to violat or to feel carnally his nychbours wife, quhilk is a person with him
may deirly bond in the sacrament of matrimony. Our saluiour Christ in the
Euangil expo^is alsua the saxt command in siclik manner as he exponit the fifth,
teching that this command nocht only forbiddis all outwart adultery committit
in deid, bot alsua the same command forbiddis all inwart causis and occasionis
of adultery, as lichetous sichtis, desyris, consenting, lustis of concupiscence
in ye heart. Math. 5.
Audistis quia dictum est antiquis, non mecha beris. Ego aute^ dico vobis, quia
omnis qui viderit mulierem ad concupiscendum eam, iam mechatus est ea^ in cord
suo. e haif hard how it was said to yame in auld time. Thou sall nocht commit
adultery. Bot I say to ow (sais our saluiour) quhasaeuir spyis or lukis upon
any woman haiffand any lust and desire to her of concupiscence, he hais
co^mittit adultery with her ellis in his heart. Lyk as hettrent, wrath, and
malice of ye heart, is the rute and beginning of al mannis slauchter, sa is
carnal desire, lust and concupiscence of the heart the rute and beginning of
adultery and all kind of lichorie. Quhat is the rycht keeping of this command?
The rycht keeping of this command.
To be chaist in mind, word and deid, to be te^perat in meit, drink and sleip,
to put away all occasionis of lechorie, quhairof all kinds ar heir forbiddin,
suppose adultery be specially namit. For, fornicatioun was nocht tholit amangis
ye Iewis vnpunissit, as oppin huirdom and manifest adultery is daily doin
amang christin men, aganis the command of God. Mairouir, Leuit. xx.
amang the Iewis incest and synnis aganis nature was punissit with dead, as it
is schawin plainly in the buke of Leuittis.

Now thairfor e sall understand yat yair is three degreis of chastity. Marreage
The first is kepit amang good maryit men and women that leiuis ane chaste life
in the stait of matrimony, kepand yame self alwais within the bondis of yat
sacrament. Quharfor S. Paul sais thus to the Hebrewis: Heb. xiii.
Honorabile co^nubium, et thorus immaculatus Lat marriage be haldin honorable,
and the bed vndefylit. How should nocht marriage be honorable, sen it was ordanit
be almychty God in the beginning of the world, for multiplicatioun of mankind,
and in ye new testament ratifyit and alsua gra^tit in remeid of concupiscence
to eschew fornicatioun, to all them quhilk hais nocht lauchful impediment, bot
yat yai may lauchfully marry be y^ ordina^s of Gods law and haly kirk. Alsua
our saluiour gaif honor to marriage with his awin presence, and kythit his
first mirakil in ye Cane of Galile turnand the wattir into wine.

The secund degree of chastity is mair perfect than the first, Vedohed
and is kepit ama^g yame yat leuis ane chaste life in the stait of wedohede, of
quhome S. Paul sais thus: Mulier alligata est legi quanto tempore vir eius
viuit quod si dormierit vir eius, liberata est, i. Cor. 7.
cui autem vult nubat, tantum in dn^o. Beatior aute^ erit, si sic permenserit
secundum meum consilium. The marreit woman is bond to the law of matrimony,
als lang as her husband leiuis, bot gif her husband dee, sche is deliuerit fra
yat law, and with quhome sche pleis, lat her marry, bot lauchfully ef^er ye
ordination of our Lord. Nochttheles sche sal ^e mair blissit or happy, gif
that sche remain euin ^ill vnmaryit after my counsel.

Virginity
The third degree of chastity is mair perfect than the first and secund, and is
kepit amang them quhilk liffis ane chaste life in the stait of virginity,
quhilk sanct Paul counsellis as a greiter perfectioun of chastity, i. Cor. 7.
sayand thus to the Corinthianis: Qui matrimonio iungit virginem suam, been
facit, et qui no^ iungit melius facit. He that ionis his virgin to marriage
dois weil, and he that ionis nocht, dois better. And agane he sais in the same
cheptour: Mulier innupta et virgo, cogitat que domini sunt, vt sit sa^cta and
corpore and spiritu. The woman quhilk is ane virgin and vnmareit, hes her mind
and her thocht upon thai thingis that belangis til her Lord God, that sche may
be halie both in her spirit and her body. Thus we conclude, that all thai men
and women keipis this command, quhilk liffis ane chaste life according to yair
stait, Quha brekis this command

Adulteraris.


degree and vocatioun.

Quha brekis this command? First, quha committis adultery with yair nychbouris
wife other in body or in mind, quhiddir thai be bayth marreit or the ane
allanerly, quhilk syn was punissit with the deed in the ald law. Sa king David
synnit grievously, Leuit. xx.
and was grievously punissit, bayth in his sonnis and his wiffis, 2. Reg. 12
for bayth he tynt his barn gottin in adulterye, 2 Reg. 16
and was coackit and compell^ to flee his awin sone Absalon, quhilk entrit in
to abuse his fatheris concubines in the sycht of all the people, and did that
lay in him to put the king his father out of his kingdom. Sa we reid in the
buke of Iugis, Iudi. xx.
that almaist the hail tribe of Benjamin was slain, for ane adultery be
oppressioun of a Leuittis wife. Gene. xx.
Bot alsua Abimelech the king was punissit be God, nocht for committing
adultery in de^d with Sara Abraham's wife, bot allanerlie yat he had desire and
pursose thairto.

Secund, Defoular^ of virgini^
thai syne grievously agane this command, yat takis virginis maidinhede,
specially gyf thai be handfast with any other, quhilk syn was punissit with
dead in the auld law. Deuteronomy. 22.


Thridly, Rauissaris of women Ge. 34.
thai syn mair grievously that reuissis any woman, for the quhilk syn we reid
yat Sichem the sone of Hemor, the prince of that land was slain with his
father, and all their men and their city destroyit. Amon also king David sone,
2. Re. xiii
because he rauissit and oppressit Thamar his sister, he was slain be Absalon
in time of a bankit.

Fourt, Incestuus personis.
yai syn aganis this command yat brekis ye band of nature, and lyis with yame
yat ar neir of yair kin, quhilk is forbiddin in the buke of Leuittis. Leui. 18.
Committaris of ye syn aganis nature.

Simple fornicatouris.

Prouokaris to ye syn of lechorie.


The same syn was in ye law punissit with the dead.

Fifth, quha vsis the syn aganis nature (abone all the laif, synnis may
grievously) doand vtherwais than God hais institute betuix man and woman.

Saxt, all thai that synnis in simple fornicatioun quhiddir it be with
concubynis or huiris. And also quhasa prouokis vthirs to lechorie, be foul
speiche, sa^gis, taillis and pictouris, quha be foul thinking or feling, fylis
them self, quha eschewis nocht the occasionis of lichorie, drounkynnes,
ydilnes, owir lang sleping, wa^tone and licht company, dansing, singing, with
vthir siclik prouicationis. And quha may keip vthirs vnfylit, be help and
counsel and dois it nocht.

Fynaly, to this command pertenis all yat the haly scripture techis of
chastity, fasting, abstinence, temperance in taking of meit and drink, as
nocht to be drounkin with wine, in quhilk is exces and lechorie. And all
exhortatioun to orisone and prayar, Ephe. 5.
walking, honest labouris, honest company, hering of the word of God, study of
halie writ, quhilk helpis to keip and defend chastity.

The xix. Cheptour.
Comminatioun of panis aganis the brekaris of this command
IT wald be to lang to rehearse to ow all panis and corporal vengeance quhairwith
God almychty in times bygane hais punissit the brekaris of this saxt command,
nochttheles, part of exempillis writtin in haly writ, we sall rehers to ow, to
that effeck, that their incorrigibil huirmaisteris, inueterat fornicatouris,
detestabil adulter^is, and other brekaris of chastity (quhilk yat should keip be
the command of God and yair awin special vocatioun) may se as into ane myrrour
their awin da^pnatioun. For doutles money of siclik fornicatouris, blindit be
carnal concupiscence of their heart, trowis that simpil fornicatioun is na
deadly syn, nor to them damnabil, and sa nocht beand punissit be man and
haiffand na feir of God and alswa schame of this world, being past the sched of
their here, thai leiue continually in huirdome, thai corrup the air with the
exempil of their vnclein life, thai lufe and theris all yat ar siclik as them
self, thai het all yame ye leiuis ane chaste life. Comminatioun of temporal
pain aganis adulteraris and all other lycherous personis. Deuteronomy. 22. Ihoan. 8.
i. Cor. 6. Heb. xiii.
Thairfor we exhort them all for the weil of their awin saulis to leif their
huirdome. and to keip ane chaste life, unless thai be punissit of God be grievous
panis and plaigis, bayth temporal and eternal, lyk as other hais bein punissit
in time bygane.

In the auld law all adultaris bayth men and women was stanit to the dead, as
we reid in the buke of Deuteronome, and alswa in sanct Iohanis Euangill. All
adulteraris ar excludit the kingdom of heuin, as sanct Paul sais in the first
to the Corinthianis and saxt cheptour. Also to the Hebrewis he sais thus:
Fornicatores et adulteros iudicabit deus. God sall judge and condemn all
fornicatouris and adulteraris. We reid in the buke of Iugis that for the
violent adultery doin to the wife of ane certane Leuit, Iudi. xix. and xx.
their was slain of the trybe of Benjamin xxv. thousandis of abil men of weir.

Solomon was first ane king incomparabill in wisdom and all good properteis,
iii. Reg. xi
bot after hend that he was giffin inordinatly to ye lufe of fair women, he
turnit his heart fra God, and was giffin to ydolatry, in his ald dais his heart
was blindit, enemeis was rasit and sterit aganis him Adad Idumeus, and Rao^,
his kingdom was diuidit, and their was takin fra the house of David ten trybes
of Israel. It is verrai true thairfor yat the prophet Osee sais, Yat blindness
of the heart is the dochter of lichory Osee. 4.
that all wantone licherous men and women ar punissit of God with blindness of
heart, and sa thai put of the honest and chaste conuersatioun of man, and leiuis
lyk brute bestis in their awin sensual lust and plesour: Fornicatio, et vinum
et ebrietas auferunt cor. Fornicatioun or huirdome, wine or dronkinnes takis
away the heart or the mind of man.

Gene. ^4.
In the buke of the Genesis we reid, that for rauissing of Dina the dochter of
Jacob, all the men callit Sichimittis was slain, their scheip and yair cattal
was reft and had away, their barnis and yair wyffis was led in captivity,
their city was put to sak and all was destroyit. Gene. 7.
Amang the causis of the greit flude quhilk drownit all the world (aucht
personis except) ane cause is assignit to be ye lecherous lust of the flesch.
Gene. 29
God almychty cuist down Sodoma and Gomorra, Sebaim and Adama with Segore five
nobil and fair citeis, with brontstaine and f^re, Gene. 19.
for their abhominabil uncleanness of lichorie. And quhen our Lord was to destroy
the forsaid citeis he reuelit the same destructioun to Abraham, the first
father of our faith, yat he mycht schaw it to his sonnis and seruandis, to that
effeck, yat thai mycht for feir of the punitioun of God, forbeir that damnabil
syn, and leiue ane chaste life. And quhairfor was all their exemplillis writtin,
bot to gif us warning to fle fra the foul stinkand syn of lychorie, les as we
synnand as thai did, fall in siclik vengeance of God as thai did. And ane
special exempil worth^ to be no^it of al kirkmen, i. Reg. 4.
is writtin in the first buke of the kingis, quhair we reid yat Ophna and
Phineis, sonnis of Hely priestis of the auld law under the hie priest Hely
their father, was giffin to greit wantones and huirdome, abusand the woman
quhilk came to make sacrifice, yair father Hely the hie priest kennit yair
abusionis, and correckit them nocht sacondingly as thai war worthy, be resone
quhairof thai two priestis Ophna and Phineis was slain both on ane day, ye
Arch of God was takin, quhen tydans thairof was brocht to Hely their father, he
fell backwart of his cheer and brak his neck. It is to be feirit that siclik
punitioun of God sall fall on all them yat kennis oppin fornicatouris and may
and should correck them and will nocht. Comminatioun of eternal panis aganis all
lycherus men and women. i. Cor. 6.
Bot suerly litil ar temporal panis, in comparisone of the panis eternal of
hell, quhairto all fornicatouris and huirmaisteris, be ye rychteous judgment of
God ar condemnit, except yai mend yair liffis be true penance. The blissit
Apostil sanct Paul in three placis of his Epistillis makis special mentioun of
the judgment of God. The first is to the Corinthianis: Nolite errare neque
fornicatores, neque ydolis seruientes, neque adulteri, neque molles, neque
masculorum concubito^es, neque fures, neque auari, neque ebriosi, neque
maledicti, neque rapaces, regnum dei possidebunt. Be nocht begylit, another
huirmaisteris or fornicatouris, nor wyrschipparis of ydollis, nor adulteraris,
nor soft or vnclein men, another abusaris of them self with mankind, nor
theuis, nor cowatous men, nor drounkin men, nor evil speikaris, nor reiffaris
or oppressaris, sal haif possessioun of the kingdom of God. The secund place
is to ye Galathianis: Manifest^ sunt autem opera carnis quesunt: Gala. v.
fornicatio, immundicia impudicitia, luxuria, idolorum seruitus, ven^ ficia,
inimicitie, co^tentiones, emulationes, ire, rixe, dissensiones, sect, inuidie,
homicidia, ebrietates, comessationes et his similia, que predico vobis sicut
predixi, quoniam qui talia agunt regnum dei non consequentur. The deidis of the
flesche ar manifest quhilk ar their, fornicatioun, uncleanness, wantonness,
ydolatrie, witchecraft, hettred, co^tentioun, emulatioun, wraith, strif,
seditioun, sectis or hereseis, inuye, murder, drounkinnes, gluttony and
siclik, of the quhilk I tell ow before as I haif tald ow in time bygane, that
yai quhilk dois siclike deidis sall nocht optene and get the kingdom of God.

Ephe. v.
The third place is writtin to the Ephesianis: Hoc autem scitote intelligentes,
quod omnis fornicator, aut immundus, aut auarus, quod est idoloru^ seruitus,
non habet hereditatem in regno Christi et dei. Know this and understand, that
na huirmaister or fornicatour, na vnclein person or cowatous (quhilk is ye
wyrschippar of ydollis) hais heretage in ye kingdom of Christ and of god.

Now tak tent O thou lycherous man and woman how the Apostil sanct Paul placis
and settis fornicatouris and lycherous men and women in the first place of all
them that salbe excludit and put fra the kingdom of heuin. Thairfor O
christin man lat euirmair the wechtie command of sanct Paul sound in thy eris,
quhen he sais: Fugite fornicationem. Fle fornicatioun. ^. Cor. 6.
Gyf you speir at me, how may I fle fornicatioun? Trewly, quhen thou fleis fra
all thai thingis quhilk ar the occasionis of fornicatioun fosteris and kepis a
man or a woman in fornicatioun, as is vain, ydil and lychorous thochtis and
vnclein desyris of carnal lust and plesour. Gluttony and all erces in eittng
and drinking, all ydilnes of the boby with lang sleping, all company of
wantone, lycht and lychorous personis, all foul wordis and dishonest talking.
That their ar the occasionis, nurissing and vphalding of ye syn of lychorie it
is plainly schawin in the xvi. cheptour of the Prophet Ezechiel, quhair it is
said to the people of Israel: Hec fuit iniquitas Sodom sororis tue, superbia,
saturitas panis, Eze. 16.
ocium ips^us et filiarum eius. This was the iniquity, that is to say, ye
occasionis of wickitnes of Sodom thy sister, pride, wealth of meit and
abundance, and the ydilnes of her and all her dochteris. In their wordis e may
understand plainly, that suppose Sodoma with ye laif of the citeis was utterly
destroyit for the syn of the flesche abhominabil and nocht to be spokin, it the
special occasionis quhilk inducit and brocht yame to the use of the same syn,
was yair pride, yair glutony and yair ydilnes. Sa e may se yat it is true yat
the wisman sais: Qui amar periculum in illo peribit. He yat luffis the perrel
moan peris in ye same, Eccle. iii.
that is to say, he yat will do any thing quhilk is the occasioun of syn, he
moan neidis fall in the same syn and sa finally peris except he amend his life
be true penance. And sa conclude that na man can eschew fornicatioun except he
fle the occasionis of ye same. Now last of all quhat special rewardis God
giffis to all them quhilk leiuis ane chaste life, Special revvardis promissit
to the keparis of this command. i. Cor. 6.
the same Apostil declaris in the same place before allegite: An ne^citis
quoniam membra vestra, templum sunt spiritussancti, qui in vobis est, quem
habetis a deo and non estis vestri. Empti estis precio magno, glorifica^e et
portate deum in corpore vestro. Know e nocht that our bodeis is maid the tempil
of ye halie spirit quhilk is in ow, quhome e haif giffin to ou of God, and ar
nocht our awin seruandis. e ar bocht with ane greit price, that is to say, with
the blud of ye immaculate lame our saluiour Christ. Tharfor, magnify and beir
God in our boby, be ane clein and chaste life. Quhat greiter gift may God gife
to man, than to gife to him the haly spirit. Quhilk be his special grace,
wyrkis all gudnes in us, mouis us to good, gydis our hartis be lufe, and gif we
expel him nocht fra us be syn, he will bring us finally to ye glorious kingdom
of heuin, quhairto he bring us quhilk hais bocht us with his precious blude.

Amen.

The seuint command.
The xx. Cheptour.
Exo. xx. The ordour of ye seuint command.
NOn furtum facies. Thou sall nocht steil o^ commit theift. Quhat is the ordour
of this command? After thai God our law make ar, in the fifth command hais
forbiddin all iniuris anent thy nychbouris person, and in the saxt command
forbade all iniuris anent thy nychbouris wife, heir in the seuint command, he
forbiddis al iniuris anent thy nychtbours geir. The rycht keeping of yis co^ma^d
Quhat is the perfectioun of vertew, quhilk God requiris to ye rycht keeping of
this command? To be lyberal of thy awin geir at thy power, to gyf them almous,
quhen they mister, to len yame glaidlie, quhen they wald borrow without hope of
wynning or of ockir, for sa our saluiour biddis the do, saying: Qui autem petit
a te, da ei, Mathei. 5 Luce. 6.
and volenti mutuare a te, ne auertaris. Gyff to him that askis, and fra him
that wald borrow, turn nocht away. Et si mutuum dederitis, his a quibus
speratis recipire, que gratia es^ vobis? Nam et peccatores peccatotibus
fenerantur, vt recipiant equalia, verumtame^ diligite inimicos vestros,
benefacite, et mutuu^ date, nihil inde sperantes, et erit merces vestra multa,
et eritis filii altissimi, quia ipse benignus est super ingratos et malos. Gyff
e len to them of quhome e hope to resaue, quhat thank have e thairfor? For
synnars alsa le^nis to sinares yt yai may resaue als mekle agane, bot rather
lufe e our ennymeis, do good and len, lukand for na vantage thairof agane, sa
sall our reward be great, and e sall be the chyldreing of the hiest, for he is
kind, euin to the unthankful and to the evil. To be schort in this matter,
Luc. 16.
our Salueour techis playnlie, in ye parabyl of the rich Gluttone, and pure
Lazarus, that a man or woman quhilk hes warldlie geir, and may gyf to the pure,
in time of their myster and will nocht, that they ar worthy to be condampnit to
the fire of hell. Mat. 25.
And at ye latter dai of extreme Judgment, he sal gyf possessioun of the
kyngrik of heuin to al thaim that in time of yis life was content to exerce and
use the werkis of mercy to the puir, and on the other party, he sal condemn
to the fire of hell, all wyckit men and women quhilk ar unmercifully to the puir.

Be this command also we are warnit to eschew al ydilnes, and to be occupyit in
lesum and profitabil labor, nocht only that we may their with wyn trewly a
leiuing to our self, bot also yat we may be abil to help ye puir in time of
yair neid, according to the wordis of S. Paul before rehersit.

Quha brekis this command.
Quha brekis this command? Trewly sa money men and women brekis this command,
that thai ar few of all degreis and estatis that can excuse them fra thyft,
other privately or pertly, plainly or ellis under color. Theiffis.
First, all theiffis quhilk quyatly and wrangously takis mennis gei^ fra them
agane their will: Tobi. 2.
Vedete ne forte furtiuus sit (hedus) reddite eum dominis suis, quia non licet
nobis, aut edere ex furto aliquid, aut contingere. Take tent (sais Tobias to
his wife) yat the Kyd be nocht stowin, for it is nocht lesum for us to eit or
to twiche any stowine thing. Reuaris.
Secundly, al reffaris quhilk wra^gously and oppinly with violence spuleis
other men of yair geir, quhiddir it be be land or see. Of quheme sanct Paul
sais thus: ^. Cor. 6.
Fures et rapaces regnu^ dei non possidebunt. Theiffis and reffaris sall nocht
get possessioun of the kingdom of God. Rece^tars
And for als mekil as the Apostil sanct Paul sais: Roma. 1.
Non solum qui ea faciunt, sed etia^ qui consensiunt facientibus. That nocht
only thai that dois evil ar worthy of the dead, bot also thai that consentis
to the doaris.

All princis and temporal magistrattis quhilk giffis command, license, help,
Princi^.
counsel and favor to any siclike reffaris be land or be see, or may stop yame
and will nocht, may be comptit as reffaris before God, and brekaris of this
command. Sa it was said to Iosaphat king of Iewrie: Impio prebes auxilium, 2
Para. 1^
et his qui oderunt dn^m amicitia iungeris. Thou gyffis help to ane wickit man,
and is ionit in freindschip with yame yat he^tis God. To siclyk Princis God
sais their wordis, quhilk yai should tak tent to: Esaie. i.
Principes tui infideles, socij furum. Thy princis ar unfaithful, marrowis to
theiffis. Also gif kingis or princis other excede and is exorbitant in taking
of taxis fra their people, or spendis nocht the same taxis justly upon the
necessary defense of the common weil, yai can nocht excuse yame fra breking of
this command. Secundly, Iugi^.
all Iugis temporal or spiritual, quhilk sellis justice and judgment that aucht
to be giffin freely, ar transgressouris of this command: Nec accipies munera que
etiam excecant prudentes, Exo. xxiii
et subuertunt verba iustorum. Thou sall nocht (sais God) resaif rewardis or
buddis quhilk blindis the prudent men, and subuertis and puttis down ye wordis
of just men. Non accipies personam, nec munera quia munera excecant oculos
sapientum, Deuteronomy. xvi.
et mutant verba iustorum.

And agane thou sall nocht except in Judgment any mannis person, nor resaue
rewardis, for rewardis blyndis the eine of wysemen, and chengeis the wordis of
Just me^. Thridlie, na les is the syn of Princis, Patrons of beneficis.
Lordis, Byschoppis, and vthir Patronis spirtuall and te^porall, quhe^ they
prouid and promouis any unworthy and vnqualifeit man to any dignity and
benefice in the kirk, for lufe of temporal geir to their awin auantage, or of
any vthir f^eind or fremmit. Quhy sulde nocht that be callit theift, quhilk is
geuin for lufe of geir, that should be giffin frelie for the lufe of, God and in
respect of leirnyng and vertew?

Co^mittars of sacrilege.

Hartars of ye common vveill Vs^raris. Luce. 6. Defraudaris of serua^dis vvagis.

Iacobi. 5. Strykaris of vnlauchfu^ co^ney Cer^ane marchads


Fourtlie al Sacrilege is aganis yis command, quhen any thing ordani^ to the
honesty and convenient myni^tratioun of the Sacramentis and service off God,
is stowin and reft out of the kirk. Fyftlie, a^ they that defraudis or spouleis
the common geir, aganis the common weill for lufe of their awin pryuate and
singular weill. Saxtlie, all vsuraris and ocki^rars synnis aganis this command
yat wi^ nocht len their geir frelie, bot makis condition of ockir, aganis the
command of Christ. Seuintlie all they quhilk hais seruandis or work men and
will nocht pay thaim their fee or waige, according to co^ditioun and their
deseruyng, quhilk syn as sanc^ James sayis, cryis vengeance before God.
Auchtlie all thai that strykis cowne of vnlauchful metal, quhair throuch the
common weil is hurt and ska^hi^. The nynte, all Merchandis that sellis
corruppit and evil stufe for good, and gyf they or any vthir in bying or
sellyng* use desait, falsate, pariurie, wrang mettis or weychtis, to the skaith
of their nychtbour, they co^mitt great syn agane this command. Certane craftis
me^.
Another can we clenge fra breakyng of this command all kyndis of craftis men,
quhilk vsis nocht their awin craft leillalie and trewlie as yai should do. Last
of al, we can nocht* nor should nocht excuse benefecit me^ fra breakyng of yis
command, quhilk ressauis the Patrymonye of Christ (that is to say) teindis and
offeryngis fra the christin pepil, e sum time mair largely than they should do,
and will nocht mynister agane to the people ye word of God, Certan benef^it men
for the fude of yair saulis, the haly Sacraments for the consolatioun of their
saulis, and will gyf na part of their benefice, for ye sustentatioun of pure
people within their paryschyng. For doutles they ar bot dispensatouris or
stewartis of the same, to be distrubit to thaim self sa far as thai myster to
their honest sustentatioun, and also to the pure people of yair awin perrochyne
in special, and in reparatioun of their queir quhen it nedis. Also nocht only
yai braik yis command quhllk stelis, reiffis, or committis ockir, Certan
ge^tyll men.
quhay begylis men with falls met or mesour, quha sellis falls rottyn
merchandyis, bot also they that be falset, optenis vthir me^nis heretage or
takis up their rentis, quha that payis nocht seruandis and lauborous me^ their
feis. All wrechis ye will be ground rich incontinent, quhay be fraud, falset,
and gyle twynnis men and their geir, Takars of ouir mekil mail or ferme.
quhay may keip their nychtbour, fra poverty and myschance and dois it nocht.
Quhay takis over sair mail, over mekle ferme or any blake maillis, fra their
tennands, or put it is their cottaris to ouir sair labouris, quhait throw the
tenentis and cottaris is put to herschip.

Quha inuies his nychbouris good fortune, ouir byis him or takis his geir out of
his ha^dis with fair hechtis, or preuenis him, or begylis him at his marchandis
hand. All their abone rehersit brekis yis command and ar comptit theiffis before
God.

The xxi. Cheptour.
Committaris of symony.
HEir we may nocht lauchfully leiue out yame yat co^mittis symony, quhilk
without dout expressly synnis aganis this command. Quhat is Symony? It is a
diligent will to by or sell any spiritual thing or any vthir thing yat is
annexit to spiritual things. Quharfore, thai that byis or sellis the grace of
God or any special gift of the halye spirit, as Simon Magus wald haif bocht
and Gezi sald, yai commit plain Symony. Quha sa byis any of the seuin
sacramentis likwais committis plain symonye. Nochtheles a puir priest quhilk
sais Mes or ministaris any other sacrament, may tak silver, nocht as a price of
the sacrament, bot as ane convenient fee to his necessary sustentatioun. For
gif he haif intentioun to sell the sacrament, he committis symony, bot nocht
gif he intend allanerly to tak his necessary sustentatioun according to the
ordination and appreuit custom of the kirk, nocht haiffand vthirwais to leiue
upon. Mairatour thai that giffis any benefice of the kirk, specially gif it
haif cure and charge of saulis, for any silver or silver worth thai commit
oppin symony. Attour, gif a patron of a benefice quhidder he be temporal man
or spiritual, gif he gife a benefice to his neir kynnis man or any vthir
friend, suppose he be qualifiet, it and he gife it under a conditioun that the
resaiffar of the benefice sall provide a leiuing for the freindis of him that
is giffar of the benefice, in sa giffin he committis plain symony. And mekil
mair fail thai aganis this command and incurris the spot of symony, thar
giffis or takes ane benefice in keeping to vtheris. And yat giffis ane benefice
with sick co^ditioun that the kepar of the said benefice sall haif bot ane
sober pensioun, that the giffar of that benefice may get in the laif to them
self and yair keching. Of Iugis and vthir men of ye law.
Another may we leif out Iugis temporal and spiritual, quhilk sellis justice and
judgment that aucht to be freely giffin, or yai yat procedis nocht ordainly and
spedfully in executioun of justice, can nocht be excusit fra breking of this
command, for to them it is said: Just quod iustu^ est exequeris. Thou sall
execute justice justly. Deuteronomy. 16.


How money manner of wayis may justice be peruertit and unjustly execute be Iugis
and vthir officiaris of the law? Four manner of wayis. First be hettrent and
malice quhilk thai beir aganis any man.

Secundly for feir to displese any great man or any warldly friend.

Thridlie for lufe of any temporal geir. And fourtlie for carnal affectioun of
their freindis. Be ane or ma of their four manner of wayis justice is often times
nocht trewlie and lauchfullie executit. And specially Aduocatis, Procuratours,
and Scrybis, quhidder they be of temporal court or spiritual, braikis yis
command two manner of ways. First quhen yai tak wagis to procure or defend a
cause, quhilk yai ken is vnlauchfull and aganis Justice. Secundlie, quhen for
their wagis they tak on hand ane lauchfull cause, bot for lucre of geir they
diffar and puttis of the executioun of Justice, Quhay sa fyndis oni thing and
restors it not Quha will nocht pay yair dettis
fra day to day, and often times fra eir to eir to the great skaith and herschype
of thaim quhilk hes ane rycht actioun of the pley. All they that fyndis any
tynt geir gold, silver or any other thing and knawis or may know with diligent
spering quhay awe the same tynt geir and will nocht restore it and gyf it agane
to ye true awner, they ar theiffis and braikis this command. Lykwayis al thai
breckis this command, Quha will nocht pay yar teinds treulie. Executors of
testame^tis.
quhilk will nocht pay, their dettis quhen they may and should pay thaim.
Quhasaeuir payis nocht their teindis dewlie and haillellie as thai aucht to do,
thai commit theift and bre^kis yis command. All executouris quhilk takis on
hand to fulfill the last will of any man or woman and will nocht pay the dettis
of ye deed and other legaceis, will nocht help ye freindis of ye deed nor do
deidis of cheritie and suffragis of the kirk for ye saul departit, conform to
the deddis will and ordinance, they greuouslie dyspleis God, be the
transgressioun of yis command and may be comptit before God (noch^ only
theiffis bot oppin reffaris. Medicinaris and Chirurginaris.
All Medicinaris and Chirurgeraris quhilk is nocht expert in their faculty,
and it will tak on hand to cure any man or woman fra seiknes quhilk thai can
nocht do, taka^d wagis largely fra the same seik personis, yai commit thift
aganis this command. Pottingaris.
Lykwais all Pottingareis quhilk takis silver for evil and rottin stufe and
droggaris can nocht be excusit fra committing of thift. Thus in the same seuint
command almychty God forbiddis all iniust and vnlauchful taking, getting and
keeping of vthir mennis geir. It is God^ command to make restitutiou^
And be the contrare God commandis that all transgressouris and brekaris of yis
seuint command before reher^it, with all yir power should make hail restitutioun of
their wrangous and vnlauchfull gottin geir, for it is ane common and true
saying of sanct Augustine: Peccatum non dimittitur, nisi ablatum restituatur.
The syn is nocht forgiffin, except the wrangous geir be restorit. And gif sa be
yat thou may nocht restore in deid and incontinent, at the leist thou should haif
ane good will and purpose to restore thy wrangous geir quhen, thou sal be abil.

Now will we spek of the panis quhilk God almychty schoris to ye brekaris of
yis command, Commin^tioun of panis aganis the brekaris of this command.
and of rewardis quhilk he hais promissit to the keparis of the same. Albeit,
that in the law of Moses the punitioun of theiffis was restitutioun, sumtime
of twyis als mekil, sum times of four times als mekle, sumtime v. times als
mekil, as was stowin, it in the new law Princis and civil Magistratis synnis
nocht quhen thai punis theiffis and reffaris with the dead, for thai haif
authority giffin to them be God to beir a sweird, that is to say, to punis
with the dead all perturbatouris of the common weil, sa yat yai proceed after
the ordour of justice according to their civil law and laudabil custom of
their country. And of the spiritual pain that fallis upon cowatous men and
women sanct Paul sais thus: Qui volunt diuites fieri, i. Timo. 6
incidunt in tentationem and in laqueum diaboli, et desideria multa, inutilia
et nociua, qui mergunt homines in interitum et perditionem. Radix enim omnium
malorum est cupiditas, quam quidem appetentes errauerunt a fide, et inseruerunt
se doloribus multis. Thai that will be rich, fallis into temptatioun, and in
the gyrne of the devil, and to money vnprofitabil and noysum desyris, quhilk
drownis men into destruction and da^natioun. For cowatousnes is the rute of all
evil, quhilk quhil sum men desyrit, thai errit fra the faith, and brocht them
self in mekil sorrow. And of their pain eternal spekis S. Paul sayand amang ye
laif of misdoaris: i. Cor. 6.
Neque fures, neque auari, neque rapaces* regnum dei possidebunt. Nether sall
theiffis, nor cowatous men, nor reffaris possess ye kingdom of God. Because
Achan in the distructioun of Hieric^, Ios^e. 7.
tuk certane geir that was forbiddin be the special command of God, a cloak of
silk verrai fine, two hundredth syclis of silver, and ane meswand of gold, he
was stanit to the dead. Saul the king of Israel was repreuit of God, and tynt
his kingdom, i. Re^ ^
quhairof ane cause was his cowatousnes, quhilk he had to the spule of Amelech,
quhairfor Samuel said to him, quhy hard thou nocht the voce of our Lord, bot is
turnit to the spule and hais done evil in the sycht of our Lord? Gehezi the
seruand of the Prophet Heliseus, was strikin with lipper, 4. Reg. 5.
because he tuk certane giftis fra Naaman the prince of Syria, quhilk Heliseus
his master refusit, because it was never lesum to sell the spiritual gift of
God. And this exemple is writtin in detestatioun of symony. Judas lykwais
throch cowatousnes sa^d our saluiour Christ quhen he said, Math. 2^
quhat will e gife me, and I sall deliver him to ow? Actu. 2.
quhais end is discriuit in the Ackis of the Apostillis, that he hangit
himself, and birstit a sunder in the myddis. Quhen Simon Magus saw, yat be the
laing on of the Apostillis handis the haly gaist was giffin, he offerit yame
money and said: Gife me also yis powar, yat on quhem saeuir I put my handis, he
may resaif the halie gaist. Then sanct Peter said to him: Actu. 8.
Pecunia tua tecum sit in perditionem, quoniam donum Dei existimasti pecunia
possideri. Perisch thou with thy money, because thou thinkis, yat ye gift of
God may be optenit with money. Mairouer, how great and terribil vengeance God
almychty hais takin on them quhilk committis sacrilege, that is to say, that
staw or reft any thing hallowit or vnhallowit out of the tempil of God, or that
abusis any siclyk.

Dani. 5
We reid in the buke of Daniel, yat Belthasar king of the Caldeis, for abusing
the hallowit veschellis quhilk his father Nabugodonosor brocht as a spule out
of the te^pil of Jerusalem, was excedanly f^eit with ane strange and terribil
visioun, sitting at ane ryall bankit, quhilk he maid till a thousand of his
nobillis, he saw the fingaris of ane hand writand three wordis upon the wall
anent him. Na man culd reid yame or tell yair signification, bot Daniel
allanerlie, quhilk read them thus: Mane, Thekell, Phares, and exponit them
thus. Mane, that is to ^ay, God hais nowmerit thy kingdom and hais co^pletit
and endit it. Thekell, yat is, thou art weyi^ in a balance, and thou art funde
to want wecht. Phares, as mekil to say, as thy kingdom is deuidit and giffin
to the Medis and Persis. And the same nycht Balthazar the king of Caldeis was
slain, and Darius the king of the Medis succedit in his kingdom. Breuelie,
quhasaeuir hurtis yair puir nychbour doing any skaith to yame, other oppinly or
quyatly be any kind of craft, falset or sutteltie, can nocht eschaip the
rygorous punitioun of God, quhilk he schoris in the buke of Exodus sayand thus:
Vidu^ et pupillo no^ nocebitis, si leseritis eos, Ex^. 22.
vociferabuntur ad me, et ego audiam clamorem eorum, et indignabitur furor
meus, percutiamque vos gladio, et erunt vxores vestre vidue, et filii vestri
pupilli. e sall nocht noy, hurt, or skayth a wedow, fatherles, motherles or any
freindles man or woman, for and e hurt yame, thai will cry to me, and I will
heir their cry, and I will take indignatioun at ow, and sall stryk ow with the
sweird. and our wyfis salbe wedowis, and our sonnis salbe fatherles.

Lat all gentilmen quhilk hais tenentes and cottaris under them tak tent to
their wordis. Lat all Medicinaris, Chirurgeanis, and Pottingareis quhilk takis
on hand to help seik or sair men, tak tent to their wordis, lat all Gryntaris,
Stewartis, Chamyrlandis, and al kind of craftesmen tak good ^ent to yis
comminatioun of God.

The xxii. Cheptour.
QVhat rewardis sall thai get be the promis of god quhilk helpis the puir,
Promis of revvardis to the keparis of this command. Prouer. iii
giffand to yame almous according to their powar for Gods saik? Trewlie thai
sall optene great rewardis of God, temporal, spiritual, and eternal. Of the
temporal rewardis it is writtin in the buke of Prouerbis: Honora dominum de tua
substantia, et de primitiis omnium frugum tuarum da pauperibus et implebuntur
horrea tua saturitate et vino torcularia tua redundabunt. Honor our Lord with
thy substance or with thy warldly geir lauchfully gottin and part of thy best
geir gife to the puir, and thy barnis salbe fulfyllit with corn and fruit, and
thy wine pressis sal flow with wine. In their wordis almychty God expressly
promissis sufficient wealth and fouth of warldly geir to all them, quhilk for
his sake blythly giffis almous to the puir people. And to this promis, all
gredie cowatous men and women giffis na credit, quhilk trowis to want warldly
geir to their awin leiuing, gif thai gife any almous to the puir pepil
according as thai may gife, and thairfor thai gi^ other litil or ellis na
thing. Of their spiritual reward, Eccle. 29.
it is writtin thus: Conclude ele^mosyna^ in cord pauperis, and hec pro te
exorabit ab omni malo. Hyde thine almous in ye heart of a puir body, yat is to
say, gife thine almous (but any intentioun of vain glore) to the puir man and
woman, and that same sall pray for the to God, yat you may be deliuerit fra all
evil. Also Tobias the elder giffand exhortatioun to his son Tobias the ongar,
rehersis great spiritual rewardis, sayand thus: Tobi^. 4.
Ex substa^tia tua fac elemosyna^, et noli auertere faciem tuam ab vllo
paupere, Ita enim fiet, vt nec a te auertatur facies domini. Of thy awin gei^
gife almous, and turn nocht thy face fra any puir man, yat is to say, gif thou
may nocht gife him almous, at ye leist schaw to him a plesand countinans, and
sum takin and syne that thou hais compaciens on him. And sa sais Tobias, it
sall cum to pas yat God sal nocht turn his face fra the. Syne Tobias techit
him the rewle of discretioun, quhilk men should use in giffing of almous, sayand
thus: Quomodo potueris ita esto misericors, si multum tibi fuerit, abundanter
tribu^ si exiguum tibi fuerit, etiam exiguum libenter impartiri stude. Euin as
you may, sa be thou merful, and you haif mekil warldly geir gife mekil almous,
and gife thou hais bot lytil warldly geir, apply thy mind to gife alsa lytil
almous with blythnes. And last of all he schawis the great rewardis that salbe
giffin for giving of almous: Premium enim bonu^ tibi thesaurizas in die
necessitatis, Tobi. 4.
quonia^ elemosina ab omni peccato et mort^ liberat, et non patietur animam ire
in tenebras. Thou sall gadder and provide to thy self a tresour, quhilk sall be
great reward geuin to the in the day of necessite, that is the day of judgment,
for almous deliueris fra all syn and dead, and sall nocht thoile the saulis of
the merciful men, to gang to the myrknes of hell. And of their eternal reward our
saluiour expressly spekis thus in the euangil of sanct Luke: Facite vobis amicos
de mammona iniquitatis, vt cum defeceritis, recipia^t vos in eterna
tabernacula. Luce. 1^.
Make our self freindis of our wyckit mammonie, that is to say, make the puir men
and women our spiritual freindis be giving of part of our rychis to them,
quhilk richis oftymes is ane occasioun of wyckitnes to warldly men and women,
nocht be the nature of the richis, bot allanerly throw the affe^tioun and
abusioun of warldly men and women, with our richis thairfor make the puir men
our frendis, that quhen e sall depart of this world yai may resaif ow till
eternal tabernaculis, that is to say, to the glorious dwelling placis in the
kingdom of heuin. Gyf e speir, how may puir men resaif the richemen till heuin?
We answeir, nocht be their awin powar and gift, quhilk allanerly bela^gis to
God, bot be their intercessioun and prayaris may optene the grace of God to
rich men, quhairby thai may cum to the kingdom of heuin.

All their promissis before rehersit is signifeit and geuin us to understand be
ane promis quhilk (...) saluiour makis in the euangil of S. Luke sayan^ thus:
Luce. 6
Dare et dabirur vobis. Gyfe, and to ow sall be giffin. Mensuram bonam et
co^fertam, et coagitatam et superfluentem, dabunt in sinum vestrum. Ane good
mesure, pressit down and schakin to gidder and ruma^d ouir, sal yai gif to ow
into our bosum. Be their wordis, eftir the expositioun of certan doctouris is
signifeit four kindis of giftis, quhilk almychty God giffis to them that
giffis almous for Gods saik. The first is temporal geir, quhil ar callit guddis
of fortune, quhilk sumtyme God giffis for doing the warkis of mercy, and this
gift is callit good or lauchful mesour.

The secund gift is of nature, as health of body, quhilk su^tyme God giffis for
ye warkis of mercy, and is callit ane mesour pressit down, quhilk is largea^
met than the first, quhilk was ane lauchful met.

The third gift is encres of grace, quhilk oftymes God giffis to them that are
mercyful, and this is largear met than was the secund.

The fourt is the gift of eternal glore, quhilk is the gretest gift of all the
laif, and is signifeit be the met yat rynnis ouir. Now it followis in the
wordis of our saluiour: Eadem quippe mensura, qua mensi fueritis, Luce. 6
remetietur vobis. With the same mesour quhair with e met to vthir, it salbe
mettit agane to ow. For according as the deidis of cheritie corporal or
spiritual is mair or les, sa sall the giffaris of the same deidis, be rewardit
mair or les. And this is largely declarit be sanct Paul sayand thus to the
Corinthianis: 2. Cor. 9.
Qui parce seminat, parce et ^^^et, et qui seminat in benedictionibus, de
benedictionibus et metet Quhasa sawis litill, sall scheir litil alsa, and he
that sawis plenteously sal lykwais scheir largely. It followis: Vnusquisque
prout destinauit in cord suo, no^ ex tristitia aut necessitate, hylarem enim
datorem diligit deus. Every ane according as he hais purposit in his heart,
nocht displeisandly or be compulsioun, for God luffis a blyth giffar. It
followis in the text of S. Paul: 2. Cor. ^.
Potens est autem deus, omnem gratiam abundare facere in vobis, vt in omnibus
semper omnem sufficientiam habentes, abundetis in omne opus bonu^, sicut
scriptum est, dispersit, dedit pauperibus, iustitia eius manet in seculum
seculi. God is abil to make ow rich in all grace, that e in all thingis having
sufficient to the vttermaist, may be rich in all manner of good warkis: as it is
writtin, he hais scatterit and geuin to the puir, his rychteousnes remanis for
euir.

Thus we end the seuint command, exhortand all christin men and weme^, to keip
yame self fra al manner of taking or keeping of wrangous geir fra their nychbour,
and with their awin geir, help all them that mistaris, for Gods saik, knawin
well that thai sall get reward temporal, spiritual, and finally eternal, fra
the liberal hand of God, to quhome be all honor and glore for euir and euir.
Amen.

The aucht command.
The xxiii. Cheptour.
NOn loqueris contra proximum tuum, Exo. xx.
falsum testimonium. Thou sall nocht beir falls witness aganis thy nychtbour. The
ordour of ye aucht command.
Quhat is the ordour of this command? This command techis the to do na skaith
to thy nychtbour in his fame and name, nor hurt him with thy tongue in his
person, his wife or his temporal geir. For nixt his life, his wife and his
geir, his fame is derast to him, a as necessary as any of the laif.

The rycht keeping of this command.
Quhat is the rycht keeping of this command? Trewly, the vertew of yis command
is, to ordour and gyde thy tongue in all thy wordis to the plesour of God and
the profit of thy nychbour. Nocht to raise pley, nor to do other men skaith,
bot you should spek thy wordis to the help and good gyding of thy nychbour. To
labor for concord amang them that are fayis, to defend thy nychtbouris fame,
quhen vtheris bakbytis him or defamis him. Schortly, that thy speech be true
and profitable to the heiraris, and to thy brother, ^aith before his face and
behind his back. All words of halie scripture yat byddis ye help thy brothers
and nychtbouris good name or fame, his rycht, his profit, and specially his
saul heil with thy wordis, belangis to the true understanding and keeping of
this command.

To ye good gyding of our tongue three thingis ar necessary.
Quhasa wald ordour their wordis and gyde their tongue to the plesour of God and
edificatioun of their nychtbour, moan leir to haif their three verteous
conditionis that followis.

The first is to use discretioun in all our speking, considerand alwais before
we spek, quhat we are to say, to quhome we spek in time and place convenient,
and because sik discretioun is a gift of God, we should pray to God for it,
sayand with the Prophet in the Psalm. Pone domine custodiam ori meo, Psalm. 140
et ostium circumsta^tie labiis meis. I beseik the, O good Lord, put a keeping to
my mouth, Lord I pray the gife me thy grace, quhairby I may dant and refrane my
tongue fra all vain and evil wordis, and to spek allanerly good wordis, with dew
circumstance of resone. And the Apostil sanct Paul sais: Iaco. iii.
Si quis in verbo non offendit, hic perfectus est vir. Gyf a man offend or syn
nocht in his word, he is ane perfect man. Heir e should nocht understand yat the
perfectioun of a christin man standis only in good gyding of our tongue, for
vndoutand, it standis principally in perfect lufe and cheritie, as sanct Paul
declaris to the Collosiens, sayand: Super omnia charitate^ habere, Colos. iii.
quod est vinculum perfectionis. Abone all thingis haif cheritie, quhilk is the
band of perfectioun. Nochtheles, good gyding of the tongue, is a special takin of
perfectioun, and sa sanct James callis a man yat synnis nocht in his tongue, to
be ane perfect man, for as mekil as he hes ane special takin of ane christin
mannis perfectioun. And to gyde our tongue with discretioun, sanct James
exhortis us be two familiar exemples.

Iaco. iii.
The first is of a brydil, sayand: Si autem equis frena in ora immittimus, ad
consentiendum nobis, omne corpus illorum circumferimus. Behald lais he, we put
brydillis into the horse mouthis, that yai should obey us, and we turn about all
their body. Mekil mair should we put the brydil of discretioun upon our toungis,
to dant them and cause them to obey the command of God in their speking.

The secund exempil is of ane rudder of a schip: Ecce naues cum magnae sint, et
a ventis validis minentur, circumferuntur autem modico gubernaculo, vbi impetus
dirigentis voluerit. Behald also the schippis, suppose yai be large and great,
and dreuin with great windis it ar yai turnit about with a verrai small Helm or
Rudder, quhairto saeuir the schipmen will. euin sa the tongue of man and woman
should be turnit be ye rudder of discretioun, quhairto saeuir the law of God will.

The third thing that should move us to gyde our tongue weil, is to considder
oftymes quhat hurt and skaith cummis of ane evil tongue, quhilk sanct James
declacis in the place before allegit, sayand thus: Ecce quantus ignis, quam
magna^ si^uam accendit and lingua ignis est vniuersitas iniquitatis. Behald how
great a thing a litil fire kendillis, and the tongue is a fire, quhilk sumtyme is
ane occasioun of all wykitnes. As it mycht be said plainly, as ane litil fire
may burn and distroy a great nowmer of treis, great housis, palacis and tounis,
sa ane evil tongue may kendil mekil evil as stryif, contentioun and seditioun,
hereseis and scismis, to the distructioun of mekil vertew, and money verteous
men. It followis: Lingua constituitur in membris nostris, qui ma ^ulat totum
corpus, et inflamma^^ rota^ natiuitatis nostre, inflammata a gehenna. Sa is the
tongue set amang our membris, yat it defylit the hail body, and settis a fire
the hail course of our life, and is it self set a fire euin of hell. The
sentence of their wordis is this. The tongue of man and woman is ane of the leist
membris of all the body, quhilk gif it be nocht refrenit and dantit fra evil
wordis be discretioun, may hurt and skayth all the hail body, for often times the
hail body is brocht to mekil cummer and pain, for the falt of the tongue. Or
be the body we may understand the hail congregatioun and cumpany of the pepil,
for as we often se be experiens, ane evil tongue bringis ane hail congregatioun or
cumpany to mekil cummer and pain. Mairouir, ane evil tongue, specially of ane
evil giffin counselor, falls prechour or techar, may kendil ye hartis of men
and women to heresy and vthir synnis, and thairin to remain fra the time of
yair outhede, to the time of their auld, sa mekil evil may spring out fra ane
evil tongue. Gyf e speir quha hais kendillit sa mekil evil in the tongue of man
and woman? Se quha puttis sa mekil evil in the tongue? Trewly, nocht almychty
God, for he hais wallit and defe^dit the tongue with certane teith and two
lippis, to signify that the tongue should nocht be hasty in speking, bot yat it
should speik with auisment and discretioun. Than quha hes kendillit sa mekil evil
in the tongue of man and woman? Verrailie the devil of hell, quhilk kendillis the
fire of concupiscence yat is in ou^ flesch sa mekil as he may, than the
concupisce^ce kindillit, kindillis and prouokis the tongue to sa mekil evil. And
heir we haif a cause to deploir and be sorry for the malice of money men and
women, quhais tongue is sa evil, that apparandly it is incurabil, quhairin thai
may be compti^ war of co^ditionis than brutel bestis or serpe^tis, according as
sanct James declaris thus: Omnia natura bestiarum, Iaco. iii.
volucrum et serpentum et ceterorum, domantur et domita sunt a natura humana,
linguam autem nullus hominum domare potest, inquietum malum, plenum veneno
mortifero. All the nature of bestis and byrdis, and of serpents, and other of
the sea, ar meikit and dantit be the nature of man, bot the tongue of sum men
and women can na man dant, it is ane vnrewly evil full of deadly poysone. As he
mycht say: their is na wyld best sa wyld, their is na foul sa fors, na
serpentis sa pestilent, na best of the sea sa cruel, bot be the ingyne,
industry and craft of man, thai may be dantit. Lyonis ar maid gentil and meik,
Tygaris ar maid myld, Drachonis ar dantit. Eliphantis make service to man,
Cockatryces ar brocht in subiectioun, serpentis ar tamit, Ernys and Eglis ar
maid familiar to the hand of man, bot the evil tongue (of sum men and women) may
na man dant. And quhy? Because it is sa wyld, yat it will nocht be rewlit, it
is sa full of poysone, that na medicine of good counsel can help it. Thus be good
consideratioun of the great hurt and skaith that cummis of ane tongue, we should
seir to refrein our tongue with discretioun.

The third thing that causis a man or a woman to haif a good tongue, Reformatioun
of our heart is necessary to ye good gyding of our tongue Math. 12.
is reformation of our heart or of our mind, for as our saluiour sais in the
euangil of sanct Matthew: Progenies viperarum, quomodo potestis bona loqui cum
sicis mali? Ex abundantia enim cordis os loquitur. O e generatioun of
serpentis, how can e spek good, quhen e our selfis ar evil? for of the abundance
of the heart ye mouth spekis. Bonus enim homo de bono thesauro profert bona, et
malus homo de malo thesauro profert mala. A good man, out of the good tresour of
his heart bringis forth good thingis, and ane evil man, out of his evil tresour
bri^gis forth evil thingis. Be their wordis of our saluiour, it is manifest and
plain, yat na man can speik good wordis to the plesour of God and edificatioun
of their nychtbour, except that he haif ane good heart or mind indewit and
annor^it with faith and cheritie. Quhairfor O christin man, and you wald
refrein thy tongue fra all evil wordis quhilk thou spekis aganis God and thy
nychbour, thou moan haif in thy heart the true lufe of God and thy nychtbour.
Quha brekis this command? Brekaris of the viii. command
Specially yai that beris in judgment falls witness. First thai offend almychty
God quhais verity thai deny and forsakis opinly.

Secundly, thai offend the Judge, Isodorus.
fra quhom yai syle and hyde the verity. Thridly, yai offend and hurtis the
person yat is accusit, quhom be ^esone of their falls wytnes, thai condemn als
mekil as lies in them and haldin to restitutioun of all hurtis. And be this e
may consider plainly, how grievous a syn it is to bear falls witness.

Mairouir, thai syn aganis this command, quhilk dois wrang to yair nychbour in
judgment, quhidder yai be Judge, Scribe, Aduocat, falls witness, party, or any
siclike, quhilk oppressis their nychbour be falset in judgment, or will nocht
say ye verity quhen thai should say it, quha be falsat and lesingis, puttis yair
nychbour to sorrow or skaith. All flatteraris, scornaris of men, falls accusaris
and bakbytaris, quha giffis reidly eris to bakbytaris, fostaris the same and
repreuis them nocht. And quha interpretis nocht all other mennis indifferent
wordis and deidis to the best face, quhen thai may be weil taken. Quha
dissimillis to schaw the verity quhen he is oblissit to schaw it be necessity
and for ye good of his nychtbour. The punissioun of them yat brekis yis command
Pro. xiii.
Is yair any pain or punitioun expremit in the scripture aganis yame yat
brekis yis command, be speking of evil wordis? is trewly. First to speik in
general, the wisman sais: Qui custodit os suum, custodit animam suam, qui autem
inconsideratus est ad loquendum, sentiet mala. He yat kepis his mouth, kepis
his saul or his life, bot he yat spekis without co^sideratioun and auisment,
sal feil trubil and pain. And to speik in special, the wisman sais: Pro. xix.
Testis falsus non erit impunitus. Ane falls witness sal nocht be vnpunissit.
Agane he sais: Testis mendax peribit. Pro. xxi.
A leand witness sall perisch. Also ye same wisman, Pro. vi.
rehersand sax thingis quhilk God hettis, he rekins amang yame a man yat beris
falls witness, and spekis lesingis. Ane exemple e may tak in ye buke of Daniel,
Dani. xiii.
of ye two lycherous Iugis quhilk falsely accusit that honest and chaste matrone
Susanna, berand falls witness aganis her, for the quhilk, be the rychteous
judgment of God yai were stanit to the dead. Also the wisman sais: Pro. xiiii.
Abominatio hoim detractor. He that is a bak byter is abhominabil till all good
men. Roma. i.
And sanct Paul in the first to the Romany, rehersand yai synnaris quhilk is
worthi the dead eternal, puttis amang them detractouris, bakbytaris or
sclanderaris, sayand: Detractores deo odibiles. Bakbytaris (sais he) ar hettit
of God. Also the wisman speikis of them yat ar quysperaris, rowkaris and
rounaris on this manner: Susurro inquinabit animam suam, Eccle. xxi.
et in omnibus odietur. A rowkar and rownar, sall fyle his awin saul, and sal
be hettit of all men. Mair ouir he sais: Susurro, et bilinguis maledictus erit,
Eccle. 28.
multos enim turbauit pacem habentes. A man or a woman that is ane rowkar and
doubil toungit, is cursit and wariit, for siclik ane person hes put mekil
trubil amang men and women, quhilk before was at peace. And to be schort with
ow, our saluiour declaris this mattir in few wordis, sayand thus: Dico autem
vobis, quonia^ omne verbum ociosum, Math. xii.
quod locuti fuerint homines, reddant rationem de eo in die iudicii. Bot I say
to ow, that ilkane idil word, quhilk men and women speikis, thairof thai sall
gife ane count in the day of judgment.

Now seen we moan gife ane count to God in the day of judgment, of all our ydil
wordis quhilk ar vain and vnprofitabil till us and our nychtbour, mekil mair
it followis, yat we moan gife ane count of all our evil words, blasphemous
wordis, backbyting and sclandering wordis, lycherous wordis, inuious wordis,
treful, prydful and malicious wordis with sicklike. Quhat will e mair? as it
followis be the wordis of our saluiour: Ex verbis tuis iustificaberis, et ex
verbis tuis co^demnaberis. Thou sal be iustifeit be thy wordis, gif yai be
conform to the law of God, and spokin of ane good mind, and thou sall be
condemnit for thy wordis, gif thai be aganis the law of God, The revvardis of
them yat kepis this command. Pro. 21.
and spokin of ane evil mind. And sa it is nocht difficill to ken how God
almychty rewardis yame yat spekis good wordis, with ane good mind. The wisman
sais: Qui custodit os suum, et linguam suam, custodit a tribulatione animam
sua^. He that kepis his mouth and his tongue, kepis his saul or his life fra
trubil. And the Prophet king David sais in the Psalm: Ps. xxxiii.
Quis est homo qui vult vitam, et diligit dies videre bonos? Quhat is the man
that wald haif life, and luffis to fee good dais? To this questioun he answeris
and sais: Prohibe linguam tua^ a malo, et labia tua ne loquantur dolu^ Refrain
thy tongue fra spekin evil words, and stop thy lippis that thai speik na
dissait. In their wordis the Prophet techis, that commonly be good gyding of our
tongue, we may cum to mekil rest and tranquillity, nocht only to be had in this
temporal life, bot also in the life to cum, quhilk we luke for in the kingdom
of heuin, quhilk he grant us, that bocht us with his precious blude. Amen.

The nynt command.
NOn concupisces vxorem proximi tui. Exo. xx. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou sall nocht cowet thy nychbouris wife.

The tent command.
The xxiiii. Cheptour.
NOn domum, non agrum, non seruum, Exo. xx. Deuteronomy. v.
non ancilla^, non bouem, non asinu^, nec vniuersa que illius sunt. Thou sall
nocht cowet thy nychtbouris house, nor his croft or his land, nor his seruand,
nor his hyir woman, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any other thing, quhilk
pertenis to him. How kepis their two last co^mandis ordour with the laif? Men
mycht trow that thai had kepit the laif of the commandis, quhen thai had nocht
oppinly brokin them in deid, as the Iewis traistit that thai fulfillit yai two
commandis quhilk forbad adultery and thift, gif yai had nocht committit siclik
in deid. God thairfor be his seruand Moses, to put away yat error fra the
Iewis and al other men and women, he schawis them be their two last commandis,
yat thai synnit than to, quhen thai desyrit their nychtbouris wife, or watchit
and waitit be wylis for yair geir. Amang the Iewis maisteris had power apo^
their bond seruandis bodeis, as upon their bestis, quhairfor the bond men and
women was comptit amang them part of their possessioun or temporal geir.
Attour, amang the Iewis it was tholit for the hardness of their heart, that a man
mycht put away his wife for any deformity. Sa, and a man mycht haif lauchfully
luffit his nychtbouris wife, Deuteronomy. 24
he mycht a fischit ane cause to ^is wife, to put her away and tak ane other,
or sche also quhen sche desyrit ane other, wald make faltis to her husband, to
get her leif. Sa mycht thai find money suttill inuentionis to get other mennis
wyffis, housis, landis, geir, seruandis and bestis, quhairfor to schaw them,
that to desire siclyke was nocht lef^ll, suppose thai had nocht got^in their
purpose in deid, their two commandis was giffin. Ar their two last commandis
exponit in the haly scripture? e, our saluiour exponis the nynt command, Math.
5.
sayand thus: Ego autem dico vobis, quia omnis qui viderit mulierem ad
co^cupiscendu^ ea^, iam mechatus est eam in cord suo. Bot I say to ow,
quhasaeuir beholdis ane other mannis wife, or any other woman by his awin wife
2 Perer. 2
to desire her, he hais co^mittit adultery with her ellis in his heart. And as
sanct Peter the Apostil sais: Oculos habentes plenos adulterii. Thai haif their
eyne full of adultery. Quhair is the tent exponit? In the Euangil of sanct
Matthew, quhair our saluiour sais thus: No^ potestis deo seruire et ma^mone.
Math. 6.
e may nocht serve God and Mammon. Ideo dico vobis, ne soliciti sitis anime
vestre quid ma^ducetis, neque corpori vestro quid induamini. Thairfor be nocht
careful quhat e sal eit or drink. Math. xiii
And agane he sais: Solicitudo seculi istius, and fallacia diuittaru^ suffocat
verbum, et sine fructu efficitur. The carefulnes of yis world and the
desaitfulnes of riches, smoris the word that it beris na fruit.

Quhat is the rycht keeping of their two comma^dis? To haif ane cleir ee, The
rycht keeping of their commandis.
and ane clein heart A cleir ee, is the rycht judgment of reasone, and
intentioun of our mind, quhilk should dereck, ordour and gyde all our deidis to
be doine to the plesour of God and profit of our nychbour, according as the
Apostil techis sayand: 1. Cor. 10. The cleir ee of our inte^tioun to God.
Colos. iii.
Sieve ergo ma^ducatis, sieve bibitis, vel aliud quid facitis, omnia in gloriam
dei facite. Quhiddir e eit or drink, or do any other thing, do all to the
honor and glore of God. And agane: Omne quodcunque facitis in verbo aut in
opere, oi^a in noi^e dn^i nostri Jesus Christi facite. All thingis quhatsaeuir e
doin word or deid, do all in ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ, yat is, quhen e
speik any good word, or dois any good deidis, lat our intentioun be, to do yame,
nocht to our awin glore and singular profit, bot principally to ye glore of
God. Matg. ^.
Our saluiour declaris this in the Euangil, in the deidis of almous, praying
and fasting. Of this ee of our intentioun, our saluiour sais thus: Lucerna
corporis tui, est oculus tuus. Si oculus tuus fuerit simplex, totum corpus tuum
lucidum erit. Si autem oculus tuus fuerit nequa^, totum corpus tuum tenebrosum
erit. Si ergo lumen quod in te est tenebre sunt, ipse tenebre quante erunt? Thy
ee is the lycht of thy body. Gyf thy ee than be simpill and clein all thy body
sall be full of lycht, bot and gyf thine ee be wykit, all thy body sall be full
of myrknes. That is to say, gif thy intentioun be rycht, thy deidis, quhilk ar
nocht eu^l and repugnand to the law of God, ar rycht plesand to God, bot and
gif thy inte^tioun be wrang, thy deidis ar maid displesand to God. A cleir ee
to thy nychtbour, The cleir ee of our inte^tioun till our nychbour
is to haif this intentioun, to do to him as you wald that he of resone should do
to the, and to do na thing to him, quhilk thou wald nocht yat he of resone should
do to the. Schortly, in all thy deidis inte^d thy nychtbouris weil and profit,
as thy awin.

The descriptioun of ane clein heart
A clein heart is yat quhilk hais na inordinat desire of warldly geir, bodelie
lust and warldly honor. A clein heart is that quhilk is content to serve God*
nocht principally for any warldly plesour or profit, bot rather for his awin
lufe and gudnes. A clein heart is that quhilk is hail giffin to the lufe of God
and our nychtbour. A clein heart is yat quhilk luffis his nychtbour lykwais
nocht for his geir, or other carnal affectionis, bot may of all for the lufe
of God.

Descriptioun of ane foul heart.
And contrary, that man hais ane foul heart, quhilk luffis him self allanerly,
sa and he be weil he curis nocht quhat becum of his nychtbour, quhilk singular
and private lufe, is the rute of all evil. Schortly, the rycht keeping of their
two commandis is to be blyth of thy nychbouris honor and profit, desire the
samyn, and help him thairto.

Quha brekis this tvva commandis.
Quha brekis their two commandis? First, quha yat with a deliuerit mind and full
consent, desyris to haif their nychtbouris wife, to commit adultery with her.
Lykwais, quha yat with full consent wald fulfill their carnal lust with any
woman quhilk is nocht his mareit wife. Quha lykwais wald haif his nychtbour
partit fra his lauchfull wife, that he mycht haif her, or any other ungodly
cause. Quha inuies his nychtbour, yat he hais ane honest woman to his wife.
Quha cowattis inordinatly their nychtbouris geir, desyr and with full consent,
to get geir fra him unjustly, or by vnlauchfull contrackis, be suttiltie,
falsat and desait. Quha wald haif any ma^nis seruand fra his master unjustly,
and by his maisteris will. Quha inuies yair nychbours, beand blyth of his hurt
and adversity, and sorry of his weil and prosperity. Schortly al lycherous,
inuious, and cowatous men, brekis their two co^mandis.

How may a christin man fulfill their two last co^mandis? How may a christin
man fulfill their tvva last commandis.
Trewly it is exced and difficill to refrain our heart fra vnlauchfull desire of
women, warldly geir and honor, because that in our corruppit nature is rutit
concupiscence, lust and desire of things forbiddin be the law of God. And
suppose the same concupiscence remain in us, quhilk ar baptisit in Christ
Jesus, or that are reconcilit to God after ou^ actual syn be true penance. it it
is in us na syn, quhil we consent with a deliuerit mind to fulfill in deid the
same concupiscence, or ellis to haif lang delectatioun in the same
concupiscence without deid. According as the wisma^ sais: Eccle. 18.
Post concupiscencias tuas no^ eas, et a voluntate tua auertere. Thou sal nocht
gang after thy concupiscence, that is to say, thou sal nocht consent to fulfill
the vnrasonabil lust and desire of thy flesch. Iaco. i.
To this agreis S. James sayand: Vnusquisque vero te^ptatur a concupiscentia
su^, abstractus et illectus, deinde concupiscentia cu^ co^ceperit, parit
peccatu^, peccatu^ vero cum consummatum fuerit generat morte^. Ilk man is
te^pit of his awin concupiscence, drawin away and entyscit. Syne the
concupiscence consaillis and bringis forth syn, quhen syn is completit it
generis dead. Understand heir, that the concupiscence co^saillis be suggestioun
and delectatioun, and bringis forth syn be consent. Se that suppose we feil
suggestioun to syn, other be evil thochtis remembrance, sycht, heiring,
smelling, sauering, tasting and tweching, or be any evil counsel giffin to us,
be our enemy or any other. Secundly, suppose we begin to haif sum plesour and
delectatioun in the same evil, it gif we incontinent ref^ane out will fra
consent to do the same evil, nocht only we commit na deadly syn, bot we pleis
God in resistance of ye same. That this doctrine is true, Roma. 8.
sanct Paul teichis plainly: Nihil ergo nunc da^nationis est his qui sunt in
Christo Jesus, qu^ no^ secundu^ carne^ ambula^t. Their is now (sais he) na
damnatioun unto them that are in Christ Jesus, quhilk gangis nocht after the
flesch, bot after the spirit. Roma. 6.
Agane: Non ergo regnet peccatu^ in vestro mortali corpore, vt obediatis
concupiscen eiis eius. Lat nocht syn regne in our mortal bodeis, that e should
obey the lust of it. Declaratioun of this matter we haif in the history of
Adamis fall and first syn. Gene. iii.
The serpent come and maid suggestioun and gaif counsel to breik the command of
God. Eve the woman, begane to haif delectatioun in the sycht of the fruit
forbiddin. Adame willing to content the mind of the woman, consentit, and eit
it, and sa braik the command of God, to the great damage and skaith of him self
and all his posterity. The same process is daily found in committing of our
synnis. The serpent signifyis the devil quhilk tempis and prouokis us to breik
the command of God, prouok and other a thing or vthir forbiddin be God. Eve
betakins ye flesche, quhilk begynnis to haif plesour and delectatioun in the
thingis sa proponit. Adame signifyis the fre will of man, quhilk quhen it
co^sentis and deliueris to do the deid, syn is completit and fulfillit. Thus we
conclude, that sa lang as we abstane fra the co^senting to the suggestioun and
tystyng of our concupiscence, we syn nocht.

The xxv. Cheptour.
QVhat is the cause that this carnal concupiscence, the mother and nuris of
syn, Quhat is the cause yat carnal concupiscence remanis in our flesch after
Baptyme.
remanis in the flesche of al christin men and women eftir Baptyme and penance,
how good, how haly, and perfect saeuer thai be, it makis to them impediment to
do the lawis of God perfitely, full sair aganis their will, and wald be quyt of
it, and can nocht, and thairfor lamentis and murnis daily for the continual
cummer of it? God almychty be his rychteous judgment and infinite wisdom,
permittis the carnal concupiscence to remain in Christin men and women, after
the resauing of Baptyme and Penance, nocht for our evil, bot for our weil,
nocht to our distructioun, bot to be to us ane occasioun of our saluatioun, for
nane sal be crownit in heuin with honor and glore, except yai get victory,
nane can get victory except he fecht stowtly and manfully, na man fechtis bot
with his ennimy, sa gif yair be na ennymie, yair is na battle, na battle, na
victory, na victory na croune. Now thairfor God hes permittit yis
concupiscence to remain in us, yat we throch his grace owyrcu^mand the same,
may optene the croune of glore in heuin. Sa God permittit the Cananeittis to
remane in a part of the land of promissioun amang the people of Israel, nocht
for their distructioun, bot for yair exercitioun in battle, that yai haiff and
exercitioun and practeis in fechting agane yame, be the help of God yai mycht
ourcum, nocht only the Cananeis, bot also al other nationis quhilk wald be yair
enymeis. How may we ourcum this enymie that dwellis in our mortal body,
euirmair prouok and and steir and us to evil? Revvlis to dant the flesch.
Thus, we doand throch Gods grace our deuore and diligens quhilk we aucht to
do, God will gife til us his spret, be quhais vertew and grace, we fall eisalie
ourcum the temptatioun of our flesch, e and also the devil, and the world. We
ourcum them, quhen we resist them, we resist them, quhen we consent nocht to
yair temptatioun. The first thing yat we aucht to do in this battle, is to make
inuocatioun to God be ane faithful prayar, to gife us his haly spret, for as
the wisman said to God: Et vt sciui quonia^ aliter non possum esse continens,
Sapi. 8.
nisi deus det. And after I kermit that I culd nocht vtherwais be continent
(...) my fle^ch fra evil, except that God gaif me grace. And as the Apostil
sais: Roma. 8
Si enim secundu^ carnem vixeritis, moriemini, Si autem spiritu* facta carnis
mortificaueritis, viuetis. And e leif after the flesch e sal dee, bot and e
mortify the deidis of the flesch be the spirit, e sall leif. How sall we
optene the spirit of God, bot with ane faithful prayar. For our saluiour Christ
hais maid us promis sayand: Ask and e sall get. Amen amen dico vobis, si quid
petieritis patrem in nomine meo dabit vobis. Math. vii.
Quhat saeuir e sall ask the father in my name, he sal gife it ow. Agane: Joan.
16.
Sa sal our heuinly father gife the good spirit to them yat askis him. Let us
thairfor ask this spirit of God be ane true faith in Christ Jesus, committand
our cause hailelie to him, traistand and lippinnand hailelie to him, that the
father eternal, for the lufe and meritis of Christ, will nocht let us want his
spirit, we doand that is in us as is before said, quhilk may renew our mind and
make us new men in God, in rychteousnes and halynes, sall slokkin the heit of
carnal lust in us, and kendil the fire of Gods lufe in our hartis, and sa make
us bring forth the frutis of the spirit, quhairof ane is continence and
chastity. The secund thing that we moan do in our battle aganis our
concupiscence is to make resistance to our foul lustis and desyris in the
beginning of yame, for and we thoil our carnal desyris bide in our mind, yai
will grow and multiply, and wax stark agane our spirit, and sa sall be difficil
to ourcum them. Thai ar lyk to ane slederie eil that may be haldin be the
heid, and nocht be the tail. Thairfor sais the Prophet in the Palm: Beatu^ qui
tenebit, et allidet par^ulos suos ad petram. Happy is the man yat sal hald his
first motionis, Psalm. 136.
thochtis and desyris, and sall stryk yame to the stane. Quhilk verse be
mistical expositioun menis yat we should repres and dant our carnal lustis and
desyris in the beginning, quhen thai ar litil, and that be faith of our
saluiour Christ, quhilk is signifiet be the stane, because he is sickar and
suir friend and defe^dar, to all yat puttis yair traist in him.

Thridly, we should forbeir all occasionis of syn, flee evil company, quhilk is
lycht, wantone and vain, keip with great diligence our eyne fra wantone sychtis,
our eris fra hering of vile talk, lycherous sangis, dishonest talis, our handis
and membris of our body fra dishonest twyching, our mouth fra excess of meit
and drink, and all our wittis fra all abusionis, quhair throch as wyndokis,
Iere. 9.
dead enteris into our saul. According as it is said be the Prophet Hieremie:
Ascendit mors per fenestras nostras. The dead clymmis up till our saul be the
wyndokis, that is to say, deadly syn enteris in our saul be abusioun of our
five wits. And the haly man Job keipit weil this rewle quhen he said: Job.
xxxi.
Pepegi fedus cum oculis meis, vt ne cogitarem quidem de virgin. I haif maid
ane obligatioun and ane band to refrane the wantone sychtis of my eyne, that I
mycht nocht haif any inordinate thochtis of virginis. Fourtly, we should dant our
flesche fra ^ll wantones, as the Apostil sanct Paul sais expressly: Qui autem
sunt Christi, Gala. 5.
earnem suam crucifixerunt cum vitiis et concupiscentiis. Quha is ye serua^dis
of Christ, yai have crucify yair flesche togiddir with the vice and
concupiscence yairof. And e wald ken how our flesche should be crucifeit and
dantit fra the evil of the concupiscence. Trewly, with walking, fasting, and
labouris. Of the first the wisman sais: Eccl. xxxi
Vigilia honestatis tabefaciet carnes. Honest walking sall mortify the
flesche. And ane other man said, Cato.
lang sleip and rest, fosteris the vice of the flesche. Of the secund speikis
sanct Paul, 2. Cor. 6.
exhortand his Corinthianis to be ministeris of God, amang vthir vertewis he
puttis fasting before chastity. And as sanct Hierome allegeis Tyrens: Sine
cerer^ et Baccho friget Venus. Be abstinence of meit and drink, lychorie is
cauld and hais na strenth. Of the third sais the doctor sanct Hierome: All
ydil men ar full of desyris. And the wisman sais: Pro. 24.
P^r agrum hominis pegri transiui, et per vineam viri stulti et ecce totum
repleuerant vrtice. I haif gane (sais the wisman) be the field of ane ydill
man, and be the wyneard of ane fuile, and behald all was full of nettillis and
wriddis, mening that ydill men of all other ar may disponit to ye vice of ye
flesche. Do euirmair sum good warke, ya^ ye devil may euir find ye weil
occupiit. The punissionis of yame quhilk brekis yir two last co^ma^dis, and the
reward of yame yat keipis ye same is knawin weil eneuch be the declaratioun,
quhilk we maid in the endis of the saxt and seuint co^mandis, quhair it is
schawin plainly with quhat punitionis God punis^is all cowatous men and also
(...) lycherous men, and because thai breik their two last commandis in special
yat hais yair hartis fylit with the synnis of lychorie and cowatousnes. And
thai keip their two last commandis in special, quhilk keipis their hartis clein
in chastity and lufe to do the werkis of mercy to yair nychtbour. The
punitioun thairfor of all them that hais vnclein hartis, is plainly expremit
in the Apocalipsis, quhair mentioun is maid of certane men and women quhilk
sall nocht haif enteres to ye heuinly city of Jerusalem, quhair it is said
thus: Non intrabit in ea^ aliquod coinquinatum. Apo. xxi.
Na thing sal enter into that glorious city, quhilk is blekkit or fylit. And
of the reward of all them quhilk hais ane clein heart, our saluiour Christ sais
thus: Beati mundo cord, quonia^ ipsi deum videbunt. Math. 5.
Blissit ar all thai quhilk ar clein in heart, for thai sall see God. And agane
in the same place he speikis of the reward of all them quhilk hais a mercyful
heart to their nychtbour. Beati mis^ ricordes, quoniam ipsi misericordiam
conseque^tur. Blissit ar all thai quhilk ar mercyful to their nychbour, for
thai sal optene and get the mercy of God. And be the contrar sanct James
speikis of all vnmercyful men, Iaco. 2.
sayand thus: Iudiciu^ sine misericordia illi, qui non facit misericordia^. He
sall get judgment without mercy at the hand of God, quhilk hais na mercy on his
nychtbour. And sa schortly e may understand how God almychty punissis eternally
the brekaris of their two last commandis, and also how that he will reward all
the keiparis of the same with eternal reward, quhilk he grant to us that bocht
us with his precious blude. Amen.

The rycht use of the ten commandis.
The xxvi. Cheptour.
TO conclude this doctrine, quhilk we haif giffin to ow of the law and
co^mandis of God, we exhort ow till haif alwayis in our remembrance their wordis
of S. Paul: Scimus aute^, quia lex bona est, i. Timo. i.
si quis ea legitime vtatur. We know (sais he) that the law is good, gif a man
will use it weil. For suppose e know the law of God, it and e know nocht ye
rycht use of the law of God, or how that e should use the law of God daily to
our edificatioun, our knawlege will do ow litill good. Quhairfor we think it
expedient to declare to ow the rycht use of the law be plain and familiar
exempillis, to that effeck, that quhensaeuir e heir the law, or any part of the
law expremit to ow, e may considdir the rycht use of it, and sa apply the law
to our great profit and spiritual edificatioun.

First christin pepill, The exemple of ane torch.
e should use the law of God as e wald use ane Torche quhen e gang hayme to our
house in a myrke nycht, for as the Torche or Bowat schawis ow lycht to descerne
the rycht way hayme to our house, fra the wrang way, and also to descerne the
clein way, fra the foul way. Euin sa aucht e to use ye law or command of God,
as a Torche, Bowat or Lanterin. For doutles, the law of God giffis ye lycht of
knawlege to descerne our hie way hayme to our dwelling placis in heuin, fra the
wrang way yat leidis to hell. For as the strecht way to heuin is the rycht
keeping of their ten commandis, according as our saluiour sais: Math. 19.
Si vis ad vita^ ingredi, serua mandata. Gyf thou will entir to the life, keip
the commandis, sa the wrang way is to breik any of the ten co^mandis. Sa quhen
thou hais gottin knawlege and understanding of all their ten commandis or of any
ane of yame, thai* co^siddir thy self quhair thou gangis, and gif you ken thy
self to gang the narrow way of vertew that leidis to heuin, be blyth in God,
and thank him of his grace, and ask at him the gift of perseverance, and gif
thou thinkis thy self out of the hie and clein way of vertew, and that thou art
gangand in the braid and hie foul way of deadly syn that leidis to hell,
incontinent cum agane to the hie way of vertew, quhilk is commandit in the law
of God, sayand with the prophet in the Psalm: Psalm. 118.
Cogitaui vias meas, et conuerti pedes meos in testimonia tua. I haif
considerit my wayis, quhairin I haif gane wrang gaitis, and I haif turnit my
feit into thy commandis, good Lord, because yai allanerly is my strecht way to
the kingdom of heuin. Gyf thou say agane to me, quha will tell me quhen I am
in the rycht way, and quhen I am in the wrang way? Trewly thy awin conscience
will tell the, being informit be the true knawlege of the commandis of God. And
this rycht use of the law is geuin us be the wisman in the Proverbs, sayand
thus to his sone: Co^serua fili mi precepta patris tui, Prouer. 6.
and ne dimit tas lege^ matris tue, liga ea^ in cord tuo iugiter, and circumda
gutturi tuo. Cum ambulaueris, gradia^tut tecum, cum dormieris, custodiant te,
et euigilans loquere cum eis, quia mandatum lucerna est, et lex lux, et via
vite increpatio discipline. O my sone (sais the wisman) keip the commandis of
thy father, and leif nocht the law of thy mother. Bynd yame to gidder
continually in thy heart, and festin yame fast about thy half, quhen thou gangis
lat them gang with the, quhen thou sleipis, lat them keip the, and quhen thou
walknys, speik with them. For the command is the Lanterin, a Torche or ane
candel, and the law is lycht and the way of life and correctioun of evil
maneris and derectioun to good maneris.

The secund exempil (quhairby we may know the rycht use of the law) is of ane
myrrour, The exempil of ane myrrour.
quhairin a man or a woman behaldis their awin face, to that effeck, that gif
thai see their face blekkit, thai may gang to the wattir to wesche them. Euin
sa e should use the law or the commandis of God. For doutles the law is geuin to
be ane spiritual myrrour to us, quhilk gif we considdir weil, we may se the
face of our conscience in it, and know perfitly all the deformiteis and spottis
of syn, quhilk blekkis our saul, quhilk, quhen we haif doine, we should
incontinent gang to the wellis to wesche us, yat is to say, to the sacrame^tis
of haly kirk. And with true faith giffin to the promis of God, draw out of yame
the watter of grace, quhilk may wesche our saulis and make tha ne fair. For
quhasaeuer hais their saul fyli^ with original syn, should cum or ellis be
brocht to the well of Baptyme, and their be weschyne fra all yair synnis. And
quhasaeuir ar fylit in their saulis be actual syn, should cum to the well of
Penance be contritioun, Confessioun, and satisfactioun, that ya^e yai may be
weschyne with ye watter of grace, quhilk is geuin be dew ministratioun and
faithful resauing of that same sacrament. And of their wellis of grace e have
large declaratioun maid to ow in the third part of this Catechis, quhilk
intraittis of the seuin sacramentis. Sa O christin man and woman, quhen ye law
of God is declarit to the, heir it nocht in vain, bot leir the rycht use of
it, and in it, as in ane myrrour behald the face of thy conscience, and eftir
you hes sem the great deformiteis and spottis of thy synnis, incontinent cum to
the wellis of grace, that is to say, to the meritis of Christis passioun,
quhilk may be applyit to the be the rycht ministratioun of the haly
sacrame^tis. Bot tak tent yat thou cum vnfenetly. Cum thairfor with true
penance, cum with ane perfect faith geuin to the promis of God cum with ane
fervent lufe and desire of thy awin saluatioun, and sa cumand to the well of
grace, without dout thou sall resaif grace quhilk sall wesche thy saul and make
i^ (...). And this rycht use of the law may weil be gaderit of the wordis of
sanct James, sayand thus: Iaco. i.
Estote factores verbi, non auditores tantu^, fallentes vosmetipsos, quia si
quis auditor est verbi, et non factor, hic comparabitur viro consideranti
vultum natiuitatis sue in speculo etc. Be e doaris of the word, and nocht
heiraris only, desaffand our awin sel^^is, for gif any heir the word, and do it
nocht, he is like to a man that behaldis his bodily face in a myrrour. etc.
Quhilk authority was set forth to ow at lenth in the end of the Prologe.

Thridly, The exempil of ane Vrinal.
e should use the law as ane spiritual Vrinal, for lyk as luking in ane vrynal
heilis na seiknes, nochtheles, quhen the watter of a seik man is lukit in ane
Vrinal, the seiknes commonly is knawin, and than remede is socht be sum special
Medicin, geuin be sum expert Medicinar. Sa the law or commandis of God heilis
na synnar fra the seiknes of syn: Nihil ad perfectum adduxit lex. Hebre. 7.
The law gaif na grace quhairby men mycht be brocht to perfectioun.
Nochitheles, as he sais to ye Romany: Per lege^ cognitio peccati. Be the law,
Roma. iii.
is the knawlege of syn. Quhairfor, quhen we haif knawlege of our spiritual
seiknes of syn, be luking in the law, as in ane spiritual Vrynal, than should we
gang with true penance and faith, till the heuinly medicinar our saluiour
Christ, quhilk sais their wordis of him self: Non est opus valentibus medico,
Math. 9.
sed male habentibus. Thai that are stark and hail in their person, neidis na
Medicinar, bot yai yat ar weik and seik neidis a Medicinar. Now because that we are all togiddir in our saul febil, weik, and seik throch co^cupisce^ce and
syn, quhilk we may se cleirly in ye spiritual Vrinal of ye law, quhat should we
do, bot with true penance and faith, pas till our Medicinar Jesus Christ, seik
fra him the medicine yat may saif us and heil all our seiknis, seik fra him the
plaster of our saluatioun, yat may heil our wou^dis, sayand to him with the
prophet in ye Psalm: Sana anima^ meam, Psalm. 40.
quia peccaui tibi. O Lord heil my saul, for I haif synnit aganis the, quhilk
doutles he will do gif we gang to him vnfenetly, doand the worthi frutis of
penance with ane substantial traist and confidence in the meritis of his
passioun, quhilk is the only spiritual medicyn of our seik and woundit saulis.

The exempil o^ the Compass.
Fourtly, e should use the law or commandis of God as the schippar of a schip vsis
his compass, for his Compass mouis nocht nor dryuis nocht the schi^ on the braid
and stormy see to good hauin, bot the schippar haiffand a wynd, takis tent to
the derectioun of his Compass, quhil he cum to ane good hauin. Sa the law of God
is till us ane spiritual Compass, for we haiffand the prosperous wynd and
motionis of the haly spret, blow and in the salis of our understanding and fre
will, syne takand good tent to the derectioun of the law of God, as till our
spiritual compass, we may verrai prosperously with ane rycht course sail to the
glorious port and hauin of the heuinly Paradise, quhair we ^all rest the s^hip
o^ our nature in perpetual tranquillity and security of bayth body and
saul. And thus we end our declaratioun of the ten commandis, geuin to us be
almychty God, to quhome be geuin al loving and thankis, honor and glore for
euir and ever. Amen.



Heir followis the secund part of the Catechis, contenand ane plain
declaratioun of the twelf artiklis of the Creed necessary to be knawin and
trowit of all christin men and women to their eternal saluatioun.
The first Cheptour.
THe secund part of this Catechis, giffis instructioun of our christin faith,
quhilk is sa necessary to us all, that as the Apostil sanct Paul sais: Hebre.
xi. Of the ne^ nessite of our christin faith.
Sine fide autem impossible est placere deo. Credere enim oportet accedente^
ad deum quia est, et inquirentibus se remunerator sit. Without faith it is
impossible to pleis God, for he that cummis to God moan belief that God is, and
that he is ane rewardar of them that seikis him. And agane he sais: Roma. 14
Omne autem quod non est ex fide peccatum est. Quhatsaeuir is nocht of faith,
the same is syn. Esaie. 7.
And as the Prophet Esaie sais: Si non crederitis, non intelligetis. Except yat
e belief e sall nocht understand. Quhat sall we nocht understand? Trewly thai
thingis that bela^gis to our saluatioun, quhilk we can nocht ken be natural
resone, i. Cor. 2.
bot allanerly be faith. Quhairfor S. Paul sais: Animalis autem homo no^
percipit ea, quae su^t spiritus dei, stulticia enim est illi, et no^ potest
intelligere. The natural man (that is, haiffand only the giftis of nature)
vndersta^dis na thing of the spre^ of God, it is fulischnes to him and he can
nocht understand
. Quha is the natural man, bot the hail person of man, with all his resone,
cunnyng, will, wit, and powar, sic a man, nocht baiffand the faith of haly
kirk, quhilk is the gift of the spret of God, can nocht understand how to cum
to his saluatioun. And how perelous it is to misken yai thingis, as we declarit
to ow in ye first prologe, e may tak exempil of the pepil of Israel, quhen yai
were in wilderness, cumand to ye land of promissioun of quhome God sais thus:
Ipsi vero non cognouerunt vias meas, quibus iuraui in ^ra mea, Psalm. 904
si introibu^t in requiem mea^. Thai haif nocht knawin my wayis (that is to
say, my justice and mercy) to quhome I haif sworn in my wraith, yet is, I
determit to execute aganis them the rigor of my justice, sa that yai sal
nocht entir into any rest in ye land of promissioun, quhilk is the kingdom of
heuin. The reasone quhairof sanct Paul schawis in few wordis, saying: Qui
ignorant, ignorabitur. i. Cor. 14.
He that miskens sall be miskennit. Mening this, gif we will nocht ken Goddis
justice and his mercy, offerit to us in Christ, in time of this life, God sall
misken us in the day of extreme judgment. Quhairfor, that e may pleis God, that
e may understand how to cum to our saluatioun, that e finally may entir into ye
eternal rest of god, promissit unto us in Christ, leir to understand the rewle
of our faith, callit commonly the Creed, compilit and set forth be the haly
Apostillis of Jesus Christ, for the common and necessary instructioun of all
christin men and women. Their is tvva kidi^ of faith.
And for the mair plain understanding of the same Creed, it is to be notit,
that faith in haly scripture is takin in two sortis. For doutles, their is ane
faith, quhilk is general, dead, and ydil. Also yair is ane faith, quhilk is
special, leiffand and wyrkand. Ane general faith.
Quhat is general faith? General faith is ane gift, quhair throch we ken yat
yair is ane true God, and trowis fermely that all quhatsaeuir is set forth to
us of God, other in the haly write, or in the diffinitionis of general
counsellis representand the universal kirk, gaderit in the haly spirit is sa
true, that na thing can be trewar, suppose thai excede the capacite of natural
reasone, because that the haly spret, quhilk is giffar of the scripture, and
techear of haly kirk, is the spret of verity. Is this general faith, be the
quhilk we trow yair is ane god, sufficient for our saluatioun? Vndoutand it is
nocht sufficient, for money Gentillis, specially Philosophouris be the sycht and
knawlege of the creatouris had a part of this general faith, and come to ye
knawlege of ane true god, Roma. i.
his eternal powar and divinity, bot because thai wald nocht thank him,
glorify and serve him, as yair God, their knawlege was dead, ydil and vain,
and swa thai vanissit away in their mind be ydolatrie and vthir abhominabil
synnis, and sa thai perischit, as it is declarit in the first to the Romany.
Also money evil christin men and women beleiffis be this general faith as the
kirk d^is, bot because thai want the special faith yat wyrkis be leiffand
cheritie, Titum. i.
thai can nocht be saiffit. Of quhome we may verify the wordis of sanct Paul,
sayand thus: Confitentur se nosse deu^, factis autem negant. Thai say thai
know God, bot thai deny him with their deidis. Mairouir as sanct James sais:
Demones credunt and contremiscunt. Iaco. 2.
The deuillis trowis yat yair is ane God, and for feir of his terribil judgment
thai tremyl. Sa thou seis that it is nocht sufficient to belief, that their is
ane God eternal, and that all spokin of him in haly write, is true, because it
is bot ane general faith, common to good men and evil men, to men and deuillis,
al kennis perfitly that God can nocht make ane lesing.

Quhat is the special and quick faith, Ane special faith.
quhilk is in all good christin men and women? It standis in three pointis. The
first is before said, to trow that their is ane God, and yat all the historeis
writtin of God in haly write, is true as that he is ane God in substance and
three in personis, that the same blissit Trinite is makar of heuin and erd, and
of all creatouris visibil and inuisibil, yat he hais geuin to us be handis of
Moses the ten commandis, to keip under the pain of eternal da^natioun, with all vthir historeis in the haly write, other in detestatioun of syn or in
co^mendatioun of vertew. Secund, because we are brekaris of the law, we should be
knawlege of the same faith* feir all the comminationis, schoringis or
bostingis, quhilk God makis in the scripture aganis the transgressouris of the
law, thinkand that thai ar maid agane ilkane of us in special. Thridly, we
throw feir of God beginnand to repent our self for our synnis, should hoip to
optene the mercy and grace, quhilk God promissis in Christ to al and sundry
faithful and penitent men and women. Breuely, to commit our self hailely to
God, to put our hai^ traist and confidence in his help, defense, gudnes and
gracious prouisioun in all our necessiteis, perellis, dangeris, mistaris,
infirmiteis, in all forsakand our awin will, and with obediens commit all to
the gracious will of God. Siclyk faith had Daniel, Dani. 6. and 14. Dani. xiii.
Jonas. 2.
quhen he was put in the cave amang the Lyonis. Siclyk faith had Susanna, quhen
sche was iniustly condamnit to the dead. Siclyk faith had Jonas, quhen he was
three dais and three nychtis in the wame of the Quhat. Dani. iii.
Siclik faith had the three children, callit Ananias, Azarias and Misael, quhen
ya^ w^r cassin into the byrnand furnace. This is the special faith of ane true
christin man, quhilk standis in the general faith before rehersit and in sure
confidence and hoip of goddis mercy. This faith obtenis to us the abundant
grace of the haly spret, Gala. iii.
quhilk powris into our hartis ye true lufe of God and of our nychtbour. This
is the faith special, leiffand and wyrkand, that is sa mekil commendit of our
saluiour in the euangil, and of sanct Paul in his Epistillis. This is the
faith yat iustifeis a christin man according as sanct Paul sais to the
Romany: Iusticat^ ergo ex fide pace^ habemus ad deum. Roma. 5.
We being iustifyit he faith, hais peace in our conscience with God. This is
the faith that makis us the barnis of God, according as sanct Paul sais to the
Galathianis: Gala. iii.
Omnes enim filii dei estis per fidem, que est in Christo Jesus. e ar all the
sonnis of God be faith, quhilk is in Christ Jesus. This is the faith that
ouircummis the world, according as sanct Iohne sais in his first epistil: i.
Joan. 5.
Hec est victoria, que vincit mundum, fides vestra. Faith is the vertew, quhair
throch e get victory and ouercummis the world. This is the faith that
ouercummis the flesche, as sanct Paul sais to the Ephesianis: In omnibus
sumentes scutu^ fidei, Ephe. 6.
in quo possitis omnia tela nequissimi ignea extinguete. In all thingis tak e
hald of the buklar of faith, quhairwith e may slokkin the fyrie dartis of the
wyckit spret. This is the faith that ouercummis the devil as sanct Peter sais:
i. Petri. v.
Fratres sobrii estote and vigilate, quia aduersarius vester diabolus, tanquam
leo rugiens circuit, querens quem deuoret. Cui resistite fortes in fide.
Brethir be sober and walk, for our adversary the devil gangis about lyk a
rampand Lyone seikand quhome he may swallie. Quhome resist steadfastly in faith.
This is the faith quhairwith the rychteous man leiffis, as it is writtin: Roma.
1.
Iustus autem ex fide viuit. The rychteous man leiffis throch his faith. This
faith is alwayis ionit with hoip and cheritie, and werkis throw lufe. This
faith confortis us in all our aduersiteis, and causis us to haif euirmair this
word in our mouth: Roma. 8.
Si deus pro nobis, quis contra nos^ Gyf God be with us, quha can be aganis us?
And also this word: Non sunt condignae passiones huius temporis ad futura^
gloria^, que reuelabitur in nobi^ The trubillis of this time, ar nocht worthi
of the glore that sall be schawin upon us. Quhair this faith is nocht present,
good werkis can nocht help to saluatioun. Quhair yis faith (quhilk is neuir with
out good werkis) is present, all thingis cu^m^s to our weil. Noder will God
almychty thoile any thing to cum to man or woman ba^and this faith, bot tha^ he
kennis is profitabil to him, suppose we ken^ nocht, say that: Sieve viuimus,
five morimur, domini ^umus. The diuisioun of the Creed
Quhiddir we leif or dee, we are the Lordis. For them that are simpil and
vnleirit, the Creed may be deuidit in three partis, eftir the three personis in
ane godheid. Quhairof the first is of God the father, and schawis our
creatioun. The secund is of God the sone, and declaris our redemptioun. The
third is of God the haly spret exponand our sanctificatioun. As we mycht
confess our faith in few wordis. I belief in God the Father, quhilk hais
create and maid me. I belief in God the Son quhilk hais redemit me. I belief
in God the haly spret, quhilk daily sanctifyis me, ane God and three personis,
allutterly of ane nature, substance, powar, wisdom, gudnes, majesty and
eternity.

THE FIRST ARTIKIL OF THE CREED.
The secund Cheptour.
THE FIRST artikil of the Creed schawis the Fatheris Godheid, will and work,
quhair thou sais I belief or I traist in God the father almychty makar of heuin
and e^d. In declaratioun of their artikillis, first e sall heir a schort
expositioun of all the wordis contenit in this same artikil, syne we sal
colleck breuelie the soume and the sentence of the same artikil. Last of all
out of the samyn we sall gadder certane moral lessones to our spiritual
edificatioun.

I. Ilkan^ christin man and vveman fuld haif in their avvin sel^ a special
faith. Gala. 2.
Quhi sais thou in the beginning of the Creed I believe, spekand in ye singular
nowmer? To signify and declare that ilkane of us should haif in our awin heart
ane special faith in God. For trewly it is nocht sufficient to the for thy
saluatioun, that sanct Petir and sanct Paul with the laif of the sanctis of
heuin, had ane special faith in God almychty, the Father, the Son, and the
haly spret, three persons and a God, sa yat thou may say with sanct Paul: In
fide viuo filii dei, qui dilexit me, et tradidit semetipsum pro me. I leiue in
the faith of the son of God, quhilk hais luffit me, and gaif him self for me.
And than may our saluiour say to the: Math. 9.
Fidex ^ua te saluum fecit. Thy faith hais maid the saif. Math. 8.
And agane: Sicut credidisti, fiat tibi. According to thy fiath, sa be it done
to the.

The artikillis of ye Creed can nocht be co^prehendit be na^ural reasone.
Esaie. 7. 2. Cor. 10
Believe or trow. Quhy sais thou this secund word, believe or trow, sayand I
believe or trow, mair than this word, I see or I understand perfit^y? Trewly
to schaw plainly that their twelf artikillis of ye Creed, can nocht be
co^prehendit be natural reasone, bot allanerly be faith, according as it is
said: Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis. Except e believe, e sall nocht
understand. Thairfor we should eftir sanct Paulis counsel: Captiuare intellectum
in obsequium Christi. Put our natural reasone in presone, that we may serve our
saluiour Christ with ane true faith, giffand ferme credit to his haly word.

To trow in God, pertanis to ye special faith of a christin man.
In. Quhy sais thou this third word In, sayand, I believe in God? Thou sais
nocht in this first artikil, I belief their is ane God, or I believe God, bot
thou sais thus, I believe in God. Veraily thou sais swa, declarand thy self to
haif that singular and special faith, quhilk God requitis of us all. For as we
tauld ow before, it is nocht sufficient to the for thy saluatioun, to believe
that their is ane true and verai God, or to belief god, yat is to say, to
belief all ye wordis of god to be true, bot thou should belief in god, yat is
traist in him with lufe and obediens, quhilk belief we declarit to ow at lenth
before. And O christin man tak tent, that thou haif alwayis this belief in god,
quhilk is requirit of the expressly be our saluiour, Joan. xliii
sayand: Creditis in deum et in me credit e belief in god, belief also in me.
Joan. 6.
And agane he sais in ane vthir place: Ho^ est, opus dei, vt credatis in illum
quem misit illo. This is ye werk that god requiris of ow to believe in him,
quhom the father hais send, that is, the son of god, quhom the father hes
send to us be his blissit incarnatioun.

God. Quhat vnderstandis thou be this word God? Trewly, it is difficil, e and
impossibil to declare perfitly and hailely the significatioun and diffinitioun
of this word God. Sum understanding of it we haif giffin to us in haly
scripture, quhilk we sall schaw to ow breuely and plainly. Goddis be falls
nominatiou^ and iniust vsurpatioun.
Their is in haly writ sumtyme mencioun maid of them yat ar callit goddis,
allanerly be falls nominatioun and vsurpatiouns, a certane proud kingis, also
deuillis throch pride vsurpit to be callit god, and certane pepil before the
incarnatioun of Christ, blindit with error and infidelity, callit and tuk
them as gods It is writtin in the Psalm: Psalm. 95. Gods be participatioun
of Gods authority.
Omnes dii gentiu^ demonia. All the goddis of the Gentilis was deuillis. Sum
time in the scripture, certane men ar callit goddis, allanerly be
participatioun of goddis authority, and sa was in the auld law, Iugis and
Kingis, callit goddis, because thai ar rewlacis of the pepil in Goddis steid,
and hais the executioun of justice giffin to them of God. Sa it is writtin in
the buke of Exodi: D^is non detrahes. Exodus 22
Thou ^all nocht speik evil of the goddis, Goddi^ be participatioun of Gods
grace.
that is to say, of ye Preistis Pri^is and Iugis. Sum time men was callit
goddis be participatioun of special grace, and of prophecy or preisthed, of
quhom^ it is writtin in the Psalm: Psalm. 81.
Ego dixi dii estis, et fili^ excelsi omnes. I haif said that e ar goddis, and
all e ar sonnis of the heast. Bot veraily and properly their is na goddis bot
ane be true godheid and very natural property of God, of quhome it is
writtin: Audi Israel deus noster, Deuteronomy. 6.
deus vnus est. Heir Israel, our God is bot ane God. Gyf thou wald haif sum
knawlege of thy god, quhat he is. First thou moan believe that he is ane
spiritual substance: Joan. 4. Sum knavvlege is geuin to us of the may
excellent majesty of our eternal God.
Spiritus est deus. God is ane spret, that is say, a spiritual substance, nocht
maid of body and saul as man is, bot he is incorporal, immaterial, and a
simpil substance nocht maid of partis, God is eternal without beginning and
without ending, God is all godnes, in him is omnipotent strenth, power and na
waiknes, in him is vnspeikabil wisdom, and na kind of ignorance, in him is
infinite gudnes, and na kind of evil, in him is infinite rychteousnes, and na
kind of iniquity, in him is infinite mercy, and na kind of crudelitie, in him
is infinite richis, and na kind of poverty, in him is health and life, and na
kind of seiknes or mortality. Breuely, in him is infinite glore, joy and
bliss, and na kind of misery, in him is eternal lufe, and na kind of malice,
and all their propirteis of God ar nocht to him accidentis, yat is to say, put
to him or geuin to him, bot yai ar al to giddir, nocht ellis bot his awin very
substance, nature and godheid. This is the ineffabil, and incomprehensibil God,
of quhom thou sais thus: I belief into God. And gyf thou desire largear
declaratioun of thy Lord god, seik in the declaratioun of the first command, in
the beginning of the fourt Cheptour.

Father. Quhy callis thou God almychty father? Trewly I should call him father of
the secund person in the Trinity our saluiour Jesus Christ, quhilk is natural
son of him, of the same nature, substance and godheid, with the father, as it
sall be schawin to ow in the secund artikil. Mairouir I may baldly call him
father of my awin self, nocht be natural generatioun, Al faithful and good men
and women a^ sonnis or barnes of God be the grace of adoptioun.
bot be the grace of adoptioun, he hais maid him self my father, quhairin he
hais geuin to us infinite consolatioun and comfort. Great is the hoip and
traist, quhilk the son hais to his natural father, kennand weil that his
father luffis him hartly, and to his powar will defend him fra all evil, and
provide to him al good, bot and we co^pair the lufe, the cuir and prouisioun,
quhilk our natural father hais to us, to the lufe, cuir and prouidens, quhilk
our heuinly father hais to us, it will seime to be na thing ellis bot a litil
schadow, of the prouidens, gudnes, and cuit of God. The natural father wald
feign help his sonnis, provide great leiuingis for them, e make them Lordis and
princis, gif it lay in his powar, bot his powar answeris nocht to his will, he
hais na powar to provide for them, sa mekil as his heart desyris. Bot our
heuinly father almychty God, nocht only he will help and provide for us, bot
also he hais mycht and powar to help us, and in deid defend us, helpis us, and
prouidis all good for us, mair or less according as his wisdom thinkis
expedient to our weil. Thairfor our saluiour sais: Math. 6.
Dico vobis, ne folliciti sitis anime vestre, quid manducatis, neque corpori
vestro, quid induamini, Nonne anima plus est quam esca, et corpus plusquam
vestimentum etc. I say to ow, be e nocht careful for our life, quhat e sall
eite, or quhat e sall drink, nor it for our body, quhat e sall put on, is nocht
the life mair worthi than yemeit, and the body mair worthi than clething?
Behald the foulis of the air, for thai saw nocht, thai schier nocht, nor it
gaderis in any thingis in the barnis, and it our heuinly father feidisyame. Ar
e nocht mekil bettir than thai? And eftir he sais thus: Thairfor tak na thocht
saynd: Quhat sall we eit, or quhat sall we drink, or quhair with sal we be
cled? For our heuinly father knawis, that e have neid of all their thingis. Seik
first the kingdom of God, and the rychteousnes thairof, fa sall all this
thingis be ministerit to ow. i. Pet^i. v.
Sanct Peter also exhortis us to the same effeck, sayand: Omnem sollicitudinem
vestram proiicientes in eum, qu^niam ipsi est cura de vobis. Cast all our cure
on him, for he caris for ow. And the Prophet sais in the Psalm: Psalm. 54.
Iacta super dominum curam tuam, et ipse te enutriet. Cast all thy thocht and
care on our Lord, and he sal nurisch the. Thus christin man, thou should be
sickir, that gif thou with ane leiuand faith put all thy confidence and traist
in God, he will be to the a luffand father and provide all good to the, as he
thinkis expedient to thy weil.

Almychty. God only is almychty.
Certane great kingis and Emperouris, ar callit mychty Kingis and mychty
Emperouris. The angels of heuin may be callit potent and mychty, bot na
creature of heuin or erde nor under the erd may be callit omnipotent or
almychty, that is say, that hais all powar and mycht, sa God allanerly is
omnipotent and almychty as the Prophet beris witness in the Psalm: Deus noster
in coelo, Psalm. 113.
omnia quecunque voluit, fecit. Our God in heuin hais doine and wrocht all
thingis quhatsumeuir he wald do. Sa quhen he spak of Abraam, he callit him self
almychty, sayand: Ego Deus omnipotens. Gene. ^7. The fundatioun and grund of
all our faith is to trow sy^kirly that God is almychtie.
I am the almychty God. And trewly christin pepil, to believe that God is
omnipotent and almychty, is the ground, strenth and foundatioun of all the laif
of the artikillis of the faith. For gif any man wald think or say, how is it
possibil that ane puir virgin may consaif and beir a barn without the seid of
man? How is it possibil that al we moan rise fra ye deed to life agane, ilkane
man in his awin body on the lattir day? How is it possibil that the precious
body and blude of our saluiour Christ Jesus, now sittand at the rycht hand of
his father in heuin, may be really and corporally present in the sacrament of
the Altar? Till all their questionis and all siclyke concerning the artikillis
of our faith we should answeir with the wordis of this first artikil sayand, I
trow in God almychty, to quhome all thingis is possibil, and na thing is
impossibil, according as the Angel Gabriel said to the glorious virgin Mari:
Luce. i.
Non est impossible apud deum omne verbu^. Their is na word or na thing
impossibil to God. Ya^ trow nocht fermely that god is almychty, quhilk denies
the body and bl^de of our saluiour to be corporalli present in the h^ly
sacrament of the Altar.
And quhy? For he is almychty, his powar is infinite, quhilk he schawit plainly
in the creatioun of heuin and erde. Than seand that the powar of God is
infinite and incomprehe^sibil of man be natural reasone, thai schaw them self
to be great fuilis and in a manner infidelis wantand ye faith of yis first
artikil, quhilk speris any siclyke questionis, how may God do this thing or
that thing quhilk he hais spokin? It may and should be sufficient, that as our
Lord God be his infinite powar, hais creat and maid heuin and erd and all
creatouris thairin, sa be the same infinite powar he may fulfill and bring to
pass all that he sais, suppose it exceid the capacity of mannis wit and
reasone.

Makar of heuin and erd of nocht. As we said to ow before, the almychty powar of
God was plainly schawin in the creatioun of heuin and erd, quhilk God maid of
na thing. And heir we should consider the great difference betuix the wyrking of
man, and the wyrking of God. Ane craftis man can nocht wyrk his werk except yat
he have sum matter to make his wark of. Ane Tail^our can nocht make ane garment,
bot of clayth. A Masone can nocht byg ane wall, bot of Lyme and stane. A Wricht
can nocht make the ruif of ane house bot of tymmer, and sa forth. Bot almychty
God maid heuin and erd and all creatouris thairin, of na thing, quhilk he did
be his almychty powar. Sa Moses beiris witness sayand: In principio creauit
Deus coelum et terram. God in the beginning, Gene. i.
maid of na thing heuin and erde. And the Prophet syngis in the Psalm:
Adiutorium nostrum in nomine domini, Psalm. 123.
qui fecit coelum et terra^. Our help is in the name of the Lord, quhilk maid
heuin and erde. Now thairfor, O christin man, thou sal leir the true
significatioun of this word creatioun, it betakins nocht allanerly making of
heuin and erde with all creatouris of nocht as we said before, bot also it
betakins continual and perpetual co^seruatioun, gubernatioun, and prouisioun of
al creatouris. God forbid that we ymagein God to be ane makar of his workis, as
man is a werkar of his werkis. Quhen a warkman hais maid a house, he passis fra
it, and takis na cuir of it. Syclike it is of all vthir warkmen concerning
their wark, bot God almychty hais sa maid of na thing all his creatouris, that
also continually he conseruis and keipis them in yair being, he gouerneis yame
and gydis yame, in samekil yat gif he wald take away fra his creatouris his
continual and daily conseruatioun, bot a moment of ane hour, all wald fall to
na thing. Tharfore our saluiour sais in the euangil of sanct Iohne: Joan. v.
Pater meus vsque modo operatur et ego operor. My father hitherto wyrkis be
co^seruatioun of his creatouris, and I wyrk also with him.

The third Cheptour.
Ye ^oume of this first artikil.
THe sentence of the first artikil of the Creed is this. I trow nocht allanerlie
that God is, or that the haly writ sais of God is true, bot I feirand the
judgment of God for transgressioun of the law and repe^tand the same, puttis al
my traist and hoip of my saluatioun into ane verai God, quhilk is father to all
his creatouris, luffis them and dois euir all good to them, conseruis and
keipis them mychtfully, disponis and ordouris them wisely, prouidis for them
graciously. And anent my self, I dout nocht bot he fauouris and luffis me, for
als mekil as yat he of his awin gudnes hes geuin me al good, quhatsaeuir I haif
or know, he keipis me at time and tide, and defendis me nycht and day fra all
evil and peril that my fayis in body or in saul wald do to me, or any vthir
creator. And that he will without dout, fulfill his promise of mercy to me for
his awin faithfulness, I doand dew penance, and haiffand a leiffand and quick
faith in him. And this I traist surely he may do, for he is almychty. Their is
na creature yat may resist to his will, for he is makar of heuin and erd and all
creatouris thairin. And I grant to, yat he is my makar and hais geuin me body
and saul, and keipis yame euir, and my life, my wit, my reasone and al my
membris. I grant he giffis me meit and drink, cleithing, house and harbarie,
gyrs, corn, and cattall, wife and barnis and vthir good. I grant also he garris
al his creatouris make service to me, the Son and Moan, nycht and day, fire,
air, watter and erd, fische, foulis and bestis, and al yat growis on the
ground. Thairfor, quhat euir I am, quhateuir I may, quhateuir I haif be heuin
and erd, he giffis it to me.

First, quhen we believe with our heart, Moral lessonis of vertevv gaderit of
the first artikil.

A lessone to ken Gods majesty. Sapi. xiii.


and confess is with our mouth this first artikil, I believe in God father
almychty, makar of heuin and erde, we are direck it to the true knawlege of the
majesty of God. For this is a general rewle, ilkane makar is mair excellent,
than is the work. God almychty is the makar of heuin and erd and al thingis
contenit yairin, quharfore he is mair excellent than all the creatouris of the
world. This is declarit in the buke of wisdom thus: Quorum et si specie
delectati deos putauerunt, sciant quanto his dominator eorum speciosior est,
spiciei enim generator hec omnia constituit. Aut si virtutem et opera eorum
mirati sunt, intelliga^t ab illis, quoniam qui hec fecit fortior est illis. A
magnitudine enim speciei, et creature, cognoscibiliter poterit creator horu^
videri. Suppose the Gentilis, haiffand plesour in certane creaturis fairnes,
had opinioun yat thai were goddis, it thai should haif kend, that the Lord and
rewlar of yame is fairar than thai all, for he that is makar of all fairnes
maid them. Or gif thai merualit at the great powar and werkis of the
creatouris, thai should haif understand be yame, yat he quhilk maid yame is
starkar than thai all, for be the gretnes, fairnes and gudnes of ye creatouris,
the makar of yame may be persaiuit with plain knawlege. Thus we may cum to sum
knawlege of gods majesty, powar, wisdom, and gudnes, be faith of this first
artikil. A lessone to gife thankis to God.
Secundly, this artikil leiris us to gife perpetual thankis to God, for quhat
saeuir we haif other fra heuin or erde, or any creator yairin, the same is
geuin us of God. According as sanct Paul sais: Quid habes quod non accepisti?
i. Cor. 4.
Quhat hais thou, quhilk thou hais nocht resaiuit? Psalm. 23.
And in ye Psalm: Dn^i est terra and plenitudo eius. The erde is the Lordis
and all contenit in it, the round world and all that inhabit in it. Thairfor we
should euir gife thankis to God for all his giftis, sayand with the Prophet in
the Psalm: Psalm. 102.
Benedic anima mea domino, et omnia que intra me sunt nomini sancto eius.
Benedic anima mea domino, et noli obliuisci omnes retributiones eius. Loiue
thou the Lord O my saul, and all that is within me loiue his haly name, loiue
thou the Lord my saul, and fore^ nocht his benefitis. A lessone to haif
patience.
Thridly, be faith of this artikil, we are inducit to haif paciens in all
aduersiteis. Suppose all creatouris ar maid of God, and sa good in yair nature
resauit of God, it gif in any thing thai noy us, or inferris any pain to us,
we should belief that the same pain cu^mis to us be the hand of God, bot nocht
the sin of evil men, quhilk puttis the pain to us. Thairfor sais the Prophet
Amos: Amos. iii.
Si erit malum in ciuitate quod dominus non fecerit? Is their any evil in the
city, quhilk the Lord makis nocht? As he mycht say, their is na evil of pain
or trubil in the pepil, bot it cummis be the send of God, according as he sais
be ye Prophet Esaie: Ego dominus et non alter, Esaie. 45.
formans lucem et creans tenebras, faciens pacem et creans malum, ego dn^^
faciens omnia hec. I am the Lord and na vthir bot I, quhilk makis lycht and
myrknes, quhilk makis peace and also makis evil, understand be this word evil,
battal, weir, and all manner of adversity and temporal trubil, for punitioun of
syn, as sanct Hierome sais upon Amos. Hiero. su^ Amos.
Bot it is callit evil, because it semys evil to yame yat tholis it. Now seand
yt al evil of pain, troubil and adversity, cummis be the send of God, other
for our correctioun, probatioun or punissioun, we should haif patience in all
aduersiteis, sayand with Job: Si bona suscepimus de manu dn^i, Job. 2.
mala aute^ quare non sustineamus? Gyf we haif resaiuit prosperity fra the
hand of the Lord, quhy should we nocht thoil the evil of adversity? Dn^s dedit,
Job. i.
dominus abstulit, sicut domino placuit, ita factum est, sit nomen domini
benedictum. The Lord hes geuin us our prosperity, the Lord hais takin it away
fra us, as it hais plesit the Lord, sa be it dome, blissit be the name of the
Lord.

A lessone to use all creatouris vveil.
Fourtly, be the faith of this same artikil we should leir to haif the rycht use
of all creatouris, quhilk is to use them to that effeck and purpose, quhairto
thai ar creat of god. And gif e wald speir, to quhat use was the creatouris
maid of God? The wisman ansueris sayand: Pro. xvii.
Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est dominus. Our Lord God hes wrocht and
maid all creatouris for his awin self, that is to say, for his awin glore that
all creatouris should glorify and magnify him according to their powar and
manner.

Secund, thai were maid for our service and profit according as Moses speikis
of the Son and Moan and sternis, in the buke of Deuteronomii: Que fecit
dominus deus tuus, Deuteronomy. 4.
in ministeriu^ cunctis gentibus. Thy Lord God sais Moses hais maid them all
to the service of all pepil. And the Prophet sais in ye psalm: Omnia
subiecisti, subpedibus eius. Psalm. 8.
Thou hais good Lord (sais the Prophet) subieck it all thingis under the feit of
man, that is to say, to the service and profit of man. We should thairfor use al
creatouris to the glore of God, quhilk we do quhen we use them to the plesoure
of God. Alsua we should use them to our awin profit, sa that quhen we use them
we commit na syn. Swa, quhatsaeuer thou hais, wisdom, cunning, fairnes,
strenth, or any warldly geir, use them all to the plesour of God, and sa thou
vsis them to thine awin profit. To God thairfor be al loving and thankis,
honor and glore for euir and euir. Amen.

The secund artikil.
The iiii. Cheptour.
ET IN IESVM CHRISTVM filium eius vnicu^ dominum nostru^. Heir begynnis the
secund part of our Creed, quhilk concernis the faith yat we should haif in the
secund person in Trinity, beleiuand fermely that he is bayth God and man. And
this part of our Creed contenis seuin artikillis. The first is, Seuin
artikillis of the Creed
I trow in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. The secund, I trow yat Jesus
Christ was consaiuit be the haly spret, and was borne of the virgin Marie. The
third, I trow yat Jesus Christ tho^it his passioun under Poncius Pylatus, was
crucifyit, dead and bereit. The fourt, I trow that Jesus Christ descendit to
the hell. The fifth, I trow that Jesus Christ raise fra dead to life the third
day. The saxt, I trow that Jesus Christ ascendit to the heuins, and sittis at
the rycht hand of God the father almychty. The seuint, I trow that Jesus Christ
sall cum fra heuin to judge the quick and the dead. Their seuin artikillis
expremis to us the true faith quhilk we aucht till our saluiour Jesus Christ in
our hartis, and to confess them with our mouth quhen neid is, for as our
saluiour sais: Joan. ^ii.
Qui credit in filium, habet vitam eternam, qui autem incredulus est filio, non
videbit vitam, ^ed ira Dei mane^ super eum. Quhasa beleiuis in the son, hais
eternal life, he that beleiuis nocht in the son, sal nocht see life, bot the
wraith of God abydis upon him. Gyf thou will know how profitabil this faith is,
heir quhat sanct Paul sais to the Romany: Quia si co^fitearis in ore tuo
dominum Iesum, Roma. 10
et in cord tuo credideris, quod deus illu^ suscitauit a mortuis, saluus eris.
Gyf thou confessis Jesus with thy mouth that he is the Lord, and trowis with
thine heart, yat God hais raisit him fra the deed, thou sal be saiffit. That is
to say, gif thou believe with ane true faith yat werkis be lufe, yat Jesus
Christ is bayth God and man, and yat he deit for our redemptioun, and raise up
agane fra the deed the third day, be the mycht of God, thou sall be saif^ it be
eternal saluatioun. Sen swa is (O christin man) that thy saluatioun eternal,
s^andis in the true and perfect faith of our saluiour Jesus Christ, I exhort ow
to tak good tent to the expositioun of yir seuin artikillis, quhilk as we said,
pertenis till our saluiour Jesus Christ.

JESUS. For the plain intelligens of this artikil, e moan understand four
wordis. The first is yis word Jesus, the propir name of our saluiour, a name sa
excellent and of sa hie majesty, yat as sanct Paul sais: Philip. 2.
In nomine Jesus, omne genu flectatur, coelestium, terrestrium et infernorum. In
the name of Jesus, all kneis should bow, of heuinly creatouris, of erdly, and of
hell. This name Jesus is a Hebrew word, and be interpretatioun is as mekil to
say in the Latin tongue as saluator* and in our Scottis speech, ane saluiour.
And after quhat manner he is our saluiour, the halye Angel declarit to Joseph
sayand: Vocabis nomen eius Iesum, ipse enim saluum faciet populum suum a
peccatis eorum. Thou sal call his name Jesus, for he sal saif his pepil fra yair
synnis. Quhat is syn? Syn is ye tra^sgressioun of Gods command, yat fylis and
blekkis our saulis. Syn bringis us in bondage and thirldome of the devil, syn
causis us to incur the offense and indignatioun of God. Be syn we deserve the
paynis eternal of hell. Finally, throch syn we are at Gods horn and banissit the
kingdom of heuin. Fra their great dangaris and misereis of syn, another can Angel
of heuin nor man in erde deliver and saif us. Only Jesus the natural son of
God may saif us, be the meritis of his blissit incarnatioun, of his may haly
conuersatioun and painful passioun. Thairfor he sais yt he sal saif his pepil
fra their synnis. And gif thou speir quha is his pepil, quhom he saiffis fra
yair synnis? Trewly thai men and women, to quhom the vertew and meritis of
Christis passioun is applyit be faith, that wyrkis be cheritie and the haly
sacramentis, thai ar the pepil of Jesus, and them will Jesus deliver fra their
synnis. Quhairfor (O christin man) have euirmair in thy mind a quick
remembrance of this haly name Jesus, have euir in thy heart fervent lufe to this
haly name Jesus, have Jesus prentit in thy heart, sa deiply and sa constantly,
that na thocht or lufe of this world put it away. Thou may tak exempil of that
halye man Ignatius, quhilk had sa fervent a lufe to this name Jesus that he
said to the tyrand, that Jesus was prentit in his heart. Quhen Ignatius was
slain, the tyrand causit the heart of Ignatius to be oppinnit and sa fande that
miraculously this name Jesus was writtin in his writtin in his heart with goldin
letteris. Quhairto should we be prolixt in yis matter? The mair yat a true
christin man or woman vnderstandis and co^sideris the great vertew and hie
majesty of this blissit name Jesus, the mair sall he grow in Faith, Hoip, and
Cheritie, euermair haiffand in his mind yir words: Non est aliud nomen sub
coelo datum hominibus, in quo oportet nos saluos fieri. Acto. 4.
Their is na other name under heuin geuin to men, in quhome we moan be saiuit,
bot allanerly be the name of Jesus.

Christ. The secund word heir to be notit, is yis word Christus, quhilk be
interpretatioun is callit vnctit. And this word Christ betakins the dignity
and may excellent office of our saluiour Christ. In the auld law, Exo. 2^. i.
Reg. xvi 3. Regu^. i.
preistis was vnctit, as it is writtin in ye buke of Exodi. Also kingis was
vnctit, as we have mentioun maid of king David, and of Solomon. Yis word
Christ betakins the may excellent dignity and office of our saluiour,
quhairby he is our head king and head bischop.
Quhy was Bischoppis and preistis vnctit? To signify yair haly office geuin to
yame of God, quhilk thai can nocht worthily and perfitly execute, without the
special grace of God. The office of a Priest and Byschop is nocht to leiue in
idilnes, nocht to leiue in fornicatioun and huirdome, nocht to be occupeit in
halking and hunting, bot to leiue ane haly life, chaist in body and saul, to
pray to God for the pepil, to offer giftis and sacrifice to God for the pepil,
to preche the word of God to the pepil, and lyk lanternis of lycht to gife
exempil of haly life to the pepil, quhow thai should contemn all inordinat lufe
of carnal plesour, of warldly geir, and temporal dignity, and to leiue a
christin life to the plesour of God. Kingis lykwais was vnctit, to signify
their excellent dignity and office. Quhilk is to rewil ye pepil be executioun
of true justice, to defend his pepil fra their ennemyis, to cherisch good men,
and to punis and dant evil men. And trewly our saluiour Jesus, may weil be
callit Christ yat is to say, vnctit, nocht with material v^e, bot with ye spret
and may abundant grace, quhilk God gaif to him, mair excellent and mair
abundantly, than was geuin to all creatouris that euir was, is or salbe. For as
sanct Iohne the Baptist sais: Joan. iii.
Non ad mensura^ dat deus spiritum. God gaif nocht his spret to our saluiour
Jesus after mesour, bot above all mesour. Thus our saluiour was vnctit
spiritually, to be ane Priest and ane King. Quhow was he ane Bischop or a
Priest? For he techit us the true word of God, he prayit and prayis daily for
us to the father of heuin, he gaif us exempil of all vertew and perfectioun, he
offerit his awin precious body upon the altar of the Cross, as ane plesand
sacrifice to the father of heuin, for our redemptioun and eternal saluatioun.
Mairouir, Apoca. 19
he is king of all kingis and Lord of all Lordis, to quhome was geuin all powar
bayth in heuin and erde, he hais authority to rewle his realm, that is to
say, all christin men and women, to defend them fra their ennemeis, to reward
all good men, and punis all evil men, quhilk he sall do perfitly upon the lattar
day, and dois daily with weir, pest, and hungir, gif e wald tak tent to it.
Thus christin pepil, euirmair haif in our mind their two haly wordis, Jesus,
Christus, for thai ar full of all consolatioun and comfort.

His only son. Quhy sais thou in this artikil I believe in Jesus Christ the
only son of God? Ar nocht we all, that beleiuis in Christ Jesus with ane true
and leiffand faith, the so^nis of God? as it is said: Joan. i.
Dedit eis potestatem filios dei fieri, his qui credunt in nomine eius. He hais
geuin powar to them to be sonnis of God, quhilk beleiuis in his name. Gala.
iii.
And alsa sanct Paul sais: Omnes enim filii dei estis per fidem, que est in
Christo Jesus. e ar all the sonnis of God be faith quhilk e have in Christ Jesus.
Now sen it is swa, yat al good christin men be leiffand faith in Christ Jesus ar
the sonnis of God, quhi sais you in yis artikil, I believe in Jesus Christ the
only son of God? Trewly we all say swa in this artikil, beleiuand with our
heart and co^fes^ and with our mouth, that our saluiour Jesus Christ is the only
natural son of God* nocht maid, bot gottin eternally of the verrai substance
of God the father, consubstancial with the father, God of God, lycht of lycht,
true God of true God, quhais eternal generatioun and birth, personal
distinctioun, co^substantial nature of godheide, equalle powar, and euirlastand
majesty with the father, is declarit be the evangelist sanct Iohne in the
beginning of his euangil, Joan. i.
sayand thus: In principio erat verbum etc. And as for all true christin men and
women, quhilk beleiuis in Christ Jesus with ane special faith that wyrkis be
lufe, ar the sonnis of God, nocht be natural generatioun, bot allanerly be
faith, grace, and adoptioun, for als mekil as almychty god the eternal father
for the lufe and me. it is of his natural son our saluiour Jesus Christ, hais
forgeuin us al our synnis, taking us to his favor, and (...) us participa^t of
his eternal kingdom, with Christ Jesus his natural son, as sanct Paul
declaris to the Romany, sayand: Ipse enim spiritus testimonium reddit spiritui
nostro, quod sumus filii dei. The haly spreit beris witness till our spreit,
that we are ye sonnis of God. How beris the haly spreit witness til our spreit,
yat we are the sonnis of God? Trewly be lufe and cheritie, quhen we have a lufe
to the commandis of God, and content to fulfill them with joy and blythnes,
principally for the lufe of God, sic a perfect lufe and spiritual affectioun
declaris til our conscience that we are ye sonnis of God be adoptioun. Than it
followis: Si filii et heredes, heredes quidem dei, Roma. 8.
coheredes autem Christi. Gyf we be sonnis we are also heretouris, heretouris I
say of God and participa^t of the eternal heretage with Jesus Christ.

Our Lord. Quhy sais thou in this artikil that Jesus Christ is our Lord?
Verraily he is our Lord and we are his possessioun be double rycht. First be the
rycht of creatioun, he hais creat and maid us, we are his awin hand wark, he
hais geuin us our body and our saul and all the good that we have. Secund, he
is our Lord be the rycht of redemptioun, for quhen we war in the thrildome of
syn, the devil, and hell, he redemit us with his awin precious blude, sa that
we are nocht our awin seruandis bot we should be his seruandis to serve him as our
Lord and master. Joan. xiii.
Sa he said to his Apostillis: Vos vocatis me magister et domine, been dicitis,
su^ etenim. e call me master and Lord, e say weil, I am swa. Bot tak tent how
he requiris of us agane to follow his exempil in meiknes, lufe and obediens,
quhilk gif we do, we sall be sickar yat he will as ane potent Lord, help us in
all our neid, defend us fra al our ennymeis, and finally (gif we persevere in
his service) reward us with the eternal glore, quhairof he is callit the Lord
and the king: i. Cor. 2. Psalm. xxiii. The sentens of y^^ artikil.
Dominus glory et rex glory. The Lord of glore, and the king of glore.

I trow into Jesus Christ, the only natural son of God and our Lord. That is
to say, I trow nocht allanerly that Jesus Christ is vercai God and allanerly
Gods natural son, quha hais the same godheid with him, substance and nature,
Psalm. iii. Math. 28
bot that as he said him self, the father hais maid him in his manheid Lord of
all, bot specially he is our Lord, he hais deliuerit us fra the devil yat
tyrand, i. Cor. 15
syn, deed, and hell and all evil, and hais tayne us in his awin keeping, yat he
sal defend us with his rychteousnes, wisdom, powar, Moral lessonis of vertevv
gadderit of the secund artikil of the Creed
life and glore, gif we serve him trewly.

Now because the natural son of God is ye eternal word of God, and be
incarnatioun was maid man in the wayme of the glorious virgin Marie, and also
the word of god temporal contenit in haly scripture, is bot ane similitude,
demonstratioun and forth schawing of that eternal word, How we should be
exempil of the glorious virgin Mari, co^saif and beir the word of God. Luce. i.
we should in this artikil leir to consaiue and beir the temporal word of god in
our myndis, be the exempil of the virgin Marie, quhilk consaiuit and buir the
eternal word of God be incarnatioun. First, the glorious virgin Marie hard the
messingeir of God the Angel Gabriel, exponand the will of God to her, behald
thou sall consaiue in thy wayme and beir ane barn, and sal call his name Jesus
etc. Secund, sche consentit to yat same will of God, sayand: Ecce ancilla
domini, fiat mihi, secundum verbum tuum. Behald heir I am ye handmaidin of our
Lord, it mot be to me as thou hais said. Thridly, sche buir him in her wayme
certane months. Fourthly, sche buir and brocht him forth be birth. And quhen
he was borne sche nurissit him: Sa should we first heir the word of God proponit
to us be the messingeir of god, the true prechour, for it is a takin yat we
lufe God, gif we heir his word blythly: Qui ex deo est verba dei audit. Joan. 8.
He yat is of God heiris ye word of God. Secund, we should give ferme credit to
the word, and consent to do as the word biddis us do, or ellis we heir in
vain: Non profuit sermo auditus, Hebre. 4.
non admixtus fidei, ex his qui audierunt. The word of preching helpit them
nocht, quhen yai hard it, that beleiuit it nocht. Thridly, we should beir ye word
in our remembrance, be meditatioun and study, according as the Prophet sais in
the Psalm: Psalm 118.
In cord meo abscondi elo quia tua, vt no^ peccem tibi. I have hyd thy wordis
in my heart, that I should nocht syn agane the. Fourtly we should bring forth the
word of God, to the edificatioun of our nychtbour, be admonitioun,
exhortatioun, cheritabil reprehensioun, and also be preching, Colos. iii.
gif we be callit to that office: Verbum Christi habitet in vobis abundanter,
in omni sapientia, doce^tes et co^monentes vosmetip ^os. Lat ye word of Christ
dwell in ow largely, warning and teching ane ane vthir: Ephe. 4.
Omnis fermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat, sed si quis bonus ad
edificatione^. Lat na evil words cum out of our mouth, bot that quhilk is good
for the edificatioun of our nychtbour. Last of all, the word of God should be
nurissit be doing good deidis, proponit and schawin in the same word, according
as sanct James byddis us, Iacobi. i.
sayand: Estote factores verbi et non auditores tantum. Be e the doaris of the
word and nocht heiraris allanarly. And gif any wald speir how is Jesus Christ
maid my Lord and quhat gaif he for my ransoume? I answeir be their special
artikillis that followis.

The third artikil.
The fifth Cheptour.
QVI conceptus est de spiritu sa^cto, natus ex Maria virgin. I believe that
Jesus Christ was consaiuit be the haly spret, borne of the virgin Marie. We
should believe o^ trow in the son of God incarnat.
In this third artikil God requiris of us to haif a special true faith in the
Incarnatioun of the son of God, without the quhilk na man may be saiffit For
as the excellent doctor Cyrillus sais, our saluatioun standis in ye faith of
the blissit Trinity, that is to say, to trow in God the father, in God the
son incarnat, and also in God the haly spret. Sa that quhen we say, I believe
in the son of God, we should eik this word incarnat, sayand: I believe or I
traist in the son of God incarnat. Sa, after that in the secund artikil we
belief with our heart, and confess with our mouth, the eternal generatioun and
nativity of the son of God, quhairby he is true God with God the father. In
the third artikil, we believe with our heart and confess with our mouth the
temporal generatioun and nativity of the son of God, quhairby he was maid
man like to us in our nature, except ignorance and syn, and vthir
imperfectionis of our saul.

Quhilk was consaiuit be the haly spret. Quha was ye formar, makar and wyrkar
of this blissit incarnatioun of the son of God? Trewly the haly spret,
thairfor thou sais I believe that Jesus Christ was consaiuit be the haly spret,
for vndoutandly he was nocht consaiuit be the seid of man, bot be the
operatioun and vertew of the haly spret, for als soine as the glorious virgin
Marie hard the will of God send and declarit to her be the heuinly messengear
the angel Gabriel, that sche should consaiue in her wayme and beir the son of
God, sche co^sentit to the samyn blissit incarnatioun, Luce. i.
sayand: Ecce ancilla domini, fiar mihi secundum verbum tuum. Behald heir I am
ye hand maidin of our Lord, sa be it to me as you hais said. Incontinent, as
sche had expremit yir wordis, the haly spret wrocht the incarnatioun of the
son of God, in ye wayme of the glorious virgin. For he gaderit certane of the
may pure and clein droppis of blud, quhilk was in the body of the virgin,
and of yame fassionit and formit the perfect body of our saluiour, wtin her
wayme, and sa sche consaiuit the son of God, nocht be the seid of man, bot be
the operatioun of the haly spret. Nochttheles e should believe that the haly
spret wrocht this blissit incarnatioun, nocht without the wyrking of the father
and the son, for doutles all the hail Trinity, the father, the son and the
haly spret, wrocht the same blissit haly incarnatioun, as we gadder of ye
wordis, quhilk the angel Gabriel said to the glorious virgin. Spiritus sanctus
superueniet in te, Luce. i.
et virtus altiss^ obumbrabit tibi. The halye spreit sall cum upon the, and the
powar of the hiast sal ouir schadow the. As e heir plainly the haly spreit
expremit, sa quhen he said this word povvar, he speikis of the son of God, i.
Cor. i.
quhilk is callit virtus et sapientia Dei, the powar and the wisdom of God,
quhen he said this word heast, he spak of the father eternal, quhilk is ye
heast. Sa in yir wordis we may leir yat the haly Trinity, the father, the
son and the haly gaist, was the wyrkar of yis incarnation, suppose be
attribution it is ascriuit to the haly spreit, because that the son of god
was incarnat, for the great lufe yat God had to mankind, and to schaw his gudnes
and mercy in redemptioun of mankind, according as our saluiour sais in the
euangil of S. Iohne: Sic deus dilexit mundum, vt filium suum vnigenitum daret.
Joan. iii.
Sa God luffit the world, yat he hais geuin his only son. And thairfor as
powar is ascriuit to the father, and wisdom to the son, sa is gudnes and
lufe attribut to ye haly spreit, be reasone quhairof we say, that the son of
God was consaiuit be the haly spreit.

Borne. Now christin pepil, Declaratioun of the blissis nativity of our
saluiour.
we exhort ow to tak tent and considder deuotly, how plainly the haly
euangelistis sanct Matthew and sanct Luke discriuis to ow the blissit nativity
or birth of our saluiour Jesus Christ, leiuand na circumstance vntald, quhilk
makis for the true knawlege of the same mystery. Declarand in quhat time he
was borne, quha was Emperor of al ye world in the time of his birth, quha was
Leuetenent in the land of Iewry in the time of his birth, of quhat clan or
househald was he borne? quhat houshald was he borne in, and in quhat ludgin of
the city? quha was messengearis quhilk first declarit and tald the same birth?
to quhem was this blissit nativity first schawin and manifest, quhat was the
propir name of his mother, quhat was ye name of his father putatiue? All their
circumstancis we sall twiche breuely, yat e may the bettir remember the blissit
nativity of our saluiour Jesus Christ.

The first circu^sta^ce.
The time of this blissit nativity, after the co^putatioun of Eusebius, was fra
the beginning of the world 5.199. quhen Herod son of Antipater had regnit in
the la^d of Iewry 30. eiris and yat be the favor and authority of the Senate
of Rome, quhen the empire of the Grekis was put down, and the Romany had
empire and dominatioun in the world, fra ye time of Abraham (to quhom Christ
was promissit) 2025. in the xxv. day of ye month of December, The saluiour of
ye world Jesus Christ was borne. That he should be borne in siclyk time, it was
prophesit lang before be the Prophet Daniel, Daniel. 2.
schawand, that in the last month or universal empire of ye world, quhilk was
the empire of the Romany, Christ should be borne. Quhem he signifiit be ane
stane quhilk without handis was hewin down off a Hill, quhilk signifyit and
betaknit, that Christ Jesus should be borne without the seid of man, allanerly be
operatioun of the haly spret. And S. Matthew makis mentioun of Herod the ^ing
to certify us, yat ye prophecy of the Patriarck Jacob was fulfillit, quhen he
said: Non auferetur septrum de Judah, et dux de femore eius, Gene. 4^
donec veniat, qui mi^te^dus est. The septour and the kingis authority in the
land of Iewry, sall nocht be takin fra ane of the tribe of Judah, quhil he cum
yat sal be send to be Messiah and saluiour of mankind. That is to say, Christ
sall cum and be borne, quhen the Iewis hais nocht a propir king of the tribe of
Judah ringnand ouir them, bot a strangear, as was Herod a man of the la^d of
Idumea. The secund circumstance
The universal empire and great dominioun of the world was than amang the
Romany. For the first empire and great dominioun of the world, was amang the
Babilonianis and Assyrianis, fra them it was translatit to the Meidis and
Persis, fra ye Meidis and Persis it was translatit into Alexander the great king
of Macedonia, last of all it was geuin to the Romany. And after, quhen thai
had kepit ye same Empire the space of 70. eiris eftir the ring of the Emperor
Caius Julius, the secund Emperor rang, callit Octauius Augustus, and in the
42. eir of his ring our saluiour Jesus Christ was borne.

Leuetenent to the same Emperor in the land of Syria and Iewry was Cireneus.
The third circumstance.
Sa quhen the land of Iewry was subieckit to the Romany be Pompey the great, all the pepil of the world subdewit to the forsaid Romany, be ane edick maid be
the forsaid Emperor Octauius Augustus, The fourt circumstance.
was commandit to pay ane taxt, quhai^for ilk a man passit to that city
quhairin he was borne, or quhair to ^e belangit be any rycht tytill, gaif his
name in writ, and professit obedience to the Emperor, and payit ane taxt to
him. The fifth circumstance.

The saxt circumstance. Michee. v The seuint circumstance.


The clan or geneologie of Jesus Christ, is discriuit be ye evangelist sanct
Matthew, declarand yat he discendit fra the stok of Abraam, and fra the house
and family of king David. He was borne in Bethleem a lytill city of the tribe
of Judah, according as it was prophesit lang before be prophet Micheas. The house
quhairin he was borne was another stark Castle, fair palace, propir cha^myr and
siclyke, bot because their was na vthir place in the lodgin, it plesit the king
of al kingis, and the Lord of al Lordis to be borne in ane stabil, and quhen he
was borne to be laid in a crybbe, so great exempil of meiknes he wald schaw to
us all. The aucht circu^sta^ce.
The first proclamour and forth schawar of that blissit Nativity, was ane
heuinly Angel, quhilk tald it to certane schipherdis keiping yair weche in ye
nycht upon their flock, quhilk came and fande him and wyrschippi^ him. The nint
circumstance.
Certane kingis and wismen come out fra the Eist, and be directioun of ane
starne fande him, wyrschippit him and offerit to him, Gold, Sense and Myr.

Of the virgin. Behald heir deuotly (O christin man and woman) how that the
mother of our saluiour was ane clein virgin quhe^ sche buir him, according as
it was prophesit money eiris before, be the haly Prophet Esaie sayand thus: Ecce
virgo concipiet et pariet filium, Esaie. 7.
et vocabitur nomen eius Emanuel, quod interpretatur nobiscu^ deus. Behald
(sais he) ane virgin sal co^saif and beir ane barn, and his name sal be callit
Emanuel, quhilk be interpretatioun is als mekil to say, as God is with us. And
doutles his blissit mother was a virgin, nocht only in his birth, bot also
euirmair eftir his birth. And her perpetual virginity, before his birth, in his
birth, and eftir his birth may weil be knawin, be her awin words quhilk sche
said to ye angel Gabriel on this manner: Luce. i.
Quomo do fiet istud? quonia^ viru^ non cognosco. How may yis be (said sche)
yat I sal co^saiue and beir a barn? seand yt I am nocht purposit to ken a man
carnally.

Marie. This is the propir name of the glorious virgin, the mother of him
quhilk is bayth God and man. Trewly all deuote christin men and women hes great
cause to be blyth in God, quhen thai heir this name Maria pronunsit and spokin,
kennand perfitly, yat for als mekil as sche is ye mother of our saluiour
Christ, How the glorious virgin Marie was ye beginni^g of our saluatioun
sche is the begynnar of all our grace and saluatioun. Eua, it being a virgin
co^senting to the devil brocht the maledictioun of God and eternal deed upon
us. Bot the glorious virgin Marie, consenting to the messengeir of God,
restorit us agane to the benedictioun of God and eternal life. Be Eua, than
being a virgin, disaiuit be werkin of the serpent, come all our calamiteis and
daily misery. Be the virgin Marie berand her son, be wyrkin of the haly
spreit come all our joy and felicity. Be Eua brek and the command of God, we are borne the sonnis of wraith and of damnatioun. Be the virgin Marie,
submittand her self to God be perfect faith and obediens we haif resauit Christ
Jesus, be quhome we are borne agane the so^nis of God be adoptioun. Eua throch
her pride and disobediens tynt the grace of God, quhairfor it was said to her:
In dolor par^es filios tuos. Thou sal beir yi barnis with dolor and pains
Bot Marie, throch her meiknes, fande grace of God, Luce. i.
and hard their wordis said to her: Aue gratia plena dominus ^ecum, benedicta tu
in mulieribus and benedictus fructus ventris tui. Hail Marie full of grace,
the Lord is with ye, blissit art thou above al women, and blissit is the fruit
of thy wayme, for be him we gat ye blissing of God promissit to Abraam.

Now deuote pepill I exhort ilk ane of ow to believe this artikil with ane
special faith, trowand fermely, that our saluiour Jesus Christ was borne for
ilk ane of ow in special, yat e mycht be borne agane the sonnis of God be
adoptioun, and finally cum to the kingdom of heuin.

The sentence of this artikil is this. I trow surely, that for me and my saul
heil, the son of God Jesus my saluiour, was consaiuit of the haly gaist,
borne of the virgin Marie, without any carnal deid of man, without mannis seid.
Sa that sche was ane clein virgin in her co^saiuing, in her birth, and after
her birth. That he should clenge mine and all mennis (quha traistis in him)
synful birth, vnclein, carnal and damnabill consaiuing. And that we should be
borne agane of wattir and the haly spret, to be the spiritual so^nis of his
father for his saik, heretouris of God, and coheritouris with Christ of the
realm of heuin. Moral lessonis of vertevv gaderit of the third artikil.
In this third artikil we may leir certane lessonis profitabil for our
edificatioun. First the true knawlege and remembrance of the blissit
incarnatioun should co^ferme us in our faith. As it apperis be this exempil,
quhen we heir tydanis tald us of thingis doine in strange, and far cuntreis, we
give mair credence to a man that hais dwellit in yat cuntre, than to ane vthir
man that was neuir thairin. Lykwis, before the blissit incarnatioun and cumming
of the son of God our saluiour Jesus Christ, the Patriarchis and prophetis be
reuelatioun of God, tald money thingis of God and his godly powar, wisdom and
gudnes, of heuin and heuinly cumpany, to quhome good men and women gaif
credence, bot because our saluiour hais tald us siclike thingis of god the
blissit Trinity and heuinly cumpany, quhilk was their him self being ane
person, equal and consubstancial with God the eternal father, thairfor to him
we should give mair ferme crede^ce in all thingis quhilk he sais to us concerning
our faith. Thairfor it is writtin: Deum nemo vidit vnq^, Joan. i.
vnigenitus filius qui est in sinu patris ipse enar^auit. Na man hes sein god
at any time, the only begottin son, quhilk is in the bosum of the father, he
hais declarit the same to us. Secundly, be remembrance of the same, our hoip,
quhilk we have to optene ye glore of heuin is mekil incressit, for quhy,
thairfor was the son of God borne of the virgin Marie, and was maid the son
of man, yat we throch the leiuand faith in him, mycht be maid the so^nis of God
be adoptioun and sa optene ye eternal glore. Roma. ^.
To this purpose S. Paul sais: Per que^ habemus accessum per fidem in gratia^
ista^, in qua stamus and gloriamur in spe glory filioru^ Dei. Be quhom also we
have ane entresse be faith into yis grace, quhairin we stand, and rejoice in
the hoip of the glore, quhilk pertenis to ye so^nis of god.

Thridly be faith of the same blissit incarnatioun we haif cause to be
kendillit in the true lufe of God quhilk hais luffit us sa greatly, that nocht
only be hais geuin to us all creatouris to make us service, the Angellis to be
our keparis, the heuins to give us lycht and influens, fische, foul, and
beist, to our sustentatioun, bot alswa to schaw his excedand lufe towart us, he
hais geuin us his awin natural son to our saluatioun and redemptioun: Sa our
saluiour him self testifeis in the euangil of sanct Iohne: Joan. iii.
Sic deus dilexit mundu^, vt filium suum vnigenitu^ daret. Sa God hais luffit
the world (that is the hail congregatioun of faithful men and women) that he
wald give to yame his awin natural son, to be yair redemar and saluiour,
quhilk great lufe of God, be rycht should kendil our hartis agane in the lufe of
God, to quhom be honor and glore for euir and euir. Amen.

The fourt artikil.
The saxt Cheptour.
I Believe yat Jesus Christ tholit his passioun under Pontius Pilatus, was
crucifyit, deed, and bureit. e should now O christin pepil, with great lufe and
fervent deuotioun heir this artikil of the passioun of our saluiour Christ
declarit to ow, co^siderand quhat sanct Paul sais: 1. Cor. 4.
Verbum crucis pereuntibus quidem stulticia est, his aute^ qui salui fiunt, id
est nobis, virtus dei est. The word of the Cross semis to be daftnes and folly
to them that perischis, and is condamnit, bot to yame yat ar saiffit, it is
the vertew and powar of God. The Infidelis quhilk wantis our christin faith
thinkis it great fulechnes to say yat god may thoil passioun, nocht
understanding that our saluiour Christ is bayth God and man, and that in the
nature of his godheid he tholit na passioun, bot in the nature of his manheid
he tholit his passioun. Mairouir the infidelis and unfaithful thinkis it great
fulechnes to thoil painis and passioun, quhen a man may eschape yame, nocht
understanding that our saluiour tholit nocht his passion aganis his will, and
for his awin synnis, bot it he tholit his may paynful passioun of his awin
fre will, nocht for his awin syn, quhilk he neuir co^mittit in thocht, word or
deid, bot allanerly for our synnis according as sanct Peter declaris: i. Petri.
2.
Qui peccata nostra ipse pertulit in corpore suo super lignu^, vt peccatis
mortui iusticie viuamus. He tholit for our synnis great painis and passionis in
his body upon the cross, yat we be the meritis of his passioun, applyit to us
be faith and the sacramentis, mycht dee fra syn and leif in blissitnes. Sa
suppose all unfaithful men and women miskennis the passioun of our saluiour,
it all good men and women with great lufe and fervent deuotioun thinkis on it, be
continual contemplatioun and daily remembrance, trowand fermely that (as sanct
Paul sais) it is the powar of god, quhairby syn, the devil and hell is
ouircommit, and we are al saiffit yat ar the true serua^dis of god.

He hais tholit passioun. Trewly he tholit sair and displesand wordis spokin to
him, yai callit him ane Samaritane, yai said yat he was possessit with a devil,
thai said he brak the sabbath day, thai said he was ane drounkart and a friend
of Publicanis and oppin synnaris, all their injurious wordis he tholit patiently
for our saluatioun. Secundly, he tholit sair strakis, and last of all he tholit
the sairaft painis of deed. And to schaw him self a true man, he tholit for us
bayth in his body and in his saul, he was takin, he was bound, he was falsely
accusit, he was strykin with neiffis, he was fylit with their vile spetting, he
was dong with scurgis, he was crownit with thornis, and last he was nalit on ye
cross on the stinkand mont of Caluary, and to his mair confusioun, set betuix
two theiffis, he tastit Gall and vynakir, and finally deed for our redemptioun.
And trow nocht yat he tholit na pain in his saul, for he said him self quhe^
he was in the aird before he was takin: Math. 26
Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem. My saul is sarie and sad euin to the
deed, and he prayit a lang prayar, sa yat his swet come rynnand down upon the
erde like droppis of blude. And as we said before, al yir paynis tholit he for
us in his ma^ly nature* and nocht in his godly nature. For as the nature of man
was passibil and mycht thoile, sa the nature of God is impassibil and may nocht
thoil.

Under Pontius Pilatus. Pontius Pylatus, is the name of the Judge, under quhome
our saluiour tholit his passioun. And the name of this Judge is expremit to give
certane knawlege of the story and the time, for that same time Pontius Pilatus
was Leuetenen of Iewry under Tyberius the Emperor of Rome, quhilk Pontius
Pilatus kend weil that our saluiour was ane innocent and deliuerit to him be
envy of the Iewis. Nochtiheles for feir of man and tyning of his office, he
gaif sentence aganis our saluiour and Iugit him to deed.

Crucifyit. In this word crucifiit, is expremit the kind of deed, quhilk he
tholit for us, for as to be crucifyit and nakit on the cross was ane deed
verrai langsum and excedand paynefull, sa it was a deed schamefull amang the
Iewis, for it is writtin in their law: Deuteronomy. 21.
Maledictus omnis qui pependit in ligno. Warriit is al man yt hingis on the
cross, it yat may paineful and schamefull deed he tholit for us, to deliver
and saif us fra the pain and schame eternal, and as the devil ouircome mankind
be menis of a tree, quhen he prouokit him to eite of the fruit forbiddin, sa it
was convenient that he should be ouircummit be a tree, quhilk was done, quhen our
saluiour tholit his passioun on a tree.

Deed. Now christin man, Qubat fruit or profit get we be the mer^tis of his
passion Apoca. i.
haif euirmair in thy mind the great lufe and kindness, quhilk thy saluiour hes
schawin to the, quhen he deit for ye. Remember the blud of his body, quhilk he
sched to wesche thy saul fra sin, according as it is writtin in the
Apocalypsis: Dilexit nos et lauit nos a peccatis nostris in sa^guine suo. He
hes luffit us and hes weschit us fra our synnis with his blude. Lat never the
word of sanct Paul gang out of thy mind, quhilk he sais: Cum inimici essemus,
reconciliati sumus deo per mortem filii eius. Roma. 5.
Quhen we war ennemeis to God, we war reco^salit to him be the deed of his
son. Think often times of the wordis quhilk haly kirk singis: Qui mortem
nostram moriendo destruxit. He hais destroyit our eternal deed, be his temporal
deed. Believe steadfastly, that quhen he deit, he offerit a perfect sacrifice
apo^ the altar of the cross, to the father eternal, for our reconciliatioun,
for our redemptioun and eternal saluatioun. Lat this faith be thy plycht ankir,
and doutles thou sall be saiffit fra all the dangeir of syn, of the devil, and
of hell, and be the meritis of the same passioun and deed optene the life
eternal. And be sickir (O christin man) that thou believe this artikil with ane
special faith, nocht only beleiuand yat the son of God deit for ye saluatioun
of S. Peter and S. Paul, bot trow sickirly that he deit for thy saluatioun in
special, sayand with sanct Paul: In fide viuo filii dei, qui dilexit me et
tradidit semetipsum pro me. Gala. 2.
I leif now in the faith of the son of God, quhilk hais luffit me and hes
geuin him self to the deed for me. In this special faith standis thy
saluatioun, you haiffa^d cheritie, and wyrkand thairefter kepand the co^mandis
of God.

And was erdit or bureit. Suppose our saluiour (as concerning the opinion of
the world) deit with great schame and confusion, it his body was bureit in ane
honest sepulchir with great cost and reverence. For he tuk our passibill and
mortal nature, for our redemptioun. Quhairfor, quhen he had completit and
fulfillit our redemptioun with his passioun and deit upon the Cross, it was
convenient that his body should be put na mair to confusioun and schame, bot
rather to honor and reverence, because of his glorious resurrectioun, quhilk
was schortly to follow. And of his honourabill and reverent burying, it was
prophesit lang before be the prophet Esaie sayand: Et erit sepulchrum eius
gloriosum. Esaie. xi.
And his sepulchir sall be glorious. And sa it was in deid, for Joseph of
Aramathia and Nichodemus buriet his precious body with costly vnctme^tis and
spices in ane honest and new sepulchir, as the euangelistis declaris at great
lenth.

The sentence of this artikil is this. The sentens of yis artikil.
I trow surely that he in his manly nature tholit passioun under Poncius
Pilatus than judge in Jerusalem, to make satisfactioun and mendis for all our
synnis, yat hes a true and leiuand faith in him. And that he was crucifyit upon
ane cross, and festinit Adamis obligatioun (quhilk was aganis us) to the
cross, Colos. 2.
that it should neuir mair noy us, that we should have redemptioun and remissioun
of al synnis be his blud, quhilk he sched and offerit as ane acceptabil
offerand for euermair, to make them perfect, quhilk is hallowit, that is to
say, sanctifyit be leiuand faith in his blude, and resauing of the sacrament of
Baptyme.

And I trow surely that he sched his precious blude, for the great lufe quhilk
he had to us, to wesche us fra our synnis, with the same lufe he deit upon the
cross to reconsal us and bring us agane in the favor of his father eternal,
makand to him ane just and perfect satisfactioun for all our offe^cis quhilk hes
a leiffand faith in him, and is trewly penitent be contritioun, confessioun,
and satisfactioun. To make peace betuix his father and us, to slay syn and deed
quhilk had ouerance upon us. To deliuir us fra all dangeir of syn, the devil,
deed and hell. And to bring us to the glorious kingdom of heuin, their to be
with him euirmair in joy and bliss. And I trow verraily yat his body was put
in the erde, in quhilk he tholit deed, to put sin out of his fatheris sycht,
Psalm. 15.
and in his awin body to change yat malesone said to Adam, yat he should turn in
ass quhairof he was maid, bot it his body, as the Psalmist sais, Gene. iii.
saw neuir corruptioun.

Moral lessonis of vertevv gadderit of yis fourt artikil.
And in this artikil of the Passioun, we have as sanct Augustine sais,
sufficient instructioun to ordour our life haillely in vertew, to the plesour
of God. For quha sa will leife ane perfect life, lat him contemn thai thingis,
quhilk our saluiour hingand on the cross contemnit, and lat him desire thai
thingis, quhilk our saluiour hynging on the cross desyrit, for trewly their is
na vertew, bot of it we may tak exempil fra our saluiour hyngand on the cross.

Wald thou have exempil of perfect lufe and cheritie? Exempil of perfect lufe
and. cheritie. Joan. xv.
Heir quhat is said in sanct Iohnis eua^gel: Maiorem charitatem nemo habet,
quam vt anima^ sua^ ponat quis pro amicis suis. Na man hais mair cheritie, than
a man to spend his life for his freindis. And that our saluiour did for us upon
the cross. And sen swa it is, that he hais geuin his life for us, we should
nocht be discontent, nor think it heavy to thoile any kind of adversity for his
faith and obediens, sayand with the prophet in the Psalm: Quid retribuam
domino pro omnibus, quae retribuit mihi? Calicem salutaris accipia^, Psalm. 115.
et nomen domini inuocabo. Quhat sal I give to the Lord, for all that he hes
geuin to me? I will tak to me the cup of my saluiour, that is to say, thoil
adversity patiently, for the lufe of my saluiour Christ, and swa call upon his
name with faithful prayar. Exempil of perfect patience.
Seikis thou exempil of perfect patience, thou hais it geuin may excellently
to the in the cross of our saluiour Christ. Patience is schawin to be great be
two pointtis, other quhen a man tholis great paynis patiently or quhen he tholis
paynis and may eschaip them and will nocht in deid eschaip them, bot tholis
them willyngly. Sa our saluiour on the cross tholit for us great paynts, in sa
mekil as sanct Petir sais: Cum pateretur, non comminabatur. i. Petri. 2.
Quhen he tholit his passion, he maid na bosting or schoring to them that put
him to the deed. Bot as the Prophet sais: Sicut ouis ad occisione^ ducetur, et
sicut agnus cora^ tonde^te se, ob mutescet. Esaie. iiii.
He sall be led to his deed like a scheip, and like a lamb sall he hald him
still before the man that clippis him. This prophecy our saluiour fulfyllit in
the time of his passioun, quhen he like ane innocent lamb tholit his passioun
patiently, without any murmour, gaynstanding, or contradictioun. Mairouir, he
mycht have eschapit the same paynis, gif it had plesit him to have maid
resistance, according as he said to sanct Petir in the time of his taking:
Math. 26
An putas quia non possum rogare patre^ meu^, et exhibebit mihi modo plusq^
duodecim legiones angeloru^? Thinkis you that I can nocht pray my father, and
he sal send me mair than xii. thousand legionis of angellis? Be this e may se,
how great was the patience of our saluiour in time of his passioun. Quhairfor
let us do the counsel of sanct Paul, sayand thus to the Hebrewis: Hebre. xii
Per parientiam curramus ad propositum nobis certamen, aspicientes in authorem
fidei et consummatorem I^sum, qui proposito sibi gaudio, sustinuit crucem,
confusione contempta. Let us ryn be patience unto the battall that is set before
us, lukand unto Jesus the author and finissar of our faith, quhilk quhen the
joy was lade before him, tholit the cross and dispysit the schame. Wald thou
have exempil of meiknes, Exempil of perfect meiknes.
think on the passioun of Christ, he that was bayth God and man, was content to
be iugit and dee under Pontius Pylate than being Judge in Jerusalem. The Lord
for his seruandis, the life of angellis, for mankind was content meikly to dee,
according as sanct Paul sais: Humiliauit semetipsum, Philip. 2.
factus obediens vsque ad mortem, mortem autem crucis. He meikit him self and
became obedient euin to his deed, the verrai deed of ye cross. Desyris thou to
have exempil of perfect obediens, Exempil of perfect obediens.
follow him yat was obdient to the eternal father, euin to the may schameful
and payneful deed, be quhais obediens we are al maid just before God. According
as S. Paul sais to the Romany: Roma. v.
Sicut per inobedientiam vnius hominis peccatores constituti sunt multi, ita
per vnius obedientiam iusti constituentur multi. Like as throch the inobediens
of a man, their was maid money synnaris, sa be the obedience of a man, their is
maid money just men. Their two men of quhom S. Paul spekis, ar Adam and Christ.
Be Adamis inobediens we are all maid synnaris, borne in original sin. Bot be
Christis obdience we are maid rychteous before God. Schortly, wald thou leir to
dispyse the vain plesouris of this world? Exempil to dispyse the vain
plesouris of this vvarld.
follow the exempill of Christ, quhilk suppose he was king of al kingis and
Lord of all Lordis, in quhom was all the tresouris of wisdom and knawlege of
God, it for our saluatioun he was content to be maid nakit, to be scornit, to
be spittit on, scurgit, crownit with thornis, to be seruit with gal and
vynakir, and finally to dee. Be nocht vainly affeckit to clething and riches,
for our saluiour sais: Psalm. 2^.
Diu^ ferunt sibi vestimenta mea. Thai have partit amangis them my cleithing.

Be nocht vainly affeckit to honouris of this world, for our saluiour tholit
great scorning and money strakis. Be nocht vainly affeckit to delicat meitis and
drinkis, for our saluiour in time of his thryst, was seruit with Gal and
vynakir. Quhat will e mair? as sanct Augustine sais: Omnia bona terrena
contempsit Christus Jesus, vt co^temnenda monstraret. Christ Jesus contemnit
and dispysit all warldly thingis, to schaw to us, that thai should be lythleit
and dispisit of us. Thus e se deuote pepil, quhat great perfectioun of life we
may leir in yis artikil of the passioun of our saluiour, to quhom be all loving
and thankis, honor and glore, with the father and the haly spreit, for euir
and euir. Amen.

The fifth artikil.
The vii. Cheptour.
DEscendit ad inferos. He desce^dit or passit down to hell. For the intelligens
of yis artikil e sall understand that our saluiour deit on the cross, quhen
his saul departit fra the body, nochttheles his godheid was sa fast ionit with
his ma^ly nature yat suppose the saul and the body was perfect syndry, et his
divinity remanit bayth with his body lyand in the graif, and also with his
saul descendand to the hellis.

Quhair is hell.
Hellis. Heir is to be notit, quhair is hell? and how money distinct partis or
placis their is of hell. This word in Latin infernus, is as mekil to say in
Scottis speiche, as laych or underneath, and sa be significatioun of yis word
infernus, hell is in the lawalt part of the erd, or in sum place under the erd
Quhairto agreis the wordis of the scripture in the Apocalypsis, quhilk plainly
assignis three distinct dwelling placis of reasonabil creatouris, sayand: Neque
in coelo, neque in terra, neque sub terra. Apoca. v.
Another creatouris dwelland in heuin, another creatouris dwelland on the erde,
another creatouris dwelland underneath the erd, was abil to oppin the buke, that
is to say, was abill to compleit and fulfill the mystery of our redemptioun,
bot only the lamb immaculat Jesus Christ. Their is four distinct partis or
placis of hell, after the declaratioun of doctouris, and ilkane of yame eftir
the common manner of speking is callit hell. Their is infernus damnatorum, the
hell quhairin thai ar quhilk departis of this world in actual and mortal syn,
quhilk ar condamnit to eternal sensibil pain. And in yat hell is three distinct
paynis The first is priuatioun of grace, ye secund is priuatioun of glore, the
third is perpetual feling of sesibil pain. Their is infernus pueroru^, the hell
quhairin is ye saulis of al ye barnis yat departis of yis world nocht being
baptizit, allanerly in original syn without any actual syn, and their is
priuatioun of grace and priuatioun of glore, bot na sensibil pain, and the
pain of their barnis is verrai litil, eisy and soft because that thai ar
private of grace and glore, nocht throch their awin actual syn, bot allanerly
throch the syn of our first father Adam. Their is als infernus purgandorum, ane
hell, quhairin thai ar quhilk hais mister to be clengit or purgit fra yair
venial synnis, or yat be the justice of God ar obli^sit to thole sum temporal
pain their for dedely synnis, Purgatory.
for quhilk thai have nocht tholit sufficiently in this world. And yair is in
Purgatory priuatioun of glore, and also sensibil pain for a time, bot nocht
priuatioun of grace, for all the saulis quhilk ar in Purgatory, ar in the
favor of God and hais his grace, for als mekil as thai departit of this world
in Faith, Hoip and Cheritie. And how thai may be helpit out of their paynis be
the prayaris and good deidis of yame yat ar on live, it sal be declarit to ow in
the end of the fourt part of this Catechis, quhen we sall schaw to ow how e
should pray for all men bayth quick and deed. Their was also infernus patrum, the
hell of the fatheris, quhair was na pain, bot allanerly wanting of the glore
of God, yai had na sensibil pain, yai had the favor and grace of God, and luk
it to get the gloi^ of God be the passioun of Christ, and thairfor it was
callit the bo^um of Abraham, because al good men and women (quhilk was purgit
and deliver it fra original syn be ye sacrament of circumcisioun into the time
of the law of Moses, and in the time of the law of nature be faith of yair
parentis or freindis, with sacrifice and departit of this world in the faith and
obediens of god, eftir the exempil of Abraham, and also hauand na mister of
purgatioun) thai passit to that place callit limbus patru^* or sinus Abrahe,
quhairto our saluiour disce^dit immediately after his passioun nocht to thoil
any pain or passioun their, for all his paynis was completit and endit, quhen
he deit apo^ the cross. Thairfor gif e will know ye cause of his passing down
to hell, Quho^ deliueri^ our saluiour of hel^
it was to deliver his serua^dis quhilk before the time of his passioun (as we
said before) departit fra yis world in his faith, hoip and cheritie, as Abraa^,
Isaac and Jacob, Moses* David, with all vthir perfect and just personis, quhom
he deliuerit fra the presone of hell, callit limbus patru^, according as was
prophesit lang before be ye prophet Zachary sayand thus to him: Zacha. 9.
Tu quoque in sanguine testame^ti tui, emisisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo
non erat aqua. Thou lord (sais the prophet) be vertew of thy blud, sched in
co^firmatioun of the new testament, hes deliuerit the presonaris out of ye
loch, quhairin was na wattir, yat is, you hes brocht out fra the presone of hell
(quhairin is no refresching of mercy, nor of gloir and joy celestial, for yt
was to cum yan be Christ) al good and haly men and women, haldin their as in a
presone. Also ye same deliverance was prophesit be the prophet Osee: Ero mors
tua, o mors, Osee. xiii.
ero morsus tuus o inferne. O deed (sais our saluiour) I sall be thy deed. This
prophecy was fulfillit quhe^ our saluiour with his corporal and temporal deed,
distroit our eternal deed, delivering al yame yat beleiuis in him with a
leiffand faith, fra ye bondage of eternal painis of hell, quhilk is callit the
eternal deed. It followis: O hell I sal byte the. The man yat bytis any thing,
he takis part to him, and lattis part remane behind. Sa our saluiour passand
down to hell, he fulfyllit this prophecy, takand part of saulis out fra hell
with him, and leiffand part behim him. Quhom tuk he with him? bot them that
was haly and good, quhilk was haldin their as presonaris. Quhom left he behind
him? bot them quhilk was in ye hell of da^natioun reprobat and condemnit to
paynis eternal, and all them quhilk deit in original syn.

The sentence of this artikil is this, I trow verraily he passit down to hell
with great powar, to subieck him quhilk had empire of deed, yat is ye devil, to
deliver yame, quhilk be dredour al yair life was under bondage, that the devil
and his wylis should nocht noye them quhilk had faith in Christ Jesus, quhom he
hais deliuerit fra the devil and hell.

Moral lessonis of vertevv gadderit of (...) fifth a^.
In this artikil we may leir certane moral lessonis. First euirmair in all
afflictionis and trubillis we should ho^p fermely in the help and deliverance of
our saluiour Christ, for sen swa it is yat he hes deliuerit his serua^dis out
of hell quhilk had ferme hoip and lufe to him, mekil mair aucht we to hoip to
be helpit and deliuerit fra all our trubillis, gif we put al our hoip and
traist in him. Exempil we have in the buke of wisdom: Sapi. ^.
Hec venditum iustum non dereliquit, descendensque cum illo in foueam in
vinculis non dereliquit eum. The wisdom of God left nocht that just man
Joseph, bot passit down with him into the deippar cave, and left him nocht
quhen he was wra^gously put in presone and bound with cheneis, bot deliuerit
him fra all trubil, and brocht him to great dignity and honor. Secundly, in
the same we may (...) co^saiue in our heart feir of God, and to put (...) all
presumptioun. For suppose our saluiour Christ deit for synnareis, and passit
down to hell, it he deliuerit nocht al synnaris, bot yame allanerly quhilk
departit fra this world without dedely syn. And them quhilk departit with
dedely syn, he left still in hell. Thairfor, lat na man trow to cum to heuin,
quhilk departis of this world in dedely syn, bot yat he sal pas to the hell of
da^natioun, yair to remain as lang als any sa^ctis salbe in heuin, quhilk is
euirmair. Sa as mekil as we may, let us bewar of dedely syn, that finally we
may eschaip the perpetual paynis of hell, and sa optene the eternal life in the
kingdom of heuin, quhairto he bring us that bocht us with his precious blude.
Amen.

The saxt artikil.
The viii. Cheptour.
TERTIA die resurrexit a mortuis The third day he raise fra deed.

We find in the scripture that sindry personis was raisit fra the deed, as
Lazarus, the wedowis son, and the dochter of the archesynagoge, with certane
vtheris. Bot the resurrectioun of our saluiour differis fra their resurrectioun
in two pointis. First thai raise fra ye deed nocht be yair awin mycht and
powar, bot be the powar and mycht of our saluiour, and sumtyme be the prayar of
sum haly prophet or sanct, God raisit yame fra the deed, quhilk allanerly may
kyth siclik miraculis be his awin propir authority and powar. Bot our saluiour
raise fra the deed mychtfully be his awin powar, because he was and is bayth
man and God, quhais godheid eftir his blissit incarnatioun departit neuir fra
his body, nor fra his saul, and his saul resauit agane his body according as
he sais of him self: Potestatem habeo ponendi animam meam, Joan ^.
et potestatem habeo iterum sumendi ea^. I have powar to leave my life and I
have powar to tak it agane. Our saluiour raise immortal and glorious.
Secundly, Lazarus with the laif raise fra the deed to ane life mortal, and
after yat thai raise, thai deit agane. Bot our saluiour raise fra ye deed to
ane life immortal, and neuir deit agane, because his body was glorifyit and
maid incorruptibil, according as sanct Paul declaris to the Romany, Roma. vi.
sayand thus: Christus resurgens ex mortuis iam non moritur, mors illi vltra
non dominabitur. Christ rysand fra the deed deis na mair, deed sall have na
mair powar ouir him. Sa mychty and glorious was the resurrectioun of our
saluiour Christ. And gif e speir, Quhy he raise the third day?
quhy raise he ye third day erar than the secund, fourt or fifth day? Trewly, to
schaw that he was trewly deed, quhilk was necessary for our belief, quhilk we
aucht to have to the artikil of his passioun and deed. For gif he had rysin the
secund day, perauentour sum men wald have said, that he had nocht trewly deit.
Mairouir, gif he had differrit his resurrectioun langar, than his discipillis
had nocht bein sa soine certifyit in the faith as mister was. Quhairfor, verrai
conveniently he raise fra deed to life the third day, according to his promise
quhilk he maid to his Apostils and discipillis, sayand: Et tertia die resurget.
Luce. 18. Math. 17.
And he sall rise agane the third day.

The sentence of this artikil is this. I trow fermely that he is rysin fra deed
to life upon ye third day, for our rychteousnes, that we should rise be his
spreit and faith, to ane new godly life, be the gyding of his haly spreit
according to his godly will, and should nocht leif any mair in syn, to be
subieckit agane to deed, bot leif euirmair in a new, godly and haly life, as he
sal neuir dee agane, bot leif for euirmair.

We may gaddir of this artikil syndry instructionis of vertew for our
edificatioun. Moral lessonis of vertevv gadderit of yis saxt artikil. Ephe. v.
Be the exempil of our saluiour we should rise spiritually
First we should study to rise spiritually fra the deed of our saul, quhilk we
have incurrit be syn, to ane life of rychteousnes, quhilk life is gottin be
true leiuand faith and penance. To this spiritual resurrectioun the Apostil S.
Paul exhortis us, sayand thus: Surge qui dormis, et exurge a mortuis, et
illuminabit te Christus. Rise thou yat sleipis, rise up fra the deed and Christ
sal lychtin the with the lycht of his abundant grace in this life, and with the
lycht of his gloir in the life to cum. And this is callit the first
resurrectioun of ane christin man, quhen he (be the grace of God) rysis
spiritually fra ane synful life, to ane godly and verteous life. Quhairfor it
is writtin: Beatus qui habet parte^ in resurrectione prima. Apoca. xx
Happy or blissit is yat man or woman quhilk hes any part in the first
resurrectioun, quhilk is risyng fra syn.

Mai^ouir, we should nocht defer our spiritual resurrectioun til the time of our
deed, as money sinful personis dois. Bot we should soine and hastily rise fra the
deed of syn, and that be exempil of our saluiour quhilk raise tymely on the
third day. To yis ilk ane of us is exhortit be the wisman, sayand thus: Ne
tardes conuerti ad dominum, Eccle. v.
et ne differas de die in diem, subito enim veniet ira illius, et in tempore
vindicte disperdet te. Be nocht sweir or lang tariand to turn to our Lord, and
differ nocht or drive nocht of fra day to day, for his wrath and just
judgment sal cum suddanly upon the, and in the time of vengeance distroye the.
Differ nocht thairfor thy turning to God, till the time of thy deed, for than
be reasone of great seiknes, quhairwith thou sall be oppressit thou can nocht
have ane cleir mind to understand thai thingis, quhilk belangis to thy
saluatioun, and commonly this is found true be experience, suppose we will
nocht despair of na mannis saluatioun, because the mercy of God is reddy at al
times, it we counsel the the sickirrar way, turn to God soine and hastily,
for sa lang as you differris thy conuersioun to God, thou tynis thy part of all
guddis doine in haly kirk. Thou incurris money perrellis of thy saul be
perseverance in syn, quhair for rise up fra the deed of syn soine and hastily.

We should rise to ane new life.
Thridly, we should rise be the exempil of our saluiour to ane new life. Quhat is
this new life? bot a life gydit be the spreit of God, ordourit be Faith, Hoip,
and Cheritie, with doing of good werkis that procedis fra the same vertewis, and
fleand fra all syn and occasioun of syn. Sanct Paul techis, sayand thus: Roma.
vi.
Quomodo Christus surrexit a mortuis per gloria^ patris, ita et nos in nouitate
vite ambulemus Euin as Christ cal^e fra the deed be the glore of his father, sa
let us gang in ane new life. And finally as our saluiour ^ysand fra the deed to
ane glorious life, ^eit neuir agane, sa should we rise spiritually fra ye deed of
syn, to ane new life of grace, and nocht be agane be committing of dedely syn,
bot do all diligens to optene ye grace of God, quhair throch we may persevere
in good life, and finally cum to the kingdom of heuin, quhilk he grant to us
that bocht us with his precious blud. Amen.

The seuint artikil.
The ix. Cheptour.
AScendit ad coelos, sedet ad dextera^ dei patria omnipotentis. I believe that
our saluiour ascendit to the heuin, and sittis at the rycht hand of the father
God almychty. In yis artikil christin pepil e may considder two thingis. The
first, how heych was the ascentioun of Christ. The secund, how profitabil to us
all was his Ascentioun. Of the first speikis sanct Paul sayand thus: Ascendit
super omnes coelos. He ascendit above all the heuins. Ephe. 4
Trewly above all ye heuins, nocht only corporal, quhilk we se above us, as the
seuin Planettis, the firmament set full of sternis, with the laif, bot also be
ascendit above all heuins spiritual. That is to say, above all the ordouris of
Angellis, euin to the rycht hand of God the father almychty, according as sanct
Paul declaris sayand: Ephe. i.
Constituens Iesum ad dexteram suam in coelestibus, super omnem principatum et
potestatem et virtutem et dominationem, and omne nomen quod nominatur no^ solum
in hoc seculo, sed etiam in futuro, et omnia subiecit sub pedibus eius. God ye
father almychty hes set Jesus our saluiour at his rycht hand in heuinly
thingis, above all the principattis, potestatis, vertewis and dominationis, yat
is to say, he hes exaltit our saluiour in his manheid in the heuinly empire
above all the nine ordouris of Angellis, and also above all other creatouris
that may be namit, nocht only in this world, bot also in the walrd to cum. And
to his powar all creatouris ar subieckit and subdewit. How we should understand
that our saluiour sittis on the rycht hand of god the father.
And quhen e say that our saluiour syttis at the rycht hand of God the father
almychty, think nocht yt God, quhilk is ane incorporal and spiritual natour,
hes oder rycht hand or left hand, bot as the rycht hand of a man commonly is
his best hand, sa be a similitude in yis artikil the rycht hand or ye rycht
side of God the father, is the best, the hiest and may excellent honor,
dignity, and glore of heuin, quhairin God the father almychty hais set our
saluiour above all the Angellis and vthir creatouris. And quhen we speik of our
saluiour co^sidderand his divine majesty, in als mekil as he is and euir hais
bein and euir sall be the secund person i^ Trinity, sa we believe that he
sittis at the rycht hand of God the father eternal. That is to say, he is equal
with the father in honor, dignity, glore and majesty. The sentence of yis
artikil.
Swa the sentence of this artikil is this. I trow surely that Jesus Christ in
his manheid passit up to heuin the xl. day after his resurrectioun, and sittis
at the fatheris rycht hand, in the same glore, with the father of heuin, having
full powar, ouerance, empire, glore and gyding of Angellis and all creatouris
in heuin, erd, and hell. Thairfor I wait that he may help me, and will defend
me and al them, quha trowis in him, that na creator in heuin, erde or hell may
noy us, by his godly will.

The secund point of this artikil is to co^sidder how profitabil this glorious
ascensioun was to us, quhairin e may leir money spiritual lessonis. Moral
lessonis of vertevv.
And trewly in his asce^tioun he was our ledar and gyde. Thairfor to leid us
the way to heuin, he ascendit to heuin before us, according as it was prophesit
la^g before be ye prophet Micheas: Math. 2.
Asce^det iter pandens ante eos. Christ sal ascend to heuin, schawa^d the way
before yame quhilk ar his seruandis, and nocht only yat, bot also he tuk
possessioun in heuin, and grathit a place for us, according as he said to his
discipillis: Vado parare vobis locum. I gang to prepare a place for ow. Joan.
14.


Secundly, be his glorious asce^tioun, he hes geuin us (in ane manner) ane
security of our saluatioun. For he ascendit to the heuin, that he in his manly
nature mycht pray for us to his and our father eternal, according as S. Paul
sais: Accedens per semetipsum ad deum semper viuens, Hebre. 7
ad interpellandum pro nobis.

He gangis be his awin self to God, euirmair leiffand to pray for us. Syclik
sentence sais S. Iohne the evangelist in his epistil: i. Joan. iii.
Aduocatum habemus apud patrem Iesum Christum iustum. We haif ane aduocat with
the father, quhilk aduocat is Jesus Christ. Thridly, our saluiour Christ in his
asce^tioun, drawis our hartis eftir him merualously, for as he sais: Vbi est
thesaurus tuus, Math. 6.
ibi est cor tuum. Quhair thy tresour is, their is thy heart. And quhat should be
our tresour samekil as our saluiour Christ, in quhom is all the tresouris of
wisdom, and knawlege. Sa our heart should alwayis be in him and with him in
heuin, according as sanct Paul exhortis us, sayand: Colos. iii.
Si consurrexistis cum Christo que sursum sunt querite, vbi Christus est in
dextera dei sedens, que sursu^ sunt sapite non quae super terra^. Gyf e be
ryssin with Christ seik thai thingis quhilk ar above, quhair Christis sittand
at ye rycht hand of God, set our mind in thai thingis quhilk ar above, and
nocht upon thai thingis, quhilk ar upon the erde, yat finally e may cum to the
glorious kingdom of heuin, to ye quhilk he bring us that bocht us with his
precious blud. Amen.

The aucht artikil.
The x. Cheptour.
INde ve^turus est iudicare viuos and mortuos. I belief yt he sal cu^ fra heuin
to judge bayth quick and deed. It pertenis to ye office of ane king, to give
sentence in judgment, sa the wisman sais: Rex, Pro. xx.
qui sedet in solio iudicii sui, dissipat omne malu^ intuitu suo. The king that
sittis in the sete of his judgment, puttis away all evil fra his sycht.

Now seen swa it is that our saluiour ascendit to heuin and yair sittis at the
rycht hand of god the father almychty, as Lord and king of all the world, it is
manifest and plain, yat it pertenis to him to give sentence in judgment.
Thairfor we confess in the rewil of our faith, yat our saluiour Jesus Christ
sall cum fra heuin to judge bayth quick and deed, euin sa the Angel said in time
of our saluiouris ascensioun to the Apostillis and other discipillis: Hic Jesus
qui assumptus est a vobis in coelum, sic veniet, Actuum. i.
quemadmodum vidistis eum eun^e^ in coelum. This Jesus quhilk is takin up fra
ow to heuin, euin sa sall he cum as e have seen him passand up to heuin. Tell
us quha sal be judge in the general judgment on the lattir day? Quha bot our
saluiour Jesus Christ in form of man? Sa it is writtin: Actuum. x
Ipse est, qui constitutus est a deo iudex viuorum et mortuorum. It is he
quhilk is ordanit of God to be judge of quick and deed. e may other understand
be the deed all synnaris, and be the leiuand all just men and women, or
literally understanding be the deed all them quhilk hes bein, is or sall be
deed before ye cu^ming of Christ to the judgment, and be the leiuand all them
quhilk sal be fond on lif in the cumming of Christ to the judgment Quhy say e
that Christ sall be judge in form of man? Trewly to yat effeck, yat he may be
oppinly sein of al yame quhilk sal be iugit, bayth good and evil. Joan. 5.
Thairfor he sais him self: Potestatem dedit ei iudiciu^ facere quia filius
hoi^s est. God the father eternal hes geuin powar to Jesus Christ to make
judgment, because he is the son of man. Quha sal be iugit in ye extreme
judgment? Doutles, al men and women quhilk is, hes bein, or salbe according as
the Apostil sais: ^. Cor. 5.
Omnes nos manifestari oportet ante tribunal Christi, vt referat vnusquisque
propria corporis prout gessit sieve bonu^, sieve malum. We moan all appeir before
the judgment seit of Christ, that every ane may ressaue in his body, according
to yat he hes done, quhidder it be good or evil. Quhairof sal al men and women
be iugit in yat extreme judgment? Of al deids good and evil, of all wordis good
and evil, of al thochtis good and evil. Quhairof the good sal be rewardit, and
the evil sal be punissit. Witness we have of Solomon, Ecclesi. ^ltimo.
sayand thus: Cuncta q^ fiunt adducet deus in iudicium, pro omni errato sieve
bonum sieve malu^. Al thingis yat ar done, God sal bring into judgment, quhidder
it be good or evil. And suppose yai be hyd and unknown in yis world, yai sal be
than manifest and knawin. And that we moan give a count that day to God of all
our wordis, It is plainly declarit be our saluiour, Math. 12.
sayand: De omni verbo ocioso quod locuti fuerint homines, reddant rationem de
eo in die iudicii. Of all ydill wordis quhilk men speikis, mekil mair it
followis, that we moan give ane count that day of al, vthir wordis that are
noysum and skaythfull to their nychtbouris or spokin agane the honor and glore
of God. Sa trewly nocht allanerly that day all men sall be iugit for their evil
deidis and evil wordis, bot also for their evil cogitationis and thochtis
quhilk men hais had with consent aganis the command of God, as it is writtin:
In cogitationibus impii interrogatio erit. Sapi. 1.
Their sal be examinatioun of the thochtis of a wyckit man. Thus christin pepil
often times think on yat extreme judgment, quhairin our saluiour Christ sal be
judge in form of man, and his manly nature, all men and women sal be iugit, and
yat of all deidis, consenting and thochtis. Swa than the sentence of this
artikil is this.

I trow without dout that he is to cum upon the day of extreme judgment with
all his angellis and with exceeding powar, The sentens of yis artikil.
in the cloudis of the aer, to give sentence upon bayth good and evil, leiffand
and deed. I trow that we moan all be present before his seit and sall se him,
quhilk sall reward every man according to his werkis. I trow that upon yat day
he sall deliver me and al yat traistis in him be true leiffand faith (quhi^k
yat day sal be declarit be the werkis and rewardit eftir as the werkis beris
witnis) fra the deed, trubil, sorrow and perpetual paynis, of our fayis and fra
their tyranny, than sall we be deliuerit for euermair, and gang with him to
eternal bliss and joy.

Moral lessonis of vertev^. Hebre. 4.
Now thairfor in this artikil leir e to feir yat extreme judgment. First
considder the infinite wisdom of the judge, of quhom sanct Paul sais: Omnia
nuda et aperta sunt oculis eius. All thingis ar nakit and oppin to his eyne.
That is, all our thochtis, al our werkis, al our hai^ deeds ar manifest and
knawin to him. Also God almychty sais: Hiere. 17
Prauum est cor hominis, et inscrutabile, quis cognoscet illud? Ego dn^s
scrutans corda and probans tenes, qui do vnicu^que iuxta viam suam. Evil is the
heart of man and vncerssabil, quha sall ken it? I the Lord that serchis hartis,
and examinis the affectionis of the same, and giffis to ilkane according to his
wayis. Secundly, considdir ye insuperabil powar of our Judge, quhilk is
almychty, to quhom na creator may make resistance. Thridly, have in thy mind
his infieribil justice. Now is the time of mercy, than sall be the time of
justice, now is our time, bot than sal be his time. Quhairfor he sais in ye
Psalm: Cum accepero tempus, ego iusticias iudicabo. Quhen I sall tak my time,
Psalm. 47.
I sall judge rycht justice. Quhat remeid agane the feir of that extreme
judgment? Doutles the only remeid is in time of this life to turn to God and
serve him in faith, hoip, and cheritie. And as S. Paul writis to the Romany,
spekand of the powar and judgment of a temporal king, Roma. 1^.
sais thus: Vis no^ timere potestatem? bonum fac et habebis laude^ ex e^ Wald
(...) powar? do good, and thou sal have leuing of it. Sa it may be said to the,
wald thou nocht feir the judgment of Christ ye king of heuin? do weil or do
good, and yat day of judgment, thou sall have loving of him. Gyf thou speir at
me, quhat is the good that I moan do, to eschaip the dangeir of that judgment?
Sanct Iohne the Baptist schawis it, sayand to the Pharisianis and Saduceanis:
Progenies viperarum, Math. iii.
quis demonstrauit vobis fugere a ventura ira? e generatioun of serpentis, quha
hais schawin to ow to fle fra the wraith to cum? That is to say, fra the
dangeir of ye extreme judgment. Than sanct Iohne giftis yame this counsel,
sayand: ^acite ergo fructum dignum penite^tiae Thairfor (sais he) do e the
worthi fruit of penance, declarand plainly, that and we wald eschaip ye
dangeir of yat extreme judgment, we moan in time of this life do the worthi
fruitis of penance, prayar, fasting, and almous deidis, and leif in the service
of God as Christin men aucht to do, according as it sal be largely declarit to
ow in the sacrament of Penance, To God thairfor be all loving and thankis,
honor and glore for euir and euir. Amen

The nynt artikil.
The xi. Cheptour.
CREDO in spiritum sanctum. I trow in the haly spreit. This is the third part
of our Creed, contenand the faith, quhilk we aucht to have in the haly spreit,
ye third person in trinity, beleuiand fermely that he is true God.

I trow in. And thairfor we say in this artikil this word In, sayand: I belief
in the haly spreit. Quhilk word we should say to God allanerly, because that we
should put our principal traist and confidence of our saluatioun in God
allanerly. Gyf any man wald speir at us, quhat is the father eternal, we should
answeir agane and say, he is God. Quhat is his natural son our saluiour
Jesus? we should answeir and say he is God. Lykwais quhen it is speirit of the,
quhat is ye haly spreit, thou should answeir agane and say, he is God, ane
distinct person fra the Father and the Son, bot equale with the father and
the son in powar, wisdom, gudnes, eternite, and all divine majesty. And
this may we leir plainly be the wordis of our saluiour geiffand the command of
Baptyme, Math. 28
sayand thus: Baptizantes eos in nomine patris, et filii, and spiritus sancti.
Baptie in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the haly spreit. In the
quhilk wordis it is geuin us to understand that the haly spreit is the third
person in Trinity, hauand equal powar and auctorite with ye father and the
son, to give us remissioun of all our synnis, spiritual regeneratioun, and
grace of adoptioun, quhilk is geuin in the sacrament of Baptyme.

The haly spreit. The Angellis of heuin ar spreitis, that is to say, spiritual
creatouris, and also haly be the halynes geuin to them of God. The saulis of
good men and women ar callit spreitis in the scripture, and is haly be halynes
geuin to them of God. Bot quhen thou sais I belief or I trow in the haly
spreit, thou should belief that he is the spreit eternal, makar, kepar, helpar,
defendar and prouidar of all the creatouris of the world of quhom it is said:
Emitte spiritum tuum, Psalm. 10^.
and creabuntur et renouabis faciem terre. Send down good Lord thy spreit, and
thai sall be creat and maid, and sa sall thou renew the face of the world.
Mairouir thou should belief that he is ane haly spreit, nocht be partitipatioun
or ressauing of halynes fra any vthir, bot that he is haly of his awin nature,
giffar and kepar of all halynes, and that he makis all creatouris haly quhilk
ar haly, and thairfor he is callit spiritus sanctificationis, the spreit of
sanctificatioun. Roma. i. Syndry namis of the haly spreit, declaris syn^ dry
operationis of the same spreit. Joan. xiii^
That is to say, the spreit that giffis all halynes. And to gar us understand
syndry haly operationis of the haly spreit he is namit in the scripture with
syndry namis. He is callit digitus Dei, the fyngar of God, for als mekil yt our
saluiour castes out deuillis fra men and women possessit, be the operatioun of
the haly spreit. He is callit Spiritus paracletus, because he giffis spiritual
consolatioun and comfort to us al in our troubil, or ellis because he is our
aduocat. And how is he our aduocat? nocht that he prayis for us, bot that he be
his grace steris and inspyris our hartis with faith and lufe, quhairby we pray
for our self. He is callit Spiritus rectus, Psalm. 50.
y^ rych spreit, because he drawis us fra all carnal and warldly affectionis,
and leidis us in the hie way of Gods commandis till the kingdom of heuin. He
is callit spiritus principalis, Psalm. 50.
the principal spreit, because he giffis us principal strenth to resist all the
ennymeis of our saul, sa yat na temporal trubil can move us. He is callit
spiritus bonus, Psalm. 142
a good spreit, because he pouris into our heart cheritie or lufe of God, quhilk
wyrkis in us all good deidis. He is callit spiritus adoptionis filioru^ dei,
Roma. 8.
in quo clamamus abba pater The spreit of adoptioun of the sonnis of God, be
quhais grace we are maid the sonnis of God be adoptioun, and baldly we cry to
God almychty, Father, Father. And their haly operationis ar wrocht in us be the
haly spreit, and also be the Father and the Son, bot be attributioun, thai ar
geuin to the haly spreit, because all gudnes and lufe is asertiue to him.

The sentens of yis artikil.
The sentence of this artikil is this. I believe in the haly spreit ane verrai
God with the Father and the Son. I believe that in the haly spreit, the
father eternal be Christ and in Christ dois all good, wyrkis al and mouis al
good. I belief yt in the gyding and governing of the haly spreit, we sall be the
son cum to the father, because that throch the haly spreit we are techit,
sterit, callit, and drawin of the father and the son. Joan. xiiii and xv.
Gala. iii.
I believe that the haly spreit is geuin to us be that faith quhilk is in
Christ. I believe also that be the halye spreit dwelland in us be his grace, we are the spiritual templis of God, according as sanct Paul sais: i. Cor. iii.
Templum enim dei sanctum est, quod estis vos. The tempil of God is haly,
quhilk is our self. i. Cor 6.
And agane: An nescitis, quoniam membra vestra templum est spiritus sa^cti, qui
in vobis est quem habetis a deo et non estis vestri? Ken e nocht that our
membris ar the tempil of the haly spreit, quhilk is in ow, quhom e have of God?
I believe yat it is the haly spreit yat repreuis our sinful conscience of all
our synnis, quhen he repreuis our hartis be his mouand grace, callis us to
repentance, kindillis ye fire of Gods lufe in our myndis, Roma. 8.
mortifeis our corrupit nature and all inordinat concupiscence, lust and
plesour, repugnand to the law of God, steiris us to good, 2. Cor. 5.
and werkis in us the spiritual fruitis. He is thairfor a sickir pleage of our
vocatioun, because that quhen we feil in us, his werkis, that is to say, the
conuersioun of our hartis in the leiuand God, he beris witness to our spreit,
that we are ye so^nis of God be adoptioun. And gif we are sonnis, we are
heretouris, heretouris trewly of god, and coheretouris of Christ, Roma. 8
to quhom be all loving and thankis, honor and glore with the father and the
haly spreit, for euir and euir. Amen.

The tent artikil.
The xii. Cheptour.
SAnctam ecclesiam catholicam. I believe yat their is ane catholic kirk,
quhairin is co^munioun of sanctis, and remissioun of synnis. For the
declaratioun of this artikil, e sall understand, that as sanct Paul sais: Vna
est fides, Ephe. 4.
their is bot ane faith. And also the same: Apostil sais: Multi vnum corpus
sumus in Christo. We quhilk ar into nowmer money, is bot ane body in Christ,
Roma. 12.
and Christ is our heid as he sais to the Ephesianis: Ephe. i.
Ipsu^ dedit caput super omne^ ecclesia^. God the father eternal hais ordanit
Christ to be heid ouir all the kirk, quhilk is his body. Thus we have that ye
catholyk kirk is callit the spiritual spouse of Christ, quhairof sanct Paul
sais to the Ephesianis: Christus dilexit ecclesiam, Ephe. 5.
and semetipsum tradidit pro ea, vt illa^ sanctificaret, mundans eam lauacro
aque in verbo vite, vt exhiberet ipse sibi gloriosam ecclesiam non habentem
maculam aut rugam, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed vt sit sancta et immaculata.
Christ hais luffit his kirk swa, yt he hes geuin him self for it for to hallow
it, be the lawar of Baptyme and the word of God, that it should be haly without
smot or fylth. And this is the new city of Jerusalem, quhilk sa^ct Iohne saw
cum down fra the heuin, adornit and buskit as ane bryde with her spouse, of
the quhilk ane voce said: Apoca. 21
Ecce tabernaculum dei cum hoibus habitauit cu^ eis, ipse populus eius eru^t et
ipse deus cum eis erit eorum deus. Lo the dwelling place of God with men, and
he sal dwell with them, yai sal be his pepil, and God him self sal be with
yame and be their god.

The sentence of this artikil is this. I trow fermely that their is bot ane
haly kirk, Quhat is the haly catholyk kirk, and quha ar memberis of it.
yat is to say, ane haly congregatioun of christin men and women ouir all the
world, quhilk hais rycht faith, quhilk hais ressauit ane haly spreit, and is
gadderit be the same, gydit and kepit be him, and daily incressis be the word
of God and the seuin Sacramentis. I traist yat na man sall be saif yat is nocht
of yis kirk, that hais nocht the same faith, the euangil, the same sacramentis,
the same hoip and cheritie. And that na Jew nor Pagane, Heretik, Scismatik,
Quha ar v^ouith the haly kirk.
or that are justly excomunicat or perseuerand in dedely syn sall be saif, bot
gif he be reconsalit to the same kirk, and trow and do in all thingis as it
dois. And this artikil I confess also: Sanctorum communionem. The communioun
of Sanctis. And the sentence of their wordis is this. I trow fermely, Of the
unity of the haly kirk.
their is ane company and community, quhilk is allanerly of hallowit men and
women, under ane heid Christ, gadderit togeddir be the haly gaist, throch ane
true faith in Christ. And suppose the heid hais partit syndry giftis amang his
memberis, quhilk is the congregatioun of faithful men and women. Nochttheles,
yair is bot ane faith, ane hoip and cheritie amang all, their is na syndry
sectis, or opinioun, or diuisioun in the same community. Quhat is the
communioun of sanctis.
I grant thairfor that I am ane member of this community and part takar of all
their good. First of all the blissit meritis of Christ (and of al ye meritis of
sanctis) be faith of the sacramentis, syne of all the good deidis done in the
kirk. Sa I grant me to be part takar of all yair prayaris and vthir good werkis,
and yat every ilkane should bear vtheris byrding.

I profess also yat quhasaeuir bydis nocht in ye unity of yis catholic kirk,
Quha ar private the comunion of sanctis.
he hes nocht of ye co^munioun of sa^ctis, that is, he is nocht part takar of
the common good before rehersit, quhilk is the meritis of Christ and his sanctis
and good deidis of the christin pepil, because he departis wilfully fra the
mistyk body of Christ, and is be cu^min ane rottin deed member quhilk ressauis
nocht the spiritual life and grace, commone to al, quick is me^beris of the
same mistik body, quhilk is the co^gregatioun of the true faithful and
obedient pepil to Christ (quhilk is heid of the same body) and that are obedient
alswa to all his true and faithful ministaris, rewlaris under Christ of the
same co^gregatioun.

Remissionem peccatorum. I believe fermely, that allanerly in the haly Catholyk
and Apostolik kirk gadderit be the haly spreit, is remissioun of synnis, be
Baptyme, and eftir be Penance, and the keys geuin to ye kirk. And certainly
Baptyme may be geuin be yame quhilk ar out with the kirk as ar all heretikis,
scismatykis etc. For gif thai pronunce the wordis of Baptyme trewly in form of
the Catholyk kirk, the person swa Baptisit ressauis the full effeck of the
sacrament, quhilk is remissioun of all his synnis, and is incorporat to the
mistyk body of Christ. For generally ye vertew of all sacrame^tis sta^dis nocht
in the gudnes of the minister, bot in the word of God pronunsit be the minister
weil, in the form of the Catholyk kirk, sa the evil ministeris stoppis nocht
the effeck of the sacramentis. Thus I believe fermely that in ye sacrament of
Baptyme al synnis ar forgeuin, bayth original and actual before committit,
Remission of original syn is gotti^ be faith and the sacrament of baptyme.
and sall neuir be imputit agane.

I believe that in Baptyme a christin man oung or auld is renewit be the haly
spreit, deliuerit fra ye thirldome of syn, the devil, and hell and maid a fre
man with the fredome of the spreit, that he may stoutly fecht agane the devil,
the world, and the flesche, and be the help of God ouircum them, and sa with
victory be crownit of God, with glore and joy, and with Christ euirmair ring
in heuin. Bot and we eftir Baptyme fall in synnis, suppose yai be neuir sa
grievous and money, we have the secund remeid quhilk is the sacrament of Penance,
be quhilk remissioun of synnis is geuin be the vertew of Christis blude, and
ministratioun of the keys geuin to the kirk in the person of S. Peter, quhen
Christ said to him: Tibi dabo claues regni coeloru^. To the I sal give the keys
of heuin: Et quodcunque ligaueris super terra^, erit ligatum et in coelis,
Math. 1^.
et quodcunque solueris super terram, erit solutum et in coeli^. Quhatsaeuir
thou bynd upon the erde, it sal be bound in heuin, and quhatsaeuir thou louise
in erde sall be loussit in heuin. The same authority he gaif to all his
Apostils after his resurrectioun, sayand: Joan. 20.
Accipite spiritum sanctum, quoru^ remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, et
quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt. Resaif the haly spreit, quhais synnis saeuir
e forgive, thai ar forgeuin to yame, and quhais synnis saeuir e hald on
forgeuin, thai ar on forgeuin. Thus I belief that in the sacrament of Penance
remissioun of synnis is geuin to al yame yt trewly be penitent, and yat be
faith in Christis blude, and ministratioun of the key of absolutioun pronunsit
be ane true minister of ye same catholyk kirk. Secundly, I belief ye true
repentance is the special gift of ye haly spreit, quhilk be his grace lythis
and turnis our heart to God as S. Paul declaris to Timothe: 2 Timo. 2
Ne forte det illis deus penite^tia^ ad cognoscendu^ veritate^ and resipiscant
a laqueis diaboli, a quo captiui tenentur ad ipsius voluntate^. Lest
parauentour God give yame Penance to ken the verity, and to amend their lyfis,
to be free fra the gyrnis or bandis of the devil, to quhom thai ar haldin
presonaris euin as the devil will.

Now seand that remissioun of synnis is nocht gottin without true penance,
quhilk contenis Co^tritioun of the heart, Confessioun of ye mouth to the priest,
and satisfactioun in deed. And yis true penance is the gift of God, we should
daily pray to God to give us grace to repent trewly.

Quha gettis remissioun of synnis fra God.
Thridly, I believe that nane can get fra God remissioun of their synnis, except
thai forgive to their nychtbour all offencis doine to them* Heir war ane
convenient place to declare (...) nowmer, namis and vertew of the haly
Sacramentis, bot because yai require ane special tractit we think it best to
defer the declaratioun of them to the third part of this Catechis. To God
thairfor be all loving and thankis, honor and glore for euir and euir. Amen.

The leuint artikil.
The xiii. Cheptour.
CArnis resurrectionem. I trow yat this same haly spreit of ye father and of
Christ sall raise all men and women, Job. 5. Math. 25.
faithful and unfaithful, good and evil, auld and oung, quha is bedely deed.
And yai ye same flesche quhilk was bureit and corruppit and co^sumit of quhat
euir manner it be, i. Cor. xv.
sal resaif life and leif agane. Thus I belief and say with sanct Paul: i. Cor.
xv.
Oportet corruptibile hoc induere incorruptione^, and mortale ^oc, induere
immortalitate^. This corruptibil body moan put on vncorruptioun, and this
mortal body moan put on immortality, yat is to say, this corruptibil and
mortal body quhilk I beir now, at the last day it sall rise agane, and be maid
vncorruptibil and immortal. Sa I be leif and say with Job: Job. 19.
Scio enim quod redemptor meus viuit, et in nouissimo die de terra surrecturus
sum. Et rursum circumdabor pelle mea, et in carne mea videbo deum. Quem visurus
sum ego ipse, et oculi mei conspecturi sunt, et non alius, reposita est hec
spes mea in sinu meo. I ken yat my redemar is on life, and that in the last day
I sall rise up out of the erd, and agane I salbe cled with my awin skein, and
in my awin flesch I sall se God, quhom my awin self sal se and my awin eyne sal
behald him, and nane vthir in my stead for me. Thus my hoip is put in my bosom,
that is to say, is sickir in my heart.

The twelf artikil.
ET vitam eternam, Amen. I trow finally after that resurrectioun their sall be
euirlastand life of rychteous me^ be the haly spreit, euirmair to be in heuin
in body and saul in perpetual joy and bliss, neuir agane to be diseisit in
body, with hungir and thryst, heit and called, mister of any thing, tyrdnes,
service or bondage, sieknes, dolor or deed, or any displesour of body. Bot I
believe that our bodies sall be indewit with immortality, maid agil, subtle,
cleir and impassibil, according as it is writtin: Math. xiii
Fulgebe^t iusti ficut sol in regno patris eorum. The rychteous sall schene as
the Son in the kingdom of their father. And also in our saul sall be na
sadness, sorrow or displesour, bot perpetual joy and bliss, euirmair to be had
in the cleir sycht of God, lufe of him and euirlastand fruitioun, quhair of ye
plesour is sa great yt it is writtin: i. Cor. 2.
Oculus non vidit nec auris audiuit, nec in cor hoi^s asce^derunt, q^
preparauit deus diligentibus se* In this walrd, the ^e scis nocht, the ^ir
heiris nocht, it can nocht be compassit with the heart of man, quhat joy and
bliss God hais preparit to all yame yat luffis him. The joy can nocht be
expremit with our wordis, the joy quhilk we sall have in the kingryk of heuin to
behald the excellent company of blissit Angellis, quhilk sall be marrowis with
us in that eternal life. Bot far gretar sall the joy be quhilk we sall haif in
the sycht of the glorifeit manheid of our saluiour Christ Jesus, quhom we sall
se with our bodyly eyne. Bot gretast of all and infinite sall the joy be,
quhilk we sall have in the cleir sycht of ye blissit Trinity, quhen we sall
see with the eyne of our saul three personis in one godheid, the father, the
son, and the haly spreit, three personis and ane God eternal, almychty,
mercyful, rychteous and faithful. Their sall we lufe God perfitly, with all
our heart, with all our saul, with all our mind and strenth, and fulfill the
command of lufe perfitly. Their sall we lufe perfitly our nychtbour as our
self, In heuin we sall fulfill the command of lufe perfitly.

Of the deed eternal quhair to all evil men and women sall be co^demnit. Math.
25.


and be euin als blyth of his joy and bliss as we sal be of our awin. And I
belief yat as al good men and women sall leife all togidder in heuin perpetually
in joy and bliss, sa sall all evil men and women leife al togidder in hell in
company of devils, perpetually in feire and pain. And suppose yai sal be al
immortal and sall neuir dee in their body, it yair immortality is comptit as a
perpetual deed because yt thai sall thoil euirlastand torment, sorrow and paynis
bayth in saul and body, according to ye setence quhilk salbe geuin of our
saluiour on dumisday: Ite maledicti in ignem eternu^. Gae cursit into ye fire
euerlastand, quhilk is preparit to the devil and his angellis. And yair this
sall be the conclusioun: Ibunt hii in supplitium eternum, iusti vero in vita^
eternal. e wyrkit sal pas to the paynis eternal, bot ye rychteous sall pas to
the life eternal. I dout nocht that the father and the son be the haly gaist
sall and will fulfill all their. Thairfor I say Amen, that is, verraily this is
true, and sal cum without dout. Their ar the artikillis of our Creed, quhilk we
should trow with ane special true faith quhilk seueris all rycht christin men fra
all vtheris, Iewis, Turkis, heretykis, Paganis, ypocritis, and falls christin
men etc. And this is the faith on the quhilk the rychteous man leiffis before
God, To quhom be all honor, Abacuk. 2*
loving and glore for euir and euir. Amen.

ANE PROLOGE TO THE seuin Sacramentis.
The first Cheptour.
HAVRIETIS aquas in gaudio de fontibus saluatoris. Esaie. 12.
The haly prophet Esaias in the wordis before rehersit spei^is plain prophecy
of ye haly sacramentis of the new testament, sayand thus to all faithful men
and women: e sall draw watter with joy fra the wellis of our saluiour. Be their
wordis we may well understand the special grace of God, quhilk purgis and
clengis our saulis fra ye spottis of syn, and s^okkins the vehement hait of
carnal concupiscence that is rutit in our corruppit nature, sa yat it can have
na powar to hurt us, sa lang as we consent nocht to it with ane deliuerit mind
and fre will. Breif^y this watter of grace adournis and decoris our saulis with
all kind of vertew to us necessary. This precious watter of grace we should draw
fra the wellis of our saluiour Christ Jesus, be the quhilk we understand the
seuin Sacrame^tis of haly kirk. For as the watteris of ye wellis springis fra
syndry vaynis of the erde and cummis to the wellis, quhairto thai that nedis
watter may cum and draw, sa the special grace of God springis to all faithful
men and women fra the vaynis of the erde, that is to say, fra the blissit
Incarnatioun, haly conuersatioun and painful passioun of our saluiour Christ
Jesus. For trewly quhatsaeuir he did, spak, or tholit, fra the first time of his
Incarnatioun to ye last moment of his passioun, it was meritabil of grace to be
geuin to us, and specially quhen he was crucifyit upon the cross and deed for
our redemptioun. Than verraily he offerand him self upon the altar of the
cross, as ane sacrifice of sweit sauoir, may acceptabil to god his eternal
father for our reconciliatioun, he conquest, he wanne, and justly deseruit
abundance of grace, Joan. i.
quhairof all faithful men and women mycht be participa^t to obtane yair
iustificatioun and eternal saluatioun according as sanct Iohne the evangelist
sais: De plenitudine eius nos omnis acceptinus. Of his fulness all we have
ressauit, That is to lay, of that abundance of grace, quhilk was geuin to our
saluiour without measour and of his meritorious passioun, all we that beleiffis
in him with a leuand faith, ressauis ane certane measure of grace, according to
his pleasure. Thairfor yat the vertew and meritis of Christis passioun, or the
grace quhilk he deseruit for us be his passioun, may be applyit, drawin and
brocht to us be sum wayis to us may convenient, The hail number of the
sacramentis.
their is institute and ordanit be the authority of God seuin halye
Sacramentis, quhilk ar Baptyme, Confirmatioun, the Eucharist or the sacrament
of the Altar, Penance, Extreme vnctioun, Ordour, and Matrimony. Their (I say)
was ordanit be almychty God to be to us instrumentis of our saluatioun, and as
spiritual cundittis and wellis of grace, in the quhilk, and be the quhilk, we
may ressaue the wattir of Goddis grace deseruit to us be the vertew and meritis
of Christis passion, quhilk saiffis nane, bot them allanerly to quhom it is
applyit be true faith, dew ministratioun and worthi ressauing of the
sacrame^tis. Quhairfor O christin pepil I exhort ow to draw this precious
wattir of grace fra the wellis of our saluiour. For and e with diligence will
leir the vertew of the seuin sacramentis, and seik for the grace of God offerit
and promissit to ow in the same sacramentis, persevere in the same grace of
God, e sall have heir in this life great spiritual joy and blythnes in God, and
in the life to cum e sall be sickir of the eternal joy and bliss.

As wattir be natural property weschis and makis clein the thing that is
foul, and slokins the thing yat is het, sa the grace of God ressauit in the
sacrament of Baptyme weschis the saul of him that dewly ressauis it, fra the
spottis of original syn, and also actual before committit, and with yat it
slokins and diminissis the vehement het of carnal lust and concupisce^ce quhilk
bydis in our fragil nature eftir Baptyme, sa in vthir sacrame^tis, ye sensibil
sign proponit outwartly to our sensis, betakins sum certane operatioun of ye
grace of god wrocht in our saulis inwartly. Quhy is it said in the foresaid
diffinitioun, yat ane sacrament is the cause of grace? seeing yat na creature
hes powar to give grace, bot God allanerly? according as ye prophet sais in ye
Psalm: Psalm. 83.
Gratiam et gloria^ dabit dominus. It is the Lord our God that sall give grace
and glore. We grant that God allanerly is the geuar of grace, nochttheles, he
hais geuin vertew and powar to the Sacramentis to be instrumentis of his grace,
quhilk thai cause in our saulis, nocht be their awin natural powar and vertew,
bot allanerly be the mycht of God assistant and being present in and with his
sacrament in his haly word. And as the corporal fire of hell be powar of God
geuin to it, is ane instrument of goddis justice, in perpetual tormenting of
the spreitis and saulis in hell, sa in this present kirk militant, the
sacrame^tis ar instrumentis of goddis mercy and grace in our iustificatioun,
Titum. iii.
sa sanct Paul callis the sacrament of Baptyme ye lawar of our spiritual
regeneratioun and renouatioun in our saulis. Thus e may easily understand quhow
ane sacrament is ane sensibil sign, takin and mark of grace, quhilk it
contenis and signifeis, and also as ane instrument is ye cause of ye same grace
to be geuin to our saulis, quhen it is dewly ministerit and worthily ressauit.

The ii. Cheptour.
QVhairfor or to quhat effect was the sacramentis of the new testament
institute be our saluiour? Trewly for syndry causis verrai expedient and
profitabil to the christin pepil. Aug. contra Faustu^ lib. 19. ca. 11. and de
doctrina christiana lib. 3. ca. 9
First to be sensibil takins and markis of that great congregatioun callit the
kirk of our saluiour Christ, for as sanct Augustine sais: In nullum nome^
religionis, sieve verum sieve falsum coagulari homines possunt, nisi aliquo
signaculorum vel sacramento rum visibilium consortio colligentur Their is na
name of religioun or godly manner of ^etting other true or falls, Sensibill
takins of Christis religioun.
quhairby men may conueine and bide togidder* except that thai be fessi^it and
bund togidder in a company with certane signs or sacrame^tis, quhilk may be
sein of yame all Men of a countrai or natioun gangand to battle v^is to have a
sign or takin upon them, quhairby thai may be knawin amangis them self and
also fra vtheris quhilk ar of strange natiouns. Part beiris the sign or takin
of ane quhyte cross, part of ane red cross, part a thing, part other thing.
Sa our Lord Jesus Christ willing to have his awin pepil to abide to gidder in
the unity of a faith, and to know ane ane vthir amang them self to be of ane
faith, and to be knawin also fra all vtheris quhilk ar nocht of that faith he
hais ordanit certane sensibil signs, takins or markis callit sacramentis,
quhilk ar few in their nowmer, easy to be kepit, and excellent in their
significatioun.

The secund cause of the institutioun of the sacramentis was, nocht allanerly
to signify and betakin grace and halynes to be geuin to us, bot also thai war
ordanit to sanctify and to give to our saulis ye special grace of god (as we
declarit to ow before) as the instrumentis of our sanctificatioun. As for
exempil, quhen ane cunning and expert Cirurginar heilis the woundis of ane hurt
man, he him self under God is the principal heilar of the woundis be the meanis
of the playsteris laid to the woundis, nocht theles the towellis, bandis or
row^is quhilk haldis fast the plaisteris to the woundis, ar instrumentis of the
heiling and curing of the same wou^dis. Luce. x.
Sa our saluiour Jesus Christ is our heuinly Cirurginar comparit to the
Samaritane that helpit the woundit man quhilk lay half deed half quick betwein
Jerusalem and Hierico, for with the vertew of his passioun as with ane medicyne
or plaster and with his sacramentis as with spiritual rowlis or ba^dis quhilk
applyis, haldis and kepis the plaster of his passioun to the woundis of our
saulis, he heilis perfitly our hurt and woundit saulis, Aug. contra Faustu^
lib. 19. ca. 11.1^.16
and be this e may easily know quhat difference is betwein the sacrame^tis of
the auld law and the sacramentis of the new law. For thai war allanerly
schadowis, takins and figuris, that signifyit thingis to cum, quhilk quhen our
saluiour Jesus Christ in his coming had fulfillit, thai war takin away, and
thairfor takin away because thai war fulfillit. And their sacrame^tis of ye new
law was institute, quhilk ar of greter vertew, to us mair profitabil, easiar to
be kepit and obseruit, fewar in nowmer, nocht only ordanit to signify and
betakin grace, bot also to ^leng^ and sanctify our saulis. Their two causis
before rehersit ar may principal quhy the sacrame^tis of the new testament was
institute and ordanit be our saluiour Jesus Christ. Nochttheles yair is syndry
vthir convenient and reasonabil causis of their institutioun, quhilk should nocht
be left vnschawin to ow.

First as thai war institute to be signis and takins of the grace of God to be
geuin presently, sa ar yai takins and memoriallis of the passioun of our
saluiour Christ, and also signis prognosticat and foreschawand of the glore to
cum. And swa thai give to us consolatioun and comfort. Aug. contra Faustu^ lib.
19. cap. 9.
Thai raise and steris up in us ye true faith in Christ. Thai give warning to
lufe ane ane vthir, because thai ar instrumentis of grace commoun and equal to
all faithful men and women. Attour thai say nocht by the truth quhilk techis
the sacrame^tis to be institut and ordanit for three vthir causis convenient.
First for our humiliatioun, that man meikly at Gods command submit himself to
be curit fra sin be the rycht use and ministratioun of certane se^sibil
thingis, quhilk turnit him self fra God proudly be inordinat lufe and abusing
of sensibil thingis. It is rycht and reasone that quhair syn rysis and
begynnis, yair also it may dee and have ane end.

Thai war ordanit also for our eruditioun and true instructioun, Contra
Faustum. lib. 19. cap. 16.
for thai give us to understand that the will of God is to give us presently
his mercy and grace, sa that quhen we see any thing done to us in the
sacramentis outwartly in our body, we should believe that sum special effect of
grace is wrocht inwartly in our saulis. As quhe^ the wattir of Baptyme weschis
ye body outwartly, we should belief that the grace of God purgis and weschis the
saul inwartly fra original syn, and sa lykwise of all the laif of the
sacramentis. Thridly thai war also institute for the spiritual exercitioun of
all faithful men and women in the seuin principal vertewis. In the sacrament
of Baptyme we profess and pronuncis our faith, and ofttymis heris vthir,
quhilk ar baptizit, rehers, pronunce and profess their faith, and thairfor was
callit in auld times the sacrament of faith. In extreme vnctioun we grow in
hoip of ye mercy and glore of God, be the meritis of Christis passioun, and
prayaris of the kirk. In the sacrament of the Altar we ressaue great increse and
exercitioun of true lufe and cheritie towart God, because yt our saluiour
Christ in the same blissit sacrament hes geuin really and presently his awin
precious body and blud, in quick remembrance of his passioun, and also to be
the spiritual fude of our saulis. Lib. 8. de ^rinitate.
And thairfor the doctor Hylarius callis it the sacrament of lufe. In ye
sacrament of Confirmatioun we ressaue the vertew of Fortitude and spiritual
strynth of our mind, to stand stowtly in the co^fessioun of our faith, agane
all ennemeis of the same faith. In the sacrament of Penance we have exercitioun
of justice and rychteousnes. For na man can do worthi penance, bot gif yat he
justly satisfy his nychtbour and make ane mendis to him with al his powar for
wrangis done to him. In the sacrament of Ordour, specially of preistis yt
ke^nis yair vocatioun and dois yair office, yai have exercitioun of prudence be
study, co^templatioun, preching ye word of God, praying for the pepil, and in
dew ministratioun of the Sacramentis to their parischonaris, of quhom thai have
euir and charge geuin to yame and also yair corporal leuing. In the sacrament
of Matrimony, thai yat ar maryit personis hais exercitioun of temperance,
because that bodily plesour is contenit within the bandis and boundis of lawful
marriage. Thus it is manifest and plane, yat be dew ministratioun of the seuin
sacrame^tis, we have exercitioun in the seuin vertewis before rehersit.

Quhairof is ane sacrament constitute and maid? Trewly of two principal partis.
The ane is ane se^sibil thing, quhilk be sum property betakins ye grace of
God, as wattir, oil, breid, wine, impositioun of handis and siclyk, the vthir
part is the word of God expremit be inuocatioun of the Trinity and grundit in
the promis of mercy, quhilk is maid be our saluiour Christ to all them quhilk
in true faith of the same promis ressauis dewly the sacrament or at the leist
makis na abstacle agane the grace of God quhen thai ressaue the sacrament. And
suppose their two thingis ar the principal partis of ilk sacrament, quharin
sta^dis the hail nature and substance of the same, it is yair eikit be ye
authority of haly kirk certane ceremoneis, quhilk hais bein vsit in the
ministratioun of ilk ane sacrament sen the Apostillis time hitherto. And gif e
wald know quhairfor thai war eikit. Trewly nocht to be principal or substancial
partis of the sacrament. For in time of extreme neid a sacrament may be
ministrit but any siclyke ceremonyis. Bot veraily yai war ordanit yat ilk a
sacrament mycht be vsit with honest gravity, with reverence, with honorabil
ordo^ and with executioun of our faith and to give instructioun to us quhat is
done in the sacrament. And as for the minister of the sacramentis, suppose he
be ane evil man, heretyk, scismatyk, excomunicat, or in dedlie syn, it he
intend and as the kirk intendis and in the ministratioun of ye sacrament vsis
the form of ye kirk, and he doand as the kirk dois, and vsand the form
thairof, his evil stoppis nocht the effect of the sacrament, quhilk as we said
before, sanctifyis our saulis, nocht be the meritis of the minister, bot
allanerly be the meritis of our saluiour, quhilk hes ordanit them.

OF THE SACRAMENT of Baptyme.
The third Cheptour.
THE Sacrament of Baptyme hes two partis, quhairof it is constitute and maid,
The ane part is the element of wattir, the vthir part is the word of God. Quhy
was wattir ordanit to be one of the partis of Baptyme? First because of the
significatioun, for as wattir weschis and clengis the body outwartly, sa we
should believe that be the sacrament of Baptyme, we are weschin in our saulis fra
original and all vthir actual synnis before co^mittit. Secundly wattir is ane
element commoun to all men and women and easy to be gottin in all partis quhair
men hais their dwelling placis. Thridly our saluiour Christ was Baptiit be the
ministratioun of sanct Iohne ye Baptist in the wattir of Iordane, of quhom
sanct Augustine sais thus: Christus tactu sue mundissime carnis, vim
regeneratiua^ contulit aquis. Quhe^ our saluiour Christ was Baptizit, and with
his haly and clein body twichit the wattir, than he gave vertew and powar to
the wattir to regenerat and bring us forth agane with ane new birth. The great
flud commonly callit ye flud of Noe, because it was in Noes time, was ane
figure of ye wattir of Baptyme. For as almychty God, be yat same flude
destroyit all warldly creaturis leua^d on erd, few except, quhilk be saiffit in
the ark be ye wattir. Sa in the wattir of Baptyme, the world is destroyit, that
is to say, al vice and sin perissis. And thai that be baptizt in the ark,
that is to say, in the faith of haly kirk ar saffit be the wattir of Baptyme,
i. Petri. iii.
as sanct Peter techis in his epistil. Attour the wattir of Baptyme is weil
figurat be the red se. For as king Pharao with all his hoist persewand the
barnis of Israel was drownit in the red see, sa in the wattir of Baptyme the
devil and all his hoist of sin, is vincusit, ouircumit and put away, and the
true faithful pepil of Christ ar saffit. Thus e may understand plainly yat for
syndry convenient resonis and figuris wattir was weil ordanit to be ane of the
two partis of Baptyme.

The secund part of Baptyme may principal and mychty in operatioun is the
word of God, be inuocatioun of ye blissit trinity, grundit apo^ this promis
quhilk our saluiour makis on this manner: Marce. 16
Qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit, saluus erit. Quhasaeuir beleiffis and is
baptiit sall be saiffit. The word of Baptyme is expremit be the minister of the
same, Of the promis of baptyme. Math. 28
eftir the form and manner geuin be our saluiour quhen the minister sais: Ego
baptio te in nomine patris, et filii, et spiritus sancti. Amen. I baptie the in
the name of the father, and the son, and the haly spreit. Amen. This word
should be co^sidderit may principally, for yis word is it yat clengis our
saulis with the wattir. Tak away this word fra the wattir, quhat is the wattir
bot allanerly wattir, as we mycht say plainly, and this word be nocht trewly
and faithfully expremit, the wattir may nocht be callit a part of baptyme, bot
and yis word be ionit to ye wattir, than is yair a perfect sacrament. How hes
the wattir yis vertew and powar, yat quhen it twichis ye body, Aug. contra
Faustu^ lib. 19. cap. 16.
it weschis the saul, bot be the resone of ye word, nocht only because yat
word is spokin and pronunsit be the mouth of the minister, bot also because it
is beleiffit and ferme faith is geuin to it, sa the saul of yat person quhilk
is baptiit is clengit fra all synnis and borne agane in God with ane new birth,
nocht be vertew of the wattir only, bot be vertew of ye word trewly expremit
and faithfully beleuit. For quhen the minister of Baptyme sais: Ego baptio te
in nomine patris, et filii, et spu^s sancti, Ame^. I baptie ye in the name of
ye father, and the son, and the haly spreit, Amen The sentence of their wordis
is yis: The sentence of the vvordis of Baptyme.
With yis sensibil sign and takin quhilk I do now, dippand yt in wattir or
power and wattir on the, pronunceand yir wordis: I baptie the in the name of the
father, and the son, and the haly spreit. I declare to the plainly yt all thy
synnis ar forgeuin to the, Augusti. in Ioa^nnem. tracta. 80 Of the co^nand maid
in baptym betvvein God and man.
and yat you ar ressauit into the favor of God, the father, the son, and the
haly spreit, quhilk ar three personis and ane god, eternal and mercyful. For
quhat vthir thing is Baptyme, bot ane faithful cunnand and sickir band of
amity maid be God to man, and be man to God? For in als mekil yat ye person
quhilk is baptizit, other be him self or be his godfather and godmother,
oppinly renu^cis and forsakis ye devil and al his werkis, and oblissis him self
in service to the true leuand God that all the dayis of his life, he sal
mortify the me^beris of syn, and serve his god in true faith of haly kirk, ye
wyrkis be lufe. In Baptyme is ane cunnand or band quhilk man makis to God, and
on the vthir part, for als mekil that God almychty agane to the person sa
Baptiit oblissis him self to forgive to him al his synnis, and yat for the lufe
and meritis of his natural son Jesus Christ, he will give to him his haly
spreit, to quickin, to sanctify and to renew his fre will and make him ane new
creature in God, it may be callit ane cu^nand or band, quhilk God makis to man,
quhilk the Apostil sanct Petir declaris with great gravity sayand thus: i.
Petri. iii.
Sic vos baptisma saluos facit, non carnis depositio sordium, sed conscientie
bone interrogatio in deu^, per resurrectione^ Jesus Christi ex mortuis. Baptyme
is nocht allanerly the outwat wesching of the body fra filth, bot it is ane
conditioun or band of ane good conscience towart God, be the resurrectioun of
Christ. That is to say, God almychty in the sacrament of Baptyme testifeis he
is content and pleasit with us for Christis saik quhilk raise fra deed to life,
that on the vthir part good conscience may keip conditioun with God, traistand
that God is pleasit with him for Christis saik. Circumcisioun was ane figure
of Baptyme. Gene. 17.
Ane figure of Baptyme in the auld law was circu^cisioun partly agreand with
Baptyme in effect and significatioun. For circumcisioun was a sign of a
certane band or conditioun maid betwein God and Abraham and all Abrahamis
posterity. Thus the scripture sais: I will (sais God to Abraham) make ane
cunnand or conditioun betwein me and the and also thy seid eftir the in their
generatioun with ane perpetual band, yat I may be thy God, and also the god of
thy seid that sal cum eftir the. Thou thairfor sal keip my cunnand, and thy
seid also in yair generatiouns. Than god declaris the same cu^nand saying: This
is my cunnand quhilk e sall observe and keip betwein me and ow. Ilk ane
ma^child borne amang ow sal be circumcisit, a barn of aucht dais auld sall be
circumcidit, and sa my cunnand, band or conditioun sall be in our flesche for
euir. Eftir the same manner our saluiour spekis to his discipils sayand: Gang
and teiche all natiouns, baptizing them in the name of the father, and the
son, Math. 28
and the haly spreit. And as the scripture of the auld law said: Gene. 17
Masculus cuius praeputii caro circumcisa non fuerit, delebitur ai^a illa de
populo fuo, quia pactum meum irritum fecit. A man child quhais flesche is nocht
circumcidit, the saul of him sall be put away fra his pepil, sa our saluiour
said of Baptyme: Joan. iii.
Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu sancto, non potest introire in
regnum dei. Except ilk man and woman be borne agane be wattir and the haly
spreit, he may nocht entir into the kingdom of God.

Quhat is the special powar, vertew, and effect of the sacrament of Baptyme? Of
the vertevv and effect of Baptyme.
Trewly the vertew and effect of Baptyme is weil declarit be the Apostil S.
Paul quhen he callis Baptyme the lawar of regeneratioun and renouatioun. And
yat e may plainly understand this spiritual regeneratioun and renouatioun, call
to our remembrance, quhow all men and women ar consauit in original syn, except
our saluiour Christ and his mother the glorious virgin Mari, al may say the
wordis of the Prophet in the Psalm: Ecce enim in iniquitatibus co^ceptus su^
et in peccatis concepit me matter mea. Psalm. 50.
Behald I was co^sauit in iniquity, and my mother co^sauit me in synnis. And
because of the synnis quhairin we are borne, Christ and his mother except, we
may al say the wordis of sanct Paul: Eramus natura filii ire sicut et ceteri.
Ephe. 2.
In our natural and first nativity we war al borne the sonnis of wraith as
vtheris ar, yat is to say. quhen we war borne of our mother we war borne in the
stait of da^natioun, and be the rychteous judgment of God for ye syn of our
first father Ada^ condemnit to want ye joy eternal. Attour, ofttymes yai yat
cum to the eris of discretioun, personally and actually brekis the command of
God, and be that incurris the indignatioun of God, and ar in dangear of the
paynis eternal as it is writtin: Ezechi. 18
Anima que peccauerit ipsa morietur. The saul yat synnis ye same sall dee. And
quhat is the deed of the saul, bot eternal da^natioun to ye paynis of hell,
according as S. Paul sais: Roma. 6.
Stipendia peccati mors est. The stipe^d or waige geuin for syn is deed and
da^natioun. Bot in the sacrament of baptyme, al we yt ar baptiit ar regenerat
and borne agane spiritually with ane new birth and maid new in our saulis. The
first effect of Baptyme.
First quhen ong barnis ar baptizit, ye original sin quharin yai war co^sauit
and borne is forgeuin to them, and quhen men and women quhilk ar cum to the
eris of discretioun ar baptizit, thai get remissioun of al yair synnis, nocht
only original bot also actual and personal, quhilk yai did yair self agane the
command of God. Thus in the sacrament of Baptyme al synnis ar forgeuin,
according as S. Petir sais in the Actis of the Apostils: Penitentia^ agite et
baptizetur vnusquisque vestru^ in noi^e Jesus Christi in remissione^ peccatoru^
vestroru^. Actuum. 2
Lat ilk ane of ow be baptiit in ye name of Jesus Christ for ye remissioun of
our synnis. Consider now christin pepil, gif yis be nocht ane excellent vertew
and effect of Baptyme to have all our synnis forgeuin to us, and be reasone of
that to be deliuerit fra the thirldome of syn, the devil and hell. Than we are at
peace with God, than we have ane blyth and merry conscience, beleuand sickirly yat
God is nocht wraith with us, and sa will nocht condemn us for our synnis, we
kepa^d fermely the co^ditioun of our baptyme. The secu^d effect of Baptyme.
The secund effect of Baptyme is ye ressauing of the haly spreit, quhilk ettis
in our hartis the true lufe of God yat we may keip his co^mandis perfitly with
ane spiritual liberty, according as s. Petir sais in ye foresaid authority,
quhen he said: Lat ilkane of ow be baptiit in ye name of Jesus Christ in ye
remissioun of our synnis. Than it followis: Et accipietis donum spu^s scti^. e
sal ressaue the gift of the haly spreit. Now co^sidder agane O christin man
quhow precious is this effect of Baptyme. Sa lang as we remane in syn we have
na perfect lufe to God and his co^mandis, we have na will to do yame, and gif we
do part of yame in our outwart deid, other for feir of punitioun, or for su^
temporal reward, ye doing is nocht plesa^d and acceptabil to god, because ye
siclik deidis is nocht done freely for the lufe of God. Bot quhen we ressaue the
haly spreit he geuis us the true lufe of God that we may with liberty and lufe
do the commandis of God. The third effect of Baptyme is, The third effect of
Baptyme.
that in Baptyme we are cled with the rychteousnes of Jesus Christ, he and his
rychteousnes is geuin to us, sa that we may say trewly Christ is ours, his
halynes, his rychteousnes, his meiknes, his mercy, and cheritie is communicate
and geuin to us in the sacrament of Baptyme, that we may cleth our self with
his rychteousnes, and repute it as our awin, as sanct Paul techis to the
Galathianis: Gala. iii.
Quicunque enim in Christo baptizati estis, Christum induistis. Quhatsaeuir e
ar quhilk ar baptiit in Christ, e ar cled with Christ. And trewly to be cled with
Christ in our saul, is to us mair precious, than gif our body war cled with
cleth of gold, set with perlis and precious stanis. That carnal concupiscence
eftir baptyme is nocht syn but consent
Peradventure e will say, gif sa be yat in the sacrament of Baptyme their is
geuin to us remissioun of original syn, quhat is then the cause that eftir hend
that we are baptiit we feil in our flesche carnal concupiscence, the dreggis of
original syn, quhilk daily mouis and steris us to breik the command of God?
Answeir to this questioun e have in the nynt and tent co^mandis. And schortly
now we say that this concupisce^ce of the flesche aganis the spreit eftir
Baptyme is na sin to us, except we consent with ane deliuerit mind to do in
deed the same concupiscence or to have in our mind lang pleasure and
delectatioun in ye same but deid, quhilk also is syn, as we declarit yair.
Secundly we say to ow that all the dais of our life we should labor to mortify
the same concupiscence, be praying for the grace of God, be putting down the
first motiouns and rysingis of ye same, be fasting, be almous deid, be honest
and convenient labouris, be hering of the word of God, be study of haly
scripture, be fleing evil company, be meditatioun of ye presence of god, be
remembrance of our deed, be co^sideratioun of the paynis ordanit for them that
brekis the law of God, and also be hoip of reward for keeping of them. With
their spiritual wepins we should mortify the concupiscence of our flesche, and
bring it in subiectioun of the spreit, and sa we sall optene eternal life.

And that we may the mair easily ouircum the powar of this concupiscence, The
(...) effect of Baptyme.
we are helpit in the sacrament of Baptyme, quhilk breikis the violent powar of
the same concupiscence, and makis it sa feeble and waik, that we fechtand aganis
it with the spiritual wapins before rehersit, we may easily ouircum it and get
victory. Thus christin pepil e have four excellent and precious effectis and
vertewis of Baptyme: Remissioun of all synnis. Ressauing of the haly spreit, to
be cled with Christ Jesus. And yat the concupiscence is maid febill and waik,
vnabill to noy us sa lang as we consent nocht to it with a deliuerit mind.

Of the cerimonyes vsit in the ministratioun of Baptyme. The fourt Cheptour.
AS ane wise mother fedis her oung tendir barn with milk and soft meitis,
Convenient causis of the cerimoneis vsit in Baptyme.
til it may grow to mair perfectioun of strenth. Sa our mother the haly kirk
techit be inspiratioun of the halye spreit, vsis in the ministratioun of the
sacramentis certane cerimonyes nocht only for the honest and reverent
ministratioun of the sacramentis, bot also for the plain and easy instructioun
of them yat ressauis the sacrament, and of them also quhilk seis the
ministratioun of the sacrament. Sa in the sacrament of Baptyme ye minister vsis
syndry ceremonies, quhilk quhen thai ar weil kend quhat yai betakin and
signifyis, thai give instructioun of all the misteryis and gracious giftis of
God geuin in Baptyme. Thai steir us to have true faith in Christ Jesus, thai
give us plain knawlege of ye pointis of our christindome, yai gar us
understand our professioun and halye vow quhilk we make to God in our baptyme.
Breuely yai discriue plainly the co^ditiouns of ane christin man. Sen their for
that thai ar so profitabil to us, and also hes bein vsit sen the beginning of
the kirk hitherto with great gravity, honor and reverence we should nocht
contemn or lythly them, bot leir quhat yai mean with diligence and se yame vsit
with reverence. Quhen ye barn is brocht to the kirk to be baptiit sole^ly, first
at ye kirk door, the minister makis ouir the barn ane exorcisme, eftir this
manner: The first cerimonie of baptym^
First he blawis upon the barn in takin that the evil spreit be ye powar of
God sall be expellit fra yat barn and have na powar to noy it, and that the
haly spreit sal dwell in it as gyder and governor. Secund, the minister makis
ye sign of the cross

The third, the minister puttis salt in ye barnis

The fourt, the minister reidis ye eua^gil: oblati Math. 19.
quhilk makis mentioun quhow that oung barnis was brocht to our saluiour Jesus,
to signify that christin men and women may lauchfully offir barnis to our
saluiour Christ, and bring them to the sacrament of Baptyme, because our
saluiour sais: Sinite peruulos venire ad me. Thoile oung barnis to cum to me.

The fifth, quhen this is done the godfatheris Pater noster, and in sa doing yai
represent ye hail kirk of god, quhilk offeris that barn to our saluiour
Christ, and ressauis it to her faith. For trewly nocht only the godfatheris and
godmotheris offeris the barn to Baptyme, be their particular faith, bot also
the hail kirk of God, that is to say, the hail co^gregatioun of christin pepil
(quhilk is content that barnis be baptizit) offeris the barn to Baptyme, and
in the faith of the hail kirk representit their be the godfather and godmother,
the barn ressauis his christindome in the sacrament of Baptyme. Mairouir the
godfather and godmother doand as we said before ar maid borrowis or souerteis
for the barn that it sall keip the professioun of Baptyme and true
christindome. And thairfor thai should with great diligence exhort the barn quhen
it cummis to discretioun to keip his christindome to leif ane chaste life, to
keip justice and equity, and to serve God in feir faith, hoip, and cheritie,
and before all thingis thai should see that the barn leir perfitly the Pater
noster, the Aue and Creed with the ten co^mandis.



Eftir yat the exorcisme is endit ye barn is brocht to the Font, and quhen the
name is geuin to the barn be the mouth of the godfather and godmother, the
barn renuncis the devil and al his workis. First ye Abrenu^cias sathane:
Renuncis you the devil. The godfather and godmother answeris for ye barn,
sayand: Abrenuncio. I renunce. The minister speris agane: Et omnibus operibus
eius? Renuncis thou all the workis of the devil. Thai answeir agane I renunce.
The ministir speris agane the third time: Renuncis thou all his pomp, all
vaniteis and glore of yis world, pride, excess, inordinat lust and plesour?
Thai answeir agane the third time, sayand: I renunce We should thairfor euirmair
have mind of this word quhilk we promisit in our Baptyme, and neuir to lat it
gang out of our remembrance. For doutles it is the word of our professioun,
quhilk we have vowit and promisit to God oppinly in the face of haly kirk,
quhilk and we wald beir continually in our mind, we mycht easily ouircum all the
tentatiouns of the devil, pride, covetousness and lychery with all vthir synnis.
Than this be and done, The barn that is to be baptiit is The Catechism.
Quhen the vn^ting is co^pletit, yair followis ane Catechism, that is to say,
ane inquisitioun of our faith, quhilk we aucht to have of the blissit Trinite,
the father, the son, and the haly spreit. quhairto thai give answeir sayand
three tymis: Credo. I belief. Agane the minister sais: Credis sanctam ecclesiam?
Remissionem peccatorum? Carnis resurrectionem? et vitam eternal post mortem?
Trowis thou that their is ane haly kirk? Remissioun of synnis? Rising up agane
of the flesche, and eternal life eftir the deed? The answeir is maid be the
godfatheris and godmotheris in the barnis behalf. Credo. I belief. Quhen the
barn eftir this manir hais professit and confessit his faith. The minister
speiris at him, say and: Vis baptiza^i? Will you be baptizit? Thai answeir agane
volo. I will. To signify that na man can be saffit bot be consent of his
frewill mouit be grace and callit be ye word of God. Than incontinent the barn
is baptiit in the name of the father, and the son, and the haly spreit. Quhat
their wordis betakins, quhat band or co^ditioun in their wordis is contrackit
between God and man we declarit to ow before. In sum countrei thai use to dippe
the barn thrice in the wattir of the font and in sum countrei that laiue or
powris wattir on the barn thrice, quhilk of their vsis be done, it rakkis
nocht, for Baptyme is geuin bayth the wais. And ye barn is twichit with ye
wattir of Baptyme thrice: Anis quhen the father is namit, anis quhen the son
is namit, and anis quhen the haly spreit is namit, to declare yat the father,
the son, and the haly spreit, ar three personis and ane God, all three of ane
wisdom, of ane powar, of ane gudnes, of ane majesty and eternity. Also the
same is done in representatioun of the burying of our saluiour, quhais body lay
three dais in the graif, counting a part of a day for ane hail day, and raise to
life agane potently the third day, be quhais exempil we should rise out fra syn
be Baptyme to ane new life, and neuir to fall agane in syn, euin as our
saluiour raise and neuir deit agane.

Quhen the barn is baptizit, he is vnctit with Crisme upon his foreheid, and
yat betakins plainly, that he is than maid ane christin man, ressauand his name
fra Christ, and euirmair to be in deid, and sa be namit Christis man, Christis
seruand or Christis knycht. And suppose we expreme to ow for schortnes ye
manchild, it we understand both ma^child and womanchild, for thai ar bayth lik
in ressauing the sacrament of Baptyme. Last of al ye barn that is baptizit, is
cled with ane quhite lynning claith callit ane Cude, quhilk betakins that he is
clean weschin fra all his synnis, that he is brocht to the liberty of the haly
spreit, that he should live ane innocent life all the dais of his life, aye quhil
he cum to the judgment seit of our saluiour. And finally ane lychtit torche or
candil is geuin to him in his hand, quhilk betakinnis yat he should leif sa
perfitly eftir ye Euangil of Christ, that he mycht give the lycht of good
exempil to bis nychtbour, that throch him God may be glorifyit.

The minister of yis sacrament should be ane priest, Quhat is the minister of
Baptyme.
hauand ordinary authority, a man of laudabil life, nochttheles quhen he
ministeris Baptyme or any vthir sacrament, we should tak na tent to his life, gif
it be laudabil or vnlaudabil. For trewly it is nocht man quhilk giffis, bot
Christ our saluiour gyffis the effect of Baptyme, and the priest is allanerly
the minister of Baptyme under Christ. And quhe^ he sais, I baptie the. It is
als mekil to say as I represent Christ as his minister, and nocht in my
meritis, bot allanerly in the meritis of Christ I minister to the this haly
sacrament. And quhensaeuir the time of neide chancis that the barn can nocht
be brocht conveniently to a priest and the barn be feirit to be in peril of
deed, than all men and women may be ministeris of Baptyme, swa that quhen thai
lay wattir upon the barn, with that, thai pronunce the wordis of Baptyme
intend and to minister that sacrament, as the kirk intendis.

Of the sacrament of Confirmatioun.
The fifth Cheptour.
How expedient it is to ressaue the sacrament of Confirmatioun.
NOw be rycht ordour followis the sacrament of Confirmatioun. For as in ye
corporal life, first a man is borne be natural birth, and eftir hend he growis
in dew quantite and strenth of his body, sa it is in the spiritual life, first
we are regenerat and borne agane spiritually be wattir and the haly spreit in
the sacrament of Baptyme and maid the sonnis of God be adoptioun, and eftir
hend in the sacrament of Confirmatioun, quhen it may be conveniently gottin, we
ressaue the haly spreit to the spiritual quantity and strenth of our saul,
quhilk is to us verrai necessary. For all the dais of our life we fecht with three
ennemyis, the flesche, the world and the devil. The flesch couettis agane ye
spreit and ye spreit aganis the flesche, Gala. 5. Roma. 7.
their ar contrary ane to ane vthir, sa yat e can nocht do ye quhilk e wald do.
I se sais sanct Paul ane vthir law in my me^beris, quhilk repugnis agane the
law of my mind. Iacobi. 4
And of the world sais S. James thus: e adulteraris ken e nocht yat the
frendschip of yis world is a ennymye to God? Thairfor quhasaeuir will be ane
friend of yis world, he is maid the ennymye of God, and a good cause quhy, for as
sanct Iohne sais: i. Ioa^. vlti.
Totus mundus in maligno positus est. All ye world is geuin to evil. i. Pe.
vlti.
And that the devil is our ennymye sanct Petir testifyis plainly sayand thus:
Brethir be sobir and walk, for our aduersarye the devil, lyk ane ramping Lyoun,
gais about seikand quhom he may deuoire and swallye, to quhom do e resist,
being stark in our faith. Sen swa it is that all our life time we moan fecht
aganis their three ennymyes, sa that and we get nocht victory ouir them and
stoutly ouircum them, we sal nocht be crownit in heuin with the crown of
glore, as sanct Paul sais to his discipil Timothe: Na man sall be crownit,
except he fycht lauchfully, 2. Timo. 2
it is expedient to us to ressaue the sacrament of Confirmatioun, quhairin ye
haly spreit is geuin to us to be our tutour, our governor, our protector and
defendour. In Baptyme we are regenerate to ane new life. In Confirmatioun we are
maid stout and stark. In Baptyme we are markit to the spiritual weire. In
Co^firmatioun we ressaue our spiritual harnes, armor and wepins whair with we
moan fecht in our battle. In Confirmatioun we are send to the battle. In Baptyme
we are waschin fra all our synnis. Bayth ar excellent sacramentis, for in bayth
is geuin the halye spreit, trewly nocht two spreitis, bot ane haly spreit be
syndry effectis and giftis of grace. In Baptyme the halye spreit be his grace
makis us the sonnis of God be faith. In Confirmatioun the haly spreit armis us
with spiritual strenth, to the co^fessioun of our faith, to grant our faith, to
teich it, to preich and schaw it quhen neid is, and nocht to stop for schame or
feire of any temporal pain that may be put to us be all the tyra^nis of the
world. Eftir yat our saluiour Jesus Christ at his last suppar had weschin his
discipillis feit, he said to yame: Joan. 15.
Vos mundi estis propter sermone^, que^ locutus sum vobis. e ar clein in our
saul, be vertew of ye word, quhilk I have spokin to ow. Eftir hend certane
wordis he said thus: Quhen that comfortir sall cum, quhom I sall send to ow fra
the father, the spreit of verite, quhilk procedis fra the father, he sal beir
witness of me and e sal beir witness, that is to say, The haly spreit sall give
to ow spiritual strenth and knawlege, quhairby e may beir witness of me to all
the world. And eftir his resurrectioun suppose he ^andit on yame and said:
Accipite spiritum sanctum. Joan. 20.
Ressaue e the haly spreit, it eftir hend quhen he was to pas up to heuin be
his glorious ascensioun, he promissit ane vthir gift of ye haly spreit to the
Apostils, and be them to all faithful men and women: Luce. 24.
Ego mitta^ promissu^ patris mei in vos vos aute^ sede^e in ciuitate quoadusque
induamini virtute ex alto. I sal send to ow my fatheris promis* sit e or remane
e in ye city quhil e be cled with stre^th fra abone. And agane he said: Actuum.
i.
Accipietis virtute^ super vementis spu^s scti in vos. e sal ressaue ye strenth
of the haly spreit yat sal cu^ to ow fra heuin, and e sal be my witness in
Jerusalem, in Iewry, and in Samarye and unto the extreme part of ye world,
quhilk promis he fulfillit upon Witsonday evidently with ane ^ensibil sign, to
signify to us yat in the sacrament of Confirmatioun, he sendis to us the same
haly spreit, to give us spiritual strenth in our saul to beir witness of him be
true co^fessioun of our faith. And yat yis sacrament of Co^firmatioun should be
had in the kirk of God, it may be manifestly knawin be two placis of ye Actis
of the Apostils, The first is thus. Actuum. 8 The sacrament of Co^firmatioun is
declarit be tvva placis of the scripture.
Quhe^ ye Apostils quhilk war at Jerusalem hard yt the cou^trai of Samarye had
ressauit the word of God yai send to yame Petir and John, quhilk quhen yai come
to Samarie yai maid yair prayar to God for ye pepil of Samary ya^ yai mycht
ressaue ye haly spreit, for as at yat time ye haly spreit was nocht cum in to
any of yame with abundance of spiritual strenth, bot thai war allanerly baptiit
in the name of our Lord Jesus. Than the two Apostils Petir and Iohne laid yair
handis upon the faithful pepil of Samarie, and incontinent yai ressauit ye
haly spreit with abundance of spiritual stre^th. The secund place is thus. Actu.
1^.
Quhen yai wordis was hard quhilk Paul prechit, yai war baptiit in ye name of
our Lord Jesus. And quhen sanct Paul had laid his handis on them, the haly
gaist, come upon them* and thai spak prophecy. Haly and catholyk writa^is
referris both their placis to the sacrament of Confirmatioun.

Quhat is the mattir or the sensibil sign of this sacrament? It is Crisme
quhilk is confeckit and maid of oil Olyue and balm sanctifyit be
consecratioun of ane Bischope. For as wattir is the sensibil mattir in Baptyme,
because of ye property of wesching and clenging, sa Crisme is the sesibil
mattir of Co^firmatioun for the property of vncting. And it betakins that as
the Crisme vnctis our foreheid outwartly, sa the halye spreit vnctis our saulis
inwartly be his grace. And as our saluiour Jesus Christ was vnctit spiritually
with the haly spreit above al measure, sa in the sacrament of Confirmatioun we are vnctit spiritually with the same grace of ye haly spreit with sic a measure
as it pleasis our saluiour to give. And as our saluiour (because he was vnctit
sa abundantly with the spreit of God) is callit Christ be excellence, that is
to say, ane vnctit bischope and ane vnctit king. Sa we all that hais ressauit
the sacrament of Confirmatioun, be resone of our vncting ar ordanit to be
Christis men, and sa we are al callit christin men, to be spiritual kingis in
haly ruling and gyding of our life be keeping of the co^mandis of God, and
defending of our saulis fra our spiritual ennymyes with the sword of gods word,
and also to be spiritual preistis or bischoppis, to offer daily our awin body
to god as ane spiritual sacrifice be mortification of our carnal lustis, sa sal
we be as S. Petir sais: Regale sacerdotium. i. Petri. 2.
Ane kingly preistheid, nocht yt al christin men ar preistis or kingis
te^porally be authority and ministratioun of office ouir the pepil, bot
allanerly spiritually for the reasonis before rehersit. The Crisme is maid and
co^fecket of two thingis, the ane is oil Olyue quhilk persis and entres in
ma^nis flesch and makis it soft. Sa the grace of ye haly spreit ressauit in
Co^firmatioun entres into our saul and makis it tender and soft spiritually be
true lufe and cheritie to our nechtbour. The vthir part of Crisme is precious
balm quhilk naturally causis ane pleasand and delectabil odor, and it
signifeis yt the haly spreit ressauit in the sacrament of Confirmatioun giffis
us grace to have ane good name and fame pleasand and delectabil before god and
man, sa yat we may say: Christi bonus odor sumus. 2. Cor. 2.
We are the good sauoir of Christ. Sa e may understand yat Crisme is ane
convenient matter or sensibil sign vsit in the sacrament of Co^firmatioun,
because yat the outwart vncting of Crisme betakins ye inwart and spiritual
vncting of ye haly spreit quhilk he makis in our saulis be his grace. Of the
word of Confirmatioun.
Quhat is the form of wordis quhair with this sacrament is ministerit and
geuin. This is it: Signo te signo crucis, and co^firmote crismate salu^is, In
nomine patris, et filii, et spu^s sancti. Amen The minister of this sacrament
sais to yat person quhilk ressauis it: I mark the with the sign of the
cross, and I confirm the with the Crisme of heilth, in the name of the
father, and the son, and the haly spreit. Amen.

For the plain intelligence of their wordis e sall understand that as verrai
conveniently all men of weir quhilk gangis to fecht in battle under yair awin
prince, beiris upon yame yair princis baige, quhilk he beiris him self, ye be
that same baige thai may knawlege them self to be that kingis knichtis, quhais
baige yai beir. Euin sa, thai that ressauis the sacrament of Confirmatioun, yai
ar markit with the sign of the cross, as with ane spiritual baige of our king
Jesus Christ, quhilk with the cross faucht agane syn, the devil and hell, and
ouircum them. Thairfor quhen the minister sais: I mark the with the sign of
the cross. The sentence of his wordis is this. Thou art ordanit to be ane
spiritual knycht all the dais of thy life to fycht spiritually agane syn under
the baner of the king Jesus Christ. In takin quhairof, heir I mark the with the
sign of the cross quhilk you should beir euirmair in yi heart as ane spiritual
baige, mark or takin of thy vocatioun. Quhy ressaue thai this sign of the
cross upon yair brow? Trewly to signify that ane christin man or woman should
neuir be eschamit nor feirit to grant and confess the faith that he hes in his
heart, concerning the passioun of Jesus Christ, be quhais meritis he trowis to
be saffit. Naturally and commonly both feir and schame appeiris in a ma^nis
face, feir causis ane pail collure of the face, and schame causis ane red
collure. Now thairfor in Confirmatioun we are markit with the sign of the cross
in the hear part of our face to signify that we should neuir be feirit nor
eschamit oppinly quhen neid is to confess our faith quhilk we have in Jesus
Christ yat was crucifyit and deit upon the cross for our redemptioun. And quhy
this mark of the cross is maid with Crisme, quhilk is co^feckit with oil
Olyue and balm, it was declarit to ow before.

Quhat is the vertew or effect of this sacrament of Confirmatioun? As we
declarit to ow before, Of the vertevv and effect of Confirmatioun.
it is to ressaue the halye spreit, to give us spiritual strenth in our saul,
to gyde and govern us in all our desiris, wordis and deidis with his seuin
giftis according as the bischop quhilk is minister of this sacrament sais in
his prayar to God quhen he ministeris the same sacrament: Immitte in eum
spiritu^ sa^ctum tuu^ septiformis gratie paracletum de coelis, spiritum
sapientie et intellectus, spiritum consilit, et fortitudinis, spiritum scientie
et pietatis, et imple eum spiritu timoris tui et signa signaculo sanct^ crucis
propitiatus, et spiritum sanctum non amitta^ in vitam eternal. O lord God send
down fra heuin (into this person that ressauis this sacrament) thy haly
spreit with his seuin giftis of grace, the spreit of wisdom and of
understanding, the spreit of counsel and of fortitude, the spreit of knawlege,
and piety, and fill him with the spreit of thy feir, and be thy mercy mark him
with the sign of the cross, sa that he neuir tyne the haly spreit, bot keip
him quhil he cum to the life eternal.

The vi. Cheptour.
HEir we think it ane convenient place to declare to ow the seuin giftis of the
halye spreit, yat e may with mair diligence and deuotioun ask yame of God in our
daily prayaris. The first gift is wisdom. Of the gift of vvisdome.
Quhairin standis yis wisdom? Trewly it standis in two pointis First to know
god, how he is eternal, almychty, mercyful, rychteous, faithful, gentill, and
liberal to the. Secundly, to have in that same knawlege a spiritual gift,
delectatioun and pleasure in God. Heir quhat the prophet sais to us all in the
Psalm: Gustate et videte quoniam suauis est dominus. Psalm. 33.
Taist and se quhow sweit is the Lord. And trewly quhasa hais this gift of
wisdom, he luffis God with all his heart, with all his saul, with all his mind
and all his strenth, he luffis nathing bot in God and for Goddis saik, he
referris all good that he dois to the glore of God. He contemnis al carnal
pleasure, al erdly richis, all warldly dignity that is contrary to the lufe
of God, or that is had aganis the command of God. The gift of wisdom is nocht
gottin be ye study and labor of man, bot be ane faithful prayar maid to God,
as sanct James teichis sayand: Iacobi. i.
Gif any of ow want wisdom, lat him ask it at God, quhilk giffis to all men
largely, and e, lat him ask it in faith doutand nathing bot God may and will
give it to him. Quhow may it be knawin quha hes yis gift of wisdom? Trewly be
certane properteis quhilk sanct James deseriuis: Iaco. iii.
The wisdom quhilk is fra above it is first puir, clein, and chaste. It is
peaceabil, gentil and easy to be entretit, agreand to all good thingis, full of
mercy, and of good fruitis, alwais do and good warkis.

Donum intellectus. Of ye gift of understanding. Psalm. 118.
The secund gift of the haly spreit is the true understanding of the word of
God quhilk we should ask daily in our prayar sayand with the prophet in the
Psalm: Da mihi intellectum, et scrutabor legem tuam. O good Lord give me
understanding and I sal search thy commandis. Quhow can we understand trewly
the word of God except that Christ oppin it to us? Apoca. iii
quhilk beiris the key of David. He oppinnis, and na man closis, he closis and
na man oppinnis. He oppins the word of god to certane men and women to quhom it
pleisis him to oppin. And hydis it fra certane men and women, fra quhom it
plesis him to hyde it, according as he sais in the euangil speikand to his
eternal father: Math. xi.
Co^fitebor tibi pater coeli et terre, quia abscondisti hec a sapientibus et
prudentibus, et reuelasti ea paruulis. I confess to the O father of heuin and
eird, yat thou hes hyde their mysteries of mannis redemptioun fra men warldly
wise and prudent, and hes reuelitt hame to meik men.

Donu^ consilii. The third gift is callit counsal. Of ye gift of cou^seil.
Be the gift of wisdom we ken God with delectatioun and pleisure. Be the gift
of understanding we have true intelligence of Goddis word. Sa conveniently
followis ye gift of counsal, quhilk is to have a spedie, a reddye, and a good
will to do willingly as the word of God byddis and counsallis us to do, sa that
be the vertew of yis gift we may say with ye Prophet in the Psalm: Voluntary
sacrificabo tibi O good Lord I will make sacrifice to the willingly. Psalm. 57.
That is to say, I will do my dewtie to the, nocht for compulsioun of pain,
bot with my awin free will luffingly. The haly spreit is callit the spreit of
liberty, because he geuis us grace to do our good deidis with fredome and
liberty of our heart. Thairfor sanct Paul sais: Vnusquisque prout destinauit
in cord suo, 2. Cor. 9.
non ex tristitia aut necessitate, hilarem enim datorem diligit deus. Lat ilk
man do his good deidis as he hes determinit in his heart, nocht with sadness or be
compulsioun, for God luffis ane blyth geuir.

Of ye gift of Fortitude.
Donum fortitudinis. The fourt gift is spiritual strenth of our mind to thoil
all manner of aduersite with patience, to do al thingis quhilk we aucht to do be
rycht, willingly as it is said in ye third gift, and nocht to gang by the
verity and rycht for any mannis pleisure, feire, reward, or malice. This gift
is necessary to al christin men and women, 2. Ti. iii.
because yat S. Paul sais: Omnes qui pie volunt viuere in Christo,
persecutionem patientur. Al men and women, quhilk wald leif ane good life
conform to the euangil of Christ, sall thoil persecutioun be them that are
evil geuin. Be yis gift it is knawi^ gif we be perfect chrsten men. For as
sanct Gregory sais: Actuum. v
Qualis vnusquisque apud se lateat, illata contumelia probat. Quhow good and
pacient ilk a man is in him self, iniureis and wrangis done to him will schaw.
The Apostillis had this gift of Fortitude quhen yai war dung for preching of
the euangil, be the auctorie of the hie counsale of Jerusalem, and come away
fra yame with blythnes, because yat thai tholit iniureis and wrangis for the
name of Jesus.

Donum Scientie. Of ye (...) of science.
The fifth gift is Cunning or knawlege, and this is nocht cunning or knawlege of
natural Philosophy, or siclyk, bot it is cunning or knawlege to leif a good
life at all times, bot specially in the middis of ane evil natioun, That is to
say, quhen we are in evil cu^pany or amang evil men, quhilk gift ye haly man Job
discriuis, sayand thus: Recedere a malo scientia. It is cunning and science to
declyne and gang fra evil. Job. 28.
And this is callit in ye scripture the science or knawlege of sanctis, quhair
of it is said: Sapien. 4
Iustum deduxit dominus per vias rectas et oste^dit illi regnu^ dei. Dedit illi
scientiam sanctorum, honestauit illum in laboribus et compleuit labores illius.
Our Lord hais led the just man be rycht wayis, he hais schawin to him the
kingdom of God, he hais maid him honest in his labouris and brocht them all
to good end. The halye man Job had this gift of knawlege, for he leiffit ane good
life in the middis of money evil geuin pepil. Job. i.
Tobie. i.
Tobias had yis gift quhilk led in captivity and daily leiffand amangis evil
men left nocht the way of verity. 2. Petri. 2
And the same gift had Loath dwelling amang the Sodomitis.

Of ye gift of pyetie. 1. Timo. 4
Donum pietatis. The sext gift is pyetie and mercy schawin to the pu^r for
Goddis lufe, quhairto S. Paul exhortit his discipil Timothe sayand: Exerce te
ipsum ad pietatem, nam exercitatio corporalis ad modicu^ vtilis est, pietas
autem ad omnia valet. Exerce and occupy thy self in godlynes, pyetie and
mercy, for bodyly exercitioun, quhilk a man takis in his body be fasting and
abstinence is a litil profitabil to him without piete, Bot pyetie and mercy done
in almous deid to the puir for gods saik, is mekil profitabil, for as our
saluiour sais Beati misericordes quoniam ipsi misericordiam co^sequentur. Math.
5.
Blissit is the merciful, for thai sall get mercy. Quhasa hes this gift of
pyetie yai ar alwayis reddye at their powar to do werkis of mercy bayth
spiritually and corporally.

Donum timoris. The seuint gift is the feir of God. Of ye gift of Feir.
First to feir God as the seruand feiris his master, quhilk dois his maisteris
command for feir of punitioun. And suppose yis feir is ye gift of the haly
spreit and is ye beginning of wisdom, it it is nocht the perfectioun of
wisdom, for the true lufe of god puttis away yis feir, and bringis us to ye
secund feir, quhilk is to feir God as ane good son or cheild feiris his father,
doand his command, nocht for feir of punitioun, bot yt he wald nocht offend or
displease his father, nor depa^t fra his fatheris company. The first feir
bringes in the secund, euin as the nedil bringis in ye threid throw ane clayth,
and the mair that ane christin man grow in the lufe of God, the les he feiris
the punitioun of God. And of the secund feir it is writtin in the Psalm: Psalm.
18.
Timor domini sanctus permanet in seculum seculi. The haly feir of our lord
lestis for euirmair. And their two feiris is declarit to ow at mair lenth in the
expositioun of the first command.

Of the sacrament of the Altar.
The vii. Cheptour.
AS in the corporal life, first ane man is borne, syne he growis in quantity
and strenth of his body, and for the confirmatioun of his life, he is fed with
corporal fude. Siclyk ordoure is kepit in our spiritual life. After yat we are
spiritually regenerat and borne agane in ye sacrament of Baptyme, And in the
sacrament of Co^firmatioun growis in ye spiritual quantity and strenth of our
saul, be ressauing of ye haly spreit be his special grace to ye spiritual
strenth of our saulis. It hes pleasit our saluiour Jesus Christ to ordane the
blissit and may excellent sacrament of his precious body and blude to be
geuin to us as spiritual fude for the co^seruatioun of our spiritual life. And
quhow necessary this haly sacrament is to us our saluiour declaris plainly in
the euangil of sanct Iohne sayand thus: Joan. 6.
Amen amen dico vobis, nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hoi^s and biberitis
eius sanguinem non habebitis vita^ in vobis. Veraily veraily I say unto ow,
except that e eit the body of the son of man and drink his blud e sall nocht
have life in ow. Qui man^ ducat meam carnem et bibit meum sanguine^ habet vitam
eternam. He yat eitis my body and drinks my blud hes eternal life. Et ego
resuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. And I sall raise him up agane in the last
day. Caro mea vere est cibus et sangui^ meus vere est potus. My body is verrai
meit and my blud is verrai drink. Qui ma^ducat meam carnem et bibit meum
sanguinem in me manet et ego in eo. He that eitis my body and drinkis my blude
he dwellis in me and I in him. And ^e this e may understand that of all the
seuin sacramentis yis is may worthi, may haly, and may excellent, because
the laif ar only signis of grace and effectuous instrumentis and causis of our
sanctificatioun. Bot this precious sacrament co^tenis him quhilk is the
fountane, the well and giffar of grace and sanctificatioun our saluiour Jesus
Christ in body and blud, saul and godheid, as it sall be schawin to ow mair
largely eftirhend.

The excellent dignity of this sacrament is sa great, yat it was figurat in the
auld testament with syndry figuris. Of the figuris of this may excellent
sacrament
First in ye law of nature, Melchisedech king of Salem and priest of the highest
God, offerit to him in sacrifice breid and wine, quhilk was ane figure that our
saluiour Jesus Christ ba^h king and priest should ordane this precious sacrament
of his body and blud under the kindis of breid and wine. Secundly in the
writtin law it was figurat be the Paschal Lamb, and be the angel fude callit
Ma^na. For as be ye immolatioun and sacrifice of the Paschal lamb the pepil of
Israel was deliuerit fra the vengeance quhilk the Angel tuk upon the Egiptians,
and sa finally fra the captivity of king Pharao. Sa be the sacrifice of the
immaculat lamb our saluiour Christ offerand him self upon the altar of the
cross, we are all (yat beleuis in him with ane leiffand faith) deliuerit fra
the vengeance that sal be takin upon tynnaris, and swa finally fra the
captivity of the devil. And also as the pepil of Israel was fed with Manna
callit angellis fude in the wilderness quhil yai come to the land of
promissioun. Sa the christin pepil is fed spiritually with this precious
sacrament in the wilderness of yis present world, quhil we cum to the land of
life, promissit to us in ye kingdom of heuin.

Attour this precious sacrament is sa hie in dignity and divine majesty that
it is nocht expremit with ane name as the laif of the sacramentis ar, Of the
syndry namis of this precious sacrament.
bot the kirk of God giffis it syndry names. First it is callit the Eucharist,
yat is to say, good grace, because it contenis him really and essentially,
quhilk is the well and giffar of grace, of quhais abundance we all ressaue. It
is callit the Communioun, for be worthi ressauing of this sacrament, al true
christin men and women ar ioynit al togidder amang yame self as spiritual
memberis of ane body, and also ar ioynit all togidder to our saluiour Christ,
heid of the same mistik body.

It is callit the sacrifice of the altar, because it is ane quick and special
remembrance of the passioun of Christ, as it is said in ye euangil of S. Luke.
Hoc facite in meam co^memorationem. Do this in my remembrance. Luc^. 22.
Now the passioun of Christ was the true sacrifice quhilk was offerit for our
rede^ptioun. It is callit our daily breid, because it is the fude of our saul.
Quhi is yis sacrament callit the suppar of our Lord.
Sanct Paul callis it the suppar of our Lord, because our saluiour Jesus gave
it to his Apostils in the time of his last suppar, quhen also he institute and
ordanit the same sacrament. Common experience schawis that quhen a man is to
depart fra ane luffand company, the thing that he dois and the word that he
sais in his last departing, is may of all had in remembrance. Sa our saluiour
purposing immediately eftir the suppar to gang to his passioun, willing also to
commend the hie dignity and great utility of this sacrament and to cause it to
be had in sickar and lang remembrance, he ordanit the same precious sacrament
in time of his last suppar. Nochttheles, the haly kirk hais ordanit that the
christin pepil sal ressaue this sacrament fastand, to that effect yat yai may
ressaue it with mair deuotioun and redynes, quhilk ordinatioun began in the
time of the haly Apostillis and hitherto hais bein vsit, nochttheles yai yat ar
seik and in perril of deed, may ressaue it suppose yai be nocht fastand. Sen
this sacrament of the Eucharist is sa necessary, sa haly, sa precious, and of
sa excellent dignity. e should O christin pepil tak good tent to ye declaratioun
of ye same blissit sacrament, quhairin first we sall declare quhat is the
propir matter, outwart sign or sensibil takin of this sacrament. Secundly,
quhat is the form of Goddis word, quhilk belangis to the consecratioun of this
sacrament, and the true intelligence of the same. Thridly quhat is the vertew,
effect and utility of this sacrament. Fourtly, how men should prepare them to
the worthi ressauing of this sacrament.

As concerning the first, The propir matter or sensibil sign of yis sacrament
is breid of quheit and wine of the berry mixed with wattir, upon ye quhilk quhen
the word of God institute be our saluiour Christ is pronuncit be ane true
minister quhilk is a consecrat priest, thai ar turnit in to the true body and
blud of Christ, and sa this sacrament is maid and consecrat. For as material
breid of quheit feidis, nurisches, sustenis and keipis a man in this corporal
life, And wine refreschis, co^fortis and makis ane man blyth in the same
corporal life. Sa the precious body and blud of our saluiour quhilk ar contenit
under ye kindis of breid and wine, and signifyit be the same, feidis,
nurischis, and sustenis, refreschis, confortis and makis ane christin man blyth
in his saul quhen thai ressaue deuoitly this sacrament with faith, hoipe, and
cheritie as yai should do. Mairouir, breid and wine ar convenient matter of this
sacrament, because thai signify and betakin the unity of ye mistik body of
our saluiour Christ quhilk is ye co^gregatioun of true christin pepil, quhilk
unity is ye propir effect of yis sacrament and signify^t be the same. For as
breid is maid of money pickillis of corn, and wine is maid of money berryis, and
ane body is maid of money me^bris, sa ye kirk of God is gadderit togidder of
money christin men and women bund togidder with ye band of perfect lufe and
cheritie and festinit with the spreit of God. In the sacrament of the Altar,
wattir is mixed with the wine quhilk ye kirk of God vsis to do, beleiff and yat
our saluiour vsit the same in the first institutioun of yis sacrament. And
trewly suppose it is nocht expressly writtin in ye euangil, it al true
christin men and weme^ should hald yame content with the faith of the kirk,
beleuand as ye kirk beleuis, quhilk doutles is instruckit and direckit be the
haly spreit, and thairfor is callit ye sicker fundement and pillar of verity.
1. Timo. iii
And gif you will know quhat betakins the wattir mixed with the wine? Thou may sone
leir the same, and thou will co^sidder yat this blissit sacrifice of the altar
is ane quick memorial, ordanit to reduce to our mind ye passioun of our
saluiour Christ, Joan. xix.
for as the evangelist S. Iohne make is mencioun, quhen our mediator and
redemar was deed upon the cross, ane of the knychtis or tormentouris with ane
speir oppinit his side and incontinent their come forth bayth blud and wattir,
blud to signify our rede^ptioun, and wattir to signitie our spiritual wesching
be Baptyme, be ye wine their for is signifyit yt be the passioun of Christ we are redemit, and the wattir betakins yt be the meritis of ye same passioun we are
weschin fra our synnis in Baptyme. Attour in ye haly scripture wattir betakins
the pepil according as sanct Iohne sais: Aque mul^e populi multi. Mekil wattir
betakins money pepil. Apoc. 17.
Thairfor quhen in the challice wattir is mixed with wine, it is signifyit, yt the
christin pepil ar ioynit and cupplit with Christ in quhom thai believe. Of the
word of God that bela^gis to the consecratioun of this divine sacrament.
Quhat is the word quhilk belangis to ye co^secratioun of this blissit
sacrament? It is ye word of our saluiour Jesus Christ, be quhais vertew ye
sacrament is co^secrat, and be the mycht of that same word, the breid is turnit
into the body of Christ, and the wine mixed with wattir is turnit into ye verrai
blud of Christ. The kirk of God hes ressauit this word fra our saluiour Jesus
Christ be the t^aditioun and doctrine of the Apostillis, and pronuncis ye same
word eftir this manner: Hoc est enim corpus meum. This is my verrai body. And
agane Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei noui et eterni testa menti misteriu^
fidei, qui pro vobis et pro multis effundetur in remissione^ peccatoru^. This
is the verrai cup of my blud of the new and eternal testament quhilk sal be
sched for ow and money in remissioun of synnis. Sa the minister of yis sacrament
is ane co^secrat priest pronunce and their wordis upon breid and wine with the
true faith and rycht intentioun of haly kirk, he consecratis the true body and
blud of Jesus Christ, nocht be the vertew of any mannis word, bot be the vertew
and powar of Gods word institut and co^mandit be our saluiour quhe^ he said:
Luce. 22. i. Cor. 11.
Hoc facite in mea^ co^memoratione^. Do e yis in my remembrance. As I have
consecrat my body and blud and geuin yame ^o ow in form of breid and wine, sa
I get ow authority to do the same, yat e and all vthir quhilk dewly ressauis
yame, may have remembrance of me. All vthir wordis quhilk the priest sais before
or eftir the same wordis of consecratioun, yai pertene to the rycht, faithful,
deuoit and reverent use of yis blissit sacrament, or ellis yai ar louingis and
tha^kis geuin to God, or ellis yai ar deuoit prayaris, obsecratiouns and
peticiouns maid to God for the christin pepil.

The viii. Cheptour.
ANd now christin pepil I exhort ow to have in our mind quhat sanct Gregory
sais: Gregorius.
Fides non habet meritum vbi humana ratio prebet experimentum. Faith hais na
merit quhair manis reasone giffis experience. Our christin faith is nocht
groundit upon the natural reasone of man, bot upon the true and infallibil word
of God. For in this sacrament eftir the wordis of consecratioun we see with our
eyne the figure of breid and wine, Of the verite of the body and blude of our
saluiour Christ in the sacrament of the Altar. Roma. 10
we smell with our neyse the sauoir of breid and wine, we taist with our mouth
the gust of breid and wine, we feil with our twiching the hardness of breid and
the liquore of wine, it their is na substance of breid and wine in that
sacrament, bot allanerly the substance of the body and blud of our saluiour
under the form of breid and wine. And thairfor we should nocht give credit to
our sycht, to our smelling, to our taisting and twiching, bot allanerly we should
tak tent quhat we heir, for as sanct Paul sais: Fides ex auditu est, auditus
aute^ per verbum dei. Our faith is ressaui^ be hering, nocht be heiring of the
wordis of man, bot be hering ye word of God. Sa in this blissit sacrament we
should give credence to the w^rd of God quhilk our saluiour Christ spe^kis be his
minister, sayand: Hoc est corpus meum. Hic est sa^guis meus. This is my body.
This is my blud Tak tent O christin man and woman, Math. 2^
quhow he sais nocht, yis is a figure of my body and blud, he sais expressly,
This is my body, and this is my blud. And yat you may be sickerly groundit in
the true faith of this sacrament, beleuand fermely the two first artikillis of
ye Creed and in the secund artikil, dout nocht bot that our saluiour Jesus
Christ is both man and God, the natural son of God, and sa is he ye eternal
verity, quhais word is sa true yat na thing can be trewar And as it is
impossibil yat myrknes may proceid fra the cleire schynand son, sa it is
impossibil that any error, falset or lesing may proceid fra the mouth of Jesus
Christ, quhilk is callit Sol iustitie. The son of rychteousnes, sapientia
patris, The wisdom of the father. Heir quhat he sais of him self: Ego sum via,
veritas et vita. Joan. xiiii
I am the way, the verity, and the life. All men of ^hair awin nature may
begyle and be begylit. Psalm. 115.
Omnis homo mendax. Bot Jesus Christ ^aith God and man can another begyle nor be
begylit. Also in the first artikil trow sickerly that he is omnipotent and
almychty, and quhy? because he is god quhais powar is infinite. Believe with thy
heart and grant with thy mouth ye wordis to be true, quhilk the angel Gabriel
spak to the glorious virgin: Luce. i.
Quia non erit impossible apud deum omne verbum. Their is na word impossibil
to God. For as the Prophet sais in the Psalm: Psalm. 148
Ipse di^it, et facta sunt, ipse mandauit, et creata sunt. Quhen be spak his
word all creaturis was maid, quhen he gave command thai war all creat and maid.
Sen swa it is that Jesus Christ our saluiour sais their wordis and hais geuin
authority and command to his minister to pronunce the same in his name and
behalf. This is my body, this is my blud. Secundly sen swa it is that he is the
eternal verity and can nocht make ane lesing. Thridly yat he is omnipotent and
almychty and sa is abil to perform and fulfill his word. Quhatsaeuir thou art
man or woman, that trowis nocht fermely and constantly, that in the sacrament
of the haly altar eftir the wordis of consecratioun, is the verrai body and
blud of our saluiour bayth God and man under the forms of breid and wine, thou
denyis the two first artikillis of the Creed and swa fallis into great heresye.
The Apostil sanct Paul speikis sa plainly of the verity of the body and blud
of our saluiour to be in this sacrament, that thai may appeir to be out of
their wit ya^ thinkis or sais the contrary. i. Cor. xi.
This is his first word: Qui enim manducat et bibit indigne, iudicium sibi
manducat et bibit, non diiudicans corpus domini. Quhasa eitis and drinkis
unworthily, he eitis and drinkis his da^pnatioun, because he discernis nocht or
puttis nocht difference betweine the body of our Lord and vthir common meitis.
In their wordis sanct Paul sais expressly, that ye verai body of our Lord is
really and substancially present in the sacrament of the Eucharist. His secund
word is this: i. Cor. x.
Calix benedictionis cui benedicimus, nonne communicatio sanguinis Christi est?
Et panis quem frangimus, nonne participatio corporis domini est? The cupe of
thankis giving, quhairwith we give thankis. Is it nocht the partaking of the
blud of Christ? The breid that we brek on the altar, Is it nocht the
parttaking of the body of Christ? In their wordis sanct Paul teichis plainly yat
quhensaeuir the sacrament of the Altar is proponit and geuin to us, the verrai
body and blud of our saluiour is proponit and geuin to us under the forms of
breid and wine, and sa aucht every ilk christin man and woman to believe.

It is nocht facil or easy to declare sufficiently, Of the frutis and effectis
of this sacrament.
quhow money, quhow merualous, quhow excellent and profitabil fruitis we may
opteine be dew ressauing of this precious sacrament. Our redemar and saluiour
luffit us sa ardently that he thocht it nocht sufficient to give him self to
the deed of ye cross for our redemptioun, Spiritual fude of our faulis* Joan.
6. Agustin^
bot also to declare to us mair specially the same lufe, he hes geuin him self
to be our special fude and refectioun, according as he sais: Caro mea vere est
cibus, et sanguis meus vere est potus. My flesche is our verrai fude, and my
blud is our verrai drink. Quhairfor desire we meit and drink, bot to keip us
fra the paynis of hungir and thrist, and to hald us in our corporal life sa
lang as we may? Than mekil mair we aucht to desire this precious fude, quhilk
in this present world haldis us in the life of grace, and finally bringis us to
the life of glore, quhair their is another hungir nor thrist, nor na vthir
pain, bot immortality, incorruptioun, eternal life in joy and bliss.

In auld times our fatheris was fed in wilderness daily with Ma^na callit Angels
fude, Ambrosius Psalm. 77.
as it is writtin: Pane^ Angeloru^ manducauit homo. Man hes eitin Angels fude.
Nochttheles yai ye did eit of yat fude eftirwart deit in wilderness, bot this
fude, quhilk you ressauis in this blissit sacrament, yis leiffand breid quhilk
come down fra the heuin, geuis the life eternal. For quha sa worthily eitis
this fude sall nocht dee eternally. Joan. 6.
Heir the promis of our saluiour: Hic est panis de coelo descendens, vt si quis
ex ipso ma^ducauerit non morietur. This is the breid quhilk come down fra
heuin, that quhasa euir eitis of it sal nocht dee. It followis: Ego sum panis
viuus qui de coelo descendi, si quis ma^ducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in
eternum. I am the leuing breid yat is come down fra heuin, gif any man eit of
yis breid, he sal leif euirmair. And gif you wald know quhat is yis breid, heir
quhat followis: Et panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita. And the
breid yt I sal give is my flesche, for the life of the world. Now consider weil
in thy mind, quhilk of their two is mair excellent, Manna, or the body of
Christ. Tha^ Manna come fra the corporal heuin, bot this precious fude of the
altar come fra abone all corporal heuins. Manna keipit ane vthir day, fell to
corruptioun, bot this precious fude is free fra all corruptioun. For quhasaeuir
religiously, deuoitly, and faithfully taist of yis heuinly breid sal finally be
maid incorruptibil. The wattir flowit to them out of ane crag, bot to the
flowis the precious blud of Christ out of his awin side. Ye wattir sloknit
their thrist for ane lytil time, bot this blud of Christ sall tak away thrist
fra the for euirmair. Of this precious fude the Prophet sais in the Psalm:
Psalm. 110.
Memoriam fecit mirabiliu^ suorum misericors et miserator dominus, escam dedit
timentibus se. Of all the merualis that God hes wrocht, he hes maid ane to be
ane remembrance of all the laif, quhilk is that in yis precious sacrament of of
the altar, he hes geuin fude to yame, yt feiris him. Quhairfor O christin man
prepair thy self worthily that thou may ressaue this fude to thy saluatioun.
Incorporatioun to our saluiour Christ
The secund fruit of this blissit sacrament is mair perfect incorporatioun to
Christ For quhen with faith and cheritie we ressaue yis precious fude, we are
mair ioynit to Christ our heid as his mistik me^beris. And heir thou should
consider the difference that is between corporal fude of the body, and this
spiritual fude of thy saul. Quhen thou ressauis corporal fude thou turnis it
to the substance of thy body, Bot quhen thou ressauis worthily this precious
fude of the sacrament, it turnis the to it, it makis ye divine, godly, haly and
Christis seruand. This secund fruit is plainly expremit be our saluiour sayand
thus: Qui manducat meam carnem, Joan. 6.
et bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet et ego in eo. He that eitis my body and
drinkis my blud, he dwellis in me and I dwell in him. O inestimabil gudnes of
God, O the ardent lufe of Christ to man, O precious benefit and gift. Quhat
could he do mair for us? He hes redemit us upon the ruid, he hes fed us with his
body and blud he hes maid us his awin mistik me^beris, he hes chosin us to be
his awin tempil, quhairin it pleasis him to dwell with us and we to dwell with
him. And doutles quhen Christ dwellis in us, the powar of God dwellis in us, ye
tresure of al Gods wisdom and knawlege dwellis in us, eternal life dwellis in
us, for als mekil yat he promissit to us eternal life, and hes geuin him self
to us as ane pledge, for the sicker fulfilling of that same promis. Think of
yis O christin man, and prepair thy self to the worthi ressauing of yis
sacrament. Augme^tatioun of ye meritis of our faith.

Magister se^ten. in 4 did. 12.


The third fruit of yis sacrament is augme^tatioun of ye meritis of our faith.
For sein faith is to believe thai thingis of Christ, quhilk ca^ nocht be sein
nor kend be natural resone, and in sa believing we get merit of God, trewly in
the faith of this sacrament we merit verrai mekil, because yat amang all ye
pointis of our faith this is ane, yat excedis ye capacity of natural reasone,
and allanerly ca^ be persauit and knawin be faith geuin to the word of God. For
before the wordis of consecratioun yair is bot breid and wine, bot eftir, yair
is the body and blud of Christ present really. Lifting up of our hoip.
The fourt effect of this sacrament is lifting up of our hoip. For we may
fermely hoip that Christ Jesus both God and man sall give to us him self in
the world to cum, quhilk sa luffandly hes geuin to us his awin self in this
present world, as s. Iohne Chrysostom sais in the xlv. omelie upon sanct
Iohnis euang^l.

The fifth fruit is augme^tatioun of cheritie, Augme^tatioun of cheritie.
quhilk doutles is eikit in all yame quhilk ressauis this precious sacrament
worthily. Thai moan nedis grow in the lufe of God quhen yai consider ye
abundant lufe of god schawin to yame in this sacrament, and yairfor it is
callit be part of ald doctors ye sacrament of lufe. Hylarius 8 de trini.


The saxt fruit is diuulgatioun and setting forth of the passioun of Christ and
his meritis. Quick remembrance of the passion of our saluiour Christ. i. Cor.
xi.
For quhen we ressaue yis sacrament in remembrance of his passioun, in deid we
confess and grant yt he deit for us, yat be his deed we mycht get remissioun
of our syns and eternal life. And this should be done in the kirk til he cum to
judgment, according as S. Paul sais: Quotien^cunque ma^ducabitis panem hunc,
et calicem bibetis, morte^ dn^i annunciabitis donec veniat. Quhow often saeuir e
sal eat of yis fude and drink of this coupe, e sal schaw the deed of our Lord
quhil he cum.

The seuint fruit is unity, concord, Unite and concord amang christin pepil.
and peace quhilk is in yame and amang al yame yat faithfully ressauis this
sacrament. And as we said before, unity, concord and peace is signifyit be ye
sensibil forms of breid and wine, as breid is maid of money pickillis of corn,
and as wine is maid of money berryis, sa ye true and faithful kirk of Christ is
gadderit togidder in yame self and in Christ our heid, be the band of lufe, and
it is signifyit be yis sacrament, according as S. Paul sais: Vnus panis et
vnu^ corpus, multi sumus, i. Cor. x.
omnes qui de vno pane et de vno calice participamus. We that are money in number
ar ane breid spiritually, and ane body spiritually, quhilk ar participant in
the sacrament of the Altar of a breid and of a coupe, yat is to say, quhilk
ressauis ane body and blud of Jesus Christ. Sen sa it is, that sa money precious
and excellent fruitis ar gottin be the dew and faithful ressauing of this
sacrament, e should think on them and daily thank our saluiour for them, and
with all our diligence leir to ressaue this sacrament faithfully, deuotly,
reverently, and meikly, ye e may obtene and get the same precious frutis of our
saluatioun.

De preparatione ad sanctissimum Eucharistie sacramentum. The ix. Cheptour.
i. Cor. xi. How christin men and women should prepair yame self to the vvorthi
resauing of this sacrament.
CHristin pepil sanct Paul sais thus: Probet autem seipsum homo, et sic de pane
illo eda^ et de calice bibat. Qui enim ma^ducat et bibit indigne, iudicium sibi
manducat and bibit, no^ diiudicans corpus domini. Let a man or a woman first
examine him self, discuss and preif him self, and sa lat him eit of that
precious breid, and drynk of that coupe. For quha sa eitis and drinkis
unworthily, eitis and drinkis his judgment and eternal damnatioun, because he
puttis na difference between the body of our Lord and vthir common meit. As all
christin men and women, quhilk worthily ressauis the body of our Lord in this
precious sacrament yai get ye seuin spiritual frutis before rehersit, sa al yai
quhilk ressauis the same sacrament unworthily, thai ressaue it to their
judgment and eternal da^natioun, e and ofttymes thai ar punissit be god in this
present world be temporal paynis of weakness, sickness and deed, as sanct Paul
beiris witnis in the same place. Sen sa it is, with ane rycht intentioun.
I exhort ow all (O christin men and women, that before e cum to the buird of
Christ yair to ressaue his precious body) yat e prepair our self to cum
worthily, reverently, and deuoitly as it becommis christin men to do.

First prepair our self to cum with ane good will and rycht intentioun. Cum
nocht to the buird of God with ane will or intentioun to get glore or loving of
man, for our appeirand halynes, for than e cum with ypocrisie. Cum nocht
allanerly for ane use and custom to do as the laif dois and allanerly for the
command of the kirk, for than e cum with compulsioun. Bot cum to the buird of
God with deuotioun, willing to obey the command of God and the kirk for goddis
lufe and weil of our awin saul, willing and inte^ding to get the seuin giftis
and fruitis before rehersit, yat e may ressaue ye fude of our saul, yt e may be
mair perfitly incorporat in to Christ Jesus our saluiour, that e may grow in
Faith, Hoip, and Cheritie, that e may have quick remembrance of Christis
passioun, and give to him thankis thairfor, yat e may leif in perfect unity,
concord and paice of christin pepil, and finally that e may have eternal life
in the kingdom of heuin. Lat this be our intentioun quhen e cum to ye buird of
God. Secundly, with ane perfect and hail faith.
prepare our self to cum with ane perfect and hail faith of this haly sacrament
quhilk sta^dis in four pointis. First belief fermely and dout nocht, yat under
the form of breid quhilk thou seis with thy bodyly eyne, their is contenit the
true body of Christ Jesus, the same body that was borne of the virgin Marie,
that was crucifeit upon the cross, yat raise fra ye deed the third day, that
ascendit to heuin and sittis at the rycht hand of God the father almychty. Put
away out of thy heid al fantaseis of natural reasone, stand sicker in the faith
of halye kirk, cleif fast to ye word of God quhilk is declarit to ow largely
before quhen we spak of the wordis of co^secratioun. Secundly believe fermely
that the hail body of Christ is in ye hail vste and also in ilk a part of the
same, belief fermely their is bot ane body of Christ that is in money vstis,
that is in syndry and money altaris, e that is in heuin sittand at the rycht
hand of God, and that is in the sacrament really present, it is ane and the
same body. Thridly trow fermely yt eftir the wordis of consecratioun pronuncit
be the priest (be institutioun of our saluiour) the substance of the breid is
turnit into the substance of the body of Christ, remaning allanerly the
accidentis, that is to say, ye figure of breid, ye sweitnes of breid, the
quhytnes of breid with siclyk, sa yat their is nocht in the sacrament the
substance of breid. Fourtly, quhen thou ressauis in the sacrament the body of
Christ, belief also constantly that you ressauis ane leiffand body. For as sanct
Paul sais: Roma. 6.
Christ rysand agane fra the deed may de^ na mair, deed sal have na mair powar
ouir him Than because you ressauis his lyffand body, you ressauis also his saul
and also his blud, for ilkane lyiffand body hes both saul and blud. And
because also yt his godhede sen ye first begi^ning of his incarnatioun left
neuir his body nor his saul, trow sickirly yat quhen you ressauis the body of
Christ yat you ressauis also his godhed. Sa o christin man and woman, belief
fermely yt in the sacrament of the altar you ressauis four thingis to ye may
precious and profitabil, ye body of Christ, his saul, his blud, and his
godhed. Sa it followis yat you ressauis na les in ane lytil vste than ye priest
ressauis in ane great vste, Also it followis yat you ressauis bayth the body and
blud of Christ in ane form of breid als weil as the priest ressauis them and
ilkane of yame in two forms of breid and wine, and also dout nocht bot yat you
ressauis the hail content of the sacrament als weil as the priest dois, and
their with you should hald the content conform to ye auld and la^g use of ye
universal kirk of god, and decretis of syndry general cou^sals quhilk hes
ordanit ye same to be done nocht without necessary cause. Eftir yis manner cum to
ye buird of god with ane hail and constant faith, trowand sickerly yat you
ressauis Christ Jesus quhilk upon the cross sched his blud, to wesche the fra
thy synnis, quhilk deit to recounsale the to ye father eternal, yat maid just
and perfect satisfactioun for all thy synnis, yat redemit the fra the devil and
hell, and hes deseruit for the the kingdom of heuin. Belief this als sickerly as
thou had seen him dee. Thridly prepare thy self to cum to ye buird of god with
ane clein conscience. Gyf you war to ressaue ane king to thy house, with ane
clein conscience.
thou wald nocht fail to clenge thy house and make it clein wish all thy
diligence, thou wald put on thy best raiment that thou mycht ressaue him with
honesty to his pleisure. And sen sa it is yat you art to ressaue the king of
al kingis in to ye house of thy saul, ressaue him with ane clein conscience,
doand the counsale of sanct Paul: i. Cor. xi.
Probet aute^ seipsum homo. Lat a man, that is to ressaue the body of Christ,
first preif him self, call him self to the count of his life, examine his
conscience, seirche weil him self gif he be fylit with any dedlie syn. And
eftirhend yat he persaue his vnclenis, lat him cum to the fountane of Penance,
be contrit with thy heart for all thy synnis particulari, and specially. Make ane
hail co^fessioun with thy mouth of all thy synnis that thou can call to thy
remembrance, to ane priest ye minister of Christ, quhilk hais authority to
assoile the. And as mekil as you may make satisfactioun, doand the worthi frutis
of penance, in fasting, praying, and almous deid. Quhen thou hais maid thy
saul fair and clein eftir this manner, than put on ye thy best garment, quhilk
is true lufe of God and thy nychtbour, yt Christ say nocht to the: Math. 22
Amice quomodo huc intrasti, non habens vestem nuptialem? Friend how hes thou
enterit in to my buird, nocht haiffand the wedding garment, quhilk is Cheritie?
Lufe thairfor thy God abone all thing and thy nychtbour as thy self. Do as thou
wald be done to, Forgive thy nychtbour his offense, as you wald that God forgive
the. Lufe friend and faa for Goddis saik, and sa cled with ye garment of
cheritie, you may cum sickirly to the buird of god.

Fourtly, with deuoit prayar and orison.
prepair thy self to cum to the buird of God be deuoit prayaris and orisonis.
For (...) gif we should be the exempil of our saluiour, say grace to god before we
ressaue our corporal meit, mekil mair we aucht to say grace before we ressaue
this may precious and excellent meit of our saul, and eftir that we have
ressauit it, give tha^kis to him als mekil as we may. Sa O christin man before
thou ressaue the body of thy saluiour, beseik him to make the worth^ to ressaue
him worthily, sayand with sanct Paul: 2. Cor. iii.
Lord I am nocht sufficient nor abil to think a good thocht of my powar as of my
awin powar, bot all my abilnes moan cum of the. Thairfor good Lord: Cor mundum
crea in me deus, Psalm. l.
et spiritu^ rectu^ innoua i^ visceribus meis. O my god, make my heart clein, and
put newly ane rycht spreit in my mind. Say with Centurio: Domine non sum dignus
vt intres sub tectum meum, Math. ^.
sed tantum dic verbo et sanabitur ai^a mea. O Lord I am nocht worthi that thou
entir under the ruff of my house, bot only speik a word and my saul sal be
saffit. Follow the exempil of the oung childer of Jerusalem, quhilk on Palm
sundai ressauit him, sayand: Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini, Math. 23.
osanna in ex celsis. Blissit is he that cummis in ye name of our Lord. I
beseik the O Lord in hye heuin, help me and have mercy on me. Say with king
David: Benedicam dn^m in omni tempore, Psalm. 33.
semper laus eius in ore meo. I will lo^ my lord at all time. Lat euirmair his
loving be in my mouth. Heir we can nocht descriue the special praiaris quhilk
ane may say at ye time, bot exhortis ilk a man to lift up his heart to God, to
put out of his mind (sa mekil as he may) all thochtis of warldly besynes. And
suppose he speik nocht loud with his lippis, i. Reg. i.
it lat him cry to God with his heart be the exempil of Anna Samuellis mother.
And gif you can reid say tha orisonis quhilk ar maid and put in prayar bukis to
ye effect, And gif thou can nocht reid, than say thy Pater noster as deuoitly
as yo^ ^n and beseik God you may ressaue him to thy eter^ saluatioun Thus O
christin man and woman (...) ^hort ye yat thou prepare thy self to the
ressauing of yis haly sacrament. First cum with ane rycht intentioun. Secundly
cu^ with ane hail faith. Thridly cum with ane clein conscience cled with perfect
lufe of god and thy nychtbour. And last of al, cum with deuoit praiaris and
orisonis. And eftir hend the ressauing of the sacrament with all thy heart give
thankis to God for all his giftis, and specially that he hes geuin to the his
awin self to be thy spiritual refectioun and eternal saluatioun.

Of the sacrament of Penance.
The x. Cheptour.
Of the necessary institutioun of the sacrament of Penance
IT is nocht unknown to ow (O christin pepil) yat quhen a man or a woman fallis
in any bodyly seicknes, he is nocht healit agane be ane new birth of his
mother, bot with the operatioun of sum hailsum medicyne geuin to him be sum
cunning and expert medicinar. Sa it is in our spiritual life as daily
experience schawis A christin man or a christin woman eftir Baptyme cummand to
the use of his awin fre will, actually transgres and breikis the commandis of
God and sa fallis into ye spiritual sickness of his saul, quhairof he can nocht
get remeid be Baptyme, for it should nocht be ressauit agane. Thairfore our
saluiour Christ nocht willing yat we want convenient remeid to help us and
restore us agane to the heal of our saul, he hais ordanit the sacrament of
Penance as ane spiritual medicyne to be geuin to al them yat ar sick in yair
saul be dedlie syn. And for the plain understanding of penance it is to be
co^siderit, quhat difference their is between the vertew of Penance and the
sacrament of Penance.

The vertew of Penance is conuersioun and turning of a mannis heart to God fra
all his synnis with ane inwart sorrow, grief, or displesure, The vertevv of
Penance
with ane hatrent and detestatioun of the same synnis, nocht only because he
hes be them incurrit the indignatioun of God and deseruit hell (as Cayn, Achab,
and Judas was sorye, and it yair sorrow was nocht to them profitabil) bot
principally because yat throw his synnis he hes offe^dit ye hie majesty of
almychty God his father, quhais command he is oblissit to observe and keip with
lufe and reverence. Secundly beside yis inwart sorrow, we moan have ane great
desire to be cle^git and deliuerit fra our synnis and to get agane ye grace and
favor of god be sir wais and remeidis, quhilk god hes ordanit to be done to get
agane his favor.

Thridly we moan have ane steadfast purpose and mind neuir to o^end agane
almychty God our heuinly father. For he that sais that he is sorye for his
offensis done agane the majesty of God, and it still perseueris or intendis to
perseuir in the same, is na penitent person, bot ane dissimular and scornar of
Penance. And thus is Penance commonly takin in in the haly scripture. And this
Penance is sa necessary for mannis saluatioun, that without it, na man that
offendis God, can be saiffit and get euirlasting life, Luce. xiii.
according as our saluiour ^ais: Nisi penitentia^ egeritis, peribitis similiter
omnes. Excep^ that e do Penance, e sall all perische. To this Penance
almychty God callis us with the wordis of haly scripture in syndry placis. In
Ezechiel it is said thus: Ezechi. 18
Conuertimini, et agite penitentiam ab omnibus iniquitatibus vestris, et non
erit vobis i^ ruinam iniquitas. Turn to me (sais God almychty) and do Penance
for all our synnis and than all our synnis sal nocht be to ow damnabil.
Pro^icite omnes iniquitates vestras, in quibus preuaricati ^stis, and facite
vobis cor nouum et spiritum nouum.

Cast away all our iniquity, quhairin e have transgressit the command of God,
and make ow ane new heart and ane new spreit: Quare moriemini domus Israel? quia
nolo mortem peccatoris sed magis, vt conuertatur et viuat. Quhy will e dee O e
house of Israel? for I wald nocht the deed of a synnar, bot rather that he
turn agane to me and leif the life of grace in this world, and in the life of
glore in the world to cum. And our saluiour sais in the euangil: Non veni
vocare iustos, Math. 9. Luce. 5.
sed peccatores ad penitentiam. I come nocht to call just men, bot synnaris to
penance. And sanct Paul sais to ye Romany: Ignoras, quia benignitas dei ad
penite^tia^ te adducit? Kennis thou nocht that the gentilnes of God leidis y^
to penance? as he mycht say: Quhair God for thy synnis mycht punisch the
incontinent, it he spairis the and differris his punitioun to that effect that
thou may ken the lang sufferance of God and turn to penance. And in the
Apocalips our saluiour sais to ane certane bischop: Apoca. 2.
Memor esto vnde excideris et age penitentia^, and prima opera fac. Remember
fra quhat stait thou art fallin and do penance, and also do the first werkis
agane, as he mycht say, Remember yat thowart fallin fra the stait of grace and
fervent lufe of God, thairfore do penance and also fulfill the co^mandis of
God, and do the deidis of mercy with as fervent lufe as thou was wont to do
before thou fell to syn. Thus O christin man and woman e may see quhow eirnestly
God almychty callis all synnaris to penance in syndry placis of the scripture.

The sacrament of Penance is properly the absolutioun pronuncit be the priest,
Sacramentum penitentie.
upon sic me^ and women as ar penitent for yair synnis, and sa makis ane
knawlege and schawis them self to be penitent. This sacrament is the secund
tabil or buird quhilk is ordanit to saif al them that are schipbrokin eftir
Baptyme. To them yt ar lyk to be drownit in hell for original syn is ordanit
buird of baptym. Bot gif any christin man or woman breik the buird of Baptyme,
yat is to say breik the promis of faith and obedience maid in baptyme than of
necessity, gif yai wald be saiffit, yai moan cum and entir in to the schip of
Penance. To yis effect our saluiour Jesus Christ gave to the ministeris of his
kirk, ye key of losing, quhe^ he said to his Apostils, and be them to al their
successouris, ministeris of haly kirk: Accipite spiritum sanctu^, quorum
remis^ritis peccata* Joan. 20.
remittuntur eis. Ressaue e the gift of the haly gaist* Quha hes povvar to
forgive synnis in the sacrament of Penance
that is to say powar and authority to forgive synnis, as my ministeris, sa
yat quhair I forgive synnis as god be principal authority, sa I give powar to
ow to forgive synnis as my ministeris and thairfore I say to ow, quhais synnis
e forgive thai ar forgeuin to yame. This powar and authority the priest, as
the minister of Christ vsis and exicutis quhen he pronuncis the wordis of
absolutioun, sayand thus: Ego absoluo te a peccatis tuis, In nomine patris, et
^ilii, et spiritus sancti. Amen. I assoile the fra thy synnis, In the name of
the father, the son, and the haly spreit. Amen.

Quhat thi^gis ar requirit to the ressaning of ye sacrament
To obtene and get the same absolutioun or sacrament, a man yat hessynnit, of
necessite moan have Contritioun, Confessioun, and purpose of Satisfactioun, as
wais or means expedient to get the effect of the forsaid sacrament, yat quhair
he hes turnit himself fra God in heart, word and deid, sa he should turn him self
agane to God be contritioun of heart, be co^fessioun of the mouth, and
satisfactioun of deid. And sa turnand to God, doutles he sall obtene the effect
of this sacrament, quhilk is remissioun of his actual synnis. That God almychty
requiris of us contritioun of the heart, and satisfactioun of deid, we may weil
understand be his awin wordis, quhilk he sais to us: Iohel. 2.
Conuertimini ad me in toto cord vestro, in ieiunio, fletu, et planctu, et
scindite corda vestra, et no^ vestime^ta vestra, ait dn^s omnipotens. Turn to
me with all our heart, with fasting, greting and murning, and cut our clayis sais
the Lord almychty. Quhen you heiris him say: turn to me with all our heart,
with greting and murning, and cut our hartis and nocht our clayis. understand
plainly, yat God requiris of the contritioun of the heart. And quhen you heiris
him say, with fasting, ken weil that he requiris satisfactioun of deid,
quhairof fasting is a part as we sall declare mair largely eftirhend, and
lykwise quhow we are oblissit to confessioun.

It is also to be notit that na man can have contritioun, make co^fessioun, and
do satisfactioun, Fides.
except that he have a perfect faith to the word of God, quhilk as it is the
ground of al vthir vertewis, sa is it the foundatioun of the sacrament of
Penance, and also of their three thingis requirit before the sacrament of
Penance, Contritioun, Confessioun, and Satisfactioun. Faith is y^ ground of
the sacrament of Penance
Na man can have true penance, bot first he moan have ane suir hoip to get
remissioun and forgeuenes of his synnis. Another can any man have sure hoip of
remissioun except yat first he have a perfect faith, and believe steadfastly yt
God will be merciful to him.

Now thairfor O synful man and woman, quhilk kennis the abhominatioun of all
thy synnis, and wald be losit fra them, ground thy self in the faith and hoip
of Goddis mercy. Remember quhat God sais in Ezechiel. Ezechi. 33.
Viuo ego dicit dominus deus: Nolo mortem impii, sed vt conuertatur impius a
via sua, et viuat. Als true as I leif sais the Lord, I will nocht the deed of a
wickit man, bot that he be turnit fra his evil wayis and be saiffit. Think
alwais quhow our saluiour offerris his mercy to all penitent personis and
callis upon them sayand: Math. 11.
Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis et one^ati estis, and ego reficiam vos. Cum
to me all e that labouris and ar ladin with the burdin of syn, and I sal
refresch ow. Ken our synnis and repent them, cum to me be faith and obediens,
and I sall have mercy on ow and will refresch ow heir with grace and in heuin
with glore. Call to remembrance quhow our saluiour fulfillit yis promis in deid
to the theif, quhilk was hingand on his rycht hand, to Marie Magdalene, quhilk
was fillit with seuin deuillis, to sanct Petir yat denyit him, to sanct Matthew
that was ane Publicane. The woman of Cananie cryit for his mercy and gat it. As
the prodigal son, quhilk departit fra his father and spendit all his gair in
wantones, gloutony and huirdome, eftir that he kennit his misery, and came
agane to his father, kennit his falt, askit mercy, maid supplicatioun to him
with great meiknes, he was ressauit agane to great fauouris, nocht without great
joy and gladness. Sa O synful man, ken the miserabil slait of syn, quhairin thou
hes leiffit agane the command of God, as the seruand of syn and condemnit to
hell, cum agane to thy heuinly father be true penance and prayar, and dout
nocht bot that thou sall be ressauit to the mercy of god. Sa ground the self
upon siclyck promis and exempils of mercy, and trow sickerly yat for the
meritis of Christis bitter passioun, God almychty hes promissit and grantit
remissioun of synnis to be geuin be ane priest as his minister, to al yame yat
ar fallin fra the grace, quhilk yai ressauit in Baptyme, and be his calling
turnis agane to God be penance. And lyk as men of perfect aige before thai cum
to Baptyme, is techit to have a perfect faith in ye promis of god, quhilk is
that all his synnis both original and actual ar forgeuin to him in Baptyme, sa
euerilk man before he entir to fruitful penance, he moan have for ane ground and
foundatioun, a perfect faith quhairby he moan hoip be the sacrament of
penance, to get remissioun of al his synnis, quhair to we cum as isafore said
be Contritioun, Confessioun, and satisfactioun.

Quhat is contritioun? Of contritioun the first part of penance
It is ane sorrow takin wilfully for synnis with ane purpose to be co^fessit
and make satisfactioun. That this diffinitioun may be set forth to ow mair
plainly e sall understand that contritioun is ane inwart great sorrow,
displesure, and grief, quhilk a true penitent, callit be Goddis grace, hes in
his heart for all his synnis. Thairfor thou synful man and woman that wald have
contritioun, first be instructioun of gods word examine, discus, search and
ripe weil thy conscience, remember thy awin synful and vicious leuing, consider
the multitude and grauite of al thy synnis, quhairby thou hes prouokit the hie
indignatioun and wraith of God aganis the. Secundly consider the dignity and
perfectioun of that stait, quhairvnto thou was callit in Baptyme, think on the
promis quhilk you maid to thy god, have mind of the great and syndry benefitis
daily ressauit of god. Thus O christin man and woman being callit be the
preuenand grace, and mouit be the great gudnes of God done to the on the ane
part, and with thy awin ingratitude and unkindness to god on ye vthir part, you
sall consaue ane ernest sorrow and haitful displeasure in thy heart, for that
that thou hes left and forsakin sa luffing a Lord, that thou hes followit syn,
and thairby you hes crabbit and offendit God, of quhom thou was callit to be in
the stait of a son and inheritour with our saluiour Jesus Christ. Say thairfor
to him with king David in the Psalm: Psalm. ^.
Quoniam iniquitate^ meam ego cognosco et peccatu^ meum contra me est semper. I
ken my wickitnes, Psalm. 37.
and my syn is alwais aganis me. Iniquitates meae supergresse su^t caput meu^,
et sicut onus grave grauate sunt super me. My wickitnes hes gane abone my heid,
I am drownit in yame, yai hald me down lyk ane heavy burding. Tak exempil of
the h^ly king Ezechias and say to God with him: Esaie. 38.
Recogitabo tibi omnes annos meos in amaritudine anime meae I will consider and
think of all my eiris, with ane bittirnes of my saul. Heir quhow God co^mandis
the to ken thy synnis and the miserabil stait, quhairin you art. Leua oculos
tuos in directu^ et vide vbi non prostrata sis. Ieremi. 3.
Lift up thy eyne and luke about the, and see quhair thou art nocht castin
down. Heir quhow he callis the in the same cheptour and offeris his mercy to
the, sayand: Tu autem fornicata es cum amatoribus multis, verumtamen reuertere,
et suscipia^ te. Thou hes co^mittit spiritual fornicatioun with money luffaris,
quhilk ar idollis, and also corporal with the flesche, the devil, and the
world, it turn agane to me and I sal ressaue the. This is the hye way to cum
to Contritioun.

The xi. Cheptour.
QVhat is confessioun? Of confessioun ye secund part of Penance
It is ane declaratioun of synnis maid before ane priest be the ordinatioun of
God. Quhy is it said in this diffinitioun that confessioun is ane declaratioun?
aganis them, that quhen thai cum to confessioun, other thai hyde yair synnis,
or ellis yai excuse yame self, and sa thai make na true confessioun. Quhy is it
said yat co^fessioun is ane declaratioun of synnis? aganis them that quhen
thai cum to confessioun, thai rehearse their good deidis, Luce. 18.
or ellis thai deny evil deidis, sayand with the Pharisean: I am nocht lyk
vthirmen, r^uaris, adulteraris, and siclyk, quhilk confessioun is nocht
pleasand to God. Quhy is it said before ane priest the minister of God be his
ordinatioun? Because a priest hes y^ keis, that is say, the authority of
lowsing and binding geuin to him be our saluiour Christ, and sa hes nocht ane
lawit man quhilk is nocht ane consecrat priest. And for the declaratioun of yis
e sal understand, yat our saluiour Christ in the day of his resurrectioun, said
their wordis to his Apostillis: Joan. 20.
Quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis, retenta
su^t. Quhais synnis e forgive, thai ar forgeuin to yame, and quhais synnis e
hald vnforgeuin, thai a^ vnforgeuin. In their wordis our saluiour expressly gave
powar and authority to his Apostillis and al vthir yair successouris in siclyk
degree and office to forgive synnis, and to hald synnis vnforgeuin. Now it is
impossibil that ane priest the minister of Christ sall ken, quhen he should
forgive to men their synnis, and quhen he should hald their synnis vnforgeuin,
except yat yair synnis be schawin to him in confessioun. It is plain be the
wordis before said yat a priest the minister of the absolutioun is ordanit to be
under Christ ane judge of mannis conscience. And quhow can a judge discern ane
cause, quhil he ken it? Sa quhow can a priest discern quhom he should forgive
and quhom nocht, quhil he heir ane sinnar oppin and rehearse his synnis to him?
Quhow can a Medicynar discern quhom he may hail, and quhom he may nocht hail,
quhil he ken the seicknes? Gyf thou have ane wound in thy body you can nocht be
helpit be ane Cirurginar, quhil you schaw thy wound to him. Sen it is swa yat
our saluiour hais geuin powar to ane lauchful priest, his minister, to bind and
lowse synnis, and to forgive synnis, and hald synnis vnforgeuin, be vertew of
the same authority he hes ordanit yt al synnaris penitent, quhilk wald be
lowsit fra their synnis, yat yai sal maik confessioun of yair synnis to ane
priest his minister. Quhairfor O christin man and woman according to the
doctrine, ordinatioun and command of god and haly kirk, cum to co^fessioun,
seik for ane lauchful minister quhilk may pronunce ye wordis of absolutioun to
the and assole the fra thy synnis, and ken yat he occupies the place of god,
thairfor bow down thy self to make thy co^fessioun to him. And before you cum to
confessioun, call to thy remembrance all thy synnis, quhilk thy conscience
tellis the, that thou hes done agane the gudnes of God. And cummand to
confessioun, declare and schaw them with thy mouth to almychty God before ye
priest Gods minister, with all circumstancis of time, place, person and
purpose, that may aggrege ye syn, and their blame, accuse, and condemn thy
self for ane unkind prodigal son to God thy father, for ane untrue seruand,
quhilk be the lycht of Gods word, kend the commandis of thy Lord God and kepit
them nocht, and was indewit with money giftis of the haly spreit, and exercit
yame nocht. and sa detesting and abhorring thy synnis and desyreand to be quit
of them, confess and grant meikly, that the cause of the synnis come of thy
self, be consenting wilfully to the concupiscence of the flesche, to the world
and the devil And yairfor yat thou art glad to submit thy self to sic
disciplyne, correctioun and penance for ye reformatioun of thy life, as the
priest ye minister of God, quhilk heiris thy confessioun, sal be his
discretioun and wisdom, according to the word of God, think expedient. And
this lawly and meik submissioun in thy confessioun, with consent to ressaue ye
said discipline and penance, is ane part of satifactioun, quhilk is ye third
mean to cum to ye sacrament of Penance as is before rehersit.

Of satisfaccioun the third part of penance.
Heir e moan understand, that satisfactioun quhilk is heir spokin of, is nocht
sa to be takin, ye ane penitent synnar may worthily merit and deserve
remissioun of synnis be any pain or punissioun to be tholit be him, or to make
to God any just and full recompense equivalent to ye syn, quhilk he hes
co^mittit aganis god, and to make satisfactioun for our synnis, for on this
manner, it is nocht in the powar of man to satisfy, for ye satisfactioun hes
only our saluiour Christ wrocht and fulfillit be his bitter passioun, according
as S. Paul sais: Qui dedit semetipsum pro nobis, Titum. 2.
vt nos redemeret ab omni iniquitate. He hes geuin him self to the deed for us,
to redeem us fra all our iniquite. That is to say, he hes maid satisfactioun
and payit our ransom be his bitter passion, makand ane full mendis for all our
synnis. Also sanct Iohne sais in his Epistil: 1. Io^n 2.
Ipse est propiciatio pro peccatis nostris. It is he yat hes maid just
satisfactioun for all our synnis. Bot satisfactioun quhilk is callit the third
part of penance is di^^init thus: Est causas peccatorum excindere and earum
suggestionibus aditum non indulgere. Satisfactioun of penance is to cut away
the occasionis of sin, and to give na entrance to their suggestionis. For the
declaratioun of this, e sal understand yat eftirhend that our actual syn is
forgeuin be faith and the sacrament of Penance, their remanis in us certane
dreggis of syn, that is to say, stif inclinatiouns and motiouns to the same
synnis quhilk we did before. Thairfor that we be nocht ouircum be consenting to
the same inclinatiouns and motiouns, we moan study to please God with ane meik
and lawly heart reddy to bring forth the fruitis of penance, according to the
command of sanct Iohne: Math. 3.
Facite dignos fructus penitentie. Do e the worthi fruitis of penance, quhilk
ar praying, almous, and fasting, and all vthir meanis that may help to cut away
the occasiouns of syn, as the minister sal think good according to the word of
god. Attour, suppoise quhen our actual syn is forgeuin, we are deliuerit fra the
dangear of ye paynis eternal, it we remane oblissit to thole sum temporal pain
for our synnis other mair or les, according to ye quantity and quality of our
synnis. Yairfor we should thole patiently al aduersite send to us be ye hand of
God, and also be the cou^sale and ^niunctioun of the priest our confessor for
ye time, the minister of God, punis our self in our body be fasting, in our
gair be almous deid, in our heart be deuoit and frequent prayar, with sic greting,
lamenting and murning quhilk burstis out of our heart, that thairby we may
please God and eschaip his punitioun. And to make satisfactioun on yis manner we
may leir be the wordis of sanct Paul sayand thus: i. Cor. xi.
Si nosipsos diiudicaremus, non vtique iudicaremur. Gyf we wald punis our
selfis, trewly we should eschaip the punitioun of God. Dum iudicamur aute^ a
dn^o, corripimur, ne cu^ hoc mundo damnemur. And quhen we are punissit of god we are correckit, that we be nocht condemnit with this world. The haly king David
had his syn forgeuin to him, quhen ye prophet Nathan said to him: 2. Reg. 12
God hais takin thy sin away, nochttheles efterhend for ye same syn was
punissit with temporal pain be the deed of his oung barn quhom he luffit verrai
tenderly. Sa christ^n man gather this doctrine in few wordis. Satisfactioun as
it is takin in yis place, is to thoil temporal pain for our synnis by gane,
and to keip us fra consenting to syn in time to cum, and to do both their
thingis with praiyng, fasting, and almous deidis, with murning and lame^tatioun
of our heart. Satisfactioun in this place is to have a full purpose to leid a
new life, doand the counsale of sanct Paul, sayand to ye Romany: Sicut
exhibuistis membra vestra seruire immundicie et iniquitati ad iniquitatem,
Roma. 6.
ita nunc exhibete ^mbra vestra seruire iusticie in sanctificationem. As e have
abusit the membris of our body proced and fra a syn to ane vthir, sa now eftir
our conuersioun to God be true penance, use weil and occupy our membris in
rychteousnes for our sanctificatioun. As he mycht say plainly, as before our
conuersioun e war hastye, spedie, fervent and diligent to be occupyit in syn,
now eftir our conuersioun, be als hastye, als spedye, als fervent, as diligent,
to be occupyit in doing of good deidis to the pleasure of God and our awin saul
hail. Also this is a satisfactioun necessary yt a penitent person declare to
his nechtbour yat he hes forgeuin to him all his offe^cis, to restore to all
men that we have iniustly takin or keipis fra any man, to recompense al hurtis
and iniuryis done be us to our nychbour, according to our powar, and nocht only
to will to do thus, bot also to do it in deid, in all pointis quhairin our
nychtbour aucht to be satisfyit be any rycht reasone. And be yis it appeiris
quhow god estemis our satisfactioun, bayth to him self and to our nychtbour
eftir the will and powar of a man and nocht eftir the equiuolence of yat quhilk
is done. For as we said before, to god na man can sa satisfy for syn. And
Christ thairfor hes satisfyit for all, be vertew quhairof our satisfactioun is
acceptabil and plesand to God, quhilk of his infinite gudnes and for Christis
saik is satisfyit, that is to say, plesit with that lytil we do. Sa quhen this
contritioun is had in the heart, confessioun maid with ye mouth, and
satisfactioun schawin and promissit. Than O christin man and woman thou being
penitent may desire to heir of the minister the co^^ortabil wordis of
remissioun of synnis. And the minister yairapon, according to the eua^gil
pronounce ye sentence of absolutioun, sayand: Ego absoluo te a peccatis tuis,
In nomine patris, et fil^i, et spiritus sancti. Amen. I as the minister of
Christ be his authority co^mittit to me at this time, assoileis and lowsis the
fra thy synnis, in the name of the father and the son, and the haly spreit,
Amen. Unto this absolutioun O christin man thou should give ferme credence, and
believe sickerly with ane perfect faith yt thy synnis ar now forgeuin to ye
freely for the meritis of Christis passioun, quhilk meritis is now applyit to
thee be ye sacrament of Penance.

It is also to be notit that co^fessioun to the priest is in the kirk
profitablie commandit, to be vsit and frequentit for money vthir good causis, and
specially for this cause, yat yai quhilk be custom ar drownit in syn and seis
nocht the abhominatioun and perrillis of their synnis, may be ane good
confessor be steirit and mouit to detest and be sorrowful for their synnis be
declaring to them the word of God, writtin in haly scripture to that effect,
and also may schaw to them the comminatioun of paynis aganis all perseuerand
synnaris, and the promis of mercy, grace and glore, quhilk God makis to all
them that are penitent, and sa exhort them to reformatioun of their life.

Finally it is to be remembrit, that nochtwithsta^ding this way before declarit
is the ordinary way and remeid for penitent synnaris to get remissioun of
yair synnis and to be recounsalit to the favor of god. it in case yat yai want
a minister to heir their confessioun and pronunce the wordis of absolutioun, or
in time of necessity quhen a synnar hes nocht sufficient laser or opportunity
to make his confessioun and to do the worthi fruitis of penance, than trewly
God will accept his good will for ye deid. For gif he trewly repent him of his
sinful life, and with all his heart purpose throw godds grace to amend his
life, and gif he may get opportunite to make confessioun and do satisfactioun,
he salvndoutitly have remissioun and forgeuenes of al his synnis. Cyprianus.
For as sanct Cypriane sais: Euin in the hour of deed quhen the saul is reddy
to depart out of the body ye great mercifulnes of God dispysis nocht penance, in
sa mekil yat than another the gretnes of synnis, nor the schortnes of time, nor
the enormitie of life excludis and puttis away a synnar fra ye mercy of God,
gif yair be true contritioun and ane vnfenit change of the heart fra synful
life. The theif that hang on the cross askit mercy with ane contrite heart, and
incontinent he was maid ane cietesene of paradyse, and quhair as he had
deseruit condemnatioun, his contrite heart with true faith in Christ, changit his
pain in to martyrdom, and his blud in to baptyme. That is to say, god of his
great mercy acceptit his deed for his perfect co^tritioun and faith to his
saluatioun, as thoch he had bein baptisit. it nochttheles na man should upon hoip
of mercy, persevere still in to his sinful life. Lyk as na man wald be seik in
his body apo^ hoip to recouir his heal agane be medicyne. For as money that
will nocht forsaik their synful life, and it thinkis yat god will forgive yame,
ar often times sa preuenit with the just plage of god, yat another yai have time
to convert and turn to god, nor grace to ressaue ye gift of forgeuenes. Eccle.
5.
Thairfor the scripture sais: Be nocht slawe to convert and turn to good, and
defar nocht fra day to day. For the wrath of god (yat is to say) ye rychteous
judgment of god cu^mis suddenly, and in time of vengeance he will destroy the.
Quhair for hauand hoip of the mercy of god on the ane side, and feir of the
justice of god on the vthir, let us neuir despair of the forgeuenes of our
synnis, nor it presumptuously remane still in our synnis, ke^nand yat the
justice of god will straightly require the dettis of all men, quhilk ar nocht
forgeuin throw his mercy offerit in Christ. To quhom be honor and glore with
the father and the haly spreit for euir and euir.

Amen.

Of the sacrament of extreme Vnctioun.
The xii. Cheptour.
IN the institutioun of yis haly sacrament we may weil understand the gracious
providence of God towart us, quhilk at al times of our life prouidis to us help
and remeid yai we may leif ane spiritual life to his pleasure and saluatioun of
our saulis. In Baptyme we are borne agane with ane spiritual birth, and maid new
creaturis in Christ Jesus, and begynnis our spiritual life. In Confirmatioun we are co^firmit be strenth of the haly spreit to stand sickerly in the same life.
In ye Eucharist we ressaue spiritual fude to the suste^tatioun of our saulis,
and to be incorporat and ioynit to Christ Jesus our heid and king. And quhen we
throw tentatioun of our spiritual ennymyes, with consent of our free will,
fallis fra the same spiritual life, be ye sacrament of Penance we are restorit
agane. Now quhat is yair mair to be done to us, than to be helpit be sum
spiritual remeid in ye time of our departing fra yis world? How expedient it
was till ordane ye sacrament of extreme vnctioun.
Than trewly we have great mister of help, consolatioun and comfort to be geuin
both to our body and to our saul. For of al times of our life the time of our
departing is may perrillous, because yat the devil our ennymye (specially at
that time) gangis about lyk ane ramping Lion seikand quhom he may deuoir and
swally, be consent to syn. Than is he may fyerie and crewel to cast aganis us
his fyrie dartis, to sla our saulis be sum transgressioun of the commandis of
God. Than is he may diligent and besye to bring us fra our faith, to stop our
entrance to heuin, kennand that gif he preuale nocht agane us at the time of
our departing, that he sall neuir preuale agane us. Quhairfor that we should
nocht want spiritual help and remeid in time of our last seiknes or yat
apperandly is lyk to be our last seiknes, our saluiour Christ Jesus hes prouidit
for us ye sacrament of extreme vnctioun, quhairof we sal schortly declare to ow
ye institutioun, the promulgatioun and the vertew, effect and profit of the
same. Wald e ken quha ordanit this sacrament? quha bot our saluiour Christ
Jesus? as we may gather of ye wordis writtin in the euangil of S. Mark. Marce.
6. That our saluiour Christ ordanit the sacrament of extreme vnctioun.
Their we reid yat our saluiour Christ callit to him his twelf Apostils, and
send them two and two togidder throw the land of Iewry, techit them quhat
thai should say, gave them powar, quhilk yai mycht use in helping of the pepil.
Than it is said in the text: Exeuntes predicaba^t, vt penitentia^ agere^t et
demonia multa ei^ciebant and vngebant oleo multos aegros, et sanabantur. Thai
passit forth and prechit to the pepil to do penance, thai kest out money
deuillis fra men and women that was possessit, thai vnctit with oil money seik
men and women, and yai war heilit of yair seiknes. In their wordis you hes
plainly schawin to the, yat the haly Apostils vsit to vnct seik folk with oil
and thai war healit. This trewly yai vsit nocht of their awin presumptioun, bot
allanerly be the institutioun, ordinatioun and command of yair Lord and master
our saluiour Jesus Christ. Attour the effect of yair vncting was nocht only to
heile the bodies of them yat was seik (quhilk commonly was done in the
beginning of the kirk for co^firmatioun of the faith) bot specially and may
principally, it was the help, consolatioun and health of ye saulis of them yt
was seik, because ye Apostils was nocht ordanit to be corporal Cirurginaris
allanerly, bot erar to be prechouris and spiritual medicynaris of the saulis.
Sa ye ald doctouris of the kirk, siclyk as venerabil Beide and vtheris exponis
yis place of the euangil, declarand plainly yt the haly Apostils be ye
institutioun, ordinatioun and command of Jesus Christ, begane to use the
sacrament of extreme vnctioun in the la^d of Iewry, quhen thai war send to
preche the euangil. Nochttheles ye Apostil sanct James, set forth and declarit
the same sacrament in to his epistil, Iacobi. 5. S. James sittis forth and
declaris this sacrament.
schawand plainly the form and manner of administratioun of ye same, sayand:
Infirmatur quis ex vobis? Inducat presbyteros ecclesie et orent super eum,
vngentes eu^ oleo in nomine dn^i, et oration fidei saluabit infirmu^, et
alleuiabit eum dn^s, and si in peccatis sit, remitte^tur ei. Gyf any be seik
amang ow, lat him call for the preistis of the kirk, and lat yame pray ouir
him, and vnct him with oil in the name of our Lord, and the prayar of faith
sal saif him that is seik, and our Lord sal comfort him, and gif he be in
synnis, yai sal be forgeuin to him. Heir we have ane document, yat the vncting,
quhair of S. James speikis, is ane sacrament, because it hes ane certane form
of wordis, ane sensibil and effectuous sign of grace, and also a promis of ye
same expressly put. The word of God quhairwith this sacrament is ministerit is
signifyit quhen sanct James sais, lat yame vnct him in the name of our Lord. Sa
the priest yat is minister of yis sacrament vnctis ye seik person* in the name
of the father, and the son, and the haly spreit, beseikand almychty God, yat
quhatsaeuir the seik person hes synnit aganis God be abusioun of any of his
wittis, sensis, or me^bris, it may be forgiffin to him be vertew of Christ's
passioun applyit to ye seik person be this vncting. The promis of mercy and
grace quhairapon ye word of this sacrament is groundit, is plainly expremit
quhen he sais: The prayar of faith sal saif the seik person, and gif he be in
synnis, yai sal be forgeuin to him. quhilk promis without dout was maid be our
saluiour, and promulgat and set forth be sanct James. It is to be thocht, Iaco.
5.
yat sanct James the Apostil of Jesus Christ wald set forth na thing belangand
to our faith and sacrame^tis by the will and command of Christ. The element or
sensibil thing of this sacrament is sanctifyit oil, quhilk trewly is a
convenient mattir of this sacrament. For as the doctor Theophilactus sais: Oil
hes a vertew to heile a man in his body, and to make him blithe in his mind, oil
is the nurischment of lycht. It is profitabil aganis great labouris of the body,
The frutis and effectis of this sacrament
and mittigatis the aicking of ye me^bris. Al their propirteis of oil ar
convenient to declare ye vertew and effect of yis sacrament. The principal
effect of it is remissioun of venial synnis. The secund is spiritual blythnes
of our mind, kennand that we have gottin all helpis and remeidis, quhilk ar
necessary and profitabil for the help of our saul aganis all the perrillis
that may occur to us in time of our deed, and sa we co^saue ane singular and
constant hoip in the mercy of God, in the special protectioun and defense of
our saluiour, we trow sickerly yat the angels of God sall be assistent and
present with us, to defend us aganis the powar of all the deuillis of hell. The
haly spreit giffis to our saul sa great consolatioun and confort in God, tha^
we are content to thole the paynis of deed patiently, and with ane blyth mind to
depart of this world. The third effect of this sacrament, is that God almychty
(gif he think expedient to us for the weil of our saul) be ye vertew of yis
sacrament, sal deliuir us fra our bodyly seiknes and restore us agane to heil,
quhilk he dois to money and syndry seik personis yat ressauis this sacrament.
Quhairfor O christin man and woman, I exhort the in Christ Jesus, contemn nocht
this haly sacrament, quhilk thy saluiour hes ordanit as ane instrument of
saluatioun. Their for quhen it sall pleise the gudnes of God to call the fra
this present world be any bodily seiknes, thou persaiffand thy self be al
apperance like to depart, and change this life, than incontinent follow the
counsale of sanct James, sent for the priest yat is the curat, require of him
deuoitly to minister to the this haly sacrament of extreme vnctioun, that thou
may obtene the three fruitis before rehersit, Remissioun of of thy venial synnis,
joy and blythnes of thy mind. And gif it be expedient to the, also heile of
thy body.

Of the sacrament of Ordour.
The xiii. Cheptour.
AS the haly sacramentis of the new testament ar necessary to the christin
pepil, Of the necessary institutioun of this sacrament.
because that be faith in Christ Jesus, and dew ministratioun and ressauing of
them, the meritis and vertew of Christis passioun is applyit to our saulis, as
be spiritual cundittis, vessellis and instrumentis of our saluatioun, sa it is
necessary that their be in the kirk of God certane men ordanit to be
convenient mini^s of the same sacramentis. For g^ (...) indifferently (...) ane
minister of ye (...), quha^ wald follow, bot gre^ (...) mi^ordour and
confusioun ama^ christ^ (...)? Thairfor our saluiour quhilk ((...) s^nct Paul
sais) is nocht God of dissentioun, ^. Cor. 14.
bot of piece, and ^eand the eternal wisdom of God, (...) and ordanis al
thingis wish. H^ (...) ordanit the sacrament of Ordour* quhairin spiritual
powa^ is giffin to ye minister of the kirk to minister the sacramentis. And for
the declaratioun of this matir e sall note f^ documentis. First e sal
understand ya^ because our saluiour Christ was to tak away his corporal
presence fra the kirk, he ordanit his Apostillis to be ministeris of the
sacrame^tis, he ga^ (...) powar to consecrate and ^nister his body and blud, ^
quhen he said to them: Hoc (...) commemorationem Do^ thi^ in my rem^mbrance.
He ga^e them powar to ^inister the sacrament of Penance quhen he said: Quo
^um rem^seritis peccata remittuntur eis. Joan. ^0
Quhais synnis e forgive thai ar forgeuin to them. He gave tham^ powar to
(...) and baptize the pepil quhen he said: Math. 1^.
Eu^^es docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine patis, and (...), et
spiritu^ (...). Gang and te^che all pepil and baptize them (...) the name of
the father and the son, and the haly spreit. And so lykwise of all the laif.

Secundly* that powar and authority, quhilk Christ ga^e to his Apostillis was
nocht geuin to them allan^^ly, bot it was geuin to them and also to their
succe^sou^is ministeris of the kirk, to persevere be successioun of time unto
the ^de of the world. Sa sanct Paul declaris plainly writand thus to the
Ephesianis: I^ ip^e dedit quo^dam quidem Apostolos, quosdam autem Prophetas,
Ephe. ^
alios vero Euangelistas, alios autem past^res et doctores, ad consummationem
sancto^um, in opus ministerii, in edificationem corporis Christi, donec
occurramus omnes in vnitatem fidei et agnimonis filii dei*. Our saluiour hes
geuin sum to be Apostillis, sum to be Prophetis, (...) to be Euangelistis,
(...) to be pastouris and doctouris, to the consummatioun and perfectioun of
sanctis in the wa^k of ministratioun, for the edificatioun of the mis^ body of
Christ, quhil we all mete to gidder in ane ^aith and knawlege of the son of
God. Heir ^how ^ets plainly, yat the office of ministratioun moan be had in the
kirk sa lang as the kirk hes mis^er to be edifyit in the faith and knawlege of
the son of God. And trewly that sal be to the end of the world. Quharfor the
powar of ministratioun of the sacramentis geuin to the Apostillis* was to be
bad in the kirk quhil the end of the world. Sa our saluiour said to his
Apostillis: Ecce ego vobiscum su^ vsque ad co^summationem seculi. Math. 28.
Behald I am with ow quhil the end of the world.

Thridly, Ordour is ane sacrament.
e sal understand yat Ordour quhai^in powar is geuin to the ministeris of ye
kirk may weil be callit ane sacrament, because it hes lyk vthir sacrame^tis ane
sensibil sign, quhilk is impositioun of ha^dis. it hes ane special form of
words vsit in the sacrament of the same, and also promis of grace to be
assistent in the same sacrament, quhilk promis is expremit be S. Paul writand
thus to his dicipil Timothe: 1. Timo. 4
Attend tibi et doctrine, insta in illis, hoc enim faciens teipsu^ saluu^
facies and eos qui te audiunt. Promis of grace annexit to Ordour.
O my discipil Timothe tak tent to thy self quhow you should leif, and also tak
tent to thy leirning, quhow thou should teiche thy pepil, be diligent and
perseuerand in them bayth, and sa doand thou sall saif thy self and also them
that heiris the. ^. Timo. 4
And agane he sais: Noli negligere gratiam* quae est in te, que data est tibi,
per prophetiam cum impositione manuum presbyterii. Negleck nocht the grace or
ye gift of god, quhilk is in the, quhilk is geuin to the throw prophecy with
the impositioun of the handis of ane priest And agane he said to him: Admoneo
te vt resu^cites gratiam dei, ^. Timo. 1
que in te est per impositionem manuum meatum. I warn the yat thou steir up in
thy self the grace of God quhilk is in the, be laying on of my ha^dis. Also he
wrait to his discipil Tytus on ye same manner sayand thus: Huius rei gratia
reliqui te Cretae, Ti^. i.
vt ea que desu^t corrigas et constituas per civitates presbyteros, sicut et
ego disposui tibi. For this cause sais he, I left the at Crete, that thou mycht
correck thai thingis yat misteris, and to ordane preistis in citeis as I have
disponit to the.

Heir O christin man, thou may understand two thingis. The ane, yat the
sacrament of Ordour is nocht the inuentioun or traditioun of man, bot yat it is
the ordinatioun of Christ, The ordinatioun of ministers in the kirk bela^gis to
bischops.
and vsit be his Apostillis. The vthir is, that ye ordinatioun of ministaris in
the kirk of god, belangis to the bischoppis allanerly, and nocht to the common
pepil.

Fourtly e sall understand that because the sacrament of Ordour is ordanit to
ye convenient dispe^satioun and ministratioun of the sacrame^tis, and of all ye
sacramentis, the haly and blissit sacrament of the Altar is may principal,
may excellent and may precious, thairfor the sacrament of Ordour and namely
preistheid is principally institute and ordanit to consecrat the sacrament of
the Altar, and to dispens and minister the same conveniently to the christin
pepil. Mairouir because the pepil may nocht worthily ressaue the same sacrament
except thai be preparit and maid reddy to it, be faith and ane cleine
conscience, Ye auctorite of ane priest is to minister ye sacrame^tis
thairfor the sacrament of Ordour and preistheid extendis also to the
ministratioun of tha sacramentis, quhairby remissioun of synnis is geuin as
Baptyme and Penance, or ellis augmentatioun of grace, as extreme Vnctioun and
Matrimonye, Sa the may principal and may excellent ordour is Preistheid,
quhilk is powar to consecrat and minister the sacrame^tis before said. And
secundly to teiche the pepil the word of God, To prech the word of God.
sa mekil as it is necessary to them to know, for their eternal saluatioun,
For as it is writtin: Labia sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam et legem requirent
ex ore eius, Malach. 2
quia angelus domini exercitu^ est. The lippis of a priest keipis science and
knawlege, and the pepil sal require ye law fra his mouth, for he is the angel,
that is to say, the messinger of almychty God the Lord of hostis and armies.
And thridly for to pray for the prosperity of all christin pepil, and
specially of them, quhilk ar co^mittit to their cuir. In their three pointis,
yat is, to minister the five sacramentis before rehersit. Baptyme, Penance, the
Eucharist, extreme Vnctioun and Matrimony (as for the ministratioun of
Confirmatioun and Ordouris it bela^gis allanerly to the office of ane bischop,
that unite may be kepit in the kirk of God.) To preche or teache the word of
God, als mekil as is necessary to the common instructioun of the pepil, and
also to pray to God daily for the pepil, Thus should al preistis haffand cuir and
charge of saulis, occupye and exerce them self at all times convenient and
necessary. And suppse the priest leif nocht sa perfitly as he is bound, and
also is nocht sa exemplaire to ye pepil as is requirit to his vocatioun, it the
pepil should nochttheles heir his Mes and ressaue fra him the sacramentis,
because yat the vertew and effect of ye sacrament standis nocht in the gudnes
and meritis of the minister, bot allanerly in the gudnes and meritis of our
saluiour Christ, sa y^ the evil of the minister stoppis nocht the effect of the
sacrament.

The fifth thing to be notit in this matir is, yat the powar of ane bischop is
to minister certane sacrame^tis, quhilk the simpil preistis may nocht do, and
also powar of iurisdictioun in preeminence and dignity above ane simpil
priest. To the priest that hes allanerly the sacrament of Ordour, pertenis to
minister the word of God, and the sacramentis before rehersit, to pray for the
pepil, bot to ane bischop pertenis the same three effectis specially and
principally as successouris of the Apostils. And with that that have the powar
of iurisdictioun, be the authority quhairof thai may exco^municat and curs al
yame y^ co^mittis grievous dedlie synnis oppinly, and ar callit to judgment and
will nocht cum, or gif thai cum, thai will nocht obey the sentence of the judge
of the kirk. siclyk personis lawfully may be excommunicate, yat is to say,
excludit and put out of ye company and communioun of faithful pepil. Quhilk
excommunicatioun is nocht geuin to them as ane distructioun, How cursing
vveil vsit is ane medicyn^
bot as ane medicyne for their correctioun, that be sic exclusioun, thai beand
eschamit for their falt, and also yat thai ar private the participatioun of the
meritis of Christ geuin be the sacrame^tis and also the meritis of the kirk,
may return to the obedience of the kirk, and be exco^municatioun as be ane
medicinabil correctioun may amend their lyffis, and amang the christin pepil
leif lyk christin men. This powar of cursing was geuin be our saluiour to ye
kirk, quhen he said: Si ecclesiam no^ audierit, Math. 18.
sit tibi sicut ethnicus et publicanus. Gyf a man will nocht be obedient to ye
lawful command of ye kirk, yat is to say, of yame that hes authority in the
kirk, lat them be to the as the Hethin and Publicane, that is to say, la^ yame
be excludit fra ye company of christin pepil and their haly communioun, euin as
Hethins and Publicanis ar. And as the bischope hes powar to curs siclyk me^, sa
hes he powar to lowse yame and assole them, quhen yai ar penitent and
obedient, according to the wordis of Christ sayand: Quecunque ligaueritis.
Math. 18.
etc. As for vthir ordouris and digniteis of the kirk, we think them nocht
necessary to be exponit to ow, because ye knawlege of yame makis nocht mekil
to our edificatioun.

Of the sacrament of Matrimony.
The xiiii. Cheptour.
MAtrimonye was institute and ordanit be almychty God in Paradise before yt fall
of Adam, to be ane lawful coniunctioun of man and woman in ane continual and
inseperabil fellowschip of life till deed depart them, according to the wordis
that Adam said: Relinquet homo patrem et matrem et adherebit vxori sue, Gene. 2.
e^ erunt duo in carne vna. The maryit man sall laif his father and his mother,
sa that he sall nocht be oblissit to dwell with them, and he sall adheir and
dwell with his wife, and thai sal be two personis in ane flesche, because that
thai sall bayth concur in the generatioun of ane barn.

Four co^ue^nt causis of the institution of matrimonye. Gene. 2.
Matrimony was institute and ordanit for four principal causis. First that it
mycht be the first coupil or coniunctioun of ane haly, luffand and freindly
fellowschip between man and woman, The man to rewle, and the woman to be rewlit
and obey the man, thairfor God said: Faciamus ei adiutorium simile sibi. Let us
make to man ane help, lyk to himself. The secund cause was generatioun and
educatioun of barnis to the service of God. Thairfor God said: Gene. 1.
Crescite et multiplicamini et replete terra^. Grow and be multiplyit and fill
the erd. The third cause of Matrimony was eftir the fall of Adam, to eschaip
the syn of fornicatioun quhen men hes nocht the gift of chastity, and to use
the pleasure of the body in the honesty of marriage. Thairfor sanct Paul sais:
Propter fornicationem vnusquisque suam vxore^ habeat, and vnaqueque suum viru^
habeat. i. Cor. 7.
To eschaip fornicatioun (quhen men hes nocht the gift of chastity and hes na
lawful impediment) lat ilk man have his awin wife, and ilk a woman have her
awin husband. The fourt principal cause of matrimonye was that it mycht be ane
figure or takin of ye may haly and beluffit coniunctioun that was to be
between Christ to cum and the kirk, quhilk coniunctioun was forsein and
preordinate of God before the beginning of ye world, according as sanct Paul
sais: Ephe. 1.
Qui elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem. God the eternal father hes
chosin us in Christ Jesus before the beginning of ye world. And doutles
matrimony is ane sacrament, that is to say, ane haly sign or takin of ye same
coniunctioun that is between Christ and his kirk. For as be the first
institutioun of matrimony ane husband is ioynit to ane wife, with ane band of
fellowschip inseparabil till deed depart yame, sa the son of God Jesus Christ
as ane spiritual husband, and the hail universal congregatioun of faithful men
and women as ane spiritual wife, ar couplit and ioynit togidder with ane
inseperabil ba^d of faith. Ephe. 5.
Thairfor S. Paul sais spek and of ye band of matrimony. Sacramentum hoc
magnu^ est, ego aute^ dico in Christo et in ecclesia. Matrimonye is ane great
sacrament, bot I say in Christ and in the kirk. And suppose matrimonye was
ordanit to sa strait and inseperabil co^iunctioun of a man and a woman, it
eftir the fall of Adame in the time of the law of nature and also writtin, How
the perfection of matrimony was degenerat
matrimonye fell fra that perfectioun and was degenerat in two pointis fra ye
first institution. For ane man maryit money wyffes, and sumtyme a man haffand
displesure at his wife wald give to her a libel of partising and put her fra
him and lowse ye band of matrimonye. The first of yir two pointis, quhilk is
yat a man mycht have syndry wyffis, specially ye haly Patriarchis and kingis,
as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, with the laif. It was lauchful be the secret
dispensatioun of God, for two reasonis, the taken is mistik, to be ane figure
yat the son of God Jesus Christ should cowpil to him self be the spiritual
matrimonye of faith bayth ane congregatioun of Iewis, and also ane
congregatioun of Gentillis, to be to him ane halye kirk. The vthir reasone is
litteral, that two mycht multiply the pepil of Israel, quhilk was the chosin
pepil of God, amang quhom and of quhom the son of God was to be incarnate.
And as for the secund point quhilk was partising, Moses tholit it to be vsit,
because of the hardness of yair hartis, for yair was amang them money styf
neckit proud and malicious men to their wyffis, and for ane litil displesure
was reddye to slay their wyffis. Thairfor to keip them fra the gretar syn,
quhilk was slaying of their wyffis, he tholit them to commit the les syn,
quhilk was partising with yair wyffis Bot quhen the time of grace was cum,
quhairin it plesit the father eternal to restore be his son our saluiour thai
thingis that was in heuin and erd, he restorit also matrimonye to the
perfectioun of the first institutioun. Thairfor he sais: Math. 19. Vovv our
saluiour is storit matrimonye to the first institution.
Qui fecit hominem ab initio, masculum et feminam fecit eos deus, et dixit.
Propter hoc dimittet homo patrem and matrem, et adhaerebit vxori sue, et erunt
duo in carne vna. Itaque iam no^ su^t duo, sed vna caro. Quos igitur deus
co^iunxit, homo non separet. He yat maid man in the beginning, maid yame man
and woman, and said: For this cause sall a man laif father and mother, and
adheir and cleif to his wife, and thai two sall be ane flesche. Now ar thai
nocht two than, bot ane flesch. Lat nocht man yairfor seuir or put syndry that,
quhilk God hes couplit togidder. And a litill eftirhend he sais: Moses ob
duritiam cordis vestri permisit vobis dimittere vxores vestras, Math. 1^.
ab initio autem non fuit sic. Quamobrem quicunque dimiserit vxorem sua^, nisi
ob fornicatione^, et alia^ du^erit, mechatur. Moses because of ye hardness of
our hearts sufferit ow to put away our wyffis. Nochttheles fra ye beginning it
was nocht sa. Bot I say to ow: quhasaeuir puttis away his wife (except it be
for fornicatioun) and maryis ane vthir, breikis matrimonye, and quhasaeuir
maryis her yat is deuorsit, co^mittis adultery. Their wordis of our saluiour ar
expounit be his discipil and Apostil sanct Paul, sayand: Iis qui matrimonio
iuncti sunt, precipio no^ ego, 1. Cor. 7.
sed dominus vxorem a viro non discedere, quod si discesserit, manner innuptam,
aut viro suo reconciliari. To them that are maryit lawfully, command nocht I
bot our Lord, yat the wife depart nocht fra her husband, bot and gifsche depart
fra him, lat her remane vnmaryit with ane vthir man, Tvva singular conditiouns
of the marriage that is amang christin men and women. ^. Cor. 7.
or ellis to be recounselit agane to her awin husband. Of their auctoriteis
quhilk we have alledgit to ow of our saluiour and sanct Paul, we may gaddir
two singular conditiouns of that marriage, quhilk is amang christin men. The ane
is, that matrimonye is allanerly between two personis, that is say, a man and a
woman, sa yat it is nocht lawful for a man to have may wyffis than ane at anis:
Erunt duo in carn^ vna. Thai sall be two personis in a flesche, quhilk may be
co^firmit be the wordis of sanct Paul: Mulier potestatem corporis sui no^
habet, sed vir, similiter et vir potestatem corporis sui non habet, sed mulier.
The woman hes nocht powar of her body, bot her husband, and lykwise the man
hes noch^ powar of his body, bot the woman hes it. Sa it followis yat the man
can nocht give the powar of his body, to may than ane. And quhe^ our saluiour
said Quhasaeuir puttis away his wife (except for fornicatioun) and maryis ane
vthir, he co^mittis adultery, he teichis plainly, that a man may nocht have
two wyffis. For and gif it war lawful to have two wyffis at anis, that man
co^mittit nocht adultery in marriage of ane vthir, his first beand alive. Now
our saluiour sais plainly, yat quhe^ he maryis ane vthir, sche beand alive, he
committis adultery. The secund co^ditioun, is yat the band of matrimony anis
lauchfully co^trackit, may nocht be dissoluit and lowsit agane be any
diuorcement or partising, bot allanerly it is lowsit be the deed of the ane of
them, for trewly the partising and deuorsing, quhilk our saluiour sais may be
done for fornicatioun, should be understand allanerly of partising fra bed and
board, and nocht fra ye band of matrimony, as it is plain be the wordis of S.
Paul, quhilk sais, Lat her be recounsalit agane to her husband. And in the
mean time quhasaeuir maryis her, he co^mittis adultery. It is to be notit
also, that for the same two singular conditiouns before rehersit, matrimonye may
weil be callit a sacrament, That is to say, a takin or sign of ane haly thing,
quhilk is coniunctioun of haly kirk with Christ Jesus. For as in matrimonye ane
man hes bot ane wife with quhom he should remane without any partising, sa Christ
Jesus hes cowplit to him self ye universal kirk of christin men and women as
ane spiritual wife, and will neuir part fra her, bot will be ioynit with her
euir, heir be grace and in heuin be glore. Mairouir a sacrament is callit a
sensibil and (...) of mu^^^hil grace, quhilk is geuin to them thar worthily
r^ssau^s the same sacrament. Now it can nocht be denyit (...) yat grace is
geuin in the sacrament of Matrimonye to yame yt a^ lawfully maryit togidder, be
(...) of y^ quhilk grace thai may ke^p the band maid b^ them. that thai may l^
ane and vthir as Christ luffit the kirk, yat thai may with diligence bring up
yair barnis to the service of God, yat yai may thole patiently all
molestatiouns and tribulatioun of the world* quhilk (...) chancis to maryit
personis, that thai may those ane ane vthir, and ane (...) ane vtheris
imperfectioun. All yir thingis can no^ht be had without the grace of God,
quhilk is geuin in ye sacrament of matrimonye as it apperis plainly be the
wordis of our saluiour, sayand: Quos Deus coniunxit homo non separer. Thai
quhom God hes ioynit in marriage togydder, lat na man seuir. And how can thai
want the grace of God, quhom God ioynis togidder, gif thai keip their marriage
conform to the law of God? Mairouir, as in ilk ane sacrament their is ane
sensibil matir, and ane certane form of wordis groundit upon sum special
promis of God sa their is in the sacrament of matrimony, The sensibil matir is
the man and the woman quhilk ar faithful personis able to contract marriage. Ye
sensibil sign of marriage.

Ye form of vvordis vsit to the contract of marriage.


The form of wordis is that, quhairby the ane giffis to the vthir powar of
their body exprement their consent to ye same be wordis of ye present time.
Quhen the man sais to the woman, I tak the to my weddit wife, and the woman
sais to the man, I tak the to my maryit husband, both of yame ending yir
wordis be m^ations of God, sayand: ^n ye name of the father* and the son, and
the haly spreit. This consent in to carnal copula^ expremit be ye wordis of ye
present time, is ye cause of matrimony. And eftir ye consent, quhen yai co^^^me
togidder in carnal deid, marriage is consu^ma^ and endit. The promis of grace
annexit to marriage. i. Timo. ^.
The promis of God annexit to yis (...) may be ga^ (...) wordis of S. Paul,
quhilk he w^itis to Timothe on this manner. spe^ and of ye woman: Salu (...)
generationem, si permanserit in fide, et dilectione, et ^ficatione, (...)
sobrietate. S^he ^al be saffit be generation of barnis, gif sche p^^seueris in
faith and (...) and sa^ctificatioun with sobernes. And na dout bot ye same promis
is maid to the man, because he co^cu^^is with the woman to ye generatioun of
barnis be the institutioun and ordinatioun of god. Quhat is ye vertew or propir
effect of matrimony? The frutis or effectis of marriage
S. Augustine sais yat yair is three great g^dis of matrimony* The first is ane
sacrament, be ye quhilk we understand y^ the hand of matrimonye should nocht be
lowsit be any ma^er of wise til deed of ye ane part lowse it* as we declarit
to ow before. The secund is fidelite or faithfulness quhairby we understand yat
maryit personis should keip yair promis faithfully ane to ane vthir, sa yat ye
man should nocht have carnal deid with any vthir woman sa lang as his lawful wife
leiffis, and lykwise the woman should nocht have carnal deid with any vthir man* sa
lang as her lawful husband leiffis. The third is barnis, and be this we
vnderst^d yat gif God send yame barnis, yt yai ^uld bring yame up in nurture
and vertew, that thai may be serua^dis to God. And this is the principal end
and cause of matrimony. And to ke^ gif a maryit man may syn with his wife, e
sall note four pointis. First that quhen maryit personis conuenis to gidder
intend and to bring forth barnis to the service of god, nocht only thai syn
nocht bot yai have merit and pleise God in sa doing. Secundly, quhen a maryit
man hes carnal deid with his wife intend and allanerly to keip her fra
fornicatioun and adultery, requirit to do the same be her, lykwise he synnis
nocht, bot dois ane deid of justice and rychteousnes. Thridly, quhen ane maryit
man hes carnal deid with his wife, nocht intend and procreatioun of barnis,
another eschewing fornicatioun of his wife, bot mouit with ye fragilitie of his
nature, intend and to keip him self fra fornicatioun, lykwyse he synnis nocht.

How ane maryit man may sin with his wife.
Fourtly, quhen he kennis his wife carnally, nocht intend and procreatioun of
barnis, nor eschewing of fornicatioun of his wife or of him self, bot intend
and principally to fulfill the lust of his body, and thairin puttis his
felicity, he synnis grievously. Thairfor lat them abstene for a time (eftir
sanct Paulis counsale) to pray, ^. Cor. 7.
and to ressaue Christis body. To quhom be all honor. Amen.

DE MODO ORANDI DEVM.
Of the manner how christin men and women should make their prayer to God.
The first Cheptour.
ANte orationem prepara anima^ tuam. Eccle. ^^.
The wisman giffis the counsale, O christin man and woman, to prepare thy mind
before thy prayer. That is to say, before thou begin to make thy prayer, tak good
tent that thou make it with sic ane myd, that it may be acceptabil to God, and
hard of him. Thairfor you sal understand, yt their is three vertewis, quhairwith
you should prepare thy mind before thy prayer. The first is faith. Praer should be
maid with ane tr^v faith.
The secund is hoip. The third is cherite. First yt thy prayer may be plesand
to God and hard with him, make it with ane true faith. For sen prayer is no^ht
ellis bot lifting up of yt heart to god, and to ask fra him all thingis, quhilk
becu^mis ye to ask, quhow can you pray gif thou want faith? quhow can you lift
up thy mind to god without faith? Roma. 10 Faith techis tvva thingis ^cessarie
(...) be ^ade (...) making of our pra^
according as Sanct Paul sayis: Quomodo inuocabunt, in quem no^ crediderunt?
Quhow can men make inuocatioun and prayer to God, in quhom thai have na belief?
Veraily it can nocht be. Thy faith O christin man teichis the two thyngis.

The ane is to ken thy awin poverty, thy awin myserabyll stait, Be ^e licht of
our faith we sulde knavv our avvin great misery and pouertye. Esaias. 40.
quhairin thou standis both in body and saul. Thy faith techis the on the
other part, the hie Majesty of GOD, his almychty powar and good will towart
the. Quhairfor O christin man before ye begin to make thy prayar, prepair thy
mind with faith, consyddir ye great myster, quhilk you hes of you help of GOD.
Set afor thy eine al thy infirmiteis, Remembir that thou art erd, and to you erd
you sall gang. Consyddir that all men ar like unto the grene girss, and all the
glore of man is like to ye flour that growis amang ye gyrss, as sayis the
Propheit Esaye. Quhair to aggreis King David sayand in the Psalm: Man is maid
like unto vanite, and his dayis passis away like the s^haddow. Psalm. 143.
Have mind quhow thou was consauit and borne in syn, call to thy remembrance,
quhow oftymes thou hes brok in, the haly promeis maid in thy Baptym, be
transgressioun of ye co^mandis of GOD. Thou beris daily about with ye, thy
ennimie, ye concupiscence of thy flesche euirmair repugnant aganis thy spreit
and tys^and ye to syn. The Devil neuir restis, bot gangis about like ane
rampand Lyone, seikand quhom he may deuore be daily temptatioun. Consyddir
thairfore, before yi prayar, al yi Imperfections, al thy vnclenenes all thy
miserabyll estait quhairin thou standis daily. Be ye l^cht of our faith we
sulde behauld and (...) ye great gudnes of go^d to^ vv^.
And than lift up thy mind agane to GOD, and be yi faith, behald and se the
great gudnes of god towart the, quhilk standis in their three special poyntis

First he hes gyffin command to the, and biddis the pray to him for grace,
help, and succoure.

Secundlie, he hes promissit to heir thy prayar and to grant to the his grace,
help, and singular protectioun, in all thy per^ells. Thridlie, Math. 7. Luc.
xi.
he hes lernit the quhow thou sulde pray, and quhat thou should say to him. Ask
sayis he, and it sal be gyffin to ov seik and e sall find, knock, and it sal be
openit to ow Gyff carnell fathers (quha is evil) gyff thaire sonnis good
gyftis, Roma. 8.
mekle mair our Heavenly father sall give the good Spreit to them that askis
him. We wate nocht quhov we should pray bot ye spreit helpis our waiknes, and
prayis for us with vntellabyl sychis, nocht sa understanding yt ye haly spreit
prayis for ws, because he is GOD, bot that he inspyris and mouis our hartis be
his grace, and makis ws abyll to pray. Joan xiiii.
He garris ws pray, in the name of Christ, of quhome we have ane promis to be
hard, quhe^ we ask any thing in his name. Heir his promeis, gyff e ask the
fader any thing in my name, he sal gyf it to ov, (that is to say) quhen saeuer
e ask any thing yt belangis to our eternal saluatioun, my Father sall gyff
it to ow. Heir thou may se, that GOD is mair ^ollyst for ws thane we are our
self, for he prouokis ws to ask, and biddis ws ask, he is reddear to give,
thane we are to resaue, because that he hes promeisit to heir ws quhen sa ever
we ask throw faith. e as sancte Paul sayis, he may and will do above the thing
yt we think or understand.

Ephe. 3. Hope the secund vertev of prayer he ^i. properte^. Marce. 11. Sycker
co^fiden^ i^ ve h^lpe off god promissid to vvs. Luc. xi.
The secund vertew requirit to the preparatioun of the mind before thy prayer is
hoip, quhilk should have ^a properteis. First thou sulde put (...) dout, bot yat
God will fulfill his promis maid to the in special, quhilk is this: Omnia que
cunque ora^tes petitis, credit quia accipietis. I say to ow sais Christ, al
thingis quhatsumeuir e ask in our prayer, trow yat e sall get them, and that
sail cu^ to ow. And to put us out of all dout, he gyffis ane similitude, quhilk
is abil to bring all men out of disperatioun. Gyf any of ow askis his father
breid will he give to him a stan^? Or gif he ask fysche at his father, will his
father give to him a serpent? or gif he ask at his father ane egg, will his
father give to him ane Scorpioun? Gyf thairfor e be and evil, hes the wit to
give to our sons thai thingis that are good, mekil mair our heuinly father
quhilk is good of his awin nature and allanerly good sall give his good spreit to
yame yat askis him. And of this we should nocht dout, Iacobi. 1.
according as sanct James sais: Postulet autem in fide nihil hesitan^. Lat him
that wantis wisdom, ask it of God with ane sui^ confidence to get it, and lat
him nocht dout of it, ^ot that God both may and will grant it to him, for he
that doutis, is lyk to a wall of the sea, Pa^iens and lang sufferance, co^^
^ta^d to god, both
quhilk is mouit and dreuin about with the wynd, Lat nocht sic a man think to
get any thing fra god. The secu^d property of hoip, quhilk we should have in our
prayar, is perseverance and patience, to await patiently with lang sufferance
quhil God heir our prayar. We should nocht prescriue to God any special time to
heir our prayer, bot pa^iently commit all to God both the manner of our helping
and the time, according as the Prophet commandis in the Psalm, sayand: Psalm.
26*
Expecta dominum, viriliter age, co^fortetur cor tuum, et sustine dominum. Wait
upon our Lord, do all thy deidis stoutly, lat thy heart be of good comfort and
thole our Lord to wyrk all thingis to his pleisure. Ane notabil exempil of this
we have in the historye of Judith, Judith. 8*
quhen yat haly woman vnderstud that Ozeas the chief prince or rewlar had
promissit to give ouir ye city, callit Bethulia, to the Assyrianis, gif god
had send them na help within v. dais, sche repreffit yame scharply sayand:
quhat manner of men ar e tha^ se^pis our Lord God? This word, quhilk e have
(...) is nocht ane word to prouoik the mercy of God to us, bot to steir his
vengeance aganis us. Have e set ane time of our lordis mercy, and assignit ane
day at our will? And eftirhend sche gave to them her counsale and said. Let us
humil and make our saulis meik and stand in ane lawly spreit, let us serve him
and say to him that we are content that he schaw his mercy upon us according to
his awin will, and thairfor will meikly abide and await upon his consolatiouns.
To this effect pertenis all the placis of halye scripture, quhilk biddis us
pray with continuance. i. Tessa. 5.
Sanct Paul sais: Sine intermissione orate. Pray without cessing, that is to
say, at all times convenient. And in ane vthir place he sais: Collos. 4.
Orationi instate, vigilantes in ea, in gratiaru^ action. Continue in prayer,
and walk in the same with giving of tha^kis. Iaco. 5.
And sanct James sais: M^ltum valet deprecatio iusti assidua. The continual
prayar of ane just man is of great strenth or powar. And he co^fermis his saying
with ane exempil, sayand: Helias was ane mortal man lyk to us, and maid his
prayer, that it mycht nocht rain upon the erd, and sa it raynit nocht, three
eiris and s^x monethis. And agane he maid his prayer to God, and the heuin gave
rain, and the erd gave fruit.

Charity is the third vertevv requirit to be had in maki^g our prayar.
The third vertew, quhilk preparis our mind to deuoit prayer is cheritie, to
lufe God above all thingis and our nychtbour as our self. Of the first ye
prophet sais in the Psalm: Delectare in domino, et dabit tibi petitiones
cordis tui. Have pleasure and delectatioun in our Lord, and he sall give to the,
the petitiouns of thy heart. Thairfor before thou make thy prayer, als mekil as
thou may, How we may in our prayar kindil our ^artis in ^he l^f^ of God.
kindil thy prayer with the lufe of God. And think quhat God hes done for the
i^ thy creatioun, makand the to his awin image and lyknes. And quhair he mycht
have maid ye ane brutel beist, he hes maid the ane reasonabil creature. He
preseruis and keipis the. He hes geuin command to his angellis to gyde the fra
all perellis. His will is, that all the heuins and four elementis make the
service. He giffis the meit, drink, and claith and harbory, cattle, geir, and
corn, and al good yat thou hes. Beside all this, quhe^ y^ was perissit and
co^demnit to hell, and maid bond serua^d to the devil, haldin in ye captivity
of syn, he send his awin natural son to be incarnat for thy saik, he sparit him
nocht, bot for thy synnis deliuerit him to the deed, quhilk willingly,
obediently, luffingly and innocently tholit deed, payit thy ransom, redemit
the fra syn, the devil, and hell, hes weschit thy saul fra all thy synnis, hes
recou^salit the agane to ye eternal father, hes lowsit the fra ye maledictioun
of the law, hes deliuerit the fra the dangear and perrel of hell, and hes
conquest to ye be his meritis, the kingdom of heuin, gif you believe in him with
ane leiffand faith ye wyrkis be cherite. Gif you wald, O christin man think on
yir benefitis of God, quhilk he hes done for the, and also remember quhat he
hes promisit to the in ye kingdom of heuin, you wald sone have pleisure in God,
and sa he wald give to the, ye petitiouns of thy heart. And gif you wald be
ardent in the lufe of thy nychtbour, consider how lyk he is ye and you to him in all pointis of nature and grace, e ar both creat and maid of ane god, e ar
both mortal men and barnis to Adame, e dwell both in ane house, quhilk is this
present world, e ar both redemit with ane blud of the son of God, leiff and in
ane faith, regenerat with ane baptyme, e stand both in ane hoip, e ar both
me^bris of ane mistik body of Christ. God co^mandis the to lufe him as thy
self, and to forgive him al his offe^sis as you wald be forgeuin of God. Quhilk
and thou do nocht, you prayis earar agane thy self, than for thy self. Thairfor
sais Christ: Cu^ stabitis ad orandu^, dimittite, si quid habetis ad ^ersus
aliquem, vt and pater vester qui in coelis est, Marce. xi.
dimittat vobis peccata vestra, quod si vos no^ dimise^itis, nec pater vester,
qui in coelis est, dimittet vobis peccata vestra. Quha sa forgi^fis nocht to
yair nychbour all offensis sal nocht be hard of god in yair prayaris.
Quhen e stand to pray, see yat e forgive to our nychtbouris al offe^cis yt e
have to ^ay to their charge, that lykwise our heuinly father may forgive to ow
all our synnis, bot and gif e will nocht forgive to our nychtbour his synnis,
yan our father yat is in heuin sal nocht forgive to ow our synnis. Heir their
wordis O thou unmerciful man, O thou yreful and malicious and envious man and
woman, quhilk will nocht forgive with thy heart to thy nychtbour all his offencis
done agane the, thou hes hard heir thy awin judgment, the quhilk is this. Sa
lang as thou will nocht forgive to thy nychtbour all his synnis done aganis
the, sa lang sall thou neuir have thy synnis forgeuin to the of God. Mairouir
sayand thy Pater noster, thou askis vengeance aganis thy self. Thairfor gyf
thou wald make thy prayar faithfully, forgive to him as thou wald be forgeuin of
God.

The secund Cheptour.
How the prayar of obstinit synnaris is nocht hard of God. Prouer. 2.
FOr the playner knawlege of this matir of prayar, we will propone certane
questions First, is ye prayar of a synnar hard of god? Answeir. Their is two
kindis of synnaris. Su^ ar obstinate, quhilk hes na detestatioun of yair sin
nor na affectioun to vertew and good life, bot hes ferme purpose to persevere in
yair syn, of quhom the wisman sais in the Prouerbis: Letantur, cum
malefecerint, et exulta^t in rebus pessimis. Thai ar blyth quhen yai do evil,
and reioysis in wickit thingis. Siclyk synnaris is nocht hard of God, as the
blind man said: Scimus quia deus peccatores non audit. Joan. ^.
We know that God heiris nocht synnaris, quhais word is to be understand of
obstinat and perseuerant synnaris. And gif thou refuse ye wordis of yat blind
man, heir quhat God him self sais of synnaris: Esaie. i.
Cum multiplicaueritis orationem non exaudiam, manus enim vestre sanguine
plenae sunt. Quhen e sal multiplye our prayaris, I sall nocht hei^ ow, because
our handis is full of blud, that is to say, our warkis ar full of syn and
purpos of sin. How the prayar of ye penite^^ synnaris (...) hard of God.
Their is vthir synnaris quhilk kennand be the law their synnis, the
vncleinnes, perrel and damnatioun of the same, begynnis to have displeasure of
their synnis, begynnis to feir God, to hoip in his mercy, to desire his grace
with ane humil and contrit heart, makis inuocatioun and prayar to god for grace,
sic ane synnar is hard of God. Exempil of the Publicane, quhilk said: Luce. 18.
O God have mercy on me a synnar, quhais prayar was hard, and eid hayme
iustifyit to his house. Gang thou and do siclyk, O synful man. Yat fasti^g and
almou^ deidis disponis a man to deuoi^ prayar. Tobi. xii.


Secundly, quhat ar the good deidis quhilk steiris us to fervent deuotioun and
prayar? Answeir. Fasting and almous, gif that be done in faith and cheritie.
Prayar is good sais the ang^l to Tobias, with fasting and almous, and mair
profitabil than to lay up gold in tresure. Quhow can a man lift up his mind to
god in prayer, quhen his wayme is full of meit and drink? Thairfor our saluiour
commandit us to walk in our prayaris, sayand: Viglate itaque omni te^pore
orantes vt digni habeamini fugere ista omnia, Luce. 21.
que futura sunt, et stare ante filiu^ hominis. Walk thairfor prayand all time
that e eschaip all the perrellis to cum, and stand saifly before the son of
man. Now it is nocht possibil yat a man may walk in prayer, bot gif he use sum
time fasting, ^. Joan. iii.
or at the leist great temperance. And that almous is necessary to deuot prayer
it is manifest be the wordis of S. Iohne ye evangelist, sayand thus: He that
hes the substance of this world and seis his brother have necessity or mister,
and closis his heart fra him, quhow can ye lufe of god dwell in him? Quhow can
thou thairfor O man cry to God lor mercy, quhilk will nocht have mercy on thy
nychtbour that cryis to the for help? or quhom thou seis have mister of help?

The third questioun. Aucht we to make lang prayeris to God? Answeir. e trewly,
according as our saluiour sais: Oportet semper orare, et non deficere. Luce. 18.
e man alwais pray and nocht cease. To ye same agreis S. Paul, 1. Tessa. 5.
sayand: Sine intermissione orate Pray continually and cease nocht. This
continual prayer quhilk we should alwayis make to God, standis nocht in money
wordis, for sa it war impossibil for us to pray alwais continually and ceise
nocht. Bot it is to have alwais and continually ane good mind to God, How we
may make to god la^g prayeris.
a fervent desire of his mercy, ane ardent lufe to him, doand and referrand al
our good deidis to his glore. Sa doand we pray alwais and ceissis nocht fra
prayer. Thou may speir agane a^ me. May we pray lang prayeris in wordis? e
trewly, gif we speik yame with the faith of our heart, and deuotioun of our
mind. Math. 6.
And quhen our saluiour in the euangil sais: Quhen e pray speik nocht money
wordis. He e^ponis him self, sayand: as the Gentillis dois, for yai trow to be
hard in yair money wordis without faith and deuotioun of their mind, trowand be
multiplicatioun of wordis, to declare to God yair mister, and to move him to
heir yair prayers as thocht God misk^nd our misters. Thairfor sais he, be e
nocht lyk to them, for our heuinly father ke^nis quhat e mister before e pray
to him. Quhairfor O christin man and woman, I exhort ow to pray to god with
faith hoip and cheritie, and nocht with our mouth allanerly as hypocritis dois,
bot pray with heart and mouth both. Pray in all placis, bot specially in the
kirk, because it is ye house of prayer, Pray at all times, bot specially upon
the sundayis and vthir halydayis (as we declarit to ow in the third command).
And sa sall e obtene our eternal saluatioun according to the promis of god,
sayand: Omnis qui inuocauerit nomen domini, saluus erit. Iohelis. 2
All thai that makis inuocatioun to the name of the Lord, sall be saiffit.

Amang all the prayers quhilk a christin man may say to god, yair is nane sa
worthi and sa excellent, Of the preeminence and excellent dignity of the
pate^^r.
as is the prayer callit the Pater noster. For it was nocht compilit and geuin
to us be ane Angel of heuin, or a pure man in eird, bot it was compylit and
geuin to us to say be the natural son of god our saluiour Jesus Christ,
quhilk is ye eternal wisdom of god. This prayar is co^pendious and schort, to
yat effect yat it may be easily leirit, bettir had in remembrance, that nane
excuse them of ignorance, that it may be said ofttymes without any irksumnes.
Also to declair yat ye vertew of prayaris standis nocht in multiplication of
money wordis, bot in ye deuotioun of ye mind. And suppose yis prayar is schort
in wordis, it it is exceeding lang and profound in sentence. For in seuin
peticiouns it contenis al thingis, quhilk we desire fra god, for ye weil both
of our saul and body, both in this life and in the life to cum. And with yat
it keipis the same ordour, quhilk we aucht to keip in all our desyris and
peticiouns. For first and above all vthir thingis, we should desire yat god be
knawin, honourit, glorifyit, and magnifyit of us and of all the pepil of the
world. And yat we desire at god in the first peticioun, sayand: Sanctificetur
nomen tu^m. Lat thy name be sanctifyit and haddin haly. In the three petitiouns
that followis, we desire at (...) to give to us all good. First eternal, quhilk
is (...) highest and may excellent, sayand: Aduenia^ regnu^ tuu^. Lat thy
kingdom cum to us. Secund, to give us gudis spiritual, quhilk is grace and
obedience to the will of god, sayand: Fiat volun^as tua, ^icut in coelo et in
terra. Thy will be fulfillit in the eird as it is in heuin. Thridly, to give us
gudis temporal for our daily suste^tatioun, sayand: Panem nostrum quotidianum
da nobis hodie. Give us yis day our daily breid. In the three last petitiouns we
desire at god to deliuir us fra all evil. First fra sin and eternal deed
quhilk is the reward of sin, sayand: Dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et
nos dimittim^ debitoribus nost^^s. Forgive us our dettis and trespassis, as we
forgive to yame yat trespassis aganis us. Secundly, fra paynis spiritual,
quhilk is to be ouircum in tentatioun, sayand: Et ne nos induca^ intentationem.
Leid us nocht into tentatioun. La^t of all we desire God to deliuir us fra
paynis temporal, sayand: Sed libera nos amalo. Bot deliuir us fra evil. Amen
Tha^ sa be it we pray the. Briefly, this prayar of our Lord is sa profound, sa
abundant, and sa plenteous in sentence, that their is na prayer maid be man,
quhidder it be writtin in the auld testament or the new, bot the soume and the
effect of that prayer is contenit and askit in ane of yir seuin petitiouns.
Quhairfor O christin man and weman say thy Pater noster to God often times,
distinctlie and deuoitly, and dout nocht bot quhen you sais yis prayer, in
effect you sais all good prayeris. Nochttheles all vthir prayers set out at mair
lenth to the same effect is co^mendabil and louabil, as declaratioun of the
same.



THE PRAYER OF OUR LORD IN LATYNE.
PATER Noster qui es in coelis, sanctifie^ tur nomen tuum. Adueni^t regnum tuu^
Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in coelo and i^ terra. Panem nostrum quotidianum, da
nobis hodie. Et dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus
debitoribus nostris. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem. Sed libera nos a malo.
Amen.

THE Same prayer of our LORD In Inglis.
OOVR Father, quhilk is in Heuinnis. Thy name mot be hallowit. Thy kingdom mot
cum. Thy will mot be done in erd, as it is in heuin. Give ws this day, our
daily breid. And forgyff ws our dettis, as we forgyfe our dettoures. And led
ws nocht in temptatioun. Bot deliver ws fra evil. Sa be it.

The third Cheptour.
Sen Christ has leirit vvs to call god fader we sulde pray to him with great
confidens.
PATER noster, qui es in coelis. O our Father quhilk is in heuin. We can nocht
O christin people comprehend in our mind, the great gudnes of God towart us,
quhilk hes leirit ws, in the beginning of our prayar to call God our Father
sayand: O our father God. This was nocht vsit to be done in time of the auld
testament, for co^monlie they leuit under the bondaige of the law as seruandis,
and sa durst nocht call God yair father bot Lord, quhilk is ane name of great
majesty and powar, bot he hes lerit ws to call God our father, quhilk is a
name of benevolence, mercy, gentylnes, and lufe. Gyff that haly Patriarche
Abraham, quhilk was callit ye friend of god, quhe^ he maid his prayar callit
god his LORD, Sayand: sall I speik to my Lord, Gen xv^
sen I am bot dust and a^se? Mekle mair, we durst neuir have callit God our
father, except that first he had lerit, and co^mandit ws to call him father,
quhairin he hais gyffin to ws great cause to put our haill confydence in him.
And to lyppi^ al good fra him. Quhow hes almychtie god, maid him self our
father? Trewlie, nocht be natural generatioun, for swa, only he is father to
our Saluiour Jesus Christ, bot he hes maid him self our father be adoptioun
throw faith in Christ Jesus, in time of our Baptyme, according as it is said:
Dedit eis potestatem filios dei fieri, his qui ^redunt in nomine eius. Ione. ^.
quhare is our deui^e to be done to god our father. Mala. 1.
He hes gyffin yame powar to be the so^nis of god, and this powar he hes gyffin
to them, quhilk beleuis in his name. And quhat is thy doctrine? Trewly first
to honor god to love and thank him euirmair for all his benefits.

Heir quhat he sayis be his Propheit Malachie: Si ego pater, vbi est honor
meus? Gyff I be our father, quhair is my honor? Secundly, Ephe. ^.
gyff thou be son of God follow him be Imitatioun of lufe, Rememberand quhat
S. Paul sayis ^ Be e ye followars of god, as deir sonnis, and gang ^^lufe as
Christ hais luffit ws.

Luc. 6. Math. 5.
Heir quhat our saluiour sais: Be e merciful as our heuinly father is mercyful.
Agane he sais: Be e perfect as our heuinly father is perfect. Quhilk
perfectioun standis in lufe, yat as god giffis ye lycht of his son to good and
evil, and his rain to just and unjust, sa should thou lufe both thy freindis
and thy sayis for goddis saik, and be yat lufe thou schawis thy self to be the
son of god. Thridly and thou be the son of god, thou aucht to him
obedience, according as sanct Paul sais: Multo magis obtemperabimus patri
spirituu^. Hebre. 12.
Gyf we are bound to be obedient to the co^mandis of our erdly and carnal
father, mekil mair aucht we to be obedient to ye co^mandis of our heuinly
father. Sen Christ hes leiryd us to say ^o god, O our father we sulde p^aye
to good, for our nychtbour as for our self.


Noster. Quhy sais thou Pater noster. Our father, carar than my father? Trewly
to give the to understand yat as thou art the son of god be adoptioun throw
faith, sa is all true christin men and women the barnis of god be faith, and
yairfor thou aucht to lufe them al with perfect l^fe and cheriti^ as brethrin
and sisters in god. Our heuinly doctor in this word giffis us instructioun of
unity, concord, and paice, and to pray to god for all christin pepil, kend and
unkind, friend or fre^mit* thy faa or enemyis, And to that effect he hes nocht
lei^it us to say, my father god that is in heuin. Bot to say our father God
that is in heuin, We say nocht give me this day my daily breid bot give us this
day our daily breid. We say nocht forgive me my dettis, bot forgive us our
dettis. We say nocht deliver me fra evil* bot deliver us f^a evil, to signify
that throw faith in Christ Jesus, we are all the so^nis of god, and yairfor the
ge^tilman should nocht dispyse ye ^ottar, ye richeman should nocht despise the pure
man, ye leirnit should nocht despise the vnleirnit, according as it is writtin:
Nunquid non pater vnus oim nostru^? nunquid no^ vnus deus creauit nos? Malach 2
quare ergo vnusquisque nostru^ despicit fratre^ suum? Have nocht we al ane
father? hes nocht ane god create and maid us al? quhi yairfor dispysis ilk a
man his brother? Luce. 18.
The prayar yat ye proud Pharisean maid was nocht acceptabil to god, because he
dispysit his nychtbour ye Publicane. Let us al yairfor ken our self to be
brether in god, and throw faith equally sonnis to him.

Qui es in coelis. Quhen you sais: Qui es in coelis. quhilk is in heuin,
understand nocht yat god is co^tenit and co^cludit in heuin as the angels ar.
For Solomon sais: 3 Reg 8. How god is in the heuins.
Que^ coeli coeloru^ no^ capiunt Quhom ye heuins of heuins is nocht abil to tak
and co^tene. Bot he is said to be in heuin, for als mekil yat with his almychty
powar, he contenis, he keipis, haldis up, and maintenis all the heuins and also
all vthir creaturis, quhilk ar contenit wtin the compass of heuin according as
S. Paul sais: Omnia in ipso constant. Collos. ^.
All creaturis in him hes their being. And sa this lord qui es in coelis may
nocht be trewly said, bot to god only, because yat God only as he hes maid
heuin and al thingis under heuin, sa he is only in all ye heuins, and with his
almychty powar conseruis and keipis them all in their being. Nothir should we
think that god is sa in heuin yat he is nocht in eird. For trewly god is in all
placis be his substance, be his presence and be his powar, according as he
sais: Iere. 23.
Nonne coelu^ and terra^ ego impleo? Fyl nocht I sais he both heuin and eird?
How god is in all placis and specially in heuin Math. 5. be manifestatioun of
his glore.
Bot it is said specially yat god is in heuin, for als mekil that in heuin he
is manifestit and schawis his godhed, his divine majesty, powar, glore, joy
and blis eternal, quhilk he hes promissit to give as reward to us al, and we
persevere in his faith and obedience, according as he sais: Merces vr^a multa
est in coelis* our reward is great in heuin. And this word should raise up our
hartis to god and make us stark in the hoip of eternal glore. For suppose our
natural father wald awance and promote us to hie dignity and richis, it he hes
na powar to do it. Bot our heuinly father almychty god, hes both will and powar
to exalt us to ye hie glore of heuin. Quhow can you understand yat he hes will
to do it? because he hes maid him self our father. Quhow can you ken that he hes
powar to do it? because he is in heuin ane glorious God, makar and kepar of ye
heuin and al creaturis under heuin. Now o christin man and woman I exhort the
to understand weil their first wordis of our Lordis orisoun, quhilk ar put lyk
ane prologe before the seuin petitiouns, declarand plainly yat na man can say
yis orisoun trewly to the pleisure of god and his awin merit except he have
faith, hoip and cheritie. without faith na man can say trewly, O father God.
without cheritie to our nychtbour na man can say, trewly and meritoriously our
father. And without hoip na man can say trewly, quhilk art in heuin* remitte
our synnis. The plain sentence of yir wordis in form of prayar.

O our father eternal god, quhilk hes maid us and all creaturis, bot us to thy
awin lyknes, and all ye laif of thy creaturis for us, and gave us ouerance of
al yat is in erd, wattir and air, and causis the heuins, the son, the moon
and the sternis to make us service, and hes geuin command to thy angels to keip
us, briefly defendis us fra all evil, and giffis us all good. Suppose we and our
forfathers, as may unthankful creaturis hes sauld our self be sin to the
devils tyranny, and yairfor be rycht aw to dreid yt as our terribil judge and
condemnar, nochttheles sen it is swa yat you of thy excellent and infinite
mercy, hes send thy son to deliver us fra the devils tyranny, deed and hell,
and be him his word, faith and baptyme, hes go^tin us agane and ma^d us thy
so^nis be adoptioun, and be him also hes biddin us call the father. We beseik
the yairfor, O merciful father, eternal god, be thy natural son Jesus Christ,
give to us thy haly spreit, to beir witness to our spreit yat we are thy so^nis
be adoptioun, be quho^ also we may call ye father with blythnes, and lippin suirly
on thy fatherly and merciful providence and help in all trubil. Give us grace
O eternal father yt we have euirmair brotherly lufe, and know us verraily for
brethir and sisters to help ane ane vthir, and to pray ane for ane vthir to the
our eternal father. Tak fra us all discord and singular lufe of our self, and
our awin profit, yat we may say verraily. O our father eternal god, quhilk is
in heuin, nocht inclusit in heuin, bot is in all placis be substance, presence
and powar, and be faith and grace dwellis in all just men and women, and in ye
heuin empire schawis yi eternal glore, joy and blys. Give us grace O father
eternal to have suir hoip to cum to that glore, and to be dwellars in heuin
with the euirmair. Amen.

The first petitioun of our Lordis orisoun. The iiii. Cheptour.
SAnctificetur nomen tuum. Hallowit be thy name. This is the first petitioun of
our Lordis prayer, quhairin we ask at God our eternal father, yt he may be
knawin, honourit and seruit be us and all the pepil of the world. Here is two
thingis to be declarit, quhat is the name of God, Quhat is the name of god.
and how should it be sanctifyit. The name of God in halye scripture, betakins
nocht this word God writtin or pronouncit, bot it signifeit God him self,
quhilk is namit be us, and also his almychty powar, wisdom, gudnes
rychteousnes, How the name of god should be sa^ctif^it
mercy, eternity and divine majesty. And the name of god to be sanctifyit or
hallowit is in this place as mekil to say as yt god him self mycht be knawin,
louit, honourit, glorifyit, magnifyit and trewly seruit with heart, word, and
deid, be us and al vthir men and women in the world. And yat e may the bettir
understand quhow ye name of god should be kennit and honourit, How the ^ame of
^od is filit ^o three ^ortis of ^en.
e fall note quhow the name of God be money men and women is miskennit and
dishonourit. And to declair ye same ye scripture vsis ane manner of speich,
saya^d that the name of god is fylit be money men, nocht sa yat ye name of god,
quhilk is euirmair haly and glorious in it self, and ye only cause of our
halynes may be filit in deid, bot ye money evil geuin men and women, als mekil
as lyis in yame, takis fra him (be their evil life) his glore, and giffis it to
his creaturis, As he sais be his Prophet Ezechiel: Non propter vos ego facia^
domus Israel, sed propter nomen sctm^ meu^ quod polluistis in ge^tibus, Ezechi.
30
ad quaintrastis. O house of Israel, sais almychty God, I will nocht saif ow
for our awin saik, bot for my halye name, quhilk e have fylit amang the
Ge^tillis, to quhom e have enterit. Sa eftir yis manner ye name of god is fylit
and dishonourit, Gentilli^.
first amang the Gentillis quhilk in auld time kennand him be his creaturis to
be a god of eternal, powar and majesty, wald nocht thank him, serve and
glorify him as God, bot vanissit away in their ymaginatiouns, gave the honor
and glore of God, to ye creaturis, worschipping men and ymagis of men, of
fowlis, Roma. i.
beistis and serpe^tis as goddis, and sa doing thai fylit and dishonourit the
name of god. Secundly, the Iewis to yis day fylis and dishonouris als mekil as
lyis in yame, Ievvis.
the glorious name of our saluiour Christ because nocht only thai ressaue nocht
his faith, bot thai blaspheme his name in their smagogis to their damnatioun.
Thridly, Evil christin men and women.
evil christin men and women two manner of wais dishonouris the name of god.
First be wanting of true faith and hoip in God, puttis mair confidence and
traist in their awin powar, in their frendis help, and sumtyme lippinis mair in
ye devil be socery and witchecraft, than yai lippin in the name of god.
Secundly, quhen we have ressauit the euangil of Christ amang us and ar callit
christin men, it our life is plain contrair to ye euangil of Christ, in sa
mekil, yat throw evil life ye name of Christ is evil spokin of amang ye Iewis
and Ge^tilis, as S. Paul sais to the Romany: Roma. 2.
Nomen dei per vos blasphematur inter gentes. The name of God be ow is
blasphemit amang ye gentiles. The common pepil vsis to esteem ane lord be his
serua^ds quhen yai see honest seruands, yai say yair lord is honest. And quhen
yai see dishonest seruands yai say yat the lord of yai seruands is nocht honest.
Lykwise, because yat the infidelis, turkis and Iewis seis the evil life and
vicious conuersatioun of christin men, thai blaspheme the halye name of our
saluiour and redemar Jesus Christ.

Now heir the sentence of this first petitioun to be said in form of prayar to
God.
O God almychty our eternal father, give us grace yat thy name quhilk is haly,
louit, and blissit in it self euirmair, and also be Angellis in heuin, mocht be
knawin, thankit and louit, amang us to quhom you hes geuin thy name to know and
to be callit thy sonnis, and eftir thy sonnis name christin men, grant us yat
our myndis, our wordis and workis, our techingis and life be conform to thy
godly will, expremit and schawin to us in thy so^nis euangil, yat men seand our
good conuersatioun may love thy name, yat workis all good in us. O father give yr
grace to Turkis, Sarracenis Paganis and Iewis, quhilk miskennis thy name and
giffis thy godly name to creaturis, and blasphemis thy sonnis blud, to laif
their error, yair ydolatrie and superstitioun, and to ken the for ane verray
eternal God, and quhom thou hes send Jesus Christ. Grant good father yat evil
christin men, quhilk dishonouris thy so^nis name be vicious life, may be
reformit in mind, word and deid, and leid yair life eftir his teching to ye
glore of yi name. Am^

The secund petitioun. The fifth Cheptour.
ADueniat regnum tuum. Let thy kingdom cum to. Behald O christin man, quhow
ordourly the secund petitioun followis the first. Like good barnis in the first
petitioun we ask at God our eternal father, yat his glorious name may be ^end
in all the world, louit and glorifyit be us and all vthir men and women,
Turkis, Iewis, and Christinit. Now in the secund petitioun we ask at god our
heuinly father, to bring us to his kingdom, euirmair to be with him
participant of his eternal and glorious heretage with Christ Jesus our saluior.
And for declaratioun of this petitioun, e sall understand that their is the
kingdom of the devil, and also the kingdom of God. And as for warldly
kingdoms, Of vvarldly kingdomis. Roma. 15.
gife thai be weil gydit be ordour of justice, thai pertene to the kingdom of
god, as sanct Paul declaris to the Romany. And gif thai be misordourit throw
wanting of justice and using of tyranny, yai pertene to the kingdom of the
devil. Quhat is the kingdom of the devil, bot empire and owrance quhilk the
devil hes in the hartis of vicious men and women, Of ye kingdom of the devil.
yat according to his will and command trasgressis the command of god, and
makis yame self seruands to syn willingly co^senting to his tentatiouns, drawin
to his service and haldin thairin be concupiscence of the flesche, the
concupiscence of the ee, and be pride of life. Of the deuillis kingdom speikis
sanct Paul to the Ephesianis, Ephe. ^.
sayand: Vos con uiuificauit, cu^ es^etis mortui delictis et peccatis vestris,
in quibus aliqua^do ambulastis, secundu^ seculu^ mundi huius, secundum
principem potestatis aeris huius spiritus, qui nunc operatur in filios
diffid^t^ae. God (sais sanct Paul) hes quicknit ow, quhen e were deed throw
trespass and synnis, How the devil is ye prince of the vvarld
quhairin in time bygane, e eid according to the course of this world, eftir ye
prince yat rewlis in yis aer quhilk is ane spreit that now workis in the
childer of unbelief. This is the devil quhom our saluiour callis the prince of
this world, Joan. 12.
that is to say, of all evil geuin pepil of the world. And yat haly man Job
callis him ye king of all proud men. Job. 41.
The kingdom of God in grace and rychteousnes. Roma. 14
Now let us speik of the kingdom of god, quhilk for our instruction may be
diuidit in ii. kingdoms, the ane is the kingdom of grace in this world, the
vthir is the kingdom of glore in the world to cum. Gyf e wald know quhat is
the kingdom of grace, sanct Paul descriuis it plainly, sayand thus: Regnum
dei est iustitia, et pax et gaudium in spiritu sa^cto. The kingdom of God is
rychteousnes, paice and joy in the haly spreit. For quhen a christin man is
iustifyit be ane leiffand faith, he leiffis in paice with God, and hes great
rest and tranquillity in his conscience, he hes great joy and blythnes, quhilk
the halye spreit workis in his heart, quhen he remembris that God almychty be
Christ Jesus hes deliuerit him fra the tyranny of the devil, the world and the
flesche. And as sanct Paul sais: Colloss. i.
Qui eripuit nos de potestate tenebrarum, et transtulit in regnu^ filii
dilectionis suae. He hes deliuerit us fra the powar of myrknes, and hes
translatit and brocht us into the kingdom of his luffit son, sa that we may
now say to our saluiour: Apoca. 5.
Fecisti nos deo nostro regnu^. Thou hes maid us ane kingdom to our God. For
doutles sa lang as we remain in grace, god regnis in to us as in to ane
spiritual kingdom, and we as his faithful pepil obeyis his co^mandis.

The secund kingdom of god is the eternal glore and euirlasting life, The
kingdom of God in glore and life eternal. Math. 25.
quhairof our saluior in his secund coming quhilk sal be upon dumis day, sall
give entrance and possessioun perpetually, quhen he sall say: Venite benedicti
patris mei, percipite regnum quod vobis paratum est ab origin mundi. Cum e
blissit seruandis of my father, possess the kingdom, quhilk is ordanit for ow
before the beginning of the world.

The sentence of this petitioun in form of prayer to be said to God.
O heuinly and may merciful father we beseik the that all unfaithful
natiouns, Turkis, Paganis and Iewis, quhilk throw infidelite ar subieckit to ye
kingdom of ye devil, may ressaue and keip the euangil of thy son Jesus
Christ, and be ane leiffand faith entir and bide in thy spiritual kingdom of
grace, maid with us thy so^nis, iustifyit, and fellowis in participatioun of
thy eternal heretage. Giant also O merciful father, yat al men and women,
quhilk erris agane ye true faith of haly kirk, and yairby is subieckit to ye
kingdom of ye devil, yat yai may laif yair da^nabil and condemnit hereseis, and
return agane to ye true catholic faith. Grant also that all temporal kingis
and maiestratis of christindome, quhilk throw yair tyranny oppressis and puttis
down thy kirk and destroyis yi pepil be unjust warris, and all vthir kingis,
quhem the devil haldis in his kingdom be pride, coueteousnes, and sensual lust
and pleasure, that yai may laif yair tyranny and vthir vicis, and be true
ministeris of justice under the king of all kingis and lord of all lordis, and
sa to pertene to thy spiritual kingdom of grace. Grant also yat thy kingdom
of grace may cum to us daily mair and mair, be true schawin of thy godly will
and thy sonnis euangil and rychteousnes of faith. Give us grace to perseueir in
thy loving, charity, and christin life, yat thy sonnis kingdom may spreid and
florische ouir all the world be rycht faith and christin work is quhil satan
and al thy sonnis fais be subieckit under his feit. Grant O merciful father,
yat thou may sa rigne in our hartis be grace, yat on the lattir day we may
stand on thy rycht hand in the number of yame, quho^ yat day you sal call to ye*
and give to us entera^ce and possessioun of thy glorious kingdom of heuin,
yair to rigne with the, quhilk is three personis and ane eternal god, in company
and fellowschip of thy haly angellis, in joy and blis withoutin end. Amen.

The third petitioun. The vi. Cheptour.
Fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo et in terra. Thy will be fulfillit in eird as
it is in heuin. The hie way to heuin is to fulfill the vvil of god schavvin
to us in his co^mandis
Eftir yat in the secund petitioun we ask at God our eternal father, yat his
kingdom of grace may cum to us in this world, and finally yat we may cum to
his eternal kingdom in heuin. Be rycht ordour followis the third petitioun,
quhairin we ask of god our eternal father, that his will be fulfillit be keeping
of his co^mandis. As a man that is far fra ane cietie and desyris to be in it,
he man entir in and gang in the hie gait yat leidis to yat cietie, sa it is of
us al, we are all far fra heuin and wald feign be yair. Quhat man we do, bot
entir and gang in ye hie gait yat leidis to heuin, quhilk is to do and fulfill
the will of god according as our saluiour sais: Non omnis qui dicit mihi dn^e,
Math. 7.
domine, intrabit in regnum celoru^, sed qui facit voluntatem patris mei qui in
coelis est, ipse intrabit in regnum coeloru^. Nocht ilk man yat sais to me
lord, lord, sal entir into the kingdom of heuin, bot he yat dois the will of my
father yat is in heuin, he sal entir in to the kingdom of heuin. And agane he
sais: Math. xi^
Si vis ad vitam ingredi, serua mandata. Gyf thou will entir in to the life,
keip the co^mandis. Thairfor be rycht ordour of this third petitioun, we ask at
God that in us and be us, his godly will be fulfillit be keeping of his
co^mandis, quhairby we may cum to the kingdom of heuin.

For the plain understanding of yis petitioun, e sall note, yat the will of
God towart us is to be considerit in two pointis, and we ask at God, that thai
may be fulfillit. First his will is yat all faithful and true serua^dis to
Jesus Christ sal cum to the kingdom of heuin, according as our saluiour sais:
He^ est volu^tas patris mei, Joan. 6.
qui misit me, vt oi^s qui videt filium, et credit in eum habeat vita^ eternam.
This is the will of my father quhilk send me, yat all man that seis the son
be faithful contemplatioun, and trowis in him with ane faith that workis be
lufe, he may have the life eternal. This will of god is completit and fulfillit
ellis in ye angellis and sanctis in heuin, quhilk leiffis in ye glore of God,
haiff and his cleir sycht and eternal fruitioun. Thairfor we ask at God, that
as his will is co^pletit and fulfillit ellis in yame yat ar blissit in heuin,
sa it moucht be fulfillit also in us that are dwelland upon the erd.

Secundly, the will of God is, that we keip his commandis, Roma. 12.
as S. Paul declaris, sayand: Renouamini in nouitate sensus vestri, vt
probetis quae sit voluntas dei bona et beneplacens et perfecta. Be e chaungit
throw ye renewing of our mind, yat e may preife quhat is yat good, that plesand,
and perfect will of God. It is the vvil of god yat all man keip his co^mandis
Trewly the will of god is good, because he commandis na thing bot it is
profitabil to the keiparis, his will is plesand, because his commandis ar
pleasant to all men and women yat luffis him, his will is also perfect, because
yat all our perfectioun standis in keiping of his co^mandis. This will is
fulfillit be all good men and women, iustifyit be leiffand faith in Christ Jesus,
in quhom is the true lufe of god ettit in their hartis be the haly spreit. And
the same will and command is nocht fulfillit in synnaris that leiffis in dedly
sin. Now in the scripture just men ar comparit to ye heuin, and synnaris to
the eird. Quhairfor we ask at God in this petitioun that his will and commandis
may be fulfillit in synnaris as it is fulfillit in just men.

The sentence of this petitioun to be said in form of prayar to God is this.
O merciful father and mychty king, quhais will the angellis of heuin fulfillis
all time willingly, luffingly and perfitly, to quhais will na creature can
resist, we know yat our heart is ouir evil in deid, or ellis inclinit to evil at
all times, to fulfill the awin lust, to desire owrance, vengeance, the awin
profit and pleasure, without feir and dredour of the, and plainly do all
thingis contrary thy word and godly will. The devil labouris always to gar us
breik thy commandes to mistraist the, blaspheme the, thy sonnis name and blud,
and traist in him, his kingdom, pride, superstitioun, ypocrisie and ydolatry.
He rasis ye world, that is to say, evil men to despise, hait, persew and
troubil all thy seruandis, willing to observe and keip thy co^mandis. Quhairfor
we beseik y^, O merciful father, let us nocht follow our awin will or be
dissauit with the devil, bot give us will and lufe of thy law, to be good be yi
spreit, to fulfill thy godly will in prosperity and adversity, to take
patiently for the glore of thy name, al troubil in geir or body, e painful
deed, ^arar than we wilfully breik thy command. Grant us yat we may with the
angels of heuin be obedient to thy will, perfitely, luffingly and constantly,
give thy grace to synnaris, that thai may fulfill thy will, as good men dois.
Gyde us al in body and saul, to be euirmair obedient to thy godly will, and
thank the of all, quhat euir thou will have done with us, sa yat finally we may
obtene the life eternal, quhilk thy will is to be geuin to al ye true feruandis
of thy son Jesus Christ. Amen.

The fourt petitioun. The vii. Cheptour.
We should ask at god our daily fude both for body and saul.
PAnem nr^m quotidianu^ da nobis hodie. Give us yis day our daily breid. In the
three first petitions, we a^k at god our eternal father, all thai spiritual
thingis, quhilk belangis to the perfect and eternal blis of heuin, quhilk
suppose yai ar begone in this life, it yai ar alanerly completit and fulfillit
in the kingdom of heuin, quhair the name of God is perfitly sanctifyit and
hallowit, that is, kend perfitely to be haly, louit, honourit, and glorifyit,
quhair the kingdom of glore promissit be Christ is perfitely geuin to the
angels and sanctis of heuin, quhair the will of God is perfitely co^pletit and
fulfillit. Bot because that we are all (that dwellis in yis kirk militant)
carnal in sum part, and vettai fragil and mortal creaturis, we have great neid
to be sustenit with the fude both of body and saul. Quhilk sustentatioun we ask
at God in yis fourt petitioun, sayand: Panem nostrum quotidianu^ da nobis
hodie. O eternal father, give us this day our daily breid. And in their wordis
our saluiour teichis us to keip us fra four great synnis, We may lauchfully
desire of God our necessary sustentatioun. i. Timo. 6
quhilk warldly men and weme^ vsis to have in getting of their corporal
sustentatioun. First we should nocht desire ouir costly, delicait and precious
meat, drink and claith, bot we should be content with sufficient and nece^sare
sustentatioun according to our estait, degree and vocatioun, according as sanct
Paul cou^salis sayand: Habentes alimenta and quibus tegamur his contenti
simus. Haiff and fude and cleithing, let us yair with be content. And yat we
ask in yis word breid, quhairby is signifyit all thingis yat belangis to the
necessare sustentatioun of this corporal life. Secundly, we should nocht desire
our corporal sustentatioun to be gottin be wrangus wayis, as be falset, theft,
spoil, or any iniureis done to our nychtbour, bot we should win our leuing
with our awin just and honest labouris, with lawtye, verity, and lufe kepit to
our nychtbour. And this we ask at God in this word nostrum, sayand: our breid,
nocht vthir mennis breid, nocht vthir mennis geir, bot to leif of our awin geir
justly gottin.

Thridly we should nocht have any superfluous desire, thocht or care of our
temporal leuing for ye time ^o cum, bot to be content with sic thingis that God
sendis to us at the present time. And that we ask ^t god in this word,
quotidianum, and in yis word Hodie, sayand: gife us this day our daily breid.
Fourtly, Suppose we labor for our leuing, it we should arovv that it is giffin
to us be ye liberal hand of god.
we should nocht think yat our meit, drink claith with vthir warldly geir, is
win and gottin allanerly with our awin industri, ingyne and labouris, bot we
should trow fermely that all is geuin to us be the liberal hand of god, quhilk
feidis man and beist and every creature. And this faith we are techit to have in
yis word: Da. sayand to god our eternal father: Give thou to us our daily
sustentatioun. The secund fude quhilk we should ask daily at God is spiritual,
for the sustentatioun of our saul in a spiritual life. And their is two sortis
of this spiritual fude. The ane is the blissit sacrament of the Altar, The
fude of our saul is the sacrament of the altar and also the word of God
quhilk we should ask at God.
quhilk is daily consecrate in the kirk of God, quhairin is really the verrai
body and blud of our saluiour Jesus Christ. Thairfor we should ask it at god, yat
daily we may ressaue his precious body be ane true and leiffand faith, for the
spiritual fude of our saulis. And quhen we sal ressaue yat blissit sacrament,
yat we nocht ressaue it unworthily to our damnatioun, bot worthily to our
saluatioun. The secund spiritual fude is the word of God, according as our
saluiour sais: Non in ^olo pane viuit homo, Math. 4.
sed in omni verbo quod procedit de ore dei Nocht only with corporal fude the
life of man is sustenit, bot with all wordis that procedis fra the mouth of God.

Than say to God this petitioun in form of prayar eftir this manner.
O merciful father almychty God, suppose thou knawis quhat we mister or euir
we oppin our mouth to ask the, and forbad us to be careful for meit and claith,
sayand that all necessare thingis sall be geuin to us, Math. ^
sa yat we seik first ye kingdom of God, and the rychteousnes of it,
nochttheles, eftir thy awin bidding we dare ask now our daily breid, quhilk is
necessare to our corporal sustentatioun. Beseikand the also to feid our saulis
with the cleyne word that cu^mis forth of thy mouth, the true word of god. Joan.
Give us the breid yat cu^mis forth of heuin and giffis life to the world. Give
us the wattir of life, Joan. 4.
the understanding of ye law be thy spreit, of ye quhilk quha drinkis sall
neuir be thristye. Give us the body of our saluiour Christ, the rycht fude of
our saul, to strenth our spreit aganis the feind, that we see neuir eternal
deed, bot pas with our saluiour Jesus (according to his promis) fra deed to
life. Amen.

The fifth petitioun. The viii. Cheptour.
ET dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris.
And forgive us our ^ettis, Be our dettis is signifyit our synnis Luce. xi.
euin as we forgive to our dettouris. This word dettis in this petitioun is
takin for synnis, as it is manifest be the evangelist sanct Luke rehersand the
same petitioun thus: Et dimitte nobis debita nostra, si quidam et ipsi
dimittimus omni debenti nobis. And forgive us our synnis, gif we also forgive
all that are dettouris to us. And quhi ar synnis comparit to dettis? As a man
quhilk is oblissit to pay any debt to his nychtbour, be ordour of justice he
should pay it, sa a synnar bund with the band of syn, be ordour of gods justice,
is oblissit to thole pain for his syn. Thairfor our saluiour in this petitioun
co^mandis us nocht to forgive alwais to our nychtbor his temporal dettis, for
yat war agane ye ordour of justice, necessare to be kepit for ye common weil,
quhilk ordour of justice is nocht takin away be the euangel, bot carar ratifytt
and confirmit manifestly. Now in their three last petitiouns, we ask at God our
heuinly father, to deliuir us fra all evil, eternal, spiritual and temporal.
And in the wordis of this petitioun we have two lessonis geuin to us be our
saluiour Christ. First we should leir alwais to be lowly and meik in our hartis,
i. Joan. i.
considerand yat we are al synnaris in the sycht of god. For as sanct Ihone
sais: Gyf we say that we have na sin we begyle our self, and their is na
verite in us. Quhairto aggreis Solomon in his Prouerbis: Prou. 20.
Quis potest dicere, mu^dum est cor meum, et purus sum a peccato? Quha may say
(sais he) my heart is fair, and I am cleine fra sin? Ecclesi. 7
And agane he sais: Non est homo i^ terra qui no^ peccet. Their is na man bot
he synnis. Also in ane vthir place: Prou. 24.
Septies in die cadet iustus, et resurget. Ane just man sal fall seuin times in
a day and rise agane. And suppose we may be ye grace of god abstene fra al
mortal and dedly sin, according as sanct Paul techis to the Romany, sayand:
Roma. 8.
Nihil damnationis est iis qui sunt in Christo Jesus, qui no^ secundum carnem
ambulant. Their is na damnato yame yat ar in Christ Jesus, quhilk gangis nocht
eftir the flesche. it sa lang as we leif in this pre^e^t world, we are sa fragil
and brukil, be resone of carnal concupiscence, remanand in our corrupit nature,
yat we can nocht abstene fra all and syndry venial synnis, sa that we have great
neid to say with ye haly prophet and king David in the Psalm: Psalm. 14^
Non intres in iudi tium cum seruo tuo domine, quia non iustificabitur in
conspectu tuo ois viuens. O Lord (sais he) entir nocht in to judgment with thy
seruand, for all man leiffand sal nocht be iustifyit in thy sicht, unless he
have thy special grace. Thus be consideratioun of our awin infirmite and
fragilite to sin, we should meik our self in the sycht of God, kennand that as
sanct Petir and sanct James sais: Deus superbis resistit, i. Petri. ^. Iaco. 4.
humilibus aute^ dat gratia^. God will resist the proud man, and give his grace
to the meik. We should thairfor with ane humil and lawly heart ask at God our
eternal father remissioun of all our synnis, and als of all paynis, quhilk
justly we deserve to have for our synnis, sayand: Dimitte nobis debita nr^a.
Forgive us our dettis, that is to say, our synnis.

Seundly we should leir in this petitioun, that the forgiffing of vthir men's
offensis done to us, is ane cause and mean, to abtene remissioun of our
synnis, according to the wordis of our saluiour Christ: Dimittite et
dimittemini. Luce. 6. Math. 6.
Forgive and e sall be forgeuin: Si enim dimiseritis hominibus peccata eorum,
dimittet et vobis pater vester coelestis peccata vestra. Si autem no^
dimiseritis hominibus, nec pater vester dimittet vobis peccata vestra. And e
forgive to men their offensis and synnis, than sal our heuinly father forgive
to ow our offe^sis and synnis. And gif e forgive them nocht their trespass, na
mair sall our father forgive to ow our trespassis. Gyf we keip this conditioun
or pactioun giffin of God with our heart, forgiffand to our nychtbour all his
offensis and faltis, then God will forgive us. Than say to god thy heuinly
father on this manner.

O heuinly and merciful father we considderand our awin infirmity, fragilitie
and inclinatioun to sin, quhairby we fall in sin daily, we beseik the to
forgive us al our synnis and al pains that we have deseruit for our synnis.
Give strenth to our spreit that we may fermely trow, that thou, O heuinly
father, hes forgiffin to us all our synnis freely, for thy sonnis blude. And
that the takin, quhilk thy son hes geuin to us of free forgeuenes, may
comfort our myndis, give us grace to ouircum our awin wickit and reuengeabil
heart, to forgive our ennemyis with our heart, lufe yame, pray for yame, do good
to yame, yat sa doand we may obtene at thy merciful hand forgeuenes of all our
synnis, for the meritis of thy son our saluiour Jesus Christ.

Amen.

The sext petitioun. The ix. Cheptour.
ET ne nos inducas in tentationem. Leid us nocht into temptation.

As in the fifth petitioun we ask at god our eternal father remissioun of all
our synnis bygane, sa in this sext petitioun we ask at him his grace, quhairby
we may be keipit fra falling in sin, in time to cum. And for ye true
intelligence of this petitioun, two thingis ar to be notit, first quhat is
temptatioun, secundly quhat is it to be led in to te^ptatioun. For ye first e
sal understand yat in haly scripture, Quhat is tentation.
yis word tempt, is als mekil to say, as to tak experience or preif of any
thing. And sa is yair ane te^ptatioun quhairby ane man tempis god, quhilk is
always sin. And quha tempis God? Their is temtation quhairby man te^pis god,
and that is alvvais evil. Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 4.
Trewly yai yat but any necessite seikis experience of the special providence
and powar of god to help them, quhen thai may be helpit vthirwais lauchfully,
be the meanis of man other of them self or of vtheris. And sa to tempe God is
forbiddin, quhen it is said: Non tentabis dominum deum tuum. Thou sall nocht
tempe thy Lord God. Quhilk wordis our saluiour allegit aganis the devil, quhen
the devil tempit him upon the pynnacle of ye tempil, and bad him fall down or
cast him self down, sayand that thairby he could get na skaith, because that
God had commandit his Angels to wait upon our saluiour and keip him fra al
skaith. Bot our saluiour wald nocht do his wickit cou^sale, because he mycht
cum down vthirwayis, than to fall down and sa tempe god. Sa christin pepil in
all our besynes, dangearis and perrellis, we should do our deuoir and diligence,
to help our self be that wit and strenth yat God hes geuin us, and quhen our
wit and powar can nocht help us, commit our cause to the providence of god and
wait upon his help. Secundly, their is temptation, Thait is temtation quhairby
god te^pis man, and that is alvvais good.
quhairby god almychty te^pis man, quhilk is alwais good and profitabil to man.
And quha ar thai quhom god tempis? veraily yai, to quho^ God sendis any kind of
troubil and adversity, nocht for their subuersioun or destructioun, bot for
their probatioun and manifestatioun, that be patience and constant obedience,
yai may be kend, both to yame self and to vtheris in the world, yat yai ar
faithful serua^dis to God, sa was Abraham Job and Tobias, with money vthir,
tempit of god and knawin to be Gods seruandis. For as the wisman sais: Eccle.
17.
Vasa figuli probat fornax, homines autem iustos tentatio tribulationis. As the
fyire preiffis and schawis the laymevessellis maid be ane pottar, sa
temptatioun of troubil preiffis and schawis just men. For quha in time of
troubil, bydis steadfastly in patience and true lufe of god and yair nychtbour,
yai ar preiffit and schawin to be gods seruandis. Thridly, their is temptatioun
quhairby the devil, the flesch, and the world tempis man and woman, quhilk is
alwayis inductioun, steiring and prouocatioun to vice and syn. The devil tempis
man to elatioun, pride, presumptioun, ire, wraith, infidelite, heresye,
desperatioun and siclyk, gangand about like ane rampand Lion sekand quhom he
may deuoire or swallye, i, Petri. 5.
be consent giffing to his te^ptatiouns. The flesche also te^pis a man to
ydilnes, sweirnes, gluttonye and lycherye, and siclyk synnis of the body. The
world, that is to say, the evil giffin pepil of the world, tempis a man to
coueteousnes and sa forth. The devil is sa stark yat na powar upon erd may be
comparit to him, the flesche is sa familiar with us yat it is part of our
nature, quhilk of necessite we mon nurische and feid, and it is ane ald
proverb: Their is na thing war than is a familiar ennymy. Ye world co^passis
us round about, before us, and behind us, and of ilk side, giffis to us evil
counsale, both in wordis and evil exempil, and troubillis us with persecutioun
to bring us fra the service of God, to quhais temptatiouns gif we consent with
ane deliuerit mind and freewill, to breik the command of god we sin dedely
and sa incurris our awin damnatioun, according as it is writtin: Ezechi. 18
Anima, que peccauerit, ipsa morietur. The saul yat synnis, ye same sal dee,
be tholing eternal pain. And as sanct Paul sais to the Romany: Roma. 6
Stipendia peccati mors. The waige of sin, is deed eternal. We should thairfor
remembir the great powar, subtilte, craft and malice of the devil, quhilk
ofttymes vsis the flesche and the world, as his instrumentis of temptatioun
aganis us, to dissaue us, to bring us to sin and finally to the paynis of
her. O^ the vthir part we should remember our awin imperfectioun, infirmity and
weiknes, how of our awin powar and strenth we are vnabil to resist him. We should
yairfor ask at god our eternal father, to give us his grace, quhairby we may
keip us fra consenting to their temptatiouns, for and we consent nocht, we
resist yame, gif we resist them, we ouircum yame, and gif we ouircum yame we
sal be crownit with the crown of glore in the kingdom of heuin.

Quhat is it to be led in to te^tatioun.
The secund word heir to be notit, is led in to temptatioun, quhilk signifyis to
be ouircu^mi^ be te^ptatioun, and fall actually in to temptatioun. For to be
tempit it is na sin, e temptatioun man be had and tholit sumtyme, to make us
ken our awin infirmite, and keip us in meiknes and grace, and als to give us
occasioun of spiritual battle, quhairin we fychtand lawfully as true knychtis
of Christ Jesus, may finally be crowni^ in heuin. Bot it is evil to be
ouircu^mit in temptatioun, yat is, to consent to the evil temptation* quhilk is
alwais damnabil.

Now O christin man thou may pray this petitioun to God in this manner.
Sen swa it is O merciful father, that all our life upon eird is ane continual
battle, and that with sic ennemyis, yat we can nocht eschaip yair temptatioun,
give us grace to refrain our hartis fra consenting to yair temptatioun: give
us grace sa to nurische our flesch yat we nurisch nocht alswa the synf^l lust
and concupiscence of the flesche. Give us grace sa to leif in c^mpany of
warldly pepil, yat we be nocht drawin to evil be yair evil cou^sale and exempil
or persecutioun Give us grace, strenth and powar sa be faith to resist the
powar of ye devil, yat we be nocht ouircu^mit be his subtle prouocations. Laif
us nocht to our awin febilnes, another give him leif to exerce upon us his
crewelnes, bot give us spiritual strenth to stand stoutly aganis him. Ephe. ^.
Belt our loyneis with verite, Put upon us the breast plait of rychteousnes. Let
the fete of our mind (quhilk ar our affectiouns) be schod with the euangil of
paice. Abone al thingis give us grace to tak hald of the bucklar of faith,
quhair with we may slokkin the fyiry dartis of the wickit spreit. Put on our
head the helmonte of saluatioun. Let us alwais bear in our hand ye sword of
the spreit quhilk, is thy haly word, that with this spiritual harnes, armor
and weapons, we may easily ouircum all our spiritual ennemyis. And finally
obtene the croune of glore, quhilk thou hes preparit and promissit to all thy
seruandis. Amen.

The seuint petitioun. The x. Cheptour.
SEd liberanos a malo. Amen. Bot deliuir us fra evil. Amen. e hard, O christin
pepil, quhow we ask at God our eternal father, remissioun of our synnis bygane,
and also that we may be his grace eschaip the dangear of all temptatiouns, and
sa fall nocht agane to dedely sin. Now last of all we ask at God our
merciful father to deliver us fra evil. And this is ane general petitioun
aganis all evil eternal, spiritual, and corporal or temporal, bot because yat
we have schawin to ow before of sin, and the paynis eternal yat followis
sin. Now we think it expedient to speik of temporal evil, quhilk is
tribulatioun, afflictioun and aduersite of this world. How god deliueris his
seruandis fra temporal trubil three manner of vvayis.
It is thairfor to be notit, that almychty God deliueris his seruandis and
barnis be adoptioun fra troubil and aduersite of yis present world three manner
of wayis. First quhen he preseruis and kepis a man fra great troubil and
aduersite, doand lyk ane wise medicinar, quhilk giffis nocht a stark medicyne
to a waik man, bot consideris the strenth of the seik man, and thaireftir
giffis to him ane medicyne. Sa almychty God sumtyme preseruis and kepis his
waik seruandis fra great troubil, because their powar of spiritual resistance is
bot litill. Sa it was said to ane certane bischop in the buke of the Apocalips:
Apoca. 3.
Ecce dedi cora^ te ostium apertum, quod nemo potest claudere, quia modicam
habes virtute^ Behald I have geuin before the ane oppin dure* quhilk na man can
clois, because that thou hes bot small strenth. Secundly, quhen God sendis to
his seruandis great troubil and aduersite, and with yat he giffis yame great
grace of patience throw spiritual consolatioun, quhilk thai consaue be the haly
spreit, in sa mekil yat yai ar blithe of troubil and gloris in ye same,
according as s. Paul sais of him self and sic lyk as he was: 2. Cor 1.
Supra modu^ grauati sumus supra virtutem nostra^. Abone mesure we are troublit,
abone our awin powar. That is to say, nocht abil to resist yat troubil with our
awin powar. Nochttheles he sais agane in ane vthir place. 2. Cor. 7.
Sed qui consolatur humiles co^solatus est nos deus. Bot god quhilk co^fortis
all meik and lawly men, hes geuin co^solatioun to us. Likewise the Prophet sais
in ye Psalm: Psalm. 93.
Secundum multitudine^ doloru^ meoru^ in cord meo co^solationes tue
laetificauerunt ai^am mea^ According to ye dolor and troubil yat was in my
heart, thy consolatiouns hes maid my saul blyth. Thridly, quhen God sendis great
troubil, he prouidis sa, that the troubil enduris and lestis bot schort time,
Tobi. 3.
according as it is writtin: Post tempestatem tranquillu^ facis. O good lord,
eftir a storm, you sendis fair weddir. Thus O christin pepil we should nocht
feir the troubils of this present world, ke^nand yat god will give to his
seruandis spiritual consolatioun in them, and also make them schorte as he
thinkis to us expedient. And trewly all the afflictiouns and troubils of this
world, i. Cor. 10.
is verai schort gif yai be co^parit to ye great blythnes and eternal joy,
quhilk salbe geuin to yame ye tholis trubil pacie^tly heir in yis world for
gods saik. Here quhat S. Paul sais: Id quod in presenti est momentaneu^ et
leave tribulationis nr^e, supra modu^ in sublimitate, aeternu^ gloriae po^dus
operatur in nobis. ^. Cor. 4.
The troubil yat we thole in yis present time gif it be co^parit to ye world to
cu^, it lestis bot a moment of ane hour, and is lycht and easy throw the
consolation of God, Attour it workis ane exceeding and ane eternal wecht of
glore in us.

The prayer to be said to God contenit in this petitioun.
O mychty and merciful father god eternal, quhilk correckis and chastise them
quhom thou luffis, and scurgis with temporal adversity all thai sonnis, Hebre.
xii
quho^ thou ressauis to thy favor, thou forgiffis them their synnis in time
of their troubil. Tobi. iii.
Thou will often times wound them and cuir yair woundis agane, thy hand strikis
them and heilis them agane. Give us grace good Lord, Job. v.
that we neglect nocht thy discipline and fatherly correctioun, bot quhen it is
thy godly will to send us temporal aduersite, we beseik the give us also
spiritual consolatioun and confort in them, throw hoip of the eternal joy and
glore to cum, And nocht according to our sensual will, bot according to thy
godly will, deliuir us fra all dangears and perrellis of fire and wattir, of
fyirflauchtis and thundir, of hu^gar and derth, seditioun and battle of pleyis
and cu^mar, seiknes and pestilence, prisone and banissing, vnprouidit and
suddane deed, and vthir aduersiteis, calamiteis, and troubils of this present
world, sa that be them we be nocht ouircu^mit in our mind be vnpacience,
murmr or any vthir sin contrary to thy godly will. And quhen it pleisis the
to send any of them to us for our probatioun and just correctioun, give us
also patience, conforte and consolatioun, that we may be in this world sa
correckit and punissit with thy merciful hand, yat we may eschaip the paynis
eternal. Amen. Sa be it.

The preface to the salutatioun of the Angel Gabriel.
AS e have hard ane brief expositioun of the prayer of our Lord, callit the
Pater noster, sa we think it expedient for our instructioun and spiritual
edificatioun, to set forth to ow ane plain declaratioun of that heuinly
salutatioun, quhilk the haly Angel Gabriel (send fra ye blissit Trinite)
proponit reverently to the glorious lady ye virgin Marie, quhen he come to
schaw to her ye blissit incarnatioun of the son of god. And this we aucht to
do for sindry convenient causis. First to keip ye lawdabil custom of haly
kirk, quhilk commonly vsis to say ye same salutatioun eftir and with the Pater
noster. Attour our mother the haly kirk hes had ane use sen ye Apostillis
hitherto, to propone till all oung scholaris and leirnaris of Christis
religioun, certane principallis and general documentis, for yair necessary
instructioun in the doctrine of our saluiour Christ, amang the quhilk the same
heuinly salutatioun was geuin to be leirnit and to be said with the Pater
noster. ^

Secundly, because the same salutatioun should be comptit ane of the special
prayars yat a christin man and woman aucht to say, for suppose yair is nocht in
it any special petitioun expremit it quhen it is said distinctly, reverently,
and deuoitly it steris up our myndis in the faith of the blissit incarnatioun
of Christ, it meuis us to contemplation and remembrance of the great benefitis
of God, and specially that he hes geuin him self to us, it warnis us to loif
God and thank him for ye same blissit incarnatioun, it garris us understand the
excellent dignite of the virgin Marie, quhilk was chosin to be the mother of
God, it causis us to honor God in her, and also her in god, it meuis ye
glorious virgin to make intercessioun to her son for us, and finally God
almychty seand our meiknes, our faith, our co^templatioun, our loving and
thankis giving, our intercessioun to his mother, will have mercy upon us. And
quhen this salutatioun is said on this manner, it is ane of the four kindis of
prayeris, quhilk sanct Paul techis to be said in the kirk, writand to Timothe:
i. Timo. 2
Obsecro igitur primu^ omnium fieri obsecrationes, orationes, postulationes,
gratiaru^ actiones pro omnibus hominibus. etc. I beseik ow yairfor, first of
all ye yair be maid in the kirk of God for all men, obsecratiouns, oresonis,
petitiouns, and giffing of tha^kis. Obsecratioun is supplicatioun maid to god
with the rehersing of sum property of God or of sum mystery of our saluiour, as
quhen we say, Lord for the glore of thy name have mercy on us, for thy blissit
incarnatioun, bittir passioun, mychty resurrectioun, glorious asce^sioun and
siclyk. Orisone is eleuatioun of our myndis to God, co^te^plation of his divine
majesty and remembrance of his benefitis. Petitioun is quhen we ask at God any
thing to us necessare. Giving of tha^kis, is to loif god, to tha^k him,
maignifie and glorify him, with all our powar. Now, gif thou speir at me, may
the salutatioun of Gabriel be callit a prayar? e trewly, it is a oresone and
giffing of thankis, quhilk ar two kindis of prayaris eftir sanct Paul. i.
Timo. 2.


The third cause quhy we will declare this salutatioun to ow and exhort ow to
say it deuoitly, is to schaw our gratitude in doing of our duty to the
virgin Marie. Thou seis be experience, yat quhe^ ane king or prince sendis be
ane honest gentilman any presand of meit, or any precious gift be ane of his
awin seruandis the gentilman yat ressauis this gift, will tak it blythly,
reward yat seruand honestly, and both for the lufe of the king that send the
gift, and for the lufe of the preciousnes of the gift, he will give honor and
reverence to the messingir yat beris the gift. Sa it is in this case, the king
of heuin hes send to us ane excellent present and precious gift, quhen he send
his son to be incarnat for us, the messingeir, quhilk hes deliuerit this gift
to us, is the glorious virgin Marie, quhilk now is in the glore of heuin, and
misteris nane of our rewardis. Quhat is than our dewtie, be quhilk we are bund
to schaw our gratitude, bot to love the virgin Marie honor her, thank her,
that scho hes brocht to us sa precious a presand and sa nobil a gift, quhilk we
do, quhen we say to her deuoitly and reverently: Aue Maria, gr^a plena, dominus
tecum. etc. Thairfor s. Augustine sais: We are all dettouris to ye blissit
virgin nixt eftir Christ to give to her thankis, because yat scho hes consauit,
borne and nurissit our saluiour, and lyk a diligent mother had cure of him,

The fourt cause, is to fulfill the ordinatioun of God, quhilk is schawin to us
be the prophecy tha^ the glorious virgin speikis in her Ca^tikil, sayand: Ex
hoc beatam me dicent omnes generationes. Fra this time all generatiouns sall
call me blissit. Luce. i.
Quhow can this prophecye of the ordinatioun of God be fulfillit, bettir than
quhen we say to her deuoitly, Aue Maria. etc? And suppose, Turkis, Iowis,
heretikis, and falls christin men and women, will nocht love the virgin Marie,
and sa fulfill this prophecye, it all true faithful and deuoit christin men
and women will loif and honor her, sayand with the Angel: Inuenisti gratiam
apud deum. O glorious lady thou hes found grace and favor at God, and also
Elizabeth the mother of sanct Iohne the Baptist said: Beata que credidisti.
Happy art you O glorious virgin, quhilk hes geuin credit to the messinger of
God. Sa O christin man I exhort the, leir to understand trewly the same
salutatioun, and to say it deuoitly to the glorious virgin, beseikand almychty
God, that quhair he hes giffin sa great abundance and fulness of grace to her,
that he wald be her intercessioun, give to the a drope of grace, quhairby thou
may be saiffit and cum finally to the kingdom of heuin.

The salutatioun of the Angel Gabriel callit the Aue Maria.
HAil Marie full of grace, our lord is with ye, blissit art you amang women, and
blissit is the fruit of thy wambe. The first word of this salutatioun is, Aue,
als mekil to say in our mother tongue as hail, be joyful and blyth. And trewly
this word may weil be said to the glorious virgin Marie, hail, be joyful and
blyth, because yat scho had and hes great cause of joy and blythnes. The first
woman Eua had great cause of displesour, sorrow and sadness, for scho tynt the
favor and grace of god, he sayand to her: Multiplicabo erumnas tuas. Gene.
I sall multiply thy sorrowis and displesouris. Scho was ouircu^mit with the
devil, quhen scho consentit to his temptatioun, scho was ordanit eftir ye fall
of Adam, to bring forth her barnis with dolor and pain, God sayand to her:
Gene. ^
In dolor paries filios tuos. Thou sal beir thy barnis with dolor and pain,
bot be the contrare manner, the glorious virgin had great matir of joy and
blythnes, for scho fand great grace and had great favor of God, the Angel sayand
to her: Luce i.
Inuenisti gr^am apud deum. Thou hes found grace and favor with God. Secundly,
scho ouircom the devil be faith and obedience, quhen scho said: Luce.
Ecce ancilla dn^i, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum. Behald the boundmaidin of
our Lord, be it to me as thou hes said. Thridly scho buir her son Jesus
Christ with great blythnes and joy, for als mekil as scho buir him with sic ane
preuelege of grace as was neuir geuin to woman, bot to her allanerly. For in
time of her birth scho was both mother and virgin, quhairfor the kirk of God
syngis to her loving: In prole matter, in partu virgo, gaude et letare virgo
matter dn^i. In thy son you art ane mother, in thy birth thou art ane virgin, be
joyful and blyth O virgin and mother of our lord God. Suthly this salutatioun
is weil begune with this word, Aue, to signify that the murning, sorrow,
sadness, and displesour, quhilk is cu^min upon mankind be that unhappy woman
Eua, is turnit to plesour, joy and blythnes, be this glorious and happy virgin
the mother of God.

Heir e may repeit ye vvordis vvrittin in the third artikil of the Creed in the
expositioun of this word Maria.
Maria. The haly doctor Bid sais, that this word, Maria, be interpretatioun
is als mekil to say as stella maris, vel domina, the stern of the sea, or ane
lady, quhilk name agreis weil to the glorious virgin, for als mekil as ye til
us quhilk ar flowand and troublit in ye seis of yis present world, scho hes
borne the true and may excellent stern of lycht and lord of all this world,
be reasone quhairof scho may weil be callit the stern of the sea and glorious
lady.

Gratia plena. Full of grace. For the declaratioun of this word, it is to be
notit, that the special grace of god workis in ye saul of man two effectis. It
expellis and puttis away sin, and also it decoris the saul with money
vertewis. And trewly concerning both their effectis of grace, we may weil say
that the glorious virgin is full of grace. Of the first spekis sanct Augustine
on this manner: Aug. libro de natura et gratia. cap. 36. i. Joan. i.
Except the haly virgin Marie, gif al sanctis men and women quhen thai leuit
heir in this world, had bein sperit gif thai had bein without sin, yai wald all
with ane voice have cryit, sayand their wordis of sanct Iohne: Gif we say yat we
have na sin, we begyle our self and yair is na verite in us, except (I say)
ye haly virgin, of quhom for the honor of our lord, quhen we speik of sin,
utterly I will have na mentioun. For we know that to her was geuin mair grace
to ouircum sin of ilk a part, because scho was maid worthi to consaue and
beir him, quhilk without dout had neuir sin. In their wordis quhilk sanct
Augustine sais, to ouircum syn, of ilk a part, or of all partis be testifyis
plainly yat in ye glorious virgin was neuir sin, venial nor mortal, sa that
we may weil say to her, plena gratia, full of grace, concerning the first
effect of grace. The secund effect of grace, quhilk was geuin to the glorious
virgin, is exponit be sanct Hierome in ane sermon quhilk he makis upon the
Assumptioun of the glorious virgin, sayand thus: The virgin Mari may weil be
callit full of grace, for to the laif of sanctis, grace was geuin be partis,
bot to the virgin Mary the hail fulness of grace was geuin. And yat e may
understand mair plainly the perfectioun of vertew geuin to the glorious virgin,
e sall note, that almychty God hes geuin his grace to syndre halye men, ilk ane
of them in syndre vertewis. For in haly scripture, in Abel is co^mendit
simplicity, in Enok clemens and honesty, in Noe lang suffering or
la^ganimitie, In Abraham faith and obediens, in Isaac chastity in marriage, in
Jacob lang tholing of labor, in Joseph, doing of good for evil, in Moses is
co^mendit great humilite and meiknes. In Iosue, s^ark hoip in the help of god.
In Job great patience in aduersite. In David abstening fra taking of vengeance.
In Solomon, wisdom. In Prophetis is co^mendit great stoutnes of mind, quhilk
yai had in repreuing of evil thingis. Sa syndre haly men, was excellent in
syndre vertewis, bot doutles the glorious virgin, because scho was full of
grace* scho excellit in all kind of vertew, in all gracis and giftis of ye haly
spreit, because scho had in her wambe ye son of God, quhilk is y^ well and
perpetual spring of grace.

Dominus tecum. Our lord is with the, e trewly in the virgin Marie our Lord
was, nocht only be substance, powar and presence, as he is in all creaturis, nor
nocht only with his special grace, as he is in all haly men and women, bot he
was alswa in her be resauing of our manly flesche and nature, in her his body
was ioynit to his divinity, in her blissit wambe he remanit the space of nine
monethis. Sanct Barnard exponis this word sayand: Dn^s tecum. Our Lord is with
the. Our Lord ye son is with the, quhom thou co^sauis, our Lord the haly
spreit is with the, be quhais vertew and powar you consauis, our lord god ye
father is with the, quhilk hes begottin him, quhom you co^sauis. Verai singlarly
our lord is with ye, quhilk be ane new life of chastity, hes lyftit up thy mind
fra ye lufe of bodily and warldly pleasoure, to the lufe and pleasure of
heuinly thingis, and be meanis of his blissit incarnatioun, hes chosin the as
ane haly tempil to his godhed and divine majesty. Sa O christin pepil, e may
easily understand yat our Lord God was with the virgin Marie, mair excelle^tly,
than euir he was with any puir creature.

Benedicta tu in mulieribus. Blissit art you amang women. e trewly, the
glorious virgin is blissit abone all women, and thairfor to be honourit, louit
and magnifyit abone all women, for as mekil as yat all the maledictioun, quhilk
come upon us be Eua, is takin away be the benedictioun geuin to Marie. And
quhat is the benedictioun of God, bot collatioun of his gracious giftis? and
sen he hes geuin ma gracious giftis to the glorious virgin, than he hes geuin
til all vthir women, giffis or sall give, quha can deny bot that the blissit
virgin, is blissit abone all other women that euir hes been, is or sal be? For
scho allanerly is nocht only ane perpetual virgin, bot also mother to ye
natural son of God.

Et benedictus fructus ventris tui. And blissit is the fruit of thy wame. Their
ar ye wordis, quhilk yat haly woman Elizabeth spak to the glorious virgin. And
thai expone the wordis yat gangis before, as gif thou wald say, quhat is the
cause that the halye virgin Marie is blissit abone all women? It is answerit
thus, because that the fruit of her wambe, quhilk is Jesus Christ the son of
God, is blissit abone all vtheris in the world. In auld time yair was syndry
haly women yat buir barnis, quhilk eftir hend was haly men, bot nane of yame al
was borne, or at the leist consauit without syn. The fruit of ye glorious virgin
was allanerly blissit, eftir sa excellent a manner, that another he was borne nor
consauit in syn, bot also it was impossibil yt he mycht be co^sauit and borne
in syn, because he is both God and man. He blissit the co^ceptioun of his
mother the virgin Marie, quhen he p^seruit her fra original syn. He blissit the
nativity of ye prophet Jeremy and S. Iohne the Baptist, quhen he sanctifyit
yame both in their motheris wambe, before that yai war borne in this world. Sa
let us conclude beleiffand fermely, that blissit is the fruit of the wambe of
the glorious virgin, our saluiour Jesus Christ, to quhom with the father and
the haly spreit, be honor and glore for euir and euir. Amen

Ane declaratioun schawand to quhem we should pray, and for quhom.
BEcause e have hard quhow e should prepare our myndis before our prayar, now for
our gretar instructioun e sall have two questiouns declarit to ow. First to
quhom we should pray? The secund, for quhom we should pray? Answeir to ye first
questioun standis in three veriteis. The first is, we should pray to almychty god,
to give us his grace, his help or giftis till us necessary and profitabil. For
it is God only yat be his awin propir powar and vertew, giffis grace and all
good to us necessare, spiritual and eternal, according as S. James sais: Iaco. i.
Omne daru^ optimum et omne donum perfectu^, desursum est descendens a patre
luminu^. All good giftis and all perfect giftis, is fra abone descendand and
cu^and fra ye father of lycht. And that he is the giffar of all temporal
guddis, the prophet in the Psalm testifyis sayand: Oculi oim in te spera^t
dn^e, et tu das esca^ illoru^ in te^pore oportuno, Psalm.
aperis tu manuu^ tua^ et imples omne animal benedictione. The eyene of all
creaturis hoipis in the good Lord, and you giffis yame fude in time convenient,
thou oppinnis thy hand and fulfillis all creaturis leiffand, with thy benesone
and gracious giftis. To god yairfor allanerly we should pray as giffar of all
gudnes. The secund is this, we should pray to good men and women leiffand heir in
this walrd, desirand them to pray for us to God, yat be yair prayaris we may
obtene the grace and help of god. Ane story of yis we have in the buke of
Genesis, quhen almychty God had repreiffit Abimelech the king of Geraris, for
taking to him Abraham's wife, callit Sara. Gene*
He said thus to Abimelech ye king: Nunc igitur read vxore^ viro suo, et
orabit pro te quia propheta est et viues. Give agane yis wife to her husband,
and he sal pray for the, because he is a prophet, and sa you sal leif and
eschaipe my punitioun. Quhen ye king had restorit agane Sara til Abraham her
husband, Abraham maid his prayar to God, for the king and all his house, then
God almychty helit Abimelechis wife and all her women, quhilk be the punitioun
of God, was maid barrat and vnabil to consaue and beir barnis. Now sen god
almychty bad Abimalech require Abraham to pray for him, quhy should nocht we
likwais desire good men and women to pray to god for us? And siclik exempil we
reid in the buke of Job, Job. 42.
yat his three freindis disputand lang time with him, and in yair disputatioun
yai offendit God, quhairfor God gef them command to ga^g to Job and require
him to pray for them to God, that be Jobs prayar the same three men mycht
eschaip the punitioun of God. Sa thai did, Job prayit for them and God was
plesit, sa should we require good men and women to pray for us. And sen the
Apostil sanct Paul yat chosin veschel of God, Hebre. vl. Roma. 15. Eph^. 6.
requirit and desirit the Ephesianis, Romany and the Hebrewis to pray for him,
mekil mair should we miserabil synnaris, desire vtheris to pray for us. The third
true saying is this, gif we may lauchfally desire them that are leiffand here
in this world to pray for us, mekil mair it followis yat we may pray the
angellis and sa^ctis of heuin to pray for us, quhilk beand present with god in
glore, yai ar mair ardent and fervent in cheritie toward us, than yai war quhen
thai leiffit in this world. And thairfor na man should dout, bot yat sa^ctis pray
for our salvation, kennand perfitly yat yai can nocht be consu^mat and maid
perfect in the glore of both body and saul, Hebre. xi.
quhil we cum to their cumpany and be glorifyit with them in body and saul.
Hieroni. contra Vigilantium*
Heir quhat S. Iherome sais of this matir writand aganis Vigilantius ane
heretyk, quhais heresye was that the sanctis of heuin prayis nocht for us. Their
ar the wordis of S. Iherome: Si Apostoli et Martyrs, adhuc in corpore
constituti, possunt orare pro caeteris, quando de se adhuc debent esse
sol^iciti, quanto magis post victorias, coronas, et triump hos? Gyf the
Apostillis and Martyris it beand in this mortal body, mycht pray for vtheris,
quhen yai should be besy and diligent for yair awin help and saluatioun, quhow
mekil mair may yai pray for us now being in heuin, eftir yat yai have victory
of all their ennemyis, the croune of glore, and triumphant joy and blythnes? E^
That ane man Moses be his prayar obtenit fra God remissioun and forgifnes of
sax hundredth thousand armit men. ^
And S. Steuin the followar of his Lord and master Jesus Christ, prayit for
them yat persecutit him, and eftir hend yat yai come to the presence and
cumpany of Christ in ye glore of heuin, sall thai be les abil to help us with
their prayaris? The Apostil sanct Paul, ^
quhen he was in ye schip in perrel of drowning, he maid his prayar to God, and
obtenit the life of two hundredth seuinty and sax personis, quhilk was with him
in the same schip. And quhen he is departit of this world and come to the
presence of Christ in heuin, was he stoppit fra all praying? And nocht abil to
help them with his prayar, quhilk throw out all the world be his preching of
the euangil beleiffit in Jesus Christ? As he mycht say plainly, the sanctis of
heuin is mair ^il to help now with their prayaris, than thai war, quhen yai
leiffit in this present life, because y^ yai ar with God mair fimiliar and mair
ardent in lufe and cheritie, than thai culd be in this present world. Sa na
christin man should dout bot yet the sanctis of heuin prayis for us continually,
and thairfor we should desire at God our eternal father, to heir and grant the
prayaris quhilk ye sanctis makis to his divine majesty for us, yat we at all
times may be defendit be the help of his godly protectioun. We belief with our
heart, and co^fessis with our mouth, yat our saluiour Jesus Christ is only the
mediator of our redemptioun, for he only be ye meritis of his bittir passion,
hes payit the price of our ransom, and hes deliuerit us fra sin, the devil,
and hell. Nochttheles, we should belief that the sanctis of heuin ar to us
mediatouris, nocht of our redemptioun, bot allanerly be the way of
intercessioun, and under God and eftir Christ Jesus patronis and helparis of al
faithful men and women, quhilk faithfully desyris yair prayars. And quhairto
will you O christin man be sa curious, as to speir gif ye sanctis of heuin
ke^nis our prayars or na? Put away yat vain curiosity, and belief as the haly
catholyk kirk of God beleiffis, quhilk as S. Paul sais, 1. Timo. 3.
is the house of god, the fundament and pillar of verity. Trow fermely yat the
kirk of god is gydit in form and manner of praying, be the derectioun of the
haly gaift, quhilk is the spreit of verite, and continually techis the kirk to
have and use ye plain verity. Thou should thairfor pray as ye kirk prayis,
quhilk in the Latanyes prayis to god the father, ye son, and the haly spreit,
to give us grace and mercy and also prayis to the sanctis of heuin, as
intercessouris to pray for us to God, that we may be their prayaris obtene the
mercy of God. Na man that is leirnit in the halye write can deny, bot that ane
blissit Angel kennis our prayar, takis it, offeris and presentis it to the
presence of goddis majesty, euin sa dout nocht bot yat the sa^ctis of heuin
kennis our prayaris, because thai ar equale in glore with the angellis, thai
have the same sycht of God that the angellis hes, and thairfor thai may se our
prayaris in the same eternal and glorious myrrour of the godhed* quhairin the
angellis seis and kennis our prayaris, according as it plesis almychty god to
reuele or manifest to them for our help and succor. It wald be lang to
rehearse the sayingis of all the catholyk doctouris concerning yis mattir, it it
should nocht be tedious to ow to heir ye wordis of S. Hierome, Hieroni in
epitaphium Paul.
quhilk as he was ane of the ald doctouris of ye kirk wtin four hundredth eris
eftir the passioun of Christ sa was he ane of the may excellent cleirkis,
quhilk florissit in the kirk of God sen the time of the Apostillis. Their ar his
wordis quhilk he sais to ane haly woman callit Paula, eftir hend that scho was
deed: Vale (inquit) O Paula, et cultoris tui vltimam senectutem orationibus
suua, fides et opera tua Christo te ^^ciant, pre^en^ facilius quod postulas
impetrabis. Fairweil (lais he) O Paula, and help with thy prayaris the last
aige of thy seruand. Thy faith and thy workis hes ioynit and couplyt y^ to
Christ, thairfor thou being present with him, sal obtene mair easily, yat thou
askis at him. Sen yis nobil clerk and haly doctor sanct Hierome, maid his
prayar to Paula (eftir that scho was deed) to pray for him, quhi may nocht ilk
ane of us lykwais pray to any sanct of heuin, to quhom we have deuotioun, that
be his prayaris we may the mair easly obtene the help of god? And think nocht,
O christin man, that quhen we pray to sanctis, that we make any derogatioun to
the meritis, intercessioun and mediatioun of our saluiour Christ. For the use
and custom of haly kirk, is to end and conclude all collectis and publik
prayaris, be this clause: Per Christum dn^m nostrum. Be Christ our lord, to
signify yat we ask at god to grant us his grace, his help, succor and giftis,
principally for ye meritis of Christ Jesus our Lord and saluiour.

The secund questioun is, for quhom should we pray? Trewly for all christin men
and women, quhilk hes mister of our prayar, quhidder thai be leiffand or deed.
And because (that as we trow) na man douttis bot that we should pray for them
that are leiffand, we sall schortlye set forth to ow the sayingis of certane
anciant catholyk doctouris, quhilk in the beginning of the kirk florissit
excellently, na les in halynes of life, than in true knawlege and understanding
of the word of god, to declair that we should pray for ye saulis departit
remanand in Purgatory quhilk may be helpit be our prayar. Dyonisius in ecclsi.
hierar^.
Accedens deinde venerandus antistes, precem sua^ super mortuu^ peragit,
precatur oration illa diuina^ clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem
humana^ admissa peccata defuncto, eumque in luce statuat et regione viuorum, in
sinibus Abrahe, Isaac et Jacob, in loco vnde effugit dolor, tristitia et
gemitus hec ille. Than (sais he) cummis the venerabil bischope and sais his
prayaris ouir the deed corse, and in his prayar he beseikis the merciful God
to forgive to yat deed person (quhais body say before yame to be erdit) all
synnis, quhilk he had committit aganis God, be mannis infirmity or fragiltie,
and that almychty God wald bring him to the lycht and regioun of leuand men, in
the bosumes and resting placis of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, quhair their can
be na dolor, sadness or murning. This doctor Dyonisius was discipil to S.
Paul, as is the common oppinioun of the historeis. Sanct Cypriane martyr,
writand to the clergy and pepil of Furnitans a city sa callit, Cypri^ episto
warnand them that it was decretit before his time, be ye bischoppis and
preistis of Cartage, that na man should ordane a priest to be ane tutour of ane
testament. Quhilk thing gif any man did, that for him, yair should nocht be maid
any sacrifice of the altar, or any celebratioun of publik prayaris, yat is to
say, that yair should be na Mes said for his saul. Be quhais wordis it is
manifest and plain, that before the time of Cypriane, quhilk was within two
hundredth eris of Christ the kirk of god vsit to pray for the saulis departit.
Sanct Augustine ye flower of al catholyk doctouris, quhilk hes geuin to us (be
the grace of God geuin to him) the cleire lycht of true intelligence of the
word of God, Aug. in libro de cura pro mortuis age^da
in a buke that he makis, de cura pro mortuis agenda, of the cure and suffrage
quhilk ar to be done for them that are departit of this walrd. He exhortis all
christin pepil to pray for the saulis departit, for two reasonis. The taken is,
the word of halye scripture writin in ye secund buke of ye Machabeis on yis
manner: 2. Mac. 12
Judas Machabeus gadderit and send to Jerusalem twelf thousand dragmas of
silver, to be offerit yair in sacrifice for ye synnis of yame yat war deed in
battle, thinkand weil and deuoitly of the resurrectioun to cum. Than it
followis a lytil eftirh^nd: Sancta ergo et salubris est cogitatio pro defunctis
exorare, vt a peccatis solua^tur. It is a haly and helsum thocht to pray for
the saulis departit, yat thai may be lowsit fra yair synnis. The secund reasone
quhilk sanct Augustine bringis to the same effect, is ye use and custom of ye
haly kirk of God. Their ar his wordis: Non parua est vniuersae ecclesiae (quae
in hac consuitudine claret) authoritas, vt i^ precibus sacerdotis, quae dn^o
deo ad eius altar funduntur locu^ suum habeat etia^ co^memoratio mortuorum.
hec ille. It is na lytil authority of ye haly kirk, quhilk vsis manifestly
this custom, that in the prayaris of the priest, quhilk ar said to our Lord at
his altar, Aug. lib. 9 co^fessiou^ cap. 13.
also ane co^memoratioun or remembrance of saulis departit hes a place. The
same doctor s. Augustine in his buke of co^fessiouns, beseikis God to gife
grace to the preistis to pray for the saulis of his father and mother, sayand
on this manner: Inspire O lord my God, inspire thy seruandis my brethrin, thy
sonnis my maisteris, to quhom I make service with word, heart, and leirning, yat
als money of them yat reidis their wordis, may have remembrance at thy altar, of
thy seruand Monica and Patrik her husband, be quhais flesche you brocht me to
this world, quhow, I can nocht tell etc. The same Monica mother to sanct
Augustine, a litil a fore her deed desirit sanct Augustine her son, to have
remembrance of her at the altar of our Lord, quhilk as he sais, he did with
great diligence, and also causit other preistis quhilk was in his company to do
the same.

Sanct Iohne Chrysostom a Grek doctor, Chrisostomus in p^ore^ epistola^ Pauli
ad Corin. sermon. 41. fere i^ fine.
bischop of Constantinopil before the time of sanct Augustine, quhilk for his
cunnying and eloquence was callit Iohne with the goldin mouth sais thus:
Abierit peccator sane, gaudere decet, peccata impedita esse, and non
accumulatum malum, nitique qua^tum fieri potest, vt inuetur, no^ lachrimis, sed
prece, supplicationibus, ele^mosynis, oblationibus. We grant (sais he) a synnar
is departit, thairfor it becummis us to be blyth, that synnis ar ceissit, and
evil is nocht hepit, and alsmekil as we may we should labor, that he may be
helpit, nocht with greting, bot with prayars and supplicatioun, almous deidis
and oblatiouns. And the same doctor in the same place declaris at lenth, quhow
yat ye saulis departit may be helpit be celebratioun of the Mes. Iohne
Damascein lykwais ane Grek doctou^ sais thus: Damas. in quoda^ sermon de
suffragiis mortuoru^
Misteriorum conscii discipuli saluatoris, et sacri Apostoli in tremendis et
viuificis misteriis, memoria^ fieri eoru^ qui fideliter dormierunt, sanxerunt.
The discipillis of our saluiour, and the haly Apostillis haiffand knawlege of
ye misteryis of Christ, hes decretit and ordanit in the feirfull and leiffand
misteryis, remembrance should be maid for yame quhilk hes sleppit faithfully, as
he mycht say plainly, that the halye Apostillis of Jesus Christ, ordanit that
the saulis quhilk departis of yis world in the leiffand faith of Jesus Christ,
yat yai should be helpit be remembrance had for yam^ in the Mes. Gregorius ad
Bonifatium et re citatur. 13. dis. q. 2. c. pro obeuntibus.
Sanct Gregour, quhilk amang all the bischoppis is callit may vigilant, sais
on yis manner followand: Pro obeuntibus quipp^ consuluisse cognosceres, si
liceat pro eis oblationes offerre, sa^cta sic tenet ecclesia, vt quisque pro
mortui^ vere christianis offerat oblationes, atque presbyter eorum faciat
memoria^. Et quamuis peccatis omnes subiiciamur, congruit tamen, vt sacerdos
pro mottui^ catholici^ memoria^ faciat and intercedat. Thou art ke^nit to have
askit counsale as concerning yame yat ar departit fra this world, gif it be
lesum to make oblatiouns for yame. The haly kirk haldis this, that ilk a man and
woman may offerre oblatiouns for them that are deed, gif thai be true christin
men and women. And the priest should have remembrance of them. And suppose we are
all subieckit to sin, It is convenient that ye priest have remembrance and
make intercessioun for them yat ar deed in the catholyk faith. And the same
doctor sais thus in ane other place: Anime defunctorum, quatuor modis
soluuntur, aut oblationibus sacerdotum, aut precibus sanctoru^, aut cha^orum
eleemosynis, aut ieiunio cognatorum. The saulis departit ar lowsit four manner
of wais, oder be oblatiouns of preistis, or be prayaris of good and haly men, or
be almous deidis done be yair freindis, or be fasting of their kynnis men. Their
doctouris before rehersit ar may ancient and excellent in the kirk of God, to
quh^me all other doctouris that come eftir yame agreis with ane consent in this
matter, and all general counsallis, and specially ye counsale of Constance
agreis to ye same, yat we should pray for all christin saulis, quhilk hes mister
and may be helpit be our prayaris. And thus O christin man thou hes declarit
three thingis to the, necessary to know. First quhow thou should pray, with
faith, hoip, and cheritie. Secundly to quhem thou should pray, to God as giffir
of grace and all gudnes, and to good men and women in erd, and to the sanctis in
heuin as intercessouris to pray for us to God, that we may obtene his grace.
The third, for quhem should we pray, trewly for all quick and deed, quhilk hes
mister and may be helpit be our prayar.

And because yat the haly Apostil S. Peter exhortis us to be redye alwayis to
satisfye and answeir all man yat speris any questioun at us concerning our
faith and hoip, ^. Pet^
we think it expedient to schaw schortly and plainly quhat our saluiour Jesus
Christ, and also quhat his haly Apostil s. Paul sais concerning this matter of
Purgatory. And suppose this word Purgatory is nocht expressly put in ye haly
scripture, it ye significatioun of it is plainly co^tenit in syndre placis of
the haly scripture, and may be cleirly prouin be the samyn, swa yat ye samyn
placis be trewly exponit according to ye faithful declaratioun of autentik and
catholyk doctouris. First our saluiour Christ sais their wordis: Math. xii.
Qui aute^ dixerit contra spiritum sanctum, non remittetur ei, neque in hoc
seculo, neque in futuro. Quhasa speikis agane the haly spreit, it sall nocht be
forgeuin to him, another in this world, nor in the world to cum. In their wordis
our saluiour expressly affirmis, that sum synnis ar forgeuin in ye world to cum.
For gif yat na kind of sin is forgeuin in ye world to cu^, quhat nedit our
saluiour to eik yir wordis neque in futuro, another in the world to cum? Now
send swa it is yat our saluiour is ye eternal wisdom of God, it can nocht be
said without blasphematioun, yat he wald speik any wordis in vain or without a
necessary cause. Thairfor co^siderand that he sais expressly, ye certane synnis
may be forgeuin in ye world to cu^, quhilk word can nocht be trewly takin of
mortal synnis, because yat thai ar nocht forgeuin in the world to cum, it moan
neidis follow that certane venial synnis or ellis sum temporal pain to be
tholit for mortal synnis (quhilk temporal pain is callit sin in the
scripture) may be forgeuin in the world to cum, for the quhilk in this world
man his nocht maid sufficient satisfactioun. Yat yis is ye true expositioun of
this place, s. Augustine bearis witness in that may excellent buke, Aug. de
ciui. Deilibro. 20. cap. 25.
quhilk he maid of ye city of god, sayand thus: Neque enim de quibusda^
veraciter diceretur, quod no^ eis remittatur, neque in hoc seculo, neque in
futuro, nisi essent, quibus et si non in isto, tamen remitteretur in futuro.
Another mycht it be said trewly of certane synnis, yat thai ar nocht forgeuin to
men, another in this world nor in ye world to cu^, except yat certane sinnis,
suppose nocht in this world, it yai may be forgeuin in ye world to cum. Sanct
Gregore allegis the samyn wordis of our saluiour to appreif Purgatory, sayand
thus: libro. 40 dialo. cap. 39.
De quibusda^ leuibus culpis ante iudiciu^ purgatorius ignis crede^dus est pro
eo quod veritas dixit: si quis in spiritu^ ^ctm^ blasphemia^ dixerit, neque i^
hoc seculo dimittetur neque in futuro. In qua se^tentia datur intelligi quasda^
culpas in hoc seculo, quasda^ in futuro re laxari. The Purgatory fire aucht to
be trowit for certane licht synnis before the judgment, because ye verity
sais: Gyf any man speikis blasphematioun agane the haly spreit, another in this
world sall he be forgeuin, nor in ye world to cum. In the quhilk se^tens it is
geuin to be understand yat certane synnis in this world, and certane synnis in
ye world to cum ar relaxit, forgeuin or takin away.

The Apostil sanct Paul writand to the Corinthianis, sais their wordis: i. Cor.
^.
Si quis autem superedificat supra fundamentum hoc, au^um, argentum, lapides
preciosos, ligna, fenum, stipulam, vniuscuiusque opus manifestu^ erit Dies enim
dn^i declarabit, quia in igne reuelabitur, et vniuscuiusque opus qualis sit
ignis probabit. Si cuius opus manse^it quod super edificauit, mercedem
accipiet* Si cuius opus arserit detrime^tum patietur, ipse aute^ saluus erit
sic tamen quasi per ignem. Gyf a man big upon this foundatioun (I mean the
faith of our saluiour) gold, siluir, precious stanis, treis, hay or stybbil,
the warke of ilk man sall be schawin. For the day of our Lord sall declare,
quhilk sall be schawin in fire. And the warke of ilk man, quhat it is ye fire
sall try or preif. Gif any man's work yat he hes biggit yairon abide, he sal
ressaue reward. Gyf the warke of any man burn, he sal thole skaith, bot he
sall be saiffit him self, nochttheles, it as it war throw fire. Quha sa will
consider diligently this authority of S. Paul, he sall esely find Purgatory
to be eftir yis life. And gif any man will say the contrary, lat him heir
quhat S. Augustine sais in his fourt sermon quhilk he makis of ye
co^memoratioun of saulis, Aug. in sermon. 4. in co^memoratio^e anima^um
quhair he exponis ye forsaid wordis of sanct Paul on this manner: Multi sunt,
qui lectionem istam male intelligentes, falsa decipiuntur securitate, dum
credunt, quod si supra fundamentum Christu^ capitalia crimina edificent,
peccata ipsa per tra^sitorium igne^ purgari, et ipsos postea ad vita^ perpetuam
puenire. Their be money (sais s. Augustine, quhilk under standis verai evil yis
present lessone of s. Paul ar desauit with a falls security, trowand yat gif
thai byg upon this foundatioun (quhilk is the faith of our saluiour Christ
Jesus) dedlie and mortal synnis, yat ye samyn synnis may be purgit be
transitory fire, and sa yat thai eftir hend may cum to the perpetual life.

And a litil eftirhend he sais thus: Illo enim transitorio igne, de quo dixit
Apstolus: ipse enim saluus erit sic tamen quasi per igne^, non capitalia, sed
minuta peccata purgantur. Quicquid enim a nobis de istis peccatis redemptu^ non
fuerit, illo igne purga^dum est de quo dixit Apostolus: Quia in igne
reuelabitur, and cuius opus arserit (hoc est cremabile erit) detrimentum
patietur. For trewly (sais sanct Augustine) with that transitory fire,
quhairof S. Paul said, that he sall be saiffit euin as it war be ane fire,
nocht dedlie synnis, bot small synnis ar purgit. For quhat sa^uir siclyk small
synnis is nocht redemit be us, it sall be purgit with yat fire, quhairof the
Apostil said, that the day of our Lord sal be reuelit in fire, and quhais work
sall burn, that is to say, abil to be burnt, sall thole skaith. Heir thou hes
O christin man ye authority of sanct Paul schortly and cleirly exponit of
Purgatory to be tholit eftir yis life, and yat thou hes sa exponit be sanct
Augustine, ane of the may excellent and catholic doctouris yat was euir in
the kirk of God. To quhais expositioun aggreis ane auld Grek doctor callit
Theodoricus byschop of Cyrane, sayand thus: Theodoricus.
Dicit Apostolus, quod saluabitur sic tanquam per conflatorium ignem purgantem
quicquid inuenit per incautelam preterite vite, expuluere saltem pedum terreni
sensus, in quo tamdiu manet, quamdiu quicquid corpule^tie et terreni affectus
inhesit, purgetur Pro quo matter ecclesia hostias and dona pacifica de^ote
offert. The Apostil sais that a man sall be saiffit, swa as be ane blawin fire
yat purgis quhat saeuir it fyndis doin throw vnwarnes or negligens of ye life
bygane, at the lest, it purgis thai thingis quhilk a man hes contrackit be the
dust of his fete, yat is to say, his eirdlie or warldly affectiouns. In the
quhilk fire he moan sa lang abide and remane as lang as any bodaly or warldly
affections abydis in him worthi to be purgit. For quhem our mother ye kirk
offeris deuoitly to god sacrifice and vthir giftis. In the expositioun of this
ancient and catholyk doctor thou may leir three lessonis: First yat the fire
quhairof S. Paul speikis, is to be tholit eftir this present life, because yat
this doctor sais, yat ye fire quhairof S. Paul spekis purgis or clengis a man
fra thai small synnis quhilk he hes doin be vnwarnes or be negligens in the
time of his life bygane, yat is to say, of this present life. Secundly, that a
man abydis in ye samyn fire, ay and quhil he be fully purgit or clengit fra ye
samyn synnis. Thridly yat he is helpit be the prayaris, suffragis and vthir good
deidis done for him in haly kirk. And gif any man will stiffly hald agane their
expositiouns of haly doctouris, sayand yat s. Paul menis of ye fire of
temporal pain and troubil to be tholit in yis present life, he may be co^futit
be two wordis of s. Paul co^tenit in this present authority, yat S. Paul
menis of a fire yat sal cum eftir this present life. The first word is this:
Vniuscuiusque opus manifestum erit. The wark of ilk a man sall be to him
manifest and knawin, quhilk thing trewly is nocht done in the time of this
present life, Eccle. 9.
because it is writtin: Nescit homo vtrum amore vel odio dignus sit, sed oi^a
in futurum seruantur incerta. In the time of this life man knawis nocht
certanely quhidder he is worthi the lufe or hettrand of God, bot all thingis ar
kepit vncertane till the world to cum. The secund word of s. Paul is this:
Dies dn^ideclarabit. The day of our Lord sall declare. Quhat is that day of our
Lord? Trewly eftir ye mind of Anselmus with vthir doctors, the day of our Lord in
ye scripture propirly is callit the day of Gods judgment, nocht denyand bot
yat all the dais of this present life ar the dais of our Lord, for als mekil as
he giffis them to us, and be his ordinatioun that all proceid according as the
prophet sais in the Psalm: Psalm. 118.
Ordinatione tua perse ^erat dies. Nochttheles ye day of Gods judgment (as we
said before) is propirly callit the day of our Lord, to signify a differans
betwein mannis day and Gods day. Quhat is callit ma^nis day? Trewly ye day
quhairin man takis his plesour aganis ye plesour of God, quhairin man dois his
awin will contrary to ye will of God. Of this ma^nis day spekis the prophet
Hieremie, sayand thus: Iere. 17.
Diem hominis non desideraui: tu scis. O good Lord (sais he) thou kennis yat I
have nocht desyrit the day of man, yat is to say, to leiue ane carnal and
delicious life agane thy will. Of ye samyn day our saluiour Christ makis
mentioun, speikand to the pepil of Jerusalem: Et quidem in hac die tua. And
verraily in this thy day. Than quhat is our Lordis day? Trewly that day
quhairin our Lord dois his plesour aganis the plesour of evil men, quhairin our
Lord ^e hi^ ^eous judgment, fulfillis his awin godly will ^arie to the will of
evil men, giffand to (...) ^an according to his warkis.

Quhow money sortis of dais of judgment find we in the scripture? Trewly two.
The taken is the day of our particular judgment, quhilk is executit to ilk man
and woman immediately eftir yair saul depart fra their body, quhairof sanct
Paul speikis thus: H^br^. 9.
Statutu^ est hominibus semel mori et post hoc iudicium. It is decretit of God,
that men and women anis sall dee, and after that to cum to yair judgment. Of
this day of our Lord quhairin he cu^mis to our particular judgment speikis
sanct Paul sayand thus: ^
Scitis quia dies domini sicut fur in nocte ita veniet. e ken yat ye day of our
Lord sal cum upon ow quietly euin as the theif cummis on the nycht. The secund
day of our lord is callit yat day quhair in he sall cum manifestly and oppenly
to ye general judgment, quhairof speikis the Prophet Iohel, sayand thus:
^o^elis. 2
Magnus dies dn^i et terribilis valde. Great is the day of our Lord and exceeding
terribil. Now quhen sanct Paul sais, the day of our Lord sall declare, for it
sall be reuelit in fire, he can nocht be vndersta^dit to speik of the day of
general judgment, for eftir yat day na man sal be saiffit be fire, because yat
eftir yat day of general judgment, only remanis paynis to be tholit
perpetually in the sire of hell, be the quhilk na man sall be saiffit. We moan
thairfor of necessity understand the word of sanct Paul to be spokin of the
day of our Lord, quhairin he cummis to our particular judgment, that day sall
declare til all men and women the quantity and quality of all their workis
good and evil. And eftir yat day or on that day, quhasa hes biggit upon the
foundation of our christin faith, treis, hay or stybbil, yat is to say, hes
done in this life any small or vanial synnis, or that in. this life hes nocht
condignely and sufficiently tholit all temporal pain, quhilk he aucht to
fulfill for his dedly synnis, and depart fra this world in the stait of grace,
that man or woman sall be saiffit be the fire, because yat quhen he is justly
purgit, both fra his vanial synnis quhairin he deis, and also quhen he hes
justly tholit all temporal pain, quhilk be ye justice of God he aucht to thole
for his dedlie synnis forgeuin to him be Penance, than is he saiffit and
passis to ye glorious kingdom of heuin. Thus christin man thou hes declarit to
the, the mind of sanct Paul, both be his awin wordis and alswa be ye
expositioun of haly and catholyk doctouris, quhairto all christin men aucht to
give ferme credence.

IN the end of this buke, first we desire ow Vicaris and Curattis, quhilk ar to
reid ye samyn to our parochionaris, that before e begin to reid it at any time,
first aduert weil and tak tent to ye correctioun of certane faultis colleckit
and put in the end of this buke, to yat effect yat e kennand the faultis and
how thai should be amendit, may the bettir reid the samyn buke to ye edificatioun
of the people, for yair is na buke sa perfitly prentit, bot sum faultis dois
eschaip in the printing thairof.

Secundly, we exhort ow all yat ar Personis of kirkis, quhilk hes ressauit upon
ow the cure of saulis, quhat degree or name saeuir e have, yat e wald apply our
diligens to do our office, that is to say, to preche and teache syncerly the
eua^gil of God to our parochionaris according as e ar ob^^ssit to do be ye law
of God and haly kirk. And trow nocht yat this buke sal discharge ow before God
fra executioun of our forsaid office, for trewly it is nocht set out to that
intentioun, another to give to ow any baldnes or occasioun of negligence and
idilnes. Heirfor for ye tender mercy of God, and for ye lufe yat e have or should
have to the bittir passioun of Christ Jesus our saluiour, quhais spiritual flock
bocht with his own precious blud e have takin to keip and feid, yat e fail
nocht to do our office, ilk ane of ow to our awin parochionaris, seand yat thai
pay to ow their dewtie sufficiently. Consider weil and dout nocht dot yat e ar
als mekil bund to yame as thai ar bund to ow. This do, as e will eschaip the
terribil vengeance of Gods judgment quhilk he schoris to cum upon ow in the
third cheptour of Ezechiel, sayand: Sanguinem autem eius de manu tua requiram.
I sall (sais our eternal judge) require out of thy handis the blud of him that
perissis throw thy negligens. And gif e be wise, lat neuir the weichty word of
sanct Paul gang out of our remembrans, quhilk is writtin in the last cheptour
to ye Hebrewis: Ipse enim peruigilant, quasi ratione^ pro animabus vestris
reddituri. Thai that are good pastouris watchis perfitely, as men that are to give
ane account to God for our saulis.

Thridly O christin pepil we exhort ow with all diligence, heir, understand,
and keip in our remembrance, the haly wordis of God, quhilk in this present
Catechism ar trewly and catholykly exponit to our spiritual edification. And
albeit al thingis be nocht sa fullily and perfitly comprehendit heirin, to our
understanding as e wald require, we exhort ow in Christ (for quhais honor and
our profit only, this buke is set out be our pastouris) that e will ressaue
and take the samyn in ye best part, and wey the good myndis and willis of yame
yat wald have had the same bettir, both compilit, correckit and prentit, to
our saul health, gif ye time mycht have tholit it. And gif e persaif be
frequent heiring heirof, our self spiritually instruckit mair than e have bein
in times bygane, give the thankis thairof only to God, the father, the son,
and the haly spreit, to quhem be geuin all honor and glore, loving and praise
for now and euir. Amen.

Errata. Heir followis certane faultis eschaipit be negligence in the prenting
of this buke, quhair thou sal^ note, yat this sillab fo. betakinnis ye leif of
ye buke, yis lettir a signifeis ye first page or side of ye buke, this lettir
b. schawis the secund side of the leif, this lettir l. betakins ye line of ye
side, countand fra the hiear part dounward, in ye quhilk line the fault is
expremit, with the true word set for it. Reid the first line on this manner. The
first leif, the first side of the leif, the line xxviii. and sa the laif.
Fol. i. a. l. xxviii* vetew, for vertew. And in the same line, ar for art fo.
i. b. l. xxiii. misend for mis^end. fo. ii. a. l. i. of superfluous. fo. iiii
a. l. vi. laf for laif. fo v. a. l. v. co^mandis for command. fo v. a. li.
viii. punitiouns for punitiouns. fo. v. a. l. xxiii. to good heaven, for to ane
good heuin. fo. v. a. l. 27. is for ar. fo. v. b. l. ix. creturis for creaturis.
fo. v. b. l. xvii iu^ificatiobus for iustificationibus. fo. v. b. l. xxvii.
rens for reus. fo. vi. a. l. xvi. eftir this word sayand* eik to yir words
lucerna corporis tui est ^us tuus fo. vi. b. l. xxiiii. brak, for breik. fo.
vii. b. l. ii. Deuteronome for Deuteronome. fo. viii. b. l. v. Adoma for Adama.
fo. viii. a. l, xxii, mattir, for matter. fo. ix. a. l. i. eftir this word God,
eik to this word, is. fo. x. b. l. xxx. eerce, for exerce. fo. xiii. a. l. vii.
getil, for gentil. fo xiii. a. l. viii. Goo. for God. fo. xiii a. l. xiii. lad
for land. fo. xvi b* l iiii. y for the. fo xvi. b lxxxi. streth for strenth.
fo. xvii. a. l. iiii. commantis for commandis. fo. xvii. a. l. xix. speid for
spend fo xvi. a. l. xxxi. fyuntane for fountane. fo. xviii. b. l. x. warloly
for warldly. fo. xix. a. l. ii. ind for and. fo. xx. a. l. xiiii. in
superfluous. fo. xx a. l. xxi. pardam for perda^. fo. xxi. a. l xvi. in^oun for
instruction fo. xxi. a. l. xxviii. incorruptibili for incorruptibilis. fo.
xxii. a. in ye coting of ye lefe xvii. for xxii. fo xxiiii. in the coting of
the leif (...) for xxiiii. fo* xxv. a. l. xxix. Te for the. fo. xxvi. b. l.
iiii. turnis for turnis. fo. xxviii. b. l. iiii. visit for vi^i^. fo. xxviii.
b. l. xxx. visit for visie. fo xxix. b. l. xxix. fulehardie for fulehardelie.
fo. xxxiiii. a. l vi. y for ye. fo. xxxvi. a. l. iii him for them. fo. xli. b.
l. xxi. us for ow. fo. xlii. b. l. xxv. mandax for mendax. fo. xlvi b. l. xvi.
reulmen. superfluous. fo. lxiiii. b. l. ii. their for yair. fo. eodem. b. l.
xviii. syne for sign. fo. lxv. a l. xvi. thirfor yair fo. lxvii. a. l. xi.
Paul for James. fo. lxix. a. l. ii. qui for que fo. eodem a. l. xcii eftir
this word auld, eik aige. fo. eodem. a l. xxiiii. Se for or. fo. eodem b. l.
xix. fors for feyrs. fo. lxx. a. l. i. eftir this ane eik evil. fo. xciii. a.
l. xx. be handis, for be the handis. fo. eodem b. l. xxvi. iusticati for
iustificati. Albeit that ten lefis ar wrang cotit, that is to say, fra x^x. to
c. it follow them because thai can nocht be correckit. fo. xcxiii. a. l. viii.
dangaris for dangeris fo. eodem. b. l. i. their four wordis ar superfluous,
writtin, in, his, heart. fo. xcxviii. b. l. i. houshald for city. fo. ciii. a.
l. v. nakit for nalit. fo. cvi. a, l. vi. obdient for obedient. fo. eodem a. l.
xviii. obdiens for obediens. fo. cxviii. a. l. i. the euangil, for the same
euagil. fo. eodem b. l ii. quick is membris for quick membris. fo, cxix, b, l*
ii, tyrdnes for tyritnes. fo. clxix, a, l. viii. myd for mind. fo, clxxiii, b,
l, xvi. (...) for for. fo. clxxiiii. a, l xi, or for their. fo, clxxxvi, a* l,
v, damna for damnatioun. fo. clii, a l, ix, eftir yis word our, eik: heart and
nocht our. fo, cliiii, b* l, iiii. that is say, for that is to say. fo,
clxxxviii, a, l, xxviii, coast for craft. All vthir faultis, other committit be
negligens as their before colleckit, or be imperfection of the preni, the lettir
nocht beand fullily fillit with ynk or nocht set in euin and rycht order, ane
gentil reider may esely persaif, and thairfor should reid them as weil as he can
in the best manner.

FINIS.
Prentit at sanct Androus, be the command and expe^sis of the may reverend
father in God, John^ Archbischop of sanct Androus, and primat of ye hail kirk
of Scotland, the xxix. day of August, the eir of our Lord M.D.lii.




