A DETECTION OF SUNDRY FOVLE ERROVRS, LIES, SCLAVNDERS, CORRVPTIONS, AND OTHER
false dealinges, touching Doctrine, and other matters, uttered and practiced by
M. Jewel, in a Book lately by him set forth entitled, A Defense of the
Apology. etc.

By Thomas Harding Doctor of Divinity.

Psalm. 4. Filij hominum, vsquequo graui cord? vt quid diligitis vanitatem,
and quaeritis Mendacium?

O ye sons of men, how long will ye be dull hearted? what mean ye thus to be
in love with Vanity, and to seek after Lying?

ornament with tree, birds, and the hand of god reaching down from the clouds
RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM
IF



LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno 1568. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio concessum est Thoma^ Hardingo Sacra Theologia
Professori, vt Librum inscriptum A Detection of sundry foul errors, lies,
sclaunders, etc. per Typographum aliquem Iuratum imprimere, ac impune
distrahere liceat.

Datum Bruxellis. 24. Maij. Anno 1568. Subsig. Vander A A.

The Preface to the Reader.
AT the first coming of this Treaty to men's hands, what, says one, so small
a Book for answer to so great a Volume? Shall this Detection containing little
above one hundred streets of Paper, match the Defense, that is almost four
hundred sheets? What means D. Harding? Is he not hable to confute M. Jewel?
Or is he loath to take pains? To this I answer. How hable I am to confute, what
so ever M. Jewel has written, not only in his late pretensed Defense, but
also in his Reply, or in the Apology (whereof at least he is thought to have
benne the penneman) let it be judged by the learned: this will I boldly say, if
he have no better mean to make his party good, then hitherto he has used,
write he what him list, it shall be no great praise to any man to have confuted
him. As it had benne small glory for valiant Achilles to have beaten Thersites,
whom Homere describes ready of his tongue, and a coward of his hands: so
among the skilful Divines, he may not look to win great commendation of
learning, who confuteth M. Iewelles writings. For certainly good Reader, if
thou have but a mean insight in these Controversies now so much disputed of
betwixt the Protestants and us, and wilt bestow some good labor about the
exact trial of the things he has written: thou shall easily epsy the
feebleness of his side. Thou shall find, that he perfourmeth more in show,
then in act: that commonly he makes up in Tale, where he lacks of Weight:
that with multitude of words, he couer^th the p^nur^^ of R^^^^^ that with huge
numbers of Doctors sainges, he sets forth the barrenness of substantial
Prou^^^, a^ many do their thin Hippes with stufte Hosen, and their solender
Arms with bombast Sleeves.

This being so, whereas the dew discussion of these points in controversy
descends unto the bottom of things, and swimmeth not above upon the foam of
words, every man can soon conceive, how mean learning may suffice, to
confute such a Writer. If therefore I make profession of sufficient ability
in this case, there is no cause, why I should be reprehended, as one that
attributes more unto him self, then male seem to stand with modesty.

This much being said for proof of ability, some perhaps would bear,
what I have to say for my self, that I am not loathe to take pains. For he
that is hable to do a good and profitable work, and refuses the labor to
do it, seems to be gilty of sl^wth. True it is, to refel all that M. Jewel
has written, or rather gathered together out of others (for in deed^ he does
nothing else in manner, but lay together he^pes of other men's sayings)
against the Catholic Church, and against the Catholic Religion, it were
great pain. By judgment both of Cicero, and Quintilian, the labor of
writing is accounted very great.

And the Scripture says, Eccles. 12.
Faciendi plures libros nullus est finis, frequensque meditatio carnis
afflictio est. There is no end of making more Books, and the often breaking of
a man's brains about such study, is a great pounishment to the body. If
any doubt hereof, let him set him self a work earnestly about writing, in
such sort as I speak of: and he shall say as I do, I doubt not. And
therefore it behooves them, that give them selves to writing, to have, not
only health, but also good strength of body.

All this M. Jewel knew right well. And for that very cause, when he saw, that
small books would fone be answered, as it appeared by my Answer made to his
Challenge, and by my Confutation of the Apology: he thought it better policy
(or it was so put in his head by the advice of his brethren) to go an other
way to work, that is to say, to reply upon me, and to make his Defense,
with huge Volumes, that either a long time should pass, before an answer
could be returned, (hoping that in the mean while his Gospel should take too
deep a root afterward to be plucked up out of the Readers ha^t^s by any what
so ever book, that should come to their hands) or that I should be wearied,
and worn out with the labor of answering, and perhaps die before I came to
the end, or that the very hugeness of the books, should fraie me from the
enterprise of making answer.

In this case it seemed to me best, neither by taking upon me to answer the
whole Books, and every parcel of them, to give our Adversaries the advantage
of the time, not to shorten my life by immoderate pains employed to no great
profit, nor by my silence, and by open giving over the whole, as it were by
fleeing out of the field, to leave them unto their Triumph, but by answering
the points of greatest importance, to set forth a sufficient Defense of the
truth for staying of the doubteful, to confirm them in the true doctrine, and
thereby to give out a clear evidence, what truth is to be looked for in the
rest of his superfluous stuff, since he has showed him self so untrue a
dealer in the chief matters.

Thus have I do^ne, not yielding to slewth, but moved with good advise, no^ as
being loath to take pains, and to sustain a long travail, but as one, who,
the state of the present time considered, and the uncertainty of things to
come mistrusted, thought it better, to do some good out of hand, though it
were of loss labor, then by long differring, whiles a larger Volume were
intended, to suffer to the loss of many souls, so much false doctrine to
grow in credit.

As touching the Reply, what has benne done, to those that read our books,
it is not unknown. What so ever he had to bring against the R^^^ ^res^nce,
against the Sacrifice of the Body and blood of Christ^, against the Mass,
whereat the Priest receives the Communion without other company receiving
sacramentally with him in the same place, against the Church S^^^ice in a
learned tongue, against the anci^^^ (...) of holy Images in Churches, and
against the pr^^acie of his Successor, to whom loving Christ more then the
rest of the Apostles, Johan. 21.
it was specially said, feed my sheep^, which are the weightiest, and chief
among all the Articles of his Challenge, and whereof all the rest^ in manner do
depend: All this is fully confuted by M. D. Sande^, by M. Do^man, by M.
Stapleton, and by me. As for his Sophistry, and manifold Art, wherewith he
enu^igleth the unlearned much like to that by which Mountebanckes get their
living, and sundry crafty, false and absurd practices, M. Rastel has truly,
diligently, and wittily detected them in three books written to that purpose,
in which by the very Title of each book he gives al men warning to beware
of M. Jewel. When I considered these chief and most special Articles of the
Reply so well and sufficiently confuted, and the rest of that Volume to
contain nothing else but needelesse heaps of diverse Writers sayings, either
true, and of us confessed, or fowly falsified, and corrupted, and wrested to a
sense quite contrary to the authors meaning, or otherwise not perteining to
the proof of any thing by the Catholics denied, or to the disproufe of any
thing by them affirmed: I thought I might do well, to lay a side the Reply
for a time, and to go in hand with some answer to the pretensed Defense of the
Apology.

Here what should I do? Many, as I understand, have wisshed, that I made a full
answer to the whole, and to every parcel of it, and for the better perfourmance
thereof they would allow me a year, or two more. This desire requires M.
Jewels great Volume to be printed again, that is to say, the Apology, my
Confutation, and the text of the Defense, and further so much of my
Confutation to be added, as in printing his book of set purpose he has caused
to be cut of from the rest, and to be suppressed, to the intent a great part
of the best proufes brought against him should not be seen in his book, which
being added would amounte to one good part, the whole Confutation being
divided into three.

This ought to be done of necessity, if an answer to the whole were to be
made. For where^^ al my Treaty must rise upon the words of the Apology, and
of my Confutation, and of the Defense: how should it be understood, how
justly I impugn the Apology, and the Defense, and maintain my Confutation,
unless the places were laid forth before the Readers eyes?

The book then of the Defense being already so great, The chief points of
the Defense being ansvvered, for what causes a full answer to the rest was
thought not necessary.
as it is, by that time a just answer should be added unto it, every man that
has any judgment in these things, may soon conceive, of what an huge
quantity my new printed Volume would be. In deed were every idle point
answered, and treated of at full, it would seem to match, yea far to
ouermatche Foxes Huge Book of his false Martyrs. Verily to say, what
reasonably I mai^ say, neither can I in three years do the work of seven
years, nor with a few Dallers defraie the charges of four or five hundred
pounds, nor can I find in my Conscience to bring the weak into danger by
setting out such an heretical book, because it is not possible, but that
among so many heresies and erroneous points, some will escape my pen
vnrefelled, were I never so diligent. Nor think I it good and profitable, in
that unfruitful travail to spend so great a part of my later years.
Unfruitful, I mean, because I shall be driven for the most part to bestow
pains about light scoffs, Cauilles, wranglinges, and vain trifles, worthy to
be contemned, rather then to be answered. Briefly neither have I list, to set
out so huge a Volume, which I believe, very few would bye.

I have therefore thought upon an other way, wherein I hope to do more good to
others, sure I am, that to my self I shall do less hinderance, in respect of
time and health, and nevertheless perform that, which in this case is
chiefly requisite.

Whereas then M. Iewelles pretensed Defense may be reduced unto three
principal Headdes, from whence, The Sum of the Defense.
as from their springes, the streams of the whole Book do run, which are,
1 a desire to disgrace me, 2 an ernest auouching of his new false doctrines in
condemnation of the Catholic Faith, and of the whole state of Ancient
Religion, 3 the reproufe of Priests, Bishops, Cardinals, and the Popes
manners: in this Treaty I have said somewhat in Defense of my self, as it was
behooful I should: the most labor I have employed to defend the received
doctrine of the Catholic Faith, which he has labored much to impugn. With
the lives, and manners of the Clergy, I meddle little. Men be men, and
wherein they have done evil, I accoumpt them worthy of reproufe, no less then
he. Howbeit, what so ever he brings, al is not the Gospel, that in this point
proceeds from his pen: and malice could never yet learn to say well.

Touching both doctrine, and manners, if it shall please God, to give our
Country grace to embrace that only doctrine, which is true and Catholic,
that is to say, which we defend against the Novelties, and Heresies of our
time, so busily by M. Jewel, and by them of that side, with all diligence,
force, and policy set forth, and commended to the people: concerning order of
life and manners, their pleasant Gospel breeds such liberty, looseness and
lewdnes among them that receive it, that we doubt not, but it shall easily to
al appear, that when the Catholics (whom they call Papists) lived worst, the
time brought forth more fellows of Angels, then their time (notwithstanding
the great number they crake of) brings forth fellows of honest men, when so
ever they live best, if it may be truly said, that at any time they live well,
who have cut them selves from that body of Christ, into the members whereof
only, the grace of God is derived. The Sum and order of this Treaty.


If then thou be desirours Christian Reader to understand the order and
purporte of this Treaty, made for answer to the Defense for the present time,
thus it is.





Furthermore, because he would the great and manifold

After this in four books following, I detecte his Errors, Lies, Cauilles,
shifts, Sclaunders, and sundry untrue matters, found in the first, and
second part of his Defense. And in respect thereof, I call the Treaty, A
Detection of sundry foul errors, lies, sclaunders, etc. At length having
tried by very certain experience, and exact view of the whole Book, that
there was no end of lying, what place so ever in reading my eye lighted upon:
I thought it most profitable, and most agreeable with my profession, to let
pass things of small importance (the handeling of which served him specially
to scoff, to utter vile matter against the Church, and to fill up his Book
in tended at the beginning to be made great) and to treat of the Articles of
Doctrine, in defense of the Truth, and to confute what he has brought to the
contrary. Among which Articles of doctrine, of some I have treated briefly,
as being already treated of in my Confutation, and otherwheres, of some at
good length, and with more diligence, as of Succession, and of the unlawful
Marriages of Priests, and al other Votaries, wherein he is very large, and
copious of Doctors sayings of al sorts, but utterly destitute of any one
saying, that makes clearly for his part.

In the end I do most evidently disprove and refel what he was hable to bring
for Defense of two points, which he is not ashamed to affirm seming to me the
one very false, the other very sclaunderous. The first is, as he avouches
them, that matters of faith, and Ecclesiastical causes are to be judged by the
Civil Magistrate. The other is, that the Papists have taught, that simple
Fornication is no sin. How weak proufes he brings for the one, and for the
other, and yet how shamelesly he goes about to prove them: by conference of
both our Treaties it shall appear. Withal, there I have added a Comparison of
Errors in mistaking names of men, books, Chapters, etc. with which M.
Jewel charge me, and I him.

Matters let pass, with treating whereof the Defense is grown to a Huge
Volume.
Thus have I, declared in few the Sum, as it were, and Order of this Treaty.
As for sundry other matters, as of forged Scriptures, of the doctrine of
Deuilles (so he calls the forbidding of Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns
to marry) of the fruits of single life, whereof he laith out great stoare of
filthy sayings, of S. James Epistle, whether it be Canonical Scripture, of
sundry ancient Traditions now grown out of use, of the Fourmes, and
Accidents, whereat he scoffeth like a Vice plaier, of the number of the
Sacraments of the Church, which we defend to be seven, he affirms to be but
two, or else so many, as the things be, unto which the name of Sacrament is by
any Writer applied, which are very many: of the Faith of Infantes: of their new
found Imaginatiue Faith, or rather fantastical Imagination, that eats the
body, and drinks the blood of Christ, of the Popes Dispensations, of
dissensions among the Fathers, of Nominales, and Reales, of Thomistes, and
Scotistes, of diversity of religious persons Apparel, wherein he says they
put great holiness: of the variance between the Luthera^s, and the Zuinglians,
of the fable of Dame Iohane the woman Pope, of the Marble Image, lying in the
high way at Rome, of the stool of easement of Porphyrie stoane at Lateran, of
Athenes and Rome, whether they were Universities in the time, this Dame Iohane
is feyned to have lived in, of the vicious life of Petrus Aloisius Duke of
Parma and Placentia, of John Diazius death, of the slaughter of the Boures of
Germany, that took weapons against the nobility there, provoked by the
preaching of Luther and his scholars, of Constantines Donation, of Poison
ministered in the Sacrament, as he reports feined fables for stories of great
soothe, of the abomination of desolation, of the state of the Church of Rome,
of Antichrist, of the mistaking of Cardinal Hosius, of their pretensed burning
of the Scriptures, of S. Augustine the Apostle of the English Nation, that he
was a wicked man, of Priests keeping of Concubines, of Images, of Latin
Prayers, and Church Service, of Comparison of learning between the Catholics
and the Protestants, of Rome, whether it be Babylon, of summoning of
Councelles, of the Stews in Rome, whereof gladly he utters much talk, of
kissing the Popes foot, of the Popes hurling of Franciscus Daldulus fast tied
in chains under his table, there to gnaw boanes with his Dogs, of the Popes
Bridle, and Stirop to be holden by Princes, of Pope Hildebrandes surmised
wicked deeds, as they fable, of the Popes treadding on the Emperors neck, of
the Pope whether he be ever holy, of the Popes Exactions, of the Cheast in the
Popes bosom, whether the Pope be God, of the Popes power feined to be over
Angels, whether the Pope can commit Simonie, whether the Pope be King of
Kings, whether the Pope be above general Councels, whether the Pope may err,
or no, whether the Pope be a King: Of these, and of a great many more such
matters, whereof some be lothesom, some be fabulous, vain, and frivolous, some
be false, sclaunderous and spiteful, some blasphemous, some already
sufficiently treated of, briefly al tending unto the contempt of the Catholic
Religion, as M. Jewel handles them, in which matters he has uttered the
stoare of his learning, Of these I say, I have said nothing, much
disaduantaging my self thereby and the common cause which I defend, for so
much as in the making up of his great Book with heaping together these
ministerly matters, he has uttered, as he does every where else, good stoare of
most evident and gross Lies, of which his own friends, and best favorers, in
case they were detected, would be ashamed.

These forenamed be the things, which I have briefly handled, and these other,
and certain mo the like, be those, which I have let pass, as being partly
unnecessary, and unprofitable, partly unmeet good hours to be bestowed
about them. By the handeling of these the weightier points, it will
sufficiently appear to al men, with what stuff he fills his great Books,
what small credit he deserves, how little pith there is to be found in his
multitude of words, how little there is that serves aptly to the purpose among
the great heaps of testimonies, that he lays together. Surely his Defense
being well examined by any man that has skill, and can judge of these points, it
must needs be thought, that when he saw he had not the plain truth of his
side, yet with multitude of allegations he would make a show of learning to the
ignorant, and trouble the answerer with confusion. Even so many Barbarous
Princes (as we read in stories) when they lacked a convenient number of good
and tried Soldiers, have gonne about to fraie their enemies with multitude of
people, who have learned by their great overthrows, that oftentimes victory
is not obtained by multitude of men.

In deed the Truth needs not so many sayings piked out of Schoolemenne, of
Summistes, of Gloses upon Gratian, and other parts of the Canon Law, and out
of so many Canonistes of al sorts. For trial of a matter to be proved true, in
questions touching our belief, one saying of the Scripture is sufficient: if
the express Scripture fail us, two, or three Testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers not being contrary to the rest, may suffice. But such a confuse,
and unorderly number of sayings, specially of such as be not of great
estimation, as this man commonly allegeth, of the same not one making clearly
for this purpose, in most matters, what does it else, but breed a suspicion
among the wise, that the matter is not true, for proof whereof they be alleged?

But by this mean he thought to win credit at least with the people. For the
people that can not judge of these matters, thinks him best learned, that
has most words. It is known, that when they behold two reasoning together
of any thing, whereof they have no skill, commonly they commend the mainteiner
of the worse cause, in case he be fuller of words, be they never so little to
the purpose, and say in his praise, that he answered the other party to every
Quare. M. Jewel understanding this, and making his most account of the people,
and of them that be unlearned, to whom he leans, and by multitude of whom he,
and they of his side mind to stand (for touching the learned, they see they can
win none) bestows great pains, and charges to set out great books, that
at least in the opinion of the unlearned, and of them that have not leisure to
examine the points how substantially they are treated, he may seem to have
done iolily, and to have acquitted him self like a great Clerk. In very deed
if a man have care how much he may say, rather then how truly, and fear
not to utter untruths: he has this advantage over his adversary defending
the truth with a conscience not to swerve from the censure of the Church, that
he may always find abundance of matter to utter. For (as it has of old ben
said) Mendacium est multiplex, veritas simplex, Lying is manifold, Truth is
simple. Lying has many plaites and foldinges, Truth is without plaite or
wrinckle. Therefore it is no marvel, if the Treaties of the one be narrow
and short; of the other wide and long.

As for me, if I prove M. Jewel an untrue man in so many points, as I have
treated of, I have done that, whereby his credit must be broken. His credit
being broken, what remains, but that in this kind of trade he go for a
Banckroute? If he be a Banckrout, worthily is he to be begiled, that trusts
him. Some will say perhaps, it is not likely, I should with so small a book
discredit him, that has written so much. But it may please this man to
remember, that, to say the truth, it is not M. Jewel, that has written much.
He has taken much out of other men's books: of his own he has in manner
nothing, certainly very little. So that, peruse his Book who will, he shall
find, that he is but a seely Translatour of other men's words, a heaper
together of al Writers sayings, and that most commonly to more ostentation of
tale, then to the making up of good weight. So that if things be brought to an
exact trial, he shall be found no disputer, no reasoner, no discourser, no
Writer, but only a gatherer together of other men's Sentences. How be it, it
is not the hugeness of a book, that argues the sufficiency of proufes.
Truth is content to be set forth with few words. Neither yet do I reprove
him, for that he allegeth what he finds in other Writers. For thereby we bring
credit to doubteful matters. But for that alleging so much, he allegeth so
little to the purpose, yea in manner nothing, and (boldly will I auouche it)
utterly nothing, for due proof of any his new and strange doctrines, being
contrary to that of ancient time has benne believed in the Catholic
Church. This shall seem more probable, if it be confirmed by some plain, and
true examples.

Let us then examine M. Iewelles common demeanor in an example or two. To
discuss many, the brevity of a Preface will not permit. O that he were in
place to choose the example him self, out of his whole Book to his best
advantage, that so it might evidently appear, with what weak tools he
fights against the truth.

Examples, whereby it is showed, how with void and impertine^t stuff, M.
Ievvel fills his great Book. Defense. Page 163. Heb. 13. Confut. 73, b.
Mark how M. Jew. alvvaies keeps him self from coming unto the point in
controversy.
Whereas in the Apology much is said in the comme^dation of Matrimony, which
no Catholic man ever discommended, as that it is Holy and honorable in all
sorts, and states of persons, in the Apostles, in the Ministers of the
Church, and in Bisshops, and that it is an honest and lawful thing (as S.
Chrysostom says) for a man living in Matrimony to take upon him therewith the
dignity of a Bishop: to this I say in my Confutation, that albeit Matrimony
be holy and honorable in all, and an undefiled. ^e^, as S. Paul says: yet that
it is not lawful for such persons to marry, who have deliberately vowed
Chastity, or have taken holy Orders. This there I prove by good and
sufficient authority, as it may be seen in my said Confutation.

Now what is M. Jewels part here to prove for maintenance of his doctrine, but
that a man notwithstanding his Vow, or receiving of holy Orders, may lawfully
marry? This is the very point of the controversy, and thereto only should he
have directed his talk. If he go about any thing else, it is beside the
purpose. But consider Reader, how he keeps him self a luffe of from the
point, with what stuff he fills certain leaves of his Book, how he
starreth from Doctor, to Doctor, how he confounds him self and the Reader,
and though he bring never so much out of other Writers, yet comes not at al
to the point directly.

First, Page 165.
he labors to discredit the holy Ancient Fathers, as men, that have not
dealte indifferently herein, but have gonne to far, either in the auancing of
Virginity, or in the disgracing of lawful Matrimony. Before he enters his
Allegations, whereof that whole Treaty stands, he puts forth two
sayings, the one of Origin, the other of S. Hierome, in reproufe of them that
condemned Matrimony. And yet even there immediately after he allegeth them both
for condemners of Matrimony. Then he laith forth the stoare of his
Allegations, whereby he would have it appear, Tertullia^ alleged by M. Ievvel
against the Church, in that for which he is condemned of the Church:
that certain Ancient Writers had an evil opinion of Matrimony. There he
allegeth two sayings of Tertullian in exhortatione ad castitatem (which Book
he wrote against the Church, as S. Hierome says, and therefore it is
condemned of the Church, for which cause he should not have alleged him) then
two sayings out of the Author of the imperfite work upon S. Matthew under
the name of S. Chrysostom, which also is a work full of heresies. Item
certain sayings out of S. Hierome writing against Iouinian, and Heluidius.
Again sayings out of Athenagoras, S. Hierome, Gregory Nazianzen, and Origin,
by which he bears the Reader in hand, they have condemned the second
Marriages of Widowers, and Widows.

After this he reckeneth up so many Priests, Page 166.
and Bishops, as he has read of to have benne married men, who in deed were
married before they received holy Orders, and not otherwise. There Palea, Palea.
that is to say, the Chafe, that is set out in Gratian, concerning Priests
and Bishops that were many Popes Fathers, a very fond fabulous tale, is
admitted to the place of a great Doctor, yet by him much falsified, Page 167.
and altered from that he found in Gratians book. There also beside the report
of Aeneas Syluius, which him self recanted, and of Polydore Vergil, a man of
our time, and in these matters of small credit, he sticks not to pray help
of one Fabian, a late seely Chronicler of London, and with his woorshipful
testimony forsooth would feign prove his matter, that is to say, with a maine
Lie, that Bishops and Priests lived a thousand years together with their
Wives, no law being to the contrary.

Now were al these things true, according to the purporte of M. Iewelles
doctrine (as for the more part they are very false, and the Doctors by him
corrupted, and very untruly reported) what should they make for his purpose, I
mean, for the point it self of this Controversy, which is, that it is lawful
to marry after the Vow of Chastity, or after holy Orders received? For I
trow M. Jewel will not use this simple kind of Logique, Certain ancient Writers
condemned Matrimony (which is utterly false in respect of al others by M
Jewel here named except Tertullian, that condemned the second Marriages, whom
the Church for the same rejects) Item, certain learned and holy men in
the Primitive Church were made Priests, and Bisshoppes, after they had benne
married: Ergo, it is lawful to marry after the Vow of Chastity, and after
holy Orders taken. As this reason is fond, and little worth, so all the sayings
of Writers which he has heaped together hitherto, serve him to no purpose,
but to increase the bulk of his Book.

After all this feeling him self pressed with the force of the Vow, which
being advisedly made is of necessity to be performed, as I proved in my
Confutation: to keep him self still a luffe of from the point of the Question,
he takes a new way, saying, that the Priests in England were never
Votaries. Touching this matter, whether the Priests of England were Votaries,
or no, F^. 290.^
I refer the Reader unto the first Chapter of the fifth book of this
Treaty. Howsoever it be, by this answer M. Jewel flees from the point, as
far as he fled before. For the Question is, whether Priests in general that
have made a Vow of Chastity may marry, and he answers that Priests of
England be not Votaries. Which answer serves as aptly in this case, as if a
question being demanded of him, whether Heretics are to be burned, he would
answer, we the Superintendentes of England, and our Ministers be no heretics.

From this he conueigheth him self to certain common places, and brings in
a Huge number of Doctors sayings tending to this meaning in effect, that
Chastity is hard to keep, that it is the gift of God, that God gives it not
to al, that it is to be counseled, but not commanded, that a man consider well
of what strength he is, and if he see him self not hable to perform the
precepts of Virginity, that rather then he fall into the dungeon of deadly
sin, he take a wife, and use the remedy ordained against incontinencie. Al
which sayings (we grant) be true, and are to be understood of them, which
be free, and have not bound them selves by deliberate Vow to contain.

To be short, it were a very tedious thing here to rehearse, how he ronneth
from Doctor to Doctor, how he craves stuffing of the Canonistes, and
Schoolmen, whom God wot he little esteems, how he writes out their
sentences, and therewith fills up his Book. As for the ancient Doctors
sayings, that follow after all this, they are spoken, some against the
perfourmance of wicked Vows, some serve for admonition, that certain may be
suffered to marry, who having made only a simple Vow, either can not, or will
not contain, and that the Marriages of such persons ought to stand for
good, and not to be dissolved, some importe rebuke of filthy life, and
exhortation to Chastity, some be written against them, that either utterly
condemned the state of Matrimony, or willed Priests, and Deacons in the
Primitive Church to be compelled to forsake the company of their lawful
Wives, which they had married before they received holy Orders.

Thus he writes out other men's sayings without order, or discretion,
skippeth from one matter to an other, and emptieth, as it were, the stoare of
his Notebookes into this Defense, and when he has shuffled in all, he proves
nothing directly, but only brings the Reader to a Confusion, and comes not
at al to the discussion of the point, that we stay upon, which in this matter
of Priests Marriages is, that to marry it is not lawful after deliberate Vow
of chastity made, nor after holy Orders received. What colorable arguments,
or testimonies he brings to prove the affirmative, Infra lib. 5 Cap. 2
in this Treaty Reader thou shall see them clearly confuted.

Likewise (to show thee an other example) having taken upon him to prove,
Defense. Page 157.
that the Canonistes have taught the people, that Fornication between single
folk is no sin, it is a world to see what a do he makes, what a number of
Allegations he hudleth together, and when he has uttered al his stoare, he is
as far from proof of that he took in hand to prove, as he was before he
began. So that in effect nothing thereby is done, but only malice showed,
and incke and paper spent.

First, to make a great show, Defense. 360.
and to increase his Volume (for to what other purpose I see not) he tells us
of certain beastly sayings of Aetius the old Heretic, and of Prodicus the
heathen philosopher, as though the Canonistes were to be blamed for the faults
of the Heretics, and Infidelles of old time. Next, he brings in
Laurentius Valla the Grammarian, whose saying, though it be not needeful here
to rehearse for the reverence of chaste ears, yet it may with a convenient
interpretation be honestly defended. Then Richardus de Sancto Victore a late
Schooleman, and Socrates the Historiographer are haled in to give their
verdite, and though they tell us of the corrupt judgment of certain, that
made little account in conscience of Fornication and whooredome: yet that the
Popes Canonistes taught the people, that simple Fornication is no sin,
thereof they speak not one word. Which because M. Jewel him self perceived
right well, he prevented that he feared would be objected, and after that number
of impertinent allegations, M. Ievvelles But.
comes in, as his manner is, with his But, saying, But ye will say, all this
hitherto pertains nothing unto the Canonistes.

To whom answer may be returned, that so it is in deed: and whereas he knew
it him self, what meant he nevertheless to put it in, but to increase the
heap of his Volume?

After this he pretends to come to the very point, and to hit the nail on
the head, as they say. And there he takes advantage of a Decree of the first
Toletane Council falsely reported in Gratian by the oversight of the printer in
an old Copy, many other Copies being true, which advantage nevertheless
eftsoon there he forgoeth, confessing the Copy to be false. Yet al must in,
to fill up the great book. Then he goes to the true Copy, and either by
ignorance he mistaketh the place, or by malice falsifieth the sense,
dissembling, that the word Concubina Co^cubina.
is oftentimes taken in good part, to wit, for a woman used in all respects
like a Wife, and with the intent, and affection of wedlock, before the
Marriage be openly solemnized. This shall be better perceived by reading that I
have said hereof Lib. 5. cap. 15.

From that Council (which was holden long before any of the Canonistes, whom
so fowly he sclaundereth, wrote letter) he goes to peake in his Gloses, the
Gloses I mean upon Otho (whom like an unskillful lawier, he makes one with
Otho bonus) and upon the Decrees of Gratian. The one Gloselie falsifieth by
leaving out a word of chief importance, the other of purpose he
misconstrueth, the rest that he allegeth out of an other Gloss, and out of one
Petrus Rauennas a Canoniste, is true, and pertains nothing to the wicked
doctrine, whereof he accuses the Canonistes.

From the Gloses he starteth to S. Augustine in Enchiridio ad Laurentium.
Defense 361.
And out of him he takes a sentence, utterly to no purpose, but to fill up the
paper. From S. Augustine to the Council of Basile, then to Erasmus in
Enchiridio militis Christiani, belying them both. From Erasmus he crepeth to
Iacobus de Valentia, Jacob. de Valentia in Psalm. 118
saying of Jews, Saracenes, and certain il Christian men, that to excuse
their detestable life, they affirm simple Fornication to be lawful. But what
is this to the Canonistes? From this Iacobus the Spaniard of Valentia, he
conueieth him self to Alexander of Hales the English man, and from him to
Antonius of Florence the Italian. But at their hands he finds no more
relief, then he found at the others. By Antonius it is roported only, that
their error is confuted, who say, that simple Fornication is no sin. In
Alexander there is nothing found, but only a saying pretended to be S.
Ambroses, which makes nothing to the purpose, neither is it at al being
uttered in such words, to be found in S. Ambrose.

At length he ends this matter with a falsified saying of S. Augustine,
making that holy Father (as untruly he reports his tale) to say, that he can
not tell, whether that kind of Fornication, which single men commit with
single womenne, be forbidden, or no. Which, were it true that S. Augustine so
said, as in deed he says it not, but speaks otherwise, as here the reader
shall find by me declared, yet by that, the sclaunder uttered against the
Canonistes, is not justified.

This much have I here noted for examples sake, to the intent thou may
understand Reader, what order he keeps commonly in his writing, and whereof
it comes, that his books rise to such a huge quantity.

And as he has done in these two matters, so has he done in the rest, very
few excepted. The same would I here by sundry other mo evident examples
show, were it not over long.

Certainly this is not to answer a Book, it is not learnedly to reply, it is
not directly to confute a Book. It is only an ostentation of much reading, it
is a copying out of common places laid up in Notebookes, it is to render words
for reasons, and heaps of impertinent sentences of what so ever Writers, for
apt testimonies of the ancient Fathers. Briefly, it is not an orderly
disproufe of the doctrine that the Church has hitherto holden. For who so will
consider of it with right judgment, shall find our proufes to stand unshaken,
and my former Book to remain a sufficient Confutatio^, not only of the
Apology, but also of the pretensed Defense it self. That it may truly be
said, there was a Confutation of the Defense made, before the Defense it self
was printed. For if the points of my former Book be well weighed and
considered of, they will to the learned seem a sufficient answer to what so
ever he brings.

For trial hereof I refer me to the answer, which here I have made unto his
View of Untruths. The View of M. Jewels Untruths.
Among which Untruths thou shall find few noted out of the Apology so by
him discharged, but that in respect of my Confutation, notwithstanding his
Defense, he may seem still to stand chargeable no less then before. If he can
no better discharge him self of such Untruths, which he him self has
chosen out of the whole heap, as the least, and easiest for him to defend,
and in justification of which he had greatest confidence: it may soon be
judged, how unlike it is, that he shall be hable to discharge him self of those
others, which he thought best to conceele and dissemble.

One thing good Reader it behooves thee much to be warned of, in case thou
desire to stand an upright vmpeere between M. Jewel and me. Upon what places so
ever thou shall happen to light, in which he shall seem to have any good
advantage against me, or against the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, pass
not them over lightly, weigh well both our grounds, examine both our
allegations, trust not to ought, that is laid forth by either of us presently,
but resort to the Books, whence every thing is taken. Doing so, thou shall
most certainly perceive, whether of us both uses more truth. Doubtless in
such places thou shall seldo^ (it were much so say never) find him to allege
the words, whereby he prete^deth any color of advantage, without some false
slight, or other.

If thou desire to understand this by some examples, consider I pray thee,
what great a do he makes about the name of Universal Bishop. Universal Bishop.
As he handles that matter, if a man will believe him, al things seem to be
plain on his side. Defense. 120.
The Counsel of Carthage (says he) decreed by express words, that the Bishop
of Rome should not be called the Universal Bishop. And behold Reader the
confidence that he has in this cause, which he shows with these words
speaking unto me. This you say, is forged, and falsified, and is no part of
that Conucel. For indifferent trial both of the truth, and of the falshed
herein, I beseech you, behold the very words of the Council, even as they are
alleged by your own Doctor Gratian. These they are Prima Sedi^ Episcopus,
etc. Let not the Bishop of any of the first Sees be called the Prince of
Priests, Did. 99. Primae.
or the highest Priest, or by any like name: but only the Bishop of the
first See. But let not the Bishop of Rome him self be called the Universal
Bishop. etc. Now M. Harding, compare our words, and the Councelles words
together. We say none otherwise, but as the Council says, The Bishop of Rome
him self ought not to be called the universal Bishop. Herein we do neither
add, nor minis he, but report the words plainly, as we find them. If you
had lookte better on your book, and would have tried this matter, as you say,
by your learning, ye might well have reserved these uncivil reproaches of
falshed to your self, and have spared your crying of shame upon this Defender.

Here is much a do, as thou feast Reader, and al stands upon falshed, as I
said at the first in my Confutation. We strive not for the name of Universal
Bishop: neither has the Pope Challenged that title. Yet these men have never
done with Universal Bishop. The whole matter is soon answered. These words
vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur: Council. Carthag. 3
Cap. 26.
The Bishop of Rome ought not to be called the universal Bishop, (these words
I say) be not the words of the third Council of Carthage, nor in the Greek,
nor in the Latin, but the words of Gratian and they stand for the Sum of
that part of the distinction, which there follows. And thereof M. Jewel was
not ignorant, as it appears by his own words in the same place. Howbeit,
were it true, that Gratian had ignorantly added them to the Council as words
of the Counsel, what learned man trusts Gratian, a man not greatly trusted in
respect of sundry his allegations, when it is easy to see the Original? For
this I refer the Reader to the 39. Chapter of the third Book of this
Treaty, fol. 184. b.

Perusing that I have answered to this point there thou shall fully understand,
how falsely M. Jewel has dealte therein, and how little cause he had so to
triumph. For neither has the Council any such words at al, nor speaks it
there so much as one word of the Bishop of Rome, nor has Gratian put those
words, as a testimony of the Council, but as the Sum of that part of the
99. Distinction, which immediately follows. As well might M. Jewel have said,
that those other words there placed, vnde Pelagius secundus omnibus Episcopis,
had been the words of that Council. He that knows Gratians manner of writing,
can not but either laugh at M. Iewelles ignorance, or marvel at his
impudency.

To prove that it is lawful for a man to marry a wife being in holy Orders,
The example of Eupsychius.
he allegeth the example of one Eupsychius, who was a Lay Gentleman of
Caesaria the chief City in Cappadocia, and in a time of persecution suffered
Martyrdom soon after that he had benne married. Now most falsely he corrupts
the reporter of the Story, and makes this Eupsychius a Bishop, that it might
appear to the ignorant, that one had married a wife after he had benne made a
Bishop, which would have served our married Superintendentes purpose gaily. For
yet after so many years search, they can not bring us forth so much as one
clear example of the ancient Church, that ever there was any Bishop, or
Priest married after that degree, and holy Order taken. With such unclean
conueiance their unclean treachery is defended.

Defense 176. Cassio. li. 6. cap. 14.
His words be these, Cassiodorus writes thus, In illo tempore ferunt Martyrio
vitam finisse Eupsychium Caesariensem (Episcopum) ducta nuper vxore: dum adhuc
quasi sponsus esse videretur: At that time they say Eupsychius the Bishop of
Caesaria died in Martyrdom, having married a wife a little before, being yet in
manner a new married man.

Behold Reader the falshod of this man. First, contrary to his custom
elsewhere, he leaves the Greek fonteine, where this Story was First written,
and goes to the river of the old translation in many places not most exactly
answering the Greek. And why did he so? Forsooth because if he had alleged
Sozomenus the Greek writer, his falshod had benne fowly bewraied. For he
names this Eupsychius expressly, Eupsychius a laieman, by M. Jewels forgerie
made a Bishop, to prove the Marriages of Priests.
(...), as much to say, Eupsychius one of the Lords (or one of the Nobility)
of the City of Caesaria in Cappadocia. Then, because the Tripartite Story of
Cassiodorus setting forth has not so expressly, that he was a nobleman of
Caesaria, M. Jewel was so bold, as to falsify the place, and to put in of
his own this word, Episcopum, to help his matter, and so corrupting his
author, makes him to call him Eupsychium Caesariensem Episcopum, Eupsychius
the Bishop of Caesaria. Thus he takes upon him to make him a Bishop, who
was a Lay man, as well a Bishop as he him self is, that it might appear to
the unlearned, that a Bisshoppe married a wife after he was Bisshoppe. Fol.
302. and 318.
See what I have said hereto in this Treaty, where I answer his false stuff
touching Priests marriages. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. Fol. 302.

Speaking against the number of the seven Sacraments of the Church, Defense.
213. Apocal. 5.8.7.1.
to bring the Catholic Doctrine in contempt, thus he says. As for the
reasons, that they of M. Hardinges side have brought us for proof hereof, they
are too childish to be remembered. For thus they say, The Book in the
Apocalypse has seven seals: The seven Angels there have seven Trumpettes:
Christ has in his right hand seven stars: Christ walks in the mids of
seven golden Candlestickes: Zacha. 3. Exodus 37.
Zachary saw seven eyes upon a stone: There were seven Candelstickes in the
Tabernacle: Ergo, say they, there must needs be just seven Sacraments in
the Church of God.

If this were true, In Compendio Theologiae.
we might be somewhat ashamed of our Doctors, I grant. Neither can this
Reason seem but weak and feeble. But what if all this be false? Then are our
Doctors not touched, then may their reasons be thought substantial, and M.
Jewel a vain Iangler, that thus stuffeth his great Book with Lies. Peruse
the place Reader, In Co^pendio Theologia lib. 6. cap. 5.
that by his quotation he directs thee unto, and thou shall find him like
him self as he is every where, a false Minister. For Compendium Theologiae,
which he allegeth, has far otherwise. It says not, there must needs be
just seven Sacraments in the Church, because seven Seals, seven Trumpettes,
seven Stars, seven Candlestickes, seven Eyes be thus spoken of in the
Scripture: but it says expressly, Sacramenta figurata sunt in septem
Signaculis, The Sacraments were figured (or foresignified) in the seven
Seals, in the seven Stars, etc. That the number of those things is made a
reason, or cause of the number of the Sacraments, it is M. Jewels Lie, it is
not the saying of him that wrote Compendium.

Defense 361. 8, Augustine foully, and dangerously falfied by M. Ievvel.
Having taken upon him to prove, that the Doctors of the Canon Law have taught
the people, that Fornication between Singlefolke is no sin, among a huge heap
of sayings taken out of writers of sundry sorts, (whereof not so much as one
affirms it) he brings in this saying, pretending it to be S. Augustine, in
Quaestion. in Exodus quaest. 20. Illa Fornicatio, quam faciunt qui vxores non
habent, cum foeminis, quae viros non habent, an prohibita inueniri possit,
ignoro. That kind of Fornication, which Single men commit with single
womenne, whether it be forbidden, or no, I can not tell.

By this sentence, as it is here set forth, S. Augustine is set to school, and
made to confess (which he would never have confessed whiles he lived) that he
could not tell, whether Fornication that is committed between single folcke,
were forbidden, or no: whereby he should seem to give great liberty to single
persons to follow the filthy lusts of their flesh. And here, which is to be
noted, whereas the rest of the sentence is printed in the small letter, in
which the Doctors testimonies be commonly set out, these words in Latin,
Fornicatio, an prohibita inueniri possit, ignoro, and these English words,
Fornication, whether it be forbidden, or no, I can not tell, are printed in a
far greater letter, that they should readily appear to the eye, and be
readde of al men, as if he were desirous, as the Devil him self is, that al
were persuaded, that Fornication among single persons were no sin. Which
doctrine there, and in certain other places of that Book, by sundry
colorable sayings of Writers he seems to labor to persuade.

But the true saying of S. Augustine, and the meaning of the same, is far
otherwise. For thus he says, not in Quaest. in Exodus quaest. 20. as the place
by M. Jewel is falsely quoted: but in Quaestionum super Exodum lib. 2. quaest.
71. Sed si non omnis Fornicatio etiam Moechia dici potest, vbi sit in Decalogo
prohibita illa fornicatio, quam faciunt viri qui vxores non habent, cum
foeminis, quae maritos non habent, vtrum inueniri possit, ignoro. As much to
say, But if it be so, that al Fornication may not be called also (Moechia)
Aduouterie, where that Fornication, which men commit that have no wives, with
womenne that have no husbands, is forbidden in the Table of the ten
Commandments, whether it may be found, or no, I can not tell.

S. Augustine says not simply, he knew not whether simple Fornication were
forbidden, or no: he knew well, it was forbidden: But if it were once denied,
that al Fornication were signified by the word and name of Moechia, (which
properly is Aduouterie, which word is expressed in the ten Commandments)
the contrary whereof he proves in that place very learnedly: in this case,
and not otherwise, he acknowlegeth him self not to know, where the
Fornication, that is committed between single persons, may be found forbidden
(where? not generally, but) in Decalogo, in the ten Commandments. And this
is the only point, wherein S. Augustine confesses his ignorance. Howbeit in
the same place he shows, that under the name of Moechia, al manner
Fornication is comprised, and that therefore in the ten Commandments it is
forbidden, no less then Aduout^ri^, as I have at large declared in this
Treaty Lib. 5. Cap. 15. where M. Jewels falsehood is further detected.

But what mean I to lay forth places by M. Jewel falsified, and corrupted?
If I would make profession thereof, I ought to lay forth his whole book new
printed. For of such stuff the whole consists. One place, because therein he
thought to touch mine honesty, I can not let pass. Thus it is.

Consider Reader how far such a false forger is to be trusted
Having in my Confutation reproved the Lady A.B. for turning these words out
of Fulgentius, formam serui, and formam Dei (as much to say, the form of a
feruaunt, and the form of God) into Manhed, and Godhed, whereby a false
meaning is conueighed in against the true presence of Christ's body in the
most blessed Sacrament of the Altar: least I should have seemed over sharp in
rebuking a woman (whereas in deed for a Doctor of Divinity to confute a
woman, I thought it no great Conquest) after certain other words of reprouse,
Confutation. Fol. 41.2
thus I say: Whether I may without breach of courtesy charge her with so
heinous a crime, or no, I doubt. Perhaps as she passes the bonds of
womanly state, in presuming to meddle so far in these perillouse matters,
etc: so may I seem to forgete courtesy, thus roughly to blame so soft a
creature.

Defense. fol. 89.
Now comes me in this Master of Defense, and for the love of his good Lady,
lays busily about him, drives very fiercely at me (though his strokes light
not on me) and like a kind hearted Lover, says very much in her praise, and
not a little to my dispraise: that she forsooth is a Lady of great learning,
virtue, and gravity, that all that I have sent over, are but toys, and trifles
(by like because I printe not my Books in Folio, as he does) that she is full
of wisdom, and I full of folly.

There he promises in great sooth, that he will not tell me how lewdly I have
demeaned my self toward her. And what is that? Nay, he will not tell it me (ye
may believe him, because it will sound to my great shame. Yet out it must, the
man is taken with such a lust. And because he was loathe it should come to the
knowledge of many, thus forthwith he tells it me in a printed book. I
beseech you (says he full courteously) call your words again to mind, if
you can without blusshing: Handle, foisted in by M Ievvel for Blame.
So roughly to handle so soft a Creature (where he has changed my honest
word Blame, into his own word Handle, of filthy imagination) This Phrase of
speech your very friends have much misliked, and as it is in deed, so in
plain words they call it Ruffianrie, etc. The whole matter thus he concludes,
with like truth as he began. But this fault, as I have said, I will dissemble.

To all this, what shall I say good Reader? God be thanked, that M. Jewel, who
is so desirous to tell that of me, whereof I should be ashamed, has nothing to
tell, but a Lie forged by his own filthy imagination, whereof he must needs
be ashamed, if he have any spark of honest nature in him. So roughly to
handle so soft a creature, be not my words.

If it be Ruffianrie so to speak (as he says, that in deed it is) then is
this Superintendent of Sarisburie become a Ruffian. For he speaks so, I spoke
it not. Thus roughly to blame so soft^ a creature, whether it might not in that
place be honestly spoken, I report me to all that be honest. Because he knew
him self, he had made this apparent advantage against me by his false
forgerie, foisting in the word Handle, in place of the word Blame, of purpose,
that his impudent falshed might not be espied, he least out of his Book,
xxvij. lines of my Confutation, where the words be with which I reprove the
Lady for her false Translation, if it were hers, and not an others, set forth
in her name.

But my very friends have much misliked this Phrase of speech, says M.
Jewel. I marvel how they could mislike it, before it was ever written. In
deed both my friends, and his friends too, mislike this Phrase, as he has
forged it, very much, I doubt not. And as for his friends, I dare say, they
are ashamed of him, and wish, he had not discredited his ministerly Divinity,
with such Ruffianly humanity, or rather inhumanitie. For a full answer hereto
see in this Treaty, Lib. 3. cap. 2. Fol. 120.

As for the Lady that translated the Apology into English, in whose quarrel
this dishonest and unclean lewdness has by this Champion ben practiced, I
wish her no worse, but that she tell M. Jewel, when she meets with him
next, that though she were desirours both of Praise, and also of revenge,
yet she had rather remain vnpraised, and vnrevenged, then of such a false
handler to be praised, and with such open lying to be revenged.

Thus Reader by View of these few places noted out of the whole heap, thou
may conceive, with what manner stuff M. Jewel has filled up that huge
Book. Such as these are, after the same rate the more part of the rest is.
Wherefore al men may see, how good cause they have to hier their Promotours,
and Waiters, to lie in wait for our Books at the Ports, and Creekes, and
with great extremity to pounish al men, who are found to have them. For by
that mean they hope to win a long time, before their guile and falshode be
made open to all the world.

Seeing then among all that huge heap so little can be found, whereby he may
seem to go directly to the points that be in Controversy, and presently
treated of, seeing where he gives out certain shadows, as it were of
proufes, if the same be duly examined, they be tried corrupted, and falsified
by one untrue mean or other, and seeing the confutation of all that is to be
confuted, must be made by repeating and laying forth again the testimonies
truly, which he allegeth falsely, by showing, where he clippeth of the Doctors
words, where he adds words of his own, where he leaves out the beginning,
or the end of Sentences, where he uses false translation, where he conceeleth
and dissembleth the Circumstance of the places, and follows the bare sound of
words without farther view of the Writers intent, where he makes false
exchange of words, as he is now taken in the manner, changing Blame, a word
of chaste meaning, into Handle a word of unchaste imagination: seeing I say,
this is the mean and way, whereby the Confutation of the pretensed Defense
must be wrought: I leave unto the judgment of those who can judge of these
things, what a long and tedious work it would be, and how little profit would
redounde thereof, if I should refute his whole Book.

This being well considered, specially whereas also a long time is required to
the finishing of such a work, great charges are to be employed in printing,
and men at these days soon wax weary, and feel lothsomnes in reading
long Treaties: I thought I should do more conveniently, if I confuted the
chief points of Doctrine, then if I bestowed my labor about the confutation
of the whole, which for the most part consists of light and vain trifles
not worth the reading. And to say the truth, what credit is he worthy to
bear in the rest, that in the chief points is proved to have dealte so
untruly?

If I truly charge M. Jewel with thertie, forty, fifty, yea with a hundred
great and notorious Lies, and sufficiently confute the same, shall I not seem
to have proved him a Lier, and a false dealer in these causes, excepted I
confute him in a thousand, eleven, or twelve hundred mo? If the case be so,
then is the advantage in the multitude of Lies, and he is farthest from being
confuted, who makes most Lies, and specially he that makes so many, as the
defender of the truth shall not have leisure to try them Lies. It is well
known, how much easier it is to write Lies, then to confute Lies. A Lie is
uttered in a word or two: the poison of an heinous Heresy is spet forth in a
line or two: Nor this, nor that perhaps can well and sufficiently be confuted,
so as it be made plain unto the unlearned, in four or five leaves.

Least I should seem to say nothing in his commendation, and not to
acknowledge his worthiest qualities, I grant, he is furnished with Rhetorie,
with human letters, with Eloquence, with a mearie wit, and that he has a
ready grace in skoffing, yea that he is hable to grieve the heart not only of
his Adversary, but also of any other godly man, with scorneful flowtes in
things of greatest holiness. But Christian Reader, we strive not for the
Garland of that game: we go not about to try maisteries of such wit, or of
human learning. Our strife is about the Truth. The way to show it, and
prove it, (which he him self by open Challenge has offered his Doctrine to be
tried by) is by laying forth the plain Scriptures, the examples of the
Primitive Church, the testimonies of the General Councelles, and ancient
Fathers.

Of these who has so great stoare, says a friend of his, as M. Jewel? Who
ever saw the margent of any Book so beset with cotations, as his Books are?
This were a great evidence of the Truth on his side, if the matter were
always tried by what so ever multitude of writers sayings. But what if the
number of his testimonies be quite beside the purpose? Seems he not then very
shameless? Is he not then far to blame so to abuse the plain and well
meaning Readers? It shall be said perhaps in his excuse: He sees the
negligence of men, he considered, that few, or none examine our writings.
And therefore he thinks, he shall seem to say much, though in deed nothing
be said, that pertains to the points presently handled. And where a thing is
to be done and the same for want of ability can not be done: there it seems
good policy to give the assaie, and to make show, as if it could be done, or
were done. It is known, how flatterers make resemblance of friendship, how
Hypocrites give forth tokens of holiness, the intended Bankroute of good
trust and credit, the craking Coward of stout courage, Beggars oftentimes of
wealth, Queanes of womanly honesty, and chaste demeanor. Right so M. Jewel
feeling him self destitute of the Truth, and impugning the Truth, and
professing to deliver unto the world a new Truth, that is to say, a heap of
old Untruths busily set forth of late years by Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin,
Beza, and the rest, and by Wiklefe, Hus, Waldenses, and others, their
predecessors in former times, labors with all his wit, and cunning, to
justify it, calling it by the name of Gods pure word, the Gospel, and the
sincere Truth: that whereas he is not hable to perform his intent in deed,
yet he might seem to make it good with words.

Touching the life of the Clergy, well may I confess, that M. Jewel has
somewhat to say, out of certain writers, how true, I know not: whereto I
shall hardly be hable to make answer in full defense of certain persons. But
as touching the Doctrine, that the Catholic Church holds at this day, and
has always holden, I auouche boldly, as by sundry our books it has now ben
clearly proved, and they understand so much that do thoroughly examine the
reasons, authorities, and proufes of both parts: that he is not hable to bring
so much as one sentence out of any allowed writer, that may not easily be
refelled.

And because he knows, that in points of Doctrine the force of Truth is
clearly on our side, he would feign train me from matters of Doctrine,
wherein he has small hope of victory, or of acquitting him self with even
hand, unto matters of life, and other bye things, whereof what so ever be
believed, therein is no great danger touching our Salvation. As for example,
what crack is there made in the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, if the
Nominales, and the Reales, if the Thomistes, and Scotistes dissent about
points Logical, or Metaphysical, or perhaps also about the paringes of some
Scholastical points of Divinity? What if some light believing writers have
sadly and in ernest made mention of one Ioane a woman Pope, deceived by
Martinus Polonus Martinus Polonus.
a man of small credit, who moved with old wives tales first committed that
fable to writing? What if some later writers have uttered their fantasies,
which they dreamed thereof, upon occasion of an old Marble Stone having in it
a woman with a ladde standing by her engraued? What if a few men that held
with certain evil Emperors, which could not abide to be revoked from their
unlawful lusts by the Pope for the time being, have written and reported il of
a few Popes? What if Johannes Casa wrote some unchaste Italian Sonettes and
Rymes in his yewth, though for filthiness not comparable to such as be extant
of Bezaes making the Apostle of the French Huguenotes? What if Petrus
Aloisius, whom Paulus Tertius the Pope loved so tenderly, were a vicious man?
What if John Diazius the Spaniard were unnaturally murdered by Alphonsus
Diazius his brother that lived at Rome?

What if Luther, wrote against the furious vproares of the Boures in Germany,
when he saw they were sure to be overthrown by the Nobility there (whom
notwithstanding he had before by Thomas Muncer his scholar stirred to take
weapons against their Lords) that he might lay some good color upon that he
had il begone? What if some have written, though not without contradiction of
others, that Poison was ministered in the blessed Sacrament? What if a Pope
showed him self cruel, and without pity, in suffering Frances Dandulus the
Venetians Ambassador to lie under his table like a dog, whiles he was at
diner.

What if Popes have suffered great Princes and Monarkes to kiss their feet,
to hold their Stiroppes, to lead their horses by the Bridle? What if Gregory
the seventh, otherwise called Hildebrande, whom many grave Writers report to
have benne a man of great virtue, and an excellent good governor of the
Church, be of some Writers of that age, who flattered the Emperor then being
that Popes mortal enemy, accounted an il man? What if Pope Alexander used
Frederike the Emperor more proudly, then became a man of his calling? What if
Constantines Donation can not be most sufficiently proved by record of
antiquity? What if certain Emperors and other Princes, for great causes have been removed from their estates by the Popes authority? What if the Gloser upon
Gratian, and certain other Canonistes have immoderately magnified the Pope,
and to extol his power have used some terms indiscreetly, which nevertheless
by favorable interpretation may be justified?

What if the Popes at certain times either for negligence cared not, or for
the wrechednesse of man's il inclination could not, or for great
considerations would not utterly purge the City of Rome of Courtesanes, and
Brodel houses? What if the life of many Priests, Bishops, Cardinals, yea of
some Popes also has justly deserved to be reproved? Once to conclude, what if
al sorts of old Books being raked out of dusty corners, Schoolmen,
Summistes, Glosers, vain Chroniclers, Legendes, writers of Dreams and
Visions, and such Riffe raffe, and men for the purpose being set a work to
peruse them, in the same be found a few fond points of Doctrine, certain
loose Conclusions, many seely Tales not worth the telling, and some lewd
faults of Religious persons, and others of the Clergy detected?

What if I say, al these, and many other such things were granted, of
which we are persuaded, that some are true, the more part is false, much is
so written, as it may be defended, no less then impugned? What great
inconvenience, what prejudice to our Faith can ensue of all this? Must the
Catholic and ancient Doctrine of the Church for these points be found
untrue? Must this now needs be made a good Argument, Some of their lives were
sinful, Ergo, their Doctrine was false?

Truly these be the matters, with the enlarging whereof his Defense has risen
to so huge a quantity. About which I have not thought it needeful to bestow
much labor, partly because in most of those points my Confutation of the
Apology yet stands vnrefelled, partly also because it liked me not to
emploie good hours in so frivolous and unfruitful a travail, but chiefly
because what so ever be said by M. Jewel touching these things, either on the
one side, or on the other, it imports no disprouse of the Catholic doctrine
in any Article, which specially I have taken in hand to maintain.

Howbeit, the things he brings in to deface the Church, must needs with
wise men in this case bear small credit, being considered upon whose
authorities, and reports they be avouched.

The Catholics can not be greatly moved with such things, as are written in
prejudice of the Church, either by them, whose Books be of suspected faith,
and therefore condemned by the Church, as Auentinus, and Beno de vita
Hildebrandi, or have been corrupted of late years by the Lutheranes of Germany,
as Vrspergensis, In Indice librorum prohibitorum.
Antonius de Rosellis, Polydorus Vergilius de Inuentoribus rerum, Paschasius,
and others, or who have benne much inclined to innouations in Religion, and
favored the Procedinges of Luther, and his disciples, as Erasmus, Cornelius
Agrippa, Carrion, Lorichius, Cassander and such others, or who be known to be
manifest Heretics, and professed enemies of the Church, as Gaspar Hedio the
Author of Paralipomena added to Vrspergensis, Anselmus Rid, Vergerius, Sleidan,
Illyricus, Fabritius Montanus, Iacobus Andreae, and many such others, al
which M. Jewel allegeth against the Church, the Popes, and the Clergy
boldly, as if they were Doctors of sufficient authority, and sound credit,
against whom, specially in these matters no exception might be taken.

As there is no cause why we should greatly esteem any thing spoken by these,
either against the manners of the Clergy, or against the Ceremonies, and
customs of the Church, or against any part of the Catholic Doctrine,
because in judgment the bare word of the Accuser, or of him that otherwise is
an il willer, bears small credit against any man: So touching the doctrine of
Faith, we fear not what so ever M. Jewel allegeth against us out of the
Schoolemenne, Canonistes of al sorts, Summistes, and Glosers, out of the
Cardinals, and those other learned and grave men appointed by Paulus
Tertius to give information of things in the state of the Church to be
reformed, and out of the Bisshoppes speaking their minds freely in the late
Council of Trent. For we are well assured, how so ever M. Jewel tells their
tales for them, they held, and maintained the doctrine which we profess, in
every condition.

What so ever therefore he brings out of them, bearing any sound of words
against the Catholic Faith, as very little it is, that to that effect he can
bring, though with heaps of their sayings he has filled his great Volume:
the same is either by heat of Disputation, or by way of Objection against the
Truth after the Scholastical manner, for the better opening of the Truth, or
by vehemency of zele, or perhaps by human oversight uttered, otherwise
then by them is determined in their Conclusions, whereof the taking of
advantage is undue and over captious, or by some sleight of M. Jewel falsified
and corrupted, or, to say the least, by untrue co^struction wrested to a sense
by the Author never intended.

How so ever it be, they show them selves either very blind of judgment, or
very contentious wranglers, or very vain Ianglers, that allege the words of
any Writer against the Catholic doctrine, whose whole course of life showed
him to be Catholic. Which is told us by S. Augustine, as a most certain
rule, whereby to understand men's words in matter of Religion. And therefore
thus he cries out upon the blindness of such men, among whom M. Jewel may
take him self annumbred, that will not understand men's words by their deeds.

Aug. contra Epist. Parme. li. 3. cap. 4.
Incredibilis est coecitas hominum, and omnino nescio quemadmodum credi posset
esse in hominibus ta^ta peruersitas, nisi experimento verborum suoru^
factoru^que patesceret, vsqueadeo se clausos habere cordis oculos, vt
co^memorent sancta Scripturae testimonia, nec intueantur in factis Prophetaru^,
quemadmodum intelligenda sint verba Prophetaru^. The blindness of men is
inoredible, and certainly I wot not how I might make one believe, that there
were such frowardness in men, unless by the proof of their words and deeds
it appeared openly, that the eyes of their heart were so fast shut up, that
they allege the testimonies of the holy Scripture, and do not behold in the
doings of the Prophets, how the words of the Prophets are to be
understood.

Wherefore seeing the far greater part of M. Jewels Defense consists of
their sayings heaped together, of whom some were either them selves, or their
works being untruly set forth after their death of suspect faith, some found
to favor heretics, some professed heretics, some contrariwise known by
public profession of their life to be perfect Catholics: making little
account, what they of the one side say, as being of no credit, specially in
matter of Faith, and not doubting but these of the other side, meant well and
godly, how so ever their words by M. Jewel be abused, corrupted, and
misconstrued, in consideration thereof good Reader, I judged a short Treaty
might suffice in this case: short I mean in comparison of that Huge Volume
fraught with so much void, impertinent, and superfluous stuff. Otherwise, it
is longer, I am well assured, then he shall ever be hable aptly, truly, and
directly to confute.

I say not, but he may do eftsoon, as he has twice already done, that is
to say, gather together a huge number of sayings out of al sorts of Writers,
and printing this Treaty withal, send us forth an other great book,
containing much stuff to little purpose, and not once touching the very precise
points, wherein he is charged with foul errors, and falshed. But to come
directly to the points by me thoroughly refelled, and with good proufes to
justify the same, keeping him self in from idle ranging abroad in matters not
denied, or otherwise impertinent: this is that I affirm, he shall never be
hable to perform, though he write again as much as Fox has raked together
into that Donghil of his stinking Martyrs.

So then I trust good Reader, this my shorter, but more fruiteful travail,
shall well content thee. In which I have defended, and justified, the chief
matters of the Catholic doctrine by M. Jewel impugned, and therewith
overthrown his weak Defense.

In sundry other points also, which depend of Doctrine, I have detected his
great and manifold Untruths. Neither have I joined issue with him in any
point, wherein I have not sufficiently proved him, either deceived, or a
deceiuer. Wherein as Ignorance may stand him in some excuse for the one, so
must he bear the gilte of malice for the other. Each point here is not
handled with like diligence, and like exactenesse, I grant, for the matter
has not so required.

Yet where I have benne least disposed to take pains, and found my self most
weary in answering his frivolous Objections, thou shall find the truth
sufficiently maintained, and M. Jewel fully refuted. If anywhere thou epsy
defecte, or insufficiency, impute the blame to me. If in any part I shall
seem to have done well, take thou the profit, give God the praise.

Thomas Harding.

A DETECTION OF VNTRVTHES IN M. JEWELS EPISTLE TO THE QVENE. THE FIRST BOOK.
How untruly and how slanderously M. Jewel has charged his Adversary with
certain hateful crimes, in his Epistle to the Queen's Majesty set before his
pretensed Defense of the Apology. The First Chapter.
WHEREAS M. Jewel in the Epistle to the Queens Majesty set before his
pretensed Defense of the Apology, charge me with diverse points, whereby
both to discredit the Catholic Doctrine, and to stir her Majesty to
indignation against me, and other learned men here, who have confuted his
manifold erroures, and detected sundry his false parts, wherewith dangerously
he seduceth her Majesty's Subjects: least both I by my silence should seem
to acknowledge my self gilty of the things he charge me with, and least
others might be induced to believe him, thinking him not to be so void of dew
reverence and shame, as so far to abuse her Majesty's credulity in these
matters, who has no leisure, or lists not to examine the same; I have
thought it convenient and necessary, before I come to any part of his direct
answer to my Confutation of the Apology, to clear my self of what so ever he
imputes unto me in that Epistle, and to show, how all that he has written
against me in the same, is utterly false, and sclaunderous. And because I
cannot better and in plainer wise perform it, then by laying forth (as it
were) the book, where each thing is said, whereof he takes hold, and by
reporting mine own sayings, which he has falsified and untruly reported: Let
it not seem strange, nor be lothesom unto thee good Reader, that being driven
unto it by this necessity, I bring forth again unto thee, certain places
before written, and contained in my former Treaties. How lothsom soever it be
thee to read, and me to repeat again certain things before uttered:
verily it is the chief way, by which in this case the truth may clearly
be opened. Thus then enters M. Jewel his accusation against me.

M. Jewel in the epistle to the Queen. page 2. ad finem. M. Harding doubts
not to seek quarelles against us, even in that we maintain 1 The Baptism of
Christian Infantes, 2 The proceeding, and 3 Godhed of the Holy Ghost, 4 The
Faith of the holy, and glorious Trinity, and 5 the General, and Catholic
profession of the Common Creed.


Harding.
To confute errors, and to declare the Truth, is not to seek Quarelles.
Neither ought he to be called a Quareller, who of two ways, shows, which is
the better. the Baptism of Infantes. For therein I hold with them. The
Baptism of infantes no where reproved.
To my remembrance, I speak not of it, of purpose, in my whole book of the
Confutation, nor in my Reioindre: only where I prove that certain great, and
necessary points are to be believed, which be not expressed in the holy
Scriptures, In the defense. page 191. Co^futatio^ fol. 84. a.
because these Ministers in their Apology say, that al things needful for
our salvation are abundantly and fully comprehended in the Scriptures: among
sundry other things, which I demand to be showed us in the Scriptures, I
ask, where in all the Bible they find, that Infantes ought to be Baptized. And
well that question might I demand, for proof of that I intended in that
place, neither can it be found expressly commanded, or spoken of, I am well
assured. Wherefore, whiles M. Jewel accuses me to the Queens Majesty of
seeking Quarelles against him, in this point he shows us in him self, a
perfect pattern of a Quareller.

If I should here appose him in his own words, and ask him, Baptism of
Christian Infantes.
what he means by mainteining the Baptism of Christian Infantes, I think
rather, he would say, I were a seeker of Quarelles. Yet would I feign hear,
what he would answer. For what? Is he of the opinion, that such Infantes, as
be borne of Christian Parents, be Christians, before they be baptized? If they
be Christians, what need they to be Christened? If they have need to be
Christened, why does he call them before Baptism received, Christian Infantes?
Is any Man, Woman or Child to be called a Christian, before he be Christened?
Latet anguis in herba: There lies a Pad in the straw. Perhaps he thinks,
it is not yet time to spette out the poison of that heresy, which it seems
he has sucked out of Calvin, against the necessity of Baptism of Infantes,
whose parents be faithful.

This point I touched in my Confutation of the Apology. Fol. 67. b. Neither
durst M. Jewel yet to be plain, when he comes to that place in his Defense,
where he had good cause to treat fully of it, and to deliver the world from
that Suspicion worthily conceived, and to resolve us, whether he think
Baptism of Christian Parents Children to be necessary, or no.

Verily by saying, that by Gods Free Election they be pure, Ievvel in the
Defense. Page 250.
and holy, and by allowing all that Calvin says thereof, he gives out a
secret signification, his meaning to be, that in them Baptism is not utterly
necessary. These men's Doctrine (if I be not deceived) tends to this issue,
that at length Baptism shall be nothing else, but a Sign, mark, badge, or
recognizance of a Christian. Whereof it must follow, that as a man may be a
Soldier, a Serving man, or a Reteiner to a Noble man, though he lack his
Captains, or his Masters Badge, or Recognizance: likewise so many as be borne
of Christian Parents, be also Christians, though they never receive Baptism.
By the Premises of these men's Doctrines, we have just cause to think, that
at length they will teach, that the very Signs them selves also for avoiding
superstition may surceasse, and be put away, where the thing signified is
performed, and sufficiently believed. And so is Baptism like to be quite
abolished with other Signs, and Ceremonies. For Calvin their new Apostle of
Geneua teaches, that if we were mindeful yenough of Christ's Death, all the
Sacraments were superfluous. Calvin. in ^. Cor. 11.
I pray God in this point I be not a true Prophet. Defense 150.
M. Jewel labors all that he can in the Defense, to discharge Calvin of this
perilous Doctrine, wherewith I burden him in my Confutation. But when he has
said al, he has lost his labor, because he comes not to the point, and
dissembleth that Calvin ever said it. And so he may begin that matter
again. He shall do well to make Calvin in Antidoto to agree with Calvin in his
commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistles, where he teaches expressly, that in
case of sufficient remembrance of Christ's Death, all the Sacraments be
superfluous.

Which I gather not out of Caluines words, by a fond collection, as M. Jewel
bears the Reader in hand, but I show it to be Caluines own saying, and for
trial I direct the Reader unto the place.

Concerning the Godhed of the holy Ghost, I moved The Godhed of the holy
Ghost. Page 90. Confutat. 41. b. The proceeding of the holy Ghost.
Yet in the Defense of the Apology he bears men in hand, that I deny,
the holy Ghost may be proved to be God by express Scripture. For these be his
words. You say (M. Harding) that the Godhed of the holy Ghost can not be
proved by express words of the Scriptures, and thereof ye say, ye are right
sure. This is as false, as true it is, that the holy Ghost is God. Read my
words who will, he shall find me true and M Jewel false.

Mary as touching the Article of the holy Ghost, whereas the Authors of the
Apology say, it proceeds which is most true: Some things are to be
believed, for which we have no express Scripture.
in consideration of this point, of this point only I say, (which is part
of the whole Article) and not of the Godhed, I say in my Confutation, that
they have no express Scripture for it, nor any of the first four General
Councelles, and that therefore, we are bound of necessity to believe somewhat,
which is not expressly mentioned in the Scriptures, and that an other
Council, where that Article was confirmed, is to be received, beside the four
first, which only be allowed in England by Parliament.

Because he was loathe so manifest Untruth uttered against me should be espied,
he nipte away my words, not suffering my whole tale to be told out, in
which I do plainly signify my denial to perteine only to the Article of the
holy Ghostes proceeding, and not to the Article of his Godhed. For after these
words of the Apology, Defense. page ^0.
(we believe that the holy Ghost, who is the third person in the holy
Trinity, is very God, not made, not create, not begotten, but proceeding from
both the Father, and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto men, and
unspeakable, etc.) In my Confutation I say thus.

As we acknowledge this Article to be true, Co^futatio^ fol. 41. b.
and Catholic, so we demand of these Defenders, how they can prove the same.
Have they either express Scripture for it, or any of the first four general
Councelles, which be esteemed of most authority? Other Conucels to be
allowed of necessity besides the 4. First.
We are sure they have not. Therefore we do them to understand, and if they
hear us not, we advertise the readers that fear God, and love his truth,
that al truth necessarily to be believed is not expressed in the Scripture, and
that other Cou^celles be to be received besides the four first, which are
allowed in England by Parliament, This much between the two stars M. Jew.
nipt away from the rest.
as that wherein this point touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost has
been defined, Council. Lugdunen. and Council. Florentin. sub Eugenio. 4. as also
other definitions of the Church, when upon a new doubt rising, an old Truth
is by later Publications declared. Likewise those Councelles in which the
doctrine has been defined by the Church, concerning the Two Wills, and
Operations of Christ, which, who so ever believes not, or at least refuses
to believe, is not to be taken for a Christian man. If these Councelles be
denied, al these things shall come in doubt again: and if these be received,
then why should not all the rest that be universal (Councelles) be also
received, which the Church has allowed? * Thus I say there.

Judge now good Reader, whether I deny in that place, that the holy Ghostes
Godhed may be proved by express words of Scripture, wherewith he charge me
in the Defense, and whether this be a seeking of Quarelles against him, for
that he mainteineth the Proceeding, and the Godhed of the holy Ghost, as he
charge me in his Epistle to the Queens Majesty.

Likewise it is an immoderate lie, where he says, I

Neither can I seem to pike Quarelles against them in that they maintain the
General, and Catholic profession of the Common Creed, for so should I prove
my self an ennemie to the Faith. As thus to do it were a heinous crime, so to
burden me therewith in a public Write, in a printed Book set forth for every
man to read, in a solemn Epistle Dedicatorie to a Prince, and to such a
Prince, the slander is heinous, wicked, and impudent. Howbeit, As I allow, and
approve the Confession of their belief touching the Trinity, confessing it to
contain true and Catholic doctrine: so I seem better to like of the old
accustomed manner of utterance of the belief. And in deed among Christian
men, when this high point of our Faith concerning the blessed Trinity is by
a public Confession to be taught, it is not yenough to utter some part of
our belief which is true, but also it behooves us to utter the whole truth,
and to use such form of words, as has benne used, and allowed by the
Church from the beginning. What I mean, and how reasonably herein I have
spoken, by these my words, unto the indifferent Reader it shall appear.

Confut. 39. b.
But what fault find ye in this confession of our Faith, says this defender.
Sir, the first part of your Confession, wherein you utter your Belief
touching the Trinity, contains true and Catholic doctrine. Where the thing
you treat of is not in controversy between you and us, and where you speak
not with affection to overcome, Strange manner of uttering the faith.
we grant some times ye utter truth. But the manner of utterance of your Faith
is strange to Christen ears, who have been accustomed to hear, Credo in
Deum, Credo in Iesum Christum, Credo in spiritum Sanctum. I believe in God, I
believe in Jesus Christ, I believe in the holy Ghost. That other form of
words, which you use, sounds not so Christianlike: I believe there is a
God, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of the Father, I believe that the
holy Ghost is God. Although this form of words do express a right Faith,
yet being such as may be uttered by Deuilles, and has been always uttered
by Heretics their ministers: the ancient and holy Fathers have liked better
the old form and manner, after which every Christen man says: I believe
in God, I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe in the holy Ghost. For this
imports a signification of Faith, with Hope, and Charity: that other of
Faith only, which the deuilles have, and tremble, as S. James says, wherein as
in many other things, Jacob. 2.
these Defenders resemble them.

S. Augustine in sundry places putting a difference between these two forms of
words, upon S. John alleging S. Paul's words, To one that believes in him
who justifies the wicked his Faith is imputed to righteousness, Romans 3. In
Johan. Tract. 29. To believe in God what is it.
demands, what is it to believe in him? It is, by his answer, Credendo
amare, credendo diligere, credendo in eum ire, and eius membris incorporari,
with believing to love him, with believing to go into him, and to be
incorporate in his members, that is, to be made a member of his body. In an
other place he says, speaking of Christ, De verbis Domini Sermon. 61, it.
It forces much whether a man believe, that he is Christ, and whether he
believe in Christ. For the Deuilles believed that he was Christ, neither for all
that believed the Deuilles in Christ. For he believes in Christ, who both
trusts in Christ, and loves Christ. For if he have Faith without Hope, and
Love, he believes that Christ is, he believes not in Christ. So he that
believes in Christ, with believing into him shall Christ come, and by some
mean he is united unto him, and is made a member in his body. Which can not
be done, except there come also both Hope, and Charity. Thus S. Augustine.
The same doctrine he utters writing upon the 77. Psalm.

By this thou see ^^^^ed, I bl^me not their (...) d^s^^^ the Trinity, not
their Prof^s^ion of the Common Creed, as M. Jewel calls it but only I seem
be^ter to allow^ the ancient and usual manner of uttering the Belief, which
for good reason has ever seemed to the learned Fathers more commendable
Reason, and consideration of duty would, that a Minister of Gods word should
be a fraide to utter so great, and so manifest untruths unto his liege
Sovereign. But of like (some will say) he will amend that fault in other
parts of his Epistle to her Majesty, specially since that he allegeth nothing,
but directs the Reader unto the place, where it is to be found by his
quotation noted in the margent, which has at least some color of upright
dealing, and being found false, declares an impudent falshod. I would wish,
that for truths sake, al would read and confer, and judge of the odds
between us both. First thus he writes.

Jewel. The maine ground of his whole Plea is this, that the Bishop of Rome,
vvha^ so (...) it ^^al like him to determine in judgment can never ^rr^ (F^^
direction of the R^^der he quoteth thus.) C^sus. fo. 334. b


Harding.
What he means by his term, Plea, I wot not, ne care not. I plead not for
right of any temporal thing.

Neither am I a lawier, as he knows (...) emploie my study of Divinity to
defend^ the. Catholic Faith, and to detecte his falshod, that God^ people be
not by him, and his fellows dangerously seduced. The thing, whereat he
scoffeth, (for these words, what so ever it shall like him to determine, be
scorneful words) is not so uttered by me, as he reports? Who list to see,
what I say, for so much as the book of my Confutation is not always at
hand^, thus it is.

The Pope succedeth Peter in authority and power. Confut. Fol. 334. b
For whereas the sheep of Christ continewe to the worlds end, he is not
wise, that thinks Christ to have made a shepeherd te^porarie for a time,
over his perpetual flock. Then what shepeherdly endoument our Lord gave to
the first shepeherde, at the institution of the shepeherdly office of the
Church: that is he understood to have given ordinarily to every successor.
To Peter he gave, that he obtained by his prayer made to the Father, that his
Faith should not fail. Again to him he gave grace, Luca. 22.
that to perform, the performance whereof at him he required, to wit, that he
confirmed, and strengthened his brethren. Wherefore the grace of stedfastnes of
faith, and of confirming the wavering, How and, vvherin the Pope erreth not,
^e never erred.
and doubteful in the Faith, every Pope obteineth of the holy Ghost, for the
benefit of the Church. And so the Pope although he may err by personal
error in his own private judgment, as a man, and as a particular doctor in
his own opinion: yet as he is Pope, the successor of Peter, the Vicare of
Christ in earth, the shepeherd of the universal Church, in public judgment,
in deliberation and definitive sentence, he never erreth, nor never erred. For
when so ever he ordeineth, or determines any thing by his high bishoply
authority, intending to bind Christen men to perform, or believe the same:
he is always governed, and helped with the grace and favor of the holy Ghost.

Answer M. Jewel to this, if ye can. Certainly hitherto ye have not answered.
As for that you bring against it in your pretensed Defense, there is no grave
or learned man of your side, that is not ashamed of it. In that game of
scoffing I do gladly yield you the garlande. Your greatest Doctors there, are
Alphonsus de Castro and Erasmus, men of our age. As for Erasmus, it were
easy to Answer him, but here I think his tale not worth the Answering. Mary
Alphonsus says somewhat to your purpose, if the tale which you make him to
tell, were his own. Certainly if he once wrote it, when he began first to
write, afterward with better advise he revoked it. For in the books of the
later printes those words, which you rehearse, are not found. Thus you say.

Defense. page ^^5. Alpho^sus de haeresiae bu^ li. 1. cap. 4.
Alphonsus de Castro, one of M. Hardinges own special Doctors says: Non
dubitamus, an Haereticum esse, and Papam esse, coire in vnum possent, etc. Non
enim credo aliquem esse adeo Impudentem Papae Assentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc
velit, vt nec errare, nec in Interpretatione Sacrarum literarum h^llucin^ri
possit: We doubt not, whether one man may be a Pope, and an Heretic both
together. For, I believe there is none so shameless a flatterer of the Pope,
that will say ( I say it not: read my words again.
as you say M. Harding) The Pope can never err, nor be deceived in the
exposition of the Scriptures.

This very saying M. Jewel brings in likewise against the Popes, in the
Defense. page 615. under the name of Alphonsus, with the same Cotation. And
after that he has rehearsed the words, thus he pipeth him self up the
triumph against Hosius in despite of the Popes, as if he had gotten of me a
worthy, and glorious conqueste.

Here M. Harding, your own principal Doctor Alphonsus, calls al them that
maintain your Doctrine, and say as you say, the shameless flatterers of the
Pope. But I say on the other side: here M. Jewel, It pitieth me to see you so
vain a man: and it is some pain also with little profit, for me still to tell
you one tale, that al stands upon false grownde that you build. I had need
to be well seen in Copia Verborum, to be furnished with diversity of terms,
that I might by some change of speech ease the grief of the Readers ears,
who must always hear this much at my hand, that M. Jewel lies.

Look Reader, and peruse my words above rehearsed, and thou shall see, I say
not, that the Pope can not err, nor be deceived in the exposition of the
Scriptures. I say he may err by personal error, in his own private
judgment, as a man, and as a particular Doctor in his own opinion. But that
he erreth, or ever erred in public judgment, in definitive sentence, and
determinations touching matters of Faith: that I utterly deny. Who be they,
who^ Alpho^sus in this case calls Flatterers.
Alphonsus would them to be accounted flatterers, who will needs say, that the
Pope can not err, or be deceived in any case: which neither I, nor any
learned Catholic man ever said. You do us wrong therefore with your
discourteous language, M. Jewel, and belie Alphonsus, faining him to call us
shameless Flatterers, which he never meant. It had benne your part to show
where, or when any Pope ever defined any false and erroneous doctrine to be
received and believed of the Church. Except ye show us this, which we are
sure, ye can never show, ye may spare such idle talk, whereof ye have great
stoare, whereby in many places of your books ye go about to prove, that
sundry Popes have erred.

Item in the place aforesaid. Jewel. That he is alvvaies undoubtedly possessed
of Gods holy Spirit^. Confut. Fol. 285. a.


Harding.
Not always M. Jewel. I say it not. I know, and deny not, but it may well be
proved, that some Popes have in sundry their Acts and Deeds, lacked the
direction of the Spirit of God, as Me^ne, but not in Public Decrees touching
the necessary doctrine of Faith. In the place noted by your Cotation thus I
say.

Confut. 285. a. Sapient. 8.
Gods wisdom (as the scripture faith) disposes al things sweetly, and in one
instant forseeth the end, and means that be necessary to the end. If he
promise any man life everlasting withal he gives him grace also to do good
deeds, whereby to obtain the same. Whom he has glorified (says S. Paul)
them he has justified, Romans 8.
and called. Matthew. 16 Luc. 22.
So whereas he has by force of his prayer made to the Father promised to
Peter, and for the saftie of the Church, to every Peter's Successor, that his
faith shall not fail, and therefore has willed him to confirm his brethren,
that is, to remove al doubts, and errors from them: we are assured, he will
give him such wit, diligence, learning, and understanding, as this Firmness,
and Infallibility of Faith, and Confirming of Brethren requires. See further
Reader, what I say in that place.

To this and to the rest said in that place, M. Jewels chief manner of
answering. Defense. page 612.
M. Jewel makes answer in his pretensed Defense after his common manner, with
these grave and learned notes. Sadly, and Sagely, and much to the purpose.
Item, Untruth fond, and childish, etc. Item, O worthy grave reasons.

Neither answers he the matter only by such marginal notes, but also
otherwise at full, where he furnishes us out two long leaves full of trumperies
pretended to be piked out of obscure, and late writers, Alphonsus de Castro, M.
Jewels doctors, and the same for the more part utterly belied.
Beatus Rhenanus, Legenda aurea, Fasciculus rerum sciendarum, Johannes Stella,
Hulderikes forged Epistle, Erasmus Annotations, the disallowed Council of
Basil, the Appendix or lable of the Council of Constance, which he fowly
falsifieth, reporting that of John. 22. which was said of John. 23. the
usurper, also out of Vesellus, the Gloss upon Gratian, one John of Paris,
Heruaeus, Gerson, Hostiensis the Canoniste, Aeneas Syluius in that book,
which he him self revoked, and recanted, Petrarkes Rymes, Lyra, ^aldas
P^a^ina, Iouerius Hermannus Gigas, Johannes Camo^ensis alleged by Cornelius
Agrippa, John of Sarisburie, Hermannus Rid an Heretic, Cornelius Agrippa
little better in his book of vanity, and of such little worth late petie
Doctors.

When he comes to answer the point it self, which stands in the force of
Christ's prayer made unto the Father for the Firmness of S. Peter's, and his
successors Faith: thus he frames his answer, full sadly, I warrant you, and
like a godly Minister. If the Pope should err, Defense. page 614.
(says he) ^r be in heresy, M. Jew. fears not to use his floutes speaking
of Christ him self.
he might (...) in an Action of Covenant, and require him to perform his
promise. Such Flowtes, and Scoffs becomme the Ennemies of Christ's Church,
and thereof this fellow serves him self, when learning fails. One great
advantage he has over me, he will be sure to make more lies, then I shall have
list, or think it labor worth, to answer. God be thanked, he can not show
any Pope, that ever lacked the spirit of God, in setting forth any public
Decree, touching any point of Faith, to be holden of Christian people.

Item in the place aforesaid. Jewel. That at the Popes only hand we must
learn to know the vvil of God. Confut. 324.


Harding.
I say not, that we must learn to know the will of God at his hand only.
That were a fond doctrine. For we may, and do learn our faith, and what is
the will of God, at the hands of others, as of our Parents, our Friends, our
Pastors, our Curates, our Ghostely Fathers, our Preachers, and our Bishops.
In the place by M. Jewel reprehended, upon occasion of the Apology, where the
Defenders require us to follow the example of S. Irenaeus, in that he (as they
say) appealed oftentimes to the oldest Churches, which had benne nearest to
Christ's time, and which, it was hard to believe, that they had erred: thus I
say.

Confut. ^^4. a.
Ye would seem to be feign, that we followed the advice of S. Irenaeus. We are
content with all our hearts. And with Irenaeus we appeal to that Tradition,
Irenaeus lib 3. ca. 8.
which is from the Apostles, which (as he says) is kept in the Churches by
Priests, that succeeded them. With Irenaeus leaving other Churches, whose
succession of Bishopes it were a long work to rehearse, we require to have
recourse for trial of our Faith, to the tradition of doctrine of the Roman
Church, which he terms, greatest, oldest, Idem lib. 3. cap. 3.
best known to al, founded, and set up by the two most glorious Apostles
Peter, and Paul. We appeal to the Faith of that Church taught abroad in the
world, and by successions of Bishops brought down unto us. For to this
Church, says Irenaeus, must all the Church of Christ repair, where so ever
it be, for that it is the chief of al, and for that the tradition of the true
doctrine, which the Apostles left behind them, is there faithfully kept.
Wherefore if ye would after the counsel of Irenaeus resort to Rome, for
decision of the controversies, that be betwixt you and us, and would them to
be tried by that sense of doctrine, which has continued by Successions of
Bishops, even from Peter, to Pius the fourth now Pope, and would stand to the
authority of that See Apostolic: al strife were ended, we should be at
accord. But we have little hope, that ye will follow this godly counsel of S.
Irenaeus that blessed Martyr, whose body your brethren the Huguenotes of
France, villanously burned at Lions, Anno Domini. 1562. after it had rested
there thirteen hundred years and more.

In all these words as thou see reader, I say not, as M. Jewel bears her
Majesty in hand I do, that we must learn to know the will of God only at the
Popes hand. But I declare, whether we may most safely resort for decision of
the controversies, that be betwixt us, and the Protestants. Whereunto M.
Jewel has not yet answered, ne never shall be hable to answer: though in the
Defense he have shuffled together a great heap of allegations nothing
perteining to the present purpose, as his custom is to do, and a great part
of my confutation there he has cut of, M. Jewel, cutteth, and mangleth the
Confutation in infinite places, leaving out words of greatest weight.
and thereby has fowly mangled the same, as for his advantage he has done in
infinite places, leaving out the matters, whereunto he had not what reasonably
to answer. See the place Reader, Defense page 701. and thou shall find my
word true.

Item there, Jewel. That in the Popes only holiness stands the unity, and
safety of the Church. Confut. 204. b.


Harding.
If I had so said, in a right sense, it might well be allowed. Howbeit thus I
said. Confut. 204. b.
As Christ gave unto S. Peter, and his Successors for the benefit of his
Church, a supreme authority, and power: so for the same Churches sake, for
whose love he delivered him self to death, by petition made to his Father he
obtained for him, and his Successors, Joan. 14. Luc. 22.
the Privilege of this Supreme, and most excellent Grace, that their Faith
should never fail. In consideration of which singular privilege obtained by
Christ, and granted to the Sea Apostolic, and to none other, S. Gregory
rebukes John the Bishop of Constantinople so much, as one that presumptuously
usurped that new name of universal Bishop, against the Statutes of the Gospel,
and against the decrees of the Canons.

To conclude, if either S. Gregory, or any other man should say, that the
Church depends upon one man: he might seem to say truth, meaning rightly,
and that not alone, nor without good authority. For such a saying we find
uttered by S. Hierome. Hieron. Contra Luciferian.
The saftie of the Church (says he) depends upon the dignity of the
highest priest, who if he have not authority peerlesse, and above al other:
there will be so many schisms in the Church, as there be priests. Which
peerlesse authority above al other, as S. Hierome in that place does attribute
unto the Bishop of every Dioces directly: so consequently to Peter's successor,
to whom it was said, Feed my sheep. Johan. 21.
For by what reason in each Dioces it behooves one priest to be highest over
other Priests, by the same, and in like proportion, no less it behooves, that
in the whole Church one Bishop be highest over other Bishops. I mean for
avoiding of schisms.

This reason is not, ne can not of M. Jewel be avoided. Of other things
impertinent, he brings us great stoare out of other men in the Defense,
Defense. page 452.
but to this very reason wherein stands the point, touching the maintenance,
and preservation of unity, he says nothing.

Item there. Jewel. That who so ever is divided from the Pope, must be judged
an Heretic, and that without the obedience of him, there is no hope of
Salvation. Confut. 306. b.


Harding.
Who so ever is divided not only from the Pope, but also from any other
Catholic Bishop in faith, ought to be judged an Heretic. As touching
obedience, Johan. 21.
whereas by Christ he is commanded to Feed his Lambs, and his sheep, and
thereby has commission to govern them: how can he be saved from the ravening
woolues, who through disobedience refuses to come into that Fold, and to be
fed, and guided of that high Pastor? I confess, that in certain cases
besides faith, a man may disobey the Pope, and yet not be removed from all hope
of salvation. My words for which you make so much a do, are these, uttered
upon occasion of your Apology. Confut. fol. 306. b.
Ye put us in mind to consider, how that your selves are those private hill
Aulters, and dark groves. For ye be they, that stop the people from the
common Temple of Christendom, the Catholic Church, out of which is no
salvation, the head whereof sits in Peter's Chair at Rome.

Item there. Jewel. And yet as though it were not sufficient for him so
vainly to sooth a man in open errors, he tells us also sadly, and in good
earnest, that the same Bishop is not only a Bishop, but also a king. Confut.
fol. 80. a. and 305. b.


Harding.
Neither have I in any place soothed the Pope in open Errors, but have
granted, that certain Popes had their Errors, either before they were called
to that room, or also afterward, holding them privately, and as private
Doctors: That the Pope erreth, how is it denied.
But that by any public decree given out to be holden, and observed of the
Church they ever maintained, or gave assent, or authority to any heresy, or
error: I deny utterly, neither shall M. Jewel, or any of his fellows what so
ever, be hable to prove the contrary.

That any where I have told them, sadly, and in good earnest, that the bishop
of Rome is a king, if he mean the express name of a King: I tell him here
eftsoon, sadly, and in good earnest, and without Saulue la vostre, that it is
a stark lie. Confut. fol. 280. a. The pope has kingly power, yet is he no
king.
In the first place of my Confutation by him coted, I say, The pope has a
kingly power over his own subjects even in temporal things and now I tell you
here for example, he has it as Moses had: yet he takes not upon him to be a
King, nor chalengeth unto him that title. Neither does he in his own person,
because he acknowlegeth him self to be no King, exercise the function and
office of a King, but commits such charge unto other Lay persons. If ye
envy the Pope his kingly power, and possessions, which he holds by right,
beware, you be not at length thought unworthy, and removed from the lands of a
Baron, and the Earledom of S. Osmunde, which you hold unduly. If that happen
to come to pass, where then shall we find your good Lordship? In the other
place of the Confutation, upon occasion given by words of the Apology, I say,
that the Pope may rule temporally, Confut. fol. 305. b.
and more there say I not, touching this matter.

Item there. Jewel. That unto him belongs the right of both Swords, as
well Temporal, as spiritual. Confut. fol. 247. b.


Harding.
What so ever I bring in my Confutation concerning both Swords committed unto
the Successor of S. Peter, it is S. Bernardes, it is not mine. Whereas the
Apology maker, were it M. Jewel, or who so ever it was (by the multitude of
the light scoffs, it appears that he was the Penneman of it, mary the stuff
I hear say was gathered by the whole Brotherhead) whereas, I say, he steppeth
forth very peartly, and says thus, Confut. fo. 247. a.
I have a special fancy to common a word or two with the Popes good
Holiness, and to say these things unto his own face, Tell us I pray you good
holy Father, etc. Which of the Fathers ever said, that both the Swords were
committed unto you? To this question the answer I make in the Popes behalf,
is this.

Confut. fo. 247. b. L. Si quis. C. d. test. Of the Popes temporal Svvorde, De
Considerat. li. 4 Math. 26.
Let S. Bernard writing to a Pope, answer for the Pope. He is a sufficient
witness. Where your self do allege him much against the Pope, you can not by
the law justly refuse him, speaking for the Pope. The spiritual sword you
deny not, I trow. Of the temporal sword belonging also to the Pope, thus
says S. Bernarde to Eugenius. He that denies this sword to be thine, seems
to me not to consider sufficiently the word of our Lord saying thus (to Peter
thy predecessor) put up thy sword in the scaberd. The very same then is also
thine, to be drawn forth perhaps at thy beck, though not with thy hand.
Else if the same belonged in no wise unto thee, where as the Apostles said,
Lucae. 22. The Church has both swords by S. Bernard.
behold there be two swords here: Our Lord would not have answered, it is
yenough, but it is to much. So both be the Churches, the spiritual sword,
and the material. But this to be exercised for the Church, and that of the
Church. That by the hand of the Priest, this of the soldier, but verily at
the beck of the Priest, and commandment of the Emperor. Thus touching the
Popes both swords you are fully answered by S. Bernarde. I trust you will not
be so discourteous, as to put him beside: nor so parcial, as to allow him, when
he seems, to make some show for you, and to refuse him, when he is found
plain contrary to your false assertions.

Upon this place of S. Bernarde M. Jewel in the Defense, sitting forsooth, M.
Jewels grave sentence pronounced against S. Bernarde. Defense. page 528. Ibidem,
as it were upon the Benche like a Judge, having power to give sentence, either
of life, or of death, says full gravely, and Iudgelike, and pronounces this
sentence. S. Bernarde says, The Pope has both swords. But S. Bernardes
authority in this case is but simple. But why I pray you Sir Judge? Mark the
cause, and profounde reason of this Judge. He lived (says he) eleven hundred
years after Christ's Ascension, in the time of King Henry the first the King
of England, in the mids of the Popes route and tyranny.

And shall we for this cause shake of S. Bernarde? Then why may we not as well
sit in Judgment upon M. Jewel, and in like sort, but with more reason,
pronounce this sentence? M. Jewel says, the body of Christ is not in the
Euchariste: the body, and blood of Christ are not to be adored in the
Sacrament: The Church has no external Sacrifice, no external Priesthod:
Prayer made for the dead is vain and superstitious: There be not seven
Sacraments, but only two, and by the same grace is not conferred or given,
but only signified: The Pope is Antichriste, and all that hold the old Faith
of the Church, who are Papists, perteine to the Kingdom of Antichriste, etc.
But M. Jewels authority in these cases is but simple. He lived almost sixteen
hundred years after Christ, and is yet alive, in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
the Queen of England, in the mids of the Caluinistes route, and tyranny. The
same sentence with a small change of words, may with like reason be pronounced
upon Luther, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Baudie Bale,
Hooper, Cranmare, and the rest of that wicked route.

It were a thing worthy to be known, why S. Bernarde should be condemned in
respect of his age, and of the route, which this man tells us the Popes
then bare, and these Apostates should be believed, and honored with all men's
assent yielded to their sayings and teachinges, their age being four hundred
years later, the tyranny, cruelty, vilanie, and outrage, which in sundry
places by them of that side is used, far surmounting any what so ever
severity of government, which the Popes used in that time, their learning
not equal with the learning of S. Bernarde, their wit much inferior to his,
of eithers virtue, and good life, what shall I speak? To compare theirs with
his, it were a kind of blasphemy, so holy a Father was he, so dissolute
Apostates are these.

Item there. Jewel. That all kings, and Emperors receive their whole power
at his hand, and ought to swear obedience, and Fealty to the Pope. For
these be his words, even in this b^rke so boldly dedicated unto your
Majesty: It is a great eye soar, says M. Harding, to the ministers of
Antichriste, to see the Vicare of Christ above Lords, and kings of this
world, and to see Princes, and Emperors promise, and swear obedience unto
him. Confut. fol. 178. b


Harding.
That all Kings, and Emperors receive their whole power at the Popes hand, I
never said it, ne wrote it, nor that they ought to swear obedience, and
Fealty unto him. These words are not to be found, neither in the places,
which you have coted, nor in the whole Confutation else where. What, and how
great obedience Christian Princes owe unto the Church, and unto Christ's
Vicare the chief Governor of the same, this is no place at large to discuss.

The words that you allege, I acknowledge to be mine. If that, which there
follows be joined withal, the whole circumstance of my discourse declaring
what is my meaning, considered: nothing shall seem said beside truth, or
reason. After the words before rehearsed, immediately thus it follows.

But they, Confut, 178. b. It is no absurdity the shepherd to be in authority
over the whole flock. Distinct. 96. C. du^ sunt.
that are the faithful subjects of the Church of God, think it no absurdity,
that the shepherd be set, not only above the Lambs, and Ewes of the Church,
but also above the Wethers, and Rams them selves. It is a very great folly
for them to find fault with the Superiority of the Bishop, of Rome, who can
never prove that he is not the Vicare of Christ. If he were not his Vicare,
yet being a Bishop, he is above any temporal Prince, concerning his priestly
office. Lo M. Jewel, by these, and other my words in that place, you might
have seen, had you not bent your wit maliciously to stir her Majesty to
hatred against us, what are the things, and causes, in which I report the
Princes, and highest estates of the world, to stoop unto Christ's Vicare, and
to promise him obedience. As for Homage and Fealty, such, as Vassalles render
unto their temporal Princes, in regard of temporal Dominion, whereof by sownd
of your speech you seem to mean, I spoke not one word. Is this the charity
of your Gospel M. Jewel, by such untrue means to incense the Prince against us?

Item there, Jewel. Whereas Pope Zacharias by the consent, or the conspiracy
of the Nobles of France deposed Chilpericus, the true, natural, and liege
Prince of that Realm, and placed Pipinus in his room: Lo, says M. Harding,
ye must needs Confess, that this was a divine power in the Pope: for
otherwise he could never have done it. Thus much he esteems the dishonours,
and ouerthrovves of Gods anointed. Confut. Fol. 182. a.


Harding.
Nay rather Lo says M. Harding, ye must needs confess, that M. Jewel belieth
him, and both untruly reports his words, and falsifieth that Story. For
truly to speak, it was not Pope Zachary, that deposed Childerike. Let it be
weighed, what I say touching this matter answering to the objection, which the
Apology makes against the Popes in general. These be my words.

Confut. Fol. 181. b. King Childerike of France deposed, and Pipine advanced
to the croune.
If the Pope Zacharias deposed Childerike (for so I find him more commonly
named) the king of France, only upon his own pleasure, or displeasure, as ye
say, and placed Pipine for him: can ye tell that story, and not see, what a
strength of authority is in that See, which is hable with a word to place,
and displace the mightiest king in Europe? With a word I say, for I am sure
you can show us of no army, that he sent to execute that his will. Is that the
power of a man trow ye, to appointe Kingdoms? Can the Devil him self at his
pleasure set up, and depose Kings? No surely. And much less can any member
of his do the same. Remember ye what Christ said, when the Jews objected,
that he did cast out Deuilles, Math. 12.
in the name of the prince of Deuilles? Beware ye sin not against the holy
Ghost, who confess, that the Pope has pulled down, and set up Kings. Which
thing undoubtedly he could not do profitably, and peaceably, but by the great
power of God. And yet did that line of Pipine, The prosperity of the line of
Pipine and Charles surmounted al other. What did Pope zacharias in the
deposing of king Childerike.
and Charles the great, which the Pope did set up, flourish above any other
stock, that ye can name sense the inclination of the Roman Empire. Which in
that transposed state of so great a Kingdom, makes no obscure Argument of
heavenly approbation, and divine providence.

Neither did the Pope Zacharias depose Childerike, because he fansied him not,
as ye sclaunder, but only consented to loose his subjects from bond of oath
made to him, at the general, and most earnest request, and suit of all the
Nobility, and communaltie of the whole realm of France, What manner a man
Childerike was.
finding him very unprofitable, and unmeet for the kingdom, as one who being
of no wit, and therefore commonly named Stupidus, as much to say, a dolt,
was altogeth^^ besides like a Sardanapalus, given wholly to belly chere, and to
filthy love of women. Therefore in your own words ye confess a divine power
in the Pope, as by whom God directs the wills of faithful princes on the
earth. The more such examples ye bring, the worse ye make your cause. I would
hier you to ease me of the labor of proving such a notable fact.

You, that find so great fault with Pope Zacharias for co^senting after a sort
to the depositio^ of Childerike a beastly man, an unprofitable, and unworthy
King of France, why do ye allow, cherish, and commend so much Christofer
Goodman, and John Knoxe, with their fellows, and helpers, that were together at
Geneua, for writing, intising, and doing, what in their power did lie, to
depose the noble, and lawful Queen's of England, and Scotland, and with the
Blastes of their traitorous Trompettes, to remove them from the right of their
Crowns, and roial estates? Says not Goodman, that Wiat did his duty in
taking Arms against Queen Marie, and that al such were Traitors, as deceived
him, and took not his part? If al be rightly constrewed, the Queen's Majesty
of England now being (I suppose) has no great cause, Goodma^s books named the
first, and second blaste against the monstrous regiment of women. Item an
other, how to obey or disobey. With other the like fierbra^des of knoxe, and
Gilbie. Goodma^ in the Treaty, how to obeie, or disobeie, page 204.
either to commend them for such seditious Blastes, or to like well of you, and
your companions, for giving ear, wind, and favor to the blowing of the same.
If Goodman had been Pope of Rome, as Knoxe, they say takes upon him to be Pope
of Scotland, o Lord what Counterblastes would ye, and your good fellow
Trompeters e^ this have blown up against him? Long er this the whole world
should have rong of it, and the Pulpites, which ye use as your Horns, and
Trompettes, should have stooncke of your breath. But it is well, that he has a
Good name, and is no Pope.

Item there. Jewel. Whereas also Pope Boniface the eight, for that he could
not have the treasorie of France at his commandment, endeavored with al his
both ecclesiastical, and vvorldely puissance, to remove Philip the French king
from his estate, and under his Bulls, or letters Patentes, had conueighed the
same solemnly unto Albertus the king of Romans: M. Harding here tells your
Majesty, that all this was well done, to the intent thereby to fray the King,
and to keep him i^ ^vv^, and to reclaim his mind from Dissobedience Confut.
fol. 1^2. b.


Harding.
Neither was this the cause of Pope Bonifacius his falling out with the French
king, that you assign, nor applied he al his both Ecclesiastical, and temporal
power, to deprive the King of his Crown, nor ever said I, that all this was
very well done, as you report. With so many Untruths you abuse the patience of
her Highness. Let my words be weighed, as I uttered them my self, and then
may it be judged, whether I answer to the sclaunderous objection of the
Apology reasonably, or you out face the matter with lying falsely. These be my
words. Confut. fol. 182. a. The causes of the strife between Philippus
Pulcher, and Pope Bonifacius.


Concerning that ye say of king Philip surnamed Le Bell, if we may believe
Paulus AEmylius the best writer of the French Chronicles, the cause was such
between Pope Bonifacius, and that King, that if he did not only excommunicate
him, but also offered gift of his Kingdom to Albert the Emperor, as Platina
your Author herein writes: he may seem therein to have done not altogether so
evil, as ye pretend. For as both AEmylius, and Platina do witness, the cause
of their falling out was, that, whereas the Pope being first sued unto by
Cassanus Cassanus.
a Christian Prince, and a great Conqueror in the East, to join with him for
the recovery of the holy land, sent the Bishop of Apamea to the French King
for his necessary aid in that so common a quarrel of al Christendom: he being
offended, either that the suit was not first made to him, either for that the
said Bishop had done his Ambassade with show of more authority, then the King
thought it became him, or upon some other private grudge: did not only utterly
refuse to send any help toward the voyage, but also contemptuously, beside
common order, and cruelly, committed the Popes legate to prison, and there kept
him, until such time, as through the Popes Interdict, the King was compelled to
set him at liberty. Now of giving away his kingdom, this chief French
Historiographer makes no mention. And if the Pope so did, why may he not seem
to have done it rather to fear him, and to reclaim his mind from
disobedience? Verily Platina writing it declares, how before the Pope proceeded
to that extremity, the French King did, what in him lay, to withdraw the
people of France from the obedience of the Church, and See Apostolic. Al
these things with eue^ judgment weighed, that Pope seems not so much worthy
of the blame, which by your malign report ye charge him with, specially the
occasion being first given of the Kings unlawful demeanor. But what so ever
may be judged hereof, yea though the Pope therein be without al excuse, what is
that to you? How serves it you to any color of excuse of your Schism, and
cutting of your selves from the rest of Christendom Christ's mystical body?

Thus there. And whereas M. Jewel makes so much adoo about that, which in
deed I said not, but which he untruly bears the Reader in hand, I say, that
is, that if the Pope gave away the kingdom of France from the Prince, he did
it to the intent to fray him, whereat he ieasteth in the Defense, saying, A pretty
devise, to fraie a king, to pulle the Crown Emperial from his head: to this I
answer. I spoke it not absolutely, but asked, why, if the Pope so did, the
case being well weighed, he might not seem rather to have done it to fraie him,
and to reclaim his mind from disobedience, as by the event it was showed,
that so he did.

For the French King returning to obedience, and being reconciled, kept still
the crown, notwithstanding that gift. And when so ever any Prince at other
times revoked his evil purpose, and confourmed him self to right, such gifts
of titles were also eftsoon by the Popes revoked. In deed certain Popes used
that practice, as a mean only to withdraw Princes from wicked attemptes, and
most commonly the same took good effect. I deny not, but some times, by such
practice Princes were removed from their estate, and other enjoyed their
roumes, but the same were such, as perseuered incorrigible.

Item there. Jewel. Now touching your Majesty's noble Progenitors, the kings
of this realm, where as we, as our loialtie, and allegiance binds us,
justly complain, that Pope Alexander. 3. by violence, and tyranny forced king
He^rie the second to surrender his crown Emperial into the hands of his
Legate, and afterward for a certain space to content him self in private
estate, to the great indignation and grief of his loving Subjects: And that
likewise Pope Innocentius the third sturred up the Nobles, and Commons of this
realm against King John, and gave the inheritance, and possession of his
dominions unto Ludouicus the French king (as for the misusing of your Majesty's
most dear Father of most noble memory, king He^rie the eight, for as much as
the smarte thereof is in fresh remembrance, I vvil say nothing) to these, and
al other like tyrannical injuries, and just causes of grief, M. Harding
shortly, and in light manner thinks it sufficient to answer thus: what
though King Henry the second were il entreated of Pope Alexander 3.? what
though king John were il entreated of that zealous, and learned Pope
Innocentius Tertius? What though King Henry the eight were likewise
entreated of the Popes in our ti^es? Confut. fol. 340. a.


Harding.
Many, and sundry false parts practiced by M. Ievvel at once.
Here al things are laid forth with Rhetorical amplifications to the most
advantage, withal, many untrue parts be practiced. The Popes are falsely
belyed, The wicked deeds of the Kings are craftily conceeled, My words are
impudently falsified, My whole purpose and meaning is misconstrued, The end,
for which I spoke thereof, drawn thereunto by special occasion ministered by
the Apology, which was chiefly to be treated of, is not so much as with one
word touched, My tale is cut of in the mids, and may not be suffered to be
told out to the end. Now because there is no dealing with M. Jewel, but the
books, whence every thing is alleged, being laid open, and every place, that
is handled turned unto (for there was never Iuggler that begyled men's eyes,
more with legierdemaine, then he begileth men's minds with his false
sleightes, if his words be simply believed) let my Confutation of the Apology
be vewed, and there I shall be found, touching these odious points of these
princes Variance with the Popes of their time, to have uttered these words,
far otherwise, then he here reports.

Confut. fol. 339. b.
Concerning the case between these three Kings of England, and the Bishops of
Rome for the time being, I say little. If they did well, and the Bishops evil,
they have their reward, the other, their punishment. If otherwise, or how so
ever, each one at Gods judgment shall have his deserved measure. But be it
granted, al were true ye say, though we know the more part to be false.
Henry the second. S. Thomas Arch bishop of Canturbury. King John.
What though king Henry the Second were evil entreated of Pope Alexander about
the murdering of S. Thomas the Archbishop of Canturburie, and King John
likewise of that zealous and learned Pope Innocentius the third, about the
stir he made against the Church for cause of Steven Lankton Archbishop of
Canturburie, Henry the.8. This is no just cause to forsake the Church.
King Henry the eigth likewise of the Popes in our time, about matters yet
fresh bleeding? Is this a good cause why ye (who have nothing to do with
Princes matters now ended and buried) should forsake the Church, change your
Faith, change the whole order of Religion, and condemn al before your time for
a thousand years?

Because the Bishops of Rome have done evil, will ye give over the Faith of
the Church of Rome? Because the Popes did wrong to Princes, will ye do wrong
to your selves? Because the Popes were at Variance with these three Kings, will
ye be at Variance with God? Because they excommunicated them, will ye
excommunicate your selves? I have heard of a fool, that being stricken of one
standing a looffe of, would eftsoon strike an other, that stood next him. But
I never heard of any so foolish, that seeing an other stricken, would therefore
kill him self. Verily your Apostasy, and departing from the Catholic
Church, is to weighty a matter, to be defended with so light a reason.

Thou may see good Reader, that here I take not upon me in Defense of those
Popes to answer unto these matters, nor shortly, as M. Jewel says, nor at
length, nor in light manner, nor in sad manner: which matters he calls
Tyrannical injuries, and just causes of grief. The more clearly to show,
how little good matter our new Usurping Clergy have to bring for the excuse,
and Defense of the Alteration they have made in Religion, and of their Schism,
and departing from the Catholic Church, because in their Apology they
alleged these Practices of the Popes: only I demand (their tale for their
better advantage being granted to be true, which yet I said expressly was
known to be false for the more part) what relief their cause could have
thereby, and how the evil doings of the Bishops of Rome (if it were granted
they did evil therein) could be drawn to Defense of their own worse doing. To
which demand M. Jewel by his silence in his pretensed Defense makes all the
world witness, Defense Page 733.
how unable he is to answer. Howbeit in that place he uses his common
slight, by cutting away the chief part of my tale, wherein lies the
weighte, and so discharges him self of the pains of answering. Any book may
so sone be answered.

Touching these Popes, and these Kings, when M. Jewel, or any of his fellow
Ministers, shall truly, and with sufficient reason prove unto us, that Henry
the Second did well, when he gave occasion that the blessed Martyr S. Thomas
Archbishop of Canturburie was murdered, that al King John's attemptes against
the Church for cause of Steven Lankton Archbishop and primate of the same
province were just and right: and that King Henry the eight did well, and
according either to the holy Scriptures, or doctrine of the ancient, and
learned Fathers, when he took upon him to be Supreme Head in earth of the
Church of England, immediately under Christ, which no temporal prince ever
took upon him before: and likewise when for maintenance of the same title he
hanged, headded, and quartered so many holy and learned men of al degrees, now
blessed Saints, and crowned Martyrs in heaven: when I say, either he, or
they, or any of them shall prove this much unto us, in such sort, as I said
before: then will we say with them, o worthy Kings, o naughty Popes, yea then
will we say too, o the crow is white. Nevertheless I do not here justify all the deeds of the Popes. But what so ever they did, that is no sufficient
cause, why these men should forsake their Faith, and depart from the
fellowship of the Church.

Item there. Jewel. But concerning the Majesty, and right of Kings, and
Emperors, M. Harding tells us, they have their first authority by the
positive Law of Nations, and can have no more power, then the people has,
of whom they take their temporal jurisdiction. Confutat. Fol. 318. b.


Harding.
If I have herein spoken evil, give witness against me of evil. Ye would feign
find a fault, I perceive, if ye wiste wherein. You seem not well to
understand, what you say, nor whereof you affirm. But you allege the
Scriptures, Per me Reges regnant, Prouer. 8.
By me Kings do reign, And, there is no power but from God: very learnedly
forsooth. As though the authority, Romans 13.
that Princes have by the positive law of Nations, and the power, which they
have of the people, were not of God, as who uses that mean to conueie that
power unto them.

Item there. Jewel. M. Harding even in the self same book, under certain
general threats, charge your Majesty with disordered presumption, by the
example of Ozias the wicked King, upon whom, as he untruly says, God sent
his vengeance for the like. Confut. fol. 298. a.


Harding.
You would feign the Queens Majesty should conceive hatred against me, I
perceive M. Jewel, and thereto you apply al your skill, and cunning. But Sir,
who deserves more thanks at God, and the Princes for the time being, he, that
tells them the Truth, and in time gives warning to beware of Gods
Vengeance, before it be to late: or he, that for his own wordly interest,
holds his peace, and leads them into a wrong way, from the which if they
return not back, they are sure at length to feel, either the temporal smarte
of Gods Vengeance in this life, or the everlasting smarte in the life to
come? Ye flatter, ye flatter your Princes M. Jewel, ye deceive them, ye blind
them, ye work al means possible, that the Truth be not brought to their
understanding, least, were it known, and of them perceived, ye should be
turned out of your welthy roumes, and driven again to Geneua (I had almost
said, Gehenna) from whence ye came. Certainly ye shut up the kingdom of
Heaven from Princes, and others, so many as be so far accursed of God, as to
believe your wicked generation, that ye neither enter in thither your selves,
nor suffer others to enter.

The place where the words be, with which you would incense the Queens wrath
against me, has no general threats, as you say, but contain such true
matter, as I am not a shamed of: confute it, if you can: verily in your Defense
ye have not done it.

Ye confound (say I) the offices of the spiritual Governors, and temporal
Magistrates. What Kings, Confut. fol. 298. a.
and Princes may do, what they be commanded to do, and ought of duty to
do, in Gods name let them do, and well may they so do. Who is he that
gainesaith? If by the pretensed example of David, and Solomon, ye animate them
to intermedle with Bishoply offices, then beware they (say we) that Gods
Vengeance light not upon them for such wicked presumption, which lighted upon
king Ozias for the like offense. 2. Par. 26.


I marueil you deny, that the Vengeance of God lighted upon king Ozias, for
the like Presumption to that, whereunto by your monstrous law, and Doctrine ye
animate your Princes. Which part deny you? That Gods Vengeance lighted
upon him? Or that the Presumption is like? For proof of the Vengeance, ye have
the plain Scripture. 2. Paralip. 26. which says, that, Ozias pounished for
presumption.
as he would have burned incense to our Lord at the Altar of the sweet
perfume, which belonged to the office of the Priests only to do, a Lepre
rose in his forehead, whereupon the Priests drove him out of the Temple, and
he himself also made have, that he were gonne out, 2. Par. 26
says the text, eo quod sensisset illico plagam Domini, for that straight
way he felt the plague of our Lord.

Touching the Presumption, it is like. For in both it is an undue giving of
adventure to do that thing, which belongs to Bishoply, Priestly authority
and power given unto the Queen by the Parliament.
and priestly office. And what is that which Bishops, and Priests may do,
which ye have not by your Act of Parliament given the Queen authority to do?
What power, or authority is excepted, where al things, and causes be
expressed, where I say, by solemn oath taken before God and his holy
Angels, ye bind men to acknowledge her for the chief and supreme Head (for
by your new word, Gouernoure, ye take not away I trow the meaning of your
former word Head) in all things and causes, as well spiritual, as temporal? Ye
know, ye know M. Jewel, this is a very large Commission for a woman to exercise
in Christ's Church. Tell us not of your new devised Iniunction, as for a poor
shifte ye are wont to do: so thin a cloak will not fence you against so
great a storm of weather.

Although the Queen that now is, have no great delight in the exercise of al
manner such authority, as ye have put her in, yet what if after her time,
there come in her place an other Prince, King, or Queen, of an other manner
courage, and fancy, whom it shall like well sometimes for his pleasure, strange
devotion, ambition, or pride, to do the office, which by law of your
Parliament is committed unto him, 2 Par. 26.
as it is written of king Ozias, that, when he became mighty, and of great
power, his heart was lifted up, and he would needs do that, which belonged
only to the Priests office? If it shall like such a Prince, be he your
Sovereign Lord, or Sovereign Lady, to go into your Pulpites, and there after
your manner to rave, and rail at the Pope, at the Papists, and to tell the
people a piece of your lusty Geneuian Gospel, whereby they may be stirred to
allewdnesse, and carnal liberty: If I say, the Prince, that shall succeed the
Queen that now is, shall take upon him so to do: what will ye say in this case
M. Jewel, and your good Brethren? Will ye come unto him, and tell him, Sir, if it
like your Majesty, you may not so do? Will ye say, that it belongs to you,
and to such Ministers of the word, as you are, and to none else? Will ye
resist him in that attempt, and drive him out of the Church, if by that time
ye shall have any Church standing at al, as the Priests of Iewrie resisted, and
drove out of the Temple King Ozias? If your hearts shall serve you so to do,
and he reply against you, saying, that by grant of your own Parliament (which
is a most assured warrant) ye have given him the supreme power, authority, and
government in all things and causes, as well spiritual, as temporal, and that
therefore he will use, and practice such power, as he may by your own
grant: what have ye then to say? Will ye then face him out with your pretty
little worth Injunctions devised by two or three Ministers? Will that serve the
turn trow ye? It will not, it will not, ye may be assured. Now let us hear
with what other matter M. Jewel charge me.

Item there. Jewel. Thus be says unto your Majesty, and with al his skill and
cunning, Confut. fol 277. Confut. fol. 328. a Confut. fol. 172. b Reioind. 314.
Conf. 87. a Co^f. 269. b Rei. 42. a. Conf. 43. a Co^f. 269. a 323. b. 334. a.
338. a. 348. b. A bundel of Untruths.
labors to persuade your Majesty's Subjects, if any one, or other happily
of simplicite vvil believe him, that the godly Laws, which your Majesty
has given us to live under, are 1 no Laws: that your Parlamentes are 2 no
Parlamentes, that your Clergy, is 3 no Clergy, our Sacraments, no 4
Sacraments: our Faith, no 5 Faith: The Church of England, whereof your
Majesty is the most principal, and Chief, he calls a 6 malignant Church a
nevve Church erected by the d^^il, a Babylonical Tovver a Heard of Antichriste,
a Temple of Lucifer, a Synagoge, and a Schole of Satan, full of Robbery,
Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy.


Harding.


That I say in my Confutation, The Laws made in the Queen's time, be no Laws,
it is an other lie.

That I say, The Parlamentes, be no Parlamentes, it is likewise an other lie.

That I say, The Queen's Clergy, is no Clergy, although I said it not, (and
so is it the fourth lie) yet here I may say, it is a very womanly Clergy, if
it be a Clergy at al.

That I say, Their two Sacraments, are no Sacraments, The Faith of
Heretics, not Faith, but perfidie.
it is the fifth lie. Sacraments they may be, though Schismatical, Heretical,
corrupt, and polluted Sacraments. The manner of the ministration of them, I
utterly condemn.

That I say, Their Faith, is no Faith, it is the sixthe lie. I confess it to
be a Faith touching the points, wherein they agree with the catholic
Church. In the other points, I say, it is no Faith, but error and heresy.
Albeit, Arius the heretic had a Faith, Eunomius had a Faith, Nestorius,
Euctyhes, Sabellius, Photinus, Apollinaris, briefly al Heretics had their
Faithes, but al were false Faithes, as much to say, no Faithes, but (as the
Latins call it) Perfidia. M. Jewel, for some show of upright dealing, has
filled his margent in this place with cotations as thick as they may stand
one by an other, directing the reader to my books. If it shall please the
reader diligently to peruse the places, both in my Confutation, and in my
Reioinder, he shall try him to be, as he is every where, a false, and a
shameless liar.

As for the Queen's Laws, The Queen's Laws, and Parlamentes.
and Parlamentes for change of Religion, and Faith, what have I to do with
them, whether they be laws, and Parlamentes, or no? Be they, as they be. It is
not my profession to discuss that matter. If there be any that doubt thereof,
let the learned men of law be demanded their opinion. If they will not, or if
they be loath to speak what they think, let the question be differred, until
the time come, that M. Jewel, and I shall be placed, where we shall no more
contend about the authority of man's laws, 2. Cor. 5.
but shall each of us receive according to that we have done in our bodies, that
is to say, accordingly as we have in our doctrine, and life either kept, or
broken Gods laws. The age to come perhaps, shall be hable to say more
therein, then this present time. It is an old said saw, Filia temporis
Veritas: Truth is the daughter of time. Let us not trouble our selves about
this odious question M. Jewel I pray you, but refer it over to the time to
come. Yet because in your pretensed Defense ye bear men in hand, that I
seem to say, Defense. page 595.
that the Parliament holden in the first year of the Queen's Majesty's reign,
was no Parliament, for that the Bishops refused to agree unto the statute made
for change of Religion: I will here truly lay forth my words, in which you
auouche, I seem so to say, that it may appear to al men, what a quareller
you are. These be my words.

Confut. fol. 276 a.
Where have ye treated of your matters? That matter has benne treated (say ye)
in open Parliament, with long consultation, and before a notable Synod, and
Convocation. First in what Parliament? Mean ye the first of our Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth? or any of those of king Edward the sixth his days? etc. If ye
mean, (as by reason you must) the Parlamentes of these later days, the first
of al did make most for you, and yet how open was it for you? Had ye any place
at al in it? Were ye admitted within the doors? Or had ye any thing to do in
that assembly? Consider then with what Consultation your purposes were
concluded. Did they tarry many months about it? Had they Bishops? Had they
Divines, and the most learned, to reason too and fro with all liberty? Was the
authority of the Universal Church of Christ, and the doctrine of the
Ancient Fathers considered? Ye say in Latin, Plenis Comitijs, that is, in
the full and whole assembly, as though none at al had there resisted, but every
man had yielded to your matters. What say ye then of the Spiritual Lords a
great part of the Parliament, and without al doubt the part, which must be
chiefly, and only regarded, when the Question is of Religion? How many of them
gave their voice to your Gospel? Yea which of them al did not resist it? etc.
As of the Spiritual Lords ye had none at al, so of the Temporal ye had not al:
and so had ye also in the lower house very many, and well learned, that spoke
against you. These words following M. Ievvel nipte away in the Defense.
And mo would, had conscience benne as free, as authority was dredful. And
yet, call ye this, a full Parliament, and a Parliament, which had al his parts
wholly favoring you? *

Upon these words M. Jewel makes much a do in the Defense, as if I had
denied that Parliament, to be a Parliament, for lack of the Bishops consent.
But whether I said so or no, let these mine own words before rehearsed, be the
trial.

Touching the matter it self, he says (how truly, I doubt) that in the
Parlamentes of England for any Statute to be lawfully enacted, the consent of
Archebishoppes, and Bishops has not ben thought necessary, Defense page 595.
and that matters have passed only by the more part of voices, yea although
(these be his very words) al Archebishoppes, Defense. Ibidem.
and Bishops were never so earnestly bent against it. And yet he says further
(whereat I marueil) that Statutes so passing only by the voices of the Lords
Temporal, though the Lords Spiritual dissente never so much, have
nevertheless always ben confirmed, enacted, and published under the names of
the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal. If it be so, then I perceive, it faieth
with the lords Spiritual, as it faieth with me. For as M. Jewel has
published, and said many things under my name, that I never said, nor meant,
to the intent to discredit me, if any happily be so simple that will believe him:
So by this tale, laws be published under the name of Archebishoppes, and
Bishops, who are the Lords Spiritual, unto which they never gave their
assent, but contrary wise, earnestly dissented.

What this is to be called in the Statutes of the Realm, I know not, but in
the writings of private men, such as Master Jewels, and mine are, this
practice of fathering words and sayings upon a man, which he never said, nor
wrote, is accounted unlawful, and false, and commonly is named forgerie,
falsifying, and belying, the chief flowers, wherewith M. Jewel always decketh
his garland.

He refers me for further proof of this matter to the Records of a
Parliament, holden by king Edward the first at S. Edmundes Bury, the
Archebishoppes, and Bishopes being (as he says) quite shut forth, Anno
Domini. 1296
where (he tells me) it is written thus. Habito Rex cum suis Baronibus
Parlamento, and Clero excluso, statutum est etc. The king keeping the Parliament
with his Barons, the Clergy (that is to say, the Archebishoppes, and
Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted etc. Perhaps the inferior
Clergy was excluded, who as I have heard Lawiers say, in old time came to
the Parlamentes, and had their place in the lower house. But that the
Archebishoppes, and Bishops were excluded, thereof I doubt.

Item (says he) in the time of king Henry the third a statute touching the
legitimation of Bastardes, An. 1273. In prouisione de Martona. cap. 9.
paste wholly with the Lords Temporal, whether the Lords spiritual would, or
no: yea, and that contrary to the express Decrees, and Canons of the Church
of Rome. Al these things, says he, the wise and learned could sone have told
me. And feign would I know of the wise and learned in deed, whether al these
things be true, or other wise. Verily for my part I have great cause to
doubt. If an other man had said them, I should rather have believed them: As
for M. Jewel, I have so generally found him false in reporting al men's
sayings, which I examine by their books, that I see good cause to misturst
him every where, when so ever I lack the books, from whence he brings his
allegations. And although all that here he reports touching this matter, were
truly reported, yet thereby it is not proved, that al was lawfully, and well
done. But hereof, as I said before, I refuse to enter dispute.

But now whereas M. Jewel commits Religion, and al matters touching Faith,
unto the Lords Temporal, and Commons assembled in Parlamente, and will that al
orders and Statutes by them made and enacted concerning the same, stand for
good and lawful, though the Bishops dissent never so much: By this he makes
the Faith, not a Standerd to measure our opinions, and judgments by, as it
ought to be, but he makes the wills and fancies of the Lords, the Standerd,
whereby to measure our Faith. Faith made cha^geable according to the change of
times.
And so the Faith shall be changeable according to the change of times. For
whereas al men know, in how few things the Lords dissent from the will and
pleasure of the Prince: who sees not, how thus it may come to pass, that our
Religion, and Faith shall change at the pleasure of every Prince for the time
being, and that so at length we shall have no stable Religion, nor Faith at al?
If M. Jewel will say, it behooves al men to know Gods word, and not to
suffer them selves to yield unto any thing, that is not allowed thereby: what
remedy can be provided against al error, when Princes, and Lords shall find
such Doctors, and Preachers, as M. Jewel is, who shall easily persuade the
people, that to be the meaning of Gods word, by which the Princes, and
Lords may acheeue their desires? But hereof I shall perhaps have occasion to
speak more hereafter.

Now whereas he complains so grievously of me, for that I call their Church, I
mean them that made the Apology, and their favorers, a malignant Church, a
new Church erected by the Devil, a Babilonical Tower, a heard of Antichriste,
a Temple of Lucifer, a Synagoge, a School of Satan, full of Robbery,
Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy: If he, his fellows, and their folowers will
repent them heartily, and unfeignedly of their errors, and heresies, and return
home again unto the Catholic Church: if they will cease to divide, and
scatter abroad with the devil the author of division, and gather together with
Christ, and repair unity: if they will leave the manifold, and absurd
confusion of opinions and doctrines, which their sundry sects do profess,
and maintain stubbornly: if they will leave to prepare a way for Antichriste,
by their evil doctrine leading the world to al liberty of the flesh: if they
will call to God for grace, and dispose them selves to humility: if they will at
length hear the Catholic Church, if they will acknowledge their wicked
doctrine against the daily Sacrifice, to proceed out of Satan's School, as it
is confessed by Luther him self: if they will not maintain their Robberies,
and Spoils of Churches, as just deeds: if they will forsake their Incestuous,
and Sacrilegious Marriages: Briefly if they will amend wherein they have
offended: I will gladly revoke those words, and how so ever in respect of time
past, they have deserved so to be spoken of, I will speak of them no other
wise, then of the Children of the Church, then of our dear brethren, then of
Gods friends.

Thus I have answered the chief parts of M. Jewels epistle to the Queen's
Majesty, and by repeating mine own words (which I was forced to do) I have
showed evidently to the Readers eye, how shamelesly he belyeth me, and my
Treaties. Whereof the Reader may take a view, and so judge, what credit he
deserves in the rest of his Defense. As for the rest of his epistle,
consisting wholly of flattery, I think not worth the answering.

Neither has he used any more truth in his Preface to the Christian Reader,
and in his Epistle to me set at the end of his Defense: where he fills his
magent with great numbers of Quotations, pretending thereby the absurd, and
untrue points in the Text reproved to be found in the Treaties, which so
busily he quoteth. Now if I should in likewise answer to every such part in
the said Preface, and Epistle contained, by these few it may appear, to what
hugeness my book would grow, and of the whole what unprofitable matter would
rise, soothly none other, but a continual and loathsome declaration of his
untrue dealing in one sort or other. But for so much as the same is by this
brief Answer to his Epistle dedicatorie already sufficiently discovered: that
other labor may seem needelesse. As we find him in this, so we find him in
the rest, though otherwise not very constant, yet in the rate of his writing
one manner a man, that is to say, one, that every where makes his only
advantage of lies, falsifyinges, and corruptions.

How unjustly M. Jewel obiecteth sharp speech, and discourteous words unto
his Adversary, and how just cause there was, that such order of speech
should be used. The.2. Chapter.
GEntle Reader, consider I pray thee indifferently, how the case stands
betwixt M. Jewel and me. Before he enters into his Defense of the Apology,
between his Epistle to the Queen's Majesty, and his Preface to the Reader, he
has extraordinarily inserted four leaves. In which he labors all that he
can, to perform two things, to discredit me, and to advance his own
credit. To bring this to pass, First, he accuses me, next, he excuses him
self. He accuses me of discourteous Words, he excuses him self, of foul
Untruths, setting forth a colorable View of a few of the same. How
reasonably he does the one, and how sufficiently the other: by that I shall here
declare, thou may judge.

First, touching words, Where so ever godly zeal, and just grief moved me
to use sharp speech, albeit nowhere I use so sharp, as the indignite of the
thing required: of al those places he has caused certain my words to be
culled out, and to be laid together, as it were in a table before the Reader.
And because he would not seem scorneful, even there reproving me for the same,
he calls them forsooth, certain principal flowers of M. Hardinges modest
speech. And least he should at any time leave his common custom of falsifying
all that he takes in hand, even here also he plays that part as kindly, as
any where else. For although some such words or, the like be in deed found
in my writings against him, yet they bear not such an owgly and lothsom
visard, as he puts on them. As for example, whereas sometimes for good cause
I can not find in my heart, to call these men's rash Innovation of the
ancient religion, their wicked abrogation of certain Sacraments, their vile
profanation of the rest, their horrible contempt of the body and blood of
Christ in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, whereas I say, I can not
find in my heart to call these things, Godly procedinges, restoring of the
Gospel, the sincere Word, the right Ministration of the Lords Supper, as they
would al men to call them, but contrariwise Deuilish spite, wickedness, and
villainy: to cause the matter to seem more odious, he reports my words thus,
your Deuilish spite, your Deuilish wickedness, your Deuilish villainy, etc: as
though I had spoken them to him, and to his fellows specially, whereas for the
more part such words are spoken (not in the second, but in the third person)
of the Heretics of our time indefinitely, and in general. Which nevertheless
if I had spoken unto him, and them directly, it had been no grievous sin,
their desert considered.

For therein had I followed the counsel, which S. Antonie that blessed man gave
unto his Scholars a little before he departed this life. To whom he said thus,
as S. Athanasius, who wrote his life, reports. Athanas. in vita Antonij.
Haereticorum venena vitate, meumque erga eos odium sectamini. Scitis quod
nullus mihi pacificus sermo cum eis fuerit. Avoid the poisons of Heretics,
and follow the hatred that I have borne them. Ye know, that I had never any
peaseable talk with them. How so ever it be, it had benne M. Jewels part, to
have used more truth in his writing.

But why did he not set forth my whole sayings, where such words be placed?
What reason is it, a man to burden his Adversary with certain words only,
and with silence to dissemble his entiere sentences? By what laudable example
has he done thus? Which of the old Fathers, ever did so? If no man ever did
it before these days, then, so far as the Catholic Church has not erred
in Faith, and has no need now to receive a new Gospel of Luther, Zuinglius,
or Calvin: by this practice, he shows him self, as well a follower of the
inuentours of new malice, as a mainteiner of new Heresies.

Brentius the first author of this new devise, of laying the Adversaries sharp
words together in one heap, practiced by M. Jewel.
This devise of laying together in a heap all the sharp words, with which
one feels him self prickte, culled out of the adversaries wri^^nges, is very
strange and new, and before this age, which brings forth many rare
novelties, was never used of any learned man. In our time it is begone, and
for ought I know, first practiced by Brentius, who in the beginning of his
book against Bullinger, entitled, Recognitio propheticae and Apostolicae
doctrinae, etc: written in defense of his new doctrine of Vbiquitie, lays
together in a heap all the words, that Bullinger had uttered in his book
against him, which might seem sharp, rough, and ungentle: so softely must
these men now be handled, after that they have spent al their intemperate
railing upon the Pope, the Papists, the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar,
the daily Sacrifice, the other Sacraments, and the godly Ceremonies of holy
Church. Wherefore M. Jewel is not like to have the glory of this new devise:
he must be content to yield it unto John Brentius, whose ape and follower he is
in this, as in many other points worthy of small praise.

Now if Bullinger the grande Captain of the Sacramentaries, of which sect M.
Jewel is a professed mainteiner, thought it not unseemly for the gravity of
his Ministership, to be so plain with Brentius, as to put him in mind
sometimes of his deserved titles, by saying, he was, Rixator, Spiritus
inflatus, Calu^niator, etc. a Branler, In Respo^sione Bre^tij ad primam partem
Bullingeri. page 8. and. 9.
a pufte Sprite, a spiteful speaker, a skoffer, a mocker, a Hickescorner, a
peruerter, a liar, unclean, impudent, a babbler, a brabler, a craker, a thrower
of Christ out of his heavenly seat, mad, light, childish, a iangler, a
reuiler, a sclaunderous person, an Eutychian, a Sophiste, a railer, worse then
Swenckefeldius him self: Again, if he thought it not discommendable in him
self being the chief Superintendent of Zurich, to call Bre^tius book written
in defense of that new heresy, Brentianas nebulas, figmenta. etc. The mistes
and devises of Brentius Head, vain, and peevish ^oies, knauish folies, a
doctrine dissoluing the hope of the faithfulles assured salvation in heaven, a
madness, a fantasy, Sophistry, crafty fetches, most false devises, a feeble
write, Sophismes, guiles, a book of Riddles, a fabulous monstre, a Sophistical
Egypt, stinking trifles prodigious Vbiquitie frantique words, etc: If
Bullinger I say, one of your noblest Worthies, thought it not unseemly for
his degree and state, to use such bitter eloquence, and order of speech in
reproving Brentius, and was never, and, it is like, should never have benne
reproved for it among them of your own Sacramentarie Sect M. Jewel: why are
you so heavy a Master to me, whom you esteem much less, then Henry
Bullinger the Successor of your great Patriarch Zuinglius in the Chaier of
your doctrine at Zurich, as to blame that in me, which you could not find in
your heart to disallow in Bullinger? Well how so ever in please you favorably to
judge of your own great Masters, and lay lode of reproaches upon me: yet this
much you may call to your consideration.

Words considered alone without composition, sound good, or evil, according
to their signification: and al manner of words may be used without blame. Of
the sentences, and whole sayings only, where the circumstance may be
considered and weighed, fair, or foul speech is conceived. Now if thou will
take the pains Reader, to turn to the places of my books, whence M. Jewel
has piked out those words, for use of which he reproves me, as a man of
discourteous utterance: thou shall right well perceive (in case heresy have not
utterly bewitched thine understanding, and bereued thee of al judgment) the
verdure of my speech to be such, as may seem convenient for a vessel of the
holy Ghost to taste of.

It may please M. Jewel to consider, that by degree of School, and by lawful
calling otherwise, I stand in the place of teachers. And therefore though at
this present the Pulpite be denied me, yet I find not my self wholly so
discharged of the office of teaching. Now having no other convenient mean to
teach, but by writing: what ought I at this time to write rather, then
Confutations of his, and his fellows false doctrine, and Defenses of the
Catholic Faith? Whereas this much I could not do, but that it behooved me to
deal with him, who above al others most busily impugneth Gods truth, and
consequently with those of his side: I thought it not good, for ryuing of hard
blocks, to use soft wedges.

And though I had little hope by any way to ryue a sunder the hard knotte,
wherein their hearts, and Heresy are fast grown together: yet that some
others by them enuegled might be brought to a better mind, who not being so
desperate, be nevertheless hardly withdrawn from their errors, by reason of
long custom, and carnal liberty by the same maintained: I judged the style and
order of writi^g, that I have used, to be most profitable for their behalf.
For they seeing the Captains of deceivers so with just sharpnes rebuked, and
their Heresies with deep strokes so deadly wounded, will the rather be induced
to abhor their former errors, to bethink themselves, and by their reproufe,
learn to amend their own faults as oftentimes young Princes, and noble
children be corrected, with beholding correction ministered to other children of
baser condition.

Howbeit, if al should be accounted to use uncivil, and discourteous speech,
out of whose writings such words may be gathered, as M. Jewel reproves in
me: I know not, what Doctor, what Father my escape that reproach. Neither S.
Cyprian wrote al things so Martyrlike, nor S. Basil so meekely, nor S. Ambrose
so gravely, nor S. Chrysostom so sweetly, nor S. Augustine so temperately, nor
S. Gregory so humbly: but with search, no small multitude of such words
might easily be found in their learned and godly works, with no less
vehemency of spirit uttered against Heretics, and other wicked persons.
What shall I say of S. Hierom, whose utterance against Heretics of less
malice, and against other men of more honesty, then these men are of, is such,
that to many he seems to thunder, and to lighten, rather then to speak?

But what speak I of men? I report me to those that have perused the books
of the old, and new Testament, whether the like tokens of ernest zeal, and
just grief, be not oftentimes found in the Prophets, and the Apostles them
selves, who were the Secretaries of the holy Ghost.

Sundry words found in the holy Scripture of more Sharpenes, then they are,
which M. Jewel reproves in me.
The words of the Psalms be not unknown to many.

Psalm. 13.
They be abominable in their studies, says the Prophet.

Psalm. 13.
Under their lips lies the Poison of Serpents.

Psalm. 13.
Their throat is like an open Sepulcher.

Their words be darts. Psalm 54.

Down to hell with them whiles they be alive. Ibid.

Their teeth are arowes, their tongue is a sharp sword. Psa. 56.

They are become like Serpents. Psalm. 57.

They have whetted their tongues like Serpents. Psalm. 139.

The poison of the Aspis is under their lips. Ibid.

Thou have spoken like a fool, said Job to his wife. Job. 2.

According to his name, he is a fool, said Abigail of her Husband Nabal. 1.
Reg. 25.

Thou have played the fool, said Samuel to king Saul. 1. Re 13

The number of fools is infinite. Eccle. 1.

Thou lie in the head, said Daniel to the wicked Judge. Daniel 13.

The Prophets are like roaring Lions, and the Princes be Wolves catching their
pray. Ezechiel. 22.

The Princes be like roaring Lions, and the Judges be Wolves. Sophon. 3.

Thy Prophets Israel be like Foxes in the wilderness. Eze. 13

Woe be to the sinful nation, people laden with iniquity, the wicked brood,
mischeuous children, said Esaie. Esa. 1.

O my people, Ribauldes oppress thee. Esaie. 3.

Again, o ye Princes of Sodom, o ye people of Gomorrha, said he. Ibid.

They are become rank Staliens, they ney, each one at his neighbors wife,
says Jeremy. Jeremy. 5.

O thou Canaans brood, and not sprung of Judah, o thou old thief, said Daniel
to the ungodly Judge. Dan. 13.

The children of the devil came out of thee, says Moses. Deuter. 13.

The men of Gabaa were the children of the Devil. Iud. 19

One of the Daughters of Belial. 1. Reg. 1.

The sons of the Devil. 1. Reg. 10.

A man of the Devil named Siba. 2. Reg. 20.

Many Dogs have becompassed me about, says David of Christ. Psalm. 21.

Save my life from the hand of the Dog. Ibid.

They are dumme Dogs, that can not bark. Esai. 56.

As a Dog that returns to his Vomit, so is a fool that doubts his
folly. Prouer. 26.

He that holds an il woman, takes a Scorpion, says the Wiseman. Eccle. 26.

Sharp, and bitter words uttered in the new Testament.
But now let us see, whether we may not find speeches of like vehemency and
sharpness in the new Testament, where the grace of the holy Ghost is showed
more abundantly. If it be much to call a man a beast, what is it to call men
Vipers, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, Swine?

O ye Progeny of Vipers, said S. John the Baptist to the Scribes and Saducees.
Matthew. 3.

O ye Serpents and Vipers brood, said Christ him self to the Scribes and
Pharisees. Matthew. 23.

O generation of Vipers, said the blessed Baptiste to the people, as S. Luke
reports. Luke. 3.

Inwardly they are ravening Wolves, says Christ of false Preachers. Matthew. 7.

Ravening Wolves shall enter in amongst you, says S. Paul. Act. 20.

I send you forth as sheep among Wolves, said Christ to the Apostles. Matthew.
10.

Say unto that Fox, quod Christ of Herod. Luke. 13.

Give not a holy thing to Dogs. Matthew. 7.

It is not good to give the childrens bread to Dogs, said Christ. Matthew. 15.

Have an eye to the Dogs, says S. Paul. Philip. 3.

Like a Dog that comes again to his Vomit, says S. Peter. 2. Pet. 2.

Cast not your pearls before Swyne, says Christ. Matthew. 7.

Like a Swyne wallowing again in the durte, says S. Peter. 2. Pet. 2.

Go behind me Satan, said Christ to Peter his Apostle. Math. 16.

Many young women are turned back, and gone after Satan. 1. Tim. 5.

Satan dwells among you. Apocalyp. 2.

The Synagog of Satan. Apocalyp. 3.

The Devil takes away the word out of their heart. Luke. 8.

One of you is a Devil, said our Lord of Judas. Joan. 6.

Ye are of your Father the Devil, it was said to the Jews. Joan. 8.

The children of the Devil are manifest, says S. John. 1. Johan. 3.

The Ministers of Satan. 2. Cor. 11.

They are holden captive of the Devil at his will. 2. Timoth. 2.

O full of al deceit, o thou son of the Devil, said S. Paul to Elimas. Act.
13.

False Prophets, lying Masters, they deny God, they bye and sell you, they
are like unreasonable beasts, they have their eyes full of aduoutrie, they
follow the way of Balaam of Bosor, founteines without water, clouds tossed with
the winds. etc. 2. Petr. 2.

Disobedient, vain ianglers, deceivers of minds, abominable, to al good work
reprobates. Tit. 1.

Ye are like to whitted Sepulchers. Matthew. 23.

Liers, evil beasts, slow bellies. Tit. 1.

God shall strike thee thou painted wall, said S. Paul to Ananias. Act. 23.

O ye foolish Galathians. Galat. 3.

False Apostles, guileful workers. 2. Cor. 11.

The enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose bellye is their God. Philip. 3.

O ye stifnecked, and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye have ever resisted
the holy Ghost, said S. Steven unto the Jews. Act. 7.

As Iannes, and Iambres withstode Moses, so these withstand the truth. 2. Tim.
3.

Hye minded, proud, blasphemous. Ibidem.

Their word creapeth forth like a canker. 2. Tim. 2.

Their tongue is full of deadly poison. Jacob. 3.

These Dreamers defile the flesh, despise rulers, and speak evil of them that
are in authority. Iudae.

As beasts, which are without reason. Woe be unto them. For they have followed
the way of Cain, and are utterly given to the error of Balaam for lucres sake,
and perish in the treason of Chore. Ibidem.

Why tempte ye me ye Ypocrites? said Christ. Matthew. 22

Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Ypocrites. Mat. 23

Woe be unto you blind guides. Ibid.

O ye fools, and blind. Ibid.

Ypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then, etc.
Matthew. 7.

It were not hard Christian Reader, here to lay forth a greater heap of
words gathered out of the Scriptures, which M. Jewel reproves in me, as
discourteous, and uncivil, and proceeding altogether of choler. But these few
may suffice for show, that if we consider words only, and not the
Circumstance of the sentence, and the just cause why they were with such
vehemency uttered: the holy Ghost may seem also chargeable of discourteous and
uncivil speech, by whose prompting the Scriptures of God have been written.

If the matter of M. Jewels grievous accusation depend of words considered in
them self only, the Scriptures have words, that being put a part, sownde
more roughly, then any yet by the written, or by him noted. And so far is
that pretensed fault in both Testamentes, nolesse then in my books. But if al
be to be weighed by the sentences, wherein such words be placed, and by the
deserte of them in whose reproufe they be uttered, as reason is it should: then
I appeal to al men of judgment, the dew circumstances, and causes well
considered, whether I have at any time passed the bowndes of a zealous defender
of the Catholic Religion, whereof I make profession.

That the use of sharp speech is convenient according to the desert of M.
Jewel, and of his fellows.
LEt the rehearsal of my whole sentences with their circumstance, in which the
words be found that do so much offend, be differred until anonne. And here
to turn thy tale unto you M. Jewel, and unto your fellows, let it be lawful
for me to come unto the causes, by which I was justly moved so to write, and
to the very things them self, for which ye deserve so to be written of, The
odds betwixt M. Ievvel and them of his side, and us.
and with such courtesy of words to be greeted.

Who be you M. Jewel? and who be they of your side? Who am I, or rather, who
are we? For of my self I am content no account be made, but only as I apply
mine endeavor to defend the Church, and the Catholic Faith by you impugned.
As for us, say the worst ye can of us, we are Catholics. By your own
confession, your doctrine has not benne in all Churches, at al times taught,
and therefore ye have told us, we know not what of your Church, that it is
invisible secret, unknown, and lurketh in corners, no man can tell where: and
therefore ye are not Catholic.

We remain in that we have received, ye are departed from that ye received.
The doctrine for which ye make such stir, is it not openly known to al,
from what men ye had it, and how late ye learned it? Where was this fifth
Gospel, so much as whispered in any known corner of the world, before that
lewd Augustine Friar Martin Luther brake his vow, ran out of his Cloister,
and yoked him self to his wanton Nonne?

Where was your Sacramentarie doctrine preached, before Friar Huskin, that new
named him self Oecolampadius, likewise brake his solemn promise to God,
forsook his Religion, and coupled him self to a young yoke fellow? Before
their time, who heard the sownde of your Gospel? Where had ye any Dioces, any
Bishop, any Church, any Priest, any Chapel, any so much as a Parrish Clerk
in the whole world?

Tell us not, as ye are wont, of Wiklef, Huss, Jerome of Prague, Berengarius,
Bertram, and a few other, which were but byles and botches in the Church, and
be in no wise worthy the name of Church. Forgete not what you say in your
Apology: that Luther, and Zuinglius, came first to the Gospel. Remember ye call
that time, the first appearing the spring, and the first grass, as it were, of
your Gospel. If it be so, how be ye Catholic? or how be ye of the Catholic
Church, which is so called in respect of the universality of times,
Vince^tius Lirinen.
places and persons? As for us on the otherside, we are hable to show you the
continuance of our faith and Doctrine, by orderly successions of Bishops, going
upward, even from those learned and holy Fathers, whom for none other cause,
but only for the Catholic Faith of Christ's Church, most unjustly ye keep in
Prison, to S. Gregory, who sent godly Preachers to convert the English people
of our country unto the Faith of Christ, and from S. Gregory further upward
unto S. Peter, and S. Paul, that preached the Faith in Rome, and consequently
unto Christ him self.

If we would speak unto you in the person of the Catholic Church, whereof we
are a part, we might say unto you those words of Tertullian spoken to
Heretics: Mea est possessio, olim possideo, prior possideo, Tertul. li.
Praescript. aduersus haereticos.
habeo origines firmas ab ipsis authoribus, quorum fuit res. Ego sum haeres
Apostolorum. The Scripture, and the right sense of the Scripture is my
possession, I am in possession of old, I claim possession by former right,
The Church continues to the worlds end, without al intermission. Matt. 28:
Johan. 14
I have the assured originals from the first authors, by whom it was set
forth. It is I, that am the Apostles heir.

The Church M. Jewel, as ye ought to know, continues from Christ's Ascension
unto the end of the world, without intermission, and without exception of any
age or years. Will ye have us prove it? What can we say, if ye will not believe
Christ, nor God him self? I will be with you (says Christ) al days unto the
end of the world. Again: I will beseech my Father, and he shall give you an
other conforter, to remain with you for ever the Spirit of truth, which the
world can not receive. God says to Christ in Esaie, Esai. 5^.
This is my covenant with them: my spirit which is in thee, and my words,
that I have put in thy mowth, shall not depart from thy mowth, and from the
mowth of thy seed, and from the mowth of thy seeds seed, from this time for
ever.

Lo here ye hear, both the words of God, and the Spirit of truth, by whom
the words may be rightly understood, promised to remain with the Church for
ever. Thus we are well assured, that the Church has never failed nor wanted
Gods word, gods Spirit, and Gods truth. But ye my Masters of the new
learning do say, that the Church failed, and was destitute of Gods word,
and of his spirit of Truth, for the space of nine hundred years and more,
until Martin Luther came, and restored the lost Gospel. By virtue of which
Gospel never preached before, ye claim the right of the Church, and so would
dispossess us, wherein of necessity ye must grant one of these two: either
that Christ the Son of God, promised more, then he performed, which were
heinous blasphemy: or that your Church has continued til this day, and shall
continue to the worlds end.

If to eschew the reproach of so wicked a blasphemy, ye grant the continuance
of your Church, ye must tell us, where it was before Luther began to preach
that ye call the Gospel. Name the place, where was it? Or was it somewhere
without a place? Dic quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo. If it were
at al, where were your Bishops? What were their names, or were they men without
names? Bring forth your Originals, your Registers, your Rolls of Bishops, that
followed one after an other by lawful succession. For this were a sure way for
proof of your right, Tertull. In prascript. Optatus. August.
much commended and used of the best learned Fathers. Your Acts and
Monumentes, where be they? Have ye none of greater antiquity, then those late
of Foxes making?

If ye had a continual succession, how came Luther, and Zuinglius first to the
Gospel? how, was all the light quite out before? how, were all the fonteines of
the water of life utterly dried up before his time? for so ye write in your
Apology. This, this can not stand together M. Jewel, by no means, as all the
world may see. So then it is, we keep our ancient Possession, ye heave and
shooue to remove us from it. We be of the howseholde, ye are strangers. We are
the heirs of the Apostles, ye are forrainers. We are the lawful Children of
the Church, ye are Bastardes: to be short and plain, whereas we are
Catholics, what follows, but that ye be Heretics?

The case standing thus, what great offense have I committed, if where I
defend the common cause of the Church, being moved with dew zeal, and just
grief of mind, to see your ungodly dealinges, I forgete sometimes the
flattering Titles, wherewith ye would your proceedinges to be magnified, and
use words more agreeable to your deserts? O ye say, I use discourteous, and
uncivil speech.

Why sir, if ye skreake like Frogs, must we say, ye sing like Nightingalles?
If ye crow like proud Cocks, must we say, ye mourn like simple Dooues? If
ye byte us like Masti^^s, must we say, ye lick us like gentle Spani^h? If ye
consume us, and devour us like ravening Wolves, must we say, ye profit us
like good Sheep? Must we tell the world, that your Serpents be Fisshes, your
Snakes be Lamproies, your Scorpions be Creauises, briefly, that your deadly
Poison is holesom Triacle? What were this, but to please men, and to deceive
Gods people?

But let us go from Metaphores, and come to the plain matter. If your Doctrine
be false, as by most sufficient ways we have proved it to be: shall we be
uncivil, except we sooth it? If your deeds be ungodly, as the world sees,
and rueth: shall we be discourteous, except we justify them? If ye say Nay for
Yea, and Yea for Nay in Gods causes: shall we be blamed, as men uncivil, and
discourteous, except we uphold your Yea, and your Nay? We can be content to
lack the praise of such sinful Civility, of such wicked Courtesy.

If any privily pike money out of our purses, steal our goods, rob by the
high way, kill men, and attempt traison to their Princes person: stands it
with good manner, to call them Pikepurses, Thieves, Robbers, Murderers,
Traitors: and whereas you, and your fellows teach, and stubbornly maintain a
false doctrine concerning the real presence (that here I speak of no other
points) by the Church, and by Luther him self the first founder of your own
Gospel condemned for Heresy: must it needs be an discourteous part to call you
Heretics?

To touch some of your rawest Gaulles, for making proffer to which ye wince
and kick so much every where, and specially where ye lay forth al my sharp
words with such diligence gathered together out of my books into one heap
before your Preface to the Reader: For so much as it is given forth by Luthers
own confession, that by the conference and disputation which the Devil had
with him, he was persuaded to defy the Mass, and become enemy to the blessed
Sacrifice of the Church, and your self M. Jewel have given your verdite in
favor of Luther, and Satan, Satan's doctrine. Satan their School Master. In
the Reply art. 1. Division. 2.
allowing Satan's Doctrine in that point, and Luthers conformity, embracing the
same also for your own part, as you have openly witnessed in your Reply:
what offense was it to say (for which you show your self grieved) that ye
joined with Satan, and concerning the spite ye bear at the Mass, to call Satan
your Schoolemaister?

That I called this new founded Church of the Protestants a Babylonical
tower, not without just cause. It angreth you, that I call this new Church of
yours (for so a Gods name we must name it) Your Babylonical Tower. And this is
for a heinous word scored up among the rest in your said Roll: you tell the
Queen of it also in your Epistle to her Majesty: but how justly ye be offended
therewith, let it be considered, by that I shall here briefly declare.


Dissensions among the Protestants.
Who knows not, that is any thing acquainted with the affairs of our age,
into how many Sects they have divided them selves, that forsook the
Catholic Church, sithence Luther began to lead us a new dance in
Religion: what controversies, debates, and strifes about the weightiest points
of our Faith, have benne stirred up, and most earnestly maintained among them?
Who has not heard of the brawling, and skolding between Luther, and Zuinglius,
and the vpholders of either side, about the Doctrine of the Euchariste? Neither
has the matter benne handled with any better quiet, between the Osiandrines,
and the Stancarians, touching the Justification of man, the one Sect
attributing it unto Christ's Divine nature, the other unto his human nature
only.

Again, what stir has benne made about the Doctrine touching Hell, between
Iacobus Smidelinus, and Nicolaus Gallus on the one part, teaching that Christ
suffered also in Hell, and felt the torment of that everlasting Fire, and the
Preachers of the Sea towns of Saxony on the other part, who tell their
people, there is no Hell at al?

The like strife is about the Doctrine of Freewil, some holding with Luther,
some with Calvin. They be divided likewise in their determinations touching
Justification, some imputing it to Faith only, as Matthias Flacius Illyricus,
some partly to Faith, partly to Charity, as Philip Melanchthon, and Georgius
Mayor. Of Penance, some make three parts, some make but two.

About the number of the holy Sacraments their discord is more notorious. The
Governors of the congregation of Geneua, from whence our new Church of
England has fetched their light, admit two. So does Illyricus, and many
Preachers of Saxony, that dawnce after his Pype. The Doctors of Lipsia will
have three, not one more, nor one less. Melanchthon at Wittenberg, and they of
his band, will needs have four at the least. Others some there be, that
content them selves with one. All the rest they refuse. And now of late years,
as this Gospel is a Proceeding Gospel, and remains not long in one sort of
Doctrine, there be under the kingdom of Pole, that have abandoned the
necessity of all the Sacraments of the new Testament, and require the Iewishe
Circumcision to be restored. It is muttered also, that in some places, where
this Ghospel is hotest, that the Paschal Lamb is called for. O merciful God,
whyther will this Gospel proceed at length?

But what need I to speak of the strifes and debates, that were, and be in
our time betwixt the chief Masters of this new Religion? They were at debate,
not only side against side, men against men, Preachers of one Church against
Preachers of an other Church: but also many of them, and that of the most
famous, were at debate with them selves. Bucer with Bucer, Bucer.
Melanchthon with Melanchthon, Luther with Luther, Calvin with Calvin, Peter
Martyr with Peter Martyr. What a do had Bucer to keep him self in credit
with any side, who, after he ran out of his Cloister, and took unto him a
Yokefellowe, first became a Lutheran, after that a Zuinglian, and again a
Lutheran, and last of al, after he came into England, as it is well known, nor
perfect Lutheran, nor perfect Zuinglian, but an uncertain, and ambiguous
Mongrel between both?

Melanchthon, Melanchthon.
as the world has seen, and as it may be proved by sundry his editions of
his Common places, and other writings, was so mutable in his Faith, that he
seems to have made him self a slave subject to al occasions of mutations. As
he was never stable in his life time, so a little before his death, he turned
wholly from his old Master Luther, and became a Caluinian Sacramentarie, as
his Epistle witnesses written to the Palsgraue of Rhene, and so died in the
woorst change of al.

To declare how Luther Luther.
disagreed with him self, both in deeds and writings, it would require a
whole book. The same has been at large set forth by Cochleus, and other
learned men of our time. What be the contradictions, wherein Calvin Calvin.
fights with him self, and other his infinite errors, and confusions,
Nicolaus Villagagno that learned man, and valiant knight of S. John's Order,
has diligently discoouered.

Peter Martyr in Strasburg a Luthera^, in England a zuinglia^.
As for Peter Martyr, I report me to the whole University of Oxforde that
heard his lessons, whether at his first coming thither, he were not a Lutheran
touching the matter of the blessed Sacrament, and after he had been sent for to
come to London, and had been schooled in the court in king Edwardes time,
became a Zuinglian.

Who so ever will stand in his defense, this that I shall here say, can not be
denied. At Strasburg, from whence he came into England, he professed the Faith
of the Lutherans, for otherwise he should not have received stipende for his
Lecture of the Magistrates there. But at Oxforde he changed his Faith of
Strasburg, for the Faith of king Edwardes Court. For which cause he was not
received again at Strasburg, at his return out of England in Queen Mary's
reign, and therefore he took such condition, as he could get at Zurich in
Suitzerland. So Peter Martyr of Strasburg, agreed not with Peter Martyr of
Oxford, as the world knows, and his books do witness. And it may be
doubted, whether Peter Martyr of Oxford, agreed with Peter Martyr of Zurich.
What confusion is this?

To dwell no longer in this lothsom matter, what Babylonical confusion is in the
chief Doctors of this new found Gospel, if there were nothing else to be
said, it might appear by that we find, that Gaspar Querchamer Gaspar
Querchamer.
a learned lay man, has gathered together six and thirty places repugnant the
one to the other, upon the one only Article of Communion under one or both
Kinds: and by that Osiander writes of Melanchthon and his folowers, that they
held.xx. Opinions, 21. Opinions touching the Article of Justification.
diverse and disagreing the one from the other, touching the Article of
Justification. Whereunto he adds his own different from the other, and also
from the truth, and so makes up the number of xxj. dissonant Opinions.

All this being weighed and considered, I trust it shall not be taken for any
heinous crime of my part, that I called that Synagog, where such men be the
chief Apostles, and Prophets, a Babylonical Tower. Yea now, if ye list M.
Jewel to aggrauate that grievous fault of mine, I say again, that it is worse
then the Babylonical Tower, how much worse it is, confusion of Doctrines to
be ^ounde in them, that have charge of Souls, then confusion of tongues in
them, that build up stone walls.

Whether the chief Deuisers of this new Gospel might not justly be called
Loose Apostates.
You have put in your heap of bitter words pretended to be gathered out of my
books, this saying, as by me spoken to your companions. Ye are Loose
Apostates. Which saying in very deed in such form of words, is not mine.
For trial whereof the Reader may repair to the place directed by your
cotation. The place is in my Confutation of your Apology. fol. 323. a. By the
note of this saying you thought to discredit me, for that is the thing you
seek most chiefly, being otherwise unable to answer to the points of
doctrine. What thereby you have obtained among your dear brethren the married
Moonkes, and Friars, I know not, ne recke not: verily for the same I am never
a white a shamed to show my self before good men.

Loose Apostates.
But with which of these two bitter words, are you grieved M. Jewel? With
Loose, or with Apostates? Amend ye the one, and I promise you to revoke the
other. Who is an Apostata.
Because every man knows not, what is meant by this words, Apostata, it may
here be said, that Apostata is he, that forsakes either the faith, which in
Baptism he promised to keep, or that Rule, and Order of Religious life,
which by solemn vow and open protestation, at his entry into Religion, he
promised to lead his life in. Of the first sort, Iulianus that wicked
Emperor, and Porphyrius, are examples. So are the great Soldans Mammaluches,
and many of the great Turks Ianizaires. Of the second sort be such Moonkes,
and Friars, and al other whatsoever Religious, that foresake their habit,
willingly depart out of their Cloister, and return unto the order of secular
persons. Of which sort there be mo seen abroad in the world at these
days, then ever were in our Forefathers time. If I call these Apostates, I call
them by that common name, by which all the world has ever called them. And
therefore the offense is very small, if it be any at al. Verily it is no
greater, then to call them Thieves, that for Theafte be hanged at Tyborn.

As touching the other term Loose, Loose.
whereas sithence the Apostles time upon Devotion many bereued them selves of
their own liberty, and for Gods sake bound them selves by solemn Vow to a
straight and hard order of life, and this sweet Gospel of yours sets such
at liberty, teaches them to break their promise made to God, to cast of the
yoke of Chastity, and to solace them selves with their Yokefellowes (for so
they call their Strompettes) to forsake the Vow of Voluntary Poverty, and to
enjoy all the worldlywelth they can procure, and to shake of the yoke of al
Obedience, and to be under no rule, but the rule of this Gospel, that is to
say, to keep what rule they list: this being so, what great sin was it to
call them Loose? Speak we well, when of brute beasts, breaking out of a pound,
stable, ropes, fetters, chains, or from the bridle, we say, they are broken
^^ose (...) ^e accomp^^d il speech, (...) we say of M^n^^^, and ^riers, that
^o^ne out or their Cloisters take Q^eanes under the name of holy wedlock,
break al vows, and al order, that they be loose? What bands be stronger to
bind man with all before God, and in conscience, then voluntary Promises, then
Oaths, then solemn Vows? Who so ever makes no conscience to break these
bands, if he be not a Loose man, I know not whom we may call a loose man. And
if such a one be a Loose man, why may he not be so called, specially that
others may so the rather be fraid from the like contempt of God?

The founder of your Gospel Martin Luther, was an Austen Friar, nevertheless
he married the wa^ton Nu^ne of Nymick in Saxony. Peter Martyr your great
Rabbin, was a Regular Chanon of the Order of S. Augustine. He married at
Strasburg Dame Katerine a loose Nun, Peter Martyr, and dame Katerine the
Nu^ne his wife. Oecolam padius. Bucer a Dominican. Pelican a Francisca^
Castalio a Carthusian. Hooper. Barlovv. Dounha^. Skory. Barkley.
that ran out of her Cloister at Metz in Lorraine. Shall it be an uncivil
part, to call them loose Apostates? The Birgittine friar Oecolampadius, the
Patriarch of your fellows the Sacramentaries, brake his vow, fled from his
Religion, married a wife (save the honor of true wedlock) so did Bucer ablacke
Friar, so did Conrade Pelican a gray Friar, so did Castalio a moonke
Cartusian. And for good manners sake, shall we be afraid to call them loose
Apostates?

As for Mooncke Hooper the usurper of Worceter, and Gloue^ter, Barlow of
Chichester, Friar, or Chanon, or both, as I hear say, Sir Downham of
Westchester, the Bonhome of Asheridge, Friar Skory of Hereforde, al married,
and the two old good Fathers, Friar Barkley of Bathe and Wells, and Friar
Couerdal Couerdal.
the Quondam of Exceter, which after the death of their old wives have of late
yoked them selves again to two young women, for their comfort in age,
forbearing to speak any worse word of them, because they be your very
friends, may I not be so bold, as to call them loose Apostates?

TOuching other bitter words gathered by you out of my writings into your
Roll, Huguenotes of France. Gues of the lovv Country.
though your Eua^gelical Brethern the Huguenotes of France, and Scotland, and
the Gues of the low Country, that have robbed and spoiled so many Churches, so
many Monasteries, No^neries, and other places, and have burnt so many
thousands of fair books with the Libraries, and committed so many horrible
outrages: I may not, least I seem discourteous, call them Thieves,
Churcherobbers, the Devils ministers, Satan's brood, scholars of Satan's
school, Caluinistes, Satanistes, Deuilish Rabble, Turkish Huguenotes, etc. For
these be uncivil, and unmannerly words, says M. Jewel, and it is a great
offense to use them.

Though Friar Luther were taught of the Devil in a night conference (as he See
the Preface before my last Reioinder tovvard the end.
confesses him self) to abandon the Mass, and to work all the spite he
could, against the most blessed Sacrifice of the Church: yet for ciuilities
sake, he may not be called the Nouice of the Devil, nor his Folowers, the
Ennemies of the Sacrifice, neither may that be called the Devils School, were
the Devil Luthers schoolmaster never so much.

What Turkish wickedness has proceeded out of this Doctrine, who sees not? yet
by M. Jewel, it is beside good manner, to call it Turkish Doctrine.

The Professors of this doctrine, and specially M. Jewel him self, do omit
no occasion, yea they seek al occasions they can, to reuele and blase abroad
unto the world, Chams brood.
the Defaultes and imperfections of the Catholics, without which men live
not, and chiefly, if perhaps some Abuses have creapte into some particular
Churches, they make much of a little, following therein the fact of Cham, Genesis
9.
who reveled the nakedness of his Father Noe. This notwithstanding it is noted
in M. Jewels Roll of my sharp words, for a grievous offense, that I call such
persons, Chams brood.

Who ever wrote so filthily, and so bawdelike, as Friar Bale Bale.
that Irishe Prelate of Oserie? The heart can not be clean, whose ears can
abide to hear such unclean words. Yet forsooth because he always railed at
the Catholic Church, and at the Clergy thereof, and wrought so mightily in
the vineyard of their lord, that is to say, in despite of the Pope, and of al
ancient order, and religion: it is skored up by M. Jewel for a bitter speech,
that I called him Bawdy Bale, giving warning by that term to al chaste hearts,
to refrain the reading of such unchaste and filthy books.

That it was no great offense to call M. Jewel him self a Liar, a Falsifier, a
Boaster, a Scoffer.
AS for your self M. Jewel, who ever was so vain, so foolish, so insolent, so
cockish, so mad, as to make such a Challenge to al learned men a live? And now
how unable you are to defend it, what wise man sees not? Yet because you
think your self shamed for ever, except you stand to it stoutely: ye
proceed without regard of truth, or modesty. And now seeing your self
brought to this distress, that you must either yield with some shame, or
prosecute your Challenge with more shame: ye choose rather to seem impudent in
lying, and to pass al measure in craking, then any thing ouerseene in that you
first took in hand. And albeit, both I, and others, have made most evident
proof hereof, and the thing it self speaks so much, yea and your own very
friends see it, and be right sorfor it: yet forsooth to call M. Jewel a liar, a
sclaunderer, a craking Chalenger: by verdite of M. Jewel him self, it was
unmannerly and uncivilly done.

But sir, since you require me to be so courteous in my writings against you,
why did not you your self in yours against me, use more courtesy? Is that
commendable in you, which is reproueable in me? Or else, what, have you a
special dispensation to say what you list, and to require al others to adore
you, and say, Aue Rabbi? Shall it be lawful for you, to cry out upon us, toll,
toll, crucifige: and must we sing unto you, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus? Whiles
ye bark, and bite, must we cast a disshe of fragmentes unto you? Whiles ye
play the Bear with us, must we throw honny unto you? Whiles ye play the part
of Satan, must we light a candle before you?

S. Paul the chosen vessel of Christ, teaching Titus, Tit. 1.
how to demean himself toward such as you are, said, Increpa illos dure,
rebuke them sharply. But what soever you say, or do, must we needs sothe
you, and smooth^ you? Must we, stroke you and cooxe you, as men do cursed
boys, after they have done shrewd turns? If you pass al men that ever wrote,
in number of lies, in vanity of boasting, in the common custom of scoffing, as
now it has benne proved against you: shall we fear, that we seem not to
lack the civility you speak of, to call you a liar, a boaster, a scoffer?
What is the matter, that doing so il, you require to be spoken of so well?

By this, or no way else, like it is, we should please M. Ievvel.
PErhaps whereas the Rentes of the Bishoprike of Sarisburie cause men al to
belorde you, your ears being of long time accustomed to such honorable
greetinges, you look to be honored at our hands, as you are of your poor
hungry Craftesmen, that having learned to read English pretily, sue unto you
for Ministerships. And then whereas you lie impudently, following them we must
say, were it not, that your good Lordship says so, verily we should have
thought otherwise. And whereas you falsify your testimonies, we must put the
fault in your Spectacles. When you hew and mangle the Doctors so fowly, that
all the world may see it: we must bear you in hand, that when your Lordship
wrote so, the book was not at hand. When you serve us with a point of
Scurrilitie, we must say: O how it becomes your L. to be meary? When you
shoot at randon, diuerting altogether from the special point that is to be
answered, unto impertinent matter: we must say, your L. shoots fair, though
somewhat wide of the mark. When by no wit, nor cunning, you are hable to
make good your Challenge: yet then we must say, that your L. lacks no words,
and has given a good Push toward it. To be short, (for these be the special
points for which you accuse my utterance of vncourtesie) when you speak big,
and Goliathlike vpbraid all the host of God, to wit, the whole Catholic
Church of these last thousand years: what must we do, but to show token of
fear, 1. Reg. 17.
as the Israelites under king Saul did, and give back, that you may boast, and
crake alone?

Truly touching your dignity, what account so ever you make of your self, I
take you but for M. Jewel Bacheler of Divinity, sometime person of Sunningwel
between Oxford and Abington. And that is the greatest degree, that ever I knew
you called unto. If the Queen's Highness of her special favor toward you, have
given you the rentes of the Bishoprike of Sarisburie, you are the more bound
to thank her, and to consider, what account you have to make of it. It is not
money, that can set you one step higher in ecclesiastical degree. A Bishop
you are not I am right sure, neither can all the Kings, and Queen's of the
world, nor all the Parlamentes of England, by any their own only power and
authority make you a lawful and a true Bishop. The same I told you in my
Confutation of your Apology, which point you have not sufficiently answered:
as it shall appear. Yet was it very behoofful for you to have fully answered.
But I bear with you, as therein not lacking good will, but ability. Study for
it, so long as you will, you shall never be hable to make it good, that you are
yet a right Bishop.

Therefore in this respect you ought to bear with my bold utterance the
more, taking you for no greater man in right, then you were, when you
subscribed in Oxford to the Real Presence, to the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
to those other points, that now you impugn so busily. In very deed, this
much I confess, that in case you were a Bishop, though an unworthy Bishop,
yea a wicked Bishop: yet for the dignity of that Vocation, and for the Orders
sake, I should, and would reverence you accordingly.

Act. 23.
Whereas it was told S. Paul, after he had reviled Ananias, that he was the
high Bishop, he revoked his word, and submitted him self to that was written,
Thou shall not curse the governor of thy people. Exodus 22.
Whereby he does us to understand, that had he known, he had benne no Bishop
at al, he would not have revoked his word (that in your opinion, is uncivil
and discourteous) but have let it stand in force. You being as il a man, as ever
Ananias was, and having done much more spite unto the Church of Christ, and
more dishonor unto God, then ever he did: bear with me for speaking truly and
ernestly without flattery. Act. 23.
The example of S. Paul (saying to Ananias, Thou painted wall, not knowing him
to be the high Bishop, and yet occupying a more honorable room, then you are
yet called unto) leads me not greatly to repent of any of those words spoken
of you, or of your fellows the Sacramentaries, and Protestants of our time,
which to impair my credit, you have culled out of my Books, and laid
together in one heap. And what so ever I have written or said, that touches
your person specially, and irketh you: I take God to record, therein I
respected not M. Jewel the private man, but M. Jewel the public enemy of
Christ's Church, the professed Impugner of the Truth, and Catholic Religion,
the despiser, and prophaner of the holy Sacraments, the breaker of unity, the
enemy of God. And for my warrant in so doing, I have the examples (which here
I laid forth before) of the Prophets, of the Apostles, specially of S. Paul,
S. Jude, and S. Peter, of S. John the Baptiste, of our Savior Christ him
self.

Yea I say furthermore, what is that sharpenes of words, which in this case,
I mean, when the authority of the Councels, and holy Fathers is so lightly
contemned, when Gods holy Mysteries are so turkishly profaned, when the
Church is so falsely sclaundered, when unity is so with most certain danger
of Christian souls broken, when the whole state of the Catholic Religion is
so wickedly overthrown, briefly when God him self is so horribly blasphemed:
In this case I say, what sharpenes of words is there, which just grief of a
Christian heart, and godly zeal, causes not to seem, not only excusable,
but also laudable, yea necessary, yea with praise, and reward to be honored?

If, when the Children of Israel, defiled them selves in Fornication with the
women of Moab, God in anger said to Moses, take all the chief of the people,
Number. 25.
and hang them up in Gibettes against the Sun, that my wrath may be turned
from Israel: where there is so much both bodily and spiritual fornication,
yea sacrilegious Incest, not only committed, but permitted, but taught, but
cou^seled and exhorted, and for some part commanded against the honor and
will of God, our Moyseses, and Aarons, the true Governors withholden from
executing their dewtie: shall it not become us, whose hearts God touches, at
least with words to show the grief of our minds, and with convenient
sharpenes of speech to rebuke the heinous wickedness that is committed, and so
(for so much as in us lies) to revoke Gods people from it?

If Phinees, being nor high Priest, nor magistrate, but only as yet a private
man, Ibidem.
was highly praised, and rewarded of God, for his zeal in killing one of the
Israelites for whooredom committed with an harlot of Madian, to stay Gods
wrath: shall we seem to deserve blame, for uttering only words in reproufe of
so far more heinous crimes, if not to stay God from his just wrath, nor the
offenders from their wickedness, yet the people of God from the like example?

What, you are very nice M Jewel, that find so great fault with me only for
certain sharp words bestowed in reprehension of your, and your companions so
diverse, and so grievous enormities. You are not taken up for halting (as they
say) pardy. Halting may have some excuse of human infirmity. This that is
reprehended in you, is not only halting, it is falling down right. Neither are
you so much to be rebuked for your own wilful falling down, but much more
for that you study and labor all that you can, to pull al others down into the
pit, that your self are fallen into.

Now in this case, the pit being so dangerous, is it not well, and dewtifully
done, to give warning to Gods people to beware of it? All that I writ, is for
the peoples sake. For with you, and such as you are, I have little hope to do
any good. Such ones the Apostle aduertiseth us, Tit. 1.
not to deal withal. Now how shall the people be dewly warned to beware, whose
senses be more lively in worldly, then in spiritual things, except the dulnes
of their mind be stirred up with the fear of great peril? And how can the
greatness of this peril be signified unto them, but with words of some
vehemency? As for example: If I should say to one that goes forth by night,
sir, the way you shall pass through, is uneven, by reason of little holes and
furrows: And you take not heed, you may happen to stumble, or perhaps to
wrentche your foot. Upon this warning, will he be so careful how to go, as if I
say thus, If you love your life, beware how you go that way, for there be great
pittes, and dungeons, that you shall hardly escape, and if you fall, you are sure
to break your neck.

The case is like in this behalf M. Jewel. The people be always going
foreward, and for lack of knowledge, they pass forth, as it were by night.
Now, so far as we are persuaded, the way they go in at this day in England,
to be perilous, as that which through Schisms, and Heresies, and other
manifold wickedness thereof ensewing, leads them to everlasting damnation:
should we not deceive them, if we told them, that Dungeons were but furrows,
that deep pittes were but stumbling holes, and that there were no great Danger
in the way?

For this cause therefore M. Jewel, that the people of God might be the more a
fraid to hear you, and believe you, and to follow your damnable ways: I
thought it good and expedient, in writing against you, and against the heresies
of our time, to use sh^rp^r words, and speech of more vehemency, then
otherwise I would have done, if I had written to you privately, or so, as
knowing that my books should have come to no man's hands, but to yours. I
knew you would wince, and kick at it. But spare not, little care I therefore,
so that by my labor profit redounde to Christian People.

For what cause in writing my Confutation of the Apology, I used such verdure
of style, as might seem not over flat, but tempred with convenient
sharpness.
BEfore I began to set my pen to the paper, I considered well with my self,
what it was to stir up such Hurnettes, and to provoke such Waspes to anger.
Touched I them once, were it never so gentilly: I knew, they would straight way
flee at my face, and buzze about me, and that possibly I should not save my
self from their stinging. Yet having a good heart, and being right willing,
for the Truths sake, and for the Defense of Christ's Church, to sustain that
Smarte, what so ever it should be: I took advise, with my self, how to tempre
my style so, as both Gods cause might seem sufficiently defended, and they
not justly offended.

Three ways of vvriting against an Adversary.
Whereas then there be three ways of writing against such Adversaries of the
Church, used diversely of the Fathers, upon diverse occasions of time, place,
person, and matter, of which the one is cold, soft, meek, lowly, and demure:
an other hot, rough, stern, and vehement: the third tempred with a convenient
mediocritie between both: though at the first in my Answer to the Challenge, I
inclined more unto the soft and gentle way, afterward in my Confutation of
the Apology, and in my Reioindre, I chose the mean, that by the one extreme I
might not seem to work upon choler, and to seek revenge, rather then Defense
of Gods cause, by the other, to be too abiecte, and to show less confidence in
our cause, to thincouragement of such cockish Adversaries.

Now comes me M. Jewel, and meddling little with the matter it self, and the
very chief points in controversy (whereby he gives out a secret confession
of the weakness of his side) he inueieth at my person, and with all his
Rhetorique does what he can, to bring me in discredit with the Reader for my
sharpenes and vehemency of speech. And feign would he al men to believe, that
I lack Discretion, that Choler rules my pen, that I use words of more
heat and bitterness, then it becomes either my vocation, or the cause. By
this he seems to discharge me, of what so ever is reprehensible in that other
extreme. Wherewith I am content. For I had rather his quarrel should be extended
to the reproufe of my person, then to the prejudice of the cause. And
doubtelesse if I had inclined to the other extreme way of writing, he would not
have failed, but have turned al to argument of weakness of our side. In deed
naturally by words and gesture we show courage, when our matter is good: and
of cold manner of handling, there grows a suspicion, that the matter is
naught. Had I therefore always written coldly and softely, I had ministered
unto M. Jewel a ioily occasion to insulte upon me, as though our cause had been
the weaker.

And so he would have taken that advantage against me, which Cicero, Cicero in
Brut^. M. Callidius.
as he writes of him self, once took against Marcus Callidius. This M.
Callidius (as he witnesses of him) was an excellent man, and was endewed with all singular graces apperteining to a perfect Orator, save that he was not
vehement, nor applied him self to stir and move the minds of them, that
heard him. Cicero and he were once matched together in a cause. Callidius
accused one Quintus Gallius, laying to his charge before the Judges, that he
had prepared poison wherewith to have destroyed him. For proof of it, he
declared that he took him in the manner, and that he had in readiness against
him, handwritinges, witnesses, signs, examinations, and showed the matter to
be manifest, and disputed of the crime very exquisitely, but yet soberly and
coldly.

When Cicero came to make Defense in the behalf of Gallius, among other
things that he treated like a cunning Orator, at length he goes from the
crime objected, and from the matter it self, to the manner of Callidius
action, and made the softnes of his demeanor, and coldness of his utterance, an
argument of the others innocence. And there he bears Callidius in hand, that
al was but a feined matter. For says he to him, would thou Callidius, Cicero
in Brute.
have handled this case in such wise, except thou had feined? Vbi dolor? Vbi
ardor animi? etc. Where shewedst thou any grief? Where any heat of the mind?
Nulla perturbatio animi, nulla corporis, frons non percussa, non femur, pedis
(quod minimum est) nulla suppl^sio. In all thy handling of the matter, thou
shewedst thy self to feel no trouble of mind, nor of body. Thou smotest not
thy self on the forehed, thou gave not thy self a clappe on the thighe thou
did not so much (which is the least of al) as once stamp with thy foot.

Thus concluded Cicero against Callidius. And thus doubtelesse would M. Jewel
have concluded against me, if I had written my answer, my Confutation, and my
Reioindre, in such kind of style, as the contrary whereof he besturreth him
self so much to disprove in me. Yea he would have borne the world in hand
(which nevertheless sometimes he does in effect) gathering argument of the
soft and cold manner of my writing, that I had but feined to please men, and
had benne persuaded otherwise in my heart. How so ever I had written, he was
determined to reprehende me.

In very deed had I thought, that he would not have abused my softenes to show
of the more confidence in his cause, and that the same should not have brought
any prejudice to our cause: I would have forborne al roughnes and sharpenes,
and would more gladly have followed the temperate and quiet vain of mine own
nature. Howbeit what he was like to find at my hand, I gave him warning at
the first: where I said, that, In the preface to M. Ievvel before my Answer.
if perhaps I should sometimes seem to scarre, or lawnce a festered bunche,
that deserved to be cut of, I would him to remember, how the meekest and the
holiest of the ancient Fathers in reproving heretics, oftetimes have showed
them selves Zealous, earnest, eager, sharp, and bitter.

Now to end this matter, wherein I confess I have dwelte longer, then I
intended when I began, I pray thee gentle Reader (if fear of Excommunication
stay thee not from reading heretical Books) for some part of my discharge,
and that M. Jewels falsehode in this thing also, as in all other that he takes
in hand, may appear, to view his book of the Defense, and mine of the
Confutatio^ To make the case mo^e odious, on my side, and to bear^ thee in
hand^, that I (...) used sharpenes in writing contrary to mine own promise,
behold, how fowly he has falsified my words. Thus falsely he lays the matter
forth.

Jewel. M. Ievvel falsifieth, this place by cutti^g away, and by changing
words.
M. Harding in the Preface before his Confutation of the Apology.

(then thus he makes me to speak.) The manner of vvriting, which I have here
used, in comparison of our Adversaries, is sober, and gentle etc. And in
respect of their heat, bitterness, and railing, as many tell me, over cold,
svveete and mild.


Harding.
Here good Reader, with his etc, he cutteth of my words, that do fully answer
his objection, and quite alters the sense of the place, by changing, But,
into And, and by leaving out my whole tale, that there followed, whereby any
reasonable man might be satisfied, Thus al his reproufes of me, and al his
other objections against the catholic doctrine will be found false, if every
man's sayings be only vewed, and so to any indifferent man they shall seem
sufficiently confuted by conference of the books only. If his continual
falsifyinges be not espied, and tried out, marvel it is not, if the Reader
conceive sinister opinion of me. Let al be tried by the books, not by his
false reports: and I doubt not of the judgment of all that be indifferent in
their judgments. As for those that be parcial, and wilfully addicted to their
own likinges, I make less account of them, then I have pity of them. My
whole saying then truly reported is this.

The manner of writing which I have here used in comparison of our adversaries,
is sober, soft, and gentle, yet vehementer, rougher, and sharper, then for my
wont, and nature: but in respect of their heat, bitterness, and railing, as
many tell me, over cold, sweet, and mild. How so ever it shall seem to thee
Reader, herein I have done as I thought best. Well I am assured, I have not gone
far from the steps of the most praised ancient Fathers, of whom who have
benne commended most for the spirit of meekenes, the same, thowgh toward other
offenders have showed them selves like mild Moses, yet having to do with
Heretics, commonly have demeaned them selves like earnest Elias. If liars
should be entreated in like sort as true reporters, slaunderers, and
backebyters, as faithful friends, heretics, as catholics, Apostates, as
steadfast Christians; blasphemers, as saints: truth should be injured,
wickedness flattered, virtue misprised. Of whom the truth was impugned or
resisted with malice, them little spared either the Prophets, or the Apostles,
or Christ him self.

Thus may all this matter for which M. Jewel has made so much adoo, seem to
have benne sufficiently answered before.

Neither with more truth has he alleged that other saying of mine, which
standing by it self alone, as he has placed it in his book immediately after
the former falsified saying, gives out a colorable show, as if I condemned my
self. Thus he lays it forth.

Ievvel. Again in the same Confutation. There is no man of wisdoms, or
honesty, that would with so immoderate vpbraidinges impair the estimation
of his modesty. fol. 300. b.


Harding.
But in that saying M. Jewel, I rebuke the impudent lies, and slanders of him,
that wrote the Apology, who there raileth immoderatly at the Bishops (whom the
holy Ghost, Act^. 20.
as S. Paul says, has ordained to govern the Church of God) saying, that
neither they know, nor will know the things perteining to their charge, nor
set a jot by any point of Religion, save that which concerns their belly and
riot. And there further uncharitably he burdeneth them, as if they were so
wicked, as to command Christian Princes to destroy al Religion, and to
crucify again Christ him self. In my answer to this, among other words
thus I say.

Confut. 300. b.
Put the words of this railing Defenders amplification aside, and the whole
sentence that rises of all this talk, is only this. It is not reason Bishops
be judges in matters of faith, and not secular Princes. Now to give a color
hereto, and to move Princes to take the matter into their own hands, they
say, as becomes them and none else. For there is no man of wisdom, or
honesty that would with so impudent lies diminish his credit, and with so
immoderate vpbraidinges impair the estimation of his modesty. Neither be
these men so hot in this matter for any love they bear to secular Princes.
For if any such Prince be not a fauorer of their Gospel, then have they a Blast
of a Trompet to blow him down, as it appears by their books made against
the monstrous regiment of women, and by the good obedience their French
brethren the Huguenotes keep toward their king in France. Other examples of the
like Euangelical obedience in other countries I leave to men's remembrance.

The circumstance of this whole matter considered (which may better be seen in
my book) I report me to the discrete Reader, whether any just cause be
ministered to M. Jewel, to pike quarrel to the words by him alleged, specially,
if they be wholly and truly alleged.

But why did he nippe of those four words, with so impudent lies? Does not
this discover his falsehode, and show of whom that saying was meant? It seemed
good to such a liar, to shifte away the mention of Lies from the Readers eyes,
that he might not seem charged therewith. Thus al his advantage stands in
falsehode. But what shall a man say? To require plainness and truth of such a
Defender of untruth, were to require him, either to unsay all that he has
said, or to say nothing at al. For certain it is, falsehode can never be
defended by truth.

Now it remains, that I require the Reader, to confer the pieces of
sentences that M. Jewel has culled out of my writings, with the whole
sentences, as they are by me written, and with the circumstance of the places,
whence they be piked out. That being done, let it be weighed, whether I speak
over bitterly, or he be answered according to his deserte. For example I think
it good here to lay two or three before the Reader, that so he be admonished to
do the like him self, for trial and judgment to be made in the rest. Here
to lay forth al, were to print again a great part of my books. Special
words of discourtesie noted by M. I^wel.


In the first place then M. Jewel has noted these words.

Your Deuilish spite. Reioindre. Fol. 18. b. Consider Reader how, and upon what
occasion, these words are there uttered. There thou find thus. First he
makes his entry with a solemn prayer protestantlike, as if he were about to
make a Sermon, and his favorable hearers ready to sing a song. Then he accuses
the inflammation of my choler, because alluding to the words of Daniel, I
glaunced at the name of the Foreronners of Antichriste, therewith rubbing him
and his holy companions, as it were on their gaulle, for the Deuilish spite
they show to the blessed sacrifice of Christ mystically represented, and truly
continewed in the daily Sacrifice of the Church, now called the Mass. Here I
said not, Your Deuilish spite, directing my talk to you M. Jewel, but the
Deuilish spite, they show to the blessed Sacrifice of Christ, speaking
indefinitely of the Protestants, and Sacramentaries of our time.

And why may I not resonably call their spite against the Sacrifice, a Deuilish
spite, sithence Luther was taught it of the Devil him self by a night
conference with him, as the will of God was, See the Preface before my second
Reioindr. Fol. 34. b.
he should confess it in open writing him self. Whereof I speak in my
preface before my last Reioindre, there setting forth the same famous
Disputation between the Devil and Luther, out of Luthers own book.

The second note of bitter words that M. Jewel lays to my charge, is this.

Your Deuilish wickedness. But where found he these three words? His cotation
is this, Reioinder, Preface to the Reader.

But what if I have uttered no such piece of sentence in all that Preface? True
it is Reader, I have no such saying there in deed. If thou would feign save
M. Jewels honesty, and try the truth, peruse that whole Preface: if thou find
it there, let it be blown abroad, that he belieth me not in this point, though
he have so done in many other. If thou find it not, give us leave to say, as
truth is, that for lack of good matter against the Catholic Doctrine, he
deuiseth of his own head, slanderous Lies against his Adversary. Which is
the common practice of them, whose cause is naught.

And why has he put this note in the second place? O it had been a foul crase
to his worship, being such a famous Minister of the word, as he is, to have
begone this new devise with a flat lie. And thereof was he not ignorant. And
for that cause he placed the other Note before this, whereas following order, he
should have placed this, before that. For that which is taken out of the
Preface that is set before the book, by reason, and order, should be placed
before that, which is taken out of the eighteenth leaf of the same book. By
this he has now deserved to hear that told him (your Deuilish wickedness)
which was not told him before. For wherein can a man show him self more
wicked, and more Deuilish, then in devising false slanders against his
brother, whereof the Devil, called in Greek Diabolus, has his name, and of S.
John is called the Accuser of our Brethren? Apoc. 12.


In the third place he charge me with these three words.

Your Deuilish villainy. Confut. fol. 256. b. These be not my words, let my
book be trial. What so ever there I say, I speak it upon right good occasion,
as the Reader vewing the place, and conferring it with the words of the
Apology, shall judge. Whereas M. Jewel, or who soever pe^ned the Apology,
co^pareth the Catholic Clergy with wicked Jeroboam, and the worship,
wherewith the Church serves God, with the worship of Ieroboams Idolatrous
Calves, and says that the Catholics have made the Law of God of none effect
through their own traditions, uttering such otherstuffe sauering altogether of
deuilish spite against the Church: hereupon moved with just zele, there thus I
say.

Neither be these things ye speak so much deuilish villainy of, our own
tradditions, but for the more part, either of the Apostles of Christ, or of
most holy and ancient Fathers. Judge good Reader how truly this man charge
me.

The fourth note is this.

Your railing words of Satan's prompting. Reioinder. 67. a. I said not, your
railing words, but, you utter railing words of Satan's prompting. And the same
I say again. For unless the Devil had prompted you, you could not have spoken
such deuilish blasphemy against the blessed and dredful Sacrifice, as there
you do. And how agreeable those words are to the words, that Satan uttered
against the fame in his Disputation with Luther, it shall appear to him, that
reads the same disputation, truly set forth in my Preface to the Reader,
before my last Reioindre. Fol. 34. b. The place who list to see, has thus.

That you are the ennemie of this blessed Sacrifice, even here you confess it
for your self, and for your fellows: where you utter railing words of Satan's
prompting, calling that, against which you profess your hatred, errors,
abuses, and sacrilege, maintained to the open derogation of the Sacrifice, and
the Cross of Christ.

An other note of discourteous words imputed unto me by M. Jewel, is this.

You are joined to Satan. Satan your Scholemaster. Reioind. 12. b. Neither be
these my words, thus laid together. In deed because Satan brought Luther in
hatred of the Mass by his night disputation that he had with him, and M. Jewel
allows Satan's opinion, and doctrine touching that point, and commends the
Friar for believing it: I say there by way of question, thus. Who sees not that
considers the place, how friendly these three Doctors join together in
league against the Mass, Doctor Jewel, Doctor Luther, and Doctor Satan? The
former words noted by M. Jewel I say not.

Touching the other words imputed unto me, Satan your Scholemaster, neither be
they mine, uttered in such order. Thus there I say, and here I revoke not.

Here M. Jewel defends, both Luther the chief Huisher of the School of
this new found Gospel, and Satan him self the head Scholemaister. Now in
this place, how soever my words seem to M. Jewel uncivil, his Defense of
Satan in that case seems to me ungodly, and if I said Satanical, I trow, I
should not greatly offend.

The sixth Note is this.

Ye are moved by the instinct of Satan. Confuta. 43. b. 255. a. This is utterly
false, specially as concerning the place of the first cotation. For there the
instinct of Satan, is not attributed unto M. Jewel, nor to this new Clergy of
England, but only unto Friar Luther. And upon how good and just occasion, let
it be judged by the circumstance of the place.

There I say, that within these fifty years this Gospel of theirs was hidden
only in Luthers breaste, powered in by the instinct of Satan thennemy of
mankind, finding the Friars heart wholly inflamed with couetise, ambition,
disdain against John Tetzet, and the order of the Dominicans, rancour and
malice against the Pope, and Albert Archbishop of Mentz, for that he was
removed from the preferment of his Pardon preaching, whereby he found him self
well cherished, and was maintained in wealth, and pleasure.

Neither in the other place, fol. 255. a. say I, ye are moved by the instinct
of Satan: I say otherwise. And the thing in deed whereof there I speak
(which here I auouche again) they have done by the instinct of Satan. So will
all the godly judge, I doubt not, who with the circumstance of the place, shall
weigh my words there, which be these.

Confut. 255. a.
Lastly concerning Prayer, what has benne ordained by our holy Forefathers of
al ages, directed with the spirit of God, for the maintenance and increase of
it to Gods honor, all that in few years by the instincte of Satan, to
promote his kingdom, ye have utterly abolished, and by wicked violence brought
the people from Devotion to a careless Idleness, from speaking to God with
hearts, and lips, to a spiritual Dumnesse, from Prayers to Chapters, from
holy thinking, to unprofitable harkening.

What can you reasonably answer M. Jewel? By what instinct have the deuisers
of your Gospel brought the people so far from devotion, and fervor in
praying, but by the instinct of Satan? If you say, the people be as devout now
and given to prayer, as in old time, before your Gospel was heard, the very
stoanes will gainesay you, and control you. And if you doubt whence this
instinct comes, since the Scripture calls the Holyghost, Spiritum precum, the
Spirit of Prayers: Zach. 12.
from whom the contrary instincte proceeds, you can not be ignorant.

The 7. Note of bitter words, wherewith he charge me, is this.

Your Father the Devil. Confutat. 2. a. If I had said so, it had been bitterly
spoken, I confess. But al bitter speeches are not to be discommended, as
neither al bitter medicines. For then we should discommend the holy Fathers,
the Prophets, the Apostles, John the Baptist, and Christ him self, who as it
is before declared, oftentimes spoke bitterly. It is to be considered, what he
deserves to hear, who is bitterly spoken unto.

Now true it is, in the place, that M. Jewel has here coted, I speak not of
him, nor of his fellows, that laid their heads together to the setting
together of the pieces of the Apology, but of al Heretics in general, who
have the Devil to their Father in deed. For if the Devil be author of
Division, The Devil Father of al Heretics. Johan. 8.
and the Father of lying, as the Scripture calls him, al Heresies being Lies,
and al Heretics being Liars: how far swarued I from the truth, when I
called the Devil, the Father of Heretics? But who sees not, how here M.
Jewel bewraieth him self, and shows his gilty conscience? For why should he
be offended with any such saying, unless he thought him self therein
touched? So Judas bewraied the gilte of his own treason, saying, Nunquid ego
sum Rabbi? Matthew: 25
Is it I Master? But what mean you M. Jewel? May not a man speak of
Heretics, as it beseems them to be spoken of, but you must take peper in
the nose? Can we not speak ought of Heretics, but your part must be
therein? If you will needs have it so, take it so, and God amend you. If the
reader list to confer the place, thus there I say.

Confut. 2. a.
But what mean al Heretics (may we judge) by coveting so much, to be seen that
which they are not? Forsooth they mean none other thing, then their Father
the Devil means, when he goes about to begyle man. For then what does he?
Uses he not this policy, to change his owggly hew, and put him self in
goodly shape of an Angel of light? 2. Cor. 11.
For he is not unwitting, that, if he showed him self in his own form, such
as he is, every one would fly from him, and none lightly would be deceived by
him. Heretics do the like. Although they hate the Church never so deadly, yet
to have the more opportunity to hurt it, pretend them selves to be of the
Church.

Lo M. Jewel, speaking of Heretics in general, and indefinitely, I said,
their Father the Devil, not your Father the Devil. By this your undue
complaint, you bewray your self as the Ratte does oftentimes by his own
noise: and even so you seem to acknowledge the Devil for your Father, and to
enfeaffe your self of the estimation, and opinion of an Heretic, with which
by me you were not charged. The more you ought to bear with me, if I hap to
stumble upon your right title hereafter. With like reason good Reader, I could
easily discharge my self of the rest of the vehement and sharp speeches
objected by M. Jewel: but I account not the matter worth, whereon to bestow so
much labor. This for that may suffice.

Now it may please thee to peruse that here follows, and to consider, whether
M. Jewel be innocent him self in the points, whereof he takes occasion so
immoderatly to reprove his Adversary.

M. Jewel countercharged with the like sharpness, and discourtesie of words,
as he reproves in his Adversary. The 3. Chapter.
BUT Sir, tell me, I pray you, what is your judgment touching these, and the
like discourteous words, and speeches, as you call them, with which for the
more part, you untruly burden me? Think you that in no case such manner of
utterance is lawful to be used? If you think so, you are deceived M. Jewel.
The example of Christ, John Baptist, the Prophets, the Apostles, the ancient
holy Fathers, show it to be lawful: who, as it is before rehearsed, in certain
cases used it so often. Verily I doubt not, but in this case (I mean, when a
Catholic has to convince an Heretic) it is most lawful: yea not only lawful,
but also most expedient for causes above touched. Neither in this case to use
such order of speech, is to be accounted Discourtesie, and Inciuilitie, as
your unnecessary Civility interprets: but right zele, and just severity.
That spirit of God, which advises us by the mouth of the wise man, Prou. 26.
to answer a Fool according to his foolishness, admonishes us no less, in
the treaty of Gods causes with Heretics, to use such verdure of Language,
as may best repress the sauciness, and pride of their stomakes.

Nevertheless if you thought such sharp language to be utterly unlawful, as a
thing that may not stand with true modesty, and civility: how happed it, that
so often times you forgote your self? It is no courteous dealing M. Jewel, to
reprove that in others, that you so commonly do your self. Touching bitter
language, whereof so bitterly you complain, it may please you at your good
leisure, to call to remembrance, whose words among infinite others these are,
with what spirit, what charity, what modesty they have benne by you uttered.
Which words, as for a great part they have the outward show of no less
heat, and vehemency, then you note in mine: so to any man of right judgment,
they seem to be of a far more spite, and malice.

A few principal flowers of M. Iewelles modest, quiet, and charitable speech,
uttered against the Catholics, taken, as they came to sight, out of his
pretensed Defense, found, partly in the Apology, partly in the text of the
said Defense, some few also in the Margent.
FRantike Anabaptists, and Heretics, as ye be. Defense. 389. Ye Scribes, ye
Pharisees, ye Hypocrites. 625. Of the house of God ye have made a Cave of
Thieves. Defense. Page 2. and 304. Of the Church you have made a Cave of
Thieves. 48. The Temple now a days is a den of Thieves. 706. The Church
they have made a den of Thieves. 739. You have blended Gods wine with
puddle water. 66. You have turned the beauty of Sion into the confusion of
Babylon. 2. Ye have turned Gods Temple into the Synagog of Satan. 328. They
are without either shame of man, or fear of God. In the Preface to the
Christian Reader.
They wilfully withstand the truth. They be given over to maintain lies. In
the Preface to the Christian Reader.
They are the children of untruth. They are the Children that will not hear the
law of God. Your hot raging sprite. 2. Leave this Hypocrisy. 377. The Jews
your ancient Fathers. 632. Your Fathers the Phariseis. 2. Your forefathers the
Phariseis. 31 Your fathers cried out, what shall we do, etc. Joan. 12. 327. S.
Hierome said of your fathers, non tam indigneutur, etc. In Sophon. c. 3. 328.
Ye confess Scribes, and Phariseis to be your fathers. 625. Your fathers cried
out against Christ, Nos legem habemus. 484. Christ was called a Samaritane,
by your ancient Fathers. 631. This is very the leaven of the Scribes and
Phariseis. 66. For malice they deprave our sayings. 23. Your Idolatrous, and
blasphemous fondness. 290. They batter us with lies. 23. In spite of the
Popes. 33. The Popes blind preiudices. 40. The Pope, his Cardinals, his
Bishops, sleep, and do nothing. In the Preface to the Reader. The Popes
flattering Parasites. 160. One of the Popes soothing Pages, and Clawbackes.
329. The Church of Rome is the very harlot of Babylon, and row of Deuilles.
453. The Canonistes be the Popes Parasites. 722. The Tyranny of the Bishops
of Rome. 457. The Popes Barbarous Persianlike Pride. Ibidem. The Church of Rome
is nothing else but a mother of falshod, and school of Pride. 609. Idolatry
is in the Church of Rome. 628. 629. The Pope uses neither Gods word, nor
discipline. 550. The Church of Rome has most shamefully, and wickedly erred.
565. The Pope speaks more reverently of Peter, then of Jesus Christ. 593.
The Popes Advocates, Abbates, Bishops, open enemies to the Gospel. 618. Your
Popes Retainers. 695. They make decrees expressly against Gods word. 620. The
Pope will pluck from us, the Gospel, and all the confidence we have in Christ
Jesus. 723. The Pope has blinded the whole world this many hundred years, and
no man may condemn him though he carry away with him a thousand souls into
hell. 729. Frantike government of the Pope. 733. The second Council of Nice
was vain, peevish, wicked, blasphemous. 502. Before the Scriptures they
prefer their own Dreams. 70. Hicke Scorners eloquence. 356. Hicke Scorners
logique. 270. Hypocritical eloquence. 2^0. They are very Church robbers. 228.
These shows, sales, and markettes of Masses, carrying about, and worshipping
of bread, other idolatrous and blasphemous fondness. 290. Blockish, and old
wives tale. 296. Harvest of Massemongers. 302. Truth is with cruelty and
tyranny kept under. 334. They agree together as the Phariseis and Saduceis,
as Herod and Pilate. etc. 342. The very foes of the Gospel, and enemies to
Christ's Cross. 354 Your faction. 611. 615. Aduoutrie, ribaudrie, whoredom,
murdering of kin, inceste, brothel houses, flocks of Concubines, heardes of
harlot haunters, beastly sensuality, abominable naughtiness. 384. Like
Anabaptists, and Libertines. 395. Naughty persons, and hypocrites. 429. They
abhor and flee the word of God, as a thief flies the gallows. 464. Ye
rent in pieces, and burn the ancient Fathers. 500. Ye condemn the Scriptures.
505. Your Droues, and heardes of Monckes. 508. They let concubines to ferme to
their Priests. 510. Their cursed paltrie Service. 511. They mumble up their
Service in a Barbarous tongue. 515. The Canonistes at this day for their
bellies sake etc. 560. They have choked up the fonteine of living water with
durt^ and mire. 573. They have forsaken Christ, and the Apostles. 576. With
most notorious sacrilege they sever the Sacraments. 584. They lean to
ignorance, and darkness. 590. They have spoiled, and disanulled the ordinances,
and doctrine of the Primitive Church. 592. Your wilful ignorance. 602. Blind
Balams wilful purpose. 602. They make decrees expressly against Gods word.
620. They take part with Annas, and Caiphas. Ibidem. Unlearned Bishops, slow
bellies. 623. Error, Idolatry, Superstition, tyranny, Pomp. 626. The
Council of Trident is a Conspiracy, not a Council. 626. Princes Ambassadors
be used as mocking stocks at the Councelles. 631. With spite they leave out
Princes. 635. O glorious Thraso. 640. They set not a jot by any point of
religion, save that which concerns their belly, and riotte. 642. This is
proud, this is spiteful. Ibidem. Princes be despitefully scorned and abused by
them. 697. They harden their hearts against God, and his Christ. 715. They are
men far more vngraceous, and wicked then any diceplaiers be. 728. Tyranny
of the Popes kingdom. 732. They were fools, and mad men. 733. A very
spiteful dealing. 54.
Content thy self good Reader with these few, taken out of the whole heap. To
lay forth al, were to printe his Huge book again. For of such stuff in
manner, and of vain Scoffs, the whole consists.

Now because M. Jewel has laid together an other Heap of words culled out
of my books, which of his courtesy he would needs call Scoffs, and
Scorns: here to make an even reckening with him, I have thought good to
return unto him coin of the same stamp, told out of his own bags, though
it be more cankred, then mine is.

Scoffs, and Scorns be unseemly, says M. Jewel. Defense. page 8.

Scoffs, and Scorns against God, his Church, and his Saints.
I trow ye would prove, that God the Father made holy water, and said Mass.
496. Christ an Abbate. 66. S. Peter said mass with a golden Cope, and a
triple Crown. 300. The Apostles had keys given them, but no house to open.
163. As if Christ, and the Pope were joined purchasers. 608. If Christ were
not Christ, then S. Patrike should be Christ. 231. Peter and Paul had never
Papale Christianity. 674. Sir Clement, Jack of Andrew. 536. The Roman faith
was heard of through out the whole world, and so was the Capitole of Rome.
437. So long as the Church of Rome can speak for her self, al is well. 715.
The spirit of Rome. 606. S. Augustines vnceasoned fantasies. 370.
Sacramentarie Scoffs.
Who taught M. Harding, that Christ has change of diverse bodies? 86. Your
shoppes, and gaineful boothes. 333. meant of Aulters. Came Christ to save
bread, and wine? 254. Came the Son of man from heaven to save Accidents?
254. Where was Christ's body ever promised to your Mouth? 274 The poor
Spiritual Fourmes, and holy Accidents are put to all the pains. 261. The man
in the moon newly Christened. 37. How can a few drops of cold water bring us
to the hope of resurrection? 221. These be their keys of the kingdom of
heaven. 249.
Scoffs against the Pope, Bishops and Priests.
One Principal Archangel, Pope in heaven. 100. The Emperor was the Popes
Summoner. 671. The Pope a special Master Keie. 160. The Pope has the holy
Ghost I trow, at his commandment. 724. The Pope a lord Paramounte. 161. The
Popes own Minions, and Champions. 468. Dame Ioane the Pope. 374. This is one
of the Cardinalle virtues of Rome, to take toll of Bawdrie. 369. in marg.
Princehoode (...) ^postolique, ioily large words, and carry great sound. ^^^.
What if Christian Vicare him self be Antichrist? 433. In Margin. Your Pope no
more a Bishop, then Annas, your Priest no more a Priest, then the Priest of
Dagon, or Baal. 659. May Bishops. 664. Blind Sir Robert the Archbishop of
Armache. 597. Blind Sir Robert of Scotland, and M. Pates of England seely
poor Bishops. 714. The blessed Bishops of the Second Nicen Council. 502.
These be the great Worthies of the world. 714.
Scoffs particular, and general.
M. Harding skippeth into Gods chair. 23. M. Hardinges mystical Catholic
ears. 232. So coye, and careful M. Harding is for holy Fourmes, and his
kingdom of Accidents. 248. M. Hardinges Almanake. 22. How long has M. Harding
benne a wisard? 209. M. Hardinges face died in Scarlet. 183. M. Harding Proctor
for the Stews. 370. M. Hardinges Dimi Communion. 195. M. Hardinges young
vntiedy Arguments. 650. Albertus Pighius the stowtest Gallant of your Camp.
24. M. Harding will trouble his Godfathers, and cause them to give him a new
name. 416. M. Hardinges mouth no just measure. 8. If you had not studied your
Copia verborum, you could never have benne so copious. 388. And do you know his
heart by towting in his ear? 157. In Margin. Alas your poor Chickens would
die for cold. 28. No Haralde could lightly have said more in the matter. 496.
All the same is substantially proved by t^^ ^o^^e, and delivery of a horse.
499. It is not a Fearnbushe, Ergo, it is a Fox. 255. It is concluded in
Louaine in great solemn sadness, etc. M. Hardinges Beaupeeres of Louaine.
492. Your innumerable Louain Vanities. 537. Your Louanian divinity. 696. Your
Louanian Logique. 650. Your poor Lauanian brethren. 623. One of your late
English Doctors of Louaine. 183. Your late Couente at Trident. 28. 43. Your
late Conuentcle of Trident. 606. 619. 627. 630. Monks are waxen nice, and
crancke. 624. We must suppose they sat mute in a mummerie. 627. I marvel,
there is not some Patriarch from Sodom, and Gomorra. 713. A mystical folly of
folies. 515. Your Captain general, Albertus Pighius. 498. Canonistes the Popes
Pages of honor. 530. Your listes, and gaineful territories of Purgatory. 537.
It pitieth me M. Harding to see you so vainly to bestow your spiritual
cogitations. 512. Your spiritual Clergy M. Harding is nothing else, but a
spiritual filthiness. 513. This is a lusty kind of Divinity. 599. Full
wisely. 610. Sadly, and sagely, and well to the purpose. 612. O worthy and grave
reasons. 613. A discrete, and worthy Proctour. 621. A sage exposition. 181. In
Margin. One pange of your Eloquence. 552. As for lies, shames, and slanders,
etc. If ye be full freight, yet ye may divide them among your poor Louanian
brethren. It shall be a work of Supererogation. For ywisse, they have yenough
already. 623. This is no doubt the holiness that Christ brought into the
world. 625. O profounde divinity. 626. A wise piece of counsel, and meet for
a Doctor of Divinity. 631. Had you not had a shrewd sharp wit M. Harding.
etc. 630. Alas M. Harding, although ye little pass for your Divinity, yet why
have ye no more regard unto your Logique? 622. It pitieth me M. Harding to see
your folies. 623. O glorious Thraso. 640. A worthy Argument, and full wisely
applied. 477. With what cement can ye make these seely loose parts to cleave
together? 637. Full Discretely, 647. Discretely reasoned. Your priestly
Conclusions. 653. Thus ye fetch your matter round, within, without, and round
about. 659. Your may Bishops, otherwise by you called Nullatenses. 664. Ye
fill the house full with Patriarchs of Constantinople. etc. 668. Your Popes by
their omnipotent power may minister Sacraments being dead. 669. The Emperors
in Councelles held their peace, and told the clock, and said nothing. 677.
Ye think no color to dear to paint out the Popes face. 695. Here we have
found a Pope with two capacitie^. 724. The Pope succeeds Peter in his
chair, as if Peter had benne sometimes enstalled in Rome, and had sat
solemnly al day with his triple crown in his Pontificalibus, in a chair of
goulde. 726. Al these matters be full solemnly proved, and are worthy to be
published by Proclamation. 414. All this is Hicke Scorners Eloquence. 356.
Here, if thou be not weary of this Loathsome gheare, gentle Reader, thou may
also see, with what sober, modeste, and learned Notes M. Jewel has painte^ the
margent of his Book, where so ever he laith forth some Maimed pieces of my
Confutation. Maimed pieces I may call them, for seldom, or rather no where,
has he suffered any discourse of mine to be printed in his Book, whole,
vnmaimed, and vnmangled. In these Notes thou have the substance of his
answers. For if thou mark, what he brings in his text besides, and
discuss it exactly: thou shall find, specially where any part of Doctrine is
touched, that it pertains very little, or nothing to the point presently
treated.

M. Iewelles sober and modeste Marginal Notes upon the Confutation.
Untruth boldly presumed. 96. 238. Manifest and mere untruths. 105. Untruth
most vain and manifest. 107. Untruth impudent above measure. 109. 512. Untruth
vain and Childish. 114. 202. 610. 683. A vain untruth. 126. 245. An odious
untruth. 127. Untruth joined with vain folly. 135. A great untruth joined
with a sclaunder. 146. Untruth fond and childish. 191. 254. 611. Untruth joined
with heathenisse blasphemies. 207. Untruth proceeding of unadvised malice. 211.
Untruth joined with gross ignorance. 215. Untruth joined with sclaunder and
malice. 219. Untruth sclaunderous. 219. 626. Untruth, and one of M. Hardinges
mystical Dreams. 219. Untruth horrible and heathnish. Ibidem. Untruth so
sensible and so gross, that a man may feel it with his fingers. 228. Untruth
blasphemous and horrible. 297. A peevish untruth. 250. Untruth trifling and
sophistical. 255. Untruth shameless and without sense. 258. Untruth vain and
arrogant. 261. Untruth grounded upon mere folly. 262. Untruth grounded upon a
dream. 266. Untruth childish and unsavory. 267. Untruth guilefully enclosed.
278. 662. Untruth vile and sclaunderous. 281. Untruths, and most fond and
blasphemous folies. 291. Untruth fond, and heathnish. 291. Untruth proceeding
of vain dotage. 311. Untruth joined with vile sclaunder. 335. A vile untruth.
368. Untruth malicious and sclaunderous. 393. 433. Nothing else but mere
untruths. 393. Untruth fond and peuish. 400. 513. 515. Untruth too vain for
a child. 400. Untruth joined with open folly. 402. A great untruth, and a
shameless fable. 411. Untruth evident to a child. 424. Untruth grownded upon
gross ignorance. 439. Untruth manifest without wit. 449. Untruth more peuish
then the former. 449. Untruth utterly void of shame. 449. Untruths impudent.
494. 661. Untruth so impudent, that I marueil M. Harding can report it without
blushing. 513. Untruth indiscreet and impudent. 532. A whole heap of untruths
and forgeries hudled together. 537. Untruth without either measure, or regard
of shame, 55^, 7^9. Untruths joined with open blasphemy. 551. Untruth without
any savor of wit and learning. 613. Untruth most impudent. 626. Untruth
shameless without measure. 68^. Untruth joined with impudent flattery, and
extreme folly.
M. Iewelles Outcries, bitter, and scoffinge Oos.
O folly. 90. 124. 250. 550. O Dangerous Doctrine. 136. O merueilous horrible
heresy. 207. O fond folly. 245. 610. O exact folly. 250. O fond grosnesse.
278. O brave Captain. 281. O earthly Divinity. 284. O so careful this good
man is for our cares. 303. O grave commentary, and a wise matter etc. 303. O
when will M. Harding confess a fault. 311. O a fair bonegrace. 382. O vain
bravery. 390. O natural folly. 396. O grave consideration. 424. O vain
excuse. 506. O fond man. 546. O so merely this man plaieth with his
fantasy. 578. O worthy and great reasons. 613. O profound Divinity. 626. O
glorious Thraso. 640. O vanity of vanities. 647. O folly of folies. 673. O
vain man. 687. O ye principal Posts of religion, O ye Archegouernours. 469
Alas they have it not. 290.
I leave mo then I take of these flowers, gentle Reader. How pleasant the show
of these few is unto thine eye, I know not. Verily had not M. Jewel driven me
unto this practice by his example, I should not have liked the Devise. Now if
it offend thee, blame not mine, but M, Iewelles Invention. I thought such
debte could not be better answered, then by payment of the same money. By this
thou may judge, what stuff in that huge Book is pacte together.

Answer to M. Iewelles View of Untruths, that is to sale, he pretensed
Defense of such Untruths, as he thought him self best hable to ^ustifie,
with which he is truly charged, and of which he has not yet discharged him
self. The 4. Chapter.
AFter his heap of sharp words, partly forged by him self, partly called
out of my writings, and laid together, as it were in a Table (which seem to
him, and to his brethren, so much irksome, how much their conscience is
gilty): he sets forth in an other Table as it were, certain Untruths, to
the number of. 31. which he found, among many more, noted against him in my
first Reioinder, and in my Confutation of the Apology. This Table he calls,
M. Jewels intent in setting forth the View of his Untruths.
A View of Untruths. His intent and meaning is, by the View of these few
Untruths, which he has chosen out, as the least among the whole number, to
purchase him self a Defense, or at least way some excuse, for the rest. For
feign would he al men to be persuaded, that the rest noted by me and by
others, who have confuted his errors, and detected his manifold falshoode, are
of no greater weight, then these are.

What, and how great the rest are, they may see, who list to read our
books, in which they be truly set forth. How unable he is to justify them,
it shall appear by that he has said in the View. For if he be not hable to
discharge him self of these one and thirty the least, how shall he be hable to
acquitte him self of a thousand, and more of greater weight, scoared up against
him, by those that have written but upon five, of his six and twenty Articles?

First (...) lays forth.15. Untruths, which among many more in my R^ioinder I
noted against him out of his Reply to the first Article. The first nine he is
driven to acknowledge, For he has said nothing in their defense. If he will
say, they be but small Untruths, and therefore not worthy of any thing to be
said of them: it may be replied, they are too great to be uttered so near
together. M. Ievvel is rife of Untruths in the very beginni^g of his Reply.
For the first six Untruths be within the compass of. 12. lines in the
beginning of his Reply. It were strange, that six great Untruths should be
uttered within so few lines in the beginning of a book. For them that can not
defend a matter, but with great lies, it is the best policy to begin with
smaller lies. For else they should mar altogether.

This circumstance considered, Untruths must needs seem, both many, and
great. Briefly, the whole fifteen Untruths noted out of the Reply, be found
in his first Division, that is to say, within less then thrice fifteen lines.
It were very il luck, if they should be proved al to be great and weighty
Untruths in the first entry of the book, and that within so little space.
There was never any Writer, so vain, or false, The. 10. Untruth. Beno, and
Vsperge^sis parcially holding with the Emperor not to be believed against
Gregory the. 7.
that sowed Untruths so thick, specially in the beginning of a Treaty.

The first nine then being confessed to be Untruths vndischargeable, let us
see, how substancially he discharges him self of the six other. It is
reported (says he) of Pope Hildebrand (so he calls Gregory the seventh)
that he wrought Necromancie and Sorcerie. This noted I for an Untruth, saying,
it is not reported by any grave and true writer: but by them that flattered the
Emperor of that time. To this he makes a Reply, This story (says he) is
largely set out by Beno, and Vrspergensis. These be they, whose witness I
refused before, as being the Emperors flatterers, and bearing malice to the
Pope, and therefore over parcial to bear credit in that case.

Gregory the seventh.
How far this worthy man, Gregory the seventh was from exercising Necromancie
or Sorcerie, and from other vices, it is largely declared by the best writers
of stories of that age, namely by Marianus Scotus, by Lambertus
Schafuaburgensis, and Leo Hostiensis, and specially by Otho Frisingensis, and
of late by Platina, and Onuphrius Panuinus. Furthermore Beno can not bear
great credit with us, as he that is condemned by Ecclesiastical censure.
Vrspergensis set out by Melanchtho^ only. The. 11. Untruth.
As for Vrspergensis, he is worthily suspected to be corrupted by your fellows
of Germany, among whom he was set out in printe by Philip Melanchtho^, and not
else.

Item, Henry the Emperor was poisoned in the Communion bread, says M.
Jewel. Untruth, say I, He was not poisoned, but died otherwise. For proof he
replieth, and allegeth Vrspergensis. Likewise Auentinus, and besides, Baptista
Ignatius, the writer of Supplementum Chronicorum, Rauisius Textor the
Gra^marian, and Carrion, writers of our time, and some of them of little credit.
Neither in such a case makes the number of writers any Argument of truth.
For the afterwriters being deceived by the Untruth of the first writer, be
they never so many in number, cannot make true, Henry of Luxemburg, how he
dyed. Lib. 8.
that which was untruly reported at the first.

Touching the Death of this Emperor, who was Henry of Luxemburg, Paulus
Aemylius a grave, and a learned man, who has examined this matter to the
uttermost, writes that he died of a sickness, which he fell into at
Bonconuento in the territory of Siena in Tuskane, being come thither from
Pisa. The same writes In scholijs in Platinam.
Onophrius. That he should be poisoned in receiving the Sacrament by means of
a Dominican Friar, Cornelius Cornepolita seems to esteem it for a fable, or
to make the best of it, for a matter of a hear say. By that which In
Chronographia. The.12. Untruth. Victors Death.
Nauclerus writes thereof, it appears to be no better then a fained tale.

Item, Pope victor was poisoned in the Chalice, says M. Jewel. This noted I
for an Untruth, and said, he died otherwise. To this he replieth, and for his
saying allegeth Martinus Polonus that vain fabler, the first author of the
fabulous Popedom of Pope Joan the woman, he names certain other of our age,
some being as very enemies to the Catholic Church, as he him self is, namely
Anselmus Rid, Anselmus Rid.
a Protestant of Berna, whom we believe in such a matter no more then we believe
M. Jewel. For such men be very ready to set out in books any thing, whereby
the estimation of our divine Mysteries may be impaired in the judgment of
light heads, be it never so untrue. Concerning Pope Victors death, Vince^tius,
Vincentius Bellouace^.
as good an Author as Martinus Polonus, and a man of much greater learning,
writes, that he died of a Dysenterie, and so Platina recites. In these three
Untruths M. Jewel has some color of a defense, because the writers of the
Stories do vary. And he likes that report best, that is most fabulous and
vain, and te^deth to the contempt of the Pope, and of the blessed Sacrament.
Such stuff is precious in his sight. Thus it is clear, that he has not
justified these three Untruths. To show a thing to be doubtful is not to clear
it of al Untruth. The.13. and.14. untruths. Lyra in Daniel. cap. 14.


As for the other two Untruths where he reports Lyra, to say that many
Miracles are wrought in the Church by the Priests, and their Companions, to
mock the people: notwithstanding any thing contained in his Reply, they
remain vndischarged, and appear as impudent lies, and falsifiynges, as
before. How falsely he demeaneth him self in that pretensed saying of Lyra, it
shall appear to him that reads my Reioinder. fol. 8. b. etc.

The.15. Vnthruth
The.15. Untruth is, that he ascribes the brief Commentaries upon S. Paul's
Epistles printed with S. Hieromes works, unto S Hierome, which are well known,
and by Erasmus (whom he so much esteems) confessed, not to be S. Hieromes.

M. Jewels Reply hereto, is this. They are printed (says he) among other S.
Hieromes works, and are commonly known by his name: but by any other Authors
name they are not known.

Bastard works printed among the true works assundrie Authors.
If that were a good Argument to prove them to be S. Hieromes, because they are
printed among S. Hieromes works: then were it easy to prove a number of
treaties to be S. Hieromes, S. Augustines, S. Ambroses, S. Chrysostomes, S.
Cyprians, and other ancient Doctors of the Church, which are well known not
to be theires, and M. Jewel him self would make no small triumph against us, if
we should allege any testimony out of such, under the name of the Doctors,
among whose works they be printed. For who is so simple, that cannot thus
reason, (as for example, the Rule of Nonnes) it is printed among other S.
Hieromes works, Regula Monacharum, Inter opera Hiero^. To^^. 4.
ergo, it is S. Hieromes? Item, the treaty of the Invention or finding of the
Head of S. John Baptiste, is printed with S. Cyprians works, ergo, it is S.
Cyprians? By this Argument you may prove, that the foolish epistle written to
Abra S. Hilaries pretensed dawghter (in the authority of which epistle you
put great confidence for the defense of Priests Marriages) was S. Hilaries,
because it is p^inted with S. Hilaries works. So might the imperfect work
written by some Heretic (by Maximinus Arianus, as some think) upon S.
Matthew printed with S. Chrysostomes works, ^e avouched to be S. Chrysostomes,
and so should we make that holy and Catholic Doctor, an Author of sundry great
heresies. The like Argument might be made for proof, and legitimation of
sundry other bastard Treatises, which to father upon those learned Fathers,
among whose works they are printed, and be not known by other Authors names,
were great injury. I dare boldly say, M. Jewel him self (how so ever he
thought good thus to shifte his hands of an Untruth laid to his charge) would
be loath to allow this for a good Argument in his Adversary. For if he would,
he is not ignorans, what a comber he should have to answer unto things, that
out of such writings might against him be alleged.

Hitherto he has not discharged him self of those fifteen the least
Untruths, that be in my Reioinder noted against him out of his very first
Division of his Reply to the first Article. What a do he should have to
justify the rest, with which he stands charged by me, and by other men,
who have dubbed him Lord, and Author of a thousand more Untruths: by his
feeble Answer unto these few of least appearance, it is soon conceived. Now
let us see, how he justifies the Untruths of the Apology.

M. Jewels pretensed Justification of certain Untruths of the Apology, with
the Confutation of the same.

M. Ievvel the apology. Pa^^^ ^. cap. 4. Diuis. 2.
The Council of Carthage (says he) provided, that no ^isshop should be called
either the highest Bishop, or the chief Priest. Untruths noted out of the
Apology. The first Untruth.


To this he forgeth an Answer in my name, and adds unto it such words, as
whereby he thought to set forth unto his reader, a show of some lightness of my
part, whereas I answer him in deed otherwise, as it may be seen in my
Confutation. part. 2. cap. 4. fol. 53. etc.

For answer; this may be here, and is in effect said there. Whereas the
Apology has thus, Also the Council of Carthage did expressly provide, that
no Bishop should be called either the highest Bishop, or chief Priest: To this
I say, that it is false, and that the Council of Carthage has not so, but
otherwise. It speaks of Primates only, and not generally of al Bishops, and
as it appears; of the Primates only of Afrike. And therefore the Bishop of
Rome by that Council is not deprived of his ancient Title of Summus Sacerdos.
This is more largely declared in my Confutation, in the place above coted.

To this M. Jewel makes his Reply in this wise.
The words of the Council, alleged by Gratian, are these. Primasedis
Episcopus, M. Ievvel allegeth Gratians words for the words of the Council
of Charthage.
non apelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel Summus Sacerdos, vel aliquid huiusmodi:
sed tantum primae Sedis Episcopus. Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus Pontifex
appelletur.

Why do you allege Gratian M. Jewel, whereas you might allege the Council it
self, from whence Gratian took these words? And so you found the place thus
coted in the end of the Chapter before. Distin. 99 Prouincia
Item ex Concilio African^. 3. ca. 26. By this your shameless falsehood
appears. For if ye had gonne unto that Council it self, ye should not have
found these words at al, neither in the Greek (for it is extant in Greek)
nor in the Latin: these words I say, Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex appelletur: Which are no more a part of that.26. Canon of the third
Africane Council, then those other words are, there likewise following
immediately, Vnde Pelagius secundus omnibus Episcopis. They are put in by
Gratian him self, whereby, as his manner is, he fortelleth the reader, what
follows in the next chapter. So this Untruth is doubled with an other Untruth,
and remains to M. Jewel, as that to which he shall never be hable to answer.
Of this I shall have occasion to treat more at large hereafter. I wish the
Reader for a further discover of M. Jewels falshoode, to peruse what there I
shall say.

M. Ievvel. Apology. part. 2. cap. 12.
Item, Calixtus (says he) decreed, The.2. Untruth.
that Consecration being finished, all the people should communicate. etc.

To this I answer, that it was the Decree, not of Calixtus, but of Anacletus,
and that the request of receiving the communion the Consecration being done,
perteined to the Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Clerks attending
upon the Bishop celebrating the Sacrifice upon a Solemn Feast, and not unto all the people. Howbeit that the people did then commonly receive every day
(which M. Jewel in his Defense goes about to prove with many testimonies, to
no purpose) I deny not, Page 227.
ne never denied, but this spec^^^ Dec^^^ of Anacletus i^^^ be (...) of the
Clergy only, Anacletus in prima Epistola Decretali.
that attend^^ upon the Bishop as the Circumstance of the place in the Epistle
of Anacletus shows. This is to be seen in my Confutation, fol. 9^. a.

To this M. Jewel replieth and says.
Here M. Harding is soon reproved even by his own Dectours, Darandus, Hugo,
Cochlaus, Clichth^ueus. For thus they say, Omnes olim, tum Sacerdotes, tum
Laici cum sacrificante communicabant, etc. Hi^ vnum de hae re Canonem recit^bo,
qui Calixto ^scribitur. Hereto I answer.

If I say otherwise touching this point, then these (whom M. Jewel calls
mine own Doctors) have said, therein I am gainesaid it will not follow, that I
am reproved. D^randus, and Hugo say nothing that is contrary to my
understanding of Anacletus Decree. As for Coclaeus, and Clichthoueus men of
our time, what if they took it otherwise, then I do? That is their Private
sense. It follows not thereof, that I am deceived.

That Anaclet^^ Decree touching the necessity of Communion to be received
pertains on^y to the Clergy.
Nicol. Cusanus epi. 7. ad Clerum and literatos Bohemia. Degradentur
I have good cause rather to believe Cardinal Cusanus, who seems to have
examined this Decree farther, and more exactly, th^n these two late writers
have done. For thus he recites the Later part of the Decree, as it is in the
Original, out of Burchardus: Sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, and sancta Romanae
tenet Ecclesia, and si hoc neglexerint, deg^adentur. Let al communicate, that
were present at the Consecration (says the Decree) for so the Apostles have
ordained, and so the holy Roman Curche holds, and if they omit it by
contempt, let them be degraded (or deposed) from their Degree. Cusanus
wills the word, Degradentur Degradentur
to be weighed, and thereof gathers, that the Decree speaks only of them of
the Clergy, that were present at the Consecration, and were admitted into
Sancta Sanctorum, the holy place, where none came, but such as were in
Ecclesiastical Orders, (...), that is to say, of the Clergy, as they are
called in the. 9. Canon among the Canons of the Apostles, whereunto the Decree
makes relation. Hereof I have spoken sufficiently (beside the place of my
Confutation above mentioned) in my first Reionder. fol. 220. a. and again,
fol. 308. a. Thus you remain still charged with this Untruth. For it is not
enough to say what is written, but to discern what is best written.

M. Ievvel. The Apology. Part. 2. cap. 8. Diuis. 2.
Gregorius Nazianzenus says speaking of his own Father, The.3. Untruth.
that a good and a diligent Bishop does serve in the Ministry never the
worse, for that he is married, but rather the better.

Here I told M. Jewel, that he used his accustomed Figure Pseudologia, which
is as much to say, as lying in plain English. For in deed he never said
it. And so much do I tell him here once again. But let us consider of his
Reply, wherein he seems to play the part of a worse Liar then before.
Thus he says.

An untruth proceeding of gross ignorance, or of great impudency.
This error of M. Hardinges grew of ignorance. For Nazianzenes words be very
plain: Meo Patri Matter mea etc. My Mother being given to my Father of God,
became not only his helper, for that had benne no great wonder, but also was
his leader, and Captain, both by word, and by deed trayning him unto the
best. In Religion and godliness she doubted not to becomme his Maistresse.
Nazianzenus in Epitaphio patris.

The faithful woman travailed with her unfaithful husband, to bring him unto
the Faith, she did not so after that he was made Bishop. August. Confess. li.
9. cap. 9.
All this, and much more uttered by the learned son of his godly Mother, is to
be understood of the time, when his father was an Infidel. She being a
Christian woman, and comme of a Christian stock, being married unto her
husband remaining yet without belief in Christ, used all the good means of a
helper, guide, leader, schoolemaistresse, and teacher, to induce him unto the
Faith. Which thing by Gods grace at length she performed, as the holy
wooman Monica S. Augustines mother, did likewise, in winning Patricius her
husband, unto the Faith of Christ, not long before he died, as S. Augustine
witnesses. But that ever she took upon her so to teach him, after that he
was chosen Bisshoppe of Nazianzum, for that M. Jewel is not hable to show us
so much as one word, or half word, and yet that does he constantly
affirm in his pretensed Defense. In the Defense. page. 178.
This being so, what makes it to the justification of his Untruth? It may
please thee good Reader to peruse that I say of this hereafter, where I treat
of it at large, and confute this impudent Untruth of M. Jewels thoroughly.
Confutation. fol. 76. and in sequent.
Howbeit I confuted the same also sufficiently in my Confutation of the
Apology.

M. Ievvel. The Apology. Part. 6. cap. 5. Diuis. 2.
Pope Liberius (says he) was a favorer of the Arian Heretics. The 4.
Untruth.


That he was a favorer of the Arians, it is utterly untrue, say I. And it
were not hard (if I were desirous to furnish forth a great Book with heaps
of Doctors sayings, as M. Jewel is) to allege very much to the contrary,
and in his Defense, that he was a man of great constancy, and never bare
savor toward the mainteiners of that horrible heresy. The contrary
appears by that Theodoritus writes of him Libro Ecclesiasticae Historiae. 2.
cap. 17. Athanasius in Apologia says, he was bannished, for that he would not
subscribe unto the Arian Heresy. Tripart. Lib. 5. cap. 16.

M. Jewels Reply hereto is this. The Author hereof is S. Hierome, de
Ecclesiasticis Scriptoribus, in Fortunatiano. And one of M. Hardinges own
principal Doctors says, De Liberio Papa constat fuisse Arianum.


That Pope Liberius was no favorer of the Arians.
Here have we two new Untruths added unto the old. Mark Reader, what is
that M. Jewel affirms, and that I deny. It is this, that Pope Liberius was a
favorer of the Arian Heretics. S. Hierome in the place by M. Jewel alleged,
says not, that Liberius was a favorer of the Arians, but that by the
importunity of Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquileia, Hieron. in Catalogo
Scriptoru^ Eccl. 107.
he was compelled to subscribe unto Heresy, as he was going into bannishment
for the Faith. Pro Fide ad exilium pergentem, primus solicitauit, ac fregit,
and ad subscriptionem haereseos compulit, says S. Hierome, if these were his
his own words, and not words added unto him by Heretics, as some have
judged. Now if a man be compelled to do a thing, will M. Jewel say of him,
that he is a favorer of the thing? Favor presupposes love, lyking, and good
will. What we like not, but abhor, and hate, that can we not favor. If Pope
Liberius bare favor toward the Arian Heretics, then was it not compulsion,
that he subscribed unto that Heresy. If he were compelled to subscribe, as
certainly he was, if he subscribed at al: thereof he ought not to be called a
favorer of the Heresy. It was for fear of pounishement, and of Constantius
the Emperors displeasure, it was not of favor. For if he had favored it, he
should not have benne thrust out of his Bishoprike, and turned out into
bannishment, but have benne great with the Emperor, as other bishops were,
that to please him, and for wordly preferment, stickte not to subscribe.

Hieron. in Chronicis.
S. Hierome writes hereof otherwise in Chronicis, saying, that he subscribed,
victus exilij taedi^, ouercomme with the lothsomnesse of his bannishement. How
so ever it was, and by what extremity so ever he was driven to subscribe,
certain it is, that he was not a favorer of the Arian Heretics. Let M.
Jewel consider of this matter in the like case. Did M. Ievvel fauer the
Papists, when he was feign to subscribe to their Doctrine?
He once subscribed in a solemn assembly of learned men at Oxford unto the
Popes supremacy, the real Presence, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and to other
parts of the Catholic Doctrine, which now he so ernestly impugneth: I trow
he will not have this much said of him, that then he was a favorer of
Papistrie. And doubtelesse he that would say so of him, should belie him. So
were it true, that Liberius through fear subscribed to the Arians, yet it is
not true, that he was a favorer of them. And so M. Jewel has not yet
discharged him self of this Untruth.

But who is that one of M. Hardinges own principal Doctors, that says these
words, De Liberio Papa constat fuisse Arianum, As concerning Pope Liberius, it
is certainly known, that he was an Arian? What is the cause that here M.
Jewel names him not? Why does not he so much as by a cotation in the margent
signify, what Doctor this is? Is he now grown more shamefast, then
heretofore, that he would be loath to be found a notorious liar in that place,
where he labors to discharge him self of Untruths? Well though he were a
shamed to be taken with a lie, yet was he not a shamed to make a lie. This
Principal Doctor of mine (for so it pleases M. Jewel to be merry) is Alphonsus
de Castro. How may this be known? Forsooth even by M. Jewel him self, who in
his pretensed Defense writes thus, word for word, where without al error
(ye may be sure) he brings much matter to show, that the Pope may err.
Defense. page. 617. lin. 2. Alpho^sus impude^tly belyed.
Certainly (says he to me) Alphonsus your own Doctor says, De Liberio
Papa, constat fuisse Arianum. Touching Pope Liberius, it is well known, he was
an Arian. And where says Alphonsus thus? Mary says M. Jewel in his marginal
cotation, Alpho^sus co^tra haeres. lib. 1. cap. 4. But read that Chapter who
will, verily in the books of sundry printes that I have seen, he says it not.
If it were once so printed, and afterward by The Author revoked, it ought not to
be alleged. Thus M. Jewel going about to justify his Untruths, doubleth his
untruths. So shall they do, that take upon them to defend Untruths. To the
objection made against Pope Liberius, my answer was sufficient before in my
Confutatio^, Confutation. fol. 285. b.
and so it remains, for ought that M. Jewel brings in his Defense to the
contrary, if al be judged by learning.

M. Ievvel. The Apology. part. 6. Cap. 5. Diuis. 2.
Pope Zosimus corrupted the Council of Nice.

The 5. Untruth. Confutat. fol. 286. a.
To this I say in my Confutation, Zosimus is belied, he corrupted not the
Council of Nice. M. Jewel replieth.

This matter most plainly appears by the records of the Council of Aphrica.

Of this matter M. Jewel ye have treated both in your Reply in the fourth
Article, and in your pretensed Defense, very untruly. What so ever you have to
say for proof of that blessed Popes forging of the Nicene Counsel, Copus
Dialog. 1. Cap. 6. and 7. Stapleto^. Artic. 4. fo. 30. and in seque^t. Dorman
Fol. 94. etc.
it is clearly confuted by M. Stapleto^, and by M. Cope, in whose Dialoges you
would seem to be much co^uersant, which either of pride you disdain to
acknowledge, or of falshod you dissemble to know. Because the matter requires
a long discourse, and the same is already well handled both by M. Stapleton in
the Return of Untruths, and also by M. Dorman in his Disproufe of M. Nowels
Reproufe: I remit the reader unto them, promising him, that by reading them, he
shall be satisfied at large, and judge M. Jewel conuicte and cast in a great
Untruth.

M. Ievvel. Apology. part. 6. Cap. 5. Diuis. 2.
Pope John (the.22.) held a detestable opinion touching the Immortality of
the soul. The. 6. Untruth.


See my Confutation reader. There have I fully answered to that is laid to this
Popes charge, Confutation. Fol. 285. b.
touching the state of the Soul after this life. The Apology burtheneth him
with a wicked, and detestable opinion of the life to come, and of the
Immortality of the Soul, for so it speaks. Most certain it is, that M.
Jew. there said Untruth, if the Apology be his, and that here again he
doubleth his Untruth. And what I said in my Confutation, true it is, and he
shall never be hable to refel it. Let us now consider, what truth there is in
his Reply.

Gerson (says he) in Sermon Pashali (writes) Pope John 22. decreed, Gerson
is impude^tly belyed by M. Ievvel.
that the Souls of the wicked should not be pounished, before the day of the
last Judgment. Which error the University of Parise condemned for heresy,
and caused the Pope to reca^t. Hereto he adds these words most impude^tly.

Council. Constantien. in Appendice. In primis. Quin imo Johannes Papa. 22.
dixit, et pertinaciter credit, Anima^ hominis cu^ corpore humano mori: and
extingui, This is impude^tly ascribed to John. 21. being spoken of John. 23.
ad instar animaliu^ brutoru^. Dixitque mortuu^ semel, etia^ in nouissimo die,
minime esse resurrecturu^. Thus far M. Jew. in his View of Untruths.

What shall I say, but that al is false? First touching this saying here in
English, pretended to be alleged, as out of Gerson in Sermon Paschali: whereas
among al Gersons works, there are but two Sermons bearing this title, In Festo
Paschae: In quarta part operum Gersonis. Linea. 28.
in neither of both is this saying to be found. Yet M. Jewel makes him self
so sure of it, that he is not ashamed to allege it again word for word, in
the pretensed Defense, page 617. where he begins the sentence thus in
Latin, Johannes Papa. 22. decreuit. etc. and thus coteth the place, Gerson in
sermon Paschali.

It is a foul thing M. Jewel, and a wicked impudency thus to belie the
Doctors. Certain it is, Gerson never said it, nor in sermon Paschali, as you
report, nor any where else, that this Pope John made any such Decree.
Neither was his error, as you untruly burden him, that the Souls of the
wicked should not be pounished, before the day of the last Judgment. That ye
write touching this Pope, either proceeds of malice, or of ignorance. If ye
be malicious, God amend you: if ye be ignorant, thus ye may understand the
truth.

What was the propre error of Pope John. 22. touching the Souls departed.
The error of Pope John the. 22. was not, that the Souls of the wicked be not
pounished before the day of the last Judgment: but that the souls of the
good, see not the face of God, before the last day. His Position, or opinion
was conceived with these terms, as the Scholastical Doctors then used to
speak, or the like, as we find in Adrianus that learned Pope, Adrianus in 4.
Sententiaru^. quaest de Sacrame^to Confirmationis.
and in the Extrauagante of Pope Benedictus vndecimus, who succeeded him next.
Animae purgatae ante finale Iudicium non habent stolam, quae est clara and
facialis Visio Dei. That is to say, The purified (or cleansed) Souls have not
their Stole, which is the clear vision of God and sight face to face, before
the final Judgment.

This matter was much disputed of among the learned Divines of that time. The
Question was thus propounded, as it appears by Benedictus Extrauagante.
^enedictus. 11. in Extrauagante.
An anima iustorum hominum, in quibus nihil erat purgabile, cum de hoc seculo
decesserunt, vel si quid erat, iam purgatum fuerat ex toto, post mortem suam
videant Diuinam essentiam, ante corporum suorum resumptionem, and iudicium
generale. As much to say in English: whether the Souls of just men, in
which there was nothing to be purged, when they departed out of this world,
or if there were any thing, the same had been now wholly purged, after their
death, see the Divine essence before the receiving again of their bodies, and
before the general Judgment.

Of this Question some Doctors then held the affirmative, some the negative.
Amongst them that held the Negative, this Pope John. 22. was one before he was
Pope, and perhaps also afterward. But he held it only as his private opinion.
As touching Decree, or definition in that behalf either against, or with the
truth, doubtelesse it can not be proved by any story of estimation, that he
made any. Who of al men is more to be believed herein, then Benedictus the
eleventh that was Cardinal in his time, and succeeded him? This Benedictus
says, that Pope John prepared him self to make a Decision and a perfect
determination of that question. And to the intent the truth might be exactly
tried out, he gave commandment in his public Consistory (whereat the said
Benedictus was then present, as he says him self) unto the Cardinals,
Prelates, and Doctors of divinity, who were there in great number, to provide
for the due examination of that question, that when they should be required,
every man should say deliberately, what he thought of it. Yet (says
Benedictus) being prevented by death, as it pleased our Lord, he could not
perform that he intended. The same was performed by Benedictus straight after
Pope John's death.

Now this was an error in Pope John, I deny not. Yet for the same is not he
to be accounted an heretic, as neither S. Irenaeus, Theophylactus, and S.
Bernarde are, who seem to have been of the same opinion, as it is by some
learned men gathered and judged of certain sayings found in their works.
Certainly it was no heresy, for so much as the matter was not at that time
expressly defined by the Church, but afterward by Benedictus the eleventh,
and at length by the Council of Florence under Eugenius the fourth.

This is the untrue doctrine of Pope John. 22. of which Gerson speaks, far
otherwise then M. Jewel reports him, in a Sermon, that he made before the
French king then being, in festo Paschali.

In that Sermon having uttered a few sentences touching Peace, taking occasion
of his Theme, which was, that Christ said to his disciples, Pax vobis, after
his prayers made, and the Theme repeated again, even after the manner that
Preachers in England used in the catholic times: thus he begins. Gerson.
Sermon. 1. in Festo Pa^schali.
Saluator noster, and verus miles, etc. Jesus Christ our Savior and true
knighte, straight after his blessed Passion in the first instant of his death
(which was on the frydaie at the nynth hour) went down unto Hell, to give the
true peace, the peace of glory and bliss, unto his friends the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and the other just, that were in Limbo Patrum, that is to say, in
the resting place of the Fathers. And it is verily to be believed, that he gave
this glorious peace to al them that were in Purgatory, and that he delivered
them, as a king does at his first joyous coming unto a place. And of purpose
this did he unto the Thief, who of likelyhoode had not yet fulfilled his
penance for all his sins: who was in that very hour made blessed, and saw
God face to face, as the Saints do in Paradise. This day (says Christ)
shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23.

Immediately upon this follow the words, by which it appears, that by verdite
of Gerson, Pope John's error was, as is before said. For there he says. Propter
quod apparet falsitas doctrinae Papae Iohannis. 22. quae damnata fuit cum sono
buccinarum vel tubarum coram rege Philippo auunculo tuo per Theologos
Parisienses, etc. For the which thing the falshed of the doctrine of Pope John
the. 22. appears, which was condemned at the sound of Trumpets before king
Philip thy uncle by the Divines of Paris.

Remember good Reader, this error of John. 22. was not condemned by the
Divines of Paris, when he was Pope, but before, when he was a private Doctor,
and lived in the realm of France. Whom notwithstanding Gerson calls Pope,
for that, he was Pope afterward, and died Pope. And thus wrote Gerson of him
long after his death.

Lay all this, and that I said before in my Confutation together M. Jewel, and
this matter of Pope John the. 22. is fully answered, and you remain still
charged with Untruth, and all the scorneful talk that you utter of Purgatory
in your pretensed defense page. 617. is found, vain, light, and unlearned,
and utterly beside the purpose. For the question, wherein Pope John is said to
have erred, was only touching the souls of the just and perfect, who were
fully purged before their departure hence ( in quibus nihil erat purgabile, cu^
de hoc seculo decesserunt, as it is showed in Pope Benedictus Decretale before
mentioned) or were purged elsewhere, Defense. page 617.
after the separation from their bodies. So that by this, Purgatory is not
taken away at al, as your skoffing tale, that likes you so well, pretends it
to be. Neither were the Heretics, that of S. Augustine are called Arabici,
the first Authors of this error, as you say, but the Armenians, and
Grecians, if we may believe Guido.

M. Jew. Untruly attributes that to Pope John. 22. which was written of John.
23.
Now touching that you have alleged out of the Council of Constance, in
Appendite, as you call it: I marvel with what face ye bring it in. And what a
great falshed is it, to put in your book the name of Pope John the. 22. for
John the. 23. who was not borne within a hundred years after John the. 22. The
name of this John the 23. was before he took upon him to be Pope, Balthazar de
Cossa, as there ye have it declared. Neither was it certain, that he held
that detestable opinion touching the Death of the body and Soul together, it
was but brought into the Council of Constance in a bille of complainte,
containing many other heinous Articles against him, which were not proved. It
was a matter of Diffamation, it was not of probation, as by the bill it self
it is expressed. For there ye find these words.

In Appendice Concilij Constantien.
The said John the. 23. was of these things diffamed grievously before the
clergy, and the people. Therefore it is thus said there of his Acousers:
Denunciant, dicunt, ponunt, and si necesse erit, probare intendunt, etc. They
denounce, say, and put, and if it shall be necessary, they intend to prove.
They that accuse, and intend to prove, if need be, have not yet proved. And
God forbid, al things should be taken as true, whereof some be accused.

How so ever it be, John the. 23. is not John the. 22. no more, then John Jewel
is John Capon. Neither was that three and twentieth John a true Pope, lawfully
elect, but an usurper, as two others were with him at the same time, which
were deposed al three at the Council of Constance, and a new Pope chosen. So
by this place ye have proved no heresy against Pope John the. 22. nor against
any true Pope at al, but only have showed your self a shameless shifter, and
one, that has a more malicious mind to hurt the authority of the Pope, then
matter of just accusation against him.

M. Ievvel. The Apology. Part. 6. cap. 6. Diuis. 1.
The Canonistes say, the Pope can do as much, The. 7. Untruth.
as Christ himself can do.

To this I said, it is false, and sclaunderous. M. Jewel replieth.

These words be most manifest, and out of al question: Extra de translatione
Episcopi. Quanto. Hostien.
Excepto peccato, Papa potest quicquid Deus ipse potest. Except sin, the
Pope can do as much, as God him self can do.

This is a most manifest, and out of al question (to use this man's own
words) a foul corruption. Certainly Hostiensis says not so. But because the
Pope is the Vicare of Christ in earth, and God ratifieth, what so ever he does
in binding, or loosing, so it be done duly, and rightly, Claue non errante,
as the Canonistes speak: having reckened certain things, wherein the Pop^
has authority as under God, and as Christ's high officer, he concludes with
these words. Breuiter, except^ peccat^, Ibidem.
quasi omnia de iure potest, vt Deus. Briefly, except sin, he has power, as
a man would say, in all things, of right, as God. Thus says Hostiensis, and
not as M. Jewel belieth him. And this saying being rightly understood, is a
true saying.

What soever the Pope does, or God does by the Pope, that is above the power,
and authority of man: the same is he said to do, not as man, but, vt Deus, as
God, because he does it, as being the Vicare of Christ, as bearing the steed
of God. And therefore it is said by the learned Canonistes (wherewith also M.
Jewel beside learning, Cap. Romana. 1. respon. de Appell. 6. Hostie^sis fovvly
corrupted by M. Jew.
or reason finds fault) that the Consistory of God, and the Pope is one
Consistory, as a Bishops, and his Chancellours Co^sistorie, is one and the
same Co^sistorie.

Now, let us consider the impudency of this false Minister. First he avouches
his shameless lie boldly, as though, where truth fails, for show of proof,
the matter might be stowted out. The words (says he) be most manifest, and
out of al question. Excepto peccato, Papa potest, quicquid Deus ipse potest.
That is to say, the Pope can do as much, as Christ him self can do. But what if
these words be not most manifest? Is it not then a most manifest impudency,
so to affirm of them? What if they be not out of al doubt? Is it not then out
of al doubt, that this Minister is a Minister of lies? Certainly the words
of Hostiensis be those very precise words, which here I have alleged, and no
other. See then good Reader this man's truth, whereof he so much craketh.

First, How many untrue parts M. Ievvel plaieth at once.
he corrupts the sentence by leaving out sundry the Doctors words, and
tells his tale for him in such wise, as he may find occasion to carpe him.
For he has nipte away, first, this word, Breuiter, which admonishes the
redaer to have recourse to that goes before: then this word, Quasi, which
being added, by good discretion mitigateth and qualifieth the saying, that
otherwise perhaps might seem over vehement: then again, those other words of
necessary importance, ot^a, de iure, and, vt. Next, he corrupts the sentence
by putting too of his own those words (besides Papa, for which I greatly
blame him not) quicquid, and, Ipse, and that by way of emphasie, that the whole
might seem the more absurd.

Besides all this he inuerteth the whole sentence, and makes of Hostiensis true
and reasonable saying, a blasphemous, and ^onde saying of his own, whereof
that great learned man did never so much as dream. And who would think,
that any man having his right wit, would speak so vainly, and so far
biyonde al sufferance of Christian ears, that the Pope can do as much, as
God him self can do? And yet must all this be faced out, and M. Jewel must
have leave to say, it is most manifest, it is out of al question. Who ever
saw one little poor sentence so nipte, so hackte, so hewed and mangled, so
turned, and cast in a new molde? And because it liked him well, that is to
say, because it should mislike al good men: he has made great stoare of it,
and has placed it in sundry corners of his books, verily in his last most
vain Defense of the Apology, in very many places.

With such stars he gives light to the congregations of his sect. If this
be not impudency, what is impudency?

M. Ievvel. The Apology. Part. 6. cap. 6. Diuis. 1.
The. ^. Untruth.
Some of them have said, The Pope is the light, that is come into the world.
And who so is an il dooer, flees that light.

M. Jewel falsifieth the Answer that I make unto this objection, by cutting
away those words, wherein the answer consists: Confutatio. 287. a.
as it may be seen in my Confutation. Thus there I say, and the same here I say
again: we answer you on the behalf of Cornelius the Bishop of Bitont^ in
Italy, Joan. 1.
that he never said, (The Pope is the light, which should come into the
world) in that sense, as it is spoken of Christ. Neither is the Reply ye
make, directed unto this answer. For against the same ye have in deed nothing
to reply. If that Bishop in an Oration made at the C^uncel of Trent spoke
undiscreetly, where it was lawful for all to speak freely, what they thought
good, as it is, or at least ought to be in our Parlamentes in England, what is
that to us? Neither are we bound to justify every man's private tale: nor if
any speak perhaps at a time unadvisedly, can that stand you in any steed for
defense of wicked Schisms, and Heresies, with which ye are charged. Howbeit
Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto there spoke not altogether, as you english his
words: and his saying being favorably expounded, in a convenient sense (as
doubtelesse he meant it) may be tolerated.

M. Ievvel. The Apology. Part. 4. Cap. 1. Diuis. 1.
The. 9. Untruth.
They have decreed, that a Priest, for Fornication ought not to be removed from
his Cure.

You have foully falsified my Answer hereunto M. Jewel: And in your pretensed
Defense ye have cut of from my Confutation, much, that makes directly against
you, as ye have done through your whole Book. Confut. fol. 158. a.
See my Confutation who will, and he shall find you proved a foul lier. And who
be they I pray you, that have thus decreed?

In your said Defense you are feign to flee to your common friend the Gloss
upon the Decrees, out of which ye serve your self of much gay stuff. And
what says the Gloss? It says thus: Dicunt neminem etc. Why M. Jewel,
depends your whole proof upon the Glosers dicunt, that is, upon a They say?
Ye tell us, they have decreed: and being required to show it, you send us to the
Gloss, and yet there ye have no certain Decree, but an uncertain dicunt. Ye
have little knowledge in your Canon law, I perceive, as great a lawier as ye
make your self, and as great a lawier as he is, to whom ye gave the
Archedeaconrie of Northwiltshire, to the intent he among others mo should help
you in patching together the Aphorisms, and pieces of your lying Books. After
this ye goo for proof hereof from the Gloss, to the margent of the Gloss. It
is pity this manne has not authority to make Gloses of his own authe^tical,
to prove his toies by, and that the marginal notes may not stand him in steed
of substantial authority.

But at length there, as also in your Reply in the view of your Untruths,
Panormitane is brought in, and he a Gods name is my greatest Canoniste, say
you: whereas ye know well enough M. Jewel, Extra. De consangui, and affini. No^
debet.
the Canon law is not my profession. But what says he? Hodie ex simplici
fornicatione Clericus non deponitur: for simple fornication now a days a
Clerk is not deposed. Why M. Jewel, this speaks but of the practice that
the^ was, and your promise was to show us, where it was decreed, you forgete
your self pardie.

Fornication pounished in the Clergy.
But sir understand you, what in the Canon Law is meant by depositio^?
Deposition what it is.
If ye think, it is nothing else, but a Priest to be removed from his cure, for,
so you take it: you are deceived. For it is a far more grievous pounishment.
Deposition by the definition of the Canonistes, is a removing of a Clerk from
the ministry of the Altar for ever. Panormitane by you alleged says, that
now a days a Clerk is not deposed for simple fornication, as in old time
indistinctly he was deposed. As you find in cap. A multis. Extra de aetate and
qualita ordinand. Yea (says he) in old time every mortal sin was thought
worthy of Depositio^. Distinct. 4 ca. erit au^t lex.
By Panormitane, a Priest committing simple fornication, is pounished
otherwise, then by Deposition, diversely in diverse respects. For the which you
are referred to the chapter, At si Clerici. Extra. De iudic. Where he treats
more fully of this matter, and as it were of purpose. There shall ye find, how
he is to be pounished.

Canone Apost. 25. C. Maximinianus. 81. did. and alijs capitibus eo tit.
Deposition of two sorts.
And here to say somewhat thereof for the better instruction of the Reader, In
the Canons of the Apostles it is plain, and also in diverse other old Canons,
that, as for theafte, perjury, and other crimes, so for fornication, a Clerk,
of what order so ever he were, should be deposed.

Deposition is of two sorts: the one, which is solemn, and with terror, when
not only by sentence, a Clerk is deprived of his holy Orders (though the
character yet remain, but unprofitable to the execution of holy Orders) but
also in deed and actually his head is shaven, his sacred ornaments taken
away, and then him self turned into lay apparel, as Cranmar, and Ridley were
in Oxford. This kind of Deposition, is properly called Degradatio, Degradatio.
which is not used, but when the offenders fault is so great, that he is to be
delivered to the secular power, to be pounished, C. Nouimus ext. de verb.
signif. etc. 1. de haereticis. libro. 6. Depositio properly.
executed, or to be walled up for ever. The other kind of Deposition is, which
is done only by sentence without actual Degradation: and that is called
properly Depositio, the which is here meant.

They that were thus by only sentence, though not actually, deposed from the
Clergy for their notorious and outrageous offenses, were grievously pounished.
First, it was a great loss to lose their Orders, and dignity of the Clergy.
Then also they lost al their spiritual liuinges, and offices, and al privileges
of Clerks. Besides this, they were without al hope to be restored again to
the ministry. C. 1. cum 11. capit. seq. did. 5^.
And withal, they were condemned to some straight Cloister, there al their
lives long to lamente, and bewail their offense, and so to do penance: C.
Sacerdos cum. c. seq. 81. dis.
But they might receive the blessed Sacrament of the body of Christ, except
they were stubborn, and would not obey the sentence.

But sometimes in the Canons, to be deposed, signifies, Dicto Can. Apost. 25.
to be deprived of Ecclesiastical liuinges, or to be suspended from execution
of holy orders for a time. Howbeit, it is not often so taken, but in the two
significations aforesaid, for depositio^ from holy Orders by sentence, or, for
Degradatio^.

And no marvel though the old Canons of the Apostles and decrees of ancient
Fathers did so grievously pounish the Clergy for fornication, theaft, perjury,
and other mortal sins. For in the primitive Church, when the Su^ne of Justice
was up at mid day, and devotion hot, sin was so much abhorred, and pounished,
that to the very lay people that were Christians, seven years penance was
wont to be enioined and decreed by the law for every mortal sin. C. hoc
ipsu^ 33. q. 2. etc. praedica^dum in Glosa. 22. q. 1. Distin. 34. C.
fraternitatis. Ita decretum est in Concilio Laodice^si. Item in Carthaginensi.
3. and in 8. synodo, vt in Gratiano.c. his qui cum 4. ca. ibi seque^t. 26. q.
7. etc. mensura^ de poenite^. did. 1. C. prasbyter. 82. dis.
But in process of time, as the Devotion and heat of Christian zeal
decreased, and the multitude of sins, and sinners increased: so these
straight pounishementes, and penances were mitigated. For as Pope Pelagius
says, Quamuis multa sint quae obseruari Canonicae iubet sublimitatis
authoritas, tamen defectus nostri temporis, quo non solum merita, sed corpora
ipsa hominum defecerunt, districtionis illius non patitur manner censuram.
Although there be many things, which the high authority of the Canons
commands to be observed, yet the defecte of our time is such, in which not
only the merits, but also the very bodies of men be decayed, that it will not
bear the censure of that old streightnes to continue in force. Therefore al
penance in secret Confession was at length referred to the arbitriment, and
judgment of the glostly Father, who should consider the contrite heart of the
sinner, and his weakness, and other circunstances, and so enioine him such
penance, as he thought sufficient.

And also withal, this open pounishement of deposition for the open sin of
fornication in a Clerk, was in Concilio Grangrensi changed into ten years
penance to be performed after a very straight, and austere manner and form, as
that Council prescribes. Which is so straight, that if it were observed now
adays M. Jewel should have no cause to complain, that the Canons did
favorably, or to gently pounish fornication in the Clergy. But though every
man ought to do the best he can to do satisfaction, and to repent of his
sins before God: yet in the open government, and public rule and policy of
the world, the law must be such, and appoint such things, as may be obtained,
and observed of men, and as the people, and time bears: else it will be quite
conte^ned, and trodden down, and be never a whit observed.

The Civil law does pounish adultery with death, L. Gracchus C. de adult.
but we see the contrary now every where. Yea it can not be established now in
many Countries, such is the state of the time, and people. Toto tit. de cohab.
cler. et mulier. extra.
Therefore if the later Canons do not so severely pounish fornication in the
Clergy, as the old Canons did: we must rather bear it, and lament it, then be
offended with it, and reprehend it. For such is the state of the time and the
world, that you may rather wish, then establish to any good effect, the
rigor of the old laws, and statutes both in civil, and ecclesiastical rule.
But you shall never prove, that the Church winked at fornication in the
clergy, or that it did not the best it could at al times, and now does, to
extirpate this vice in every sort and degree of men, and especially in the
Clergy, as far, as possibly it may be, and no farther. For such
government, as can not take place in commonweals, we will leave to M. Jewel,
and his companions, who go about with double brazen Canons, and not by
ecclesiastical Canons to reform the world, as now in France it appears.

Look and consider, Council. Tride^t. Sessio 25. c. 14. in decret. reformat.
what the Council of Trent lately decreed against vicious and lewd Priests,
that defile them selves with women, and keep concubines: and you shall well
perceive, the Church does all that may be, as the time now serves, to pounish
and extirpate that foul fault out of the Clergy, which your Bishops, and
ministers in England maintain openly, keeping in the face of the world their
strompettes under the name of wives, contrary to their oaths, vows, and
solemn professions made to God, and to the world: and yet are they not
ashamed, to lay the mainteinance of this vice to the Catholics charge. Yea
some of them be openly known, that will not stick to come from unlawful
beds, yea from other men's wives, and like sad prophets step into the
pulpites, and there rail at the unchaste life of Priests, and Votaries, as
they call them.

M. Ievvel. The Apology part. 6. cap. 14. Diuis. 1.
The 10. untruth.
In the Council of Chalcedon the Civil Magistrate condemned by sentence of his
own mouth, three Bishops, Dioscerus, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius, for
heretics, and gave judgment, that they should be deposed.

That al these three (say I) were condemned in that Council, we find not.
Much less, that they were condemned by any Civil Magistrate for Heresy, do
we find. Confut. 315. b.
Read what follows in my Confutation. To this M. Jewel makes his Reply,
saying.

Concilij Chalcedo^. Action. 1. page 831.
These be the words pronounced openly in the Council. Videtur nobis iustum
esse, eidem poenae Dioscorum Reuerendu^ Episcopum Alexandriae, and Iuuenalem
reuerendum episcopum Hierosolymorum, and Thalassium reuerendum episcopum
Caesariae Cappadociae subiacere, and a sancto Concilio, secundum regulas, See
the Defense. page 683.
ab episcopali dignitate fieri alienos.

That Dioscorus only was condemned in the Council of Chalcedon, and that not
by the Civil Magistrate, but by the Bisshoppes.
This testimony M. Jewel helps you nothing at al. Nay let it be truly
englished, and duly considered with the circumstance, and it shall appear to
be quite against you, and al together with us. And therefore craftily in this
place ye forbear to put it in English. It seems you saw not the place in the
Original, but that you trusted your note book. For they were not only these
three Bishops, of whom it was thought just, that they should be condemned, but
also three others, for six there be spoken of by name.

For breuities sake, Council. Chalcedo^. Actio. 1. page 831. colum. 2.
certain words of less weight without altering of the true sense leaft out,
thus I report you truly the words of the Council of Chalcedon. The honorable
Judges, and Senators said, For as much as Flauianus of holy memory, and the
reverend Bishop Eusebius, are found unjustly deposed: it seems unto us good
right, that Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, Iuuenalis Bishop of Jerusalem,
Thalassius B. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Eusebius B. of Ancyra, Eustathius B.
of Berytus, and Basilius B. of Seleucia in Isauria, (who were the Captains and
rulers of that Council at Ephesus, where Flauianus and Eusebius were unjustly
deposed) should suffer the same pounishment, and a sancto Cancilio secu^dum
regulas ab Episcopali dignitate fieri alienos, as much to say, and that they
should be put out of their bishoply dignity, by the holy Council according
unto the Canons.

This is no sentence in judgment pronounced against Dioscorus, and the rest,
as M. Jewel takes it. Those noble lay men said, what to them seemed just and
right, but by these words they gave not sentence of condemnation, or
deposition. They leave that unto the Council by express words.

A sentence definitive in judgment stands not in these, or the like words,
it seems to me, or, I think it good, etc: But in these, or the like, I
pronounce, I condemn, I ^bsolue, etc. The sentence of Dioscorus condemnation
(for he only was condemned, all the other bishops were pardoned) was solemnly
pronounced in the Council by Pope Leos Legates, in the name and stead of the
Pope. Which thing I have sufficiently set forth in my Confutatio^, Confutat.
page 316.
where thou shall find Reader the sentence of condemnation expressed in
English, word for word, as it was pronounced in the Council. And that very
sentence is in the Council. Tomo. 1. Council. Chalcedon. Action. 3. page 8.
Columna. 2.

Again with what face could M. Jewel allege these words, (...). Euagrius.
lib. 2. ca. 4 (...). Idem lib. 2. cap. 17.
to prove, that the Bishops were condemned by the Civil magistrate, whereas
those noble men them selves said the contrary, that they judged it right,
they should be deprived of their bishoply dignity (not by them, or by their
sentence, but) a sancto Concilio, of, or by the holy Council, and that
according unto the ancient Canons of the Church? Which words he might also
have found fully reported in Euagrius, in two sundry places: that there was
no cause why he should so co^fide^tly tell me of the one of those places, as he
does in the Defense pa. 683.

Dioscorus deposed, not by the Civil Magistrate, but by the Council of
Chalcedon. Act. 3. page 862.
After that Dioscorus was condemned, by sentence of Pope Leos Legates, and
consequently by all the bishops assembled in the Council, there was a solemn
Instrument of his condemnation made, and sent unto him. Where these words are,
by which it is clear that the Council condemned him, and not the Civil
Magistrate by sentence of his own mouth, as M. Jewel untruly reports.
Cognosce te ipsum, propterea quod diuinos Canones despexisti, and inobediens
extitisti huic sancto and universally Concilio, etc. Octobris mensis praesentis
terti^ decimo die, a sancto and universally Concilio esse ab episcopatu
depositum, and ab omni Ecclesiastica fanctione submotum. Because thou have
despised the holy Canons, and have benne disobedient unto this holy and
universal Council, etc. know thou, that in the thirteenth day of this present
month of October, thou art by the holy and universal Council deposed from thy
Bishoprike, and removed from al Ecclesiastical function. Lo M. Jewel, all this
was done, not by the Civil Magistrate, but by the Council.

As for the Civil Magistrate, to whom your Gospel commits al, by report of
that Council, is so far from condemning Bishops by sentence of his own
mouth, that he may not so much as be present at the examinations in such a
case. Ask ye of me how I prove it? Look in that Council, and ye shall find
these very words: Quando quaedam regularia examinantur, neque Iudices, Act.
3. page 838. colum. 2.
neque alios aliquos Laicos interesse oportet. When certain regulare matters
(that is to say, touching the Canons or rules of life) are in examination,
neither Judges, nor other lay men must be present.

And as concerning the condemnation of Dioscorus, when it was done, or rather
when it was a doing, neither Martianus the Emperor, nor his officers knew of
it. For said the Judges and senators unto the Bishops in that Council, Actio.
4. Page 872. colum. 1.
Dioscorus a vobis damnatus est ignorante Diuo Vertice, and nobis. Dioscorus
has benne condemned of you, without the knowledge of the Emperors Majesty,
and of us. Now if he had benne condemned by the civil officers, I trow M.
Jewel will not say, that they knew it not. For if they condemned him, they knew
it. But they knew it not, The five other Bishops not condemned.
when he was condemned, ergo, they did not condemn him.

Now touching the other five Bishops, who with Dioscorus bare all the swaie in
that wicked Council of Ephesus, of whom Iuuenalis was one, and Thalassius an
other: It appears by the Council of Chalcedon, that they repented, and
revoked their error, and so upon suit made by the Bishops for them, were
admitted into the Council, and suffered to continue in their former roumes.
After the condemnation of Dioscorus, and signification openly and solemnly
made, that all the Bishops agreed together in belief, and after they had al
subscribed to Dioscorus condemnation, among other ioiful acclamations, that
were made according to the ancient manner, this was one, Iunenalis and
Thalassius were not condemned In the Counsel of Chalcedo^. Action 4 page 872.
colum. 2.
uttered by the Bishops: Ipsi quinque Episcopi fidei subscripserunt. Sicut
Leo, sic sapiunt. The five Bishops them selves have subscribed to the faith.
As Leo (the pope) thinks and holds, so they think and hold.

Hereupon the noble Judges, and Senators said: Piissimus noster Imperator,
etc. Our most godly Emperor understanding your petitions, has permitted unto
your arbitrament to deliberate of Iuuenalis, Thalassius, Eusebius, Basilius,
and Eustachius the reverend Bishops, and to determine what soever it shall
please you. Your reverence therefore knowing, that ye have to make account unto
God of these things, think with your selves, what is to be done with them.
Then Anatholius the reverend B. of Constantinople said: Petimus eos intrare.
Our request is, that they may enter into the Council. Then all the Bishops
cried, rogamus eos intrare, etc. we pray that they may come in, who believe
like as the synod believes, and hold as the synod holds. Assint qui
subscripserunt epistolae Leonis ad Synodum. Let them be here, that have
subscribed unto the Epistle that Leo sent unto the Synod. The Judges, and
Senators said: Intre^t. Let the^ come in. So were they restored, and held
their former roumes. And thereupon were made diverse cries in signification of
joy. Thus it is evident that Iuuenalis, and Thalassius were not condemned by
the Civil Magistrate, as M. Jewel says.

But M. Jewel allegeth Pope Leos Epistle to Anatholius the B. of Constantinople
speaking of these Bishops, to prove, I cannot tell what. Defense page 683.
For thereof it can not be gathered, that they were condemned by the civil
Magistrate. These be the words of Leo. De nominibus Dioscori, etc. Touching
the names of Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and Eustathius, Leo epist. 40. ad Anatholiu^.
not to be rehearsed at the holy Altar, it becomes you to keep this much.
By these words, and the other that follow immediately, Leo required Anatholi to
see, that the names of those Bishops, that had consented to Dioscorus, unto the
unjust comdemnation of blessed B. Flauianus, should not (as the manner then
was) be rehearsed at th'Aulter in the time of the Mass among other Catholic
Bishops, whereby they were prayed for, specially in that Church of
Co^sta^tinople where Flauianus had been bishop, Ibidem.
that so injury should not be done (says he) unto the blessed memory of
Flauianus, and that by so doing, he should not turn away the minds of the
Christian people from his own grace and favor. For how could the people
gladly hear their names rehearsed, in that Church, Iuuenali^ not condemned in
the Council of Chalcedo^ by Witness of Leo Leo ad Iuuenale^ epist. 72.
by whom the most worthy Bishop of the same Church, was most unjustly
condemned, and deposed?

As for Iuuenalis the Bishop of Jerusalem, Leo him self in his Epistle unto
him, is a manifest witness, that he was not condemned, but restored again unto
his Bishoprik. For thus he writes unto him among other things. Gauisus quide^
sum, quod tibi ad Episcopatus tui sedem redire licuisset. I reioised that it
was made lawful for thee, to return home again unto thy Bishoprike. Again he
says unto him eftsoon there. In tempore indulgentia resipiscentiam magis,
quam pertinacia^ de legisti. In the time when pardon might be obtained, thou
have chosen amendment, rather then stubbornness.

Thus I have sufficiently proved, that the six Bishops (M. Jewel not having
seen the Original, but trusting to an others note, as it seems, names but
only three) were not condemned of the civil Magistrate, by sentence of his
own mouth, but that Dioscorus, and not one else was condemned and deposed, not
by lay Magistrates, who gave place to the Bishops in that case, as I have
before declared: but by sentence of the Popes Legates, and by the Council it
self.

Now because M. Jewel takes me up very roundely in his pretensed Defense, as
if he had gotten a great conquest against me, whereas after a huge number of
shameless Untruths, he charge me with many Untruths: I will here by way of
a brief dialogue answer him, reporting his words none otherwise, then he him
self has uttered them speaking unto me in his book.

Jewel. Defense. Page 685. Now, shortly to consider the whole substance of
your tale first, ye say, these three Bishops, Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and
Thalassius, were never condemned in the Council of Chalcedon: M. Jewels
objection of Untruths ansvvered.
This ye see is one untruth.


Harding.
In deed I see it, and grant it to be an Untruth: But of your part M. Jewel,
not of mine. For as now ye see it by me sufficiently proved, only Dioscorus
the B. of Alexandria was condemned, and that by the Council, not by the Civil
Magistrate, as you untruly affirm. Iuuenalis, Thalassius, and the other three,
in consideration of their submission, and agreeing in belief unto the Council,
were pardoned, admitted into the Council, and restored unto their former
roumes, and dignities.

Jewel. Secondly, ye say the Civil Magistrate, never condemned them. This is
an other untruth.


Harding.
True it is, it is an other Untruth. But it is yours, not mine. For in deed
(as I have before proved) the Civil Magistrate did not condemn them, but the
Council of Bishops condemned Dioscorus only. This being true, it follows
that your contrary saying is an Untruth.

Jewel. Thirdly, ye say, Iunenalis, and Thalassius were rebuked for fitting
as judges in Council, without the Popes authority. These are two other
untruths.


Harding.
Ye are rise of your Untruths. Of two, I return one back unto you again.
For the report you make of my words, is untrue. Look better in my
Confutation, There ye shall find me to speak otherwise, not determinatly, as
you report, but coniecturally thus. Confutat. fol. 316. a
They might well have rebuke for misusing them selves in the second Council at
Ephesus, where they sat like Judges without authority of the Sea of Rome. All this considered, with that I have declared before touching this whole matter,
l^^ the indifferent reader judge, yea one of your own sect being learned, if
he will take the pains to vewe, and confer all that I have here written with
the place in your pretensed Defense, whether I had not just cause to say, as I
said in my Confutation, what is Impudency, what is licenceous lying, what is
false dealing, if this be not? If I seem over long Reader in this point, the
blame ought to be M. Jewels, whose manifold Untruths, and shameless shifts
used in his Defense to color this matter, have driven me to use more
prolixitie, then otherwise I would have done.

After this follow in M. Jewels View of his Untruths, six mo Untruths, which
although he has advisedly chosen, both out of my Reioindre, and out of my
Confutation, as the easiest for him to make his answer unto, and to defend:
yet by ought he is hable to say, he has not so justified the least, but that
he may yet stand charged. The three untruths of the Apology next following
be of no great weight I confess. And therefore I will not spend time about
them. Yet great malice may lie hid under small trifles. For the trial of
them, I refer the Reader to both our books. The. 11. The. 12. The. 13.
Untruth. Reioind. fol. 251. b. The Apology. part. 2 c. 13. d. 1. Apology part.
2. c 1 Diuis. 1.
What I said of these words, post finem orationum, true it is, and untrue it
is that M. Jewel says.

Likewise Origin has, Ille Cibus, that meat, not ille Panis, as M. Jewel
untruly alleged. As for the place of S. Augustine, which M. Jewel notes in
his. 13. Untruth, whether the word be Oportet, or Potest, it is doubteful.
Books of diverse editions have diversely. The point which by that place he
would prove, contains heresy. So that though it were not an Untruth in
word, yet is it a great Untruth in sense and meaning.

M. Jew. The Apology, Part. 5. cap. 3. Diuis. 11. The old Council of
Carthage commanded nothing to be readde in the Congregation, but the Canonical
Scriptures. The. 14. Untruth.



This old Council is newly falsified, say I, by nipping of words from the
sentence, that be of great importance, and quite contrary to that M. Jewel
intends. For the whole Decree has these words: Council. Cartag. 3. Cap. 47.
Placuit vt praeter Scripturas Canonicas nihil in Ecclesia legatur, sub nomine
diuinarum scripturarum. It has benne thought good, that nothing be readde in
the Church under the name of the holy Scriptures, beside the Canonical
Scriptures. It follows in the same Decree, Let it be lawful also for the
Martyrdomes of Martyrs to be read, when their yearly Feasts are kept. This
Untruth M. Jewel by no shifte is hable to excuse. What he brings in his
Reply out of the Abbridgement of the Council of Hippo made in the third
Council of Carthage, is to no purpose. For though the Abbridgement say, that
(praeter Scripturas alia non legantur) other things be not readde in the
Church beside the Scriptures, yet how that is to be understood, it is
supplied by the Decree of the third Counsel of Carthage, by those words, sub
nomine diuinarum scripturarum. So that M. Jewel may look to find no better
relief in the Council of Hippo Abbridged, then he found in that Council of
Carthage. See my Confutation of the Apology. Fol. 243. a.

The. 15. Untruth The 15. Untruth.
of the Apology, which M. Jewel goes about to make good, stands altogether
upon a point of the Canon law, in what case the Pope commits Simonie. I
alleged summa Angelica. He in his Repli^ says, I understand not my Summa.
Because the discussion hereof nequireth a large process, and is not very
necessary in it self, nor pertains specially to our profession: I leave it
to M. Iewelles great lawier to treat of it to the most advantage, if he have
so much leisure as to think hereof, being him self much encombred poor man
with matters of the law about his two wives, not being yet determined, which
of them he may keep still, which he may turn away. Ye should do well to
amend that disorder M. Jewel.

Touching the. 16. Untruth, The. 16. Untruth.
I need to say little. It pleased M Jewel of his own humility to acknowledge
an error, which I laid not unto his charge. Certainly whiles he goes about
to try him self a true man, he ladeth him self with a more huge burden of
Untruths, and makes al men, that will lose their time in reading his books,
witnesses, how, when falsehed is attempted to be defended, lying and falsehed
is farther multiplied.

By experience of M. Jewels writings this much I find, What it is to
confute. M. Jewels writings.
that to confute him, is no more but to say, where he says ought of his own,
that either al is false, or light scoffing stuff, or otherwise vain: where he
brings the sayings of other men, wherewith in manner only his books be
farced, that either much is true, but impertinent, nor by the Catholics
denied: the rest false, as alleged out of Heretics, or at lest in some part
adversaries unto the unity of the Church, as Bale, Illyricus, Iacobus
Andreae, Sleidan, Cassander, Lorichius, and such others: or by M. Jewels
common sleightes falsified, and corrupted, and wrested to an undue sense, or
otherwise not very material, unprofitable, and not worth the answering. This
shall he find to be most true, who soever will examine the things he sets
forth, as I have. If he mingled some true discourses, with his other untrue
extrauagantes, as other Heretics commonly have done: our labor of answering
should be less. Now his untruths and impudent Lies be so many, that to
confute al, it were labor both infinite to the writer, and unprofitable to
the reader.

Toward the end of the View of his Untruths, at last in a great bravery he
concludes with the words of S. Paul, tanquam seductores, and ecce veraces.
2. Cor. 6.
We are (says he) called Deceivers, and yet we say the truth. But how truly
this boaste is made, the Defense of these few his Untruths by me now
answered, does sufficiently witness.

How be it here at length the man remembering him self better, In the Defense.
B. iij. a. b.
begins to take some conscience of the matter, and protests, that he will
not so warrant every parcel of any his writing, as though there were nothing
therein contained, that might safely be justified in all respects.

What is that then, wherein he acknowlegeth him self to have done untruly? Let
us see, how much, and how great it is, for by that we shall take a View of his
sincerity, and of his humility. O, says he, The errors that M. Ievvel may
be induced to acknovvledge in him self.
If I have at any time (mark this, if I have, Reader, for neither this much
will he confess simply) mistaken Author for Author, or name for name, or
Chapter for Chapter, or book for book, or any one Father, or Doctor for an
other: such erroures were never hitherto accounted damnable. Yea the best
learned have oftentimes fallen into them. Do thou not see reader what great
errors, and ouersightes this man, with his (If) confesses to be in his
writing? As though we found that only fault in him (which may happen to any
writer by oversight, be he never so diligent) and not other great Untruths,
corruptions, falsifyinges, lies, and sclaunders, that by no color can be
excused? What many of them be, hereafter thou shall see in this process.

August. in Psalm. 33. Co^cione. 1. The great faults. that M. Ievvel finds in
my books.
Now to requitte me, he lays certain great crimes to my charge: As that in
alleging this saying of S. Augustine, Christus ferebatur in manibus suis, I
leafte out (as he says) this word, quodammodo. That in an allegation I name
Iosue for Osee. that there is found in the margent of my book, where Socrates
is alleged, lib. 8. (which fault was the printers) whereas Socrates never
wrote but 7. books. Item that in the margent the printer has put Luc. 2. for
Luc. 22. and in the text, (...): with which ouersightes I may reasonably,
and truly charge the Printers Compositours, and discharge my self, for at al
times I attend not upon the printe my self: and though I had, yet such small
faults might well have escaped me, though I had as many eyes, as the poets
feine of Argus. So of mine own accord I confess (whereat M. Jewel makes no
little adoo, as though it were a heinous offense) that, where I speak of
Henry the fourth Emperor, and his son Henry the fifth, the compositour by
oversight and negligence has set for Henry the son against Henry the
fourth, Henry the second against Henry the fourth. For in that place, See
the Defense page 418. See the Confutat. fol. 187. b. M. Ievvel in the View of
Untruths. B. 3. b
whereas M. Jewel demands this question, Who put in arms the Son against
the Emperor his Father Henry the fourh? I answer in my Confutation with these
words, It was not the Pope, that armed Henry the son, against Henry the
fourth. For it had been absurd in reason, and nature, to make Henry the
second son to Henry the fourth. There needed not so great a Tragedy to be
made for reproufe hereof.

Touching the pretensed leaving out of the word Quodammodo, out of S.
Augustines saying, Judge reader of M. Jewels truth by the truth in this point.
thus he aggrauateth the matter.

That in alleging of Liberatus I leafte out this word quodammodo, it was only
an error. For why I should of purpose do it, there was no cause: specially
that word bearing in that place Ye as si^ in that place the word bears
great weight, and could not be leafte out, but with foul corruption.
no greater weight. But M. Harding alleging these words of S. Augustine,
Christus quodammodo ferebatur in manibus suis, not of error, but, as it may
be thought, of set purpose, leafte out, Quodammodo, as knowing, that in that
one word rested the meaning of the whole.

How justly M. Jewel excuses him self, and accuses me, for leaving out this
word, Quodammodo.
To this I answer. M. Ievvel in the Reply. page 287.
That you for your part have falsified Liberatus Master Jewel, you can not
choose but Confess. That ye did it by only error, and oversight, and not
of set purpose, he that knows you as we know, that be now acquainted with
your humor, can never believe it. And whereas ye say, Liberatus cap. 13.
that the word, quodammodo bears small weight in that place of Liberatus, the
Circumstance of the place, and the story of the time must needs convince you.
See the Return. Fol. 155. a. and in sequent.
Which thing has benne already told you largely, plainly, and truly, by M.
Stapleton in his Return of Untruths, which you dissemble, as if you went
invisible, and were not espied for an Author of such foul Untruths. Ye shall
never be hable to scour such spots out of your cote.

M. Ievvel most impudently belieth both S. Augustine, and me touching this
word, Quodammodo.
Well, yet ye thought to excuse this your falsehed, by obiecting the like unto
me. But Sir, what if whiles ye go about to excuse your self, you show your
self worthy to be accused, both of me, and of S. Augustine too? If S.
Augustines words be as I alleged them, then who has belied me? who has
belied S. Augustine? Go to S. Augustine good reader, and thou shall find the
words truly by me alleged, and quodammodo not by any falshed leafte out at al,
for in that place from whence I took his testimony, the word is not: nor in
any part of that Sermon, which I quoted. See the first Concion upon the. 33.
August. in Psalm. 33. Concione. 1. sub fine^.
psalm. There he says thus. Et ferebatur in manibus suis. Hoc vero fratres
quomodo posset fieri in homine, quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur in manibus
suis? Manibus aliorum potest portari homo, manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo
intelligatur in ipso David secundum literam non inuenimus, in Christo aute^
inuenimus. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum
corpus suum, Math. 26.
ait, Hoc est corpus meum. Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis, etc. And
he was carried in his hands? This brethern how it might be done in man, who
can understand? For who is borne in his own hands? With the hands of others
a man may be borne, with his own hands no man is borne. Christ at his supper
was carried and borne in his own hands.
How it may be understood in David him self according to the letter we
find it not, but in Christ we find it. For Christ was carried in his own
hands, at what time commending his own body it self (unto his disciples) he
said, This is my body. For he bore that body in his own hands, etc.

This testimony M. Jewel does directly overthrow your doctrine of the
Sacramentaries, A clear testimony for the Real presence.
and teaches us Christ's body to be really, and in deed present in the most
blessed Sacrament. For if that substance, which is in the Sacrament after
consecration, were but a sign, a token, or a figure of Christ's body, as they
of your sect, and you do teach: what cause is there, why S. Augustine should
make so great, so strange, and so wonderful a thing of it? For if it were but
the figure of Christ's body that he held in his hand, when he said, this is
my body: what wonder was it? David of whom there he speaks, could have done
that, yea what is that man, that can not bear the figure of his body in his
hands? But S. Augustine says, that Christ did bear his own body in his
hands, when at the Supper he commended it unto his disciples, sayng, this is
my body. Which thing neither David, nor any man could ever do. And here
consider Reader, how S. Augustine speaks, as if it were of purpose, to take
away al occasion of cauil from such heretics, as should deny the real
presence, which M. Jewel does. The body, that Christ commended and gave unto
his disciples, was (says S. Augustine) ipsum corpus suum, his own body it
self: with which veheme^cie of express speech he excludes al such Tropes,
Figures, Significations, Remembrances, and Energies, as do derogate from the
real presence. And that body ( illud corpus, says he) Christ did bear in his
hands. Which was miraculous, and above the power of David, or any other man.

Thus we see clearly, that, where S. Augustine speaks of the truth, and real
presence of Christ's body, borne of Christ in his own hands, he speaks
plainly, and precisely without this word, Quodammodo. But in an other Sermon,
where he speaks not specially of his body being verily borne in his hands,
but how, and after what manner it was borne in his hands: there to signify
the secretnes of the Divine Mystery, he uses this word, Quodammodo. August.
in Psalm. 33. Concio. 2.
For having demanded this question, Quomodo ferebatur (Christus) in manibus
suis, How was Christ borne in his own hands? touching the manner, thus he
answers: Quia quum commendaret ipsum corpus suum, and sanguinem suum, accepit
in manus suas, quod norunt fideles, and ipse se portabat quodammodo cum
diceret, hoc est corpus meum. For when he commended (and gave unto his
disciples) his own body it self, and his own blood, he took into his
hands, that, which the Faithful do know, and he him self did bear him self
after a certain manner, when he said, this is my body. In which saying the
word, quodammodo, as much to say, after a certain manner, does not withdraw
our mind from belief of the true presence of the body borne in Christ's
hands, but from conceiving a carnal, common, and gross manner of bearing,
such as we see, when we behold nourses bearing their children. Now, as it is
evident by the order of the words in my Answer fol. 108. b.
I alleged not this place of S. Augustine, out of the second Sermon, but that
other former place, out of the first Sermon upon the.33. Psalm.

Thus are you clearly confuted, and eftesones charged with a double Untruth,
for leaving out the word Quodammodo, out of Liberatus, wherein the chief
weight of the matter there spoken of lies, and for charging me with your own
peculiar fault of corrupting S. Augustines saying by taking away the word,
quodammodo, where that holy Doctor has it not.

So then by this View of your Untruths, we have a perfect View, that Untruths
can not be defended, but with a multiplying of new Untruths. Wherefore the
fewer such Defenses ye write, with the fewer Untruths shall ye peister the
world.

The Second Book contains a Detection of certain Lies, Cauilles,
Sclaunders, and of such other untrue matter, uttered by M. Jewel in the first
part of the Defense.
The first Chapter.
IT is not reason gentle Reader, thou should require at my hands a full
answer to every part and parcel of the huge book, that M. Jewel has set out
in Defense (as he prete^deth) of th'Apologie. The labor should be wearisome,
the time long, the charges great: that neither I perhaps should have
ability to print it, nor thou list to bye it. And when al were done, though
many good things should be uttered, yet the more part would not be worth the
reading. For whereas he heapeth together so much (al in manner out of other
writters) which is either utterly impertinent, and such, as being in it self
true, neither reliueth his cause, nor weakeneth ours, or is wrested to a
meaning quite contrary to that the authors had whence it is taken, or al
together falsified by one corruption or other: and what he brings of his own
(which in respect of the rest is very little) is either false in sense, or
light in the scorneful manner of utterance, or a mere wrangling, or briefly
otherwise vain and frivolous: all this being so, as by this Detection it shall
sufficiently appear: if a just, and particular answer were made unto it,
which of necessity must amounte to a far greater quantity, then the
Defense it self is of: any man of judgment can soon conceive, how
vnfruitefully good hours should be bestowed in reading it over. Wherefore if I
so apply my labor, as the things of least weight being past over, the chief
points, or the greatest part of the chief points of M. Jewels Defense be
refuted, and the necessary truth clearly confirmed, and that with convenient
speed: I trust I shall seem to have done that, which in this case, and in this
state of time, at my hands was to be looked for. Leaving then many other
unnecessary things objected by M. Jewel against the Catholic Church, let us
hear the woorst he has not benne a shamed to say, and first in the first
part.

M. Jewel in the first part of his Defense pagina. 7. The Manicheis forbad
lavvful marriage, and allowed fornication, In quaest. in No. Tes. q. 72.
as M. Hardinges Catholics do now. So says S. Augustine of them,
Nuptiarum aditus intercludunt, and promiscue conuenire hortantur.


Harding.
You sclaunder us M. Jewel most unjustly, and impudently. The Catholics never
forbad lawful marriage. Fornication in a Clerk never allowed, but alvvaies
punished, though diversely, according to diversity of times.
And it is known to all the world, that Fornication was never allowed in the
Catholic Church at any time, or age. For this, your weak proufes are out of
Panormitane, and other Canonistes. Panormitane speaking of his time, says,
that fornication in the Clergy was not pounished then, so grievously, as in
old time. This proves not that it was then allowed. Though a Clerk be not
pounished for fornication with Deposition, which is a perpetual removing from
the ministry of the Altar: yet he might be pounished, and was to be
pounished otherwise, as with Suspension, or D^priuation, and with other me^nes
at the discretion of the Ordinary. Now the truth is Panormitane teaches not,
that a Clerk is not to be pounished for Fornication at al: but that he is not
to be pounished with Deposition indistincte, indistinctly, as the austeritie of
the Primitive Church required, when Clerks were generally deposed for every
mortal sin without distinction. How, and in what sort, a Clerk is now to be
pounished for fornication, In Cap. At si clerici. Extra de Iudic.
Panormitane shows at large, where he speaks thereof purposely, as I have
before declared, in my Answer to the View of Untruths, in the. 9. Untruth.
fol. 69. a.

August. in Quaest. in Nouum Testam. quast. 72.
Again the Manicheis by your pretensed proof out of S. Augustine, Nuptiarum
aditus intercludunt, and promiscue conuenire hortabantur, excluded al men from
marriage generally, and exhorted their followers to use carnal dealing together
one with an other in common, without distinction of al degrees of persons.
For so signifies the Latin word, promiscue. But who sees not this
excedingly to pass simple Fornication? And to exhort men and weemen to such
abominable Bauderie, who sees it not to pass without al comparison, the not
most extrem^ pounishing of Bauderie? Behold reader, how immoderatly M. Jewel
sclaundereth us.

Jewel. In the same page a few lines after. M. Harding says: The scriptures
were falsified, and full of errors.


Harding.
The 2. Chapt.
What so ever the Manicheis have said, with whom you compare us, we might well
say, the Scriptures have benne corrupted by your false Translatio^s into
vulgar tongues: but that the Scripture it self were full of errors, neither
I, not any Catholic man ever said it.

These words M. Jewel has caused to be printed in that letter, False and
sclaunderous report.
in which my words of the Confutation be set out. He notes in the margent
thus, M. Harding. fol. 220. b. Look gentle Reader in the said leaf of my
Confutation (for thereof he means) and certainly thou shall find no such
words at al. If I have either there, or else where uttered these words, let
me never have credit in thy judgment. In deed, whereas in that place the
Author of the Apology burdeneth the Catholics with burning the holy
Scriptures, and for the same compares them with wicked king Aza, with
Antiochus, with Maximinus, and with Herod: moved with just zele, among other
things, thus thereto I say.

Why say you of us in general, that is to say, of the Catholic Church,
that we despise, hate, cast away, and burn the holy scriptures? Had we not
loved and kept the scriptures, how could you and your fellows have come by
them? Had ye not them of us? From the Apostles time to this day we have kept
them unspotted and undefiled, and ye within these fifty years have by your
vulgar translations corrupted them, that lamentable it is to consider. And
when we burned the same corrupt translations, or any part thereof, or any of
your heretical treatises, we burned not the Scriptures, no more then one does
the Apple tree, that burns the Caterpillars. The Scriptures we honor, and
keep most reverently, and diligently.

Therefore your comparing of us with the wicked kings Aza, Antiochus,
Maximinus, and Herod, is false and sclau^derous.

Read the rest that follows there good Reader, and if thou will judge, as
thou find, and say, as thou iudgest, and write that thou may truly say:
M. Jewel shall be said to be a false sclaunderer, and regestred in the book of
lying sclaunderers.

Jewel. Page 10. As for John VViclef, John Hus, VValdo, and the rest, they
were godly men, their greatest heresy was this, that they complained of the
dissolute, and vicious lives of the Clergy, of worshipping of Images, of
feined miracles, of the tyrannical pride of the Pope, of Monks, Friars,
Pardons, Pilgrimages, and Purgatory, and other like deceiving, and mocking of
the People: and that they wished a reformation of the Church.


Harding. That Wiclef maintained sundry heinous Heresies.
The. 3. Chapt.
Beside these heresies which you account for none M. Jewel, they had sundry
other far greater. As for example: Among the Articles of Wiclef condemned in
the Council of Constance, Art. 4.
this was one: That if a Bishop, or a Priest be in deadly sin, he does not
order, consecrate, Lib. 1. co^tra Petilianu^. ca. 1. Art. 6. Art. 10.
nor baptize. This was the plain heresy of the Donatistes, as it appears by
S. Augustine. Item, that God ought to obey the Devil. Item, that it is against
the Scripture, that Ecclesiastical Ministers should have any temporal
possessions. If this be no greater heresy then the rest M. Jewel, then allow
it, as you allow the rest. But the gain is to sweet: you can not brook it.

Item, that no man is a temporal Lord, Art. 15.
no man is a Prelate, no man is a Bishop, whiles he is in mortal sin. If ye
make this no Heresy, then ye deny the Queen to be Queen of England, when so
ever she falls into Mortal sin. And whereas by your doctrine, ye make every
sin mortal, utterly rejecting the distinction of venial sins, the Queen, as
no man else, living not without sin: What mean you by this doctrine, to
allow her in this case for no Queen of England? She is much beholden unto you.

Item by Wiclef the common people may at their arbitriment correct their
Lords, when they do amiss. Art. 17.
If you, and your fellows will allow this for a true Doctrine, and preach it
in your Pulpites lustily, ye shall like the people ioilily, and well: and thereof
doubtelesse will follow such order, and obedience, as becomes your Gospel,
and as Satan the Author of it, shall be pleased withal. Such the like, and
worse, were the Heresies of Huss, and Waldo. These Articles, and many other
were recorded both in the general Council of Constance, Council. Constant. Sess.
8. page 96.
and in your fellow Fox in his book of the Deuilles Martyrs.

But touching John Hus, since ye make him so godly a man, and so void of al
Errors, and Heresies, how will you defend him for that so commonly he said
Mass, whereat ye enueigh and rail so much? Mass said by Hus.
Look in the Teutonical history of the Council of Constance, written by one
Huldrick Reichental Citizen of Constance, and ye shall find by him reported,
who lived at that very time, and marked well, what happened (...) those days,
that John Hus oftentimes said Mass in his hosts house during the time of his
abode in Constance, and that the people came much unto it. Itaque Dominica
Oculi quae tertia est in Quadragesima, In histor. Teutonica de Council.
Costa^tien.
vbi celebrasset Missam mane, etc. When he had said Mass (says he) in the
Sundaie named Oculi, which is the third Sundaie in Lent. And this did Hus, not
only before he had read the Books of Wiklef, by which he was carried away
into an other Gospel, but also at the end of his life, even a little before for
his detestable heresies he was burnte, as it is at large reported by the said
Reichental and witnessed by Ioannes Cochlaeus lib. 2. De Historia Hussitarum.

The 4. chapt.
Page 11. In the matter of planting the faith among the Britains, and the
English, M. Jewel tells us again a long tale, which he told us before in
his Reply, the untruths whereof are already largely, and specially, confuted
in the Return of vnthruthes upon his Reply, M Ievvel disse^bleth al answer
made to his untruths.
Art. 3. page 124. and sequent. Wherein he dissembleth utterly al answer made
thereunto, though it be well known, that he has seen the said Return, and
that he had one with the first presented unto him at Oxforde, at what time the
Queen's Matie was there in progress. In that page he belieth extremely
Theodoritus, S. Augustine the Apostle of the English nation sclau^dered by M.
Ievvel under the name of Golfridus Monemuthensis.
Nicephorus, and Galfridus of Mounmouth, sclaundering immoderately under
Golfridus name, our blessed Apostle S Augustine. See the Return page 30.

In the page following he belieth Beda twice: first applying that to the
English men, which he spoke of the Britains, namely of 7. Bishops, and one
Archbishop, etc. For what soever he tells us of the Queen, King Ethelbertes
wife, who being a French woman lived in the exercise of her Religion, that she
was Christened in among the Christian people of France: certain it is, that
our English Nation (of whom in my Answer to his Challenge, I spoke, and not of
the Britains) were not Christians, before S. Augustine came, sent by S.
Gregory from Rome.

Secondly he belieth Beda, in saying as out of his ecclesiastical story, that
the Christians of our Country utterly refused to receive this new Apostle
with his religion. Forbid speaks only of the Britain or welshe Bishops,
but nothing so much as M. Jewel fableth.

They refused to obey him as their Archbishop, they refused not his religion.
They were also in many points Schismatikes, as Bede in the same place
records, whom M. Jewel here so commends. See Bid either in Latin, or in
English lib. 2. cap. 2. The matter is of right good importance, and worthy to
be tried.

Page 12. The 5. Chapt.
The judgment of Constantine the great in a cause Ecclesiastical between
Cacilianus, and Donatus a Casis nigris he renews again, M. Ievvel in the
Defense repeteth again the old stuff of his Reply in many points, as if the
same were not ansvvered.
utterly dissembling the Answer made thereunto in the Return. Art. 4. page
105. and seque^t.

Page 14. He brings in again the common objections against the Real
Presence, out of Tertullian, and S. Augustine dissembling utterly, that those
objections are answered, and fully soluted by M. D. Saunder in his 7. book of
the supper of our Lord, partly also by me in my Answer. And so does he in this
pretensed Defense repete his old stuff, which he laid forth in his Reply
before, as if the same had not benne already answered, and confuted.

Jewel. Page 16. We never armed the people, nor taught them to rebel for
Religion against the Prince. If any thing has at any time happened otherwise,
it was either some willful rage, or some Fatal fury. It was not our Co^^sel,
it was not, our Doctrine.


Harding. That the Professors of this new Gospel have stirred the people to
Rebellions.
A notorious Untruth in sight of al men.
This is a famous and an evident untruth controlled by the bloody practices,
yea and by printed writings of your own Brethren the Caluinistes. It is
notoriously known and manifest, that of late in Valencenes two Ministers of
your religion were at great variance in the town about this point, Variance of
opinion between two Ministers of Valencenes, vvhiles it was besieged.
at what time the gates were shut, and king Philippes army lay in siege
before the walls. The one preached and taught, that they did well, and
lawfully, to rebel for Religion against their Prince. The other thought it
could not be defended for lawful by Gods word. And therefore these two being
afterward taken, the town being conquered, the one was hanged, and broken,
the other but hedded. And here M. Fox might have stuff to increase his
Martyrologe. Christopher Goodma^.
M. Christopher Goodman in his book, How to obey, or disobey, Page 204.
commends, as lawful, the Rebellion of Wyat, and calls them plainly
Traitors, which took no part with Wyat.

John knox of Scotland.
What John Knox that Fierbrande of Scotland has written, and done, to whose
ears by public fame is it not come?

In Tournay likewise not long ago, The Ministers of Tournay. Poltrot persuaded
by Beza to kill the Duke of Guise. See the Confession of Poltrote. Ite^ Claudius
de Saints in Responsione ad Apologiam Beza. Luther. Tomo. 6. Germanico. fo. 602
the Ministers did not only counsel the City to rebel, but also took the
whole Government, and administration of Civil matters into their own hands.

That Theodore Beza counseled, and persuaded Poltrot that wretched Caitife, to
murder the noble Duke of Guise, his Princes Captain General, not only Poltrot
confessed it, but Beza him self craketh, and reioiseth thereof, and defends
the fact, partly in a little book made for that very purpose, partly in his
Preface upon Esaie.

Luther expressly in a book De seculari potestate, which he made in the year
of our Lord. 1523. and is extant in his works, labors to prove by
Scripture, that among Christians there ought to be no superior power, or
Magistrate. And in an other book made a little before his death Anno. 1545.
entitled thus: Ad Electorem Saxoniae, and Lantgrauium Hessiae D. Martin.
Lutherus de Captiuo Brunsuicensi, provoke subjects to fight against their
Prince for Religion, and says of subjects, they do tempt God, which use not
their weapons, when they may.

See the Apology of Staphylus. Melanchton, in libello ad Bohemos and Silesios,
stirred the Bohemians to rebellion. Mela^chthon.
He also in the year. 1548. wrote openly against the Emperor Charles the
fifth, in the time of the rebellion of Saxony, and Hesse, as witnesses
Illyricus in Informatione sua de quibusdam Articul. part. 3. fol. 129. 137.
and sequent.

Jewel. The Nobles and Commons there (that is in Scotland) neither drew the
svvorde, nor attempted force against the Prince.


Harding.
What is a lie, if this be none? I pray you good Sir, are you only a
stranger in these matters? When in the days of the late King there the
Queens husband, the said Queen and her husband were for a time daily in the
field, and in arms against some of their Nobles, was there none then in
Scotland, that attempted force against her? Was all that army assembled, and in
field, to fight with the air, or to keep crows from the corn? When the
Lord Hambleton, Hambleton, and Lord James of Scotland.
and the L. James with others fled, some into England, some into France, was
there none of her Nobles, or Commons, that had attempted force against her?
When (during the Queen's absence in France) they ouerthrewe Churches, and
Monasteries, attempted not they force against the prince, whose plain
commandment was to the contrary?

The Queen's Secretary slain without force by M. Jew.
When her Secretary was by force taken from her, and outragiously murdered with
in her hearing, when she with her husband by night was feign to flee unto the
Castle of Dumbar, when at an other time she was driven to retire to Edinburg in
great haste, not without danger passing through waters without any stay,
where she lost Arture one of her most trusty servants, Arture drowned
was there in all these matters no force attempted against the Queen, neither by
her Nobles, nor by the Commons? What has happed sithence, I need not to
speak. Time shall try, how untrue it is that you say. Think you that such
gross and palpable lies may ever be defended? Then tell us, VViate.
that Wyate rebelled not against Queen Marie, as your brother Christopher
Goodman says in deed: that the Gues here in the Low Country, The Gue^ of the
Lovv Country no Rebels by M Ievvel neither the Huguenotes of France.
namely they of the town of Valencenes, and they of Tournay, and others have
not rebelled against king Philip, nor the Huguenotes under the Prince of Conde
in France, against their liege Sovereign the French King. Yea and then tell us,
the Snow is black, and the Crow is white. But I pray you M. Jewel, if they
attempted not force against their Prince, what did they? You say.

Jewel. They sought only the continuance of Gods undoubted Truth.


Harding.
Put the case they did so: And let open Heresy stand ones for Gods truth. Was
that a lawful, and commendable mean to seek it by? Behold, though before you
denied, they attempted any thing against the Prince, yet now you defend their
disobedience, saying:

Jewel. The Subject is bound to obey his Prince: Rebellion against Princes
defended by M. Ievvel. Act. 5. Psalm. 118.
Howbeit not in all things without exception, but so far as Gods glory is
not touched. These Nobles had learned of S. Peter, It is better to obey God,
then man: And of the prophet David, Better it is to trust to God, then to
trust in Princes.


Harding. S. Peter by this saying teaches us not to rebel against the Prince
for maintenance of Religion.
Had these Nobles, as you say, learned this lesson? The.6. Chapt.
And does this lesson either of S. Peter, or of the Prophet David, teach the
Subject to resist, and take Arms against his Prince, in case the Prince does
command any thing against Gods Truth? I had thought M. Jewel, that the
doctrine, which teaches us to obey God more then men, were fulfilled
rather by suffering the penalty of man's law, or will, being contrary to
Gods Law, and will, then by resisting man put in authority by God: as S.
Peter, who wrote the foresaid words, suffered scourging, Act. 5.
contumelies, and emprisonment, rather then he would obey the Magistrate
commanding him not to preach, nor teach in the name of Jesus. If the prince
command Heresy, or Idolatry, the way to obey both God, and the Prince, is,
to keep thee from yelding to Heresy, or committing of Idolatry, and for
Gods sake to sustain the pounishment, what soever the Prince puts upon
the breakers of his commandment. For it is two things, and much different,
to obey the Prince in an unlawful request, and to take Arms against the Prince.

Round capped Ministers
Both we (God be praised) for the Catholic faith, and your Round capped
Ministers for their Cappes and Hattes, refuse to obey the Queen's Majesty's
commandment, The Prince not to be obeyed by M. Jewels Divinity, when Gods
cause is touched.
touching matters of conscience, because we know right well, and they pretend
to think also, that by such commandment of the Prince, Gods glory is
touched. In which case you say M. Jewel, the Prince is not to be obeyed. Yet
(God be praised) neither we, nor they do take Arms, or attempt any force
against our Prince, as these Nobles of Scotland have done. We have not so
learned S. Peter's lesson. We have not so learned to obey God more then man.
But we do rightly judge and protest, such demeanure to be an open
disobedience, both to God, and to man. And yet say you M. Jewel, and that in
your book dedicated for a singular present unto the Queen's most excellent
Majesty, that these Nobles of Scotland had learned S. Peter's lesson? Tell us in
good sooth, if the Catholic Nobility, and Commons of England (who take your
heresies to be against Gods truth, as they are in deed) should deal with
the Queen's Majesty for matters of Religion (which God forbid) as the Nobles
of Scotland have dealte with their liege Sovereign: would you defend their so
doing, by S. Peter, and the prophet David, and say, that God is more to be
obeyed, then man? I perceive you are so self willed, and so addicted to your
faction, that if you were a Papiste, you would do no less, and be as ready to
help such a matter forward in England, as Beza your good brother in France,
as the Gues here in the low Countries, and as Knox in Scotland have benne.

But we openly protest before God, and the world, that we condemn, and defy
al such attemptes. I mean, that any Subject, or Subjects what so ever, of
their own private authority, should take Arms against their Prince for
matters of Religion. This we do teach to be plain disobedience both to God,
and to the Prince. This have your Nobles of Scotland done more then once. And
therefore you have done untruly, and lewdly, I will not say traitorously to
the prejudice of the Queen's Majesty's own safety, in defending them, and in
calling their outrageous attemptes, such obedience, as S. Peter taught, which
was such Treason, and Rebellion, as S. Paul condemns, Romans 13.
saying, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. etc.

The Doctors, whom you allege, make clearly against those Nobles, Leo de
passione Domini. Sermon. 10.
whose rebellion you defend. Leo says, To give unto Caesar, that which is
Caesar's, is not to rebel against Caesar, but to help Caesar. But your Nobles
rebelled against their Prince: Ergo, they gave not that to Caesar, which was
Caesar's. Again the Christians, of whom S. Ambrose speaks, Ambrosius. lib. 5.
Epist. 33.
said to the Emperor, Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus: we beseech thee Noble
Emperor, we fight not. But your Nobles fought against their Prince, they
humbly besought not their Prince.

And yet (o extreme impudency) these places you allege to show the obedience
of those Nobles. After this, as though all the ears of England were stopped,
and their wits bewitched, you conclude in this wise.

Jewel. page 17. To conclude, the Queen of Scotland is still in quiet
possession of her estate.


Harding.
And what will you stick to say, or write M. Jewel, which do say, write,
and set out in printe, such a palpable, and manifest falsehod? Such (I say)
as even the very Tankerdbearers of London, and al others of the basest sort
besides, can witness against you? What? was not the Queen of Scotland of late
imprisoned in her own realm? And had she not benne in prison, long before
your book came forth? And is a Prince cast in prison by his own Subjects,
still in quiet possession of his estate?

What? will you make us believe, that the Reverend Fathers, the old and only
true Bishops of our country, are now still in quiet possession of their
Bishoprikes, whom al England knows to have sustained emprisonment these eight
years and more, for their constant profession (Gods holy name be blessed) of
Gods Truth? Go M. Jewel, and tell this tale in the new found Islands of
India. For not only al England, but al France, Spain, Germany, Italy, yea
as it may be thought, a good part of Turkey it self, can controlle you, of
this most infamous lie, that the Queen of Scotland is still in quiet possession
of her estate. God keep you, and your brethren in such a quiet possession, if
ye will teach the truth no better, then in this Princes days ye have taught.
Yet you add farther, and say of the Queen of Scotland.

Jewel. Ibidem. And she is obeyed of her subjects, as far as is convenient
for godly people to obey their Prince.


Harding.
Lo, a Queen being the right prince of a realm, violently, and besides al
order of law by her subjects thrust out of her roial estate, is yet obeyed of
her subjects, so far as is convenient for godly people to obey their Prince.
Then by your doctrine M. Jewel, it is convenient for godly people, violently to
bereue their prince of princely estate, if they like not his Religion: and yet
in so doing they obey. Let us suppose half a realm to be Catholics, whom ye
call Papists, half Protestants: Shall the Papists depose their Protestant
Prince, shall the Protestant Subjects depose their Papist Prince? If ye teach
not this, what is that ye teach?

Are not you now one of them, that teach Subjects to take Arms against
their Prince? Thus much and more (which I omit) have you said of the Queen
of Scotland: and yet how promised you, that you would say nothing? Truly it
had benne better for you, and more for your honesty, to have said nothing in
deed, and to have dissembled the whole matter (as you have done many other
special matters, and such as be of greatest importance in my Confutation) then
thus to have bewraied your traitorous judgment and mind, touching obedience
to princes: and that in a book dedicated, and offered to be read even of the
Queen's Majesty her self.

Confut. 15. a.
Among other things thus I say in my Confutation of the Apology. It stands
not with Gods promises made to the Church touching his being with the Church
al days to the worlds end, and, the holy Ghostes remaining with it, Math.
28. Johan. 14.
the spirit of Truth for ever, that he should suffer his Church to continewe
in Darkness, and lack of Truth these thousand years past, and now at the
later days to reuele the truth of his Gospel by Apostates, Vowebreakers,
Churcherobbers, and such others most unlike to the Apostles. Hereunto thus
answers M. Jewel.

Jewel. page 32. You say, it stands not with Gods promise, to forsake his
Church a thousand years. It is much for you M. Harding, openly to break Gods
commandments, to defile his holy Sanctuary, to turn light into
Darckenesse, and Darckenesse into light, and yet nevertheless to bind him too
his promise.


Harding. Gods promise being infallible, the Church never erreth.
Se^ good Reader, The. 7. Chapt.
how absurdely and wretchedly M. Jewel answers, to this most evident and
invincible argument taken out of holy scripture. I reason thus: God promises,
he will never, Math. 28.
no not one day forsake his Church. Ergo, if he forsook it a thousand years
(as these men tell us) he broke his promise. M. Jewel answers by a lewd
kind of Sophistry, called Petitio principij, Petitio Principij.
that is, the bringing forth for proof the thing it self, which he ought to
prove, and which chiefly lies in question, and which will never be granted,
because it can never be proved. That thing I say he brings forth for a
proof, and proceeds thereupon, as upon a matter undoubted, and granted. You
M. Harding (says he) have broken Gods commandments, you have defiled his
holy Sanctuary, etc. Ergo, you ought not to bind God to his promise. This
Antecedent, or former proposition is the thing, which he should specially
have proved and then in Gods name he might thereof have concluded what he
could. Now to bring it for proof, it self in respect of true doctrine being
most in question, and utterly denied by us, it is a lewd kind of reasoning.

Again behold (good Reader) how he ouerturneth the Argument taken out of Gods
word. I reason thus. God has promised, his Church should never err. Ergo it
has not erred these thousand years past. he answers. The Church by our
defaulte has erred. For we (says he) have turned light into Darckenesse, etc.
Ergo, God was not bound to his promise. What mean you M. Jewel? As though God
promising that his Church should not err, provided not also such means,
whereby to preserve it from error? As though Gods promise depended of us, and
of our well doing? As though any power of man, or the world, were hable to
frustrate Gods promise? As though, if any such power should have come (as you
imagine the Popes power to have darckened Christ's Gospel) Christ could not,
or would not have foresene it? or, foreseing it, would yet notwithstanding
promise, that Al days he would be with his Church, Math. 28. Esaie. 59. John.
14.
and again that the spirit of Truth should assiste it for ever?

Think you M. Jewel that Christ our Savior forsawe not the Ruin, or
Darckenesse of his Church, of which so blasphemously you affirm? Or think
you, that foreseing such an universal Darckenesse to come, and that for the
space of so many hundred years together, he would nevertheless have said, The
Churches error of a thousand years, and the foreknovvledge of Christ can not
stand together, unless we make Christ false of his promise.
as he said, and have so assuredly promised unto his Apostles, and in them unto
their Successors, the perpetual assistance of the holy Ghost, the spirit of
truth with his Church? How could such foreknowledge of Christ, and such a
promise stand together? Choose M. Jewel which you will. The one of these you
must of necessity grant: that either Christ forsawe not the great
Darckenesse to come, which you say, you do see, and so you see more then
Christ, God, and man ever saw, or foresawe: or that Christ promised one
thing, and intended to perform an other thing. He promised Al days, and, for
ever, but intended to perform only five hundred years at the beginning, and
after the leap of a thousand years, to grant certain years more, God knows
how many. O heinous blasphemy, whereby Christ the Son of God, the wisdom
of his Father, is proved either to have been ignorant of that which
Protestants know, or else to have been false of his promise.

But what need many words? M. Jewel him self immediately after his former
words, to his own condemnation says: Al men be liers, but God only is
true, Psalm. 50. 2. Tim. 2.
and prevails, when he is judged. God knows his own, Christ will be
evermore with his Church, That the light of truth has not ben put out in the
Church.
yea although the whole Church of Rome conspire against him. All this is true,
and the same does evidently condemn you, and your Religion. Al men be liers,
Protestants for example, which say, that these thousand years the Church
has been corrupted, and light has been turned into Darkness. God only is true.
Christ's word is true, the Light of faith has not benne turned into
Darckenesse these thousand years, nor any one year at al, unless Darckenesse,
and the Spirit of truth may dwell together.

God knows his own. The Church is his, therefore he knows his Church.
And because it is built upon a hill, it is ever seen, and is never unknown.
Math. 5. Math. vlt.
Christ will be evermore with his Church. But with your Congregation, or
Synagog (how shall I call it?) he has not ben these many hundred years, (for you
say in your Apology) The Pope has blinded the whole world many hundred
years, and in this your Defense you say again, that when Doctor Luther
began to Publish the Gospel of Christ, there was a general quietness, such
as is in the night, when folk be a sleep. etc.

Ergo your company is not the Church. Let us see what you can answer to
this argument, M. Jew.
Mark the Argument I require you, and avoid it, if you be hable.

To repete it once again, thus we say. Christ promises evermore to be with
his Church: but Christ has not ben ever more with you, and your fellows:
Ergo, you, and your fellows are not the Church. The mayor is true, not only
because it is Christ's promise, but also by your own Confession. The minor you
confess also in your Apology: it rests ye discharge your self of the
Conclusion. Touching the minor, the Pope, you say, blinded the whole world
many hundred years. Then in those so many hundred years no man saw the light.
where then were they of your sect, of whom you say, they see such a light,
as under the Pope, the world saw not? Of this it follows, that the time then
was, in which Christ was not with you. And so every way, if Christ's word
be true, yours must be false.

M. Ievvel obiecteth against the Church, as the old heretics the Donatistes
did.
But mark well gentle Reader that which I will now declare unto thee. M. Jewels
objection against the Church, is the very old objection of the Donatistes. For
as M. Jewel says here, that it were to much for us having broken Gods
commandment, etc. yet nevertheless to bind Christ to his promise, which
was, that his Church should continewe for ever, and have the Spirit of Truth
always remaining in it: So the Donatistes said, ideo ex partibus terrarum,
August. lib. 1. ca. 2 contra Epistol. Parmen.
in quibus iam impletum erat, perijsse Abraha semen, quod est Christus, and
euacuatas promissiones Dei, quia ipsi non sunt admissi ad eorum communionem,
apud quos hoc iam retinebat orbis impletum. That therefore the seed of
Abraham, that is Christ, had perished from out of other parts of the world,
where it had been already fulfilled, and therefore the promises of God (touching
the continuance of Christ with his Church to the worlds end) were made void,
because they (the Donatistes) were not admitted to the Communion of those
Christians (in France, Italy, Spain, and other Christian Countries) among
whom the world kept this promise of Christ already fulfilled. They said, the
promise of Christ's continuance was broken, because all the other parts of the
world besides, and out of Africa, communicated with Cecilianus, and his
successors, (whom they accused for Traditores.
Deliuerers up of the Scriptures in time of persecution, and therefore
accounted them for no part of Christ's Church) and refused to communicate
with them, even as M. Jewel says here, that for our evil doings Christ was
not bound to his promise.

This objection of the Donatistes seemed to a learned man of their own sect,
Ticonius Ticonius.
by name, unreasonable, and insufficient. And therefore he wrote a book of
that matter: to wit, that the promises of God in the Scriptures, for the
continuance of his Church universally spread through the world, could not
possibly be broken, through any wickedness of man, or men what soever. This to
be so, S. Augustine witnesses, saying, August. li. 1. contra epist. parmen.
ca. 1.
Ticonius (homo quidem and acri ingenio praeditus, and vberi eloquio, sed tamen
Donatista) omnibus sanctarum paginarum vocibus circumtusus euigilauit, and
vidit Ecclesiam Dei toto orb diffusam, sicut de illo tanto ante per corda and
ora sanctorum praeuisum, atque praedictum est. Quo percepto suscepit aduersus
ipsos suos demonstrare and asserere, nullius hominis quamuis sceleratum and
immane peccatum praescribere promissis Dei, nec id agere quorumlibet intra
Ecclesiam co^stitutoru^ quamlibet impietatem, vt fides Dei de Ecclesias^tura,
and diffundenda vsque ad terminos orbis terra, quae in promissis patru^
retenta, and nunc exhibita est, euacuaretur. Ticonius (a man endewed with a
sharp wit, and with tongue at will, but yet a Donatist) knocked up on every side
with all the sayings of the Bible, waked out of sleep, and saw the Church of
God spread over all the world, as thereof so long time before by the hearts, and
by the mouths of Saints it was foresene, and foretold. Which thing having
perceived, he took in hand against them of his own fide evidently to show, and
affirm, that no man's sin, being never so wicked and passing great, does
prescribe against the promises of God, and that no manner impiety of any what
soever that be placed in the Church, does bring this to pass, that the promise
of God should be made void touching the Church to come, and to be spread abroad
unto the borders of the round world, which promise was continued in the
promises made to the Fathers (of the old testament) and is now come to
perfourmance. Thus then wrote Ticonius the Donatiste, being forced thereto by
the very clear evidence of holy Scripture.

Parmenianus an other Donatist, foreseing (as S. Augustine writes) that if the
persuasion of Ticonius took place, then he, and his fellows, which did not
communicate with the whole corpse of Christendom, should be no part of all the
Catholic Church, Dioscorde between the Gospellers, as in old time among the
Donatistes.
so universally dispersed, and so being out of the Church should stand for
Heretics: wrote first an epistle against this Ticonius, and when that would
not suffice, procured him to be openly condemned in a Counsel of their own
sect: Even as at this day the Lutherans write against the Sacramentaries, as
Westphalus against Calvin, Brentius against Bullinger, Illyricus against Beza,
Peter Martyr against Bre^tius, Heshusius, against Boquine, condemning one the
other, al being protestants, or rather (as they will be named) Gospellers.
Against the foresaid Epistle of Parmenianus, written (as I said) against
Ticonius, S. Augustine wrote three books, learnedly defending the Scriptures
alleged by Ticonius, to prove, that no impiety of men what soever, and how
great soever it were, can possibly be hable to drive Christ to breach of his
promise, concerning the perpetuity of his Church in many Nations, and the
assistence of the holy Ghost therein.

You therefore M. Jewel, that think it much for us, to claim by the promise
of Christ, because by our wretchedness, he should no more be bound to his
promise, The Donatistes Heresy renewed by M. Ievvel.
do plainly renew the wicked and detestable opinion of the Donatist
Parmenian, whom S. Augustine, so largely confuteth. I remitte the learned to
the said work of S. Augustine, specially to the second book. The unlearned I
remitte to a late written Treatise entitled, The Fortress, The Fortress.
annexed to the history of Venerable Bede translated into English, where he
shall find such scriptures, as prove an universal, and known continuance of
Christ's Church, largely laid forth and prosecuted out of the Psalms, the
Prophets, and the new testament.

To be short therefore: An Argument proving this new Congregation not to be
the true Church of Christ.
I frame you once again this argument. The true Church of Christ, is such a
multitude, as has had evermore in all ages and times Christ present, and the
Spirit of truth remaining with it. Your Congregation is such, as was not extant
in the earth many hundred years together before Luther was borne, and therefore
can not be said to have had that presence of Christ: Ergo, your Congregation is
not the true Church of Christ.

The Mayor is evident by Christ's own promise, and by your own Confession.
The Minor you confess also both in your Apology, and in this pretensed
Defense, as I said before. The Conclusion therefore remains undoubted. To
this one argument M. Jewel you shall never be hable to answer truly and
directly.

You add yet farther. Christ will be evermore with his Church, yea though the
whole Church of Rome conspire against him. It is true M. Jewel. And therefore
this being a matter impossible, that the whole Church of Rome should be hable
to deface Christ's Gospel, or to defeat Christ of his promise: it must needs
follow, that, where you say, the Pope has blinded the whole world, you have
said most untruly, and have avouched that thing, which by your own confession
in this place, was not possible to be done.

Again seeing that, though the whole Church of Rome conspired against Christ,
yet Christ will be evermore with his Church, and these many hundred years
Christ has had no other Church then the Church of Rome (for the Pope you say
has blinded the whole world, and D. Luther began to publish the Gospel, a
general darkness going before): it must needs follow, that the same Church
of Rome was the true Church of Christ, that the said Church never co^spired
against Christ, that the Pope never blinded, nor was ever hable to blind the
whole world: briefly, that the same which you call blindness, was good
sight, and that which you call darkness, was clear light.

Verily either so must it be, or Christ's promise must fail. Of the which
promise of Christ, and of a number of other sayings in the Psalms, in the
Prophets, and in the Gospel affirming, and confirming the same, it has been
largely and sufficiently treated in the foresaid Treatise entitled, The
Fortress of our first Faith, annexed to the History of venerable Bede, of
late translated into English. If you M. Jewel, or any of your fellows will
avoid this argument, that proves a known continuance of Christ's Church,
answer to the first part of that book. If you can not avoid that one
Argument, your new doctrine is plainly proved to be false, and heretical, and
the Faith of our Forefathers is plainly proved, to be the Faith of the true,
and only Catholic Church of Christ in earth.

You pretend as if ye had advantage, for that I spoke but of a thousand years.
For thus you infer.

Jewel ibidem. Page 32. But why do you so much abate your reckening? Why make
you not up your full account of fifteen hundred, three skore and six years,
as ye were wont to do? Ye have here liberally, and of your self quite
stricken of five hundred three skore and six years.


Harding. That we have not stricken of the first five hundred years, as M. Jewel
cauilleth.
You say untruly M. Jewel. The. 8. Chapt.
I have not stricken of the first five hundred years, etc. But I, and others do
(God be praised) defend and maintain the Catholic Faith no less by the
Doctors, and witnesses of the first five hundred years, then by the Doctors,
and Witnesses of these last thousand years. Yea Sir, it is well known to them
that have perused both our labors, that you allege more writers of these later
ages by ten to one, then either we do of the same, or your self do of the
first five hundred years. It is well known, our writings are confirmed with
the authority of the Fathers of the first five hundred years. We allege very
seldom the writers of these later ages, condescending herein to your
infirmities, which through weakness of Faith, do reiecte these later Fathers,
as too young, and require to be persuaded only by the Doctors, and Councelles
of the first six hundred years. And herein we do willingly omit the great
advantage, which we might have, if we should press you with the Writers of
these later ages. This is well known M. Jewel to all that know any thing in
matters of these common controversies. We have (Gods holy name be blessed)
largely, and abundantly proved the Real Presence, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the Popes Primacie, the use of Images, the Confession of sins to the
Priest, the Invocation of Saints, the Praying for the dead, the Church
service in the two learned tongues, Greek and Latin, and such other matters
by you now brought into Controversy: we have sufficiently proved them (I
say) by the Doctors, and Councels of the first six hundred years, wittingly
and willingly (a very few places excepted) absteining from the Writers of
these last thousand years, not because we refuse them, or contemn them, but
because ye refuse them, that we might seem to use the better means to
persuade you, whose couersion we seek and labor for. You say therefore
untruly that I have liberally, of my self quite stricken of five hundred years,
etc.

The cause why I named but these last thousand years, your self I am sure are
not ignorant of. But so it liked you to dallye, and to answer a most earnest,
and important question with trifling toys, cauilles, and wranglinges. It was
your exception M. Jewel, and prescription of the first six hundred years: It
was your lewd contempt of these later ages: It was your blasphemous assertion
condemning the Church of Christ so many hundred years of Idolatry,
superstition, and palpable darckenes, which made me to challenge you with
Christ's promise for the Continuance of his Church these last thousand years.
If you deny this to be your opinion of the last thousand years, beside your
prescription insinuating no less of the nine hundred, beside your former
words of Luthers first publishing of the Gospel, (for so you term your wicked
Heresies) your own words in this place do signify no less. For thus you
say even in this page.

Jewel. Verily in the judgment of the Godly, five hundred of those first years
are more worth, then the whole thousand years that followed afterward.


Harding.
This comparison is odious, The commendatio^ of the first five hundred years in
comparison of the later ages
and little becomes a Christian man. If you speak of learning, and virtue,
though the comparison be odious, yet is it more tolerable. For learning, and
virtue may seem to have excelled more in those former ages, then in these
later. specially virtue and holiness of life, when as the blood, that Christ
shed for redemption of the world, seemed to menn^^ hearts yet fresh and warm,
as in a place S. Augustine writes. And therefore those times brought forth
more Martyrs. As touching learning, it must also be confessed, that more
Doctors in both tongues then excelled.

The north parts of the world converted in these later ages.
This without prejudice to the learned Bishops, and Godly people of
Christendom in so long a time afterward, might perhaps to the commendation
of Antiquity be granted. Howbeit, it is not unknown to the learned, that in
these later thousand years, the North parts of the world (being many, large,
and savage Countries) have benne brought to the faith of Christ, many
Bishops, and Monks of excellent learning, and of great perfection of life
have flourished, many Martyrs also have suffered: as al histories, and
Chronographies do witness.

Touching faith and doctrine of belief the first five hundred years no more
vvorth, then the thousand years that followed
But in respect of faith, and the necessary doctrine of our salvation, it is a
manifest blasphemy, to say, that the first five hundred years are more
worth, then the thousand that followed. For this assertion imports, that
Christ assisted his Church the first five hundred years absolutely, and
perfitely, so that then the Pastors and Doctors of the Churches erred not in
faith and doctrine, but in the later thousand years the Church was not so
assisted of Christ, and of the holy Ghost the Spirit of Truth, but rather in
such wise neglected and forsaken, as Idolatry, superstition, yea palpable
darkness overcame, and prevailed. And thus you M. Jewel, who say before,
Christ will be with his Church evermore, say now otherwise, that these thousand
years are little worth which is as much to say, as that Christ's special
providence has failed his Church after the first five hundred years. And so
shall his promise of his everlasting assistance, so oftentimes avouched in the
holy Scriptures, be found to fail. But, Al men be liers, and God is true.
The promise of Christ the son of God is infallible. The Church therefore in
no age or time wanted the assistance of Christ, nor of the holy Ghost the
Spirit of Truth.

The Church of Rome (of which you speak so villanously) neither has
prevailed, The Church of Rome the only and true Church of Christ.
neither could possibly prevail against Christ. It has prevailed against al
Heresies. and therefore no other Church in the world appearing al these
thousand years, then the Church of Rome (by which word I co^prehende al
nations agreing with the faith of that Church) that only was the true Church
of Christ, and is to this day, and according unto Christ's promise, shall
endure to the end of the world. For as we shall not have any other Christ, so
neither shall we have any other Faith, nor any other Church.

Jewel. page 36. That the Princes, and Free Cities of Germany ever persecuted
us, it is utterly untrue, and like the rest of your tales. None of them al, no
not one would ever suffer the same Doctrine of ours to be condemned.


Harding. That the Sacramentaries have been persecuted by the Princes of
Germany, and by their Doctors, and by the free Cities,
The. 9. Chapt.
This is so gross, and so palpable a lie, that no man b^^ you M. Jewel would
ever, I think, have had the heart to affirm it so constantly, and that in
printe. First Carolostadius Carolostadius.
the first professor in Saxony of your Sacramentarie heresy, was bannished
out of al Saxony by the procurement of Luther in the year. 1525. as witnesses
your own friend John Sleidan. Sleidan. Lib. 5. Histor.


Again the younger Princes of Saxony, and the Counteis of Mansfeld in the year
1559. published each of them a Write, wherein they reckon up, and condemn, the
one nine, Lib. contra 9. Sectas. Lib. co^tra 11. Sectas. Lauatherus in histor.
co^tra Sacrament.
the other eleven Sects, of the which your Sect of the Sacramentaries by
name is one. This is yet extant to be seen in print, and can not be denied.
Lauatherus a Sacramentarie him self reports it.

Thirdly in the year. 1561. though in the meeting at Numburg, by the entreaty
of certain Princes the Zuinglians were not condemned generally in all Germany,
as the Princes of the Confession of Ausburg would openly and solemnly have
done: yet in the same year afterward in a Diet holden at Luneburg, Lauatherus
ibide^ and Surius. Fra^ciscus Philippus in histor.
Albert of Hardenburg a great Zuinglian was openly condemned for an heretic.
Last of al in the same year. 1561. the French Caluinistes were commanded, and
forced by the Magistrates of Fra^kford, either to practice no more their manner
and order of religion there, or to depart the City. Yet you say you were
never persecuted either of the Princes, or of the free Cities in Germany. What
shall I here speak of your brethren at Andwerpe, whom the Martinistes (for so
they call the Lutherans) ioining with the Catholics, and putting them selves
in arms, drove away, and compelled to flee the City? If ye believe not me,
believe their flight, believe your fellow minister Hermannus the Predicant (that
of late was in Norwiche, and now as I hear say, is driven from thence I know
not whither) what favor he and his fellows found at the hands of the
Martinistes.

Jewel. Page 37. In deed certain towns (of Germany) subject to Bishops,
in outvvarde vsages of their Churches remain still, as they were before. Yet
nevertheless where the Churches are popish, the people of al sorts are
Protestants.


Harding.
This is a sensible lie, and a mere sclaunder. Great parts of Germany yet
remaining whole, and Catholic.
The people of al sorts in Germany, where the Churches remain Catholic, do
in such numbers resort unto the service, haunt the Sermons, and frequent the
Sacraments (as all that have benne at Worms, at Spires, at Augusta, at
Ingolstadt, at Vratislauia, and such other Cities, can bear witness) that a
man to say, as you say, must needs prove him self gilty, either of purposed
lying, as speaking against a known truth: or of a malicious judgment, as to
judge of men's hearts contrary to their whole outward life, and behavior.
For by this you condemn of detestable Hypocrisy, and dissimulation, not only
the people of al sorts in the forenamed Cities, and diverse such others, where
Catholics live mingled with Protestants: but also you condemn the whole
Countries of Austria, of Bauaria, the great Dioces of Saltzburg, of Passaw,
Mentz, Treueres, Coulen, and other Territories, where the whole face and show
of Religion, is only Cathholike. It is a small token of grace, yea of civil
honesty, for the setting forth of your conceived opinion so far and so
notoriously to sclaunder whole Nation and Countries.

Jewel. Page 37. Linea vlt. As for the West Spanish Indies, the people there
lived not only without al manner knowledge of God, but also vvilde, and
naked, without any Civil government. Being in this miserable state, and
naturally by the very sense, and judgment of Common reason abhorring, and
lothing their own blindness, what merueil is it, if they were easy to be
lead into any religion?


Harding. M. Jewel attributes the glorious conversion of the Indians not to
the power of the Gospel, but to the leading of natural reason.
The 10. Chapt.
What M. Jewel, do you envy at the glory of God? Does it grieve you, to see
great Countries converted to the faith of Christ by them that be not of your
Faith? And will ye needs, to deface the power of the Gospel, attribute the
miraculous conversion of that rude people unto natural reason? Had your
heathnish heart herein rather acknowledge a leading of nature, then the power
of our Savior? What could Porphyrie, Julian, or Celsus say more? S. Thomas
preached in India.
S. Thomas the Apostle converted a great part of the Indies, as both ancient
Stories do report, and certain evident monumentes found in those Countries
by the Jesuits, and other religious men, do witness. Now might not an
other Jewish Jewel abase and bring in contempt, all the Apostolic travails
of that blessed Apostle in converting those rude, and barbarous Nations, as
well, and as rightly, as this our Jewel abuses and b^ingeth in contempt the
Apostolic travails of these blessed Jesuits? Nicephor. lib. 11. cap. 48. The
Christian faith brings savage and barbarus people to humanity, and
civility. Theodoritus de Curatione Graecaru^ affectionu^ lib. 7. sub finem.


It is noted of Nicephorus for a singular effect, and commendation of the
Gospel of Christ, that where it was first planted, it brought the savage,
rude, and cruel people, to a civility, humanity, and sobriety of life. And
the ruder, and farther from al humanity the people was, the more was Christ
glorified in their Conversion.

In like manner Theodorite notes, that whereas at Heliopolis in Egypt, at
Laodicea in Syria, at Carthage in Afrike, and in Greece it self, the Gentiles
offered up men in sacrifice to Idolles, and lived otherwise most abhominably,
and barbarously: yet through the Gospel (says he) these horrible vices were
utterly abandoned: and adds, Sacrae vero Euangeliorum leges nationes melius,
ciuitatesque moderantur: The holy laws of the Gospel are they, whereby nations,
and Cities are best ruled. Al which he tells, and reports for the
commendation, and honor of the Christian faith, as being such a heavenly
Religion, that has brought most barbarous, and savage Nations to a more civil
order of life, to modesty, moderation, and humanity. Contrariwise M. Jewel,
to withdraw the due praise from those holy religious persons, by whose
travail God has so wonderfully wrought, draws also the glory from Christ,
and gives that to natural reason, which other Christian writers do attribute
most rightly to the power of the Gospel. What is malice, if this be not? M.
Jew. follows the Pharisees.
So the blasphemous Pharisees maligning the miraculous operations of our
Savior here on earth, said, in the power of Beelzebub he casts out Deuilles.
Matt. 12.
So the Infidelles called S. Peter Maleficum, a sorcerer, and an enchaunter,
(...) one that by Witchecrafte had brought men to Christ's. August. de Ciuit.
Dei lib. 18. ca. 53. and ca. 54.
So commonly they ascribed Miracles done by Martyrs, to Witchecrafte, and
Sorcerie.

Jewel. Page 41. If Pope Pius were so good a man, and so fit and worthy a
pastor for the Church of God, why then did his Cardinals of late lab^^^ so
earnestly by treason, and Conspiracy to depose him, being, as you say, so
good a man? Or if it were not so, why then did he him self complain thereof
so bitterly in an Oration pronounced openly in Rome in the Consistory? Oration
Pij Papa.



Harding. M. Jewel proppeth up his weak cause with a forged write.
The. 11. Chapt.
Nay why do you M. Jewel, to sclaunder the blessed memory of so virtuous a
man, give credit to such a pelting Pamphlet, as you allege us in the
margent, for authorizing this infamous and most false reproach?

Where was that Oration printed, A forged Oration set out in printe, as being
made and pronounced by Pius the fourth the late virtuous Pope.
and who wrote it? by whom was it set forth? It bears a date of the year, but
neither of place where, nor of Author by whom it was set forth. If you sought
for the truth sincerely and uprightly, as you will seem to the unlearned to
do, and not rather to deface the Church of Rome by what means soever: you
would never utter a matter so heinous, upon the report only of such an
unlawful, and sclaunderous write, published by such Makebates, and seditious
Protestants, which for want of true and just matter, being grieved at the very
heart, that any Pope should be virtuous, do forge in corners, and invent such
infamous libelles. This is the practice of your good brethren, signifying
thereby, of what sprite they are. If any truth had been in the matter, at the
lest the printer should not have been a fearde to put unto it his name, and
dwelling place. But so it is, he that loves to do evil, flees light. And
contrariwise, Truth seeks not corners: Tertullia^. In Apologetico.
but as Tertullian says, Nihil veretur, nisi abscondi. It fears nothing, but
lest she be hid.

Jewel. Page 41. Your Fathers in the Council of Basil, Council. Basil. Council.
Trident.
and your friends in the last Council of Trident, I vvil not say had
disputations, but certainly yielded, and gave place unto the Bohemians, and
unto such others, as you call heretics.


Harding. The Council of Basile, and that of Trent never yielded to Heretics.
This lie is so clear and evident, The 12. Chapt. Contradictions.
that our Confutation is nedelesse. Your own very words do convince you
herein, where you say hereafter, that the Council of Trident has yielded in
no manner thing in the world.

Again in the next leaf, Page 43. you would feign prove unto us out of John
Sleidan, Mathias Flacius Illyricus, one John Fabritius Montanus (a forged name)
and Petrus Paulus Vergerius, al professed Protestants, as your self are (and
therefore likely I trow to report uprightly, and without al partiality) that
in the Council of Tridente no Audience could be given at al to any of your
Sect, exc^p^e it were to recante their heresies. If this were true (as it is
most false, and so pla^^ely proved by the Safeconductes of that Council
published in printe) then how likely I pray you is it, Absurdity.
that they should yield unto them, to whom they would not give so much as the
hearing?

Prove this M. Ievvel, or i^ your next book say, pene thou made a lie.
Last of al, the very utterance of this matter, breaths out an untruth. For
neither is it told, wherein those Councils should yield, neither where that
yielding should be found. No Action, no Session, no Cano^ is noted, when,
where, and how this great matter should come to pass. Verily a matter so
great, that in case it were true, al these great controversies should soon be
at a point, specially you now being worthily taken for a man of small credit,
would have been clearly and evidently set forth. For if either two such
Councels should yield to your Doctrine (which we are sure has not, ne could
not be done) or you should yield to them: we would never change word with you
more about your Doctrine, neither would we ever be so mad, as to call those
men Heretics (as it pleases you to say we do) to whom those two
Councels, yea or any one general Council should think good to yield. We
submit our selves to General Councels humbly, as it becomes us. You, because
through heretical pride you will not yield to the General Councelles, think
good to make men believe, that the General Councels have yielded to you.
Pride, and humility makes a clear difference between the city of God, and
the city of the Devil.

Jewel. Page 43. Where you say, that Bishops only have Sentence definitive
in the Council, ye seem willingly and without cause to report untruth.
When he vvrote that, he was neither Pius secundus, nor Pope but a private
man. Aeneas Syluius de gestis Co^cilij Constant. lib. 1. False tra^slatio^.
Apparet, in this place signifies not, it is plain, but, it appears. Ioha^.
Gerson. Quae veritates credendae Corol. 4. The 13. Chapt.
For Pius Secundus * being him self a Pope, would have told you the
contrary. These be his words. Apparet alios quam Episcopos, in Concilijs
habuisse vocem decidentem. * It is plain, that certain others beside
Bishops had voice definitive in the Councelles, Likewise John Gerson. Etiam
ad laicos hoc potest extendi, and plus aliquando, quam ad multos Clericorum.
This (privilege of giving sentence in Council) may be extended even unto the
lay sort, yea and that oftentimes better then unto many priests.


Harding. That in Councelles Bishops only have sentence definitive, the
objections of Pius 2. and Gerson answered.
Neither willingly, nor without cause, nor untruth. Not willingly: For I came
to speak of this point, by occasion of your Apology complaning that you had
no audience in the General Council at Trente. Not without cause: For that being
true (as I shall anon prove it to be true) that only Bishops have Sentence
definitive in the Council, ye being no Bishops at al, for giving Sentence
definitive, there is no place for you: which greueth you full sore. For feign
would ye once sit in General Counsel, as the Masters, and Superintendentes of
al Christendom. Not Untruth: For it is evident by the ancient practice of
the primitive Church, that in all Councelles, Only Bishops at Councels
subscribe definitiuely.
only Bishops have subscribed definitiuely. The tenor of al General
Councelles yet extant, is a clear witness hereof to all that can, or will
peruse them. And though a Negative be hard to prove, yet this Negative, that
none but Bishops should subscribe in Councelles, is plainly proved in the
Ancient great General Council of Ch^^^don. Where it is openly ^^ouch^d, first
of the Bishop^^ them selves, Act. 1. Page 745.
thus ^ Synodus Episcoporum est, non Cleri^^^ A Synod, or Council is of
Bishops, not of the (in^^riour) Clergy; or of Priests, as always you turn
the word. Then of one Martinus Presbyter, a Priest, thus, Non est meum
subscribere, bid. Page 775.
Episcoporu^ tantum est. It is not my part to subscribe, It belongs only to
Bishops.

But M. Jewel will prove the contrary, and that others beside Bishops had
sentence definitive. But by whom? Forsooth by Aeneas Syluius, and John Gerson,
both very late writers, and not yet of two hundred years auncientie. Such new
little worth stuff, he, that requires us to prove al things by the writers of
the first. 600. years, brings against the Ancient practice of the primitive
Church. And yet he belieth his Authors most sham^lesly. See Reader, how many
untrue parts M^l. plaieth in one pore little sentence.
For first, he says, that Pius Secundus being him self a Pope, tells us the
contrary: which is utterly false, For when he wrote that book, he was Aeneas
Syluius Piccolomineus, not Pius Secundus. He was then ^ private man, not a
Pope. And being Pope, he recanted that h^ had done in the pretensed Council of
Basile, and that he had written thereof, and certain other errors, which
before he had published, Bulla recantationis Pij Papa 2. Tom. 4. Council. page
503.
and written to the derogation of the Sea Apostolic, and of the Clergy.
Neither was this told by Aeneas Syluius, as a thing of his own judgment, and
of his own utterance, but as a thing in that Synod said by Cardinalis
Arelatensis, whose priuat^ opinion that was, and the same uttered he with that
liberty, which is granted to al men admitted to Councels, in which they
are permitted freely to speak what they think. And therefore in debating of
d^ubteful matters, they speak things contrary one against an other. And this
saying of the Cardinal of Arles was in that Counsel controlled and gainesaid by
other men of great lerning and judgment, as by Panormitanus, Ludouicus, and
others there mentioned. So that it is no better authority, then a thing that
is spoken in heat of disputation against the truth for the better discussion
of the truth.

In alleging then your Doctor, you have committed five untruths. First, he
never wrote any such book, as you name, to wit, De Gestis Concilij
Consta^tiensis: but de Gestis Concilij Basiliensis. Secondly, when he wrote it,
Vide Aene. Syl. de Gestis Council. Basil. li. 1. pa. 27
he was not Pius Secundus Pope, as you say he was, but Aeneas Syluius
Piccolomineus, a private man. Thirdly, it is not the saying of Aeneas him
self, but of the Cardinal of Arles. Fourthly, you have added of your own to
his sentence these words, in Concilijs, which are not in your Author. Neither
spoke he that of other Councelles, then of the Apostles Council me^cioned in
the Acts. Fifthly, you corrupt your Doctor by false translation. For Apparet
does not always signify, it is plain, as you have translated it, but it
seems, or appears. And many things appear, that be not plain, nor true,
as this it self is one. Of a thing that is plain, to say, it appears, were
prejudicial to the truth. Whether these untrue parts have proceeded of
Rhetorical policy, called otherwise lying for advantage, to make the most of
your Author you could, or of mere ignorance, for that you never saw the place
your self, but trusted other men's untrue eyes therein, or else of a certain
disposition proper to your humor that nothing can pass your fingers without
some false slight or other: I leave it to be considered of others.

Ge^son impudently be lied, and falsified by M. Jewel.
As for John Gerson, you deal as falsely with him, as with Aeneas Syluius, and
to speak plainly, though as you would have it some, discourteously, you
utterly belie him. In the place by you allege, Gerson speaking of verities,
that are so of necessity to be believed, Gerson Quae veritates credendae.
Cor^llario. 4
that otherwise a man can not be saved, shows, that one man is bound under
pain of heresy to hold some points with certain and express faith, and
thereof in no wise to doubt, whereof an other man for a time without blame may
be in doubt. This does he there declare by a threefolde example. As, a divine
(says he) or a professor of divinity exercised in the holy scriptures, is
bound expressly to hold, and not to doubt at al of many things, of which a
simple, and an unlearned man being required might with reason stand in doubt,
so it be without pertinacie: as that (for these be his examples) Thobie had a
dog, or, that Aaron had a bearde: or that the Arc of the Testament had a
covering of Goats hear. Further there he proceeds, and shows the same by
the example of a Canoniste exercised in the determinations of holy Church, and
an other man having thereof no skill nor knowledge, likewise of a man skilled in
Logique, Philosophy, and other human science, and an other man utterly
ignorant and unlearned.

The whole and true sentence of Gerson which M. Jew. falsifieth.
To come unto the words, which you have fowly falsified, thus he concludes.
Denique sequitur ex his omnibus, quod iudicium, and conclusiones fidei, licet
auctoritatine spect^nt ad Praelatos, and Doctores: spectare tamen potest ad
alios quam Theologos deliberatio, sicut and cognitio super ijs quae fidem
recipient, ita etiam vt ad laicos hoc posset extendi, and plus aliquando, quam
ad multos clericorum. Finally of al these foresaid things it follows, that
although the Judgment, and Conclusions of faith belong unto the Prelates, and
Doctors by way of authority, yet deliberation (or consultation) may belong
unto others beside the Divines, as also examination and trial of those things
that concern the faith, yea and that so, as this thing might be extended unto
lay men, and more unto them sometimes, then to many of the Clerks.

Now Reader if thou mark well, and consider, Gerson speaks not at al of
giving sentence definitive in Council.
thou may see, how M. Jewel deceives thee. Gerson in this place speaks not
at al of the authority of giving sentence Definitive in general Councels,
whereof our controversy is. Behold therefore with what conscience this man
handles these matters. First he falsifieth Gerson, making him to speak
expressly of Sentence Definitive to be given in a Council. This privilege of
giving Sentence in Council, says he, etc. Then he utters Gersons words
otherwise then Gerson does.

Again Gerson there speaks of three things: Of Judgment to be given, and
Conclusions to be made of the Faith by way of Authority in general: Of
Deliberation and Cognition, touching matters perteining to the Faith. The
first, he says, belongs unto the Prelates, and Doctors, or Professors of
Divinity only: the second, and the third, not only unto the Divines, but
also unto others, and (says he) sometime, that is, in some cases, it may be
extended unto lay persons. And this we hold well withal. For even at this
present we wish, that the discrete and wise men of the Laity would better
deliberate of points of the Catholic faith, then hitherto some have done,
and that they would examine, and try your allegations, and ours together by
conference of the Books, whence they be taken out, that they may be hable to
judge, whether part uses more truth, and upright dealing. If they would thus
do (as perhaps some few of a great number do) they should soon see just
cause to condemn you, and utterly to give you over.

Jewel. Page 48. The. 14. Chapt.
Verily M. Harding, we never said Luther and Zuinglius were the first
publisshers of the Gospel.


Harding. Proved by their own words, that Luther was the first publissher of
the Gospel.
A great Untruth. M Jew. denies here, that he says othervvheres.
In this your Defense, touching Luther you say no less Page 17. thus: Doctor
Luther began to publishe the Gospel of Christ. If he that begins to
publish, be the first publisher, then you said that Luther was the first
publisher. If there be any difference between these two terms, then have you
well defended your self. If there be none (as all that understand English, may
easily see there is none) then you have proved your self guilty of a great
untruth.

In the Apology pretended to be translated by the Lady A. B
But I must rather put you in remembrance of your own words uttered in the
Apology. Who called the first sedicious, and heretical preaching of Martin
Luther, and Hulderike Zuinglius, Herbam Euangelij, the first spring of the
Gospel, or the very first appearing of the Gospel, as your Lady Interpreter
terms it? Again, who says, that forty years agone, and upward (that is at
the first setting forth of Luther and Zuinglius) the truth was unknown, and
unhard of, and that they first came to the knowledge, and preaching of the
Gospel? Be not these the words of your own Apology? Be they not set forth in
diverse books of diverse printes? And will ye now tell the world, and bear us
also in hand, who be well acquainted with your false dealinges, that ye never
said so? What can any man understand by the first spring, or first appearing
of the Gospel, but the beginning of the Gospel? If the Gospel began with
Luther and Zuinglius, how was it before? If before their time the Gospel was
unknown, and unheard of (for so the Apology says) then where was there any
truth at al? If it were not known, nor heard of at al, where was it in all the
earth? Or imagine ye that it may lie hid in some secret place, without, and
beside the heart, mind, and spirit of man? And if (as you say) Luther and
Zuinglius came first to the preaching of the Gospel, how were they not the
first preachers of the Gospel? If they were the first preachers, how were they
not also the first publishers of the Gospel? Thus you say, and vnsaie. Yea,
and Nay is one with you. And a Gods name al must be defended, be it yea, be it
nay, be it true, be it false. But thus it is clear, that your word is not the
Gospel. And God be praised, that we have driven you to eat your own word.

Jewel. Page 48. Of Abailard, and Almarike, and certain other your strange
names (he means Apostoliques, Peterbrusians, Waldensis, Albigenses, and
Imagebreakers) we have no skill. They are none of ours.


Harding. That these Heretics be of M. Iewelles side.
The 15. Chapt.
I am glad M. Jewel, to hear you so absolutely to renounce these wicked
heretics, at lest in words. Would God ye would as freely forsake their
Heresies in your doings. Alphonsus de Castro lib 9. Bernard. Lutzeburg.
Almarik the heretic.
First as touching Petrus Abailardus, he denied the free will of man. Do not
your great Masters Wiclef, Luther, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, and Calvin the
same? If these be yours, how is not Abailard also yours.

Almarik the Frenchman taught of Images, of Aulters, of Invocation of Saints,
and of Transubstantiation, as you do, condemning the Church of Idololatrie in all these points, as you do. Of this Almarik then have you no skill? Is he not
thus far yours? What, are you become an other man, Bernardus Sermon. 66. super
Cantica. VValde^ses. AEneas Slyuius Bohem. Histor. cap. 35.
then men take you to be? The Apostolikes denied Purgatory, as you do. The
Waldenses in many points agree iumpe with you, or rather you with them. They
renounced the Popes Primacie, they condemned Purgatory, they called Images, by
the name of Idolles, they contemned holy Water, and such other good and
wholesome ceremonies, they reproved the Religion of the Begging friars, with
such like, al as ye do: I marvel therefore why they are none of yours.

Verily Aeneas Syluius says, that John Huss John Hu^
(whom in the next line you allow for yours) embraced the wicked sect of the
Waldenses. And why then are not the one yours, as well as the other? As for
Imagebreakers, Imagebreakers.
if they be not yours, whose are they? They were no Papists (your self will
confess I trow) that have overthrown Images in England, and in Scotland, in
France, and now of late here in sundry places of the low Country. They be
yours, they be yours M. Jewel, and such others a great many more: with whom in a
rueful procession ye are like to join, singing Vae with them, if ye repent
not, and sing an other song.

Jewel. Page 48. Of John Huss, Hierome of Prage, and Berengarius, and other
like virtuous learned men, we have no cause to be ashamed.


Harding.
The more verily is your shame, if any spark of shame be leafte in you. Albeit
no great wonder. For it must needs be true, that the wise man says: Prouer.
18.
Impius cu^ in profundum venerit, contemnit. When the wicked man is come unto
the bottom (of wickedness) then he passes of nothing. Neither the Whoare at
length takes shame of any her filthiness what soever. And therefore it is
said of such pastshame wretches, Ierem. 3.
Frons mulieris meretricis facta est tibi. Thou have gotten thee a whoares
forehead.

Though I have small hope of any good to be done with you, yet for the sake of
others, thus I may say unto you. You denied a little before the Waldenses to
be yours. But the Hussites followed altogether the Waldenses, as witnesses
Aeneas Syluius: Therefore the Hussites also ought to be none of yours. Yet you
are not (you say) ashamed of John Hus. I marvel now the less, if you be not
ashamed of your so many, so notorious, and shameless Untruths, uttered before
in your Reply, and confuted by diverse, but now repeted and renewed again, the
Confutation thereof utterly dissembled. The most shameful heresies of Hus, of
vvho^ M. Ievvel professes him self not to be ashamed Alpho^sus de Castro
aduersus haereses lib. 6. Council. Constant. post 45. Sess.


But if you mean good faith, and that you are not in deed ashamed of John
Hus, neither of Hierome of Prage, then tell us I pray you, how like you these
heresies of theirs? First, of John Hus, who with the old Donatistes affirmed,
that in the Church are only good men? Are you not ashamed of that heresy so
clearly, and so fully confuted by S Augustine? Again, of that other, to
pounish one that is excommunicate with the secular sword, is a pharisaical
tyranny.

Allow you also that dissolute Heresy? And if you be not ashamed to profess
this Doctrine, why are ye not then ashamed to do that, which is repugnant to
the Doctrine ye profess? For how say you? Do ye not excommunicate such as
will not condescende unto your pestiferous opinions, and refuse to come to your
heretical Service? And then further, if they stand constantly in the
mainetenance of the truth, as it becomes men that have the fear of God
before their eyes, not yielding to your great, but vain threats: do ye not
cause their persons to be apprehended by the secular officer, and to be cast in
prison, and then in your wicked, and bloody preachinges cry ye not out unto
the prince to draw her sword? Are ye not (I say) ashamed thus to fight with
your selves, teaching one thing, and doing the clean contrary?

Alphonsus lib. 12. Council. Co^stantien.
Thirdely, have ye no shame of that other heresy, that who soever is in deadly
sin, is neither king, nor civil Magistrate, nor Bishop? How like you of
this brutish heresy? Have you no cause to be ashamed of John Hus? I let pass
other his infamous heresies. Joan. Cochlaeus. Hus said Mass a little before he
was burnt. Supra. ca. 3. fol. 83. Hierom of Prage.


But if you be not ashamed of any of his heresies, how say you to that he said
Mass, as it is proved before, and that but a few days before he was burnt?
Be ye neither ashamed of that? What is that ye will be ashamed of in an heretic
then, being neither ashamed of his heresies, nor of that he judges well of the
Mass?

But now touching Hierome of Prage, have you no cause M. Jewel to be ashamed of
him? Verily it appears by the Council of Constance, Council. Constant. Sessio
21. Sessi. 19.
he held and professed al and singular the heresies of Wiclef, and John Hus.
He recanted once openly, and abiured them al, as Cranmar did in Oxforde, but
after reuolting again to his former vomit, he was burned for an Heretic,
Hierom of Prage, recanted, and returned to his vomit.
as Cranmar was. If you think it no shame to be an heretic as Hierome was,
yet I trow ye think it a shame to recante, as he did. How be it I may doubt
thereof, for your self have trodden that trace, and perhaps may once more
be brought to tread it again, and like it is, that you will not be ashamed of
it, and to reuolte, once back again: so little shame is in you. Go your way
then M. Jewel, It booteth not us to go about to make you blush. For I
perceive, there is nothing, whereof lightly you will be ashamed: such a
shameless grace you have.

As for Berengarius, Berengarius.
of whom likewise you say, you have no cause to be ashamed; I marvel the
less, considering the natural property of heretics, which is to increase
their errors daily, and to proceed from il to worse. Luther the first brocher
of your religion was ashamed of Berengarius, and would never condescende to
Carolostadius, though five years continually he travailed with him to bring him
to be of Berengarius opinion. Flacius Illyricus with his fellows of Magdeburg,
all the Protestants of Wittenberg, of Lipsia, of the upper Saxonies, Nicolaus
Gallus, George Mayor, Westphalus, Brentius, and diverse others, whom your self
account for Gospellers, for the true, godly, and right believers, are al to
this day ashamed of Berengarius, and be at defiance with you, and them of his
opinion, and do in their writings, and preachinges plainly condemn your
Sacramentarie Heresy, of which Berengarius was the first publisher.

Tom. 2. fo. 260.
Luther condemns the heresy of Berengarius revived by Zuinglius in these
words. I must needs eschew, and avoid them, as men condemned by their own
judgment. Neither may I join with them in any means, by letters, In parua
Confess. de Caena Domini. In publica Confess. pura doctrina. Lib. co^tra 11.
sectas. and lib. co^t. 9. sectas. In the book in tituled Recta fides de Caena
Domin.
nor by writings, nor by word, nor by deed, as the Lord has commanded,
whether he be Zuenckfeldius, or Zuinglius, or what soever he be called. And in
an other place he condemns by name Zuinglius, Carolostadius, and
Oecolampadius, with all their diverse, and dissonant sacramentarie heresies.

Nicolaus Amsdorffius a famous Superindent in Germany says thus plainly.
Thirdely we condemn the Sacramentaries, Zuinglius, and his fellows.

The public write of the princes of Mansfeld, and of the younger princes of
Saxony, does reckon up in the roll of condemned Heretics, the
Sacramentaries by name.

Ioachimus Westphalus says: No false doctrine is so far spread, none with
such labor, and hypocrisy is defended, ^o^e has more beguiled the world,
then this false doctrine of the blessed Sacrament meaning Caluines own
doctrine learned first of Berengarius, of whom you have no cause, you say, to
be ashamed.

If Heretics of your own school can not make you ashamed of Berengarius, and
his doctrine, what say you to the great General Council holden at S. John
Laterane in Rome under Innocentius the third, Counsel of Laterane.
thereof called Concilium Lateranense? That Council was an universal assembly
out of al parts of Christendom, Platina in Innoce^tio tertio. The great
Assembly of Laterane Council.
as well out of the Greek Church, as out of the Latin. The Patriarchs of
Constantinople, and Jerusalem, were there present.

Archebishoppes were there threescore and ten, Bishops four hundred and
twelve, Abbates, and Priores more then eight hundred. There were at that
Council the Ambassadors of both Emperors, both of the West Church, and of
the East, also of the kings of Jerusalem, of France, of Spain, of England,
and of Cyprus. In this Council, so general and universal, the Heresy of
Berengarius was condemned, Council. Lateran. Cap. 1.
and the doctrine of Transubstantiation by occasion of his heresy exactly and
fully discussed, was by general consent of al plainly and clearly confirmed.
If the Sentence, Consent, and Accord of the whole universal Church can move
you M. Jewel, then have you good cause to be ashamed of Berengarius, whose
heresy, was in so full, ample and General a Council condemned, as none in this
world was ever greater.

If all this move you not, yet let Berengarius him self, De Consecrat. Did. 2.
Ego Bere^garius.
whom you esteem so much, move you to be ashamed of his doctrine, of the
which he him self was so much ashamed at length, and not only in judgment
openl^ recanted, but also (...) the hour of his Death full bitterl^ and heartily
repented him self thereof, as by sides other^ Guilelmus Malmesburiensis
records, saying thus.

Guilelmus Malmesburiensis de gastis Anglorum. lib. 3.
Ipse Berengarius die Epiphaniorum moriens, g^^i^^^ producto, recordatus quot
miseros quondam adolescen^, primo err^ris ^al^t^ secta infecerit: body
(inquit) in die Apparitionis suae apparabit mihi Dominus meus Jesus Christus,
vel propter poenitentiam, vt spero ad gloriam, vel propter alios, vt time^, ad
poenam. Nos sane credimus; post benedictionem Ecclesiasticam, illa Mysteria
esse verum corpus, and sanguinem saluatoris, adducti and veteris Ecclesiae
authoritate, and maltis no^iter ostensis miraculis.

Bereng^rius himself, as he lay dying, upon the Epiphanie day (which we call
Twelfth day) and with heavy be wailing called unto remembrance, how many
miserable persons he had infected with his heresy in youth at the first
heat^ of the Sacramentarie Error, spoke these words: He alluded to the word
Epiphanie which signifies appearing, or reueali^g.
This day my Lord Jesus Christ, being the day of his appearance, shall
appear unto me, either to glory, as I trust, because it repents me of my
heresy, or to pounishment, as I fear me, for the sake of others (whom I have
seduced). What so ever it shall please God to do with me, Truly I believe,
that after Consecration used in the Church, those Mysteries are the true
Body, and Blood of our Savior, being persuaded both by the authority of the
ancient Church, and by many Miracles showed of late years. Thus ye may see,
how so ever ye be not ashamed of Berengarius, that yet Berengarius is ashamed
of you.

Jewel. Page 48. But as for your doctrine, because it is only of your selves,
therefore it falls daily, and is now forsaken the world through.


Harding. Our doctrine is the doctrine of the Fathers; not of our selves,
neither is the same forsaken.
The Catholic doctrine, The.16. Chapt.
The Fathers of the first. 600. years rejected. In institut. Cap. 18. de coena
Domi. Iacobus Acontius. Stratage^. Satan. lib. 6.
which you call ours, has been by your own Confession welneare a thousand
years old. I call your Confession, your solemn prescription of the first.600.
years. For prescribing the one, ye renounce the other. It can not therefore
seem to be of us, that live now, which by your own Confession has been so
ancient. Howbeit it is evident, the first 600. years stand as fully for us,
as do the later. Therefore John Calvin accuses the first. 600. years of
Iudaisme, and of Jewish superstition, namely in the matter of the blessed
Sacrifice. Therefore Iacobus Acontius one of your own side, in his book
dedicated to the Queen's Majesty plainly misliketh, and reproves such, as
offer to be tried by the ancient Fathers, calling it perniciosissimam,
omninoque fugiendam consuetudinem, a most pernicious custom, and altogether to
be avoided.

Therefore M. Nowel (as this Acontius) calls it a Valde amplum spatium.
Novvel in the preface of his first book.
large scope, to try matters by the Fathers. And he that has uttered so much
blasphemy against the Cross of Christ, for his part also protests
plainly, In the book against the Cross.
that he will not be tried by the Fathers. And why all this M. Jewel? Mary they
know ^ight well, that by the Fathers you are condemned, and that our doctrine by
them is clearly established. W^ therefore have learned of our Ancestors all that we teach. We have invented nothing of our selves. Your beginning is
known, and is yet in man's memory. When Papistrie (as you call it) began,
you can never (...) for your life, The Gospelle^ I shall never be ha^ble to
show, when Papistrie began.
otherwise then with the beginning of Christ's gospel. Show once M. Jewel,
when, in what age, in what place, Country, City, or Church, of whom, under
what Pope, Emperor, or Prince, Papistrie began: and then say hardely it is
our Doctrine, and only of our selves.

Except you show this, your lie will seem palpable. If ye have ought to show,
for the worship of your cause, bring it forth, be it but one sentence, or one
half sentence.

The Catholic doctrine untruly reported by M. Ievvel to be forsaken all the
world through.
In like manner, a sensible, and a palpable lie it is, that you add, that our
doctrine is forsaken the world through. No M. Jewel, not so. Gods holy name be
blessed, it is not yet forsaken al England through. We know it right well, we
praise God for it, and reioise therein. You know it also, and it greeueth you
at the harteful deeply, and specially that diverse have returned from your
lying Religion to the truth of the Catholic Faith, even in these last
years, when ye seemed to have most prospered in the sight of the world. Such
is the nature of truth, the more it is pressed down, the more it rises up, A
lie impudently avouched by M. Ievvel.
and shows it self.

Had our doctrine ben forsaken the world through, your Gues I trow in these
low Countries, and your Huguenotes in France had prospered better.

But what will not you stick to avouch, which so boldly, yea so impudently do
auouche such a known Untruth? Untruth? Nay so sensible, and so palpable a
Lie. The Catholic doctrine, not only contineweth in Italy, France, Spain,
Portugal, and Germany, in whole Countries, and Territories, but even where
your breth^^n are thickest, there lack not Catholics right many, and
perfitte among them. Yea the Catholic doctrine is preached, and published
among heathens, and Infidelles to the great glory of God, and to the great
despite of the devil, and his ministers, as it well appears by your self M.
Jewel, and by your words which before I have touched.

If our doctrine be forsaken the world through, where are we M. Jewel, against
whom you write so busily? Are we out of the world? Where was the late general
Council, with so many Bishops, learned Doctors, and Princes Ambassadors
there present, al condemning your heinous heresies? Were they al out of the
world, or have they al now changed their mind, and yielded unto you? Maximilian
the noble Emperor, King Philip of Spain with all his so sundry, and so large
Dominions, besides the kingdom of Naples, and Sicilia, the Dukedomes of
Millan, Burgundy, Brabant, Holland, Zeland, Friseland, Gelderland, the
Counties of Tyrol, Flaunders, Henault, and Artois, Charles king of France, the
kings of Portugal, and of Polonia, The states and Princes of Italy, with also
many Dukedomes, Free Cities, States of Christendom besides, al yet remaining
Catholic, are they al out of the world? I can not tell, whether I may call
this lie, more impudent, or more foolish.

Jewel. Page 50. Neither there any sufficient cause to the contrary, but that
Ber^^garius, John VViclef, John Hus, D. Luther, Zuinglius, O^colampadius, and
others, either for learning, or for truth, or for i^^^^ment in the Scriptures
or for Antiquity, may well and safely b^ compared with Lanfrancus, Guimundus,
Abbas Cluniacensis, Tho^^^ Waldensis, John Fisher, and others.


Harding. What difference there is between these holy Fathers and those
pestilent Heretics.
The. 17. Chapt.
No, no Sir, the odds is exceeding great. Berengarius, Wiclef, Hus, Luther,
Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, non comunicabant oi^bus gentibus, and illis
Ecclesiis Apostolico labor fundatis, Aug. cont. Lit. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 16.
did not communicate with all nations, and those Churches, which were founded by
the Apostles labor. Nay by the full and intier consent of al nations
Christened, assembled in general Councelles, they were al condemned.
Berengarius in the great general Council of Lateran. Anno. 1205. Wiclef, and
Hus in the general Council of Constance, Anno. 1413. Luther, and the rest,
among whom you may take your self for one, in the late General Council of
Trent. Contrariewise the other Fathers communicated with the whole corpse of
Christendom then living. They were Bisshoppes, and Doctors of that age,
lineally succeding in the Catholic doctrine, even from the Apostles, and the
Apostolic men.

Again these said Fathers are accounted and placed in honorable roumes, as
Lumina Ecclesiae, lights of the Church in all Chronographies, yea made and
written by the Protestants them selves, namely by Henricus Pantaleon of Basil,
and others of your sect. Berengarius, on the other side with all the rest, are
noted in the Chronographies drawn out by Protesta^tes them selves in the rewe
and line of condemned heretics.

Thirdly what comparison is there between lewd lecherous Luther, and that holy
Bishop, B. Fisher.
and blessed Martyr of God Doctor Fisher late Bishop of Rochester? The very
writings of both extant, do declare the diversity of their spirits. Luther
takes his pleasure in Ribaudrie, belketh out filthiness, breaths rancour,
raileth, and reuelleth against the honorable states of the world beyond al
measure, even against that Prince him self that afterward prepared the way
for your heresies to proceed lustily, King He^^ie the eight. The writings of
D. Fisher are well known to be modest, piththy, and learned, and at this
present highly esteemed in all Christendom. So are the writings of Lanfrancus,
Guimundus, and Cluniacensis. Of the others we have but names only leaft, except
Luther with the two others, whose writings yet no doubt if ever Gods truth
prevail, will also at length come to naught, and have the like fortune, as the
books of al other heretics have had.

Jewel. Page 50. The Councelles ye mean, are very nevve, and therefore bear
the less Authority, for that they be so many ways contrary to the old.
Certainly there is none of your errors so gross, and palpable, but by some
of your late Councelles it has benne confirmed.


Harding. The causes examined, for which M. Jewel allows not the Councelles
of these last. 500. years.
The. 18. Chapt. Guli. Malmesburie^. lib. 3. de gestis Anglorum. Guimundus and
Al. gerus lib. 1 de Sacramentis. Platina in Innocentio. 3. Tyrius lib. 21. cap.
26 Guido Carmelita de haeresibus. Platina. Palmerius Nauclerus.
Three causes then there are (if I understand you well) why you and your fellows
so saucily do condemn the General Councelles holden in Christendom within
these last five hundred years, as the Councelles holden at Toures in France,
at S. John Lateran in Rome, that under Nicolaus 2. to the number of. 114.
Bishops, this under Innocentius 3. whereunto Patriarchs, Archebisshoppes,
Bishops, and Abbates out of al parts of Christendom resorted, to the number
of a thousand two hundred fourscore and five Fathers, in all which the doctrine
of Berengarius was condemned.

Also the other General Council holden at S. John Lateran at an other time to
the number of 300. Bishops, both of the East, and the West Church, where the
Waldenses your brethren were condemned, the Council of Constance where the
doctrine of Wiclef, and Hus was condemned, to the number of. 270. Bishops,
last of all the General Council of Trent, to the number of 198. Bishops, where
sundry of your present heresies were after mature discussion with full consent
accursed, and condemned: Al these and diverse other Councelles for three causes
you contemn, and despise. First, for that they are very new: Secondly, for
that they are contrary to the old: Thirdly, because al our errors have benne
confirmed in them.

Your first cause implies a great folly, I will not say also a blasphemy. A
great folly it is for you, and your fellows to contemn the General Councelles
of late years, for that they be new, as you say, your selves and your doctrine
being yet so new, and of so little age. Verily no age, or time of Christ's
Church to any Christen man ought to seem new in respect of doctrine and
faith. If he believe the holy Scriptures describing the Church unto us, he can
not without folly in that respect call it new. The time may be new, or late,
because it comes, and passes. The Faith, and Doctrine remains one, and
the same not changed with the course of times. Now as the Word of God, and
our Faith dureth for ever, so Christ's Church being one and the same, as it
has in all ages continewed, so shall it continewe to the worlds end. This
before has benne proved, and by your self confessed. The Councelles
therefore, I mean the doctrine of Faith, opened, discussed, and agreed upon
in Councelles by the Bisshoppes, whom the holy Ghost has ordained to rule the
Church, Act. 20. Ephesians. 4.
and by the Pastors and Doctors, whom God places to the edefying of the
Church, that we be not carried away by every wind of doctrine, is not new.
The discussion, and plain opening of it may be new. The doctrine is old, as
truth it self is old. Answer to the objection of the later Cou^celles being
contrary to the old.


Your second cause, why these later Councelles do bear with you the less
Authority, is, for that, as you say, they be so many ways contrary to the
old. It had benne good reason, that, if these later Councelles be so many
ways contrary to the old, you had showed presently at the lest one of those
so many ways. Shall it be sufficient for you, to give out such a Reproach i^ a
matter of so great Importance without any prous^ at al? It had benne plain
dealing, at the lest, to have named some one Council, and to have touched some
one point, wherein that Council should be found contrary to the old. This
therefore I let pass for a Notorious, and a Reprocheful Untruth, boldly
avouched, but no way proved.

Only I advertise the Reader, that it is not possible any general Council
should be contrary to an other, in matter of faith, One Church, one faith.
and necessary doctrine. As the Church in Faith is but one, so the Faith
discussed, determined, and agreed upon in Councelles (truly representing the
whole body of the Church) is but one. As the Church can not be contrary to
it self in Faith, so general Councelles assembled in the holy Ghost can not
be contrary to them selves. Mark well good Sir what I say, One general
Council can not in a matter of faith be contrary to an other Counsel. Math. 18.
In doctrine and matter of Faith, no lawful General Council, truly and
rightly, that is, in unity and Charity, assembled, has, or can at any time
determine contrary to an other likequalified. For so the one should err in
Faith, whereby Christ's promise should seem to fail, who said: wheresoever
two or three are assembled together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. In my name, faith S. Cyprian, that is, in unity, and in the body.

That later Councelles have determined some matters, not before in other
Councelles determined, it is evident, and not denied. Heresies have caused many
matters to be more opened, then they were before, as S. Augustine notes. But
new articles of the faith be not decreed in Cou^celles. That also in matter of
manners, and of external order or government, some Councelles have done
co^tratrarie to other according to the state of times, and diversity of
circumstances, it is not denied. Yea that it be so done, sometime the state,
and present case of the Church of necessity requires it. Aug. epist. 5. ad
Marcellinum.
For which S. Augustine says notably. Non itaque verum est quod dicitur, semel
recte factum nullatenus esse mutandu^. Mutata quippe te^poris causa, quod recte
ante factu^ suerat, ita mutari vera ratio pleru^que flagitat, vt cu^ ipsi
dicant recte no^ fieri si mutetur, contra veritas clamet, recte non fieri, nisi
mutetur: quia vtru^que tunc erit rectu^, si erit pro te^poru^ varietate
diuersum. It is not therefore true which me^ say, look what thing is once well
done, it ought in no case to be changed. For the state of the time being
altered, that thing, which was well done before, good reason oftentimes
requires so to be changed, that whereas they say, it is not well done, if it be
changed, the truth on the other side cries out, It is not weldone, if it be
not changed: because both shall then be right and well, if it shall be diverse,
according to the variety of the time. But that in matter of faith or doctrine,
Answer to that M I^vvel obiecteth against the later Councils, for that by the
same al our doctrines, which they impugn, (...) con^irmed.
as is a fore said any General Council lawfully assembled was ever contrary to
the other, it is a mere untruth, and a false sclaunder, that can never be
proved.

Where you say for a third cause, or reason, why these later Councils are of
less authority, for that there is none of our errors so gross, and palpable,
but by some of them it has been confirmed, to that we answer: Quod das
accip^mus. we admit gladly, that in these late Councils al such matters as we
defend (which it pleases yau to term gross and palpable errors) have been
confirmed. We are then discharged, and the whole Church of late years is
charged. But Sir being confirmed by General Councelles, why call you them
Errors gross, and Palpable? Say you not also herein, that the whole Church
erred at that time grossly and palpably? Let us take one Council, and one Age
for example, to avoid confusion of general discoursing, and to bring this
matter to some clear issue.

The Lateran Council under Innocentius. 3.
In the year of our Lord. 1215. above three hundred years past, in the General
Council holden at S. John Laterane in Rome, with full consent of a thousand, two
hundred, fourscore and five Fathers assembled there, out of al parts of
Christendom, as well out of the East Church, as out of the West, the
Ambassadors, and Orators, as well of both Emperors being present, as also of
diverse other Kings, Princes, and States, it was by mature discussion found,
Transubsta^tiatio^.
and agreed upon, and decreed so to be believed, that in the blessed Sacrament
of the Altar, due consecration being made, the substance of bread is changed
into the substance of the body of Christ, and the substance of wine into the
substance of his blood, the word Transubstantiation (whereby much that
belongs to that mystery is by a commodious brevity expressed) was allowed,
the opinion of Berengarius was condemned. This declaration, and determination
you take to be a gross and a palpable error. For you are not ashamed you say
of Berengarius doctrine.

But Sir if this were a gross, and a palpable Error, how say you then, did al
those Patriarchs, Archebisshoppes, Bishops, Abbates, Doctors, and learned
Priests grossly and palpably err? Did the Emperors both of the Grecians,
and of the Latins, the Kings of France, Spain, England, Jerusalem, Cyprus,
whose Ambassadors and Orators were there, representing the persons of their
Princes, and people to them subject, did al these also err, with all their
people, and subjects grossly, and palpably? This question then I demand of
you M. Jewel. At these days and in that age, where was the Church of Christ?
By you al erred, grossly, and palpably. Berengarius him self, whose doctrine
was there condemned, had both recanted his Heresy, that you hold now, and was
long before that time dead and buried. There was not a man living at that
day, who was known in the unity of the Church to maineteine that doctrine,
which that Council condemned, and which you now do maintain.

Only Almaricus Almaricus.
is noted of the Chronographers to have lived about the time of that Council,
and to have holden the heresy of Berengarius. Pantaleo^. Bernard. Lutzenburg.
Gaguinus. Lib. 6. Page 48.
But M. Jewel has plainly renounced this Almaricus. He said before, of
Abailard, and Almarike, and certain other, we have no skill. They are none of
ours. Then as I said, there was not so much as one man known at that time, in
the unity of the Church, and allowed by your judgment, to have holden the
opinion by that General Council condemned. This being so, either that Council
held the unity of Christ's Church, or else at that time Christ had no
Church at al. But Christ's Church endures for ever, Page 32.
you have your felfe before confessed it: therefore we must believe, that the
said Council held the unity of Christ's Church, and the doctrine by the
Fathers of the same approved, is the true and Catholic doctrine of the
Church, and your Sacramentarie opinion to the contrary at this day, is a
condemned heresy.

In like sort by Induction we might discourse of the other General Councelles.
But this one for example may suffice, to prove, that the same points of
doctrine, which you call gross and palpable Errors, M. Ievvel acknovvlegeth all the parts of doctrine vvher in he varieth from us, to be approved by the
Church in General Councelles
fully discussed, and confirmed in Councelles, are no Errors at al, but
Catholic verities and truths, tried, and confirmed by the highest, and most
infallible Authority, that is in earth. And we have al good cause to reioise
M. Jewel, that by the force of truth ye are driven so freely, and so plainly
to grant unto us the confirmation, and Approbation of Councelles, for all such
points of doctrine, as we defend against you, termed by you, modestly, I
trow, and without heat, or choler, Gross and palpable Errors. He must
needs be a great favorer of your sect, that upon the warrant of your mouth
only, will hold the general determinations of Councelles for gross and
palpable Errors. And very gross must he be, that sees not the proud
Luciferly sprite breathing forth of you, in such a malapert and saucy
controllement of them, whom God ordained in their time to govern his Church.
No, no M. Jewel your mouth is no just measure, your pen is no right square,
your verdite is very insufficient for a dew resolution thereof to be taken in
matters of such importance.

Yet have you forsooth an example for your so doing, and that of no less man,
then S. Augustine him self. For thus you infer to justify your former
asseuerations.

Jewel. Ibidem. August. Contra Maximin lib. 3. c. 14.
Therefore we may justly say to you, as S. Augustine sometime said to
Maximinus the Arian heretic. Neither may I lay to thee the Council of Nice,
nor may thou lay to me the Council of Ariminum, either of us thinking
thereby to find prejudice against the other. But let us lay matter to matter,
cause to cause, and reason to reason, by the Authority of the Scriptures.


Harding. How little this place of S. Augustine serves M. Jewels purpose, and
how falsely by him it is alleged.
How your therefore follows M. Jewel, I see not, The.19. Chapt.
except you will reason thus: The later Councelles have confirmed gross and
palpable errors: Therefore you will not, that we should lay them against you,
no more then S. Augustine would lay the Nicene Counsel against Maximinus the
Arian. See you not how untowardly, this your therefore follows? For admit
that we granted you that the late Councelles were erroneous (which we will not,
ne may not in any wise grant you) yet you will not I trow say, that the
Nicene Council also was erroneous. If the Nicene Counsel were not erroneous,
but a most Autentike, and Catholic Council, what deduction can you make from
the one to the other? If S. Augustine had refused the Nicene Council, as you
refuse the late Councelles, that is, if he had condemned the Nicene Council of
gross and palpable errors, as you do condemn the later Councelles: then had
the example of S. Augustine served your turn, this being presupposed, that
these later Councelles were such, as you sclaunder them to be. Now S.
Augustine does not so put of the Nicene Council, either as an erroneous
Council, or as an Authority insufficient, whereby to controlle the Heretic:
but partly, because the Heretic quarelled about the name of an other Council
at Ariminum, which was no lawful Council in deed, but a schismatical, and
heretical conuenticle (and yet were there at it 800. Bishops, but for want
of Damasus the Popes confirmation, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 23. Theodor. lib. 2.
cap. 21.
as Sozomenus, and Theodoritus do write, it was accounted for none) partly
also because he saw him self sufficiently instructed otherwise with holy
scriptures to confute the Arian. For these two causes to cut of occasion of
longer brabling, and to draw the sooner to an issue (for it was in an open
disputation before a multitude, not in private writings carried to and fro) S
Augustine was content to lay aside the advantage that he had of the Nicene
Council, upon condition the Arian would brable no more of the Council of
Ariminum. This did S. Augustine of Christian policy, and by occasion then
ministered, and not as giving example to others to shake of al Authority of
Councelles, as you do M. Jewel of a great many.

Again, you require us to press you no more with the late general Councelles
of Laterane, of Consta^ce, of Florence, of Trent, and such other, as the Arian
required, not to be pressed with the Nicene: but you have not so much as the
name of one Council of your part, for the which we might by way of
composition yield our Councelles, that you also might yield yours, as the
Arians had the names of that of Ariminum, and certain other Councelles holden
by the Arians. Your heresies (God be praised) have not yet prospered so much,
that ye might have hundreds of Bishops to assemble, and determine on your
side, as the Arians had. Therefore again your case is very unlike, and your
example of S. Augustine and the Arian, very uneven. When you have Councelles on
your fitl^, that shall make for the proof of your Doctrine and for condemnation
of our Doctrine, then may this place of S. Augustine seem to serve your
purpose.

Last of al your accustomed legierdemaine in citing this place, opens your
falsehood. For in the sentence immediately going before the words by you
alleged, S. Augustine professes plainly the authority of the Nicene Council
to have been sufficient for conuincing of the Arian heretic. Thus he says. Hoc
est illud Homusion, Lib. 3. ca. 14. contra Maximinu^ Arianu^
quod in Concilio Niceno aduersus haereticos Arianos a Catholicis patribus
veritatis authoritate, and authoritatis veritate firmatum est. This is that
Doctrine concerning Homusion, which in the Council of Nice was confirmed
against the Arian heretics with the Authority of Truth, and with the Truth
of Authority. S. Augugustine falsely alleged by M. Jew. words of chief
importance quite left out. Sed nunc.
Straight after it follows, Sed nunc nec ega etc. But now at this present,
neither will I lay against thee, etc. as before you alleged it.

These words, Sed nunc. But now, which importe the doing of S. Augustine to
have been but for that present time, and occasion, and do show, that he meant
not generally to renounce the Nicene Council, those words I say M. Jewel, you
quite leafte out, alleging S. Augustines words in such sort, as if he had
peremptorily, and precisely protested, that the Arian had been no more bound to
the Authority of the Nicene Council, then he him self was bound to the
Council of Ariminum. Whereas both before he plainly protested, that the
Catholic Fathers of the Nicene Council had determined against the Arian
heretics, veritatis authoritate, and authoritatis veritate, By authority of
Truth, and by truth of Authority, and also in this later saying restrained
him self only to the time present, for cause before mentioned.

O how would that blessed Father be agreeued, if now he were a live, and saw
his sayings so peruersly wrested to a sense by him never meant, nor intended,
and that drawn to mainetenance of heresy, wherein he relented, for better
means to be had toward the Confutation of heresy?

In what credit, and estimation S. Augustine had General Councelles.
The 20. Chapt.
Howbeit this blessed Father touching the credit and authority of lawful
Councelles, not only in this present place (as it now appears) but also in
others of his works has written so circumspectly, and warely: that except
heretics were of very purpose, and mere wilfulness set to peruerte the
truth, they could never have piked out of his sayings, so much as any
color of advantage to the prejudice of Councelles. Contrariwise to the
advancement of their credit, and estimation, he writes in sundry places.
Verily to the Donatistes being confuted, and convinced by a great Assembly of
the Aphrican Bishops, August. epist. 152. Ad populu^ factionis Donatia^a.
he says, Nulla excusatio iam remansit. Nimium dura, nimium diabolica sunt
hominum corda, quae adhuc tantae manifestationi veritatis obsistunt. There
remains now no excuse. The hearts of men are too too hard, and too too
deuilish, which do yet withstand the truth so clearly opened unto them. How
much better may we say this unto you, and your companions M. Jewel, whose
heresies have been detected, and learnedly confuted in the late General Council
of Trent, unto the which out of al Catholic Countries of Christendom,
Bishopes, and the best learned men were assembled?

Again disputing against the error of S. Cyprian touching the rebaptizing of
such as heretics had baptized, in the end he concludes with the Authority
of a General Council, and protests, that he him self would not have been so
bold, as in such sort to confute that holy Fathers opinion, except he had
had the General Council on his side. These are his words. August. de Baptismo
co^tra Donatist. li. 2. cap. 4.
Nec nos ipsi tale aliquid auderemus asserere, nisi vniuersae Ecclesiae
concordissima authoritate firmati: cui and ipse sine dubio cederet, si iam illo
tempore quaestionis huius veritas eliquata, and declarata per plenarium
Conciliu^ solidaretur. Neither should we be so bold, as to affirm so much,
but that we are assuredly vpholden with the authority of the most uniform
consent of the universal Church. To the which (S. Cyprian) him self would
undoubtedly have yielded, if at that time, the truth of this question being
boulted out and made clear, had benne by a full (general) Council established.

In like manner he urges the Pelagians, saying. August. Co^tra Iulianum.li. 3.
cap. 1.
Vestra vero apud competens Iudicium communiu^ episcoporum causa modo finita
est. Nec amplius vobiscu^ agendu^ est, quantu^ ad ius examinis pertinet, nisi
vt prolata^ de hac re sententia^ cu^ pace sequamini. Quod si nolueritis, a
turbulenta, vel seditiosa inquietudine cohibeamini. Your matter is now ended,
by sufficient judgment of Bishops from al parts. Neither ought we now to have
further dealing with you, as touching right of examination to be made, but now
it behooves that y^ follow peacebly the verdite, which has (...) pronounced
of this matter. And if ye will not, yet that ye be restrained from al
troblesome, and seditious disorder.

August. Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium.
Last of al speaking of General Councelles, he says, Quorum est in Ecclesia
saluberrima authoritas, their Authority in the Church is most wholesome.

And because M. Jewel finds him self agreeued wit^ the later Councelles, and
is offended with the newness of them, and claims by former Councels, and
prete^deth to follow the Apostles own Traditions: let us see, what S. Augustine
(of whom he would so feign borow help, if it would be) will say for him.
Whereas the Donatistes for their rebaptizing of such as the Catholics had
baptized, alleged the Apostles Tradition, and neglected a late General Counsel
assembled against their opinion, holding upon a more ancient Tradition, even
such as came from the Apostles: to them in this case S. Augustine says thus.
Nec quisquam dicat, August. li. 4. cap. 7. de Baptis. co^tra Donatistas.
quod accepimus ab Apostolis, hoc sequimur. Quato robustiuo nu^c dicimus, Quod
ecclesiae co^suetudo semper tenuit, quod haec disputatio dissuadere no^ potuit,
et quod plenariu^ Concilium co^firmauit, hoc sequimur? Neither let any man say
(as the Donatistes said, and as Protestants now say) we follow that, which we
have received of the Apostles. How much more stronger is that we say now, we
follow that which the Custom of the Church has evermore holden, which all this reasoning to and fro, has not ben able to pluck out of men's hearts, and
last of al, which a full General Council has confirmed? So highly esteemed S.
Augustine those things, August. li. 2. de Baptism. cap. 9.
which M. Jewel of al other makes lest account of.

And again he says, Concilia posteriora prioribus apud poster^s
praep^nuntur. Later Councils preferred before the former, for what cause.
The posterity prefers the Later Councelles before the Former. Not as
though the later should be contrary to the former, but because in the later
Councils the Church is always better instructed, through the contradictions of
heretics, by occasion whereof matters are more exactely searched, discussed,
and more clearly opened. Like as the flint stoanes being knokte hard together
fire flies out, and corn the more ye fifte it, the purer it is tried: so
truth by our adversaries Contradictions is beaten out, and doubteful points
by long discussion, and search are made plain and clear.

Therefore again he says, Ibidem.li. 2. cap. 3.
Ipsa plenaria Concilia saepe priora posterioribus emendantur, cum aliquo
experimento rerum aperitur, quod clausum erat, and cognoscitur quod latebat.

The very former general Counsels are oftentimes corrected by the later
Counsels, when as by some trial of ma^^er that thing is opened, which before
was close shut up and that is known, which before lay hid.

Ye^ and this is the chief and best fruit, The benefit and fruit of
heresies. August. in Psalm. 54. super versum, Diuisi sunt prae ira, etc.
that heresies bring unto the Church, as the same S. Augustine otherwhere
declares, where he says: The matter of the blessed Trinity was never well
discussed, until the Arian^ barked against it. The Sacrament of Penance was
never thoroughly handled, until the Nouatians began to withstand it. Neither
the cause of Baptism was well discussed, until the rebaptizing Donatistes
arose, and troubled the Church. Thus M. Jewel, if you give ear unto S.
Augustine, whose example you seem to claim by, you shall learn of him not to
refuse, and renounce the authority of General Councels, but to obey them, and
to yield dew reverence unto them, yea though they be later, and as you call
them, new.

Truth drove M. Jewel to justify al our Doctrine, wherein he dissenteth from
us.
The 21. Chap.
This odds therefore remains between you and us, that our doctrine, yea every
point thereof in cotrouersie now, is (by your own confession) approved by the
later General Councelles: and so we defend no doctrine of our own, nor
maintain any profane Novelties of our own devise, but we follow Saluberrimam
authoritatem, the most wholesome and sound authority (as S. Augustine terms
it) of General Councels: that is to say, we follow the voice of the whole
body of Christ's Church (most truly represented in Councelles) the voice of
Christ's spouse, yea the voice of Christ him self, speaking to us by his
Church, and so speaking, that he wills him, which hears not the Church,
to be accounted for a Heathen, Matt. 18.
and a Publicane. Contrariewise your Doctrine M. Jewel, is not only not
authorized in General Councelles, but also is clearly condemned by the same,
as for example (that one may serve in steed of many) the General Council of
Laterane condemns your Sacramentarie heresy.

Yet we thank not you, but the truth, that you have this much confessed for
us. And as S. Augustine said of the Donatistes, so we say most truly of you:
Vt illa omnia vel loquendo, vel legendo, pro causa nostra promerent, atque
propalarent, Aug. contra Donatist. post collat. ca. 34.
veritas eos torsit, non charitas inuitauit. That the Donatistes should utter
and bring forth either by talk, or by allegation out of a book, al those
things for behoof of our matter, the truth forced them, it was not any
charity that invited them. The truth, I say M. Jewel, not any love you bear
to our cause, forced you to confess, that there is none of our errors (so you
term sundry weighty points of the Catholic Faith) that by some of the late
Councelles, has not benne confirmed. We take that you give us right gladly, in
as much, as it declares you to be convinced by witness of your own mouth,
For if the points of Faith and Religion, wherein ye dissent from us, be
approved and confirmed by authority of the Church in General Councelles, who
sees not, what a good staff we have to lean unto? And who is that Christian
man, which will not humbly believe the same?

The Third Book contains a Detection of certain Lies, Cauilles,
Sclaunders, etc. uttered by M. Jewel in the second part of his pretensed
Defense.
Jewel. Page 88. Where ye fantasy that the Body of Christ in the Sacrament
has in it, self neither. Form, nor Proportion, nor Limitation of place, nor
Distinction of parts, S. Augustine tells you, Spatia locorum toll, etc.
Take away from Bodies Limitation of place, and the Bodies will be no where:
Augu. ad Dardanu^ epist. 57.
And because they be nowhere, they will be nothing. Take away from Bodies the
qualities of Bodies, there will be no place for them to be in: and therefore the
same Bodies must needs be no Bodies at al. Hereof we may conclude, that the
Body of Christ, which you have imagined to be contiened grossly, and carnally
in the Sacrament, for as much as by your own confession, it has neither
Quality, nor Quantity, nor Form, nor place, nor proporti^^ of Body,
therefore by S. Augustines doctrine, it is no Body.


Harding. Answer to the Objection made out of S. Augustine to Dardanus against
the real presence of Christ's Body in the Blessed Sacrament.
The. 1. Chapt.
THE great confidence you have in S. Augustines two sayings in his 57. Epistle
to Dardanus, may much better serve your turn to skirmish with Brentius a
Master of youres, Brentius the author of the heresy of the Vbi. quetaries.
and a graund Captain among the Lutherans, who spares not by public write
to teach the world, that Christ's Humanity is every where as his Divinity
is, then against the Catholic doctrine of Christ's Bodily presence in the
Blessed Sacrament, wherein no such error is allowed, that Christ's humanity
should be every where with his Godhead, but it is avouched, that Christ by his
omnipotent power, does make his Body present in as many places, as the Blessed
Sacrament is duly, Natural qualities suspe^ded from Bodies by Gods special
power. Exodus 3. Daniel. 3. Exodus 14.
and rightly consecrated.

You are not ignorant M. Jewel, but that you know, that God by his special
power has suspended from diverse sorts of Bodies, sundry natural Qualities,
as he did suspende the action of burning from the Fire, as well in the Bushe
that Moses saw, as in the fiery Fournaice, where the three Children were
saved: the fluxilitie of water both in the Red Sea being divided, and giving
passage to the Children of Israel safely to goo through, and in the River of
Iordane: Iosue. 3. Matthew. 4. Exodus 34. 3. Reg. 19.
the very force of natural heat both in his own Body, and in Moses, and
in Helias Bodies, when they fasted forty days, and forty nights: the peise,
and the weight of his own body, when he walked upon the water: Matt. 14.
the grossness of his own Body in his Transfiguration. Matt. 17.


If such qualities, which do naturally follow the state of al Bodies, may
for a time be suspended, or taken away by Gods Omnipotent power: The very
point of the Answer.
why may not Extension of place, and Limitation, which are mere Accidental to
al Bodies, be as well suspended? Bodies doubtelesse leafte to their own Common
nature, have always the state, that S. Augustine speaks of in his Epistle to
Dardanus. But the precious Body of our Savior made present in the Sacrament,
not by common natural action apperteining to Bodies, but by the special working
of God Omnipotent, far passing al natural power, is not bound to that state,
or condition.

Defense page 88.
And whereas M. Jewel thinks, I must take a day to answer a peeuishe
question that he moves, why Christ's Body in Form, may not as well be in
many places, as the same in Substance: to this question I answer without such
great delaie as he appoints, that there is no Contradiction implied,
including any impossibility to God, if I should grant, that one Body, as
well in Form, as in Substance, might be in diverse places at once by Gods
incomprehensible power.

The true meaning of S. Augustines place to Dardanus.
But the Controversy at this time lies not betwixt us for the right
understanding of S. Augustines place to Dardanus, what may be by Gods
omnipotent power: But in what state, and Condition the Body of Christ is now,
being united with the Godhed, whether it be only by the force of that
Conjunction every where, as the Godhed is. To this Question S. Augustine
answers, that it is not. For notwithstanding it be united with the Godhed,
yet thereupon it follows not, it should match the Godhed in being euerywhere
with the Godhed, which error your graund Captain Brentius is not afraid to
defend. Against whom for the refutation of that point, Peter Martyr at
variance with Bre^tius.
Peter Martyr of condemned memory, though a great God among you, has written
a Pamphlet. So has Bullinger: and Brentius again, against Bullinger. Whereby
the world may see, how your Captains, and your great Gods do disagree
among them selves.

The voice that is one in the origin, Example of the Voice.
pronounced by one man, if you will believe Priscian that ancient learned
Grammarian, is a very Body: and yet the self same one voice, is driven into
the ears of a thousand persons at once, as experience teaches you by the
common course of Nature. And yet you will needs appointe the Omnipotent power
of God such limits, as please you. Whether the Voice be a Body, or a
Quality, to our purpose it makes no matter. If common Nature be hable to
drive one and the self same Quality into diverse places at one time, I trust
men will have grace to see, that Gods working, who is the Author of Nature,
may as well use Bodies in the like case, and specially his own glorified
Body, being united with the Godhed.

Aristotle, who travailed al together in the search of Nature, in his
disputation against them, that would needs establish Vacuum, Vacuum.
Successiue motion.
saw no other causes of Successiue Motion, but only the Form of the Body
moved, the resistance of the Body, through the which the Motion was made, and
the strength, or power of the Mouer, which being limited, might at length be
wearied. These grounds being laid, he concludes against the defenders of
Vacuum, that if their opinion were true, it would follow, that one Body might
be in diverse places at once, for lack of resistance in the Body, through the
which Motion is made.

If Aristotle by natural reason saw none other causes of Successiue Motion,
but such as I have told, and for the lack of one of them, saw, that one
Body might be in diverse places at once: what would that great Philosopher have
laid of the state of Glorious Bodies, if he had benne endewed with the
knowledge of them, in whose motion he should have found the lack of al his
causes, no hinderance nor let in the Form and Figure of the body
glorified, to move as it will, no hinderance nor let in the Body through which
the Motion must pass, as it appears in the quick passage of our Saviors
Body through the doors remaining shut, John. 20.
without let or hinderance, no weariness in the power of the glorified Body
to move as long as it will? If al glorified Bodies by the lack of the
impedimentes that make Successiue Motions, can not be stayed by all wit that
Aristotle had, but that they may be in diverse places at once: what shall men
think of the glorified Body of our Savior, which is now knitte in unity of
person with the Godhed?

Thus I must send M. Jewel being destitute of faith to Aristotle, to learn
wit of him. Besides this, since both the ancient Fathers that wrote within
the first six hundred years, and al Catholic Writers, that wrote since that
time, do plainly testify, that the Body of our Savior is verily, and
really present in the Sacrament of the Altar, as it is well proved by M. D.
Saunder, and others, to whom I marvel M. Jewel answers not: every simple
witted man must needs conceive, that al such Writers must also agnise the
very real presence of our Saviors precious Body in as many places, as the
Sacrament is rightly consecrated. So that now I had more need to take a day
to awake M. Jewel out of his deep dreams of gross ignorance, and
infidelity, then to consider better how to answer so Childishe a question,
wherein no Christian man sees any difficulty. The Prophet tells you the
way to understand, what I say, and also that the way, that you take, shall
never bring you to understand, what our Religion means, where he says: Nisi
credideritis, non intelligetis: Unless ye believe, Esai. 7. in 70.
ye shall not understand. Let faith be in the foundation M. Jewel, and
thereupon may you build all that is good. You place in your foundation, your
own blind reason, and make that the Controller of Faith, thereby deceiving
your self, and all that believe you.

What a Business makes M. Jewel to prove, Form. Page 89.
that the term, Form, does signify Substance? As though a term, that has
many significations, as the term, Form has, ought always to be taken for
that signification, which he will appointe, and not for that which aggreeth
best with the right meaning of the Authors mind. No doubt Fulgentius never
meant to take the term, Form, in such a signification, that should exclude
Christ's bodily Presence from the blessed Sacrament: in the doing whereof he
should have benne contrary both to him self, Terms that have diverse
significations, are not to be taken at pleasure, but according to the Tradition.
and to the Faith of the Catholic Church, at that time universally confessed.

Look in the Scriptures, there shall you find diverse Terms, that have many
significations. If Heretics might have the liberty that M. Jewel claims,
to appointe in every place, where any such Term is used, what signification
the same must have: they might easily overthrow all the grounds of our Faith.
The Article of the Resurrection of our fles^^ were quite abolished, 1. Cor. 15.
because it is written, Car^ and sangui^ regnum Dei non possidebunt, Flesh and
blood shall not possess the kingdom of God. Romans 8.
Again, Qui in carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: they who are in flesh,
can not please God. In these places, and such others, if flesh and blood
should be taken for the substance, and not for the vicious motions, and filthy
acts, that rise out of the flesh, no man should be saved, no flesh should be
partaker of eternal life, contrary to holy Jobs Confession and belief, Job.
19.
who said, Et in carne mea, videbo Deum. And in mine own Flesh I shall see
God: Where Flesh is taken for the Substance, and not for the corruption of the
Flesh. Psalm. 83.
Cor meum, and caro mea exultauerunt in Deum viuum, My heart, and my flesh
reioised in the living God: Verbum Caro factum est, Joan. 1.
the word was made flesh: Where Flesh is taken for the Substance. If then
any Heretic would be so froward, as arrogantly to stand in Defense, that, as
Flesh is taken in these later places for the substance, even so it must be
taken in the former, as M. Jewel plaieth for the signification of this term,
Form: Where were the Resurrection of our flesh to life eternal? Yea where
were our Salvation? Where were our Faith? 1. Cor. 15.
Inanis esset fides vestra, inanis praedicatio nostra: Your faith were void,
our preaching also were void, says S. Paul.

Infinite such places might be brought of Terms, that have many
significations, whose signification for every place, if M. Jewel had full
authority to appointe at his pleasure, to serve best his own turn: our Faith
would soon be quite overthrown. For very shame let M. Jewel from
henceforthe leave dallying in matters of Faith by Equivocation of Terms. The
Counterfeit personage he bears, should put him in mind of more sadness,
honesty, and plainer dealing.

Be it, that the Lady Interpreter, The Lady Interpreter. Page 89.
whom you do praise so much be of such learning, virtue, and gravity, yea
hable to ouermatche your self also, if you put not on your saddest
countenance: yet shall you alwaie find her guilty of unwomanly Presumption,
either in translating that, which she understood not, or, if she understood
it, in that she stepte a wrye for the nonce, using one signification of the
word, when the author means the other. In which case I might with more
reason, and right reprehend her, not only of Presumption, but also of Malice,
in that she would deceive the ignorant Reader, then you might reprehende the
lack of manly Modesty in me, in warning the Reader to take heed. An
impudent, and filthy corruption, and falsifying of the words of the
Confutation. VVil ye see, how this man dissembleth a fault?


Jewel. Page 89. I vvil not here tell you M. Harding, how lovvdely you have
demeaned your self toward her, whom it likes you so often, and so
scornefully to call the Lady Interpreter. etc. I beseech you, call your words
again to mind, if you can without blushing: So roughly to handle so soft a
creature. This Phrase of speech your very friends have mutche misliked, and,
as it is in deed, so in Plain words they call it Ruffianrie, a virtue,
although match agreeable unto your profession, yet unmeet for a man either of
learning, or of sober wisdom. But this fault, among many others, as I have
said, I vvil dissemble.


Harding. M. Iewelles impudency, and Ruffianly corruption detected.
The.2. Chapt.
You will not here tell me you say, how lewdely I have demeaned my self toward
my Lady A. B. what shall I call her? For the name of my Lady Interpreter, likes
you not. Yea God knows, such Charity is suddeinly blown upon this man,
that, if he knew any lewd fault in me, he would conceele it, and spare my
honesty. I beseech God so to keep me by his grace from sin, and shame, as
I were sure by him, both in books, and pulpites to be proclaimed lewd, and
dishonest, if he knew any lewd, or dishonest act done by me. And whereas you
pretend, you will not tell me: ye tell al, and more then al. But tell on in Gods
name M. Jewel, and save your belly from bursting, say the worst ye can, if you
can say any thing without a lie.

Mark Reader how this Ruffia^rie is proved.
As for this Ruffianrie, wherewith you charge me, il be he thought of, that il
thinks. In good sooth before you wrote these impure words, I did not so
much as once think of the Filth, which your filthy pen, ruled by
commandment of your filthy heart, has here most filthily uttered. God be
thanked, that your Searchers, and Promotours, have not met with all the Books
of my Confutation of your Apology.

There the Reader shall find these very words, whereby your malice, Confutat.
fol. 41, a.
and impudency may appear to all the world. Confutation. Whether I may
charge her with so heinous a crime (of a falsified translation) or no, I
doubt. Perhaps as she passes the bounds of womanly state, in presuming to
meddle so far in these perilous matters, allowed now by a few of the new
English Church, and disallowed always by the whole ancient Church of
Christendom (if the translation be hers, and not an others set forth in her
name): so may I seem to forgete courtesy, thus roughly to blame so soft a
creature.

What Ruffianrie M. Jewel can you find in these words of mine? Why should
any friend of mine mislike this Phrase of speech? Why may not I call them to
mind, without any blushing at al? In deed as you have falsely reported them,
altering one word for an other, whereas I wrote, I may seem to forgete
courtesy, thus roughly to blame so soft a creature, your false report being,
so roughly to handle so soft a creature, in phantasiastical headdes, and
unclean imaginations, it might breed an opinion of some unchaste meaning. But
if your Euangelical sincerity could have suffered my words to stand, as they
were by me written, if you had not changed the honest word, blame, which I
used, The honest word, blame, by M. Ievvel charged into the filthy word,
handle.
into the word of dishonest meaning, handle, which you would have men believe,
that I used: how should there have risen of my words any opinion of il
meaning? Verily M. Jewel, in your alteration of my words, and placing in the
steed of the word (blame) the word (handle) that seemed to you to serve
better for your filthy purpose to disgrace mine honesty if you could, there
appears an evident argument, both of false, and also of malicious dealing.

Your very friends must needs mislike with you, if they have any honesty, for
this your dishonest handling. You are never hable to avoid it, cast upon it
what colors you can. What would you stick to speak of me, were I dead, that
are not ashamed thus to belie me, being a live, and occupied in showing to the
world, with what impudent lies ye blotte your papers? Yet of al your foul
shifts, this is one of the fowlest, and such as in common persons, is called,
you know what, I am a shamed to speak it, you are not a shamed to play the
part.

The Apology part. 2. Cap. 1. Division. 2. Page 90.
We believe that the holy Ghost, who is the third person in the holy
Trinity, is very God: not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding from
both the Father, and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto man, and
unspeakable. etc.

Confutation.
Co^fut. fol. 41. b
As we acknowledge this article to be true and Catholic, so we demand of
these Defenders, how they can prove the same? Have they either express
Scripture for it, or any of the first four general Councelles, which be
esteemed of most authority? We are sure they have not. Therefore we do them to
understand, that if they hear us not, we advertise the Readers that fear God,
and love his truth, that al truth necessarily to be believed is not expressed
in the Scripture, and that other Councelles be to be received besides the four
first, which are allowed in England by Parliament, Left out by M. Ievvel.
as that wherein this point touching the Proceeding of the holy Ghost has
benne defined. Council. Lugdunen. and Council. Florentin. sub Eugenio. 4. as also
other definitions of the Church, when upon a new doubt rising, an old Truth
is by later publications declared. etc. *

Jewel. Page 90. Consider M. Harding, notvvithstanding ye evermore tell us of
Fathers, Fathers, yet how contrary oftentimes, ye are in judgment to the same
Fathers. You say, that the Godhed of the holy Ghost, can not be proved by
express words of the Scriptures, and thereof ye say, ye are right sure.


Harding. That M. Jewel is not able to prove by Scripture certain truths,
which with the Catholics he teaches touching the holy Ghost.
What folly is in frowardness, The. 3. Chapt.
it appears by M. Jewels travail to prove the Godhed of the holy Ghost by
Scriptures, which I never denied, nor ever gave him such issue to prove. But
where he confesses a Trinity, and that the holy Ghost is the third person in
the holy Trinity, which holy Ghost also he confesses to proceed from the
Father, and the Son, though al these parts be true and Catholic: yet I
say he is never hable to prove any of these points by any express words of
the Scriptures. Things believed, and yet not expressly written in Scripture


Where can he find this word, Trinity, in this signification, in all
Scripture? Where has he this word, Person, in this signification in any place
of the Scripture? Where has he in any express words of the Scripture, that
the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son? Or where has he in all the Scripture, that the holy Ghost is rather the third Person in Trinity,
then the second?

These are the points that M. Jewel is charged to prove by express words of
Scripture, and not that the Holy Ghost is God. The word Transubstantiation
abhorred, because it is not found in scripture, expressly.
The word, Transubstantiation, they abhor, because it is no where found
expressly in Scripture, and yet they acknowledge the word, Trinity, and the
word, Person, both First, Second, and Third, though these words be no where
found expressly in these significations in the whole body of the Scriptures.
So can these crafty Iuglers, and false peruerters of Gods truth do, when
they be disposed, changing them selves into al manner colors like the beast
Chameleon, except the color of good meaning, and plain dealing, into which
for any long time, they can not change them selves.

Jewel. Page 93. I trust, Gentle Reader, thou vvilt not look I should answer
al M. Hardinges ordinary idle talk. So should I loose good time without
cause, and be over troublesome to thine ears. O, says he, what a world is it
to see these Defenders? They which have not kept the Unity of spirit, in
the band of Charity, which S. Paul requires, but have severed them selves
from the body of the Church, tell us now forsooth, they believe, that there is
one Church of God. O M. Harding, if we have herein said il, then bear
witness of the il: If we have said well, wherefore make you this bitter
outcries? etc.


Harding. The Protestants claim by the great visible Church, and by the
little invisible Church, as it serves best their turn.
O M. Jewel, if your saying, and doctrine were one, The. 4. Chapt.
I would never reprehend you: but when you say one thing openly, an other thing
privily, and have diverse points of secret Doctrine contrary the one to the
other, when ye are driven to the straightes, as now claiming by an invisible
Church no where appearing many hundred years together (which, to say the
truth, is no Church at al) and now by your great visible Church, spread
abroad in all kingdoms, when ye have made your pack: what is this in effect,
but in words for the time to set forth your belief of one Church
gloriously, and when time will not bear out this gaie glorious Confession of
yours, then, as your manner is, to run to Corners, to seek some comfort of
an unknown Invisible Church, where both the Ministers, the preachers, the
Sacraments, the people, and their whole life are al together invisible? In the
saying whereof, what do ye else, but utterly deny that one Church, which ye
ought to Confess?

Jewel. Page 93. We say, See Reader how well this ghear is proved. M.
Harding. fol. 25. a.
that our Doctrine, and the Order of our Churches, is elder then yours by five
hundred whole years, and more. If ye vvil not believe us, yet believe M.
Harding: he vvil tell you even the same. Mark well his words: These they be:
It stands not with Christ's promises made to the Church, that he should
suffer his Church to continue in darkness these thousand years past. And
thus by secret confession, he leaves us five hundred, three score and six
whole years at the least: that is to say, the whole time of Christ, of his
Apostles, and all the Godly learned Doctors, and Fathers of the primitive
Church, etc.


Harding. That by no such secret Confession I have granted them the first
five hundred years, etc.
The. 5. Chapt.
To bring M. Jewel once to feel his palpable grosnesse in mistaking one thing
for an other, thus I made my reason. Christ's promise is as well warranted to
the Church^ for the later thousand years, as for the first five hundred: But
it saved the Church from error the first five hundred years, by your own
Confession M. Jewel: Ergo, it has saved the Church from error the later
thousand years. Where is the secret confession, that I gave you the first five
hundred years of light, and left to my self the later thousand of Darkness?
It lies you upon to drive out that my secret Confession by some words of
mine, (which you shall never be hable to do) or else to revoke and agnise
your wilful malice, or your gross ignorance.

If ye had any place of Scripture, that said Christ's promises were no longer
warranted to the Church, then for the space of the first five hundred years,
you had some color to triumph. But such places of Scripture have ye none,
nay ye have the contrary, both for the presence of Christ's special
assistance, Math. vlt. Johan. 14. Esai. 59.
and of the holy Ghostes, unto the end of the world. What Scripture have ye
then to warrant the first five hundred years, more then the later thousand?
Here I call earnestly upon you to answer. Tell us, have ye any Scripture to
warrant the one, more then the other? No doubtelesse, I am well assured thereof.
And does M. Jewel now, that was wont to call so busily for Scripture,
Scripture, make warrant of the one, more then of the other, without al
Scripture?

Yet once again I call upon you, to tell us, in what part of that sentence is
my secret Confession contained, that all the first five hundred years are
yours. Tell it to my shame, if you can, spare me not. If you can by hook, or
crook, by wresting, wringing, racking, or by any good drifte of reason boult
out any such secret Confession of mine, A free and liberal offer made to M.
Jew.
mark well what I say M. Jewel, when you have done it in deed, as I am well
assured you shall never be hable: I do promise faithfully to yield unto you in all the rest of your Articles, upon Condition, that if you do it not, you shall
in like manner, yield to all the Articles of the Catholic Doctrine, wherein I
have travailed against you. Lo here is a fair offer, who can deny it? Take it
if you dare. If you refuse it, take the shame to your self.

Touching Lirinensis (of whom in this place you speak besides all reason) who
gives three Notes, to know what Doctrine is Catholic: you make such a
pretty Limitation of his saying, Page 94.
that his three Notes so limited, shall never stand us in any steed.
Lirinensis purpose was, to show us certain assured notes, or marks, how to
know, what doctrine is Catholic, and what is heretical, and erroneous,
thereby to instruct us how to beware of false doctrine. What is Catholic by
Lirinensis.
That is Catholic (says he) that every where, ever more, and of al persons
has benne believed, that is, whereas the Churches were not corrupted, says
your fond^ limitation, and special Restraint. But the Churches (says
Lirinensis) that teach doctrine agreeable with these three notes of
Universality, can not be corrupted in doctrine. For these are the very true
notes whereby to know sownde Catholic doctrine from corrupt, as he
avouches: neither he only, but S. Augustine also. Whereupon it follows, that
M. Jewels new found Limitatio^, and special Restraint, is a very vain toie
of his own devise. Yea the Limitation, as it is uttered, utterly destroieth
Lirinensis general rule of his three Notes to know Catholic, and incorrupt
doctrine.

If that, which has been believed every where, evermore, of al persons, may
be corrupt doctrine, then are both Lirinensis, and S. Augustine utterly
deceived in giving us such deceitful Notes, Aug. li. de Genes. ad litera^
imperfect. cap. 1.
and M. Jewels Limitation, and special Restrainte must take place. On the other
side, if that doctrine, which has been believed every where, evermore, and of
al persons, can not be but true, Catholic, and incorrupt doctrine: then
may M. Jewel put up his Limitation, and special Restrainte in his purse, which
he expressed by these words, whereas the Churches were not corrupted. Verily
the same is utterly unsavory, and has no ground of learning, nor of wit,
nor of common reason.

To live every where, evermore, among al sorts of men honestly, to hurt no
man, to give al other men their own, are three special Notes taught by
Justinian, for men to know, who do live Ciuilly under the law. But M.
Jewel, if he play with Justinian, as he has with Lirinensis, and S.
Augustine, will not leave the matter so rawly: he will rush in with a Limitation,
and a special Restrainte, saying, it is to be understood, whereas he that so
lives, commits, or offends nothing against the law. If it would please
him to take a day to consider the matter better, he might see that he, who
keeps him self within these Notes, or precepts appointed by Justinian,
does no more offend against the Law of man in doing, then the Churches,
that teach doctrine agreeable with Lirinensis, and S. Augustines Notes, offend
against the Law of God in believing: which doctrine of necessity must be
incorrupt, and the Churches likewise that so teach, must of necessity be in
doctrine incorrupt, if S. Augustine, and Lirinensis say true. But iuggle on M.
Jewel, your false play shall do no great harm, as long as it comes to light
in this sort, always to your own shame.

Jewel. Page 94. The Catholic Church of God stands not in multitude of
persons, but in weight of Truth.


Harding. That the Catholic Church stands in a multitude of persons,
which M. Jewel denies.
If not in multitude of persons, The. 6. Chapt.
why then allege you this place of S. Augustine, Aug. li. de Genes. ad litera^.
imperfect. cap. 1.
to choke your self with all? Says he not, the Church is called Catholica,
Catholic, quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, and in nullo claudicat, and per
totum orbem diffusa est, Because she is universally perfect, and halteth in
nothing, and is (not now shut up in one only Country, as the Church of
the Jews, but) powered throughout the whole world? If the Church be powered
throughout the whole world, then must it needs stand in multitude of
persons, unless your wisdom can conceive a Church spread throughout the
whole world, without a multitude of persons, that so it be imagined to be
planted in stocks, stones, trees, grass, roots, fire, water, earth, aier,
and brute beasts. If not in multitude of persons, why is it said, and
dominabitur a mari, ad mare, Psalm. 71.
a flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum: he shall bear rule from sea to
sea, and from the river to the uttermost coasts of the world? If not in
multitude of persons, what meant God the Father to say, unto Christ his Son,
Psalm. 2.
as David prophesied, Ask of me, and I will give unto thee, the Nations, for
thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession? If not in
multitude of persons, Apology.
why triumph ye so in your Apology, because all the world does now begin,
as you say, to behold the light of your Gospel mightily spread abroad? If not
in multitude of persons, why is it said to Abraham, Genesis 22.
in semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes, in thy seed al nations shall be
blessed? Why is it said to the Apostles, Math. vlt.
euntes, docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine patris and filij, and
Spiritus sancti? Goo ye, and teach ye al nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Why said Christ to
his Apostles, Act. 1.
Eritis mihi testes in Jerusalem, and in omni Iudaea, and Samaria, and vsque
ad vltimum terrae? Ye shall bear witness of me in Jerusalem, and in all
Iewrie, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the world.

Know you not M. Jewel, This opinion of M. Ievvel tends to the heresy of
the Donatistes.
that S. Augustine allegeth al these, and many mo such places against the
Donatistes? And what mean you? After al these Heresies of our wretched time,
shall we have also a Donatiste of you? Men marvel much, why you are so
contrary to your self, and that you lack the discretion, to discern, what
makes with you, and what makes against you. What discretion was that, to
bring in S. Augustines authority, that says, the Church is called
Catholic, because it is spread throughout the whole world, to prove that the
Catholic Church stands not in multitude of persons? Can the Church be
spread abroad into every part of the world, without multitude of persons?
Page 94.
Or will ye the two persons you talk of out of Fortalitium Fidei, M. Ievvel
says, the Catholic Church stands in the weight of Truth, and as for
persons, it may stand in two.
should bodily replenish every quarter of the world, and contrary to your
self grant, that one body may be in diverse places at one time? Or will you
the Weight of Truth, wherein the Catholic Church stands, as you say, to
wander round about the world, tanquam accidens sine subiecto? Or mean you
by your two persons out of Fortalitium alleged, to appointe the Church to be
only (not as the Donatistes did, in Aprica alone, excluding all the quarters of
the world besides, which is more tolerable) but in some two persons, as for
example, your self perhaps, and M. Grindal, or Friar Whitehed, or Friar
Couerdal, or some one or other of the Puritanes, and that all the rest of the
Realm, are no members of your Catholic Church? Or mean you in the
excluding of the multitude of persons, to leave your self some refuge (if it
happen your number to decay) to the invisible Church, as ye were wont to do,
being driven into any narrow streightes by drifte of reason, where men shall
have as much comfort of preaching, of the Sacraments, and of good examples,
as the hungry man has comfort in his great hunger, if it be his fortune to
find a stone?

Consider well of your folly M. Jewel in the allegation of S. Augustine, and
weigh with your judgment, how contrary he is to your doctrine. Aug. li. de
Genes. ad litera^. imperfect. cap. 1.
He says, that the Catholic Church is universally perfited, and halteth in
nothing. Meaning thereby, that the Church can not err, ne can not be
deceived. This speaks he expressly of the Church that is spread throughout
the whole world, that is to say, of the visible Church. Your doctrine is,
that the visible Church does err, has erred, and may err, as well in
Doctrine, as in manners. Thus you see, your luck is very il in the allegation
of Fathers, in that you bear us in hand, they make with you, when they make
fully against you.

Ibidem.
The truth, say you, be it in many, or in few, is ever Catholic. And what
if it were in none at al? Were it not also Catholic? If no, then the
substance of truth, as it is truth, must needs depend upon some person:
and to have the same called Catholic, Lirinensis, and S. Augustine tells
you, that it must be every where, evermore, and of al sorts of men be
believed. If yea, then have ye once found out a Catholic truth, and a
Catholic Church planted not only in a few persons, but in no persons
at al.

The case that Fortalitium Fidei sets out by way of supposition, which you
allege (though untruly, as your custom is, for his words are not, duo homines,
but, duo very fideles) has taken place in Adam, and Eve: Also in Noe and his
small family. But take the world, as it is now, full of people, I ask you,
whether it be agreeable with Scripture, to say, that the Catholic Church
consists only, and alone in any two persons, as for exemple, in M. Jewel
(if you will) and Sir James Proctor your worthy Chancellor, or in any two
others? But how say you? will not the Prophet David be found altogether
contrary, and put you in mind of the verse, Postula a me, Psalm. 2.
and dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam, and possessionem tuam terminos terrae:
Ask of me (says the Prophet in the person of God the Father, speaking of the
dilatation of Ch^istes Church) and I will give thee the Gentiles for thine
inheritance, and thy possession, the uttermost Coasts of the world. Can you
M. Jewel make that narrow, and small (to serve your turn) which the whole
Scripture openly avouches to be great, and large?

Whereas you defend Luthers dog eloquence by the great zeal he had of
Gods glory, and of his holy Temple, Luthers eloquence defended by M. Ievvel.
eadem Page 94. Matthaeus Iudex.
after that you have once read over Matthaeus Iudex a Lutheran, and seen how
Luther raileth at Oecolampadius, and Zuinglius your graund Captains, yea the
patriarchs of your progeny and considered, by what names he calls them,
saying, they are as evil, as the Devil him self: it is likely you will repent,
that you ever became his advocate, who so roughly handles them, that are the
founders of your own Synagog.

In the very next line before you allege my worde^, with the vehemency of
which you do greatly dislike, your self in the reprehension of my vehement
speech, do fall into the self same Vehemency. Whose words are these M.
Jewel? M. Jew. blames my vehemency of speech, him self being also no less
vehement. Page 94.
Behold your own words so many, so vain, so bitter, so fiery, so furious,
al together in one place? Are not these your own words? Are not these as
vehement, as you could devise? Will you find fault with me, for that you use
your self? If vehement speech be to be used, when the matter requires, why
blame you me? If not, why do you so often use it? Whether you and Luther do
use it justly for the zeal of Gods glory, ask that of them, that wrote the
Confession of the Church of Zurich. Your own friends, the Ministers of that
congregation, do set forth Luther for his outrageous, and filthy railing
against them, in his colors, and speak of him, as of a very vile fellow, and
pay him home again with as good, as he brought. Read the book, and ye shall
find it to be true. Howbeit I could send you to many other books of your
brethren fraught with much more vile stuff of railing, then that little book
contains, with all which you are better acquainted, then I am.

The Confutation of the Apology. The second part, the 2. Chapter.
Confut fo. 44. b
Again the name of Head is attributed to Christ a^ other way, because
Christ is head of the Church by his own power and authority. Men be
called heads, in as much as they be in steed of Christ, and under Christ,
after which meaning S. Paul says to the Corinthians, for if I forgave any
thing, to whom I forgave it, 2. Cor. 2.
for your sakes forgave I it, in persona Christi, in the person of Christ. And
in an other place. 2. Cor. 5.
We are Ambassadors in the steed of Christ, even as though God did exhort
you through us. To conclude in few, (...) what sense Christ is named the Head
of the Church, and in what sense the Pope is so named.
according to inward influence of grace into every faithful member, Christ
only is the head of the Church: according to outward governing, the Pope
under Christ, and in steed of Christ, is head of the same.

Jewel. Page 94. To the matter, ye say, that, touching the influence of grace,
Christ only is the head of the Church: but touching direction and
government, the Pope only as the head. All this is but your own tale, M.
Harding: ye speak it only of your self: other authority of Scripture, or
Doctor you bring us none.


Harding. Dog eloquence, proved no unwonted term, and how the Pope is Head
of the Church.
To the matter, ye say. And truly well said of you. The.7. Chapt
For hitherto you have not directed your talk to the matter, but to the person
of your Adversary: with whom you show your self grievously offended, for
calling the Currish, and snarling utterance of Luther, Dog eloquence. And
whereas you would feign draw the same to the prejudice of my modesty, I trust,
you, that are so great a Rhetorician, and so well seen in poets Fables, will
judge so much the better of me, for so much as Quintilian that modeste, and
grave Orator, and Ouide also no Poet Satirical, thought such phrase of
speech not unmeet for the countenance of modesty, and humanity, that they
bare in the world. For if you remember, Canina Eloquentia, Quintilia^ lib. 12.
c. 9 Ovid. in Ibin.
is Quintilians word, call it dog eloquence, dogged eloquence, or dogs
eloquence, or how soever otherwise it please you to term it. And Ovid says,
Latr^^ (...) in toro verba canina foro. If for the use of this ancient term I
seem to pass the bounds of modesty, specially attributing it unto Luther,
whose heretical, and Deuilish utterance is commonly in deed far worse, then
the barking of any Dog, or the hissing of any Serpent: what will you say of
the Scolding of your hot brother M. Calfhil?

But now that after much idle, and impertinent talk, you are come to the
matter, what say you, that is worth the hearing? M. Jewels foul falsifying of
my words.
Thus you say. Ye say, that touching the influence of Grace, Christ only is
the Head of the Church: (I grant, I say so in deed. Go ye forth, and make no
lie) but touching direction, and government, the Pope only is the Head. Yea
sir? Where say I so? You should have caused your printer to have falsified
that sentence of mine, that at your own pleasure, the simplest of your own
poor Favorers, who take al for the Gospel that you say, or write, might not
in your own book epsy your shameless lying. For even there, notwithstanding
your common falsifyinges other where is, and also there, they may find my
saying otherwise reported.

It is an evident argument, that mine own words were to true for you to
confute, since that you thought it necessary, least you should seem overcome,
to alter and change them for other words of your own, which being false, to
the unlearned reader I might seem to speak fondly, and besides al truth. For
how is it likely I should say, that touching Direction, and government, the
Pope only is the Head? Your fetch was, to bring your unlearned favorers, by
whom you are magnified, to believe, that from the Direction, and government of
the Church I excluded Christ, and the holy Ghost, the spirit of truth. Which
God forbid I should do.

Now the true words of my Confutation in this place are these, Defense Page 92.
which the Reader may see also in the book of your Defense, although very
much mangled, and falsified of set purpose, to the intent the force of truth by
me opened should not be seen, as by view of my book it may clearly appear.
Where thus I say.

For Head, and Spouse alone he is (of his kingdom) in one respect, not alone
in an other respect. Confut. fol. 44. a. left out by M. Ie.
For a clear declaration whereof it is to be understood, that, being of a
Head may be considered after two ways, The being of a Head considered two
ways.
either according to the inward influence, so as the virtue and power of
moving, and of sense, is derived from the head unto the other members: or
according to outward government, right so as a man is directed in his outward
acts according to the sight, and other senses, According to it ward influence
of grace Christ only is Head of the Church. In respect of outvvard
government the name of Head is attributed to others beside Christ.
which have their root in the head. Now the inward influence of grace is not
of any other, but of Christ only. Because Christ's manhood only has power to
justify, for that the same only is joined personally to the Godhead. *
According to this inward influence of Grace, Christ properly and only is Head
of his mystical body the Church. But as touching the outward government, the
being of a Head is common to Christ with others. For in this respect certain
others may be called Headdes of the Church, as in Amos the prophet the great
states be called the Heads of the people. So the Scripture speaks of King
Saul, When thou were a little one in thine own eyes, thou wast made Head among
the tribes of Israel. So David says of him self, he has made me Head of
Nations.

Amos. 6. 1. Reg. 15. Psalm. 17. Headship in respect of government diverse in
Christ and in men.
Left out by M. Ievvel.
In this sense the name of Head is attributed to princes and governors. And yet
not altogether so as to Christ. First forasmuch as Christ is Head of al those
that perteine to the Church, according to every place, every time, and every
state. But men are called Heads in regard of certain special places, as
Bishops be called heads of their Churches. Or in respect of a determinat
time, as the Pope is Head of the whole Church during the time of that calling.
And according to a determinate state, even so as men be in the state of this
mortal life, for further stretches not this humanie Headship.

Again the name of Head is attributed to Christ an other way, because
Christ is Head of the Church by his own power and authority. * Men be
called Headdes, in as much as they be in steed of Christ, and under Christ,
after which meaning S. Paul says to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 2.
For if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it,
in persona Christi, in the person of Christ: and in an other place, we are
Ambassadors in the steed of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
even as though God did exhort you through us. To conclude in few, according
to inward influence of grace into every faithful member, Christ only is Head
of the Church, according to outward governing, the Pope under Christ, and in
steed of Christ, is Head of the same.

These be my words there M. Jewel. To which because you had nothing to say,
you answer by your accustomed art of mangling, hewing away what liked you
not, by falsifying them, and by putting in your own self words in place of
mine that teach the truth.

And at length you fall to skoffing at my Logique, making fond and peevish
Arguments of your own forging, bearing the simple reader in hand they are
mine, which God knows, I never made, nor no wise man else. For they are
such, as of all that peruse your writings, you may be known by them, as a
Beggar is by his patched cloak, or rather as a Vise is known by his Babul.

The greatest thing you say, is, that al is mine own tale, that I tell, and
that I bring in no Scripture, nor Doctor. To this I answer. Were it true that
you say, as my Book it self proves it false, yet in this case my Yea
hitherto is as good as your Nay, and better too, because it stands with the
uniform Doctrine of the Church. Be it, I allege no Authority of Scripture,
or Doctor, to prove the Pope Head, because I am not yet comme to the place,
where I mind to prove it. Yet my case stands as good as youres, that bring
neither Scripture, nor Doctor to the contrary.

If it had pleased you, ye might have found both Doctors, and Scriptures,
more, The Rock of the Church.
then you would gladly hear of, in M. D. Sanders book entitled the Rock of
the Church, written for that behalf, and in M. Sapletons Return written
against your so many gross Untruths and errors. The Return of Untruths.


You crake much of your great skill in Logique, in comparison of other men's
ignorance: search out I pray you, among your rules of Logique, whether
Distinctio multiplicis in quaestione positi, the Distinction of a word, that
has diverse significations, placed in a controversy, ought not to go before
the disputation of the controversy. If it ought, then have I done rightly and
orderly, in that I made a Distinction of the term Head, before I entered to
prove the Pope to be Head, and you ignorantly, and disorderly, in calling upon
me to do two things together, against al good order of nature, reason and
learning, or to do the later, before I had ended the former.

Testimonies auouching the Pope to be head of the Church.
Peter the chief member of the Church. Gregor. li. 4. epis. 38.
Now because you be so hasty to have some Doctor to prove that the Pope is
Head, somewhat to satisfy your hasty humor, the Authority of S. Gregory
afterward alleged by your self, may suffice any wise man, who calls S.
Peter the chief member of the Church, which (the Pope succeding in that right
of Peter) is al one with that we say, the Pope is Head in government under
Christ. What difference I pray you can your wisdom put betwixt the chief
member, and a Head under an other, or in the steed of an other?

Chrysostom. in Matthew. homil. 55.
It is your hap alwaie to allege Doctors to your own Confusion.

S. Chrysostom also witnesses, that Peter was such a Head, saying of him:
Ecclesia Pastor and Caput Piscator homo, The fisherman (by whom he means
Peter) is the shepehearde, and head of the Church. Again he says in an other
place, Quod si quis percontaretur, Chrysostom. in Joan. Hom. 87.
quo modo Iacobus Sedem Hierosolymis acceperit, responderem, hunc totius orbis
magistrum praeposuisse. In case any man would demand of me this question, how
James came to have the Sea at Jerusalem: I would answer him, that this (Peter)
the Master of the whole world made him Bishop there. Lo, Peter Master of the
whole world.
he calls Peter the Master of the whole world, by which word, what else
signifies he, but that he was the Head touching spiritual government of the
whole world?

He says furthermore, and that most plainly in an other place. Ieremiam Genti
vni pater, Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matthew.
hunc autem vniuerso terrarum orbi praeposuit. God the Father made Jeremy the
Head and Governor over one nation only, (that was the nation of the Jews)
but as for this man, Peter made head of the whole world by Christ.
to wit, Peter, Christ made him Head and Governor over the whole world. Are
you contented now? Verily I have followed your mind willingly. And if ye
require mo the like testimonies of me, I remitte you to the Answer Art, 4. fol.
9. b. etc.
where you shall find that may satisfy any learned man touching this point.
Neither are you hable to avoid the plain force of those testimonies, for all
the great a do you have made in your huge Reply.

Jewel. Page 94. Ye say, S. Paul says, If I forgave any thing, for your
sakes, 2. Cor. 2.
I forgave it in the person of Christ: We are Ambassadors in the steed of
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
even as though God did exhort you through us: Hereof ye conclude, Ergo, the
Pope under Ch^^st^ and in steed of Christ, is the head of the Church. If ye
conclude not thus, ye wander idly, and speak in vain, and conclude nothing.


Harding. To what sense these words of S. Paul were alleged, and that S.
Bernarde makes for us.
The 8. Chapt.
That place of S. Paul was not alleged to prove, that the Pope is Head, but to
prove, that men, which do bear the person of Christ in ruling the
Church, may in one signification be called Headdes, because they are
governors under Christ, and so much it proves sufficiently. Leave
Cauillations M. Jewel, and keep you to the matter for very shame. If you
mark no better, what your Adversary takes in hand to prove against you,
then you have done in this: you will be found as weak in Logique for all your
glorious shows and crakes, as you are in Divinity.

You can see nothing, you say, wherein the Pope resembles S. Paul. And what
then? Admit we this to be true (though in deed it be false) that he
preaches not, he exhorts not, etc: will you remove rulers from their
authority, if they satisfy not your mind in all points of duty? Kings
shall not then long keep their rooms, as men may see, what wholesome broiles
your good brethren have now stirred up in sundry realms. Your Gospel and
Pistles (I might say your Pistolets) are to full of gunne powder M. Jewel.
Christ's Ghospel breaths not forth such outrageous and blouddy blastes.
Look well upon all the places and phrases, that you have hunted after, touching
the Term Head, and if they be well examined, they shall be found to make rather
with us, then ought at al against us.

Jewel. Page 96. S. Bernarde, without gloss says plinely: Bernard. in Council.
Remensi.
Non sunt omnes amici Sponsi, qui hodie sunt Sponsi Ecclesiae. They be not all the Bridegromes friends, that are this day the Spouses of the Church.


Harding.
Denies S. Bernarde in that place, trow ye, that Bishops are the Spouses of
the Church? Or does he not rather grant it, in that he says, Qui sunt hodie
Sponsi Ecclesiae, They, that are now a days the Spouses of the Church? Have
not you the reason to mark what he grants, and what he denies? He denies,
that al they were the Bridegromes friends, that were at that time Spouses of
the Church, Ergo, there were some, that were both the Bridegromes friends,
and also Spouses of the Church.

What il luck have you, always to allege the Fathers to your own overthrow?
As strange as you make, that any man should be called, the Light, the Life, the
Savior, and the God, yet certain of these have been attributed in Scripture
(as loathe as you be to hear of it) to men, that were Headdes under Christ.
Matthew. 5.
The Apostles pardy are called the light of the world. Moses is called by
God, the God of Pharao. Exodus 7. Psalm. 135.81. Genesis 41.
Rulers are called Gods. Confitemini Deo Deorum. Ego dixi Dij estis. Joseph
is called a Savior of the world.

The Apology part. 2. cap. 3. Diui. 1. page 96.
Furthermore (we believe) that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the
Church: whereof some be Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops, to whom is
committed the office to instruct the people, and the w^^le charge, and setting
forth of religion.

Confutation.
Here it had been your part to have declared your says touching the holy
Sacrament of Order, aggreable to the faith of the Catholic Church: that
there be seven Orders in the Church, four lesser, and three greater: for so
by good reason they are called, etc.

Jewel. Page 96. Gentle Reader, if I should leave these, and other like M.
Hardinges vvord^s vnansvvred, thou might happily think he had said
somevvhat, etc.


Harding.
More then ever you shall be hable truly and learnedly to answer. As for
sundry of lesser Orders I referred you to places in the old Fathers, where
they are specially named.

Jewel. Page 96. Anacletus epist. 3.
His own Anacletus says, Amplius, quam isti duo Ordines Sacerdotum,
(Episcopi and praesbyteri) nec nobis a Deo collati sunt, nec Apostoli
docuerunt. More then these two Orders of Priests (Bishops and Elders)
neither has God appointed us, not have the Apostles taught us.


Harding.
why is Anacletus I pray you, rather mine, then yours? Why allege ye such
Doctors, whose auhoritie ye esteem not? If Anacletus, that was a holy Father
and Martyr with in the first hundred years after Christ, be not to be
credited, why do you allege him? Will your courrage serve you, as well to defy
the Fathers, that lived so nigh^ to Christ, as it does to contemn al them,
that wrote in the later nine hundred years? If he be worthy of any credit, why
is he called mine own, more then your own? What insolency is this, to make
account of no Father, of what antiquity so ever he be?

If it had pleased you to have taken time sufficient, to consider the matter
better, you might have found out, that the Apostles taught us the order of
Deacons, as it is manifest in the Acts of the Apostles, Acto. 6. 1. Tim. 4. 2.
Tim. 1.
and in S. Paul's Epistles to Timothee: whereby ye might have easily conceived,
that the Ancient Father Anacletus in his third Epistle, comprehended not only
under the term Sacerdos Priests, but also Deacons, and Subdeacons, as
Bartholomaeus de Caranza now Bishop of Toledo in Spain plainly testifies by
his notes upon the same Epistle. Perhaps you take Anacletus to be mine rather
then yours, because in the same third Epistle he says, that the Church of
Rome had the preeminence over all the Churches in the world, given, not by the
Apostles, but by our Savior Christ him self. This is it that disliked you in
so ancient a Father, and constant Martyr of Jesus Christ, and for this you
account him mine, and not yours. He is in deed mine, and not yours, as all the
other old Fathers are, when they come to trial. In the mean time remember,
that I have alleged evident places of S. Chrysostom, of S. Gregory, and of
Anacletus, for the Primacie of the Pope, and by Gods grace I intend to
allege more hereafter.

Jewel. Page 96. And yet of the same two several Orders, S. Hierome seems to
make only one Order. For thus he vvriteth: Audio quendam in tantam erupisse
vecordiam, vt Diaconos Praesbyteris, id est, Episcopi^ anteferret: I hear
say, there is a man broken out unto such wilful fury, that he places
Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops. etc.


Harding. That there is difference betwixt Bishops, and Priests, that terms
of diverse significations may not be used at pleasure. Item of holy Orders. etc.
The.9. Chapt.
But what say you M. Jewel? Is there no difference betwixt a Bishop, and a
Priest? If there be, why bring you S. Hierome to prove them both one? If there
be not, S. Augustine shall lay to your charge, that you are an Aerian, Aerians.
which sect of Heretics being otherwise Arians, had their first name of one
Aerius, that was an Arian Priest, The heresies of Aerius.
who because he could not be ordered Bishop, began to teach certain new
heresies: The first, that there was no difference betwixt a Bishop, and a
Priest: the next, that no prayer, or Sacrifice ought to be made for the Dead:
the third, that men ought not to keep the solemn, and the accustomed Fastes
of the Church, lest they should be under the law. It shall be good for you,
and for your better purgation, that you are not an Heretic of Aerius school,
to consider of S. Hieromes places better, and se^ke why S. Hierome spoke those
words, who in other places following has leaft a plain difference, betwixt a
Bishop, and a Priest.

What discretion you have in the understanding of old Authors, as by you it
appears where so ever you call for healpe at their hands: Hieron. in Esai.
cap. 19.
even so it is seen most evidently in this place, where you allege S. Hierome,
to prove, that there be but five Orders in the whole Church: two of which
neither S. Hierome, nor any other old writer ever took to be Orders, as we
speak properly of Order Ecclesiastical, as it is a Sacrament having his
necessary ministers to do duties in the Church, in the time of public
Service.

So you deceive your self always, because you are so ignorant, What
inconvenience may follow, if in any question, it shall be lauful for one to use
the diverse significations of terms at his pleasure Presbyter Diaconus.
Diabolus.
(For I would be loath to say it were malice) that you see not how a term,
that has many significations, is used: whether it be used in his largest
nature, or in some proper, and singular signification restrained. You may, if
you list so to abuse terms, say, that al Elders are Priests, as some times
you do, because this word, Presbyter, imports the signification both of
Priests, and of Elders: that every Magistrate secular is a Bishop, because he
is an ouerseer, whom Episcopus signifies: that every servant is a Deacon,
because Diaconus signifies a Minister: that every il man that is a quareller,
is the very Devil him self, because Diabolus signifies a quareller. If you
will not see, and take a day better to consider, when Authors do use terms
in some large significations, and when they use them properly in significations
restrained from the Generality: your folly will be such, er it be long, that
every man shall see it.

In the allegation of S. Clement, I think verily you groped, and sensibly
fealt your own folly, where he says, Clemens. Epist. 2. De Con. Distinct. 3.
Tribus gradibus.
that the Sacraments of the Divine secrets are committed unto three Orders,
unto the Priest, unto the Deacon, and unto the Minister. You saw plainly,
that S. Clement named expressly three Orders distinct, and yet you say, that
Deacons, and Ministers, as touching the name, are al one. This place of S.
Clement joined with your own Confession, that Deacons, and Ministers, Minister.
touching the name are al one, will enforce you to confess, that terms are
diversely restrained from their generality, without apposition, or addition at
al: as the term Minister, which is general, must needs signify some
distinct Order, diverse from the Deacon. Among all the Authorities that you have
brought, if you had alleged any, that by naming of any number of Orders, had
therewith excluded al other, that had not ben contained within the same: you
had brought somewhat to help your cause.

Page 97.
S. Hierome, S. Clement, S. Dionyse, as their matter and occasion served, spoke
of certain holy Orders, that have preeminence in the Church, as the Bishop,
the Priest, the Deacon, the Minister, or Subdeacon: but they never so spoke of
these principal holy Orders, that either they expressly excluded, or meant any
exclusion of the lower Orders. Wherefore al your talk, and stoare of
Testimonies are to no purpose, as being utterly wide of the matter you should
prove.

Page 97.
It pleases here your ministerly gravity, and great wisdom, first, to scoff
out all the lower, or inferior Orders, whose offices our Savior Christ him
self executed in his own person, and therefore to keep Order within the
Church, whiles the sacrifice of the Mass was celebrated, or any other
Sacrament ministered, the three lower Orders were decently placed, the door
keepers, Inferior Orders.
the Exorcistes (not Coniurers M. Jewel by your license) which term now in
English contains an infaime, as the laws made against them do witness) the
Acolutes, the Readers.

As touching the pleasure you take in scoffing, Page 97. 98.
solacing your self therewith in this place, we can not much wonder, that
you mock, and jest at Petrus Lombardus, a man far passing you in virtue,
and learning, seeing your scorneful head could not refrain from scoffing at S.
Clement, the holy Martyr of Christ, that lived in the Apostles time, and was
appointed by S. Peter to be his successor in the Sea Apostolic, and spare
not to scoff out the Order of Deacons, who took place in the very Apostles
time. You would gladly to delight your folowers for a time, make them believe,
that the Deacons office was for no other purpose, but to hold a fan in their
hands to keep of flies from the Communion Cup, and yet that scoffing head of
yours does know, that the Deacons had an office more proper unto their Order
then that, and yet that office, as base as your merry head would it should
appear, considering to whom that service was done, to wit, that nothing
should chance indecently about the precious blood of Christ upon the Altar
consecrated, was in dignity far passing the highest office, that is done in
the presence of the honourablest wordely Prince that is.

And will ye see the great wit of the man? After that he has made merry with
his good fellows, his Disciples, and scoffed at the office of the Deacons, at
Patrus Lombardus, that holy and learned Bishop, at S. Clement, that blessed
Martyr, at the origin and foundatio of all the lower Orders: as one that had
quite forgotten what fond parts he had played, at length he comes in
confessing plainly, that sundry of the Offices of the lower and inferior
Orders, in the Primitive Church were appointed to very good and sober
purposes. And yet the man would have them al suppressed in the end, because
Ostiarius now keeps not the excommunicates out, the Acolute waits not on
the Bishop, the Exorcistes cast not out Deuilles, the Reader openly
pronounces not the Scriptures, the Deacons provide not for the poor, yea
because the Bishop preaches not the Gospel: And yet this man, had he ben in
Italy, and seen what is there continually done, how the Exorcistes do in
deed cast forth Deuilles in manner weekly, as diverse of our own Contriemenne
that have been present, can report: he would for very shame (if any were in
him) have kept in that negative. Verily I fear me, he will one day proceed
further, and utterly deny the Order of Bisshops to be necessary, because he
can franckely say, that the Bishops preach not his lustly Caluinian Gospel.
Yet I trow he will be good master to the Superintendentes of England, that be
of his own profession, of whom some preach not, and some have not the
learning to preach, nor yet to tell a wise tale.

The Apology. Cap. 3. Diuis. 2. Page 98.
Yet notvvithstanding, we say, that there neither is, nor can be any one man,
which may have the whole superiority in this Universal state: for that
Christ is ever present to assiste his Church, and needs not any man, to
supply his room, as his only heir to al his Substance: and that there can
be no one mortal creature, which is hable to comprehend, or conceive in his
mind the universal Church, that is to wit, all the parts of the world:
much less hable rightly, and duly to put them in Order, and to Govern them.

Jewel. Page 98. M. Hardinges answer hereto is too long, and tedious.


Harding.
I dare well say, it is too tedious to you, and glad would you be to be rid of
it, if you wist which way. Acknowledge the truth M. Jewel, return from your
error, leave of scoffing, suppress singularity, deli^e not in the vain
praises, that your ignorant favorers give you, fear God, think, you can not
continue in in this Bravery always: then shall you find liking in my answer,
and think it nothing to tedious. Certain it is, the matter is not so
sclenderly to be answered.

Jewel. Page 98. Where we say, no one mortal man is hable to vvealde the
burden of the whole Church of God, M. Harding answers, where any thing
is in deed, there whether it may be, or not, to discuss it is needelesse.
Therefore whether any one man can be superior, and Chief over the whole
Church, we leave to speak: that so it is, thus we prove. Every parish has
his several vicare or person, and every Dioces^ his own Bissh^ppe, Ergo,
what reason is it, there be one Chief Governor of the whole Christen
people? etc. His first reason concludes very vveakely: Every Parish is
Governed by one Vicare or Person: and every Diocese is governed by one
several Bishop: Ergo, there is one universal Governor over the whole Church
of Christ. Here is neither order in reason, nor sequel in nature. Therefore
of any man would deny the argument, M. Harding were ^^uer hable to make it
good.


Harding. The justification of this Argument.
The.10. Chapt.
Yeas forsooth, the Argument may be proved very well by this axioma, or dignity
in nature, upon the which the Argument is grounded. That the whole ought to be
governed by one general Head, whose several parts can not be governed, without
several Heads. If your leisure serve you, you may now train the Argument,
that I was never hable to make good, as you say, for lack of order in reason,
and sequel in nature (if ye altogether have not forgotten your Logique,
whereof you set us forth so often crakes) into the very form of a good, and
perfect Syllogism. If your courage then serve you to deny the Argument, you
shall but disgrace your self in denying the grounds of that art, wherein you
have placed a great part of your glory: and put your self to pain, to make
us some new Logique of your own, that men may trust too. Search diligently
the cause without scoffing, and wrangling, why the several parts of the
universal Church, Parishes, Dioceses, provinces, are not hable to be kept in
any good order without several heads: the self cause shall infourme you, that
the universal Church may much less be kept in order without one general
Head. Render what causes you can M. Jewel, you shall never be hable to avoid it
before any learned company, but that the one shall follow of the self same
causes, as well as the other.

Whereas you run to disprooue mine argument, by making the like of every
kingdom ruled by one Prince, inferring, Ergo, there ought to be one universal
Prince, to rule over the whole world: I see no such absurdity in the
conclusion of this Argument (the several rightes of Princes reserved untouched)
but that if you should talk with Aristotle that great Philosopher, you should
see good cause to grant it. If there were but one good Monarke in the whole
world, would there not be fewer broilles, and wars in the world, then now
we feel? Perhaps, when the matter is well weighed, it may seem, the world
was never in better state, then when it was governed by one good Emperor. Let
a just View be taken of Constantines time the Great. Yet it must be
confessed, there is great difference betwixt the Civil government of Princes
(who may be permitted to rule their several Dominions without one general
Head, because they have to do but with things of the world, as with earthly
goods, lands, and such other things, which may receive diverse kinds of
rule, without danger of Souls) and the Ecclesiastical government, whose chief
respect is to keep unity of Faith in the bond of peace, which may not
receive any alteration, without great danger to our Salvation. Therefore there
is greater cause to have one general Head, or Supreme governor (without whom
this unity can not be kept any long time, Hiero. aduersus Iouinianum lib. 1.
as S. Hierome witnesses) to rule the whole Church in matters of Salvation,
then to have one Head to rule over the whole world in wordely matters.

To your other scorneful Argument of one general Shepehearde to be had over
all the flocks of (...) throughout the whole world, I will frame answer, when
you can prove, that God has as great care to bring all the sheep in the world
to the self same glory of life everlasting, as he has to bring men: or
that he has appointed them any one general end, the which they can not
atteine without the having of one general shepeherd to govern the whole kind.
But S. Paul puts al such fond reasons to silence by this question, where
he asks, 1. Cor. 9.
Nunquid de bobus cura est Deo? Has God any such special care of kine and
Oxen, as he has of men? Put up such shepeherdes pipes for shame M. Jewel,
and leave to piper us up such trifles. If you mind thus to continue, every
ignorant Reader at length shall epsy, what little good stuff ye utter.

I made not these reasons, for that men should take them for very precise
Demonstrations, or for that every one of them alone had full force to conclude,
as though the whole weight of the matter lay in any one of them: But for that
natural reason should partly declare to the ignorant, who are not hable to
conceive deeper Arguments, that the Order, which our Savior leafte in his
Church, the same to be ruled by one general Head, does so sensibly stick in
every man's conceit, that understands the force of any good natural reason,
that you, or any of your fellows with any heaps of impertinent sentences of al
sorts of Writers (with which you fournish us out books of great bulk) shall
never be hable to prove the contrary. Disorder not (...) reasons M. Jewel,
take them as my self have set (...) mark what force they are of, when they
be linked in one. Then overthrow them if you can. I am assured you can not.

The other three reasons, to the which you say, ye answered in your Reply, are
so by M. Stapleton returned upon you again, and your whole answer reproved,
that the world now sees, what small worship ye have won thereby. I would
advise you to begin again, and labor for a more sufficient answer, else
you may be sure, that men well give you over for one that promises much, and
perfourmeth nothing.

Jewel. Page 100. I grant, Dissension, and quarelles be the sooner ended,
when al things be put over to one man, so that the same man may live for
ever, and still continue in one mind, and never alter.


Harding. M. Jewel allows no one man to be ruler, except he may live for
ever, and continue in one mind, which is fond.
Live for ever? what a blind answer is this? The.11. Chapt.
I pray you Sir, did Moses, when he had the government of the people of
Israel, make an end of no Dissensions, and quarelles among them? I ween you
will say, yeas. And yet he lived not emonge them for ever pardy. Did not Iosue
so? Did not Samuel? Did not David? Did not Solomon, and others? Yet I trow,
you will not say, they lived for ever. Does not every Prince daily within his
own Realm so? Every Bishop within his own Diocese? the Archbishop within
his own Province? And yet ye know, they live not for ever. Heard ever any man
a fonder answer made then this? The first four General Councelles ended
diverse matters of contention, and yet they that were there, lived not for ever.
For very shame call back this unsavory answer again, or at least put it out
of your book at your next Impression, if the first find good utterance, and
lie not upon you hands.

Jewel. Ibidem. And still continue in one mind, and never alter.


Harding.
That is the very cause perhaps, why Archeheretiques can make an end of no
Dissension, because their minds do daily, 2. Tim. 3.
and hourly alter, as S. Paul says of certain curious wemenne, that were
always learning, always talking and babbling of Scripture, and never drawing
to any good end, never atteining to the knowledge of truth. Princes bound by
M. Ievvel to continue still in one mind.
You have bound Kings and Princes very hard, to continue still in one mind,
and never to alter: so that if one have cause to war against the other, after
war once entered, they may never entreat of peace. They must continue still
in one mind, and never alter. They must keep so precise, and so wholesome a
diet, that they may live for ever. If they make any statute that is good and
necessary to be kept for some one time, perhaps for the space of v. or vj.
years afterward, when the Continuance of such statutes shall be found to
breed great disorder, and inconvenience to the Realm: it shall not be lawful
for them to repeal them, because M. Jewel has bound them to continue in the
mind they were, and never to alter. For if they once alter, how so ever, and
wherein so ever it be, dissensions and quarelles (says he) can not by them be
appeased and ended, and therefore good government shall fail.

Jewel. Page 100. But oftentimes one Pope is found contrary to an other.


Harding. Answer to the contrarities in certain Popes reprehended by M.
Jewel, and to the violating of Pope Formosus dead Carcass. etc.
Not so often as one king is found contrary to an other. The.12. Chapt.
Read the Stories, you shall find it true. But Lord what a do ye make here
about the Contrarieties of certain Popes! and yet you shall never find one
Pope contrary to an other in any article of our Faith, as heavy a Master as
you are unto them. But why do you not call to mind, what variety of opinions
ye have had among your selves, fith ye brought your Gospel first into the
Realm? Remember within so short a time, how many sorts of Communions have
benne seen, how many sects have risen among your selves? How far the
Puritanes (who have well nigh tried out the Quintessence of your Gospel,
Puritanes
and perhaps at their next proceeding will utterly deny God) how far, I
say, they are alienated, and divided from you, and that not only for Square
cappes, and side gowns, but also for other matters, that in their time shall be
reveled. I will say nothing here of the Arians, Anabaptists, Libertines, and
Atheistes, who since the first planting of your Gospel, have crepte into the
realm, and now swarm in diverse places there uncontrolled: who if they had the
full liberty ye preached, when ye first labored to supplante the Catholics,
were well like shortly to set you also beside the stool.

But they (for that their time is not yet come) must do as they may, and be
passed over as not seen, that all the charitable blows of your fyrie Gospel
might light upon the Catholics headdes.

Your manner always is in the allegation of histories, as also of other
things, to add somewhat of your own, as you do in telling us how Pope Steven
unburied his predecessor Pope Formosus: ^abellicus falsified by M. Ievvel.
Sabellicus Ennead. 9. lib. 1.
where you report that he defaced, and mangled his naked carcass. The
history makes mention of no such mangling, and defacing of his Carcass:
only it shows, that the forefingers of his right hand, which had benne
anointed, and consecrated, were cut of, and that the Pontifical garments,
wherein Popes were wont of an old custom to be buried, were taken of from
his corpse. A man that had heard of defacing, and mangling a naked carcass,
would have thought, that the carcass had benne hewed in pieces, or otherwise
spitefully mangled. Leave, leave that il property for shame M. Jewel. Add
not, diminishe not, tell stories as you find them, and so shall you give your
Adversary less advantage against you.

It is marvel it came not into your head, by diligent search to find out a
dissension among the Popes, because some of them loved rather to eat fish
then flesh, some used to rise sooner in the morning, some later: some were of
stature higher, some lower. And least your story should be vnrequitted, it
were well done of you to take some little pains, to search out, who of you was
the first author of that famous lie against the Catholic Bishops, The false
brute of king He^ries body taken away.
that to bring them in displeasure with the Queen's Majesty which now is,
reported, that they had taken away king Henry the eightes body, which
matter, after great brute spread about the Realm, after that it came to be
searched, was tried false, and forged, and the body was found safe, where it
had benne laid. But the body of king Henry the sixth that holy man, King
He^rie the sixth his body taken up, and consumed.
was not found in his place, but said to have benne burnt, by certain (I will
spare their worshippes) of Catholic religion I warrant you. There is a wiued
Superintendent in England, that if he be asked, can tell tidinges, how these
things were conveyed. But al things ye do, are well done, and worthy of
praise. Yet what an impudent lie was that devised against the Catholic
Bishops? And what an heinous deed was it, to violate the Grave, to take up a
good Kings Body, and to burn it, or otherwise to consume it? Yet because they
that are of your fecte did it, it must be praised, though it be done against
al good Order, Religion, and humanity.

To be short, as you are not hable to defend al things, as well done, that
ye and your fellows have done: even so we have not taken in hand to defend
the innocence of every Pope in all acts of his life, nor yet to take the Popes
will, and pleasure to be our stay in all doubteful cases, as you impute unto us.

But the Popes advised, and mature determination following the advice of his
learned Doctors, assembled together for discussion of weighty matters in
general Councelles (which is an other thing then the Popes will and pleasure,
which your scoffing head would have to be our stay) we take to be a
sufficient resolution of al doubtful cases, that are necessary for us to know.

Jewel. Page 100. How be it, this, I trovve, is not the readiest way to
procure peace, and to maintain unity in the Church.


Harding. Unity is best maintained by the government of one general Head.
The.13. Chapt.
If the having of one king, or Prince be the readiest way to procure peace, and
maintain unity in worldly matters of a Realm, why should not the having of
one general Head, be the readiest way to procure peace, and unity in the
Church? If that be not the way, you leave us none at al. If every man take
that Religion, that likes best his own fantasy, as many do in diverse
parts of the world already: who shall call them back to the true Catholic
Religion?

Jewel. And therefore Gregory says of John the Bishop of Constantinople, that
claimed to him self this universal power, etc.


Harding.
What need we bestow more words about this matter of John of Constantinople?
John the ambitious Bishop of Constantinople claimed the title of universal
Bishop.
M. Stapleton has answered fully unto it. This John claimed to him self the
title of universal Bishop, meaning thereby, that there was no Bishop in the
world, but he: which title in deed S. Gregory in that sense could not
brook, but took it to be arrogant, and proud. And we say, as we have
always said, that no Pope ever claimed the title of universal Bishop, in that
sense, that there ought none others to be Bishops but he. And yet S. Gregory
claimed the right title of the Primacie apperteining to his See, in his answer
made to Mauricius the Emperor, as Platina records. And S. Chrysostom,
Chrysos. in Matthew. homil. 55. and in illa verba Ioh. 21. Sequere me. homil. 87.
Aug. de vera religione cap. 45.
as we said before) does not spare to tell al Christian men, that to Peter was
committed the Charge and Cure of the whole world.

Jewel. For although all the world either would, or could give ear, and
credit to one man, yet were not that therefore alvvaies Christian unity. S.
Augustine says, Pride it self has a certain desire of unity, and of
vni^ersal power.


Harding.
What should move you to allege S. Augustine, De vera religione, against the
unity of the whole Church, obeying their universal head? Did S. Augustine
speak any thing of the Pope in that place? What so'euer affection there be of
Pride, or Singularity in the ruler, it touches not others, but disgraceth his
personal acts only, I mean in respect of his own person, not of others, who
do but their duty in obeying what he teaches, or bids, being their
general governor, or head. And in that duty doing, what soever the rulers
affection is in governing, they keep Christian unity i^ Faith, Matthew. 23.
and Doctrine. Upon the chair of Moses, the Scribes and Pharisees have sit,
al things what so ever they tell you, do ye, says Christ. If Christ bad us
to obey the Scribes, and the Pharisees; as long as they sat in Moses chair,
although their life agreed not with their doctrines what can the Popes il
affection of pride hurt the unity of Christian men, who do their duty in
obeying his lawful power?

Jewel. Page 100. An other of M. Hardinges reasons is this: The Church
laboring here in earth, must resemble the Church of the Saints triumphing in
heaven. But in heaven God only is the gouernoure over the whole: Therefore, in
the Church beneathe, the Pope likewise must needs be governor over the
whole. Thus God must be rated to govern above, and the Pope beneath: and so
as one some time said, Diuisum imperium, cum Jove Caesar habet.


Harding.
You falsify my words, and reason, my term is not Must, but, Meet. Show it
not to be meet: Leave you skoffing, and come to the matter. Every good thing
is the worse, that comes into your hands.

Jewel. Page 100. This is a valiant kind of argument. It holds from heaven
to earth, from angels to men, from God to the Pope.


Harding.
Well skoffed M. Jewel. It was not for naught, that the Prophet David in the
description of a blessed man, says among other things, Psalm. 1.
that he sits not in the chair of Mockers, by which word Heretics are
signified, which in deed are very skoffers, and mockers of al good things.
And ween you good Sir* that an argument may not hold from heaven to earth?
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Upon these words, if you list,
Matthew. 6.
may ye not frame an argument, that shall hold from heaven to earth? Now from
Angels to men: Videte ne contemnatis vnum ex his pusillis: dico enim vobis,
Matthew. 18.
quia Angeli eorum in coelis semper vident faciem patris mei, qui in coelu est.
See ye despise not one of these little ones: For I say unto you, that their
Angels in heaven do always see the face of my Father, which is in heaven.
Out of this Scripture, if your good will, and cunning would serve you, ye may
see an argument plainly made, from Angels to men. Likewise from God to the
Pope. Petre amas me? Pasce oues meas. Peter love thou me? Johan. 21.
Feed (or rule) my sheep. If your cunning can not compass such Arguments
M. Jewel, that are used in Scriptures, from heaven to earth, from Angels to
men, from God to the Pope: yet it were good for you to leave skoffing at
such arguments, as are used in the very Scriptures.

Jewel. Page 100. But how knovveth M. Harding what Orders of Angels, and
Archangelles there be in heaven? What they do? How they deal: etc.


Harding. Of Angels, to what purpose Osee was alleged, of the Head invisible,
and visible.
Forsooth I may easily know that, The 14. Chapt.
which is evidently reveled in the Scripture: yea so evidently, that yo^^
ignorance must seem to gross, to ask any such question. Of the Angels.
That there be orders of Angels, it appears bo^^ in diverse other places,
and specially by the fourth Chapter of S. Matthew, where we find that the
Angell^s wait on Christ. Matthew 4.
Behold (says the Euangeliste) the Angels came, and ministered unto him. You
might have found mention of many thousands of Angels, in the 12. Hebre. 12.
Chapter to the Hebrews. There is mention also made of diverse Orders of
Angels in the epistle to the Colossians. Coloss. 1.
Sieve throni, sine Dominationes, sieve Principatus, sieve Potestates, omnia per
ipsum, and in ipso creata sunt. Ephesians. 3. and 4. Archangelles. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
The like is to be seen in the epistle to the Ephesians. Of Archangelles we
read in the epistle to the Thessalonians, that our Lord shall come down in the
voice, and in the commandment (or shoute) of the Archangel, and in the trompe
of God. In S. Luke we read, that there is more joy in heaven before the
Angels for one sinner doing penance, Luc. 15.
then there is for. 99. just men, that need no penance. In the epistle to
the Hebrews we read, that all the Angels do honor Christ, Hebre. 1.
and that al Angels are spirits to do service, sent into service for them,
that do receive the inheritance of salvation.

Dionysius de Coelesti Hierarch. cap. 6. Tobia. 3.
S. Dionyse the Areopagite speaks of nine Orders of Angels. The Scripture in
sundry places tells us, that the Angels do offer up the prayers of the
faithful before God. This we know of Angels in heaven, that they obey one
God: that they are spirits so confirmed in grace, that now they can not sin:
that they are ready to do Gods commandment at al times: that there are
Orders among them, as there shall be among them, which shall be saved among us,
some placed in greater glory, then some others, as S. Paul declares by the
diversity of Stars, 1. Cor. 15.
that are not al of one brightness. We know, that they being Spirits
confirmed in grace, having no motions at al to do any thing contrary to Gods
will, need no Pope to correct, to pounish, to excommunicate, to deprive, to
depose them, and to assoile them. This much we know concerning the Angels,
and this might you M. Jewel also have known. And this confession, if occasion
so required, would better have becomme you, then your skoffes, fitter for a
common Table Ieaster, then for a man, who professes to teach others the
duty of life, and truth of belief.

To S. Dionysius, M. Ievvel commonly argues negatiuely from autorities
that wrote purposely of the government of the Church, and made no mention of
one Pope, which you obiecte: we say, that we hold him for unskillful in his
Logique, who deduceth Arguments negatiuely from any Fathers authority: as for
example: That Father, or this Father spoke not of the proceeding of the holy
Ghost from the Father and the Son: Ergo there is no such thing. Yet it had
benne more for your commendation, to have argued from Heaven to earth, from
Angels to men, from God to the Pope, then so sottelike to reason against al
good order of learning, from Authorities negatiuely. Howbeit in deed the manner
of your reasoning is, not from God to the Pope, from Angels to men, from
Heaven to earth* but from truth to error, from Religion to Hugonotrie, from
Christianity to Paganism, from good to naught, from Christ to Antichriste
from God to Satan. which manner of arguments is not very wholesome.

The Objection of the name of Iosue mistaken for Osee.
You make much a do, for that I mistake the na^^ of Iosue, for Osee. To
mistake one man's name for an other, as long as there is no prejudice thereby
made to the necessary doctrine of our Faith, and the place truly alleged:
although the name were mistaken, it is but human error. In that I named
Iosue for Osee, I acknowledge mine error, and wish you would do^ the like
when you err, and then ye should call in again all that you have written
hitherto, wherein you should do well in wise men's Judgment, and most safely
for the wealth of your own soul. But to train the people from truth to
heresy, and stubbornly therein to continue, as you do M. Jewel, and where no
other shifte will serve you, there to assaie, whether you can skoffe out the
truth: this is not human error, but a Deuilish practice.

Osee to what purpose alleged.
The place of Osee was alleged for no other purpose, but to show, that God does
us to understand, that his Church militant is then in most perfect state, and
in best order, when al true believers, both converted Jews, and Gentiles, do
obey one Head. Now then, if in the Government of one Head consiste the best
Order, and state, that can be planted in the Church, though it be true, Christ
one and only head Invisible.
that our Savior Christ be that one Invisible Head, as I never denied, but
that he is: yet that the Visible Church atteine unto that perfect Order and
state, which the Prophet Osee commends for the best, Head Visible
it behooves, that it have one Visible general Head, that shall keep and
maintain visible, and external Order among all the faithful. This is the force
of my drifte. Neither for all that did I deny, Johan. 10.
but that Christ is that one Head, that Christ is that one Shepeheard that S.
John spoke of, which I do openly confess in my Confutation of the Apology,
in the self same place, where I allege the saying of the Prophet Osee, and
the saying of Christ out of S. Ihon. So that you needed not to allege all that
out of S. Hierome, Nicolaus Lyra, and S. Augustine, to prove that which I
confessed before. M. Jewels common manner in all his vvriti^ges
But this is your manner always M. Jewel, to show your copy in matters
undoubted, and impertinent, and when ye come to join with your adversary in
the very point, that lies in controversy, then are you possessed with a
dumme spirit, and for ought that is to the purpose, you can say nothing.

The argument, which you allege out of Opus Tripartitum annexed to the Council
of Constance, I marvel that you had the face to bring it forth. M. Jew.
allegeth obiectio^s made by Doctors against the truth, as if they were the
Doctors own meaning.
What mean you M. Jewel? Is it not there set for an objection against the
truth? And even there in the next Chapter answered, and soiled? What learned
man ever brought in his Defense the Objections set forth by a Doctor, to
the intent by the solution of them the truth may more clearly appear? By this
you show your self to be very shameless, and that you care not in what
trippes learned men take you, so that for the time it be not espied, and you
to the unlearned people seem a ioily fellow. I refer you for the Answer to
that Objection to the chapter there following, where you shall find it fully
answered.

Jewel. Page 102. Operis Tri part. li. 2. cap. 6. Council. Tom 2
Like as the Emperor Caligula somitemes took of the hea^ of (...) great God
Iuppit^r, and set on an other head of his own: even so by these
interpretations, and Gloses, M. Harding smites of Christ (his great God, M.
Jewel should have said to make it answer to Iuppiter Caligulas great God) the
only Head of the Church, Suetonius Tranquil. in Caligula.
and sets on the Pope.


Harding. Answer to the former Comparison.
The 15. Chapt.
What Sir, do you compare me with Caligula the Emperor, and Christ our
Savior God and Man, with Iuppiter the Idol? This comparison is not very
handsome. But mark gentle Reader, how M. Jewel speaks more honestly of me,
Christ by M. Jew compared to Iuppiter.
then he was aware. Here are Caligula the Emperor, and I, compared together:
Iuppiter, the Emperor Caligulaes great God, and Christ my great God. In which
comparison, as M. Jewel has ouershot him self too foul, in comparing Christ
with Iuppiter: even so have I some cause to yield him a few thin and
sclender thanks, for that he acknowlegeth Christ to be my great God, as he is
in deed, though this confession seems to have leapt out of his pen
unadvisedly.

The difference that he would not see, stands in this point, that Iuppiters
own head, and the head that Caligula took to set in place of it, could not
agree together, without monstrous deformity, and inequality to Iuppiters
body. Christ the supreme Head of the whole Church, Christ the head invisible
by i^fluence of
and the Pope, who is but Christ's Vicare, his ministerial head, or vnderhead,
do maruelously agree together: So that the one is the Invisible Head
continually by influence of grace, the Pope the Visible Head, each Pope for his
time, to keep Visible rule, and Order among the people, by visible mean,
whereof as being men they have need.

An other difference he might have seen also, if it had pleased him: that
Jupiter the Idol had no people under him to be exercised in the absence of his
own head, in the use and right faith of the holy Sacraments: Christ our
Savior is visibly absent for the exercise of Christian peoples faith in him,
and in the holy Sacraments. Whose visible absence, if it were not supplied by
a visible general Head, under whom the people might be ruled, there would
follow infinite disorder, and Babylonical Confusion.

Jewel. Page 102. Thus we are taught, that Christ is neither the head of his
own body the Church, nor the shepeherd of his own flock, but only the
Pope.


Harding.
Among many other lies, which you have devised against us, to sport your
self withal, this is not only a flat lie, but also a skoffing, and a
sclaunderous lie. We never taught so, we never wrote so. If ye prove it not,
let the shame be yours.

Jewel. And yet Chrysostom says, Qui non vtitur Sacra Scriptura, sed ascendit
aliunde, id est, non concessa via, hic non Pastor est, Chrysostom. in Johan.
Homil. 58
sed fur. Whosoever uses not the holy Scripture, but comes in an other
way, that is not lavvful (which is by false Gloses, and corruptions) he is
not the Shephearde of the flock, he is the thief.


Harding. M. Jewel in reasoning suppresseth that, wherein the proof rests:
so his arguments must be weak and vain.
The.16. Chapt.
You lay forth many solemn Majors diverse times, as this out of S. Chrysostom,
and thereupon without either laying forth of the Minor, or proof thereof
(notwithstanding the whole matter on your behalf to be proved stands in the
Minor) you use to infer your seely Conclusions. As here you reason after this
wise. Who so ever uses not the holy Scripture, but comes in from an other
where, that is to say, by a way not lawful (for so S. Chrysostom speaks,
and not as you have falsified him) he is not the shephearde of the flock:
Ergo, the Pope is not the shephearde of the flock. How proves M. Jewel this
argument with all the Logique he has? Had it not ben reason, Chrysostom. in Math:
hom. 55. and in illa verba. Johan. 21. sequere me. Hom. 87. August. Contra
Donatist. Lib. 6.1. Q. 3. vocantur Canes.
he had first proved, that the Pope uses not the holy Scripture, neither
comes in according to the Scripture, but that he comes in by some other
unlawful way, which ought to have been his Minor? This because he saw he was
not hable to prove, he thought it good policy to suppress it with silence.

But let the question be asked of S. Chrysostom, who uses holy Scripture
better, he that says, that the charge of the whole world was committed to
Peter (and consequently to his successors) as the same Chrysostom says: or
he, that denies flatly, that any such thing may be concluded out of the
Scripture.

It is to true, that you bring in of S. Augustine, that the note, or mark of a
Bishop many give unto Wolves, and be Wolves them selves. You had never the
true Character of a Bishop, being never lawfully consecrated by three lawful
Bishops, as the holy Canons require: and yet you bear your self for a
Bishop, and usurp Bishoply office: therefore you are one of the Wolves, that
S. Augustine spoke of. Leave ravening, and deceiving of Gods people, and
become penitent, that you may be saved with the meek sheep of Christ's
flock, and not be damned everlastingly with the ravening Wolves.

Jewel. Page 102. and. 103. M. Harding says farther: For as much as Christ
is ascended into Heaven, and is now no more conversant amongst us in visible
Form, as he was before, it behooved some one man to be put in commission for
bearing the charge, and taking care for the whole Church. Therefore he said
unto Peter, Feed my flock: Confirm thy Brethren. First what ancient
learned Father ever thus scanned the words of the popes commission? Or why
does M. Harding auouche so great a matter of him self only, without farther
Authoritite? etc.


Harding. Feed my Sheep, are words of Peter's commission to govern the
Church, and the same is proved by the Fathers.
You tell my tale in such wise, The.17. Chapt.
as you may best make the matter seem weak, and sclender. First I think
good here to set before the reader (who is now made judge of this controversy)
mine own words, as I uttered them my self. Then I shall the better frame my
Answer to that you obiecte. Thus I say.

Where these Defenders, ^onf^t. fol. 46. a.
as others the Adversaries of this unity say, that Christ is this one
shepherd, this one Head who is so, Christ is the principal Head, and of him
self: the Pope is the Ministerial Head, and under Christ, and for Christ Math.
28. 1. Pet. 2. A man is necessary to do Christ's steed of outward government
in in the Church. The necessity and institution of the Head of the Church.
Genes. 32. Number. 12.
we deny not, Shepeheard of his flock^, Head of his body, Bridegroom of his
spouse, Prince of hi^ kingdom, as it is before declared: yet say they therein
nothing to the disproufe of the catholic doctrine touching unity of the
Head, which is in steed, and ministry of Christ. For whereas the Father has
given to Christ al power in heaven and earth, so as he only is the King, Head,
ruler, Judge of al, the Pastor and Bishop of our souls: and therefore they
which we acknowledge to be Kings, Headdes, Rulers, judges, Pastors, and
Bishops in earth, be his Vicares, Lieuetenantes, Vicegerentes, and Ministers:
all this power, by what name so ever it be called, being such as is exercised
and administered by his word: need it is, that for as much as Christ now
dwells not with us in visible presence, his Church have one man to do his
steed of outward ruling in earth, by his word to administer all that is
behooful, and to perform the duty of the head in respect of the body.

Now that Christ is not conversant with us visibly, as he was with his
Disciples before his passion, and preaches no more unto us with his own mouth
sensibly: to atteine the understanding of his will, we may not look to have
God appear unto us, as he did unto the Fathers of the old Testament, to
speak to us, as he did to Moses face to face, mouth to mouth, as the
Scripture says, to send us his Angel, as he did to the Virgin Marie, to
instruct us with visions from Heaven, Luc. 1. Act^. 10. 2. Cor. 12.
as he instructed Peter, to take us up into the third heaven, as he took
Paul, there to hear the secrets of his will: but it behooves us to be content
for the working of that which remains to be done touching our Salvation,
with such order, as has pleased him. For it is manifest, that Christ
perfiteth all the Sacraments of the Church. He it is, that baptizeth, he it
is, that forgeueth sins, he is the true priest, that has offered him self
on the Cross, and by whose power his body is daily consecrated, and offered on
the Altar. Yet because he would not remain in visible presence with all
believers, he chose men to be his Ministers, by whom the forsaid things
should be done, and ministered to them. By like reason, forasmuch as he would
take from the Church his corporal and visible presence, it behooved some one
man to be put in Commission for bearing the charge, and taking care of the
Church in lieu, and steed of him self. For this purpose before his Ascensio^
he said to Peter, whose love he had tried, and found to be most fervent above
al others, feed my sheep, and before his Passion, Thou being again converted,
strengthen thy brethren, Johan. 2^. Luc. 22. Math. 16.
And to him specially he said by promise, To thee will I give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, thereby to show, that the power of the keys should be
derived to others by him for the better keeping of the unity of the Church.

Now let it be judged, with what substantial learning you have confuted this
doctrine. If it had not ben sound, and such as clearly opens, what we
mean, The former words of my Confutation left out of M. Ievvelle^ Defense.
when we call the Pope the chief Pastor, and supreme Governor of Christ's
Flock: doubtelesse you would not have leafte it out of your book. For you
(making a show, as though you had printed my whole book again, and so
confuted it) take only that pleases you, and leave out what seems to hard
for you to answer, mangling, disordering, and confounding my whole treaty, to
thin^^^^ it may bear the less face of learning, and of good prouf^ of the
things I entreat of, which is a foul practice n^uer used by any learned man
hitherto. And yet you would men to believe, you deal truly, and plainly in
laying forth my Confutation. Yet here having nothing to say else, least you
should seem to give over, you demand of me, what ancient Father ever thus
skanned the words of the Popes Commission, or why I have avouched so great a
matter of my self, without farther authority.

Thus when I bring Fathers, you call for Scripture, when I allege Scripture, M.
Jewels way to continue wrangling. Johan. 21
you ask what ancient Father ever understood it so, or why I dare so handle
the Scripture: so ye will be sure not to lack matter of wrangling, what so ever
I say. Yet thus I answer. It is no hard piece of work to prove by sufficient
authority, that these words, Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep, spoken to
Peter, and in him to his successors, In Math. Homil. 55 and in Johan. Homil.
87. Grego. lib. 4. epi. 32. Pascere,
gave Peter and his successors, Authority g^neral to govern the whole
Church. S. Chysostome treating upon these words, says, as it is before
alleged, that the charge to rule the whole world was given to Peter, and
consequently to his successors. S. Gregory says the same, as is before
rehearsed. Pascere, is not a word that signifies to feed only, as you know,
but also to rule and govern, and therefore Homere calls King Agamemnon,
(...), the Pastor, that is to say, the ruler of the people.

And that it may appear, that I auouche not this matter, and apply the place
of S. John's Gospel to it of my self only without farther Authority, as you
say: it may please you to hear S. Ambrose teaching the same, and in manner
with the same words, that I used, writing upon the.24. Chapter of S. Luke,
thus he says. Ambro in cap. 24. Lucae. Johan. 21.


Dominus interrogabat, non vt disceret, sed vt doceret, quem eleuandus in
coelum amoris sui nobis velut Vicarium relinquebat. Sic enim habes: Simon
Ioannis diligis me? vtique tu scis Domine, quia amo te. Dicit ei Jesus, pasce
agnos meos. Been conscius sui, non ad tempus assumptum, sed iam dudum Deo
cognitum Petrus testificatur affectum. Quis est enim alius, qui de se hoc
facile profiteri possit? Et ideo quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus
antefertur. Our Lord asked (that question of Peter, whether he loved him) not
to learn, but to teach him, whom being to be lifted up into heaven he leaft
unto us, The Pope is leaft to us, as the Vicare of Christ's love tovvard us.
as the Vicare of his love (that is to say in plainer terms, such a one, as
should be in steed of Christ in those things, that for his tender love
toward us he would us to have.) For even so thou have (in the Ghospel) Simon
the son of John love me? Yea verily thou know Lord, that I love thee.
Jesus says unto him: Feed my lambs. Peter here knowing right well the
secrets of his own conscience, professes that his good affection (which he
bare to Christ) was not now entered into him for the present time, but that
God knew it long before. For who is the man else, that may soon profess this
much of him self? And therefore in as much as he only of al professes it, he
is preferred before al.

Lo M. Jewel, by this you may see, I spoke not of this matter altogether of
mine own head, and without farther authority. S. Ambrose says in effect so
much as I said, That Christ, for so much as he should ascend into heaven, and
withdraw his visible presence from us, lea^^ behind, him for our behoof S.
Peter, as Vicare of his love. Now of this I may conclude, for so much as
Christ, who died for our love, and redeemed us with his blood, ceasseth not to
love us: that he leafte not only Peter, to be the Vicare of his love for his
own life only, but also Peter's Successors for ever, that is to say, the
Popes, for other Peter's Successors we know not.

Arnobius likewise understands this supreme charge, and authority to be
given unto Peter, and therefore consequently unto Peter's Successors, applying
the same text of Scripture to that purpose. These be his words. Arnobius in
Psalm. 138. Johan. 10. Johan. 21.
Nullus Apostolorum nomen Pastoris accepit. Solus enim Dominus Jesus Christus
dicebat, ego sum Pastor b^nus: and iterum, me, inquit, sequunturoues meae. Hoc
ergo nomen sanctum, and ipsius nominis potestatem post resurrectionem suam
Petropoenitenti concessit, and ter negatus, negatori suo hanc, quam solus
habuit, tribuit potestatem. None of the Apostles has received the name of
Pastor (or shepeheard.) For our Lord Jesus Christ alone said, I am a good
Shepeheard. And again, my sheep (says he) follow me. So then this holy name,
and the power of the name, our Lord after his resurrection gave to Peter being
repentant, and being thrice denied, he gave the authority, which he had
alone, unto his denier.

Peter by the three fold commandment of feeding, must feed al sorts of the
Flock the la^bes, the young little Sheep, and the great Sheep.
S. Ambrose according to the word of commission spoken to Peter thrice repeted,
feed, feed, feed, notes three degrees of authority to be exercised in
feeding. Iam non agnos, vt primo, quodam lacte vescendos, nec oniculas, vt
secundo, sed oues pascere iubetur, perfectiores vt perfectior gubernaret. Now
(that is to say, when Christ said at the third time, Feed) Peter is not
commanded to feed lambs, that are to be fed with a certain milk, as at the
first time: nor is he commanded to feed the little sheep, as at the second
time: but the Sheep he is commanded to feed, that the perfiter should
govern them, that are of the perfiter sort.

That learned Father S. Leo says, Leo epist. ad Episcopos per prouincia^
Viennen. constitut.
Cum Petro prae caeteris soluendi and ligandisit tradita potestas, pascendarum
tamen ouium cura specialius mandata est. Whereas the power to loose, and bind
was delivered unto Peter above the rest, yet the charge of feeding the Sheep,
is committed to him more specially. The same S. Leo says of Peter in an other
place, Non solum Romanae sedis, sed and omnium Episcoporum nouerunt esse
primatem. As for Peter, they know him not only to be chief ruler of the Sea
of Rome, but also the Primate of al Bishops. Peter primate of al Bisshoppes.
Sermon. 2. in Aniuers. Assumpt.


What shall I allege S. Gregory, whose words be most manifest? He
acknowlegeth S. Peter, and therefore every Bishop of Rome his Successor, to
have the charge of the whole Church by commission of Christ, alleging to that
purpose the words, for alleging of which you blame me, as though I did it of
mine own self without farther authority. Thus he says. Epist. 32.
Cunctis Euangelium scientibus liquet, etc. It is evident to all that know the
Gospel, that the cure and charge of the whole Church, has been committed by the
word of our Lord, to the holy Apostle Peter prince of all the Apostles: For to
him it is said. Peter, Joan. 22. Luc. 22.
love thou me? feed my sheep: to him it is said, Behold Satan has desired
to sifte you, as it were wheat, and I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy
faith fail not. Math. 16.
And thou being once converted, strengthen thy brethren. To him it is said.
Thou (...) Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. And unto thee I will give the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven: And whatsoever thou bindest upon earth, shall be bound also
in heaven, and what so ever thou lowsest on earth, shall be lowsed also in
heaven. Behold he receives the keys of the heavenly kingdom: the power of
binding and lowsing is given to him: the charge of the whole Church, and
principallitie is committed to him. And here I will add that follows in S.
Gregory, and tamen vniuersalis Apostolus non vocatur, and yet he is not called
the universal Apostle, least M. Jewel find great fault with me, Reply 225.
as he does in his Reply, for leaving it out, and least once again he feine,
that I have the Chinecoughe, and that I set S. Gregory to school, Gregor.
lib. 6. epistol. 37.
and keep him in awe, and suffer him not to tell more then I will give him
leave, and many such gaie good morowes, that needed not at al. The same S.
Gregory writes in much like sort to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria.

Leaving al other Fathers, that might here to this purpose be alleged,
Bernardus lib. 2. de Consideratione.
for breuities sake I will end with S. Bernarde, who writes thus to Eugenius.
Other pastors have their flocks assigned unto them, each man one. Al are
committed to thee, the one whole flock to one. Neither art thou only the
Pastor of all the sheep, but also the only Pastor of all the Pastors.
Demaundest thou of me, how I prove it? Forsooth out of the word of God.
Joan. 21.
For I pray you to whom (I will not say of the Bisshoppes) but also of the
Apostles, were all the sheep so absolutely, and indeterminately committed? If
thou love me Peter, feed my sheep: which sheep? The people of this, or of
that city, of this, or of that country, or kingdom? My sheep, quod he. Who
now does not evidently see that Christ did not appointe him certain, but
assigned him al? Where no distinction is made, there nothing is excepted. Thus
you see, how little cause you had to say, why does M. Harding auouche so great
a matter of him self only without farther authority.

Jewel. Page 103. And if this so large Commission be to Feed, and feed so
many, why then does the Pope feed so little?


Harding. The Pope feeds, and why Christ appointed him to be his Vicare.
The stubbornness of Heretics is a let, The.18. Chapt.
that his diligent feeding can not take place in many. How many Articles of
the Christian Doctrine had the peruersitie of Heretics wrapped up in a
Confusion, and brought in doubt, that few men knew, how to unfold them?
The Popes diligent feeding has so by General Councelles through his authority
and care assembled, unfolded, and disclosed all the false crafts, and
sleightes of Heretics: that now every man that will, may have in a
readiness by perusing the Canons of the Councelles, what Doctrine is true, and
wholesome, what is false, and heretical. Of late years he employed his
diligence in calling all The Pope feeds, but some refuse his good food, and
feed of Poison.
the Protestants unto the Council of Trent, he gave them safe Conductes to
come, and depart without danger of their persons, and there, during the time
of their abode, to propone, argue, and dispute of the points in controversy
with all freedom. Why the Ministers of England vve^t not to the General
Council at Trent, most liberal and free Safe co^ductes being granted them.
But ye of England knowing your own weakness, and that ye were not so well
hable to prove your doctrine in learned Assemblies, as ye were with boasting
Chalenges, and bold talks to prate it out of pulpites among the ignorant at
home, least with shame ye should there have been put to silence, and proved
unlearned: wylily absented your selves. Notwithstanding liberty was given you,
to come, and say for your Gospel, what ye could, and as it appears in the
Acts of the same, to frame your safe Conducte, if ye desliked the form set
forth in the Council, in as ample manner for your own safegarde, and
benefit, as ye could devise.

Jewel. Page 103. Again, where learned M. Harding to reason thus: Christ is
ascended into heaven, Ergo, the Pope is head of the whole world?


Harding.
Nay, where learned M. Jewel to fashon such peevish arguments, of his own
devise, and fathering them upon his Adversary, to scoff at them, as if they
were of his Adversaries making? If this Argument be naught, let him amend it,
that framed it. If it be ridiculous, the Reader may see, what a ridiculous head
he has, that brought it forth. My reason depends in this sort. If it had
pleased Christ to have remained here visibly among us always, and to have
taken continual order him self for the external government of the Church: we
should not have needed any other general head, but Christ him self, who had been sufficient. But for as much as Christ's bodily, and visible presence through
his Ascension was for good purposes taken away from us, that we might have
better occasion to exercise faith, and the holy Sacraments: it was needeful,
that in his steed he should leave some one General Vicegerent, In. 24. caput
Luca.
and Vicare of his love, as S. Ambrose terms him, that should have full
authority to rule the whole Church. The parts of this reason are well linked
together, both by divinity, and also by logique. As M. Jewel has framed it,
it serves for nothing, but to make sport among Prentises. I allege not
Christ's Ascension for the full and sufficient cause of having one general Head,
as M. Jewel would bear men in hand, if any be so simple to believe him: The
cause why Christ has placed his Vicare here in his stead. Ambros. in. 24.
cap. Lucae.
but as the occasion, why he should place an other in the absence of his
Visible person, in his steed. The necessity of the Church, that disorder and
confusion be avoided, and that unity be kept, considered together with the
great love, that Christ has to the Church, is the full cause why Christ
placed in his steed a general Vicegerent, Vicarium amoris sui, the vicare of
his love, as S. Ambrose calls him.

Jewel. Ibidem. But ye say, God speaks not now unto us mouth to mouth. etc.


Harding. What rule is like to be, if the Scripture be made ruler and governor.
Your drifte is in this place, The. 19. Chapt.
to put the whole government of the Church quite from the Pope, whom
Chrysostom, as I have told you before, takes to be the universal Head,
because he is S. Peter's Successor, and to drive us to deliver the whole rule
unto the Scripture, and that being removed quite from any one certain sense,
and leafte to men's Fantasies to descant upon it. What unity, and good Order
will follow thereof, they of Germany, ye of England, the Lutherans, the
Zuinglians, the Caluinistes, the Osiandrines, the Zuencfeldians, the
Anabaptists, the new Puritanes that now spring up so freshly, and other sects
wherewith the world swarmeth, have told us already, the which could never
yet come to any good unity, and common agreement.

Ye leave us also an other sort of governors, Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, of whom S. Paul speaks. If
these be the Governors appointed by holy Scripture, how falls it out, that
ye, contrary to Scripture, have given the supreme government of your Church of
England to lay Princes, some being under their nources governance, some being
women? The cas^ thus standing, if the Ministers agree not in doctrine, how
shall unity be made, and the people kept vnpoisoned?
If these forenamed the Apostles, etc. be the right governors, how happeth it,
that they can do nothing concerning Order to be taken for the Church, but by
authority derived from a mere lay power? If these, that is to say, the
successors of the Apostles, Prophets, etc. be the right governors, what if
any of these jar, and fall at square among them selves (as it has oftentimes
ben seen) either within the compass of one Realm, or in diverse Realms, and
do poison the people with sundry Heresies, to whom shall we resort to have
them called home, and reduced unto order? whom have you least us in this case,
as Judge, and supreme Governor to end al Dissensions, and to condemn
perilous Heresies? They of Germany take them selves to be as good men, and
to know the Truth, as well (if no better) as either D. Parker of Canturburie,
or M. Grindal of London, or Bacheler Young of York, or any of the other wiued
Priests, Monks, and Friars, yea as M Jew. of Sarisburie him self.

Ye of England will not yield to them of Saxony, they of Lifeland, Swethen,
Denmark, Pole, Scotland, Zuitzerland, and Geneua, will not yield them selves
subjects to either of you both. And yet every one of these sundry
congregations will preach still the doctrine of their own sect, one contrary
to an other. How now M. Jewel? Let us hear what wise tale you ca^ tell us, by
whose authority we may come from these great Dissensions, and manifold
Schisms, to Unity. Entreaty can not do it. Colloquies, meetinges, and
Conferences of the learned of each sect, can not bring it to pass. The more
it has been attempted, the worse end has ever benne concluded. Have not you
leaft us then a beautiful Church? a blessed company of Ministers, that will not
come to Order? Yea leaving us without any lawful authority of one Head to
reduce us to unity, do you not leave us in endless strifes, and
indeterminable broilles? Be we not much bound unto you? Were not the world
wise, and well advised, to forsake al old orders, and to put confidence in this
your new devise?

The same self S. Chrysostom, whom you allege to have al ruled by the
Scriptures, saw a little farther, then you see M. Jewel, when he said, that the
charge of the whole world was committed to Peter. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil.
55. Ambros. in cap. 24. Luca. Theodoritus in Epist. ad Renatum. Cyprianus. lib.
3. Epist. 13.
So did S. Ambrose, when he named Peter, and by a consequent Peter's Successor,
the Vicare of Christ's love. So did Theodorit^^, when he said, the Sea of Rome
holds the stern, and has the government of the Churches of the whole world.

You allege S. Cyprian, though far otherwise then he writes, and that out of
that epistle, in which he wills Stephanus the Pope to depose Martianus the
Bishop of Arles in France for Heresy, and put an other in his room, which
argues a supreme authority of government in the Pope: you allege him I say,
as if he said, that therefore there are many Bishops in the Church, that if
one fall into heresy, the rest may help. But what if there be as many
Heretic Bishops, as there be Catholic, as it has commonly benne seen in
the East Church? What if the Heretics, being more learned, will not yield?

Cyprian. ad Cornelium. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
S. Cyprian in an other place spares not to tell you, that Schisms, and
heresies rise of no other cause, then for that the whole brotherhed, that is to
say, the company of Christian people, Obey not one high Priest, that is in
Christ's steed. Which saying by what reason it takes place in every several
Dioces, by the same it is to be understood in respect of the whole world.
For as Heresies rise of disobedience of the people to their Bishop: so they
rise no less, yea rather much more, as experience teaches, of the
disobedience of the Bishops them selves, if they will not be under one Head.
And as the people are not kept in unity, but by being under one Bishop, so
neither the Bishops, except they be likewise under one chief Head, and
ruler, who is the Successor of Peter, to whom, as loving Christ more then the
rest, which the Scripture shows, the charge, not only of the lambs, and
weaker sheep, but also of the great and stronger sheep, was committed, as S.
Ambrose before alleged, has well noted.

Whether S. Peter were fault worthy, when S. Paul reproved him, as you tell us
without proof, Defense page 103.
it remains in question betwixt S. Augustine, and S. Hierome. But if there
were any thing worthy of reprehension in S. Peter that S. Paul saw, there was
great humility in S. Peter to agnise the fault by the warning of his
inferior. Likewise there was in S. Victor the Pope, in that he would give ear
unto S. Ireneus. Of that S. Peter's humility thus speaks S. Cyprian in his
epistle to Quintus, which is also rehearsed of S Augustine. August. li. 2. de
Baptis. cont. Donatist. cap. 1.
Nam nec Petrus, quem primum Dominus elegit, and super quem aedificauit
Ecclesiam suam, cum secum Paulus de Circumcisione disceptaret, postmodum
vendicauit sibi aliquid insolenter, aut arroganter assumpsit, vt diceret se
primatum tenere, and obtemperari a nouellis and posteris sibi potius debere.
Example of humility to S. Peter.
For neither Peter whom our Lord chose to be first, and upon whom he builded
his Church, at what time Paul reasoned with him about Circumcision, by and by
challenged any thing proudly unto him self, or stately took ought upon him, as
to say, that he held the Primacie (or the chief rule over al) and that such
as came newly to the Faith, and were his aftercommers, ought rather to obeie
him. But this kind of humility is not found among Heretics. The more
courteously they be warned of their Heresy, the more stubborn they grow, and
stay not so, but do the uttermost they can, to make their parties as good, as
the Catholics, as by sundry old heretics, to them that have read the
Tr^gedies by them played in the Church, is most evident. How now M. Jewel?
What remedy? Shall we resort in this case to any Head, that has General
authority, or stand still iarring, and snarling the one at the other, without
alremedie? For ought I see, you are like to leave us still in the briers.

Touching your gloses of the Canon Law, they may perhaps one day, if it
shall be thought worth the labor, be altogether answered in some one several
treatise, where doubtelesse it shall appear, to your small estimation, with what
beggarly rags, and clowtes, you have patched together your clowted cloak.

Jewel. Page 104. For the rest, M. Harding says, One King is hable to rule one
Kingdom: Ergo, one Pope is hable to rule the whole Church.


Harding.
My talk runs not so bare, as you rehearse it: your grace is alwaie to
report worse, then you find. I said, that a King (or Queen) in governing a
Realm, rules not al in his own person, but does many things by his Deputees
and Officers. Even so, why may not the Pope in all Christendom take order, by
other fit men having from him commission, notwithstanding his person be not
present? For very shame M. Jewel, make not your Adversaries tale worse then you
find it: For by that you must much discredit your cause.

Jewel. Page 104. Of the government of Princes we have daielie practice: But
of Popes, that ever used this universal Dominion over the whole Church of God,
M. Harding is not hable to shevve us one.


Harding. The government of the whole Church exercised by the Popes actually.
If the Popes manner had benne to bring men in subjection by the Sword, and
force of Arms, The 20. Chapt.
as it is not, which thing Kings have used to do: then had ye as well known
the Popes Universal Government (which you had rather call Dominion) by
practice, as you do now know the Kings. Or were it so that ye fealte so
sensibily the pain of Excommunication, as ye do the torments, that Kings
use against Rebels, when they once draw their sword of correction: you
would much more fear to offend the Pope, then ye do now the force of
Princes. But your manner is always to fear him, that has the sensible rod
in his hand, ready at a word to give the stroke: the Pope because he uses
long patience, before he strikes, and when he strikes, his stroke brings no
bodily pain, but causes a spiritual separation of man's soul for his
contumacie, from the unity of the Church, and from God, which is not sensibly
fealte: therefore ye fear to offend Princes, and utterly set naught by the
Popes authority.

But what if none of the Popes hitherto ever exercised their universal
government over the whole Church of God (which in deed is not true) is the^^
right therefore any thing the less? Not at al. The Duke of Sauoie (you know)
has in right the Dominion and rule of Geneua, yet they of the town (such is
the spirit that your holy Gospel breaths into the people) like errant
Rebels have kept him out of his right many years. And what if this be not
true, that you say? What if diverse Popes may be named, that have ruled the
whole Church, both the East, and the Weast, as far as any Christian Emperor
extended his Dominion? May you not then revoke your stout assertion? You have
read, I suppose, of the great council of Chalcedon under Pope Leo, and of the
great Council of Lateran under Innocentius tertius, and the Councelles of
Florence, and of Lions. How say you, I pray you, find ye not there, that the
Greek Church, as well as the Latin Church, agnised the Popes Supremacy? I
deny not, but that a few Heretics, or Schismatiques perhaps might
disobeie him at certain time, and in certain places. But what then? So do
rebels oftetimes disobeye their Princes. His authority notwithstanding took
place through the whole Church among obedient Christians.

Jewel. Page 104. But God be thanked, it appears already to al them that have
eyes to see, that we have not departed from the servile obedience of that See,
But upon just cause, and good a^ise.


Harding.
The 21. Chapt.
Yea God wot, upon as just causes, as they of Germany rebelled against
Charles the fifth, that noble Prince, their lawful Emperor, or, if ye list,
upon as just causes, as they of Geneua departed from the Duke of Sauoie their
lawful Prince, or, if ye will wade farther, upon as just causes, as the
Huguenotes of France have, to remove their lawful king from the godly and
accustomed government of his realm, by open rebellion, now the second time.

What you account servile obedience, Servile obedience.
I know not, but of this I am well assured: that such government as ye, and they
of your spirit use in some places, when the world serves your turn for the
establishing of your Gospel to work your policies, may well be called a yoke
made of hard iron, whereas the Popes yoke (if it must needs be called a yoke,
Yoke of iron, yoke o^ wood.
because ye speak of servile obedience) is but of soft wood, that is to say,
light, and easy. As al thieves would gladly depart from the obedience of
their lawful Judge, and call it Servile, if that might be allowed: even so al
such adversaries of the Catholic Church, can think every small cause, yea
being no just cause at al, sufficient to depart from the obedience of the Pope
the chief Pastor, whose office is to condemn al their Heresies, as al your
Heresies at this day are condemned in the Council of Trent by the Popes
authority.

Touching the argument you make a contrario sensu, Page 104.
out of the words of Calixtus Epistle in Gratian: if you had foreseen the
folly of it, I dare say, Distinct. 12. Non decet. M Iewel^ Argume^^.
you would never have printed it for very shame. The argument is this. What so
ever is done without discretion of Justice, against the order of the Church of
Rome, it may not by any means be allowed: Ergo, what soever is done by
discretion of Justice, notwithstanding it be against the Order of the Church
of Rome: yet ought it to be well allowed. First, your duty had benne, to have
laid the causes of your departure from the Church of Rome before some lawful
Judge, and have proved the causes so alleged, both true and just, and not to
make your selves judges, both of the sufficiency of the causes, and of your
departure. Next, your duty had benne, to have weighed well this Argument,
whether it receives any deceitful sophistication, The folly of M. Ievvelles
argument shevved by the like.
either in it self, or in his like. Is this argument (trow ye) good, M.
Jewel? What so ever thing is done without discretion of Justice, against the
order of Gods law, it may not by any means be allowed: Ergo, what so ever
is done by discretion of Justice, notwithstanding it be against the Order of
Gods law, yet ought it to be well allowed. And yet is this argument in all
points like yours. Such Divinity, such Logique. Well may this Logique be
allowed in your new school at Geneua, in any learned University of
Christendom certainly it will not be allowed. Look what fault ye can find
in the later Argument, the same may ye find in your own. This later may be
a glass unto you, to behold your folio in the first.

The Gloss expressly found contrary to M. Jew.
Verily where you found these words in Gratian, even there in your own Gloss
upon Gratia^, you found your Argument disproued with these very words. Hic
vacat argumentum a contrario sensu: Here the argument deduced of the contrary
sense is void, and holds not. This you saw, or your gatherer for you. Yet
you would it should out, be it taken well, or otherwise. Thus you delight to be
striking, though we can soon heal your wounds. For so you think to persuade
the simple, that ye have much matter against us.

The places of S. Augustine, and of Pius, that you allege, Page 104.
make nothing against the Pope, therefore I marvel why you allege them,
serving you to so little purpose. Perhaps this may be your manner of reasoning:
S. Augustine would not have us to give over to any Bishops, be they never so
Catholic, if they happily be deceived, and be of a contrary judgment to
Scripture: Ergo, we may not believe the Pope, if he be of a contrary
judgment to Scripture. Why did not you first prove, that the Pope has
determined against the Canonical Scriptures, wherein the whole weight of the
matter lies? But your luck is always to leave that unproven, which you should
chiefly prove, and to encomber the Reader most with matters impertinent, and
quite besides the issue. S. Augustines place would have served better to
conclude, that men ought not to believe Heretics, which are certainly
deceived, if they may not believe Catholics, when they be deceived. But
then, where were your credit become, who are proved to be such Wolves, and
Traitors, as S. Bernard spoke of in Goncilio Remensi, which Council you
allege so often times? Page 104.


Jewel. Page 107. S. Hierome says: Dices, super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia:
Hieron. Aduersus Iouinian. lib. 1.
Licet idipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni
coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super omnes Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: Ye
well say, The Church is founded upon Peter: Notvvithstanding in an other
place the same thing is done upon all the Apostles: and al receive the keys of
the kingdom of heaven: and the strength of the Church is founded equally
upon them al.


Harding. M. Jewel allegeth this and other places to his own confusion.
The. 22. Chapt.
What il fortune has M. Jewel ever to allege the Fathers to his own shame?
That so he does, it appears by many other, and by this very place of S.
Hierome against Iouinian, which he allegeth maimedly, cutting of the half
sentence. For the other half sentence is this: tamen propterea inter duodecim
vnus eligitur, vt Capite constituto, Schismatis tollatur occasio. Yet among the
twelve there is one chosen out, to the intent he being ordained Head, the
occasion of Schism be taken away. Thus S. Hierome there. If I had nipte of
such a notable piece of a sentence, M. Jewel would have benne at me with the
Chinecough. etc. It had served S. Hieromes turn better, reasoning against
Iouinian the Heretic (who affirmed the state of Virgins to be of no greater
perfection, then the state of married persons, as M. Jewel does also at this
day, which heresy S. Hierome confuted) never to have granted, that S. Peter,
who had been a married man, was ordained to be the Head of the Church, if it
had benne, as M. Jewel would persuade. But because the truth was, that S. Peter
was appointed Head among the Apostles, S. Hierome does not deny it, but
shows the cause why he was preferred before S. Ihon the Evangelist. This is
M. Jewels plain dealing. What is falsehod, if this be not falsehod?

Jewel. Page 107. S. Chrysostom of Peter says thus: Crysost. in Matthew. h^mil.
83.
Duplex crimen erat, tum quia repugnauit, tum quia caeteris seipsum praeposuit:
Peter was in double fault, both for that ^e vvithstoode Christ, and also
f^r that he set him self before the rest.


Harding.
The common saying is, the blind eats many a fly. Even so does M. Jewel,
for lack of dew consideration devour many a soul error. S. Chrysostom
has not one jot in this place that makes for M. Jewel. He speaks of that
stout confidence, that Peter had of him self, when he said: Mat. 26. Two
faults committed by S. Peter, Zacha. 13
Although they al (meaning the rest of the Apostles) shall be offended by thee,
I will not be offended by thee. Nevertheless he offended twice, says S.
Chrysostom: First, in that he withstoode Christ, and considered not what was
alleged out of Zachary the Prophet before, who said, I will smite the
shepeheard, and the sheep shall be scattered: Yet S. Peter (were it for the
great love, and the affection, that he bare to his Master, or were he touched
with some ambition, and trusted to wade through of him self without farther
help of special grace) warranted the matter, that he would never fall from
Christ. There is one of his faults.

The other fault is, Quoniam praeposuit se illis, because he prefered him
self before the other Apostles. What means that, M. Jewel, say you? What so
ever you would men should think of it, it makes no matter. The right meaning
of the place is, that Peter offended the second time, because he thought him
self more sure, as touching standing to his Master, then all the rest of the
Apostles. What is this to the meaning, that you would feign wring out of this
place: that Peter was not Head of the Apostles? In the self same Homily
before S. Chrysostom calls him, verticem Apostolorum, the very Head, and
chiefest of all the Apostles. Etia^ ipsum Apostoloru^ verticem negare permisit:
Christ suffered (says he) the top, or head him self of the Apostles, to
deny him.

Again, S. Chrysostom faith in an other Homily, as is before told, that
Peter had committed unto him the charge, Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matt.
and government of the whole world. Thus you may see, how al things go
against the hear (as they say) with you M. Jewel, thus always to allege such
sayings out of the Fathers, as further not your cause but rather hinder it. So
shall al they do, that fight against the Truth.

Ievvel. Page 107. Augustine. epist. 86.
S. Augustine makes Peter Felovve, and Equal with the other Apostles: Inter
seconcorditer vixerunt Petrus, and Condiscipuli eius: Peter and his fellows
lived agreably together.


Harding. Peter fellow Disciple with the rest, and yet Head of al, by S.
Augustine.
The 23. Chapt.
Peter, and they that were Christ's Disciples with him, lived concorditer (for
that is S. Augustines word) in good concord together, I grant: what conclude
you thereof? So did Christ, and the Apostles live in concord and agreably
together, and yet there was a difference between them pardy. If you harp upon
the term Condiscipuli, Joan. 15. Matt. 28.
which you interpret fellows, Christ calls his Apostles in one place his
friends, and in an other place, his brothers. And yet every wise man confesses
a difference, and that Christ was their Head, and that they were his
Disciples, and subjects. Even so may we judge of this Fellowship, that was
between Peter, and the rest of the Apostles. How be it, in the self same
Epistle of S. Augustine, S. Peter is called Caput Apostolorum, Coeli ianitor,
and Ecclesiae fundamentum: Augustine. epist. 86.
The Head of the Apostles, the porter of Heaven, and the foundation of the
Church. Which saying not being S. Augustines own, but an other man's, yet his
silence in not speaking against it in that place, proves, that he does well
allow it.

And that to be even so, the same S. Augustine in a Sermon, which he made to
the people, unto whom he spoke always without al obscurity the plain truth,
calls S. Peter Head of the Church saying. Augustine. de tempo. Ser. 124. Head
of the church.
Totius corporis morbum in ipso capite componit Ecclesiae: and in ipso vertice
componit membrorum omnium sanitatem: in Petroscilicet illo, qui dixerat, etiam
si oportuerit me mori tecum, non te negabo. He cures the sickness of the whole
body in (Peter) the very head it self of the Church, and in the very crown
of the head it self, he sets in order the health of all the members: I mean
in the self same Peter, that had said: Although I were driven to die with
thee, Mat. 26.
I will never deny thee.

Jewel. And the very Ordinary Gloss gives these words to S. Paul: Non
didici ab aliis, tanquam a maioribus: sed contuli cum illis, Gloss. Galat. 2.
tanquam cum amicis, and paribus: I learned not of (Peter, and) others as of my
betters, but I had conference with them, as with my Equalles, and friends.


Harding. Difference between learning, and conferring together.
Had M. Jewel learnedly considered the difference, The 24. Chapt.
that is bewixt learning, and conferring, he would never for very shame have
alleged th^s place of the Ordinary Gloss. In learning, the teacher is of
greater dignity, In conferring, what soever the persons otherwise are,
either of one dignity, or of diverse: as touching the act of conference, they
make them selves equal, as does the King with his Counsel, when they lay their
heads together to boult out one matter. Yet no man may thereof reason, that
there is no difference of state betwixt the King, and them of his Counsel: or
that every of the Counsel is of equal state one with an other. What need S.
Paul had of S. Peter to have matters decided by his authority, Act^. 15.
it appears in the Acts of the Apostles, when he with Barnabas, and others,
were sent from Antioche to Jerusalem, to know whether the Gentiles were bound
to be circumcised. But M. Jewels hap is always to fall upon places, that
bring him small worship, or advantage of his cause.

The Apology. Part. 2. Cap, 3. Diui. 4. page 107.
It was said indifferently to them al, feed ye, etc.

Confutation,
We deny that it was said indifferently to them al, Feed ye, Johan. 21.
yea or that it was said at al, Feed ye. To Peter, and none else was it said,
Feed my lambs, Feed my sheep.. Which word of Feeding so singularly spoken
to Peter in the presence of the other Apostles, proves, that it was not
indifferently said to al, Feed ye.

Jewel. Page 107. It forces not greatly what M. Hardinge deny, or grant,
having neither reason nor authority, but only his own. But if power were
not given indifferently to all the Apostles, tell us then, wherein is the ^ddes?
What had Peter more? What had the others less? Or what old Doctor, or
learned Father ever savv this difference?


Harding. M. Jewel is told where he may find his demaundes answered, and are
also here answered in part.
Though we tell you this, The 25. Chapt.
and prove it never so plainly, yet still will you wrangle. The Fathers have
infinite places for Peter's preeminence above the rest, as I have partly here,
but more largely in my Answer Article. 4.
Yea, the self same places of the Fathers, that you allege to prove the
contrary apparently, within few lines after do utterly, and in plain words
so refute you, as your self know, that for very shame you durst not to allege
any whole place of certain the old Fathers, but Iewishly left them
circumcised, as I have showed before in sundry allegations of S. Hierome, of S.
Chrysostom, of S. Augustine, and of others, whereby the Reader has a view,
and may conceive, what you have done in the rest. And yet such is your
impudency, as though you walked invisible, and none were hable to detecte your
false dealing: you call importunately upon us, to show the odds, and to tell
you what authority Peter had, more then the rest: And to declare what old
Father ever saw any such difference. If it may please you to read the
fourth Article of my Answer to your Challenge, M.D. Saunders book entitled,
the Rock of the Church, and M. Stapletons Return of your Untruths upon you
in justification of Untruths, which you impute unto me: there may you have
more old Fathers, then ye have yet, or ever shall be hable to make reasonable
answer unto.

A most plain and evident testimony of the Popes Primacie over all the world.
Chrysostom. homil. 1. de poenite^tia.
In the mean time, tell us what S. Chrysostom meant, when he said thus in his
first homily de poenitentia. Ecclesiae primatum, gubernationemque Petro per
vniuersum mundum Christus tradidit. Christ has delivered unto Peter the
primacie, and government of the Church through the whole world. When ye can
show us such a plain testimony out of any Father, that S. Peter had not the
primacie, and supreme government delivered unto him by Christ: you shall seem
to say somewhat.

Jewel. Page 107. and 108. Christ said equally unto them al. Receive the holy
Ghost: whose sins ye forgive, they are forgeuen: Go into the whole world:
Preach the Gospel to every creature. These words perceive equally unto al.
Peter had no more the holy Ghost, no more power to forgeeue sins, no more
commission to go into the whole world, no more authority to preach the
Gospel, then others had.


Harding.
Why are you so copious in bye matters, wherein I never striued with you, and so
barrein in the principal matter, that lies in controversy betwixt us? Equal
power was granted to the Apostles to gather the Church: this was never denied
you. But their power was not equal to rule the Church, after that it was
gathered from every coaste of the world: The which point you disprove not.

Jewel. Page 108. M. Harding says: To the Rest of the Apostles it was not
said at al, Johan. 21.
Feed ye. To Peter, and to none else was it said, Feed my Lambs, Feed my
sheep. Yet Christ him self says. Quod vni dico, omnibus dico: Marc. 13.
That I say to one, I say to al.


Harding. M. Jewel foully falsifieth the word of Christ him self.
What M. Jewel, will ye never leave your falsifying? The 26. Chapt.
And are ye not a fraide, to corrupt the holy Word of the Son of God him
self? Is our cause so good and substantial, that ye can make no show of
truth aagainst it, but by foul corruption of the Scripture?

Where is this written? Be ye not a fraide for your advantage, to deceive the
world with Scripture of your own making? And were it true that S. Mark had
so written, how can you wreste it to your purpose? Thus it is good Reader. Our
Savior gave a general warning, not only to the Apostles, but to al men
believing in him, to be watcheful against our Lords coming, which shall be
suddeinely, at such time as they know not, and therefore said, Vigilate,
watch ye etc. That it should not be thought he meant only of the Apostles, to
whom he spoke: he added in the end (not as M. Jewel falsely reports, quod
vni dico, omnibus dico, that I say to one, I say to al) but, quod autem vobis
dico, omnibus dico, vigilate. Marc. 13.
What I say to you (my Apostles) that I say to al (Christians who so ever
they be) watch ye. Now comes me M. Jewel in, and by this place would prove,
that the words, which our Savior spoke to Peter in S. John, concerning the
commission he gave him to Feed his Lambs, and his Sheep, were spoken, not to
Peter alone, but to all the Apostles. And why? Forsooth because in this place of
S. Mark, Christ giving a general warning to watch against our Lords
coming, said, What I say to you, I say to al. To al, M. Jewel? But what?
said Christ to al, Pascite? No forsooth good Sir: that he said to al, was,
Vigilate, Watch ye. Certainly the unlearned, that read your books, had
need to watch your fingers.

This is M. Jewels worthy Argument, this is the liberty he gives unto him
self, this is his new profounde Logique. He might by this Scripture as easily
have concluded, that al Christians, as well of the lay and secular sort, were
as well commanded to Feed Christ's Lambs, and sheep, as Peter him self, or
the other Apostles. For if he will grate upon the words (not as he falsely
allegeth them, quod vni dico, omnibus dico, what I say to one, I say to al)
which are not in the Scripture, but, quod autem vobis dico, omnibus dico, what
I say to you (mine Apostles) I say to al (Christians) Why may not every
Tinker, and Sowter take upon him to Feed Christ's Lambs, and Sheep, saying,
if he be rebuked for his presumption, He that said to Peter, Feed my Sheep,
said he not to al in general, What I say to one, I say to al? And if he said
to al, wherefore should I not feed Christ's flock, as well as Peter?

Yea, if either S. Marks Scripture, What I say to you (mine Apostles) I say
to al, or M. Jewels scripture, what I say to one, I say to al, may take
place, and be understood in general: what need shall there be of Bishops,
Priests, Ministers, or of any Order at al, since that by M. Jewels
interpretation, what was spoken to one, or more Apostles, was spoken to al
men, and women indifferently? Such good order will ensue of M. Jewels
disorderly handling of the Scripture. Yea whereas Christ said to Judas, quod
facis, fac citius, By M. Jewels divinity, it may be proved, that every man is
bid to make speed in betraying Christ. Joan. 13. 1. Cor. 3.
do quickly that thou art about to do, every man shall betraie Christ
again. For after M. Jewels divinity, Christ said, what I say to one, I say
to al. O worthy clerk: Nay o miserable people, where such corrupters of
Scripture, have charge of souls.

Jewel. Page 108. S. Paul says: What is Peter, what is Paul, but the
Ministers of Christ, through whom ye have believed? Paul has planted,
Apollo has watered. etc.


Harding. This place of the Scripture, and two other of S. Chrysostom answered,
by which M. Jewel would prove, that Peter had no preminence in government
above the other Apostles.
What conclude you thereupon? The.27. Chapt.
That there is no difference of preeminence betwixt the Apostles? Or, that all the ministers of the Church are equal? Bishops, Priests, and Deacons? I
marvel, why ye allege it. S. Paul's meaning is in that place, that the
Sacraments take not force to work grace by any minister, be he of high, or
low degree, be he good, or be he otherwise. The virtue of the Sacraments is
given by Christ, who is the principal geuer of grace by his Sacraments, as by
instruments. Ergo, says M. Jewel, Peter has no more preeminence to rule the
whole Church, then the rest of the Apostles. How do the iointes of this
argument hang together? By some new kind of Logique I suppose. Certain it
is, the world hitherto never knew any such.

Jewel. Page 108. In Epist. ad Galat. Cap. 1.
Chrysostom says, Angeli, quamlibet magni, tamen serui sunt ac ministri. The
Angels of God, be they never so great, yet are they but Servants, and
Ministers.


Harding.
As well may you beat down the preeminence, that Emperors, and kings have
upon their lay subjects by that place of S. Paul (for kings and Emperors
are but Ministers) as to ouerbeare thereby the preeminence of Peter in
government above the rest of the Apostles.

Yea you may as well conclude thereby a plain equality (such as the
Anabaptists would have) among al Christen men, as equality of Authority
among the Apostles. What mean you M. Jewel? Will you by such a text conueie
to al subjects, equal power, and authority with Kings? to al Deacons with
Priests? to al Priests, with Bishops? to al wives, with their husbands? to
al Children, with their parents? to al scholars with their Masters? Mean you
to bring the world to such a Confusion? It were good you had the counsel of
some learned Physician, to purge you of such wild disordered humors: or at
least, to keep you close in some dark place, til you come to your self
again. For these fantastical dreams signify, your brain is not in good
tempre.

Jewel. Page 108. Chrysostom. homil. 2. in Epist. ad Timoth. 2.
Therefore to conclude, he says: Ne Paulo quide^ obedire oportet, si quid
proprium dixerit, si quid humanum: sed Apostlo Christum in se loquentem
circumferenti: We may not believe Paul himself, if he speak any thing of
his own, or of vvorldely reason: but we must believe the Apostle bearing
about Christ speaking within him.


Harding.
Thus you reason: we may not believe Paul, if he speak any thing of his
own: Ergo, Peter had no preeminence above the rest of the Apostles. Logique
must needs be good cheap, where this wise argument comes to market for good
chaffer. Where finds M. Jewel this new proper Logique? As well might he
conclude: Ergo, Christ has no preeminence above the Apostles. If we search,
and examine S. Chrysostom well, we shall find, that he spoke those words,
against them, that take upon them to judge, and to condemn the life of
Priests, and thereupon break from the unity of Religion. Of which sort M.
Jewel is one, who has now a good while sitten in his throne of Judgment, as
it were, and has condemned the Pope, and the whole clergy, and forsaken the
Catholic faith, and the unity of the Church, for none other cause, for
ought that he can allege, but only for the Popes il life, and for the
negligence of some of the clergy.

Look well upon that Homily of S. Chrysostom M. Jewel, and you shall perceive,
that his discourse is as much directed against your own arrogant manner in
condemning all the Christian world, specially for condemning of the Pope,
because his supreme Authority can not bear with sundry your errors, and
Heresies, as against any man in the world besides. The force of your argument
is this: We may not believe Paul him self, if he speak any thing of his
own Head, thereby to condemn Priests for their living: Ergo, Peter has no
more authority, ne no more power to rule then the other Apostles. O M. Jewel,
call in these arguments for shame of the world, why suffered you them to
escape your pen?

That S. Paul said somevvhat of his own 1. Cor. 7.
But how say you Sir? Shall you not find, where S. Paul spoke of his own some
thing? Have you forgotten, who said, Na^ caeteris ego dico, non Dominus, For to
the rest I say, not our Lord? and yet you must believe him, if you deny not
the Scripture. Again, says he not some thing of worldly reason, as you have
translated, humanum, Romans 6.
where he writes to the Romans, Humanum dico propter infirmitatem carnis
vestrae, I speak as one that follows the trade of man's reason, for the
infirmities sake of your flesh: I trust you will be entreated to believe him.
Thus how discretely you bring in the Fathers to speak for you, I need not to
declare. Your own bad stuff shows it at large.

The Apology. Cap. 3. Diuis. 5. page 108.
And as Hierome says, Al Bishops where so ever they be, be they at Rome,
Ad Euagrium. De Simplicitate praelator.
be they at Eugubium, be they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be al of
like preeminence, and of like priesthood. And as S. Cyprian says, There is
but one Bishoprike, and a piece thereof is perfitely, and wholy holden of
every particular Bishop.

Confutation.
My lady the Interpreter not without the will and advise of this Defender, has
altered the sense of the latin, as the author of the Latin has altered the
words of S. Hierome. For neither speaks S. Hierome of Bishops in the
plural number, neither says the Latin Apology, that the Bishops be al of
like preeminence, which this translation has, but, of the same merit, and of
the same Priesthood, etc.

Jewel. Page 109. Here to dissemble these childish Cauillations of the altering
of Numbers, the Singular into the Plural: and of the changing of this word
Merit, into this word Preeminence: which great fault, if it were any, by
M. Harlinges own Confession, proceeded only from the Interpreter, and not
from the Author: etc.


Harding.
Dissemble hardely M. Jewel what ye list, so that with all ye confess the
truth, that you are not hable honestly to discharge your self of that, which
you pass over by dissimulation. Such dissembling shifts serve your turn not
seldom, as the which you ca^ sooner use, then against the truth shape a
reasonable answer. But leaving aside your dissimulation, Tell me I pray you,
where find you, that ever I confessed, that the fault of changing this
word, Merit, into this word, This word Merit, changed by M Ievvel into
this word, Preeminence.
Preeminence, proceeded only from your good lady the Interpreter, and not from
the Author? Have not I in plain words told you the contrary? Have I not
laid the fault as much upon the Author that allowed the Interpretation (as
your good Maistresse M. C. says in her epistle) as upon the Lady Interpreter?
How then can you deliver the Author from al blame by mine own Confession?
Look better M. Jewel upon the book again: where, if you shall find no such
Confession of mine, but the plain contrary, remember, who is not ashamed
openly to auouche Untruth. But it will not be otherwise, you have by long
practice gotten a full perfect habit thereof.

Jewel. Page 109. What S. Hierome meant hereby, Erasmus, a man of great
learning, and judgment, expounds thus. Hieronymus aequare videtur omnes
Episcopos inter se. etc.


Harding. Erasmus answered. Difference found between Deacon and Priest in
Order, and between Bishop and Bishop in power of government.
And is Erasmus in deed a man of such learning and judgment, The.28. Chapt.
as you say? If he be, how happeth it, that you condemn those articles of
religion, which he confesses true? He agnised the real presence of Christ's
body and blood in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, which you deny.
Erasmus against the false Gospellers. Aduersus Pseudeua^gelicos, and fratres
inferioris Germaniae.
How happeth it, if he be a man of great learning, that he wrote so earnest an
epistle against the false Gospellers (so he calls them of your side) of which
number you are? How happeth it, that he wrote that vehement, and long Epistle
to the Brothers of the Inferior Germany, commonly called the Low country,
to beware of al such heresies, which you, and your fellows do now profess? If
Erasmus be not such a one, as you say, why do you allege his authority, whose
judgment in sundry articles ye contemn? But what has Erasmus to help you in
this matter? Truly when al is searched, nothing at al.

Yet by the way it is to be marked, that you would bind us with Erasmus
authority, a man of our time, whom your self in diverse Articles, as in the
approbation of the Mass, of the real presence, free will, and of such other, do
greatly dislike: yet you will not stick to deny utterly, not only the
autorities of the Fathers within these last nine hundred years, but also of
them sometimes, that wrote within the first six hundred years. For so do you
deal afterward with that holy, and great learned Father S. Leo, whom you
labor to discredit, being pressed with the witness he gives of the
prerogative of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, as though his desire were, Page 111.
as your false surmise is, to enioie as great honor as he could, for his own
time. Have you no better mean to avoid that Fathers authority M. Jewel, but
by charging him with ambition?

Where Erasmus says, Erasmus in Antidoto post Scholia in epist. Hieronym ad
Euagriu^.
that S. Hierome seems to put in equal match al Bishops together, as if
they were al equally the Apostles Successors: that part of his saying, you
could well remember: but where he says within five lines following, that the
Metropolitan has a certain dignity, and Jurisdiction above other Bishops,
which takes away the equality, that you dreamed of: your eyes, without
being called on, that part of the sentence were very loath to see. Take the one
with the other M. Jewel, then is the equality of Bishops in regiment quite
gonne, though they remain equal in the order of Priesthood, and in that, that
the highest Archebisshop in the world, yea the Pope him self, is no more a
Priest, nor Bishop, then is the poor Bishop of Eugubium, or who so ever is
the lowest Bishop in the world, though his authority to rule and to govern,
be more ample, and large, then any others. Read the old Fathers in such
sort, that you may understand them without mistaking their right, and
purposed meaning: then may you cite them both to your own honesty, and to
the commodity of others.

The error of one Falcidius.
One Falcidius a foolish man, utterly deceived, went about to prefer, as S.
Hierome of him to Euagrius seems to report, or to match in one equality,
as S. Augustine says, the order of Deacons, with the order of Priesthood. For
suppression of which error, the rather to abbase the Deacons vanity, August.
in Quaest. veter. and no. Testam. Quest. 101
S. Hierome disputes, that in diverse places of the Scripture, in certain
respects, Priests are taken for Bishops, and Bishops for Priests: so
that if the Deacons be about the Priests, since the Scripture does call
Priests, by the name of Bishops: it will follow, that Deacons should also be
above Bishops. Which absurdity is so evident, as no man may grant it.
Therefore, for the avoiding of this absurdity, which would follow upon
Falcidius false assertion, it behooved him, and such as held with him, utterly
to revoke that error, that Deacons are, either above Priests, That a Priest
is above a Deacon.
or equal with them. A Priest may do all that a Bishop does, save that he can
not give Orders: A Deacon can not do al things that a Bishop does, save only
the giving of Orders: for he can not consecrate the body and blood of Christ
in the blessed Sacrament: Ergo, the Priest that has more power then the
Deacon, must be above the Deacon.

This is S. Hieromes very drifte in that Epistle to Euagrius, with the which
meaning of S. Hieromes, your author Erasmus does well agree, Erasmus in
Antidoto. post Scholiam in epist. ad Euagriu^.
where he writes thus upon the same Epistle. Itaque quod hic aequat humilium
vrbium Episcopos cum alijs, ad Diaconos est referendum, qui nonnullis locis
praeferebantur presbyteris, quos propemodum aquat Episcopis. Where as he does
here equally match the Bisshoppes of the meaner Cities, with other (that are
Bisshopps of great Cities) it is spoken for the Deacons sake: who in certain
places were preferred before the priests, whom almost he makes Bisshoppes
fellows. And again, In hoc igitur aequales sunt Episcopi, and presbyteri, quod
vbicunquesunt, Diaconis sunt praeferendi. Touching this point Bishops and
Priests are equal, for that they are to be preferred before Deacons, where so
ever they be.

But that there is great difference in authority of government betwixt
Bishoppes', Priests, and Deacons, S. Hierome is plain in the last sentence
of that Epistle, where he writes thus. Et vt sciamus traditiones Apostolicas
sumptas de veteri Testamento, quod Aaron and filij eius, atque Leuitae in
Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vendicent in
Ecclesia. And that we may know, the Apostles Traditions were taken out of the
old Testament, what Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple,
Bisshoppes, Priests, and Deacons, may challenge to them self, the same in the
Church. But Aaron being the high Priest, and Bishop, was in authority far
above all the rest: Ergo, if Priests be named in Scripture Bisshoppes, as S.
Hierome reasons against their folly, that preferred Deacons above Priests:
There is one Bisshoppe found out, that ought to have special rule over all the
rest, and that by a consequent of the very Scripture.

Whereas S. Hierome condemned the lewd disorder of the City of Rome, not of
the Church of Rome (as M. Jewel untruly interprets) which he says is one
with the Church of the whole world, keeping one rule of truth with the rest,
for having Deacons in more honor then Priests, and puts the matter to be
tried by authority, saying, that the authority of the universal Church of the
whole world, with the which the Church of Rome is one, is rather to be
followed, then the corrupt manner and custom of that one City: there is no
reason, why he should seem in that place to have used the word Merit, Merit
for Preeminence, after M. Ievvelles judgment.
for this word Preeminence, as M. Jewel full vainly iangleth, and can not
prove. His seely arguments stand thus: The authority of the world, that is
to say, of the universal Church of the whole world, and therefore of the
Church of Rome also being One Church with the rest, is greater then the
authority of the City of Rome: Ergo, the word Merit in the next sentence
following must signify Preeminence. Again, the power of riches, and the
baseness of poverty, makes not a Bishop either higher, or lower: Ergo, the
word Merit, in the sentence before must signify Preeminence. This is
strange Logique, by use whereof every fool may seem to reason wisely, if it
were once allowed in open schools. The world is more the^ the City,
expounded.


Whereas S. Hierome to Euagrius speaking against the evil custom of Rome,
where a Deacon was preferred before a Priest, says, Si authoritas quaeritur,
Orbis mayor est vrbe. If we seek for Authority, the world is more then the
City: he means not, as the circumstance of that Epistle gives, that
authority there should signify, authority in government, as M. Jewel has
interpreted, making S. Hierome to say, that in Authority of government, the
whole world is greater then the City of Room, whereby he thinks to
displace the Pope, and to deprive him of his authority in government, and to
bestow it confusely abroad in all the world, whereof in deed, the Confusion
which they may best hold, and stand by, might be procured: The truth is,
S. Hierome there is not to be understood to speak of the Churches authority
in government, but of common, and public authority to be followed for
avoiding of that error, that made a Deacon better then a Priest, or at least
equal with a Priest. In Controversies we follow authority. Now says S.
Hierome. If we seek for authority, the world is greater then the City. As
who should say, let no man defend the error by the authority of the City
of Rome, because there a Deacon is preferred before a Priest: for what shall we
esteem the custom of one City, the whole world holding the contrary? And the
authority of no one City, can be co^parable to the authority of the whole
world. Therefore pretending one to obiecte unto him, that the manner was at
Rome for a Priest to be ordered at the testimony of a Deacon, he says, Quid
mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem: what bring me forth the custom of
one City? As who should say, Neither at Rome was more honor given to
Deacons, then to Priests.
it were not to be regarded in comparison of the custom of the whole world.

Now that the Church of Rome gave not greater honor to Deacons, then to
Priests, by S. Hierome him self it seems to be evident, for so much as
Priests there sat in the Church, where Deacons used to stand, and the
Deacons never durst to sit emonge the Priests, Hiero. in eade^ epistol. ad
e^uagriu^.
whiles the Bishop was present. Although he confesses, that once in the
Bishops absence, he saw a Deacon, when disorder took place, sitting among
the Priests, and at private Feasts in private houses giving the benediction
to Priests. Whereby it is manifest, that the preferring of Deacons above
Priests, rose not of any ordinary custom of the Church of Rome, where al
states best keept due order in the Bisshoppes presence, but of the private
pride of some Deacons, and of the simplicity of the people of that City.
Therefore S. Hierome says not, Quid mihi profers Romanae Ecclesiae
consuetudinem, why bring me forth the custom of the Roman Church: but,
Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem? Why bring me the custom of one
City? The ignorant people made more of the Deacons, Eusebius. lib. 6. Eccles.
histor. ca. 33.
because they were but few in number, to wit, but only seven at one time, as
Eusebius makes mention, whereas at that time there were six and forty
Priests in that Church, whom the people, as S. Hierome says, for the number
had in contempt.

Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve Co^stantinopoli,
sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tanis, eiusdem meriti, eiusdem est and
sacerdotij. Behold Reader how M. Jewel has translated this sentence. Where so
ever there be a Bishop, be it at Eugubium, be it at Rome, be it at
Constantinople, be it at Rhegium, be it at Alexandria, be it at Tanis, they are
al of one worthiness, they are al of one Bisshoprike. Where the nominative
case Episcopus, Bishop, being of the singular number, so placed by S. Hierome
with the verb Est, also of the singular number, because it served not M.
Jewels turn, guilfully in translation a change is made into the plural, and
thereby the meaning of the sentence clean altered, to the intent the sentence
might so the rather sound to his purpose, which is to make al Bishops equal
in authority of rule, and government. Now S. Hieromes words do signify,
that a Bishop is of the same Merit, and of the same Priesthood, whether he be
Bishop of a great City, or of a little. And here is to be noted, that M. Jewel
can not yet brook this word, Merit: and whereas before he used the word,
Preeminence, being by me admonished of it, now he translateth, eiusdem est
meriti, they are al of one worthiness. Likewise he terms, eiusdem
sacerdotij, of one Bishoprike, for, of one Priesthood.

How so ever you bring in S. Hierome for the equality of Priests with
Bishops, it forces not. It is well known, S. Hierome never dreamed of such
an equality, as you would have, when he wrote this sentence, Ecclesiae salus
in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendet, Hieron. aduersus Luciferainos.
cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in
Eccesia efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes. The sauegarde of the Church
depends upon the dignity of the highest Bishop, unto whom, if a peerless,
and supreme power be not yielded, there shall arise so many Schisms in the
Church, as there be Priests. If God have a special regard to the safety of
the Church, and if the Church can not be safe, without there be a peerless,
and a supreme power yielded unto the highest Priest, which is a Bishop, as S.
Hierome says, what so ever M. Jewel say to the contrary: God must needs
allow the having of such Bishops, as shall have power peerless to rule
their flocks, not only their lambs, but also their sheep, to wit, the
Clergy, the Priests, and the Deacons under them. Hieron. Lib. 1. aduersus
Iouinianu^.
He says also, Propterea inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto,
schismatis tollatur occasio: Therefore is there one chosen among the twelve
(says S. Hierome) who should be made Head, that the occasion of Schism might
be taken away. And that we should be put out of doubt, who chose that one to
be Head above all the rest, and why Peter was rather chosen then John, that was
so dearly beloved, S. Hierome says, delatum est aetati, partly in
consideration of his age, and partly because he would deliver John from the
envy, that he should have incurred, if he had benne placed in that room being
so young a man. M. Jewel had need to look better upon his book, and to learn
by these places better to tempre the other sayings of S. Hierome. S. Hierome
says unity can not be kept, the Church can not be in sauegarde, Schisms
can not be suppressed by equality of Priests with Bishops: Ergo, there must
be Bishops, that shall have power to rule the Priests, and the rest. Thus M.
Jewels equality will not stand with the doctrine of S. Hierome.

Although (says S. Augustine) after the names of honors now used in the
Church the state of a Bishop be greater, August. Epist. 19.
then the state of a Priest, yet in many things Augustine is less then
Hierome. Notwithstanding we ought not to refuse, and disdain to be corrected
of any man, though he be our inferior. Upon these words of S. Augustine M.
Jewel reasons, that the difference of power and authority betwixt Bishops
and Priests, had no allowance from Scripture, but by the custom of the
Church. As though one thing could not be allowed both in Scripture, and also
by the common custom of the Church. The common custom of the Church
teaches us to fear God daily: does not the Scripture allow the same? To
honor our Father, and mother: And does not the Scripture command the same?
But M. Jewel would feign make debate betwixt the custom of the Church, and
the holy Scripture, and therefore full prouidently he has interlaced a
Parenthesis of his own politic devise in this manner: The office of a
Bishop, is above the office of a Priest (not by authority of the Scriptures,
but) after the names of honor, which the custom of the Church has now
obtained. I have here before declared, that there was a sect of Heretics
calls Aerians, as S. Augustine reports, who denied, that there was any
difference at al between the state of a Bishop and the state of a Priest:
August, de Haresib. ad Quoduult deu^. Haeres. 53.
which opinion being accounted for heresy by S. Augustine, ought to stop any
reasonable man's mouth, and to persuade him, that S. Augustines opinion is quite
contrary to that, which M. Jewel holds.

Jewel. Page 1^1. As for Pope Leo, his own authority in his own cause can
not be great. The Emperor says, Nemo debet sibi ius dicere: ff. Li. 2. de
Iurisdict. omniu^ Iudicum. 16. q. 6. Consuetudo: in margin.
No man may minister law unto him self. And it is noted thus in the
Decrees, Papa non debet esse iudex in causa propria. The Pope may not be judge
in his own cause.


Harding. The Pope may be judge in the cause of the Church.
Though Leos Authority be not great in his own cause, The.29. Chapt.
yet in the cause of the Church being so ancient, so holy, so learned a
Father, by your own grant it must be very great. The words you bring, are of
your own forging. Wherefore as ye have hitherto benne a forger of Doctors,
Scriptures, the Canon law, and Gloses, so now you are become a forger of the
Civil law. With what words the law is written, here anonne you shall see.
But be it true, that Vlpian said, (for so you should have said, The Emperor
alleged for Vlpian.
and not the Emperor, as your skill in the law unskillfully tells us) no man
may minister law unto himself. Yet neither he, not the Emperor ever forbad,
but that a man may truly report of his own matters. Now Pope Leo that holy
man, and great learned Clerk in the place by me alleged, does not minister
law unto him self in his own cause, but for the better government of the
Church, and that peace, and good order may the better be kept in the
Church, reports a difference, or diversity of power to be among Bishops,
with likeness of Order, and honor, as S. Hierome in his epistle to Euagrius
confesses them to be of one merit, and of one Priestehood. In declaring
whereof, he speaks of the right, that the Bishops of the Sea Apostolic,
S. Peter's successors ought to have in the government of the universal Church
through out the whole world. This M. Jewel was not his own private cause, but
the cause of the whole Church, in which he might give judgment.

But M. Jewel guilfully seems to put the case, as though there had been many
Catholics, that called Pope Leo to law for usurping the authority not dew
unto him, and as though he had been defendant against them al, yea as though
he had stepte up into his judgment seat, and there sitting as a Judge in his
own matter, had pronunced sentence for him self. Which thing he did not, nor
ever was there any catholic man, that laid any such kind of usurpation to
his charge: he never stood as defendant, nor sat as Judge in his own cause:
but discretely, and truly as occasion served, signified unto the world his
lawful authority, and his ^uccessours, as Kings use to do in their titles of
honor, and styles. If M. Jewel will call his double wiued lawier unto him, and
with him peruse the law, that begins, Qui Iurisdictioni praeest, neque sibi
ius dicere debet, ^ Qui iu risdiccioni ff. de iurisdict. omn. iudic.
neque vxori, vel liberis suis etc. (which is the true law, that he should
have alleged) and will consider, that Princes, Kings, and Emperors use to do
in their own causes by very order of law: and if he will therewith search out
the right meaning of the law, L. in priuatis. ff. de inoffic. testamen
In priuatis iudicus pater filium, vel filius patrem iudicem habere potest: he
shall find, both that he has fondely, vainly, and rashly alleged a law, that
he understood not, nor made any thing to his purpose, but only to fill up
paper with words, and also that it is one thing, to say, Nemo debet sibi ius
dicere (as he falsely allegeth the Law) and that it is a far other thing, to
say, Qui iurisdictioni praeest, neque sibi ius dicere debet, neque vxori, vel
liberis suis, neque libertis, vel caeteris quos secum habet: For so is the law
uttered by Vlpianus.

As for your marginal note out of the Decrees, you show how barrein and poor
your matter is, that for defense of it, you are feign to run for help to
notes put in the margent of the Gloss: a very poor shifte God wot. To your
marginal note I answer. The Pope (as there the Gloss says) if there be a
matter in law between him, and an other man about a temporal thing, ought not
him self to be judge in that case, and to take the thing into his own
possession, before it be tried whose it is, but to choose Vmpeeres to sit
upon it. Now mark what follows good Reader: 16. q. 6. Consuetudo.
tamen si vult esse Iudex in causa Ecclesiae, potest esse: yet if he list to be
a judge in a matter concerning the Church, he may be. Certainly no one thing
more concerns the wealth, tranquillity, and good order of the Church, then
that which Leo entreats of in the epistle. 84. to Anastasius the Bishop of
Thessalonica, which in my Confutation to good purpose I alleged.

Jewel. Page 111. Council. Aphricanum cap. 105. Superbum seculi typhu^.
It is well known, that the Pope has sought for, and claimed this universal
authority these many hundred years. Pope Innocentius was therefore reproved
of pride, and vvorldely lordelinesse, by the whole Council of Aphrica.


Harding. The Aphrican Council untruly reported by M. Jewel.
The 30. Chapt.
The Pope has not sought for that, which our Lord gave unto S. Peter, no more
then S. Peter sought for it at Christ's grant. The fame he may justly
claim, for so much as it pertains to the feeding and government of
Christ's flock, and to the strengthening of the faithful, as being the
Successor of S. Peter.

That you say of Innocentius, is utterly false. He was not so reproved of
pride, and worldely Lordelinesse, as more like a proud worldely Lordeling, then
an humble plain handler of Gods Truth, you say. Neither be those words,
superbum seculi typhum, which you lay forth in your Margent, to be found in
any Epistle of the Aphrican Council to Innocentius, nor be they spoken, or
written at al against Innocentius, as you bear us in hand. Neither was
Innocentius then a live, when the Aphrican Council was holden, but departed
this life long before. I grant there is extant an epistle of the Aphrican
Council to the learned Pope Coelestinus, in which Epistle Innocentius that
blessed man is not once touched. Neither was the charity of that whole Council
so small, as to speak so il of a holy Bishop so long before departed. The
manner of those Fathers was to pray for such, specially for the Bishops of
Rome deceassed rehearsing their names in their Masses, and in no wise to
report so il of them. How be it, in that whole epistle Pope Innocentius is not
so much as once named, nor spoken of. There we find these three words
fumosum typhum seculi, that is to say, the smoky pride of the world (or the
vain stoutness of the temporaltie) but in a far other sense, and to an
other purpose, then M. Jewel pretends.

Whether he rightly understood the place, or no, I have good cause to doubt.
It seems that the Bishop of Rome in the cause of Appiarius (whom the Aphrican
Bishops had deposed, and removed from his Bishprike, for crimes not
sufficiently proved) sent his Clerks, that were his Agentes in Aphrica, unto
certain noble men of the Country bearing offices under the Emperor, to
require their assistence, if need should so require: which is as much to
say, as now we use to speak, as, implorare brachium seculare, to call upon the
temporal power for help, that justice may be executed. With this the Aphrican
Bishops did much mislike, and therefore besought Pope Coelestine, that it
should no more be done, but that matters might be ended by them, being
Bishops of that province, without al intermedling of the lay power. The
words of the epistle are these. Council. Aph^ican. cap. 105.
Executores etiam clericos vestros quibusque potentibus nolite mittere, nolite
concedere^ne fumosum typhum seculi in Ecclesiam Christi, quae lucem
simplicitatis and humilitatis diem, Deum videre cupientibus praefert, videamur
inducere. Furthermore we beseech you, that you send no more your Clerks, that
be your Agentes, unto any of the great men, and that you grant to no such
thing hereafter, lest we should seem to bring the smoky (or vain)
stoutness of the world into the Church of Christ, which to them that
couete to see God, shows forth the light of simplicity, and humility. This
is the Untruth you make upon the Aphrican Council in reproving Pope
Innocentius of pride, and worldely Lordelinesse, fully answered.

Now as vow have brought an untruth against the Pope, out of the Aphrican
Council, as you pretend, so may it please you to consider of the contrary
reported in the behofe of the Popes supreme authority in government, out of a
Council of Aphrica, where we find the same authority with these words
avouched and acknowleged. Maxim tuste debent (Episcoporum iudicia, and negotia
ecclesiastica) ab ipso praesulum examinari vertice Apostolico, Epist. Stephani
and trium Co^ciliorum Aphrica ad Damasum Papa^ Con. 10. 1.
cuius vetusta solicitudo est, tam mala damnare, quam releuare laudanda.
Antiquis enim regulis censitum est, vt quicquid horum quamuis in remotis, vel
in longinquo positis ageretur prouincijs, non prius tractandum, vel accipiendum
sit, nisi ad notitiam almae sedis vestrae fuisset deductum, vt eius
authoritate, iuxta quod fuisset pronunciatum, firmaretur. The judgments of
Bishops, and ecclesiastical matters, ought most justly to be examined of him,
that is the Apostolic top (or the crown of the head) of the Prelates, whose
care it is of old, as well to condemn il things, as to relieve good things.
For it has been decreed by the old Canons, that what so ever matter of the
Bishops were in suit, though it were in provinces that be far of (from
Rome) it should not be ended before it were brought to the notice of that your
See, that it might be assured by the authority of the same, right so as the
sentence in judgment should be pronounced. By these words, and by the whole
Epistle of the Fathers of that Aphrican Council assembled together under the
Archbishop Stephanus, it appears evidently, how reverently they submitted
them selves, and the determination of their causes and controversies unto the
Pope, and how far of they were from the outrageous sprite, as to charge
Innocentius, or any other Pope with pride, and wordely lordelinesse, as M.
Jewel has fained.

Jewel. Pope Bonifacius. 2. condemned S. Augustine, and all the said Council of
Aphrica, and called them al heretics, and Schismatiques, Inter decreta
Bonifacij. 2. Instigante diabolo.
for the same, and said they were al * lead by the Devil. Pope Zosimus to
maintain this claim, corrupted the holy Council of Nice.


Harding. Bonifacius 2. Fowly be lied.
The.31. Chapt.
It is pity this man has not a good matter. For where he makes so much of
nothing, what would he do, had he somewhat? But it is easy to say much in a
naughty cause, for one that is not a shamed to lie. It can not be found among
the Decrees of Pope Boniface the.2. (unto which M. Jewel refers us) nor any
where else, that he ever condemned that blessed, and learned Father S. Augustine
by name, nor the Council of Aphrica by any solemn sentence, pronounced against
them. Verily that he called them al Heretics, and Schismatiques, for the
same, that is to say, for the Popes universal authority, or for any thing,
and that they were lead by the Devil, it is an impudent lie. The most grievous
words he utters against them, are these in an Epistle, that he writes to
Eulalius the Patriarch of Alexandria, exhorting him to reioise, and to give
warning to other Bishops near unto him, to reioise also, and to give God
thanks, for that the Church of Aphrica was reconciled, and returned to the
obedience of the Church of Rome, from whence they had severed them selves for
the space of a hundred years, upon some stomach, as it appears, for that they
would not admit any Appellations of the Bishops of Aphrica to be made unto
the Pope, which authority the Pope claimed by a Canon of the Nicene Council,
Council. Sardicen. ca. 7 Bonifac. 2. Epist. ad Eulabiu^. Council. to 1. page 1057.
and likewise by a Canon of the Council of Sardica. Aurelius Carthaginensis
Ecclesiae olim Episcopus, cum collegis suis (instigante Diabolo) superbire
temporibus praedecessorum nostroru^ Bonifacij atque Coelestini contra Romanam
Ecclesiam coepit. Aurelius some time Bishop of the Church of Carthage began
with his fellow Bishops (the Devil intising them) to be proud against the
Church of Rome in the days of Boniface, and Coelestine my predecessors. etc.
Of Heretics, and Schismatiques, here is not a word. And though he said, the
Devil intised them, yet will it not follow, that al they were leadde by the
Devil. The Devil intiseth many: yea whom does he not intise to evil? Yet al be
not leadde by the Devil. To be intised of the Devil, is one thing, to be
leadde, is an other.

Touching Pope Zosimus, say what ye can, following your Master Calvin, and
when ye have said all that ye can say, it is well known, ye shall never clearly
prove, Calvin Institut. Cap. 1.
that he corrupted the Council of Nice. For this I refer the Reader to M.
Stapleton in his Return of Untruths upon M. Jewel, Articulo. 4. fol. 30. and
sequentib. Peruse the place Reader, and thou shall find thy self well
satisfied touching this point. That, which there is said in defense of
Zosimus against their sclaunderous reports, M. Jewel should first have
disproued, if he had minded in that matter to try out the truth, and then have
laid it again in our way. But he full craftily dissembleth al, and makes as
though he had not seen any such thing, thereby both to encomber us with often
repeating of one thing, and the reader with hearing that, which has been said
before.

Jewel. Page 111. S. Hilarie, and other learned Bishops of France, for
usurping such unlawful authority, charged this same Pope Leo, of whom we
speak, with Pride, and ambition.


Harding. What a man this Hilarie was and how unworthy to be called S. Hilarie.
The 32. Chapt. An ^^pudent, and cra^ty lie.
This is both an impudent, and also a crafty lie. Impudent, as being such,
wherein M. Jewel him self knew, he lied. For all is utterly false. For neither
this Bishop Hilarie, as evil a man as he was, nor any other Bishops of
France, for ought that M. Jewel has to show, charged Leo with pride and
ambition for usurping unlawful authority. Leo epist. 89 ad Episcopos prouincia
Viennen.
In deed he is reported of Leo to have spoken arrogant words against the
reverence of S. Peter. But what the words were, or, that he laid pride and
ambition to Pope Leos charge, M. Jewel has nothing to allege. Much less can
he prove it, of the other learned Bishops of France.

Leo contrariwise having heard the complaints of the great disorder, and
outrage of this Bishop Hilarie, charged him with a strange pride, and
immoderate ambition for usurping vndew authority. For as it is clear by that
epistle of Leo, wherein this matter is laid forth, this Hilarie took upon him
to exercise the Jurisdiction of the Metropolitanes, chalenging unto him self
the ordinations and making of Bishops of all the Churches in France. He
unjustly deprived Celidonius of his Bishoprike. He besides al right and reason
deposed Protectus lying sick in his bed, and set an other bishop in his room,
whereby he seemed, besides the breach of the Canons, to have don very cruelly,
and to have sought the shortening of his life. He rode up and down in the
Country of France, as the people complained of him, like a light person, much
unlike a Bishop, and ran from place to place with a company of armed
Soldiers, to be the better hable to put his unlawful attemptes in execution,
if any resistance should have benne made.

All this notwithstanding M. Jewel calls him S. Hilarie, wherein he uses
craft, S. Hilarie, a wicked man saincted by M. Ievvel because he despised the
Pope.
for which this may be well called a crafty lie. For who is there, specially of
the unlearned, that hearing the name of S. Hilarie, would not think, that
famous Father, and learned Doctor, S. Hilarie the Bishop of Poitiers to be
meant? For none bears that famous name of S. Hilarie, but he. Thus can M.
Jewel to help forth his Gospel, abuse the name of Gods Saints, and make a
Rebel, a proud, an arrogant, and ambitious usurper of other men's right, a
Saint. Of such Saints they have Canonizate us good stoare. Thus he would get
credit to his doctrine that impugneth unity, under the false color of the
name of a blessed Saint.

Wherefore good reader let not M. Jewel beguile thee with the name of S.
Hilarie, who as he died long before this Hilarie was borne, so he was always
obedient to the sea of Rome, as who grants, that S. Peter for the confession
of the true faith deserved to have, Hilar. do. Trinit. li. 6
Vltra humanae infirmitatis modum supereminentem locu^, a place of authority
passing al other beyond the measure of human infirmity: whereas this
Hilarie, that M. Jewel speaks of, was a violent usurper of others right, a
seditious troubler of the unity of the Church, and otherwise an il man, and
such a one as against whose unjust, and violent doings, the godly and
discrete Citizens of certain Cities in France, directed their common lettres
unto Pope Leo, to have refourmation. And thus is the forged matter of this
Hilarie new sainted by M. Jewel, truly answered.

Ievvel. Page 111. But, gentle Reader, that thou may the better understand,
what credit thou ought to give to this Pope Leo, specially setting forth
his own authority, I beseech thee, consider, with what majesty of
words, and how far above measure, he auanceth the authority of S. Peter.
These be his words. Christus Petrum in confortium Indiuiduae vnitatis
assumpsit. Leo Epist. 89. Leo Epist. 52.
Christ received Peter into the company of the indivisible unity: Authoritate
Domini mei Petri Apostoli: by the Authority (^ot of Christ, but) of my Lord
Peter the Apostle: Deo inspirante, and beatissimo Petro Apostolo: By the
inspiration of God, and of S. Peter the Apostle. etc. Leo. 89.



Harding. These Phrases of Leo defended, and justified.
It is happy that once you have met with an old Father within the first six
hundred years, The 33. Chapt.
whose words are so plain for the preeminence, and supremacy of the Sea of
Rome, that you could not possibly find any probable Gloss to avoid them.
Being therefore destitute of a direct answer, you go about to find fault
with the manner of utterance that Leo uses. And here you are sore offended
with the majesty of words, with which he extolleth the authority of S.
Peter. Which certainly be no other, then may be found in diverse other
ancient learned Fathers.

Touching the first sentence, you should have laid it forth truly, as it is in
the Doctor, then would it appear to contain no such immoderate, nor
ambitious dignity, as you find fault withal. The words of Leo are these.
Petrum in consortium indiuiduae vnitatis assumptum, Leo epist. 89. Matt. 16.
id quod ipse erat, voluit nominari, dicendo: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc
Petram adificabo ecclesiam meam, etc. Christ willed Peter, taken into the
company of his indivisible unity, to be named that thing, which he was him
self, saying? Thou art Peter (or Rock) and upon this Rock I will build my
Church. What is that, wherewith a Christian man should here be offended? O say
you, Leo makes Peter received into the company of the indivisible unity. I
grant M. Jewel. But what indivisible unity means he?

First, al unity is indivisible. For where there is a Division of a thing into
two, three, or more, Peter received into in diuisible unity with Christ.
there is not unity, but multiplicitie. Now there is unity of Substance, and
unity of quality. S. Peter is not reported of Leo, to be assumpted into the
fellowship of unity of Substance, or of nature with Christ the Son of God,
for so he should have made him equal with God, as Christ is, for nothing is of
one Substance, or co^substantial with God, but that, which is God. Which God,
though he be three in Persons, yet is one in Substance. Into this indivisible
unity of Substance Peter is not received, which full deuilishly you would the
Reader to conceive and imagine to be the meaning of S. Leo in those words.

Into the company of the indivisible unity of a quality, or grace, or name
with Christ, S. Peter was assumpted, that is to say: Christ gave him a
quality, a grace, a name, that is proper to him self. What is that? Leo
expounds him self: That which he was him self, he willed Peter to be named,
saying. Thou art Peter, as much to say, thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock
I will build my Church (and least we should think, that Christ gave him that
name only, and not the thing signified by that name: Leo adds further) Vt
aeterni aedificatio te^pli, mirabili munere gratiae Dei in Petri soliditate
co^sisteret, that the building of his everlasting Temple, should by the
marvelous gift of Gods grace, stand in the foundenesse of Peter. Christ is
the Rock, Christ is the Rock and Peter is the Rock, and how either? Leo
sermo. 2. in Natiuitate Ap. Petri, and Pauli. Matt. 16.
and Peter is the Rock. How Christ? How Peter? Christ, by his own power,
Peter by participatio^.

But let us hear Leo expounding him self more plainly. Thus he says:
Euangelica siquidem referente historia, etc. As the story of the Gospel
tells, our Lord asks of all the Apostles, what men thought of him. And so
long as they be in declaring the doubtefulnesse of man's understanding, the
talk of them that answer, is common among them al. But when it is required, of
what sense the Disciples are, there he is first in confessing our Lord, which
is first in the Apostolic dignity. Who, when he had said: Thou art the
Son of the living God: Jesus answered him: Blessed art thou Simon the son
of Iona, because flesh and blood has not reveled (this) unto thee, but my
Father, that is in heaven. Therefore blessed art thou, because my Father has
taught thee, neither has earthly opinion deceived thee, but heavenly
inspiration has instructed thee, and it is not flesh and blood, that has
showed me unto thee, but it is he, whose only begotten Son I am. And I, quod
he, tell thee, that is, as my Father has manifested my divinity unto thee, so
I make known to thee, thine excellency. Quia tu es Petrus, id est, cum ego
sim inuiolabilis Petra, ego lapis angularis, qui facio vtraque vnum, tamen tu
quoque Petra es, quia mea virtute solidaris, vt quae mihi potestate sunt
propria, sint tibi mecum participatione communia. Peter is as much to say, as
Rock.
Because thou art Peter, that is, whereas I am the inviolable Rock, I the
Cornerstoane, which make both one, yet thou also art the Rock, because by my
virtue thou art made sound and sure, that the things which are proper unto
me by power, may be common to thee with me by participation. Thus far Leo.

By these last words he declares unto us, how Christ received Peter into
the company of his indivisible unity, to wit, by admitting him to enter
commons (as I might say) with him, and by making him partaker through free
gift, of that name, and not of that name only, but also of that excellency,
which is Christ's own by power. Deceive not the unlearned Reader M. Jewel, by
such pieces of Doctors sayings, which laid forth barely, and alone without
circumstance of the place whence they be pickte out, may perhaps seem
obscure, and doubteful, and being vewed in their Authors, or otherwise set out
in their own colors, appear most true, plain, and agreeable to the
Scriptures.

Furthermore where Leo says: The Council of Chalcedon abhorred the prodigious
devises of the Deuilish heresy of Eutyches, Leo epist. 52.
consenting unto my writings strengthened with the authority and merit of my
Lord the most blessed Apostle Peter: My Lord S. Peter.
M. Jewel finds a great fault with him for calling S. Peter, my Lord the
most blessed Apostle Peter. For the use of which humble term, he might as well
find fault with S. Gregory, who calls Mauricius the Emperor likewise by
the name of Lord, the term, my Lord used of the antiquity. Council. Chalcedo^.
Act. 3. pa. 834. co. 2
and with the learned men of the time that Leo lived in, for so the Bishops
at the Council of Chalcedon spoke of Leo him self, Domini nostri, and
sanctissimi patris, and Archiepiscopi Leonis lecta est epistola. The Epistle of
our lord, and most holy ffather, and Archiebishop Leo has benne readde, with
the whole nation of the French men, who speaking of S. Peter, of S. James,
and of such others the friends of God are wont to, My Lord R. Peter, My Lord
S. James
say, Monsieur saint Pierre, Monsieur saint Jacques, my Lord saint Peter, my
Lord saint James: with the Italians also, who use to speak likewise. That
this manner of speech was not strange in the Church, it appears by sundry
Monumentes of the Grecians of later time. Matthaeus Hieromonachus, Matthaus
Hieremonachus in Collectan.
makes Constantine the Great so to speak: (...). We do this in the worship
of my Lord S. Peter.

As for that other phrase, Deo inspirante, and beatissimo Petro Apostolo, by
the inspiration of God, and of S. Peter the Apostle (so here it is tran^^^ted,
but falsely) for which M. Jewel condemns Leo, as using immoderate, and
ambitious speech in the praise of S. Peter, to the behoof of his own
preeminence: it seems strange in deed, yea so strange, that at the first
reading, my mind gave me, that M. Jewel, to deceive the Reader, has fowly
abused the place. As I thought, so it was. For now I find, that these words
are in Leo in deed. But they are to be construed far otherwise, then this
translation reports. Here I must bring M. Jewel to his small Rules of
Grammare, and ask him, how he construeth these words, Leo epist. 89 in fine.
Obtestamur vt ea, quae a nobis Deo inspirante, and beatissimo Petro Apostolo
decreta sunt, seruetis. Verily were he at a Grammare school, and would tell his
Schoolemaister, that here beatissimo Petro Apostolo, were put in the ablative
case absolutely, as Deo is, and so would make S. Peter to give inspiration to
Leo, as well as God: he were worthy to have six stripes on the bare, three for
his negligent, and gross ignorance, three for the blasphemy, attributing that
to S. Peter, which is only to be attributed unto God.

There is no inconvenience in this sentence good Reader. Thou may tell M.
Jewel, that beatissimo Petro is here the ablative for the preposition a, which
requires the nowne following it to be put in the ablative case. And thus is the
whole to be construed, as if the preposition (a) were repeated again before
beatissimo, we beseech you that ye keep the things, which by the
inspiration of God, have been decreed of us, and of the most blessed Peter the
Apostle.

Let no man think it strange, S. Peter joined with Leo.
that S. Peter is here joined with Pope Leo. The Fathers speaking of any Godly
Decree, ordinance, sentence, or writing published by any Bishop of Rome for the
benefit of the Church, have commonly so spoken of it, as both it proceeded
from the Pope for the time being, and also from S. Peter, because doubtless
the privileges which Christ granted to S. Peter for the health of the Church,
remain still to every Bishop of Rome, his lawful Successor. And what so ever
is decreed by the Successors of Peter, sitting in Peter's Chair, it ought to
be unto us none other, then a Decree of S. Peter him sefe. For to us he is
Peter. Therefore the learned Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, having heard
the famous Epistle, that Pope Leo wrote to Flauianus against the Heresy of
Eutyches, Council. Chalcedo^. Act. 3.
allowing well of it in their solenne Acclamations, which the Grecians always
used in their Councelles, cried out, Petrus per Leonemita locutus est, Peter
has so spoken by Leo.

Leo him self seems to declare, in what sense S. Peter is thus joined with
him in government of the Church, where he says thus. Post resurrectionem
suam Dominus beato Petro Apostolo post regni claues, Sermo. in ^atiuitate Petri
et Pauli.
ad trinam aeterni amoris professionem, mystica insinuatione ter dixit,
Pasceoues meas, quod and nunc proculdubio facit, and mandatum Dominipius pastor
exequitur, confirmans nos exhortationibus suis, and pro nobis orare non
cessans, vt nulla tentatione superemur. Si autem hanc pietatis suae curam omni
populo Dei, sicut credendum est, vbique protendit, quanto magis alumnis suis
opem suam dignatur impendere, apud quos in sacro dormitionis thoro, eadem qua
praecedit carne, requiescit? Our Lord after his resurrection, said thrice
(signifiyng a mystery) unto S. Peter the Apostle, Johan. 21.
after the keys of his kingdom had been given to him, at what time he made
three times profession that he loved him: Feed my sheep, which without
doubt he does also now, and as a godly sheepeheard fulfilleth our Lords
commandment, confirming us with his exhortations, and not ceassing to pray
for us, that we be overcome by no tentation. And if he streatche abroad in
every place this his Godly care to all the people of God, as it it to be
believed, how much more does he vouchesaue to bestow his help upon his own
dear ones, among whom he rests in the sacred bed of his dormition (that is
to say, in his Sepulcher) in the same flesh, in which he goes before us.

In what sense then S. Peter is said to feed Christ's sheep to this day, in
the same sense it might well be said of Leos decrees, that they were Decreta a
Leone, and beatissimo Apostolo Petro, things decreed by Leo, and by S. Peter
the Apostle, God giving the good inspiration. Certain other such phrases of
Leo M. Jewel condemns as containing immoderate and ambitious praise of S.
Peter, and for the same would discredit that ancient learned Father, about
the discussion of which, I think it not worth my labor to stand. They may
well be admitted with a convenient understanding, and such as every good man
would at the first reading of them, conceive. Marie I confess a curious
carper, will find fault not only with that this holy Father, but with what so
ever any learned Father has written, if he be disposed to wrangle upon that
which seems to be contrary to the doctrine he has taken upon him to
maintain.

Jewel. Page 111. Some others have thought, that as well these Epistles of Leo,
as also others more, and other the ancient Bishops of Rome have benne
interlaced, and falsified by the ambitious Popes, that followed afterward etc.


Harding.
Of the number of these some others, your self are one M. Jewel, and your
fellows are the rest: who neiter being hable to avoid the truth by Leo most
clearly uttered, nor willing to yield unto it, would feign, wiste ye how,
raise up against the credit of his Epistles a surmise of Corruption, and
falsifying, a common practice of yours. But what you, and such others as you
are, think of Leo, it skilleth little. He has benne esteemed hitherto for a
worthy Clerk, and a holy Father. Berengarius your first founder has always
benne accounted an heretic, and so shall all the Zuinglians, and Caluinistes,
that follow him, upon whose credit ye have gaged the everlasting state of your
souls, be accounted of the Church for ever. Of al your weak shifts, this is
the weakest, and has least color of learning, to say of that in an
ancient Father ye are not hable to answer, that it is interlaced, and
falsified by the Popes. If ye could once purchase you this authority, to
condemn of corruption, and falsifying what is found to make clear against
you, bring we never so much for proof of the Catholiqu^ religion, your Answer
may soon be ready. What you say of Pope Zosimus falsifying of the Council of
Nice, it has benne thoroughly answered by us, as I told you before, and as you
know M. Jewel right well, and yet you dissemble it, as if nothing were by us
said at al, and let not so oftentimes to sing one song. Which argues a
contentious wit, and a desire to fill up great books, be the matter never so
much, and sufficiently before answered.

Jewel. Page 112. Touching that M. Harding calls the Pope, the prince of
Pastors, be might have remembered, 1. Pet. 5.
that the right of this name belongs only unto Christ. S. Peter says, That
when Christ the prince of Pastors shall appear, ye may receive the
incorruptible crown. Now, to inseaffe the Pope with Christ's peculiar
titles, a man might think it were great blasphemy.


Harding. The Pope lawfully called the Prince of Pastors.
The 34. Chapt.
Great blasphemy say you? Woe be then to S. Augustine, that spoke such great
blasphemy, when in a Sermon made before the people, August. de Sanctis Sermon.
28.
he called S. Peter, principem Apostolorum, the prince of the Apostles: But the
Apostles were Pastors, yea the chief Pastors of Christ's flock: Ergo, S.
Augustine saw, that it was no great blasphemy, to call S. Peter principem
Pastorum: the prince of Pastors. August. de verbis domini in Euang. secundum
Math. Sermon. 13. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 14. In Registro epist. 32. In
Johan. Homil. 87
He has the like words in an other place. Idem Petrus a petra cognominatus
beatus, Ecclesiae figuram portans, Apostolatus principatum tenens. The same
blessed Peter having his name of a Rock, bearing the figure of the Church,
holds the princehood of the Apostleship. Eusebius also calls S. Peter
(...), prince of all the rest of the Apostles. To S. Peter prince of all the
Apostles, the charge of the whole Church was committed, says S. Gregory. S.
Chrysostom names him, Totius orbis magistrum, the master of the whole
world, no whit less in effect, then Prince of Pastors. S. Bernard says to
the pope, Tu Princeps Episcoporum, Thou art Prince of Bishops. But Bishops
are Pastors, Ergo, the Pope is Prince of Pastors. To leave many others, and
to conclude with S. Augustine, thus he says speaking of S. Peter: Quis nescit
illum Apostolatus principatum, August. de Baptis. co^tra Donatist. lib. 2. cap.
1.
cuilibet Episcopatui praeferendum? Who knows not, that that Princehood of
the Apostleship, is to be preferred before every Bishops state?

Where is this great blasphemy becomme, that M. Jewel so horribly layth to our
charge? What will he accuse al these holy and learned Fathers of Blasphemy? I
hope, though he spare not us, yet he will be good Master unto S. Bernard, S.
Gregory, S. Augustine S. Chrysostom, and to Eusebius. As for S. Leo, who is
plainest of al, I dare not here to name, least I should seem to reuerse M.
Jewels high judgment, whom he has so late here before by his solemn sentence
condemned. Yet it may please him to be advertised by us, that Titles which
appertain to God him self, when they are in their dew order, and degree
given unto men, Exodus 7. Psalm. 81.
contain no blasphemy. Moses is called in Scripture the God of Pharao. And
rulers in the Psalms, are called also by the name of Gods.

Jewel. As for the other authority of S. Cyprian, M. Harding says, we
understood it not: and therefore he wills us to look better upon our
books. The Council is good. etc.


Harding. The origin of unity begins of one, who is Peter, by S. Cyprian.
The popes preeminence proved by S. Basil.
The.35. Chapt.
The fruiteles pain you took in laying forth so many places of S. Cyprian
together, and al to the end men should conceive, you understood your book,
does give us sufficient witness, that either of malice you will not, or of
ignorance you can not declare, to what end al those places do perteine. If
you had joined to these places of S. Cyprian, which you allege, but one place
of the same S. Cyprian, which you durst not talk of, least al your confuse
heap should stand you in no steed: the case had been so plain, that the
shame would have benne yours. S. Cyprians whole purpose is to show Christian
men (not by long talk of arguments, but by the marking of two things, that
is to say, the Churches received Doctrine, and the Head of the Church) how to
stay them selves in the right faith, and unity, when so ever Schisms, and
Heresies shall happen to rise. For this purpose he speaks of the Church, and
of the unity of the Church: which unity among diverse other things, does
principally stand in the having of one Bishop to be Head over al.

Although (says S. Cyprian) Christ give equal power after his resurrection to
all the Apostles, and say, Cyprianus, de Simplic. Praelatorum.
as my Father has sent me, even so do I send you, receive ye the holy Ghost,
if ye shall remitte any man's sins, they shall be remitted unto him: if ye shall
retain any man's sins, they shall be retained: yet to the end he would make
Unity manifest, he ordained by his authority the beginning (or origin) of
the same unity to begin from one (to wit, from Peter) The rest of the
Apostles were the same that Peter was, endewed with like fellowship, both of
honor, and of power: but the beginning rises forth from unity (to wit from
Peter). that the Church may be showed (to be) one. Hitherto S. Cyprian. This
place of S. Cyprian does sufficiently prove, not only, that Christ began his
Church from Peter, but also, why he would there should be only one, from whom
he might begin his Church (and not those many, of whom M. Jewel dreameth)
because (says he) he would have his Church showed one. The plain meaning
whereof can be none other, but that the Unity of the Church can by no other
way so conveniently stand, as by the having of one visible Bishop head over al.

As the multitude of Priests, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
of whom S. Hierome speaks in his Epistle to Euagrius, was driven to choose
one to be Bishop among them in Alexandria that was S. Marks see, to avoid
Schisms, that would have rent and torn the Church asundre, and to keep
Unity: even so S. Cyprian saw, that among the multitude of Bishops, the
case being like, to avoid Schisms, and to keep unity, Hiero. aduersus
louinianum lib. 1.
it was necessary one Bishop to be placed head over al. The which thing S.
Hierome says, Christ did, when he ordained Peter Head of the Apostles, to take
away occasion of Schism.

As touching the place of S. Basil alleged for the government by a multitude
of Pastors, if M. Jewel, mean, Basil. ad Neocaesarienses.
that S. Basil thought the multitude of Pastors should rule without having of
one Head, he is far deceived: and yet that must he mean, otherwise that
place makes nothing for him. But that untrue meaning of his needs no other
wise to be controlled, then by S. Basil him self writing thus to S.
Athanasius. Basiliusin epistol. ad Athanasium page 549. In Graeco codic. Frobe^.
Visum est vtile scribere ad Episcopum Romanum, vt consideret res nostras, and
iudicij sui decretum interponat, vt quoniam de communi and Conciliari Decreto
aliquos inde huc emandari difficile est, ipse sua authoritate negotium
componat, etc. It has seemed good unto us, to write unto the Bishop of Rome,
that he will consider of our cases (or (...).
visit us, for so the Greek may be translated) and to determine the matter by
his sentence, that, for as much as it is hard for any to be sent hither from
thence by authority of a common and Synodical Decree, (...).
he take the matter into his own hand, and by his authority strike the
stroke.

Why should S. Basil, being a Greek of the East Church, think it convenient
to write to the Bishop of Rome being in the Weast, to consider of, (or to
visit them of the East, for so to the Greek (...) signifies) their state,
and to send forth a Decree of his judgment, and to give sentence, unless he
agnised the prerogative of the Bishop of Rome, which your fellows deny?
Verily by this place it appears evidently, of what judgment S. Basil was
touching the Bishop of Rome his Supreme Authority in rule. The more ye stir
this matter, the more it turns still to your own shame.

Jewel. Page 115. The whole body of Christendom was divided into four
Patriarkeshippes: whereof the first was Rome.


Harding.
Search out M. Jewel, The.36. Chapt.
by whom was the whole Body of Christendom divided into four
Patriarkshippes, whereof the first and chief was Rome, and why Rome was the
first, and not rather the second, or third, thereby shall you perceive, how your
self unawares are taken in your own snare. In Praefat. Nicen. Council.
In the Preface of the Nicene Council we read, that the Church of Rome was
preferred before al other, not by decrees of any Synod, but by the voice of
our Savior Christ in his Gospel, when he said to Peter, Tu es Petrus, thou
art Peter etc. Math. 16.


Jewel. page 115. And each of them was limited, and bounded within it self:
Alexandria to have the oversight over Egypt, and Pentapolis: Antioche over
Syria: Jerusalem, over Ievvrie, Rome over Italy, and other Churches of the
vveast.


Harding.
If none else had Jurisdiction over Italy, and other Churches of the Weast,
then is the Bishop of Rome your lawful Patriarch, that dwell in England:
otherwise it will fall out, that England shall be no part of the whole Body of
Christendom, if it be under the rule of no Patriarch. If he be your Patriarch,
as he is by your own confession, why do not ye obey him?

Jewel. Page 115. Copus. dia. 1. 166.
And herein we have the exposition of Theodorus Balsamon, that lived five
hundred years ago, and was Patriarch of Antioche, and, as some of M.
Hardinges friends have thought, a man of great learning. Yet for as much as M.
Harding here utterly refuses him, not only as a Schisma^tique, but also as a
man void of learning, and reason: etc.


Harding.
That he swarued from learning, and reason in the exposition of the.6. Canon of
the Nicene Council, is my saying, not that he was void of learning, and reason
absolutely, as you untruly report, to make some apparent contradiction
betwixt me, and M. Cope. A man may for the love he bears to his own false
opinion, or schism, expound a Canon contrary to his own learning, as M.
Jewel does many times, and yet in other respects be a right well learned man.

The Apology. Cap. 3. Diuis. 7.
The Bishop of Rome, except he do his duty as he ought etc. we say, that
he ought not of right once to be called a Bishop, or so much as an Elder. For a
Bishop as says S. Augustine, is a name of labor, and not of honor.

Harding. The Pope, or any other Bishop is Bishop, though he be negligent in
doing his duty.
The.37. Chapt.
I said enough to this in my Confutation, whereof the chief pith M. Jewel in
the Defense has slyly least out, that it might not in his own book appear
to the Reader, how fully the Apology is in that place confuted. Now I add
thereto this much more. Can any man justly blame the Pope that now is, for the
doing of his duty? Has not he, and other his Predecessors in our time
assembled a general Council, and therein disclosed al your heresies, with
mature disputations examined, confuted, and condemned them? Has not he in so
doing done more good, then M. Jewel (if he should recant, and become a true
Catholic) do all the days of his life, though he were suffered to preach as
many Sermons, and do otherwise, as true Penance would require?

Yea suppose he had leaft at this undone, neither had answered to his vocation
in most duetiful wise, were he therefore no Bishop at al? As S. Augustine
says, a Bishop is a name of labor, and not of honor: So S. Hierom says,
Hieron. in epist. ad Euagriu^.
that a Bishop is a name of honor, and of dignity. Let M. Jewel make both
these to agree together, and grant, that a Bishop is both the name of labor,
and of honor: Of labor, because his chief office, and merit stands in the
diligent and paineful doing of his duty: of honor, because qui been praesunt
presbyteri, duplici honor digni sunt, 1. Tim. 5.
maxim qui laborant in verbo and doctrina, Priests that govern well, are
worthy of double honor, specially such as take pains in the word, and
teaching.

But put the case the Pope does not his duty: has he lost by and by the
order of Priestehood, or Bishoply order? M. Jewel says yea, but S. Chrysostom
says no: Chrysostom. Homil. 2. in cap. 1. epist. 2. ad Timoth.
in whom we find these words. Sacra ipsa Oblatio sine illam Petrus, sieve
illam Paulus, sieve cuiusuis meriti Sacerdos eam offerat, eadem est quam dedit
Christus ipse Discipulis, quamque Sacerdotes modo conficiunt. Nihil habet ista,
quam illa minus. The holy Oblation it self, be it Peter, or be it Paul, or of
what so ever merit the Priest be, that offers it: it is the self same,
that Christ did give to his Disciples, the self same, that Priests at these
days also do consecrate. Thus S. Chrysostom. If a Priest of what so ever
merit, or deserte he be, good, or evil, do offer up the self same oblation,
that Christ gave to his Disciples, as S. Chrysostom says, seeing he has full
power, be he good, be he naught, to consecrate, and to offer up the self same
oblation, that Christ gave to his Disciples: how shall M. Jewel not grant, but
that he remains a Priest still, be he never so negligent, or otherwise
unworthy of that dignity? Likewise a Bishop, be he never so vnmindeful, and
careless touching his duty: it is not his negligence, or evil life, that
bereueth him of his bishoply Order, and Degree.

For proof hereof, if there were no other testimony to be alleged, this of S.
Chrysostom might suffice. But S. Augustine disputing with the Donatistes,
August. de Baptis. co^tra Donatist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
whose heresy was of near cousinage unto that M. Jewel here holds, has so
plain a place, that neither he, nor al his fellows shall ever be hable to
avoid. And this it is. Sacramentum Baptismi est, quod habet, qui baptizat. Et
Sacramentum dandi Baptismi est, quod habet, qui ordinatur. Sicut autem
baptizatus, si ab vnitate recesserit, Sacramentum Baptismi non amittit: sic
etiam Ordinatus, si ab vnitate recesserit, Sacramentum dandi Baptismum non
amittit. Nulli enim Sacramento iniuria facienda est: si discedit a malis,
vtrumque discedit: Si permanet in malis, vtrumque permanet. Et paulo post.
Redeuntes, qui priusquam recidere^t ordinati sunt, non vtique rursus
ordinantur, sed aut administrant quod administrabant, si hoc Ecclesiae vtilitas
postulat, aut si non admistrant, Sacramentum Ordinationis sua tamen gerunt, and
ideo eis manus inter Laicos non imponitur. It is the Sacrament of Baptism,
that he has, which is baptized. And it is the Sacrament of ministering
Baptism, which he has that is in Orders. But as the baptized person, if he
should depart from the Unity (of the Church) does not lose the Sacrament of
Baptism: even so he that is in (holy) Orders, if he depart from the unity
(of the Church) does not lose the Sacrament of giving Baptism. For to no
Sacrament may we do wrong. If (the Sacraments) do depart from such as are
il, both the Sacraments (of Baptism, and holy Orders) do depart. If it
abide in such, as are il, both (the Sacrament of Baptism and of holy Orders)
do abide. Again there a little after. They that return (from Schism and
Heresy) if they were in holy Orders, before they became schismatikes, they do
not receive holy Orders again, but either they do minister that which they did
minister, if the profit of the Church do so require, or, if they minister
not, yet do they bear the Sacrament of their holy Orders still, and therefore
the hands are not laid upon them among the lay sort. Hitherto S. Augustine.

What has M. Jewel to say unto this? If S. Augustine say, that an Heretic,
or a Schismatique does not lose the Priestehoode, that he had lawfully before
he fell into Schism, or Heresy, shall M. Jewel control him with his new
Divinity, and say unto him, no sir, it is not so, For if a Bishop be
negligent, and do not his duty, I say, he loses his Order, or
Bisshophoode, and is no more a Bishop? M. Jewels il luck is, that whereas he
reads many Fathers, or some others for him, and heapeth a number of their
sayings together to fill up a great book: never a one can be found, that when
any matter comes to trial, makes clearly for his side. No marueil. For truth
can never be made to serve against truth.

Jewel. Page 117. As for VVicklefe, he expounds plainly his own meaning,
etc.


Harding. Hus mistaken for Wicklefe: a Canon of the Council of Valentia truly
expounded.
The 38. Chapt. Article. 22.
The expositorie Article, that you allege, is one of John Hus his Articles and
not Wicklefes, condemned in the fifteenth session of the Council of Co^stance.
Therefore it is false, that Wicklefe ever expounded his meaning in that
Article, and much more is it false, that he did it according to mine own
construction, Hus mistake^ by M. Ievvel for VViklefe.
as you say. Thus you rehearse and translate, Papa, vel praelatus malus, et
praescitus, est equiuoce pastor, and vere fur, and Latro. The Pope, or any
other wicked prelate in doubteful speech is a Pastor, but in very deed he is
a these, and (Latro) a robber.

Here with M. Jewel (Latro) is a murderer. This is John Hus his article, not
John Wicklefes. This needed not to have been marked, but that M. Jewel is so
precise, and so watcheful, to pry for the least escapes that any of us makes.

How be it both were Heretics, both Hus, and Wicklefe, and therefore we may
bear the better with M. Jewel, if he mistake the one for the other, Hus, for
Wicklefe, and think, that Wiclefe had more zeal of the house of God, more
learning, more knowledge, then all the Bishops of that age (for so he judges):
yet if he spoke, or meant more then truth may bear, M. Jewel (who dares not
plainly, and flatly either to allow, or to condemn the man, but with Iffes,
and Andes) minds not to defend him. Yet he does the best he can to defend
him by a Canon of the Council of Valentia in France not truly understood,
but altogether misconstrued. Which Canon, if it were truly translated, that
is to say, otherwise then M. Jewel has translated it, it should appear, he
were fully answered, and confuted. A canon of the Council of Valentia in France
truly expounded, that was corrupted by M I^w^ls false translation. Council.
Valentin. Cap. 4. Concilioru^. Tom. 1. page 414.


The canon truly translated is thus. Who so ever (sub ordinatione) at the time
that order is given either of deaconship, or of Priesthod, or of Bishophod,
shall say they are defiled with mortal sin, they are to be removed from the
foresaid (not orders, as M. Jewel falsely translateth, but) ordinations, that
is, orderinges, or giving of Orders, for so the word signifies, the very act
of ordering, not the Orders them self: whereby is meant, that they ought to be
removed and bid to depart without Orders: if one I say would thus translate
the Canon, as the praeposition, sub, imports, M. Jewel were put quite besides
his purpose, and Wiklef should remain undefended, and guilty of heresy, as
he was before M. Jewel took in hand to defend him.

Remember M. Jewel, Ordination is the act of giving Order, Order it self is
the effect of Ordination, or ordering. By this Council of Valentia they, that
confessed them selves defiled with mortal sin, were removed, not ab
ordinibus, from Orders, for they had not yet received them, but ab
ordinationibus, from the giving of Orders, unto which they came for Orders.
Use truth M. Jewel, deceive not your unlearned Reader with false translations.

Wicklefe is charged with this Article in the Council of Co^stance, A king is
not a king, and a Queen is not a Queen by VVicklef, if they be in deadly
sin. A king being in deadly sin, is a king by vviklef. Huss. and M. Ie^vel
(aequ^uoce) in doubteful speech only, and by a word of doubt, meaning, as a
painted man, is a man
Nullus est Dominus ciuilis, nullus est praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum
est in peccato mortali: None is a temporal Lord, none is a prelate, none is a
Bishop, so long as he is in deadly sin. Behold Reader, how M. Jewel in
Wicklefes defense, brings in Wicklefe expounding his own meaning, or rather
Hus for Wicklefe. The Pope (says Hus whom M. Jewel takes for Wicklefe) or any
other wicked prelate, in doubteful speech is a Pastor, but in very deed he
is a thief, and a murderer. What then says Master Wicklefe of a king, or a
queen, that is in deadly sin by the plain exposition of his own meaning?
What answers M. Jewel in this case for his friend Wicklefe? Mary whereas
Wicklefe says, If a king, or a Queen be in deadly sin, then neither is he a
king, nor she a Queen, M Jewel comes in with Hus, and thus expounds the
meaning of Wicklefe, he is a King, and she is a Queen, but how? In doubteful
speech only, he means in name only. In very deed both he and she, are,
either of them a thief and a murderer. For so he must say of the Princes, as
he says of the Priest, and Bishop, that he is a King, or she a Queen, by a
word of double meaning, as for example, unsavory salt is called salt, or as
the Prophets of Baal, are called Prophets, or as a painted manne, is called a
man, or, as S. Gregory says of the Priest by M. Jewels report, let him or
her be called a King, or a Queen, though in deed he be no King, and she no
Queen, but a thief. etc.

If a King, or a Queen being in deadly sin, be no King, nor Queen in deed,
as M. Jewel with Hus must say, and Wicklefe does say: what honesty has he
done Wicklefe, in so making him to expound plainly his meaning, to deliver
him from the obloquie of his Heresy, and from the hatred of Princes, when the
exposition is as lewd, and of as great force, as the Heresy is it self, that
I laid both to Wicklefes charge, and his at the first? Though with your
Rhetorique you may do much, and beguile the simple, yet think not, but the
wise do see, whyther the maintenance of this doctrine tends. It is il
haulting before kreples, they say. Truly I judge this haulting will appear
much worse before princes. They had need take heed, since that ye are so
bold with them, that they fall not into deadly sin, least soon after by this
Doctrine they be driven out of their kingdoms.

The authorities in this place by you alleged out of S. Chrysostom, S.
Ambrose, S. Gregory, S. Cyprian, Page 117.
do not mean, that such as are il livers, do lose the Sacrament of Orders
once had, which to say, were a very great, and an old condemned heresy of
the Donatistes: but that al such do not live, as the dignity of Priests,
and Bisshoppes does require, and that they be not such, as have all the good
virtues and qualities, that Priests and Bisshoppes ought to have. Many things
are for certain respects denied, which absolutely are not denied. All that in
a respect is denied, is not absoluely denied. Psalm. 21. Ephesians. 6.
Ego sum vermis, and non homo, I am a worm, says the Prophet speaking of
Christ, and not a man. Will you hereof by like Logique conclude, that Christ's
humanity is denied? Non est nobis colluctatio aduersus carnem, and sanguinem,
we have no wrestling against flesh, and blood, says the Apostle in some
respect, because our principal conflicte is not against flesh, and blood, and
yet we have a conflicte, and a great conflicte against flesh, and blood, and
are commanded therefore to crucify the flesh with his lusts. Galat. 6.
But because the Apostle says so, shall we deny, that we have to wrestle, and
fight against flesh, and blood at al? I trow you, nor your fellows, are not
yet so spiritual, but that ye will confess, ye have to fight against the
flesh. Verily the world sees, your works be not yet al of the spirit, but
some of the flesh.

Jewel. Page 118. If the name of Universal Bishop be a provvde name in others,
why may it not also be a provvde name in the Bishop of Rome?


Harding. The name of Universal Bishop is not a proud name in the Pope,
because he has it of right.
The.39. Chapt.
Because the word taken in the right sense, is the very right, that our Savior
Christ gave to S. Peter, and to his Successors, which right of universal
regiment he gave not to others. You may as wisely reason thus: If the name of
a Queen be a proud name applied to Margerie Horn M. Horns dame of
Winchester, why may it not also be a proud name in Elizabeth the lawful
Queen? With such gear you fill up your paper, and like a great Clerk, set us
out great books full fraughte with stuff of small substance, and less honesty.

Jewel. Page 118. May Pride be humility, and humility Pride, only in
respect of diverse persons?


Harding.
Pride is Pride, and humility is humility in what so ever person. Neither
can ever the one be the other. But that thing, which is prowdly, or with pride
done of one man, may of an other man be done humbly, and without al breach
of humility. You might have demanded many wiser questions then this. Know you
not, that the title of honor, which is due to any person, may be
acknowledged of the same, without any pride at al? S. Paul offended not in
pride, when he said, he was an Apostle (sent) not of men, nor by man. Gal. 1.


Jewel. Page 119. Likewise Chrysostom says, Did. 40. Multi.
Quicunque desiderauerit primatum in terra, inueniet in coelo confusionem: nec
inter seruos Christi computabitur, qui de primatu tractauerit: Who so ever
desires primacie in earth, in Heaven he shall find confusion: neither shall he
be accounted among the servants of Christ, that vvil once entreat of
primacie.


Harding.
If that be the saying of S. Chrysostom, A forged saying at tributed to S
Chrysostom.
why did you not quote the place? And why make ye so much a do for the
Primacie of the Queens highness in Ecclesiastical matters within the Realm?
Intend you to bring your self, and her highness into Confusion, and to shut
your self out of Heaven? S. Chrysostom has no such saying. That which goes
before in Gratian, is taken out of Opus imperfectum in Matthaeum, Homil. 43. in
cap Matthew. 23. Maximinus Arrianus.
which is well known not to be S. Chrysostomes, and witht great probability
though to be the work of an Arrian Heretic named Maximinus.

But this saying which here you allege out of Gratian, is neither there, nor
in S. Chrysostom. It is a forgerie, and that you knew well enough. Yet you are
not ashamed to use it to deceive the ignorant Reader. Leave, leave M. Jewel to
abuse the simplicity of the unlearned with such forged pieces, and patches.
What you allege out of S. Chrysostom truly, or out of any other Doctor, we
shall soon answer it by Gods grace. For we are sure, that truth always
agrees with truth. As for such forgeries, we return them back to you
again.

But because both you M. Jewel, and others the chief Pillars of your side,
have said so much touching the name of Universal Bishop, and have so
vehemently inueighed against the Pope for the same, bearing the unlearned in
hand, ye have a great advantage against us therein: I think it good and
necessary, here to treat more fully thereof, and to show, how little ye are
to be trusted, as well in this, as in many other points of Doctrine, and how
far ye abuse the unlearned Reader by misreporting the third Council of
Carthage, being deceived, (if it be error, and not wilful malice) by a place
of Gratian very ignorantly, and grossly mistake^.

M. Jewels Forgerie concerning the name of Universal Bishop.
The 40. Chapt. Universal. vvhi^therby is signified.
This word, Universal, does importe as much as one in all, and al in one. For
the name of Universality leaves nothing vncomprised: so that if any man be
properly the universal Patriarch, or Bishop, there is no Patriarch, or ^ishop,
which is not in him, and which he is not. Therefore when Ihon of Constantinople
named, and wrote him self, Universal Patriarch, or Bishop, albeit perhaps he
meant not thereby to derogate from al other Patriarchs, and Bishops, but only
to make him self equal with the best, (which now also M. Jewel likes well of,
and defends it for lawful): yet S. Gregory, and before him Pope Pelagius,
consydering the sclaunder, that might rise by occasion of that proud Title,
did worthily resist the said name, and style, as proud, and wicked, both in
it self, and specially in the Bishop of Constantinople. For if any man living
should take any such name unto him, it should be the first, and chief of al
Bishops, which is, the Bishop of Rome. But he does not so, ne never did so,
as the truth is: therefore much less any other Bishop should challenge that
name unto him.

These things are at large proved, and set forth, both by me in my Answer
Artic. 4. fol. 90. b. Return. Artic. 4.
and by M. Stapleton in his Return of Untruths against you M. Jewel: where
you shall find, that S. Gregory did exercise his jurisdiction over all the
Bishops in the world (in case they failed in any thing) and took him self to
have cure and charge of them al, not as a King, and Tyrant, but as a brother,
yea rather a servant to al. Gregor. Lib. 7. Epist. 64.
For he confesses every Bishop to be his equal, so long as he sins not, or
as long as his Church suffers not some defecte. And in that case, he
supplieth al negligences, and al defectes, and provides for all Churches in
Asia, in Europa, and in Aphrica, as his Epistles do fully declare. The which
if I were disposed here ambitiously to blase, as M. Iewelles custom is, I
might write out the effect of twelve great books of S. Gregory's epistles,
which do fully prove these my sayings. But for so much as that is already
done sufficiently, let this one sentence serve for all. S. Gregory says of
his own Church of Rome: The Apostolic See Head of al churches. Gregor. li.
11. epist. 54.
Apostolica Seeds omnium Ecclesiarum Caput est. The Apostolic See is the Head
of al Churches.

This being so, let us now consider, that M. Jewel does not only mislike with
the name of Universal Bishop, as not beco^ming the Bishop of Constantinople,
because he was of lower degree, then the Bishop of Rome, nor only as unseemly
also for the Bishop of Rome, because it contains a proud and ambitious brag,
and a meaning, that may be taken in evil sense (for which cause no Bishop of
Rome ever used that name): Defense page 118.
but also he misliketh with me for saying, that the name of Universal Bishop in
a right sense, is no proud name, in respect of him, to whom it belongs. By a
right sense I mean that sense, which S. Gregory allowed, and that, which the
fourth general Council allowed.

Yea farther M. Jewel says, that some Popes would have had, Ibidem.
and ambitiously labored for the title of Universal Bishop: and again, that
the Council of Carthage forbad the Pope of Rome to be called the Universal
Bishop. Al these things are false and fond, as now it shall be proved.

Gregor. li. 4. epist. 32 ad Mauricium. Ite^ eode^ lib. epist. 36. ad Eulogium
and Anastasium. Item codem lib. epist. 38. ad Iohannem Co^stantinop. Gregor.
li. 4. epist. 36 The name of Universal Bishop offered to Pop^ Leo by the
Council of Chalcedon. The name of Universal 8. in what sense agreeable to the
^ope.
First, S. Gregory witnesses, that the fourth Council offered the name of
Universal Bishop to Pope Leo* Therefore (say I) there is a good meaning in
that name, which the Sea of Rome may laufully use. For it is not to be
thought, that the fourth Universal Council assembled out of the whole world
(wherein were six hundred thirty and six Bishops) would have offered that name
unto the Pope, which by no means could be verified of him. S. Gregory's
words are these, written to Eulogius, and Anastasius, the two patriarchs of
Alexandria, and of Antioche. Sicut veneranda vestra sanctitas nouit, vni per
sanctam Chalcedonensem synodum Pontifici sedis Apostolicae (cui Deo disponente
deseruio) hoc Vniuersitatis nomen oblatum est. As your Reverend holiness
knows, this name (of Universality, or of Universal Bishop) was offered by
the holy Council of Chalcedon to the only Bishop of the Apostolic See, wherein
I serve by the disposition of God.

If then that name of Universality was offered to the Pope, and only to him:
how can it be justified, that the said name may in no sense be agreeable unto
the Pope of Rome? If it may be agreeable unto the Pope in any sense, it is in
this, because he is the chief of al Bishops, who by office has care of the
whole Church. For the name of Universal must needs have respect to the Whole
Church. And in that only sense did the Fathers of that Council of Chalcedon
offer that name to the Pope, because they knew that thing, dignity, and office
to be in the Pope, for that he is S. Peter's Successor: which cause also is
expressed in S. Gregory. Gregor. lib 4. epist. 32.
Certe (nomen Vniuersalis Episcopi) pro beati Petri Apostolorum Principis
honor, per venerandam Chalcedonensem Synodu^ Romano Pontifici oblatum est.
Soothly (the name of Universal Bishop) was offered by the reverend Council of
Chalcedon to the Bishop of Rome, for the honor of S. Peter the Prince of the
Apostles. Mark M. Jewel, he says not that it was offered, because Rome was
the Emperial City: That had been a heathnish respect: but it was offered for
the honor of S. Peter. If it may then be used in a good sense only of that
Bishop, who is the Successor of S. Peter, M. Jewel has unjustly reproved me.

That no Pope used the title of Universal Bishop Gregor. li. 4. epis. 32
Now to the second point, that no Pope used the same title. So says S. Gregory
in the same place. Nullus little vnquam hoc singularitatis vocabulum assumpsit,
nec vti consensit, ne dum priuatum aliquid daretur vni, honor debito
Sacerdotes priuarentur vniuersi. None of the Bishops of Rome has taken this
name of Singularity upon him, nor did consent to use it: lest, whiles some
peculiar thing should be given to one, al Priests (or Bishops) together should
be deprived of their due honor. This modesty was then in Popes for six
hundred years together. But this man here says:

Jewel. Page 118. Wherefore then did their Successors that followed
afterward, so ambitiously labor to geate the same?


Harding.
They labored not for it, nor used it any time afterward, as their style in all
ages til this day, does witness. For the Bishops of Rome does not write them
selves Universal Bishops, The Popes style, Seruus seruoru^ Dei.
but each one, Seruum Seruorum Dei, the Servant of Gods Servants. And that
style was of purpose taken and retained of them, to check thereby the pride of
the Bishop of Constantinople, who never leaft his proud name of Universal, til
the Turcke was sent over him, to chasten both him for his Shisme, and all that
defended, or obeyed him in despite of the Bishop of Rome.

And that you bring out of Platina, proves not, that any Pope ever called him
self Universal Bishop: but when the Bishops of Rome saw, that the Bishops of
Constantinople would needs by force keep, and use that arrogant name:
Bonifacius. 3.
then Bonifacius the third intending to stay, that together with that name, the
right of the Sea Apostolic should not be lost, and pass away to the Sea of
Constantinople: then I say Bonifacius obtained, verily not that the Sea of
Rome should be made Universal, or be made Head of al Churches, for so it was
ever: but that it might be so taken, and called of al men: lest the Grecians
should think, that the chief Pastor of Gods sheep sat in Constantinople.
Whereof it would follow, that if the chief Postour once taught Heresy (as now
the Bishop of Constantinople does concerning the proceeding of the holy Ghost)
then the whole Church should perish, since all the flock depends upon the
chief shepeheard. Now M. Jewel, as he is wont to do, has most guilefully
endeavored to persuade the Reader, that the Popes call them them selves
Universal Bishops, and brings Platina forth in such sort, that he will not
let him speak his whole mind. His words are these. Platina in vita
Bonifacij. 3.


Bonifacius tertius a Phoca Imperatore obtinuit, magna tamen contentione, vt
seeds beati Petri Apostoli, quae caput est omnium Ecclesiarum, ita and
diceretur, and haberetur ab omnibus: quem quidem locum Ecclesia
Constantinopolitana sibi vendicare conabatur, fauentibus interdum malis
Principibus, affirmantibusque eo loci primam sedem esse debere, vbi Imperij
Caput esset. Affirmabant Romani Pontifices, vrbem Romam, vnde Constantinpolis
Colonia deducta est, Caput Imperij merito habendam esse, cum etiam Graeci ipsi
literis suis principem suum, (...), id est, Romanorum Imperatorem vocent,
ipsique Constantinopolitani etiam aetate nostra (...), non Graeci vocentur.
Omitto quod Petrus Apostolorum Princep^ Successoribus suis Pontificibus
Romany, regni coelorum claues dederit, potestatemque a Deo sibi concessam
reliquerit, non Constantinopoli, sed Romae. Illud tamen dico, multos Principes,
maxim vero Constantinum comparandae Synodi ac dissoluendae, confutandi vel
confirmandi ea quae in Synodis decreta erant, Romanae sedi tantummodo
concessisse. Merito igitur seeds Romana caeteris antefertur, cuius integritate,
and constantia cunctae haereses confutatae sunt and explosae.

Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the Emperor (although not without great
difficulty) that the Sea of the blessed Apostle Peter, which is the Head of
al Churches, should both so be called, and also taken of al men, the which
place (or preferment) the Church of Constantinople went about to challenge,
wicked princes sometimes helping foreward the matter, affirming, that the
chief See ought to be in that place, where the Head of the Empire was. The
bishops of Rome avouched, that the city of Rome was for good cause to be taken
for the Head of the Empire, as from whence the city of Constantinople had
benne translated: Whereas also the Grecians them selves call their Prince, the
Emperor of the Romans, and they of Constantinople even in our days are
called Romans, and not Grecians. I let pass, how Peter the prince of the
Apostles gave unto his Successors the Bishops of Rome, the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and leafte the power, that was given him of God, not to
Constantinople, but to Rome. Only this I say, that many Princes, but
specially Constantine, granted to the Sea of Rome only, power and authority
to gather, and dissolve Councels, to reiecte, and allow those things, that were
decreed in Synodes. Therefore the Sea of Rome is worthily preferred before the
rest, as by whose integrity, and constancy, al Heresies have been confuted and
quite put away.

This was the Platina M. Jewel, whom you alleged, and durst not let him to tell
out his tale. But he says not, that the Popes labored to be called Universal
Bishops, but only to stay the Grecians from a false, and erroneous opinion,
and to keep them in the unity of the Roman Church, from whence that usurped
name did by little and little withdraw them.

Thus have we seen two errors of yours, the one, Three errors of M. Jew.
touching this point of universal Bishop
whereas you reprove me for saying, that the name of Universal taken in a right
sense, is no proud name in respect of the Bishop of Rome: the other because you
impute to the Bishops of Rome, that they labored for that ambitious name.

The third error follows, Page 118.
which is worse then the other two. For you say, these be the words of the
Counsel of Carthage, as Gratian allegeth them, Did. 99. Prima.
Vniuersalis Episcopus nec ipse Romanus Pontifex appelletur. The Bishop of Rome
him self may not be called the universal Bishop. And this thing you prosecute,
Page 121. 122.
and repeat again and again. But you belie the Council, and Gratian, and the
Gloss too, al at once. And yet you are so highly auaunced in your own
conceit, that ye seem to make a glorious triumph for it. Thus you say.

Jewel. Page 121. Now M. Harding, compare our words, and the Councelles
words together. We say none otherwise, but as the Council says. The
Bishop of Rome himself ought not to be called the Universal Bishop. Herein we
do neither add, nor minish, but report the words plainly, as we find
them. If you had lookte better on your book, and would have tried this matter,
as you say, by your learning, ye might well have reserved these uncivil
reproaches of falshed to your self, and have spared your crying of shame upon
this defender.


Harding.
I never cried so often shame upon the Defender, as he deserved, and that he is
a shameless man, it shall now be here as clearly tried, as ever it was before.
I lay three maine Lies to your charge in this matter. Three main lies laid to
M. Jewels charge. Page 118. Page 121.
Let the world understand, how well ye are hable to discharge them. One, for
that you say the Counsel of Carthage forbids the Pope to be called Universal
Bishop: An other, for that you say, that Gratian says so. The third, for that
you say, that so much is noted in the Gloss. First the Council of Carthage is
extant both in Greek, and in Latin: but those words be found in neither of
both Copies. In Greek, the Decree is thus uttered.

(...).

In which words there is no mention made of the Universal Bishop. Now the
Latin words are these in the first book of the Councels. Carthag. Conc. 3. c.
26.
Vt primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, aut summus
Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus. It is by us
decreed, that the Bishop of a first See be not called the Prince of Priests,
or the highest Priest, M. Iev. falsifieth the Counsel of Carthage. In Nomocanon.
or any the like, but only the Bishop of a first See. Where also no mention is
made of the Universal Bishop. Balsamon also making a Comment upon the same
Canon, yet speaks no word of the Universal Bishop. We see then plainly,
that M. Jewel has falsified the said Canon, by adding the words of Universal
Bishop to it, which are not in the Canon expressed.

Nay (says he) your own Doctor Gratian does allege it so. This say I, M.
Iev. falsifieth Gratians meaning.
is a worse falsehed then the former. Gratian uses to keep a certain order,
and method in othet places of his book, as he does in this special place,
Distin. 99.
whereof M. Jewel now would feign take advantage. In that Distinction he
treats of Patriarchs, saying in the first part, that Archebishoppes must
obey Patriarchs. In the second, that Archebishoppes must not be called
ordinarily Primates: In the third, that the Pope him self is not to be called
Universal.

And so does the Gloss divide this Distinction, Glosa in distin. 99.
beginning thus. Haec Distinctio diuiditur in tres parts, in quarum prima
dicitur, quod vbi erant Primates Gentium olim, ibi sunt modo Primates, id est,
Patriarchae, qui idem habent officium, licet nomina sint diuersa. Secunda ibi:
nulli Archiepiscopi. Tertia ibi, Vniuersalis.

This Distinction is divided into three parts: in the first of which it is
said, that where the Primates of the Heathens were in old time, there are now
the Primates, that is to say, Patriarchs: who have the same office (that
Primates have) although the names be diverse. The second part of this
Distinction begins at the words, Nulli Archiepiscopi: The third part
begins at the word, Vniuersalis. This being so, it will follow, that Gratian
meant to place the Canon of the Council of Carthage, in the second part of his
99. Distinction. And so the matter of the universal Bishop is not referred by
Gratian to the Council of Carthage. He never meant any such thing. Neither was
there any cause in deed why he should so have meant. The true discussio^ of
Gratians words in the 99. distinction.
But it is referred to the third part of the distinction, which follows
afterward. For it is Gratians custom for the connection of his matters, one after
an other, to put in his own words many times, whereby to signify unto his
reader, what follows. These words then (vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus
Pontifex appelletur: Vnde Pelagius secundus omnibus Episcopis). These words I
say, be Gratians own words, which are this much in English. Not so much as
the Bishop of Rome him self, may be called Universal Bishop, whereupon
Pelagius the Second writeh to al Bishops.

If now M. Jewel be so blind a Lawier, as to say, that the words Vniuersalis
Episcopus, etc. do apperteine to the former Decree of the Carthage Counsel, and
be a piece thereof: he may say also that these words, Vnde Pelagius
Episcopus, etc. be words of the Carthage Council. For they are no less in the
same Chapter, as it may seem. But verily a mean wise man might have seen
the difference of these matters. And yet M. Jewel is so lusty in his game, that
he doubts not to say:

Jewel. Page 121. distin. 99.
And in the Gloss thereupon it is noted thus. In hac distinctione dicitur, quod
Papa non debet dici Vniuersalis. In this distinction it is said, that the Pope
ought not to be called the Universal Bishop.


Harding.
O impudent Gloser. Are you not ashamed to show your peevish falshed after this
sort? Why leafte you out the beginning of the sentence? Why have you placed,
and counterfeited the words, otherwise then they are in the gloss? There they
are thus written, Vniuersalis, M. Jew. fovvly falsifieth the Gloss upon
Gratian.
haec est tertia pars Distinctionis, in qua dicitur, quod Papa non debet vocari
Vniuersalis. This word, Universal is the first word, whereat the third part
of the distinction begins, in which third part it is said, that the Pope
ought not to be called Universal. It is the third part, says the gloss,
which is to say, it is not the second part, (wherein the Decree of the
Council of Carthage was rehearsed) it is the third part. For as the first part
spoke of Primates, the second of Archebishoppes so the third speaks of the
Pope. The Decree of Carthage belongs to the matter of Archebishoppes, and
therefore it stands in the second part. Where are now these vain bragges so
often doubled by M. Jewel, that these words (Let not the Pope be called the
Universal Bishop) are the words of the Council of Carthage, as Gratian
allegeth: Page 118.
They are not the words of that Council, neither does Gratian so allege them,
nor does the Gloss so take them, and consequetly you are like your self, I
need not tell what.

Some man perhaps will say, at the lest they are Gratians words, and then he
holds, that the Pope ought not to be called the Universal Bishop. Concerning
that objection I answer, that Gratian does no more but join together diverse
decrees, and his words depend upon those that follow. For he refers him
self to the Decrees, which he there immediately after recites. These Decrees
are, the one of Pope Pelagius the second, the other of Pope Gregory the first,
which both refused the name of Universal Bishop, as also al their successors
have done. But neither of them both refused that sense, and meaning of the
name, wherein the fourh Council offered that name unto Pope Leo: In what sense
the fourth Counsel of fred unto Pope Leo the title of universal Bishop which
the catholics defend. Greg. li. 7 Epis. 64.
and that sense we only defend: To wit, that the Sea of Rome is Head of al
Churches, and may correct, or supply the want of any Church whatsoever, by
sending a Bishop to it where none is, or by deposing him, that is vnwotthy of
that room. For hereof the same S. Gregory (who refused to be called,
Universal) writes thus. Quod se dicit (Primas Bizancenus) sedi Apostolicae
subijci, si quae culpa in Episcopis inuenitur, nescio quis ei Episcopus
subiectus non sit. Cum vero culpa non exigit, omnes secundum rationem
humilitatis aequales sunt. Whereas the primate of Constantinople says, he is
under the Apostolic See, A saying of S. Gregory to be noted touching this
whole controversy.
if any fault be found in the Bishops, I know not what Bishop is not subject
hereunto. But when no fault requires so, al are equal, according as humility
would it should be.

Concerning the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, I think it not convenient
to stand here any longer about it, seeing all the Articles thereof are
sufficiently by me handled already, both in my Answer to the Challenge, and also
in the Confutatio^ of th'Apologie, M. Dorman also has answered to the
Objection out of the sixth Counsel of Carthage, and M. Stapleton has well
handled the matter of Appeals, of the confirmation of Councels, of the Popes
jurisdiction over the East, and of their not erring in the faith. D. Saunder
has showed Peter to be the Rock, and the Popes to be his successors. He has
showed also, how the other Apostles were equal with Peter, and how in other
respects they had less power, for ordinary continuance in their successors,
then Peter had.

But if I were of M. Jewels boasting humor, I should now dissemble all this,
and write it in here a fresh, as though nothing had benne said thereof before.
But I trow wise men epsy that smoky pride in him well enough. I wisse less
books might have served him, for any good stuff that is to be found in them.

The fourth Book contains a full refutation of all that M. Jewel has laid
together in his pretensed Defense touching the Succession of Bishops in the
Church from the Apostles time, unto this present age: Item a proof of the
necessity of Confession.
WRITING the Confutation of the Apology, I had occasion to speak of the
Succession of Bishops. Thereto M. Jewel in his pretensed Defense has replied
at great length. Wherein because he may perhaps to the unlearned seem to have
some color of advantage against us, the matter being of good weight, I judge
it not unprofitable to bestow some labor, and here to confute his whole
Defense touching that point, whereby I doubt not it shall appear, how little
credit he deserves, if his sayings be thoroughly examined, where he blazeth
forth most show of learning. That it may appear, how directly he answers
the points of this Controversy, and of what pith his own sayings, and how
much to the purpose his testimonies be, and how truly alleged, and that al be
made the more plain and clear: I will rehearse, first, the place of the
Apology, that gave me occasion to treat of Succession, then the words of my
Confutation, against which M. Jewel bends the force of his Defense. After
this I will lay forth his whole Defense sentence by sentence, word by word,
as I find it in his book, and so briefly as I can, refel the same. I am
driven to rehearse that discourse of my Confutation again, because a great
part of the Defense depending thereof, and being directed against the same,
unless it were again by rehearsal commended to the readers view and memory,
our whole disputation would be obscure, and uncertain. And this have I done
also the rather, to the intent the reader might have that part of my Confutation
intier and whole, which M. Jewel has caused to be set forth in his book,
pared, hewed, dismembered, and altogether disgraced.

The Apology part. 2. Cap. 5. Diuis. 1. in the Defense. Page 125.
Furthermore we say, that the mi^ister ought laufully, duly and orderly to
be preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man has power
to wrest him self into the holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore
these persons do us the greater vvrong, which have nothing so common in their
mouths, as that we do nothing orderly and comely, but al things troublesomly
and without order: and that we allow every man to be a priest, to be a
teacher, and to be an interpretour of the scriptures.

Confutation. fol. 56. a.
Al from star to star leafte out by M. Ievvel.
Saing and doing are two things. Ye say well in outward appearance. Would God
your doing were accordingly. Albeit the manner of your saying had been more
commendable, if in so weighty a point you had spoken more particularly and
distinctly, not so generally, and confusely. * Ye say that the minister ought
laufully to be called (for so has your Latin) and duly and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God. Why do ye not so? why is not
this observed among you Gospellers? What so ever ye mean by your Minister, and
by that office, this are we assured of, that in this your new Church Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, or any other inferior Orders ye have none. No
holy orders, among the gospellers. Le^^ out by M. Ievvel.
In saying thus we speak not of our Apostates, that be fled from us unto
your congregations. Who as they remain in the order which they received in the
catholic Church: so being divided and cut of from the Church and
excommunicate, laufully they may not minister the sacraments. * For where as
after the doctrine of your new Gospel like the foreronners of Antichrist ye
have abandoned thexternal Sacrifice and priesthod of the new Testament, and
have not in your sect consecrated Bishops, and therefore being without
Priests made with lawful laying on of hands, as Scripture requires, al holy
Orders being given by Bishops only: how can ye say that any among you can
laufully minister, or that ye have any lauful Ministers at al?

This then being so, let me have leave to oppose one of these Defenders
consciences. And that for the better understanding I may direct my words to a
certain person, let him be the author of this Apology, or because his name to
me is unknown, let him be M. Jewel. for with him gladly would I reason in this
point the rather for acquaintaince, and for that he bears the name of a
Bishop in that Church, where my self had a rome.

How say you Sir minister Bishop, ought the Minister to be laufully called?
ought he duly and orderly to be preferred to that office, or (as the Latin
here has) promoted or put in authority over the Church? in the Apology this
Defender says yea. Leaft out by M. Ievvel.
Then answer me directely. How prove you your self laufully called to the
room you take upon you to occupy? First, touching the ordinary Succession of
Bishops, from which as you know, S. Iraeneus, Tertullian, Optatus and S.
Augustine bring argument and testimony of right and true religion: do you
allow the same with those fathers, or no? If not, then dissent you from the
learned and most incorrupt antiquity. which is not reasonable, neither then
are you to be heard. If yea, then how can you reckon us up your succession, by
which you may refer your imposition of hands and consecration to some of the
Apostles, or of their scholars, as the foresaid fathers did, to repel the
novelties of heresies, and defend their continual possession of the Church?
Which if ye go about, how can ye but to the great hinderance of your cause
bewraye your weak hold? For whereas succession of doctrine must be joined
with the succession of persons, as Calvin in his institutions affirms, and
Beza avouched at the assembly of Poyssi in France, and we also grant:
Succession of doctrine joined with succession of persons.
how many Bishops can you reckon, whom in the Church of Sarisburie you have
succeeded as well in doctrine as in outward sitting in that chair? How many can
you tell us of, that being your Predecessors in order before you, were of your
opinion, and taught the faithful people of that Dioces the doctrine that you
teach? Did Bishop Capon teach your doctrine? did Shaxton? did Campegius? did
Bishop Audley? Briefly did ever any Bishop of that See before you teach your
doctrine? It is most certain they did not. B. Shaxton and, B. Capon repented.
Leaft out by M. Ievvel.
How so ever those two first named only in some part of their life taught
amiss, how afterward they repented, abhorred your heresies, and dyed
catholics, it is well known.

Now besides these whom else can you name? M. Iuel can show no laufull
succession in the bishoprike of Salisbury.
If you can not show your bishoply Petigree, if you can prove no Succession,
then whereby hold you? Will you show us the letters patentes of the prince? Well
may they stand you in some stead before men: before God, who shall call you to
account for presuming to take the highest office in his Church not duly
called thereto, they shall serve you to no purpose.

I cast out by M. Ievvel.
Here if you allege an interruption of this Succession of doctrine, as it has been alleged by some of your side: then must you tell us when and where the same
began, which you can never do. In prascis ptionibus aduersus haereticos.
These be Tertullia^s words.
You know what Tertullian says of such as ye be. Edant origines ecclesiarum
suarum etc. We say likewise to you M. Jewel, and that we say to you, we say
to each one of your companions. Tell us the original and first spring of your
Church. Show us the register of your Bishops continually succeding one another
from the beginning, so as that first Bishop have some one of the Apostles, or
of the Apostolic men for his author and predecessor. For by this way the
Apostolic churches show what reputation they be of. As the Church of Smyrna
tells us of Polycarpe by John the Apostle placed there. The Church of the
Romans tells us of Clement ordained by Peter. S. Augustine having reckened
up in order the Bisshops of Rome to Anastasius successor to Siricius, who was
the eight and thirteth after Peter, says that in all that number and roll of
Bishops there is not found one that was a Donatiste, Epist. 165.
and thereof he concludes, Ergo the Donatistes be not catholics. So after
that we have reckened all the Bishops of Sarisburie from Bishop Capon upward, we
shall come at length in respect of doctrine and orders, to S. Augustine the
Apostle of the English, who was made bishop by S. Gregory, and from S.
Gregory upward to S. Peter. And in all that rewe of Bishops we shall find never
a one that believes, as M. Jewel believes. ergo your Zuinglian and Caluinia^
belief M. Jewel and of the rest of your fellows is not catholic. Leaft out by
M. Ievvel.
But what speak we of succession to them, who have no orderly succession, as
no sect of heretics ever had? Hard que^^ion^ proponed to M. Iuel.


Therefore to go from your Succession, which ye can not prove, and to come to
your Vocation, how say you Sir? you bear your self, as though you were Bishop
of Sarisbury. But how can you prove your Vocation? By what authority usurp
you the administration of Doctrine, and Sacraments? What can you allege for
the right and proof of your Ministry? Who has called you? Who has laid
hands on you? By what example has he done it? How, and by whom are you
consecrated? Who has sent you? Who has committed to you the office you take
upon you? Be you a Priest, or be you not? If you be not, how dare you vsurp the
name and office of a bishop? If you be, tell us who gave you Orders? The
institution of a Priest, was never yet but in the power of a Bishop. Bishops
have always after the Apostles time according to the Ecclesiastical Canons ben
consecrated by three other Bishops with the consent of the Metropolitan, and
confirmation of the B. of Rome.

Leaft out by M. Ievvel.
Thus Unity has hitherto ben kept, thus Schisms have been stayed. And this S.
Cyprian calls legitimam ordinationem. For lack of which he denied Nouatian
to be a bishop, or to have any authority or power in the Church. Hereto neither
you nor your fellows, who have unlawfully invaded the administration of the
Sacraments, can make any just and right answer, I am sure.

Athanas. in Apologia. 2.
What, do not you remember what judgment Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt,
Thebais, Lybia, and Pentapoli were of concerning Ischyras the Arian? And why
may not al good Catholic men judge the like of you? Ischyras and M Iuel
compared together.
Macarius a Priest of Athanasius (as it was laid to his charge by his accusers)
pulled Ischyras from the altar as he was at Mass, ouerthrewe the holy table,
brake the chalice. The matter brought to judgment, Athanasius and those
bishops both denied the fact, and also though it were granted, yet defended
the same as well done, because Ischyras was not a lauful minister of the Church.
And why so? Because he was not lawfully made Priest, nor with churchly laying
on of hands consecrated. Leaft out by M. Ievvel. Colluthus. Hu^c presbyteri
and Diaconi Mareotici vocant no^ verum, sed imaginarium episcopum. Epist. ad
Curiosum and Phylagrium. Apolog. 2. apud Athanasiu^.
For proof thereof they alleged, that neither he was of the number of those
whom Alexander bishop of Alexandria before Athanasius received into the Church
made Priests by Meletius the heretic, neither that he was by the said
Alexander created. Then how is Ischyras a priest, say they, or of whom has he
received his orders? Has he received them of Colluthus? For this shift only
remains. (Colluthus was an Arian, who bare him self for a bishop and gave
Orders being but a priest). Now Colluthus, say they in their reply, could not
make him a priest, for that he died in degree of priesthod himself, and never
was consecrated bishop, and that al imposition of hands or giving of orders
was compted of no force, and that al they whom he had consecrated, were brought
down again to the order of the laity, and under the name and in order of lay
men received the communion. Hereof they conclude that Ischyras could be no
priest. And therefore it was denied, that there was the mystery of the body
and blood of our Lord. What may be judged of the new communion.
By which example besides other points we are taught, what to judge of your
pretensed Communion.

Again what say you to Epiphanius, who writes against one Zacchaeus of his
time, for that being but a lay man with wicked presumption took upon him to
handle the holy mysteries, and rashly to do the office of a Priest? Co^tra
haereses lib. 2 (...) Least out by M. Ievvel.
Likewise where he finds great fault with two other, of which the one dwelt
at a monastery in the wilderness of Egypt, the other at Sinaeum: for that they
feared not to execute the things that belong to Bishops not having received
the imposition of hands, The doi^g of a bishops office by one that is not a
bishop.
that pertains to the consecration of a Bishop. And will you understand what
Epiphanius judged of that wicked disorder? He acknowledges it to be the part
of men that of a certain presumption of minds violently and besides all truth
play the rash and dissolute wantons. What Epiphanius judges of it
For so the Greek signifies (...). Thus they be neither Priests nor Deacons,
which be not consecrated laufully according to the order used in the Church,
that is to wit, by bishops laufully consecrated, but either by the people or
the lay magistrate, as it is in some places where this doctrine is professed,
or by monks and friars Apostates, or by excommunicate priests having no
bishoply power. In Dialogo contra Luciferia nos.


Hereof S. Hierome says notably. Hilarious cum Diaconus de Ecclesia recesserit,
etc. Hilary forasmuch as he went from the Church being a Deacon, and is only
(as he thinks) the multitude of the world, can neither consecrate the
Sacrament of the altar being without Bishop and Priests, nor deliver
Baptism without the Eucharist. And where as now the man is dead, with the man
also the Sect is ended, because being a Deacon he could not consecrate any
clercke, that should remain after him. And Church is there none, which has
not a Priest. Sacerdote^
But letting go these few of little regard that to them selves be both lay and
Bisshops, listen what is to be thought of the Church. Thus S. Hierome there. In
whom leaving other things I note, that if there be no Church where is no
Priest: where is your Church like to become after that our Apostates that now
be fled from us to you, shall be departed this life? Leaft out by M. Ievvel. By
S. Hierome the English church shall be no Church at al.
And yet being with you as they be, your Church is already in such state as S.
Hierome reports, that is, no Church at al, how so ever ye set forth your
new gospel under the name of the Church of England. Bucer being once charged
to give account of his vocation, had no other shifte, but to acknowledge for
defense of his ministry, that he had taken Orders of a bishop after the rite
and manner of the Catholic Church.

Luthers advise touching Muncers vocation
Sleidan records that Luther himself wrote to the senate of Mulhusen
concerning Muncer the preacher of the Anabaptists, who stirred the common
people of Germany to rise against their nobility, that the senate should do
well to demand of Muncer, who committed to him the office of teaching, and who
had called him thereto. And if he would name God for his author, that then
they should require him to prove his vocation by some evident sign or miracle.
If he could not do that, then he advised them, to put him away. For this is
the wont of God said he, when so ever he wills the accustomed form and
ordinary manner to be changed, to declare his will by some sign. Of what manner
is the vocation of our super intendet^
Therefore this being true, it remains M. Jewel, you tell us, whether your
vocation be ordinary, or extraordinary. If it be ordinary, show us the
letters of your Orders. At lest show us that you have received power to do the
office you presume to exercise, by due order of laying on of hands and
consecration. But order and consecration you have not. For who could give that
to you of al these new ministers how so ever else you call them, which he has
not him self? If it be extraordinary (as all that ye have done hitherto is
besides al good order) show us some sign or miracle, If you fail in all
these, why ought not you to be put away? The Defenders have nothing to say for
defense of their vocation.
If you can show no sign or miracle, as your virtue promises us none: bring
us forth some example of your extraordinary vocation out of the Stories of
Christ's Church that has followed the Apostles. If you be destitute also
thereof, at lest show us, what prophet in the old Testamente ever was heard
extraordinarily without sign, or miracle, or testimony of God. Leaft out by
M. Ievvel.


Finally what can you answer to that, Lib. 1. Epist. 6.
which may be objected to you out of S. Cyprians epistle to Magnus touching
Nouatian? It was at those days a question, whether Nouatian baptized and
offered, specially where as he used the form, manner and ceremonies of the
Church. Cyprian denies it. Eusebius Ecclesiast. Hist. li. 6. cap. 43. in
Graec.
For he can not (says he) be compted a Bishop, who setting at naught the
Tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, nemini succedens a seipso
ordinatus est, succeding no man, is ordained bisshoppe of him self. For by no
means may one have or hold a Church, that is not ordained in the Church.
Leaft out by M. Ievvel. M. Ievvel and the rest of his companions, be no
bishops, but usurpers of an undue office and ministry.
I leave here to recite the rest of that Epistle perteining to this point, and
al against you, for that it were to long. Thus it is evident, for as much as
you can neither prove your doctrine by continual Succession of Priests, nor
refer your Imposition of hands to any Apostle, or Apostolic Bishop, nor
show your Vocation to be ordinary for lack of lauful ordination and
consecration, nor extraordinary for lack of Gods testimony and approbation
by sign or miracle, or example of the old or new Testament: that you are not
laufully called to the administration of Doctrine and Sacraments, that you are
not duly and orderly preferred to the Ministry which you exercise, that you
go, not being called, that you run, not being sent. Therefore we may justly
say, that ye have thrust your selfs into that Ministry at your own pleasure
and list. For though the Prince have thus promoted you, yet be ye presumers and
thrusters in of your selves. Well, lands and manours the Prince may give you,
Priesthod and Bishophod the Prince can not give you. Ierem. 23.
This being so, we do you no wrong as ye complain, in telling you and
declaring to the world, that touching the exercise of your Ministry ye do
nothing orderly, or comely, but al things troublesomly and without order.
Unless ye mean such order and comelines, as thieves observe among them selves
in the distribution of their robberies.

Lastly, if ye allow not every man, yea and every woman, to be a Priest, why
drive ye not some of your fellows to recant, that so have preached? why allow
ye the books of your new Evangelists, that so have written? Leaft out by M.
Ievvel.
And whether ye admit al sorts of the common people to be your Ministers of
the word, to teach the people, and irreverently to handle the holy
Scriptures, or no: our proof is nedelesse, the thing is manifest. *

Harding.
Here treating of Succession, as thou see Reader, I have among other things
brought forth Tertullia^ demau^ding of the Heretics the Original of their
Churches, Tertul. lib. de praescription.
and the Register of their Bishops succeding one an an other from the beginning
til his time. Again I have alleged S. Augustine naming. 38. Popes of Rome in
order, August. Epist. 165
and thereof concluded, that because never a one of them was a Donatist, the
Donatists were al Heretics. Whereupon I also concluded, that, seeing among all the Popes from S. Peter til this day, none was of M. Jewels opinion, he and
his fellows, the Zuinglians, and Caluinistes, must by the rule S. of Augustine,
be taken for Heretics. For the true Church is, where the true ordinary, and
manifest Succession is, from the Apostles til these our days. This only I
require of thee gentle reader, that thou would vouchesafe to read this
matter through: and not to judge before al be heard. For in deed following M.
Iewelles confuse order of writing, I could not dispose my things in such
Method and Order, as the weight of the matter requires. Because the matter is
of importance, I intend to leave out no part of M. Iewelles words, whereby
he may seem to impugn the Catholic doctrine. And by the treaty of this
one point it will appear, what huge books we should write, if we should
direct a full answer to every part of his idle talk in the pretensed Defense
contained. Thus then he begins.

Jewel. Page 127. Here has M. Harding taken some pains, more then ordinary.
He thought, if he could by any color make the world believe, we have
neither Bisshoppes, nor Priests, nor Deacons this day in the Church of
England, he might the more easily claim the whole right unto himself.

And in deed if it were certain that the religion, and truth of God passes
evermore orderly by Succession, and none otherwise: then were Succession
whereof he has told us so long a tale, a very good substantial Argument of
the Truth.


Harding.
Irenaeus says it is a certain Rule to know the Truth by. For having
reckened twelve Popes, who in order succeeded after S. Peter, to wit, Linus,
Anacletus, Clemens, Euaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius,
Anice^^, Soter and Eleutherius, who then was the twelfth Bishop from the
Apostles, Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 3.
immediately he says thus: Hac ordinatione, and successione, ea quae est ab
Apostolis in Ecclesia Traditio and veritatis praeconiatio, peruenit vsque ad
nos. Et est ple^issima haec ^stensio, vnim and eandem viuificatricem fidem
esse, quae in Ecclesia ab Apostolis vsque nunc sit co^seruata and troditain
veritate. By this order and Succession, the Tradition, and preaching of the
truth, which is in the Church from the Apostles time, came even to our days.
And this is a most full declaration, that the faith, which is kept in the
Church, and delivered in truth from the Apostles time even til this present
hour, is the one self same faith, which is the causer of life and of
salvation. He says it is a most full declaration of the true and lively faith.
And you will confess I trow, that where that faith is, there is the true
Church of God.

Such a Succession of Bishops in diverse countries we have, and can show it
from the Apostles time til this day. As the rue and order of Popes in all
Chronicles does show to the eye, and witnesses to the understanding.

But such a Succession M. Jewel, and his fellows have not: therefore by his
own confession, we have a good substantial Argument of the Truth.

Jewel. Page 127. But Christ says, In cathedra Moysi sederunt Scribae, and
Pharisaei: by order of succession, the scribes, Math. 22.
and Pharisees sit in Moses chaier.


Harding.
Well handled M. Jewel. You bring these words, as though Christ had spoken
them in the reproach of Succession: Whereas Christ in that place made an
Argument for Succession in this wise: Super cathedram Moysi sederunt Scriba and
Pharisaei, Math. 23.
omnia ergo quaecunque dixerint vobis, seruate, and facite. Upon the chaier of
Moses, the Scribes, and Pharisees have sitten. Therefore keep ye, and do ye,
what so ever they say unto you, or command you to keep.

Could you not see that Ergo M. Jewel, which is to say, Therefore? Could you
not perceive that Christ made a plain argument why, and why only the Scribes,
and Pharisees should be obeyed? The matter goes as if in more words it had been
thus said: The Scribes and Pharisees be naughty men, their works are not to
be followed, they ^ie heavy and importable burdens, laying them on men's
shoulders, Math. 23.
but they themselves will not so much as once m^^^ them with their finger: They
do al their works for a show. (Thus Christ him self does paint them forth) al
which notwithstanding, for only Successions sake, because by order of
Succession they sit in Moses chaier, which my father and I have planted, in
respect thereof do ye, and keep what so ever they command you to do and
keep.

Mark the word of keeping.
Mark that he binds the people to obeie the very Scribes for Successions
sake, and to obey them in keeping, and observing the former laws, and rites.
To keep I say. Beware of that Bishop, who not succeding, but usurping the
Chaier of good men (as M. Jewel does having iustled him self into the Chaier
of good S. Osmund, and others mo in the Church of Sarisburie) does yet
command the people not to keep things, but to cast them away. These new
Bisshoppes vvil not the people to keep their faith, but to change their faith.
There is no Bishop of this new Religion, that commands the people to keep
their old faith, and law: but always he bids them to change it. But
Christ bad the people to do that, which the Pharisees commanded them to
keep, and not to follow their deeds. The Pharisees killed Christ, but by
keeping their laws and Orders, they should never have come thereto. If ever
place of holy Scripture made for any truth in the Gospel, this place, which M.
Jewel brings against Succession, makes for it, and so for it, that it can
never be avoided. What Doctor ever wrote upon the holy Scriptures, who might
not now be brought for a witness of this my assertion? S. Augustine says,
that Christ made the people secure concerning evil Rulers. Ne propter illos
doctrinae salutaris Cathedra descreretur, August. Epist. 166.
in qua coguntur etiam mali bona dicere. Neque enim suae sunt quae dicunt, sed
Dei, qui in cathedra Vnitatis, doctrinam posuit veritatis. Lest for their sakes
the chaier of holesom Doctrine should be forsaken, in the which, yea wicked
men are forced to say that which is good. For the things which they say,
are not their own, but Gods, who in the Chaier of Unity, has placed the
doctrine of Verity. And immediately S. Augustine brings forth this text of
Christ, whereupon we now dispute.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 74. Benefit granted unto
Succession. Johannes Sarisburiensis in Polycratico, de Curialiu^ nugis. li. 6
cap. 24. Platina in Vitis Pontificum.
whereas Christ could not make the Scribes and Pharisees worthy of faith for
their manners, he does it a sede Moysi and doctrina, for that they sat in the
seat of Moses, and taught his doctrine. So that, albeit Scribes and Pharisees
did sit in S. Peter's chaier at Rome (as M. Jewel affirms one Ihon of
Sarisburie to say, who in deed says it not of him self, but in familiar
talk reported, unto Adrianus quartus, the Pope, what was bruted abroad by the
common people): yet for their Chaier, and Successions sake, they must be
obeyed. For in the Chaier of Unity God has put the doctrine of Verity: and
in that Chaier evil men have benne constrained to say the Truth, as I could
show at large by the example of Pope Vigilius, who a thousand years past,
before he came to be Pope, promised the Emperesse to confirm the Patriarch of
Constantinople being an Heretic: but being once in the Chaier of Peter, he
chose rather (through Gods grace) to suffer death, then that he would so defile
the Sea Apostolic, as by open bishoply fact, to establish an heretic in a
bishoply seat.

Jewel. page 127. Annas and Caiphas touching Succession, were as well Bishops,
as Aaron, and Eleazar.


Harding.
Not fully so well: because perhaps they came to it by Simonie; and yet because
they were Bishops, and sat in that Chaier, God honored them, I wisse not for
any virtue of theirs, but only for their Chaiers sake. The honor which God
gave them, was the gift of Prophecy, as it appears by that which he gave
evidently to Caiphas, who was the Bishop of that year. August. tract. in Johan.
11.
Which thing S. John witnesses in these words. Vnus ex Pontificibus Caiphas
nomine, cum esset Pontifex anni illius, prophetauit, quia Jesus moriturus erat
pro gente. One of the chief Priests Caiphas by name, whereas he was Bishop of
that year, prophesied, that Jesus should die for the people. Upon which place
S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. In Johan. homil. 64
Vides quanta sit pontificalis potestatis virtus? Cum enim pontifex esset,
licet indignus, prophetauit, nescius tamen quid diceret, and ostantum Gratia,
non autem foelestum cor attigit. Do thou see, how great the virtue of
bishopply power is? For whereas he was a Bishop, albeit unworthy, he
prophesied, yet not knowing, what he said. And the Grace touched his mouth
only, but not his wicked heart. And afterward again.

Quid signat* quum esset pontifex anni illius? What mean these words, whereas
he was Bishop of that year? Among other this custom was corrupted. For now
the hye priesthood was not during life, but made a yearly dignity, and was
given year by year, from the time that the chieftie was to be sold for money.
Veruntamen etiam sic aderat spiritus. Yet that notwithstanding the holy Ghost
(or gift of God) was yet present. Postquam autem in Christum manus extenderunt,
tunc eos dereliquit, and abijt ad Apostolos. But after they extended their
hands upon Christ, then the holy Ghost forsook them, and went from them to
the Apostles.

S. Augustine likewise writes thus. August. in Iohanne^. tract. 49.
Hic docemur etia^ homines malos prophetiae spiritu futura praedicere: quod
tamen Euangelista diuino tribuit sacramento, quia Pontifex fuit, id est, summus
sacerdos. Here we are taught, that even evil men foretell things to comme by
the spirit of prophecy, the which thing yet the Evangelist ascribes to the
divine Sacrament, because he was the Bishop, that is to say, the high Priest.

If then Caiphas being one of the vilest men that ever was, and committing
the most horrible sin that can be devised in murdering Christ, yet for his
successions sake, had the gift of prophecy: shall we now give ear to M. Jewels
itching humor, wherein he so reioyseth to reckon up the faults of the Popes
of Rome?

Be it some of them were proud, and some coniurers, The Popes teach truth not
vvithsta^ding their evil life.
or never se great sinners besides: yet so long as they sit in Peter's chaier
(which doubtless has no less privilege, the^ Moses chaier had) we say,
they have the holy ghost to this effect, that they keeping them selves in the
faith of their Predecessors, shall not be suffered to teach us false doctrine
out of the Chaier of Unity, which Chaier of Unity Optatus more then eleven
hundred years past, affirmed Peter's Chaier to be, Optat. lib. 2. contra Parmen.
and reckened up the Bishops thereof in order til his own time. Therefore as
from Moses time til Christ's Coming, God of his mercy provided, that a
Bishop, and high Priest, with other Priests and Levites about him, should not
fail in Moses Chaier, whom al men under pain of death (as it is said in the
book of Deuteronomie Deuteronomy. 17.
) were bound to hear, and obey: so much more in the time of Grace, God has
provided, that in the Chaier of S. Peter (to whom loving Christ more then the
other Apostles, Johan. 21.
he consequently gave Authority to feed his sheep, in such superiority
above the other Apostles, as he loved above them): much more I say now God
has provided, that there shall not lack til Christ's second coming a Bishop,
or high Priest in Peter's Chaier, with other Bisshops, and Priests not only
about him in that one City of Rome, but also joined with him in the same faith
and doctrine in many Countries and Nations together, whose final sentence in
matters of faith, and of good manners, who so ever hears, and obeieth,
hears, and obeieth Christ, but who so ever despises the same, he despises
Christ him self. Now I say to you M. Jewel, what Bishop had your faith with
preachers, Ministers, or Deacons about him from age to age, who might
witness in all generations the Doctrine of Christ, and the ordinary
Succession of the Church?

Jewel. Page 127. Of Succession S. Paul says to the faithful at Ephesus: I
know that after my departure hence, ravening wolves shall enter, Act. 20.
and succeed me. And out of your selves there shall, (by succession) spring up
men speaking peruersly.


Harding.
I thought so: you have a succession to, but it is of ravening Wolves. They are
your Predecessors, and ye are their Successors. For this saying, M. Ievvel
falsifieth the Scripture.
as you have handled it, is yours, and no^ ^. Paul's. He says not, that
ravening Wolves should succeed him, as your blasphemous pen has uttered:
but he says only that after his departure ravening Wolves shall enter in.
Scriptures falsified by M. Ievvel.


But he adds not that they shall succeed him (that is your accursed addition)
but he says, non parcentes gregi, which you have left out. Those ravening
Wolves shall not spare the flock, but shall divide the faith, and scatter the
flock, as you have done. For where one Faith was, you have made two, and
where charity was, you have set debate. Now whereas S. Paul farther says,
men speaking perverse things shall spring out of them selves, he says not, Act.
20.
they shall spring by Succession: That is your foul corruption of the holy
text.

He adds also other words immediately, which you have leaft out as utterly
betraying your foul Heresies. It follows in the self same clause and
sentence, vt abducant discipulos post se: There shall spring out of your selves
men speaking perverse things, Act. 20.
to lead away scholars after them. Vt abducant, to lead away. Whence shall they
lead them? from the Apostles, and from their Successors, and from the flock,
wherein they lived before. Whither shall they lead them? Post se, after them
selves. That is to say, they shall not keep the former Succession of Doctrine
and order, teaching as their Fathers have done, but they shall depart from
that Succession, and shall lead and cari^ others away with them, and become
perverse Teachers, in such sort, that they shall have Disciples of their own,
who shall bear their name: as Luther has the Lutherans, Zuinglius has the
Zuinglians, Calvin has the Caluinistes after him, who go away from their
forefathers Doctrine, and them selves set up a new belief, coming in Christ's
name, and pretending his Gospel, but yet not teaching his truth, because they
leave the Succession, where only his truth was, and is taught. For it only
does by open practice show, and witness the true meaning of his word.

who be the leaders away of the Flock 3. Reg. 12.
This, this M. Jewel is the Succession that we claim by. Tu abducis, you lead
away the flock from their ancient Pastors, and shepeherds, we tarry still
behind in the old Succession of Peter's Chaier. Jeroboam went out from Moses
Chaier, and carried ten tribes after him, so did Arius, and so did Luther, so
did Calvin, so do you. The Prophets tarried behind with Moses Chaier, in so
much that good Simeon, Anna, Zacharias, Elizabeth, and our Lady the Blessed
Virgin Marie, chose rather to dwell in Gods Church with the unclean scribes, and
Pharisees, then to go out ofter the Samaritans, and to seek a cleaner
Congregation, either in the mount Garizim, or in Egipte in the Scismatical
Temple of Onias. Even so do we abide still in the old Church, neither are we
greatly moved with your mockes, and scoffs, when ye call it the Mumpsimus
Church. Yea we abide contented with the old translation of the Bible, with
the old Portuises, and Mass books, yea perhaps also among some Scribes,
and Pharisees. But yet there by Gods grace, we will look for our Lords
glorious coming, who commended our forefathers to the special charge of Peter,
Joan. 21.
and therein us to his Successors.

We are within the Fold, ye without, we are Sheep, ye are Goats: we keep in all that we can, ye draw away, and pull out all that ye can: we sprang not out of
you, but ye out of us. If S. Paul had spoken of his Successors in that place,
he would not have said, Vt abducant, to lead away scholars. For when some be
leadde away, some others tarry behind. Now the Successor, if he abide not
behind, he is no Successor, Nestorius a skatterer of the flock.
but a leader away. In so much that Nestorius being Bishop of Constantinople,
yet when he taught otherwise of Christ's Person, then his Predecessors had
done, he was then no Successor of Alexander, Paulus, and S. Chrysostom,
because he disalowed those his Predecessors, but he was a scatterer of the
flock, and a leader away of Scholars after him self, and not after his
Predecessors.

Think you that any true believing man takes you M. Jewel for one of the
Successors of S. Augustine our Apostle, M. Jew. no Successor of our Apostle
S. Augustine,
who converted our English nation from Idolotrie to Christ? Are you his
Successor? Why, you lead men away from him, and persuade in this your book,
that he was not our true Apostle, nor any true teacher of Gods word, but a
cruel, and blouddy man, 1. Joan. 2.
and proud above measure. Away Woolfe, and devour thy Goats abroad, thou
came from us, but thou were not of us, for if thou had benne of us, thou
had remained still with us. I exhort al Christian men to return unto the
Succession of Peter, and of al other faithful men, who abide in the same
faith with him.

Jewel. S. Hierome says, they be not alvvayes the children of holy men, that
(by Succession) have the places of holy men. Did. 40. Non est.



Harding.
Double holiness.
There is a double holiness, one of life, an other of state, or office.
Concerning life, it is true, that many times evil men succeed in the place of
good. And so meant your Author, M. Jew. falsifieth S. Hierome. Did. 40. No^
est facile.
as his own words (which in the same sentence you have leafte out) do
witness. For thus he says: Non Sanctorum filij sunt, qui tenent loca
sanctorum, sed qui exercent opera eorum. They are not the children of the
Saints, who hold the places of the Saints, but those who practice the works
of the Saints. In this sentence you have least out the end, and have cast
in of your own the word (always) and these two words (by Succession). And
when al is done the sentence is not S. Hieromes, but Gratians own, added to
the former words of S. Hierome. Howbeit they are somewhat altered. Hierom.
epist. ad Heliodoru^
For thus says S. Hierome, Non est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere gradum
Petri, iam cum Christo regnantium. It is not an easy thing to stand in the
place of Paul, and to hold the Degree of Peter, now reigning with Christ. of
which ye can take no advantage against Succession, whereof we treat.

Holiness of degree and office Joan, 1.
But concerning holiness of Degree, state, and office, there is the same
holiness in the Successor, which was in the Predecessor. For it is Christ
that baptizeth, and that in like ministeries works by the evil man, as well as
by the good, so long as the Succession is not broken of, and forsaken. For if
that be once done, he that makes the breach, is not properly a Successor in
truth, but a beginner of error. As for example: Who will say that Cranmer was
the Successor of S. Thomas Cranmer no Sucessour of S. Thomas.
the blessed Martyr, or of Bishop Warrham in the Chaier of Cantorburie? I trow
he him self would not say it, if he were a live, seeing he succeeded not in
their Faith, and Doctrine.

Jewel. Page 127. Not vvithstanding the Pope him self vvil say, as it is
before alleged, Did. 40. Non nos.
If the Pope want good things gotten by his own merits, the good things
which he has (by Succession) of S. Peter his predecessor are sufficient.


Harding.
They are sufficient for him to do his ministerial office toward other, and
so to make him holy by office: but not sufficient to make him holy in life. The
ministry of an evil man is available to the effect of sacraments,
And the place does evidently show, that only to be the Popes meaning. And I
suppose your self M. Jewel do not deny, but that an evil man may do the
office of a good Predecessor, as well to the peoples salvation in ministering
Sacraments, as a man being never so good. Why then skoffe you at the Pope for
this saying? What gredinesse of gainesaying is this, to control where no fault
is?

Jewel. Page 127. The Gloss thereupon says, Petrus fecit Papas haeredes
bonitatis suae. Peter made the Popes Heieres of his goodness by Succession.


Harding.
M Ievvel falsifieth the Gloss. In Glosa. Disti^ct. 40. Non nos.
It is not so, but thus: Petrus ad hoc transmisit dotem meritorum cum
haereditate innoce^tiae ad posteros, vt essent haeredes bonitatis suae. Peter
made over the dowry of his merits, with the inheritance of his innocence
unto his Aftercommers, to the end they might be the heirs of his goodness.
There is odds between these sayings, Peter would have them to be heirs of
his goodness, and, Peter made them heirs of his goodness. The first he might
do, the second he was not hable to do. For goodness comes only of God.

Jewel. Page 128. Distinct. 19 Sic omnes. in Glosa.
Again the gloss says. Papa sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra The Pope receives
holiness (by succession) of his Chaier.


Harding.
He receives holiness of dignity, degree, and office, but not of life. For
that is the very meaning of the law, which says that all the holy Decrees of
the Sea Apostolic are so to be taken, as if they were strenghthened with the
divine voice of S. Peter hem self.

Mark, he speaks of Decrees, but not of good works. And I trow M. Jewel him
self does not deny, but that Baptism ministered, or the Word of God preached
by Judas, was as good as that which was done by Peter. Why then scoffeth he
(for hitherto he does none other) but only to play his part?

Jewel. Page 128. Johan. 8. Johan. 9.
Such affiance sometime had the Scribes, and Pharisees in their succession.
Therefore they said, we are the children of Abraham. Unto us has God made his
promises: art thou greater, then our father Abraham?


Harding.
If the Jews used these words in such sense, that how so ever they lived,
they should be saved, as being the children of Abraham: it was a naughty sense.
But if they had used the same words against the schismatical places of prayer,
either of Jeroboam, or of the mount Garizim, or of Onias temple in Egipte: they
had used them right well. For as Christ said, Salus ex Iudaeis est, Johan. 4.
Salvation is of the Jews, and not from the Samaritans, or any other
Schismatikes. And so concerning succession of dignity, and not of life, they
might well say, unto us God has made his promises. For so in deed he had, but
yet with such condition, if they dishonored not God, 1. Reg. 1.2
and despised not Christ their Savior. For in doing so, all the promises made
to them were at an end, because God would seek a new people to him self,
Deuter. 32
in case they would forsake him, and seek to them selves a new God.

But now the Scribes and Pharisees used not these words against Schismatikes,
but against Christ him self, whom both the old Prophecies, and his own
marvelous works witnessed to be the true Messiah. Johan. 5.
And yet Christ came every year to the Temple, and kept all the Law, and
honored the Scribes, and Pharisees, for that they sat in Moses Chaier, so
that there was now no cause why they should talk of their Succession, and of
Gods promises against him, who denied none of them both, but maintained them
both. For S. Paul said even after Christ's death unto the Jews, Actor. 13.
To you we ought first to preach the word of God, But because ye refuse it,
and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, behold we are turned unto
the Gentiles. For so our Lord commanded us. The Jews then abused them selves
against Christ in pretending Succession, and promises, where obedience and
faith should have been used. Even so if the Pope, or any other Bishop now at the
second coming of Christ, would make claim to heaven by his Succession of S.
Peter, or S. James, he should but deceive him self. But in the mean time any
catholic Bishop may lawfully use the argument of Succession against heretics,
and schismatikes, who run out from the true Succession of Bishops, 3. Reg. 12.
as Jeroboam did from the high Priests of Moses. It skilleth much M. Jewel
how every place of scripture be applied. For that which serves very well
against Heretics, will not serve at al against Christ.

Jewel. Joan. ^.
The Pharisees said, As for Christ, we know not from whence he came, or
what he can show for his Succession.


Harding.
Albeit the Pharisees would not see or hear, what predecessors Christ was
hable to show for him self, yet God has so notably commended the matter of
Succession in Christ's own person according to his manhood, that I marueil you
would once bring forth any example thereof, seeing it makes so evidently
against you. Christ verily to give example to all the world, how much they ought
to esteem the order, and Succession, as well of Bishops in matters of Religion,
as of Kings and Civil Gouernoures in politic matters, provided that his
line, and succession should be most notable even from Adam, til his own
Mothers time, the blessed Virginne Marie, as S. Matthew, Matt. 1. Luke 3.
and S. Luke have testified.

Neither could either the calamity of the people of the Jews, or the sins
of the house of David by any means hinder, but that Christ would come lineally
from Abraham, and from David, which thing was written for our learning, and
instruction, Romans 15.
to show thereby that no sins of the Bishops, nor of the faithful people,
shall be hable to stay, but that his providence in governing the Church by his
Apostles, and their Successors, Continuance of Succession. Psalm. 88.
shall continue for ever, accordingly as David has foretold at large, saying,
If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my paths, if they profane
my righteousness, and keep not my commandments, I will visit their iniquities
with the rod, and their sins with scourges, but my mercy I will not
separate from them: that is to say, from the seed of David, which is meant to
be the faithful people, Gal. 3.
which bear the name of Christians. And to the Apostles Christ said, Matt.
28.
I am with you al days until the worlds end.

If he be with them til the end, they likewise are in the world, til the
worlds end. But they lived not so long in this world, therefore it is meant,
that from age to age, and from man to man Christ will have always some to
sit in the Chaieres, and Seats of his Apostles by ordinary Succession,
until the worlds end.

Of this Succession David in the person of Christ spoke in spirit, saying to
the Church: For thy Fathers, Psalm. 44.
Sons are borne unto thee. Thou shall ordeine them the Chief Governors over
all the earth. The Church answers. I shall be mindeful o Lord of thy name in
every Generation and Generation, therefore the peoples shall give praise, and
thanks to thee for ever, and from age to age.. So that the cause, why the
Church continues, are the Governors by God appointed unto it, and as the
Church continues from age to age, so do they govern from age to age. For the
Visible Flock of sheep can not long lack their Visible shepeheard at any
time, but that the Wolves will enter in, and disperse them a sunder.

Jewel. When Christ began to refourme their abuses, and errors, they said
to him, Luc. 20. Mark. 11. Beda in Lucam li. 5. cap. 80.
by what power do thou these things, and who gave the this authority?
where is thy Succession? Upon which words, Beda says: They would have
the people understand, for that he had no solenne Succession, that all that he
did, was of the Devil.


Harding.
See what co^ueia^ce M. Jew. uses to help his cause.
Scarce one line has passed your hands, into the which you have nor conveyed
of your own head, the word, Succession. Whereas neither S. Luke, nor S
Matthew, nor S. Mark, nor S. Paul, nor S. Hierome, nor the Pharisees, nor
Bid, whom you allege, used that word at al. But to make your tale sound
against Succession, M. Jew. falsifieth al his testimonies.
you drive al to that point: and thereby you falsify every place, that you
bring, as every man shall find, who does confer the matter with the
Originals: and so al your Defense stands upon fialsified Authorities. But our
cause (God be praised for it) is so strong, Christ's true Succession.
that we need not to care, though all that were true, which you allege. For
albeit the Pharisees would not harken to Christ's Succession, yet in deed he
Succeeded lineally to all the Kings, and Patriarchs, and thereby to the Priests
also of the best Order, to wit of the Law of nature, and not of the Law of
Moses, which was an inferior Law in respect of that of Nature.

Christ therefore had not only a most perfect Succession, which is described
in the Gospel, from Adam til Joseph the husband of the Virgin Marie: but also
with that his Succession he stopped all the mouths of his Enemies. For thus he
said to them. What think you of Christ, that is, of your Messiah, whom you
look for? Matt. 22.
Whose Son is he? They say to him, the Son of David. Christ says to them.
Psalm. 109.
How then does David call him Lord in spirit, saying, The Lord has said to my
Lord, sit at my right hand, until I put thy enemies, as a foot stool under
thy feet: If then David call him Lord, how is he his Son? And no man was
hable to answer him a word. Neither durst any manne after that day ask him
any more questions.

Here it is first to be noted, that the Scribes, and Pharisees knew Christ to
have a Succession from David. For his Son (they said) he must be. Therefore
M. Jewel in making the Pharisees to acknowledge no Succession of his, has
corrupted the text of the Gospel, and uttered a great Untruth. The Pharisees
knew, that Christ should succeed in the very best line: but they would not
attend, nor consider, how that Succession was now brought to pass in the
Son of Marie, who being of the house of David, had miraculously brought forth
Christ the perfect end of the Law. So likewise M. Jewel knows, that the
Church of Christ must needs have a perpetual Succession: but he will not
consider, how it is preserved chiefly in the Chaier of Peter, Joan. 21.
to whom above al others the sheep of Christ were committed.

Well, Christ then giving the Jews to understand, that he succeeded in the
line of David, Christ not only the Son of David, but also the Sone of God.
would have had them farther to consider, that he also was the son of God,
and so showed, that he, who was David's Son, was also called the Lord of
David: his Son by flesh, his Lord by Godhed, which thing did put them al to
silence. Even so that weak, mortal, and some time miserable, and sinful man,
whom sitting at Rome, M. Jewel despises, when he hears him to be according
to the gift of God, the Vicare of Christ's love (as S. Ambrose calls him) in
feeding his sheep, Ambr. in co^mment. in Luc. c. 24.
and the Successor of the chief Apostle: he is surely astoined at it, and
would be put to silence, if he were not worse, then a Pharisee. For admitting
that the Pope were not S. Peter's Successor, but only one of the lowest
Bishops of Christ's Church: yet who would not wonder to see him keep his
Succession so notably fiften hundred years together, whereas all the Patriarchs,
and thousands of Bishops besides, are so mangled, and so brought to naught?

But now if we add hereunto, that the same is even by our enemies confession,
and ever was the first See, how much more ought they to wonder at the special
providence of God in that behalf? Therefore even as it was miraculous, that
the line of David was so notably preserved in so many changes, and captiuities
of the Jews: right so may we say of the Bishops of Rome, in such sort, as
smaller things do imitate the greater, and may in their manner be compared to
the greater.

Jewel. Cyrillus frames the Pharisees words in this sort. Cyrillus in
Cathen. in Luc. 20.
Thou Being of the tribe of Judah (and therefore having no right by Succession
unto the Priesthood) take upon thee, the office that is committed unto us.


Harding.
Here again you add these words (having no right by Succession unto the
Priesthode) of your own head. M. Jew. falsifieth Cyrillus by adding words
of his own.
Howbeit even there Cyrillus shows, that Christ had right by Succession,
which you should not have conceeled, had you dealt truly. For there it
follows. Sed si nouisses, o Pharisee, scripturas, recoleres quod hic est
Sacerdos, qui secundum ordinem Melchisedech offert Deo in se credentes, per
cultum qui legem transcendit. O thou Pharisee, Christ had right also by
succession.
if thou had known the Scriptures, thou would remember that this is the
Priest, which after the order of Melchisedech offers up unto God those that
believe in him, by a service of godly worship, which passes the law.

Why would you not see those words that followed in Cyrillus M. Jewel? First
Christ had a Predecessor in his Priesthod, even Melchisedech the high Priest.
Secondly, Melchisedech is here declared to have offered unto God, and that
Christ in offering unto God, fulfilled his figure: whereas you would have
Melchisedech to make his oblation to Abraham, and not to God. Thirdly, the
thing offered by Melchisedech, was not only bread and wine, but Abraham the
Father of al believers was offered unto God by Melchisedech: And so Christ in
his last Supper offered unto God, not now bread and wine only: but by his
almighty power he turned the bread into the seed of Abraham, and so he offered
unto God all the faithful, which by reason of their head Christ being truly
contained under the forms of bread and wine, were also signified present as
members joined with the head, and so were al offered unto God.

Now whereas Christ was of the tribe of Judah, that made for him, for out of
that tribe the Messiah was looked for, by the Succession of the h^^se of David,
as the Pharisees them selves confessed. And thereby they ought to have
understood, that their Succession from Aaron should yield unto the Succession
of David, who had said that his Lord, Psalm. 109.
and Son, should be also a Priest after the order of Melchisedech. And the
Jews knew, that they ought to have yielded to their Messiah, as to their chief
head so long before promised.

If you can show us M. Jewel, that as Christ was prophesied of to put the
Priests of Aaron out of their places, so Luther, Zuinglius, or Calvin was
prophesied of, to destroy the Succession of S. Peter, we yield unto you. But
as the high Priests, and Pharisees were never bound to yield unto any man, but
only unto Christ at his first coming: so S. Peter's Successors ought never to
yield, but only to Christ at his second coming. And so by all means the
Succession is perpetual, and the true Religion never lacked it visible and
clear, as this new Religion does, which for lack of it can not possibly stand
long, no more then that of the Arians, or of the Nestorians did. Sap. 4.
For Bastard slippes take not deep roots. And therefore though they seem to
flourish for a time, yet soon they vanish away. But the Tree, which Christ
has planted, that only shall endure for ever. That, say we is the Chaier of
Peter, with all such Successions of Bishops, as keep them in the unity of
Peter's Chaier.

Jewel. Chrysostom imagines the Pharisees thus to say. Chrysostom. in Math.
Hom. 39.
Thou art not of the house of Priests. The Council has not granted it thee,
the emperor has not given it thee.


Harding.
You know this author is not S. Chrysostom, and yet still you name him so, not
so much as addi^g, M. Ievvel very often allegeth the writer of opus imperfe^ctum
in Mattheum for Chrysostom, knowing him not so to be. Hom. 39.
in opere imperfecto, whereby we might understand whom you mean, wherein of
purpose you do untruly. Now to the matter. This writter (whether he was
Maximinus Arianus, as some auouche, or who so ever he was) does not only show,
that the Pharisees might have had such thoughts, but also he shows that the
signs and the true priesthod agreed al, and met upon Christ, who had his
power, not of men, but of God. And farther he adds there in this wise:
Sacerdos qui est secundum Deum, omnem Sacerdotem timet offendere, quia omnes ex
Deo fieri arbitratur; quamuis ex hominibus sit factus.

Every Priest which is of God, fears to offend any Priest, because he
thinks every Priest to be made of God, although he be made of men. But you M.
Jewel think no Priest at al now to be made of God. To be made I say. For you
will grant none other Priesthod, then that Spiritual and internal Priesthod,
which is common to women, and children, as well as to men. As for external
Priesthood you think none at al to be made, and therefore you despise not only
every Priest made of men, but also you despise the highest Priest of al, to wit
the Bishop of Rome, and al his predecessors, being above thirty Martyrs, and
mo Confessors, and blessed Saints, that have sitten in that See, and have
exercised their power over the whole Church, as it is well known of S. Clement,
Eleutherius, Victor, Stephanus, and others.

The Pharisees words may be truly applied to you M. Jewel. For you will have no
spiritual power to be in the Church, but that which the temporal Counsel, or
Emperor, Lay Princes made governors of Christ's Church in all things and
causes
or some like secular Prince does give. For these officers have you made the
supreme governors of Christ's Church in all things, and causes. He that says
in all, leaves out nothing at al, wherein the temporal Prince is not supreme
Governor. Therefore in your Church it is a good argument, thou may not do
the office of a Bishop, preach, absolve, or Baptize, because thou art not
admitted thereto by the Civil Magistrate. I wisse they of the Clergy in the
Primitive Church would rather have suffered a thousand deaths, then they
would have submitted the power, which Christ gave to them, unto the lay
governors, who although Christ allows them and commands them to be
obeyed, yet were not made by him masters of his Religion, and of his Church.
The power must come from the Apostles by lawful Succession, which shall rule
Christ's Church, and not from the Emperor, or from the King, much less from
a woman, or from a child, having otherwise never so good right to
thinheretance of a Crown.

Jewel. Thus to maineteine them selves in credit, for that they had Succession
and continuance from Aaron, and sat^ in Moses chair, they kept Christ's quite
out of possession.


Harding.
They would have done so in deed M. Jewel, but he did put them out of
possession, because they would have had there priesthod to continue longer,
then the prophecies had foretold, and Gods Counsel had determined. For the
law, and Prophets brought al to Christ, and there was showed, that a change
should be made by him. Bring us forth the like Prophecies, that Luther,
Zuinglius Calvin, or that lusty Gospeller Beza must put the Pope out of
possession, and forthwith by like Miracle bring you to pass, that the whole
Church, (I mean al them that profess the Faith of the Roman Church) be
dispersed, and destroyed, as Christ dispersed, and destroyed the Jews: then we
will leave the Pope, yea Christ also, and follow you, and them, as our second
Messiah. But if, as from Aaron til Christ's first coming, the High Priests
ought to have yielded their possession to no man that ever came, so from S.
Peter til Christ's second coming, the Pope S. Peter's successor ought to yield
his Chair to no creature: Then be ye assured, 3. Reg. 12.
that as Jeroboam setting up a Succession against the Succession of Aaron
before Christ, was a wicked Schismatike, and an Idolatour: so what soever King,
Queen, or Priest sets up a Succession against S. Peter's Chair before
Christ's second coming, is a Schismatike, and shall, without he, or she
repent, be damned in hell fire with Idolatours for ever. For S. Peter's Chair to
the new Law is that, which Moses Chair was to the old Law.

Jewel. The Pharisees said unto Christ then, even as M. Harding says now unto
us: Who ever taught us these things before thee? What ordinary Succession,
and vacation have thou? What Bishop admitted thee? Who confirmed thee? Who
allowed thee?


Harding.
What means this man? will he take upon him to be Christ him self? I thought
he would have put Luther, Zuinglius, M. Ievvel shows us in him self an
Image of Antichrist.
Calvin, or Beza in Christ's place. But he will now have it himself. Mark his
words good Reader, thou shall see a very Image of Antichriste. We must be like
the Pharisees, and he must be like Christ: And therefore as Christ did put
the Pharisees from their former Temple, Chair, and Law, so we must yield to
M. Jewel. For it was prophesied before for soothe, that as Christ was the end
of the Law, so M. Jewel should be the end of the Gospel. And as all the former
Successions of high Priests, and of Levites gave place to Christ, and to the
new Order, which he appointed: so must now all the former Successions of the
Apostles, and the new law, yield unto M. Jewel, and unto the order that he shall
take hereafter, in Religion. For he seems as it were to say, I am Christ,
and M, Harding is a Pharisey. And as the Pharisees asked Christ who ever
taught us these things before thee, so M. Harding the Pharisey asks M. Jewel
(who now is become Christ) what ordinary succession or vocation have thou?
What Bishop admitted thee? who confirmed thee? who allowed thee?

Mark I pray thee good Reader, how it comes to pass, which Christ said
before, that many should come in his name, and should seduce many.

There shall arise (says he) false Christ's, and false Prophets: Math. 24
that is to say, men shall come, who, except they attributed to them selves
mine own glory, authority, and power, should not deceive you. Such a one is
M. Jewel. For I say unto him in good earnest, that beside Christ him self,
who was above al Succession, and might alter, and change the same, he can have
none other man possibly from Adam the first man, til this hour, No man ever
was, or shall be of authority, to take away, or change the lavvful Succession
of Bishops.
but that lawful Succession of Bishops and Priests ought to be heard, and
followed against that man, what soever he were. Cain ought to have obeyed Adam,
to have remained with Seth, and not to have constituted a new company in
such sort, that there should be one City of the children of men, and an
other of the Children of God. Nemrod ought to have kept him self in the
Succession of Seth continewed by Noe, and not to have made him self a Prince
by force, by which occasion the faith began to be abandoned. Ismael, and Esau
should have tarried in the Succession, and not have suffered their offspring the
Agarenes, and Edomites, to leave the old Religion of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Core, Dathan, and Abyron should not have forsaken the Succession of Leui
and of Aaron. Joseph lib. 11. Antiquit. ca. 8.
Jeroboam should not have forsaken the Succession of Moses Chair: Manasses
the brother of Iaddus should not have forsaken the same Succession, and have
gone to build a new Temple in the mount Garizim. Josephus de bello Iudaic. lib.
7. ca. 30.
Onias should not have forsaken the known Succession at Jerusalem, and have
built a Temple in Egypt. The Samaritanes should not have sacrificed but only
in Jerusalem. Only Christ, only Christ I say, might lawfully according to
the prophecies forsake the former ordinary Succession, Joan. 21.
and elect a new, as he did saying to Peter, feed my sheep. From which
hour til the end of the world, no man what so ever he be, may forsake the
Ordinary Succession of Peter, but must keep him self in the same house of
God with him, and his Successors, until Christ come again.

From that Succession departed Marcion, Arius, Eunomius, Nestorius, Pelagius,
Eutyches, and briefly al other Heretics, which al have benne condemned of
Peter's See, and of al other Bishops, that were joined and lincked in unity
of faith and Doctrine with that See. Now for M. Jewel to take upon him
Christ's own peculiar office, such as no Patriarch, no Prophet, no Apostle
ever had, and to require, that he may abolishe the Mass, and change the order
of the Communion, diminish the number of Sacraments, and transfer the Order
of Succession from the Apostolic See, they can not tell whither, and all this,
none otherwise then Christ him self did: is not this the proper spirit of
Antichrist? Remember your self M. Jewel, whiles you have time to repent. And
consider, that either you think your self to be in very deed the Messiah of
the world, who was anointed only of God, and needed no vocation of man: or
else be you assured, that you are bound to hold of the ordinary Succession, of
them I mean, who sit in S. Peter's chair, and are of the same faith, and
communion with S. Peter's successor.

Jewel. Page 128. Therefore good Christian Reader, let not these M. Hardings
great words much abashe thee. The Scribes, and Pharisees in the like cases
used the like language long ago.


Harding.
Wherefore shall not the Christian Reader be abashed at my words, demanding
of M. Jewel, where his ordinary succession is? Wherefore I say, shall not the
Christian Reader be abashed? Forsooth because by like M. Jewel is Christ, or
rather better then Christ, who puts away Christ's former Church, and the
succession of his Apostle S. Peter, as Christ did put away Moses former Law,
and the Succession of Aaron. Therefore as Christ passed Moses, in so many
degrees must M. Jewel pass Christ, if his doings shall be justified. Therefore
good reader be not abashed, if M. Jewel be Christ. But if thou think not so,
and yet do think in religion as he does, then be thou worthily abashed.
For surely he is either Christ, who makes a new Succession of Priesthod, and
of Bishops: or Antichrist, who goes about to undo the old former
Succession, which Christ had established.

Jewel. Touching the Church of Rome, I vvil say no more at this present, but
only that was spoken openly by Cornelius the Bishop of Bitont^ in the late
Council of Trident. Vtinam non a religione ad superstitionem, a fide ad
infidelitatem, a Christo ad Antichristum velut prorsus vnanimes declinassent.
Would God they were not al gonne by consent together from religion, to
superstition, from says, to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist. These fevv
words, considering either the speaker, or the place where they were spoken
may seem sufficient.


Harding.
If you had considered either the speaker, or the place, so as you ought to
have done, you might have benne ashamed, to have alleged the words of a
Catholic Prelate for your purpose. For what soever he meant by them, you may
be well assured, he meant not to say, that the Catholic Church was gonne from
faith to infidelity, or from Christ to Antichrist. Otherwise he him self
would not have still continued in that Catholic Church, which had seemed to
him to have lacked faith, Cornelius episcopus Bito^tinus
and Christ. But now the man is known in all Italy, and is alive to this
day, who still continues in daily preaching, and in exhorting al men to fly
from your heresies to the Catholic faith, and to keep them in the Church: so
that his deeds do well show, what he meant by his words.

The which rule S. Augustine would have kept in the understanding of what so
ever Writers, A lesson how to understand men's words in matter of Religion
Contra epist. Parmen. li. 3. cap. 4.
and specially touching religion. And who so ever does not so understand men's
words by their deeds, upon his blindness he cries out in this sort.
Incredibilis est coecita hominum, and omnino nescio quemadmodum credi posset
esse in hominibus tanta peruersitas, nisi experimento verborum suorum
factorumque patesceret, vsque adeo se clausos habere cordis oculos, vt
commemorent sanctae Scripturae testimonia, nec intueantur in factis
prophetarum, quemadmodum intelligenda sint verba Prophetarum. It is an
incredible blindness of men: and verily I know not how it might be
believed, that there is such frowardness in men, unless by the proof of
their words and deeds it appeared openly, that the eyes of their heart were
so fast closed, that they allege the testimonies of holy scripture, and do not
consider by the doings of the Prophets, how the words of the Prophets are
to be understood.

And straight after where S. Augustine says those words, he shows by
example, what he meant. Hieremie had written, Hier. 2.
what has Chafe to do with the Wheat? The Donatistes thereupon reasoned,
that the Catholics were Chafe, and them selves Wheat: but, says S.
Augustine by way of exposition there, did Hieremie, that said, the Jews were
Chafe, forsake their Church and fellowship? No verily. How so ever then
Hieremie the prophet meant, we ought to understand his words according to his
deeds. And seeing as concerning his deeds he lived in one Temple, and faith
with them, whom he called Chafe, we may be well assured, that by the name of
Chafe, he meant not, that the Jews had not true Faith and Religion, but only
that they had not true Charity and Obedience.

Even so if M. Jewel would consider, that the Bishop of Bitonto goes not from
Italy to Geneua, nor to Germany, nor to England, but both abides still in his
Bisshoprike, and has so much preached against these present Heresies of
Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, that now three whole Volumes of his eloquent
Italian Sermons are extant in print: if he would have considered this, he might
have benne ashamed with such a great brauarie and so often to have alleged a
Catholic man's words against Rome the mother Church of al Catholics.

S. Augustine calls it an incredible blindness so to do, and such as no
man would believe, except he saw it used. But by whom? Verily by Heretics, who
having no truth for them, do still make vain bragges and shows of words,
when the very deeds of them, whose words they bring, are against them. Which
thing I stand the longer upon, because M. Jewel has used this practice above
a thousand times in his pretensed Defense. M. Ievvel every where allegeth
their words for him, whom by their deeds he well knows to be against him.
Above a thousand times I say, he has alleged the words of Schoolmen,
Gloses, Summistes, and Canonistes for his purpose, whereas he well knows, they
believed al such, as he is, to be detestable Heretics, and for such
condemned them. Yet must they be brought in, and that so often, so seriously,
and with such Preambles, as though he would bear the world in hand, they
were clear of his side.

Neither did Cornelius the Bisshoppe of Bitonto speak of the Bisshoppes of
Rome specially, as M. Jewel would bear the Readers in hand, Bito^tinus in
oratione habita in Council. Tridentino
but generally of the Christians, saying, that they have wandered like sheep
in hills, and feeldes, and that the chief of them are turned from authority,
unto Lordlynes, from right, unto wrong, and would God (says he) they were not
utterly as it were with one consent, bowed from Religion, to superstition, from
faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist.

Neither does he say, they are al gonne, as M. Jewel englisheth the words.
How M. Ievvel falsifieth his allegation.
The word (al) is not there. Again he says not, they are gonne by consent
altogether, but, velut prorsus vnanimes, as it were utterly of one mind. The
word velut, as it were, does temper his words: but M. Jewel has leafte out
velut, and has put in this word al, lest if the sentence of that Bishop
should be thus tempered, it should not seem grievous enough.

His meaning was to complain, as every good man daily does, upon the vices of
men, who live as if they had neither Faith, nor Religion. And that would
have appeared most plain, if M. Jewel had not cut of the later words of
Cornelius, discourteously stopping him from telling out his whole tale. For in
the very same sentence it follows, A Christo ad Antichristum, quin a Deo ad
Epicurum, vel ad Pythagoram, velut prorsus vnanimes declinassent. Would God
they had not as it were utterly with one consent gonne a side, from Christ, to
Antichriste, yea rather from God to Epicure, or to Pythagoras. These last
words, which made al plain, were omitted by M. Jewel, as his custom is,
and the authors tale is falsified, and his words abused. For any man would
soon judge, that they go not to Epicure, or Pythagoras, to the end to
maintain the doctrine and opinions, that those Philosophers held.

Pardonne me good Reader, if herein I seem to long. For at this time I do but
as it were give thee a show, what and how much might be said in every other
Article of the Book, if I thought it labor worth to discuss them
particularly. For I assure thee, in my conscience, there is not any thing in
this pretensed Defense, which might not be well and easily answered, were not
that it seems to me a thing both superfluous so to answer such heaps of
lies, and gloses, and also an unprofitable bestowing of good time.

Jewel. They are gonne from Faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrists.


Harding.
Which they M. Jewel? Did he speak of the Pope^ of Rome? M. Ievvel odiously
lays that to the Bishops of Rome, which was spoken generally by way of
complaint of al evil Christians.
You say, touching the Church of Rome, etc. And yet now you bring forth that,
which was generally spoken, and that by way of complaint, of al evil
Christians, and not namely of the Bisshops of Rome.

Again how are they gonne from faith to infidelity, and from Christ to
Antichrist? Verily because they are gonne from God to Epicure, that is to say,
because many of them live, as if they had neither faith, nor Christ, nor God.
Last of al, he says not, they are gonne as you falsify his words: but with a
moderation, would God they were not gonne: He shows him self to fear, lest
they be gonne: he takes not upon him boldly to affirm it, as you do.

Jewel. And yet al other things failing, they must hold only by Succession:
and only because they sit in Moses Chair, they must claim the possession of
the whole. This is the right, and virtue of their Succession.


Harding.
Is it not reason, if secular men hold their kingdoms, lands, goods, and
rightes by Succession, yea when al other rightes, forces, and virtues fail,
that Gods Ministers, if they had nothing else leaft, should hold still their own
also by Succession? It is well known, that the Bishops of Rome have more then
only Succession. For they make good Decrees, they give answer to great
consultations, they call General, and Prouincial Councelles, they execute the
Canons of them, and send forth Preachers, as of late they have done even unto
the new found Indies, beside many other godly and virtuous acts, which they
exercise for the salvation of their own souls, and of the people.

But what if they had nothing, but Succession? Would you then have men forsake
their fold, and Church? Did Isaias so? did Esdras so? did Judas Machabeus so?
did Zacharias so? did S. John Baptist so? Can you devise the Popes to be worse
then Caiphas, or the Pharisees? Math. 23.
And yet Christ willed them to be obeyed, albeit they had little else beside
Succession. It is this Succession M. Jewel, which shall lie in your, and in your
companions way at the dredful day of account. It shall not be demanded of
every man, why he studied not the Scriptures, which most men have not learned
to read: But it shall be demanded, why they have no faith, nor charity. No
faith, by forsaking the open, and known Succession: no charity, by breaking
unity. Every man sees Succession, ignorance can not be pretended, and every
man shall be judged by it concerning his Faith.

Jewel. The words of Tertullian M. Harding, which you have here alleged,
were spoken of certain your ancient fathers, that had raised up a new
religion of them selves, as you have also done, without either word of God,
or example of the Apostles, and holy fathers.


Harding.
It is happy that at the length, Here at length M. Ievvel begins to answer
my words: but how, consider.
you begin to answer my words. We shall now see, how well you touch
Tertullians meaning. You say his words were spoken of certain my ancient
Fathers. That can not be so. For none are in this behalf my fathers, but
those, who love well the Succession of Bishops. But Tertullian spoke of those,
De Prascription. aduersus Haret.
that esteemed the Succession of Bishops, as little as you do. And therefore
they are your fathers, of whom he speaks: that is to say, they are Heretics,
of whom he speaks. For in deed no heretic can abide Succession, because they
would feign iustle out the old Succession, to schuffle in their new Intrusion.

You say the men, of whom Tertullian speaks, raised up a new Religion of them
selves, and therein you say truth. You add, as I also have done: but therein
you belie me, for ye are not hable to lay any one point of doctrine to my
charge, wherein I follow not that old Succession, which abhors al new
Religion. Let all the world judge, who raises up a new Religion, you, or I.
You say the Heretics, of who Tertullian spoke, raised up a new Religion
without the Word of God, example of the Apostles, or of holy Fathers. If you
mean without the true meaning of Gods word, you say truth: and then you also
are without Gods word, because you are without the Church, whereunto Gods
word with the true interpretation thereof was given: and we are not without
it, because we contain our selves within the Church. But if you mean, that
these heretics did not sound the words of the Scriptures in their lips, as
falsely, and withal, as fast, as you do, then you say not truly. For
Tertullian in that book does show, that the Heretics also appealed to the
Scriptures, Tertullian in Prascript aduersus haeret.
and he answered, that to strive with heretics upon the scriptures, was a
thing of uncertain victory, because one says, it is not holy Scripture, an
other says, it is holy Scripture, one says, it is meant thus, an other says,
it is ^^^^t otherwise. But (says Tertullian) the interpretation of the
Scriptures belongs to them, It booteth not to strive with heretics about
the Scriptures.
who have the true faith, and he concludes, that they have the true faith, who
have the perpetual Succession of Bishops from the Apostles time til their
own days.

Scripturas obtendunt, and hac sua audacia statim quosdam mouent. The
Heretics pretend to bring Scriptures for them selves, and with that their
impudency forthwith they shake some. And afterward. Ibidem.
Ergo non ad scripturas prouocandum est, nec in his constituendum certamen, in
quibus aut nulla, aut incerta victoria est, aut parum certa.

Therefore we must not always appeal unto the Scriptures, neither must we
strive about them, in which either no victory at al, or an uncertain, or
verily not very certain victory is obtained.

Then shows he that heretics of right have not to do with the Scriptures,
but only the Catholics, Heretics of right have not to do with the
Scriptures. Tertullia^. Ibidem.
to whom the Apostles delivered them: and not them only, but other things
also, viua voce, by mouth, and word, without writing. Si hac ita sunt, constat
proinde omnem doctrinam, quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis, matricibus, et
originalibus fidei conspiret, veritati deputandam, reliquam vero omnem
doctrinam de mendacio praeiudicandam, quae sapiat contra veritatem Ecclesiarum,
and Apostolorum, and Christi, and Dei. If this be so, then is it evident, that
al such doctrine, as agrees with those, that are the Apostolic Churches, the
mother Churches, and the original Churches of the faith, is to be taken for
true, and that al other doctrine is to be adjudged to come of lying, as that
which sauoureth against the truth of the Churches, of the Apostles, of Christ,
and of God.

Our doctrine proved to be true by the Succession of the Apostolic Church.
Now concerning our Churches, it is evident, that we agree with the original,
and mother Churches, which were planted by the Apostles. For we agree in faith
with the Church of Rome, which was planted by the most blessed Apostles S.
Peter, and S. Paul, and always kept her Succession til this present day:
and therefore our doctrine is true. But you agree in faith with no Church at
al now extant in the world, which came from the Apostles: and therefore your
doctrine by the rule of Tertullian, is false, and lying.

Whiles he then disputed with Heretics, as we do now with you, he said,
either these Heretics confess, that they began since the Apostles time, and
they are false teachers: or if any of them dare intrude them selves into the
Apostles age, Edant origines Ecclesiarum suarum, then let them bring forth the
beginninges, or show the original evidences of their Churches, let them unfold
the order of their Bishops, so ronning along from the beginning by Succession,
that he who is the first Bishop, had for his founder and predecessor, one of
the Apostles, or of the Apostolic men, who continued til the end with the
Apostles in the same faith. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos
deferunt. For by this way the Apostolic churches do show forth along their
public registers.

At length having brought forth the examples of the Church of Smyrna, and of
the Church of Rome, and of other like Churches, he concludes thus confidenly,
Consingant tale aliquid Haeretic^; let the Heretics feine some such matter.
He bad them feme, For he well knew in truth, they could show no such
Succession.

I have then showed that Tertullian spoke not of Heretics, who lacked the
pretense of Gods word, M. Jewels Doctrine is proved by Tertullia^ erroneus
for lack of Succession proved.
but of them, who had no Succession of Bishops from the Apostles time til
their own age. And one such Succession of Bishops in any one Church of all the world seeing M. Jewel can not bring forth, it remains that he is an
Heretic, and that his Doctrine is erroneus, false, and heretical.

Jewel. Tertullian says not unto us, but unto you, and such as you be, let
them show forth the Originals of their Churches.


Harding.
Is that al he says M. Jewel? Why went you not forth to the next words? The
Scrolles or rolls of Bishops names.
Let them unfold the order of their Bishops. He calls it unfolding, because
the Bishops names were used to be kept, and written in order in long Rolls,
the which Rolls must be unfolded, when they are to be read. He meant not
therefore such Originals M. Jewel as you imagine: to wit, particular examples
of this, or that fact: but he meant the Original copies, or instruments, and
evidences of founding, and planting of their Church, who it was that preached
the Faith first unto them, and who was their first Bishop, who the second, who
the third, and so forth until the present time.

Jewel. Even so we say unto you, show us the Originals of your doctrine.


Harding.
You say not even right so as Tertullian said. For he called not for the
Originals of Doctrine, but of Churches: Originals of Churches.
For by the Churches the Doctrine is known, to be good or evil, to be
allowable, or reproueable.

Jewel. Show us any one of the Apostles of Christ, or of the learned
Catholic Doctors of the Church, that ever said your private Mass. Show one
at the lest, either Greek or Latin.


Harding.
It was not that, which Tertullian required. He demanded only for the
Originals of Churches, and for the order and Succession of Bishops. But for
that you durst not call, knowing, that we could show, how S. Augustine converted
us, being sent into England from S. Gregory the Pope, which Pope S. Gregory
succeeded S. Peter in his Chaier. Thus we can show the Originals of our
Churches, bringing them from the Catholic Bishops, which are yet alive, M.
Ievvslyly diuerteth from the present matter, to an other matter impertinent
touching private Mass.
upward until S. Peter.

But you are fallen away from the matter of Succession, which only Tertullian
presses, and are now come to demand of a particular fact, whether any
Apostle, or old Father ever said private Mass, or no. I say, al of them might
have said private Mass, and that I prove by Tertullians reason, and rule,
because the use of saying private Mass came to us time out of mind by
Succession, without any change or innovation noted therein by any story or
Chronicle. And yet was there never any strange or new thing received and used in
the Church, but that great trouble came thereof (as now there does of your
changing of Religion) the which trouble of Churches, and commonweals, is at
no time omitted in the stories of that age, wherein it falls. But now seeing
the use of saying private Mass came so peaseably to us from hand to hand, and
no first author thereof can be showed: it is out of al controversy, that it
was ever accounted a Godly and a lawful thing.

But what need I now to repeat that I have already written in that argument?
Answer that part of my book better to the purpose then yet ye have done,
which treats of that point, where many plain evidences be brought forth of
Sole Receiving Sole Receiving.
in the Primitive Church, In my answer, Art. 1. and likewise in my first
Reioindre. Aug. Epi. 165.
which Sole Receiving is the only thing, for which you reprove private
Mass, as you call it. It is clear, that S. Chrysostom and certain others said
Mass, and yet had no man to receive with them, as I have other where declared.
I think not good now to fall into that Disputation again, and therefore here I
will call you home to the present Argument of Succession.

Jewel. Page 128. 129. S. Augustine says of so many Bishops of Rome, there
could not one be found, that had benne a Donatiste: Even so in like sort say
we to you, of all the same Bishops of Rome, there can not be one found, that
ever agreed with M. Harding in saying Mass. Or if there were any such, show
his name, with other Circumstances, when, and where, and who were
vvitnesses of the doing. Show us your Originals M. Harding: Confess the
Truth: deceive us no longer. It is a new devise: ye have it only of your
selves: and not by Succession from the Apostles.


Harding.
You pretend to reason like S. Augustine, as though he had reasoned upon a
particular fact, and not upon the Doctrine. Even so in like sort, say you,
and it is not even so, nor in like sort. S. Augustine concluded, that the
Donatistes were Heretics, S. Augustines example cannot be fitly applied to M.
Ievels purpose. S. Augu. speaks of doctrine, M. Jew. of a particular fact.
because no Bishop of Rome taught that doctrine which they taught. And you
turn all the matter of doctrine to a manner of doing. It were surely hard to
prove, that ever any one Pope, not only of those 38. whom S. Augustine names,
but also of all the rest til this hour, did say private Mass. For if M. Jewel
should put me to the proof, that Paulus tertius, or Pius quartus, Federicus
Fregosius that noble and learned Bishop of Salerno, or Bellaius that worthy
Bishop of Paris, or any the like, who lived in our time, had said Private
Mass, and that in such wise, as if I were not hable to show him, when they
said it, where they said it, and who were witnesses thereof, I should not be
credited for want of due proof: I were not hable to prove it, either for that
I lived not at Rome, and in the places where they made their abode, or else
because, though I lived in those places, I was not so curious, nor careful to
know, what they did therein. And so it would follow, by this fond collection of
M. Jewels Logique, that even yet to this day, no Pope, nor other Bishop, faith
private Mass, because I can not prove it, and show the circumstance, where,
when, and how it was done.

Think you M. Jewel, that the Religion of Christ depends upon any
particular fact of men? Is that your Divinity? All the Popes, and all the
Apostles agree with us in Doctrine, because we can show diverse Churches,
which have benne planted of them, and have kept from time to time the
Religion, which they received from hand to hand of them. This is our
demonstration of the Truth. This is that, which Christ allowed, when he
commanded his disciples to do, and keep, that which the Scribes and
Pharisees, who sat in Moses chair, bad them to keep and do. Even so do we
M. Jewel, we say private Mass (so ye will needs call it) because the Popes, and
other bishops, who sit in Peter's, and in the other Apostles chair, do tell us,
that it is lawful to say private Mass. And we doubt not also, but that it
has benne used for ever to be said, though the people, either were not
present, or being present, would not receive with the priest, as it is plain
in S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. homil. 61. ad Pop. Antioche^.
who stood at the Altar, and did that which belonged to priestly duty, that
is to say, he said Mass, and looked for some communicantes, to come to receive
the communion, but he stood in vain, for any that would come to him. Yet did
he still come to the altar, when so either the feast, or his devotion required.

Jewel. Page 129. But wherefore tells us M. Harding this long tale of
Succession?


Harding.
Because it is a special mark of the true Church, as Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ireneus, De Praescript.
Tertullian, Lib. 2. contra Parmen.
Optatus, and S. Ep. 165.
Augustine do teach: and your Church has no Succession that is thirty years
old, nor any Bishop at al lawfully planted. But ours has a Succession of a
thousand five hundred threescore and eight years, with a great number of
Bishops in all countries, and times.

Ievvel. Have these men their own Succession in so safe record? Who was
then the bishop of Rome next by succession, unto Peter? Who was the second?
who the third? who the fourth? Irenaeus reckeneth them together in this
order: Petrus, Linus, Anacletus, Clemens: Epiphanius thus, Petrus, Linus,
Cletus, Clemens: Optatus thus, Petrus, Linus, Clemens, Anacletus. Clemens,
says, that he him self was next unto Peter, and then must the reckening go
thus. Petrus, Clemens, Linus, Anacletus. Hereby it is clear, that of the first
four bishops of Rome, M. Harding can not certainly tell us, who in order
succeeded other. And thus talking so much of Succession, they are not well hable
to blase their own Succession.


Harding.
Here is a deep consideration, I promise you. What if al writers being sure of
these four Bishops of Rome, yet be not sure who was before other? Is therefore
our Succession uncertain? We are well assured, that Peter was the first, and
after him there was a Second, a Third, and a Fourth. We are also assured, that
the same were Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacletus. And what skilleth it unto us,
The true order of the first Popes succeding one another. Damasus in
pontificalt. Clemens epist. 1. Tertullia^. De praescr.
who was Second, who Third, who Fourth? But now all this business is ended, if we
make a distinction. And that is this.

S. Peter being yet alive made two Suffraganes, Linus, and Cletus, who might
do the outward business of his office, whiles him self did attend to prayer,
and preaching. So says Damasus in the life of S. Peter. Again when S. Peter
saw his death to be at hand, he chose Clement to be his successor, as we read
in S. Clementes epistle, and in Damasus. Yea Tertullian also confesses, that
the Church of Rome shows Clement to have benne ordained of Peter.

Thus were there three Bishops in Rome, but not three Bishops of Rome, when S.
Peter died, of the which S. Clement had most right to succeed. But he having
seen before the good experience of Linus and Cletus, did yield the
administration to them, one after the other, first to Linus, and then to
Cletus, after whose death Clement him self governed the Apostolic See. And
after him came Anacletus, whom some Greek Writers took to be one with Cletus.

Thus are al matters reconciled. Discussio^ of al doubt touching thorder of
the first Popes in Rome. Ruffin. in Praefat. ad lib. Recognit.
And that not by me only, but by Ruffinus eleven hundred years past, who also
received it of his Forefathers. He says, Quidam requirunt, quomodo, cum Linus
and Cletus in vrbe Roma ante Clementem hunc fuerint episcopi, ipse Clemens ad
Iacobam scribens, sibi dicat a Petro docendi Cathedram tradit^m ^cuius rei hanc
accepimus esse rationem. Quod Linus, and Cletus fuerunt quidem ante Clementem
episcopi in vrbe Roma, sed superstite Petro, vt illi episcopatus curam
gererent, ipse vero Apostolatus impleret officium. Sicut inuenitur etiam apud
Caesaream fuisse, vbi cum ipse esset presens, Zachaeum tamen a se ordinatum
habebat Episcopum. Et hoc modo vtrumque verum videbitur, vt and illi ante
Clementem numerentur Episcopi, and Clemens tamen post obitum Petri docendi
susceperit sedem. Some ask this question, how Clement him self, writing to
James, says, that Peter leafte to him the Chair of teaching, whereas Linus,
and Cletus were Bishops in the City of Rome before this Clement. Of which
thing we have learned this to be the reason: That Linus, and Cletus were
bishops in the City of Rome, but in the life time of Peter, to the intent they
should take upon them the charge of the bishops duty, and he him self fulfill
the office of an Apostle. We find that he did the like also at Caesarea,
where, though he were present him self, yet he had Zachaeus, whom he ordered
him self, to be the bishop. And thus both may seem true, to wit, that they
were taken for bishops before Clement, and yet that Clement after the death of
Peter took the place of teaching.

Ruffinus invented not this solution of him self, but he took it of others.
For he says accepimus, as much to say, we have received, we have heard, we
have learned this: so that it was a thing known, and taught from the
beginning, which yet M. Jewel either knew not, or willily dissembled: As though
it were a great hinderance or prejudice to the Emperors Majesty, if it were
unknown now, whether Vitellius had been Emperor before Galba, or Galba before
Vitellius: with such toys he stuffeth his book.

Jewel. Page 129. I might farther say, that Peter's See Apostolic was over the
Jews, and not at Rome over the Heathens. Gal. 2.
For so S. Paul says: The Gospel of the Vncircuncision was committed unto me,
as the Gospel of the Circuncision unto Peter: God that was mighty in Peter in
the Apostleship of the Circuncision, was mighty in me among the Heathens.
Therefore if the Pope this day vvil claim only by Peter's title, and require no
more then Peter had, then must he seek his Primacie amongst the Jews,
where Peter had his jurisdiction limited, and not at Rome among the heathen
Christians, among whom, as S. Paul says, he had not much to do.


Harding.
The lewdnes of this licencious Minister passes al reason. He excludes not
only the Pope from the government of the whole Church, but also from his own
Chair at Rome: neither only the Pope, but even the blessed Apostle S. Peter.
And he thinks him self to have the Scripture agreeable unto his malicious,
and fond conceit. Why S. Peter had to do at Rome with the Gentile
Christians. Mar. 16.
S. Peter had to do with those Christians at Rome, which before had been
Heathens, or Gentiles, for four special causes. First, because he was one of
the twelve Apostles, al which had to do with any Christian, whether he had been
Jew, or heathen before. For Christ said to them al, Go ye into the whole
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: that is to say, to men of al
nations, were they Jews, or Gentiles. So that who so ever denies, that S.
Matthew, S. Thomas, or who soever else of the Apostles had to do with the
Christians being converted from their heathenish Idolatry, he denies plainly
Gods word. If then every Apostle had right to exercise any Apostolic duty at
Rome, in case he had come thither: what ignorance is it to say, that S. Peter
could not do that in Rome, which any one of the twelve might lawfully have
done?

Secondly, Christ him self having said before, Joan. 10.
that he had other sheep beside the Jews, which he would bring into his
Fold, said afterward to S. Peter, Feed my lambs, Joan. 21.
Feed my sheep. Seeing then the Heathens, or Gentiles, that became faithful,
were Christ's sheep, they were commended also unto S. Peter. And therefore he
had to do with them above al other men.

Thirdly, God chose, that is to say, purposely provided, that the Gentiles
should hear the word of the Gospel by S. Peter's mouth, Actor. 10. and 15.
and believe. Therefore it was the special will, and choice of God, that S. Peter
should have to do with the Heathens, that should be converted, which is
directly against your saying M. Jewel.

When S. Peter came unto Rome. Eusebius. Histor. eccles. lib 2. c. 14. Hierom. in
Catalo. When came S. Paul unto Rome. Eusebius. Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Fourthly S. Peter came to Rome before S. Paul. For S. Peter came thither in
the days of Claudius the Emperor, as Eusebius, and S. Hierome with diverse
others do witness: And there he preached the Gospel: and salutaris
praedicationis verbo primus in vrbe Romae Eua^gelij sui clauibus ianuam regni
coelestis aperuit: and first opened the gate of the heavenly Kingdom in the
City of Rome with the keys of his Gospel by the word of heathful preaching.

But S. Paul came to Rome long after, in the days of Nero the Emperor, as
Eusebius also records. S. Peter therefore must needs have to do with those
Christians, who were converted at Rome, no less then S. Paul. And thence also
S. Peter wrote his first epistle, as Papias one of the Apostles scholars does
witness.

Eusebius. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Did not you know all this M. Jewel, as well as I? How chances it then, you are
so impudent, as to bring into doubt, whether S. Peter's See Apostolic was over
the Heathens at Rome, or no? You answer, for so says S. Paul. What, does he
say, that S. Peter was not over the faithful Heathens at Rome? He neither says
it, nor means any such thing. His meaning is to show, that he was made an
Apostle not by Peter, or John, or James, or by any other man, but only by Jesus
Christ. And therefore although three years after his conversion he went to
Jerusalem, Gal. 1. Gal. 2.
to see Peter, and fourteen years afterward he co^ferred with him, concerning
the Faith, which he preached: yet neither Peter, nor Ihon, nor James did give
him any thing, or make him either the better learned, or endewed him with more
power, and authority. But rather they joined hands with S. Paul, and took
him into their fellowship. Why so? In consideration that they saw, God had no
less committed to him the preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, then he
had before committed to Peter the preaching of the gospel unto the Jews. And
how saw they either this, or that? Because the effect showed it so. For as God
had wrought mightily among the Jews in converting them by S. Peter's preaching,
so they saw that he wrought mightily among the Gentiles by co^uerting them at
the preaching of S. Paul. So that by the very euente of the matter, they saw
that S. Paul was called in deed of God to the Apostleship.

S. Paul then meant not in these words, that S. Peter by Christ's commission
had to do only with the Jews, and him self only with the Gentiles. Act. ca.
13.
For S. Paul had also to do with the Jews, and he preached to them in their
Synagogs through diverse parts of Asia, and otherwhere: Yea at Rome it self,
he preached to the Jews. Act. 28.
Shame it is to you M. Jewel, the shame of ignorance I mean, or, (which is
more likely) the shame of impudency if you see not, that both S. Peter had to
do with the Gentiles, and S. Paul with the Jews, and each of them with both.

But what saying of holy scripture, or of holy doctor did you ever allege
against the truth, without some corruption? In S. Paul's words you leaft out a
small word in appearance, but yet great of strength. The word, (...), enim, M.
Jew. corrupts S. Paul.
which in english does signify, for. This word (for) gives great light to S.
Paul's meaning. For when he had said, that the preaching of the Gospel to the
Gentiles was committed unto him, even as the preaching of the Gospel to the
Jews was committed unto S. Peter: least any man should think, that he meant
of a special commission purposely reserved to him alone by God: he declares,
how that commission might be proved. Qui enim operatus est Petro, For he that
has wrought in Peter in the Apostleship of the Circuncision, that is to say,
of the Jews, has wrought in me also among the gentiles. That same, enim, for,
does make the place plain. They knew that God had no less committed the
Gentiles to Paul, then the Jews to Peter. How knew they it? For he wrought
now as mightily with Paul among the Gentiles, as he had wrought before with
Peter among the Jews. So that S. Chrysostom well notes, Chrysostom. in 2. ca.
ad Galat.
non dixit, postquam audissent, sed cognouissent, hoc est, ex ipsis didicissent
factis. He said not, after they had heard, but after they had known: that is
to say, after they had learned by the deeds them selves. Mark M. Jewel, mark
the deeds them selves. It was now the commission of the deeds, whereby God
declared him self to have wrought in them both. But that not withstanding, S.
Peter did, might and ought to preach unto the Gentiles, and to plant, and
dispose their Churches, no less then S. Paul: And S. Paul might likewise
plant, dispose, and order the Jews Churches. For their right was one,
concerning the Apostolic authority.

Jewel. Where you say, that according to the ecclesiastical Canons, ever from
the Apostles time, Bishops have evermore ben consecrated by three other
bishops, with the confirmation of the bishop of Rome,


Harding.
I said, M. Jew. falsifieth my saying.
with the consent of the Metropolitan (which you have here pared away) and
Confirmation of the Bishop of Rome. I added also, thus Unity has ever benne
kept, which you also have untruly leaft out.

Jewel. Page 129. As if without him no man might be allowed to be a Bishop,
ye should not so vnaduisely report so manifest Untruth. For I beseech you,
where be these Ecclesiastical Canons? Who devised them? Who made them? Who
gave the Pope that singular privilege, that no Bishop should be admitted in all
the world, but only by him?


Harding.
Among the Canons of the Apostles, this is the first: Episcopus a duobus, aut
tribus Episcopis ordinetur. Let a Bishop be ordered (or made Bishop) by two, or
three Bishops. These Canons are allowed by the sixth General Council. Yet can
you ask, where be these Ecclesiastical Canons? who devised them? who made
them? By a Decre of Hilarious, no Bishop can be consecrated without the
Metropolitanes consent. What Consecration could M. Jewel, and his fellows have,
who has neither Metropolitan at al, nor lawful Bishop to Consecrate them?
Howbeit touching this I need to say little: for in the very next side of the
leaf M. Jewel confuteth him self. Where, as one that had quite forgoten him
self, he says thus. Our Bishops are made in Form, and Order, as they have
benne ever, by free election of the Chapter, by the Consecration of the
Archbishop, and other three Bishops. If this be the Form and Order of
making Bishops, that has benne ever, to be Consecrated by tharchebishop, and
three other Bishops, why were you so hot against me, in calling for
th'Ecclesiastical Canons: which you bind your self now to show, or else you
must confess, that you have made this new order, that has not ben ever.

Anacletus In epist. Decret. The Popes authority of co^fiming Bishops is of
Christ. Joan. 21.
But now concerning the Popes authority to confirm Bishops, to omit for this
present the old Canon of Pope Anacletus, which is afterward alleged, and to
show the first author of this matter: Christ, who made Peter the chief Pastor
of al, and who gave commission to him loving him more, then the other Apostles
did, to feed accordingly as he loved, that is, to feed more then the other
Apostles did: Christ who inspired Peter to go to Rome, and there to settle
the Apostolic See and Chair of his Bishoply Primacie: Christ, who inspired
Peter to make S. Clement, and the other Bishops of Rome his Successors, gave
the Bishop of Rome Peter's Successor this Privilege, that no Bishop ought to
be a Bishop without his consent. For what reason can suffer, that any man shall
gouuerne any part of those sheep, which are al committed to the Bishop of
Rome, without the Bishop of Romes consent, which consent is a Confirmation
sufficient to any Bishop for the due government of his flock.

Now this consent of the Bishop of Rome was many ways known. For when soever
he consented to the general order of the catholic Church, to wit, that he
should be a Bishop, whosoever were laufully chosen by the Clergy, Optat^us
lib. 2. Communicatorie letters.
then his consent was given generally. And when after the election made,
co^municatorie letters thereof came to Rome, as to be head place of the
Christian Communion, then was the said Bishop specially confirmed, and so
confirmed, that the Pope could not choose but confirm him, except he could
make any just exception against him. For as no man ought to gouuerne in the
Church without the Popes confirmation (when it may co^modiously be had without
impediment) even so the Pope must needs confirm those, who are lawfully
chosen, except he will upon good ground change the gouuernme^t of the Dioces to
a more profitable order, as many times it has been don. This matter would
require a large Treatise. But it is in part handled already in my first book
set forth against the Articles of your Challenge M. Jew. where you might have
seen what I alleged, why the Pope should confirm Bishops, so that now this
thing should not have been so strange unto you.

Ievvel. Page 129. I remember your Canonistes have said, Felin. D. constitut.
ca. Canonum statuta. col. 6. ver. fallit. M. Ievvel speaks as if he had been a
Canonist many years ago.
the Pope may make a Bishop only by his word, without any farther
Consecration.


Harding.
Do you remember it M. Jewel? It was clearkly spoken forsooth, and in such
sort, as if you had been an old stude^t of the Cano^ law many a winter past,
and that now whiles you had been occupied in higher matters yet some of these
former meditations had come again to your mind, and worthily. For it was a
thing much to be mused upon of him that occupies a Bishops place, what
Felinus, or Panormitan said concerning the Pope. The truth is M. Jewel, you
either had this stuff in some of your German gatherers, or else it was
ministered to you by some of your Co^ministers, if not by your blind lawier,
whose help you have bought with a piece of an Archdeaconrie. For you began not
I suppose to study the Canonistes, and the gloses of the Law, before you
occupied the place of a Bishop, if then at the least you did. But how soever
that be, your memory might have been better bestowed, the^ in keeping in stoare
such a toie. The Canonistes mean, that the Pope, as being the highest judge,
is not bound to the observation of any thing in the law, which is only
Ceremonial: so that he may dispense with those matters, when he sees cause, and
may with his only word promote a man to the authority of a Bishop, the
omission of any Ceremony notwithstanding. But they speak only of rites and
Ceremonies, such as I suppose you your self would not, or should not stick
upon, when either necessity, or universal profit should require a thing to be
spedily done. As for any point necessary to the Sacrament of holy Orders, the
Pope may not omit in any wise.

Jewel. Page 129. Panor. de co^stitutio^. translato.
And Abbate Panormitane moves a doubt, whether the Pope by the fullness of
his power may deprive all the Bishops of the world at one time. But thus
they say, that care not greatly what they say.


Harding.
When you had only said that Panormitane moved the doubt, you conclude with,
thus they say: as though he had said, that in deed the Pope might deprive all the Bishops in the world at once. Certainly the moving of the doubt shows
him not to say it. For many doubts be moved, you know pardy, not to the end
men should think, that al may be done, whereof by learned men, a question is
moved: but that they may the better carry away the answer. So question is moved
among the Scholemen, An Deus sit, whether God be? not that any man at al
doubts thereof, but to see, how the doubt might be resolved, if any man were
so mad as to move it. Once it is certain, that the Pope can not deprive al
Bishops. For although they be under him (specially if they do amiss, or need
any help) yet they are as truly Bishops, as he is, and are the Successors of
the Apostles, who knowing the Primacie to belong unto S. Peter, did yet make
Bishops by Gods ordinance, where so ever they thought it expedient. Aaron was
the chief among all the Priests, and Levites, yet he could not therefore
deprive all the Levites, and Priests. And even so your own Panormitane, whom
you make to doubt, concludes with these words. Quod si papa vellet, c.
Translato ex. de Constitut.
non posset remouere omnes Episcopos, cum repraesentent omnes Apostolos. If the
Pope would, he could not remove al Bishops, for as much as they represent all the Apostles. Call you this a doubting, when he so plainly determines against
that, for which you allege his doubting?

Jewel. Verily Nilus a greek writer says thus: Nilus d^ primatu Romans
Pontificie.
The Bishop of Constantinople does order the Bishop of Cesarea, and Other
Bishops under him, But the Bishop of Rome does neither Order the Bishop of
Constantinople, nor any other Metropolitan.


Harding.
It neither much skilleth, what Nilus does say, Nilus a late writer, and
mainteiner of the Greeks Schism.
whose authority, is so little worth, being a late mainteiner of the Schism of
the Grecians, and yet though his saying were true, it skilleth also as little,
because it speaks of a matter of fact, and not of power. For he says not,
that the Bishop of Rome is not hable, or has not power, to order some
Metropolitan, but only that he does not so, meaning that he uses not so to
do. And if the not doing prove any impotencie, or unableness to do it, then it
may be said, Christ is not hable to ordeine a Deacon, because we read not
that ever he did so, by his own mouth, Actor. 6.
or hands. For Deacons were ordained by his Apostles after his Ascension. But
albeit the Pope uses not to Order Metropolitanes with his own hands, yet
Nilus I trow meant not, but that he was of power to do it: or if he was so
folish as to think so, yet you M. Jewel should not in that behalf bear the
babble with him, as who confess, that he was ever as great a Patriarch, and
much more ancient then the Bishop of Constantinople was: so that the Bishop of
Constantinople can not be able to do that, which the Pope also can not do.

To be short, you that can call so many gloses to your remembrance, could you
not remember that, as Liberatus, Liberatus in breuiari^. ca. 21.
records, Anthenius the Bishop of Constantinople being yet alive, but deposed
for heresy, Agapetus that good Bishop of Rome consecrated, and ordered with
his own hands Mennas, who professed the Catholic faith, making him Bishop of
Constantinople, instead of the other heretical Bishop? Are you then so far
to seek in your Logike, as not to know, that if the Bishop of Rome did
lawfully once order the Bishop of Constantinople, that still he were of
authority and power so to do, if need were?

Jewel. But hereof I have spoken more at large in my former Reply to M.
Harding.


Harding.
But thereof you are confuted more at large by M. Stapleton in his Return of
Untruths upon you, and yet could you dissemble the matter, as though your
fourth Article, and namely that part, whereof here you speak, were not found
as full of Untruths, as of Allegations.

Jewel. Page 129. Certainly S. Cyprian wills, that Sabinus, being lavvfully
elected, Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
and consecrate Bishop in Spain, should continevve Bishop still, yea although
Cornelius, being then Bishop of Rome, would not confirm him.


Harding.
By this a man may know, what a Dodger you are, and whence your great books
proceed. Verily from certain heretical Notebookes made by some Gra^marians, or
Scholemasters of Germany. For always your allegations, and reports, come out
after the same sort. If once they contained an open lie, being never so often
repeated, they shall still contain it: and reason. For they were always written
out of one lying fountain. In the Return Artic. 4. Fol. 127.
M. Stapleton had told you of this very matter before. He showed, that your
note book is false. It was not Pope Cornelius, but Pope Steven, who would have
restored Basilides to his bishoprike against Sabinus, who was newly elected in
Spain. But the stay, why Pope Steuens Decree stood not, was only for lack
of true information in Basilides appeal made to Rome.

Now reason, and law shows, that when a thing is not done only upon a
certain cause, that cause ceasing, the thing should be right well done. Sabinus
might continue Bishop not withstanding that Pope Steven wrote, against him,
only because Basilides, for whom the Pope wrote, had deceived the Pope by
false suggestion.

Therefore if a true suggestion had been made to the Pope, his Decree should
have prevailed, although it extended it self as far as Spain, and that for
the restitution of a Bishop against him, that was newly elected a Bishop, by
the consent of all the Bishops of Spain. Therefore the Popes authority over
other Bisshops, grounding it self upon a right and true information, was
acknowledged in the Primitive Church.

Jewel. Page 129. 130. Did. 64. cap. fin.
In deed touching every Metropolitanes several Jurisdiction, Gratianus notes
thus: Illud generaliter clarum est, quod si quis praeter sententiam
Metropolitani fuerit factus Episcopus, hunc magna synodus definiuit Episcopum
esse non oportere. This is generally clear, that if any man be made Bishop
without the consent of his Metropolitan, the great council (of Nice) has
decreed, that such a one may not be Bishop. So likewise says Socrates of the
Bishop of Constantinople. Without the consent of the Bishop of Constantinople
let no man be chosen Bishop. Socrates Lib. 7. cap. 28.
Here is a right, reserved specially to the Bishop of Constantinople and to
every Metropolitan within his own province. But of the Bishop of Romes
universal right of Confirmation we hear nothing.


Harding.
You reason upon authority negatiuely, as though if the Council of Nice, and
Socrates, speak not of that confirmation, which belongs to the Bishop of
Rome, therefore there could be no such. But it appears by S. Cyprian in
diverse Epistles, that it was the custom in his time for a Bishop newly made,
to send letters to all the other Bishops, intimating his Election. Now as those
letters came first, and specially to the Bishop of Rome, Cyprian. Lib. 1.
Epist. 3.
as fitting (by S. Cyprians own confession) in the principal chair, and
succeding S. Peter: even so if the Pope for just causes had not received the
letters, and communion of the said new Bishop: he then for lack of the Popes
confirmation could not rightly have enjoyed his Bishoprike, as it appears by
many examples, which would require a discourse over long for this place, nor
very needeful, since the confirmation of Bishops is not our principal matter,
but only the Succession. Yet M. Jewel who reme^breth of old so much Canon
Law, may call to his remembrance, what I have said in my Answer to the Articles
of his Challenge: In my Answer Artic. 4.
where I have showed, that the Pope had three Legates in the East, In epist.
Simplicij ad Acatiu^.
one in Constantinople, In epist. Bonifacij ad Eulalium.
the other in Alexandria, Leo epistol. 82.
the third in Thessalonica. Whereunto M. Jewel has replied nothing, as also M.
Stapleton has noted in the Return.

Now if those Bishops being not only Metropolitanes, but also two of them
Patriarchs, were never the less the Popes Legates: it is easy to see, how the
Popes confirmation was given to the Bishops generally under those Primates,
seeing the Primates them selves were confirmed by him, or else they were not
accounted lawful Bishops, for lack of his confirmation, Zonaras in vita
Consta^tis nepot. Heraclij.
as it is evident in the example of Pyrrhus the Bishop of Constantinople, who
both was put into his bishoprike by the bishop of Rome, when he had persuaded
him, that he was Catholic, and again was put out by his authority, when it
was perceived, that he had dissembled.

Jewel. Page 130. Neither does M. Hardinges counterfeite Anacletus claim all the Bisshops thorough the world, as belonging to his Admission, Epistol. 3.
did. 93. iuxta Sanctoru^.
but only a part. These be his words. Omnes episcopi qui huius Apostolicae
sedis ordinationi subiacent. All the bisshops that are under the ordering, or
confirmation of this Apostolic See.


Harding.
If Anacletus be counterfeite, Anacletus not counterfeite.
it is far from our knowledge. For we found that Epistle in his name,
registered among the epistles of other Popes above a thousand years past. And
Isidorus, who gathered them, found them so entitled, as we read them.
Therefore your slaunderours tongue touches not us.

Ordination, and Confirmation, are diverse
Concerning that you account Ordering, and Confirmation to be al one, it is a
gross error both in Grammar, and in knowledge of histories. Ordinatio is
ordering, and Confirmatio is confirmation. The Ordering of bishops was done by
the bishops of the same Province, with the consent of the Metropolitan: Nicen.
Council. ca. 6.
But the confirmation was made by other Bisshops also without the Province, and
specially by the Bishop of Rome, who these many hundred years has confirmed
them alone, because the use of communicatorie letters is leaft, and that is
reputed done by the whole body, which is done by the head thereof.

Jewel. Page 130. Sozom. li. 6. cap. 23.
So likewise vvriteth Damasus to the Bisshops of Illyricum. Par est omnes qui
sunt in orb Romano magistros consentire. It is meet, that all the teachers
within the Roman jurisdiction should agree together.


Harding.
The old stuff of M Jewels Reply here repeated.
Before you referred these matters to your Reply, as though you would have said
no more thereof, and yet all this while you do but write out your Reply again.
To what purpose you allege these words, I cannot tell, as the which make
evidently against you, and nothing for you. The Roman world, or jurisdiction,
was both East, and Weast, as far as the Romans had conquered, and they had
conquered all the countries, wherein all the Patriarchal Sees were placed. If
therefore by Damasus you will prove, that he confirmed all the bishops in the
Roman circuit, surely you prove thereby, that he confirmed the three
Patriarchs, of Alexandria, of Antioche, and of Jerusalem with all the bishops
under them. So well your own tale is told. And in deed better it can not be
told, seeing every thing that is true, is agreeable with the truth, and
therefore what soever you falsify not, must needs prove against you, who
sustain the false cause.

Jewel. Page 130. Again, that you say, a Bishop has alvvaies benne
consecrated by other three Bisshops, whether it be true, or no, it may well be
called in question, a^ being of your part hitherto very vveakely affirmed.


Harding.
My affirmation therein is taken out of the fact of the three Apostles, S.
Peter, S. John, and S. James, Eusebius. histor. Eccl. lib. 2. ca. 2
who as Eusebius witnesses, did consecrate our Lords brother the first bishop
of Jerusalem. And he again recites it out of Clemens Alexandrinus. So
ancient was this tradition whereof now M. Jewel doubts. The same likewise is
again witnessed in the fourth Council Council.
holden at Carthage, Cartha. 4
where two bishops are prescribed to hold the book of the Gospels over the
Bishops head, Can. 2.
whiles the third blesses him.

Jewel. Page 130. Surely Petrus de Palude, De potestate Apostolic.
one of your own Doctors, would have told you thus. In the Church one
Bishop is sufficient to consecrate another. And it is nothing else but for the
solemnity of the matter, that the Church has devised, that three Bisshops
should join together.


Harding.
Surely you took great pains to find out sumwhat for your excuse, when you
forsook the example of the Apostles, and of the ancient Councelles, and went
from S. Peter the Apostle to Peter de Palude for your Defense. And yet he says
nothing, that makes against us. For he says not that any Catholic Bishop
was ever consecrated of less then three: but that one suffices to consecrate
a Bishop. I meant, that in all solemn consecrations it has been so, and Petrus
de Palude denies it not, but he says one suffices, and means, that in a
case of extremity one bishop alone may consecrate an other: and the same I
deny not. But consider for what purpose I spoke it. My talk was directed to
you M. Jewel, and your fellows, who after fifteen hundred years in a realm,
that has not lacked Christian pastors, and bishops in it for the space of
these thirteen hundred years together, ought not now to pretend any
necessity, as though three Bishops either in that country, or in the next
could not be found, who might solemnize your Ordering, and Consecration.

Jewel. Page 130. Likewise Johannes Mayor an other of your own Doctors
would have said unto you, Quis ordinauit Petrum, etc. Who ordered Peter, In
4. sentent. did. 24. q. 3.
and made him a bishop? They can not show me three Bisshops that ordered him.
Therefore I say, that a bishop be ordered of other three Bisshops, it is an
ordinance made by man. For Paul when he ordered Titus, and Timotheus, he
sought not about for other two Bisshops.


Harding.
See now again how far this man is gonne from the Doctors of the first six
hundred years. If you will stand to their judgment M. Jewel whom you allege, M.
Ievvel allegeth the Schoolemenne, who are well known to be altogether
contrary to him.
they condemn you for an Heretic, and a Schismatike, because you have
forsaken that Doctrine of faith, and that holy fellowship, wherein they lived,
and died. They offered the external sacrifice of the Church, and taught it to
be offered for the live and dead in Christ, who died for both, and least us
his own body in a Sacrament to be made and consecrate by the priests of the
new testament, for the application of Christ's merits to every particular
faithful man, and for the whole body of the Church. Seeing you say, this is
Idolatry, why seek you for help at their hands, who have taught us this
doctrine, for which you tell us, they be in hell? Again, admit, it be an
ordinance of man, that a bishop should be consecrate of three other bishops. Is
it therefore in your power to break every ordinance of man? It was the
ordinance of men, that ye should pay this, or that tribute unto your prince.
May ye therefore cease to pay it at your pleasure?

That, which man ordained, By what man may the ordinance of man be changed.
may in deed be altered by an other man, but he must then be of the same
power, that he was of, who ordained it. The Apostles ordained, that a Bishop be
consecrate of three. An Apostle therefore is not bound to that ordinance. But
are you, and your brethren Apostles, that ye take upon you to alter the
Apostolic ordinances? If ye were but the scholars of the Apostles, ye would
keep their Successions, and follow their steps. But now whereas they kept
Christian men in one bond of peace, ye skatter the flock into so many
sects, as there are proud and vaineglorious men among you.

Jewel. 130. Whereas it farther pleases you to call for my letters of Orders,
and to demand of me, as by some authority, whether I be a Priest, or no:
what hands were laid over me, and by what order I was made: I answer you,
I am a Priest, made long since, by the same Order and ordinance, and I think
also by the same man, and the same hands, that you M. Harding were made
Priest by, in the late time of that most virtuous prince King Edward the
sixth. Therefore you can not well doubt of my Priesthood, without like
doubting of your own.


Harding.
Neither by the same Ordinance M. Jewel, nor by the same man, nor by the same
hands, nor in the time of the same late King. How be it, you tell not half my
tale. I laid for my foundation out of S. Hierome these words: Dialog. contra
Luciferianos.
Ecclesia non est, quando non habet Sacerdotem. Church is there none, which
has not a Priest or Bishop, and such a Priest he there describes, as may
consecrate the Sacrament of the Altar, that is to say, that may offer External
Sacrifice, and such a Bishop he describes, who may order priests. For
Sacerdos, as you know, does signify both a Priest, and Bishop. Sacerdos,
Bishop, or Priest.
Now S. Hierome there disputed against Hilarious a Deacon, whom being alone in
his new sect, and not hable to offer Sacrifice, nor to make Priests, it
behooved needs to leave that his congregation without a Priest.

I ask you then as well of your bishopply vocation, and of your Sending, as of
your Priesthood. Give me leave I pray you, here to put you in mind of my
words once again. Thus I said, Confut. fol. 57. b. Hard questions proponed to
M. Ievvel
and yet you have not answered me. Therefore to go from your Succession, which
ye can not prove, and to come to your Vocation, how say you Sir? You bear your
self as though you were a Bishop of Sarisburie. But how can you prove your
Vocation? By what authority usurp you the administration of Doctrine, and
Sacraments? What can you allege for the right and proof of your Ministry?
Who has called you? Who has laid hands on you? By what example has he done
it? How, and by whom are you consecrated? Who has sent you? Who has committed
to you the office you take upon you? Be you a Priest, or be you not? If you
be not, how dare you usurp the name and office of a Bisshoppe? If you be, tell
us who gave you Orders? The institution of a Priest, was never yet but in the
power of a Bisshoppe. Bisshoppes have always after the Apostles time according
to the Ecclesiastical Canons benne consecrated by three other Bisshops with the
consent of the Metropolitan, Cut of by M. Ievvel.
and Confirmation of the B. of Rome. * Thus unity has hitherto benne kept,
thus schisms have benne stayed. And this S. Cyprian calls, Legitimam
Ordinationem, Cyprian. lib. 1. epistol. 6.
Lawful Ordering. For lack of which he denied Nouatus to be a Bishop, or to
have any authority or power in the Church.

Hereto neither you, nor your fellows, who have unlawfully invaded the
administration of the Sacraments, can make any just and right answer I am
sure. *



These being my questions M. Jewel, you answer, neither by what example hands
were laid on you, nor who sent you, but only you say, he made you priest, that
made me in king Edwardes days. Verily I never had any name, or title of
Priesthod given to me during the reign of King Edward. I only took the Order
of Deaconshippe, as it was then ministered: farther I went not. So that if you
have none other Priesthood, then I had in King Edwardes time, you are yet but
a Deacon, and that also not after the Catholic manner, but in a Schismatical
sort. Truly after that I had well considered with my self those questions,
which in my Confutation I moved unto you, I took my self neither for a
Priest, nor yet for a lawful Deacon in all respects, by those orders, Romans 13.
which were taken in king Edwardes days. For I considered, that, whereas al
power comes from God, most specially the power, whereby the Church is
governed, comes from him by Christ. And seeing al men know and see, how the
power, whereby temporal kingdoms are governed, is, and ought to be well
witnessed by lineal descent of blood, or else by election, and such other
vocations, as are among men: and seeing that external witness, whereby their
titles are proved, is both good and necessary: I thought, that it was much more
convenient to grant, that the power, whereby Christ's Church is governed,
ougtht to be well witnessed even outwardly, ^. Timo. 3.
since S. Paul requires also, that a Bisshoppe, or Priest, should be of a
good name among the Infidels, if he live with them. And seeing Christ came into
the world to be seen, and to minister, and to institute visible Sacraments,
and to send visible Preachers: Johan. 02
I considered, what an absurdity it was, after his Ascension for man to
challenge an Invisible Church, or Succession to him self.

Furthermore when I vewed the state of the Primitive Church, and saw that
Bishops evermore succeeded lineally one after an other, even from the Apostles
time: and had read that same order of Succession to be urged, and pressed upon
by S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, Optatus, and S. Augustine (as is before noted): And
perceived, that who soever forsook the open and known Succession of Bishops,
he was condemned for an Heretic, as well in the Latin, as in the Greek
Church: al these things being set before mine eyes through Gods grace, who
showed me them: I esteemed not the title of any Ministry, which I might seem
to have received in King Edwardes time, so much as I should have done, if I
had received it of a Catholic Bishop, and after the order of the Catholic
Church, being well assured that those, who took upon them to give Orders, were
altogether out of Order them selves, and ministered them not according to the
rite and manner of the Catholic Church, as who had forsaken the whole
Succession of Bishops in all Christendom, and had erected a new Congregation of
their own planting, the form whereof was imagined only in their own brains,
and had not benne seen, nor practiced in the world before. Now the same
reasons, which with many other moved me, I proponed to M. Jewel, not being
wholly without hope, but that through Gods grace they might have moved him
also. And yet he not unwitting, that I had returned to the universal and only
true Church, and that I had taken a better ground of Priesthod, then his Sect
has, among whom al external Priesthod is utterly denied: he dissembling all this, will seem to be a Priest by my knowledge, and confession, as if he, and I
had benne made priests by the same man.

No, no M. Jewel. We were in part together, but I thank God of it, we were
not wholly together. For I was with you with fear of God, and with misliking
of many your deeds, and opinions, and with desire to serve God in that Truth,
Religion, and Church, wherein I might safely rest, and quiet my self. In
your fellowship I sought that safe quietness, but I never found it, because my
feet were not stayed upon the Rock, nor upon any sure ground, since I saw,
what ye misliked, but I saw not, what ye would have: I saw, what ye pulled
down, but I saw not, what ye set up: I saw, from what ancient Church ye
were departed, but I saw you not to go to any elder society of faithful men,
then your selves were. And yet I knew, and at the length considered, that
Christ's Church must be above fifteen hundred years old, whereas your Church
(place it at Wittenberge, at Zuriche, or in what other corner so ever ye will)
is not yet full fiftye years old, and your first Preacher can show no
commission, either ordinary, or miraculous for him self.

These reasons with diverse other moved me: the same also ought to have moved
you. And because you can not answer them, you dissemble them, and therefore of
your lawful Commission, Vocation, and Sending you speak never a word.

Jewel. 130. Father, as if you were my Metropolitan, ye demand of me,
whether I be a Bishop, or no. I answer you, I am a Bishop, and that by the
free, and accustomed Canonical Election of the whole Chapter of Sarisburie,
assembled solemnly together for that purpose.


Harding.
It was no free Election M. Jewel, M. Jewels canonical election to the Sea of
Sarisburie.
when the Chapter, which chose you, saw, that except it chose you, it self
should be in danger of the law, and of the Princes displeasure. It was no
Canonical Election, when he was chosen, whom the old Canons have judged unable
for that Vocation.

For how can he be chosen Bishop, that is to say, high Priest, who
teaches, that there is not at al any external Priesthod in the Church? How
can he be chosen Bishop, that is to say, high priest, who teaches with
the old condemned Heretic Aerius, Epiphan. Haeres. 75.
that by Gods law there is no difference between a Bisshoppe, and a priest? How
can he be lawfully chosen Bishop in Sarisburie, according to the old Canons,
who teaches all the old Canons to be superstitiouse, wherein from the Apostles
time Prayers for the dead were commanded and prescribed? What Canon can allow
his Election, who breaks the Unity of the Church, and divides him self,
and his flock, (...) Queen's Chapel, let M. Richard Chaundler prebendarie
there, and Archedeacon of Sarisburie, let your own friend and faithfelowe M.
Parry Chancellor of that Church be demanded, whether I was present at your
Election, and gave free, and open consent unto it, or no. I marvel that you,
who can remember so many sayings of Glosers, and Canonistes, could not
remember to call for the Registers book, or for the witness of those of that
Church there with you daily present, to understand the truth hereof before you
wrote this much. You knew it, you knew it right well M. Jewel, that both I, and
M. Richard Dominike, that Reverend and virtuous Priest, Prebendary also there
(whom in your visitation for the Queen's highness, ye appointed to be a prisoner,
as also my self in mine own house at Sarisburie) utterly, and with express
words refused to give our voices, and consent to your pretesed Election. Truly
we accounted it no less crime to have chosen you Bishop of Sarisburie, then to
have chosen Arius, Eunomius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Aerius, Pelagius, or any
other the like Heretic. Wherefore revoke so many Untruths, you have here
uttered with one breath. Your Election was neither free, nor Canonical, the
whole Chapter was not present, I was not one of that company, I gave not my
consent. Now that you have so impude^tly affirmed all this notwithstanding, take
heed, (that I may use your own words) your own breath blow not against you,
al good and true men blow not against you, your own conscience (which is more
to be feared) blow not against you, and before God the true and just Judge,
blow not you vpside down.

Ievvel. Page 130. As touching the impertinent tales of Ischyras, and
Zacchaeus, they touch us nothing, they were none of ours, we know them not.
Our Bishops are made in form, and order, as they have been ever, by free
Election of the Chapter, by Consecration of the Archbishop, and other three
Bishops.


Harding.
These true Histories, not tales, M. Jewel, touch you in this behalf, because
Priests are not so consecrated with you, that they may stand to offer the
Sacrifice at the Altar, as it was reported of Ischyras, that he had done. As
for breaking of a Chalice, Athanas. in Apolo. 2.
which was laid to Macarius charge Athanasius Priest, who pulled Ischyras from
the Altar, for that he took upon him to celebrate the mysteries, being made
no Priest by laying on of hands of a Bishop, with you this is a small fault.
For your fellows have broken certain hundredes of holy chalices in these low
countries, without making any conscience thereof at al.

Moreover Epiphanius writes of Zacchaeus, Contra haeret. to. 2. lib. 3.
ludenter sancta Mysteria contrectabat, and sacrificia cum laicus esset,
impudenter tractabat. He boldly handled the holy Mysteries, and whereas he was
a Lay man, he impudently handled the Sacrifices. What Sacrifices (I pray you)
has your Religion, which a Lay man may not handle, as well as a Priest? But
because you have abandoned al external Sacrifice, and Priesthood, therefore you
judge the example of Zacchaeus belongs nothing unto you. Certainly by those
examples it is proved, that ye are no Bishops, and so far they be not
impertinent.

Your Bishops are made (you say) in form and order. What form and order
mean you? The form and order of these new Bishops.
Mean you the old, which was used in the first five hundred years, or the
new? In the old form after the Election notise was given to the Bishop of
Rome, and to all the Bishops of the Church, that such a man was lawfully chosen
Bishop within the Church, and not schismatically. And so all the other Bishops
knew by the Communicatorie letters, Cyprian. li. 3. ep. 13.
to whom they should send, or of whom they should receive such letters. But so
ye were not made Bishops: If ye were, show us to what Bishops out of
England ye wrote any such letters. After that the custom of those letters
became to be out of use, the only Bishop of Romes Confirmation was in steed of
the said notise, and by him surely you were not confirmed. And yet seeing he is
a Bishop, if ye will not grant him the Confirmation, ye ought at the lest, to
put him to knowledge of your Election, that he may know you to be men, with
whom he may Communicate. But for as much as you wrote not to him in that
matter, ye show, that ye be no Catholic Bishops. Fot never was there any
Catholic Bishop in the Church, which did not one way, or other, show him
self to communicate with S. Peter's Successor, from the beginning til this
day.

How was M. Jew. consecrate by an Archbishop, and how the Archbishop him
self.
But ye were made (you say) by the Consecration of the Archbishop, and other
three Bishops. And how I pray you was your Archbishop him self
Consecrated? What three Bishops in the Realm were there to lay hands upon
him? You have now uttered a worse case for your selves, then was by me before
named. For your Metropolitan, who should give authority to al your
Consecrations, him self had no lawful Consecration. If you had been Consecrated
after the form and order, which has ever ben used, ye might have had Bishops
out of France to have consecrated you, in case there had lacked in England.
But now there were ancient Bishops enough in England, who either were not
required, or refused to consecrate you, which is an evident sign, that ye
sought not such a Consecration as had been ever used, but such a one whereof all the former Bishops were ashamed.

Jewel. Page 130. Our Bishops are made by the admission of the prince: And in
this sort not long since the Pope him self was admitted, Platina in
Seuerino Papa.
and as Platina says, without the Emperors letters patentes was no Pope, as
hereafter it shall be shevved more at large. Therefore we neither have Bishops
without Church, nor Church without Bishops.


Harding.
The admission of the Prince is not reproved of us, The admission of a man by
the Prince to a Bishoprike.
when it is done in his place. For it is convenient, that as in the old time,
beside the Clergy, which of right did chose the bishop, the people were
called to see, who was chosen, and to show, whether they liked, or misliked
him: so much more the Prince, who bears the peoples person, should have his
place of assent, and consent in naming the Bishop, and in commending him, to
the end he may govern his sheep with the more love, and quiet, when no man
withstandeth his Election. And in that sort it was in deed the custom, that
every Bishop of Rome should expect the Emperors consent, until the Emperors
them selves partly being content to remitte that custom, did commit al to the
Clergy, and partly leafte it by prescription.

Neither was it of late, that this custom ceased, but well near seven hundred
years ago, In Hadriano. 3.
as it may be seen in Platina. But seeing your Bishops were neither consecrated
by those, who lineally succeeded the Apostles, nor have by your own confession
more power by Gods law then a Priest: you both have false Bishops without the
true Church, and a false Church without true Bishops. For the true Church has
Bishops, That a Bishop is above a Priest.
which by Gods law ought to be above Priests, because S. Paul writing to
Timothee a Bishop, 1. Timo. 5.
bids him not to admit an accusation against Priests without two witnesses,
licencing him to admit such accusations, when there are two witnesses. It is
his part only to admit accusations against Priests, who is the judge of
Priests: and every Judge is above him, over whom he sits in judgment.
Therefore a Bishop by Gods law is above a priest, whose judge he is allowed to
be. Epiphanius har. 75.
Which argument Epiphanius brings against Aerius the heretic, who said (as
now M. Jewel says) that Priests and Bishops were equal.

Hieron. ad Euagriu^.
Again S. Hierome, who defended that the names of Bishops, and of Priests were
confounded in the beginning, and that the order of priesthod in them was one
(both which things are true): yet he made an evident difference between the
power of them, granting that a Priest could do all that a Bishop can,
Hieronymus aduersus Luciferianos.
excepta ordinatione, the ordering, or giving of holy orders excepted. In that
point then he believed a Bishop to be above a Priest. Now say I, such a Bishop,
as by Gods law is above a Priest, as who may only make Priests, and give them
power to consecrate, and in Christ's person to make, and offer unto God his
body and blood: such a Bishop, or such a Priest you have not in all your Church,
unless they be Apostates, and Renegates, who being once made priests with us,
have now denied the faith wherein they were Christened, and are run out of
the Church unto your false Congregations, and scattered troops.

Jewel. Neiter does the Church of England this day depend of them, whom you
so often call Apostates, as if our Church were no Church without them.


Harding.
S. Hierome said, no Priest, no Church: Aduersus. Lucifer Epistola ad
Heliodorum.
and by a priest he meant him, that makes Christ's body with h^^ holy mouth,
and offers the same. For these are his own words: but such a priest is made
only of a Bishop, who is by Gods law above him. And such Priests have you none
besides Apostates. Therefore your Church either is none, or depends of
Apostates, and Renegates.

Jewel. Page 131. They are no Apostates M. Harding, that is rather your own
name, and of good right belongs unto you.


Harding.
He is an Apostata, who forsakes the good profession, Who are Apostates.
which he once had. But the profession either of Monks, or of the Catholics
(whom you call Papists) is good and godly. For concerning Monks, they are the
men, who after the counsel of our Savior, Matt. 19.
profess to give away their goods to the pore, or forsake the hope of goods
which may be had in the world, and follow Christ, gelding them selves, or
making them selves Eunuchs, for the kingdom of heaven This must needs be a
good profession. And as for the Catholics, they are the only true members of
Christ's Church, and none other can be Catholics beside those, whom you call
Papists: Because none others have benne always in all places, and al times
since Christ's Ascension. And we have been so, as our predecessors, and pastors
in the Sea of Rome, with all other pastors agreeing therewith, do evidently
show even to the eye. Therefore who so have forsaken their profession and rule,
as Renegate monks, and Friars have, or our Church, as those priests have, who
being rightly ordered in the catholic Church, communicate now with you they
are Apostates, and Renegates.

And whereas you say, that to be my name, and of good right to belong unto me:
there can be no just cause to call me an Apostata, except it be for departing
from you. But ye are al Apostates your selves. For it can be named but of what
Catholic fellowship ye are departed, whom ye leafte behind you (al Italy,
France, and Spain etc.) who went out with you (a piece of Germany,
Suitzerland, England, and Scotland) and after whom ye went, some after Luther,
some after Zuinglius, some after Calvin: Therefore ye are al Apostates. Now
when I departed from you, with whom notwithstanding I never remained wholly, I
departed from Apostates, and came to that fellowship, which never forsook
their former faith, nor went out, nor leaft any behind them, who might
complain of their departure, nor had any peculiar Captains, but only the
Apostles, and their Successors, that followed them lineally from age to age.
Therefore the name of Apostata belongs not to me, but to you, and to your
fellows.

If the Reader say, that we do but sclaunder one the other, let him consider
the reason, and not the words. An Apostata is one, The Protestants be
Apostates.
who fails and depareth from some certain lawful head. We depart from none,
but keep God, Christ, and his Ministerial headdes, Bishops, Priests, Kings,
and Magistrates. But the Protestants have denied all the Bishops alive in the
whole earth, who lived before, and in Luthers time. They have, and do, rebel,
in all countries for the pretense of Religion. And so they forsake both the
obedience of spiritual, and temporal governors: therefore they are by all
means Apostates.

Jewel. Page 131. They are for a great part learned, and grave, and godly men:
and are much ashamed to see your solies.


Harding.
There is no learning against faith. What learning call you it, when a man
learneth to deny this to be Christ's body, which he said to be his body? Or to
hold, Matt. 26.
that the Church is sometimes hid, Matt. 5.
which Christ said to be a City built upon a hill, that can not be hid? What
gravity is this, to be moved and carried out of the Church, and to be tossed,
hither and thither, with every puff of new doctrine? Now to be a Hussite,
then a Lutheran, now a Brentian, afterward a Zuinglian, and last of al a
Caluinist? Yea what gravity is it, to defend, that al these sects may be
saved, seeing they te^^^ contradictorie doctrine, and will come to no agreement?
Concerning our folies, which you say they see, they are folies to worldlynges,
and to men wise in their own eyes: as a man to shut up him self in a
Cloister, to watch, to fast, to pray, to live chaste, to bewail his sins,
to give away al his goods for Gods sake, to honor Gods friends with a due
reverence and worship, to believe Christ rather then our eyes, and to trust the
wit of our Predecessors, rather then our own: These are in deed our folies,
in(...), we glory, through Gods grace leaving the pride o^ ^o^ new
tra^slations of the Scriptures, your Sects, and wordly wisdom, the breaking
of vows, the living in incest, and open filthiness, with impudent maintenance
thereof, to your great learning, gravity, holiness, and wisdom.

Jewel. Page 131. Notvvithsta^ding if there were not one, neither of them, nor
of us leaft alive, yet would not therefore the whole Church of England flee to
Louain.


Harding.
Who ever said, that the whole Church of England must flee, or was fled to
Louaine? You keep some part of it fast enough from fleeing to Louaine, or any
whither else, if the Tower, the Fleet, the Marshalsea, the Counters, the Kings
Beanch, and other prisons in London be hable to keep men fast. But if you
speak of your own Church, surely you had Apostates, and renegate priests in
it, Aduersus Luciferia^.
or you had no Church at al, as out of S. Hierome I showed before, who says,
no Priest, no Church. And verily no true Church ever was there without an
External and public Sacrifice, which it might offer to God to acknowledge, that
he is the beginning and end of al grace and goodness. But where no external
Priesthod is (as you now believe there is none) there is no external Sacrifice,
and co^seque^tly no true Church. And seeing renegate priests can not make a
true Church, nor their Sacrifice can be acceptable unto God, yea rather seeing
they are of the mind and belefe, that it is not lawful to honor God with the
external Sacrifice of Christ's own body and blood leaft to us for that intent:
it does still follow, that although ye have true Priests which run from us,
yet have ye neither true Sacrifice by them, nor true Church.

Ievvel. Page 131. T^rtullian says, Nonne and laici sacerdotes sumus? scriptum
est etc. And we being lay men, are we not priests? it is written, In
exhortatione ad Castitate^.
Christ has made us both a kingdom, and priests unto God his father. The
authority of the Church, and the honor by the assembly, or Council of Order
sanctified of God has made a difference between the lay, and the clergy,
whereas there is no assembly of ecclesiastical Order, the priest being there
alone (without the company of other priests) does both minister the
oblatio^, and also baptize. Yea, and be there but three together, and, though
they be lay men, yet is there a Church. For every man lives of his own faith.


Harding.
Wonder not M. Jewel (as you confess that once you did) at your misfortune,
and evil luck, in that by us a thousand faults are sooner fownd in your
books, then you could well without blushing (if any shame were in you) note two
hundred in mine. For who so ever writes against the truth, can not possibly
bring one word, which for maintenance of an untruth may be altogether truly
applied after the writers mind, out of whom the same is alleged, unless that
writer were him self an Heretic, or in that behalf by better judgment noted
of some error. Therefore it is easier to find many thousand Lies in your
books, then any few in mine. And as that has been showed in many other
examples heretofore, so shall it now appear most evidently in this, which you
bring out of Tertullian. Tertullia^. in exhort. ad castitatem. Mo^tanus, and
Tertullian condemned the second Marriages.


First, the book and work, that you allege, is one of those which Tertullian
wrote against the Church, after that he became an Heretic, and was one of the
disciples of Montanus. For as Montanus did condemn the second Marriages, so did
his scholar Tertullian: Who having corruptly interpreted many places of S.
Paul, comes at the length to prove his heresy by conferring the old
Testament with the new. Ecce in veteri lege, etc. Behold (says he) in the
old law, I find the license of mariyng often to be inhibited. It is enacted
in the book of Leuiticus, Sacerdotes mei non plus nubent, my Priests shall not
marrye any more. But the fulness of the law, as in other points, so in this,
was reserved to Christ alone. VVhereupon it was more fully and more straightly
prescribed, that those ought bo be of one matrimony, who are chosen in the
Priestly ord^r. In so much that I my self remember certain men for having
had two wives, to have been removed from their place (of Priesthod). An
objection of Tertullia^ against him self.
But thou will say: Then is it lawful for other men (to marry twice) for so
much as exception is made against them (to wit against Priests) to whom it is
not lauful (to have been twice married). Hitherto Tertullian has gone about by
the example of the Priests of the old and new Testament to show, that Lay
men also may not marrye but once. For in the new Testament S. Paul would have
them only chosen to Priesthod, Tit. 1. The husband of one wife
who are, or have benne the husbands of one wife, that is to say, have
neither had two wives at once, nor have married a widow, nor have had two
wives one after an other. For all this does the Apostle mean, and the ancient
Fathers do so witness.

Now Tertullian saw evidently, that there was a difference between Priests, and
lay men, whereupon he made the former objection to him self, that the
second marriages, which only do stay a man from being Priest, are absolutely
lawful for him, who will be no Priest, but will remain still in the degree and
state of lay men. To the which objection being to strong for Tertullian, it
behooved him so to answer, as yet his heresy against the second marriages might
be maintained. So that now M. Jewel brings forth his heretical answer made
unto a Catholics argument. Thus then Tertullian goes forward. Vani erimus si
putauerimus, quod Sacerdotibus no^ liceat, laicis licere, nonne and laici
Sacerdotes sumus? We shall be deceived (or we shall be vain men) if we shall
think that to be lawful for Lay men, which is not lawful for Priests. We
that are Lay men, are we not Priests also? And so he goes forward with that
which M. Jewel did allege for his purpose. Double priesthod
For whereas there is a double Priesthod, one public and external, which is
only common to those, that receive power to consecrate Christ's Body and Blood
at the Altar, the other private, and internal, which is indifferently common
to the Priests, and to lay men, whereby they al receive power in Baptism to
offer spiritual Sacrifices unto God, 1. Pet. 2.
as S. Peter says: Tertullian would have the argument to be good, that as none
are made public and external Priests, which have had two wives, so none who
are internal priests, might have two wives. But Tertullian is deceived in his
heretical argument, as well as M. Jewel is in alleging an heretical authority.

Whereupon S. Hierome says. Montanus, Tertullia^ enemy ^o s^co^d marriages.
and qui Nouati schisma secta^tur, putant secunda matrimonia ab Ecclesiae
communione prohibenda, cum Apostolus de Episcopis and Praesbyteris hoc
praecipiens, vtique in caeteris relaxarit, non quod hortetur ad secunda
matrimonia, sed quod necessitati carnis indulgeat. Montanus, and those who
follow the schism of Nouatus, think that the second Marriages ought to be
forbidden from the Communion of the Church, whereas the Apostle giving that
commandment unto Bishops, and priests, has doubteles released it in other
men. Not that he exhorts them to second marriages, but bicuase he yields to
the necessity of the flesh. So that S. Hierome reproves that very argument of
Tertullian, which now M. Jewel sets forth. And in that very place, S.
Hierome names Tertullian, as an enemy of second marriages.

But verily the case is not like in Bishops, and Priests. For every man of
necessity is borne a lay man, therefore it were not reason to force him, who
could not chose but be a lay man, to marye but once, whereas none are made
Priests, but those that know before hand, that the Apostle willed such only to
be chosen Priests, as are the husbands of one wife, that is to say, as have
not had two wives, but either none, or but one. This law being foreseen,
causes it to be no injury, to forbid the second marriage, if any man will be an
external and public Priest. For he needs not to be such a Priest, except he
him self be willing thereunto.

Again the internal Priest needs no more, but an internal sanctity, which
may be kept in the second marriage, and whereby God is specially pleased, and
that because he is only his own Priest. But the external Priest, must also
profess an external sanctity, because he bears the person of the whole
Church, and by his order witnesses, 2. Cor. 11.
that the Church (as S. Paul says) is despoused, or married to one husband
alone, verily to Christ: so that in the internal Priesthod it is enough to have
inward holiness without any outward sign peculiarly belonging thereunto,
because it is a Priesthod, which is given in Baptism, where the soul is
inwardly washed, and prepared to receive other sacraments. But in the external
Priesthod there must be also an external sign of holiness, because that
external priesthod is of it self a Sacrament, that is a visible sign of a
holy thing wrought inwardly. Internal priest, and external do differ. ad Heb. 5.


Thirdly the internal Priest has only to offer his own spiritual Sacrifices
upon the Aultare of his heart: but the external Priest has to offer gifts,
and external Sacrifices upon the outward Altar also, for the sins of the
whole people, as S. Paul says. Therefore both Tertullia^ in this point the
Mo^tanist, and M. Jewel the Caluinist are in like sort deceived. The Montanist
in making it no more lawful for a lay man to be twice married, then for him to
be made a Priest, who had been twice married: The Caluinist in making the
internal, and external Priest to be al one. For whereas I reasoned out of S.
Hierome, no Priest (or Bishop) and no Church (and S. Hierome meant of such a
Priest, as is above a Deacon) M. Jewel would prove out of Tertullia^, that
where three Christian lay men are, there is a Church. I confess where but one
Catholic layeman is, there is one of the Church, in which Church there are
many external Priests: but if there be a thousand layemen belonging to such a
congregation, as does not acknowledge any external Sacrifice, and Priesthod (as
the protestants do not): there those thousand neither are the Church, nor of
the Church, because no Church is without an external Priest, or Bishop, who may
offer public Sacrifice, and also consecrate an external priest.

Tertullian was not of this mind, that there was no external Priesthod: but his
error was, Tertullia^s error.
in that he would have the internal, and external Priests to be in like case
concerning the second marriages. But otherwise his words confess, that not
only the authority of the Church, but also the honor sanctified of God by the
assembly of priests, Tertullia^. Ibidem.
has made a difference between the Order (of priests) and the lay people. His
words are, differentiam inter ordinem, and plebem constituit Ecclesiae
authoritas, and honor per ordinis consessum sanctificatus a Deo. The authority
of the Church, and the honor sanctified of God by the assembly of the Order
(to wit, of priests) has made a difference between Order (that is priesthood)
and the Laity.

Two things have made this difference between priests, and laymen, the one is
the authority of the Church: the other is Christ him self: Who beside the
authority of the Church, by the Sacrament of holy Orders has instituted this
difference of priests, and of layemen. The sacrament of holy order is given,
Consecration of a Bishop.
whiles God sanctifies the honor, that is the preferment of him, upon whom
the bishop in an assembly with many priests about him lays his hand.

This Consecration of the bishop, with other bishops, or priests, Tertullian
calls Consessum ordinis, the assembly of Order: and the Sanctification of
God, is that which is given by the Sacrament of Priesthod. For every Sacrament
does sanctify the worthy receiver, as S. Paul namely says of the Sacrament
of external priesthod unto his disciple Timothee. 1. Tim. 4.
Despise not the grace which is in thee, False translation, to minister the
oblation, for to offer up Sacrifice.
which has been given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of
priesthod. Now a priest thus made might baptize, and offer Sacrifice, albeit he
were alone. But the word offerre, to offer, M. Jewel turns, to minister the
oblation. But what perverting of words is this? What corruption of the sense?
What licencious translation? Speaks not Tertullian of the action of a Priest?
You mean by your ministering of your oblation, that the Priest ministers to
the people that thing, which the people offered to the priest. and so you make
the people to offer bread unto the priest, but the priest to offer nothing unto
God. But Tertullian says the priest does baptize, and does offer, meaning that
he offers to God. But if your sense be true, the people does offer to the
Priest, and not the priest unto God, and consequently the priest does not offer
at al.

Jewel. Page 131. Again ye demand of me, what Bishop of Sarisburie ever
sithence Augustines time maintained this doctrine. I might likewise, and by as
good authority demand of you, what Bishop of Rome before the same English
Augustines time maintained your doctrine? Or, as I said before, what Bishop of
Rome ever before that time, either said, or knevv your private Mass?


Harding.
The questions are not like M. Jewel, there is a thousand years distance between
them. I demand of your Predecessors from this day upward til S. Augustines
time, who first brought the faith unto the English nation. But you demand not
from our time to S. Augustines, and so upward: but only from S. Augustines
time upward. Many things have been, or might have been lawfully concluded between
this and S. Augustines time, which is the space of a thousand years, albeit the
same had not ben used before, or, not thoroughly known, The Eucharist ministered
to children at their Baptism.
and decided. As for example, the use has been these later thousand years, to
minister baptism unto children rather without giving them the Sacrament of the
Altar, then otherwise, and that even in those Churches, in some of which
within the first five hundred years, the Sacrament of the Aultare was given to
children at their baptism. And yet M. Jewel can not say, that this later
custom is worse then the first was, but rather that it is better, as the
council of Trent has declared.

I demand then of any M. Jewels Predecessors in Sarisburie, even til our
Apostle S. Augustines time: but he skippeth over these last thousand years, and
asks me of that which was before. Which inequality not withstanding, I
answer to his question, and say, that all the Bishops of Rome, as well before S.
Augustines time, as sithence, maintained our Religion. And that I prove,
because the B. of Rome that now is, Pius the fifth, does allow our Religion.
For we communicate with him, and he with us. And this present Bishop agreed
with his predecessor Pius the fourth, and he again with Paulus the fourth.
And so if we go upward from man to man, from Pope, to Pope, even unto S.
Gregory's time: we shall find, that concerning any question which is between the
Protesta^tes, and us, there was never Pope yet, which disagreed with his
predecessors, or aftercommers. For every one of them does praise, and follow.
S. Gregory. Now S Gregory sent S. Augustine into England, who turned our
English nation to the faith: and S. Gregory him self agreed in says with his
predecessors, even til we come to S. Peter. Neither can it be showed, which
Pope did ever break, or change the universal faith, which was in Rome, or any
where else before, concerning either private Mass, as you term it, or any
other Article.

If then Pius the fifth, or any Pope else do allow private Mass, as it is
evident he does, and the General Council of Trent with him: certainly every
Pope before him did allow the same. For this Pope agrees with his
predecessors. Or else if until S. Gregory's time private Mass (in such sense
as we now dispute of it) had not ben heard of, being so heinous an offense
against God, as that whereby the Institution of Christ's supper is broken,
which Pope so ever had begone it, he should have been noted for his new
Invention, as they have been, who have begone any change, as in certain
ceremonies some have done. Platina in vitis Pontifi.
For pope Sergius is noted to have been the first, that changed his former name:
Leo the third was the first, that placed the empire in France and Germany:
and Hadrianus the third was the first, that challenged to be pope without the
Emperors authority, and so forth in many like matters.

But seeing M. Jewel can name no man who began to say, or allow private
Mass, and yet seeing it is said and allowed thoroughout al Christendom, it is
S. Augustines own rule, that the said use of private Mass came from the
Apostles them selves. For thus he writes. August. ad Ianuarium. Epist. 118.
Quod vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, nee Concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. What thing
the whole Church keeps, and has not ben instituted in Councels, but has been always retained: the same is most rightly believed to have been delivered
none otherwise, then by Apostolic authority. Neither M. Jewel, nor any man
else can show us, which Counsel instituted first Private mass: and the Church
from age to age is found to have had private mass, neither can any one man be
named, that first said it: therefore private Mass, and also the other necessary
points of our religion, are most rightly believed to have proceeded only from
the Apostolic authority. Thus I have answered M. Jewels question. Now let
him answer mine.

Jewel. Touching the Bishops of Sarisburie, you your self have named two,
Bishop Shaxton, and Bishop Capon, both learned, and grave fathers, and both
preachers, and professors of the gospel.


Harding.
Bishop Shaxton not to be accounted of M. Jew else side.
Among the wise, a man is accounted to be such, as that is, be it good, or
evil, wherein he makes abode, and what thing is done by a man but once, or
seldom, and wherein he makes no continuance, thereof he has not his name. For
example: he is not accoumpted virtuous and just, who once or very seldom does
virtuously, or justly, Aristotel. in Ethicis. Vna Hirundo no^ facit ver. Math.
10.
but he that does often so, and still desires so to do. This much M. Jewel you
should have learned of Aristotle, who teaches you, that it is not one Swalow,
that makes the Springtide. After this sense Christ him self said, they are
blessed, that continue until the end. But Bishop Shaxton, although he
sometime preached certain parts of your doctrine, as a man being deceived by
Luthers, and the Lutheranes books, before he had well examined them: (...).
yet he continued not in your congregation, but repented him earnestly of it,
and revoked his former unadvised doings. If then his judgment with you be of
some accoumpte, his last judgment must stand. It is said (you know) by the
wise, and reason so gives, that the second thoughts are better advised, and
of more wisdom. To say few, it is well known in all therealme, that he died a
Catholic, and could by no means be brought to reuolte to you again in all
King Edwardes time. And so you have no help by B. Shaxton.

Touching bishop Capon, he was never in his life wholly of your belief, Bishop
Capon ^o Protestant.
none otherwise but as every man most loves him self, and the things of the
world, so he is the more inclined to your side, and has the more liking of
your lewd, fleshly, and licencious Doctrine. And who, that is more carried
away with the lusts of the flesh, then is ruled by the aduises of the
Spirit, would not be glad to hearken unto such a fleshly Gospel, and as it
were upon a soft coishon, to lean the elbowes of his loose conscience?
Whereby I mean not to accuse that Bishop of any unknown crime, but only to
show, that whiles he was loath to displease the Prince, and glad to please him
self, and for fear confourmed him self to the world: he seemed to favor
sundry points of your proceedinges, and in some part rather did like unto
you, then believed as you do: as it is well known by the order of his life, and
specially by his end, which tries a man best, at what time he showed him
self thoroughly Catholic, and heartily repented, that he had ever gonne so
far with you. And because he was known not to have been of your side in
heart, he was suffered to keep his state, and bishoprike in Queen Mary's time,
when all the Protestants were removed from such roumes.

Thus have you neither Shaxton, nor Capon for your predecessor, and
consequently you are (as S. Cyprian said of Nouatian) Nemini succedens, a
teipso ordinatus, Cypria. li. 1. epist. 6.
a Bishop succeding no man, but ordained of your self. Which thing would yet
have benne more plain, if you M. Jewel had not practiced your old false
slight in cutting of my words. For when I had asked whether D. Capon,
Shaxton, Campegius, or Audley, or any other bishops of Sarisburie taught your
doctrine, I answered thereunto, it is most certain they did not. How be it I
stayed not there, but went forward to remove that your objection of Capon, and
Shaxton, which I forsawe you would make: And thereunto I said thus. How so
ever those two first named (Capon, M. Ievvel left out al these words, because
they ansvvered him fully.
and Shaxton) only in some part of their life taught amiss, how afterward
they repented, abhorred your heresies, and died Catholics, it is well known.
Now beside these, whom else can you name?

Al these words of mine, you leafte out M. Jewel, as if I had never printed
them. You leafte them out, not only by not answering them, but also you did
not suffer them to be printed in your book among mine own words, least you
should have benne answered, before you had replied, as most times you are, as
it should appear, if it would please the Reader, but to view and peruse my
words over again, and diligently to confer them with yours. Which I wish
him to do not only for trial of this point, but also al others, whereof so
ever both we have treated. And he shall say, you were answered before you made
the Reply, confuted before you made your pretensed Defense.

But what conscience have you, that live, at least maintain the life of your
estimation among them of your Sect, by lying, by dissembling, by cutting of,
by adding unto, by mangling your Doctors, briefly by deceiving the reader one
way, or other? You were ashamed to have no predecessor at al in the Sea of
Sarisburie, and to be like Nouatian, or Donatus, and such other the like
Heretics. And therefore you name two Predecessors, both which protested at
their death, that you, and al your fellows are Heretics, and repented, that
ever they communicated with you so far as they did. Thus you come of your
self, as the Devil does, and shall come in his chief member Antichrist. And you
come not holding by lineal Succession, nor by lawful Sending, as Christ came,
being sent of his father, and being borne of the seed of David, and of
Abraham: But you are without Predecessors, and I am sure, if God for our great
sins forsake not our Country, you shall not long have Successors.

Jewel. For the rest of the bishops that were before them, what faith they
held, and what they either liked, or misliked, by their writings, or
sermons, it does not greatly appear.


Harding.
What need words, when deeds speak? It is evident, they kept that, which
they received of S. Augustine our Apostle, and that, which was before, and
afterward believed in all Christendom. They said Mass, they adoured Christ's
body in the blessed Sacrament, who doubts of it? They asked their
confirmation of the bishop of Rome, and acknowledged him to be the Apostle S.
Peter's Successor. Therefore they were not your Predecessors, in faith and
doctrine, you may be assured M. Jewel.

Jewel. I trust they held the foundation, and lived, and died in the faith of
Christ.


Harding.
Now, now M. Jewel you have bewraid, M. Ievvel be wraith him self.
what you teach in corners, now that lurking heresy is cropen out, whereof I
spoke in my Preface to you before my last Reiondre touching the Sacrifice of
the Mass. There I showed, that the Catholic Church must be believed in all
points of Religion, and that they were Heretics, who persuaded them selves,
that it was enough to believe certain Articles of the faith, and to let the
rest alone, not regarding whether this, or that be true. But what call you the
Foundation of the true faith? You know, that al your Predecessors acknowleged
the Popes Supremacy, said Mass, and believed the doctrine of the seven
Sacraments, and taught so. Otherwise they had been noted for Heretics of
others, who lived together with them, as you are of them, who live with you.
Seeing then you know they did so, what can you mean by the foundation, but
only the belief of the Trinity, and of Christ's birth, death, and Ascension?
As though it were enough to believe those things, what so ever become of the
rest.

Math. 12. Math. 18. Luc. 10.
But Christ says, he that is not with me, is against me. He that hears not
the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen, and a publicane. He that hears
you, hears me, he that despises you, despises me, and him that has sent
me. And S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 3. Jacob. 2. Agust. epistol. 29. ad Hieron.
The Church is the pillar, and sure stay of truth. And S. James, he that
fails in one, is made guilty of all, that is, as S. Augustine expounds it,
he that fails or sins against Charity, is guilty of al other faults.
Now charity is broken, if unity be broken: and unity is broken, if the
bishops believe not every Article of the faith expressly, which the Church
teaches to be expressly believed. Therefore either your predecessors were with
you, or against you. There is no middle, or mean. With you they were not,
because they taught seven Sacraments, and the Popes supremacy, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. Therefore they were against you. And then ye are
the first of that faith and doctrine, which now ye teach. You therefore came
of your self, and are without Predecessors.

Jewel. 131. If they had lived in these days, and seen that you see, they
would not have been partakers of yours vvilfulnesse.


Harding.
These are the words of an Antichrist, who seeking to make him self equal
with Christ, does use such Phrases by his wicked members, as Christ did use
concerning his own person. In deed Christ and only Christ might say such
words, because he only showed such miraculous works, that were hable to have
turned Sido^, and Tyrus, Joan. 2. and 10.
or any other hard hearted people.

But what have we seen in these days M. Jewel, which would have been hable to
have made al your Predecessors to have yielded unto your new faith? Have ye
spoken with all tongues, as the Apostles did? Nay ye have co^fou^ded, and
dispersed them, as it was done at the building up of the toure of Babylon. For
whereas in holy matters, and specially in the Church Service, we seemed to be
delivered from the curse of the Division of tongues, because many nations of
diverse la^guages were united and knit together in one Latin, or Greek Church
Service, you go about to set the world again as far a part by diverse
vulgar tongues, as ever it was before Christ's coming. Have ye built us new
Churches, or schools, or hospitalles, or colleges? Nay ye have pulled down
the old, and defaced them to the uttermost of your power. Have ye made peace
in the earth, and reconciled al dissensions? Ye have rather divided the
subject from his Prince, the child from his father, and the wife from her
husband. What is it then, wherein your Predecessors, if they had now lived,
and had seen it, would not have benne so wilful, as we are? They should have
seen in you Divisions, sects, factions, pride, wantonness, fleshly liberty,
cruelty, murders, treasons, rebellions, Church robbinges and to be short al
impiety, and contempt of God. Pride accompained with malice, couetise, and
lechery, was the foundation. A foul mouthed Friar, as ever lived on the
earth, and a Nu^ne incestuously coupled together, was the building that rose up
of your doctrine, which to this day goes forward, with like increase. And yet
if your Predecessors had seen that which we see, they would forsooth have been
astonned to see the heavenly fruits, which these men bring forth.

Jewel. To be short, we succeed the bisshops that have been before our days,
we are elected, consecrated, confirmed and admitted as they were.


Harding.
Here is no lie at al. That I may speak of no other difference, the Bishops,
whom you succeed, were al confirmed by the bishop of Rome, and so is none of
you.

Jewel.. If they were deceived in any thing, we succeed them in the place,
but not in error.


Harding.
By their place is meant specially their doctrine and belief, which seeing you
have not, you are not their successor, no more then Paulus Samosatenus the
heretic, was the Successor in S. Peter's chair in Antioche, no more then
Gregorius the Arian was S. Marks successor in Alexandria, no more then all the
Bisshops of Christendom are to be accounted the successors of the Heathnish
Priests, which in the same Cities before worshipped Idols. It is the Doctrine,
and place together which makes the Succession, and not the walls of the
town, Church, or house alone.

Jewel. They were our Predecessors, but not the rules, and standards of our
faith.


Harding.
As long as they remained in that unity of Doctrine, which they received of
the Apostles, or of the Apostolic Churches, as Tertullian does well show, so
long they are presidentes, and their continual Succession is a good rule, and
standard of our faith. For they are pillars of the Church, the Successors of
the Apostles, Luc. 10.
whom he that hears, hears Christ. Now when those that break the Unity,
which was in the Church before, come to sit in any bishops Chair, they in
deed are no presidentes, no rules, nor standards of our Faith, because the
Apostle bids us observe, and beware of them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
that walk inordinatly, and make dissensions. For the Church of God has no
such custom to strive, 1. Cor. 11.
and to resist at once all the Bishops of the whole Church, as Martin Luther
did.

Jewel. 131. Or rather, to set apart al comparison of persons, the doctrine of
Christ this day, M. Harding, succedeth your doctrine, as the day succedeth the
night: as the light succedeth darkness, and as the truth succedeth error.


Harding.
What is the day, what is the night in M. Ievvelles judgment.
That is to say, your doings, and proceedinges are the day, the light, and the
truth: but the Catholic faith which we teach, and al our predecessors in all the world have ever taught, is the night, the darkness, and error. But
sir, if your doctrine be day, or light, and ours night, or darkness: how
chances it, that our doctrine was ever openly seen in the whole world from
the Apostles time unto these days, in so many Bishops throughout al nations,
teaching al one thing, and yours was not seen by your own confession for nine
hundred years together? This was a long night pardy M. Jewel. Is it the nature
of the light not to be seen? Who saw not our Altars, our external Priests,
and our Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ in the whole world from East
to Weast, Malac. 1.
as Malachias prophesied, and the event showed?

But your no Aulters, your no external Priests, and your no sacrificing of
Christ's body, briefly, the Imaginatiue face of your Negative Religion, or
rather of your no Religion, who could see, before that now of late ye pulled
down our Aulters, to show how ye had no Aulters, and before violently ye
bannished our Priests, and drove them out of their Churches, to show how ye
had no Priests, and denied Christ's Real Presence, to show how ye had no
Sacrifice? Our Munkes, and Friars from S. Ihon Baptistes days, and from the
time of those, that lived a very holy life in Egypt, from the time of S. Mark
the Euangeliste unto the time of S. Basil in the East, of S. Augustine, S.
Benedicte, S. Frauncis and S. Dominike in the Weast, had replenished
Christendom with Cloisters, and Monasteries: to those our Monks, I say, all the
world bears witness. But your no monks, Renegates, and Apostates, lived in
Turkey, or in Hell: for in the lands of Christendom no such doctrine shined,
none such was heard of, which should auouche, that it is not lawful by Gods
grace to make a vow, that a man will renounce the riches, and pleasures of the
world, and live continently, under the obedience of a spiritual Father.

If your doctrine be the light, and the day, how comes it to pass, that
not so much as one Church, or chapel in the whole earth can be named, where
before these fifty years it was unlawful to occupy holy Chrisme in bishopping
of childerne, or to say Mass, or to teach the seven Sacraments, to pray
for the dead, to celebrate the Church Service in the Latin tongue, to desire
the Apostles, Martyrs, and the other Saints to pray for us, al which things
now you account for unlawful? Can the light be so darkened, that it should be
unknown unto you, whether ye had any ancestors at al, or no? We can, if
need were, set forth a roll of our Pastors and Bishops, from this day
upward unto S. Peter's time in such sort, as you shall name no one time, of
which we are not hable to say unto you, these many prelates, and Pastors
were known to preach Christ's gospel, at once in diverse nations.

Marcke M. Jewel, what I say to you, and consider of it well: For herein your
utter Confusion appears, that ye are not hable to bring the continuance of
your doctrine up unto S. Peter's time without interruption, albeit you should be
bound to name for every fifty years in Order, but one man in the whole world
at once. Think of it with all your wit, and give me an instance. There are
since Christ's time fifteen hundred years passed. Give me for every hundred
years two Catholic men, one living after the other, whom you may justify to
have been of your faith, holding that doctrine which you hold, and so give me
in all but thirtye men, living, and known to have lived, each of them about
fifty years one after the other, and for my part I will release you of your
bond of subscription.

Such a lightsome Church ye have, that ye must go into the pit of Hell to fetch
out Aerius, Pelagius, Vigilantius, Iouinian, Heluidius, Manichaeus, and such
others of condemned memory, to give light unto your Church, or else you can
bring forth none at al. For whereas all the Greeks, Epiphan. Haeres. 75
as it may appear by Epiphanius, and all the Latins, as it may appear by S.
Augustine, condemned him for an heretic, who said the prayers of the live
could not help the dead, what catholic is it possible to bring forth, for
the year of our Lord three hundred and fifty, or four hundred, who taught as
ye now teach, that it is not lawful, nor profitable to pray for the dead?

Well, ye are not the light, nor the day. Is your doctrine at the least the
truth? Nay, that is the truth, which is also the light. For the true doctrine
is taught in that Church which is built upon an hill, and can not be hid.

The truth is uniform, Math. 5.
but among you Luther and Zuinglius, Calvin and Westphalus, Bullinger and
Brentius, Illyricus and Beza, and sundry other couples and parts agree so
well, that a man may easily know them to be false Prophets. For whereas they al
disagree, yet they are al without that Church, where unity is preserved in
the perpetual Succession of many Bishops always agreeing in one says.
Therefore your doctrine is neither the light, nor the day, nor the truth: but
darkness, but night, but error.

Jewel. 131. Now, for as much as ye have thought it so good, to examine the
petite degree of Bishops of Sarisburie, I trust you vvil not think it il, if I
a little touch the l^ke in the Bishops of Rome, that we may thereby the better
be hable to see some of the branches of your Succession.


Harding.
In deed they of whom you speak, are but some of the branches of our
Succession. For you touch of two hundred and thirtye Bishops of Rome not
thirteen, and yet our Succession consists also of all the Bishops in Italy,
Spain, France, Germany, Sicilie, Polonia, Hungary, Denmark, Suethen, and
England even til king Henry the eightes time. But go too on Gods name: touch
whom you can. I am well assured, you will play the Spider, to epsy if any
poison can be found any where. Let us see, with what truth and honesty you
blase their faults.

The worst that can be said of all the Popes touching doctrine by the
Protestants, is here gathered together, and laid forth by M. Jewel, and the
same is truly answered.

Jewel. Page 131. Therefore shortly to say: you know that Pope Marcellinus
committed Idolatry.


Harding.
Of S. Marcellinus Martyr and Pope.
I know that after his Idolatry, whereto he yielded for fear of death, he
repented, and shed his blood for Christ, and dyed a glorious Martyr, even as
S. Paul, after that he had persecuted the Church, through grace repented, and
died for Christ's name. Who ought now to be more ashamed of S. Marcellinus,
you, that challenge him for an Idolatour, or I, that challenge him for a Martyr?
The Idolatry, you speak of, is gone and pardoned: the Martyrdom, whereof I
speak, is everlastingly crowned in heaven. The end M. Jewel tries al,
whereof you should have taken your judgment. And yet this very Idolatoure,
because he was S. Peter's Successor, and sat in the first See, was in case for
the room he occupied, to be judged of no man in the earth, as the Council of
three hundred and thirty Bishops assembled at Sinuessa pronounced above
twelve hundred years past. Tom 1. Council.
Primasedes non iudicabitur a quoqua^. The first seat shall not be judged of
any man. What have you won now by this example, but that you do the world to
understand, what malicious stomach ye bear against the Popes of Rome, whose
faults ye are right glad to epsy, and blase abroad, although they repented
of them. Verily it would have becomme a son of the Church, to conceele such
acts of frailty, and not to see such spots that were with so abundant
founteines of tears clean washed away, and with the blood of so glorious
Martyrdom quite blotted out.

Jewel. 131. Pope Syluester the second was a Coniurer, and gave himself
whole, body and soul to the Devil, and by the Deuilles procurement was made
Pope.


Harding.
That Syluester the second came to be Pope, malis artibus, by evil means, it
is not so clear a matter, as you make it. Platina the chief author we have
for credit of that Story, utters it doubtefully by his Parenthesis (vt
aiunt) as they say. Whereby he gives us to understand, that he was not hable
to auouche it for a certain truth, but refers him self to the vulgar
rumor of the people, which most commonly bruteth abroad more lies, and
vanities, then truths and certainties. How beit Platina, Platinae in vitis
Pontificu^. Pope Syluester 2. his repentance at the end.
who told you all this, added also, Poenitentia motus, and errorem suum coram
populo fassus, etc. being moved with repentance, and confessing his error
before the people, he first exhorted them al, that ambition and the deuilles
deceites laid aside, they should live well. And afterward his body was
miraculously drawn by horses to the chief Church of Rome, and there was
buried. If you believe the one, you must believe the other, sithence it is but
one Story, whereof you told the first part, and I the last. Whereupon I
attribute so much to that holy Succession, that I doubt not, as evil a man as
he once was, but God delte the more mercifully with him for his good
predecessors sakes, who I doubt not, prayed for him, that he might die
penitently, and be a saved soul.

Jewel. 131. Pope Zosimus for ambition, and claim of government, corrupted the
holy Council of Nice.


Harding.
You say it, Pope Zosimus sclaundered by M. Jew.
but never did any honest man say it from the beginning of the world, til this
time, neither was the same yet ever proved. For albeit he alleged such words
of a certain Canon, as the other copies had not, yet did no man lay to his
charge, that he had corrupted the Counsel. For he alleged that which he found
in his own copies. I say to you M. Jewel, there is nothing showed by this your
tale, but that you are a man of il disposition, who gladly report evil, and
besides that you find reported of others, invent your self that, which
utterly is false, to diminish the estimation of a holy man, that died eleue^
hundred years past. Mark the point, I say, if it be said of any man that ever
wrote in the old time, that Pope Zosimus corrupted the Council of Nice, then
you, or your fellows did not feine it: but if no man said it but bawdy Bale,
or Illyricus, and such others the like: then your part is with liers, and
sclaunderers, and thereafter shall your judgment be without you repent, which
God grant you. M. Stapleton in the Return Article. 4. fol. 30. and seque^tib.
I think it not good, to stand about it here, because the matter is well handled
already by M. Dorman, M. Cope, and M. Stapleto^. But you dissembling what they
say, go on to maintain the Succession of lies in your own generation.

Jewel. Pope Liberius was an Arian Heretic.


Harding.
Or else you are an errant sclau^derous lier. The truth witnessed by all sorts
of writers, is, that he suffered bannishment by Constantius the Arian Emperor,
for the true Catholic faith, Hieron. in Chronicis and in Catalogo.
and (as S. Hierome reports, being overcome with the tediousness of his
bannishme^t, subscribed to the Heresy after a sort, to wit, by setting his
hand to the bannishment of Athanasius. For the Popes power was then known to
be so great, that the Emperor knew the Patriarch Athanasius could not seem
justly to be deposed, unless both other Bishops, and specially the Bishop of
Rome had agreed unto it. But when Liberius would not agree to the Emperors
unjust request, he was bannished, Theodorit. lib. 5 hist. Tripart. cap. 18.
and as Theodoritus witnesses, he returned home to his See at the request of
the virtuous Matrones of Rome, who knew him to be far from the Arians
heresy, and judged so well of him for it, that they would not communicate with
Felix, whom the Emperor had placed in Liberius room. For so much as no man
knew the cause, and state of Liberius better then Athanasius, of al otherlie is
chiefly to be heard. His words are these. Athanasius in Epist. ad Solitaria^
vitam agentes. What Athanasius judged of Liberius.
Liberius deinde post exactum in exilio biennium inflexus est, minisque mortis
ad subscriptionem inductus est. Verum illud ipsum quoque, and eorum violentiam,
and Liberij in haeresim odium, and suum pro Athanasio suffragium, cum liberos
affectus habebat, satis coarguit. Afterward, Liberius having passed over two
years in ba^nishement, stooped, and by threats of death was brought to
subscribe. But that very self same fact of his is a sufficient argument, both
of their Violence, and of the hatred, that Liberius bore to the heresy (of the
Arians) and what his consent, and opinion was concerning Athanasius, at what
time he had his desires free, that is, when he might both speak, and do
freely, what seemed to him most mete and expedient in that cause. How plain are
these words against you M. Jewel? Athanasius, who lived together with
Liberius, and knew his whole state, saw right well, that the Subscription,
which he made, proved him not an Arian Heretik, but rather a Catholic, because
he subscribed not voluntarily, but violently constrained, and that not with a
vain fear only, but also with the present bannishment of two years, and
farther with the threatninges of death. Therefore although Liberius sinned
grievously in yelding for fear, yet he neither was an Arian, nor preached he
their heresy in his Church at Rome after his return: but rather repented his
deed of subscription, and amended it by preaching, and doing all that he was
hable against the Arians, and therefore after his death, Epiphanius calls him
beatum, Epiphan. Haeres. 75 Tripart. lib. 7. c. 23 In Apolog. 2.
blessed: and Theodoritus calls him sanctissimum, most holy.

In an other place Athanasius writes of him thus. Eximiarum vrbium Episcopi,
and capita tantarum Ecclesiarum, et verbis mihi patrocinati sunt, and exilia
sustinuerunt, in quorum numero est and Liberius Romanus praesul, qui, quanquam
non vsque ad finem exilij maela perpessus est, biennium tamen in ea
transmigratione perdurauit, non ignarus sycophantiarum quas patiebamur. The
Bishops of famous cities, and the heads of great Churches favored me both in
words, and (for my sake also) sustained bannishement. Among whom was Liberius
the Bishop of Rome: who although he suffered not the miseries of bannishement
until the end, yet he continued in that place which he was carried unto, two
years, not unwitting what were the sclaunders that we suffered.

This Liberius then, although perhaps he subscribed at the length, yet was
there never good, or honest man, that ever would call him an Arian, who in deed
never loved the Arians, but abhorred their opinion. But perhaps (perhaps I say)
he was wearye of his long bannishement, and after terrible threats of death
being otherwise weak subscribed. Well may such a forced subscriptio^ argue the
lack of fortitude, certainly it proves not heresy. For an Heretic does
stubbornely defend his opinion. But Liberius was so far from defending the
Arian heresy, that he could hardly with terror of death after two years
banishment be forced, to put his hand unto the book against Athanasius, which
was in deed a derogation to the faith by a co^seque^t, but directly it was not
Arianisme.

How seems not this wicked generation to spring of the Devil, sithence it
makes the worst of every thing, speaking evil of that, which may well, and
ought charitably to be defended? And yet if he had benne an Arian with all his
heart, so long as he never decreed any thing according to the Arian heresy,
nor did set it forth by public authority of the Sea of Rome: that should not
hurt our matter of Succession.

Jewel. Page 131. Pope Leo, as appears by the Legende, was likewise an
Arian.


Harding.
Here are al things stoutely spoken, and nothing proved. There have benne ten
Popes, every of which was called Leo, but none of them al (for ought that can
be proved) was an Arian. But it appears by the Legende, say you. What an
obscure proof is this? yet how clear is the sclaunder? What Legende mean
you, M. Jewel? Is it so notable, that it was enough to say, the Legende, which
manner of speech we use, when we speak of known things? Or were you a
shamed to name the author? Verily unless you mean Leo the first, I dare
boldly say, you can show us no Legende written of any other Pope of that name.
And does it appear by his Legende, that he was an Arian? Certainly the
contrary appears. That holy and learned Pope both by his own learned
works, Leo the first far from al suspicion of Arianisme.
wherein he speaks much against the Arians, and by the witness of the fourth
General Council, and of all the world besides, is so purged from the suspicio^
of that infamous name, that your sclaunder in such a case must needs be most
damnable unto your self. Truly me thinks I lack words to set forth in due
colors the lewd licentious tongue of this Sclaunderer, and yet he alleges
nothing at al for all those heinous crimes, which he imputes unto so many
innocent and worthy men.

The worthy Legende, by which it appears to M. Ievvel that pope Leo was an
Arian. Iacobus de Voragine.
But will thou know learned Reader, what a worthy piece of work it is, that M.
Jewel here calls the Legende, whereby he would prove, that Pope Leo was an
Arian? Forsooth there is an old motheate^ book, wherein Saints lives are said
to be contained. Sometimes it is called Legenda Aurea, sometimes Speculu^
Sanctoru^, sometimes Legenda Lombardica, or Historia Lombardica. Gesnerus of
Zurich says, one Iacobus de Voragine a Black Friar was the author of it. It
shall not greatly skill, who was the author of it: Certain it is, that among
some true Stories, there be many vain Fables written. Among which this is one,
that M. Jewel here allegeth in great sadness. Neither is this reported of Pope
Leo that he was an Arian, in a special Legende written of Leo, but in a Legende
of S. Hilarie of Poitiers in France, whose holy relics the Huguenotes in
their late vproares in France villanously abused, burned to Ashes, and threw
away, as likewise the boanes, and Relics of S. Martine Bishop of Toures, and
of that ancient and glorious Martyr S. Ireneus Bishop of Lions.

That it may the better be known, what a worthy Doctor the writer of this
Legende was, Historia Lombardica De sancto Hilario. Legendae. 17. Hilarious
dicitur ab Altus, and ares.
let the beginning of the same Legende be taken as it were for a taste, where
full Clerckely discussing the Etymology, and first original of S. Hilaries
name, thus he says. Dicitur Hilarious, quasi Alarius, ab Altus, and Ares,
virtus: quia fuit alius in scientia, and virtuosus in vita. Vel Hilarious
dicitur ab i will, quod est quasi primordialis materia, quae obscura fuit. Et ipse
in dictis suis magnam habet obscuritatem, and profunditatem. Of such gear the
Reader may find great stoare there, when so ever he is disposed to lawgh.

Now let us hear the Legende, or rather the Fable, by which it appears to M.
Jewel, that Pope Leo was an Arian. Thus it is told word by word. Eo tempore
Leo Papa haereticorum perfidia deprauatus, etc. At that time Pope Leo corrupted
with the false belief of Heretics, assembled a Council of all the bishops.
They being called together, Hilarious came in amongst them not sent for. Which
thing when the Pope (Leo) heard of, he commanded, that no man should rise up
unto him, nor give him place. When he was come in, the Pope said unto him. Art
thou Hilarious the French man? I am not a French man, quod he, but one of
France. that is to say, I am not borne in France, I am a Bishop of France.
Then said the Pope, If thou be Hilarie of France, I am the Bishop of the
Roman See, and Judge. Then said Hilarious: Although thou be Leo (that is to
say, Lion) yet thou art not the Lion of the tribe of Judah. And though thou
sit as judge, yet thou sit not in the Seat of Majesty. At that the Pope
(Leo) arose with disdain, saying, Abide a while, til I come again, and pay
thee that thou deseruest. To whom Hilarious answered. If thou come not again,
who shall make answer unto me in thy steed? I will come again by and by, quod
he, and will bring down thy pride.

When the Pope was gonne to do the secret business of nature, he died of a
dysenterie, and avoiding forth at the Pryuey al his entrails, he ended his
life miserably. In the mean ceason Hilarie seeing, that none would rise up
unto him, took patience, and setting him self down on the grownde, said:
Domini est terra. Our Lords is the earth. And therewith the earth by the will
of God, whereon he sat, lifted it self up, and stood up equal with the
seats of the other Bishops. Hereupon when tidinges came that the Pope was dead
miserably, Hilarie arose, and confirmed all the Bishops in the Catholic
Faith, and so sent them home. This is the wise Legende, by which it appears
to M. Jewel, that Pope Leo was an Arian Heretic.

To let pass the other folies of this Fable, what a vanity is it to make Leo
the Pope, and S. Hilarie the Bishop of Poitiers, thus to braule together at an
assembly of Bishops, whereas it is most certain, that S. Hilarie died at
least one hundred years, before Leo was borne? M. Jewel should not so falsely
have conceeled, what follows immediately in the same Legende, whereby this
tale is discredited. For thus says the author him self. Hoc autem miraculum
de morte Leonis Papae dubitationem habet, tum quia historia Ecclesiastica, vel
Tripartita nihil de hoc loquitur: tum quia aliquem Papam talis nominis tunc
fuisse, Chronica non testatur: tum quia Hieronymus dicit, quod Sancta Romana
Ecclesia semper immaculata permansit, and in futuro manebit sine Haereticorum
in sultatione. But of this miracle of Leos death it is doubted, partly because
neither the Ecclesiastical, nor the Tripartite story speaks of it: partly
because the Chronicle witnesses not, that there was any Pope then of that
name: S. Hieromes testimony for the Church of Rome out of his own Doctor.
also because S. Hierome says, that the holy Roman Church has ever
continued unspotted, and so shall continue for time to come, that Heretics
shall have no cause to insult at here. Mark M. Jewel, if your Legende be ought
worth, with how clear testimony of S. Hierome, your imputing of Heresy unto
the Sea of Rome is confuted.

After this by way of gheasse, the Author says, to make a bad defense of the
fables vanity, wherein he shows also his own folly, and vanity, that it
might be said (that is to wit, if a man would lie) that at that time there
was some Pope so called, not canonically chosen, but set in by tyrannical
intrusion. Whereas he feared this would not serve, he adds an other gheasse,
Vel forte Liberius etc. Or else perhaps (says he) Pope Liberius, who favored
Constantius the Heretic Emperor, was after an other name called Leo. Which
al are very poor, and peevish shifts to sooth the vain fable of this Legende.

Such Donghilles, and broken haies M. Jewel is feign to rake, and skrape, to
find some Rags, wherewith to cover the foul nakedness of his wretched cause.
Yet the Story set out in the name of Amphilochius, touching S. Basiles
miracles, is much more probable, and may bear the name of the text, where
this Legende shall not be thought worthy the name of the Gloss.

Jewel. 131. Pope Coelestinus was a Nestorian heretic.


Harding.
coelestinus Pope falsely charged with the heresy of Nestorius Photius in
epist. ad Michaele^ Bulgariae principe^. Prosper in Chronic.
Who ever heard such an impudent man? It was Coelestinus, who condemned
Nestorius, and al his heresies. It was Coelestinus, in whose place Cyrillus the
Archebisshop of Alexandria sat president in the third General Council at
Ephesus, where Nestorius was accursed, and condemned. Of this Coelestinus the
learned Bishop Prosper, who then lived, writes: Nestorianae impietati
praecipua Alexandrini Episcopi industria, and Papae Coelestini repugnat
authoritas. The special diligence of the Bishop of Alexandria, and the
authority of Pope Coelestinus, resists the impiety of Nestorius. And yet is
Pope Coelestinus a Nestorian? No truly, but M. Jewel proves him self a most
impudent Liar, and a wicked sclaunderer.

Jewel. Pope Honorius was a Monothelite heretic.


Harding.
Of Pope Honorius.
Now at length M. Jewel you say that, which has some face of truth. For
Honorius in deed fell into the heresy of the Monothelites. But he fell into it,
when as yet it was not evidently condemned by the Church in any general
Council. He fell into it, but he defended it not: and yet the crime of heresy
is not properly incurred, without a stubborn defense of falsehod.

Again, he did not only not make any heretical Decree, touching the defense of
that heresy, by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, but rather as a public
person, he did resist that heresy. Platina in Honorio.
For he induced Heraclius the Emperor to bannishe Pyrrhus the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Cyrus the Patriarch of Alexandria, who were guilty of the
Monothelite heresy. How then stands it together, that Honorius did both
favor, and hate the self same heresy?

Some men considering what he did, say, that he was falsely accused of the
heresy, but others think rather, that in his heart he favored the heresy,
yet because the Roman Church, to wit, the Bisshoppes of Ostia, of Porto,
of Preneste, of Velitro, of Sabini, and such others, that having their
bishoprikes near there about, are most commonly resident in Rome, or are
most easily assembled thither to every Consistory with a great number of
Priests, of Deacons, and of other learned men, who are the Council, Cypria. in
epist. ad Clerum vib. Romans
and Senate of the Pope: because I say, they are and ever have benne even from
the beginning, men of great experience (as it may appear in S. Cyprians
works) and of constancy in the faith, as who lived with diverse Popes one
after the other: because then this reverend company were known to resist, as
well the Monothelite heresy, as al other heresies: it stands well together,
that, Pope Honorius, albeit in his own person he favored that heresy, Pope
Honorius only burdened with the crime of heresy among the Popes
yet durst not to publishe it in the common assembly, but contrariwise did
there, as they gave him Council. Whereby it came to pass, that he both deposed
Monothelites openly, and yet favored their opinion privily. And this is the
only Pope, who may justly be burdened with heresy.

But now consider good Reader the work of God, when he should come to confirm
his brethrene, that is to say, to do any open thing, whereby the other
Bisshoppes might be established in their faith: then was he constrained to do
that, which might edify, and not hinder the true faith, that God might be
justified in his words, Math. 16.
who said to S. Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church, and Hell gates
shall not prevail against it, Luc. 22.
and thou being once converted confirm thy brethrene: feed my sheep, Joan.
21.
feed my lambs.

For when Honorius came to this point, whether in public Consistory the
Monothelite heresy (which taught, that there was but one will in Christ)
should be allowed or no! then, as Platina records, the Pope infourmed the
Emperor, as well by letters, as by messangers, that Christ had two wills: and
that was done by the common assembly, and the letters went, as the deed of
the Sea, and Church of Rome: whereas in the mean time Honorius was of an
other mind within him self. And they that are about great personages know
right well, that they do many times send many messages, and letters, through
the advice of their Council, which the great personages them selves would not
have to take place. Thus we see a double person in him that governs: one,
which he has in respect of his own private mind, and judgment, the other,
which he has, or rather takes as put upon him, by the public office, which
he bears.

Now concerning the matter of Succession, the public person is only to be
regarded, which in Pope Honorius was Catholic. For that is the personage,
which may hurt, or hinder the Church. Of that public personage Pope Agatho,
who followed not long after Honorius, doubted not to write, as it is recited in
the sixth general Council Act. 4. Council. 6. General. Act. 4.
concerning this very heresy of the Monothelites. Apostolicae memoriae meae
paruitatis praedecessores dominicis doctrinis instructi, ex quo nouitatem
haereticam in Christi immaculatam Ecclesiam Constantinopolitanae Ecclesia
praesules introducere conabantur, nunquam neglexerunt eos hortari, atque
obsecrando commonere, vt a praui dogmatis haeretico errore, saltem tacendo
desisterent, ne ex hoc exordium dissidij in vnitate Ecclesiae facerent, vnam
voluntatem, vnamque operationem duarum naturarum asserentes in vno Domino
nostro Jesus Christo. The predecessors that were before me, seely man that I
am, men of Apostolic memory, and instructed in the Doctrine of our Lord,
since that the Bishops of Constantinople endeavored to bring an heretical
novelty into the unspotted Church of Christ, never ceased to exhort them,
and with earnest mean to admonish them, that they would, at the least wise by
forebearing talk, surcease from the heretical error of their wicked opinion,
least affirming, that there was in our Lord Jesus Christ but one will, and one
operation of two natures, hereby they should cause strife to begin in the
unity of the Church. Thus the predecessors of Agatho, among whom Honorius was
one, did, as he reports, always openly defend the Catholic faith against
the Monothelites.

It is to men known perhaps sometimes, that the Pope, or prince leads an
evil life, as for example, in fornication, or in Aduouterie. Yet so long as
their laws forbid them both, the men are of evil example, but the laws are
good and holesom, and the common Weal is well provided for. But if once
Aduouterie, or Fornication should be made lawful by Law (as some men say
that usury somewhere is) then is the common Weal domaged. No heresy ever
decreed openly by any of the Popes
But since the time that S. Peter sat first at Rome, God has wrought this
miraculous, yea thrice miraculous work, that there was never yet any open
Assembly or Synod kept, wherein any Heresy, by any one of so many as have been S. Peter's Successors, was ever decreed. The public sentence, and
judgment of the Sea Apostolic, in matters of faith, was never to this day
defiled, or defaced with false doctrine. That is the Succession which we hold
of, and whereof S. Augustine said so long time past: August. in Psalmo contra
partem Donati.
Numerate etc. Reckon up by tale the priests even from the very seat of
Peter, and in that rue of Fathers, see who succeeded other: that is the Rock,
which the proud gates of Hell do not overcome.

Jewel. Pope Ihon 22. was reproved by Gerson, and by the school of Paris for
an Heretic.


Harding.
Of Pope John. 22. his error, see my Answer to M. Jewels View of his
untruths, before fol. 64.
He was reproved for an opinion M. Jewel, which he held before he was Pope many
years, what the opinion was, I have declared before at large, to which place I
refer the reader for a full answer. But when being Pope he would have
confirmed that his wrong opinion (that the souls of the just lacked the sight
of God face to face until the day of Judgment) God took him out of this
life, that all the world might know, come who shall to sit in Peter's chaier, he
shall never decree any Heresy, to be maintained as the Faith. How be it it was
not to be accoumpted heresy at that time, as yet not being determined by the
Church, and seemed to have been holden of certain old doctors of the Church,
as is before said. The miracle of God, in staying that man from confirming that
error by authentike decree in open Synod, ought more to move you (if you were
a man whom Gods works could move) then his private erroneous opinion, which
hurts no man but him self.

Jewel. 132. Petrarcha says, Rome is a sanctuary of al heresies.


Harding.
I neither believe you, nor him. I am sure that men of greater authority, then
ever that ryming Poet was of, has said the contrary. But it may be right well,
that your sclaunderous pen belieth Petrarcha. Ambrosius in Epist. ad papam
Siricium. Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 3. In Math. cap. 16.
Once you name not where he says it. But what so ever Petracha say, S.
Ambrose, whom we more regard, said, that the Church of Rome keeps always the
Apostolic belief whole and undiminished. And S. Cyprian says, that
infidelity can not have access unto the Romans.

Jewel. Lyra says, that many Popes have fallen into heresies.


Harding.
He says, many, as well princes, as chief priests have fallen from the faith,
but not that many have decreed heresies, as to be followed, and embraced of
others. But how truly he says, that many have fallen from the faith, let him
answer to it: For I find not those many, nor yet M. Jew. him self, as dilligent
as he is about it. Wherein Lyra may help us for opening the text of holy
Scriptures, we gladly use him: as for his authority, specially touching
antiquity, being so late a writer, you know how little weight his word bears
in the judgment of the learned. And how is it come to pass, that Nicolaus de
Lyra is now so good an author with you M. Jewel, who being a professed Friar in
his life time followed the faith of the Roman Church, and believed the
Bishop of Rome to be the chief Bishop of Christendom, and the Roman
Church to be the head of al Churches?

Jewel. 132. You know, that Pope Hildebrand, as he was charged by the Council
of Brixta, was an aduouterer, a Chu^che robber, a periu^ed man, a mankiller, a
Sorcerer and a renegate of the faith.


Harding.
I know that you lie, I may say it, saving my charity, rather then your
worship. For Pope Gregory the seventh, otherwise (before he was Pope) called
Hildebrandus, was a very holy man, as Marianus Scotus does witness, who lived
in the same time, Marianus Srotus in Chronicis. Pope Hildebra^dus persecuted,
and accused by He^rie the Emperor. Marianus Scotus of Pohe Hildebrand.
and knew, that Henry the Emperor being enemy to Pope Hildebrand (because
the good Pope warned him of his faults) did procure a false conuenticle at
Brixia, and caused false accusations there to be laid in against him: as he did
the like also in Rome it self, whence the Pope was constrained to flee. Videns
autem (says Marianus Scotus) Henricus papam aufugisse, congregatis 30.
Episcopis, fautoribuss suis, in ipsa Romanae vrbis obsidione iussit
haberisynodu^, in qua Gregorius papafalsis and inauditis criminationibus a
fautoribus Henrici ficte compositis absens accusatur. Denique dicebant cum
prophanum, scelestum, amatorem discordiae, virum sanguinu^, sedem Apostolicam
vsurpare per necromantiam. Conspirantes ergo qui co^uenerunt in vnum aduersus
Dominu^, and aduersus Vicarium eius Papam Gregorium, da^nauerunt eum. But
Henry seeing that the Pope was fled, assembling together 30. Bishops, who
favored his part, commanded a synod to be kept, even as he was at the fiege
of the city of Rome: in which Synod Gregory the Pope being absent, is
accused of false crimes, and such as were never heard of, the which Henry's
fautours had purposely forged. To be short, they said he was a profane man, a
wicked man, a lover of discord, a bloody man, and that he had usurped the Sea
Apostolic by Necromancie. They therefore who had thus assembled them selves
together, conspiring against our Lord, and against his Vicare Pope Gregory,
condemned him.

If you were but a civil honest man M. Jewel, you would not take that for a
Truth, which one enemy says of an other. Hildebrand acquitted by true and
indifferent historiographers.
It may please you to read those Historiographers which wrote without
partiality, as Marianus Scotus, Platina, Lambertus Schafnaburge^sis, and
Nauclerus, with such like. By perusing them you shall find yourselfe a Liar,
and Pope Hildebrand a virtuous man, and one that was zelously bent to correct
such faults, as were in the clergy, at that time, specially Simonie. But
though he had been otherwise, it hinders not our cause, as long as he kept
the same Faith, which he received of his forefathers.

Jewel. Page 132. Platina calls the Popes sometimes in scorn, Pontificulos,
Platina in Romano. 2
little petite Popes, sometimes monstra, and portenta, monsters, and unnatural,
and ilshapen creatures.


Harding.
If Platina speak so of some Popes, it is the more sign, that he either hated
the Popes, or else that he spoke as he thought, and that he wrote not for
flattery, as sometimes you say of him. I pray you what cause had Platina to
flatter with them (as with Hildebrand) who were so long dead before he was
borne? And as for those with whom he lived, he flattered them never a whit, as
may appear by the life of Pope Paulus the second. Platina cannot seem to have
flattered the Popes in vvriti^g their lives
Well, were then some Popes monsters? Verily I think so with Platina concerning
some few of their lives. But even those, that were worste, made no breach in
the rule of the faith. God so provided always, that although Hell gates, to
wit, al vices, and all the power of the Devil were bent against the Popes, and
the Church of Rome, yet al should not prevail against the Rock, and true
Confession of the Faith, which ever has been, and shall be in the Succession of
Peter's Chair. Whereupon, S. Hierome doubted not to say, Hieron. epist. ad
Damasu^.
Cathedrae Petri Communione consocior, super illam petram aedificatam
Ecclesiamscio. I am joined in communion to the Chair of Peter, upon that Rock
I know the Church is builte.

Jewel. Pope Adrian the fourth was wont to say, we succeed not Peter in
feeding, but Romulus in killing.


Harding.
Were it true, you would have named your author. Now your saying seems to
proceed out of your own Forge. But what if it were true, that Pope Adrian said
so by way of complaint? This proves, that as some of his predecessors were
evil men, so always God gave his grace to some other Popes to disallowe their
faults, and yet to continewe their Faith, Doctrine, and Succession.

Jewel. Page 132. And to lean Dame Joan the woman Pope, with many others me
of like virtue, and holiness, as having no pleasure in this rehearsal.


Harding.
There was no such woman Pope: and yet God knows, you take still great
pleasure in the rehearsal of a vain dream (as you do of many other false
tales) dreamed first by Martinus Polonus.

Jewel. For as much as M. Harding began this matter with Sarisburie, to end
it with the same, Ioannes Sarisburiensis says, In Polya cratico.
in Romana Ecclesia sedent Scribae and Pharisaei, In the Church of Rome (by
Succession) sit the Scribes, and Pharisees.


Harding.
The matter that I began here to treat of, was not of Sarisburie, but of your
Succession in Sarisburie, for which notwithstanding the huge stuff you bring,
you show your self to have nothing to say. Touching Ioannes Sarisburiensis,
if it were so that Scribes, and Pharisees sat in the Church of Rome, yet you
should be damned for departing from them, 3. Reg. 12.
even as Jeroboam was for departing from the Chair of Moses. You are bound to
communicate in Doctrine with the chief Chaier, what soever they be, that sit
in it. For Christ bad us keep that, Matt. 23.
which they command. Now as the Scribes, and Pharisees sitting in the Chair
of Moses, did exactly keep his Succession, and witnessed the continuance of
that Temple, whereunto all the Jews were bound: So the Popes of Rome sitting in
S. Peter's Chair, do exactly maintain his Succession, and witness that to be
the true Rock, and Church, whereunto al we are bound to be obedient, as
sheep to the chief Pastor.

But since you are desirous to end this matter, begone, as you say, of
Sarisburie, with Sarisburie, whereby you mean the authority of Ioannes
Saresburiensis: therewith I am right well content. For your part, that is to
say, against the Church of Rome (whose faith we profess, whatsoever be the
manners of some great persons in that Church) you allege John of Sarisburie,
saying, that Scribes, and Pharisees sit in the Church of Rome. True it is,
these words be in John of Sarisburie in deed. As for the Addition (by
Succession) it is your own, it is not his. But you must understand, they be
not his own words, as spoken by him self, but reported by him, as words of
the common people. For being required of Pope Adrian the fourth, who was an
Englishman, in familiar talk, whereto for his learning and wisdom he was
admitted, to declare freely, what was commonly said abroad of the Pope, and of
the Church of Rome: among other things bruted abroad by way of complaint,
specially against the Briberie, and coueteousnes of great personages of that
Church, he rehearsed those words out of the Gospel. Matt. 23.
At the end of his tale thus he concluded, Johannes Sarisburiensis in
Polycratico de curialium nugis. lib. 6. cap. ^4.
signifiing whose tale he told. Haec inquam Pater loquitur populus,
quandoquidem vis, vt illius tibi sententias proferam. These things, Father the
people speaks, for as much as you will have me to utter unto you, what they
say. Thus M. Jewel by testimony of your Ihon of Sarisburie, you prove nothing
against our Doctrine of Succession, but only put us in mind, what the common
people in those days said of the governors of the Church.

If you would with as good sincerity have alleged on the other side, what good
he in the same book, and Chapter reports of them, as with malice you rehearse
the evil: you should have laid forth a very good tale for them. For immediately
after the words before rehearsed, thus it follows there. Et tu, inquit, quid
sentis? And what is your opinion, quod the Pope. Thereto answers John of
Sarisburie. Angustiae (inquam) sunt vndique. Vereor enim ne mendacij, vel
adulationis cortraham notam, si solus populo contradixero. Sin autem, reatum
vereor Maiestatis, ne tanquam qui os in coelum posuerim, crucem videar
meruisse. I am driven (quod he) to straightes on every side. For I fear me, I
shall be noted for a Liar, or a flatterer, if I alone be in my tale contrary to
the people. Else (if I should say as they say) I fear the gilte of treason,
least I seem to have deserved the pounishment of death, being as it were one
that have set my mouth up against heaven. This Preface seems to contain the
words of one, that intends to utter the truth plainly, and discretely.

And although there in deed he touch the Popes, and the Roman Clergies
faults freely, yet on the other side he confesses him self moved in
conscience to speak much also in the praise of many. These be his words.
Vnum tamen audacter conscientia test profiteor, Ibidem.
quia nusquam honestiores Clericos vidi, quam in Ecclesia Romana, aut qui magis
auaritiam detestentur. Albeit some be faulty, yet one thing, my conscience
bearing me witness, I dare be bold to say: that no where I have seen Clerks
of more honesty, then in the Church of Rome, or that do more deteste
coueteousnes. Of such good and virtuous Clerks, there he reckeneth up some by
name. At length speaking of the number of the good in general, he says,
Plurium tanta modestia, tanta grauitas est, vt Fabrici^ non inueniantur
inferiores, quem agnita salutis via modis omnibus antecedunt. The modesty, and
gravity of the more part of them, is so great, that they are found nothing
inferior to Fabricius (the noble Roman of famous memory for his virtue) whom
in respect of that they acknowledge the way of Salvation (which he knew not
being an Infidel) by all means they pass and excelle.

Then follow these words immediately, which are most to our purpose, and most
worthy of consideration. Quia vero instas, vrges, praecipis, cum certum sit,
quod Spiritui sancto mentiri non licet: fateor quia quod praecipis faciendum
est, and si non sitis omnes operibus imitandi. Nam qui a doctrina vestra
dissentit, aut haereticus, aut schismaticus est. For as much as you are instant
upon me, and will have no nay, and command (me to say what I think) since it
is certain, that I may not lie unto the holy Ghost: I grant, that what you
command us to do, we must do, although ye be not al to be followed in your
deeds. For he that dissenteth from you Doctrine, is either an Heretic, or a
Schismatique. These words being well and duly considered of, I report me to
thine indifferent judgment discrete Reader, what M. Jewel can seem to any wise
man to have won by Johannes Sarisburiensis. He accuses the vices of the
Roman Clergy, and of some Popes them selves. We also accuse the same. Their
evil deeds be not to be followed, says he. We say the same, and pray God to
amend them. Scribes, and Pharisees sat in the Church of Rome, said the people
in his time. Were it true, yet were they to be obeyed touching doctrine, and to
be believed, because they sat in the Chair of Peter, as Christ commanded the
Scribes, and Pharisees of the Jews to be obeyed, and things to be done and
kept, which they said, because they succeeded Moses, and sat in Moses
Chair.

Howbeit what the people of Rome, of Italy, and of Germany said of the Pope
at that time, it ought the less to be regarded, because they spoke upon grudge
conceived against him: the Romans, Platina, in vita Hadriani. ^.
for that (as Platina witnesses) he denied them their ernest request, which
was, that they might live freely under the government of the Consulles, and be
exempted from their subjection to the Church: the Italians, and Germains, for
that they were much vexed with wars by William the King of Sicilia, and
Frederike the first, Emperor, from which vexation and troubles they saw they
should have benne delivered, if the Pope would have benne content to suffer
the Lands of the Church to be invaded, and taken away by those Princes. Even
so in these days the Popes be the worse spoken of, and find the less good
will at many men's hands in some parts of Christendom, because they can not
be induced to allow and confirm the possession of certain ecclesiastical
Lands, which have been taken from the Church by unlawful means, in such wise,
as they them selves would have it allowed, and confirmed.

To be short, agree with us M. Jewel unto the doctrine, which the Church of
Rome teaches, where the Succession is certain, whereunto your own doctor
Ioannes Sarisburiensis leads you: and we will agree with you in reproving the
vices and faults of that See, the proof of which for a great part of them,
for ought ye can show, is uncertain. Would God, ye would once consider, how
sclender and weak the Arguments, ye make against the catholic Faith are,
which always ye deduce, a moribus ad doctrinam, that is, from reproufe of
manners, to the reproufe of doctrine.

Jewel. Page 132. This is M. Hardings holy succession: though faith fail, yet
Succession must hold.


Harding.
Nay sir, Succession does hold, that faith may not fail. For you have not
proved by any one example, that faith did ever fail in the Church of Rome. In
the Church, I say, which consists of the Pope, and of a college, and an
assembly of grave Bishops and priests professing them selves the faith, and
teaching it others. In that open assembly never was there false religion
decred, or taught, whereas so many heresies have been (not fewer then a hundred)
and so many Archeheretikes, of whom some have been in the other Patriarchal
Sees, but in Rome never was there an Archeheretike, or any Pope, who in
Council, or Consistory decreed, or confirmed any heresy to be admitted.

To him that knows the ecclesiastical histories, and conferreth the Sea of
Rome with all other Churches, it is such a miracle, as thereby God has witnessed
that Succession to be the Rock of the faith. In so much that the Bishops of
the province of Tarracon in Spain wrote thus unto Pope Hilarious. In Tom. 1.
Council. epist. 2.
Ad fidem recurrimus Apostolico ore laudatam, inde responsa quaerentes, vnde
nihil errore, nihil praesumptione, sed pontificali totum deliberatione
praecipitur. We resort unto the faith praised by the mouth of the Apostle,
seeking answers from thence, whence nothing is commanded by error, nothing by
presumption, but al by bishoply deliberation.

Jewel. For unto the succession, God has bound the holy Ghost.


Harding.
No, but unto the holy Ghost, The holy Ghost causes the Succession to abide
faithful.
God has bound the Succession. For he causes the Succession to abide
faithful, because he causes it to follow the inspiration of the holy Ghost:
that it may so be known for ever certainly true in the chief Apostles Chair,
and in the fellowship abiding with him. Christ says, he that hears you, Luc.
10.
hears me. I am with you al days until the worlds end. Math. 28.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luc. 22.
and thou being once converted, confirm thy brethern, feed my sheep, Joan.
21.
feed my lambs. I will beseech my father, Joan. 14.
and he shall give you an other conforter, that he remain with you for ever,
and 16.
the spirit of truth, he shall teach you al things, and al truth. The Roman
faith is preached in the whole world. Roma. 1.


Jewel. For lack of this Succession, for that in our Sees in the Churches of
England, we find not so many Idolatours, Necromancers, Heretics, Aduouterers,
Churcherobbers, Perjured persons, Mankillers, Renegates, Monsters, Scribes,
and Pharisees, as we may easily find in the Church of Rome, therefore I
trovve M. Harding says, we have no Succession: we are no Bishops: we have
no Church at al.


Harding.
Your Church of England has yet scant continued so many weeks, as the Church
of Rome has continued years. But if it had passed over such times of
persecution, as Rome has, if it had been so assaulted by all sorts of enemies,
as well within, as without, as well with prosperity, as adversity: I trow your
Church would have had before this, as many Idolatours, Necromancers,
Heretics, Aduouterers, and such others by you named, as the Church of Rome
has had Bishops. And certainly already it has had mo sorts of Heretics,
and that within these xx. years, then Rome has had even by your own account
evil men, within these fiften hundred years. Idolatry annexed unto Heresy.
For your beginning, progress, and the whole profession of your life is
nothing but heresy, whereunto Idolatry is evermore annexed. For an heretic
does always worship his own conceit, and fantasy for truth, and whereas God
is truth, he worshippeth his fantasy for God, which is Idolatry.

If the pope committed any fault by frailty, he defended it not, as you
maintain in open pulpites the breach of laudable, and godly vows, and the
marriages of consecrated persons, who have absteined from marriage ever since
the Apostles time, whose marriages says S. Hierome be not so much Aduouteries,
Aduersus Iouin. li. 1.
as Inceste. But in the number of mo then two hundred Popes, within fiften
hundred years, you have falsely numbered six, or seven, as Heretics: whereas
you can not deny, but there have been in the same Succession above thirty
martyrs, who died for Christ's sake, and as many confessors, or more, whom all the good men in the Church have accounted for holy and blessed men. There was
never general Counsel holden by catholic Bishops, which did not communicate
with that See, and reioysed to be honored, and confirmed by it, From S. Peter's
time to our age you cannot name any one day, or hour (marcke well M. Jewel,
you can not name one day, or hour, I say) in which any known Catholic
Bishop in all the world, did, or might ever say with the approbation of good
men: I defy, or I despise, or I do not communicate with the Church of Rome,
how soever some one Pope might seem not commendable, yet the Church, the
faith, the Doctrine, the Succession was ever commended of al Catholic men.

To that See appealed, and resorted, as to the chief Light of the Church, Li.
3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, De Praes.
Tertullian, Lib. 2.
Optatus, Ad Siriciu^. ep. 81
S. Ambrose, Ad. Damasum.
S. Hierome, Epi. 165.
S. Augustine, De vocat. gent. li. 2. c. 16.
Prosper, with all the fathers besides. That See promoted the Gospel into the
ends of the world, into England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmarcke, the low
Country, Germany, Polonia, Lituania, Prussia, Liuonia, Hungaria, Bohemia,
Bulgaria, and presently into the new found Lands.

That See conquered al heresies, confounded them, and al their authors, and
mainteiners, from Simon Magus to Martine Luther, and Ihon Calvin, who now
begins to be brought very low, and by Gods will shall be brought lower
shortly, the folly, and rebellious sprite, which his Doctrine breeds in his
adherentes, breaking out, and showing it self daily to the world more and
more. See M. Jewel, you, and your fellows are as sore a fraid, as ever was the
gilty thief of his judge, or the naughty boy of his master. But do I say
(trow you) that ye therefore have no Succession, or that ye are no Bishops, and
have no Church, because in your Churches of England there are not to be found
so many Idolatours, so many Necroma^cers, so many Heretics, Aduouteres,
Churcherobbers, Perjured persons, Mankillers, Renegates, Monsters, Scribes, and
Pharisees, as many easily be found in the Church of Rome? Nay I trow M. Jewel
you take your mark amiss. For if I thought so, as it pleases you to think
of me, I would not have denied you, neither Succession, such as it is, nor
Bishops, nor Churches, or rather Congregations, nor Ministers, nor Minstrels
neither, for the better furnishing of them withal, if these so many worthy
qualities, could work so great an effect. For, that I speak not here of
Heretics, The clergy of these new co^gregatio^s vvherby Succession is
claimed.
and so consequently of Idolatours, which fault is common to you al: what
aduouterers, whoremasters, Incestuous persons, Church robbers, Church
breakers, Perjured persons, Mankillers, Renegates, Abiured men, Friars,
Apostates, Lecherous Munkes, Tapsters, Hostlers, Pedlers, Tinckers, Cobblers,
Summoners, Viceplayers, Devil Players, Fellons, Horse stealers, Newgate men,
briefly what vile, and rascal rabble want ye to fournish up your Succession,
your bishoprikes, your Synagogues, and Ministering roumes withal? Verily if this
gear could make a Succession, it shall soon be made good, that ye have also a
Succession such, as it is. And ye need not to mistrust any whit at al, having
so many of every sort, as shall be more then enough for you. Marie put these
away out of your congregations (I would call them Churches, were not that name
to good for you) I fear me you would leave but a poor seely clergy behind.
See how M. Ievvel vvil prove his so many Idolatours etc. In the Church of Rome.


But how easy is it (trow you M. Jewel) to find so many Idolatours in the
Church of Rome, as you bear us in hand there may be found? Does one poor
fact of S. Marcellinus alone, for the which he repented forthwith, and dyed
a glorious Martyr of God, make up with you so many Idolatours? I am well
assured, that if you could have found but one Pope more that had done the like,
you would not have spared him (your modesty is such) but he should have been
scored up also, to make up your number of so many Idolatours.

Be it that Syluester was a Necromancer, So many Necroma^cers.
and Hildebrand too, who was of that crime (as of many other) untruly
sclaundered by his enemies, that could not abide to hear of any correction for
their enormous faults, and therefore spited that good Pope, as you do all the
Popes: will yet those two make such a number of Necromancers in that See, that
it were a very easy matter to find so many, as you would gladly make your
Readers believe there were?

Be it that Liberius, Leo, Coelestinus, Honorius, So many heretics.
and Ihon the 22. holding private opinions without open maintenance of them had been Heretics, as you most sclaunderously report them out of baudye Bale, and
braine-sicke Illyricus: yet these five make not so great a number pardy, that
it should be an easy thing for you to find so many Heretics in the Sea of
Rome, as full rhetorically you set the matter forth. Now with what face pretend
you unto the world, that it is an easy matter, to find so many Heretics
among the Bishops of Rome, whereas with long prying, and pooring in all your
brethrens books, you could find but five, to whom you durst to impute that
crime, of which yet three are unjustly sclaundered, and the other two, only
misliked for their private assertions, and never denounced Heretics for
stubborn maintenance, or making any open Decree touching that, whereof once
they erroneously judged.

But yet you will say, that among the Bishops of Rome there were many
Aduouterers, So many aduouterers, etc
many Church Robbers, many Perjured persons, many Mankillers, many Renegates.
It is happy M. Jewel, that your word is no sclaunder. But I pray you good sir,
how many can you truly name of al these? For of so great a number as you speak
of, it is well likely, you can name some: and your malice is such against the
Popes, that you will spare none, how small a surmise soever you have inducing
you to think so evil of any Pope. Go to then M. Jewel, of your so many, name
us some one infamous in each of these great crimes, which indifferently you
lay to the charge of the Bishops of Rome, leaving an evil suspicion in your
Readers head, that for the most part, all the Bishops of Rome were guilty of
the one, or the other. How many Aduoutrers then can you name to us? Pope
Hildebrand (say you) was an Aduouterer, that is a stark sclaunderous lie. But
were it true, how many mo can you name? let us hear them. Is there no mo but
Pope Hildebrand? Is one now become many with you, and many but one?

So many Church robbers.
Perchance yet of your Church Robbers you have greater stoare. And who were
they I pray you among the Popes, that committed that heinous fact? Hildebrand
you tell us again was a Church Robber. Doubtelesse this poor Pope has
offended you very much, which argues he was a good Pope. And were there no
mo Church Robbers among the Popes, but Hildebrand? Cough up M. Jewel, void
the malicious humor of your stomach. Of so many Church robbers as are in that
rewe of Bishops, name us but one more. For upon so great a vaunt, your Reader
may happily think, that you could name some other besides Hildebrand. But
suppose that this Hildebrand had been no Church Robber (as in deed he was
none, and you could not justly have charged him therewith, had you not put your
felicity in sclau^dering good and virtuous men) where then might a man so
easly have found, I say not so many Churchrobbers, as you tell us of, but only
one among all the Bishops of Rome?

Well yet of Perjured persons, we shall find great numbers, that you might not be
found a sclaunderer in that point, So many Perjured persons.
how well soever you have acquitted your self of the former. Go to then, tell us
how many Perjured persons occupied that room, and who they were. You tell us
once again, that Hildebrand was a Perjured person. Verily you are much
beholden to Hildebra^d, but specially to that wicked co^uenticle of naughty
Bishops assembled by the Emperor at Brixia, who most unjustly sclau^derd that
godly Pope. For had they not ben, you had lost a fair rhetorical lie, I should
have said a foul conclusion.

But yet perhaps there were among the Popes many Mankillers, and many
Renegates, So many ma^killers and Renegates.
whom if you can name to your Reader, you may peradventure seem to him at the
lest in this, a true reporter, and not a malicious sclau^derer. Who then were
these so many Mankillers? so many Renegates? Of likelyhod you know many such,
or else you would not so stoutly avouch it. Tell on, Perge mentiri, name us them.
Yet once again you tell us, that Hildebrand was a Mankiller, Hildebrand was a
Renegate. But what, was there none but Hildebrand M. Jewel? Among two hundred
Popes, and upward can you find none that was an Aduouterer, a Churchrobber, a
Perjured person, a Mankiller, a Renegate, but only Pope Hildebrand? And yet you
tell us, that of men of these qualities there have been such a number in that
rewe of Bishops, that of every sort it were (or else you lie, saving other
men's honesty) an easy matter to find many. Are they now so suddenly
vanished out of sight, that, to save your poor honesty, you can bring us
forth none, but only Hildebrand? And how can Pope Hildebrand, whom most
unjustly, and upon the manifest sclaunder of his enemies, you have here
accused, make up the number of your so many Aduouterers, so many Church
robbers, so many Perjured persons, so many Mankillers, so many Renegates? Are
you not ashamed thus notoriously, and withal most sclaunderously to belie that
blessed Succession of Bishops, which has through the miraculous working of God
continewed without interruption from S. Peter's time until these our days?

Leave, leave M. Jewel these vain, Rhetorical, lying, and sclaunderous
conclusions. Go simply, and plainly to the matter, tell no more then you are
well hable to prove. Learn rather to speak well of your forefathers, then with
such impudency to diffame, and speak il of them, who are departed this world
in the unity of the Church, and peace of Christ.

And whereas you charge me with saying that ye have no Succession, no
Bishops, no Church, because ye have no Idolatours, Necromancers, Heretics,
and such like, and then would seem to salve the matter again with an (I
trow): I trow it be no good manner, and less honesty, to say that of your
adversary, which by no color possibly, you can pike out of his words. How be
it I forgive it you, for that every man may easily perceive it, to be but a
pretty sleight of your art (which as I trow) most men call the art of lying.

Jewel. But S. Paul says, Romans 10.
faith comes (not by succession, but) by hearing, and hearing comes (not of
legacy, or enheritance from Bishop to Bishop, but) of the word of God.


Harding.
If faith come of hearing, and hearing come of Gods word, I ask you, whether
the hearing shall endure for ever, or no? I say it shall, because it is written,
Math. 28. Luc. 1.
I am with you al days to the worlds end, and al generations shall call me
blessed, and Christ the son of David shall reign in the house of Jacob for
ever. This can not be but where that hearing is. Now if hearing endure for
ever, seeing hearing was at the first by the preaching of Bishops: I say, that
the Succession of Bishops endures for ever. Ephesians. 4.
For God has given pastors, and doctors unto his Church (says S. Paul)
until we shall al meet in unity of faith, which shall be at the second coming
of Christ. Therefore it is not only not true, that the hearing of the faith
preached does any thing withstand the perpetual Succession of Bishops, but
rather the Succession is proved thereby. For as Christ instituted first the
preaching of the faith by the Apostles, who were also Bishops, and as after the
Apostles, they were Bishops, who chiefly continued the preaching of the same
faith: even so unto the worlds end, there must lack no Bishops, by whom
the same may still be preached. For Isaie says, Isai. 62.
Upon thy walls o Jerusalem I have set watchemen, no day, nor night shall
they hold their peace. Such watchemen have been always in the Church of
Rome: such M. Jewel can not reckon to have been always in his Church.
Therefore the preaching of the faith has been in the Roman Church, and not in
his.

Jewel. They are not alvvaies godly, that succeed the godly.


Harding.
Much less are they godly, who forsake the godly. But our question is not of
godliness, but of true faith, which may be where godliness is not. For they
that preached the true faith for envy against S. Paul, Philip. cap. 1.
had the true faith, yet were they not godly.

Jewel. Manasses succeeded Ezechias.


Harding.
And therefore Christ was as well borne of Manasses line, as of Ezechias. For
albeit the godliness were not like in the men, yet Christ wrought then the
mystery of his Birth, and now he works the preservation of his faith, as well
by the evil, as by the good.

Jewel. Hieroboam succeeded David.


Harding.
3. Reg. 12.
There you were deceived M. Jewel. Roboam succeeded David. Hieroboam divided the
kingdom, and the inheritance of the Succession of David. But God says often
times, that he kept some of David's line in his throne, 3. Reg. 11. et 15. et
4. Reg. 8.
that a candel might remain to his servant David for ever. God surely
accounted the line of Hieroboam no succession of David's, but rather the undoing
of it, as much as lay in Hieroboam. For Hieroboam was of an other tribe then
David was.

Jewel. By Succession the Turk this day possesses, and holds the four
Patriarchal Sees, of the Church of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and
Jerusalem.


Harding.
No M. Jewel, it is by violence, by force, The Turk comes not as a
Successor, but as an inuader.
by power of arms, by tyranny, and not by Succession, as you hold the Church
of Sarisburie by force of the Princes sword, and by none other right.
Succession, is when a man comes in the same place, which his predecessor
had, by the same order, and law, by which his lawful predecessor came to it.
The son succedeth his Father in his lands, but the thief, and robber, or he
that by force inuadeth, and keeps them, is no Successor. The old Patriarchs
of whom you speak, came to their place by Election, and Confirmation: the
Turk by neither of both, but only by tyranny and violence. Your
Predecessors, I mean the true Bishops, came to the Church of Sarisburie
orderly, by professing them selves to communicate, and by taking Confirmation
of the Bishop of Rome. So came not you in: therefore you came in by the
window, and not by the door.

But now how blind are you, The Turk by Gods special providence kept from Rome
as not hable to consider, why God permits the Turk to possess
Constantinople, Antioche, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, whereas he keeps him yet
from possessing Rome? When the Turk had gotten Constantinople, and had so
far entered into Croatia, and Hungary, as it is well known: Rome was both
nearer to him, then Alexandria, and easier to come by, as it might well have
appeared. For the Sultan Lord of Egypt, and Syria, and the Sophy joined with
him, were thought far stronger to resist him, then the power of Italy. But
the truth is, it was the scourge of God, to revenge al Rebels that would not
obey the Church of Rome, where the chief pastor was placed by Christ, whose
voice all the sheep ought to hear. In Epist. Nicolas. 1 ad Michaelem Imper.
Bessarion in Epist. ad Graecos
But when the Grecians of pride and disdain began to make a schism, and to
divide them selves from the Sea of Rome, and being often warned, and terribly
threatened, yet would not reconcile them selves, but, though at certain
meetinges they were confounded, as at Lions, and Florence, yet would still
return to their wilfulness, and disobey the chief Bishop: God at the length,
who made them, that would not obey Samuel his Prophet, to obey Saul, and to
feel his heavy hand: suffered them utterly to be overthrown and vanquished,
and to lie under the yoke of most miserable bondage and slavery, which the
cruel Turk lays upon them. The particular declaration of which story would
require a long Treaty. But sure it is, that for the withdrawing of their
obedience from the Succession of Peter, the Grecians are compelled to obey the
Succession of Mahomet.

Jewel. Math. 24
By Succession, Christ says, desolation shall sit in the holy place, and
Antichriste shall press into the room of Christ.


Harding.
M. Ievvel falsifieth the Scripture.
Does Christ say, it shall be so by Succession? You falsify the words of God,
and man, and that verily by Succession: For so have al Heretics, your
forefather^ done before you. And I pray you, behold, how well your words hang
together. Desolation shall fit in the holy place by Succession, and yet
Antichriste shall press in. That which is by Succession, is without pressing:
and that which comes in by pressing, comes not in by Succession. Nay
contrariwise, Succession is the chief way for any Christian man to avoid
Antichrist. For he that remains in that faith, which came lineally, and by
Bishop after Bishop from the Apostles, he is sure of his enheritance, and
needs not to fear, lest he obey Antichrist. For Antichrist (as S. Paul
says) comes not, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
except defection (and Apostasy) go before. He that forsakes succession, may
right well fall upon Antichriste. But he that keeps him self in the chief
Succession, shall be sure not to fall from faith. And good reason why. For
Antichrist comes in to break order: yea rather the Devil breaks the order
of Christ's Church, to prepare a way for Antichrist. For if al men keep
them selves in one faith, and Doctrine, when soever Antichrist should preach
against that, he should be detected, and known unto al men. But now when
there are so many beleefes in the world, why may not Antichriste get a
company to follow him, as well as other Archeheretiques do? He therefore that
once changes his faith, except he return from whence he went, can not tell in
what Church he is, and whether it be Antichrists Church, or no. But he that
keeps that, which was from the beginning, he is sure to hold that faith,
against which Antichriste must strive, and fight.

Wherefore S. John speaking of Antichrist, says thus: Vos quod audistis ab
initio, in vobis permaneat. 1. Johan. 2
Let that abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. Not that which
ye began to hear of late, but that which ye heard from the beginning, let
that abide in you, let it abide, and not be changed. Hac scripsi vobis de ijs
qui seducunt vos, Who are leaders out of the way.
I have written these things to you, concerning them, who lead you out of the
way. Mark the words, who lead you out of the way, which from the beginning
you were set in. Did not Luther lead us from the way, wherein we were? Did
not Calvin lead both us, and some Lutherans too out of the former way? There
S. John also says of heretics, Exierunt ex nobis, they are gonne out of us.
Nunc Antichristi multi facti sunt, Now many Antichrists are made. It is the
going out that makes an Antichrist, and not the abiding within the tents of
the Church. And therefore when Christ forewarned his Disciples of the
desolation to come, Math. 24
he said among other things, Nolite exire, go not out, leave not your old
enheritance, and your Succession, for a vain promise of a new land.

Jewel. It is not sufficient to claim succession of place: it behouet us
rather to have regard to succession of Doctrine.


Harding.
Therefore you are no Successor in the Bishoprike of Sarisburie by your own
confession. For you keep not the Succession of Doctrine. And we join both
together. For we know who succedeth in the same Doctrine, by his quiet
Succession in the place. If there be no change in the Church, no tumulte no
dissension, or contradiction: then is it certain, that it is a perfect
Succession as well in place, as in Doctrine. But if a dissension arise, and one
say, this is true, and the other say, this is not true, or if the new Bishop
accuse his Catholic Predecessors Doctrine: then is it sure, that there is no
succession in doctrine. Now I say, run over all the Bisshops of Rome, and you
can say of never a one, this man coming into his Predecessors See, did
oppugn his doctrine, or preached with the Church of Romes contentation
against that, which was in use before. So that in Rome al things are even at
this day concerning faith as S. Peter leafte them. For every man has agreed in
outward Decree, sentence, and profession, with all the predecessors, and
successors.

Jewel. Page 132. S. Bernard says, Quid prodest si canonice eligantur, In
council. Remen.
and non canonice viuant? What avails it if they be chosen in order, and
live out of order?


Harding.
It avails nothing to the evil liver: but yet it avails much to him, that
obeieth the good, and true doctrine of the evil teacher.

Jewel. So says S. Augustine, Ipsum characterem multi and lupi, Cont.
Donatist. lib. 6. 1. q. 3. vocantur ca^es. Character what it signifies in the
Sacraments
and lupis imprimunt. The outvvarde mark, or right of a bishop, many give to
wolves, and be wolves them selves.


Harding.
By Character is not meant an outward mark, but rather an inward mark and
print, which through the receiving of certain Sacraments is imprinted in the
souls of them, who receive them, of which sort are Baptism, Confirmation,
and holy Orders. And those sacraments being once received, ca^ not be
repeated, or be again received of the same person. For the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, although it be an outward sign yet it leaves not any
Character, or such inward print in the soul, as may be no more repeated.

But letting that error pass of the true interpretation of this word
Character, I grant that Heretics may baptize heretics even without the
Church: and the Baptism shall stand, although it be unlawfully ministered. What
makes that against the Suceession of Bishops? It rather proves, that seeing
the Sacraments may be ministered, if not to salvation of them that are of
discretion, yet truly, and really without the true Church: there must be an
other rule taken to know the true Church by, besides the administration of
Sacraments. And that true and certain rule is, the perpetual Succession of
the Sea Apostolic.

Jewel. Page 132. Therefore the ancient father Irenaus gives us this good
counsel, Eis qui sunt in Ecclesia presbyteris obedire oportet, Iren. lib. 4.
ca. 43.
qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum episcopatus successione charisma
veritatis certum secundum beneplacitum patris acceperunt. It becomes us to
obey those Priests in the Church, which have their succession from the
Apostles, and together with the Succession of their bishoprikes according to
the good vvil of God the Father, have received the undoubted gift of the
truth.


Harding.
All this makes against you M. Jewel. For seeing you can show no such Priests,
having their Succession from the Apostles, and having received the undoubted
gift of the truth, whom ye do obey it is certain, that ye have not the
gift of the truth among you. On the other side, seeing we have Priests, that
is to say, Bishops of Rome, who are also Priests, which have their
Succession from the chief and most glorious Apostles Peter, and Paul, and
seeing such Priests, and Bishops, keeping still the same faith and doctrine,
from man to man, have received the undoubted gift of the truth according to
the good will of God the Father: doubtelesse the undoubted mark of the truth is
with us only, and not with you at al, who have no Succession at al of any
Priests, and much less of any such Priests, that succeed lineally from the
Apostles them selves.

Jewel. 132. S. Cyprian being likewise charged for dissenting from his
predecessors, Lib. 2. epist. 3.
answers thus: Si quis de antecessoribus meis, etc. If any of my
predecessors have not observed, and kept the same, that our Lord has taught
us both by his example, and also by his commandment, his simplicity may be
pardoned, but we (if we do the like) can hope for no pardon, being now
admonished, and instructed of our Lord.


Harding.
Cough up man it will choke you, Phy. what a foul corruption is this? Lib. 2.
epist. 3.
if you let it tarry within your throat. Here is but half the bone, there is
yet in S. Cyprian no full point, it follows in the same sentence, Vt calicem
Dominicum vino mixtum secundum quod Dominus obtulit, offeramus. We can hope for
no pardon, who are now admonished, and instructed of our Lord, that we should
offer our Lords chalice mixed with wine, accordingly as our Lord offered the
same. Either M. Jewel took this saying of S. Cyprian upon the German
credit, as he found it noted in their books, and then his false brethren
deceived him: or else he wrote it out of S. Cyprian himself, and then his
study and will was to deceive us. He would full gladly have given us an
authority, that we might forsake the example of our Predecessors, but he was
loath we should see the thing, wherewith the authority was exemplified. For if
at any time he say al, he is sure to speak against him self, and no wonder,
because he speaks against the truth: and every good saying evermore agrees
with the trtuh.

First, he corrupts S. Cyprian, in putting in, meis, for nostra, my
predecessors, instead of our predecessors. For S. Cyprian speaks not of
his own Succession, but of what soever Priest, or Bishop, that lived before
his time. Again, S. Cyprian spoke not of any such custom, as had been
generally used of al Bishops, for then it had been of full authority: but of
that, which some one man used privately, and without keeping the law of
Succession. And therefore S. Cyprian said, Si quis, if any man. Thirdly, the
thing he spoke of, was, that some were said to offer water alone in our Lords
supper, and not wine withal. Now says he, if any before our time have used to
offer water, and not wine mingled with water, well he may be pardoned by our
Lords mercy: but we that are admonished, and instructed to offer our Lords
chalice mingled with wine, that is to say, consisting not of water alone, but
of water and wine mingled together: we ca^ not be pardoned, except we mingle
water with wine, and so do offer our Lords Chalice, as he him self did offer
it.

Now apply this gear Christian Reader to our new brethrens deeds. Do they
offer our Lords Chalice at al? Or do they grant, that our Lord in his Supper
offered it? Do they mingle water with wine at the time of consecrating the
mysteries? If they do neither of both, what folly, yea what madness was it for
M. Jewel, to bring forth these words of S. Cyprian, thereby to accuse him
self, and his own Communion, as not observing that, which our Lord
commanded to be ob^^rued?

It is a world to see, how these men apply the witnesses of the Scriptures,
or of the ancient Fathers. M. Jewel meant to show, that by Gods word we
might forsake our Predecessors examples. But S. Cyprian rather shows, that
if our predecessors be taken, as they ought to be taken, that is to say, for
those that keep the tradition, and doctrine of the Apostles: that then their
Tradition is Gods word. Gods Word not written.
For he puts it to be Gods own word, that Christ offered his Chalice
mingled of water and wine. Yet of water there is no mention in the story of
the Supper. In what word then is it written, that Christ had water in his
Chalice? Verily in the word of Apostolic Tradition, Tradition.
in the unwritten word, in the word of General Succession. For in all Churches
he saw water mingled with wine: and being assured that the Apostles, who saw
Christ to do it, taught it so: doubted not to say, that our Lord taught us by
his example, and word, to mingle water with wine, and so to offer the Chalice.
Verily you were far ouerseene M. Jewel, when you alleged this example, as
being such, whereby your self, and al them of your side are utterly
condemned. And what should ye do? Except ye would repent (which God grant, if
it be his will) ye must needs add lie unto lie, without end or measure, or
give over the enterprise, whereof you made your boasting Challenge.

Jewel. Compare the use of our Churches M. Harding, with the Primitive Church
of God, and ye shall easily see the right of our Succession.


Harding.
Diversity between the primitive Church, and the Churches of this nevve
Gospel. Romans 10. Joan. 20. Tit. 1. Damasus in pontifi. Who sends you M.
Ievvel, who sent your fellows? Joan. 10.
If I should compare your Churches with the Primitive Church of God so
narrowely, as I might, from the beginning to the ending, we should find scant
any shadow in your Churches of the Primitive Church. There no man preached,
but he that was lawfully sent, as S. Paul says. And sent he was, either of
Christ visibly, and sensibly speaking unto him, as when he said to the
Apostles, as my Father sent me, I send you: or else by the Apostles, as when S.
Paul sent Titus, and Timotheus, and S. Peter sent S. Clement, and so S.
Clement afterward sent others, and so from man to man. Now tell us, who sends
you to preach? Not the Bishops, which are the Successors of the Apostles, whom
ye despise. Who then? Forsooth one is sent of the common Weal, which never had
power to send him: an other of the Civil Magistrate, who also had no such
power: An other runs before he be sent, and therefore comes of him self,
and is an Antichriste.

Moreover the Apostles, and their scholars preached that, Irenaus lib. 4. c. 3.
which they had heard preached, whether it were written, or no, as S. Irenaeus
witnesses. But you will have nothing preached, except it be written: and
nevertheless ye preach that, which is neither written, nor delivered you by
Apostolic Tradition, but as every vain, Justin. in Apolog. 2. Lib. 4. cap. 32.
light, and idle brain imagines of it self. They mingled water with wine, so
do not you. They taught the Supper of our Lord to be the new oblation of the
new Testament, as says S. Irenaeus. You say, there is no external Oblation of
the new Testament, beside Christ's death. In the Primitive Church, he that had been twice married, Tit. 1.
could not be Priest, according to S. Paul's doctrine. You teach it to be
lawful to make him Priest, that has been ten times married: and unless every
Priest, 1. Timo. 5.
and Minister among you be married, ye judge not well of him. S. Paul speaks
of old Widows, who might marry no more: you have none such.

But what end shall there be of words? If I would go thorough an hundred
articles together, it should appear, that ye have nothing like the Apostles,
or like the Primitive Church. There, were Exorcismes, Insufflations, holy
Oil, holy Chrisme, Incense, Altares, De Eccles. Hierarchia.
as we read in S. Dionysius: of al which ye have not one, and condemn the
having of them. They fasted a certain number of days, as they who keeping the
example of Christ, fasted the forty days, Ignatius. Epist. ad Philippe^s.
Actor. 2. and, 4. et. 5 Math. 19.
which we call the Lenten Fast. They prayed, watched, gave away al their
goods, and vowed so to do: they vowed chastity, and most exactly performed
the same, they commended the Dead to God with prayers, almose, and Sacrifices:
which things ye for the most part despise, and account superstitious.

Jewel. 133. S. Cyprian says, Si canalis aquae etc. If the pipes of the
conduit, Ad Pompeium contra Epist. Stephani.
which before ran with abundance, happen to fail, do we not use to search to
the head? The priests of God keeping Gods commandments, must do the same,
that if the truth has fainted, or failed in any point, we return to the very
original of our Lord, and to the Tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles,
that there hence we may take the discretion of our dooinges, from whence the
order it self, and original first began.


Harding.
S. Cypria^ alleged by M. Ievvel in an il cause. The error of S. Cyprian
It is to be known M. Jewel, that S. Cyprian used this saying in an evil cause,
as your self can not deny. And therefore he defending a falsehood, was driven
to the very same shifts, whereunto al Heretics are driven. He in deed was no
Heretic. For although he falsely believed an untruth, and earnestly taught,
that those, who had been baptized of Heretics, if they came to the unity of
the Catholic Church, should be baptized, as having before no true sacrament
of Baptism, yet he protested many times, that he judged no man, that thought,
or taught the contrary. Cyprianus In epist. ad Iubatanu^. and contra Epist.
Stephani.
For he would not deny unity, neither for that, nor for any thing else, but
lived a true Catholic, and died a blessed Martyr.

Notwithstanding, whiles he defended his error, he was deceived in that
Principle, which now you allow. For whereas Pope Stephanus, knowing, that by
Succession the use of the only laying of hands upon them that had been baptized
of heretics, without baptizing them a new, was derived from the Apostles, and
received generally even in Afrike it self, until Agrippinus a Bishop of
Carthage before S. Cyprian brake it: whereas Pope Stephanus, I say, knowing
this, decreed, that nothing should be changed, or be taken up a new: S. Cyprian
not being able to deny the tradition, whereof Pope Steven spoke, and which S.
Cyprians predecessor Agrippinus first began to change, fled to this common
place, that the word of God was against the custom, and therefore the custom
ought to be broken.

The Pope defended with diverse other Bishops, that the custom, and Tradition
was not against Gods word. Then said S. Cyprian, seeing we are at variance, let
us resort to the very beginning, and to the Original, which is our Lords
word, and the Apostolic Tradition. This was well said. But the Apostolic
Tradition was so, as Pope Steven defended, and not so as S. Cyprian would have
had it. And this M. Jewel neither do you, nor can you deny. For your self I
trow, will not allow, that they should be baptized again in your own Church,
that have been before baptized in an other Church, which ye account for false,
heretical, or schismatical. What meant you then to consecrate S. Cyprians
error, and to allege his authority therein, where it ought not to be admitted
and allowed? But with you the ouersightes of the Fathers, the errors of the
Greeks, the sayings of heretics, the examples of Schismatiques, the
objections of Schoolmen, and Canonistes, and the pelf of Gloses is always
good stuff.

Jewel. S. Cyprian says, If the Pipes of the conduite, which before ran
with abundance, happen to fail, do we not use to search to the head?


Harding.
Yeas, if they could fail. But in Christ's Church the Pipes can not fail,
The Pipes of the Co^duite of Christ's Church can never fail. Math. 28.
because Christ promised to be with his Apostles (and thereby with their
Successors) al days until the worlds end. If the Pipes of Christ's grace,
and of his Church fail to run any one day, then is not Christ that day
with his Pastors and teachers, and consequently he is not al days, or every
day with them. But if his word can not be false, then the Pipes never failed,
ne shall not fail: and that was well seen in S. Cyprians question. For
although they in Afrike had cut of the Pipes by force, in changing the former
custom, and Tradition: yet in Rome the Pipes ran still, and therefore Christ
was still with the Bishops of Rome, and with the other Bishops, who remained in
his Communion.

Example of agreeing in communion, where is disagreeing in opinion.
Yea Christ was also with S. Cyprian, because S. Cyprian departed not from Pope
Steuens Communion. But he was with S. Cyprian, not in that question, wherein he
dissented from the Pope, but in that he consented and agreed with the Pope. For
he both dissented concerning the particulare case, and consented concerning the
general bond of unity: wishing to have his own sentence followed, but if it
were not followed (as it was not) content to yield to his brethren, rather then
to break of, and to make a Schism. For thus he ends that epistle which he
wrote in that argument to Iubaianus. Cyprianus Ad Iubaianu^ de Haereticis
baptiza^d.
Si quis putatur contentiosus esse, nos talem consuetudinem no^ habemus, neque
Ecclesia Dei. Seruatur a nobis patienter and firmiter charitas animi, collegij
honor, vinculum fidei, et concordia Sacerdotij. If any man be thought to be
given to strife and debate, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God.
The Charity of mind, the honor of the society, the bond of faith, and the
concord of Priesthood is both patiently and firmly keepte of us.

If M. Jewel, if before him Luther, and Calvin, if all the rest of these
Gospellers had none otherwise dissented from the Pope, and the whole college of
Bishops, then S. Cyprian did: they might have been saved, as he undoubtedly is,
a glorious Martyr in heaven. But they imagined the Pipes, whereby grace, faith,
and al other gifts are derived from Christ unto us, to have been broken of for
the space of these nine hundred years past, devised with them selves, how they
might repair to the head, and so might fetch the watter of life unto us by
new Conduites, and Pipes. But they were deceived. For after Christ did once
set the Pipes a ronning, they never ceased, nor shall cease to run, til the
day of judgment. For the holy Ghost is promised to abide with the Apostles,
Joan. 14. Esai. 59. The B. of Rome is the successor of Peter. Cyprian. lib. 4.
epi. 2 ad ant^nianum. Luc. 22.
and their Successors, in aeternum, for ever. And their Successors are the
Bishops. And as the Chief of the Apostles was S. Peter, so S. Cyprian says of
Fabianus, who was Bishop of Rome two hundred years after S. Peter: Cum Fabiani
locus, id est, cum locus Petri, and gradus Cathedrae sacerdotalis vacaret, when
the place of Fabian, that is to say, when the place of Peter, and the step or
degree of the Priestly Chair was void. So that as Peter's faith was most
specially prayed for, and that not only for his own sake, but to the end he
should strengthen, and confirm his brethren: even so was every Bishop of Romes
Faith prayed for, to the end every one might strengthen, and confirm his
brethren, which are al Bishops, in the truth of the Faith, and in the
Government of the flock.

That Succession of the Bishop of Rome, Augu. in in psalmu^ co^t. parte^ Donati.
and of the Sea of Peter is the Rock, which as S. Augustine says, the proud
gates of Hell do not overcome. So he said eleven hundred years past, so until
this hour the thing it self proves, so do we believe, that it shall be
performed by him that promised it, until the worlds end: because it is the
Rock which shall ever confess the true Faith, and feed the sheep of Christ,
and stay up the house of God, and confirm all the faithful that lean unto it.

Thus have I confuted (M. Jewel) your treatise of Succession, The Pipe of
Christ's doctrine has continued in the catholic Church only.
which I took in hand specially to treat of, because it shows most
evidently, that ye have no true Church, because ye can show no Pipe, or
Conduicte, which from Christ until your Sects has still continued ronning, or
has still derived his doctrine, and grace unto them of your side. It is the
Catholic Church (which you call the Papistical Church) which has that Pipe:
and can evidently show, where the stream has gonne, and how it has been
maintained from age to age, from generation to generation, yea from man to man,
without any interruption. Isai. 62. Matthew. 5. Philipp. 2. Matt. 28. Joan. 14.
and 16. Esai. 59. 1. Timo. 3.


Such should the state of the Church be, according to Gods word, where watch
men should never hold their peace, where the city built upon the hill can not
be hid: where the children of light shine like sterres in the midst of the
infidelles: where Christ is al days unto the worlds end: where the holy
Ghost is for ever teaching al truth: where the pillar, and sure stay of
truth is visibly seen, as with which men be conversant in this world, as
S. Paul says: where to be short, Joan. 21.
Christ's sheep are fed of Peter, al abiding within the unity of his one
Fold in this world, thence, and thence only, to be transferred unto the
glorious Pasture of life everlasting, which God grant us al.

Of many other questions, I have said somewhat: But herein is most profit,
because in few it contains all the rest. For where the Church is, there all the necessary treasure of Gods wisdom, Isai. 59.
there is the holy Ghost, there is the word of truth, and the incorporation
with Christ, the spouse and husband thereof. Whosoever loves his soul
health, If thou vvilt be ^u^d depart not out of the Church,
let him understand well which is the true Church, and keep him self therein.
For it is ordained of God, as a mother, and a nourse, to contain, and keep al
men safe within it, who do not wilfully depart out of it. The continuance of
it is by Succession, Sheep succeed after Sheep, and Bishops who be the
Sheepeheardes, after Bishops, those to be fed, these to seed. If those can
not fail at any time, neither can these lack, or fail. We show both. M.
Jewel shows neither any Succession of Sheep, nor of Bishops. Therefore he that
rests with M. Jewel, is out of the Fold. And he that will be the saved Sheep
of Christ, must abide in, or if he be out, return to the Fold of Peter, to
whom alone, as loving more then others, it was said, Joan. 21.
feed my lambs, feed my sheep.

Of Auricular, or Sacramental Confession.
Jewel. Page 133. We say, that private Confession to be made unto the
Minister, is neither commanded by Christ, Chrysostom. ^d Hebr. homil. 30.
nor necessary to salvation: and therefore Chrysostom says, I will thee not
betraye thy self openly, not to accuse thy self before others. But I counsel
thee to obey^ the Prophet saying, open thy way unto the Lord.


Harding.
Conf^ssio^ necessary private or public. Johan. 20.
NEither do we say precisely, that Private Confession is necessary, but that
either Private, or Public is necessarily to be made to a Priest, because he
only has power of Christ to forgive, and to retein^ sins: And he can not
judge, who are to be forgeuen, or who are to be retained, except the sinners
do particularly open their heart, and thought, where the founteine of sins is,
Matt. 15.
accordingly as Christ said: Evil thoughts come forth from the heart.

S. Chrysostom in this place speaks not in deed of Sacramental Confession,
but of that, which is daily to be made unto God alone. Of the confession that
S. Chrystom speaks of. Ad Heb. hom. 31.
He had said before, Poenitentem non oportet peccatum suum obliuioni tradere:
peccatum Confessione minuitur, nullum inuenitur delictorum tale remedium, sicut
eorum continuata memoria. The penitent must not forgete his sin. The sin is
diminished by Confession. No such remedy of sins is found, as the continual
remembrance of them. Nec tantum nos peccatores esse dicamus, sed etiam ipsa
peccata specialiter singula computemus. Neither let us only say we are sinners
(in general) but let us reckon up every sin in special. Upon which words
immediately it follows: I say not to thee, that thou shall bewray thy self
openly, but open thy way unto our Lord.

Now put the whole tale of S. Chrysostom together: whereas he willed men to
have continual remembrance of their sins, to confess them, and that in
special, and particularly, and still to do it: a man might worthily have said
unto him, why sir, shall I go every day to the Priest, and never leave
confessing the self same sin? To this objection he makes answer, saying:
Ibid thee not bewraie thy self openly, nor to accuse thy self before others.
Reuele thy ways to God. Here then we have, Particular and often remembrance of
sins.
that it is good to call the self same sins oftetimes particularly to
remembrance, and to confess them often unto God. But that they need not at al
to be confessed to the priest, that S. Chrysostom says not. For in other
places he has taught us, that the priest is in better case to purge sins
now, then the priest in the law was to show, that the leprouse were purged.
His words are.

Corporis lepram haud purgare quidem, Chrysostom. Lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.

Priests have power to purge the Lepre of the soul.


sed purgatos probare, Iudaeorum sacerdotibus solis licebat. At vero nostris
sacerdotibus non corporis lepram, verum animae sordes, non dico purgatas
probare, sed purgare prorsus concessum est. The priests only of the Jews had
power, not to purge the Lepre of the body, but to try them that were purged.
But truly unto our Priests it is given utterly to cleanse, not the Lepre of
the body, but the filth of the soul. Mark reader these words, To cleanse,
and not to try who are clean.

If our Priests do so far pass the Priests of the Law, and yet no Leprous
man might be admitted into the Temple, and Communion of the Jews, until the
only Priests of Moses law had declared him to be clean: much less can any
mortal sinner (who in his soul is leprous) be ordinarily purged, but only by
the Priests of Christ, who now, as S. Chrysostom says, do not only show that
men are purged, but have power throwghly to purge the lepre, that is to say,
the mortal sin of the soul. But how can they discretely purge that, which is
not showed unto them? Math. 8.
When Christ sent away the leprouse man, bidding him to show him self unto
the priest, then he declared (as in a figure of the law) that in the time of
the new testament a great sinner should not be purged, before that he had
showed him self, that is to say, had reveled the soars of his heart, and
conscience unto the priest. So have we, that it is good and necessary to
confess al our sins unto God, and our Lepres, or mortal sins also unto the
Priest. Of these two truths neither impugneth other. That is a continual
practice of Heretics, to reprove the one kind of Confession, because they find
sometimes the other alone co^me^ded, or spoken of. A wise, and a good man will
co^ferre, and join al truths together, and not go about to destroy one truth
by another.

As for Gratian, and al your hotchepotte of gloses, I will leave for a more
convenient place, where perhaps if it shall be thought worth the labor, they
shall be answered al at ones.

Against your heretical Proposition I will set S. Basils catholic judgment. It
was demanded of S. Basil, Qui vult confiteri peccata sua, Basil. In Quaest.
Co^peud. 288.
number omnibus confiteri debet, and quibuscunque, and quibus. He that will
confess his sins, whether he ought to confess them to al men, and to what
soever persons, or else to whom? Hereunto he makes this answer. Necessarium
est confiteri peccata ijs, quibus administratio mysterioru^ Dei concredita est.
Sic enim and qui olim poenitentia^ egerunt, coram sanctis fecisse comperiuntur.
Scriptu^ est enim, in Eua^gelio quide^, quod Iohanni Baptistae confite bantur
peccata sua: in Actis vero, Apostolis ipsis, a quibus etiam omnes
baptizabantur. It is necessary to confess sins unto them, to whom the
dispensation of the mysteries is committed (those are the priests). For so
they that in old time did penance are found to have done before the Saints.
(He means priests). For it is written in the Gospel, that they confessed
their sins to Ihon Baptist: In the Acts, that they confessed them to the
Apostles, of whom also they were al baptized. By S. Basil then it is necessary
to confess sins unto the priests, who are Christ's ministers: by M. Jewel
it is not necessary at al. Who is the likelier of these two to be a liar?

Ievvel. Page 133. and 149. M. Harding him self is forced to confess, that
the express term of Articular, or Secret Confession is seldom mentioned in
the ancient fathers. His tale had been truer, if he had said it is never
mentioned.


Harding.
True it is in deed, seldom we find the express name of Auricular, or
Secret Confession, because the custom in old time was, rather to confess
great sins openly. But what skilleth it, whether we find the express name
of Secret Confession, seeing that is ordained only in favor of the penitent,
whom if he do it not secrtely, it behooves to do it openly. For done it must
be, if he will enjoy the forgeuenes of sins, which to imparte unto
penitentes, Christ gave power to his Apostles, Joan. 20.
and by them to such Priests, as are lawfully sent by the Superior for that
purpose.

But yet to gratify M. Jewel, I will bring forth one au^cie^t witness for
secret Confession. Leo the great, understanding that in some Churches of Italy
the custom was the sins of men to be openly published, and read out of a
paper: wills the said custom to be abrogated, and taken away, Leo epist. 80.
cum reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis sacerdotibus indicari per
confessionum secreta: forasmuch as it suffiseth, that the gilte of the
consciences (that is to say, the faults where of men are guilty in their
consciences) be showed unto the priests by the secret means of Confessions.
How think you M. Jewel, is not this the Secret Confession, which you required
to be once showed in the Ancient fathers?

Leo goes forward in declaring the matter. Quamuis plenitudo fidei videatur
esse laudabilis, quae propter Dei timorem apud homines erubescere non veretur,
tamen quia non omnium huiusmodi sunt peccata, vt ea quae poenitentiam poscunt,
non timeant publicare, remoueatur tam improbabilis consuetudo, ne multi a
poenitentiae remedijs arceantur, dum aut erubescunt, aut metuunt inimicis suis
sua facta reserare, a quibus possunt legum constitutione percelli. Sufficit
enim illa Confessio, quae primum Deo offertur, tunc etiam Sacerdoti, qui pro
delictis poenitentium precator accedit. Although the fulness of faith seems
praise worthy, which standing in awe of God, fears not to blush before men:
yet because al men's sins be not such, that they have no cause to fear the
publication of those things which require penance: let so disalowable a
custom be removed, lest many be withholden from the remedies of penance,
whiles either they be ashamed, or afraid, to open their deeds unto their
enemies, of whom they may be troubled (therefore) by the ordinance of the
laws. Confession is to be made to God first, then to the Priest.
For that Confession suffices, which is first offered unto God, then afterward
also unto the Priest, who comes to make intercession for the sins of the
poenitent.

Here M. Jewel you see, it is both necessary to confess our sins unto God,
and also unto the Priest. You see also, that it is laudable for a man to
confess them openly: but it is to hard to bind him to it, seeing the Secret
Confession may suffice. But one of them both must of necessity be made to the
Priest, for great, and mortal sins, which need the Priests Absolution. For
thereof S. Augustine speaks notably, declaring how a sinner is brought out
of death, out of the grave, and as it were out of the bonds of sins by three
degrees. Aug. in Psalm. 101. conc. 2.
Cum audis hominem poenitere peccatoru^ suoru^, iam reuixit. Cum audis hominem
confitendo proferre conscientiam sua^, iam de sepulchro eductus est, sed nondu^
solutus est. Qua^do soluitur? Math. 18.
A quibus soluitur? Quae folueritis (inquit) in terra, eru^t soluta and in
coelo. When thou hear, that a man repe^teth him of his sins (that is by
hearty sorrow and co^trition) now he is brought again to life: When thou
hear, that a man by making his confession utters his conscience (that is
by confession either open, or secret at the lest) now he is brought forth of
the grave, but he is not yet loosed. When is he loosed? Of whom is he loosed?
What things ye loose in earth (says he) they shall be loosed also in heaven.
This Absolution is made by the Priest. So that God calls us to life again by
inward contrition, and we prevented with his grace come our selves to confess,
yet if the Absolution of the Priest follow not, we remain still bound. I say
not that we are dead, but we are bound.

And verily as long as we are bound, we can not enter into heaven. For as
Lazarus being called up by Christ, yet if he had either remained in the grave,
or if his winding sheet had not yet ben loosed (as it was by the Apostles) he
should naturally have been stifled up a fresh, and have died again in his own
grave and bands, that he was tied withal: even so after co^trition, if
confession, and absolution follow not, there is in deed a certain seed,
beginning, and towardnes of life, but the man is choked up in his own bonds,
and can not enjoy the life, which is begone in him. For Christ will have some
ministerial part of penance done by his ministers in earth, that his own
ordinance be not void, and that the power he gave them to remitte sins, be
not frustrate and superfluous.

This doctrine grounded upon the holy Scriptures, and so expounded by the
learned Fathers, and so practiced by the Catholic Church, is sound M. Jewel.
Knock and beat at it, as long as you will: you shall but cause it to be the
better tried. As for the gewgawes of Scholemen, and Gloses, which you bring in
this matter, I utterly despise them. It is well known, whatsoever the
Schoolmen, or Canonistes say, they taught not your sacrilegious Doctrine, but
would have yielded to the holy general councels of Florence, and of Trent, where
this our faith was discussed to the great admiration of al sober wits in the
world. There I say mo Bishops, and Doctors concluded that, which we defend,
then you can bring Gloses, or sophistical devises against it. Of the power of
Priesthod
He that lists to see more of the necessity of Confession, may resort to
M. Allens learned book of the lawful power of Priesthod to remitte sins.

The fifth book contains a Detection of M. Iewelles errors, lies,
sclaunders, etc. touching the Marriages of Priests and Votaries, the Canonical
Scriptures, the Sacraments, and other points of Doctrine.
The words of the Apolagie. In the Defense 2. part. ca. 8. Division. 1. Page
163.
We say, that Matrimony is holy, and honorable in all sorts and states of
persons: as in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in the holy
Martyrs, in the Ministers of the Church, and in Bishops: and that it is an
honest and lavvful thing (as Chrysostom says) for a man living in matrimony,
to take upon him therevvith the dignity of a Bishop.

Confutation. fol. 73. b.
Matrimony is holy and honorable in all persons and an undefiled bed, as
says S. Paul. Hebre. 13.
Yet is it not lawful for them to marye, which either have by deliberate vow
dedicated almaner their chastity unto God, or have received holy order. For
the vowed be forbidden marriage by express word of God. Those that have taken
holy orders, by tradition of the Apostles and ancient ordinance of the Church.

Touching the first, the Scripture is plain, because a vow is to be
performed, Psalm. 75.
Vouete and reddite Domino Deo vestro. Vow ye and pay (or render that ye
vow) to your Lord God. Christ also says in the gospel, Matt. 19.
there be some eunuchs that have made them selves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heavens sake. He that can take, let him take. Vovve-breakers in what danger
they stand. 1. Tim. 5.
Again S. Paul speaking of young widows, which have vowed and promised
chastity, says, that when they wax wanton against Christ, they will mary,
having damnation, because they have broken their first faith. Whether these
scriptures perteine hereto, and be thus to be understood, we refer us to
the primitive Church, and to all the holy Fathers. From star to star leafte
out of M Ievels book What the Fathers have judged of marriages after vovv of
chastity. De bono viduitatis
Whosoever have thus vowed chastity, or by receiving holy orders have bound
them selves to the bond of co^tinencie to the same by ancient constitution of
the Church annexed, if afterward presuming to marye, excuse the satisfying of
their carnal lust with the name of wedlock, be they men, be they women: they
live in a damnable state, and be worse then Aduouterers. * Such marriages, or
rather slydinges, and falls from the holier Chastity that is vowed to God, S.
Augustine doubts not, but they be worse then aduowtries. S. Cyprian calls
this case plain incest, S. Basile accompteth the marriages of veiled Virgins to
be void, of no force, and facrilegious.

She that has dispoused her self to our Lord (says S. Basile) is not free.
lib. de virginitate
For her husband is not dead, that she may mary to whom she list. And whiles
her immortal husband lives, she shall be called an aduoutresse, which for
lusts of the flesh has brought a mortal man into our Lords chamber. Leaft
out by M. Iev.
The case is like in the man.

And whereas such persons with deliberate vow purposed to consecrat them
selves to our Lord only, maids by virginity, widows by chastity of
widowehod, priests by single life and continency: they may not with good
conscience marye, because the lust of the flesh follows not that former
purpose, but draws the soul to her vices from that whereto it is bound. For
what so ever is the work (says S. Basile) before which reason, and law
goes not in the mind, the same is of the conscience noted for unlawful. Of al
such after many words uttered in reproufe of their lewdnes, he concludes,
that they follow not wedlock, but aduoutrie. But for proof that vowed persons
may not marye, it were not hard to allege so much out of the fathers, as
would fill a volume. Clerks bound to co^tine^cie Li. 1. c. 11 Paphutius. Li.
1. c. 23.


Touching the second, the Apostles forbid those that come single to the
Clergy, to marye, except such as remain in the inferior orders, and proceed
not to the greater, as we find in their canons. Can. 25. Paphnutius as Socrates
and Sozomenus record in their Ecclesiastical story, said at the Nicene
Council, that it was an old tradition of the Church, that such as come to the
degree or order of Priesthod single, should not marye wives. And this is that
holy Bishop Paphnutius, whom these Euangelical vowe-breakers pretend to be
their proctour for their unlawful marriages.

Leaft out by M. Iev. Siritius and Innocentius were not the first ordeiners of
clerks co^tine^cie.
Neither Pope Siritius and Innocentius the first, who lived long above a
thousand years past, were the first makers of the law that forbids Priests
to marie, but declaring that the same was of old time ordained and used of the
Church, they condemn the disorders against the same committed. * Read who
list the epistle of Siritius ad Himerium Tarraconensem. cap. 7. the second
epistle of Innocentius to Victricius Bishop of Roen. cap. 9. and his third
epistle to Exuperius B. of Tolouse. cap. 1. and weighing well these places he
shall perceive, that these holy Popes forbad the ministers of the Church the use
of wedlock by the same reason, by which the priests of Moses law were
forbidden to come within their own houses, in the time when their course came
to serve in the holy ministeries. By the same reason also by which S. Paul
required married folk for a time to forbear the use of their wives, 1. Cor. 7.
that they might attend praying.

The place of S. Chrysostom alleged by this Defender well considered, Answer
to Chrysostoms place.
disproueth no part of the Catholic doctrine in this hehalfe, but condemns
both the doctrine and common practice of his companions these new fleshly
Gospellers. His words be these upon the saying of S. Paul, In 1. cap. ad Tit.
homil. 2.
that a Bishop ought to be without crime, the husband of one wife. The Apostle
(says he) stops the mouths of Heretics which condemn marriage, showing
that it is not an unclean thing, but so reverent, that with the same a man may
ascend to the holy throne or seat (he meant the state of a Bishop) and
herewith he chastises and restrains the unchaste persons, Twice married may
not be Bishops, and why? Second marriages lauful, yet open to accusations Leaft
out by M. Iev,
not permitting the^ who have twice married, to atteine such a rome. For whereas
he keeps no beneuole^ce toward his wife deceased, how can he be a good
governor? Yea what grievous accusations shall not he be subject unto daily? For
ye al know right well, that albeit by the laws the second marriages be
permitted, yet that matter lies open to many accusations. And therefore he
would a Bishop to give no occasion (of evil) to those that be under him. * Thus
Chrysostom. Where, with S. Paul, first he puts to silence the Cerdonistes,
Marcionistes, Seuerians, Tatians, Manichees, and al other Heretics that
condemned marriage, and said it was an impure thing. Secondly he allows
matrimony fo far, that he acknowledges a married man may ascend to a Bishops
seat. Thirdly Leaft out by M. Iev. Big^mie lauful rather then commendable.
leafte out by M. Iev. The Bigamie of the gospellers condemned by Chrysostom and
Paule-Stro^pets,
he puts Bigamie, that it to wit, marying an other after the first, or a
widow, to be lawful, rather then commendable.*

Now as we do not condemn marriage, neither deny, but that married men
in the Primitive Church, and before the Ghospel was so generally received, as
it was at length, were and might be called to the dignity of Bishoprike, when
scarcetie, and lack of single men worthy of that rome was found: * so we
see the impure Bigamie of our holy gospellers condemned both by S. Chrysostom,
and S. Paul, of whom many being Priests and (as they say) Bishops, at lest
presuming to occupy that holy seat, for custody of their chastity after
their former old yokefellowes decease, solace them selves with new
strompettes. By a better name I would call them, if I wist I should not offend.
For what woman soever coupleth her self in such damnable yoking, how can she
appear either to be honest, or to have care of her soul health? As for the
simple that be deceived by the importunity and craft of those lurdens, as they
are not to be borne withal, so yet I think them to be pitied.

But if this Defender press us with Chrysostom, we answer that though
Chrysostom grant, that a married man may ascend to the holy seat, yet he
says not, that a man may descend from that holy seat to the Bride bed. For
we deny utterly, After holy orders received marriage never co^pted lauful among
catholics.
that any man after that he has received holy orders, may marye. Neither can
it be showed, that the marriage of such was ever accounted lawful in the
catholic Church. In deed we know that in Germany, and in England, and certain
other provinces, at dissolute times, when the discipline of the Church was
shaken of, Priests have been married, as we read of the time, in which
Anselmus was Bishop of Cantorbury. Priests married in England in the time of
Anselmus.
But that disorder was always by due correction of bishops punished and
redressed. So that what soever Bale, Poinet, or any other of that filthy
railing rabble bring out of Huldrike of Auspurg, Huntingdonensis, Capgraue,
Chronica Chronicarum, or such other obscure and barbarous stories for witness of
priests marriages, seeing the same were by good rulers of the Church at al
times controlled and resisted, as unlawful and wicked: it is of no force nor
authority. How, why, and when married men were admitted to be priests, and
where the profession of chastity and absteining from company of their wives
was required of them, and many other poinctes touching the unlawful marriages of
priests, who so ever is desirous to be amply instructed: the same I refer to
a large treatise written hereof by a learned man in our own tongue. I think not
good here to recite the things, that be so well treated already.

Jewel. Page 164. Here I grant M. Harding is like to find some good
advantage, as having undoubtedly a great Number of the holy Fathers of his
side. etc.


That Priests, and Votaries may not marry. The first Chapter.
Harding.
The Fathers be on our side by M. Jewels own confession.
THEN undoubtedly you have not the holy Scriptures on your side. For the holy
Fathers have never in great number determined, or weighed against the
Scriptures. For the same Christ that gave us the holy Scriptures, gave us also
Pastors and Doctors (as S. Paul teaches) to make perfect the Saints, that
is, the Christians, by their ministerial working, and to build up the body of
Christ, which is his Church. Seeing then M. Jewel confesses, that for this
point we have a great number of the Fathers on our side, let him make his
Moustre of Glosers, Summistes, all the Canonistes, Schoolmen, and of his other
late petie Doctors, whom, when they serve us, he calls the Black Guard,
never so great: we will content our selves with the great number of Ancient
Fathers.

And if the Fathers be on our side, what remains, but that the Reader make
his choice, to which side to incline, to the old Fathers of the Ancient
Church, of whose holiness we are well assured, or to these young Fathers of
this new Church, whose Children do give us better witness, that they be
fathers, then does their life, that they be holy.

Well, how great number of holy Fathers so ever we have on our side, certain it
is, that M. Jewel will not yield. Let it then be considered, how he defends
this point, and what pith there is in all that number of the Doctors sayings,
which he would seem to allege for his purpose.

As concerning the words of my confutation of the Apology touching this point
of the marriage of Priests, and Votaries, because I knew, these married
Apostates do charge us, as having an evil judgment of Matrimony, directly
answering the words of the Apology, first, I commend Matrimony, Heb. 13. To
marry unlawful in two cases.
and approve the saying of S. Paul uttered in the Epistle to the Hebrews in
praise of it. Nevertheless I say, that to marry it is unlawful in two cases.
The one is, if any person have vowed continency: the other, if any man have
taken holy Orders. The first I prove by Scripture, and the Fathers: the second,
by the Ordinance of the Church, and also by testimony of the Fathers. Then I
answer to the place alleged out of S. Chrysostom, who says, that a married man
may be promoted unto the dignity of a Bishop. In discoursing whereupon I show,
that the Bigamie of the married Apostates of our time, is by sentence of S.
Chrysostom utterly condemned. After this, granting that in the old Church
married men upon good causes were made Bishops, I deny, that Bishops were
ever made married men, after they were Bishops.

The four things that in this matter M. Ievvel has to defend.
These then be the things, that here M. Jewel has to defend. First, that is
is lawful to marry after the Vow of Chastity. Secondly, that it is lawful
after the taking of holy Orders. Thirdly, that Bigamie, or second marriage is
lawful in Priests, Monckes, Friars, and Nonnes. Fourthly, that in old time
Bishops were married after they had once ben consecrate Bishops. These four
if he do not defend, he perfourmeth nothing touching this point, but shows
him self to al men ouercomme, though his Doctors allegations besides the
purpose be never so many. What is that M. Ievvel. perfourmeth in this matter of
Priests and Votaries marriages.


Now comes me M. Jewel in, and allegeth Doctors as thick as hail, old,
and new, known, and unknown, allowed, and disallowed, Schoolmen, and
Summistes, vea the very marginal Annotations upon the Gloss of Gratian are
haled in to help at a pintche, and yet al helps not.

Of his own in manner he says nothing, but thus, Origin says, Tertullian
says, such a one says, and such an other says, and he says, and again he
says, etc. Then he laith down their Latin, be it true, be it false, and
puts a translation unto it, such, as becomes shifters to use in a false
matter, and thus furnishes out a great book, that the world may think, he
is a great Clerk.

Were all that he allegeth to the purpose, then were it somewhat, yet were it no
great commendation, to make books only out of Notebookes already made, and
gathered to his hands.

First (to declare his order) keeping him self a luffe of, M Jewels order in
his treaty of this point, and his two principles.
and coming nothing near the point, wherein my Confutation consists, he
brings the holy Fathers into suspicion of not dealing uprightly and
indifferently herein, bearing the Reader in hand, they have swarued from
truth, either in the auauncing of Virginity, or else in the disgracing of
lawful Matrimony. To make proof of this, he allegeth no small number of
sentences out of certain Fathers, in which not being thoroughly examined,
they seem to speak hardly of Marriage, specially of the second Marriage. For
this point his Doctors be these, Tertullian in Exhortatione ad Castitatem: the
author of the imperfect work upon S. Matthew, whom he calls Chrysostom,
whereas it is well known not to be his, as that, which contains sundry
heinous heresies: S. Hierome writing against Iouinian, Heluidius, and to
Gerontia: Athenagoras in Apologia pro Christianis: Nazianzen in dictum
Euangelij, Cum perfecisset Jesus etc. Origin in Lucam, Homilia. 17. for which
his cotation has, Homil. 19.

Next, he reckeneth up so many men, as he has read of, that being Married,
were afterward made Bisshops. Of whom he says, that they used Marriage them
selves in their own persons, which is more then he is liable to prove, if by
use of Marriage, he mean the carnal copulation.

M. Jewels two Principles.
These two, that is to say, the Fathers disgracing of Matrimony and their
having of wives them selves, he calls by the name of his two Principles,
which being laid, he makes his stout vaunte, that he is the better hable to
consider the substance of my reasons, for so he says, and there at length he
addresseth him self to shape an Answer to the part of my Confutation above
set out.

Now to say somewhat to his Principles, before I come to his Answer, were it
true, that certain Fathers speaking of Matrimony, used immoderate, and
extraordinary speeches, for so he terms them: Again, that many of them had been married before they came to be Bishops: what pertains that to the defense
of the marriage of Votaries, and Priests, which was the point presently
treated of? What, will he make this fond and childish Argument, Certain
Fathers spoke over vehemently concerning Matrimony, Item, some of them were
called to the dignity of Bishops, from the state of married men: Ergo,
Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nonnes, who have vowed Chastity, may lawfully
marry wives, and take husbands? Truly either this is his reason, or else
hitherto he has no reason at al. And of what small substance this reason is,
the veriest Cobblers of al their Ministers, if they can read any English
besides their communion book, may easily perceive.

Touching the Fathers speeches in reproufe of Matrimony, one answer M. Jewel,
Answer to M. Jewels doctors.
in manner may serve to refute all that you would infer of their sayings.
Only I except Tertullian, who being fallen into the foul Heresy of
Montanus, in his book entitled, Exhortatio ad castitatem, wrote otherwise of
Marriage (specially in that he condemned second marriage) then the Catholic
Church holds, or the truth bears. And S. Hierome witnesses (as Beatus
Rhenanus notes) that book to have been written against the Church. Now we
think not our selves bound to defend, what so ever they say, whom the
Church condemns for Heretics. As for Origin likewise, you know, of how
little credit he is, in regard of sundry great errors: albeit touching the
case of the second, and third Marriage, The Fathers call immoderate lust, an
evil thing, for which they be thought of some unlearned, to reprove marriage
De peccato originali contra Pelag. and Coelestiu^. lib. 2. c. 37 Lib 1. de
Nuptiu et Concupiscent. c. 22
speaking where of you allege him: he may better be defended, then Tertullian
may.

As concerning the other Fathers by you alleged, the thing, for which they
seem sometimes to speak of Matrimony not favorably, is the immoderate
concupiscence or lust now after sin by our first parents committed, which
is of the holy Fathers reported to be malum, as much to say, an evil thing, and
to proceed not of God, but of sin, without which evil thing, the thing, that
is good in Matrimony, that is to say, generation, can not be performed.

This, besides other Fathers S. Augustine calls oftentimes, malum, an evil
thing, as carnalis concupiscentiae malum, the evil of fleshly lust, and malum
libidinis, the evil thing of carnal pleasure, etc. He says that natural
shamefastness shows it so to be, by which it comes to pass, that
although married persons glory in Children, yet when they attend upon the
work of begeting Children, they choose them selves secret places, and will al
witnesses to be out of their way, thereby confessing the shamefastness it
self of Nature. And this much our first Parents confessed, after they had
sinned, Genesis 3.
by that they were ashamed, and coouered their shamely parts with Fig tree
leaves, as the Scripture plainly declares.

Neither proceeds this evil thing of Marriage, but of sin, August. in Psalm.
70.
and it is the pain of sin. In married persons it is evil, but no sin,
malum poenae, not malum culpae, as the Scholastical Divines call it. And this is
the meaning of that saying of the author that wrote the imperfect work upon
S. Matthew, Opere imperfecto in Matthew. Hom. 1. sub finem.
whom you will needs to be S. Chrysostom. The saying is this. Haec ipsa
Coniunctio Maritalis malum est ante Deum. Non dico, Peccatum, sed malum. This
very wedlock Conjunction it self is an evil thing before God. I say not, it
is Sin, but I say, it is an evil thing. In translating which words, you
do very falsely demean your self, and beguyle your unlearned Reader. For in
that place the author means not by Coniunctio Matrialis the Copulation of
Matrimony, as you translate it, as though he said, What is that which is of
the Fathers accounted evil in vvedlok work.
Matrimony it self were an evil thing: God forbid, any should so speak of
Gods holy ordinance. But he means the conjunction of the Husband with his
wife in the act of generation. Neither yet understands he the conjunction or
act it self, in wedlock to be an evil thing (so it be not to the end to
saciate lust and pleasure, but to the end to begete a child, that being
again begotten and regenerate, may serve to fill the City of God, as S.
Augustine speaks) but the immoderate concupiscence and lust, without the
which that wedlock act is not done. Whereof S. Augustine says, August. de
Nuptijs et concupiscent. lib. 1. cap. 24.
Cum ventum fuerit ad opus generandi, ipse ille licitus and honestus
concubitus, non poterit esse sine ardore libidinis, vt peragi possit quod
rationis est, non libidinis.

This immoderate concupiscence, this inordination, this rebellion of the
flesh, and preventing and ouerbearing of reason, this filthy motion swaruing
from reason whereof shame is taken, without which the act of Wedlock is not
done, is the thing, which the author of that imperfect work upon S.
Matthew, and sundry holy Fathers, have called Malum, as much to say, an evil
thing. The evil thing of wedlock work of married persons well used. The three
good things of marriage. a cap. 10. vsque ad cap. 16.
Which evil thing notwithstanding, married persons do use well, because of
the three good things that Matrimony has, by which it is excused.

Those three things are these, Fides, Proles, Sacramentum. Faith, or
Fidelity, Issue, and the Sacrament, whereof S. Augustine teaches learnedly in
his first book De Nuptijs and concupiscentia ad Valerium. By these three good
things, as S. Augustine, and the Church teaches, the use of Matrimony is
excused, not as an act that of it self is evil, is excused thorough
ignorance, or infirmity, which is rather an excuse of the party that
works: but it is excused, for that otherwise it should be a sin, except it
had these three good things joined together. Which when it has, the
Circumstances to every good act behooful presupposed, it is an act lawful,
honest, good and laudable.

Now this being considered, whereas you M. Jewel judge the holy Fathers to
speak otherwise of Matrimony, then the honor and holiness of that state
deserves: you show your self to be of the number of those deceived men,
August. de Nuptus et Concupis. lib. 1. ca. 5.
of whom S. Augustine says thus. Profecto erra^t, qui, cu^ vituperatur libido
carnalis, damnari nuptias opinantur, quasi morbus iste de connubio sit, non de
peccato. Verily they are deceived, which, when fleshly lust is rebuked, think
that marriage is condemned, as though this disease were of wedlock, August. de
peccato originali contra Pelag. and Coelestiu^ lib. 2. c. 37
and not of sin.

Likewise he says again, Quia iam ista condition mortalium, nunc simul
aguntur concubitus and libido, eo fit, vt cum libido reprehendatur, etiam
nuptialis concubitus licitus and honestus reprehendi putetur ab eis, qui nolunt
discernere ista, vel nesciunt. Because as the condition of men is now (after
Sin) the act of generation and lust, are done both atonce, thereof it
comes to pass, that, when lust is reproved, the lawful and honest dealing
of them together that be coupled in wedlock, is thought also to be reproved,
of them, which will not discern between these things (he means the act,
and the lust) or else know not how to discern them. To conclude, what so ever
certain Fathers say, and how so ever they seem to speak of Matrimony, this
perteined nothing to the purpose. Al your great number of allegations might
have been leafte out, for as much as thereby your Vowbreakers marriage is
nothing justified, nor defended.

M. Jewels second, Principle for defense of Vow-breakers marriages, answered,
which is, that Bisshoppes and Priests were married in old time.
Your second Principle (for so you call it) wherein you put the chief
confidence of this cause, is, that many Bishops and Priests in old time were
married, for so you dispose your words. I tell you M. Jewel, you have not so
much as one example for you, that a bishop was married, I mean, that any was
ever married in the old Church, and allowed in it, after that he was Bishop.
That diverse and sundry married men were for their virtue and holy life made
Bishops, I deny not, ne never yet denied. You allege all the examples of
antiquity that you can, yet not so much as one to the purpose.

That Tertullian was a married man, Tettullia^ of a married man made Priest.
Spiridion made Bishop from being a married lay man. S. Hilarie married by M.
Ievvel. In the Reioinder against the Sacrifice of the Mass fol. 172. b.
and afterward made a Priest, I grant. You say, Spiridion the Bishop of
Cyprus, was married, and had children: I deny, that Spiridion being a Bishop,
was married: but I confess, that being a married lay man before, he was
chosen afterward to be a Bishop, and had one daughter, named Irene. Whether
he had mo children I know not, of mo children of his I have not read.

You make S. Hilarie the bishop of Poitiers a married man. Your proof is the
Epistle to Abra his daughter. If I deny, that he was ever married, how can ye
prove it? The Epistle to Abra, is a peevish Apocryphal, and forged write, as I
told you in my last Reioindre, where you utter this same very stuff in great
sooth, whereby the world may understand, what simple rags ye have wherewith
to coouer your brethern the Apostates filthy lechery. That Prosper the Bishop
of Rhegium was a married man, you say it, but you prove it not. And were it
so, yet it serves not your turn, because if he were married, it was before he
was priest.

Neither have you good authority for proof, that Chaeremon Chaeremo^
the Bishop of a City called Nilus, whom you reckon among married Bishops,
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap 42.
was married. Eusebius says, that in time of persecution he fled unto a Hill in
Arabia, with her that lived with him, (...), and was never found again. That
she was his wife, it appears not. She might be some woman of his kin, or
some other old woman, that kept him, and dressed his meat, and attended him as
a nourse, of whom he had need, being a man of extreme age, as Eusebius
reports of him, saying that he was (...), that is to say, passing old.

Polycrates, Polycrates.
you say, being a Bishop, sometimes said, that seven of his Fathers, or
Ancestors, had been Bishops. What healpeth this your cause at al? Marry say
you, the Greek word is, (...), (...)
and Ruffinus translateth it, Patres. Whereunto stick you? unto the Greek
word, or unto the Latin? If you stick unto the Latin word, Patres, which
signifies Fathers, or Ancestors, you mean not I trow, that Polycrates had
seven Fathers, for that were to much by six, you know. One Father is enough
pardy for one man. If he had seven Ancestors, what gather you thereof? that he
was married, because he had seven Ancestors? Where is your Logique becomme M.
Jewel? The truth is good Reader, here is Ruffinus belied. Ruffinus belied.
He tra^slateth not (...), Patres, but, Parents: which goes further of in
signification, then the word Patres does, as the learned in the Civil Laws
do know. And this Greek word (...), properly signifies kinnesmen, them
that be near in blood, them that be of one family, and of the same kindred. S.
Hierom translateth it propinquos, Hiero. in Catalogo. in Polycrate.
and him follows Sophronius, putting for S. Hieromes Latin word (...),
signifiing them that were nigh in blood. Now Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus said,
in his epistle to Pope Victor, that 7. Bishops in that See before him, were of
his house, his family, his stock, his blood, or his kindred. Let M. Jewel make
the most of this place. Thereof he can co^clud nothing for any of the four
points before mentioned, which he has taken in hand to defend.

That S. Peter was a married man, Ignat. ad Philadelp. Origin falsified by M.
Ievvel. Origin. in Comme^t. in epist. ad Romans c. 1. Whether S. Paul had a
wife ot no by the opinion of S. Ambrose. M. Jewels foul contradictions.
Reply. Article. 17. Division. 11.
for which you allege S. Ignatius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius the
reherser of his words, it was never denied. This have you now told us diverse
times. But where you say thus, Origin says, that S. Paul, and his wife were
called to the Faith, both at one time: you deal with Origin, as you do with
the rest, whom so ever you allege, falsifying them more or less. Origin says
not as you report him, but thus, Paulus (sicut quidam tradunt) cum vxore
vocatus est. S. Paul (as some say) was called with a wife, that is to say,
having a wife before. That he had a wife, he affirms it not for certainty,
but makes it a matter of a Some say. And there it follows immediately (aliis
videtur, sine vxore) that others were of the opinion, he was free, and called
to the Faith having no wife at al.

But sir touching this point, whether S. Paul had a wife or no by the opinion
of S. Ambrose, whom here you call to witness, whether is truer man, Master
Jewel, that wrote the Reply, or Master Jewel, that wrote this pretensed
Defense? There he says thus, The twelve Apostles, Ambros. in 2. Cor. 11.
says S. Ambrose, only S. John excepted, were al married. Here he says
otherwise, S. Ambrose says, Omnes Apostoli, excepto Iohanne, and Paulo, vxores
habuerunt. All the Apostles had wives, only John, and Paul excepted. Here S.
Paul has no wife, there S. Paul has a wife. If you were a true man there,
then are you falfe here. If you be true here, then were you false there. Or he
had a wife by S. Ambrose, or he had not: say which ye will, M. Jewel is
contrary to M. Jewel. Again by M. Jewel in his Defense page 184. S. Paul had
a wife. But by the same M. Jewel in the same book page. 512. the same S. Paul
had no wife. Feign would I know, which of these M. Jewels were to be trusted.

Hieron. contra Iouinian. Lib. 1. In the 2. Keioinder. fol. ^75. b.
The place of S. Hierome against Iouinian, saying, that Priests in his time had
Matrimonies, that is to say, were taken from the state of married persons to
be Priests, helps you nothing. To the same I have answered in my second
Reionder, as to sundry things else here by you again rehearsed. Hitherto M.
Jewel has small advantage, as thou see Reader. Remember the four points I
noted to thee before, which is his part to defend, which not being defended,
he may of any man be challenged to yield, at least in this matter of the
marriage of them, that have vowed perpetual chastity. Before he comes to the
point, he says little of him self, but brings in heaps of other men's
sayings nothing perteining to the question, as I judge, to make a show of
learning to the ignorant. Among which this is one, pretended to be alleged out
of Damasus, for proof that many Popes were Priests sons. Thus he says.

Jewel. Pope Damasus shows us, Distin. 56 Osius. A vain and a fond thing
ascribed to Damasus, as though he vvrote of things done long after his death.
that a great number of Bishops of Rome were Priests sons: As Pope
Syluerius: Pope Deus dedit: Pope Adrianus. 2. Pope John. 15. Pope Felix. 3.
Pope Hosius: Pope agapetus: Pope Gelasius: Pope Bonifacius: Pope John. 10. Pope
Theodorus. And concludes thus: Complures etiam alij inueniuntur, qui de
Sacerdotibus nati Apostolicae Sedi praefuerunt: many others beside there are
found, that being Priests Sons, ruled the Apostolic See of Rome.


Harding.
What shall I say unto this fellow? Who ever saw so impudent a man? Does Pope
Damasus show you all this M. Jewel? Phy for shame man. You a minister of Gods
word? Nay, a minister of vain Fables, a minister of open lies. What may we
call this in you, foolish ignorance, or shameless malice? How could you be so
ignorant, or so witless, as once to dream, that Damasus that learned Pope
should thus write? That you might seem a ioily proctour for your brothers the
married Apostates sacrilegious, incestuous, and abominable yoking (for Marriage
is too honorable a name for that filthiness) must Damasus needs be made a
Prophet, and such a Prophet, as the world had never the like? A Prophet I
say, for unless he had a strange gift of Prophecy, how was it possible, that
he should tell, who should be the Fathers of men borne so many years after his
death?

Consider Reader I pray thee (for it booteth not to tell it M. Jewel) how this
tale hangs together. Damasus was the.39. Pope. Syluerius, whom M. Jewel
puts in the first place, was the.60. Pope. Deus dedit was the.70. Pope.
Adrianus the second was the.109. Pope. John the.15. was the.143. Felix the
third was the.50. Agapetus was the.59. Gelasius the.51. Bonifacius the first
(whereas there were diverse of that name, whom he means I know not) was
the.44. Ihon the tenth was the.126. Theodorus the first (if he mean any other
of that name, he was farther of from Damasus) was the.75. Pope.

Pope Hosius, a Pope of M. Jewels making.
As for Pope Hosius, he is a Pope of M. Jewels own making Verily in all the
Registres of Popes I find none so named. A small matter, if M. Jewel, who makes
so many Popes Priests sons, make us one Pope, who is neither Priests, nor
lay man's son, nor any man's son at al. What a marvelous Prophet then
was M. Jewels Damasus, that could thus prophecy of so many Popes so long to
come after his death, and tell, who should be their fathers, so many years
before their great Gra^dfathers were borne?

If for some excuse you say, that this much you found in Gratian, Distinct. 56.
it ca^ not help you. The printed Gratian has neither this form of words,
nor this order of names, nor so many Popes names by three. For he hameth not
John. 10. nor John. 15. nor Adrian. 2. So that you must take it upon you your
self, and bear the shame of it. And what if the book of Gratian had it, as
you have alleged? Do you not know, that such things in Gratian be of no
authority sometimes, which be rehearsed under this word, Palea? Palea.
Palea, good Reader, is as much to say, as Chafe: and where so ever this word
(Palea) Chafe, is put in Gratian, by the same it is signified, as some do
judge, that the saying immediately following is with little judgment infarced,
and that it is little worth, as Chafe is little worth in comparison of clean
wheat. Such Chafe, and vain fables M. Jewel is driven to take hold of, to
maintain his brothers filthiness, for lack of better stuff.

And were it true, that these Popes, or some of them, whose names be found
here in Gratians Chafe, were Priests sons: yet had he benne a true dealer
in this cause, he should not so unjustly have conceeled, what the Gloss says
in the same place, specially seeing that he is so well acquainted with the Gloss,
and furnishes his great book specially, and above al other Doctors, with the
stuff of the Gloss. Thus there we find. Distinct. 56. in Glossa.
Omnia ista exempla intellige de ijs qui in Laicali statu, vel minoribus
ordinibus orationibus parentum suscepti sunt: quando suis parentibus licebat
vti vxoribus suis. Understand thou al these examples of them, that were
received (at Gods hand) by the prayers of their fathers being in the state
of lay men, or in the lesser Orders: when their fathers might lawfully use
their wives.

Thus, for any thing you have brought hitherto, is your Great Post of Priests
Marriages, thwited to a pudding prick. As for that, which after all this you
pretend to allege out of AEneas Syluius, AEneas Syluius.
whom you call Pope Pius, whereas at the time when he wrote De gestis Concilij
Basiliensis, he was neither Pope, nor Pius, and out of Polydorus Vergilius
Polydorus Vergil.
the late Prebendarie of Poules in London (whom in the Chronicles you report
falsely) and last of al out of fabling Fabian Fabian.
the late Merchant of London, a man of small learning, and of as little
authority in these points, though a special favorer of your side, as it is
told, and therefore the readier to report untruth: I am sure men of mean
knowledge will little esteem, and I account it not worth the answering. Make the
best you can of it, thereby perhaps, or by some part of it, ye may prove, that
of Married men some were made Bishops, which as I have oftentimes told you,
we deny not: but that Bishops, or Priests were ever in any well ordered
Church permitted to marry, you shall never be hable to prove.

Now that you have laid your two Principles, as you call them, let us see how
substancially you defend your four points above mentioned. And first, that
it is lawful to marry after the Vow of Chastity, and after holy Orders taken,
show us by what learning, or authority ye prove it.

Jewel. First of al, his objection of Vows nothing touches the Clergy of
England. For it is known, and confessed, that the Priests of England were
never V^taries. Yet for further answer we grant, it is reason, and
convenient, that who so has made a Vow unto God, should keep his promise.
Cyril in Leuitic. Lib. 3.
Cyrillus says, Si castitatem promiserit, and seruar^ non poterit, pronunciet
peccatum suum. If he have promised,(...) vvovved Chastity, and can not keep
it: let him pronounce, and confess his Sin.


Harding.
How long will you go about the bush, as they say, when come you to the purpose?
These bye matters not touched in my Confutatio^, have made your book great,
but the same give evidence, that you put more trust in multitude of words,
then in substance of matter. If ye had the clear truth on your side, what
needed so many words? One plain sentence might have better served you. That
you wander not abroad, here once again I call you home, and require you to
leave your delays, and answer to the very point, or to confess your error.
Remember, my words of the Confutation be these. It is not lawful for them to
marry, Confutat. fol. 73. b.
which either have by deliberate vow dedicated al manner their chastity unto
God or have received holy Order."

Over against these my words, you have placed in the margent of your book,
this note with your star. Defense. page 163.
Untruths, two together, as better appears by the Answer. By which you
charge my saying with two Untruths. Of such notes your book has great
stoare. But God be thanked, the world sees, you are ryfer of vpbraidinges, and
sclaunders, then of substantial proufes. Now by your note you have bound your
self to show us, that it is lawful to marry after the Vow of Chastity,
likewise also after the holy Orders taken.

Before you came to prove either of these two points, you tell us, that the
Priests of England were never Votaries, that is to say, that they never made
Vow of single life, and chastity, whereby to bind them selves not to marry.
Never is a long day M. Jewel. Well, be it, as it is. If they be not Votaries,
they may marry say you. But answer directly to the point I pray you. M. Ievvel
full coldly makes that but reasonable, and convenient, that is necessary.
May they marry, who have vowed chastity? Say yea, or nay. We grant, say
you, it is reason, and convenient, that who so has made a Vow unto God,
should keep his promise. This is somewhat, though it be coldely spoken.

But yet you must come nearer unto the point. You speak generally, and
faintly. We speak not of a Vow, or promise in general. If a man make a
promise to an other man, it is reason, and convenient, that he keep it. But
how say you to the vow of chastity, deliberatly made, of man, or woman to
God? Is it in any wise necessary to perform it, or no? If it be necessary,
why speak ye so coldly, it is reason, and convenient? What mean you by your
reason and conuenience? Is it any more, but that if a Moncke, or a Friar feel
him self moved with lust, he shall by and by take a woman under pretense of
Wedlock, and so quench heat? that your Nonnes also, if they begin to be
wanton, shall take husbands, and so mortify the lusts of their flesh? For
making the perfourmance of the Vow but a matter of reason, and conuenience, ye
seem easily to dispense with their marriages in case of hot, and urgent
temptations. For so men are wont to dispense with that which seems reasonable
and convenient, when a greater reason seems to move them to the contrary.

But let us leave your saying to your own construction. The Fou^ders, and
chief masters of this new Gospel are judged unreasonable me^ by M. I. him
self.
By the same this much you grant at the least, that so many of your Gospel,
as have broken their Vow of Chastity, and have married, have don otherwise,
then was convenient, and agreeable to reason. Thus ye make the Founder of your
Religion Friar Luther, an unreasonable man. Such was Oecolampadius, such was
Bucer, such was Peter Martyr, such were in manner all the rest of your fleshly
Prelates, Teachers, Preachers, and Ministers, who being Religious by taking
Yokefelowes unto them, have broken their Vow and promise to God.

I can you thank M. Jewel for granting this much, althoughte it be too
little. Mary to your companions, I doubt not, it seems too much. And little
thank doubtelesse shall you have at their hands for it. For the breach of
their Vow being granted to be against reason, and a thing inconvenient, how
shall Gods people believe, their doctrine to be reasonable, and their lives to
be convenient? Sure I am that neither Luther him self, nor Bucer, nor Peter
Martyr, nor any of the rest, could ever be persuaded to acknowledge, and
confess so much. And were they now a live, they would be offended with you for
so saying. And how your good married brothers of England will like you for it, I
doubt, for as much at it is not for their profit, the people should
understand, that by your own confession, their Preachers, and spiritual
Governors (specially such as were professed in any Religion, for certain it
is that they be Votaries) by taking wives have done the thing, that is
inconvenient, and al together against reason. What a heinous crime it is to
contemn the vow of Chastity, and to break promise with God, it may be
declared in an other place. Here only we take that you confess your self,
that it is against reason, and not convenient.

As for the saying you allege out of the third book of Cyrillus in Leuiticum,
Forgerie.
it can serve you to no purpose, but to witness your forgerie, and falshoode.
For there is no such saying in that book. If any man be moved to break his
vow upon warrant of those words, you are gilty of the crime.

If the Priests of England be no Votaries, as you say, yet what say you to the
Priests of other countries? Is it lawful for them of Germany, France,
Italy, Spain, and of other lands, who have made the vow of chastity, to
marry? That it is not lawful, I have sufficiently proved in my Confutation.
For the Scriptures be plain, that a Vow made to God, is to be performed.
Neither willed I that which I said in my Confutation, to be understood of
your fellows of England only. How excuse you then your brethren of other
Countries, What has M. Ievvel to say in defense of the votaries marriages in
other lands besides England?
that first gave the onset, and adventured to set your Gospel a broche? What
say you for Luther, for Peter Martyr your own good friend and Master, and for
many such others, who were not only Priests, but also Religious men, and
feared not to yoke them selves in pretensed marriage unto Nonnes? If they did
wickedly therein, as no man living can excuse them, how is not your Gospel
builded upon an evil foundation? But this is too large a field at this
present, for us to walk in. I look still, when you will come to the point, that
requires your direct Answer.

As for the Priests of England, what moves you to say, they be no Votaries?
What privilege have they above al other Priests of Christendom, at least of
the Latin, That priests of England be Votaties.
and West Church? Who ever said it? Who ever wrote it? Where ever found you
it? Or if any where it be found (which I trow ye shall never be hable to show in
any authentical writer) what reason has the reporter for it? O say you, it is
known, and confessed. But your word M. Jewel is no Gospel. Your bare
affirmation is of small credit. If ye have no better proof for it, and ye will
do by my read, in case you be a Priest, be not over hasty to take a Yokefelow
yet, as your companions have don. For surely not withstanding your marvelous
knowledge, and bold confession, you are like to prove deceived. Mary if you be
no Priest, as I can not tell what to make of you, then go to it, and God send
you better luck, then some of your fellows have had.

For proof that Priests of England are Votaries, this is most certain, that
the Vow of Chastity is annexed unto holy Orders by statute of holy Church,
and that with most convenient reason the Church has ordained, The vovv of
chastity annexed unto holy Orders.
that al from a Bishop to a Subdeacon, shall vow Chastity. Which thing the
Grecians also admitted, though not universally. For although they marry not
after holy Orders received, yet they use matrimony before holy Orders
contracted. Wherefore there is no doubt, but every man that takes holy Orders,
be he of England, or of what country soever in the west Church, promises
co^tinencie, ipso facto, that is to say, by the very taking it self of Orders,
whether he express it in words, or hold his peace.

That the vow of Chastity is required at the taking of holy Orders, we have
these plain words of S. Gregory, The vow of Chastity required at the
taking of Subdeaconship.
by whose procurement our English nation was converted to the Faith, and at
whose hands the Church of England received al order and institution necessary
to Christian life: Nullum Subdiaconum facere praesumant Episcopi, nisi qui se
victurum cast promiserit. Let Bishops not presume to make any Subdeacon,
unless he promise to live in chastity. Justinian that Christian Emperor, who
lived within five hundred years after Christ, Grego. li. 1. epi. 42.
gave the like charge unto Bishops. Neither was it S. Gregory, that first made
this Decree, or statute. Novel. 123.
He did but command the ancient Order and Tradition of the Church to be
renewed, and more exactly to be kept, as certain others his after comers
Bishops of Rome did, when they saw the old discipline broken, and austeritie
of life in some part of the clergy slaked. The Fathers of the second Council
of Carthage, which was holden above eleven hundred years past, Council. Carthag.
2. Ca. 2. Leo epist. 92. ca. 3.
say expressly that these three Degrees, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are
annexed and tied unto chastity. S. Leo that learned Bishop of Rome writing to
Rusticus the Bishop of Narbon in France, says. Lex continentiae eadem est
Altaris ministris, quae episcopis atque presbyteris. Qui cum essent laici, sieve
lectores, licite and vxores ducere, and filios procreare potuerunt. Sed cum ad
praedictos peruenerunt gradus, coepit eis non licere, quod licuit. The
ministers of the Altar (that is to say Deacons, and Subdeacons) be bound to
the same law of continency, as Bishops, and Priests be. When they were
Laiemen, or Readers, it was lawful for them both to marry wives, and to begete
children. But after they came to the foresaid degrees, what before was to them
lawful, began now to be unlawful.

Distin. 31. Quoniam.
Whereas the Fathers of the sixth General Council holden in Constantinople do
agnise and confess (as Gratian reherseth out of Iuo Carnotensis) that it is
commanded by the Roman Canon, that they who took the holy order of
Deaconship, or Priesthod, should profess and promise to company no more with
their own wives, which they had married before they came to take orders*
thereof it is undoubtedly concluded, that, if any came single to those holy
orders, they were, as they might be with more right required afterward never to
marry.

Chastity promised at the raking of holy Orders also in the ancient Greek
Church Council. Neocaesar. Cap. 1.
Neither was it the custom of the Latin Church only, that who so ever took
holy orders, should promise chastity: but also of the Greek Church, and that
before the first Council of Nice. The Fathers of the ancient Council of
Neocaesaria now called Trapezus, Trapezonda in vulgar language, whereat S.
Basile, and S. Gregory Nazianzen were present, decreed, presbyterum si vxorem
duxerit, ab ordine suo deponi debere, that a priest should be deposed from his
order, if he married a wife.

In the old council of Ancyra we find this decreed concering Deacons.
Quicunque Diaconi tacuerunt, Council. Ancyran. cap. 10.
and susceperunt manus impositionem, professi continentiam, si postea ad
nuptias venerini, a ministerio cessare debebu^t. What Deacons so ever held
their peace (when they took orders) and received the laying on of the Bishops
hand, so having made their profession of continency, if afterward they come
to marry, they ought to cease from the ministry.

The Fathers of the council of Gangra, Council. Gangren. in fine.
in the end of their decrees concluded with these words. Haec au^t
scripsimus, non, qui in Ecclesia Dei secundu^ Scripturas sanctu^ propositu^
Continentiae eligunt, vituperantes, sed eos qui abutuntur proposito in
superbiam, and extolluntur aduersus simpliciores, abscindimus, etc. We have
written these things, not reproving them, which in the Church of God according
unto the scriptures do choose the holy Vow or purpose of continency, but we
cut of (by excommunication) those that abuse such purpose to pride, and
becomme haulte and lofty against the simple.

The Counsel of Laodicea speaking of Priests, Deaco^s, Council. Laodice^s. cap.
24.
and others, that have given them selves over to live in the holy ministratio^,
says, no^ oportere eos, qui in proposito contine^tia sunt, tabernas intrare,
that they who have purposed to keep Chastity, may not be haunters of Tauernes.

Origin, Origin. in Numer. homil. 23.
whom I may well allege for a witness of the Church of his time, says, that
none may offer the continual Sacrifice, but such only as have vowed continual
Chastity.

The ancient Fathers of the Church, who ordained the vow of Chastity to be
made by them that would be admitted to holy Orders, were moved thereto partly
by the holy Ghost author of al pureness, partly by the devotion of them
selves that came to the holy ministry, partly also by the Tradition of the
Apostles, who touching chastity of ministers made this Decree. Exijs qui
coelibes in Clerum peruenerunt, iubemus, vt lectores tantu^, and cantores,
Canonum. Apost. can. 25.
si velint, nuptias contrahant. Of them that have comme to the clergy single,
we command that the Readers, and singing men marry, if they will, and none
else.

Some of our married Priests of England will here perhaps say unto me. Sir,
when I was made Priest, I made no vow, Vovv of Chastity made in fact, though
no words be spoken.
nor promised at al to live the single life: For I said nothing to the bishop
that laid hands upon me, and he required no such thing of me. How am I then a
Votarie? And why may I not marry? To whom I answer, you took this charge upon
you, before you came to be made Priest, when you took Subdeaconship. For that
is the first among the holy Orders. Unto which for so much as the vow of
Chastity by common Tradition, by special statute and ordinance of the Church,
is annexed, in taking that Order, you hounde your self ipso facto, that is to
say, Promises other, and Grauntes, made in deed without word.
in fact it self, to that condition, which thereto belongs. For Vows,
Promises, Oaths, Grauntes, and such other the like, may be made, and professed
by fact and deed, though words of vowing, promising, swearing, or granting
be not expressed. Many a man that marries a wife, does not tell her before, or
at the time of marriage with express words, that he will love her, cherish
her, keep, defend, and maintain her, render wedlock duty unto her, etc:
Yet in that he marries her, al these he is bound to perform, as being
understood to be contained in the condition of marriage, and has promised no
less by taking her to wife. And if being required of the wise to render these
duties unto her, he refuse, and say, nay wife, thou shall pardon me, I never
made thee promise to do this much for thee: may not she say again, why
husband, you have married me, and that is promise enough?

The party that takes an Oath, commonly says nothing, but by laying his
hand upon a book, and by kissing the book, or, as the custom is in some
countries, by holding up his two forefingers, gives his consent, and
protests to do that is included in the condition of the oath. Some time
men give consent to a thing, not by speaking ought at al, but by going unto a
side: which of the old Romans was termed, pedibus ire in sententia^.

The Soldier Soldier.
by taking his badge, and yelding his name to be booked, which is a deed,
though he speak nothing, promises, and so far forth binds him self, to
obey his Captain, and to abide the fortune of war. The Gentiles in old time,
that received Circuncisio^, who were called, Proselyti, Proselyti.
by that very fact, made Vow and protestation, to perform what Moses law
required, though they said nothing. And many a Christian man in the time, when
the faith was persecuted by heathen Tyra^tes, made promise, and profession of
Idolatry, Thurificati.
only by casting a little frankencense into the Fire, when they uttered no
words of Idolatry at al. Many other such examples might here easily be
rehearsed, by which it is declared, that a man in some cases voweth, promises,
and professes a thing, good or evil, in act and deed, where words of Vow,
promise, or profession be not spoken. And to this sense the common English
proverb (if it may be applied to so sad a matter) leads us: As good is a
beck, as a Dieu guard, whereby is meant a consent, Vovv of Chastity made in
silence. Council. Ancyran. cap. 10.
given by deed without word.

But what need I to prove this by examples? The plain text of the tenth
Cano^ of the most ancient Counsel of Ancyra above rehearsed, puts this
matter out of doubt. Where it is said of Deacons, that if, when they received
the Bishops laying on of hand upon them, they required not license to marry,
but held their peace, thereby ( professi continentia^ be the words of the
Council) having vowed, promised, or professed to continue in Chastity: in case
afterward they married, they should give over the holy ministry. Lo there by
taking the holy order only, without words of a Vow expressed, the promise and
Vow of Chastity is by those learned Fathers pronounced to be made. Neither is
the party, that after holy Orders taken marries, excused by that he cease
from the ministry. The cessation from the ministry, is a pounishement in
the court of man: there remains to such a one an other pounishme^t in the
court of God, for his breach of promise. Thus it is clear, that the Priests
of England were Votaries, as well as other Priests of the Latin Church be,
which M. Jewel only upon warrant of his own authority denies.

Since then it is so Reader, that M. Jewel keeps him self a luffe of, and will
not come to the point, wherein the controversy lies, not being hable in deed
to justify the marriage of them that have taken holy Orders, or otherwise have
made Vow of Chastity: I think it good here briefly to rehearse the sum of
his allegatio^s, wherewith he has blotted so much paper about this matter. The
sum of M. Jewels allegations for proof of priests marriages


Having denied the Priests of England to be Votaries, he brings in sayings
of Fathers, reporting that Virginity is a hard thing, and that it is not in
our choice, but the mere gift of God. Which thing as it makes nothing to the
present purpose, so I grant to be true. We ought not to choose that state of
life, but upon good trial of our selves. But when we have taken that yoke upon
us, it behooves us to pray for the assistance of Gods grace, and to use al
such good means, by which we may atteine help toward the perfourmance of
our promise.

Then he allegeth other sayings counseling those, that either can not, or will
not keep Chastity, to take the remedy, that God has ordained, that is to
say, to marry. Which counsel is understood to be given unto them, that have
made no Vow at al to the contrary.

After this he brings in certain testimonies speaking in favor (as they
seem) of marriage after a Vow of Chastity, taken out of S. Cyprian, S.
Augustine, Epiphanius, S. Hierome. In all which places those holy Fathers are to
be understood to speak of them, that have made a secret or simple Vow, as
they term it, and not a Solemn Vow. Neither do they allow such marriages
simply, Bonifac. 8. in c. vnico. de voto. in 6. The determination of the
Church, in what case of a Vow made marriage holds, in what case it
holds not. For what reason marriage holds in the case of a Simple Vovv,
otherwise in the case of a Solemn Vow.
but in comparison of a worse iniquity. The matrimony of such, is not to be
dissolved, yet is the breach of their promise a mortal sin. Now so it is by
determination of the Church, that a Solemn Vow is made at the profession of
any approved Religion, and at the taking of holy Orders, and by whom such Vow
is made, they may not go back to marriage, neither if they marry, does that
marriage hold, but is taken for none. In the case of a simple Vow, marriage
stands for good, and may not be dissolved, albeit the party who Vowed, and
promised the contrary, by contracting marriage, as I said sins mortally.

The reason hereof is this. In a Simple Vow there is made but a bare Promise,
and the dominion of the thing which is promised, remains still with him that
promises. But in a Solemn Vow, there is not only a promise, but also a
delivery made of the thing that is promised, as much to say, of him self, and
so there is also an acceptance, and a possession to the interest of Christ
taken of the Churches part. This is the difference betwixt both. And it is a
thing natural, and apperteining to the law of al nations, that a bare promise
be of less efficacy, then the exhibitio^, surrendre, and delivery of
Possession of the thing that is promised. He that has promised one a house, or
a portion of Land, has not yet taken away from him self the dominion of the
thing. Wherefore if afterward he make delivery of it to an other, the
delivery shall stand for good. Yet to the other he is bound to make
recompense, which commonly is judged to be the valor of the thing promised.
And he that has now delivered unto an other a house, or Land, has altogether
deprived him self of the dominion thereof, neither can he now give it to an
other, as being an others thing.

The case is like in the Vow of Chastity, which is a certain co^tracte
between man and God. And reason it is, that what we acknowledge ourselves bound
to perform unto man in a worldly contract, we be bound to perform no less
unto God in this spiritual co^tracte. The bare promise made to God differs
much from the exhibiting: and therefore if after a simple Vow of Chastity,
which consists in promise only, a man deliver his body to another, which
thing is done by Matrimony: the delivery stands firm and good. But if he
give up also his own body to keep chastity unto God, and by entering into
some Religion, or by taking Orders: now he can not dispose of it otherwise, as
not being in his dominion, neither if he attempt it, shall it stand for good.
This much touching the diversity of a Simple, and Solemn Vow, I thought
necessary to be said in this place.

This much being weighed, and considered, it must appear certain, that the
places, which M. Jewel allegeth out of S. Augustine, affirming the marriages of
such as marry after the Vow of chastity, to be true marriages, and to be such,
as may not be dissolved: are truly understood of marriages contracted in the
case of a Simple Vow, and not of a Solemn Vow. Howsoever a man, or a woman
make a Vow to live the single life, chaste and continent, and do not solemnize
the same, either by entering into some Religion, or by taking holy Orders: if
not withstanding the Vow they presume to marry, the marriage holds. But if
they marry after they have solemnized their Vow by entering into Religion, or
by taking holy Orders: the marriage is none at al, M. Dorman defended against
M. Ievvel. Defense page 169. Dorman in his first book, fo 16. b.
and therefore is to be dissolved, because they have made delivery of them
selves before the Church into the hands of their Superiors, and be not in
state now to dispose of their persons or bodies otherwise, as being delivered
up to custody of perpetual chastity.

Hereof it appears, how little cause you had M. Jewel to reprove M. Dorman,
for calling the mainteiners of marriage in this case, the Devils ministers. In
this case I say, for he speaks expressly of Priests. And therefore you may
consider, how well it became you to say that by the iudgdment of our late
Louanian Clergy, S. Augustine is become the minister of the Devil, for these
be the terms of your seemly eloquence. Here therefore I return upon you M.
Jewel those words, which without cause, you imagine S. Augustine to say unto
me. Ye speak fondly, and unadvisedly, and understand not what ye speak.

Here to return to M. Jewels order, among other things, M. Ievvel charge
the holy Fathers with oversight for zele and heat.
for answer unto certain places of the Fathers, calling such kind of
marriage, worse then Aduoutrie, Inceste, and Sacrilege: he says, that such
words have proceeded more of zele, and heat of mind, then of profound
consideration, and judgment of the cause. And so in effect he rejects the
holy and ancient Fathers, as men unworthy of credit. But o Lord, what
Fathers? Verily the chief, and best learned, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Basil,
S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine. Ah good Sir, lacked these learned and holy
Fathers consideration and judgment, and do you acknowledge it in your self,
and your companions? O men of deep consideration, and great judgment, that
could so easily provide them selves of women to give the bridle unto lust!

Among al other things that he brings in defense of his Companions unlawful
marriage, this is the fardest from reason, and has least color of learning,
that by his doctrine the vow of Chastity is to be broken, and that al Monckes,
Friars, Priests, and Nonnes, may lawfully marry, because il promises, filthy
Vows, and wicked Oaths ought not to be kept. For proof that il Vows are to
be broken, he allegeth Isidorus out of Gratian saying, 22. quaest. 4. In malis.
In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi vot^ muta decretum. Quod incaute
vouisti, ne facias, impia est promissio, quae scelere impletur. In an il
promise break thy faith. In a filthy Vow, change thy purpose. What thou have
unawarely vowed, do it not. It is a wicked promise, that is fulfilled with
mischief. Marc. 6. Act. 23. 22. quaest. 4. Inter caetera.


Again he says, It is not sufficient to say, I have vowed. Herod vowed John
Baptistes head. The Jews vowed S. Paul's death. Hubaldus made a vow that he
would never help his own mother, or brethren, were there need never so
great. He allegeth also the 8. Council of Toledo. Where it was declared, and
decreed, that wicked vows ought not to be made, and if they were made, that in
any wise they should not be performed. Where for example the vow of Herod is
mentioned, Iudic. 11.
and that of Iephte, who through his vow thought him self bound to sacrifice
his daughter.

But what relief brings all this unto his cause, unless he be hable to
prove, that Chastity is an il, and a wicked thing, as the murdering of S. John
Baptist, and of S. Paul, and as the sacrificing of Iephtes daughter was? But
how excellent a thing chastity is, and how acceptable it is unto God, and of
how much more merit it is then matrimony, both Christ him self in the
Gospel, and S. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians do partly teach us,
Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
and the holy Fathers in manner al have most largely declared, specially S.
Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, who have written special
Treaties of Virginity, Iouinians heresy.
and S. Hierom, and S. Augustine disputing most learnedly against Iouinian,
that held opinion, Marriage and Virginity to be of equal merit, to whose
Heresy our fleshly Gospellers bear special favor, and maintenance.

As for the eight Council of Toledo, I marvel, how he durst be so bold,
Council. To letan. 8. Cap. 7. in Epitom. Married Priests of old times called
Apostates.
as to allege it, which makes so little for him touching the breach of a Godly
Vow, and so much against him, touching the marriage of them, that have taken
holy Orders. For the words of the Council be these. Si vero ad coniugia,
moresque seculi redire attentauerint, omni Ecclesiastica dignitate priuentur,
and Apostatae habeantur, and in monasterio donec vixerint, sub poenitentia
retrudantur. In case they give the attempt to return unto marriages, and unto
the manners of the world, let them be deprived of al Ecclesiastical dignity,
and reputed for Apostates: And let them be shut up in a Monastery to do
penance, so long as they live. By this M. Jewel may see, by what men his
married Brethren were called Apostates, and by how many hundred years, before
he and I were borne. I trust he will bear the more with me, if I happen to call
them by that their ancient name some times.

Concerning that you pretend to allege out of one Alphonsus de Castro,
Philippica. 19. whom you say to be one of M. Hardinges greatest Doctors: in
good sooth he is no whit a greater Doctor of mine, Alphonsus de Castro alleged
by M. Ievvel instead of Alphonsus Viruesius Episcopus Canarie^.
then is the man in the Moon. For in deed there is none of that name, that
ever wrote Philippicas. It is one Alphonsus Viruesius M. Jewel, a learned man
of this present age, Bishop of Canaria, who writing against Philip Melanchthon,
called his Orations, or Treaties, Philippicas, after the imitation of
Demosthenes, who so named those most eloquent Orations, that he made against
King Philip of Macedonia the great Alexanders Father. A like error to that you
reprove me of so often, and so bitterly, by oversight naming Iosue, for the
Prophet Osee. Thus you see your self not clear of the fault, you charge me
so much withal. Neither is this your only oversight of that sort.

Howbeit that I alleged out of Osee under the name of Iosue, makes clearly
with me: and this you allege out of Bishop Viruesius under the name of the
Obseruant Friar Alphonsus de Castro, makes quite against you, Viruesius
Philippica 19.
and your Brethren. For this is that Viruesius writes. If a man have vowed
(says he) and can not contain, and having assaid al means, yet prevails
not: in this case I would advise him, to provide for his safety by Marriage,
not doing it of his own head but by the authority of the Pope. Thus he. In
which words he gives but his private advise, referring the party so standing
in danger, unto the Pope for dispensation of his Vow. Your Brethren on the
other side, notwithstanding their solemn Vow, as being, some, Religious
persons, some Priests, run hedlong to Marriage, as they call it, having
assaied few due means or none at al for the obteining of Chastity, never
calling better men then them selves to counsel, nor sticking for any
dispensation for their Vow to be had at al. To say the least of both: his
advise is sober, and leans to Obedience: these men seem to play the
merchants venturers, their doing is rash comtemptuous, and altogether
disobedient.

But how farreforth this advise of Viruesius is to be allowed, whether the case
be to be admitted, that by Prayers, fasting, by straight discipline, and
chastisment of the flesh, by any asking, seking, knocking, nor by any means, a
man having deliberatly, and devoutly made a Vow of continency, with intent
the more expeditely and purely to serve God, can not obtain at his mercy the
necessary gift of continency, and whether, if through frailty, and
negligence perhaps he fall, he shall not repent, and study how to amend that he
has done amiss, and continually fight against temptations, but straight way
take a woman, and marry, and how safe it is for a man in this case to sue unto
the Pope for a dispensation of his Vow: and whether when he has married, he
be sure to be delivered from al temptations of incontinencie: these points I
will not take upon me here to determine, but leave them to the consideration of
their consciences, that be learned in these cases, Now M. Jew. comes to the
point at length.
and have the true fear of God.

At length M. Jewel comes unto that point, which he should have answered long
before. At length I say, because after that he has filled five leaves of Paper
with diverse sayings of the Doctors gathered out of his Notebookes, and heaped
together to little other purpose, then to show of a great book. Now then thou
shall here see good Reader, how substantially he proves it to be lawful for
Priests to marry, and that the Marriage of Priests has been accounted
lawful. As concerning Monckes, and Friars, and Nonnes, that have taken the
veil of their profession, they must defend their Marriages, or rather
yokinges, as well as they can them selves: for this man has nothing to say in
their defense. If he had, out it should, to help to make up the heap, neither
could he be spareful of it, favoring the cause so much as he does. That then
being leaft as a desperate cause, let us see, what good stuff he brings for
the Marriages of Priests.

Jewel. M. Harding vnvvares falls into the same Negative Divinity, that h^s^
often, and so much abhors. For thus he says, we deny utterly, that any
man, after that he has received holy Orders, may marry.

Neither can it be shevved, that the Marriage of such was ever accounted
lavvful in the Catholic Church. If this tale be true, then be all the Greek
Priests Votaries, as well as the Latins. Distinct. 31. Quoniam. in Margin.
But it is noted upon the Decrees, Graeci continentiam non promittunt, vel
tacit, vel express. The Greeks make no promise of continent, or Single life,
neither secretly, nor expressly.


Harding.
If you take them to be Votaries, In what sense are the Greek Priests
Votaries.
that make a Vow never to marry for time to come, so are the Greeeke Priests
Votaries by law of the Greek Church, as well as the Latins. but if you
account them to be Votaries, that Vow utterly to abstain from the use of a
woman, whether they had wives before they took holy Orders, or otherwise: in
this sense the Greeks are not ne have not ben Votaries generally, that is to
say, in all places and at al times, as the Latins were, and yet be, as among
whom more austeritie of life has always ben used. M. Jewels chief authority
is a marginal note upon the Gloss.
So that in this respect your Argument is naught, and concludes not. As for
your marginal note, it is besides the text, and therefore of small authority.
It is a sign, ye lack good evidence for this matter, fith that for proof of
it, ye are driven to serve your self of such weak stuff. Albeit the same
note is thus to be understood, that they of the East Church, what time they
were promoted to holy Orders, made no promise to abstain from the company of
their lawful wives, unto whom they were married, before they took such
Orders. And so much you might have found in the text, Distinct. 31. Quoniam.
being a Decree of the sixth synod, that you needed not to have scraped help
out of the books margent. Now show us your better stuff. For this is little
worth.

Jewel. Council. Ancyran. cap. 9.
In the Council holden at Ancyra, it is concluded thus, Diaconi quicunque
ordinantur, si in ipsa Ordinatione protestati sunt, and dixerunt velle se
Coniugio copulari, quia sic manner non possunt, Hi si postmodum vxores
duxerint, in Ministerio maneant, propterea quod Episcopus illis licentiam
dederit. Deacons as many as be ordered, if at the time of receiving Orders,
they made protestation, and said that they would marry for that they find
not them selves hable so to continue without Marriage, if they afterward
marry, let them continue in Ministry, for as much as the Bishop has given
them license. M. Harding, I trow, vvil not deny, but Deaconship is one of the
holy Orders.


Harding.
Answer unto the Canon of the Counsel of Ancyra.
This proves not, that Deacons did marry: nor that any Bishop ever gave them
license to marry, but only, that if they would marry, the Bishops license
thereto obtained, they should not be removed from the ministry. Whether any
with license married or no, you are not yet hable to show. And whereas no
deacon might marry, but such as had made protestation that he would marry,
before he took holy Orders, and had obtained leave of the Bishop so to do: by
this we understand, that for a Deacon to marry, simply to speak, and of it
self, it was unlawful. For otherwise what needed protestation, leave and
license? What so ever is lawful, may be done without protestation or license,
and what may not be done but with protestation and license, the same of it
self is unlawful. And so my saying by this testimony is confirmed, it is not
confuted.

Again it is to be considered, that by this Council, a Deacons Marriage was
not made first allowable after that he was promoted to the Order of
Deaconship, but before he received that holy Order. For if he made no
protestation that he would marry, and asked no license thereto, but held his
peace: by the words that follow in the same Canon, it is clear, that he bound
himself to perpetual continency, and might never marry afterward, as he
that had by taking that Order, professed, and promised chastity. Those words
are these, which you should have rehearsed, had you dealt truly and uprightly.
Quicunque Diaconi tacuerunt, etc. Council. Ancyran. cap. 10.
What Deacons so ever held their peace (when they took Orders) and received
the laying on of the Bisshoppes hand, so having made their profession of
continency, if afterward they come to marry, they shall be bound to cease
from the ministry. The case of our Apostates is not like unto this case.
He that made his Protestation that he would marry, and that for necessity,
and had license of the Bishop: when he married in deed, was suffered to
remain in the Ministry, as they that were admitted unto holy Orders with
wedlock. For he seemed already in heart and affecte, a married man. And such
that Prouincial Council did bear withal, when for lack of other worthy men,
the more part yet remaining in infidelity, the Bishops were compelled to
admit to the Ministry of the Church married men. Your brethren can not
claim by this example. For they never made any such protestation, when they
were ordered, neither demanded they ever any such license of their Bishops,
but each, as they felt them selves moved with the spirit of lust, upon
warrant of your Gospel, and their own spirit, went lustily to their yoke
fellows, and under pretense of Marriage concluded a lusty bargain. If ye have
no better stuff then this, for the marriage of the Apostates your companions,
well you may receive your fee of them, verily it is not yet sufficiently
defended.

Jewel. So says Pope Steuin, Did. 31. Aliter.
Graecorum Sacerdotes, Diaconi, aut Subdiaconi Matrimonio copulantur: The
Greek Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons are coupled in Matrimony. Glos. did.
31. Aliter.
Upon which words the Gloss notes thus, Multi ex hac litera dixerunt, quod
Orientales possunt contrahere in Sacris Ordinibus. Many have said upon occasion
of this text, that the Priests of the East Church (contrary to that M.
Harding so certainly here assures us) may marry, being within holy Orders.


Harding.
Diversity between the East, and west Church touching liberty of Clerks
marriages
Had you rehearsed the whole Decree, as you found it, you had marred your cause,
and played a simple Proctour. Your married brethren therefore do commend your
police, I doubt not, who see their marriage condemned by that Decree of Pope
Steven* The whole is this. Aliter se Orientalium traditio haebet Ecclesiarum,
aliter huius Sancta Romanae Ecclesiae. Na^ earum Sacerdotes, Diacons, aut
Subdiaceni Matrimonio copula^tur. Istius autem Ecclesiae, vel Occidentalium
nullus Sacerdotum a Subdiacon^ vsque ad Episcopum licentiam habet coniugium
sortiendi. The Tradition of the East Churches, is otherwise, then is the
tradition of this holy Roman Church. For their Priests, Deacons, or
Subdeacons are coupled in matrimony* but there is never a Priest of this
Church, or of the weast parts, that from a Subdeacon to a Bishop has license
to marry.

By this Decree it is evident, that so many as from a Subdeacon to a Bishop do
marry in these weast parts, do contrary to the Tradition and order of the
Church. And whereas you allege the Gloss for you, you make all that be hable to
read the place, witnesses of your impude^cie. For it makes altogether against
you. First whereas the Decree has, Matrimonio copulantur, as much to say, the
Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons of the East Church are coupled in Matrimony,
the Gloss expounds it thus, and that truly, id est, copulato viu^tur, that is
to say, they use Matrimony, wherein they were coupled before they took
orders. As for the other words of the Gloss, Multi ex hac litera dixeru^t,
etc. Many upon occasion of this text have said, that they of the East Chucrh
may marry within holy Orders: it is not the mind of the Gloss, but a some
say, as I may term it, and a fancy of certain, whom the author of the Gloss
there confuteth, with these words immediately following, which by your common
sleight of falsifying, you nipte away from the end of the sentence. Sed eis
obstat infra Distinctio proxima, Si quis eoru^. etc. But the next distinction
that follows, whose beginning is, Si quis eoru^, is contrary to their opinion.
Distin. 32. Si quis eorum.
That next Distinction taken out of the sixth Council has thus. Si quis eoru^
qui ad Cleru^ accedu^t, voluerit nuptiali iure mulieri copulari: hoc ante
ordinatione^ Subdiaconatus faciat. If any of them that come unto the Clergy,
be willing to couple with a woman in right of Marriage: let him do it, before
he be made Subdeacon. Upon that place the Gloss says thus, whereunto it made
relation in the former Distinction: Istud caput euide^ter est co^tra illos qui
dicu^t, quod Graci possunt co^trahere in sacris ordinibus. This Chapter is
evidently against them, which say, that the Greeks may marry, being within
holy Orders. Lo M. Jewel, what have you gained by the Gloss? he that examineth
your books, specially that of your late pretensed Defense, will say with me,
there was never such a false Gloser, as you are, by abusing al other writers
that you allege, but specially the poor Gloss upon Gratian.

Jewel. Of the Priests of the west Church Cardinal Caietane says, Papa
potest dispensare cum Sacerdote Occidentalis Ecclesiae, Catharinus contra
errores Caietani, errore. 103.
vt vxorem ducat, nulla existe^te causa publicae vtilitatis. The Pope may
dispense with a Priest of the west Church to marry a wife, although there
be no manner cause of common profit.


Harding.
It goes hard with you M. Jewel, when you have no better testimonies for the
Marriage of Priests, then the Objections which the Gloss makes to him self,
and the error of Caietaine, at least which Catharinus notes for an error.
But to whom will you stick? To Catharinus? or to Caietanus? If to Catharinus,
then Caietane helps your cause nothing at al. Caietan. in Opusc. lib. 5.
tractatu. 27.
For of Catharinus it is condemned for an error. If you stick to Caietane,
then you disannul Catharinus, who is your author. For else you must tell us,
where Caietane says so, and upon what grounds he says so.

whether the Pope may dispense with a Priest, or religious person to marry
in a case.
Touching the Question, whether the Pope may in a case dispense with a Priest of
the West Church, or a religious man to marry a wife, or no, here I dispute
not. I confess, the Single state of the Clergy, not to be Iuris Diuini
expressly, but Iuris Ecclesiastici positiui. And to say, that the Pope may in
no case at al dispense with a Priest of the West Church, or with a religious
person to marry, it is against the Divines, against the Canonistes, and
against the authority, Raymeri^ made king of Arago^ of a Monk and married by
dispensation. See the history of Franciscus Tarapha.
which the Church of Rome has in some cases used de facto, as they speak, as
it is known by the example of Raymeris the king of Aragon in Spain, with whom
about the year of our Lord, 1160. the Pope dispensed, yea he compelled him, as
we read, to give over the Profession of his Religion, and to marry (which is
more, then to dispense with a secular Priest) for saving of Christian blood,
and for the necessary disposition of that kingdom. The like example happened in
the kingdom of Pole. Casimirus the only that remained a live of the kings
blood, Munster. Cosmographiae, lib. 3. in Schlesia. and lib. 4. in Polonia
Mart. Cromerus.
being a Moonke and a Deacon, by suit of the Nobles of that realm,
Dispensation of the Pope obtained, was taken out of his monastery of the Order
of Cisterce, made King of Pole, and married. But such a singular case makes
no common rule. Again where a thing is not done, but by special dispensation,
the dispensation it self argues the same of it self, that is to say,
considered without dispensation, to be unlawful. Therefore my Assertion, that
no man may marry after holy Orders received, and that such Marriage was never
accounted lawful in the Catholic Church, stands true, as before.

Jewel. Athanasius says, Athanas. ad Dracontium.
Multi quoque ex Episcopis matrimonia non inierunt: Monachi contra Parents
liberorum facti sunt. Many of the Bisshoppes (he says not al, but many) have
not married. By which words he gives us to understand, that some have
married) contrarievvise, Monks have becomme fathers of Children.


Harding.
This testimony is bodged with your forged Parentheses. Whereby you signify,
that of it self, and without addition of your own words, it helps you
little. Al stands upon trial of the translation. If you could have alleged S.
Athanasius own words, as he wrote in Greek, a right answer might soon be
made. The translatour little thinking of their sleightes, that be Proctours for
the Marriages of Votaries, had rather having respect to the finenesse of the
Latin, so to turn it, then otherwise. If the place were thus latined, Multi
ex Episcopis matrimonia non inierant, or, non habuerunt, Monachi contra
parents liberoru^ extiterunt, whereby is signified, that many Bishops had
never contracted Marriages, and that some Monks had been fathers of children,
if the place had thus benne turned, as I suppose the Greek has: it would have
served you to no purpose. For I grant you, that some bishops have had wives,
but before they were made Bishops, as Spiridion, S. Gregory Nazianzenes
father, and Gregory of Nyssa S. Basils brother, and that some Monks were
fathers of children, which they begote in lawful wedlock, before they entered
into that profession, and order of life.

Albeit, if we allowed you this translation for good and true according to the
Greek, yet of these words you can not conclude, that by judgment of S.
Athanasius the Marriages of bishops are accounted lawful. by the circumstance
of the place in that Epistle to Dracontius, S. Athanasius may seem to speak
those words in dispraise of certain Bishops, and Monks, and not at al in
their commendation, and so you ought not to allege it for an allowed example.
But hereof we shall be more assured, if they of Basile will set forth that
Fathers works in Greek.

Jewel. Page 176. Cassiodorus vvriteth thus. Cassio. li. 6. cap. 14
In illo tempore ferunt Martyrio vitam finisse Eupsychium Caesariensem
(Episcopum) ducta nuper vxore: dum adhuc quasi sponsus esse videretur. At that
time they say, Eupsychius the Bishop of Caesaria died in Martyrdom, having
married a wise a little before, being as yet in manner a new married man.


Harding.
A man would think, if this will not serve the turn, that nothing will serve. A
blessed man Eupsychius, bishop of Caesaria, a holy Martyr, married to a wise
but a little before his Martyrdom. The writer of the Story Cassiodorus, a
noble man, and grave Senator of Rome, a man of good credit. What can a man
desire more? But phy upon such shameless falsifiers. O lamentable state, A
falshod in excusable, and in tolerable of M. Jew.
where the people of God be compelled to hear such false Prophets. What will
he fear to speak in pulpite, where he is sure no man shall control him, that
is not ashamed, thus to write in books openly published unto the world, which
he knew should not escape the examination of his Adversaries?

The truth is good Reader, Neither Cassiodorus wrote thus, nor Eupsychius was
ever Bishop of Caesaria, nor of any other place, nor so much as a Priest,
Deacon, or Subdeacon. The writer of the Story which we have of this blessed
Martyr Eupsychius, is Sozomenus the Greek. Who with the Ecclesiastical Story
of Socrates, and Theodoritus, was translated into Latin by one Epiphanius
Scholasticus. out of which three Cassiodorus gathered the Abridgeme^t that we
have under the name of the Tripartite history. Histor. Tripartit. lib. 6. c. 14
The place truly reported has these words. In illo tempore ferunt vitam
finisse Martyrio Basilium Ecclesiae Ancyranae Presbyterum, and Eupsychium
Caesariensem Cappadociae ducta nuper vxore, cum adhuc quasi Sponsus esse
videretur. They say, that at that time Basilius a Priest of the Church of
Ancyra ended his life in Martyrdom: Also Eupsychius the Caesarian of
Cappadocia, having married a wife a little before, and when as yet he seemed to
be but a new married man.

Here is no mention made, that Eupsychius was the bishop of Caesaria. The
story, as we have it in Latin of Epiphanius turning, calls him only
Eupsychium Caesariensem Cappadociae, that is to say, Eupsychius a man of
Caesaria, that is in Cappadocia: which is added to signify of which Caesaria
he was, for that there was an other famous City of that name in Palestina, an
other likewise in Mauritania, and others more in other countries. Sozomenus him
self, who is the author of the Story, adds a word more, signifying of
what estate and condition he was, whereby the opinion of his being the Bishop
of Caesaria, is quite taken away. For thus he reports of him in the Greek,
Sozomen. lib. 5. c. 11
(...), i. Eupsychiu^ Caesariensem Cappadociae Patriciu^, as much to say,
Eupsychius of Caesaria in Cappadocia, a nobleman, or, one of the Lords of the
City. Thus is Eupsychius, whom M. Jewel has made a Bishop (as much as he is
him self) found to be a Lay gentleman, or noble man of the City of
Caesaria. And whereas he married a wife, but a little before his Martyrdom,
what is that to the purpose for proof that it was in old time lawful for
Priests to marry? Because M. Jewel knew this much rightwel, contrary to the
custom he uses at other times, he dissembled the greek Original, and thought
he might better father this shameful lie upon Cassiodorus, meaning the latin
Translation of Epiphanius. And to help the matter, An impudent falsifying.
he stickte not to put in this word (Episcopum) Bishop of his own, and so
calls him boldly, Eupsychius the Bishop of Caesaria. Let these men have
leave thus to corrupt and falsify the Fathers, and by them they shall be hable
to prove, what they list.

M. Jewel stands so much in his own conceit for the example of this
Eupsychius, Nicephorus belyed by M. Jew. Defense. page 514.
that for proof of this very matter he brings it in again in an other
place, in his pretensed Defense of his Apology. But there he allegeth it out
of Nicephorus. His words be these. Nicephorus says, that Eupsychius, being a
Priest at Caesaria in Cappadocia, married a wife a little before that he was
martyred.

Now let us hear Nicephorus tell his own tale. Nicephorus. lib. 1^ cap. 20.
Thus he says in like sort as Sozomenus said before him. Hoc ipso tempore and
Basilius Ancyranae Ecclesiae Praesbyter, martyrio est defunctus: atque item
Caesariensis Eupsychius Cappadox, veteri familia, locoque claro natus. At the
very same time Basilius a Priest of the Church of Ancyra, died a martyr. Even
so likewise did Eupsychius the Caesarian of Cappadocia, borne of an ancient
house, and of noble pare^tage. Thus has M. Jewel belied and falsified, both
Sozomenus, and his translator, and also Nicephorus. Let us see, what
substantial witness he brings for legitimation of his Priests Marriage, in
the last place. Did. 84. Cum in praeterit^ in Glossa.


Jewel. Likewise M. Harding might have found it noted in his own Gloss,


M. Ie^el says of my (...) seems* that than he (...) Nicepherus sp^king of
the two Apollinar^s, Father, and Son, both heretics, Apollinaris the elder
not married, after he was made Priest.
says, P^ter Presbyters, filius Lect^ris ordine^^ti^ebat, the Father obtained
the Order of a Priest, the son of a P^^^der. Of this it seems not, that the
father was married, after th^^ he obtained to be a Priest, but rather
contrariwise, that he was married before he was Priest. For Ni^^ph^r^^ says,
the father obtained to be a Priest, whereby he seems to signify (if we may
say, what seems to us) that he was a father before he was made Priest, and
not first a Priest, and afterward married, and so made a father.

But perhaps M. Jewel g^^her^th his seeming of these words following in
Nicephorus: Senex Alexandriae^ri^^, Beryti d^c^it and ^ucta Laodicia coni^g^;
Apollinari^ fili^ proge^^it ^smuche to say. The old m^^ was borne at
Al^xandria, ^^ught a^ Berytu^, married a wife at Laodice^, and beg^^^
Apollinaris his son. Of this order of words he can conclud^ no more that the
older Apollinaris was married after that he was Priest, then that he was borne
at Alexandria after that he was an old man. If he could prove that he was an
old man b^^ore he begote the younger Apollinaris, and that he was Priest, before
he came to Laodicea, when he married, then should he seem to prove, that an
Heretic was married after he was Priest, as many be now adays. Until he
prove so much, which s^^l a (...), this his seeming (...) seem little worth.
Chrysostom. in Epist. 1 ad Timo. Homil. 1^


Jewel. Chrysostom speaking of the Marri^ge of Bishops, says thus, Quamuis
nuptie plu^imum di^^^u^tatis in s^ hab^^^^, ita tamen assumi possunt, (...)
perfectiori vitae impedimento non sint, Notwith^^^^^ing marriage have in it
much tr^^ble yet so it may be taken, that ^shalbe no hinderance to perfect
life. He says marriage may be tak^^ or chosen: and he speaks namely of the
marriage of Priests and Bishops.


Harding.
Why nipte you of the end of the sentence M. Jewel? M. Ievvel nippeth of
words of his doctor.
Though you, nor your good brethren the married Apostates, like not well of
them: yet for true dealinges sake, you should not so have gelded your Doctor of
the words, that so jointly hang to the sentence by you alleged. They be these.
It is a hard thing that marriage should not be a let unto the perfites life
by judgment of S. Chrysostom.
Verum id plane perquam raro atque difficile. Marriage may be so taken, that it
shall not be a let unto the perfiter life (so much goes before) but certainly
that is a thing very seldom, and of great difficulty. Do ye hear sir, what
your own Doctor says? That marriage be not an impediment unto perfiter life,
which Priests do profess, it is very seldom seen, and a thing of very
great difficulty, says your Chrysostom.

Here good Reader that thou be not begyled, I must tell thee this much. Whereas
M. Jewel bears thee in hand, that S. Chrysostom says, Marriage may be taken
or chosen, and that of Priests, and Bishops, for of their Marriage he
speaks, says this manne: all this is false. M. Ievvel builds his prouf upon
a forged sentence added unto S. Chrysostom.
For first understand thou, this sentence is not in S. Chrysostom at al: not
in the Greek, I say, in which tongue only he wrote. For I have seen the
Greek, and diligently conferred it my self. But it is added unto his text,
either by the translation, or by falshod used at the printing, as in these
corrupt times false printers have corrupted many books of the old Fathers.
Yet this much will I say of this sentence, that it may right well stand without
any evil m^^ning gathered of it, though(...) be not S. Chrysostom^^, the Greek
examples supposed to be true. For the Circumstance of the place bears it to
be spoken, not specially of the Marriage of Priests, and Bishops, as M.
Jewel takes it in this place, but of Marriage indefinitely, and generally, as
it may be proved (if there were nothing else to prove it) by the same M.
Jewel in an other place, namely in the page 179. before, where he says thus,
in the first line of that page, S. Chrysostom says generally of al men,
Quamuis n^ptia plurimum difficultatis habeant, etc. Thus M. Jewel in the 514.
page. is confuted by M. Jewel, in the 179. page. Of such Contradictions he has
good stoare.

That it may appear the plainer, thus is it that we read in S. Chrysostom.
I^ prim. cap Titi. hom. 2.
Si igitur qui vxorem duxit, etc. Then if it be so, that he which has married
a wife, be careful for the things of the world, and of conuenience a Bishop
should not be touched with any such care: how said the Apostle before, vnius
vxoris virum, that a Bishop, should be the husband of one wife? Some understand
such a one to be signified (by these words) that shall be made a Bishop after
his wives death. Albeit he, that has a wife, may be, as one not having. And
this much he granted them very well in consideration of the time, 1. Cor. 7.
and nature of the thing, as the case then stood. And a man may take that
thing honestly, and lawfully, if he will. For as richesse do hardly bring a man
into the kingdom of Heaven (yet often times many rich men have there entered
in) so also does marriage. Thus far goes the greek in S. Chrysostom, and no
further touching this matter. For immediately follow, not the words that M.
Jewel builds his proof upon, but other words concerning an other thing, as
every learned man may see in the ^nted Greek book, in the 20. leaf, the
second page t^^ 20. line.

You might have seen this in the Greek M. Jewel, or your Greek Friend for
you, as well as you saw that other place of S. Chrysostom by me truly alleged
and translated, where he expounds these words of S. Paul, Tit. 1. ho. 2
The husband of one wife. Which place you wring and wr^st very violently to
serve your purpose, and yet it will not be, M. Jew. in his defense pa. 175.
uses false translation.
and the learned may easily perceive your false iuggling in it. There you will
needs have, (...), to signify, the wife that is gonne from her husband by
divorce, and therefore you turn it, Vxori quae decessit (ase) whereas you
should have followed the allowed translation that is in use, which has
Defunctae vxori, the wife deceassed, or departed this life. So I have turned
the place in my Confutation according to the Greek, and as the common Latin
translation has.

Consider therefore how impudently you reprove me without cause. First in the
margent of your book, (...). Page 164.
over against this testimony of S. Chrysostom, truly translated by me out of
the Greek word for word (For whereas be ^^epeth no beneuol^nce toward his
wife deceased, how can he be a good governor? You have set this odious note of
reproufe, directing it by your sterre unto the word, deceassed * Untruth. For
M. Harding fowly mistaketh S. Chrysostomes meaning. And there again immediately.
* Untruth standing in false exposition. Not being content with this in your
te^te, page 174. lin. 3. you say further? Those words M. Harding in his
translation has purposely falsified. I have not purposely falsified them M.
Jewel for they be not my^^, but they be the word^^ of the common tr^^slation,
and the same i^ according to the Greek: For the verb, (...), (...)
signifies not to depart away by divorce, as you have violently turned it,
but simply to depart, or go away, and sometimes, as in this very place, to
depart out of this life. You might have learned so much of the common Greek
Lexicon.

What second marriage not forbidden by the laws.
Now that S. Chrysostom is so to be understood, S. Chrysostom him self
clearly shows in words of the same sentence there. For whereas he speaks
of that second marriage, which he confesses not to be forbidden by the laws:
what other second marriage means he, but that, when as a man marries again
after the deceasse of his first wife? For I trow you will not say, that the
laws after Christ's coming, among Christian men permitted a man to marry
again, his wife being alive, and so to have two wives at once, specially in
the case which your translation imports, that is, when the wife (is not put
away for Aduoutrie of her part, but) departs from the husband, which she may
not do, but for aduoutrie of his part.

It is not likely, S. Paul would debar a man from coming unto the dignity
of a Bishop, that had two wives at once. For such a one, except he repented,
and had put away from him one of them, was not admitted to be made a Christian
man. What trow ye, that he required not a farr^ mo^^ p^rfection in him, that
was to be made a Bishop?

Thus you see good reason, why Ambros^^s-C^^ild^le^sis that learned man,
translated, (...) (for that is S. Chrysostoms word, and not (...), as you have
noted in your books margent) by this word, Defunctae, and why I turned it,
the wife disceassed. You may now of your courtesy take back again your
bitter reproaches of foul mistaking, of false exposition, of purposed
falsifying, to your self. For these special qualities be proved to be yours,
they be not mine.

For two other testimonies in proof of Priests Marriage, M. Jewel craves
help at Erasmus, and Cornelius Agrippa. Thus he says.

Jewel. Erasmus says, The Priests of the Greek Church this day, not
vvithstanding their Orders, marry vviues. The like vvriteth Cornelius Agrippa
against the Iouanians.


Harding.
Erasmus, and Cornelius Agrippa Erasmus, and Cornel. Agrippa.
be men of small credit God wot in this cause, which in their time they
f^uo^red, as much as you do now. It is commonly reported (you know) for a vain
shifte of a thief, to say, Ask my fellow, whether I be a thief, or no.
Herein we are moved with the authority of these two smatterers of your Gospel,
in their days but newly broc^ed, no more then if we heard Friar Luther, Monk
H^p^r, Peter Martyr the regulare Chanon of S. Augustines order, and such other
married Apostates, to speak a good word in favor of their unlawful yokinges.
How be it the truth is, both Erasmus, and Cornelius Agrippa, belie the Greek
Church herein, as the Doctors of the Sorbo^e in Paris have in their Censures
against Erasmus truly declared. For by the law, it was never, nor yet is to
this day, lawful in the Greek Church, for Priests to marry wives, after
that they have taken the holy Order of Priesthood^.

Ie^^l. Likewise Cardinal Caiet^n^ says; Nec ratione, nec authoritat^ probari
potest, Caietan. in Quod libet.
quod absolute loquendo Sacerdos peccet, co^trahe^do matrimonius* It can not be
proved, neither by reason, nor by a^th^ritie, speaking absolutely that a Priest
offends God, (...) marrying a wife,


Harding.
Cardinal Caietane has his errors, for which he has been reproved and
confuted. We are not bound to maintain, what so ever he says. How be it this
saying of his seems to have no great error, Where of is it, that the
Marriage of Priests in the west Church is unlawful. Statute of the Church
and Vovvannexed.
so it be understood, as he meant. There be two things, that make the
marriage of Priests in the most Church unlawful, the S^ of the Church, and the
Vow annexed. The Statute and co^stitution of the Church, binds clerks
receiving holy Orders never to marry. As touching the Vow like as the Order
and h^b^^e of Monks (by which ^a^e al religious be understood) has
Chastity ^^nexed by(...) that institut^d the habit, and the ^^le for monks
to(...) in, and therefore he that receives it, is said therewith to make a Vow
consequently ^^^en so holy Order among the Latins, or thereof the West Church,
by the Churches co^stitution, has (...) anne^^d inseperably, and therefore who
so ever t^k^th it, willingly binds him self thereunto in fact and deed,
though no word of the bo^d be spoken. So ^h^t this b^nde proceeds both of the
statute of the C^^^^^ and of the Vow. What means Caietane by this word,
Absolutely.
And for this consid^ration the (...) Priest^^ is unlawful. Bu^ speaking
^bso^^t^ly says (...) that is to say, if there were no such stature, of the
(...), nor Vow at ^et in this case ^f ^ Prie^st ^^rried for any thing that is
in reason,(...) in the (...) of (...) press Scriptures to the cont^ he ^ould
not sin. Whereby he signifies, that, the case ^tanding as it does, Priests
marriage is unlawful. Now remains M. Jewels last proof of this matter.

Jewel. (...) likewise, Anselmus says in a Dialogue between the Master ^d
the Scholare, touching these matters. Anselmus in Dialog. Inquisitione prima.
Desideramu^ certificari tua sol^tione super vulgari in toto orb quaestione,
quae ab omnibus pene quotidie ventilatur, and adhuc lis indiscussa celatur.
Scilicet, an liceat presbyteris, post acceptum ordinem vxores ducere. We are
d^sirous by your answer to be certified, about this common question, that is
now tossed through the world, and as yet lies undiscussed, I mean whether
a Priest, being vvil his Orders, may marry a wife. Hereby a appears, that
in the time of A^selmus, which was above a thousand years after Christ, this
matter lay in question, and was not yet discussed.


Harding.
Anselmus wrote three Dialogues, Anselmus wrongfully made a spokesman for the
Apostates marriage.
in which he makes the Master and the Scholare to talk together. The first,
is De Veritate: the second, De Libero Arbitrio: the third, De Casu Diaboli. An
other Dialogue he wrote also of an other matter, in which he appoints for
talkers together, Anselmus, and Beso More Dialogues he never wrote, for ought
that can appear by the works, that be extant in printe under his name. And in
these, neither in any of these, there is no such Dialogue between the Master,
and the Scholare touching these matters, as you say. And whereas you have in
the Maigent of your book, Inquisitione prima, I may inquire for such an
Inquisition a long time, before I find it, for there is no such thing at al
among his Dialogues. Whether Friar Bale, Illyricus, or some other such
gatherer of Rifferaffe have deceived you, or of your self you were disposed in
this place to (...) you^ own invention (I w^^(...) call it pl^^^e lying) I
know ^ot: certainly amongst(...) printed works, there is no such Dialogue to
be found.

But if there were any such, what should that releive your sorry, causes? If the
Master had in good so^^h so told the Scholar^, it had ^en some what. Now
that(...) Scholare says it is a common question, and much toss^d between men,
and as yet lies undiscussed: what other thing does the Author by these words,
but provoke the Readers attention, that the Answer be the more diligently
weighed, and considered of? You know M. Jewel the writers of such Dialogues,
may make the demaunder to talk, what they list. Neither is any thing to be
avouched for true or false the sooner, because the demau^der so reports. By
this you may see, that the author had a desire to discuss this matter by the
Scholars moving of the question, you can not argue, that at that time, this
point was so much in question.

And whereas by the a^thors fictio^, the Scholare says, it was then a common
question, and lay undiscussed, by that a man may ghess^ that in Anselmus time,
such, as whom it bec^me to be Scholars, and not Masters, were busy in common
table talk about such questions, as the like persons now a days occupy
their heads, and wheat their tongues about the like, and other questions of
greater weight, wh^ (...) them selves in their bold and sto^^^ ^ss^^erations
more like masters; the^ Scholars.

And again, whereas the Scholare in the pretensed Dialogue said, that question
lay as yet undiscussed, it is to be referred to those days, and to the
comp^ss^ of that time, sine^ ^hiche that matter in that age began to (...) in
question. Thereof you may not conclude, that it was never before discussed in
Christ's Church, for the sp^ce of a thousand years, as you thereof would seem
to g^ther. For among learned men, and the governors of Christ's Church, it
was ever from the Apostles time certain, and without al controversy, that
Priests being in holy Orders might not marry. And this is all that M. Jewel
was hable to bring for proof, that Priests, and who so ever have Vowed
Chastity, may marry. Let us see further, how well he defends his Apology
against my Confutation, touching this matter.

The Apology, cap. 8. Division. 2. And as Sozomenus says of Spiridion, and as
Nazianzene says of his (...) Father, we say, that a good and diligent Bishop
does serve in the ministry never the worse, for that he is married, but
rather the better, and with more hablenes to do good.


The Confutation. fol. 76. a.
Were it not that the weight of these matters required an upright and plain
dealing, for ciuilities sake I could be content sometimes to spare you, and
where ye make manifest lies, to use a softer word, and term them fittens.
Lying much used of this defender.
But now if I tell you that you use your accustomed figure pseudologia, which is
lying in plain english: I trust you will bear with my plainenes, amend your
own fault, and consider the power of truth, that causes me to be so bold with
you. This I am sure of, that neither Sozomenus, nor Gregory Nazianzene,
Sozomenas, Gregory Nazianzene
nor Eusebius lib. 10. cap. 5. as you have caused your books both Latin and
English to be noted in the margent, where ye mistake Eusebius for Ruf^^u^ ^o^
N^^ia^^ (...) ^^ther i^ M^nodia, Eusebius belyed by the aucthour of the
Apology.
as you note also in the margent, n^r in the fu^ oration that he made of his
fath^^ has any such saying as ye report of them. For how could they say that a
bis^^^ serves in his ministry never the worse, but rather the better, and
with more ablenes to do good for that he is married, the Scripture being so
plain to the contrary^ What, wene ye they were either so ignorant, or so
forgetful, or so much inclined to promote your carnal doctrine of priests
marriages, as to say so, not withstanding that S. Paul writes to the
Corinthians? A bishop is not able to do his ministry the better for that he
is married to a wife.
Says he not of them that be married, that such shall have tribulation of the
flesh? Says he not, he that is without a wife, cares for the things of our
Lord how he may please God? Of him that has a wife says he not, that he
cares for the things that be the worlds how he may please his wife, and is
divided? finally says he not, I tell you this thing for your profit, not to
tangle you in a snare, but for that which is honest, and comely unto you, and
that which may give you readiness to pray to God without let? Wherefore recant
for shame that foul error, that a bishop serves the better in his
ministry, and is the more able to do good, for that he is married. Leaft out
by M. I.
* Verily here ye seem to be of the flesh rather then of the spirit. Neither
are ye to be called any longer, if ye maintain this doctrine, spiritual men,
as in times past they have been, whose romes ye occupy, but rather fleshly men.
* Such men, such doctrine, fleshly men, fleshly doctrine. Left out by M. Iev
* Neither see I, what ye can say for Defense of this doctrine, unless ye
bristle your selves against S. Paul, and maugre his authority affirm
impudently, that it is no let for a Bishop from the service of God, to have
the tribulation of the flesh, that he may serve in (...) vocation better,
taking care for the things that be the worlds, and seeking how to please his
wife, then if he study for the things that be our Lords, and seek how to
please God: that a man may do more good, being by occasion of his wife divided
and distract, then being whole and in him self united finally that a bishop
shall serve the Church better being entangled and clogged with worldly affairs,
then having power and oportunite to pray to God without let. *

Now therefore see you not how great is your impudency in that you lie your
self, and father such a foul lie upon Sozomenus, and that light of the world
in his time Gregory Nazianzene? Left out by M. Ie. The place of Sozomenus
examined
* But for then dealing let us hear what Sozomenus says concerning Spiridion.
For Rufine in the tenth book added to Eusebius touching this matter reports
nothing, but that he had a daughter named Irene, who died before her father a
virgin. * The words of Sozomenus be these. Cap. 5. lib. 1. cap. 11.
(...), that is to say, Spiridion was a Husbandman, having wife and children,
and yet for all that he was never the worse about Gods service. Of this place we
grant ye may say with Sozomenus, that Spiridion served God never the worse
for that he was married. But how, and whereof gather ye, that he served God the
better, and was more able to do good because of his marriage? Left out by M.
Ie.
* Now Spiridion Spiridion
was a man of passing holiness, and in power and virtue surmounted al other
men of his time, as one that wrought great miracles, and was taken for a
prophet. For Rufine, where (...) ^ompareth P^pl^^utiu^ with the Apostles,
Ecclesiast. Histo. lib. 10. cap. 4. and 5.
s^m^th to pro^^tes Spiridion before him. If this one Saint of so great
excellency being made bishop of a married man served God never the worse for
that he was married; will ye therefore make a general doctrine, that bishops and
priests shall ma^y, and that thereby they shall be no whit hindered from Gods
service? * Spiridion obtained that privilege through especial grace by his
exceeding ve^^ue, which is granted to few. And the privileges of a few make
not a law for all in general ye know, as Nazianzene says.

The place of Sozomenus alleged by the defender makes utterly against them.
Leaft out by Mil.
Furthermore if the words of Sozomenus that ye build your annal doctrine upon
be well examined, ye shall find, th^^ he makes more against you then with you.
For signifying that he had wife and children, he adds, (...). Yet for all that
he was never the worse about God^ service. This reuocation, or exception
negative (yet for all that etc.) implies a confession affirmative of the
contrary. * As though by reason the sentence should bear this meaning. He had
wife and children, and therefore was less apt and able to serve God in
bishoply ministry. If there were no repugnance between the state of a bishop,
and marriage, but the having of a wife were a better abling of a man to serve in
that vocation, as ye say: then Sozomen us neither would, nor should have used
that manner of speech, (...), (as much to say, yet for all that but ^^ther thus
he should have spoken, (...), that this sense might rise of his words,
Spiridion was a husbandman, having wife and children, and therefore he was the
better disposed and readier to serve God. *

Neither makes the place of Gregory Nazianzene ^y what for you more, then
this of Sozomenus does: Nazianzenes words returned upon the defender.
whose words be these after the translation of Rapha^ Volaterranus varying
much from the Greek. Hic Basilij pater Basilius item appellatus, et si
matrimonio se vinxit, ita tamen in eo vixit, vt nihil propterea ad perfectam
virtutem, ac Philosophiam consequendam impediretur. Basiles father who was
named also Basile, although he put him self in bonds of matrimony, yet he
lived so herein, as he was let no whit from the atteining of perfitte
virtue, and holy knowledge. Were not marriage a let and hinderance to
perfection requisite in a Bishop, this learned man could not rightly have said,
ita tamen in eo vixit, etc. yet for all that he lived so, etc. Leaft out by M.I.
* Because the having of a wife is a hinderance to perfection, therefore of
good reason in the praise of that holy Bishop, who was married long before he
took that degree, yet notwithstanding (says this writer) he was not
therefore let from perfection. By which manner of speech he acknowledges
marriage in others to be a let to perfection. Who understands not for what
cause of these two speeches, the one is reasonable, the other absurd: he is
power, yet for all that liberal, and, he is power, yet for all that sparing? The
like consideration duly conceived, retourneth the authority by this Defender
alleged against him self. For the like absurdity is in this saying, Basiles
father was married, yet for all that he was not thereby let from perfection:
if for having a wife a man be the better able and readier to serve in the holy
ministry of a Bishop. *

Right so it is easy to put him from the hold he takes of Chrysostom, by
Chrysostom him self. For least my man should think, Tit. 1.
whereas S. Paul says, a Bishop ought to be the husband of one wife, that
the same order contineweth still in the Church, thereto he says in his second
homily de patientia Job: non ea ratione quod id nunc in Ecclesia obseruetur.
Oportet enim omni pr^rsus castitate S^cerdotem ornatum esse. S. Paul (says
he) required this not in consideration that the same be now observed in the
Church. For it behooves a Bishop to be garnished with all manner a chastity.

Jewel. Here comes M. Hardinge in a lofte with Io Triumph, as having beaten
down all the world under his feet: And as being already in sure possession
of the victory, he cries out, Impudencies, Loud his, foul Faults, and
piety Fittens. And full terribly charge us, like a Conqueroure, to render
our selves, and to r^cante for son. This nevve courage is suddenly blovven
upon him, for that he th^^keth, we have intruded v^on his office, and as he
says, have corrupted, and falsified the holy Fathers. But it were a vvorthie
matter to know wherein. Forsoothe we say, by the report of Soz^menus, and
Gregorius Nazianzenus, that Spiridion, and Gregory Father to Nazianzen, being
both Married Bishops, notvvithstanding their Marriage, were never the
vv^rs^ hable to do their Ecclesiastical offices, but rather the better.

The words importe it not.
Here M. Harding of himself, and freely confesses, these Holy Fathers vv^re
ne^^r the worse hable to d^^ their offices? For so much the (...) of (...)
importe, (...). But that they were the better hable to do their^ offices,
^^cause of their VViues, that he d^nieth utterly, and herein he saie^h me are
corrupters, and falsifiers of the Fathers. And thus the whole difference, that
is between M. Hardinge and us touching this matter, stands only in these
two poor words, Rather the better, and ^euer the v^^rse.

Now gentle reader, I beseech thee also Reader to weigh my Answer.
that thou may be the better hable t^ i^dge between us, I beseech the
indifferently weigh these vv^^des.

Gregory Nazianzene hereof, that is, of the help, Untruth for then he was
not Bishop, but an infidel Nazian. in Epitaphi^ patris.
that his Father, (...) being the Bishop of Nazianzum had by his wife,
vvriteth thus: Illa quae data est Adamo, etc. Eua that vvvas given to Adam for
a helper for as much as it was n^^ good for man to be alone, in steed of a
helper became his enemy. It follovveth, Meo autem Patri Matter mea data illi a
Deo, non tantum adiutrix facta est, id enim minus esset miru^, sed etia^ dux,
and princeps, verbo, factoque inducens illu^ ad res optimas. Et aliis quidem
rebus quamuis optimum esset subditam esse viro, propter iura coniugii tamen in
pietate non verebatur seipsam illi magistram exhibere: My mother being given to
my father of God, became not only his helper, for that had been no great
vvonder, but also was his leader, and Captain, She was his Maistresse before
he knevv, what the faith of Christ was yet they serve you to no purpose.
False. He was not then Bishop of Nazianzum, nor yet a Christian.
both by word and by deed, trayning him unto the best. And albeit in other
things it were best for her to be subject unto her husband for the right
of marriage, yet in religion, and Godliness, she doubted not to becomme his
Maistresse.

These words M. Hardinge, be plain, and clear, and without fitton,
Gregory Nazianzen says, that his own ^^^ther was unto his father the
Bishop of Nazianzum, a helper and a directour, both by word and deed, to
lead him to the best: and that in all other things being his inferior, yet in
^eligion and Godliness she was his (...) What a do would this fellovv make,
if he had me at a Vantage in deed, that thus fares without cause, as by the
answer it shall better appear.
Maistresse. And yet m^st al these words so open, so plain, so clear, be
drowned with your simple distinction, of Rather the better, and never the
worse. May we not now allow you with favor, to take al these, that ye
call sitions, lies, corruptions, and falsifienges, home again unto your self?

If you ^^^^r cr^^le th^se t^^^ges before is (...) must remember al truth must
not be measured by your reading*


Harding.
To begin with these last words, as I require not al truth to be measured by
my r^^ding M. I^w^l, so neither is it to be measured by your writing. Whether I
ever readde these things before, or no, it skilleth not. Certain it is, where
you readde all that ye have here alleged out of S. Gregory Nazianzene, you
readde also that, whereby your false, and unreasonable assertion is confuted,
teaching that his Father being Bishop of Nazianzu^ learned the doctrine of
Godliness of his wife. Having read and seen the truth of this point in that
very place, and here conceeling it, that you might not seem confuted, yea, and
so boldly auouching the contrary: how make you not al men, that know this,
witnesses of your falshode, and impudency?

M. Jewels gay eloquence minister-like.
As for your vain, and light tauntes of my coming in a lofte, with Io
Triumph, of my terrible charging of you like a Conqueror, of the new courage
suddenly blown upon me, and such other pretty eloquence fitter for a Minister,
then for a sober man: I can easily contemn. No wise man that reads my
words, for which ye ruffle so with me, will judge you had just cause, with
such sport to delight your self. Neither said I, if you mark my words well,
that you had corrupted and falsified the holy Fathers, for that you said upon
report of Sozomenus, and S. Gregory Nazianzene, that Spiridion, and Gregory
Father to Nazianzene, were for their marriage never the worse hable to serve
God, but rather the better (which nevertheless is false): but for that you
speak it generally of a Bishop: as though Bishops should do^ that apperteineth
to their charge the better, if they married wives. For truth whereof I refer
me to the place. Spiridio^, and Gregory Nazianzenes father.


Those two holy Fathers, were men endewed with a singular and special grace,
and the example of so few, is not to be drawn to be made a rule in general, as
I said in my Confutation. Yet the most that is said of them, is, that they
served God never the worse by reason of their Marriage.

Again, M. Ievvel defe^deth after his manner but fevv parts of the Apology.
whereas I answered to every part of your Apology in this place, you defend
but one thing by me confuted. Neither to say the truth, do you defend the
same, but say, what you were hable, to show some color of a Defense. This
argues that the other things you brought, are fully confuted. For else why
did you not defend them? And this much is the Reader here to be warned of by
the way: That whereas most commonly I answer to every thing by the Apology
objected unto the Catholics, in your prete^sed Defense, you lay much of my
Confutatio^ together, and in your Answer, either you touch no point by me
confuted, or very few points, but fill your book with new matter, not
perteining to the defense of that which is confuted, taken as it seems out of
the stoare of your Notebookes, which Illyricus, Friar Bale, and certain others
of that cut have made to your hand.

Touching this present matter, you would, if you wist how, persuade the world
by the example of Gregory Nazianzenes Father, that a Bishop is not only not
let or hindered from doing that, which belongs to his duty by having a
wife, but also much helped, and that for being marrried, he is the better
hable to discharge the service of a Bishop. To prove this, you allege much out
of S. Gregory Nazianzene in Epitaphie patris. In what respect says
Nazianzen of his Mother, that she was to his Father, a leader. etc.
And the words, which you allege, be there in deed. Which words report,
that S. Gregory Nazianzenes Mother, was to his Father a helper, a guide, a
Leader, a Captain, by word, and by deed training him unto the best, yea
further, that in Religion, and godliness she was not ashamed to becomme his
Maistresse. All this is true M. Jewel, I confess, and yet it proves not your
purpose at al. How so?

M. Jewels falshed discovered.
Mark Reader, and consider of it well, how M Jewel begyleth thee. Gregory
Nazianzen hereof (says he) that is, of the help that his Father, being the
Bishop of Nazianzum had by his wife, writes thus. Illa etc. Here lies the
deceit, in that he makes S. Gregory Nazianzenes Father Bishop of Nazianzum,
when he had such help of his mother, as though it were credible, that a
Bishop should be taught of his wife, how to teach his flock the doctrine of
our Religion. If S. Gregory Nazianzene had meant thus, he had made his Father
but a simple Bishop. It is a weak flock, they say of sheep, where a Yew
bears the belle. So truly it must be an unfortunate Dioces, where the Bishop
is his Wives scholare. Gregory Nazia^ze^ expounded.


Now Reader al these great crakes, that M. Jewel utters here so liberally, in
thy judgment must come to naught, when thou understand the truth of this
matter. Thus then it is. Gregory the elder, S. Gregory Nazianzenes Father,
was a married man long before he was Bishop: and before he was married unto
his wife, and also long after, he was in Infidel. She, S. Gregory's mother,
contrariwise was a Christian woman, borne of Christian parents, and descended
of a stock, that had been Christian of long time. Her learned son speaking of
her, (...), etc. fol. 124. a. Aldi. Hypsistarij what men they were
in comparison of his Father, says, that she was not taken out of the wild
Olive, and engraffed into the good Olive, as he was: But that she had virtue,
and the true faith of Christ, as by ancient inheretance, from her godly
forefathers. Of him he says, that he was a branche of a Root, that was not to
be praised, that was not disposed to godliness, that was not planted in the
house of God. Touching the religion that he was of, speaking more particularly
of him, he says, that he was one of them, who were named Hypsistarij, of whom
I have not readde, but in S. Gregory Nazianzene. These Hypsistarij, as he
describes them, were neither altogether Heathens, nor Jews, but (as a man
following S. Gregory might term them) mongrels between both. For (as he says)
of the Heathnish error, they exchewed Idolles, and Sacrifices, and yet
honored the Fire and Lamps, and of Moses law they had in reverence the
Saboth day, and used the Jewish superstition about certain meats, but
Circumcision they utterly refused. Such a one touching Religion, was this
Gregory.

Now that virtuous and holy woman his wife on the other side, taking great
thought for her husband, and, as her son writes, having great grief at
heart, that being yoked together in wedlock, (...).
they drew not one way together through diversity of faith, that she was
united unto God but in respect of half, that the copulation of the spirit
was not joined with the bodily copulation, being most desirous to remedy this,
and y^^ not being ^^ble to bring it to pass: she f^l down (says h^) before
God day and night, she besought and craved of him the salvation of her
husband, with much fasting, and with many tears. Withal she was instant upon
her husband to come to the Christian faith, she used all the ways she could
devise whereby to win him, (...), etc. Gregory the Fathers Vision.
with chidinges (says he) with admonitions, with (...), etc. Gregory the
Fathers Vision.
kind and loving services, with tokens of displeasure. To be short, (...),
etc. Gregory the Fathers Vision.
it could no otherwise be (says he) but that the drop of water with
continual falling should at length make a hole in the stoane, and that the
thing in time should be brought to pass, that was so earnestly intended.

There then speaking particularly of the means, by which Gods providence
brough him to Salvation, and to become a Christian man, among other things, he
says, that his Father was much furthered with a vision in a dream, wherewith
(says he) God oftentimes benefiteth(...) soul, which he accompteth worthy to
be saved. It seemed unto him in his dream, that he sange that verse of David
the Prophet. Laetatus sum in ijs quae dicta sunt mihi, in demum Domini ibimus.
Psalm. 121.
that is to say, as he utters it out of the seventy Interpreters, It
reioised me to hear them, that said unto me, Come on, let us go into the
house of our Lord.

This vision he told his wife. She, being very glad of it, as having assured
hope, that her long prayer and desire was heard, interpreting it to the best
sense, and signifying unto him, how great favor God showed unto him, made all the haste she could possibly, that he were Christened, fearing, as her son
writes, lest by differring some thing might happen in the mean while, that
should be a hinderance to that blessed calling, and defeit al, (...) she had so
much and so long gonne about to bring to affecte. To be short, within a while
after she found the mean, that he was Christened by the holy Father Leontius
Bishop of that Dioces, at what time out of al coaster of the world the
Bishops repaired to Nicaea, there to hold a General Council, to the
condemnation of the heresy of Arius. After this he lived a holy life, and at
length by Gods providence, he was promoted unto the bishoprike of Nazi^nzum.

This much is (though in a far larger process) declared by S. Gregory
Nazianzene in the Oration, which he made at the burial of his Father. Whereby
it is made clear to al men, how his Father was helped by his wife, not as
being a Bishop, as M. Jewel does untruly say, but as yet being an Infidel. That
her son reports of her, that she was unto his Father, a helper, a guide, a
leader, Faithful vviues have been cause of their husbands conversion to the
faith. Monica S. Augustines Mother labored to convert Patricius her husband.
Confessionum. li. 9. cap. 9.
a Captain, an instructour, a teacher a maistresse in religion, and
godliness: all this is to be understood of the time, in which he remained an
unbeliever, not of the time, in which he was Bishop of Nazianzum.

Herein she did the part, that many other godly and faithful wives have done,
who have used the like diligence and care, to bring their husbands being
Infidels, unto the faith of Christ. That holy woman Monica S. Augustines
mother, did the like with her husband Patricius, of whom he writes thus in his
book of Confessions, speaking unto God, as there his manner is: Tradita vira
seruiuit veluti Domino, and sategit cum lucrari tibi, etc. When she was married
out unto her husband, she served him, as if he had been her Master, and took
care how she might win him unto thee, o Lord. Again he said there
afterward. Vir^m s^^m iam in extrema vita temporal eiu^ lucrata est tibi. She
wanne her husband unto thee (o Lord) now in the end of his temporal life.

In consideration that God oftentimes works such grace by the wife to the
winning of the husband unto God, S. Paul requires, that a Christian woman put
not away her husband from her being an infidel, if he consent to dwell with
her. For how know thou o woman (says he) whether thou shall save thy
husband or no? 1. Cor. 7.


Either you have read these things M. Jewel, in the place from whence you
took the words, which here you allege, or you trusted the gatherer of your
Notes. If you trusted your gatherer, you should have tried the testimony well,
before you had spoken so peremptorily. If you have readde and seen all this, in
that you have conceeled the truth, and spoken so much to the contrary, you show
your self to be one, that is little to be trusted.

Certainly al men may now see, how just cause I have, not to take these
fittons, and corruptions again unto me, but to leave them with you, and to
charge you with them, as I did before in my Confutation of your Apology.

After this M. Jewel brings in a great meany of Doctors sayings, with
which they commend Marriage and seem to blame them that despised, and
condemned Marriage, and were of the opinion, that a man could not be saved if
he were married. Whereunto I think al answer needeles, for as much as we are
not they, that condemn Marriage, as it has now ben oftentimes said. we esteem
it as honorable, and where marriage is lawful, and lawfully used, we account
that bed unspotted and clean, as S. Paul calls it. Mary we say, Heb. 13.
that who soever have bound them selves to live in continency by solemn Vow,
as Priests and Religious persons, for them it is not lawful to marry, and
their Marriage is unlawful, or rather, none at al. Against which doctrine M.
Jewel has nothing to say, nor to allege, and yet touching Marriage, he has
filled a great deal of paper with the doctors sayings. So ready he is to
bring much, and so little hable to bring ought, that makes clearly for him.

What things certain Fathers have written against impure heretics dispraising
marriage in all men, With what stuff M. Jew. furnishes out this point at
large. Defense Page 187. 188. 189.
the same he allegeth now, as if they were spoken against the Catholics
condemning the Marriage of these Apostates. He brings in a long saying of
Origin, spoken of the Marcionistes, and Cerdonistes, and such others. He
allegeth Epiphanius against the filthy Origenians. Chrysostom against wicked
women, that keeping the name of Maids, lived worse then hartlots in the Stews.
Briefly so many mo as he found, old, and late writers of al sorts, speaking
bitterly against the impune life of il men, and women. Whereunto I answer
briefly: As all the married Apostates approach near unto the filthiness of
Devils, so some of the Catholic Clergy, and religious persons, be far
from the pureness of Angels. God give us al grace to amend, that is amiss,
and you M. Jewel a better heart, and more charity toward his Church. With
which grace being endewed, you will take less pleasure in reporting il of her
Ministers.

I need not here after this sort to travail any farther in this matter
against Master Jewel. What soever is beside that, which I have here answered
in the whole book of his pretensed Defense touching the point, it is either
not worth the answering, as altogether impertinent, or sufficiently refelled in
my former Confutation. Compare the one with the other Christian Reader, and if
thou be hable to judge of these things, assure thy self, my said Confutation
may satisfy thee, for ought that M. Jewel brings. Now because it were
infinite to stand upon every point, and to discuss so many tedious, and
impertinent allegations: I think it more convenient to use an other way, and
by laying together certain his Untruths, to make shorter work.

M. Jewels Untruths, and flat Lies concerning the Marriage of Priests, and
Votaries.
Page 165.
S. Gregory Nazianzen, and diverse other learned and ancient Fathers, as
disgracing lawful Matrimony, and the Marriage of Widows, and Widowers.

in Catalogo witnessed, that Tertullian was a married Priest. Page 166.
The place will show this untruth. Albeit I deny not, but that he was married,
before he was Priest: and so were diverse others, as Spiridion, S. Gregory
Nazianzenes Father, Gregorius Nyssenus, and certain others.



it can not be proved, that he was married after that he was Bishop. that is
enough for us.

He says, that Polycrates had seven of his Fathers (...)
as is before noted.

That which he allegeth under the name of Pope Damasus, Palea, as much to say,
Chafe, by which name in the Decrees of Gratian, that is signified, which is by
some other man added unto Gratian. and well may this be so named, because it is
a thing forged, and little worth. And how could Damasus write of so many Popes,
which lived after his death certain hundred years?

He says, alleging for his author Fabian the late merchant Page 167.
that Marriages of Priests in England were free a thousand years together, and
yet it is evident, that the English Clergy was governed according to the order
which our Apostle S. Augustine leaft, who by S. Gregory's rule, might not allow
married Priests.

He says, the Priests of England were never Votaries, it is known, and
confessed, which stout asseueration makes weak proof. And were it so, then
surely if any had married, although he had sinned thereby, yet the marriage
should have continued, which is known to have always benne used otherwise.

He calls the Vow of Chastity, an evil promise, Page 168. 169.
and by any good or honest man. For our Lady vowed her chastity unto God,
Luc. 1.
as it is evident by the interpretation of many holy Fathers upon S. Lukes
Gospel.

primam fidem, the first faith in S. Paul to be meant of the Vow of Chastity,
Page 170. 1. Tim. 5.
which is directly against the ancient fathers doctrine. For although it were
expounded of baptism also, yet none but Heretics, ever denied it to
apperteine to Vows.

Page 171.
It comes of their own choice, and of Gods grace, and not of any constraint
of ours.

Offerre, to Minister the oblation, or holy communion, Page 172.
whereas it is to make the oblation, before that it be ministered.



Paphnutius alone, was proctour for the truth against the whole Council of
Nice, Page 173.
intending thereby to bring his reader in belief, that one is better, then
three hundred and seuenteen. For 318. Bishops were at that Council. Thus he
seeks to discredit Councelles.



Page 174
For S. Chrysostom says, that neither he, that had two wives at once, nor he,
who had been again married after his first wives death, may be made Priest by
S. Paul's rule, he speaks of the second Marriage after the first wives
death, saying. Qui defuncta vxori beneuolentiam non seruat, he that renders
not good will to his wife being dead, how can he be a good governor over the
Church? So that by S Chrysostomes interpretation, S. Paul literally forbids
him to be made Priest, who has had mo Wives then one, whether it were at once,
or one after an other.

He corrupts the text of S. Chrysostom, putting for Page 175. Chrysostom. in
epist. ad Titum Hom. 2.
quae discessit (a se) her that is gone from him, instead of this word
defunctae, which is, dead. His conjecture taken of the Greek word, is void,
and nothing worth. For (...), decedo, does signify also to depart this life.
And it is plainer, that S. Chrysostom expressly confesses this sense, which
we defend, saying, Quidam hoc ita intelligunt, vt ad episcopatu^ is assumatur,
qui vnius fuerit vxoris vir. Some men do understand this matter, that he be
taken to Bishophoode, who has been the husband of one wife. And that this last
sense not being reproved of S. Chrysostom, is the most literal sense, it may
appear by these words of S. Paul. Let her be chosen a widow, quae fuerit
vnius viri vxor, 1. Tim. 5.
which has been the wife of one husband. Wherefore as by the wife of one
husband, she is meant, which has not ben twice married: so by the husband of
one wife, he likewise is understood, that has not ben twice married.

Cassiodorus (says M. Jewel) writes, that Eupsychius, Page 176.
was a Bishop. What a shameful corruption is this, to add the word,
Bishop, unto the text, whereas it is evident by Sozomenus the author of the
Story, and by Nicephorus, that Eupsychius was a lay gentleman of Cesarea in
Cappadocia, as is before declared. What vile forgerie is this M. Jewel, to
turn a Gentleman, or a Noble man, into a Bishop, only that a Bishop might
seem to have married? So little can your Marriages of Bishops, and Priests
be maintained without Lies.

Page 175.
which the Gloss allows not, leaving that, which it allows.



Page 182.
and Deacons should be the husbands of one wife: the sense is not well given.
It is to be understood, that none other husbands should be Bishops, or
Deaco^s, but such, as had been, or were, the husbands of one wife.

in the same tenor and course of speech S. Paul shows, that some shall
forbid to marry. This is false. It does not follow immediately. For there goes
between a commendation of the Church (which S. Paul names the pillar of truth)
and likewise of the Incarnation of Christ. After which words S. Paul says.
^. Tim. 4.
The spirit says plainly, that in the last days some shall depart from the
faith. From which faith? Verily from that faith of the incarnation, and that,
whereof the Church is the pillar. Mark the word discedent a fide, Discedent
a fide.
they shall depart from the faith. He that departs from the faith, once had
the faith. We never had your faith M. Jewel, neither in any other point, nor in
this concerning the marriage of Priests. But we had, and have the faith, that
the lawful Marriage of Christian persons is a Sacrament, and that faith had you
once, when you were baptized, and incorporate in our Church. You are gone from
that faith, and not we. S. Paul then teaches, that some shall forbid Marriages,
as the Manichees, Encratites, and Marcionistes did, of whom the Apostle
prophesied, as S. Chrysostom, and diverse other Fathers do expound. But (says
M. Jewel.) He that condemns Marriage in a few, Page 182.
must likewise be called a condemner of Marriage. Why sir, do you allow

There is impediment, as of blould, as between brother and sister, so of Solemn
Vow, and of Religion, as between a Priest and a Nonne, or any other woman. And
as S. Paul does allow the impediment of blood, counting him a great sinner,
who had his fathers wife: 1. Cor. 5.
so does he allow the impediment of a vow, when he says, that the young widows
(if they should be received into the number of those chaste persons, whom the
Church used to feed) were like to have damnation, because they would desire
to marie, and so would in heart at the least break their former faith, or
promise of perpetual Chastity. But (says he) let young widows marry, 1.
Tim. 5.
and bring forth children. As who should say: If they were received into the
solemn number of Widows, then they should make promise not to marry: and
that promise perhaps they would break, if not openly, yet in heart.

Thus it is no Devils doctrine to teach, that a person having once vowed, can
not marry: because he him self gives the impediment, and not the law of the
Church. For that law was in S. Paul's time, as I now have showed after S.
Chrysostoms mind. Oecumenius says, Pactae sunt quod Christo adiungerentur,
reijciunt autem ipsum ad humanas reuolutae nuptias. (Item post) verum quia hoc
faciunt, nubant, seipsas Christo non despondeant. They couenaunted that they
would be joined unto Christ, but they shake him of, and turn them selves to
human Marriages. But because they do so, let them marry on Gods name, let
them not (by Vow) betroth them selves to Christ. Mark Reader, S. Paul would
not have them marry after their profession of Chastity (that might not be in
any wise) and therefore he will have them not to be professed, and so to marie.
Page 182.
Pope Innocentius is belied. he condemns If thou deal not chastely, Page 183.
what is meant thereby, and how reasonably it is said, Infra. li. 5. cap. 15.
I shall hereafter declare in due place. Where I shall clear the Canonistes of
the sclaunder you utter against them of teaching the people, that Simple
fornication is no sin, which they never taught.

We say not that men in Marriage can not please God: he that joins his
virgin in Marriage, does well, 1. Cor. 7.
but he that joins her not, does better.

Whom God has joined, let no man sunder. But God neneuer Page 185.
is against his Marriage. Again he is already married to Christ, who lives
for ever, and so whiles his first spouse lives, he may marry no more. that
is S. Basils reason. Although simple fornication be not now pounished

Last of al you repeat many abuses of the Clergy, which as in some part may
seem to arise and come of single life, so I doubt not, but if Priests were
commonly married, the case would be much worse. Certainly seeing Christ
said, there are Eunuchs, Math. 19.
who gelde them selves for the kingdom of heaven, the Church has done right
well, to reserve the highest order for them, who do most force unto them selves,
for heavens sake. And seeing S. Paul would have al men chaste without Marriage,
as him self was: much more it is to be thought, 1. Cor. 7.
he would have his own Successors in the public ministry to be such.

Again if among married men, he be meetest to be chosen Priest, who has had
but one wife, he yet were more meet, who had none at al. If before Priesthod
one wife be the most, afterward one is to much. If perfection, and an Angels
life be in most perfect chastity, that same is most meetest for Priests, who
are the Angels of God. If married persons ought to be apart for a time, to have
the more leisour to pray, and to communicate: he that must still attend the
public prayer, and must both offer, and minister the Communion, had need still
to abstain from wedlock: specially seeing the Priests of the law during the
time of their ministry, did not company with their wives.

Eusebius, and Epiphanius, account those counselles, and praises of single
life, which are in holy Scripture, to apperteine to Priests, as to the most
excellent degree, and not unto the Lay men: as who are permitted to use a
lower state of perfection. If no man that lives in warfare to God, do wrappe
him self in secular business, and yet S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.
that the married person does think upon the things of the world, and is
distracted thereby: how conveniently has the West Church ordained, that he
should only be made a Priest, who by Gods grace is content to profess and
lead a single life? Or how can that Bishop, or Priest wholly attend
hospitality and almose deeds, and the profit of his flock, and the setting up
of common schools, of universities, of hospitals, and almose houses for the
poor, and such other like deeds of mercy, and of public profit: who has his
wife and children to provide for? Had we now had in all England the furniture of
Colleges, and Schools (which God be praised we have, and should yet have had
more, had not the blaste of your Euangelical spirit overthrown them) if the
Clergy had always ben married? Nay the married Bishops, that now live so
merrily, and keep such continual dalliance and cheer upon other men's pains
and travails, were nourished in the Universities, specially by their almose,
and foundations, who were single, and chaste Bishops, and Priests. Thus though
nothing be perfect in this life, yet the single life, of the two, is more
convenient for the Clergy, both by Gods Word, and by the experience of Civil
policy.

Of the Canonical Scriptures, the Word of God, Traditions, etc. The second
Chapter.
Ievvel. Page 193. In prooem. in prouer. Solomon.
Touching the book of the Machabees we say nothing, but that we find in S.
Hierome, S. Augustine, and they holy fathers. S. Hierom says, the Church
receives them not among the Canonical allowed scriptures.


Harding.
The books of the Machabees canonical emonge the faithful.
S. Hierome speaks of such Canonical Scriptures of the old Testament, as the
very Jews allowed for Canonical. Such in deed the books of the Machabees are
not. But why have you not alleged S. Augustines words, as well as S. Hieromes?
Certainly because they condemn you. For if ye said all that of the books of
the Machabees, which S. Augustine says, you would allow them for Canonical
Scriptures among faithful Christians. August. de De Ciuitat. Dei, lib. 18. ca.
^6.
He says Machabaeorum libros non Iudaei, sed Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet. As
for the books of the Machabees, not the Jews, but the Church acco^pteth them
for Canonical. Hereunto I mai^ add: but M. Jewel, and his Companions, account
not the books of the Machabees for Canonical (...) the^^in they are of the
Jews Synagog, and not of the Church of Christ. Now see good Reader* (...) be
made, when he said as thou find noted in the m^rge^ of his book, Page 191.
that he would deny no more, then S. Austine, S. Hierom and other Fathers have
^enied. If you say, ye deny not the books of the Machabees* (...) ^eproue you
praying for the dead, which is so suffici^^^y proved by those books? Soothly
if you allow the one, you must allow the other.

Ievvel. Page 193. S. James epistle.
Eusebius says, S. James Epistle was written by some other, and not by S.
James, We must understand (says Eusebius) that it is a bastard epistle.


Harding.
You have abused Eusebius. For he leaves not there, but goes forward,
showing, what he meant by his word, li. 2. c. 23. li. 2. c. 23.
(...), which you turn, is a bastard. But Ruffinus more ciuilly translated
it, a no^nullis non recipitur, The epistle is not received of some men. And
Eusebius him self adds: Nos tame^ scinius etia^ istas cu^ caeteris public
aplerisque fuisse Ecclesiis receptas. Yet we know that S. James, and S. Iudes
Epistles with the rest, have been publicly received of most Churches, whereby we
learn that Eusebius mea^t by the word, (...), as much to say, as it is
accounted of some men, not to be S. James own. Touching his own judgment, he
shows him self to be of the opinion, that it is S. James epistle. Of some,
he confesses by those words, that it was doubted of. Therefore you have
reported Eusebius untruly, making him to pronounce negatiuely of the epistle,
which directly he has not don.

Jewel. S. Hierome says: It is said, that the Epistle of S. James, was set
forth by some other man under his name. Hiero. i^ catalog^.



Harding.
I grant. But S. Hierom had said before those words, which you allege, Vnam
tantum scripsit Epistolam, quae de septem Catholicis est. He wrote only one
epistle, which is one of the seven Canonical Epistles. Hiero. i^ catalog^
Ecclesi. script.
Again after the words by you alleged, it follows, that the said epistle in
process of time has obtained authority.

Ievvel 194. We (Lutherans and Zuinglians) agree thoroughly together in the
whole substance of the Religion of Christ.


Harding.
I perceive the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, is no substantial point
with you: and yet he that receives it unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.
receives his damnation. And he can not receive it worthily, who believes
amiss of it. But either the Lutherans, or the Zuinglians, or both, believe
amiss thereof, because in that behalf they ^eache clean contrary doctrine.
Therefore either both, as the truth is, or one of those two sects, as them
selves must confess, receives always unworthily: and consequently they must
confess, that one of the two sects is utterly damned, without any hope of
salvation. And certainly the Zuinglians, as also the Caluinistes are the
worse, because they believe. Gods word less in some degree, then Luther
taught; and go further from the literal sense of his Gospel, 1. Timo. 3.
and from the belief of the Church, which is the pillar of truth.

Jewel. 194. The Church is not God, nor is able of her self to make, or alter
any article of the faith.


Harding.
Esai. 59. Joan. 14.
But she is the spouse of God, and to her he has promised both his words, and
his spirit, to remain with her for ever. And therefore she is the chief
witness of all the articles of the faith. Wherefore seeing you hear^ not her
witness, you ought to be unto us, as an Heathen, Matt. 18.
and a Publican.

Jewel. Isai. 8.
Esaie says, to the law rather, and to the testimony. If they answer not
according to this word, they shall have no Morning light.


Harding.
Iere. 31. Hebre. 8.
This law is written also in our hearts, as Jeremy, and S. Paul do witness.
And the successors of the Apostles give also a testimony of Christ no less,
Joan. 15.
then Christ said the Apostles should do. Therefore the law and testimony,
whereunto Esaie calls, is as well that, which is written in faithful men's
hearts, and which is witnessed in the Church, as that which is written in the
old, and new Testament.

Jewel. Page 194. M. Harding says further, If quietness of Conscience comme
of the word of God only, then had Abel no more quietness of conscience then
wicked restless Cain. etc. Who would think, that M. Harding bearing such
a countenance of Divinity, would thus go about to deceive him false with a
point of Sophistry?


Harding.
Who would think, that M. Jewel being pressed with a point, whereunto he is
not hable to make answer, would not thus go about to deceive his unlearned
Reader with a point of Sophistry? I pray thee reader take the pains to
peruse, what the Apology says, what I have said in my Co^futation, and what
M. Jewel brings in the Defense, touching this matter. I desire no more, but
that thou read it, and then judge, as thou see cause.

It is an easy matter for M. Jewel, when he has made me to speak, what he
lists, to frame an answer accordingly. But I must always warn the reader,
not to believe M. Jewel, when so ever he reports either my words, or any
other man's, M. Jew. shifteth him self from Scripture, to Gods word.
but to repair to the Original. Fot seldom is he found clear of the crime of
falsifying. And here he entwiteth me of Sophistry, whereas in deed he uses
the grossest sleight of Sophistry him self. He conueigheth him self from the
Canonical Scriptures, to Gods word. Now I spoke of the Scriptures, and he
answers of Gods word.

Defense. page 191.
Whereas it is said in the Apology, that only in the Canonical Scriptures of
the old, and new Testament man's heart can have settled rest: Against this I
bring the example of Abel, Noe, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of those holy
men, that lived before the time of Ezdras, when the Scriptures were lost:
and here I demand whether their hearts never found settled rest. For if rest
be found only in the Scriptures, how could they have rest, when no book,
nor part of the Scriptures was written? If it be true, as the contrary can
not be proved, that Moses was the first, that ever wrote any part of the
Scriptures, shall we judge, that all the holy Patriarchs, that were before that
time, had no settled rest in their hearts? Co^fut fol. 82. b.
If this be true, then (say I) had good Abel no better rest in his heart, then
wicked restless Cain. As I said in my Confutation, so, for ought that M. Jewel
is hable to bring in his Defense, I say here again, what foolish, and absurd
Doctrine is this?

Now how does M. Jewel defend this Doctrine of his Apology? What is his
answer? I wish no more, but that it be read, and co^ferred with my
Co^futation: here to write out al again, it were too long. He slincketh away
from his own words, and by change of words, makes of it a new question. M.
Harding (says he) says further, If quietness of conscience, come of the word
of God only, then had Abel no more quietness of conscience, then wicked rest
less Cain.

You belie M. Harding, as your custom is: he says not so. Let the book be
trial between us both. The question is not, whether man's heart finds his
settled rest only in Gods word: (the quietness of the conscience was not
spoken of) but whether that rest you spoke of in the Apology, be found only
in the Scriptures. In your Apology ye said, yea, in my Confutation I say nay.
And now in your Defense, your self also say Nay: Galat. 2.
and so ye destroy, what ye builded before, and thereby prove your self a
preuaricatour as much to say, a false hartlot.

For in that now ye co^ueigh the matter from the Canonical Scriptures of the
old and new Testament, unto Gods word, what is this, but a secret recantatio^
of your former false tale? If your said former tale were true, and might be
maintained, why do you so shifte your hands of it? are you a shamed to be
accoumpted a Recantour, and yet recante in deed? Who sees not great
diversity between Gods word, and the written Scriptures? These be more special,
that is more general. By skipping from the written Scriptures, to Gods word,
you thought to set your self at h^^re liberty. And yet having taken your
liberty, as it were by breaking loose out of your chain, never so much, as
you seem to give over your former saying, and to recant: so you prove not your
later saying. You allege S. Chrysostom saying, In Genesis Ho. 2. Heb. 1. in Job.
27.
that God from the beginning spoke (...) m^n by him self: S. Paul, that God
in old times spoke many ways, and in sundry sorts unto the Fathers: S.
Hierome, that the holy Scriptures be everlasting, though the w^^ld shall have an
end, and that the thing, which is promised by the holy Scriptures, shall last
for ever, though the paper, parchement, and leaves of books shall be abolished.
Again you allege S. Chrysostom, saying, 2. Cor. hom. 18.
that S. Paul calls Preaching not written, the Gospel. But to what purpose
all this? How proves this, either, that you avouched in your Apology touching
the settled rest of man's heart, to be found only in the Canonical Scriptures
of the old; and new testament, or, which now you teach, having revoked your
former doctrine, that it is found only in Gods word?

Verily by ought that you have said yet, either in your Apology, or in your
Defense, you have neither showed, where man's heart shall find the rest you
spoke of, nor where we shall find you: so like a hunted fox you starte, from
one thing to an other, as it were, from bushe to bushe, from hole to hole. So
must they do, who serving the Master that you serve, take upon them to
impugn the Catholic Doctrine, and to defend Untruth.

Jewel. Ibidem.
God him self in his own person and presently spoke unto Abel. etc.


Harding.
That would I confess: But he spoke not to him by paper and incke. And yet we
are not now in worse case then the old fathers were. And the word of God in
their hearts (whereof they could not doubt) was ever much more clear and
plain, then that, which is in our books, whereof some men doubt many times.
Therefore we also in Christ's Church have as well Gods word in our hearts, as in
our books, whence also (to wit, out of our hearts) we may resolve the doubts,
which arise upon our books. But let us see this matter ripte up more deeply.

Jewel. Page 194. We speak not so precisely and nicely of Gods word written
in paper, for so it is a corruptible creature, and shall perish.


Harding.
Why then bind you us in all cases to the written word, and will have nothing to
be believed, or done, that is not written?

Jewel. Page 195. Chrysostom says, Preaching not written Paul calls the
Gospel. Homil. 18. in 2. Cor.



Harding.
But we only have preaching not written, Preaching not written.
for you will have nothing preached, which is not also written. Therefore we
only have the whole Gospel, and you have but one piece thereof.

Jewel. Page 195. S. Antonie the Eremite was notably learned, Aug. de
Doctrinae Christ. li. 1. in prologo.
and perfect in the scriptures.


Harding.
But without knowledge of letters, as with S. Augustine your self must
confess. This proves that by the Scriptures the sense, and meaning is
understood, and not the bare letter. Now the meaning of the Scriptures, not
only tolerateth, but conuinceth the unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's body,
Transubstantiation, prayers to the Saints, and prayers for the dead, as diverse
learned men have declared at large.

Jewel. The force and substance both of prayer, and of meditation depends of
reading. Aug. de scalis paradisi.c. 11



Harding.
Not only of reading. For then unlearned persons should neither pray, nor
meditate, nor have Gods word. Mark still, we deny not the written word: but we
say besides it, there are unwritten Verities, Basil. de Spiritu Sancto. cap. 27.
which thing you impudently deny.

Jewel. Page 195. S. Basil reckeneth Traditions to be equal with the word of
God, but that he vvrote those words rather of zeal, then of judgment
it(...) appear, because the traditions he names, are forgotten even in the
Church of Rome, as not to kneel in the Church upon the sonnedaie.


Harding.
If because some Traditions be altered, Traditions.
or abolished, they were not Gods word, then the precepte of absteining from
strangled meats, Actor. 15.
is not Gods word, because it is now abolished. But you miss M. Jewel. What
soever God commands but for a time, it is his word: And whatsoever his
ministers do command, as profitable to the Church for the present time, it is
Gods word, as him self said; Luke. 10.
He that hears you hears me. He that despises you despises me. How be it
S. Basil speaks not altogether as you report. He makes not al Traditions
equal with Gods word, simply, and in all respects: he speaks of three
things, of Doctrines written, and doctrines unwritten, and of customs, for
which we have no scripture. Of the unwritten doctrines it is, that he speaks,
not of customs, that they have equal force with the written doctrines, ad
pietatem, to train us to godliness. As touching unwritten customs, many
think your example false. For we were never forbidden to kneel at al upon the
Sonnedaie, but at our Lords prayer, whiles it is said at Mass time, as some
interpret it. At which time all the Popes Chapel to this day uses to stand
up, and not to kneel.

Jewel. Page 195. The rest of S. Basiles traditions stand in hallovving of
water, and blessing of oil: etc.


Harding.
Those Traditions, which belong to Sacraments, as that of the blessing of the
oil does, may never be changed. Those that are mere ceremonial, may be
abrogated by custom, as the thrife dipping of the child, or of any other that
is to be baptized, and such others the like, which neither S. Basile, nor we
ever made equal with Gods express word.

Jewel. Page 196. S. Paul saying, hold the Traditions which ye have
received, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
either by epistle, or by word calls them traditions, although they were
contained in his epistles and delivered to them by vvriting.


Harding.
And also, though they were not delivered by writing. You leave out half. For
he says by writing, or per sermonem, that is to say, by speech. The writing
contemed words: ergo, the speech, which differs from writing, were words
without writing.

Jewel. Page 196. Whereas S. Paul vvil have his own things to be kept,
Hieron. in 2. These. 2.
he vvil have no strange things thereto to be added.


Harding.
We add no strange things, but believe, that S. Paul preached, and delivered
the Sacrifice of the Mass unto the faithful people so plainly in practice, and
words, that the writing was not hable to show his mind so fully in that
behalf. And by Tradition we have as well that, which he taught by practice, as
that, which he preached, whether he wrote it, or no.

Jewel. Page 197. S. Paul by the word, Traditions, meant not Ceremonies, or
certain secret unknown Verities, ^. Cor. 15.
but the substance of the Gospel I have delivered unto you that Christ died for
our sins, says he.


Harding.
M. Jewels Secret unknown verities.
He meant not only Ceremonies, I grant. And as for secret unknown verities,
we have no such, except you are so mad, as to call praying for the dead a
secret unknown verity, which has even benne known to al men, yea women,
and children in the Church of God. And that custom of praying for the dead, S.
Paul did teach, as well as al other the Apostles, as Tradition tells us,
Homil. 69. Ad populu^ Antioche^.
witnessed also by S. Chrysostom. So that as the whole Gospel comes unto us
by Tradition, so does Mass, Dirige, Holy water, Lenten fast, and others.

Jewel. Page 197. Epist. ^6.
S. Augustine finds is not appointed by Christ, or the Apostles, what days
we ought to fast.


Harding.
Lenten fast is not found in the Apostles writings, but in the Apostolic
Traditions. Aug. in epist. 86.
You keep your kind, in alleging things out of their kind. S. Augustine there
speaks of that, which is to be found in the writings of the Apostles. For
thus it went before, In Apostolicis literis, in the Apostolic writings. There
he finds not the Lenten fast. But he finds it in the Apostolic Traditions,
saying in the very same epistle. In his rebus de quibus nihil cert^ statuit
scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei, vel instituta maioru^ prolege ^edendasunt.
Look in what things the holy Scripture has determined nothing of certainty,
the custom of the people of God, o^ the ordinances of the Forfathers, Custom
is a law.
are to be kept as a law.

Mark that the custom of Gods, people must be ^olden for a law: prolege, for a
law M. Jewel. It is the epistle alleged by you, that says, Traditions, and
customs must be kept for a law. And his own words another where are Vt
quadraginta illi dies ante Pascha obseruetur, Augustine. epist. 118.
Ecclesiae consuetudo roborauit. That the forty days before Easter should be
kept, the custom of the Church has confirmed, and strengthened it. And
generally he says: Quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto
terrarum orb obseruantur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel
plenarijs Concilijs commendata, atque statuta retineri. Look what things we
keep, not being written, but delivered by tradition, which are observed all the
world over, thereof intelligence is given us, that they be kept in ure, as
things commended unto us, and ordained either by the Apostles them selves, or
by the General Councelles.

Now seeing the Fast of the forty days was, and is generally kept in the
Church, and yet not first commanded by any general Council: it remains
according to S. Augustines rule, that it was instituted of the Apostles. And S.
Hierome by name says, it came from the Apostles. In fidei regula discrepamus.
We differ in the rule of faith from the Montanistes. For they deny three
persons confounding them into one. They account the second Marriages as il, as
Aduoutrie, and make three Lenten fastes. Nos vnam Quadragesimam secundum
traditionem Apostolorum toto anno, tempore nobis congruo ieiunamus: We fast at
a time convenient one Lent, in the whole year, according to the Traditions of
the Apostles.

Jewel. 199. M. Harding says, Persona, Ingenitus, Homousion, are not found in
the scriptures, but the sense and meaning is found there.


Harding.
So is the sense, and meaning of Mass, of transubstantiation, and of praying
to Saints found there.

Jewel. Page 200. Gennadius says, the perpetual Virginity of our Lady is
proved sufficiently by scriptures. In catalogo.



Harding.
Gennadiin catal. in Heluid.
This is a loud lie. Try it out who will, Gennadius says not so but only, that
S. Hieromes book, which he wrote against Heluidius, affirming that our Lady
bare children, after she had borne Christ, was sufficiently fournished with
Documentes
testimonies of the Scriptures. For although it be not expressly written, that
she was a perpetual Virgin, yet the faith thereof is most agreeable to the
Scriptures, and most certain in Tradition. But were not the Tradition so
strong, the Scriptures certainly might be doubtful enough in that behalf.

Jewel. Page 200. Of God and his word they would evermore have us stand in
doubt: but of the Pope, and his word, they say, in any wise we may not
doubt.


Harding.
Our doubt is not whether Gods word ought to be believed, no man doubts
thereof: But only what is the meaning thereof. And then besides to understand
it the better, we join universal tradition with it, and in all further doubts
we say, the Pope, or the General Council is the highest, and last judge in
earth to declare unto us the meaning of Gods word. Otherwise we should never
have an end of Controversies, as we see by experience between the Lutherans, and
Zuinglians.

Ievvel. Page 200. and 201. How know you says M. Harding, that the
scriptures, be the scriptures? etc. The Church of God had the spirit of
wisdoms, whereby to discern the true scriptures from the false. So says S.
In prooemi. in Luc.
Ambrose. S. co^t. Fau lib. 22.
Augustine. and 80. li. 6. ca. 2.
Eusebius. Yet vvil it not follow that the Church is above the scriptures.


Harding.
If the Church of God have the spirit of wisdom, to discern the true
scriptures from the false, shall it not also have the same wisdom of God, to
expound the holy Scriptures, and also to determine any question arising
thereon? Neither do we say, that the Church is above the Scriptures in
authority: but that it is to us better known, and as a more lively, so a more
plain teacher, then the Scriptures be.

For if we ask the Scriptures any question, Cleme^s Alexand. li. stro^. 1
be it never so hard, as Clemens Alexandrinus has well noted: They will answer
us no more, then it is written. But if any man ask the Church never so many
questions, if the knowledge be behooful for man's soul health, it will ever
make him to each question an answer, and so will dimisse him with a full
satisfaction touching al his doubts. 1. Tim. 3.
For this cause the Church is called the pillar of truth: And as you confess,
that the Church has showed us, which be the true Scriptures: so must you
likewise grant, that the Church has the spirit of God, to show us the truth
in all behooful cases, yea even in those, which be not expressly written. For
where is it written expressly, that the church of God should have the spirit
of God, for this end to show us the true Scriptures, to approve the true
Scriptures, and to condemn the false forgeries? Luc. 10. Mat. 18.
Christ said generally of al matters, He that hears you, hears me: Item,
he that hears not the Church, let him be to thee, as an Heathen, and a
Publican.

Of the Sacraments of the Church. The third Chapter.
Jewel. Defense. Page 103. and 104. M. Harding says, there be seven
Sacraments, which (as he says) do not only signify a holy thing, but also
do make holy those, to whom they be adhibited. But how can Matrimony
sanctify a man, and make him holy? Or by what institution of Christ
contains it grace in it self, and power to sanctify?


Harding.
Ephesians. 5.
S. Paul answers you thus. Ye husbands love your wives, as Christ has loved
his Church. And then he proves the wife to be the flesh of the husband, as
also the Church is the body of Christ. And so both ways the Prophecy of Adam
is verefied, Genesis 2.
that two shall be in one flesh. Sacramentum hoc magnum est in Christ and
Ecclesia. Sacrament Mystery.
This is a great Sacrament (or a great Mystery) in Christ and the Church.
For we stand not now upon the word, but upon the thing. What is that great
Mystery? First Matrimony is always a conjunction of two in one, both by
natural consent of minds and also (if it be consummate) by corporal
conjunction. Now by Christ's institution, that conjunction is also made
inseparable, Matt. 19.
when he said, That which God has joined together, let not man separate, or
put a sunder.

Now then this conjunction is made to be inseparable between faithful persons,
it is directed by Christ, and instituted purposely to signify his inseparable
conjunction with the Church. And whiles it is instituted of Christ to signify
that thing, it is made a Sacrament, or Mystery, whereunto Christ gives
grace, and holiness for that purpose. For when any thing, or action is
appointed by Christ to signify a holy thing in Religion, that action is
thereby made a Sacrament, and does sanctify the worthy receivers of it. We see
that Circumcision might be made, and was used among some Infidels, and to them
it was no Sacrament. Genesis 17.
But when the faithful were commanded to circumcide them selves, to signify
the Circumcision of the heart, which Christ should make in them that believed,
by his spirit and grace: then Circumcision was made a Sacrament, and did
sanctify the worthy receiver. Even so it is in Matrimony, as S. Augustine
says. August. lib. 1. de Nupt. and Concupis. cap. 10. Ephesians. 5.
Quoddam Sacramentum nuptiarum commendatur fidelibus coniugatis. Vnde dicit
Apostolus, viri diligite vxores vestras, sicut and Christus dilexit Ecclesiam.
A certain Sacrament of Marriage is commended unto the faithful married
persons. Whereupon the Apostle says, ye men love your wives, even as Christ
loved his Church. Huius proculdubio Sacramenti res est, vt mas and foemina
connubio copulati, quam diu viuunt, inseparabiliter perseuerent. Nec liceat
excepta causa fornicationis, a coniuge coniugem dirimi: hoc enim custoditur in
Christo, and Ecclesia, vt viuens cum viuente in aeternum nullo diuortio
separetur. The thing doubtless of this Sacrament is, The thing of the
Sacrament of Matrimony.
that the man and woman joined together in Marriage, as long as they live,
continue together vndisseuered, and that it be not lauful for the one to be
separated from the other, but for fornication. For this thing is kept in
Christ, and the Church, that he living with the living for ever by no divorce
be separated.

Here we learn, not only that the name, but also that the thing of a Sacrament
is in the Marriage of Christians: which thing does sanctify those persons,
that come worthily to Marriage. For as Marriage was from the beginning ordained
to begete Children, so by Christ it is ordained to a higher signification,
verily not to be separated, whiles the parties married together do live, and
thereby to signify Christ's inseparable vnio^ with his Church. The chief
signification of Matrimony.
And as that union of Christ with us is an inseparable sanctification to
faithful men, so is the sign thereof a special sanctification to them, who
married in our Lord. It is known, that as S. Augustine assigns, there are,
tria bona matrimonij, August li. de Nuptijs and Concupisc.
fides, proles, and Sacramentum: Three good things are in Marriage, the faith
(or fidelity of wedlock which the man, and wife must keep, rendering duty
the one to the other) the child which is brought forth, and the Sacrament,
whereof Christ said, That which God has joined, Math. 19.
let not man separate.

Jewel. 042. In this place M. Jewel sets us forth a great many of Phrases.
The Fathers entreating of the Sacraments, have used vehement, and great
words, etc.


Harding.
Whiles you hunte for words, and Phrases, you consider not, that the Church of
God had the practice of certain things, whereby the Fathers words were
perfitely understood. Restore us those things, which you can not deny to
have been in the Primitive Church, as holy oil, Chrisme, Monckes, consecrated
Virgins, Altars, and Sacrifice for the quick and dead, with other such: and
then talk you of words, what you list. I account it labor lost to dispute
with you about Phrases of speech, upon which Christ's faith depends not: but
upon his Institution, and the practice and custom of his Church, the best
interpreter of the same.

Jewel. Page 206. The Sacraments of the old, and of the new law, in truth,
and substance are al one.


Harding.
I know not what you mean by Truth, and Substance. I confess the effect of
them al tends to one end: That is to join us with God, and with Christ, in
heart, will, and glory. But after Christ's incarnation, grace is more
copiousely distributed by corporal instruments, to the end we may learn to
seek our salvation by the fleash and body of Christ, Sacraments are the
ordinary means vvherby to receive grace in our Souls. Marci 16. Chrysostomus
ad Hebrae. Homil. 14 1. Cor. 10. Johan. 20. Jacob. 5.
who was made Man to save us. And therefore although grace be only in our
souls, yet the ordinary mean of receiving grace, comes to us by the
Sacraments, accordingly as it is said, He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved. Baptismus (says S. Chrysostom) corporis mundatio non est, sed
animae. Baptism is not the cleansing of the Body, but of the Soul. Now the
Soul is cleansed only by grace. Therefore baptism gives grace, as an
instrument appointed thereto by Christ. And al we being many are one bread, and
one body, which partake of the one bread, to wit, of the body of Christ, says
S. Paul. Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgeuen. And he that is anointed
with oil by the Priests of the Church praying for him, in the name of our
Lord, shall have his sins forgeuen him, if he be in any.

Jewel. M. Harding vvil reply: S. Augustine says, In Psalm. 73.
the Sacraments of the new testament give salvation. But his meaning is this,
Our Sacraments teach us, that Salvation is already come into the world.


Harding.
So then Dare, is to teach, and Salus, is salvation come into the world. Here
is gaye gear for wantons, to dally with words, in matter of our Salvation.

Jewel. Contra Faust. Manich. lib. 19. cap. 14.
S. Augustine says in an other place: The Sacraments of the old law were
promises of things to be accomplished: our Sacraments of the new law are
tokens that the same promises be already accomplished.


Harding.
If your words had any pith in them, I would lay them out at large and answer
them fully: But now I grant all that you say. What then? Will it follow, that
because our Sacraments do show, that Christ is already come, therefore our
Sacraments give no grace? For that is the point which you deny. Nay rather
they give grace therefore, because they show so much by his Institution. For
Christ makes not naked shows, his words work, and his deeds be effectual
in the soul, and his Sacraments both show that, which is done, to wit, the
death of Christ, and make us partakers of the grace purchased by the same. He
that eats Christ's fleash, 1. Cor. 11. Joan. 6.
shows his death (says S. Paul) and he that eats my fleash (says Christ)
has life everlasting. Mark, how our having of life goes together with our
showing of Christ's death. You divide these matters, and make Christ's
Sacraments only to be shows.

Jewel. M. Harding says our doctrine is but in a corner of the world, and
that therefore Christ has given this vvatchevvorde of us, believe them not.
Howbeit so many kingdoms, Countries, Common weals, as profess this day the
Gospel, would make a good large Corner of the Church of God.


Harding.
I look not only to your present state, M. Jewel: but I look a little
backward. For Christ's Church began not with Friar Luther within these fifty
years, but fifteen hundred years past. Your Church is not yet very great, and
nothing so great, as the Arians was. Howbeit fifty years past it was so small,
that not only Christ, but even Photinus, or Pelagius would have benne ashamed
of you. For your candle was under a bushel, and your congregation in the
desert, or in the secret parts of the house, Math. 5. Math. 24.
which kind of Congregations, Christ willed us not to believe. For his City
is always upon a Hill, and can not be hid.

Jewel. Page 208. Christ meant of Antichrist, as it is very likely, when he
said, In Math. Homil. 49
believe them not. For out of the very true Churches come deceivers, as
Chrysostom says.


Harding.
And you are the members of Antichrist: for you came out of the true Church,
when you went from us.

Jewel. 208. Verily howsoever M. Harding vvil shift this matter, the plain
words seem rather to touch him, and his company, then either Luther, or
Zuinglius, or any other. For they can point with their fingers, and say, here
is Christ, and there is Christ: Behold in this pixe are three Christ's: in
that five: in that seven: in that more. Therefore it is likely that Christ
gives us this special vvatchvvord of them, and such others, believe them not.


Harding.
If those words, here is Christ, and there is Christ, Math. 24 Marc. 13.
were meant of his body in the Sacrament, even at his own Supper it might have been said, here is Christ, and there is Christ. For in every Apostles hand, or
mouth Christ then was. Ambro. de iis qui initiantur myster. c. 9.
For as S. Ambrose witnesses, In illo Sacramento Christus est, quia corpus
Christi. Christ is in that Sacrament, because it is the body of Christ.

S. Chrysostom of purpose answers your foolish objection: Chryso. ad Heb.
Homil. 17.
Quoniam in multis locis offertur (Christus) multi Christi sunt? Nequaquam, sed
vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic plenus, vnum
corpus. Because Christ is offered in many places, are there many Christ's?
No, not so. But one Christ is in every of the places, being fully here, and
fully there, it is one body.

Reservation of the Sacrament of the Alter
Again this Sacrament was preserved even in the Primitive Church, and sent by
Deacons to those, that were absent, as S. In Apologia. 2.
Justinius the Martyr, and S. Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24.
Irenaeus do witness. Exuperius also the Bishop of Tholosa (as S. In epist. ad
Rustic. Monachu^. Math. 24. Arius. Nestorius Hus. Luther. Zuinglius
Hiero^ shows) carried it in a wicker basket. So that it is but the lewd
Sowters Divinity, to expound, here is Christ, and there is Christ, of the
being of Christ's body in the Sacrament. And what was Christ's meani^g in
those words, it is expressed in the Gospel, that diverse false prophets should
arise in diverse corners of his Church, as Arius at Alexandria, Nestorius at
Co^sta^tinople, and likewise other Archheretikes in other corners, of the which
every one should challenge Christ to him: As for example, that John Hus would
say, Christ is well preached with us in in Bohemia only: Not so quod Luther,
but Christ is well preached here at Wittenberg only. Zuinglius then would say no
thereunto, but that he is well preached at Zurich only. Nay says Calvin, he is
most excellently, and most purely preached at Geneua. Tush quod Suenkfeldius,
Suenckfeldius.
he is better preached in Silesia. Ye are al deceived quod Waldo, VValdo.
he is best of al preached in certain dens about Lions. I perceive quod
Bernardinus Ochinus, Bernardi. Ochinus.
ye never were in Polonia: for there is the very sincere word of God
professed, and the doctrine for a man to have mo wives at once, is allowed. But
Osiander Osiander.
for his part cries out, that in Prussia the Gospel has more liberty,
because Duke Albert is for his own tooth. Well quod Brentius, Brentius.
when al is done, there is no doctrine like to the Vbiquitie frankly taught in
the Duchy of Wirtemberg. Ye are al far out of the way, say the Anabaptists,
Anabaptists.
for Friseland is alone, and there only Christ is truly preached, and that
should well appear, if our kingdom begone at Muster had gonne forward.

Now last of al crepeth me forth one Brown at London, with his unspotted
Congregation, otherwise called Puritanes. Puritanes
As we come last, say they, so we are purest, and cleanest of al others. For
we will have no jot of the Popes dregs, nor any religion, what so ever has been to fore. away with all: for all was naught until we came, and our way
doubtless is without fault. These and many other contrary Sects (M. Jewel)
chalenging each one of them the truth to them selves, are these Corner crepers,
who cease not to cry, here is Christ, and there is Christ, Math. 5.
of who^ we are al warned to beware. For in the mean time Christ is preached
truly in the only Catholic Church, in the light of the world, where his Candle
stands upon the Ca^dlestick to give light to all that are in his great House.
And in this sense do all the Fathers expound these words of Christ, as I might
at large show, if I had your boasti^g vain, and coueted to seem to say much
upon every thing, be-it never so plain.

Jewel. 208. M. Hardings fellows are not yet well agreed what to make of
their own Consecration.


Harding.
Your long needelesse process is answered with one word. Their question is
concerning a point not necessary, to wit, how Christ did consecrate. But they
are al agreed, that he made and consecrated his own body and blood, by what
means so ever he did it.

Jewel. 209. We use the words, that Christ used. If Christ and his Apvstles
consecrated, then do we undoubtedly likewise consecrate: And our intention is
to do that, Christ has taught us to do.


Harding.
Christ was a Priest, and consecrated as a Priest, as Lib. 2. epist. 3.
S. Cyprian, and Ad Heliodor, and ad Euagrium.
S. Hierom do witness, that as Melchisedech in foreshewing the figure of
Christ had done, panem, and vinum offerens, offering bread and wine: ipse
quoque veritatem sui corporis and sanguinis repraesentaret, Christ him self
also should make present the truth of his body and blood. And when Christ had
thus consecrated his body and blood, then he made his Apostles also Ministerial
Priests, Luc. 24.
saying, do ye this (wherein is contained, make this) in my remembrance. And
so they consecrated always as Priests, and taught us the oblation of the new
testament, Lib. 4. cap. 32.
as S. Irenaeus witnesses. But as for you M. Jewel, believing, there is no
external priesthood, and refusing to take the Sacrament of O^ders, which the
Church has always had: how can you have either the intention to consecrate,
and offer up Christ's body, or to do that thing, which you falsely believe may
not be done?

Jewel. Page 209. There is the body of our Lord (says M. Harding) be the
receivers believing, or not believing. But S. Augustine says: In Johan. Tract.
26
This is the eating of that meat, and the drinking of that drink, that a man
dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in him.


Harding.
That is in deed the worthy eating, and drinking, whereof S. Augustine
speaks. But S. Paul shows, that he, 1 Cor. 11.
who eats unworthily that meat, is guilty of the body of our Lord, which
should not be so by his eating, except it were the body of our Lord, which he
does eat.

Jewel. Page 109. Origin says, Est verus cibus quem, nemo malus potest edere.
In Math. cap. 15.
Etenim si malus posset edere corpus Domini, no^ scriberetur, qui edit hunc
panem, viuet in aete^num. The body of Christ is the true food, which no evil
man can eat. For if the evil man could eat the body of our Lord, it should
not be written, he that eats this bread, shall live for ever.


Harding.
You have fowly corrupted this place M. Jewel. Origin speaks not of the
Sacrament in those words, nor of the Sacramental eating. Yea expressly having
spoken before of the Sacrament, Origin. in Mat. c. 15.
he ends his talk thereof in this sort. Et haec quidem de typicosymbolicoque
corpore. And these things I have said of the typical and figurative body.
Where it is to be noted, Figurative body.
that the Sacrament is called a figurative body, because it is made present for
a figurative purpose, that is, to thend the death of the same body (which
death is: now past and absent) may be remembered most effectually by the
presence of the self same body, that died. Now goes Origin forward, saying:
Multa porro and de ipso verbo dici possent, quod factum est caro, verusque
cibus, quem qui comederit, omnino viuet in aeternum, quem nullus malus potest
edere. Et enim si fieri posset, vt qui malus adhuc perseueret, edat verbum
factum carnem, cum sit, verbum and panis vinus: nequaquam scriptum fuisset,
quisquis ederit panem hunc, viuet in aeternum. Moreover much might be said of
the word it self, how that it was made fleash, and the true food, the which,
he that eats, shall be sure to live for over, the which no evil man can eat.
For if it could so be, that he, who continues evil still, should eat the word
made fleash, whereas it is the word, and living bread, it should not have been
written, whosoever eats this bread, shall live for ever.

Origin fovvly corrupted by M. Jew.
These are the true words of Origin. But M. Jewel has so mangled them, that
the sense is clean altered. For in steed of verbu^ caro factum, the word
made flesh, he has placed the body of Christ, referring it to the Sacrament.
And whereas in Origin it is (edere) verbum factum carnem (to eat) the word
made flesh: he has made exchange thereof into edere corpus Domini, to eat the
body of our Lord. And so whereas Origin meant, that evil men can not eat
spiritually, and effectually the Divinity of Christ, so as it dwells
corporally in his flesh: M. Jewel has taught him to say, that an evil man can
not in the Sacrament eat Christ's body.

Jewel. Page 210. We say with S. Augustine the Sacrament is not our Lord, In
Johan. Tract. 5^
but the bread of our Lord.


Harding.
S. Augustine denies not the Sacrament to be our Lord, he has no such words.
Howbeit we our selves would deny it, in some sense. For some time the
Sacrament is taken for the form of bread and wine, and that in deed is not
our Lord.

Jewel. 212. M. Harding might account not only seven, but also seuenteen sundry
Sacraments.


Harding.
I account only seven in such sense, as the Church properly takes a
Sacrament. And how that is, I showed before.

Jewel. page 213. Thus we say it can not be proved, that this number is so
specially appointed. As for the reasons of seven seals, seven trumpettes,
seven stars, seven golden Candelstikes, and seven eyes, they are childish.


Harding.
We ground not our seven Sacraments upon those similitudes. Seven Sacrametes.
August. de Ciuit. Dei li. 11. c. 30. and de doctrina Christiana lib. 2. cap. 16.
Albeit if any man apply some of those matters to the seven Sacraments, it is
not childishely done: seeing S. Augustine confesses, that the Mysteries of
numbers be great in the holy scriptures.

Jewel. 213. Unto every Sacrament two things are necessary: a sensible
outvvard Element, as in Baptism Water, in our Lords Supper Bread and Wine,
and the word of Institution.


Harding.
Thus far we are agreed with you.

Jewel. Matrimony, Order, and penance have the word of God, but they have
no outvvard creature or Element. Extrems Unction, and Confirmation, have
neither word, nor Element.


Harding.
To answer you herein M. Jewel I can not do better, Conci. Florentin. in
union Armeniorum.
then to send you to the Council of Florence, and to the books, wherein the
order of our Sacraments are contained. Where you shall find, that there
lacks neither the word of Institution, nor convenient Element. It is
yenough to us, that both by the word of God, and by the perpetual doctrine of
the Church we are taught, Act. 8. Jacob. 5. Luc. 22. Joan. 20.
that these seven are Sacraments. Confirmation is proved in the Acts of the
Apostles: Extreme Unction in the Epistle of S. James: Order in S. Luke, and in
S. John. Now baptism, and our Lords supper, your self grant: of penance,
and Matrimony I have said sufficiently already. To be short, we are in
possession of seven Sacraments: neither can you, nor any man now alive, or
that ever lived since the Apostles, show, that ever the Church was without so
many Sacraments. Impugn them when you list, I doubt not but you shall be
answered. For that ye have said hitherto is little worth, and most things are
lies.

Jewel. page 213. and 214. De Sacrame^t^ Eucharistia.
The ancient Fathers having occasion to entreat of purpose, and specially
hereof, speak only of two Sacraments, and so Bessarion namely says.


Harding.
None of them al has written purposely of all the Sacraments of the Church,
but as occasion served, M. Ievvel belyeth the ancient Fathers touching the
number of the Sacraments. Dionysius De Ecclesiast. Hierarch. Tertullia^. lib.
de resur. carnis. Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 1. ad Stephanu^. Bessarion de
Sacrame^to Eucharistiae. Bessarion belyed by M. Ievvel.
they now speak of two, now of more. Of two they speak the more specially,
because the custom was to give them both together, to those, that were of
discretion.

Howbeit Dionysius Areopagita the most ancient of al, entreats of many more,
as his book de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia does witness. Tertullian besides
Baptism, and the body of Christ names together with them Anointing, and
Signing, and Imposition of hands. And the Doctors which you bring, affirm
two, but they deny not more. Yea S. Cyprian, whom you cite in the first place,
can not be proved there to mean by both Sacraments, Baptism, and the supper
of our Lord.

Bessarion says, two were delivered plainly in the Scriptures, but he
confesses more which are delivered also in the Scriptures: though not so
plainly as the other two. And he expressly names Chrismatis Sacramentum, the
Sacrament of Confirmation, or of Bishopping. Of the other Sacraments in
general he speaks twice in the beginning of that Treaty. Wherefore there is
an impud^nt he included in your words, where you say, that I have in express
words, The only two Sacraments of the Church. So that now we may couple
you with Beza, ^^o teaches the same doctrine in his Confession, and iu^^ly call
you both false teachers.

Jewel. 214. Al these things not vvithstanding the Tridentine Council
concludes seven Sacraments.


Harding.
So it ought, and may easily do M. Jewel, any thing that you have yet
brought, notwithstanding. You prove in deed that there are two Sacraments, but
that there are no more, you have not brought so much as one apparent authority,
Saving that of Bessarion, who nevertheless is utterly against you. For he
believed, and taught, that there were seven Sacraments, Bessarion De Sacramento
Eucharistiae.
as by that Treaty it may well appear. But what should I do good reader,
should I now prove that there are seven Sacraments? Certainly it were easy
for me so to do, and to set out a book of that Argument far greater, then
M. Jewels is. And that may well appear true by that Ruardus Tapper, Cardinal
Hosius, and Petrus a Soto with diverse other learned men have done in this
behalf. I am sure M. Jewel will not deny, but I were hable to english at the
lest that, which I should find in their Latin books. And yet therein stands
his whole show. For in deed he does little else, but english that which the
Germans and Geneuians books have. The 7. Sacraments proved out of S.
Augustine. Augustiniana Co^fessio.
The untruths, and scoffs, that he adds of his own, though they be many in
number, yet do they not greatly increase the bulk of his volume. Besides al
other Catholic books there has one benne set forth of late by the learned
Jesuits of Dilinga in Germany, entitled Augstuiniana Confession, where in
manner no word is found besides that, which is in S. Augustins own works.
And there al seven Sacraments are proved at large, out of S. Augustine alone,
and that may suffice in this behalf. For if ye refuse S. Augustines
authority, I know not whose authority ye will allow.

Of the power of Baptism in infantes, and of Concupiscence. The 4. Chapter.
Harding.
What M. Jewel would say in this matter, Incertaintie of M. Jewels doctrine.
Page 215. Page 216. Page 215.
I can not certainly tell: he is so inconstant, and like a man, that is half
ashamed of his doctrine. For one while he says, the Sacrament depends of no
man. At another time, The just man shall live not by the faith of his parents,
but by his own faith. And yet he says, S. Augustine, Justinius Martyr, S.
Cyprian, S. Hierom, and others write plainly, that the faith of the Parents
does help. But how truly that is written, he will not say.

Again, he says, that Infantes are not void of faith: Page 216.
A little after he writes, God is able to work salvation both with the
Sacraments, and without them. And then he mingleth the Sign with the Thing,
and the Thing with the Sign. Last of al he says, In deed, Page 217.
and in precise manner of speech, Salvation must be sought in Christ alone,
and not in any outward signs. In effect he sticks, and makes much a do
(and feign he would if he durst) bring forth this proposition plainly,
condemned of the Church in old time, That infantes may be saved without
Baptism. But it is the heresy of Pelagius, and the same is against the word
of God, saying, Ioban. 3.
Except a man be borne again of water, and of the holy Ghost, he can not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. For whereas says with the vow and desire of
baptism in a time of necessity, does serve him, that has discretion to
believe, Augustinus Epist. 23.
seeing the said faith is not in the child, except baptism, which is the
Sacrament of faith, be received of him: it does follow, that Children dying
without Baptism, are condemned. This much may suffice for that point.

Jewel. Concupiscence remaining in the faithful after baptism, is sin
forcing S. Paul to cry out, Romans 7.
I see an other law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and
leading me prisoner to the law of sin. And again. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death?


Harding.
1. Pet. 3.
It is to be understood, that whereas Baptism saves us, as S. Peter says:
al sin is washed away therein. And we are made a new creature, according to
that S. Paul says In Christ Jesus, Gal. 6. Chrysostom. Ibidem ad Galatas.
neither Circumcision is ought worth, nor vncircuncision, but the new creature,
meaning by a new creature, as S. Chrysostom, and other holy Fathers expound it,
that our nature, which was waxen old in sin, Repe^te baptismi lauacro
renouata est, non aliter quam si denu^ esset condita, is renewed in the washing
of baptism, none otherwise, then if it had been made a new. So that no sin
at al can be in us now baptized, if we have worthily received Baptism. Which
notwithstanding, there is evidently perceived in our fleashe a certain
resistance, and rebellion against Reason: in such wise that, as our mind, and
soul being endued with grace desires to do al goodness: so do our senses, and
sensual appetites intise and provoke us to much naughtiness.

Now because the sensual appetite deliteth us, and so overcomes us commonly,
more or less: therefore it is called the law of the fleash, or the law, which
the fleash would gladly follow, and obey: which law, or concupiscence, leads
us prisoners to sin, so much as lies in it, and so often as we obey it.

Whether concupiscence be sin, though we consent not unto it.
But the point of the question is, whether it be truly and in deed a sin in
us, although we consent not unto it. We say, it is not properly sin. M.
Jewel defends the contrary: but S. Paul's words prove not the concupiscence
which remains, to be a sin, except we obey it. Otherwise if of it self it
were sin, we had not benne made a new creature in Baptism. For the creature
wherein sin is, remains still an old creature. But albeit al sins be taken
away in Baptism, yet God suffers the concupiscence to remain in our
fleash, partly that we may by the Rebellion thereof, perceive from what an
enemy our soul is delivered, and so give thanks to God, as the Apostle does
in this place, Romans 7.
which M. Jewel alleged: partly that we may be exercised with tentation, to
the end we may be crowned for our victory. I therefore (says S. Paul) in
mind (or soul) obey the law of God, but in fleash I obey the law of sin.
And who knows not, it is the consent of the mind, and not the desire of the
fleash, which makes a man to be a sinner?

Concupiscence is in my fleash only, and not in my mind, except I consent
unto it, and so take it into my mind, and then in truth it is a sin. And
this is the very discourse of S. Paul. For when he had said, in mind (or in
the highest part of my soul) I obey the law of God, he concludes thereupon,
Romans 8.
Nihil ergo damnationis est his qui sunt in Christo Jesus, qui non secundum
carnem ambulant. Therefore no part of damnation is to them, who are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh. For if a man walk according to
the flesh, then in deed his Concupiscence, which before was no sin, is become
a sin. Thus albeit our flesh be the flesh of death, that is to say, Ibidem.
mortal, as S. Chrysostom expounds it, and therefore S. Paul would feign be
delivered from it, as fearing lest he should at any time yield unto it: yet if
he do not yield unto it, Romans 8.
there is no sin in him. For the law of the spirit of life (which is the
grace that justifies us in baptism) delivers him from the law of sin, and
of death everlasting.

Ievvel 217. Lib. 10. epist. 84.
S. Ambrose says. There is not found in any man such concord (between the
flesh and the spirit) but that the law (of concupiscence) which is planted in
the members, fights against the law of the mind. And for that cause the
words of S. John the Apostle are taken, 1. Joan. 1.
as spoken in in the person of al Saints. If we say, we have no sin, we
deceive our selves and there is no truth in us.


Harding.
I grant that in this continual fight we are daily so conquered in some small
sin, or other, that we never remain any long time without venial sin. But
that happeth, because we yield, and consent unto sin, and not because the
concupiscence of it self is sin, before we have consented unto it.

Ievvel. 217. S. Augustine says in most plain wise: Contra Iulianum lib. 5.
c. 3.
The concupiscnce of the flesh, against which the good spirit lusts, is
both sin, and the pain of sin, and the cause of sin. Yet the late
blessed Chapter of Trident in spite of S. Augustine, has published the
contrary.


Harding.
Thus ye speak in spite of the Counsel. Verily the Counsel of Trent did
determine that, which it found in S. Augustine, who teaches most manifestly,
that the Co^cupisce^ce is not properly sin, but is only called so. And thereby
you know how S. Augustine is to be understood in the place by you alleged.
His most plain words are these. Augustine. co^t. duas epist. Pelagi. li. 1. ca.
13.
Dicimus Baptisma dare oi^m indulgentia^ peccatoru^, et auferre crimina, no^
radere: Sed de ista co^cupiscentia carnis, falli eos credo; vel fallere, cu^
qua necesse est, vt etia^ baptizatus, and hoc, si dilige^tissime proficit, and
spiritu Dei agitur, pia mente confligat. Sed haec etia^si vocatur Peccatu^, non
vtique quia peccatu^ est, sed quia peccato facta est, sic vocatur, Sicut
sciptura, manus cuiusque dicitur, quod manus ea^ fecerit. We say that Baptism
gives remission of al sins, and that it takes crimes quit away, and does
not shave them (as who would say, it leaves not the roots behind). But I
suppose that (as touching this Concupisce^ce of the flesh (they be either
deceived them selves, or that they deceive others. For of this Concupisce^ce he
also, who is baptized, yea though he profit neuel so well, and be guided with
the spirit of God, must of necessity suffer in his Godly mind some conflicte.
But this Concupiscence, albeit it be called sin, yet verily it is not so
called, because it is sin, but because it is made by sin. As for example,
any writing is called the hand of him, that wrote it, because the hand made it.

If then S. Augustine say most distinctly, that the Concupiscence in them, that
are baptized, is not a sin, how spitefully, yea how falsely also have you
said, that the Council of Trent defined the contrary in spite of S. Augustine?
I pray you be not so angry with the Council of Trent. If your stomach will not
hold in that spiteful humor, but you must needs utter it: yet will truth be
truth.

Of the Real presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament of the Altar. The 5.
Chapter.
The Apology. Page 218.
We say that Eucharistia, that is to say, the Supper of the Lord, is a
Sacrament that is, an evident representation of the Body and Blood of Christ:
wherein is set, as it were before our eyes, the death of Christ, and his
Resurr^ction, and what so ever he did, vvhilest he was in his mortal Body: to
the end we may give thanks for his death, and for our deliverance. And
that by the often receiving of this Sacrament, we may daily renevve the
remembrance thereof, to the intent we being fed with the Body and blood of
Christ, may be brought into the hope of the Resurrection, and of everlasting
life: and may most assuredly believe, that as our bodies be fed with bread
and wine, so our souls be fed with the Body and Blood of Christ.

Confutation. fol. 90. b.
Among al these gay words, we hear not so much as one syllable uttered,
whereby we may understand, that ye believe the very Body of Christ to be in
deed present in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Ye confess the
Eucharistia, which commonly ye call the Supper of the Lord, to be a Sacrament,
and all that to be none other, then an evident token of the Body and Blood of
Christ, etc.

Jewel. Defense. Page 220. Here is no mention, says M. Harding of Real
presence, and thereupon he plaieth us many a proper lesson. Notvvithstanding
here is as much mention made of Real presence, as either Christ, or his
Apostles ever made, or in the Primitive Catholic Church was ever believed.


Harding.
COnsidering how often this matter has been handled, and how few men are
ignorant, what each side says: I will be the shorter in this place. First, I
grant the Matt. 26. That these words, this is my body, this is my Blood,
are meant properly. Tertullia^. de resurr. Carnis.
Which conclusion is proved, because the words of Christ, this is my body, are
meant properly, and without any figure of speech, albeit the manner of the
presence be figurative.

My reason to prove, that Christ's words are meant properly, is the perpetual
interpretation of the ancient Fathers, the sense and custom of the Church.
To begin with Tertullian, he says in this wise: Caro abluitur, vt anima
emaculetur. Caro vngitur, vt anima consecretur. Caro signatur, vt and anima
muniatur. Caro manus impositione adumbratur, vt and anima spiritu illuminetur.
Caro corpore, and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima de Deo saginetur. The
flesh is washed, that the soul may be made without spot. The flesh is
anointed, that the soul may be consecrated. The flesh is signified, that the
soul may be fenced. The flesh is shadowed with the laying on of hands, The
flesh is the mean, whereby the grace of God passes unto the soul.
that the soul also may be lightened with the holy Ghost. The flesh is fed
with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul also may be made fat of God.

In these words, as diverse Sacraments are joined together, so herein they
agree al, that the flesh is the mean, by which the grace of God passes to the
soul. As therefore in Baptism the flesh is washed, that the soul may be
cleansed: so in the Sacrament of the Altar, the flesh is fed with the body and
blood of Christ, that the soul may be nourished with the godhead, which
dwells in that flesh. It is then to be noted, that the flesh eats not
material bread and wine, but the body and blood of Christ. For as the thing,
wherewith we are washed, is water, and that wherewith we are anointed is oil:
even so that, wherewith the flesh is fed, is the body and blood of Christ. The
instrument therefore of Gods grace is none other in the Supper, beside that
flesh, wherein the fullness of the Godhed dwells.

It is well known, that our flesh has no faith to eat Christ's body withal.
Therefore when our flesh is said to be fed with Christ's body, it is clearly
meant, that our flesh is also really fed, with Christ's own substance, as it
is washed with water. And as by water touching our flesh, cleannes comes to
our soul, even so by the body of Christ touching our flesh, the fatnes of God
(so Tertullia^ speaks) that is to say, the plentiful grace of God, comes
to our soul. Coloss. 2.
For in that flesh God the son dwells corporally. And by that only flesh
grace is most abundantly ministered unto us, for which cause that flesh is made
the instrument of grace to us.

Ambros. de Sacrament. li. 6. cap. 1.
Hereunto agrees S. Ambrose: Idem Dominus noster Jesus Christus consors est and
diuinitatis, and corporis: and tu qui accipis eius carne^, diuinae eius
substantiae in illo participaris alimento. The same our Lord Jesus Christ is
partaker both of Godhead, and of body. And thou which receiuest his flesh, art
made partaker in that food of his Divine substance. There S. Ambrose spoke of
receiving the Sacrament, and expounded, how Christ is the living bread, that
came down from heaven. Joan. 6.
His flesh (says he) came not from heaven: but whiles thou receiuest that
flesh, in that food thou art made partaker of the godhead. But if it were
bread, which we receive at Christ's supper, in that food of bread we should
not be made partakers of the divine substance. For the divine substance is in
none other food (as to be received of us) but only in the flesh and blood of
Christ. And there it is for our sakes: and for that divine substances sake, the
flesh of Christ is given really to us: that thereby the Godhead may the more
mightily pour grace, and the seed of immortality into our souls.

By faith we might feed of the Godhead, but by that means only we should not
be made partakers of the godhead as by the best mean. For the flesh of Christ
with our faith, is a better mean to derive the godhead unto us, then faith
alone. Faith suffised the old Fathers, because there was yet no better mean.
But when Christ had once taken flesh, then his flesh together with says, Joan.
1.
was an other manner of mean to make us partakers of more abundant grace.
Christ is touched now of us. Luc. 6.
For now we touch really the flesh of Christ by the forms of bread and wine,
even as in the days, when he lived in earth, diverse persons touched him by
touching his garment, which was about his flesh. And by that means as they
were most spedily healed, so are we.

Chrysostom cries out: Chrysostom. in epistol. ad ephesians. homil. 3.
Quomodo comparebis ante tribunal Christi, qui manibus, ac labijs immundis
ipsius audes contingere corpus? Et regem quidem nolles ore tuo foetido
adosculari, regem vero coeli anima graueolenti oscularis? Oro te, an voles
manibus illot is ad oblationem accedere? Atqui manibus quidem ad tempus
contin^tur, in ill^m ver^(...) resoluitur, seu diuersatur. Cur non vasa vides
ita vndique lota, ita splendida? Illa non sunt capacia illius quem in se
habent, non sentiunt illum, nos vero plane. How shall thou appear before the
throne of Christ, who art so bold, as with unclean hands, and lips to touch
his body? Thou would not adventure to kiss the king with thy stinking
mouth, and will thou kiss the king of heaven with a foul stinking soul? I
pray thee, will thou not wash thy hands, before thou come to the oblation?
And yet in thy hands he is holden but for a time, but into the soul he is
wholly resolved, or (there) makes his abode. Wherefore beholdest thou not the
vessels, how they be clean washed, and shine full brightly? And yet they be not
partakers of him, nor feel him, whom they contain, but we do truly.

Christ holde^ in our hand.
In this discourse it is evident, that we touch Christ in the Sacrament. In so
much that he says, the vessels hold him, our hands hold him, and our soul
holds him. Mark well that the self same thing is in the vessels, (to wit, in
the patin, and in the chalice), and in the hand also, which is in the soul.
Bread and wine are not in our soul but only Christ's fleash. Wherefore it is
Christ also which is in the vessels, and in our hand* But he is holden in our
hand, says S. Chrysostom, ad tempus, a while. But he dwells in our soul
none other wise, then if one thing were made of both, and one were resolved
into the other. Again the vessels hold him, but they partake him not, because
they lack faith. But it is the same Christ in the vessels and in our hands,
which is in our soul. For from the vessels he comes to our hands, and from
our hands into our bodies, and so into our souls. What extreme impudency
then is it to say, that in these words S. Chrysostom meant not the blood of
Christ to be really in the Chalice, and his body to be really under the form
of bread?

Leo the great says, Leo sermon. 6. de ieiunio. 7. mensis. Christ's body is
received with mouth.
ye ought so to communicate of the holy table, that ye doubt nothing at al of
Christ's body, and blood. Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur, for that
thing is taken in by mouth, which is believed in faith. But the thing believed
in faith concerning Christ's supper, is the manhod, and godhead of Christ.
Therefore the self nature of God, and man, is received in mouth. What can be
prentended here to the contrary?

Cyrillus says, The mystical blessing, Cyrillus lib. 10. in Joan. c. 13.
when it is becomme to be in us, does it not cause Christ to dwell corporally
also in us, by the communicating of his flesh? Mark that the mean of Christ's
dwelling corporally in us, is the receiving of the Sacrament. And with Cyrillus
it is well known, Hilarious de trinit. lib. 8. Gregorius in Euangelia homil. 22.
how thoroughly S. Hilarie agrees.

Last of al S. Gregory says: Quid sit sanguis Agni, non iam audiendo, sed
bibendo didicistis. Qui sangus super vtrumque postem ponitur, quando non solum
ore corporis, sed etiam ore cordis sumitur. In vtroque etenim post sanguis
Agni est positus, quando sacramentum passionis illius cum ore ad redemptionem
sumitur, ad imitationem quoque intenta mente cogitatur. Nam qui sic redemptoris
sui sanguinem accepit, vt imitari passionem illius nec dum velit, in vno post
sanguinem posuit. What the blood of the Lamb is, ye have now learned, not by
hearing, but by drincking. This blood is put upon both the posts, when it is
received not only by the mouth of the body, but also by the mouth of the
soul. For the blood of the Lamb is put upon both posts, when the Sacrament
of his passion is both received by mouth for our redemption, and is also
ernestly thought upon in the mind, for imitation. For he that so receives the
blood of his Savior with this mind, that he is not yet willing to follow his
Passion: has put the blood but upon one post.

The very same blood which is received with the mouth of the heart, is also
expressly taught, to be received with the mouth of the body. It is not
therefore bread, that enters into the mouth of the body, and it is the flesh
of Christ, that enters into the heart. But the self same thing, which the heart
feeds on, enters in at the mouth. These are such testimonies, that can never
be avoided by any Answer, and at this present they may suffice for this
controversy of the Real Presence. For what soever M. Jewel brings, well may
it perhaps prove a figure, which I grant, but that figure is also the truth:
as it may appear by these witnesses now alleged. For the Fathers be not
contrary one to the other, but agree al in one faith, and doctrine, specially
in this matter, which was ever so continually believed and practiced in the
whole Church.

That in old time many faithful at the celebration of the holy Mysteries
stood by, who received not the Communion. The 6. Chapter.
Ievvel. Page 225. Good men, says M. Harding, withdraw them selves, and
are contented to be present only, and to stand by, but receive not the
sacrament. Ad ephesians. homil. 3.
But Chrysostom says, thou may no more stand here, then an Heathen, that
never was christened.


Harding.
YOu ever make your advantage of untrue report. I did not call men good, for
withdrawing themselves: but whereas in consideration of their unworthiness
they would humbly withdraw them selves: I said, this desire to be present, and
deuoutely to stand by, Whom S. Chrysostom calls a Catechume^, M. Ievvel
interprets a Heathen.
was commendable. As for S. Chrysostom, you abuse him very much, by
interpreting, whom he calls a Catechumen, who is a learner of the faith, a
Heathen as though they were Heathens, that profess the faith, which is taught
in the school of Christ. It was truly an heathnish interpretation of yours.

But that very place of S. Chrysostom proves, it was become to be a custom
in those days, the Christians to be present at the holy Mysteries, and to
stand by, although they did not receive. And S. Chrysostom also suffered his
own people and diocesans, so to do. How be it reproving them for negligence in
not receiving, he vehemently exhorted and stirred them to often receiving. Qua
ratione Praecodicit, Abite, qui preces fundere no^ potestis? Chrysostom. ad
ephesians. homil. 3.
Tu vero impude^ter perstas. Verum no^ es istoru^, sed de illis qui communicare
possunt. Et tame^ rem ha^c nihil curas, nihil aestimas? (Item). Aduenisti,
hymnum cecinisti, cum ci^bus reliquis ex eorum te numero esse qui digni sunt,
hoc ipso confessus es, quod non cum indignis abscessisti. Quomodo cum manseris,
de mensa ista non participas? For what consideration says the Crier of the
Church, depart ye, that can not pray? Yet thou stand still impudently. But
(thou will say) thou art none of those, but of them, who may communicate, and
yet carest thou nothing for it, regardest it nothing? Item afterward. Thou art
come hither, thou have song an hymn, in this thy fact, that thou did not
depart with the unworthy, thou have confessed thy self with all the rest, to
be one of them, that are worthy. Wherefore then do thou not participate of
this table, seeing thou remaynedst behind?

Thus we see, it was the custom for the faithful people, to be present at the
mysteries, and to stand by, though they received not the communion. And albeit
S. Chrysostom reproves them fot not communicating, yet he does not
excommunicate them, as breaking the order of the Church in tarying. And yet if
there had been such an order, he would have caused the Deaco^ no less to have
driven them out, then the Catechumens, the possessed of Spirits, or the
penitentes. But this odds there was, that they only were of necessity driven
out of the Church, who though they would, might not communicate: But the rest
that might communicate, did, and might tarry, albeit they would not communicate.

Now a wise man (as M. Jewel takes him self to be) would understand, that how
earnestly soever S. Crysostom speaks, to provoke those that were present, to
communicate: yet his meaning was not to burden them with any mortal sin for
standing by without receiving the communion. His words therefore import a
counsel rather then a precept. And verily of the two, it were less evil to
stand by, and not to communicate, then neither to communicate, nor to stand by.
Neither is the standing by that, which chiefly S. Chrysostom reproved, but the
absteining from the Communion. And there is no doubt, but if (whereas none at
al by his own words did sometime communicate) S. Chrysostom had seen every
one go out of the Church, and him self leafte alone: he would then as fast
have called them in again, bidding them at the lest, to honor the Sacrifice
with their presence, if they would not sacramentally communicate.

S. Augustine cries out upon those Heretics, Augustine. co^t. episto.
Parmeniani. lib. 3. cap. 4.
that bring the words of the Prophets, which they spoke against the high
Priests, and yet will not look to the deeds of the Prophets, who always
remained in the same Church with those high Priests, whom they so much
reproved. But now the Lutherans, and Zuinglians, reproving us for certain
things, depart from our company, faith, doctrine, and Church: wherein they
have no example, neither of the Prophets, nor of the Fathers,

Of Communion in one, or both kinds. The 7. Chapter.
Jewel. Page 229. M. Harding says, neither Christ commanded, nor the
Apostles ordained, that the Sacrament should be delivered to the people in both
kinds. Certainly these words of Christ, Drink ye al of this, do this in
my remembrance, are very plain words of commandment, and institution. In
1. Cor. homi. 27. 1. Cor. 11.
Therefore Chrysostom says, that Christ said, both in the bread, and also
in the cup, Do this in the remembrance of me. And Theophylacte, The reverend
cup is in equal manner delivered to al. And whereas Christ says, drink ye
al of this, Paschasius puts thereto these words, tam ministri, quam
reliqui credentes, as well the ministers, as the rest of the faithful.


Harding.
Matt. 26. The literal meaning of drink ye al of this.
THe literal sense of those words, Drink ye al of this: was none other, then
that the Cup should be divided between all the twelve in such sort, that two, or
three of them should not drink it up, as thinking to have it filled again for
the rest: but that Peter should so drink, as to leave some for Ihon, and Ihon
so, as to leave some for Androw, and so each man to leave some deal, til the
very last man had drunk of that cup, once filled, and once consecrated: for to
that end, this word (al) does serve. And that may well appear by S. Luke, Luc.
22.
who gives us Christ's words in this wise: Accipite, and diuidite inter vos.
Take ye, and divide it between you. Which words S. Augustine says were spoken
of the Cup of the new Testament. Augustine. de consensu Euangelistaru^. lib. 3.
c. 1. Enim. Matt. 26. Drink ye al of this, in what s^^se was it spoken.
Marc. 14.
Divide this Cup between you, and drink ye al of this, does make al one sense:
and that may more plainly appear by the word, enim, (for) which does follow
in Christ's saying. -- Drink ye al of this, for this is my Blood. As if he
said, were not this my blood, each of you might drink up the whole cup, if
occasion of thirst so required. But now it is given, not to quench bodily
thirst, but to nourish the Soul. Therefore drink ye so, that al may drink of
this one Cup. Et biberunt ex illo omnes. And al they drank of it.

Thus we see by the Circumstance of the place, that the word (al) does nothing
else, but warn them of the Mystery present in the Cup: whereof we may not
infer that al, which at any time do communicate in one Church, must needs
drink of one Chalice, as the Apostles did: as neither that there must be still
twelve to drink of every Cup. For that was a Circumstance so used in Christ's
Supper, as we can make no law thereof. The true law to direct us in that
behalf, was committed to the Apostles, who taught the Church, that always at
the Consecration it was needeful for both kinds to be offered, and received:
as well that the being of Christ's Soul aparte from his Body at his death might
be signified, as also, that the public Minister might wholly represent by his
outward action, that here is al food necessary for man's comfort, whether
it be meat, or drink that he needs. As for the rest, it should be al one,
whether they that communicated, received one, or both kinds: because the
whole Body, Blood, Soul, and Godheade of Christ is fully present in either
kind.

Concerning that S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact^ have said, as well of the cup,
as of the bread, Do this in my remembrance: it means, that as well when we
consecrate the Body, as when we consecrate the Blood, or when we receive either
of them both, the end of our doing must be the memory of Christ's death.

Whereas Paschasius adds expressly, that the Ministers must as well drink of
the Cup, as the rest of the faithful, you name us not the place, where we
may find it: And therein you have done more politikely, then uprightly, or
plainly. For in deed it makes not for you. Paschasius speaks of the
spiritual eati^g or drinking. Paschasius ca. 15.
Paschasius in that place disputes of spiritual eating or drinking, and says,
that as well the faithful people, as the ministers, must drink spiritually of
this Cup. His words immediately before are these: Solus Christus est qui
frangit hunc panem, and per manus ministrorum distribuit credentibus, dicens,
accipite, and bibite ex hoc omnes, tam ministri, quam and reliqui credentes. It
is Christ alone that breaks this bread, and divides it by the hands of his
ministers unto the beleuers, saying, take ye, and drink ye al of this, as well
ministers, as also the other believers, this is the Cup of my Blood. Lo as well
the ministers, as al others are bid to drink of the bread or Cup
indifferently, to wit of Christ, so that he speaks no more of the Cup, then
of the bread, but al in like wise of Christ alone. For Paschasius says, ca. 15.
that Christ brake the bread, saing, take ye, and drink ye al of this, this
is the Cup of my blood. He then so mingleth the breaking of the bread with the
drinking of the Cup, that a man may well perceive, that he rather spoke of the
thing it self contained under those forms, then of either kind, or form by
it self.

Jewel. Page 230. M. Harding him self is forced to confess by the report of
Leo, Sermon 4. De qua drages.
that the first known deuisers, and authors of his Communion in one kind,
were the old heretics called the Manichees.


Harding.
Where have you any such word in all my book M. Jewel? I must bear with you
for customs sake. M. Ievvel forgeth words upon his Adversary.
For this is your accustomed manner, to make me speak, that, which I never
thought. It is to be understood, that before the time of Leo, and in his time
also, the manner and custom was, that the faithful people received either one,
or both kinds, as their devotion served them. By occasion of which custom,
The Manichees heresy denying Christ's true flesh.
the Manichees also covered their pestilent heresy, as they who believed, that
Christ had no true flesh, and consequently no true blood, but only a
fantastical, or apparent body without real truth of flesh and blood. They then
perceiving, that at the mysteries some Christians used to receive one kind
alone, mingled them selves always with them, and wholly absteined from the
Chalice. Which thing when Pope Leo perceived, he gave a watch word thereof
unto the people, saying, Sermon 4. De qua dragesim.
Cum ad tegendam infidelitatem suam nostris audeant interesse mysterijs, ita in
Sacramentorum communione se temperant, vt interdum tutius lateant: Ore indigno
Christi corpus accipiunt, sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino
declinant. Whereas they, to hide, and cloak their infidelity, be so bold, as
to be present at our Mysteries, they behave them selves so in the receiving of
the Sacraments, that now and then they may lurk the more fafely. They receive
with unworthy mouth the body of Christ, but as for the blood of our
redemption, they utterly refuse to receive it.

Now if these men came thus to the mysteries among the Christians to hide their
heresy, and infidelity: it is not to be thought, that they alone received one
kind. For then they had forthwith ben betrayed. But whereas other men received
either the body, or the blood, as occasion, or devotion required: the Manichees
ever received only the body of Christ, and never the blood, and that with this
false and heretical opinion, that Christ had no true blood. Gelasius then
being Pope not long after Leo, willed all the Christians, who before were at
liberty, to receive both kinds, that thereby al opportunity, and occasion
might be taken from the Manichees any more so to lurk, and to cloak their
impiety. Now to declare this much, is not to confess, that the Manichees
were the first deuisers of Communion under one kind. Wherefore you may have
good leave M. Jewel to take that spiteful Untruth to your self home again.

Ievvel. 230. You say, ye exhort the people to receive their maker. What
Scripture, what father, what doctor ever taught you thus to say? It is the
bread of our lord, In Johan. Tract. 59.
as S. Augustine says, it is not our Lord. It is a creature corruptible, it is
not the maker of heaven, and earth.


Harding.
Johan. 6. That we receive our maker in the B. Sacrament.
Good words M. Jewel, I pray you. Christ says: he, that eats me, shall also
live for me. Was he, that spoke these words, the maker of heaven, and earth,
or no? If he were, accursed be he, that demeth him so to be. If he be our
maker, and God, when we exhort men to receive him in the blessed Sacrament, why
may we not exhort them to receive their maker? And the body of Christ has no
other person to rest in, or to be sustained of, beside him only, who being the
Son of God, is maker of heaven and earth.

You know, that our forefathers were taught to call it their maker, even as S.
Augustine confesses, that his people called the Sacrament of the Altar,
vitam, life. The blessed Sacrament our Lord, and maker by verdit of S.
Augustine. Augustine. in Johan. Tract. 59. 1. Cor. 11.
You make as though S. Augustine denied the Sacrament to be our Lord, which he
never does, but rather says, Illi manducaba^t panem dominum, they did eat the
bread their Lord: but Judas did eat Panem Domini, the bread of our Lord,
against our Lord Illi vitam, ille poenam, They did eat life, he did eat
pain. For he that eats unworthily (says the Apostle) eats damnation to
himself. If the Apostles at the supper of Christ did eat only the Sacrament
(for the scripture speaks of none other thing eaten) and yet they did eat
the bread, which is our Lord (as S. Augustine says): Certainly the heavenly
bread of the Sacrament is our Lord. But Judas is said to have eaten the bread
of our Lord against our Lord, because he did eat the Sacrament unworthily, and
so he did not eat our Lord, as he is bread, that is to say, as he feeds, but
as he is a judge, and as he condemns the unworthy eater to everlasting pain.
For otherwise S. Augustine says, Augustine. Epist. 162. Judas did care his
maker.
that Judas did eat his maker. Sinit accipere venditorem suum, quod norunt
fideles, pretium nostrum. He suffers him that sold him, to receive our price,
which the faithful know. Our maker was our price through his human nature.

In illo Sacramento Christus est (says S. Ambrose) quia corpus est Christi
Christ is in that Sacrament, Ambros. de ijs qui initiant. cap. 9.
because it is the body of Christ Wherefore you see, how little cause ye have to
be so much offended with me, for saying, when we exhort the people to receive
the blessed Sacrament, that then we exhort them to receive their maker.

Of Transubstantiation, and M. Jewels falsehod in that matter. The 8. Chapter.
THe Real Presence is the ground of this doctrine. For seeing Christ said,
Math. 26.
take, eat, this is my body, these being propre, and not figurative words, as
it has benne showed before: it follows thereof that the body of Christ,
which is not made of nothing, is at the lest wise made really present by
virtue of the Consecration, the substance of bread and wine converted and
changed into it. Ambros. De Sacrament. li. 4. cap. 4. Chrysostom. De Eucharistia
in Encenijs.
For which cause S. Ambrose says: Vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane fit caro
Christi. When consecration is come thereunto, from of bread is made the body of
Christ. Likewise S. Chrysostom says: Number vides panem etc.

See thou bread? See thou wine? God forbid. Think not so. Like as if wax
be put into the fire, it is made like unto it, neither remains ought of the
substance of wax: even so here think the Mysteries to be consumed away with
the presence of that body. Sermon 5. de Pascha.
Eusebius Emissenus, in catechetica Oratione.
Gregorius Nyssenus, in Leuit cap. 22.
Hesychius, in Johan. 6.
Theophylante, de orthodoxa fide. li. 4. cap. 14. Theophylact in ca. Math. ^6.
Damascen, and all the other Fathers, teach the same doctrine, as it has benne
often told in other places.

Jewel. 239. What one word speaks Theophylact either of your
Transubsta^tiatiation, or of your Real Presence, or of your corporal, and
fleshly eating?


Harding.
Can there be any greater impudency in the earth, then to save, that
Theophylact speaks not one word, of these points? Beside all that I have
already brought out of Theophylact in my Confutation, how plain is he, where he
writes thus upon S. Matthew? Ineffabili operatione tra^siformatur, etiam si
nobis videatur panis, quonia^ infirmi sumus, et abhorremus crudas carnes
comedere, maxim hominis carnem. Et ideo panis quidem apparet, sed re vera caro
est. It is transfourmed by an unspeakable operation, although it seem bread
to us, because we are weaklinges, and do abhor to eat raw flesh, specially
the flesh of man: And therefore it appears to be bread, but in deed it is
flesh. Can these words be eluded, or shifted by your phrases, and figurative
speeches? It seems bread, but in deed it is flesh, says he, what is then
become of the bread? It is transfourmed, or made over into another thing. Into
what other thing, but into the flesh of Christ? And why remains the form of
Bread, whereas in deed it is made flesh? Because (says he) we abhor to
eat raw flesh, and specially man's flesh. And yet speaks not Theophylact
one word of Transubstantiation, or of the Real Presence of Christ's flesh? Many
other places in him are as plain as this, but he that has such a face, as to
deny this one, will not be moved, if we bring forth never so many. Having thus
abused Theophylact, perhaps he will seem for antiquities sake to bear more
reverence toward S. Ambrose, whom here he now takes in hand.

Jewel. Page 246. S. Ambrose says of the bread and wine, Sunt quae erant, and
in aliud mutantur. They remain the same, that they were, and are changed
into an other thing. S, Ambrose says not so. Phie, what falsifiyng is this?
The natural creatures of the bread and wine in the supper of our Lord (says
S. Ambrose) remain still in substance, as they were before: yet are they
changed into an other thing, that is to say, they are made the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, which before they were not.


Harding.
Many other places M. Jewel make me doubt, left you have your conscience
marked with the sign of Antichrist, that is to say, lest, although you see,
and know your self to lie, and to falsify the holy Fathers, yet you will not
yield unto the truth in any point. Much a do we had to persuade you, that
Sabellicus wrote Decades: and I think you would never have granted it, except
other men might have found the book in Powles Churchyard, and so have seen
your f^lsehood. But of al other impudencies, this which you stand in concerning
this saying of S. Ambrose is not the lest of al. Confutat. fol. 97.
For you defend it, and repeat it again and again, notwithstanding it was
fully by me confuted: and yet it is so childish an error, that I can not
think you to be deceived therein, but rather to be set desperately in defense
thereof, for which ye have nor learning, nor reason, and only because you
would not seem overcome. Who would think, that a man of your study, and
learning, and of that place, would say and maintein it, that S. Ambrose means
bread and wine after Consecration, to remain still in substance that, which
they were before?

M. Ievvel defends his part by falsifiyng S. Ambrose Ambros. de Sacra. lib.
4. cap. 4.
To begin first here with the term of bread and wine is no part of S.
Ambroses words: it is your forgerie, it is your corruption, it is one of your
own falsifiyinges: His words are these: Panis iste, panis est ante verba
Sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane fit caro Christi. Hoc igitur
astruamus. Quomodo potest, qui panis est, corpus esse Christi? Consecratione.
Consecratio igitur quibus verbis est, and cuius sermonibus? Domini Jesus. Nam
reliqua oi^a qua dicu^tur, laus Deo defertur, oration praemittitur propopulo,
pro regibus, pro caeteris: vbi venitur vt co^ficiatur venerabile Sacramentu^,
iam no^suis sermonibus sacerdos, sed vtitur sermonibus Christi. Ergo sermo
Christi hoc co^ficit Sacrame^tu^. Quis sermo Christi? Nempe is, quo facta sunt
oi^a. Iussit Dominus, et factu^ est coelu^. Iussit dominus, et facta est terra.
Iussit Dominus, et facta sunt maria. Iussit Dominus, et omnis creaturage nerata
est. Vides ergo qua^ operatorius sit sermo Christi. Si ergo ta^ta vis est in
sermon Domini Jesus, vt incipere^t esse, quae no^ era^t: quanto magis
operatorius est, vt sint quae era^t, and in aliud commutentur? Coelum non erat,
mare non erat, terra non erat. Sed audi dicentem: Ipse dixit, and facta sunt:
ipse mandauit, and creata sunt. Ergo tibi vt respondeam, non erat corpus
Christi ante Consecrationem, sed post Consecrationem dico tibi, quod iam corpus
est Christi. Ipse dixit, and factum est: ipse mandauit, and creatum est.

This bread is bread, before the words of the Sacraments: when Consecration
comes to it, of bread is made the flesh of Christ. Let us confirm this. How
can that, which is bread, be the body of Christ? By Consecration. With what
words then is Consecration made, and with whose words? With the words of our
Lord Jesus. For as for all the rest, that is there said, praise is given to God
prayer for the people is sent before, for kings, and for all other. When the
Priest comes to make this honorable Sacrament, he uses not now his own
words, but the words of our Lord. The word therefore of Christ makes this
Sacrament. What word of Christ? Verily that wherewith al things were made. Our
Lord commanded, and heaven was made. Our Lord commanded, and the earth was
made. Our Lord commanded, and the seas were made. Our Lord commanded, and
every creature was brought forth. Thou see therefore how workeful the word
of Christ is. If then so great force, and strength be in the word of our Lord
Jesus, that those things should begin to be, which were not: of how much
more strength is it to work, that the things which were, be, that is to say,
have a being, and be changed into another thing? The Heaven was not, the Sea
was not, the Earth was not. But harken to him who says: He said, and they
were made, he commanded, and they were created. Therefore that I may make
thee an answer to this question, it was not the body of Christ before
Consecration: but after Consecration I tell thee, that now it is the body of
Christ. He said, and it was made, he commanded, and it was created.

Who sees not here this drifte of S. Ambrose, to prove, that as the Word, or
speech of our Lord, made al things of nothing, even so it is much more hable,
to change one thing into another thing? And because I required M. Jewel to
construe S. Ambroses words, which yet he would not do, though he promised to
do it: I will construe them for him, and will show his extreme blindness, or
rather his wilfulness in the understanding of that sentence. Ergo, then, si
tanta vis est, if so great strength be, in sermon Domini Jesus, in the speech
of our Lord Jesus, vt, that, quae non erant, the things which were not,
inciperent esse, began to be, that is to say, to have a being: quanto magis
operatorius est, how much more is our Lords speech workful, vt, that, quae
erant, the things which were, sint, be, that is to say, have a being, and in
aliud commutentur, and be changed, into an other thing? By these words it is
clear, that S. Ambrose here speaks generally of al things, which God
works by his word, and not particularly of bread, and wine.

Now will I construe the same words, as M. Jewel would have them to be taken.
First, he understands, and supplieth, bread and wine, to be the nominative
case to the verb, sint, be, or rather to the verb, Su^t, as for his advantage
he alters that holy Doctors words. Whereas it is evident, that in the same
whole sentence, bread, and wine are not particularly once named.

Secondly, he begins the construction with the verb (sint) whereas (quae
erant) should go before it, as it may well appear by setting the one part of
the comparison against the other. For the one part is thus to be set, Quae non
erant incipiunt esse, the things which were not, begin to be. Therefore the
other must be thus set accordingly: quae erant, sunt, and in aliud commutantur.
The things which were, be, and be changed into an other thing.

Thirdly, between quae, and erant, M. Jewel conueieth in a pronowne
demonstratiue, which has no place there, saying, which (they) were, as if
bread, and wine were respected. Again, you translate, Sunt, quae erant, they
remain the same, that they were. And those words you put forth in great text
letters. Is Sunt, to be englished, They remain the same? Sunt, is no more, but
They be. If S. Ambrose would have said, as you untruly translate him, his
words had benne these, manent eadem: for that is the Latin of this your
English, they remain the same.

But S. Ambrose means thus. Those things that were not, by Gods word begin
to be: And those that were, by Gods word be also, but they be another thing.
How so? Because they are changed into an other thing. But M. Jewel beginning
the construction amiss, teaches us, that Gods word causes things to be,
that they were, which is not S. Ambroses mind. For then Gods word should
cause bread to be bread still, and that were only the conseruing of creatures,
and not a changing of creatures. But now al S. Ambroses reason proceeds to
prove, that Gods word is of force to change creatures, and he means of
change in substance. For all his comparison consists about the words, non
esse, and esse, and, esse, and aliud esse. Things that were not, be, and those
that be already, become to be an other thing. If they become to be only an
other thing in quality, then they are only already a thing in quality,
which is false. For the being that they have, is a certain substance or
substanciall being. Therefore the other being, or change, which they have, is
an other substance.

And I pray you, who would not wonder to see S. Ambrose labor so vehemently
to prove, that Gods word is able to change a creature in quality, as though
a man were not hable to change a thing in quality? Can not the Cutler make
rustie iron bright? Can not a Pargeter make a brown wall white? Can not a Cook
make cold liquour hot? And can not you M. Jewel show your self sometimes
sweet, and quiet, sometimes eager, and waspish, sometimes a true man, more
oftentimes a liar? Wherein stands this great force and working of Gods word,
whereof S Ambrose speaks? Soothly in the change of the substance of things.
For as he began his disputation, before the words of Consecration, quod he,
the bread, is bread: but when Consecration is come unto it, de pane, from of
bread it is made Christ's flesh. Mark, whence is the change made, from bread.
And into what is it made? Into flesh. This then is that S. Ambrose must prove,
That Gods word has power to change bread into flesh.

To make short, this very sentence, whereof we now dispute, is in an other
place thus uttered by S. Ambrose. Sermo Christi, qui potuit ex nihilo facere
quod non erat, De ijs qui initiantur mysterijs. cap. 9.
non potest ea quae sunt, in id mutare quod no^ erant? The word of Christ,
which could make that, which was not, of nothing, can it not change those
things which be, into that which they were not? He gives an evident reason of
his own words, saying: Non enim minus est nouas rebus, dare, quam mutare
naturas. For it is not less, to give new natures unto things, then to change
natures. As who should say, he that can give new natures, can much more change
natures. Now sir, I pray you, when God gives new natures, does he not give new
substances? When therefore he is said at the same time to work in changing
natures, it is meant that he changes substances, to wit, bread into the body
of Christ, and wine into his blood. You have a guilty conscience M. Jewel, if
all this considered, yet you will hold your own, and say still, that S. Ambrose
meant not a change in substance, but only in quality. For either you have lost
your wit, or else you do see, to what purpose S. Ambroses discourse goes.

Besides all this, consider good Reader, how S. Ambrose concludes, and ends
this discourse: Ergo didicisti, quod ex pane corpus fiat Christi. Now then
thou have learned, that of bread the body of Christ is made. His purpose then
was to show, not that a new quality, but that a new substance was made by
change of the old substance: Of bread (I say) the Body of Christ was made,
and of wine was made his blood. And yet it appears not blood, Ibidem.
vt nullus horror cruoris sit, that there might be no abhorring of blood. But
as in deed our sins are utterly taken away in Baptism, where the old Adam
dies, and a new creature is made in righteousness: even so although it appear
not blood, yet in deed the old substance of the wine is changed into the new
substance of the blood of our Savior. Thus the bread, and wine are changed in
substance, and yet keep still their old outward forms.

Jewel. page 248. and 249. What moves you M. Harding to make this piteous out
cry? We change not S. Ambroses words, but report them simply, as we find
them. These they are. Panis and vinum, sunt quae erunt, and in aliud mutantur.
The bread and wine are the same that they were, and are changed into another
thing.


Harding.
You have learned this falshed of that false man Berengarius. Panis, and vinum
are not there, and for that cause Lanfrancus denied those words so alleged by
Berengarius to be in S. Ambrose. Lanfrancus in lib. de sacramento Eucharist.
Again in the Latin al these words lack, which you put in English, to
wit (the same that they) there is no Latin I say for those words. The
nominative case to, sint, is not bread and wine, but things imported by these
words, quae erant, things which were. The sense is, the things which
were, be, and be changed into an other thing. Bread and wine were, but they are
not any more bread and wine: and yet they are somewhat, to wit, they are that,
into which they are changed, that is, the body and blood of Christ. This
only can be the meaning of S. Ambrose by the very literal construction of the
place, as every man may see, that is hable, and willing to construe, and parse
it. As for M. Jewel, he has no way to shifte his hands hereof, avoiding al
lying and falsifying. I should be a shamed thus to descend to these Grammare
points, were I not driven unto it by M. Iewelles untrue dealing.

Jewel. Ibidem. By this Logike, In Math. cap. 18.
where S. Hierome says pride is changed into humility, M. Harding may say,
it is changed, therefore pride is, or remains still.


Harding.
How so ever it like you to esteem my Logique, my Argument remains
unanswered. If your skill in Logique were answerable to your boasting, you
should see the difference between change of accidents, and change of
Substances, whereof you seem ignorant. Howbeit, I said not the bread is
changed, Ergo, bread remains still: it is you, that say so. I said the bread
is changed into another thing. Ergo, it is. But I say not, that it is bread,
but that it is that, into which it is changed. And therefore it has a being,
though it have not the same being in substance, which it had before
consecration. For it is not made nothing (as you are woonte to cauil of it) but
is it made an other thing: and so it is still: but it is not that it was.

Your example of pride, is more proudely, then wisely alleged. For pride is no
substance, nor creature at al. Man only in his understanding considers it as
somewhat, whereas it is only a defecte, and failing from humility. For God
never made vice. Pride is a vice, and therefore

But what shall a man say to this fellow? When the name of Substance seems to
make for him, then it stands properly, as the Philosophers use the word,
which is in Greek (...): but when it seems to make against him, then it
stands for grace, faith, words, and Sacraments: which in some writers are
named Substance, as the divines sometimes use the term, whereto the Greek
term Hypostasis answers, as S. Paul uses it, Heb. 11.

How the Church is resolved in doubtful cases.
The truth is, that seeing words for the more part, are doubteful, ambiguous,
and subject to cauilles, Christ has not planted his Church in such sort upon
words, that his faithful members should thereby be divided into many sects.
For as he considering our infirmity, left unto us his holy will conceived in
such words, as men use in their common speech, he left also with those
words a high Pastor, Johan. 21. Luc. 22.
by whom we should be fed, for whose faith he prayed, and his prayer is heard.
To which chief Pastor he gave power, and commandment to strengthen, and
confirm his brethren. So that it is in deed little worth to hang of syllables,
and letters, but it behooves us always to seek for the meaning of the word.
And because we should never agree among our selves upon words: Math. 18.
he bound us to hear the Church, the chief and ordinary mouth whereof S.
Peter was, whiles he lived, and after him the Bishops of Rome his Successors,
have ever had the same place.

He then that will be sure to know, how every word that belongs to matter of
the faith, must be taken in this, or in that place of holy Scripture, or of
holy writers, must be ruled by the mouth of his chief Pastor.

Act. 20.
Now that Pastor calling to him out of all the world the chief and best learned
Bishops, ordained by the holy Ghost Governors of particular flocks, having
seen, and heard all that might be said too and fro in the midst of four
hundred threescore and ten Bishops, and of more then a thousand learned
Divines besides, the assistance of the holy Ghost called for, mature
deliberation had, and diligent examination of the Scriptures, and holy Fathers
made, found, and by all their consent determined, Council. Lateranen. ca. 1.
that the substance of bread and wine (in the Sacrament of the Altar) is by
the power of Gods word changed into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood.
After which determination we know, how Gelasius, and how Theodoritus must of
necessity be understood, if at the lest we will hear the Church, as under
pain of damnation we are bound to do. This answer may suffice all the
cauilles, that are moved, and tossed by M. Jewel touching nature, substance,
subsistence, or any like word. Al words are ambiguous, as S. Augustine
confesses. In lib. de Dialecti.
The highest judge in the highest court of Christendom has given sentence.
He that obeieth, has humility, and sees his ground. He that being loath to
seem deceived wrangleth, as M. Jewel does, is proud, vain, contentious, and
disobedient: which custom Heretics have, and ever have had, but as S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 11.
the Church of God has it not.

Jewel. Page 262. 263. To leave these unfruitful gheasses, we say that the
cup of blessing, which Christ calls the Cup of the new Testament
notvvithstanding it were made in a Mystery the Sacrament of Christ's Blood
yet in nature and substance was very wine still and as Christ him self
calls it, the very fruit, and generation of the grape, as it was before.
The words of the Evangelist S. Matthew are very plain.


Harding.
Would God, I could so clearly show to the Reader, as the weight of this
matter requires, how lewdly you play as well with the Gospel, as with me. It
is not I M. Jewel, that am inco^stant in saying, now these words were spoken
before consecration, and now after, and perhaps at both times, whereat you
jest, and scoff: it is not I, that changed my mind. But whereas one of the
Evangelists tells the matter one way, and the other an other way, and
whereas sometimes they tell things out of order, as your self can not but
grant: my answer must needs be such, as by all means to save the truth of
the Gospel: that howsoever these words were spoken, which be obscure, yet the
plain truth should not be hindered by them. You stick to the plain words of
S. Matthew, as you say. And why sir I pray you, may not I as well claim, that
S. Lukes words are as plain? Luc. 22.
I then have mine eye to both, and so make a distinction, showing how both
together may be defended. You little esteming S. Luke, talk to us only of S.
Matthew: whereby you declare, that you believe none other Euangeliste, ne none
other word of God, beside your own fancy.

Likewise you dissemble, how diversely the Fathers have expounded the fruit of
the Vine, and utter many words about a most known truth, The fruit of the
vine.
which no man denies, wherein as you deserve small praise of learning, so you
lose among the wise the commendation of discretion. For answer to al which I
say, that it is a certain case, and clear out of question, that there was
wine in Christ's chalice, whereof the Sacrament should be made, and yet
forsoothe you would needs prove it in many Pages together. Again I say, that,
as there was wine in the chalice whereof the Sacrament should be made, so after
it was made, there was no more the substance of wine. And that I will prove so
plainly, That after consecration there was no more the substance of wine in
Christ's cup. Luc. 22.
that you shall never be hable to answer to it.

Christ him self said (if at the least you admit S. Lukes Gospel) This
Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, which (cup) is shed (or, shall be
shed) for you. The Cup shall be shed for us, says Christ, that is to
say, the liquour contained in the Cup, shall be shed for us. But natural, or
artificial wine was not shed for us, but only Christ's own Blood was shed
for us: Ergo, only Christ's own Blood is in that Cup, and the substance of
wine is not there at al.

The words are plain, that, which is in the Cup, or chalice, shall be shed for
us: that was only Christ's Blood: Therefore only Christ's Blood is in the
Cup or Chalice. But Christ's Blood is no wine, except we call it wine in
such respect, as Christ him self is called the Vine, and the grape:
Therefore no material wine of the common grape is in the Cup of Christ's
Supper. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 10.


With these plain words agrees the Doctrine of the old Fathers. S
Chrysostom says: Quod est in Calice, id est, quod e latere fluxit, and illius
nos sumus participes. That which is in the Chalice, is that, Chrysostom. in Ephe
hom. 3.
which flowed from his side, and thereof we are partakers. And again Vasa
non participant, nec sentiunt Sanguinem, quem in se habent, nos vero plane. The
vessels partake not, ne feel not the blood, which they contain in them,
but we do partake it. And as there Chrysostom says, the vessels have the same
blood of Christ for the time, which comes to our hearts, and souls.

Augustine. epist. 86.
S. Augustine also says, dicit cessisse panipecus, tanquam nesciens and tunc
in Domini mensa panes propositionis ponisolere, and nunc se de agni immaculati
corpore partem sumere. Dicit cessisse poculo sanguinem, non cogitans etiam nunc
se accipere in poculo sanguinem. Vrbicus says, that the Lamb (of the new
Testament) has given place to the bread (of the new Testament) being ignorant,
that both then the show bread was wont to be put upon the table of our Lord,
and that now also he takes his part of the Body of the unspotted Lamb. He
says, that blood (of the old Testament) has given place to the cup, not
considering, that he now also receives blood in the Cup.

Mark Reader this comparison of S. Augustine, that, as the old Fathers did
eat of the Lamb, so do we of the true Lamb Christ: and as the Priests of
the Law had blood in their basens, even so have we in our cup, whence we
receive it. The odds only is, that their blood was only the blood of
Calves, not hable to cleanse man, but our blood is the blood of Christ,
which cleanses al sins. Our Sacraments therefore are the spiritual novelty
of the new Testament, not lacking either Altar, or Fire, or Bread, or Lamb,
or Blood, but having them al in Christ's Body, and Blood, into which the
bread, and wine are so converted, that the verey true and real blood of
Christ is received in the cup.

Oecumenius also says: Oecumenius in cap. 11. 1. Cor.
Pro sanguine irrationalium Dominus proprium dat sanguinem, et been in poculo,
vt ostendat vetus testamentum ante a hoc delineasse. Our Lord instead of the
blood of unreasonable beasts, does give his own blood, and it is well that he
gives it in a cup, to show that the old Testament did foreshadow this
thing. Euthymius agrees with the same Fathers. If then it be clear by
Christ's own words, and by the interpretation of the Fahers, that the same
blood, which was shed for us, and which ran out of Christ's side, was in the
cup, and that thence it is partaken, seeing that wine was not shed for our
redemption: it is clear, that after Consecration wine was not in Christ's
cup, except (as I said before) we take wine by a metaphore, as Christ is the
vine, and his blood is the wine of that vine which Christ is.

Notwithstanding that I have great advantage in the rest of M. Jewels words,
yet seeing this much does suffice for the Catholic reader, I will not spend more
words therein, but will pass away to some other matter.

Concerning the adoration of the Sacrament, Adoration.
there is much more said of it in mine own, and in other men's books, then
as yet M. Jewel, or al his fellows have answered. And that thing wholly
depends of the real presence.

Of applying the merits of Christ's Death to others in the Mass. The 9.
Chapter.
Harding.
We never taught, that by our Masses, we applied and distributed all the
merits of Christ's death to men, how soever they were disposed.

Jewel. Page 297. The most catholic pillars of your catholic Church (as
namely Caietanus) have said, that faith is not necessary for him, that
receives the Sacrament of thankesgeuing: notvvithstanding he acknovvlegeth
this was an error.


Harding.
What vanity is this, to lay that to Cardinal Caietane, which your self
confess, he defends not, but acknowlegeth to be an error? The words by you
alleged out of a book made by one, Paralip. Vrsper. anno. 1518.
that was as false a brother, as your self, do mean no more, but that a man
may receive Christ's body, albeit he have no faith, as Judas did. What is this
to the purpose, that we speak of? Moreover, if Caietane once had thought
(which he never did) that by the Mass we apply Christ's merits to men not
well disposed: yet seeing you say, he took it for an error afterward, by this
mean I might prove, that M. Jewel were a Papist, because once he professed
the belief of the Catholic Church, when verily that Church was only meant by
Godfathers, Godmothers, and the Ministers, which had the Sacrifice of the
Mass, and prayers to the Saints, and Prayers for the Dead.

But you can not M. Jewel allege us any one man, that says, that by the Mass
we apply the merits of Christ to men, howsoever they be disposed. Neither
does Gabriel Biel, nor Iacobus de Valentia, De venerab. Sacramento altaris. c.
1.
nor S. Thomas teach so, whose words you corrupt with false translation,
englishing, Pro quotidianis delictis, for the debte of daily sins, where
debte is not in the Latin. And in deed the debte of al sins, as well actual,
as original, was taken away by the Sacrifice of the Cross. But we see
evidently, that the act, or actual doing of al sins was not then taken
away. For even now faithful men do sin daily. Therefore we need still a
daily Sacrifice of none other substance, then that of the Cross was, but even
of the very same substance, which substance has in it al his merit of the
Cross. And thus we offer Christ's body, and blood, not now in truth by
bloudshedding (as once only upon the Cross it was offered) but in mystery, by
changing the bread, and wine into his body, and blood. We offer it thus I
say, to apply unto devout persons by faith, and sacraments, the merit of
the Cross, praying unto God, that the death of Christ, which is ever
available in it self, may (through his blood, which we offer in the chalice,
and drink with our mouth, and partake in our souls by faith and charity) be
made auaileabe unto us.

Jewel. Catharinus one of the Worthies of your late chapter of Trident, says,
Deincrue^to Sacrificio.
Apparet etc.


Harding.
Whatsoever he said, he is none of our Worthies, nor yet is he allowed of the
Council of Trente, when soever in any matter of Doctrine he speaks otherwise,
then that Council does, I doubt much M. Jewel, how in the judgment of wisemen
these boish flowtes become a man of your profession, in that so vainly you
praise unto us, now Peter Lombard, now Gratian, now the Gloser upon him, now
Lorichius, now Cusan, now Catharinus, now Caietane, now Alphonsus, now Pighius,
now Bitontino, and I can not tell how many more. As though we leaned to them,
more then to the Scriptures, or to the ancient Fathers. If you will know, what
we believe, and will not be deceived therein, read the Council of Trent, the
doctrine I mean of the Canons in the same decreed, and so shall you not lose
your labor. We tell you, though ye be not ignorant thereof, that sundry
things have been said, and written by Glosers, which we defend not, no more
then you defend, either al baudie Bales lies, al Luthers devilish doctrines,
Beza in c. Luc. 22.
or al Bezas filthy verses, wicked writings in defense of heinous acts, and
blasphemies against S. Lukes Gospel. And yet Catharinus says not that, which
you should prove, when al is done. He says in deed fondly, but he utters not
that fondness, which you lay to us, as his words, and yours, do show to him,
that lists to read both.

Jewel. We receive the merits of Christ's death only by faith.


Harding.
That we receive the merits of Christ's death by faith, The merits of
Christ's death be not rec^iued by Faith only.
we grant, but that by only faith we receive them, it is a false doctrine, and
repugnant to many express sayings of the holy Scriptures. God according to
his mercy has saved us (says S. Paul) by the washing of the second birth,
and of the renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3.
By receiving salvation, we receive the merits of Christ's death: but we
receive salvation by Baptism, Ergo, we receive the merits of Christ's death
by Baptism. And since that Baptism is not faith, but a different grace from
faith, verily we receive not the merits of Christ's death by faith only.

Again the merits of Christ's death are received of him, whose sins are
forgeuen. Christ's Merits received by Love, or charity. Luc. 7. 1. Cor. 13.
But Marie Maudelenes sins being many, and great, were yet forgeuen her,
because she loved much, as Christ him self said: and yet love is not faith,
for S. Paul says, faith, hope, and charity are three things: Wherefore the
merits of Christ's death are not received of us by faith only. The like
Arguments might I make out of Gods word, for the fear of God, for hope, and
for many other virtues, and specially for the grace of God, Matthew. 5.
whereby we suffer unjustly for righteousness sake. For as Christ specially was
exalted according to his manhod in glory, for that in humility, and
meekness he suffered most unjustly: Philipp. 2.
even so he grants to them the greatest merits of his death, who by his
grace suffer together with him unjustly for the defense of his justice, as the
holy Apostles, and Martyrs have done. That, in Joan. tractatu. ^0.
which M. Jewel here says out of S. Augustine, that the water of Baptism
works, because it is believed, proves Faith to be nec^ssarie, which thing we
grant: but it proves it not to be sufficient alone, which was the point we
sp^ke of.

Jewel. Page 29^. Hesychius says, the grace of Go^ is received by only faith.
in Leuit. lib. 4. ca. 14.



Harding.
Lib. 4. cap. 14.
You l^aue out half, as your custom is. For Hesychius says, The grace of God
is received by faith alone, non ex eperibus, vt Paulus dicit, not of works, as
S. Paul says. Nam gratia iam non erit gratia. For if the grace of God were
deserved by works, now grace were not grace. Thus Hesychius says, that Gods
grace is received by faith alone, only to exclude their vain opinion, who
thought works, which were without faith, to deserve faith, or justice, which
is not so. For we are justified freely without works, that may deserve the
grace that God gives. Yet it is not denied, but that, when faith is given us,
then hope in God, and the love of him is also given us. By which hope, and love
spread in our hearts, we receive the merits of Christ, and not by faith only.

For Purgatory matters we refer you to M. Allens Book, and to that I said
thereof in my Confutation, which is more railed, and scoffed at, then answered.

Of the Intercession made to Saints to pray for us. The 10. Chapter.
Jewel. Page 311. If Christ only be the mediator of Salvation, wherefore do
you thus call upon the blessed virgin Christ's mother, Salua omnes, qui te
glorificant? Save thou al them that glorify thee. Here ye intrude upon
Christ's office.


Harding.
A Wrangler will never lack words. Save us o blessed virgin, in what sense is
i^ taken.
Whereas you know by our doctrine, and profession, that we believe, not the
blessed Virgin, but only Christ to be our mediator, what fish you for words
to trappe us in them? When we say to the Virgin, save us, we mean thus: pray
for us to God, that we may be faued. And herein we speak, as S. Paul did
speak, who says to Timothee: doing thus (that is to say, preaching, and
giving good example of life) and teipsum saluum facies, 1. Tim. 4.
and eos qui te andiunt. Thou shall save both thy self, and those that hear
thee. What? Does S. Paul make Timothee a mediator and Savior in these
words? They are thus well meant: Thou shall be a mean to save thy self, and
others, that is to say, whereby the sooner salvation may freely for Christ's
sake be given of God to thee, and to others. Even so, save us virgin, is to
say, O virgin pray to God, and to thy son Jesus, that through his death
salvation may be given unto us. I might bring many such speeches out of the
holy Scriptures, if I thought this might not suffice. He is a contentious
wrangler, who knowing our meaning, does pike quarrels of dissensio^ upon words
only, taken in evil sense, the good sense dissembled.

Jewel. Ibidem.
Wherefore say ye thus of Thomas Becket: O Christ make us to ascend unto
heaven, vvhither Thomas is ascended, even by the blood of Thomas, that he shead
for thy sake. Here you seek salvation in the blood of Thomas.


Harding.
This is an objection for a Cobbler, as the other was, and not for a Divine,
How it is lavvful to say in prayer. super Thomae Sanguinem, and the like.
Esai. 37.
whose duty it were to depend of things, and not of words. Albeit you make
it otherwise to your advantage, then the Latin words report, yet thus we
say: It is lawful to ask mercy of God only for his own sake: it is lawful
also at the time of asking mercy, to present to him the remembrance of any
gift, or grace of his.

God him self says by his Prophet Isaias: Protegem ciuitatem istam vt saluem
eam propter me, and propter David seruum meum. I will defend this city to save
it for mine own sake, and for Dauides sake my servant. Now because we know, it
was a most gracious gift of God, that he gave S. Thomas grace to dye for his
honor: when we desire to be helped by his blood, representing the memory of
S. Thomas unto Christ our Savior, and as it were putting him in mind of his
death suffered for his sake, we desire to have Gods grace the sooner given unto
us through that mercy, which he showed to the said S. Thomas. Philip. 1.
Scio quia hoc mihi prouen^et ad salutem, per vestram orationem, and
subministrationem spiritus Jesus Christi. I know (says S. Paul) that this
thing shall help forward my salvation, by your prayer, and by the help of the
spirit of Jesus Christ. Prayer of good me^ and Gods spirit joined together in
healping us.
Here are joined together two things: the prayer of good men, and the help
of the spirit of Christ. They are both uttered by this syllable, per, by or
through.

But what? Is S. Paul become blasphemous, because he joins men's prayers
with Gods spirit? No, no. He meant, that the prayer of men might help him,
not of them selves, but by Gods gift. But the spirit of Christ was hable to
help him of it self, as being the spirit of God. And yet those two helps so
far unlike, are put together in one sentence, and expressed by one kind of
speech. But it is not a phrase of speech, which makes the difference, it is
the heart of the faithful, which distinguishes al. Your words be fair M.
Jewel, but your heart unawares to your self does honor the Idol Calvin, more
then Christ Jesus. For you are ashamed of Christ's old Church, and deformed
spouse, as you think: But the trim strompet of Caluins setting out, pleases
you right well. It is that foul, and blind heart of yours, that shall condemn
you, and not letters, or syllables, which in all your books you hunt after.
Whatsoever our words be, you may assure your self, our faith, and heart
puts difference enough between S. Thomas Becket a good man, and Christ Jesus
God, and man. If it shall please you to confer this prayer touching S. Thomas
with a prayer that I shall anonne allege out of S. Ephem, I trust, you will
revoke your rash judgment, wherein you condemn the Catholic Church for
this, and the like prayers.

Jewel. Page 312. You in your imagination of the Saints of God have made
Idolles.


Harding.
It is you that have made Idolles of the enemies of God, to wit, of Luther, of
Calvin, of Peter Martyr your master, and of others the like. As for our honor
given to the Saints, it is no greater, then the primitive Church gave to them,
that is, that they hear us in Christ, and pray in great charity for us. And
so did all the old Fathers believe, as being so taught of the Apostles. S.
Irenaeus so nigh unto the Apostles, S. Marie the virgi^ is the advocate of Eve.
Irenaeus li. 5.
doubted not to say, that the Virgin Marie obeyed God, Vti virginis Euae Maria
virgo fieret aduocata. That the Virgin Marie should be made the advocate of the
virgin Eve. And yet does he not make her equal thereby with Christ. For our
Lady is in an other sense, and sort our advocate, then Christ is. Christ by
right may plead for us, the Virgin Marie by grace may entreat for us.

S. Gregory Nazianzene, who prayed him self to S. Basil being departed this
life, Gregorius in monodia. Idem. in laudem Cypriani. Hilarious in psalm. 124.
Homil de 40 martyribus.
reports thus of S. Cyprian, Virginem Mariam rogauit, vt periclitanti virgini
opem ferret. He desired the Virgin Marie to help the Virgin which was in
danger.

S. Hilarie says, we have no small garrison in the Apostles, and in other
Saints.

S. Basil speaking of the forty Martyrs, says, He that is pressed with any
calamity, ad hos confugiat, vt a malis liberetu^. Let him flee to these, that
he may be delivered from evil things, hos oret, let him pray unto these, etc.

S. Hieromes mind is well known writing against Vigilantius. Hom. 66. ad
populu^ Antioch.


S. Chrysostom says, that the Emperor (the pride of his purple laid a side)
stat Sanctis supplicaturus, stands to make his supplication to the Saints,
that they make intercession for him to God.

S. Augustine shows it to be a commodity, De cura pro mort. gerenda. cap. 4.
that Christian men should be buried nigh to the Saints, that the friends of
the dead, eisde^ Sanctis ta^quam patronis susceptos apud Dominum adinuandos,
orando commendent: that the friends of the dead may by making their prayer,
commend the dead, as clientes to the same Saints, as to their patrones, by
them to find help with God. Theodorit. De curatio. graecarum affect. li. 8,


Theodoritus at large treats of this matter, saying, that they which go on
Pilgrimage, pray unto the Martyrs to be their companions on the way, not
(says he) that they make them Gods, but they pray unto the Martyrs, as
being the men of God. He shows moreover, that after their return, some
dedicated Images, or figures of Eyes, some of Hands, some of feet made in
silver, or gold. S. Paulinus, S. Leo, S. Gregory, S. Bid, and all the other
holy and learned Fathers, agree herein.

Jewel. Page 313. Whereas ye teach the people thus to pray unto the blessed
Virgin, Monstra te esse Matrem, command thy son, use thy motherly
authority over him, let him know thee to be his mother, this you say, is no
blasphemy, but a spiritual dallying. Now verily this must needs be a
blessed kind of Divinity, that can turn prayer into dallyance.


Harding.
You scoff well, but what say you to my reason, that the spouse in the
Canticles dallieth in such sort with Christ her spouse? Why is the word
ieasted at, and the reason let pass? But sir I pray you, who taught you to
english, Monstra te esse matrem, Commau^d thy Son. where have ye these
words, let him know thee to be his mother? Monstrare, is to show, you know.
The English of monstra te esse matrem, Monstra te esse matrem.
is, show thy self to be a mother, and it may well be understood, by relation
made as well toward us, as toward Christ: Toward him by nature, toward
us by affection.

But do not the words next following sufficiently declare the matter? Sumat
per te preces, qui pro nobis natus tulit esse tuus. Show thy self to be a
mother, let him take prayers by thee, that is, offer prayers unto him who for
our sakes was content to be thy son. So that all this notwithstanding, we may
demand of you, where it is written, that we bid our Lady to command her
son. For which demand you scoff at M. Cope, without wit, Page 313.
or reason calling him, One of my Beauperes of Louaine. Why you should so call
him, I know not, nor your self, I believe. For Beaupere in french, is a
Father in law. And neither I have married his daughter, nor he my mother. You
say likewise of him full wisely, that, he as a man carrieing his face in his
hand, says boldly, etc. I doubt how this boyerie may seem to becomme so
old a Minister. But let such toys go.

Neither did I grant you, that it was so written, but I said in case it were
so written, or said, yet it might be well taken, if it came to an honest man's
interpretation. For to the unclean, nothing is clean, because their own
conscience is unclean.

Bembus for calling our Lady Deam, Page 314. Our lady called Dea by Pet.
Bembus.
(for which you storm so much) is not commended of us, how beit it came
rather of a poetical, or a Ciceronian spirit, coveting overmuch to use the old
Latin profane terms, then of any unbelief, or heresy.

I think no man called our lady Gods fellow, which you impute unto us. The
Latin words, which you bring, may be well taken by relation to Christ, to
wit, that whereas al others forsook Christ at his passion, yet our lady his
mother stood by him, as a most faithful keeper of her sons company.

If you find fault with the Council of Oxforde The Counsel of Oxford.
for leaving out Christ's name, we take it not left out, where his father is
named, with whom he is one substance. Heb. 1.
Otherwise you may find great fault with S. Paul, who sometimes names God
the father, without mention of the Son, and them both without the holy
Ghost. But where no contempt is, these omissions are not imputed.

Jewel. 314. You say, the blessed virgin has more grace given her, De sanctae
virginitate. ca. 3.
then any creature: except ye can name a greater grace (say you) then to be
the mother of God. Verily M. Harding, to be the child of God, it is a great
deal greater grace, then to be the mother of God, as S. Augustine says.


Harding.
If our Lady were the mother of God, and not the child of God also, it were
somewhat that you bring out of S. Augustine. But since that she is both, and
because I being sure of it, thought you had believed it too: thereupon I said,
that our Lady being as she is, was above al creatures in grace. For she is
the child of God with many others, but she is the natural mother of God above
al others. Now when we tell the excellency of any person, I had thought, we
should specially have told that, wherein the same passed al others, and not
that, which is common with many others. But a man may well perceive, that M.
Jewel goes about to bring the blessed Virgin into contempt, by which way so
ever he may bring it about: as though the way to honor the Son, were to
dishonor the Mother.

Jewel. Page 315. But touching the matter it self,


Harding.
I cry you mercy M. Jewel, have you benne a wandering all this while, and now
at the very end come you first to touch the matter? In deed you leave it full
often untouched, every where in manner, taking an occasion of some bye word to
fall into your peevish gloses, and into your common Phrases, letting pass the
chief point of the question. But now touching the matter, what say you?

Jewel. 315. Ad Romans c. 1.
S. Ambrose says, Therefore we are brought to the presence of kings by
Lords, and officers, because the king is a man, and knows not to whom he may
commit his realm. But to obtain Gods favor, to whom nothing is secret, and
knowing what every man is meet to have, we need no spokesman, but a devout
mind. For where so ever such a one speaks to God, God vvil answer him.


Harding.
Remember you what you promised? Answer to S. Ambrose,
Said you not, you would touch the matter of praying to Saints? Verily. S.
Ambrose speaks these words of the unbelieving Gentiles, who despised God,
and putting the hope of their Salvation in Gods creatures, made to them
Gods, and Idolles of them, and adored them, and prayed to them, as if there
had benne many Gods. And they prayed to them so, as though the highest God,
(whom they acknowledge by discourse of reason after a sort) had need of their
help, as not being hable to know al, and to govern al things alone. So that
they despising God, adored the Sun, the Moon, the Stars and other
Creatures, as S. Paul in that Chapter says, and S. Ambrose expounds.

But now what say you touching the matter M. Jewel? Romans 1.
Would you not know S. Ambroses mind therein gladly? I dare say, you would
not. And if a man might look into your heart, I think he should epsy, that
you know for certainty, that S. Ambrose thought not of praying to Saints, as
you do: Or else verily you are not so well seen in S. Ambrose, as I took you
to be.

Howsoever it be, I will here give the reader a taste of S. Ambroses mind,
touching the very matter of praying to the Saints which live with Christ.
Ambros. in lib. de viduis. S. Ambroses mind touching praying to the Saints.
Rogauerunt pro vidua Petrus, and Andreas. Vtinam existat aliquis, qui tam cito
possit rogare pro nobis, vel certe iste, qui pro socru rogat Petrus, and
Andreas frater eius. Tunc enim pro affinitate poterant, nunc iam possunt pro
nobis, and pro omnibus impetrare. Videtis enim, quod magno peccato obnoxia
minus idonea sit, quae pro se precetur, certe quae prose impetret. Adhibeat
igitur ad medicum alios precatores. Aegri enim, nisi ad eos aliorum precibus
medicus fuerit inuitatus, pro se rogare non possunt. Infirma est car^, men's
agra est, and peccatorum vinculis impedita, ad medici illius sedem debile non
potest explicare vestigium. Obsecrandi sunt Angeli pro nobis, qui nobis ad
praesidium dati sunt: Martyrs obsecrandi, quorum videmur nobis quoddam
corporis pignore patrocinium vendicare. Possunt pro peccatis rogare nostris,
qui proprio sanguine, etiam si qua habuerunt peccata, lauerunt. Isti enim sunt
Dei Martyrs, nostri praesules, speculatores vitae actuumque nostrorum. Non
erubescamus eos intercessores nostrae infirmitatis adhibere, qui and ipsi
infirmitatem corporis etiam cum vincerent cognouerunt.

Peter and Andrew prayed for the Widow. Would God there were some body, who
would so speedily pray for us, yea that it were this Peter, who prays for his
mother in law, and Andrew his brother: for then they might for their kinsfolk
obtain, but now they may obtain for us, and for all others. For ye see, that a
woman being thral to a great sin, is not so fit to pray for her self, at least to obtain for her self. Let her therefore use some other man's help,
and prayer to the Physician (for her). For they that are sick, unless the
Physician be brought to them by the means and prayers of others, can not (come
and) desire him them selves. The flesh is feeble, the mind is sick, and so
entangled in the bands of sin, that it can not set forth her faint and feeble
foot toward the seat of that Physician. The Angels are to be called upon
for us, who are given unto us to be our Guard. The Martyrs are to be prayed
unto, of whom it seems we may (as it were) challenge a certain assistance,
for that we have their bodies in pledge. They may well pray for our sins, who
with their own blood have washed away their own sins, if they had any. For
these are the Martyrs of God, our chief Prelates, and the ouerlookers of our
life, and doings. Let us not be ashamed to use them as intercessours for our
infirmity, whereas they them selves even then when they wanne the victory,
knew well the infirmity, and weakness of the body.

This place M. Jewel, shows, that S. Ambrose, who will not have any man to
flee to Idolles, would have al faithful men to pray to the Saints for
them. And yet you for lack of better stuff, were feign to make your Reader
believe, that the words written against the accursed Idolles, might be applied
by you against the blessed Apostles, and Martyrs. Whereby you show, what good
opinion you have of that blessed company of the house of God, who reigning
with him in heaven, see in the face of the Lamb our hearts, so far as
belongs to their joy, and our comfort.

This one place of S. Ambrose might have suffised, The practice of the Church
touching the prayer to Saints, and honor to them exhibited
but it shall be good, that we join therewith the practice both of the Church in
those days, and also of the Heretics, that as well the Catholics may see, how
the Saints were esteemed in old time, as M. Jewel may perceive, that he is
not the first heretic, whom it grieved to see Gods Martyrs so to be honored,
as they are among the Catholics. Let us then hear what S. Paulinus writes in
the life of S. Ambrose, who lived in his time. Paulinus in vita Ambros^.
Per ide^ te^pus sancti Martyrs Protasius, and Geruasius se sacerdoti
reuelaueru^t. Era^t enim in Basilica positi, in qua sunt hodie corpora Naboris,
et Felicis Martyrum. Sed sancti Martyrs Nabor and Felix celeberrime
frequentabantur: Protasij vero and Geruasij Martyrum, vt nomina, ita etiam
sepulchra incognita erant: in tantum, vt supra ipsorum sepulchra ambularent
omnes, qui vellent ad cancellos peruenire, quibus sanctorum Naboris, and
Felicis Martyrum ab iniuria sepulchra defendebantur. Sed vbi sanctorum Martyrum
sunt corpora leuata, and in lecticis posita, multorum ibi Satanae aegritudines
perdocentur. Coecus etiam Seuerus nomine, qui nunc vsque in eadem basilica quae
dicitur Ambrosiana, in quam Martyrum corpora sunt translata, religiose seruit,
vbi vestem Martyrum attigit, statim lumen recepit. Obsessa etiam corpora a
spiritibus immundis curata, summa cum gratia domum repetebant. Sed his
beneficiis Martyrum in quantum crescebat fides Ecclesiae Catholica, intantum
Arianorum perfidia minuebatur. Denique ex hoc tempore sed^ri coepit persecutio
quae Iustinae furori accendebatur, vt Sacerdos de Ecclesia pelleretur. Tamen
intra palatium multitudo Arianorum cum Iustina constitut^ deridebat tantam Dei
gratiam, quam Ecclesiae suae Catholica Dominus Jesus meritis Nartyrum suorum
confer dignatus est, venerabilemque virum Ambrosium narrabat pecunia
comparasse homines, qui se vexari ab immundis spiritibus mentirentur, atque ita
ab illo, sicut and a martyribus, se torqueri dicerent. Sed hoc Iudaico ore
loquebantur Ariani, suppares scilicet eorum. Illi enim de Domino dicebant,
Quoniam in Beelzebub principe Daemoniorum eijcit Daemonia. Isti de Martyribus,
vel de Domini Sacerdote loquebantur, quod non Dei gratia quae per ipsos
operabatur, immundi spiritus pellerentur, sed accepta pecunia se torqueri
mentirentur. Clamabant enim daemones, Scimus vos Martyrs: Et Ariani dicebant,
Nescimus esse Martyrs.

About this time the holy Martyrs Protasius, and Gernasius reveled them selves
to S. Ambrose. For they were buried in the Church, where at this day are the
bodies of the Martyrs, Nabor and Felix. But men haunted very much unto the
holy Martyrs, Nabor, and Felix, and as for the Martyrs Protasius, and
Gernasius, as their names were unknown, so were also their Graves, where they
lay, in so much that men, that were desirous to come to the Grates, wherewith
the toumbes of the blessed Martyrs, Nabor, and Felix, were fenced from injury,
walked upon their graves.

But after that the bodies of the blessed Martyrs were taken up, and laid in
their cofines, that many were there cured of their Diseases, it is well known.
Seuerus a blind man by touch of martyrs garment, received fight.
A blind man named Seuerus, who at this day full deuoutely serves in the same
Church, now called S. Ambroses Church, whither the bodies of the Martyrs
were translated: after that he had once touched the garmente of the Martyrs,
forthwith received his fight. Many bodies also possessed of wicked Spirits
were cured, and returned home with great grace. But how much the faith of the
Catholic Church by these benefits of the Martyrs grew more and more, so
much did the perfidious falsehood of the Arians wexe less and less. Finally
after this the persecution, which was enkendled by the rage of Iustina the
Emperesse, which sought to drive Saint Ambrose out of his Church, began to
slake. Nevertheless the rabble of the Arians, who were in the Court with
Iustina, scoffed at this great grace of God, which it pleased our Lord Jesus
to bestow upon his Catholic Church through the merits of his Martyrs. And
they bruted abroad that the reverend Bishop Ambrose had hiered me^ with money,
that should feine them selves to be vexed with unclean Sprites, and say, that
they were as well tormented by S. Ambrose, as by the Martyrs. But this the
Arians like very Jews uttered, as being (in malice) their own companions.
For the Jews said of our Lord: He casts out Deuilles in Beelzebub the
Prince of Deuilles. But the Arians said of the Martyrs, and of S. Ambrose the
Priest of our Lord, that the unclean Sprites were not cast out by the grace of
God, which wrought by them, but that men hiered with money, feined them
selves to be tormented. For the Deuilles cried out: We know you to be Martyrs,
But the Arians said, we know not them to be Martyrs. Thus far S. Paulinus.

Do you know your Father M. Jewel, if ye saw him? I mean not your natural
Father, would God you were so good a man, and of so good a faith, as he was.
But I mean your other father, that begote Arius, whose younger brother you are.
At that time the Arians mockte at the miracles wroughte by the Saints, and
that at their Toumbes, even as you do now. But at that time the Catholics
honored the Saints, as we do now. If the Arians were heretics, you know
your brethren.

How S. Ephrem prayed for the help of Saints, a^^ to the Saints.
Before I conclude this matter touching praying unto Saints, I would the Reader
to understand, what good men thought thereof twelve hundred years ago. It
may be conceived by that we find in S. Ephrem that blessed man, whom S. Basil
esteemed so much. Thus he says speaking unto God. Grex tuus electus, Ephraem
De Compunctione cordis. li. 1 cap. 13.
Monachorum quoque conuentus, and omnium Sanctorum, qui placuerunt ante te, qui
nunc in Paradiso exultant, iam deprecantur pro me, and obsecrant te solum
amatorem hominum. Exaudies quoque eos, and saluabis me obsecrationibus eorum.
Ego vero per eos tibi gloriam and laudem offeram, qui exaudisti orationem
eorum, and misertus es mihi, and non despexisti petitiones eorum, quae pro
salute animae meae profusae sunt.

Thy chosen Flock, and company of Monks, and of all the Saints, that have been acceptable before thee, who now reioise in Paradise, at this present do
pray for me, and be suitors unto thee the only lover of men. Thou shall hear
them, and shall save me for their prayers. And I shall offer glory, and praise
up unto thee, who have heard their prayers, and have mercy of me, and have not
despised their requests, which have benne made for the health of my soul.

Some will say perhaps, This place witnesses, that the Saints pray for us,
but not that we may pray to the Saints. Who so ever is desirours to see this
point witnessed by holy Ephrem, let him read a prayer, that he made in praise
of our Lady the virgin Marie. Where she is honored with these high titles,
without prejudice of Christ's glory, Regina omniu^, spes desperantiu^, spes
Patru^, Ephraem. in orati. de Sanctiss. Dei Matris laudibus.
gloria Prophetaru^, omniu^ Princeps, omniu^ Dux. The Queen of al, the hope of
them that be without hope, the hope of the Fathers, the glory of the
Prophets, Princess of al, the captain of al. Yea further praying unto her he
says, which M. Jewel will evil abide, Per te reconciliati sumus Christo Deo meo
filio tuo. Tu peccantium, and auxilio destitutorum adiutrix. Tu portus procella
vexatorum, solatium mu^di, carcere clausorum liberatrix celeberrim^^. Tu
Orphanorum susceptio, tu captiuorum redemptio, tu agrotantium exultatio, and
omnium salus. By thee we have been reconciled unto Christ my God thy Son. Thou
art the helper of them that sin, and be forsaken of help. Thou art the
heaven of them that are tossed with tempest, thou art the comfort of the
world, the famous deliverer of them that are shut up in the Prison. Thou art
the receite of Orphans, thou art the redemption of them that be taken
Prisoners, thou art the reioising of them that be sick, and the health of al.

These petitions stand not in this order together. But they are truly reported.
Item he says there: Sub alis tuis custodi me, and protege. Miserere mei,
quisum luto inquinatus, qui sceleribus quam plurimis Creatore^ Deu^ meum, et
iudice^ offendi. Non mihi alia fiducia o virgo sincera. Imple os meu^ gratia
dulcedinis tua. Illumina mentem o gratia plena. Keep me, and defend me under
thy Wings. Have mercy of me, that am defiled with durte, that have with very
many wicked deeds offended the Creator my God, and Judge. I have none other
trust, o pure Virgin. Fill my mouth with the grace of thy swetnes. Lighten my
mind o full of grace.

Item there he says further. Dignare virgo te tuum seruum laudare, and dicere:
Aue Dei splendidissimum, and luculentissimum vas. Aue Pax, Gaudium, and Salus
mundi: Aue vallum fidelium, and mundi Salus. Aue progenitoris illius Ada^
Resurrectio, aue refugium peccatorum, and hospitium, aue propitiatorium
laborantium. Aue spes omnium proborum aduersis casibus afflictorum. Aue mundi
Mediatrix gloriosissima, aue vniuersi terrarum orbis conciliatrix. Aue porta
coelorum, ascensus omnium, aue reseramentum portarum Paradisi, Aue clauis
Coelorum, and regni Christi. Aue portus optime huius vita Nautarum, aue animae
meae spes bona and fida, aue Christianorum omnium firma salus.

Vouchesafe Virgin, that I thy servant praise thee, and say: Hail the
brightest, and cleerest Vessel of God. Hail Peace, Joy, and health of the
world. Hail Bulwark of the faithful, and health of the world. Hail
Resurrection of Adam that first Father of ours. Hail refuge, and herborough of
sinners, hail propitiatory of them that labor. Hail hope of al good folk
oppressed with adversities: Hail most glorious Mediatresse of the world,
hail reconciler of all the round world. Hail gate of heaven, the ascending
up of al, hail the vnlocking of Paradise gates. Hail keie of heaven, and of
the kingdom of Christ. Hail the best haven of the Mariners of this life.
Hail good, and trusty hope of my Soul. Hail the strong health of al
Christians.

Consider Reader, whether, Tu per Thomae sanguinem, Whereat M. Jewel makes so
much adoo, may not well seem justified by the prayer of the Aunciente Father
Ephrem. I deny not, but that if there be such excessive speeches, as seem to
attribute to our Lady, or to any Saint, that, which is propre, and belonging
to Christ only: they ought by a convenient interpretation, and understanding
be drawn unto such a sense, and meaning, as is agreeable unto the Scriptures of
God, and faith of the Catholic Church.

Of the possibility of keeping the commandments of God. The 11. Chapter.
Harding.
Joan. 15.
sine me nihil potestis facere: without me ye can do nothing. And the whole
Church prays continually, Grace necessary to the keeping of Gods
commandments. Math. 6.
forgive us our debtes (or trespasses). With the grace of God, the
commandments may be so kept, that the keepers of them may atteine life
everlasting. For Christ said of the commandments, Si vu ad vitam ingredi,
serua mandata. If thou will enter unto life, keep the commandments. And
again, Hoc fac, and viues, Non enim auditores legis iusti sunt apud Deum,
Math. 19. Romans 2.
for the hears of the law be not accounted just before God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified.

1. Johan. 1.
If we say, we have no sin, the truth is not in us, says S. John. But the
fulfilling of the law is not so required of us, that we never swerve any whit
from the line of perfection, but so as we never turn backward from God (after
grace once received) by wilful consent to mortal sin. Augu. de Spirit. and
lit. ca. 27.
Non impediunt (says S. Augustine) a vita aeterna iustum, quaedam peccata
venialia, sine quibus haec vita non ducitur. Certain venial sins, without
which this life is not passed over, do not let the just man, from the
atteining of life everlasting. He then is just, who though he have venial
sins, is clear and void of al mortal sins. Who is lust in this life?
Luc. 1.
Otherwise how should the Scripture say, that Zacharias, and Elizabeth were
both just before God, walking in all the commandments, and righteousnesses
of our Lord without complaint?

Jewel. Page 316. Ye seem in some part to renevve the Pelagian old
condemned error.


Harding.
Ye do us wrong to raise that evil surmise upon us. Hieronymus ad
Ctesiphontem. The Pelagians heresy what was it. August. ad Quoduult Deum.
Here Is. 88. Ibidem. Here Is. 88. A point of heresy common between the Pelagians,
and the Caluinistes. Deuteron. 6. Math. 22. Deuteronomy, 17.
We are as far from that heresy, as ye are from the Catholic faith in many
other great and weighty points. S. Hierome shows that the Pelagian heresy
was, posse hominem sine peccato esse, si velit, that a man may be without
sin, if he will. And S. Augustine says, Credunt sine gratia Dei posse hominem
facere omnia diuina mandata: They believe, that a man without the Grace of God,
can do all the commandments of God.

We defy these two opinions. But they had an other erroneous opinion, from the
gilte whereof you M. Jewel being a scholar of Caluines school, shall hardly
clear your self. They taught, as S. Augustine does witness, that infantes
might have, not in deed the kingdom of God, but yet life everlasting without
Baptism. And you teach, that they may have both life everlasting, and the
kingdom of heaven without Baptism. Therefore I leave it to be considered, how
far ye differ from the Pelagians.

Jewel. God says, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, with all thy power. Ye shall not turn, neither to the right hand,
nor to the left.


Harding.
This precepte of loving God with all our heart, etc. was given to us, not as a
thing to be fully done whiles we live, but as a thing to be in this life by
faith begone, and to be hoped for presently by the help of Gods grace, but
really, perfitely, and in deed, to be accomplished in the life to come. De
spiritu and litera cap. 36. Philippe^ 3


So says S. Augustine: Ideo nobis hoc etiam nunc praeceptum est, vt
admoneremur quid fide exposcere, quo spem praemittere, and obliniscendo quae
retro sunt, in quae anteriora nos extendere debeamus. Ac per hoc quantum mihi
videtur in ea qua penficienda est iustitia, multum in hac vita ille profecit,
qui quam long fit a perfectione iustitiae, proficiendo cognouit. Sed dici
potest quaedam iustitia minor huic vitae co^petens, qua intus ex fide viuit,
quamuis peregrinus a Domino: and ideo per fide^ ambulens, non du^ per specie^,
no^ absurd dicitur etia^ ad ista^ pertinere ne peccet: Abacuch. 2. Romans 1. 2.
Cor. 5.
neque enim fi esse no^ dum potest tanta dilectio Dei, quanta illi cognitioni
plenae perfectaeque debetur, iam culpae deputandum est. Aliudest enim totam
nondum assequi charitatem, aliud nullam se qui cupiditatem.

Therefore this also now is given us in commandment (that we love God with all
our heart, etc.) to put us in mind what we ought to ask (of God) by faith,
whither to send before our hope, and to what things that are before us, we
ought to stretche forth our selves, forgeting the things that are behind. And
by this, for so much as seems to me, in that righteousness, which is to
be performed, he has profited much in this life, who in profiting knows,
how far he is from the perfection of righteousness. But there may be named an
other lesser Righteousness competent for this life, in which the righteous man
lives of faith, although he be as yet a forreiner (or Pilgrim) from our Lord:
A lesser righteousness compete^t for this present life.
and therefore whiles he walks by faith and not as yet by sight, it is not
absurd to say of him, that he belongs to this (lesser righteousness) that he
sin not. For if there can not yet in this life be so great a love of God, as
is dew unto that full, and perfect knowledge, it is not to be imputed unto us
for a fault. For it is one thing, not to attain as yet the whole Charity, and
an other thing, to follow no lust. How the precept of loving God with al our
power, is fulfilled in this life.


By these words we learn, first, that the precepte of loving God with all our
power, is after one sort fulfilled in this life, if doing what we can, we
believe, and hope, as we ought, that we shall love God with all our power in the
other life. For it is here so set before our eyes, as a mark whereunto we
should presently direct our selves as nigh as were are hable, with certain
belief, and trust, that if we do here by the help of Gods grace that which
we are hable to do according to the measure that God gives unto us: we shall
in deed attain the righteousness of perfect Charity.

Again the lack of that perfect righteousness is not now to be accounted in us
a sin, Human perfection.
but if we do our best endeavor it is a degree of righteousness inferior, and
baser, then that, which is to come. So that the righteousness of the way, or of
this life, albeit it be not the greatest, that ever shall be, yet it is a
certain human perfection, The lesser righteousness. Hierom. lib. 1.
aduersus Pelagianos.
and fulness, and as S. Augustine calls it, quaedam iustitia minor, a certain
lesser rightheousnesse, S. Hierome calls it, perfectione^ secundu^ humunae
fragilitatis modulu^, Perfection according to the small measure of human
frailty: the highest degree whereof is a man to bestow his life for his
friends, which thing by Gods grace many Martyrs have done: who loved God with all their power, as far as in this life of man he could be loved.

Hieronymus ad Cresipho^t.
Of this lesser righteousness S. Hierome says, Iusti appellantur, non quod omni
vitio careant, sed quod maiori part virtutum commendentur. Men are called
righteous, not for that they be without al vice, but for that they are
furnished with the more part of virtue.

Hieron. Lib. 1. aduersus Pelagianos. Double Perfection.
Again in an other place: Perspicuum est duas in scripturis sanctis esse
perfectiones, duasque iustitias, and duos timores. Primam perfectiomem, and
incomparabilem veritatem, perfectamque iustitiam, Dei virtutibus coaptandam.
Secundam autem, quae competit nostrae fragilitati: iuxta illud quod in psalmis
dicitur: non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens, ad eam iustitiam,
quae non comparatione, sed Dei scientia dicitur esse perfecta. It is manifest,
that in the holy Scriptures there are two perfectio^s, and two righteousnesses,
and two fears: And that there is a first perfection, and an incomparable
truth, and a perfect righteousness, which is to be set with the virtues of
God. And that there is a second perfection, which stands with our frailty:
A distinction vvherby al M. Jewels obeictio^s may sone be ansvvered touching
this point. The Pelagians heresy.
according to that which is said in the Psalms: Every one that lives shall
not be accounted righteous in thy sight (as much to say) in comparison of that
righteousness, which not in comparison, but in the knowledge of God is said to
be perfect. By this double perfection al is answered, what so ever M. Jewel
brings against us, either out of the Scriptures, or out of the Fathers. It is
possible to do the law in this life, after that perfection, which belongs to
Pilgrims, but not after that, which belongs to Heaven. But the Pelagians
held, that a man might if he would, perform the perfection, and that by the
benefits of nature, and by free will without grace.

If a man consider the doctrine which we have taught hitherto concerning
Perfection, it shall appear, that many things, which M. Jewel has alleged in
the Defense, are of us confessed. Whereof then rises the difference? verily of
the words of the Apology, In the Apology. Defense, page 315.
which are these. We are hable by no means to fulfill the law of God in this
life. This proposition M. Jewel I have confuted. This have you taken in hand
to defend. But in all your Defense I find nothing to that purpose. I have now
showed, By what means we fulfill the law.
that by some means we may fulfill the law, to wit, by present faith, and
hope, and by going daily forward in Charity, until we come to perfection in
Heaven.

Furthermore we may die also for Gods sake, The glad suffera^ce of death for
Christ's sake, is one mean to fulfill Godslaw. Cap. 1. and vlt.
and for the defense of his truth. This is one mean, whereby the law is
fulfilled. Therefore your Proposition remains still guilty of erroneus
doctrine. Besides this, it is not impossible for a man actually to fulfill the
law in this life: because God may give a man so much grace as to do it, if
it please him, as S. Augustine has declared twice in his book De spiritu and
litera. Therefore by some means we may be able to fulfill the law, and that
perfitely, although I confess, we do not fulfill it. But remember, you said
not only we do not fulfill the law, but that we are not hable to fulfill it by
no means. Whereby you abridge the power of God. For Gods singular grace, is a
mean to perform it. S. Hierome also granted to Pelagius, possibilia mandata
dedit Deus, Ad Ctesiphont.
and quis hoc negat? The commandments which God gave us, are possible to be
don, and who says nay thereto? Forsooth M Jewel in his Apology.

Of Faith without Works, and of the Merit of good works. The 12. Chapter.
I Had said, there is a true Faith, which is not lively, but idle. M. Jewel
after his flourish made at diverse Scholemen, of whom I intend not much to
speak, says thus.

Jewel. Page 320. 1. Tim. 5. Tit. 1.
He that has no regard to his own, specially such as be of his howsehold,
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel: And again, they, say
they know God, but by their works they deny God.


Harding.
This is brought to prove, that in every great Sin, at the lest we lose our
Faith. Add hereunto that which Martin Luther said: In Artic. 35.
Nemo est certus se non semper peccare mortaliter, propter occultissimum
superbiae vitium. Noman is sure that he sins not always mortally, for the
most privy vice of pride. If then at every mortal sin the faith be lost, and
noman be sure, but that he is always a mortal sinner, doubtelesse no man is
sure, that he has any Faith. And so Only faith is brought to no faith at al.
Only Faith become no faith at al. 1. Tim. 5. Faith denied by evil works.
Tit. 1. Double knowledge of God. Of Understanding, and of vvil, and
obedience. Naked Faith. Faith clothed with Charity.
So well these men profit in their Doctrine. But how says S. Paul, that he who
has not care of his household, has denied the faith? Surely M. Jewel answers
him self out of S. Paul, who says, They profess them selves to know God,
but by their deeds they deny him. For so S. Chrysostom also does expound the
former of these places by the later.

So that there is a double knowledge, one in the understanding only, which
those have that believe in God, and break his commandments by killing, or
stealing, or any other mortal sin. There is another knowing of God in will,
and obedience of heart, when a man prevented with grace, is desirous to do, and
keep Gods commandments, which are not heavy, nor grievous to him, that has
grace. The first kind of knowledge, is bare, and naked Faith. The second, is
Faith furnished, and clothed with Charity. This later Faith he has denied,
who does not take care of his howsehold, and of them of his kin, etc. But
that notwithstanding the former Faith remains, because he may yet believe all the Articles of the Faith, which verily seeing it is a grace of God, and a great
furtherance to everlasting life, and yet has none other name at al ever
invented for it, beside the name of Faith: it must needs be a true Faith,
though it be not a profitable Faith, as al Thieves and Perjured persons are
true men in nature, though they be not honest men in manners, nor true men
of their deeds. Al which words uttered in manner with the same order in my
Confutation, M. Jewel has quite stricken out of his book of Defense, because
they opened the point of the controversy. There I said, Faith, Hoape, and
Charity were three: 1. Cor. 13.
And that as there is a Faith working by Charity of great profit, so is there
a Faith, which may be without Charity, nothing worth to everlasting life.

Jewel. Page 320. Jacob. 2.
S. James says: Faith without works is dead, but a dead faith is no more a
true perfect faith, then a dead man, is a true perfect man.


Harding.
Did not you know the answer M. Jewel? Nothing is more common. You belie the
Scripture, that is the answer to you. And your forefathers even up to Luther
have always belyed it: and being told of it, will not yet amend no more, then
the Devil, whom they follow. A thing may be dead in two sorts, Idle faith, i^
a faith.
either because it had life in it of his own, or else because it had it of
another thing. If a man be dead, he is dead in respect of the life, which
belonged to him self. For a man does consist of body and soul, and not of the
one alone. So that when the soul is aparte from the body, then is he no more a
perfitte man, during the time of that separation. But the Body being one part
of a man, has life in it, whiles the soul abides in it. But that life is not
the Bodies own, but it is the life of the soul, giving moving unto the Body.
which life when it is taken away, the Body remains still a perfect Body in his
own nature, although it be imperfect in respect of the soul, which did
commend it, and set it forth.

Now it is to be considered, whether Faith have life in it self, and of his
own nature, as a man has (for then a dead faith is no faith): or else whether
faith has life of another thing, to wit, of Charity, and then a dead Faith is
a true Faith in his own nature, albeit it be disgraced for lack of the life,
which it was wont to have through Charity.

The very express word of God has ended this question. For S. James gives
us to understand, that Faith has life of an other thing, like as the body has
of the soul, for he says: Sicut enim corpus sine spiritu mortuum est, ita and
fides sine operibus mortua est. Jacob. 2.
As the body without the soul is dead, so is faith dead without works. Not as
the man is dead without the soul, but as the body is dead without the soul,
so is faith dead without works: But the body being without the soul, is still
a true natural body: Therefore faith being without good works, is still a true
real faith. But it is idle, and no more profitable, until good works be again
graffed into it. This matter is so plain, that the confirmation of witnesses is
needelesse, and so M. Jewel is tried a lier in that he said, an idle faith is
in deed no faith at al.

Jewel. Page 321. We grant good works have their revvard, but the same
rewards stands in mercy, and favor, and not in duty. Job says, If a man
will dispute with God, he is not able to answer him one for a thousand. I was
a fraid of al my works. Although I were perfect, yet my soul shall not know
it. etc.


Harding.
These witnesses do prove well against your assurednes of salvation, which you
warrant to your selves. But concerning our question, it shall be good here to
lay certain truths confessed of al sides, that the doctrine may be the
plainer. First, there is no merit of works at al before faith, or without
faith: August. epist. 52. Defense. 321.
For else grace were not grace, and thereunto perteine S. Augustines words by
you alleged to an other purpose. After faith no particular man is able to
warrant his own works to be meritorious, And that is proved by all the
testimonies of Scriptures, and Fathers, which you have brought. For every man
is uncertain of his own state, Ecclesiastes. 9. Our works considered in
themself can not deserve life everlasting.
as not knowing, whether he be worthy of hatred, or of favor. But when we
dispute generally, whether those men, who being in grace, in deed are confessed
to have wrought well, do merit life everlasting thereby, or no, that being our
question: thus I say. No works of man, were they never so good, could of them
selves without Gods ordinance have merited heaven of God, or have made him
debtor of such a reward, or wages dew to them. For they are al done in time,
and can not deserve an infinite reward, such as is rendered in heaven. Romans 8.
For I judge (says the Apostle) that the afflictions of this time are not
worthy of the glory that shall be reveled in us.

In what consideration are our good works meritorious of infinite reward.
But seeing it has pleased God, not only to give us abundance of grace, whereby
our works may be acceptable to him, but also to promise everlasting life to
the doers of them, and to make him self a debtor to us of such a reward:
this promise of God being put, it were injurious to God, if now we should not
say, that our good works deserved life everlasting. For saying God gives
them freely to the end we should thereby deserve heaven, who is so void of
reason, as to deny, that those works deserve Glory, of which God has said,
the dooer^ of them shall have glory rendered unto them, as their wages? Matthew. 5.
Merces vestra (says he) copiosa est in coelis, your wages is plentiful in
Heaven. Vnusquisque propriam mercedem accipiet secundum suum laborem. 1. Cor. 3.
Every man shall receive his proper wages according to his own labor. Psalm. 61.
Thou shall render to every man (says the Prophet) according to his works.
If then no man's works in no sense deserve glory, it must follow, that God
shall render glory to no man: and yet S. Paul says, Romans 2.
that God will render life everlasting to them, who seek glory, and honor,
and incorruption according to the patience (or continuance) of working well. The
same word reddere, Reddere
to render, or pay, does import a title and right, that good workers have to
demand life everlasting. For as if I promise one ten pound to bring me a
cup of fresh water, although before I had promised that wages, the water were
not worth one halfpennie, yet if once upon my promise a man do bring me the
water, I am bound by my promise and covenant, to pay him his wages: Mat. 10.
even so God has bound him self to give us life everlasting for our good
works, saying, Hoc fac, and viues, do this thing, and thou shall live.
Again, he that continues til the end, shall be saved. And therefore now he,
that has wrought well even til the end, may require God to keep his promise,
who surely is faithful, and will not fail to keep it.

And this thing is meant by the Parable of him, that hiered men to labor in
his wineyard (that is, in his Church) couena^ting with them for a penny, that
is to say, Mat. 20.
for life everlasting. To whom, when he paid their wages: he said, Nonne ex
denario conuenisti mecum? Toll quod tuum est. Did thou not bargain with
me for a penny? Take that which is thine. And S. Paul testifies of him
self. 2. Tim. 4.
I have fought a good fight, I have ended the raze, I have kept the faith, as
for the rest the Crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which our Lord
the just Judge will render to me in that day. And not only to me, but also to
them, who love his coming. Here are first rehearsed S. Paul's works, to fight,
to run, to keep the faith: Then is their reward rehearsed, which is a Crown,
not only of mercy, but of justice, of righteousness, which God will not only
give him, but he will render it to him, and not only to him, but to all that
follow his Faith, Hope, and Charity. And yet shall we say, that God rewards
not works of such duty as him self appointed? That which God promises for
working, is due to him that has wrought. And this is the doctrine of S.
Augustine, and of all the other Fathers, and Councels, which might be at large
brought forth, but that the scriptures are therein so plain, that they only
suffice. For he that believes not them, will hardly believe the Fathers, or
Councels.

In what respect is life everlasting freely given, and in what respect it
is due for good works. Romans 6.
Therefore to end this question, if we look to the cause of al our good
works, seeing it is not Nature (which was corrupted) but Grace, which has
repaired Nature through Christ: in that respect life everlasting is freely
given, and not deserved. And so the Apostle says, Life everlasting is the
grace (or free gift) of God. But if we speak of them, who have already grace
by Gods gift, and do now work well: to them life everlasting is by promise
due for their good works. Hereof no man speaks more circumspectly, or
profoundly, then S. Augustine, Augustine. epist. 105. Whether we have merits.
who says thus. Quae merita iactaturus est liberatus, cui si digna suis
meritis redderentur, non esset nisi damnatus? Nullane igitur sunt merita
iustorum? Sunt plane, quia iusti sunt. Sed vt iusti fierent, merita non fuerunt.

What merits (or deserts) shall he that is delivered boast of, who if he were
rewarded according to his deserving, could not be but damned? Are there then no
merits of the just? Yes verily there are, because they are just. But they
merited not to be made just.

And again. Ibidem.
Quod est ergo meritum hominis ante gratiam, cum omne bonum meritum nostrum non
in nobis faciat nisi gratia, and cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud
coronet, quam munera sua? and post. Vnde and ipsa vita aeterna quae vtique in
fine sine fine habebitur (and ideo meritis praecedentibus redditur) tamen quia
eadem merita, quibus redditur, non a nobis parata sunt per nostram
sufficientiam, sed in nobis facta per gratiam, etiam ipsa, gratia nuncupatur,
non ob aliud nisi quia gratis datur. Nec ideo quia meritis non datur, sed quia
data sunt and ipsa merita, quibus datur. Et post. Vnde etiam and Merces
appellatur plurimis scripturarum locis. What then is the Merit of man before
grace, whereas nothing works our good merit in us but grace, and when God
crowns our Merits, he crowns nothing else, but his own gifts? And
afterward. Whereupon life everlasting it self, which doubtless at the end we
shall have without end (and therefore it is given to the Merits going before)
yet because those Merits unto which it is given, be not gotten of us by our
own sufficiency, but are wrought in us through Grace, that Life also is
called Grace, for none other thing, but for that it is given freely. Nor
therefore because it is not given to Merits, but because the Merits them
selves, to which it is given, are given. And afterward. It is called also in
many places of the Scripture, Wages.

Thus in effect then the Scriptures, and after them S. Augustine, and with him
al Catholics do say: Life everlasting is rendered or paid, as wages, or as a
due reward to good works. But because the very same works are not good, but
by Grace, therefore the life everlasting is also called Grace. Both these
parts we grant, the Heretics deny the one, to wit, that good works
merit everlasting life.

Of the Resurrection of the flesh attributed to the worthy receiving of the
blessed Sacrament. The 13. Chapter.
I Said, the Resurrection of the flesh is attributed in the Scriptures not only
to the spirit of Christ, that dwells in us, but also to the real eating of
Christ's flesh in the Euchariste, because in S. John Christ says, Joan. 6.
he that eats my flesh, and drincketh my blood, has life everlasting, and I
will raise him again in the last day.

Jewel. Page 324. Where is your real, and substantial eating?


Harding.
The eating of Christ's supper was a real eating, and thereto the words of S.
John do apperteine, as the very circumstance, and also as all the old Fathers
declare, namely S. Chrysostom, and Cyrillus upon that chapter.

Jewel. Ibidem. S. Augustine expounding the same words, says, believe, In
Joan. tract. 25.
and thou have eaten.


Harding.
S. Augustine says it, though not upon those words. But he meant of the
spiritual eating by Faith only. You still confound eating by faith, with eating
really at the Sacrament.

Jewel. Ibidem. Nicolas Lyra, Nicol. Lyra in Psalm. 111.
one of your own Doctors, says, these words of S. John perteine nothing
to the Sacrament. Thus he says, Hoc verbum direct nihil pertinet ad
Sacramentalem, vel corporalem manducationem. This saying (of the sixth of John)
pertains nothing directly to the Sacrame^tal, or corporal eating. It was
some oversight of your part M. Harding, to seek to prove the eating, of the
Sacrament by those words that by your own doctors judgment pertains
nothing to the Sacrament.


Harding.
But it was a more oversight of you M. Jewel to-blemish your credit by belying
my doctor, Lyra fovvly belied by M. Jew.
if Lyra be my Doctor. For Lyra never said the words, that you allege. Your
cotation directs the Reader to the Psalm: 111. Read thexposition that Lyra
makes upon that Psalm, who list, he shall find him to say no such thing. In
deed he expounds that Psalm of the Euchariste, and says quite contrary to
your doctrine, Lyra in Psalm. 110.
In praecedenti Psalmo actu^ est de Sacerdotio Christi and eius sacrificio,
quod est Eucharistia: in isto agitur de Eucharistiae efficacia. In the former
Psalm the Priesthod of Christ was treated of, and his Sacrifice, which is the
Euchariste: in this Psalm the efficacy of the Euchariste is treated of. There
ye have a plain testimony both of Christ's Priesthod, and of his Sacrifice,
which he performed otherwheres then upon the Cross, which you deny. For
which cause specially, I suppose, ye call him one of mine own doctors. In
consideration whereof all the Doctors of Christ's Church be my Doctors, they
be not yours. For that Doctrine is generally taught by them al.

Lyra understood Christ in the 6. of John to speak of the Euchariste. Joan. 6.
Tha^ Lyra understood the words of Christ spoken in the sixth Chapter of S.
John, of the Euchariste, it is clear, both by thexposition of that Psalm,
and also of that chapter. In the exposition of the Psalm, to declare the
benefit of the Sacrament worthily received, h^ allegeth those words of
Christ, Si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. If any man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever. Touching the 6. chapter of S. John, upon
these words, Operamini non cibum qui perit, etc. Thus he writes: Haec autem
esca est Christi corpus in Eucharistia, etc. This meat (whereof S. John
speaks) is the Body of Christ in the Euchariste, as it appears by the
letter following, in which he speaks very diffusely of the Sacrament of the
Euchariste, showing what is contained in it really. Whereof it is said in this
very Chapter hereafter, my Fleash is very meat, and my Blood is very drink.
Whereby the error of Berengarius is taken away, who said the Body of Christ
to be contained in this Sacrament, as in a Sign. For the which he recanted
his saying, as erroneus. Thus Lyra. By these, and by many other words there,
Lyra shows at large, that he was of the opinion, that sundry sayings of
Christ, in the 6. Chapter of S. John perteine to the Sacrament. Whereby it
appears, how falsely you have belyed him.

The words which you allege M. Jewel to entwite me of ouersighte, are not the
words of Nicolas Lyra mine own Doctor, as you say, but of one Matthias
Doring, Matthias Doring.
who wrote Replies against the Additions of Paulus Burgensis printed with Lyras
expositions. Wherein as you have deceived your Reader with false forgerie,
fathering that upon Lyra, that Lyra never said, nor dreamed of: so you have
fowly corrupted also this poor Doctor Doring, with cutting of his words,
pretending him to speak of these words of S. John, He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, and I will raise him again in
the last day, which I alleged: whereas in deed he spoke neither of these
words specially, nor of Christ's whole discourse in that chapter of S. John in
general, but only of these special words of S. John, Nisi manducaueritis
carnem filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non babebitis vitam in
vobis. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye
shall not have life in you.

That the truth be known, and your falsehed detected, thus it is. Burgensis
had written these words: Licet Iohannis sexto legatur, Purgen. Additione 1. in
Psalm. 112.
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, non habebitis vitam in vobis, per
hoc tamen secundum Doctores non imponitur praeceptum necessitatis ad sumptionem
huius Sacramenti, prout Augustinus declarat. Vnde sumptio huius Sacramenti
corporaliter quantum ad populum, vel Laicos, cadit sub consilio potius, quam
praecepto. Although we read in the sixth Chapter of S. John, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, ye shall not have life in you, yet hereby after
the Doctors mind we are not charged with a precept of necessity to receive
this Sacrament, but only the thing of the Sacrament. (By the thing of the
Sacrament is meant the Unity of the Church) as S. Augustine declares.
Wherefore the receiving of this Sacrament bodily, as touching the lay people,
is such a thing, as is rather counseled, then commanded. Hitherto Burgensis.

Now comes me in Doctor Doring, whom M. Jewel would have men believe to be
Nicolas Lyra, and finds fault with Burgensis for alleging the said words of
S. John, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. to this sense,
Matthias Doring in replica in Psalm. 110.
that the corporal Communion, as touching the lay people, is a matter of
counsel. Per hoc non satisfit Haereticis modernis. The Heretics of our age
will not be satisfied with this, says he. And why? It follows there: Quia
litera non habet illud dictu^ fundamentum. Because that saying (that the bodily
receiving of the Sacrament in lay folk is a matter of counsel) has not his
foundation out of the text. And therefore concerning the Sacramental
Communion, it has not the force of a precept, neither for the Clergy, nor for
the laity, as touching al, according to the true understanding of that text.
Howbeit in the same place it is declared, of what eating, and drinking it ought
to be understood, to wit, of the spiritual. For it follows, he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Which S.
Augustine expounds saying, Hoc est manducare illam escam, and bibere illum
potum, in Christo manner, and Christum manentem in se habere. This is to eat
that meat, and to drink that drink, a man to dwell in Christ, and to have
Christ dwell in him, which is no thing else, but to be in Charity.. Then follow
these words, whereof M. Jewel would take advantage. Hoc au^t omnibus
indiffere^ter est praeceptu^ implicit, sed nihil direct pertinet ad
Sacrame^talem, vel corporalem manducationem. Hoc verbum nisi ma^ducaueritis,
etc. This is given in commandment to al men indifferently by way of
implying: But this saying, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man etc.
This word, or this saying, pertains nothing at al to the Sacrame^tal, or
corporol eating. Thus far Matthias Doring.

Thus you may understand M. Jewel, the words you allege be not Lyras, but one
Doringes, and the same have relation not to the place of S. Ihon that I
brought, but only to these words, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, ye shall not have life in you. Which words after that Doctors mind
importe not a precepte of necessity of the Sacramental, or corporal eating,
and so think I to. And though he judged, they were not aptly alleged of
Burgensis to prove that the bodily receiving of the Sacrament is a matter of
counsel, and not of precepte, because they perteine not to the Sacramental
Communion at al: yet the other saying, he that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, has life auerlasting, and I will raise him again in the last day,
may well be alleged for benefit of the Resurrection of the flesh to redounde
to the faithful believer, of the worthy receiving of Christ's Body in the
Euchariste, for which purpose it was by me alleged. You should have seen these
things better, before ye had entwited me of oversight.

Jewel. How lived then the Patriarchs, and Martyrs, and how shall children
have life, who never receive the Sacrament?


Harding.
Page 324.
I make not the real eating of Christ's flesh the only mean of Resurrection to
life. And therefore your long talk is to no purpose, which you utter in this
place. They shall live by the spirit of Christ, who gave them Faith, and
Charity. But does not therefore S. John speak also of real eating? as though
one effect may not be wrought by diverse means concurring thereunto? Ego
(says Cyrillus) id est, Cyrill. in Ioha^. li. 4. cap. 15.
corpus meu^ quod comedetur, resuscitabo eu^. I will raise him, that is to say,
my body, which shall be eaten, shall raise him. Thus you see plainly, that
touching this point, no less Clerk then Cyrillus teaches the same, that I
said, which you have unjustly, and rashly controlled, as you have done the
rest of the Catholic Doctrine.

That matters of faith, and ecclesiastical causes are not to be judged by the
Civil Magistrate. The. 14. Chapter.
Jewel. Page 637. That a Prince, or magistrate may not lavvfully calae Priest
before him to his own seat of Judgment, or that many Catholic, and godly
Princes have not so done, and done it lavvfully, it is most untrue.


Harding.
I have told you M. Jewel, Confut. Fol. 299. ae.
that the duty of Civil Princes consists in Civil matters, and ever said,
that Bishops ought to be obedient to Princes in such cases, whither so ever
they call them. And if they make any temporal Decree, the Bishop, who has
temporal goods under the Prince, must obey without grudge, Confut. Fol. 302. ae
or gain saying, so far as the Decree stands with the honor of God. But
that in Ecclesiastical causes, and matters of Faith, mere temporal Princes have
any authority of them selves to call Bishops and Priests to their Seats of
Judgment, or ever did it lawfully: we utterly deny. Ambrosius. lib. 5. Epist.
32. Priests only ought to be judges over Priests by Theosius.
S. Ambrose said to the Emperor Valentinian: Nec quisquam contumacem iudicare
me debet, quum hoc asseram, quod augustae memoriae patertuus non solum sermon
respondit, sed etiam legibus suis sanxit, in causa fidei, vel ecclesiastici
alicuius ordinis, eum iudicare debere, qui nec munere impar sit, nec iure
dissimilis: Haec enim verba Rescripti sunt. Hoc est, Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus
voluit iudicare.

Quinetiam si alias quoque arguerelar Episcopus, and morum esset examinanda
causa, etiam hanc voluit ad Episcopule iudicium pertinere. Neither any man
ought to judge me as stubborn, seeing I affirm that, which your father of
most renoumed memory not only answered in word, but also established by his
laws: that in a case of faith, or any ecclesiastical order, he ought to be
judge, that is neither unequal in office, nor unlike in right, or authority:
For these are the words of the Rescripte. That is, he would Priests to be
judges of Priests. And also, if otherwise a Bishop were reproved, and a cause
concerning behavior and manners were to be examined, he would this cause (of
manners) also to apperteine to the Bishops judgment.

Upon these words of Theodosius, alleged, and allowed by S. Ambrose, An
argument, proving that a Civil Magistrate may not be judge oner Priests in
causes ecclesiastical, and matters of Faith.
thus I reason with you M. Jewel. He can not be judge of Bishops and
Priests, nor call them to his seat of Judgment in Ecclesiastical causes, and
matters of Faith that is unequal in office, or unlike in right and authority.
But the Prince is unequal to the Bishop in office, and unlike unto him in right
and authority: (For he has no right nor authority to sacrifice, to preach,
to bind, to loose, to excommunicate, and minister Sacraments) Therefore the
Prince can not be judge of Bishops, and Priests, nor call them to his seat
of Judgment in any ecclesiastical cause, or matter of Faith.

Again, no man has authority over his superior: But the Bishop, in matters
of Faith, and Ecclesiastical causes, is superior to every Prince: Therefore
in those causes the Prince has no authority over the Bishop. And if he have
no authority over him, he can not call him to his seat of judgment.

Furthermore, were it true, that the Prince were equal with the Bishop in
Ecclesiastical causes, and matters of faith, yet could he not call him to his
seat of judgment, ff. ad S. Trebel. L. ille. Te^pestiuum.
quia par in parem non habet potestatem, because the equal has no authority,
or power over his equal. But to see M. Jewels art in facing out this matter,
let us consider the authorities, that he brings to prove his purpose. And
because he blaseth this saying in the top of his margent with great letters.
What it is to be conue^ted before a Magistrate. Spiegelius in verbo conuenire.
A Bishop conuented before the Magistrate, let us first define, what it is to
be conuented before a Magistrate.

The lawiers say, Conuenire, est aliquem in ius vocare, To convent a man, is
to call him into the law: and so Conueniri coram magistratu, est in ius vocari
a magistratu, to be conuented before a magistrate, is to be called into the
law by the magistrate. To call a man into the law, is a judicial act,
proceeding of superior authority in him that is judge, both of the party so
called, and also of the cause, wherefore he is called. As if the Mayor of
London would convent any of the Citizens, he must both have jurisdiction over
that Citizen, and also authority to judge in that cause, for which the
Citizen shall be conuented. But no civil magistrate has authority by virtue of
his temporal office, to be judge our Bishops in ecclesiastical causes, as it
is before proved, and shall hereafter appear: Therefore no temporal magistrate
can convent any Bishop, or Priest before him, in any Ecclesiastical cause.
But let us hear M. Jewel. Cod. de Episcopis et clericis. L. Nullus.


Jewel. Page 637. Justinian the Emperor him self, who of al others most
enlarged the Churches privileges, says thus: Nullus Episcopus inuitus ad
ciuilem vel militarem iudicem in qualibet causa producatum, vel exhibeatur,
nisi princeps iubeat. Let no Bishop be brought, or presented against his vvil
before the captain, or Civil Judge, what so ever the cause be, unless the
Prince shall so command it.


Harding.
Seeing Justinian (as you say) of al others did most enlarge the Churches
Privileges, is it likely, that he would most of al others break them? And
whereas he made a law, Authent. 83. Coll. 6. vt Clerici apud proprios
Episcopos.
that, Clerici apud proprios Episcopos conueniantur primum, Clerks should be
conuented first before their own Bishops, in causa pecuniaria, in a money
matter, and afterward before the Civil Magistrate, if either for the nature of
the cause, or for some other difficulty the Bishop could not end it: yet he
adds priuilegijs omnibus custodit is, quae reverend issimis Clericis sacrae
praestant co^stitutiones, al Privileges kept, which the Emperors laws do
grant unto the reverend Clerks, And says farther, Si vero Ecclesiasticum sit
delictum, egens castigatione ecclesiastica, and mulcta, Deo amabilis Episcopus
hoc discernat, nihil communicantibus clarissimis prouinciae Iudicibus. Neque
enim volumus talia negotia omnino scire ciuiles iudices, quum oporteat talia
ecclesiastice examinari, and emendari animas delinquentium per Ecclesiasticam
mulctam, secundum sacras and diuinas regulas, quas etiam sequi nostra non
dedignantur leges: If the fault be ecclesiastical, and need ecclesiastical
pounishment, and discipline, let the well beloved Bishop of God judge and
discern it, and let not the honorable Judges of the Province intermedle with
it at al. For it is not our pleasure, that Civil Magistrates have at all the
examination of such matters, seeing such matters must be examined
ecclesiastically after the order of the Canons, and the offenders must be
punished by Ecclesiastical discipline, according to the holy and divine Canons,
which our laws do not disdain to follow: Seeing Justinian has so ordained,
no wise man that has read his Laws, will say, that either he in fringed those
Privileges, or, as one contrary to him self, made a law against the
Liberties of the Church, without any mention of the former, that he him self
had made. Wherefore Justinian in the Law, that you rehearse M. Jewel, is to be
understood, to speak of civil, and temporal cases: and that in those cases
no Bishop should be brought before the Lieutenant, and Civil Magistrate, except
the Prince so commanded it.

Now, whereas you upon those words say, that a Bishop may be conuented
before a Civil Magistrate, we grant, and ever so said, that in Civil causes,
and temporal matters, of which Justinian speaks, Bishops may be co^uented
before a temporal Magistrate. But that is not our question. But this is that
which we say, The very point of this Question.
that it is not lawful for a Prince, to call a Priest to his seat of judgment
in Ecclesiastical causes. And in this your own author Justinian condemns
you. He says, as you heard before: Autent. 83. col. 6. vt Clerici.
Si ecclesiasticu^ sit delictu^, etc. If the fault be ecclesiastical, let the
well-beloved Bishop of God judge and discern it. Let the honorable Judges of
the Province intermedle nothing at al with it. For we will not, that Civil
Magistrates have the examination of such matters. And again. Cod. de Episco.
and clericis. L. Clericus.
Si vero crimen sit Ecclesiasticum, episcopalis erit examinatio, and
castigatio. If the fault be Ecclesiastical, the examination, and pounishing of
it shall apperteine unto the Bisshoppe.

But peradventure you will reply to this, and say, that Justinian in the law
by you rehearsed, speaks not only of Civil, but also of ecclesiastical
causes, and wills a Bishop, in qualibet causa, in any cause, to be conuented
before the temporal magistrate, if the Prince do so command. If you, or your
lawier make this objection, we answer, that it can not be showed out of al
Justinians laws, Anthent. 83. col. 6. vt Clerici.
that he willed a Bishop, or Priest to be conuented before a temporal
Magistrate in an Ecclesiastical cause, or to be pounished for any heinous
offense, before he were degraded of his Bishop. And hereof, if you had but a
mean smattering in the Civil Law, you could not be ignorant.

Besides that already alleged, you find in the Code this Law: Cod. de Episco.
and Clericis. L. Statuimus.
Statuimus vt nullus Ecclesiastica^ personam in criminali quaestione vel civilly
trahere ad iudicium seculare praesumat contrae co^stitutiones imperiales, and
canonicas sanctiones. We ordeine and decree, that no man presume to bring any
Ecclesiastical person to the seat of judgment of any seculare Magistrate in a
criminal, or civil cause, contrary to the Imperial Constitutions, and
canonical Decrees. By this you see, that it is against both the Emperors
constitutions, and Canons of the Church, that a Bishop should be conuented
before a Magistrate in an Ecclesiastical cause. As for the vantage which you
seek in those words, In qualibet causa, in any cause, it is none at al. Had
not you benne blinded with malice, and your lawier with ignorance, you might
have learned, A Maxima among the lavviers.
that it is a Maxima, and a Principle with the lawiers, that, Leges tales
indefinite loquentes, intelligendae sunt secundum aliam legem speciatim
loquentem. Such laws speaking indefinitely, must be understood by an other
law, that speaks specially and particularly. Wherefore seeing the law,
Clericus, in the Code, and the Antentike, vt Clerici in the new Constitutions,
make special mention, that Bishops, and Priests should not be conuented before
Civil Magistrates in Ecclesiastical causes, and permit no temporal Judge to
meddle with Ecclesiastical persons, except it be in Civil matters, and that
with a Limitation, and a Prouiso also: it had been your part, and your blind
Lawiers also, to have understood those words, In qualibet causa, in any
cause, spoken there indefinitely, by the other Laws, that speak more
specially. But then had you lost a peevish sophistical Argument, and men had
not known your worthy skill in the Law: which no doubt will appear great by
your practice.

Jewel. page 637. and 638. The Emperor Martianus commands, if the cause be
criminal, that the Bishop be conuented before the Lieutenant, vt coram
Praeside conueniatur.


Harding.
For your credit touching Martianus commandment, you refer us to the Code
of Justinian. L. Si qui ex consensu, de Episco. Audient. L. Cum Clericis, de
Episco. and Clericis.
As for the first, you may tell your lawier that he has foully deceived you, and
therefore is not worthy to have his fee. That law, Si qui ex consensu, Cod. de
Episcop. Audient. was never made by Martianus the Emperor, but by Arcadius,
and Honorius, and requires neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor Clerk to be
conuented before the Lieutenant, but declares, that if any by mutual consent,
will have their matter debated before the Bishop as an arbiter, it shall be
lawful for them so to do, as every man that either considers the law, or
reads the Sum set before it, may easily see.

M. Jew. forgeth.
As for the other law, Cum Clericis, although it be Martianus decree, yet has
it not those words, vt coram Praeside conueniatur, that the Bishop be
conuented before the Lieutenant, nor any clause or sentence sounding to that
pupose. For trial whereof I refer me to the book, and to any indifferent
man, that can read, and understand it.

But suppose it to be true, that the Emperor Martianus had given such a
commandment, what could it advantage your cause M. Jewel? You should prove,
that a Christian Prince may lawfully call a Bishop to his Consistory for
matters of Faith, and Ecclesiastical causes And not hable to do that, you tell
us like a Trifler, that, if the cause be criminal a Bishop may be conuented
before the Lieutenant. And in so doing, you prove that, which no man denies.
As Cranmare Archbishop of Cantorburie was called to the Princes Consistory,
Cranmare.
and imprisoned in the Tower for treason against the Queen's Majesty, and
afterward degraded, and burned at Oxford for heresy: So any Bishop for like
treason, or like heinous and criminal offense, may not only be summoned to the
Princes seat of Judgment, but also be cast into prison, and after degradation
according to the Canons be deprived of his life. This we do not deny. But that
which we deny, and you should prove (for I must tell you one thing often
because you are always forgetful of the very point that is in controversy)
is, that in matter of Faith, and in Ecclesiastical causes, a Prince may call
Bishops to his consistory, as their superior and governor in Ecclesiastical
causes. This is the matter in controversy between you and the Catholics M.
Jewel. Let us hear, how substanrially you prove that.

Jewel. Page 638. Pope Innocentius 3. him self confesses, De mayor, and
obedient. ca. 2. Innocent. 11. q. 1. Cleric. nullus
that the Pope may make a lay man his Delegate, to hear and determine in
Priests causes. The like hereof ye may find in your own Gloss, Papa laico
delegat causam spiritualem. The Pope commits the hearing of a spiritual
matter unto a lay man.


Harding.
If any reason may be forced upon the Authority of Innocentius, and the Gloss
to your purpose, it is this: The Pope may make a Lay man his Delegate, to
hear and determine Priests causes: Ergo, Bishops and Priests may be conuented
before the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical causes. But to vnrippe the
rudenes of this Argument, imagine M. Jewel, that you were infamous for Simonie,
and accursed for extorsion and unjust exactions amongst the clergy of
Sarisburie Dioces under the name of a benevolence toward the setting up of
your house: And that the Metropolitan hearing of it, fearing least great
dishonor should rise to your Person, and infamy to the Gospel, as ye call it,
would have the matter examined, and to that end, sends a commission to the
Mayor, and Bailiffes of Sarisburie, and makes them his Delegates to examine,
and enquire of your doings, and that the Mayor, and Bailiffes upon virtue of
that Commission from the Metropolitan convent you before them: All this then
imagined to be true, shall it be said, that M. Jewel was conuented in a cause of
Simonie, and extorsion before the Mayor, and Bailiffes of Sarisburie, as Mayor
and Bailiffes of Sarisburie, or as commissioners, and delegates from the
Metropolitan? If you confess that you were conuented before them, as the
Metropolitanes Delegates, then must you confess, that you were not conuented
before them, as Mayor, and Bailiffes of Sarisburie, and mere lay Magistrates.
In like manner, when the Pope makes a Lay man his delegate to hear and
determine Priests causes, the Priests cause, which is heard, and determined
by that Lay man so delegated by the Pope, can not be said to be heard and
determined by a Lay man, as a Lay man, but by the Popes Delegate. And seeing,
Extr. de offic. Deleg. c. Sane.
Delegatus gerit vices delegantis, a degate susteineth the steed of him, that
gives him commission, the Bishop, or Priest, who is conuented before the Popes
delegate, shall be said to be conuented before the Pope him self, and not before
the Lay Magistrate, as a mere Civil and temporal Magistrate.

M. Ievvel begileth his Reader with false allegations.
But what mean you M. Jewel thus to begyle your Readers with false allegations?
Innocentius has no such words, as you report, de Mayor. and obedient. cap.
2. Innocent. Neither is the Decree that is there registered, the Decree of
Innocentius, but of Gregorius, and nothing at al God wot to the purpose, for
which ye allege it. More over the Gloss brought out of the 11. cause, and first
question, says not, Papa Laico delegat causam spiritualem, the Pope commits
the hearing of a spiritual matter unto a Lay man, but, Si Papa, if the Pope do
commit a spiritual matter to a Lay man. And what then M. Jewel? Forsooth in
that case a Clerk may be conuented before a temporal Judge. But that temporal
Judge is the Popes delegate, and deriueth his authority from him, as the
Commissioners in London have their authority from the Queen. So that the
exceptions there alleged by the gloss, prove, ius commune esse in contrarium,
that the common law is to the contrary, that is, that no Bishop, or Priest
ought to be conuented before a Civil Magistrate.

Jewel. Page 638. Yea, further ye shall find even in the Popes own Decrees,
that the Pope has committed a spiritual matter in a cause of Simonie, to be
heard, 2. q. 5. Mennam.
and ended by a woman: and that Brunichildis, being a woman, by Virtue of the
Popes commission, summoned a Bishop to appear, and solemnly to make his
purgation before her.


Harding.
If the Pope did ever commit any spiritual cause to a woman, What was that
Brunichildis had to do in the cause of Menna by co^missio^ of S. Gregory.
as you tell us he did to Brunichildis Queen of France: then was the Queen of
France by your Confession, the Popes commissioner in that cause, and Delegate,
to hear, and end that matter of Simonie. But what if we can not find in the
Popes Decrees, to which you refer us, that the Pope ever committed a
spiritual matter in a cause of Simonie, to be heard, and ended by a woman, and
that Brunichildis had neither commission from the Pope to summon a Bishop,
neither ever summoned a Bishop to appear and solemnly to make his purgation
before her? What then shall we say, but that M. Jewel is a shameless falsifier,
a deceiuer of all that believe him?

The words of that Decree, being the words of S. Gregory, Grego. lib. 11.
epist. 8. 2. q. 4. Mennam.
stand thus. Mennam vero reuerendissimum fratrem and coepiscopum nostrum, post
quam ea, quae de e^ dicta sunt requirentes, in nullo inuenimus esse culpabilem:
qui insuper ad Sacratissimum corpus beati Petri Apostoli, sub iureiurando
satisfaciens, ab ijs quae obiecta fuerant eius opinioni, se demonstrauit
alienum: reuerti illum purgatum absolutumque permisimus: quia sicut dignum
erat, vt si in aliquo reus existeret, culpam in eo canonice puniremus: Ita
dignum non fuit, vt eum adiuuante innocentia, diutius retinere, vel affligere
in aliquo deberemus. Purgationem tamen ante duobus sibi sacerdotibus iunctis,
vbi accusator cessauerit, eundem ex se praebere tuo commisimus arbitrio. We
licensed our most reverend brother, and fellow Bishop Menna to return home,
after he had made his Purgation, and was assoiled of the crime laid to his
charge, specially, since that after long inquiry made concerning those things,
which were reported of him, we found him culpable and blame worthy in none:
And he him self besides making satisfaction upon his oath at the most holy
body of the blessed Apostle S. Peter, has declared him self to be free, and
clear from al those things, that were objected to impair his good name. For
as it was convenient, that we should severely have pounished him according to
the Canons, if he had benne guilty in any thing: So it was not meet, that we
should stay him, or trouble him any longer, seeing his own innocence did so
help him. Notwithstanding we have given charge, that he him self, taking
before two Priests unto him, make his purgation, when the accuser has given
over his action, before you at your arbitrament. Thus far S. Gregory.

But this proves not your intent, and purpose M. Jewel. For I beseeke you
Sir, M. Jewels forgeries.
where is it said in all this Decree, that the Pope committed a spiritual matter
in a cause of Simonie to be heard, and ended by a woman? Where is it said, that
Brunichildis being a woman, by virtue of the Popes commission, summoned a
Bishop to appear, and solemnly to make his purgation before her? In the text
it is not, nor in the gloss, that you so solemnly allege. Or if it were, had
your lawier forgotte to tell you, or were you so simple, that you could not
conceive, that (which is commonly said) Maledicta est Glosa quae corrumpit
textum, it is a cursed gloss, that corrupts the text? But seeing you build
so much upon the Gloss, let us see, what the Gloss says.

Jewel. 638. In your Gloss upon the same place, it is noted thus. Fuit tamen
hoc nimium papaliter dispensatum. The Pope was to Popelike in this
dispensation.


Harding.
To let pass your scoffing and ministerlike interpretation, let us come to the
matter. M. Ievvel corrupts his Gloss by nipping away the end of the
sentence alleged.
What dispensation is it, that the Gloss speaks of? Why suffered you not the
author of the Gloss to tell forth his whole tale? Ye always make your
advantage among the unlearned of falsifying and corrupting your testimonies.

It follows there, Quod Episcopus expurgatus coram Papa, cogitur adhuc coram
muliercula se purgare: that a Bishop having made his purgation before the
Pope, is forced to purge him self before a woman. And this is the
dispensation, that the Gloss misliketh, as to popelike, according to your
interpretation. But if either the Gloser had considered the reason that moved
the Pope, or you, that follow the Gloss, would have marked the little cause,
that stands by the Gloss in the margent in the last printe of Paris, where it
is said, hoc totum ideo fuit, vt fama eius clarior appareret: all this was done
(by the wisdom of S. Gregory) to the end his good name might appear more
clear: neither he would so rashly have controlled S. Gregory's order in that
behalf, nor you so fondly alleged it. And of a word spoken in jest, as the
Canonistes sometimes speak, you take a weak hold, as of a matter spoken in
great soothe.

Notwithstanding you will say, the words of the Decree are plain, tuo
co^misimus arbitrio. We have given a commission to your arbitriment, that he
purge him self before you. If you make this objection, we answer, that if the
words were exactely sifted by the true and grammatical construction, you would
hardly maineteine this interpretation. But I will not contend about words. Let
it be, as you would have it. Let Brunichildis have a commission from the Pope
to see, that Bishop Menna made his purgation before her. Your purpose and
saying is nothing proved by it. For first you say, The Pope committed a
spiritual matter in a cause of Simonie to be heard, and ended by a woman. And
this is a vain tale, and untrue fancy of yours, not hable to be gathered by
any word of that decree. For the cause of Simonie whereof Menna was accused,
was heard, and ended by the Pope, and he not found faulty in it, was
absolved, and sent home. And a cause once heard, and determined by the Pope, is
not wont to be committed afterward to the hearing, and determination of a
woman.

After this, as though this lie had not ben loud enough, you tell us, that
Brunichildis being a woman, by virtue of the Popes commission, summoned a
Bishop to appear, and solemnly to make his purgation before her: and for your
credit you refer us in the margent to Gratian. 2. q. 5. Mennam. It is. 2. q.
4.
But that Brunichildis did either summon a Bishop, to wit, Menna, to
appear, or required him to make his purgation before her, it is not to be
found there, nor any where else, that M. Jewel has alleged, or can allege, as
I doubt not. For Brunichildis Queen of France being so holy, so virtuous, so
religious a Lady, as S. Gregory reports she was: it is to be presupposed,
that she would not disquiet a good and an innocent man, nor put him to farther
trouble, who, when his cause was heard, and ended by the Pope, was found in
nullo culpabilis, blame worthy in nothing that was laid to his charge, by the
evident testimony of S. Gregory declared in his epistle sent of purpose to
Queen Brunichildis. Wherefore M. Jewel these fantasies of yours are but wanton
and vain, employed to none other end, but to deceive the unlearned.

Jewel. Page 638. The Emperor Constantinus vvrote thus unto the Bishops,
that had been at the Council of Tyrus. Cuncti, Socrates. lib. 1. c. 34
quotquot Synodum Tyri compleuistis etc. Al ye that have been at the Council of
Tyrus, come without delaie to our camp, and shevve me plainly, and without
color, how vpprightly ye have delte in iudgemement, and that even before my
self, whom ye can not deny to be the true servant of God.


Harding.
These letters were written by the Emperor Constantinus to Arian Bishops,
that had made a false conuenticle or conspiracy, (and not a lawful Council M.
Jewel) at Tyrus: and they were written unto them upon the complainte of S.
Athanasius that worthy Patriarch of Alexandria, made both against the injuries,
and violences, that Flauianus Dionysius the Emperors Lieutenant attempted
against him, and also against the sclaunders, that his enemies the Arians had
wrongfully laid to his charge. And these sclaunders were not of Faith matters,
but that Athanasius had murdered one Arsenius, Ruffin. in Histor. Eccles. li.
10. cap. 17. Socrates. Li. 1. c. 29.
and had committed a foul rape with a woman, and that with an Arm cut of from
Arsenius body, he practiced Witch craft: for the which crimes these Arians
sought Athanasius death. Wherefore no marvel, if that good Emperor being
Gods minister to see justice ministered, and the Violences, and injuries of his
Lieutenantes and Officers pounished, and these civil causes of Felony, Murder,
and Rape to be truly and thoroughly examined, ad vindictam malorum, to the
revenge of malefactors, wrote his letters to al them, that had been at the
foresaid conuenticle at Tyrus, and required them to appear before him, as
before the sincere minister of God, and to render account of their dealing
against Athanasius in those Civil cases. Of this matter See the Return. Art. 4.
Item the Countreblast. lib. 2 Cap. 2. and. 3
For he might well do it, and nothing further M. Jewel in proof of his
desperate cause, that a Bishop was conuented in matters of Faith, and
ecclesiastical causes, before the Civil Magistrate, as his lawful, and
ordinary Judge.

Jewel. Page 638. Justinian the Emperor in the law, that he makes touching
the public prayers of the Church, says thus, we command al Bishops and
Priests to minister the holy oblation, Authentica constit. 123.
and the prayer at the holy Baptism, not under silence, but with such voice,
as may be heard of the faithful people, to thintente the hearts of the
hearers, may be stirred to more Devotion, etc. Afterward he adds further.
And let the holy Priests understand, that if they neglecte any of these
things, they shall make answer therefore at the dreadful judgment of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, And yet nevertheless we our selves
understanding the same, will not pass it over, nor leave it vnpounished. Hereby
we see, that Godly princes may summone Bishops to appear before them, even
in causes Ecclesiastical, to receive such pounischement, as they have deserved.


Harding.
For answer to this, or any thing that you can bring out of Justinian, for
breuities sake, I refer you to Justinian him self. By whose constitutions,
and Godly laws, it may easily appear, how far he was from claiming
superiority over Bishops, or government, as supreme judge in causes
Ecclesiastical, as he who decreed according to the definitions of the 4.
general Councelles, that in Spiritual causes the Pope of the elder Rome should
be taken for the chief of al Priests, and advertised Pope John, that there
should be nothing moved perteining to the state of the Church, but that he
would signify it to his Holiness, being Head of al Churches, and declared,
that in all his Laws, and dooinges for matters Ecclesiastical, he gave place
to the holy Canons made by the Fathers, and willed, that when any
Ecclesiastical matter were moved, his Lay officers should not intermelde, but
suffer the Bishops to end it according to the Canons.

In this very Constitution which you have alleged, with these special words
he commits the Judgment, and pounishment of al sorts of offenses committed
by them of the Clergy, to such as the Canons have put in authority.
Authentica constit. 123.
Thus he decrees. Quotiescunque aliquis vel Sacerdotum, vel Clericorum, vel
Praesulum, vel Monachorum, vel de fide, vel de turpi vita, vel quod contra
sacros aliquid Canones peregerit, accusatus fuerit, si quidem is, qui
accusatus, Episcopus fuerit, huius Metropolitanus, ea, quae proferentur
examinato: Si vero Metropolitanus, beatissimus Archiepiscopus, sub quo
censetur: si Presbyter, aut Diaconus, aut alius Clericus, aut Praesul
Monasterij, aut Monachus, Religiosissimus Episcopus, sub quo hi censentur
delata in accusationem examinato, and veritate co^probata, vnusquisque pro modo
delicti Canonicis censuris subijcitor iudicio eius, qui causae examinationem
accommodat. As often as any either of the Priests, or of the Clerks, or of
the Prelates, or of the Monks is accused, either of faith, or of filthy life,
or that he has done ought against the holy Canons, in case, he that is
accused, be a Bishop, let his Metropolitan examine the things, that shall be
laid to his charge: if he be a Metropolitan, let the Archbishop, under whom he
is, have the examination: If he be a Priest, or a Deacon, or some other Clerk,
or a Prelate of a Monastery, or some Monk, let the Bishop, under whose
jurisdiction they are, examine the things that be laid in accusation. And when
the truth is tried out, let every one abide the Censures of the Canons for the
rate of the fault by the judgment of him, that sits upon the examination
of the matter.

Again how far he was from the mind and will that Bishops, or any other
whatsouer Ecclesiastical persons should be summoned to appear before him, or
his temporal officers in judgment for any Ecclesiastical cause, this express
Decree, which there also ye might have found, sufficiently witnesses. Si
Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam Communionem habento Ciuiles Magistratus cum
ea disceptatione, sed Religiosissimi Episcopi secundum sacros Canones negotio
finem imponunto. If the matter be Ecclesiastical (that is to be judged) let the
Civil Magistrates have nothing to do with it: But let the most Religious
Bishops make an end of it according to the holy Canons.

By these, as also by the purporte of sundry other Justinians constitutions,
ordinances, and decrees, al men may see, that he neither challenged any
supreme dominion over Bishops, and Priests in Ecclesiastical causes, nor
enacted this, nor any other law, as chief Governor of the Church, but
followed the holy Councels, and willed the Canons to take place, and confirmed
that, which was decreed by them.

For special answer then to this special objection made out of the 123,
constitution, I say that Justinian threatened to pounishe them with the
severity of temporal laws, who would not be contained in their duty by
Ecclesiastical discipline, and order of the Canons, that fear might force,
where love and conscience could not bind. Which policy we do not mislike,
seeing (Duo vincula fortius ligant) two bonds bind faster then one.

To be short, Justinian leaves the correction of Clerks offending in any
thing against the Canons, to the ce^sures of the Canons. And if any refuse to
abide the order appointed by the Canons, and utterly shake of the yoke of the
Canons: then, that is to say, in the case of extreme stubbornness, and
contempt of the Canons, like a Godly prince, he threateneth revenge, and
pounishment. In which case the Church does now call, and always has called for
the aid of the Seculare Arm against those, that utterly refuse to be
corrected by the censures of the Church, and seem incorrigible.

So neither by the laws of Justinian, neither by the example of Brunichildis,
neither by the Gloses, that you so solemnly allege, it can not be seen, that
Godly Princes might ever summone Bishops to appear before them, to receive any
pounishment at their hands, as their superiors and supreme governors in
ecclesiastical causes. Peradventure if we put on eyes of better sight, we may
see it hereafter, if we diligently attend, what you say. Forth therefore M.
Jewel.

Jewel. Page 638. The Emperor Constantinus in his letters to the people of
Nicomodia, Theodorit. li. 1. c. 19.
speaking of the willful errors and heresies of Priests, and Bishops, says
thus: Illorum temeraria praesumptio, mea, hoc est, ministri Christi, manu
coercebitur. Their rash attemptes shall be repressed by my hand, that is to
say, by the hand of Christ's servant. August. co^tra epist. Parme. li. 1.
cap. 7.
So likewise S. Augustine says to the Donatistes: An forte de religione fas
non est vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Cur ergo ad Imperatorem
legati vestri venerant? Is it not lavvful, that the Emperor, or the Emperors
deputy should pronounce in a case of Religion? Wherefore then went your
own Ambassadors to the Emperor?


Harding.
If you had said M. Jewel that Constantinus in his epistle to the Nicomedians,
had threatened to pounishe Bishops, and Priests, that were Arians, that is,
cursed, and abominable heretics, you had in some part said the truth. But
where you say, that he spoke of the wilful errors, and heresies of Priests
and Bishops, and add not Arian Priests, and Arian Bishops, you conceele
part of the true Story, and declare your malicious heart against Priests, and
Bishops. But to leave that cankred spite of yours to the judgment of God,
why do ye not report the Emperors words, as they are in your author
Theodoritus? M. Jewels corruption
Will you never leave this your accustomed vile corruption? Theodoritus says
not as you report, but thus: Theodorit. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Quod si quis audacter inconsulteque ad memoriam and laude^ pestium illaru^
exarserit, illius statim audacia, ministri Dei, hoc est mea executione
coercebitur. If any man be inflamed boldly and incircumspectly at the
remembrance and commendation of those wicked and pestilent heretics, his
boldenes shall be repressed straightwaie by execution done by me, that am the
minister of God. And these threatening words of the Emperor are to be referred
to the people of Nicodemia, for to them the epistle was directed. And having
temporal jurisdiction, as power of life, and death over them, he put that
terror into their hearts, that they should be neither in love, nor in
admiration of those accursed Bishops, whom he had bannished for the Arian
heresy. Or if M. Jewel will have those words of the Emperor to be referred,
as well to the Bishops, and Priests, as to the lay people: Let him
understand, that, as it is lawful for any Prince to pounish heretics that are
excommunicate by the Church, and delivered to the secular power, be they
Bishops or priests: So it was lawful for Constantine to pounishe these
wicked Arian Bishops excommunicated, and accused by the. 318. Bishops in
the Council of Nice. And as the prince that now as an executour of Justice
pounisheth heretics by death, is not for that consideration, neither judge in
causes of heresy, nor supreme governor of the Church: So Constantine at that
time had no jurisdiction over Bishops in ecclesiastical causes, albeit he
bannished them, and threatened them other pounishme^t, if they fell in love of
those cursed Arians. For the princes threatening of pounishment for heresy, is
no argument to build a superiority in ecclesiastical causes.

As for the place which you bring out of S. Augustine, you brought it before
in your Reply, to prove, that Emperors might receive Appeals in
ecclesiastical causes. Art. 4. fol. 104. 105, 106.
And a sufficient answer was made unto it in the Return of Untruths upon
you. Why conceele you that? If you had been studious of the truth for Gods
sake, you should have yielded unto it, or if you had judged it false, have
confuted it, and not let it pass in silence, and now trouble the Reader with
the same stuff again.

But peradventure you will say, that you never saw that book, and therefore
that you dissemble not the answer. If it were credible, that you would not see
a book written directely against you, and one that touches you so near, this
excuse were tolerable. But seeing it has no color of truth, there can be
little pretended to save you from the gilte of dissimulation and hypocrisy in
this case. I answer you therefore, as he did S. Augustine spoke in that place
against the stubborn Donatistes, of whom Parmenianus was one, which
complained that the Emperor Constantine, (eos ad campum, id est, ad supplicium
duci iussit) commanded them to be brought forth into the field, that is, to
pounishement. And in reasoning against him, he took advantage of his own
doings, not as allowing the Appeal to the Emperor, but as proving him
unreasonable, who for advantage would appeal to the Emperor, and when the
Emperor had pronounced sentence against him, would strive and repine at the
sentence, and say, that he being a temporal prince, ought not to pounishe
Bishops. Like as if you M. Jewel (having made the Queen supreme governor of
your Church) should say, in case you were condemned of heresy, or of Simonie
by the Prince, Her grace ought not to condemn me in these cases: a Catholic
that flattereth her not with that title, would reason against you, and say: No
sir? Is it not laweful for the Queen to condemn you in a case of heresy, and
Simonie? Why then made you the Queen supreme governor of your Church? Even
so did S. Augustine reason against the Donatistes. And because by their appeal
to his Majesty they had chosen him judge in their cause, and after said, he
could not condemn them: S. Augustine used their own weapon against them, to
convince their folly, and said as you say. Is it not lawful, that the
Emperor, or the Emperors deputy should pronounce in a case of Religion?
Wherefore then went your own Ambassadors to the Emperor? etc. But as the
Catholic reasoning in such wise against you, can not be said by that to
allow the Queens supremacy: So S. Augustine in this talk against the
Donatistes, can not be said to allow the Emperors authority in condemning of
Bishops, and other ecclesiastical causes. For he answering an other Donatiste
that said, Augustinus epist. 162.
Non debuit episcopus proconsulari iudicio purgari, a Bishop ought not to make
his purgation before a temporal magistrate, said, If he be worthy to be blamed,
whom the temporal judge has absolved, whereas he him self did not require it,
how much more are they to be blamed, which would have a temporal prince to be
judge in their cause? By this it appears that he thought, that Princes could
not be judges over Bishops.

Ibidem.
Moreover he reports, that Constantine, who appointed judges to hear their
cause, did it, a sanctis Antistitibus veniam petiturus, as minding to ask
pardon of the holy Bishops for his fact. And the same Emperor seeing their
importunity in repairing to him as judge, said, Optatus li. 1. co^tra Parmen.
O rabida furoris audacia. Sicut in causis Gentilium fieri solet, appellationem
interposuerunt. Oh see the desperate boldness of rage and fury. As if it
were in the suites of Heathens, and Paganes, so these men have put up their
Appeal.

Now sir, if he had been of the mind that you imagine, or had thought it
lawful for Constantine to hear, and determine ecclesiastical causes, or a
right apperteining to his Emperial estate: he would not have told us, that he
thought it a fault to intermedle in such matters, and therefore asked pardone
of the holy Bishops. Neither would so wise an Emperor, seeing those Bishops
appealing in that cause, have d^t^sted their doings, and cried, O rabida
furoris audacia, oh the desperate boldness of rage and fury. Wherefore M.
Jewel, neither this fact of Constantine, nor that authority of S. Augustine,
can further your pretended conuention of Bishops before Civil Magistrates. Let
us see what follows.

Jewel. Page 638. But what speak we of other Priests, and inferior
Bishops? The Popes them selves, notvvithstanding al their universal power,
have submitted them selves, and made their purgations before kings and
Emperors. 2. q. 7. Nos si. Gerson in Sermon. Paschali.
Pope Liberius made his humble appearance before the Emperor Constantius. Pope
Sixtus before Valentinian. Leo the third before Carolus Magnus, Leo 4. before
Jews the Emperor. John 22. was accused of heresy, and forced to recant the
same unto Philippe the French king.


Harding.
The higher every good man is, the more humbly he behaueth him self. If then
the Popes having an universal power over Christ's Church, did submit them
selves to Princes, and Emperors, they showed much humility in their hearts,
and confidence in their causes: and prove against you M. Jewel, that if this
submission had not ben made voluntarily by them, nor King, nor Caesar could
have had authority, or power to have benne judges over them: as you may see
by the example of that good Emperor Constantine, refusing to be judge over
Bishops, and saying, Sozo. lib. 1 cap. 17.
Deus vos constituit sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis dedit de nobis iudicandi,
and ideo a vobis recte iudicamur, vos autem non potestis ab hominibus iudicari,
God has appointed you Priests, and given you power to judge of us, and
therefore we are rightly judged of you, but ye can not be judged of men, that
is, of lay men, and men (as S. Ambrose reported of Theodosius, which I
declared before) that are unequal in office, M. Ievvel failing of his purpose,
falls from the Popes purgatio^ before Emperors, to their appearance before
Emperors, which no man denied. Liberius appearing before Constantius.
T^^odorit. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2 cap. 16. Pope Sixtus after what forte he made
his purgatio^ and for what cause.
and unlike in authority, and right. Of such, Bishops may not be judged.

The Pope Liberius, you say, made his humble appearance before Constantius. It
is true. But appearance is not purgation M. Jewel. You promised to tell us of
Popes, that submitted them selves, and made their purgations before kings and
Emperors, and beginning with that good Pope, you forgette your self, and for
making of a purgation, you tell us of making appearance. Whereby we gather, that
either you pass not what you say, or remember not what ye promise. Liberius
dealing with Constantius the Arian Emperor at that appearance, was such, as
became a Bishop of the Apostolic See. For in that cause he would neither be
ouerborne by the authority of the Emperor, nor yield unto his wickedness
against Athanasius for a long time, much less acknowledge him for his
superior, or judge.

As for Pope Sixtus, it is certain, that he made his purgation before the
Emperor Valentinian. But he did it M. Jewel in Concilio, in a Council of
Bisshoppes, and not in a court of the Prince. And he did it of humility to
avoid the suspicion, and malice of his adversaries, and not to give any
President to others to do the like, nor to preiudicate the authority of the
Apostolic See. These are his words in the place, that your self allege.
Understand ye, 2. q. 4. Ma^dastis. Nostra authoritate.
that I am falsely accused of one Bassus, and unjustly persecuted. Which the
Emperor Valentinian hearing, commanded a Synod by virtue of our authority
to be assembled. When the Synod was assembled, I satisfying al with great
examination, albeit I might otherwise have escaped, yet avoiding suspicion, I
made my purgation before them al, discharging thereby my self from suspicion,
and from emulation and envy, Sed non alijs, qui hoc noluerint, aut non sponte
elegerint, faciendi formam dans, But not giving a president to others to do
the like, that either shall not be willing, or will not voluntarily choose this
kind of purgation.

Lo M. Jewel, your own author condemns you. Pope Sixtus made his purgation,
not only before Valentinian, but, coram omnibus, before al Bishops, and
others assembled in the Synod. And he did it not by compulsion of any
superior Authority, but of humility, to declare his innocence, and not to
give any other a president to do the like. And by this ye may perceive, that
the Emperor had of him self nor authority to call that Council, nor power to
summone the Pope to his Judgment Seat, nor any jurisdiction to force him to
make his Purgation before his Majesty. For all was done by the submission of
the Pope. He consented to the Emperors calling of that Council: he gave him
license to hear his purgation, and to be judge in that cause. And he that
gives an other authority and commission, is by natural reason higher: and of
greater power in that case, then he that receives the authority, and
commission. Wherefore Pope Sixtus making his purgation before the Emperor
Valentinian, can not be said to have benne conuented before a lay Magistrate,
as his superior, and lawful judge.

Leo 3. and Leo 4.
Concerning Leo the third, and Leo the fourth, their case is like. When they
made their Purgation, the one said even in the place, that you allege: hoc
faciens, non legem prascribo caeteris, 2. q. 4. Audite. 2. q. 7. Nossi.
doing this, I do not prescribe a law to force other men to do the like.
The other gave the Emperor license to appointe Commissioners, to hear his
cause, and submitted him self to their judgment, and therefore we say the
Emperor was not their judge, nor superior by any princely authority, but by
these Popes permission, and appointement.

As for Pope John the 22. (of whose error you make much a do in so many
places of your books) I have said sufficiently before, in the Answer to your
View of your Untruths. Fol. 64. and sequent. Where I have declared, how falsely
you belie him, and wherein he erred touching the state of the Souls of the
just after this life. And here I say again, that it is most false, that ever
he recanted any heresy before Philippe the French king. In deed the error
which he held, as his private opinion, was condemned at the sound of
trompettes in presence of that king, as Gerson writes: but that was done,
before he was Pope.

Jewel. 639. Your own Gloss says, Did. 63. In Synod. in Glos.
Papa potest dare potestatem Imperatori vt deponat ipsum, and sese illi in
omnibus subijcere.

The Pope may give the Emperor power to depose him self, and may in all
things submit him self unto him.


Harding.
Be it that our Gloss says so M. Jewel, your Gloss I might rather say. For
the Gloser seems to be your chief Doctor. There was never Divine, that
served him self with the stuff of the Gloss, so much as you do. What
infer you upon it? If you can like a good Logician frame this argument upon
that Gloss: The Pope may give the Emperor authority to depose him self,
Ergo, the Pope may be conuented before the Magistrate, as one that through
virtue of his temporal office, is his superior in Ecclesiastical causes: let
us have it in writing, and we will return you the like with as good
consequence, and say: The Queen may give any of her Lords, and subjects
power to depose her from her roial estat, and to transfer it to an other:
Ergo, she may be conuented before that Lord and subject of hers, as one that
has authority to depose her of him self, without commission and authority
from her grace. And if you find fault with the sequel of this, find fault
with the sequel of you own. For they are both like. Did. 93. cap. vltim. in
Glossa.
The Law says: Ex alterius persona, quis consequitur, quod non habet ex sua. A
man gets of an other-mannes person, that, which he has not of his own.
Wherefore the Emperor having authority of the Pope to depose him, Extr. de
off. iudicis Deleg. c. Sane.
has not that authority of him self, or any his Imperial power, but of the
Pope. And seeing Iudex delegatus a Papa gerit vices Papae, a Judge delegated of
the Pope, occupies the room of the Pope, the Emperor in this case shall not
depose him as Emperor, but as the Popes Vicegerent, and Delegate.

Jewel. Page 639. Franciscus Zarabella says, De schemate, and Concilio. It is,
de Schismate pontificu^.
Papa accusari potest coram Imperatore de quolib^t crimine notorio: and
Imperator requirere potest a Papa rationem fidei: The Pope may be accused
before the Emperor of any notorious crime, and the Emperor may require the
Pope to yield an account of his faith.


Harding.
Neither Franciscus Zarabella, nor Franciscus Zabarella (for so is his true
name) says as you report, that, Papa potest accusari coram Imperatore de
quolibet crimine notorio, M. Ievvel falsifieth his Doctor by addition of his
own to help his matter.
The Pope may be accused before the Emperor of any notorious crime. Those
words (coram Imperatore) before the Emperor, are of your own interlacing,
and be not in the Author. You ought to be ashamed so foully to corrupt your
authors, and deceive the people.

Again Zabarella says not, Imperator requirere potest a Papa rationem fidei,
the Emperor may require the Pope to yield an account of his faieth, They are
your words Master Jewel. That, which Zabarella says is thus. Zabarella
made to say, What pleases M. Ievvel
Si Papa est de haeresi suspectus, potest (Imperator) ab eo exigere, vt indiret
quid sentiat de fide. that is, if the Pope be suspected of heresy (the
Emperor) may require of him, that he declare, what he thinks of the Faith.
Now sir, to require a man to yield an account of his Faith, and to require
him to declare what he thinks, are two diverse things. For the one can not
be done, but by Superior authority: the other by way of friendship and
common charity.

But as for Superior authority, In what case of necessity the Emperor may
entermedle with matters of Faith and religion, after the mind of Zabarella
Zabarella allows the Emperor none over the Pope, nor grants, that he
may intermedle in Ecclesiastical causes, but in an extreme necessity, to
wit, if there were two Popes at one time (as there were when he wrote this
Treaty whence you fetch your falsified sentences) and neither would yield
unto the other, nor the Cardinals take order for the quiet gouernemente of
the Church in procuring a General Council, and if he saw the Antipape to give
over his usurped Authority: then the Emperor, whose duty is to defend the
Catholic Faith, may intermedle in Ecclesiastical causes, says Zabarella.
His words are these.

Cumergo deficit Papa, vel Cardinales, Francis. Zabarella de Schismate
pontificu^.
qui subrogantur Papae in Congregatione Concilij, vt dictum est in praecedenti
quaestione, ad ipsum Imperatorem, qui pars post praedictos est praecipua,
Concilij spectat Congregatio. Nec quenquam moueat, quod Imperator est Laicus,
vt ex hoc putet esse inconueniens, quod se intromittat de clericis. Non enim
semper prohibetur iudicare de clericis: sed tunc prohibetur, quando non subest
ratio specialis. Nam propter specialem rationem permittitur, vt ratione feudi.
Hoc autem casu subest ratio specialis, imo specialissima, ne fides Catholica
ruat, quod nimium periclitatur, diu permittendo pluralitatem in summo
Pontificatu. In quo maxim est Imperatoris, and praecipuam habet potestatem.
Nam permittere plures in Papatu, est offendere illum fidei articulum, vnam
sanctam Catholicam, etc. Therefore when the Pope fails, or the Cardinals,
who are next in room unto the Pope substituted to the Pope in assembling of a
Counsel, as it was said in the next question before, the assembling of a
Council apperteineth unto the Emperor, who after the Pope, and the
Cardinals, is the chief part. Neither it ought to move any man to think it
inconvenient, that the Emperor, in that he is a lay man, should intermedle
with matters belonging to clerks. For he is not always inhibited to judge of
Clerks. But then he is forbidden, when there is no special cause. For it is
permitted for some special reason, as in consideration of fealty. And in this
cause there is a special, yea a most special reason, that the Catholic Faith
come not to ruin, because it is in great danger by long suffering of
plurality in the Popedom, that is to say, of more Popes then one. In which the
Emperor is the chief doer, and he has the chief power. For to permit many
Popes in the Popedom, is to offend that article of the Faith, I believe one
holy Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

By this and the whole discourse, that Zabarella your author makes there, it
appears M. Jewel, that the Emperor has not the authority you pretend, but
in that case of extreme necessity. And by your advocate in the Law, if he had
not benne half in a phrenesie, you might have learned, L. Na^ ad ad ea. ff. de
legibus. ff. de regu lis iuris.
that, ex ijs quaeraro accid^nt, lages non fiunt, of those things, that happen
seldom, laws are not made. And, Quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non
debent in argumentum trahi, those things, that are received for necessity,
ought not to be drawn to an argument, or president to be followed. Wherefore
^^ither upon the doings of the Emperors in that great and lamentable schism
of the Church, neither upon Zabarella you can build, that Bishops may
ordinarily be conuented before a civil Magistrate in ecclesiastical causes.

But sir, seeing you thought it convenient for your purpose to use the
authority of Zabarella (although you have fowly falsified, and misreported his
words) tell us by what reason, you may refuse his authority, if we can allege
it against you. He says in the same treaty that you allege, Papa est
vniuersalis Episcopus, Zabarella M. Jewels own doctor alleged against M.
Ievvel.
Papa non habet superiorem. Papa habet iurisdictionem, and potestatem super
omnes de iure. Seeds Apostolica errare non potest. The Pope is the universal
Bishop: The Pope has no superior: The Pope has jurisdiction, and power over
al by law. The Apostolic See can not err. Why admit you not this? Is it
reason that you should admit an authors saying, the which he spoke, and
allowed in a case of necessity, for avoiding of a greater danger, and not
admit the same authors saying in the same treaty, which he speaks
according to received, and approved doctrine of the Catholic Church? Ask
your advocate, L. Si quis. Cod. de testibus.
and he will tell you, that reason, and law faith, That si quis vsus fuerit
testibus, ijdemque testes producantur aduersus eum in alia lite, non licebit
personas eorum excipere. If one use witnesses (in a cause) and the same
witnesses be brought against him in an other controversy, it is not lawful for
him to make exception against their persons. And if either reason, or law
could prevail where heresy has entered, you should not only admit this,
but also that, which he says in an other place ^^^^stas(...) immediate pendat
a Deo, Joan. 21.
per illa verba, Pasce(...) Papa habet potestatem supra omnes quic omnes sunt
^^^s. Papae vicem Dei gerit in terris, Zabarella in Clement. de Sente^t. and
reiudicata cap. pastoralis. Ibidem in Clement. de magistris cap. Inter. de
Sentent. excommu. cap. ex freque^tib.
The power of the Pope depends immediately of God, by those words; feed my
sheep. The Pope has power over al, because al be sheep. The Pope bears the
person of God in earth. For he spoke this with as good advise, as he spoke the
other. And this is generally allowed, and that but in a case. Wherefore if his
authority be good in the one, ought it not to be good in the other?

Now therefore M. Jewel I report me to your indifferent judgment, how true it
is that you say, that a Prince or a civil magistrate may lawfully call a
Priest before him, to his own seat of judgment, and that a Bishop may be
conuented before the Magistrate, as his lawful and superior judge in
ecclesiastical causes. No one example, or sentence that ye have yet alleged,
does prove that vain assertion of yours: Neither could ye have had any
advantage by them, if ye had truly reported their words, and declared the
circumstances why, and wherefore they were spoken. But that liked you not.
Wherefore referring your corruption, and false dealing in these matters of
weight to the judgment of God, and examination of the indifferent and wise, I
conclude against you, with S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and al
other Catholic Fathers, that it is not convenient, Extr. de Maiorit. and
obed. cap. 2. in marg.
nor lawful for a king to call priests before him to his own seat of
Judgment, as their superior in ecclesiastical causes. As for the note glosed
in the Decretalles, which ye bring to prove that priests are exempted from the
Emperors jurisdiction by the Popes policy, and the princes consent, and not
by the word of God: we tell you, that such glosed notes declare you to be a
very Gloser, and argue that your stoare is far spent, when you rest upon such
marginal glosed notes. Were it granted (which in no case we grant) that
Bisshoppes, and priests were exempted from the Emperors jurisdiction in
ecclesiastical causes, only by the Popes policy, and consent of princes, for
confirmation whereof they have made diverse laws, and given out large
privileges: yet these laws standing vnreapealed, and privileges vnauthorized,
they can not be conuented lawfully before the civil magistrate. For it stands
not with the Majesty of a prince to do against his own laws, and break the
privileges by him self granted to others, before he has with as mature
advise, and consideration revoked them, as he did first grant them.

That the Canonistes are wrongfully charged by the Apology, with teaching the
people, that Simple Fornication is no sin. The 15 Chapter.
The words of the Apology. Defense. Page 357. They be the Popes own
Canonist^^ which have taught the people, that Fornication between single
fo^^^ i^ no sin.


Harding.
A sclaunder uttered by the Apology against the Canonistes, not recanted in
the Defense. touching the thing, but only touching the error of the name.
IN my Co^futation I say, that this is a grievous offense, and worthy to be
pounished, in process I say to the make^s of the Apology, How prove ye it?
They allege for it, one John de Magistris. How be it M. Jewel has recanted
that error, and confesses him self to have been deceived. For he grants,
it was Martinus de Magistris, whom he meant, or should have meant. He should
do well to recant diverse other the like his errors. For he has not only ben
deceived by his note books, or his Notegatherers, in naming John de Magistris,
for Martinus de Magistris, but also in the names of sundry other men, as it
shall be declared in the next Chapter.

But touching the sclaunder of the Canonistes, if Martinus de Magistr^^ had so
taught, yet the matter is not clear, for he w^^ no Canoniste, but a School
Doctor of Divinity. Again^, he ^^^^ht not the people, as our Masters of the
Apology ^^e, but only wrote of that matter after the Scholastical manner,
from understanding whereof the peoples simple capacity is far of.

Well, let these three errors, Lies, or ouersightes, be ^in^^ed at. Hitherto
the Canonistes are not touched, but sclaundered. What shall we answer for
Martinus de Magistris? Certainly neither that Doctor taught either the
people, or any other person, that ungodly, and false Doctrine. Certain it is,
that in this Treaty, De Temperantia, quaestione 2. he taught the contrary,
where he proves very sufficiently, and copiously, that simple Fornication is
mortal sin. Alphonsus contra haeres. li. 5. Coitus Defense. page 362.
But Alphonsus charge him with saying, that to believe the Contrary, is not
a point of Heresy. And thereof M. Jewel in the Defense takes hold, giving
over al his other false holds. Let it be as Alphonsus says. Yet will it not
thereof follow, that the Popes Canonistes, or Divines taught the people, it is
no sin.

By Alphonsus, whom M. Jewel allegeth, this Doctor Martinus de Magistris says
two things. That Fornication is deadly sin, and yet that to believe the
contrary, Non sit haereticum, is not heretical, or a case of heresy. The
first he proves substantially: The second he proves not sufficiently, as it
appears to Alphonsus. The reason, whereby he would prove it, is this, Quia
testimonia scripturae sacrae non sunt expressa, The variety of meaning betuixt
Martinus de magistris and Alpho^sus de Castro, touching simple Fornication.
because the testimonies of the holy Scriptures are not express, that is to
say, because simple Fornication is not expressly so called. And though it
were so, yet may it otherwise be plainly, as it is most plainly signified.
Now this question rises between Martinus, and Alphonsus, whether to believe,
that Fornication is not mortal sin, be a case of Heresy, or no. Alphonsus
says it is, Martinus says it is not. And what if he say it be not a case of
heresy so to believe, yet it man be a wicked opinion so to believe, and a more
wicked thing to commit the crime, which Martinus does not only not deny, but
affirms, and proves very earnestly, and that pertains to the present
purpose. Every false belief makes not a case of heresy, but whosoever
stubbornely holds, and mainteineth a false belief contrary not only to the
bare letter, but also to the sense of the Scripture, specially if it be
determined, and published by the Church, is to be accounted an heretic. How
soever it be, and whether Alphonsus impute that saying to Martinus de
Magistris, as erroneous, or no: Hitherto M. Jewel proves not, that the Popes
Canonistes have taught the people, that Simple Fornication is no sin. Let us
see with what other testimonies he can prove it.

Jewel. Page 360. Did. 34. Is qui.
Thus it is noted in the Decrees, Qui non habet vxorem, loco illius Concubinam
debet habere. He that has not a wife, in steed of her must have a Concubine.


Harding.
Is it likely, that any Christian ever wrote so? It was never so written, and
that M. Jewel him self knew well enough. Council. Tolet an. 1. cap. 17.
For he confesses the printed book, that so reports, to be a false copy.
Wherefore then would he allege it? Like will to like. False manners seek to be
defended by false head. For of true dealing they can procure them self no
relief. But se^ Reader what pleasure he has in Untruth.

Jewel Page 360. Ye vvil say, there is error in the prints. Be it so, yet
t^^^(...) extant i^ many Copies. And it is well agreeable to your common
pr^^tise. For the best that you can make of the same place, is this: Is qui non
habet Vxorem, et pro Vxore Concubinam habet, a Communione non repellatur. He
that has no wife, and in steed of a wise has a Concubine, let him not be
removed from the Communion.


Harding.
What shame is it to allege the error of a false book, that has either
crepte in by the negligence, or put in by the malice of the printers
Compositour? The most, and truest Copies have otherwise, and that could you not
be ignorant of directing the Reader by your cotations unto Gratian, and unto
the first Toletan Council, from whence the testimony is taken out.

And what say you sir, does not this place prove, that the popes Canonistes
teach Simple Fornication to be no sin? For this is the thing, which you
have taken upon you to prove. If you fail in proof thereof, you may not
blame us, if we account you for a Liar, and a sclaunderer. O say you, lo,
here a man is allowed to have a Concubine. For in as much as he is not to be
repelled from the Communion, that has a concubine, The keeper of a co^cubine
not repelled from the communion, and yet simple fornication not allowed, by
the Counsel of Toledo.
how is not a man allowed to keep a Concubine? And shall we not say, that they
which teach this doctrine, teach Simple Fornication to be no sin? If all this were granted you, yet how truly have you burdened the Canonistes with
this Doctrine? For these words you know, be not the words of the Canonistes,
but the words of the first Counsel of Toledo, that was above a thousand years
ago.

Here is good gear M. Jewel for you to iuggle withal. And how can it be, but
that your self do know, that you do impudently? You peruerte the text, you
misconster it, you leave out that goes before, and(...) follows immediately
after. Because you know this place might serve your purpose to deceive the
unlearned, who can not epsy your falsehed, you thought ye might be bold, as
you are in many other places. And so without blusshing you sclaunder Christ's
Church, burdening it with the allowance, and maintenance of Concubines. You
play like a shrewde boy of the Grammar school, who having a Theme appointed
him by his Master to dilate, and write upon, purleth, and gathers out of
every book, as many sentences, as he finds to have one word of his Theme,
or sounding toward his Theme. So have you here, or your Coadiutor, done, to
find somewhat in the writings of the Catholics, that might seem to allow
simple Fornication and the keeping of Concubines. And here ye bring us forth a
piece of a Canon concluded in the first Council of Toledo. But in good sooth it
makes as much for your purpose, as that sentence, Diuinum auxilium maneat
semper nobiscum, made for his purpose, that being among others demanded a
pretty sentence concerning Wine, after al had said their sentences, alleged this
for his part, because in the word, Diuinum, the first syllable taken away,
what is meant by a co^cubin in the counsel of Toledo, in the Civil and Cano^
law, and other where.
there is Vinum, which signifies Wine. In much like sort you have done here,
dissembling the Circumstance of the place, and omitting the Chapter, that in
Gratian goes immediately before, In which Chapter he declares, what in that
place, and certain other there by him alleged is meant by a Concubine, saying,
Concubina autem hic intelligitur, quae cessantibus legalibus instrumentis vnita
est, and coniugali affectu ascistitur. Hanc coniugem facit affectus, Did. 34.
Omnibus. Co^cubin.
Concubinam vero lex nominat. By a Concubine here (to wit, in certain Canons
alleged in the former Distinction 33.) is understood such a woman, as is
coupled unto a man without any formal writings according to the Civil Laws,
and is taken with intent and affection of marriage. This woman the intent and
affection makes a wife, but the law, (that is to say, the Civil law) names
her a Concubine. Yea the Canons also do name such a Woman a Concubine
sometimes, and not a wife, until the Marriage be solemnized, not that she is a
whore, but that with the reprocheful name of a Concubine, as it were with a
secret rebuke, such persons be driven to solemnize, and publish their
marriage in the face of the Church. Now let it be judged by the Learned, what
you are worthy to have for dissembling this much.

Gratian had alleged certain Canons, Did 33. c. Laici. etc. Fin.
wherein mention was made, that they might continue in holy Orders, and
minister, who before they were made Priests, had had Concubines. In this
sentence therefore that now I translated, he expounds, how the word
Concubine is to be taken in those Canons, as much to faie, for a wife taken
privately without public Solemnization. For says he, the Civil law takes
not for a wife, but names a Concubine (which is a baser and a more
reprocheful name) her, which a man takes, and uses for his wife without any
solemn and public instrument made concerning the dowry, and other matters
accustomed to be agreed upon between the man and wife. And this with diverse
other solemnities, to take away occasion of strife, 30. q. 5. c. ^. 3. and 4.
and sin was politikely ordained by the Civil Law, and Canon also. But
as soon as that writing was made, and public Solemnite performed, the
children borne before, were accounted lawfully borne, and the Concubine to have been a wife from the beginning. And this woman the law names in the mean time
a Concubine, Nec non Justin. de nuptijs. Council. Toletan. 1. cap. 17.
and not a whore.

And Gratian to prove this exposition to be true, and good, alleged the Council
of Toledo, saying, De hac dicitur in Concilio Toletano, Is qui non habet, etc.
Of this Woman it is said in the Council of Toledo, he that has not a wife, but
has a Concubine for a wife, let him not be put back from the Communion.
Which words, you bring to prove, that the Church does allow Concubines.
Wherein it is plain, that the word, Concubine, is taken for a wife taken
privately, and not openly married with due solemnity in the face of the
Church, yet kept in bed, and at burde, as a wife, with intent of wedlock,
which was in old time very common in Spain, and yet is in some places. And
the Council there holden does not repelle from the Communion those that have
such women in that sort. Whereas if the word Concubine signified a whore in
that Canon of the Council of Toledo, as it does most commonly in other places,
the Council would not have wincked at that sin, nor suffered such persons
to comme unto the Communion, but would have repelled them, Did. 56. Toto
titulo and ext. le filijs presbyt. 3. Reg. 12
as by many other Decrees the Church does, and also repelleth their children,
and bastard brood, from the holy order of Priesthood, whereunto ye admitt^
the rascalles, and the outcastes of all the people to further your carnal
Doctrine, as Jeroboam admitted the like, to bring the people of Israel to
Apostasy, and Idolatry. Did. 34. Audite. Aug. li. 50 homiliaru^ homi. 49.


That the Church allows not Concubines taken in the worse sense, even in the
same place, it is witnessed by S. Augustine alleged in the Decrees, in whom
thus we find. Concubinas habere non licet vobis: and si non habetis vxores,
tamen non licet vobis habere Concubinas, quas postea dimittatis, vt ducatis
vxores, tanto magis damnatio erit vobis, si volueritis habere vxores, and
Concubinas. It is not lawful for you to have Concubines: Albeit ye have no
wives, yet it is not lawful for you to have such Concucubines, as which
afterward ye may put away to the end to take wives: so much the greater
shall be your damnation, if ye will have both wives, and Concubines.

And this signification of Concubina, is not strange, that when a man minds
to marry a woman, she be called a Concubine, which in deed is a true wife
before God, though she be not known so to be in the public fame of the
people, til the marriage be solemnized. A concu^bine is a wife secretly taken
with out sole^nitie of marriage
It may please you to look on your brother Matthias Flacius Illyricus in his
book entitled Clauis Scripturae, in the word Concubina. And you shall find the
word taken in this sense, and the same proved by diverse authorities.

Ioannes de Turre Cremata a man right well learned upon the Chapter Omnibus
before alleged, says thus. Abraham praeter Saram habuit Agar ancillam vxorem,
sic enim dicitur Genes. 16. Dedit Sara ancillam viro in vxorem Suam, post
mortem vero Sarae, accepit Abraham Ceturam vxorem, vt legitur Genesis 25. Et quia
istae non fuerunt acceptae cum illa solennitate, quamuis essent vxores affectu,
and in veritate, dictae tamen sunt Concubinae, vt Genesis. 25. vbi dicitur,
dedit Abraham cuncta quae possidebat, Isaac, filijs vero Concubinarum, munera.
In libro etiam Iudicum idem habetur, videlicet quod vxor vocetur Concubina, vt
patet Iudic. 19. etc. Abraham beside Sara, had Agar to wife, that was his wives
maid servant, for so it is said in the 16. Chapter of Genesis, Sara gave her
maid unto her husband to be his wife. And after the death of Sara Abraham
took Cetura to be his wife, as we read in Genesis the 25. chapter. And
because these women were not taken with that solemnity, as the wives were,
although they were wives in affection, and in truth, yet were they called
Concubines, as in Genesis 25. Chapter, where it is said, Abraham gave all the
things, which he possessed, to Isaac, but to the sons of his Concubines, he
gave gifts. The same is also to be found in the book of the Judges, that a
wife is called a Concubine, as it appears Judges 19. chapter. etc. This
therefore proves not your sclaunder M. Jewel, wherewith you burden the
Canonistes, as defending Simple Fornication to be no sin. Let us see, whether
your other stuff be any better to that purpose. Constit. Othonis Boni deco^
cubinis clerico remonendis, licet ad pro sugandu^. in glossa. In eadem glossa.


Jewel. Page 360. Likewise it is noted in the Gloss upon the constitutions of
Otho Bonus: Videtur quod crime^ meretricij Ecclesia sub dissimulatione trasire
debeat. It seems, that the Church ought to pass over the crime of vvhooredom
under dissimulatio^ (and not to see it). In which Gloss ye shall find these
words, Si non cast, tamen caute: If ye do it not chastely, yet do it
charily.


Harding.
You mistake your mark M. Jewel naming Otho Bonus, for Otho. They were diverse
men, as you might have seen in the Constitutions, that you allege: wherein
your skill in the Canon law appears. If you had laid forth the place wholly,
as true and upright dealing requires, it should soon have appeared, upon how
small a matter you pike so great a quarrel. Thus it is. Johannes de Athon, who
wrote the Gloss upon the Constitutions Legatine of Otho, having declared how a
Clerk (by which word is not meant only a Priest, as you always interpret,
but any that is within Orders, be they the lesser, or the greater) is to be
pounished for having a Concubine, at length after his manner demands this
question. Sed quid dices de punitione ipsarum Concubinarum, si ad suam
excusationem coram Iudice ecclesiastico se asserant publicas Meretrices quaestu
corporis viuentes? But what will thou say of the pounishment of the Concubines
them selves, if for their excuse they say before the ecclesiastical Judge,
that they are common whoores living by the gain of that filthy service of
their body?

Now immediately there follows the answer, which M. Jewel brings against the
Canonistes, not without a little point of falsifying by nipping away this word,
Hoc, an ordinary mark of his workmanship. Hoc nip^e away by M. Jew. a
word of important si^uification.
Videtur quod Hoc crimen Meretricij sub dissimulatione transire debeat
Ecclesia. It seems, that the Church ought to pass over this Crime of
whooredome under dissimulation, that is to say, to dissemble it. The cause why
the Church ought to dissemble this crime in such women as profess public
whooredom, which the author of that Gloss says not precisely, but speaks it
as an opinion, and as a thing that seemed to some men reasonable, I had
rather M. Jewel heard it of an other man, then of me. Certainly he may judge,
it is not altogether without cause, that al Christendom over, whereas al other
women be pounished for the sin of the flesh, only the common and public
whoores be let alone under dissimulation. Yet it argues not, that simple
fornication is made no sin. If M. Jewel would have read further in that
Gloss, he should have found these express words, by which the Canonistes
are cleared, and he further charged with a false sclaunder. Dic tamen quod hoc
peccatum prosequi debet Ecclesia vt mortale. Ibidem.
Yet say thou (by which words he signifies his own opinion) that the
Church ought to pursue this sin, Vnde illud vulgar, Si non cast, tamen
caute.
as deadly sin. Whereof it follows, that continuing in such life, they
might not be admitted to the Sacraments of holy Church.

As for those other words, which we find in the Gloss, Si non cast, tamen
caute, they are there rehearsed, as a common saying, not as a rule, or a
precepte of the Canon Law, neither perteine they to clerks, more then to the
lay sort. The circumstance of the place considered and weighed, al things
may seem there to be well, and discretely said. Of two that commit
Fornication, he does less evil, that does it secretly, then the other, that
does it openly. For the open fornicatour increases the offense by his il
example, by the offense the people take of it, and by the contempt of his own
fame and good name. Of such a one it is said there out of the Law, quod famae
suae prodigus, etiam quoad homines suspensus est, licet occulta fornicatio
quoad Deum, turbet bonam conscientiam, that being a recheles loser of his own
fame, he is suspended also as concerning the estimation of men, although the
pryuie Fornication do trouble a good conscience, as touching God.

So then if it be an il thing a man to be suspended among men, and to lose
the fame of his honesty, Crudelis est, qui famam contemnit.
if he be accounted cruel, and desperate, that cares not for his good name, if
it be dangerous to the soul also, to provoke others to offend by il example,
al these euilles following the public, and open fornicatour, though secret
fornication ought also heartily to grieve and vex the conscience before God:
how shall not that vulgar saying seem to give good counsel, Si non cast,
tamen caute, whereby a man is not animated at al to do il, but (if he hap to
do his unclean lust, If not chastely, yet charily.
or will not be staid from it) is admonished to do it charily, though not
chastely. And if there were any il meaning in this vulgar saying, as there is
not, though it may be abused to cast some shadow upon evil lyuers, the
judgment of the Canonistes were not to be reproved thereof, but the custom of
the world, from whence it proceeded.

Jewel. Page 360. Likewise says Petrus Rauennas, one of your notable
Canonistes, Extra de immunitate Ecclesiaru^. Pet. Raue^nas.
upon the Decretalles: Quamuis tactus and oscula sint praeludia incontinentiae
in Laicis, secus tamen est in Clericis. Nam Clericus praesumitur ista facere
pro charitate, and bono Zelo. Notvvithstanding handeling, and kissing in lay
Persons be the occasions, or beginninges of incontinent behavior, yet in
Priests it is, far otherwise. For a Priest is presumed to do^ these things
of Charity, and of good zele.


Harding.
Yet Petrus Rauennas says not, that Simple Fornication is no sin, That is
the thing, you have taken in hand to prove against the Canonistes. When touch
you the point? In Italy, where this lawier lived, to kiss a woman is taken
for a certain earnest of a wanton bargain promised, and therefore openly men
kiss not women at first, and last salutations, as the use is in England. But
because that thing may be in it self diverse, according to the diverse manners
of Countries, and therefore may be deemed good, nolesse then evil, men being
bound to judge the best of that which may be well done, or is at least
indifferent: the Lawier considering the virtue, and degree of a Clerk, says,
that an evil presumption is not lightly to be taken thereof, but wills it to
be taken for courtesy, and charitable salutation, as it is taken in England,
and in sundry other countries. Extra de Prebend. c. nisi in principio.
For the quality and state of the person does oftentimes purge the suspicion,
that otherwise is wont to rise of any act. Let us hear what other Gloses
this Gloser brings for his purpose.

Jewel Page 360. 11. quaest. 3. Absit, in Glossa.
Likewise it is noted in your Gloss, Si Clericus amplectitur mulierem (Laicus)
interpretabitur, quod causa benedicendi eam hoc faciat. If a Priest embrace a
woman, a laieman must judge of it thus, that he does it to the intent to
bless her. Where also ye shall find this special note set out in the margin
for the purpose, Clericus amplectens mulierem praesumitur been agere. A Priest
embracing a woman is presumed to do well.


Harding.
It can not be proved by all these Gloses, that the Canonistes teach the
people, that simple fornication is no sin. And therefore they stand you in no
stead otherwise th^n to seoffe. How be it if the meaning of this Gloss were well
considered, it could not seem very fitly to furnish you with any good matter of
scoffing. Gratian alleged a saying out of S. Hierome under the name of Pope
Antherus. Hieron. ad Heliodoru^ 11. quaest. 3. Absit.
Absit vt quicquam sinistrum de his arbitremur, qui Apostolico gradui
succedentes, Christi corpus Sacro ore conficiunt, per quos nos Christiani
sumus, qui claues regni coelorum habentes, ante iudicij diem iudica^t. God
forbid that we should think any sinistre thing of them, who succeding the
Apostles in degree, with their sacred mouth do consecrate the body of Christ,
by whom we are Christians, who having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, judge
before the day of Judgment.

This sad and grave saying you could not well brook. It liked you better
therefore to purle in the Gloss. Now lay all that the Gloss says, together, and
let it be judged, how much it makes for your scoffing humor. God forbid,
says S. Hierome, we should think any il, or sinistre thing of them, that with
their holy mouth consecrate Christ's body. Tpon this word, Sinistrum, the
Gloss says. Hoc est verum in ijs quae possunt trahi ad bonum, and ad malu^,
vbi semper in meliorem partem est interpretandum. Si ergo Clericus amplectitur
mulierem, interpretabitur (Canon) quod causa benedicendi eam hoc faciat. This
is true in those things that may be drawn to good, and to evil, where
always we must interpret (that which is done) in the better part. Therefore
if a Clerk embrace a woman (or lay his arms over her) this Canon will
interpret it, that he does it to bless her. These words, a lay man must
judge of it thus, be your own words, the Gloses word, interpretabitur, does
not so signify. Neither is it to be understood of the secret judgment,
which a man conceiueth in his own heart to him self, of such a deed
beholden with his eyes, but of the interpretation made of it to others, for so
does interpretari signify. This then is the sense of that Gloss. If a clerk
or a Priest embrace a woman, for so much as it may be drawn to good, that is
to say, it may in a case be done to good purpose, as to bless her, to pray
over her, or to do the courtesy of salutation according to the manner in some
countries: the Canon will interpret it, that is to say, if we follow the mind
and devotion of S. Hierome, whose words that Canon contains, we shall (he
says not judge) but interpret it, as done to the intent to bless her. Why I
make Canon nominative case to the verb interpretabitur, it is not to be
marueled at, for so the Gloss it self teaches me, where immediately it
follows, tamen quandoque Canon solam confabulationem interpretatur in
deteriorem partem. Yet sometime the Canon does interpret the only talking
(with a woman) in the worse part.

To be short, if a Priest may embrace any woman with honest, and good intent,
if it be not of it self utterly dishonest, and unlawful: when he is seen so to
do, by the godly Counsel of this Canon, which is the faying of S. Hierome, and
by the exposition of the Gloss, the fact is to be taken and interpreted, not
in the worse, but in the better part, for so the order of charity requires,
and so specially the honor of the Apostolic Degree, whereunto Priests be
admitted in making or consecrating the precious body of Christ, requires. Now
as the sin of a Priest is more heinous then the same sin in a lay man, so
when he does a thing that may be both well, and evil done, for the reverence,
and honor of that high and holy order, it is to be reported with the better
interpretation. And thus that Gloss makes nothing for defense of Fornication
between single folk, for proof whereof, to the reproufe of the Canonistes it
is by you alleged. Now let it be indifferently judged, how just cause you had,
thus to triumph.

Jewel. Page 361. These be your Canonistes: these be your Schoolemaisters:
these be your Doctors, M. Harding: thus they write, not only in the
singular, but also in the Dual, and plural number. They would never so
lightly have judged hereof, if they had thought, your Simple Fornication had
benne Sin.


Harding.
Blow your trompet, and make your Triumph, when ye have won the victory,
and obtained a true conqueste.

Jewel. Page 361. Somevvhat it must needs be, Council. Basilien. Sess. 20.
Erasmus in Enchiridio militis Chris. cap. 14. Vt leave co^missum, neutiqua^
refugiunt.
that in your Late Council of Basile, enforced the Bishops there to decree,
that Fornication should be Sin. Erasmus says, a great many of them, whom
the common sort takes for good and godly men, not a vvhitte abhor simple
Fornication, and a sober use of pleasure, reckening it to be but a little petite
fault.


Harding.
The Bishops of the Council of Basile made no such Decree, that Fornication
should be Sin. That was before decreed by God. And so much the Council it
self in that very place, unto which you direct us by your cotation,
signifies most plainly. For thus it says: Sess. 20.
Cum omne fornicationis crimen lege diuina prohibitum sit, sub peccati mortalis
poena necessario euitandum, (Concilium) monet omnes Laitos tam vxoratos, quam
solutes, vt similiter a concubinatu abstineam. Nimis enim reprehensibilis est,
qui vxorem babet, and ad alienam mulierem accedit. 1. Cor. 7.
Qui vero solutus est, si continere nolit, iuxta Apostoli consilium vxore^
ducat. Whereas the whole crime of Fornication is forbidden by Gods law, of
necessity to be avoided under the pain of mortal sin: the Council
admonishes al lay men, as well married, as single, that in like sort they
abstain from keeping Concubines. For he is very much worthy to be rebuked, who
has a wife, and yet haunteth the company of an other woman. As touching him
that is single, if he be not disposed to co^teine, according to the Apostles
counsel, let him take a wife. By these words they decreed not that Fornication
should be sin, but they admonished men as well married, as unmarried to
forebeare the company of co^cubines, because it was mortal sin by the law of
God.

Erasmus.
As for that you allege out of Erasmus, whom you call a man of singular
learning, and Judgment, which the Divines find not in him, it helps you
nothing. Only he as his common manner is, accuses the loose life of some whom
the people names good, and godly men. You have fasly turned his words, for
he says not, as you make him to speak, that they reckon Fornication to be but
a little petite fault: He says, vt leave commissum, neutiquam refugiunt, they
flee it not, as if it were but a light offense.

Iacobus de Valentia, Iacobus de Valentia.
whom also you allege, makes quite against you. For naming Jews, and
Saracenes, and il Christian men expressly, he seems not to mean the Popes
Canonistes, whom here you burden with mainetenance of Fornication, which
sort^ of men he would not have let to name, had the matter ben so clear,
as you sclaunder them.

Touching that you tell us out of Antoninus, and Alexander de Hales, It is not
worth the answering. Mary a^ for that you bring us S. Augustine, because
worthily he is of great authority, it is well to be weighed, what he says.
Thus you make him to tell his tale, or rather your own tale. For his it is not,
as you set it forth.

Jewel. Page 361. And likewise S. Augustine, Illa Fornicatio, quam faciunt,
August. in quaest. in Exodus quaestion. 20.
qui vxores non habent, cum foeminis, quae viros non habent, an prohibita
inueniri possit, ignoro. That kind of fornication, which Single men
commit with Single vvomenne, vvhetber it be forbidden, or no, I can not tell.
Thus you have M. Harding, not only what your Canonistes, but also what your
School Doctors have taught, and thought of Simple Fornication.


Harding.
What M. Jewel, M. Jew. makes S. Augustine to be ignorant, whether Simple
Fornication be forbidden, or no.
are you so far become the Devils slave, that now he may use your service,
not only to persuade men to believe false Doctrine, but also to lead a
wicked life? And the rather to perform this, make you S. Augustine to say,
that he can not tell, whether Simple Fornication be forbidden, or no? Who is to
be believed, if S. Augustine be not? And if he being so great a learned man, as
ever Christ's Church had, could not tell, whether Simple Fornication be
forbidden, or no, who is he that can tell? And if there be no man that can tell
us, it is forbidden, the same once persuaded, the inclination to the fulfilling
of fleshly lust being in mankind so general: what a window, yea what a wide
gate shall be opened to men to rush in, and without al conscience^ to follow
filthy pleasure?

But where has S. Augustine this saying? Your cotation has thus. August. in
quaest. in Exodus quaest. 20. Certainly in that short Chapter he says no such
thing. What, may we think, that of purpose you have l^ad your Reader away
from the place, least your falshed should be espied, and least you should be
taken, as they say, with the manner: Truly it is not unlike. O M. Jewel though
we bear with you in your common custom of falsifying the places ye allege,
yet think not, that we may wincke at you, when by the use of that slight you
open a way unto so great wickedness, and edify unto hell.

The place from whence you took these words, is in S. Augustine, Quaestoinum
super Exodum, lib. 2. quaest. 71. To open, and set forth the circumstance of
the points, whereof he disputes there, it were very long. The learned may
read him. Having said, that the woman commits Aduouterie, which has carnal
company with a man, that is not her husband, though he have no wife, and that
the man likewise commits Aduouterie by sinning with her, that is not his
wife, though she have no husband: How fornication is forbidden in the
Decalogus.
He adds further, Sed vtrum si faciat, etc, But if one do this, who has no
wife, with a woman, that has no husband, whether (in this case) both be
holden for transgressors of the precepte (he means this precepte, Thou shall
not commit Aduouterie) The Question is for good cause moved. For if they be
not giltye of transgression, Moechia, Aduouterie called Fornication in the
Scriptures.
then is not Fornication forbidden in the Decalogus, that is to say, in the
ten Commandments, but only Moechia, that is Aduouterie, howbeit al
Aduouterie is understood to be Fornication, as the Scriptures speak. For our
Lord says in the Gospel, whosoever puts away his wife, Scriptures.
the cause of Fornication except, causes her (Moechari) to commit Aduouterie.
This he calls Fornication, if she sin with an other man, that has a
husband, which thing is Moechia, that is (Adulterium) Aduouterie. And so al
(Moechia) Aduouterie in the Scriptures is called also Fornication.

But (on the other side) whether al Fornication may be called (Moechia)
Aduouterie, whether fornication be called aduouterie in the Scritures.
in the same Scriptures I can not yet call to my mind the example of such a
speech. (Now follow the words, that M Jewel would seem to allege, and has
alleged falsely) Sed si non omnis Fornicatio etiam Moechia dici potest, vbi sit
in Decalogo prohibita illa Fornicatio, quam faciunt viri, qui vxores non
habent, cum foeminis, quae maritos non habent, vtrum inueniri possit, ignoro:
but if it be so, that al Fornication can not be called also (Moechia)
aduouterie, where that Fornication, which men commit, that have no wives, with
women, that have no husbands, is forbidden in the table of the ten
commandments, whether it can be found, or no, I can not tell.

This is that (M. Jewel) S. Augustine confessed he could not tell, whether
Simple Fornication were forbidden, what is that properly that S. Augustine
here confesses, he knevv not.
or no, as you tell us, for he knew right well it was forbidden: but whether, if
al fornication be not contained in the name of Moechia, aduouterie, which word
is expressed in the te^ commandments, that kind of Fornication which men
having no wives commit with womenne having no husbands, can be found forbidden
(he says, not al, but) in decalago, in the table of the ten commandments.
This is that, and none other thing, whereof S. Augustine in that place
confesses him self to be ignorant.

Ibidem. Fornication forbidden under the name of aduouterie. Robbery forbidden
under the name of Theafte.
Now that such kind of Fornication is to be thought to be forbidden under the
name of (Moechia) aduouteri^, with these words he declares there immediately
his determinate sentence, and judgment. Sed si furti nomis ne been
intelligitur omnis illicita vsurpatio rei aliena: non enim rapinam permisit,
qui furtum prohibuit, sed vtique a part totum intelligi voluit, quicquid
illicite rerum proximi aufertur, profecto and nomine Moechiae, omnis illicitus
concubitus, atque illorum membrorum non legitimus vsus prohibitus debet
intelligi. But if al unlawful usurpation of a thing, that is an other man's,
be meant by the name of Theafte: for he that forbad Theafte, has not permitted
Robbery, but would the whole to be understood by the part, what so ever
thing of the neighbors is unlawfully taken away: verily likewise we ought to
understand, that under the name of (Moechia) Aduouterie, every unlawful carnal
act, and use of those parts not allowed by Gods law, is forbidden.

The effect of this whole discourse is this. S. Augustine confesses the name
of that which we call Simple Fornication, not to be found expressly in the
Table of the ten Commandments. Nevertheless he says, that it is to be
understood in the name of Aduouterie, which is there expressed, and that so
it is forbidden under that name, as also every unlawful act, and use of those
parts, that serve to the Generation. And all this proceeds of like reason, as
we ought to judge, that (Rapina) Robbery is forbidden, though in that Table it
be not expressly named, as also every unlawful taking away, and deteining of
an other man's things, as being understood in the name of Theafte in that
Commandment only expressed, as oftentimes by reason the whole must be
understood in the name of a part. Saepe intel ligitur a part totum.
For else we should think it lawful to rob, and commit rauine, whereas
Theafte only is by express term forbidden: wherein we are controlled by
reason it self, without further advise of Gods written word. Mow judge good
Reader what reward M. Jewel is worthy to have in a well ordered commonwealth,
for such abusing of S. Augustines name, and authority, to the Defense, and
mainteinance of Simple Fornication. Certainly the liberty, that through this
pleasant Gospel the world is now grown unto considered, it was little need to
teach such Doctrine in open Books at these days.

A Comparison of Errors, with which M. Jewel charge me, and I on the other
side, charge him. The 16. Chapter.
Because Reader M. Jewel to excuse a few errors, with which I charged the
Author of the Apology, charge me likewise with errors, and ouersightes,
committed in my Confutation, and in my first Reioinder, that it may appear
evidently unto thee, who stands more charged, he, or I, both in respect of
the number, and also of the weight of the matter reported in the errors: I will
here truly and plainly rehearse those heinous errors, which he lays to my
charge, and then also I will lay forth certain of his errors, as they came to
hand. Certain I say, for to lay forth so many as by search I might easily
find, it would require the charges of an other book. These then be the great
and weighty matters, wherein I seem to M. Jewel worthy of great blame.

Jewel. in the View of his Untruths. B iij. b. M. Harding may remember,
Confut. 4. 6. a. Confut. 312. b. Confut. 47. a. Reioinder. fol. 287. a. Confut.
332. a.
that he him self in steed of the Prophet Osee, has alleged us the noble
Iosue: and that by an other like oversight, he has alleged the 8. book of
Socrates Scholasticus vvhere^s Socrates never vvrote but seven. M. Harding him
self in hi^ Confutation of the Apology, in steed of the 22. of Luke, has
printed the 2. of Luke. Likewise in his Reioindre, in steed of these words
(...), be has printed, and sent us quite the contrary, (...). To be short,
M. Harding in this self same book, in steed of these words, lulled a
sleep, by error has printed, lulled a sheep.


Harding.
Of al these great and dangerous errors, I acknowledge but one to be mine,
which is, that by ouersighte I named Iosue, in steed of Osee. And o that there
were no greater sin in me, for which I ought to cry God Mercy. And yet that
it is an error, and a fault too, I confess: would God, you M. Jewel would
as readily confess yours. As for the rest, you must quarrel with the
Printers servants, with whom I am offended: not only for these faults, but
also for many mo, no less then you. Were they diligent and true workemenne, I
perceive touching this case, you should have little to say. Now let the
indifferent Reader compare these my errors, or rather this my one error,
which in so many places you have objected unto me, and which only after so
long search you have found, with a few of yours noted out of your late
book, entitled The Defense of the Apology. Sure I am for your excuse, you
can not lay the fault upon your Printer, nor by any other means justify
them. Thus among other infinite Untruths, you say.

Jewel. Page 634. Ye may remember that two of the principal pillars of yuor
Chapter (at Trent) Petrus a Soto, and Catharinus, dissented even there openly,
and shamefully, and that in great points of Religion: and vvrote the one
mightily against the other: the one charging the other with error and
heresy, and could never be reconciled.


Harding.
Here I must tell you M. Jewel that you affirm more, then you are hable to
abide by. By this also, as by other infinite places, ye give your Reader to
understand, what a sure card you are to trust unto, Catharinus, and Petrus a
Soto be lied by M. Ievvel.
For Catharinus and Petrus a Soto, were never together at the Council of Trent,
as any doers there, much less as principal pillars. Yea Catharinus was dead
ten years before Petrus a Soto came to the Council, as one to have any doing
there. For Catharinus died Anno 1552. and Petrus a Soto came to the Council
Anno 1562. Sixtus Senensis in Bibliotheca sancta. lib. 4.
Wherefore I marvel that you are not ashamed so precisely to affirm an open
and shameful untruth. For if they were not at the Council together, how could
they dissent there openly, and shamefully, as you term it.

Hereunto you add an other great Untruth, that they wrote mightily, the one
against the other. For I am well assured, you can not prove, that ever they
wrote the one against the other at al. Albeit I will not say, but that Petrus a
Soto peradventure does disallowe some certain erroneous opinion of the others
in some part of his works. That you say, they could never be reconcilied, is
most false in your meaning. Howbeit in a contrary sense it may be truly said.
For Reconciliation presupposes a falling out. But where there was never
falling out (as between them there was not, as far as it can appear by their
writings) there could not be any Reconciliation.

To like effect, and with as little truth you speak of them both Pagin. 350.
In deed some such thing there was between Dominicus a Soto and Catharinus.
Albeit their Dissension was not so outrageous, as you would have it seem. I
merueile that you should so much, and so often after one sort be ouerseen,
especially if you have read their books, as you pretend, or else if you have
read Illyricus de Sectis, with stuff out of whose dragges you have somewhat
enlarged your volume, as it appears both otherwise, Illyricus Luthers great
defender, a special Doctor of M. Ievvelles.
and also by your own quotations out of that work. Yet he allegeth always
there, and in other of his such the like rash and false scriblinges, Dominicus
a Soto by his right name. But this error, or ignorance might peradventure be
asscribed to some of your gatherers of stuff, and coadiutours, saving that you
will needs take upon you all the fault your self, and discharge al others
thereof, as you have admonished the reader in your View of Untruths, where
thus you say: what soever error shall be found in any my writings, I will
discharge both my Clerk, and the Compositour, and the Printer of the same,
and take the whole upon my self.

Moreover to show your constancy in this error, B. iij. b.
you do allege, Page 499. Petrus a Soto de natura and gratia, whereas he never
wrote any such work, but Dominus a Soto. And herein it is to be noted also,
that you neither quote the number of the book, nor of the Chapter, where that
saying is to be found. But by like you went by heresaie, and report, and so
left your reader to seek at adventure, that he should either not find, or
else so hardly find, that he would be loathe to take the pains to look for it.

You tell me in an other place, that my friend Catharinus says, I can not tell
what, of Schole writers: Page 571.
and you refer me in the Margent to a book of his against Petrus a Soto. But
I am sure you never saw any such book against that person. Well it might be
against Dominicus a Soto. A man may think, that you read these things with
spectacles of a false sight, that you were never hable to discern Dominicus
from Petrus, or else that you wrote, you knew not what, in a dream.

Page 169. Alpho^sus de Castro mistaken by M. Ievvel for Alpho^sus Viruesius
Bishop of the Canaries.
You allege unto me about vows, one of my greatest Doctors (as you call him)
Alphonsus de Castro Philippica. 19. How great soever he be with me, it may be
justly said, that you are greatly beholding unto him, if he make so often for
you, as you allege him. For he has helped you with stuff even for your own
tooth, as you have handled the matter. But I pray you, did you ever see his
Philippicas, because you allege the 19? I know not what spectacles you use: but
if you read no better, and were in case, as some be, who have not murdered so
many bodies, as you have souls, you might be put to a hard disstresse in time
of need, at the Sessions, and be refused for not reading vt Clericus. For as
it appears your reading is quite beside the book. Show me any such book of
Alphonsus de Castro, and you shall be quitte by Proclamation of al your false
reports, which are more and greater then a man would ween, that is not
acquainted with your writings. I remember that one Alphonsus Viruesius
Episcopus Canariensis made such a work against Philip Melanchton, and called
the Treaties of it, Philippicas, as I have told you before.

Page 345.
Endeavoring to disgrace, as much as you can, godly and perfect obedience, you
do contemptuously speak your pleasure, Cassianus lib. 4. cap. 27. de
Institutis coenobiorum. Page 51. Zarabella de Sectis, alleged by M. Jew.
whereas he never vvrote any such book. M. Ievvel allegeth Illyricus the
heretic, under the name of zabarella, whom he means by zarabella. Defense.
Page 618. Ioannes Camotensis, a Doctor of M. Ievvelles, never knovve^. Confu.
so. 286. Defense. page 613.
and yet because you would not seem to speak unto us without some authority,
you bring in Cassander lib. 4. cap. 27. But certain it is, you miss the
cuishon, and have mistaken your mark, in not discerning between Cassianus, and
Cassander, and naming the one for the other, which fault might be laid to
the Printer, but that ye have taken the matter in hand your self.

In purling in the Canonistes for sayings that might be wrested against the
Pope, you tell us a tale out of Franciscus Zabarella de Sectis 115. Whether you
have seen any author called Zarabella, by which name you always allege him,
I do more then doubt. It may be, that you mean Zabarella, for that is his
right name. But yet can you not show us any book that ever he made de Sectis.
I wis M. Jewel you should have written Illyricus De Sectis, your own great
friend. You do also allege in three diverse places. Videlicet page 639. 648.
694. your the same Zabarella de Schemale and Concilio. I would ask you, what
is meant there by those words de Schemate. Should it not be, trow you, de
Schismate?

About Ioannes Camotensis you play and dally, even as a fish with the hook,
til he be caught fast by the iawe. You seem to please your self much in
controlling my guess. But therein at length you bewraie your own ignorance,
and prove your self not to be so wise, and well learned, as you would be taken,
in your own authors alleged. Because I said, what worshipful Doctor, you
mean by Camotensis I know not: You added in the margent, If I knew him no^, I
might best blame mine ignorance. But how justly you are to be blamed of
ignorance in the self same matter your self, wherein you take your self to
be so great a doctor, let every upright Reader judge. After you have a while
skornefully told me, whom I might have ghessed this author to be, as
Fulbertus Carnotens^^, or Ioannes Sarisburiensis, otherwise called by some (as
you say) Rupertus Carnotensis, you pronounce at length the definitive sentence
very saddely with these words: But in deed this writers name is Ioannes
Carnotensis, alleged by Cornelius Agrippa. Cornel. Agrippa.
As for Agrippas allegation, it makes no force: for he is not of so honest
same, but that exception may lawfully be taken against his person, and
therefore he is meeter for your purpose, Albeit in this case it may be, that
the Printer was in fault, and not Agrippa him self. And how easily Camotensis
is made of Carnotensis, by change of rn^ into m^, who perceives not? And so
would Agrippa say, were he alive, there is no doubt. But you affirm plainly
without al doubt, that in deed it is Ioannes Camotensis, that was a Bishop.
And there you do very odiously without al cause make a comparison between him,
and certain others, only to serve your own scoffing humor.

But Sir I pray you, for as much as you will have him in deed to be a Bishop,
Cornel. Agrippa de vanitate Scie^tiarum. cap. ^1.
be so good as tell us, whether he be called Camotensis of his country, or of
his Bishoprike. Your great substantial Doctor Cornelius Agrippa seems to
signify (if the Printer have not deceived him) that he had that name of his
Bishoprike, calling him Ioannes Camotensis Episcopus. But whether he bears
that name of the one, or of the other, it makes no great matter. If it be so,
it remains, that you can tell us, in what part of the world, whether in
Asia, in Aphrica, or in Europa, or in the new found lands, there be any place
of that name. I think you must be feign to look over all the Geographical
tables, and books you have, and borrowe some of your fellows too, and put on
your spectales of the best sight, and yet for all that (I warrant you) not find
it, except it be in Vtopia.

Well M. Jewel, that you may understand, that the more occasion you give me to
seek, the more I find matter of Untruth and ignorance to charge you withal,
I tell you in deed, that you have named Ioannes Camotensis in steed of Ioannes
Carnotensis, if you have respect to his Bishoprike. Ioannes Camotensis, must
be Ioa^nes Sarisburiensis, who was Bishop of Chartres in France, and thereof
in Latin called Carnotensis. Defense. page 613.
But if you will have his Country signified, then must you call him Ioannes
Salesberiensis (or Sarisburiensis, choose whether) as you have done Page 132. I
might say that this Ioannes Sarisburiensis was a Bishop in all respects far
better (to use your own words, not, then Leontius, Hippolytus, or Clemens, as
it likes you to skoffe at those learned and blessed Bishops, but) then John
Jewel of Sarisburie, if you, naming your self John of Sarisburie, could justly
be accounted any Bishop at al. But between a Bishop, and no Bishop in this
behalf, there can be no comparison.

This is not the first time, that you have alleged your witnesses by a blind
gheasse, hearesaie, or report, not having seen their books, nor knowing what
the Authors were. You can say much by rote, and prou^ little by skill, as in
many other places, but here most evidently it appears. For if you had
known, that your Ioannes Camotensis, is the self same Ioannes Sarisburiensis
(otherwise named Carnotensis) for that he was in his time Bishop of Chartres in
France, Page 132.
named Carnotum in Latin, which you have alleged before out of his work
entitled Polycraticon, but never declaring out of what book thereof, being
eight books in the whole, or what Chapter (because ye never readde the place
in the Author him self, but received it by the way of alms of friar Bale,
Flacius Illyricus, or some such other): if, I say, you had known so much,
as you might, if you had taken the pain to peruse the Polycration your self,
you would never have made so much a do about so small a matter.

Now for your better instruction, and fuller satisfaction, may it please you
to understand, that he which is misnamed in Epitome Bibliothecae Gesneri,
Ioannes Camotensis, is in Partitionibus eiusdem Gesneri tituli. 5. fol. 95.
rightly called Ioannes Carnotensis. And that your Ioannes Camotensis is by you
blindly mistaken for Ioannes Carnotensis, it evidently appears by the
sentences alleged by your own Necromantical Doctor Cornelius Agrippa, and by
an other of the Spritish sort of your gospel Paulus Scalichius in his railing
Libel De Choraea Monachorum, Paul. Scalichius.
and by lying Illyricus in Catalogo testium veritatis, which are adscribed by
Baudy Bale 2. Centur. Scriptorum Britanniae, page 212. too Ioannes Carnotensis
out of his Polycraticon. And in deed they are there to be found, albeit not to
that purpose, that all the pack of your holy brethren have untruly alleged
them for. And therefore never a one of you al has quoted either number of the
book, or Chapter, where any of those sentences are to be found, lest your
falsehed might have benne espied, and that by reading the whole discourse of
the places, your evil purpose should have benne nothing furthered, but much
hindered. But if it will please either you, or the Reader to peruse the 16.
chapter of the 5. book, and the 24. of the 6. book of the said Polycraticon:
you for your part shall have occasion to understand your error and folly, and
the Reader for his part, not to be deceived with your blind report. Page 51.
Cusanus sovvly, and ignorantly belied of M. Jew.


You bear your Reader in hand page 51. that Nicolaus Cusanus wrote a book,
entitled, de Auctoritate Ecclesiae and Concilij, supra, and contra Scripturam:
Of the Authority of the Church and Council, above and against the Scripture.
And as though you had seen the book, and well perused it, you refer your
Reader thereunto in 14. mo places of this your pretensed Defense, as it shall
appear to him, A false forged book odiously attributed by M. Jew. to
Cardinal Cusanus in xv. Sundri^ places.
that will take the pains to turn to these pages here truly quoted. 53. 55.
78. 157. 331. 438. 439. 474. 558. 593. 665. 674. 704. 724.

Now M. Jewel notwithstanding al these quotations of yours, if you be hable to
show us any book of Cusanus so entitled, either in print, or in autenticke
written hand, I will say, that you will prove your self a truer man, then ever
I took you to be.

But because this may little move you, I will more add on the contrary side, if
you be not hable to show the same after so many allegations out thereof, it
will consequently follow, that you are a shameless man, I might say, a false
harlot. If a man were disposed to dally with you in a matter most certain, as
you use to do with others, when you think you have gotten any small shadow of
some counterfeit advantage (for an undoubted example whereof I refer the
readers to the page 414.) he might perchance dash you quite out of
countenance, and deface you for ever, yea even before your friends, and the
flattering vpholders of your dooinges, which would grieve you at the heart. Now
might one challenge you, and say: M. Jewel, if you be hable to show any book,
or half book, oration, or epistle, or any little pamphlet, whereunto Cusanus
has given this title, then will the Catholics grant you more then ever you
were hable to get yet at their hands. If you have all the books in your
study, either of your own, or of other men, that you allege, then bring the
book with this title forth, and you shall discharge your self of a most
impudent lie, and sclaunder. And if you be hable so to do, then I pray you
let it be proclaimed by you with your book in your hand at Powles cross, (as
you have done at other times, to your worship forsooth) that all the world may
bear witness thereof. Verily M. Jewel it appears, that you have readde
more, then you understand, or at least then you have list to understand: and
yet you allege more, then ever you readde in the books whereunto you refer
us, as it may well be proved by this present example, and many other the like.
You may beshrewe him, to whom you gave so light credit herein. Covet not
praise by making great books. Write fewer words, more truth. Trust not every
pelting book, that seems toothsom unto you, yea write nothing but truth, and
ye shall ease us of much pains. Now a man's life will not serve him to discover
the multitude of your Lies, to such impudency ye are grown. What man is
there, having any spark of shamefastness, that would refer us so often, and
so confidently to a book by a title, which it never had, ne never was any such
written? And therefore until you bring forth your author hereof, you must be
content to bear all the blame of a sclaunderous and impudent Lier.

It had been an easy matter for you to have vowed Tritemius de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis, Conradus Gesnerus Bibliotheca, or his Epitome, or else Cusanus
works printed at Basile anno 1565. which was out almost two years before your
Defense was published, where you should have found, that he never wrote book
of any such title. What is to be thought hereof, but that, either you have
maliciously invented this Lie of your self, to deface the author withal, or
else that you have unwisely received it of some other, who is not hable to
abide by it? If of your self, then, maius peccatum habes, if of any other,
then bring him forth a Gods name, to discharge your self of malice, albeit
not of folly.

I do guess, that you will peradventure bring forth a great Stoareman of
yours, who furnishes you with such gaie stuff, and makes you a great
Truant, a fellow meet for the purpose, that will never fail such a false
merchant at a need. I take him to be that sures be of yours, Matthias Flacius
Illyricus. For you declare your self, that you, beside other books of his,
have benne busy with his Norma Concilij Tridentini. And there I find written:
In altera part clauis Scripturae. pa. 541.
Nicolai Cusani, post quam factus est Cardinalis, sententia, de auctoritate
Ecclesiae, and Concilij supra, and contra Scriptutam. But yet this will not
discharge you of malice. For he says not, that he entitled his book so, as
you do affirm, but does pretend to recite Cusanes mind of that matter, as
this word, Sententia, declares. Now one may gather an other man's mind
concerning any matter out of his writings, though he never made any work of
that title.

Neither does Illyricus specify in that place the work out of the which he
has drawn that, which he there allegeth, and which you received of him
again at the second hand. So that I can not perceive, but that the blame
both of folly, and of malice must rest still upon your own person. For I
suppose you will not have your self taken for so ignorant, as to think
Sententia is latin for a book: or if you will, then why do you so brag, as
it were, and boast of your great reading and learning?

Moreover you have not only given us a false title of your own imagination to
Cusanus writing, but also of an Epistle you have made a Book. That your good
intent and plain dealing herein may be more evident, I will recite the title
of thal Epistle, as it is to be found among his works printed at Basile Anno
1565. Pagin. 851. 852. Epistola 7. Nicolai de Cusa Cardinalis ad Clerum, and
Literatos Bohemiae, and thereunto in the top of the leaf is added, De
amplectenda vnitate Ecclesiae. Let both these Titles be conferred, and your
malicious intent in so wilfully deprauing the authors words, to bring him out
of credit, must most manifestly appear.

Well, perchance you will say, though the title be altered, yet his words out
of that same Epistle be truly recited, wherein consists the chief effect,
and principal purpose. If you so say, you will be proved no less a Lier, and
false reporter herein, then you have benne in the rest. And for example hereof
I will bring even the very first place that you have alleged out of him. You
tell us page. 55. that, thus he says. Sequuntur Scripturae Ecclesiam, and non e
conuerso: Cusanus fovvly falsified by M. Ievvel.
The Scriptures of God follow the Church: but contrariwise the Church
follows not the Scriptures.

You have here clipped the Authors sentence, and quite altered the sense. His
words are these. Ecclesia igitur, sicut recipit Scripturam, ita and
interpretatur. Page 858,
Sequuntur Scriptura Ecclesiam, quae prior est, and propter quam Scripturae,
and non e conuerso: The Church, as it receives the Scripture, so does it
expound the same. The Scriptures therefore do follow the Church, which is the
former, and for the which the Scripture is ordeiined, and not contrariwise.

What odds is betwixt this sentence of Cusanus, and that which you have
fathered upon him, any mean witted man may ealsily perceive. For Cusanus
words in their right form do both stand well, and have a good meaning. But
your false changing of them causes them to importe an intolerable Derogation
to the Scriptures without any color of truth. For as it is most true, that the
Church was before the Scriptures (that is to say, the written word of God)
and that the Scriptures were ordained and appointed for the Church, but not
contrariwise the Church for the Scriptures: so is it very false, that the
Scriptures do follow the Church, and the Church not the Scriptures. For why
has the Church received the Scriptures, but to follow them, and put them in
execution both in our inward belief and in our outward actions? Do you not
blush M. Jewel thus wilfully to peruerte that with your false iuggling, and
conueying away of those words quae prior est, and propter quam Scripturae,
which before had a right good sense? You thought by like, you should never
hear thereof again, nor be called to any reckening: or else you would have
had more regard to your good name and honesty. You can pretend no tolerable
excuse, as that you had not Cusanus works at hand. For even Illyricus, upon
whose credit you have taken up all that you have out of this epistle, does not
otherwise report the same, Page 544. in 2. part Clauis Script.
then they are to be found in the author. But you thought you would pass him
an ase in falsehood, although he be his crafts master therein.

How fowly you have ouershote your self in falsifying sentences, and
misreporting author for author, and book for book, that which has hitherto
ben declared, may be sufficient instruction to any man, that is willing and
desirous to understand the truth, and not content to be lead into wilful
blindness and error. Howbeit to make the matter a little more sensible and
plainer and also to give you occasion the better to know your folly, and not to
exalte your self overmuch with pride, vain glory, and presumption, of I can
not tell what extraordinary knowledge, as you seem to do: I will set before
your eyes such a glass of your gross oversight, ignorance, and blindness to
look in, as you may, and peradventure will be ashamed thereof, if you be not
altogether past shame already. Many times either to hide your ignorance, or to
weary the searcher, or to cover your falsehood, you bring us in such general
quotations without number of Book, or Chapter, as a man shall be little the
nearer. For examples whereof, Page 15. 158. 265. August. Page 51 August. de
Ciuitate Dei. Page 50. 267. Cyprianus Page 37. Eusebius. Page 29. Theodorit. in
Histor. Ecclesiast. Pa. 11. Theodorit. de curand. Graec. affect. Page 482. 532.
Baldus. pa. 486. Eckius. Page 564. Hieronymus. 629. Fortalitium fidei. Ite^
401. 313. Antoninus. 498. Liriensis Episcopus. 447. Eusebius Emissenus. Page
13. You refer us to a Council of Carthage as you remember, you can not tell
which.

In all these and such like places, a man has occasion justly to suspect your
covert dealing: that either the place makes nothing for your purpose, if it
were considered, or that there be no such words there at al, or at the least,
that you do not speak of certain knowledge, but by some guess, or upon an
other man's report. But where you are so bold, as to quote unto us the
Chapters, there it were to be supposed that you should speak ex speciali
scientia, of your precise knowledge, and so much the more, as you often
inculcate one place. And yet for all that it is to be proved, that even in such
places you do but set a great look on the matter, to outface your readers,
and gainesaiers withal. Example most notable hereof is to be taken of your
quotations of one Heruaeus de Potestate Papae, a great and familiar Doctor
with you. About 37. times, and every where (saving in two places, that is to
wit Page 331. 608.) you have quoted unto us precisely the Chapter, and yet he
has not divided his book into any Chapters at al. Therefore by like you had a
good sight, that could so often see so many, and distinct Chapters, where
there be none. Yea which is more, that you could recite so many sentences out
of him, and some of them not without lothsomnesse oftentimes repeated, and yet
never a one of them to be found in such form of words in all the book. This
may seem a very strange matter unto them, who took you to be the chief
Doctor, and the most precious Jewel of al our Ministers of this English
Congregation. And therefore they will surmise, that I speak this in a dream of
you. But that they may know I speak not of report, but by trial and
experience, I will here set out before the Readers eyes the Pages, where
Heruaeus is quoted in the margent of your book, that if he can come by the
book, which is in deed of an old printe, he may by conference prove,
whether I have said herein otherwise then truth.

Al these here following, are not in Heruaeus, but in one Johannes de Parisijs.
Pagina. 119. Cap. 13. 162. 12. 399. 13. 400. 12. 13. 401. 19. 405. 13. 13.
528. 16. 532. 16. 533. 20. 536. 11. 12. 13. it should be 14. Pagina. 537. Cap.
19. 538. 19. 544. 12. it should be 13. 607. 14. 615. 18. 651. 18. 652. 8. 653.
18. 660. 18. 692. 17. 694. 13. 696. 18. 15.

Now is never a one of al these places in Heruaeus, but in Ioannes de Parisiis.
Whom M. Jewel makes a distinct Author from the other: and yet does he recite
out of the self same book of his diverse sentences, and refers them unto
him, as it may appear.

Pagina. 53. Cap. 3. 102. 3. 467. 3. 535. 5. 649. 5. 652. 5.

A Note of certain places of the text of my Confutation, leafte out by M.
Jewel in his Defense.
GOod Reader, I have here set before thee a brief Note, or Table of certain
places, of purpose, and guilefully leafte out by M. Jewel in his recital of the
text of my Confutation, printed in the book of his Defense, which places in
making this Detection I had occasion to express. By the same thou may see,
and as in a few have a taste (for to note al it would amounte to a just
volume) how he deceives thee in the rest, bearing the countenance of one,
that has answered the substance of the whole Confutation. For so much he
tells thee him self with these words.

To answer M. Hardinge to every parcel of his Book, being so long, it would
be tedious. M. Ievvel in the beginning of his De, fence. Page 2.
Wherefore leaving many his impertinent speeches, and unnecessary and waste
words, I vvil touch only so much thereof, as shall bear some shevve of
substance, and may any way seem worthy to be ansvvered.

How well and truly M. Jewel has kept this promise, and how at the first
greeting, and entry of his Book he begileth thee, by these few places here
noted, and in this Detection at large set forth, thou shall see and perceive.
For trial therefore of his truth, have recourse unto the leaves of this Book
here quoted, and look what places of the Text of my Confutation there
recited, be comprehended within two stars (as I do also there in the Margent
warn thee) assure thy self, that al those, and an infinite number of such
other places, are by M. Jewel in this his Defense quite leafte out, as if no
such thing had been written. And then whether such places by him so leafte out,
be but impertinent speeches, and unnecessary and waste words, or right worthy
to be answered, I leave it to thine own indifferent judgment to discern.
Verily if it may be lawful thus to deal in the handling of Controversies, it
shall not seem hard to confute the works of any written, be they never so
learned and substancial.

But now to the Note, wherein I direct thee, to the Leaves and Pages of this
my Detection, in such order, as by occasion such his false sleightes have been
by me detected.

The first place. fol. 3. b. line. 27. until. fol. 4. a. line. 9. The ij. fol.
21. b. line. 31. until. fol. 22. a. line. 3. The iij. fol. 43. b. line. 7. The
iiij. fol. 45. a line. 6. The v. fol. 121. b. line. 28. The vj. fol. 129. a.
line. 16. The vij. fol. 129. b. line. 8. The viij. fol. 193. a. line. 22. The
ix. fol. 193. b. line. 4. The x. Ibidem. line last. The xj. fol. 194. a. line.
29. The xij. fol. eodem. b. line. 10. The xiij. and xiiij. fol. 195. a line. 7.
and line 28. The xv. fol. eodem. b. line. 17. The xvj. fol. 196. a. line. 11.
The xvij. fol. eodem. b. line. 13. The xviij. fol. 197. a. line. 15. The xix.
fol. eodem. b. line. 2. The xx. fol. 198. a. line. 2. The xxj. fol. 230. a.
line. 24. The xxij. fol. 278. b. line. 4. The xxiij. fol. eode^. line. 24. The
xxiiij. fol. 279. a. line. 18. The xxv. fol. 279. b. line. 23. The xxvj. fol.
280. a. line. 6.
M. Iewelles most shameless and most notorious Lies, (other common untruths
of false alleging and false translating, omitted) noted in such order, as they
lie in this Detection confuted.
The first lie. fol. 1. b. line. 27. The ij. fol. 3. a. line. 15. The iij. fol.
4. a. line. 17. The iiij. fol. 6. a. line. 5. The v. fol. 6. b. line. 25. and
7. a. l. 17. The vj. fol. 7. b. line. 12. The vij. fol. 8. b. line. 15. The
viij. fol. 9. b. line. 12. The ix. fol. 10. b. line. 19. The x. ibidem. line.
28. The xj. fol. 12. b. line. 25. The xij. fol. 13. b. line. 9. The xiij.
xiiij. and xv. fol. 15. a. line. 3. The xvj. xvij. and xviij. fol. 16. b. line.
5. The xix. and xx. fol. 19. a. line. 2. and 17. The xxj. xxij. xxiij. xxiiij.
xxv. and xxvj. fol. 20. b. l. 6. The xxvij. fol. 45. b. line 30. The xxviij.
fol. 46. a. line. 28. The xxix. and xxx. fol. 47. a. line. 4. and 26. The xxxj.
fol. 48. a. line. 20. The xxxij. fol. 62. a. line. 22. The xxxiij. fol. 63. a.
line. 13. The xxxiiij. fol. 64. a. line. 25. The xxxv. fol. 66. b. line. 10.
The xxxvj. fol. 67. a. line. 24. The xxxvij. fol. 74. b. line. 28. The xxxviij.
and xxxix. fol. 75. a. line. 10. and 18. The xl. fol. 78. b line. 14. The xlj.
fol. 81. a. line. 17. The xlij. fol. 81. b. line. 26. The xliij. fol. 82. b.
line. 9. The xliiij. xlv. and xlvj. fol. 83. b. line. 23. 28. The xlvij. fol.
84. b. line. 8. The xlviij. fol. 85. b. line. 1. The xlix. fol. 87. b. line.
20. The l. fol. 88. a. line. 17. The lj. fol. 93. a. line. 22. The lij. fol.
95. a. line. 23. The liij. fol. 96. a. line. 11. The liiij. fol. 98. a. line.
10. The lv. conteniing more then v. petit Untruths in it fol. 99. a. 100. a.
line. 9. The lvj. fol. 100. b. line. 3. The lvij. fol. 101. b. line. 13. The
lviij. fol. 102. a. line. last. The lix. fol. 103. a. line. 7. The lx. and lxj.
fol. 106. a. line. 2. 3. The lxij. fol. 108. a. line. 27. The lxiij. most vile
and filthy. fol. 120. a. line. 24. 121. lines 16. and sequent. The lxiiij. fol.
128. b. line. 17. The lxv. 145. a. line. 17. The lxvj. and lxvij. fol. 169. b.
lines 14. and 15. The lxviij. lxix. lxx. and lxxj. fol. 171. a. lines. 24. 25.
26. and 27. Item fol. 171. b. and 172. a. The lxxij. fol. 172. b. line. 3. The
lxxiij. fol. 186. b. line. 21. The lxxiiij. fol. 187. b. line. 16. The lxxv.
fol. 189. a. line. 21. The lxxvj. fol. 207. a. line. 22. The lxxvij. fol. 209.
b. line last. The lxxviij. fol. 215. a. line. 21. The lxxix. fol. 229. b. line.
8. The lxxx. fol. 232. a. line. 6. The lxxxj. most Impudent. fol. 232. b. line.
20. The lxxxij. fol. 234. a. line. 2. b. 18. The lxxxiij. fol. 245. b. line.
20. The lxxxiiij. fol. 249. a. line. 24. The lxxxv. fol. 249. b. line. 20. The
lxxxvj. fol. 251. a. line. 14. The lxxxvij. fol. 253. b. line. first. The
lxxxviij. fol. 255. b. line. 19. The lxxxix. fol. 256. b. line. 12. The xc.
fol. 262. b. line. 28. The xcj. and xcij. fol. 263. a. lines. 5. and 15. The
xciij. and xciiij. fol. 263. b. lines. 17. and 21. The xcv. and xcvj. fol. 264.
a. lines. 7. and 18. The xcvij. fol. 265. b. line. 15. The xcviij. fol. 266 a.
line. 3. The xcix. fol. 266. b. line. 25. The c. fol. 268. b. line. 2. The cj.
fol. 269. a. line. 18. The cij. fol. 271. b. line. 1. The.ciij. fol. 282. b.
line. 3. The ciiij. fol. 283. b. line. 23. The cv. fol. 285. a. line. 18. The
cvj. fol. 285. a. line. 24. The cvij. fol. 285. b. line. 28. The cviij. fol.
286. a. line. 17. The cix. fol. 287. a. line. 3. The cx. fol. 287. b. line. 6.
The cxj. fol. 288. a. line. 19. The cxij. fol. 288. a. line. 21. The cxiij.
fol. 290. a. line. 17. The cxiiij. fol. 296. b. line. 25. The cxv. fol. 299. b.
line. 15. The cxvj. fol. 302. a. line. 17. The cxvij. fol. 303. a. line. 15.
The cxviij. fol. 305. a. line. 7. The cxix. fol. 305. a. line. 22. The cxx.
fol. 306. a. line. 10. The cxxj. fol. 308. a. line. 16. The cxxij. fol. 309. a.
line. 25. The cxxiij. fol. 321. b. line. 22. The cxxiiij. fol. 322. a. line.
14. The cxxv. fol. 323. b. line. 28. The cxxvj. fol. 327. b. line. 7. The
cxxvij. fol. 333. b. line. 20. The cxxviij. fol. 335. a. line. 1. The cxxix.
fol. 342. a. line. 14. The cxxx. fol. 345. a. line. 6. The cxxxj. fol. 347. a.
line. 26. The cxxxij. fol. 352. a. line. 14. The cxxxiij. fol. 356. a. line. 4.
The cxxxiiij. fol. 357. b. line. 2. The cxxxv. fol. 358. b. line. 13. The
cxxxvj. fol. 360. b line. 3. The cxxxvii. fol. 370. b. line. 6. The cxxxviij.
fol. 373. b. line. 2. The cxxxix. fol. 380. b. line. 4. The cxl. fol. 381. b.
line. 20. The cxlj. fol. 382. a. line. 16. The cxlij. fol. 383. a. line. 19.
The cxliij. fol. 387. a. line. 13. The cxliiij. fol. 391. b. line. 15. The
cxlv. fol. 392. b. line. 19. The cxlvj. fol. 399. a. line. 21. The cxlvij. fol.
401. a. line. 31. The cxlviij. fol. 402 b. line. 23. The cxlix. fol. 404. a.
line. 12. The cl. fol. 406. b. line. 2. The clj. fol. 410. a. line. 15. The
clij. fol. 412. a. line. 18.
FINIS.
A Table of the chief matters treated of in this Book.
A
AErius his heresies. fol. 133. b. Agreing in Communion, where is disagreing
in opinion. fol. 272. b. Almaricus. fol. 111. a. Almaric and Abailard
Heretics. fol. 102. b. Alphonsus impudently belied by M. Jewel. fol. 63. a.
Alphonsus shamefully abused by M. Jewel. fol. 6. b. S. Ambroses mind touching
praying to Saints. fol. 362. a. Anacletus his Decree expounded. fol. 60. b.
61. a. Answer to special words of discourtesie noted by. M. Jew. fol. 45. a.
Answer to M. Jewels View of his untruths. fol. 56. b. Angels and
Archangelles. fol. 142. b. Anacletus not co^unterfeite. fol. 227. b. Ancyran
Council answered touching the continuance of married Deacons in the ministry.
fol. 298. b. Anselmusmade wrongfully a spokesma^ for Priests Marriages. fol.
308. a. Apostasy of the Protestants. fol. 35. b. 36. a. b. Apostata, who so
is, and what it signifies. fol. 35. b. 236. a. The Apostates married of the
English Congregation. fol. 36. b. Application of Christ's merits to others in
the Mass. fol. 355. b. Appollinaris the elder not married after he was
priest. fol. 304. b. Arguments hanging from heaven to earth. fol. 142. a. An
Argument proving this new Congregation not to be the true Church. fol. 92. a.
Augustine falsely alleged by. M. Ievvel. fol. 113. a. Augustines Doctrine of
General Councelles. fol. 113. b. 114. Augustines place to Dardanus expounded.
fol. 117.
B
Baptism of Infantes necessary. fol. 336. a. Bastard works printed with
good authors. fol. 58. b. Baudie Bale vvorthily so called. fol. 37. Beno
parcial, holding with the Emperor against the Pope. fol. 57. a. S. Bernard
rejected by M. Jew, fol. 12. a. Bere^garius words as he lay dying. 105. b.
his heresy condemned. fol. 105. a Beza persuaded Poltrot to kill the Duke of
Guise. fol. 85. a. Bigamie lavvful rather then commendable. fol. 279. b.
Bishops only in Councelle have sentence definitive. fol. 99. a. Bishops not
doing their duties are yet Bishops. fol. 181. 182. Bishops and Priests
different. fol. 133. b. Bishops be Bishops though they be negligent. fol.
181. a. A Bishop above a Priest. fol. 235. b. The Bishop of Rome is the
Successor of Peter. fol. 273. a. A Bishop is not hable to do his duty the
better for that he is married. fol. 309. b. Blame, a word of honest meaning
changed by M. Jew. in to Handle a word of filthy meaning. fol. 121. a. Brentius
the first deviser of laying together the Adversaries sharp words. fol. 25.
b. Brentius charge Bullinger with sharp speech. fol. 26. a. Brentius the
author of the heresy of the Vbiquitaries. fol. 116. b. Brown the head
Minister of the Puritanes. fol. 336. a. Brunichildis Queen of France. fol. 382.
a
C.
CAnonical Election of M. Jewel to the Sea of Sarisburie. fol. 232. a. Capon
Bishop, no Protestant. fol. 243. a. The Catholic Church. fol. 272. 273. 274.
Catholic what by Lirine^sis. fol. 124. b. Catholic Church standing in two
persons by M. Ievvel. fol. 126. a. Cathecumenus interpreted by M. Ievvel an
heathen. fol. 342. a. Celestinus Pope sclaundered. fol. 253. b. Chams brood.
fol. 37. a. Character what it signifies in the Sacraments. fol. 268. a.
Christopher Goodmans Traitors. fol. 84. b. The Church stands in multitude of
persons. fol. 125. b. 126. Christ is the Rock, and Peter is the Rock, and
how each. fol. 174. b. Church a plainer teacher then the Scriptures. fol. 328.
Christ a consecrated priest. fol. 3, 2. b. Christ touched of us in the
Euchariste. fol. 340. a. Christ's body received of us with mouth. fol. 341.
a. Church how it is resolved in doubteful cases. fol. 352. The clergy of
this new Congregation what worthy men it has. fol. 262. b. Clerks bound
to Continency. fol. 279. a. Communion in one or both kinds. fol. 343. b. and
in sequent. b. Communicatorie letters. fol. 223. b. Concupiscence without
consent is not properly sin. fol. 337. a. Continuance of the Church without
intermission. fol. 31. a. 89. 90. 91. 92. Council of Laterane a great
assembly. fol. 105. a. Councelles of later time in authority. fol. 108. 109.
a. b. Councelles not contrary one to the other. fol. 109. b. Councelles later
preferred before the former fol. 114. b. 115. a. Concupiscence in married
men, without which generation is not performed, is an il thing. fol. 283.
a. Consecration of a Bishop. fol. 240. b. Confession of sins necessary. fol.
274 b. 275. 276. 277. Contradictions of M. Ievvel. fol. 98. a. 101. b. Cranmar
no Successor of S. Thomas. fol. ^04. a. Cranmar how dealt vvithal for heresy
and treason. fol. 380. b. Cyrillus falsified by M. Jew. fol. 280. a. Cyprian
nipped foully by M. Jewel. fol. 269. a. Cyprian alleged by M. Jew. in an il
cause. fol. 271. b.
D.
DAmasus made by M. Jewel to write of things done after his death. fol. 287.
a. Degradatio. fol. 7. a. Deposition of the Clergy what it is, and how. fol.
69. b. 70. 71. Dioscorus condemned by Bishops, not by the Civil magistrate.
fol. 72. 73. Dissensions among the Protesta^tes. fol. 33. 34. 35. 151. 152.
Donatistes error renewed by M. Ievvel. fol. 92. a. Dorman defended. fol. 295.
a. Double holiness. fol. 203. b. Drink ye al of this, in what sense it was
spoken. fol. 343. b.
E.
ERasmus against the Protestants. fol. 163. b. Erasmus and Agrippa belie the
Greek Church touching priests marriage. fol. 307. a. Ephrem prayed for the
healpe of Saints, and to Saints. fol. 364. b. Error of S. Cyprian. fol. 271.
b. Error of Pope John 22. what was it. fol. 64. b. Errors that M. Ievvel
may be induced to acknovvledge. fol. 77. a. Errors the greatest that M.
Ievvel could find in my books. fol. 77. b. Euchariste ministered to Children at
Baptism. fol. 241. a.
F.
Faith in England made changeable. fol. 23. a. Faith without works. fol. 369.
b. Faith of the later thousand years as good, as that of the first five
hundred years. fol. 94, b. Faithful wives have been cause of the couersion of
their unfaithful husbands. fol. 315. a. Fathers charged by M. Jew. with
oversight for zele and heat. fol. 295. b. Figurative body, and figurative
eating. fol. 333. a. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Luther compared. fol. 108.
Flesh is a mean whereby grace passes into the Soul. fol. 339. a. Formosus
Pope. fol. 139. b. Fornication how it is punished in the Clergy. fol. 69. 70.
71. Fornication ever pounished by the Church. fol. 81. Fruit of the Vine.
fol. 353. b.
G.
Germany for many parts remaining Catholic. fol. 96. a. Gerson impudently
belied by M. Jewel. fol. 64. a. 100. b. 101. a. b. Goodma^s traitorous writing.
fol. 14. b. Gospel comes unto us by Tradition. fol. 326. b. Gratians words
alleged by M. Iev. for the Counsel of Carthage. fol. 59. b. Grace necessary to
the kepi^g of the commandments. fol. 366. b. Gregory Nazanzenes saying
touching a married Bishop expounded. fol. 61. b. 313. b.
H.
HEad of the Church one. fol. 136. b. 137. and seq. Henry of Luxenburg how he
died. fol. 57. b. Henry the eightes body bruted to be taken away. fol. 140.
a. Henry the sixth his body taken up. fol. 140. a. Heretics, it booteth not
to strive with them. fol. 215. b. Heretics have not to do with Scriptures.
fol. 216. a. Heresy has idolatry annexed. fol. 261. b Hildebrand Pope. 57.
b. acquitted by grave writers. fol. 256. b. 257. a. Hierome of Prage heretic
recanted. fol. 104. a. Hieromes place ad Euagrium, expounded. fol. 165. b. 166.
167. Hilarie a wicked man saincted by M. Jewels Canonization. fol. 173. a. S.
Hilaries verdite of S. Peter's preeminence. fol. 173. a. S. Hilarie married by
M. Jew. fol. 28^. a. Holiness of degree, and of offite. fol. 203. b. Honorius
Pope no public teacher of heresy. fol. 253. b. 254. and seq. Hostiensis fowly
corrupted by M. Jewel. fol. 67. b. Husse said Mass a little before he was
burnt. fol. 104. a. Hussites heretics. fol. 83. a. b. 103. a. b. Huguenotes
of France. Gues of the lovv Country. fol. 37. a. Hypsistarij what me^ne they
were. fol. 314. a.
I.
M. Jewels dignity, and degree, no Bishop. fol. 39. a. M. Jewels especial
Doctors. fol. 8. a. 213. b. 228. b. 229. a. 251. b. M. Jewels scoff against
Christ him self. fol. 8. b. M. Ievvel mangleth his adversaries text in
infinite places. fol. 9. b. 17. b. M. Jewels grave sentence pronounced against
S. Bernard. fol. 12. a. How M. Jew. may be pleased. fol. 38. b. Flovvres of
M. Jewels modeste speech. fol. 50. 51. 52. M. Jewels scoffs, and scorns
against God, his Church, and his Saints. fol. 52. a. b. M. Jewels
Sacramentarie scoffs. fol. 52. b. M. Jewels scoffs against the Pope,
Bishops, and Priests. fol. 52. b. 53. a. M. Jewels general, and particular
scoffs. fol. 53. 54. M. Jewels Outcries, and scoffing Oes. fol. 55. b. M.
Jewels modest marginal Notes. fol. 54. b. 55. a. b. M. Jew. plaieth many
untrue parts at once fol. 68. a. M. Jew. falsifieth my answer made in the
Confutation. fol. 44. b. 45. a. 68. b. 69. a. 128. b. 141. a. 147. a. 153 b.
180. b. 223. a. what it is to confute M. Jew. writings. fol. 76. b. M. Jew.
repeateth objections and allegations already ansvvered and confuted,
dissembling utterly al answer made. fol. 83. b. 84. a 226. a. 227. b. 248. 249.
253. b. 255. b. 256. b. M. Ievvel defends open rebellion, and treason. 86. a.
b. 88. a. Item 183. and 184. in defending wickless traiterous heresy. M.
Ievvel reasons against the Church, even as the Donatistes did. fol. 90. b.
91. a. M. Jew. blasphemously maligneth the conversion of infidels to the
faith. fol. 96. b. 97. a. M. Jew. contrary to him self. fol. 98. a. 101. b.
M. Jewels extreme impudency. fol. 106. b. 160. a. and b. 221. a. M. Jewels.
deceit in equivocation of terms. fol. 119. a. 134. a. M. Jewels fond
limitation against Lirinensis. fol. 124. b. 125. a. M. Jew. fond conditions,
to admit one head of the Church. fol. 138. a. M. Jewels vain skoffing. fol.
141. b. 150. b. M. Jewels negative arguments fol. 143. a. 226. b. M. Jew.
alleges objections of the Doctors made against the Truth: as Truths avouched
by the Doctors. fol. 144. a. M. Jewels way to continevve wrangling fol.
147. b. M. Iewelles ridiculous and loose Arguments. fol. 143. a. 152. b. 155.
b. 160. b. 161. a. 162. a. 184. b. M. Jewel falsely alleges the Fathers
sayings. fol. 6. b. 113. a. 156. b. 157. a. 166. b. 173. b. 208. a. 240. b.
269. a. 286. a. 333. b. 387. a. M. Jewel falsifierh the holy Scripture. fol.
160. a. 202. a. 222. a. 265. a. 266. b. M. Iewelles dissembling shifte. fol.
163. a. M. Jewel misseallegeth the Civil Law. fol. 168. b. 169. a. 380. b. M.
Jewel missealleageth and falsifieth Gratian, and his Gloss. fol. 169. a. b.
190. a. 191. a. 204 b. 383. a M. Jewel falsifieth the Councels. fol. 183. a.
189. a. M. Jewels forging of the Fathers sayings. fol. 185. a. 186. 290. a. b.
203. b. 209. a. M. Jewel charge me with three main Lies. 189. b. Item with
more Lies. fol. 287. a. 285. a. 295. b. 316. b. 303. a. 285. b. 310. b. 374. b.
M. Jewel a scatterer, no Successor of any one Bishop. fol. 203. a. M. Jewel
falsifieth al his Testimonies against Succession. fol. 206. b. M. Jewel plaieth
the very part of Antichrist. fol. 210. b. 245. a. M. Jewel falsifieth
Bitontinus. fol. 213. b. M. Jew. continually alleges those men's sayings for
him, whose deeds he knovveth to be against him fol. 213. b, 229. a M. Ievvel
never ordered Priest, nor Bishop. fol. 230. b. 222. a. b. M. Ievvel sticks
not to say untruly, I was present, and consented to his Election. fol. 232.
b. M. Ievvel can shevve no one Predecessor of his Religion in the Sea of
Sarisburie. fol. 241. 242. 243. M. Ievvel bevvraieth his lurking heresy. fol.
244. M. Jewels day, and night. fol. 246. b. M. Jewels Lying, and Rhetorical
addition of words, and sentences to his Authors sayings. fol. 199. a. 201.
b. 203. b. 204. a. and b. 205. b. 208. a. 258. a. 265. a. 302. a. 313. b. 305.
a. Intercession to Saints to pray for us. fol. 358. a. John the. 22. his
error. fol. 64. b. 65. 66 255. b. John Huss. fol. 83. a. b. 103. b John of
Sarisburie. fol. 258. 259. 260. John 22. charged by M. Jew. with the error of
John. fol. 23. 66. b. John of Constantinoples ambition. fol. 141. a. Iosue
mistaken for Osee confessed. fol. 143. b. Iouinians heresy making Marriage and
virginite of equal merit. fol. 296. a. Iuuenalis and Thalassius not condemned
in the Council of Chalcedon. fol. 73. b. 74. a. Just, who may be called in
this life. fol. 367. a.
L.
LAteran great Council. fol. 105. a. 110. b. Lady Interpreter noted of
presumption. fol. 120. The Law by what means it is fulfilled. fol. 369. a.
Leaders away of the Flock who be they. fol. 202. b. 267. b. A Legende of Leo
alleged by M. Jewel a fond fable. fol. 251. a. Lenten Fast a custom of the
Church, fol. 327. a. Leo the first defended from Arianisme. fol. 172. b. 173.
174. 175. 176. 177. 251. 252. Liberius defended from Arianisme. fol. 62. a. b.
250. a. Life everlasting how freely given, and how for good works. fol. 372.
b. Light not put out in the Church for a thousand years. fol. 90. a. This
term, my Lord, used of the Antiquity. fol. 175. a Loose Apostates, whether
the diuisers of this new Gospel may not so be called. fol. 35. b. Luthers
dog eloquence. fol. 127. Lutherans and Zuinglians dissension. fol. 322. b.
M.
MAcabees book Canonical among the faithful. fol. 321. b. Magistrate Civil not
judge in Ecclesiastical causes. fol. 377. a. Manichees heresy denying Christ's
true flesh. fol. 345. a. Marie the Virgin advocate for Eve. fol. 359. b. Marie
our Lady Queen of al, hope of the Fathers. etc. fol. 365. a. Marcellinus Pope
Martyr. fol. 248. b. Marcus Callidius an Orator. fol. 42. b. Marriage after
Vow of Chastity, what the Fathers have judged thereof. fol. 278. b Married
twice may not be made Bisshoppes. fol. 279. b. Marriage after holy Order ever
accounted unlawful among Catholics. fol. 280. a. Married Priests in England
in Anselmus time. fol. 280. b. Marriage unlawful in two cases. fol. 281. a.
Marriages three good things. fol. 284. a. Married Priests in old time called
Apostates. fol. 296. b. Marriage a let unto perfiter life by S. Chrysostom.
fol. 305. a. Matrimony a Sacrament that gives grace. fol. 328. b. Mass said
by John Husse in his last days. fol. 83. a. b. Menna absolved. fol. 382. a. b.
Merit changed by M. Jewel into Preeminence. fol. 163. a. Merits of Christ's
death be not received by faith only. fol. 356. b. Merits of works. fol. 369.
b. and sequentib. Ministers of Tourney. fol. 85. a. Monica. S. Augustines
mother labored to convert her husband. fol. 315. a. Montanistes heresies. fol.
327. a.
N.
NEstorius a scatterer of the flock. fol. 203. a. Nicephorus belied by M. Jew.
fol. 303. a. Nilus a late Greek Schismatike. fol. 225. a. Nipping of Doctors
by M. Jewel. fol. 305. a. North parts converted to the faith in these later
ages. fol. 94. b.
O.
Odds between the Protestants and Catholics. fol. 30. a. 107. b. An Oration
forged in the name of Pius. fol. 4. 97. b. Order of Popes at the first
succeding one an other. fol. 219. b. Ordination, and Confirmation, diverse. fol.
227. b. Origin falsified by M. Jewel. fol. 286. a. 333. b. Orders
Ecclesiastical. fol. 134. b. 135. a.
P.
Papistrie can not be showed when it began. fol. 106. b Patriarchs. fol. 180.
Peter Martyr in Strasbourg a Lutheran, in England a Zuinglian. fol. 34. b.
Peter Martyr and dame Catherine his wife. fol. 36. b. Peter Martyr at variance
with Brentius. fol. 117. b. Peter's authority and prerogative. fol. 174. a.
175. 176. Peter over the Christian Gentiles. at Rome. fol. 221.(...) Peter when
he came to Rome. fol. 221. b. Peter the feeder of al sorts in the flock. fol.
148. b. etc. Peter's humility. fol. 153. Peter offended twice. fol. 157. Peter
follows the rest, yet head of al, by S. Augustine. fol. 158. Peter received
into indivisible unity with Christ. fol. 174. a. Peter joined with fol. Leo.
176. a. Pelagius heresy maintained by the Caluinistes. fol. 367. a.
Perfection, double, one of Pilgrims, the other of heaven. fol. 368. b Petitio
principij, much used by M. Jewel. fol. 89. a. Platina no flatterer of the
Pope. fol. 257. b. Pope the Head of the Church. fol. 130. b. The Popes
Supremacy proved. fol. 146. 147. 148. 149. 159. b. 179. 186. a. b. The Pope
Prince of Pastors. fol. 177. b 178. a. The Pope leaft the Vicare of Christ's
love toward us. fol. 148. a. The Popes confirming of Bishops. fol. 223. b.
224. and seq. Popes charged with heresy, and other enormites, defended. fol.
248. 249. 250. 251. 252. 253. 254. 255. 256. 257. 258. The Pope Peter's
Successor. fol. 273. a. The Pope laufully called the Princ^ of Pastors. fol.
177. b. Possibility of keeping Gods Commandments. fol. 366. b. Priesthood
double. fol. 239. a. Priest above a Deacon. fol. 164. b. Priests of England
are Votaries. fol. 290. b. Priests of Greece, in what sense they are Votaries.
fol. 298. a. Priests and religious men, whether they may be dispensed to
marry. fol. 300. b. Priests only Judges over Priests. fol. 377. a. Praying
for the dead, taught by S. Paul. fol. 326. b. Protestants dissent not only
one from an other, but also from them selves. fol. 34. a. Protestants vary
from the Primitive Church. fol. 270. b. Protestants be Apostates. fol. 336.
b. Protestants are proved by an invincible Argument, to be no part of Christ's
Church. fol. 90. a. b. 92. Puritanes. fol. 139. a. 332. a.
R.
RAymeris made king of Arragon, of a Monk, and married by dispensation. fol.
301. a. Real presence clearly witnessed. fol. 79. a. proved. 339. and
sequentib. Rebellion against Princes maintained by M. Jewel. fol. 86. a.
Religious men married, the first fou^ders of this new Gospel. fol. 36. b
Reservation of the Sacrament. fol. 331. b. Righteousness competent for this
life. fol. 368. a. Round capped Ministers. fol. 86. b. Ruffianrie of M. Jewel
detected. fol. 120. b. Ruffinus belied by M. Jew. fol. 285. b.
S.
SAbellicus falsified by M. Jewel. fol. 139. b. Sacraments means to receive
grace. fol. 330. a. Sacraments seven. fol. 334 a. Sacrament of the Altar
called our maker, and Lord by S. Augustine. fol. 346. a. Sacramentaries
persecuted by the Lutheranes. fol. 95. b. 96. a. Sacramentaries condemned by
the Lutheranes. fol. 104. b. Seruus seruuorum Dei, the Popes style. fol. 187.
b. Seuerus a blind man by touch of a Martyrs garment recovered sight. fol.
364. a. Shaxton Bishop, no Protestant. fol. 241. b. Shaxton and Capon
Bishops of Sarisburie, repented. fol. 194. a. Shaxton B. not of M. Iewele
side. fol. 242. b. Sharp words found in the Scriptures. fol. 27. b. Sheep
of three sorts. fol. 149. a. Siritius and Innocentius were not the first
ordeiners of Clerks co^tinencie. fol. 279. a. Sozomenus, Gregory, Nazianzen,
and Eusebius belied by the Apology. fol. 309. a. Sophistry of M. Jewels
shifting from the Scriptures to Gods word. fol. 323. a. Spiridion made
Bishop of a married lay man. fol. 285. a Syluester. 2. Pope. fol. 249. a.
Succession of Bishops treated of at large. Lib. fol. 4. Succession of
Bishops, a certain rule to know the Church by. fol. 198. b. 199. and
sequent. Succession can not lack the Truth. fol. 199. 200. Succession lavvful
can not be taken away by man. fol. 211.
T.
TErtullia^ of a married man made a Priest. fol. 285. a. Tertullians error.
fol. 239. 240. Three ways of vvriting against an adversary. fol. 42. b.
Tradition. fol. 270. a. Traditions belonging to Sacraments may not be changed,
Ceremonies may. fol. 326. a. Traditores what they were in the primitive
Church. fol. 91. a. Transubstantiation. fol. 110. b. treated of. 346. b. This
is my Body, meant properly. fol. 339. a. Turks invasion brideled. fol. 266.
a.
V.
VAriance of opinion between two Ministers of Valencenes in the time of the
Siege. fol. 84. b. Victor the Pope his death. fol. 58. a Virgilius Pope his
Constancy. fol. 200. a Unity can not be without a supreme head. fol. 140. b.
141. a. 152. 153. a. Universal Bishop truly attributed to the Pope. fol. 185.
b. 186. 187. 188. and sequent. Votaries may not conveniently marry by M.
Jewel. fol. 289. a. Vow breakers in what danger they stand. fol. 278. a. Vow
of Chastity annexed to holy Orders. fol. 291. a. Vow of Chastity made in
fact, though no words be spoken. fol. 292. b. Vow made in what case
marriage holds, or holds not by the determination of the Church. fol. 294.
b Vrspergensis set out by Melanchthon only. fol. 57. b.
VV
Waldensis heresies. fol. 102. b. VVedlockes il thing is inordinate lust.
fol. 283. b. VVickleff his heresies. fol. 82. b. 63. a. VViues that couerted
their unfaithful husbands. fol. 61. b. 350. a. Words of God not written.
fol. 270. a. Works, how meritorious of infinite reward. fol. 371. b.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fault. leaf line Correction my 27. a. 27. may sor- 38. a. 12. sorry Golfridus
83. b. 25. Galfridus lustly 135. b. 23. lusty famofum 170. b. 9. fumosum to
179. b. 28. lut it out least 180. b. 28. leaft S. of 198. a. 19. of S. In the
margent. 202. a. a note superfluous

Liber hic D.M.N. Thomae Hardingi lectus and approbatus est a viris Anglici
idiomatis and Theologiae peritissimis, vt sine periculo imprimi and publicari
possit, Quanquam alioqui and ipse D. Hardingus mihi tam probe notus est, vt de
eius cruditione, fide and prudentia nihil sit dubitandum.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri Louanij. 21. Maij. An. 1568.

