BRITAINS HALLELUJAH OR A SERMON OF THANKSGIVING For the happy Pacification
in BRITAIN Preached in the English Church at Hamburch before HIS EXCELLENCY
THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS ROW LORD AMBASSADOR EXTRA ORDINARY FOR HIS
MAYESTY OF GREAT BRITAIN IN GERMANY, etc. And to The Worshipful and famous
Society of MERCHANT ADVENTURERS and some Cavelliers of SCOTLAND

By MA. HARRIS Batchelour in Divinity, Fellovv of EMMANUEL College in
CAMBRIDGE and Chaplain to his EXCELLENCY.

ANNO M.DC.XXXIX.

To the Right Honorable SIR THOMAS ROW Knight, Gentleman, of the Privy
Chamber, Chancellor and Treasurer of the most Noble Order of the Garter, His
Majesty of Great Britains Ambassador Extraordinary to the King of Denmark
and other Princes and States in Germany etc.
My Lord!
MEaner and Baser Mettalls may pass Curant, when once they have passed the
Approbation of the Mint. There is noe other Life in my Hopes of this Poor
Things Acceptance abroad, but this that it bears Your Lordships Sta^pe upon
it. T'vvas your Lordship, that first commanded de It to the Ear, and now to
the Eye. If to Either It did, or shall give little Content; It knovves where
to take Sanctuary. Only in this Jam richly satisfied, that it may publish to
the World your constant Zeal and (...) to your Country: for whose sake you
consecrated a day of Public Thancksgiving here.

To mention your Lordships Name any further: were to tell the world There is
a Sun, whose Fellovv-Traveller you have bin. Both Hemispheares know you
well, and bless you much. I know your Lordship too wise and too Good to he
flattered. And yet He that shall render you but half of your dues must needs
incur that Censure, in the Opinion of them (if there be any) that know you
not. How Great and Good a Statesman you have allvvays approved your self in
those your many and High employments abroad: what Princes Court, or remotest
Country does not amply testify? I need not tell your own Country, what a
True Patriot, nor your own University, Oxon.
what a Noble Benefactor, nor your Holy Mother the Church what a Devout Son
you have ever bin.

There is an Epitaph upon the tomb of of a Demi-Founder of a College much
commended for its Fullnes and Modesty. Fui Cajus, Gonvell. and Caj. Coll. in
Camb.
I was Cajus. Identicall Propositions, where the Subject is high speak high,
witness those of the Divine Maty. Let me only alter the Person, and the Tense
(I pray God it may long and long be Present) and his Epitaph is your Elogie, as
little and as much as can be said, You are Sir Thomas Row. One who lives
much Desired (as any that carrys such a Head and such a Heart) and therefore
must necessarily dye much Lamented. And so will your other self your Noble
Consort. Who as she is in her House the exact Antitype of Solomon's Virtuous
VVoeman Prove. 31. v. 10. and deinceps: so do her works praise her in the
Gates, in Public, as well Eleemosynall as Thera peuticall, I for bear to
mention those many Church ornaments her Fingers has wrought, Her other
Masculine and Heroical virtues raise Her above Her sex. But I know I strike
too long upon this stringe to you Both, whose study is, been potius facere
quam audire rather to Do well, then to Hear well. I have done, when I have
only, supplicated the Divine Majesty for your Lordships Health. (for I know
none that conque'rs such difficultys of Business who vvrestles with such
infirmitys and pains of Body) and for the continuance of a prosperous success
in your great and weighty Affairs, and for Both your Aeternall Happiness,
vvhither I know you tend as your Motto speaks.

So prays TRAMITE RECTA. Your Lordships Most humble Devoted. Chaplain MA.
HARRIS

BRITAINS HALLELUIAH.
Psalm CXXVI. v. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad or now rejoice.


A Text so melodiously tuned to this blessed occasion, that, I know not
whether, the Composer, were more Patheticall in that their Hallelujah, or,
Prophetical of this of ours. If ever, They among the Heathen could say. The
Lord has done great things for them of whom can they say it, if not of us?
and when if not now? If ever any Church can sing The Lord has done great
things for us what Church can do it rather then ours? and at what Time
rather then this? when the De liverance is so exceeding great, the
Circumstances so wonderfully vvonderfull: that at the first entertainment of
the nevves we were in the Church's case in the first verse of this Psalm
like them that dream, as fearing, least we rather imaginarily dreamed it
sleeping, then credibly heard it waking.

But now it is avouched with such vndeneyable proofs that we must be said
to dream indeed if yet we doubt of it: let us having first set our hearts
in tune to a thankful Comemoration, then fill our mouth's with joy full
Acclamations and singings. That so, both Cordially and vocally, we may join
in consort with Sion here. The Lord has done, etc.

Great things? what great things were those that caused so great thanks?
Yea, that is the Point upon which the whole Psalm runns descant, the very Gam
ut of the Psalm. according to which, we are to take our notes anon, in our
Counter-Tenor.

To set the Psalm then for Them first, then for our selves: let this be the
task of this time.

Their great things done them here, were a great Deliverance, a Deliverance
from Captivity, from Captivity in Babylon. This was that, which set them here
on singing and gave both Time, and Tune to this Psalm.

Which (as most of the rest do) consists of two Parts.

Of an Hallelujah praises.

Of an Hosanna a prayer: so a great Prelate has divided it before me.

B. Andr.
An Hallelujah etc. praises for favors already obtained.

An Hosanna a prayer, either for the continuing of the same favor still, or,
for the like, upon the like occasion, as we shall touch upon anou.

As for the first, the Hallelujah, that takes up the 3. first verses. And as
thanksgiving is allvvays founded upon some Favor received, so, according to
the height of the one, the other is still elevated. High praises for high
favors. This is good in the common law of gratitude. What then was the
favor done the Church here? that is the Question, and has bin already
ansvvered-A Deliverance from Babylonish Captivity.

Now into this (as all other favors) two Inquirys, will be made. 1. what
was it? for the matter and nature of it.

2. How was it? for the manner and order of doing it.

1. To the first, the matter and nature of a deliverance, that is usually valued
and estimated by the Evil or Danger escaped: and so this of theirs will
admit of 2. degrees.

First, it was a Deliverance from Captivity one of the greatest of Evils.
Secondly, it was from Babylonish Captivity, the very greatest of all other
Captivitys.

Here is justly then an Hallelujah due to the Deliverance for the matter and
nature of it, that it was a Return from captivity, that it was from such a
Captivity.

2. And 2ly an Hallelujah again will be noe less due for the Manner of the
Deliverance, The next Inquiry. How was it done?

1. It was done so unexpectedly, that they were like them that dream. As
dreams we know come upon men unlooked for, unthought of.

2ly It was done so without any labor or seeking of theirs, that they were
like them that dreamed again fast a sleep perhaps vvhilest it was doing. Or
rather like them that dreamed not, for they never once dreamed of it, it was
done so suddenly.

3ly It was done so graciously that at the first hearing of the good nevvs,
they were so amazed with Joy, that they knevv not, whether they were in a.
Dream or not, whether they might trust their senses, when they both heard,
and savv it.

4ly. It was done so miraculously, that it manifestly appeared, to be the
Lords doing, and so became marveilous not only in their eyes but in the eyes of
the very Heathen, They among the Heathen could say. The Lord has done etc. v.
2.

And shall the Heathen say it, and shall not Sion sing it? yes I vvarrant you,
with their heart strings tuned to the highest pitch, with their voices
elevated to the highest note. The Lord has done etc. v. 3.

Thus far their Hallelujah, or praises, the first part of the Psalm.

The Second was their Hosanna or prayer. v. 4. Turn again our Captivity.
That is Either Continue to turn it, confirm, and ratify what thou have
already done Or, turn is hereafter, if not praeveniendo that the like
Calamity befalls us noe more: yet at the least Subveniendo, that we may have a
like taste of such goodness in such an happy enlargement as this was.

Turn, us like the streams in the south And this shall be as vvellcome to us
as the water streams to those deserts (perhaps of Arabia) in the dry
Southern Clymates as Vatablus will have it. Or turn us in a facile melting
way (as now they did by Cyrus) even as those vvaterbrooks in the South are
caused by the melting of the snow upon the neighbor mountains, as that
great Bishop of ours. Then shall it fare with us, as it does with Husband
men in a great dearth; howsoever they may sovve in tears (whether for the
dear price of the seed corn, or the small hopes of a Crop) yet a plentiful
harvest makes them a good amends for all: so though we may go into Captivity
with tears, by weeping cross: yet shall our Return be with greare Joy
like the joy in a greare Harvest after a great Dearth.

And thus you have the Psalm analyzed and para phrased.

But we have made choice only of one verse, the third. Which, as for its
Situation in the middle of the Psalm, it may be called Cor Psalmi, the Heart
of the Psalm: so for its Nature (like the Heart in the Body) it is the seat
of all those vital Spirits and strong Affections that are diffused in the
whole body of the Psalm. You hear how lively and pathetically it renders it
self

The Lord has done etc.

The Division.
And this Versicle will be set in two parts.

1. Magnalia Dei great things the Lord has done for his Church.

2. Magnificat Ecclesiae, the Church her Magnificat or thankful
acknovvledgment of these great things thus done by the Lord.

1. Magnalia Dei.
In the former three things are in sight 1. The Benefit Great things 2. The
Benefactor the Great God Jehovah. 3. The Beneficed (so to speak) the Church.
We begin with the Benefit, because that is first in Nature, 1. The Benefit.
being the fundamentu^ relationis bevvene the Benefactor, and the Receiver of
the Benefit.

The Benefit is expressed by Great things, great things interpreted a great
Deliverance v. 1. and every Deliverance allvvays so much the greater by how
much the greater the Evil is from which we are delivered, and by how much
the greater providence was seen in the manner of the deliverance. So that
this Deliverance of Sion here lays claim to its greatenes, upon a double
title, first in regard of the Substance of it, secondly, in respect of the
Circumstances.

1. For its Substance.
First it is great for the Substance, and this again in a double degree.
First as it was a Return from captivity that is great. Secondly, as it was
a Return from Babylonish Captivity, this is yet greater.

1. A Return from Cape.
First it was a Return from Captivity. Now to our Rule. The measure of the
Mercy must be the misery escaped. Is not captivity a great misery? Does any
man doubt it? Let him ask Jerem. in Lament. 4.9. They that fell by the svvord
were in better case then they that went into Captivity. And yet David in that
his great straight, chose rather the Pestilence, then the svvord. Must not
that then be a great evil, that is greater then that, which is greater then
the Pestilence? But why do I name but one place in the Lamentations? The
whole book is but one entire proof of the miserys of Captivity.

Captivity a great Evil? Does any man question it? Let him ask him self: Is
it not a great evil to be plundered and spoiled of all one's goods at once?
And yet a man may be bereaved of his whole estate, and yet have that, which
he may have that has nothing in goods, his Liberty. Well then is Restraint a
great evil? The bird in the cage will tell you it is. And yet a man may be
in hold upon very good terms, and among good friends. Is it a great evil
then to be taken Prisoner by an Enemy? a cruel feirce enemy, whose mercys are
cruelty?

Say! Are bitter taunts? insulting reproaches? cruel oppressions? remote
Banishment? the extremity of all manner of hatdship? are these great, evils?
what then shall we make of Captivity that has so many legions of great
evils within it? But what speak I of Banishment? Restraint? Poverty? these
are but the afflictions of the Body, and so are but the bodies and carcasses of
afflictions. There are afflictions of the Soul and they are the Souls of
afflictions. And this was their case. Not only in Captivity.

2. from Babylon: Capt.
But 2ly in Babylonish Captivity, that is a degree higher of their misery. They
were Captives in Babylon.

In Babylon, where true Religion is scoffed and gybe dat Come, and sing us one
of the songs of Sion Psalm. 137.4. This alone was enough to set open sluices
to their tears as they sat by the Rivers of Babylon.

In Babylon, where the grossest Idolatry is urged with all madness of
violence. Either fall down and worship this Image, or what? noe more a do
but into the fiery furnace with them Dan. 3. Was it not enough for them to
lead their Bodies captive, but would they lead away their souls also? Can
there be greater evils (on this side Hell) then these? And may not a fair
Deliverance out of all these be counted great things? That is the First,
great for the Substance.

^ for its Circumst.
And 2ly as great for the Circumstances, and manner of bringing it about. Had
they bin able to have made any Head, or Resistance, themselves: the matter had
not bin so great. A violent Revolt from under an Enemy is not so greatly
strange in the world. But what could a company of poor, forlorn, unarmed
Captives do a against so mighty a Potentate? Or had they had some good able
Friends abroad, to send them in succors for their rescue it had bin something.
Foreign supplies have done great matters in this kind. But alas, they were
the object of contempt and Derision to the whole world. Or had they else, any
good Friends at Court, who being set upon the vantage ground of great
favor, might have ventured to solicit the king in their b^halfe: there had
bin some shadovv of hope. But alas! what freindes were such contemptible
vvretches like to make? Or what Courtier durst vouchsafe an ear to such a
motion, which seemed to classh against all laws and rules of State Policy?
Or lastly had the king himself bin a vvorshiper of the true God: Religion
might have svvayed him toward a propitions Inclination. But as for him, He
was an absolute Idolater, and so not only a stranger but an enemy to their
Religion. Which way shall this desighne be compasse'd? who shall roll away
these so many, and so great stones thus vvedged one in another? Noe Power in
themselves, noe hopes from any Friend at home or abroad, noe thinking of
dealing with the king himself: yet God undertakes it, and it shall not fail
of taking effect. Cyrus himself shall be moved to do it, and that voluntarily
and spontaneously, that peremptorily and resolutely maugre all suggestions and
counsels to the contrary, that magnificently and munificently, He shall enable
them with all the force of Diplomaticall letters and decrees, furnish them
with all accommodations whatsoever. Verily such mighty things (Ps. 118. 16.)
could not have bin brought to pass but by the right Hand of the Lord, which
has the preeminence. Doubtless it was the Lords doing.

2. The Benefactor.
And this minds me of the second Particular.

The Benefactor, the Lord. The Lord has done etc. His name was written upon
the Fact in such capital lettets, that the blind Heathen could see and read
it The Lord has done great things for them said they And it is not perhaps
unworthy your observation, that in this their Doxologicall acknovvledgment,
they hit upon the Tetragrammaton, Jehovah, for so the Hebrew has it in that
their verse. v. 2. They attributed nothing of this to Fortune or chance, or any
false God, or to any second cause but expressly pronounce it done by the Lord
Jehovah.

Digitus Dei, It is the finger of the Lord, cried out the Heathenish
Egyptians, and among them the most Divelish Magicians. Yea and Brachiu^ Dei it
was, the out stretched arm of the Lord, that all the nations felt, when
Israel is to pass into Canaan. And now I have mentioned Isreal's passage into
Canaan, let that one Instance serve for a Demonstration in this matter.

For their removing out of Egypt, who must be their Spokesman, but stammering
Moses, but obnoxious Moses? (for it were strange if the Eminency of the man a
famous Courtier, and his sudden flight out of the Land, should not recall
that Fact into the minds of some of his Cooetaneans.) yet this man must be the
man. I pass over the Categories of those wonders done in Aegipt. Look we
upon the Transcendency of Gods power and providence, now they are on their
way. Do they want a Guide for their way? God him self goes before them in
fire. Do they want a Shelter? His cloud is spread over them for a covering
Do they want way? the Sea it self shall make it, and at once be a street
and a wall unto them. Do they want bread? Heaven it self shall rain down
Angels food. Do they want meat to their bread? The very vvind shall become
their Cater, and bring them whole drifts of Quails into their tents. Do they
want drink to both? The Rock it self shall be their Sellar and yield it them
in abundance. Do they want Change of Apparel? Their clothes shall not
wear old on their backs. Do they want counsel and advise? God Himself
will be their oracle from bevveene the Cherubims. Do they want a Law?
Himself vvil sit upon the Bench, on mount Sinai, and give them their charge
in Person, and write it upon tables with his own fingers. Are they resisted
by Enemies? God himself discharges volleys of hail stones, upon their heads,
and brains them to their hands. Are they to sit before Jerico? The
Tovvnevvalls of themselves shall fall down flatt before them. Is Joshuah to
pitch a Battle? The Sun must stand still, to see him have the Victory. O the
great and mighty things the Lord did for Israel? I cannot have while so much
as to unclasp any more volumnes, wherein are recorded Gods strange doings for
his Church in all ages. It susticeth, that a Devoute Bishop, has folded you
down some fevv leaves, B. Hall.
in that book which is most known, I hope to the most. God does use to
appear so for his Church, that he sticks not, to put it among his Titles
Royal (nay makes it his Cognomen says Petrarch) the God of Abraham and of his
seed. which in the Apostles exposition, is the whole household of the
faithful, the Church.

3. The Beneficed.
And this calls me to the third and last Particular the Receiver of the
Benefit, the delivered. The Church. For us, says the Text. The Lord has done
great things for us. And what were we might Sion say (who were glad to
lick the dust of the feet of our Enemies) that the Lord of Heaven and Earth
should look so graciously upon us? The meanenes of the Receiver argues the
magnificence of the Giver. Who am I that the Mother of my Lord should visit me?
It was a true, and religious complement of devout Elizabeth. The best of men,
are but the children of dust, and grandchildren of nothing. And yet for the
Lord to do great things for us? this yet greatens those great things. Was it
be cause we were his Church? It was his super-abounding grace, to select us
out of others, as, it was our greater gracelesnes, above all others, so to
provoke Him, as to force him, to throvve us into Captivity. Or was it, because
our Humiliation, in that disconsolate condition, did move him to so great
compassion? Alas! there was choice of Nations, whom he might have taken in
our room, that might have proved far more faithful then we had bin, for
the one half of those favors, we had enjoyed.

Or was it for his Covenants sake with our Forefathers? Alas! we had
forfeited That long since, again and again we know not how often.

Wherefore, when we remember our selves, we cannot but make this an
Aggravation of Gods great things, that he should do them for us, for us, so
very very unworthy.

The 2. General Magnific. Eccl.
And so much be spoken to the first General Magnalia Dei.

The next is, Magnificat Ecclesiae. The Church her solemn thanksgiving and
rejoicing for those great things the Lord had done for Her. We can but glaunce
at it now, least we prae occupate our business that is behind. This Magnificat
likewise will bear 2. Parts.

1. a Pious Commemoration and Acknovvledgment. 2. a Joy full Jubilee or
Exultation.
In the first the Churches Soul magnifies the Lord, by her thankful
Acknovvledgment of the Benefit. In the Second, the Churches Spirit reioyoeth in
God her Savior, by her Panegyricall solemnization of the Benefit.

Ob.
First she gratefully acknowledges is. Yea but this the Heathen did' too,
when they said among themselves The Lord has done etc. Sol.
True! they acknowledged it indeed. The thing was so clearly and evidentsly
done before their eyes; that they could not but see it, and say it. But
whether they did so greatefully acknovvledge it, that is a Question, or rather
noe Question. Probably, some of them savv it with the Eye of Envy, and when
they had said it, bitt their lips for anger that it was done. Certainly, none
of them could speak of it with that Affection, the Church did. Whom alone it
concerned as a Receiver, They but mere spectators the vvhiles.

2. Next, she solemnly rejoices. And this Joy you have. 1. in the fountain 2.
in the Streams.

1. In the fountain. It was a rejoicing in the Heart. v. 4. So much the word
(...) seems to import. 2. This Joy streams forth, and derives itself into
these 3. channells. 1. Into the Countenance that is filled with laughter. 2.
Into the Tongue, that runns over with praises. 3. Into the Hand v. 2. For
besides, that it was their usual custom, upon such occasions, to send gifts
to their neighbors, and largesses to to the poor; besides this (which carrys
some fair probability, they did it now) the very penning of this psalm,
testifies their hands were not id idle: when they took order for such a
durable memorial to be transmitted to Posterity. So then; It was a Cordial,
hearty joy, It was a laughing visible joy it was a manual, legible, durable
joy, that the poeple unborn might for many ages pervse it.

And thrice happy we, who are a poeple now in such case, that we may justly
take up the same words, chaunt forth the same Hallelujah, upon an occasion not
much less great. The Lord has done great things for us, too, whereof we
rejoice also:

The Application of the Text to us.
This was our second promise in the beginning: To set this psalm to our
selves: which now we come to perform as the duty of the day binds us
strongly.

But then, we must needs set it in a far higher, cliffe. Our notes if you
please, shall stand some in space, some in Rule: My meanning is we will look
a little backwards to former times (but this shall be dispatched in a Sembreife
or two) and then close with the Diapason of this Day.

Great things (may our Israel say) the Lord has done for us. Great things
and a great many great things. To single out only 3. remarkeables.

It is very well worthy your consideration, how that (since the Reformation
of our Church.) Our 3. last Gracious Princes (under whose blessed goverments
She has seeue such golden days) has had each ones several Reighne erovvned
with some notable singular Deliverance: and every Deliverance a degree higher
then its precedent.

You know what I would. That of 88 That of November. 5. This late happy
Pacification.

That learned and holy Lord Bishop, af Chichester Bp. Carleton, has published
a Book entitled A Thankful Remembrance of the Church of England. You are
well acquainted with it Jam sure. And in the Frontispice of that Book (as I
remember) he has set the Portraitures, of Q. ELIZABETH (of renowned memory,)
with a Flagg in her hand, in which is described, the, Spanish-Armado in 88.
as also, of King JAMES (of ever famous and blessed memory) with his Flagg, and
in it the Parlayment, house, the vault etc. Nov. 5.

I verily believe, if the Reverend Father had lived to see this day: He would
have a found a room for king CHARLES too (our most Gracious sovereign) with
his Flagg in His hand likewise. Wherein should have bin expressed those late
unhappy Preparations in Britain, and this most happy Reconciliation concluded.

It will be too great an Expense of Time to display the first of these
Banners. You cannot be ignorant of it. It were only to be wished, It had
somevvhat a fresher varnish. It begins to grow so old, that it is too much
worn out of our memorys. But it must be acknowledged, to the worlds end,
That, it was one of Gods great things done for our Island. When such a Navy
named the Armado, Surnamed Invincible: shall so suddenly, so easily be
dissipated, be defeated.

I have much a do to let it pass vvishout an Hallelujah. Me thinks, It runns
upon Eights of it self, on purpose for a Song. Lord what great things did
thon then do for that thy blessed Servant, and Her Realm! when Thou
seemed'st to suffer the sea and Winds to obey Her, as if they had taken Pay
under her.

But there is a nevver, fresher Flagg, (King JAMES His) which desires rather
to belooked upon, as it tells us of a later and greater Deliverance. That of
November. 5.

The former was from an Invasion of a foreign Enemy, and (if you will,) of a
cruel proud one, therefore noe less could be expected from Them. I would
almost all Christendom, and the Indys to boot, did not sweat and bleed --
Under Their Insolency. But This (we are now to speak of) was from a
Domestic Conspirancy. All the Actors our own Coungion is Rebeltry-men, our
Fellovv Subjects, till Treason and Rome (whose Relilion) had dissolved that
vinculum.

A Conspiracy it was, which noe Age can parallel, and which (but for its
Annual Commemoration) would be thought by Posterity, to be all to geather
incredible.

A Conspiracy, wherein Malice was armed with Fortitude, Fortitude animated
with Policy, Policy masked with Secrecy, Secrecy invested with Religion.
They counterfeited, the Broad Seal of Heaven, and would have it rati-fied
with a Sacrament: Lord! what Preparations were there what a Brevving of
death (it is a BPs expression) was tunned up in those barrells. Powder,
Billets, Bars, and I know not what store of Hellish provision, as if they
had meaned to have made an Earthquake throughout the whole, Island. What
ayled ye, O ye Sonns of the Cole! What meant ye, O ye Firebrarnds, and
Granados of Hell (Pardon me, I cannot be uncharitable unless Repentance came
after) what meant ye I say? Was it your purpose to Trans-late, the king, his
nobles and the whole state representative, to translate, them all into Heaven
in an Instant, by an Extemporary Martyrdom? Was it your meaning presumptuously
to prevent a Resurrection, and to prefer Companions to Elias in fiery
Charriots?

A Conspiracy, wherein, all the Crueltys that have bin heard of, or can be
Imagined were met to geather, as our late Great and Good L. Bishop of
Winchester well observed. The Cruelty of Pharoh and Herod, murdering, the
harmeles, Innocent, harmeles Infants and yet they spared the mothers. The
Cruelty of Esau killing the mothers with the Children; The cruelty of
Nebuzaradan not sparing the King, and his Nobles, The Cruelty of Haman not
sparing Esther and her Ladys. The Cruelty of Edom, not sparing the Sanctuary
and its vvalls. Down with them, Down with them to the very ground: Or
rather up with them up with them into the highest Region of the Air. The
Cruelty of the Devil Himself, hurling down the four corners of the House
Shall I say? or of the whole City? upon the most and best of the sonns of the
Church and State As if Lucifer Himself, had not bin (before this time) either
old and vvitty enough to plott, or mischeivous enough to attempt such a
damnable desolation, as this would have proved. And was not the Deliverance
from this a great thing? that so dismal a Calamity should be praevented by
the vnridling of an aenigmaticall letter directed to a friend? A Letter in
deed which in the event did salutem plurimam dicere brought most happy
salutations to the whole Church and state: But we must thank (next Allmighty
God) King JAMES. Of whom it might be better said, then once it was of a
great Orator Miserum esset eum tacuisse It had bin a miserable thing if He had
held his peace. Had there not bin Divinatio in labijs Regis, a divine sentence
in the lips of the king Prove. 16.10. (As if King Solomon had purposely writ
that saying to be verified in his Successor in Wisdom upon this occasion.) Had
there not bin I say a Divination in the kings Lips (I may speak it after that
Reverend Prelate) we had bin all in the Javves of death, were not these
great things which the Lord has done for us?

But this you will say is more pro per to a 5th of November. Well then we turn
over the Calendar, to the Month of June this 1639. and look upon King CHARLES
his Flagg, the just Trophy of this day.

But here I am vlterly at a loss, and know not which way to turn my self.
Yet you may and must pardon me loquuntur leves as true of Joys as of Greifes.
Light Joys may be Rhetorical, vvhilest such as these know noe either Figure
then an Eckstaticall Aposiopesis.

It deservedly takes place of both the former The first was from a foreign
Invasion. The Second takes place of it as It was from a domestic Conspiracy.
This Third of them both, both as it was from an Insurrection, and so of an
higher nature then a Conspiracy, and as it was made by men of the same Church
of the same Religion, and so outstrips the second That being done by men,
though Britains by Nation yet Romans by Relegion, with whom any thing is
lavvfull, Treasons, Rebellions, what not, in or dine ad Deum they say, ad
Diabolum they should say.

Here I might well take leave to make a Revisall of what has bin spoken
concerning Sions Deliverance: and compare this of ours with that of Theirs
both for Matter and Manner, that so the Praeeminency of ours may more
manifestly appear. We will be very breife.

1. For the Matter. You will say perhaps, there was noe fear of a Babylonish
Captivity. Well we let that pass now But there was a great fear of a most
bloody war, was there not? And do you know what war is. Can you tell
me what horrid confusions there are in one pitched field? what roaring and
thundering of Canons? what clashing of armor? What svveating and svvimming in
blood? what hideous outerys? My leg is of, my arm is of, my gutts be out,
half dead, half alive, worse then either because neither, as one describes
it pathetically. Can you tell me the direful Issues of a victory? what
plunderings, and burnings? what killing and encouraging to kill? what amazed
flights? what fearful screichings? Noe regard of Age, or Place or Sex, The
Grayheaded vvallovving. in their goare, under the hand of a
fell-ruffian-souldier. The tender Infants either dashed a against the stones, or
spravvling upon the points of spears. The screaming Mother the vvhiles,
bruitishly ravishedere she may have leave to be slain. Do but look out of
your own doors, a little higher into these Countries. How are those gardens
of Eden become desolate vvildernesses! How many miles may you travel ere you
find a Dorpe! How many Dorpes may you pass thorough ere you meet with a
man? Meet with a man said I? Nay rather one whom you will startle at, as at
a Ghost, and run away from, as from a Lycanthropus. Have you not heardl (I
am sure you have and that often and that by very good hands) what monstrous
Metamorphoseis Famine has wrought among them? when the Host shall lodge his
Guests in his Mavv; when friend shall bury friend in his belly; when the
mother shall entombe her child in her womb; when the Living shall prey upon
the Carcasses of the dead. Nay when (hear o Hell and be moved with pity!)
when the dead shall be raked out of their graves, to beburied a second time,
in the Stomach and a third time in the Draught. O the calamitys of war
whilst the very relating of them can scarce secure you from tears! And is a
Deliverance from a war then, think you noe great thing?

We do not say (as many have) that it might have proved in the end a Captivity
little better then Babylonish (vvhiles either a whole Church should be with
out Government, or almost every private man in the Church should become a
Governor) yet again vvhiles a Pair of Turtle-doves (it is but seldovvne I
confess) shall in an angry choleric manner make feircely one at another who
knovves but some Eagle, or Faulcon may be pearched not far of, delighting to
see such a spectacle, and feeding her selfevvith hopes of preying upon both?

But suppose this to be a groundles Suspicion: yet a Captivity it would
questionles have bin, and for its kind a very strange one. Hear o Heavens and
be amazed! Hearken o Earth and be astonished! Britain should have bin lead
Captive by Britain Countryman by Countryman, Brother by Brother the Son by
the Father, the Father, by the Son. Coeter a loquantur lachrymae! Thus you
see we come not far short of Sions Deliverance for the Matter.

Nor 2ly for the Manner I trust. I know very well the Pulpit is noe place for
Currantos and Gizets noe place to tell nevvs in. It was my boldness ere while
to fancy my Soveraighne with a Flag in his hand: let me now be bold to add
his Devise and motto, (that shall tell you in breife, the Manner) and it will
be noe less then what was once attributed to another Caesar in a different
case. Venit, vidit, vicit. He came, (He Himself, Principem sus Majestas
defendit. It was his own sole act.) He came, looked upon them, had
conference with them, and instantly Overcame them, conquered them. Conquered
Them? Their Hearts I mean. The happiest Conquest that possibly could be. A
strange Conquest! wherein both were conquerors, both conquered. The king
conquered with the Loyal Submission of the Subject. The Subject conquered,
with the Royal Pardon of the king. Why Gracious Soveraighne! was it not
enough for your Majesty to succeed your Royal Father, in his Throane, in his
Prinely endovvm ent? to wear his Crown? to bear his Coat? but must you
needs challenge his Motto too, Beati Pacifici?

Hitherto you see our Deliverance keeps good pace with that of Sions for the
Manner. It being done in such a thavving melting way. Only in this it far
outruns that That was done Subveniendo. They had smarted sonndly under their
myseris many years, ere they were released. Ours is done praeveniendo, we
were only Shevved the Danger, and fairly Delivered. Here is a Conduit would
run amain, if we could stay to turn the Coek.

We have heard and seen what great things the Lord has done for us. Great
for the Substance. Great for the Circumstances. Great as done by a Great
God, whose Praerogative Royal it is to turn the hearts of kings. Yet greater
as done for us so unworthy a poeple. Another Topic, if we had time to knock
at that door. And should not all these Magnalia Dei now justly call for our
Magnificat? Shall not our souls magnify the Lord, and our Spirits rejoice in
God our Savior? I hope they shall and do.

But then as our Deliverance has, so let our Hallelujahs, and Reioycings
likewise, run parallel (at least) with Sions here. Her Joy was a Cordial
hearty joy: so must ours proceed from a true pure heart. This Incense, would
not be offered up but in a golden Censer: Can Adulterys Can Murders, can
Envyngs (which our Savior tells us, love to billet in the heart.) can these
dead works praise the Lord? Her Joy was a visible laughing Joy: so may ours
be a merry one too. We may do well to make merry, to drink of the svvete,
and eat of the fatt. Only let ustake heed, we make not work for
sacrificings after our feastings, as Job was feign to do for his sonns. Her
joy was a Vocal audible Joy: so let ours be, let our Tongues chaunt forth
praises, and thanksgivings, let our discourses beat upon this theme: so it be
prudently, and discreetely. Her Joy was a Manual, handy Joy (so to speak) a
Joy that shooted forth into good works. Here was sending of gifts probably,
and giving to the poor: so let our hands be dilated with our hearts: let the
needy and stranger have matter of rejoicing with us, that so there may be a
full Queere of Praysers. Here was penning of Psalms and hymns for Posterity
to take notice of: so let us do something to our power, that after Ages may
witness our thankfullnes. And good Luck may He have with his Honor, who
has solemnized a day to be spoken of by future Times.

But before we proceed further in our Hallelujah it will not be amiss, to
interpose an Hosanna and Prayer: just the Churches Method here. That God would
still and still continue to do great things for us, to be our Lord and
faviour allvvays! That as there is now an happy Amnestia of old matters, so
there may be a wholesome evacuation of all such peccant humors and principles
which may breed such like Epidemicall diseases in a State. For this purpose,
I had thought to have made a Digression, (if yet it be a digression) and to
commend to men's serious considerations some Texts of Scripture. In this have I
will only name one, that in S. Math. cap. 22. v. 21. Render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. They are
Christ's own words you know.

Now, till Heaven and Earth shall pass away one title or Jota of his word
shall in noe wise pass. And truly, if one Jota, or title of this word
should pass; Heaven or Earth or both would instantly, pass away.

Let but one of these Quaes pass: you shall see what will follovv upon it.
If Caesar's quae passes, the Kings Tribute and Duty's: now Earth passes away
immediately. If Gods quae. Take away Gods dues, (His worship and the
mantainance thereof) and the Kingdom of Heaven is passing away presently. All
Religion and Devotion clean vanishes.

Nay, do but misplace these Quae's once; and noe less Confusion will ensue.
Put Gods Quae to Caesar. Render unto Caesar and the State the things that are
Gods and His Churches ( Dionysius his Religion) and what comes of it? Nothing
but plain Atheism. All Religion cease. Neither Priests lips nor poeples
ears in a very short time. Here Heaven passes away again. Again put
Caesar's Quae to Deus. Render unto God and the Church the things that are
Caesar's (the Jesuits Religion as they make it) and then ere long noe Caesar at
all, nor secular Magistrate but merely Titular Domini sine Terra Here Earth
passes away again.

Yet again, if we admit only one of the propositions and shut out the other:
the danger is still the same The Herodians were all for the first. Render unto
Caesar etc. and stayed there. Nothing but Earth the^ to the^: Heaven passed
away from the^. The Romanists would make us believe. they are all for God and
his Church Render unto God with this noise and hubhub they fill the air. And
so they order it that to them Earth passes away. I said well to them, to
themselves indeed, and from all others. They swallow up the Earth here under
the praetext of Heaven. It is well if they let not Heaven pass in the mean
time. Thus you see what Danger there may be in leaving out this title (And) in
the Text.

Once more, if any dare to be so Atheistically Rebellious as to go about to
cancel that one word Reddite Render; suddenly Heaven and Earth both will
pass away from them. Nor God nor King will be acknowledged, nor Religion
nor Policy, mantained, nor Heaven nor Earth possessed by such. And we hold
but a third place. Let them take leede least that fall to their lotts. The
Sum of all is. God and Caesar, Religion and the State cannot be separated in
the Text in the world.

But I well remember where Jam. In the Magazene of Religion and Loyalty. For
so (me thinks) this goodly Audience seems to be nothing else but a glorious
Constellation of true hearted Christians and Loyal Subjects.

I Know well You make it your Religion, to make your frequent prayers and
Supplications for kings and All that are in Authorithy over us; to render them
all honor and love, all Homage and Loyalty, in your hearts, by your tongues,
with your good, with your Lives.

I am sure it is your faith. That the Sin of Rebellion is as the Sin of
vvith-crafft 1. Sam. 15. 23. An interpretative renouncing of God Himself: That
Stubbornness is as Idolatry mark it as Idolatry, they are Samuels own
words, in the same place. I forbear to make any gloss on that now: That
Mutterings and vvhisperings are the language of vvizards, and Dialect of Hell,
as, odious to your Thoughts and Ears, as in others Mouths. and Penns. That
Kings and Princes are in their Goverments Solo Deo minores, as Tertull,
professed to Scapula: and therefore must not be judged, much less, opposed by
Subjects, But in case entreatys and Supplications may not prevail, to leave
Them to stand or full to their own Master, as was the constant practice of
the Primitive Churches. That, though they may be of the same metal with our
selves (although we must yield them far more refined and of a far larger
Size) yet when they have Gods Stamp and Image upon them, they must pass
Current, prove as they will now. Let Saul be one of the Lowest familys of
the least Tribe of Israel yet when He is once elected King, He is now
consecrated to God by that Sacred Oil and becomes the Lords anointed and not
to be touched (though now a very Tyrant) noe not by David, though by Divine
right, his next, Successor. That is is the Lord by whom all Kings reighne
prove. 8.15. And the day of their Coronation on Earth, is the day of their
Filiation in Heaven. Now God calls them his sonns (And who shall teach God
how and when to correct his sonns?) Thou art my son this day: have I
begotten Thee. Begotten thee, Generatione sc. Politica, that is, this day I
have made thee King. This to be the primary, proper sense of that place, Cl.
M.^. Med^. in MS.
as also of Psalm 110. a great and modest Critic dares avouch it out of the
purport of the Texts. And how soever they are understood of Christ in the
mystery, yet of Christ as Christ, Unctus Domini the Lords anointed. That God to
set Princes above the reach of Subjects hands has advanced them to the Dignity
of a Deity. I have said you are Gods. It is God that says it, or if the
Psaimist yet it is (...) in the person of God as Cyril of Hirnsal, glosseth.
Kings (...) (as he goes on to catechize his, it is in presat: ad Catech.)
Kings being but mort all men do yet (...) bear the name of the Immortal God.
This is your Religion.

I Fully persuade my self you make it a matter of Conscience, That, to whom
you owe, for your Justitia Gladij the Justice of the svvord against foreign
Invasions: that to him you ought to pay toward vvarlick provision and
supplies: That, to whom you are endebted for your Gladius Justitiae, the
Svvord of Justice against Domestic Injurijs; that to Him you are to pay duty's
for the upholding of those Courts of Justice: That, by whom, you enjoy your
Mare liberum, your Harvest of the water, your safe merchandise, under whom
you possess your Terra Liberalis your rich Crops and Lands; that to Him you
are to pay Customs and Taxes. This is your Allegance this is your Divinity.
Yea and you can bring Scripture for all these, for Taxes 2, kings, 23. 35. for
Customs Romans 13. 7. for Fines and Confiscations Ezra 7. 26. and cap. 10. 8.
for all in one, in that forenamed Text: Render unto Caesar etc.

I verily believe, you thoroughly perceive, that Corrumpitur omne Imperantis
officium and dissolvitur, si quis ad td, quod jussus est, non obsequio debito,
sed consilio non desiderato, respondeat. It was a Captains Speech in Gellius
to a Pragmaticall Shipvvrigt, that would needs be scanning and interpreting
his Lords commands and rather lend his counsel uncalled for then perform his
office, Why, says the, Captain: Corrumpitur omne officium etc. If this may be
allowed a Commander will be put quite out of office. Fare well all
Authority. Neither will a General, or officer have any Command over his
Regiments, nor a Master be able to bear up himself against his servant, or
Apprentise, nor a Father command his child. You see all this and can easily
understand that many of those Anticks you see in great Buildings, which make
such fearful faces and use such hideous Postures as if the whole weight of
the building lay on their shoulders only, that if these be taken away the
structure will stand never the less: and so you believe, that State or Church
is never the nearer to falling, out of which some (who having least reason,
are most clamorous and unruly) be fairly casheired. These are your Oeconimicks
These are vour Politics.

I dare say for you, that, that Discipline and order in the Church, which
fetches its Pedigree from Apostolical Institution, and has held on in a Line
of uninterrupted Succession for 15000. Years together (as has bin again and
again demonstrated by your Hookers, Dovvnams, Carletons, Feilds and I know
not how many learned, Pious, and Modest vvriters of your own Countrymen.)
that this Church Policy you willingly submit unto: Remembering the wise man's
Counsel Meddle not with them that are given to change. Prove. 24.21.

I make noe Question but you are fully convinced, that what Authority
Churchmen have more then Directive and Instructive which extend's to external
Coaction that this is merely derived from the King (who rightly possesses
what the Pope usurped) and that therefore these Ecclesiastical Persons fit
the Kings Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Courts, where in their proceedings
are according to Laws Ecclesiastical ratified by the King and the whole
State: And for this you can receive full satisfaction from S. Thom. Radley a
Lavveyer, and from the Acts and Statutes of our Kingdom.

I doubt not but you see great reason that when men in Place shall secundum
allegata and probata be convicted peccant, that the Places therefore and the
Orders are not presently to be demolished. For if this may hold: then, down
with all Judges because some have bin proved Corrupt, then, down with all
Nobles because some have bin known Rebels: then, down with all Kings
because some have bin Tyrants: then, turn all Common into a vvilde Anarchy,
wherein men will temper as well as the Jron and Clay in the toes of his
Image and so in conclusion, down with all the world, These are your
Ecclesiasticalls.

I assure my self, that where others take Liberty to prate againest you count
it your duty to pray for all Superiors, and to praise God for this happy
settled Government, under which our State and Church has flourished so many
Decads of years together. For to what State has Foreign Nations so veiled,
as to ours? or by what Hierarchy has the Roman chair ever bin(and is daily)
so shaken, as by ours? So that if to be Anti-Romane be Antichristian men may
speak their pleasures. And to whom does both Church and State (under God)
owe for this happiness but to our Theodosius, our most Gracious king CHARLES?

I could vvish heartily, that Flattery were counted Treason. It is so in
effect. (...), that is Greek for a Flatteror, a Complementall murderer. I
would he had the punishment of such a Malefactor. But our Savior gives us in
charge to pay Caesar bis dues. Nay made Himself a President. Conditor Caesaris
non cunctatus est Reddere Censum Caesari. It is St. Bernards gloss upon that
place. The God of Caesar stuck not to pay Tribute to Caesar, to Heathenish
Caesar, to Tyrant Tiberius Caesar: and may not we to ours? The Splendour of
whose true Religion, The brightness of whose vvisdome, The propitiousnes of
whose Clemency, The Candor of whose Justice, Temperance, Chastity have every
where rendered Him so truly glorious, that He seems to be set far above
the reach, either of a Courtiers flattery or of an Orators Hyperbole. This we
all know, and are not men, unless we all acknovvledge it in all places, with
all thankfullnes. And now (me thinks) I hear all the Poeple, happily
changing that Jevvish Rebellion, into a Christian Religion: He is now noe
friend to Christ, that is not a friend to Caesar, to such a Caesar.

By this time I believe your Affections are all on fire to be returning to your
Hallelujah, and Echo Back to Sion what she did to the Heathen, The Lord has
done great things for us, who has given us so happy a Prince by whose
vvisdome and svveetenes such a great Deliverance has bin newly wrought for
all Britain.

Go to, if you will, and let the scale of your Divine music reach as high
and as deep as ever any did or can.

Let the Counselors of State praise God and say. The Lord has done great
things for us. Our Cares may now be employed in more Public and Catholic
Desighnes, which have bin of late taken up in the composing of these private
Tumults.

Let the Clergy praise God and say. The Lord has done etc. for us. Now there
is hope that the Priests who bear the Arc will turn their faces all one
way, in a decent uniformity.

Let the Gentry praise God and say. The Lord has etc. for us We are now
secured, that our Lands may be called after our own names.

Let the Universitys praise the Lord and say. The Lord etc. for us. Now may
we enjoy the Polutecnia, and Calotecnia, the Number and beauty of our sonns,
without any fears of proving Abortive by the Affrightments of vvarlick
Alarums.

Let the Merchants praise the Lord and say The Lord etc. for us. Now Traffic
will be open, Now our Burses and vvare houses shall be thronged.

To conclude, let all Persons high and low, youngmen and maidens, old men and
children: Yea let us call in our Fellovv Creatures, the Elements, the Meteors,
the Fowls, the Cattle, let all that have any breath, that have any being in
our Island, praise the Lord, and make a Joyful noise unto our God, who has
done so great so very great (Lord how great!) things for us whereof ^ve
now rejoice.

Even so Great and Good God we praise Thee, we magnify Thee etc-

FINIS
Good Reader.

I know you would be satisfied in these Demands why was this thus raggedly
Penned? why Printed? why so ill Printed?

To the first, I confess it is too poor, yet pleasse to consider. 1. That I
am far from my study, and have but a Portable. (I had almost said) a Pocket
Library. 2. Of those fevv days I had for (...), all but the two last (verbo
Sacerdotis) were run out in Meditations another way. But some
considerations turned me out o^ it. Among the rest these. 1. That my message
was to a full Audience, not to two or three only. 2. To my Countrymen, and
concerning our own Country, and therefore it was fit I sho^d be well
understood of All.

To t^ ^econd. I was commanded by Author(...) to print, as near as I could,
what I (...) which I have but obeyed

To the last. Know, the Printer to be a mere stranger to language. And
notvvithstanding my diligence in over looking him, did err sometimes and upon
a mistake, print the full number of the coppyes of one sheet, ere it was
corrected. Which errors I must be beholding to your pen to Correct vide
especially page 13. l. 9. and 10.


