A REIOINDRE TO M. JEWELS REPLY AGAINST THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.

In which the doctrine of the Answer to the.xvij. Article of his Challenge is
defended, and further proved, and all that his Reply contains against the
Sacrifice, is clearly confuted, and disproued.

By Thomas Harding Doctor of Divinity.

Luke. 22. Do ye this in my Remembrance.

Irenaeus lib. 4. Cap. 32. Christ (at his last Supper) taught the new Oblation
of the new Testament, which the Church, receiving it of the Apostles, offers
up unto God through the whole world.

LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno. 1567. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio concessum est Thomae Hardingo Sacrae The^logiae
Professori, vt Librum inscriptum A Reioindre to M. Jewels Reply against the
Sacrifice of the Mass, per Typographum aliquem Iuratum imprimere, ac impune
distrahere liceat.

Datum Bruxellis. Callend. September. Anno. 1567. Subsig. De La Torre.

TO M. IEVVEL.
BICAVSE this tale has now oftentimes ben told you M. Jewel, that in your
books you corrupt and falsify the holy Scriptures by private interpretation,
that you deny certain General Councels, as for lack of age and years, that
you misconstrue other most Ancient Councels, and Fathers, partly by figurative
Phrases, lightly applied in very weighty matters, partly by paring away their
words, yea sometimes by lopping of certain their whole works (which and such
other the like, have been hitherto, as it is well known, your ordinary and
shameless shifts): I thought good at this time writing particularly unto you,
to touch briefly some other matter, that might more edify, if not to call you
home again unto the Church wherein you were baptized, who seem to stand
obdurate in yt you have once attempted, yet to stay some, and to revoke others,
to the fellowship of that City and company of God, which was never hid under
the Busshel since the first erection and publication of it, but stood
always upon a Hill, Math. 25.
and can by no means be at any time hid, as Christ him self has warranted
us, the Prophets have fortolde us, and the Psalms have sounded unto us.

And thus to do I am the rather moved, for that some of your Ministers, and
many of your deceived favorers, as we hear say, seeing now your forgeries
espied, your corruptions detected, your lies manifested, your insufficie^cie
brought to light, begin to take an other way, how to abuse the people, keep
some credit, and continue the course of your pleasant Gospel. Yea for sooth
they say now, that these controuersed points be no matters of the Faith, no
Articles of the Creed, but Schole points of indifferency, and that it
suffices to believe in the Father, in the Son, in the holy Ghost, and to
believe the birth, passion and resurrection of Christ, ye rest at liberty.

They, that teach this dangerous piece of dostrine, seem to skimme of the
froth of that old Nouatia^ Heresy, not calling to remembrance Chore, Dathan,
and Abiron, who, as S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 6.
believed in one God, worshipped one God, called upon him, and lived in like Law
and Religion, as Moses and Aaron did. Yet because they divided them selves by
schism from the rest, and resisted their Priests and Gouernous, Gods heavy
hand lighted on them.

And touching this matter, who sees not that there be expressed in the Creed
other Articles to be believed of them, which will be saved, as to believe the
Church, Remission of sins, everlasting life, and that the belief in the
Trinity excludes not these, and that in these there is not one meaning among
Heretics, and Catholics, not one and the same Law of the Creed, as S.
Cyprian calls it? For when they be asked, believe you Remission of sins,
and life everlasting through the Church, they answer not truly. For they have
not ye Church, without the which there is no Remission, and then can it not
avail them to believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, as Chore,
Dathan, and Abiron had a right belief of God, which nevertheless were damned.
As, touching Faith, it is necessary besides the Article of the Trinity, to
believe the other Articles, that the Church holds: so touching Unity, it
behooves a man to join him self unto the whole body of Christ the Catholic
Church, from the obedience of whose Head, that is the ministerial Head, and
governs over al under Christ, who so ever departs, he enters Schism, and
until he return, and be duly reconciled, he remains a dead member, as being
cut of from the body. The Nouatia^s, the Pelagia^s, the Donatists, erred not in
the Article of the Trinity, yet are they reputed Heretics of condemned
memory. S. Augustine avouched that the belief of ye Pelagians was not
sufficient, although they touched not the Manichees maladies. For (says he)
there is mo then one kind of infection, as of bodies, so of minds.

The Donatistes believed in the Trinity, used Baptism, read the Gospel, kept
the feasts of Martyrs, August. in Psalm. 54.
and the sole^nitie of Easter. In these they were with me, says he, and yet
not altogether with me. In Schism not with me, in Heresy not with me, in
many things with me, in a fevve, not with me. In those fevv, by the which
(they were) not with me, the many could not help them in which (they were)
with me. In all the Sacraments with me, in only Charity not with me.

Mark well this M. Jewel, and consider of it advisedly. Be the points wherein
ye dissent from us, I mean from the Catholic Church, never so few, and
never so small, as they be many, and great in deed: if ye join not in charity
and unity with the Church, ye are not annumbred with the Church, ye are not
of the Church. If not of the Churche^ then have ye not part with Christ, whose
Passion works the effect of salvation only upon the members of the Church.

Luther the Founder of this fifth Gospel gives this Censure of you, and of
your fellows of Peter Martyrs, Tom. 2. Fol. 263.
and Caluines school. Frustra illi in Deum patrem, and filium, and Spiritum
sanctum credunt. omnia (inquam) haec nihil illis prosunt, quando hunc Articulum
negant, eumque falsi insimulant, qui de Sacramento dixit, Hoc est corpus meum.
They believe in God the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost in
vain. Al these things (say I) profit them nothing, forasmuch as they deny
this Article (he means the Article of Christ's real Presence in the
Sacrament) and make him a false reporter, who said of the Sacrament, This is my
Body.

Gather then thereupon, if Luther him self be in any credit with you, that it
suffices not to confess the grounds of the Faith in general, as Heretics
do commomly, if there be contempt, or breach in special matter employed in the
general: and that to believe in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and
to receive the story of Christ's doings in flesh, is not enough, except the
faith be kept orderly, and wholly without wicked breach made in any one point.

Neither can you M. Jewel smoothe the world under the show of this belief.
For were it so that you offended not in Schism, Number. 16.
as Chore, and his fellows did, that you abbridged not the universal Church,
as did the Donatistes, that you bangored not in the Sacrament of Baptism, as
the Pelagians, that you denied not the Sacrament of Penance, as the Nouatians,
that you bereued not the dead of the Sacrifice of the Church, as the Aerians,
that you profaned not the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, as the Caluinistes
of our time: yet could you not say, that your only belief in the Trinity,
and of Christ's chief doings, is a saving belief. For infidelity or
unbelief about any one point of those things that are to be believed, Basil.
lib. de Spiritu sancto.
is an utter denial of the whole Godhead, says S. Basil.

What untruth you maintain in many and great points of the Faith, I may let
pass in silence, since your self have in public audience professed it, by
open writings confirmed it, and do still defend it. Some of your erroneous
points I have detected, and confuted, and so other learned men have confuted
many others. Let that be judged by those who can judge, and unto whom judgment
belongs. Let it be tried, how you believe not truly, and wholly in the
Godhead.

We may believe Christ, who is our Lord and God, and we may believe in
Christ. To believe Christ, is to believe that Christ is. To believe in
Christ, is to believe al to be true, that Christ spoke and taught, August in
Johan. Tract. 29. De verb. Dom. Ser. 61. and in Psalm. 77.
with believing to love, and with beleeeuing to go into him, to cleave unto
him, and to be incorporate in his members, as S. Augustine teaches, that is
as much in effect, as with belief to have Charity.

For he that has Faith without Charity, believes that Christ is^ and yet
believes not in Christ.

If we should here discourse upon some particulars of your new devised Faith,
and precisely press what S. Augustine says is to believe in Christ, your
Faith and doctrine were like to be proved no faith.

Christ is true God, equal with God the Father, and therefore as he is God, he
is not a Priest no more then his Father is, nor, as God, ever made he any
Sacrifice. You teach in the.14. M. Ievvel makes Christ a Priest, and to have
made Sacrifice, according to his Godhead. Which is heinous heresy.
Division of your Reply in your.17. Article. page 578. (whereto now I have
made answer in my Reioindre) that Christ touching his Godhead, was the Priest,
and made the Sacrifice, for these be your very words. Of which you can not
excuse your self by saying, they are the words of any Doctor. For never was
there any that so taught, or said. Which words are clean contrary to ye
Faith, which the holy Scriptures do teach, and which has been believed in the
Church evermore. And by the same you seem to have an other Christ, then we
have. For our Christ in one person has two natures: to wit, the Nature of
God, and the Nature of Man. Touching the Godhead, or the nature of God, he is
in no point at al, in any one jot, less then his Father. For the Godhead
receives no degrees. Neither can any thing be said, devised, or imagined,
touching the Godhead, which is not altogether common with ye Father, and the
Son: Joan. 10.
as he him self said, Ego and Pater vnum sumus. I and the Father are one
(thing, nature, or substance). And the Apostle says, of Christ, that, Philip.
2.
Being in the form of God, he thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
Yet say you, Christ, touching his Godhead was the Priest and made the
Sacrifice: Of which, these absurdities and most horrible blasphemies do follow.

cultus Latriae, a service of worship, and a recognizing of superiority in him
to whom the Sacrifice is made: Christ, making Sacrifice to his Father,
touching his Godhead, as you say, is inferior to his Father, and does service
to his Father, touching his Godhead.

Christ Superior to his Father, for having an Excellency, Dignity, or
Quality touching his Godhead, which God the Father had never.

Thirdly, you make by this means two several Ergo, the Godhead of the Father,
and the Godhead of the Son, are two manner of Godheades of several and
distinct powers, not equal, and one, the one Godheade having Priesthood, the
other having not, or, which is al one, the one God being a Priest, and the
other being no Priest: whereof will follow, there are two Gods, not One
only God.

O horrible blasphemy. After these long Schisms, and multiplying of
Heresies, our Protestants are now come to be right Arians, and professed
enemies to the most blessed Trinity.

If to avoid this most heinous and detestable Heresy, you will say, that God
the Father also touching his Godhead is a Priest, then tell us, what has he to
sacrifice? To whom shall he do that humble service and worship? Or is he a man
also as Christ is, and did he suffer death, as the old Heretics taught,
called thereof, Patropassiani? Patropassiani.


The Truth is. Christ touching his Godhead is not a Priest, ne made not the
Sacrifice touching his Godhead (as very blasphemously you have written): but
only touching his manhood.

Mark the point good Reader, as being of most weighty importance. Christ is
both God, and Man. But what he does touching the manhood, that does not the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost in the same sort. Marie, what he does touching his
Godhead, that in all points God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, does
equally with him. Which is the cause that forces us to believe, that not the
Godhead, or whole Trinity took flesh, but only the second person in
Trinity: Least if the Godhead had done it, or if it had been done touching the
Godhead, we should be constrained to say, the whole Trinity was incarnate,
which is against our Faith. Now if Christ touching his Godhead could do that,
which the Father and the Holy Ghost should not do: the Godhead were divided,
and peaces, or parts were made thereof (it being immutable, indivisible, one,
and most excellently perfect) so that touching that part of the Godhead,
which were in Christ, Sacrifice might be made, but touching that, which were
in the Father, and the Holy Ghost, sacrifice might not be made.

Here we shall try how this now broched Arian, will purge him self. Here shall
we see, whether this Heresy shall also be soothed, bolstered, and shouldered
up, as your other Heresies are, or no. Last of al here shall we see, whether you
will recant, and retract this abominable Heresy, as in your Sermon of the.15.
of June last at Paul's Cross, you promised and protested to do, if you could
be convinced of any. Of this I say no more. But if this blasphemy may be
maintained in this new English Church, undoubtedly this English Church (o
pitiful case) will prove a professor of Arianisme, yea I fear, at length of
worse, if worse may be. Certainly our Christ never taught this doctrine,
neither was ever any such thing attributed unto Christ by Gods word, nor by
the Catholic Church: wherefore you seem not to believe in our Christ.

Christ said of the Spiritual Rewlers, Luc. 10.
he that hears you, hears me, he that despises you, despises me, and so
taught obedience unto his Church, and also unto that chief Governor, whom he
instituted Head of the same, and appointed to be his Vicare. For whereas he
said, Joan. 21.
feed my sheep, he meant, that the sheep should obey him, whom he ordained
their feeder, or Pastor. Whereof it follows, that who so ever refuses to be
fed, that is to say, to be governed and taught, by that general Shepeherd, he
forsakes the state and order of a sheep, Math. 25.
and becomes a Goat, and therefore to be placed at the left side, when the
great Shepeherd of al Shepeherdes shall come to sort his flocks. Christ
commends unto us the Sacrament of Penance, in which if we sin after
Baptism, we are reconciled to God by a Priest, whereunto Confession of sins
belongs. Christ also requires perfourmance of Vows. This doctrine you
receive not, you teach it not. You believe not our Christ.

Christ (says S. Irenaeus) at his last supper took into his hands the
creature of bread, blessed, and gave thanks, Iren. li. 4. cap. 32.
saying. This is my body, and taking the Cup likewise, he confessed it to be
his blood, and taught the nevve Oblation of the nevve Testament, which the
Church, receiving it of the Apostles, offers up to God in the whole
world. Christian people has ever been taught from the Apostles time to this
day, that to be his true Body, and his true Blood, which are offered, an
upon credit of Christ's saying, do adoure and worship the same. You teach
not this doctrine. You believe not, that Christ's words do implye this much,
you teach the contrary. Thus you believe not in our Christ.

That Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven, is at the
same time in the hands of them who receive the Sacrament of the Altar, both
Sacrifice, and Sacrificer (as S. Chrysostom teaches and the Church believes)
you teach not, you receive not, you believe not. Whereas Christ consecrateth
the host by the ministry of the Priest, saying, this is my body, this is my
blood: his saying being true, and you not believing, how believe you in
Christ?

Christ said, Math. 5.
A City built upon a hill can not be hid, meaning it of his Church built upon
him self. You teach, yt the true Church of Christ has hen hid these almost
a thousand years, and so hid, that before Luthers time, al Christians were in
palpable darkness. How then believe you in Christ? Christ said to his Disciples
bearing the person of al ye Church. Math. 28.
Behold, I am with you al days until the end of the world. And again. Joan.
14.
I vvil pray my Father, and he vvil give you an other co^forter, to remain
with you for ever, the Spirit of Truth. Mark well good Reader, Al days: For
ever: and, The Spirit of Truth. But you M. Jewel, and your good fellows do
teach plainly, that the whole Church of Christ was guided in Truth by the
Holy Ghost, only for the space of.600. years: and therefore you limit, and
prescribe the trial of Controversies to that age only. As for these later so
many hundred years, you say, the Pope has blinded the whole world. You believe
then in a Christ of.600. years only, not in our Christ and Savior, which
promised to remain with his Church, Al days, no day or year intermitted,
even to the worlds end.

August. in epist. Johan, tractat. 6.
Nay believe you in Christ at al? S. Augustine teaches, that Heretics believe
not, that Christ came in flesh. Charity (says he) brought him unto flesh.
Who so ever therefore (thus he concludes) has not Charity, he denies that
Christ came in flesh. And to prove that an Heretic has not Charity, thus he
reasons. Tu non habes Charitatem, quia pro honor tuo diuidis vnitatem. Thou
have not Charity, because for thine own honors sake thou diuidest unity.

There for sure trial of Preachers, whether they have the spirit of God, or
no, comparing them, as S. Paul does, to earthen pitchers, he bids men to
prove them by the sound. Pulsate, tangite vasa fictilia, ne forte crepuerint,
and male resonent. Knock the earthen pitchers (says he) tinke them with your
fingers, least perhaps they be crackte, and give a broken sound. You are
crackte, you are crakte M. Jewel. We have knockte you, and we find, that your
sound is not whole. How so? Because you have not the Charity and love of
unity.

You say (I know well) yt you have Charity, and that ye divide not the Unity,
but that we the Papists (for so ye call the Catholics) be they, by whom the
Unity is divided. No, no, M. Jewel. It will not serve you so to say. For when
men were once One, and in one Ancient fellowship or Communion (as ye and we
were in One Ancient Church, before Luther brake the knot) he divides Unity,
which departs from his fellows and former godly company, to join him self
with a new company, not he who abides still in the former Ancient company.
Say therefore what ye will, S. Augustine plainly proves, that ye are they,
which have broken the Unity. For this can not be denied, which by him is
spoken, as it were to your person: Tollis te ab vnitate Orbis terrarum etc.
Tract. 6. in epist. Johan.
You withdraw your self from the unity of the whole world. You divide
the Church by Schisms, you rent the body of Christ. He came to gather
together, you cry out to the end to set a sundre. It is you M. Jewel, and
your fellows, that divide your selves from the Unity, in which the whole
world was joined and knit together. We remain in that Faith, which we found
the world in when we were borne, and in which the world has continued
since the Apostles time. You shall never be hable to show, that ( Orbis
terrarum) the round world is at this day, or ever was, of your side.

Will ye have it appear evidently, how ye divide yourselues from the Unity of
the world? Your selves do confess it in the Apology of your English
Synagogue more then seven times. There ye affirm, that Friar Luther, and
Zuinglius were the first that began to set abroad the Gospel, and that all the light was quite extinct, and that all the fonteines of the pure water of
life were utterly dried up, before they came.

Thus it is clear to the simplest wits that are, forasmuch as ye condemn
the universal Church dispersed over the whole world, depart from it, and
join your selves to Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin, that ye make breach of the
Unity. Of all this it is concluded, that you lack Charity, and therefore
though ye have never so much Faith, by S. Augustines doctrine, well may it be,
that ye believe Christ, but in Christ ye believe not.

If it be so then that ye believe not in Christ, (which never the less S.
Augustine declares to be understood in respect of deeds, not of words,
for many confess Christ with mouth, Tit. 1.
and deny him with deeds, as S. Paul says) and that therefore chiefly ye
believe not in him, because ye are void of Charity, as being gone from the
Unity of the whole world: so many as love Christ, and fear to lose the
part they hope to have with Christ, will study how to keep them selves like
sound wheat in the safe Flower of Unity, and will not by the puffes of any
your preachinges, Ephesians. 4.
or writings, seem they never so sweet and pleasant, suffer them selves, like
light Chafe, to be scattred into your damnable sects and divisions.

Nevertheless, if ye glory, and crake of the multitudes that ye have in our
country of England, where the trompettes of your pleasant Gospel have been
sounded, and twite us of our small number (small I mean in respect of such as
make open profession there to be Catholics, for otherwise Gods secret and
unknown number doubtelesse is right great): we tell you, a Pecke of wheat is
more worth, then a Sack of Chafe. Then remember ye withal, Math. 3.
yt when the Winower shall come with his Fan, the wheat shall be laid up in his
Garner, the Chafe shall be cast away into unquenchable fire. God send you grace
to see the perilous state ye stand in, and both to believe in Christ rightly,
and otherwise as to salvation is behooful: that so the people, for whom Christ
has shed his blood, be no more with most certain loss of their souls
seduced by you, and so to join in unity with ye Catholic and Universal
Church. Which when I shall understand, I shall right heartily reioise in you, as
now I am right sorry for you, and with good will, if ever I write unto you, say
(which now I may not say) Farewell. 2. Joan.


Thomas Harding.

August. Contra literas Petiliani Donatistae. Lib. 2. Cap. xcij. An non est
ista vestra fallacia, sed error humanus est? Vtinam ita sit: emenda ergo, non
inde eris minor: imo vero maioris ingenij est animositatis flammas confitendo
extinguere, quam falsitatis nebulas intelligendo vitare.

Say ye, that this is not a false part played by you, but human error? I
pray God it be so: amend then, stick not at it, thou shall therefore be never
a whit the worse man: nay it is a point of greater wit to quench the flames of
stourdy conceit by confessing that is amiss, than by sharpenes of
understanding to avoid the clouds of falshode.

The Preface to the Catholic Reader touching the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IT can not be unknown unto thee, Christian Reader, what a do there has been
in these days about the Mass. Many scoff, and skorne at it, and after most
unworthy wise revile it. Some make Arguments against it, and labor to bring
it in contempt, with written treatises. Others have gone about to overthrow it
with a penal Law, which punishes them, that hear Mass, or be present at
it, with imprisonment of their persons, and with los^e of great sums of
money. The dispysers of the Sacrifice not to be regarded.
But if it be certain, that the most worthy Sacrifice of the Mass is of
Christ's Institution, most acceptable to God, and the thing sacrificed Christ
him self, as in this Reioindre thou shall find it proved: what is there, why
thou should regard the first sort, more then the Jews, that passing by our
Savior Christ, as he hoong upon the Cross, reviled him, Math. 27
wagging their heads, and saying, Va^, as much to say, Phy on thee, or, out
upon thee: The second, more then the two false Witnesses, Math. 26
who deposed against Christ, as he was conuented before Caiphas: The third,
more then Caiphas himself, and the Aldermen of the Jews, Math. 27
that brought Christ bound, and delivered him unto Ponce Pilate, to be
condemned to death?

Concerning the Civil Iusticers the Executours of this Law, as it becomes
me not to say much: so yet I may be so bold, as to put them in mind, that,
what Law so ever is unjust, God shall judge the Promotours, the Makers, and the
Ministers of the same. I wish heartily, they would deeply consider of that God
says by his Prophet Esaie, which among other things he commands to be
cried out alowde, as with the sound of a trompet. Esai. 58.
Dissolve the bands of impiety, loose the burdens, wherewith men are
ouercharged, let go free them that be oppressed, etc. Certainly it is such a
Law, as the like was never before heard of in any Christian Realm.

As for the Arguments, and whatsoever other devises our Adversaries have
invented against this Sacrifice, because al proceeds of falshoode, malice, and
ignorance, by reading this Preface, and my Reioindre, the truth being declared,
I trust al shall vanish away, and seem worthy of no credit in their
judgments, whom the love of Heresy has not bewitched, bereued of wit and
understanding.

And as touching them, that mock, skoffe, and rail at the Mass, As Moses,
and Aaron standing before King Pharao, Exodus 5.
said, The God of the Hebrews has called us, that we go forth into the
wilderness three days journey, and sacrifice unto our Lord, least perhaps the
pestilence, and sword come upon us: Even so if we Priests, and Catholic men
be mocked, evil reported, and evil judged of for that which we do at the
Mass, we confess plainly, for so much as we ought not to be ashamed of it:
that according to Christ's commandment we offer unto our Lord God this
Sacrifice in remembrance of Christ's death, Luc. 22.
and for our necessities, and that according unto the exhortation of S. Paul,
1. Tim. 2.
we make supplications; prayers, intercessions, thankesgeuing, for all men, for
Kings, and foral that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness, and chastity. For that (says he) is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our savior, who will al men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is but one God, and one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, that has given him self
a ransom for all men. These be the things, that we do in the Mass. What
reproufe they deserve, we see not. Yet these be the things, for which we
sustain persecution.

This being so, to thentent they find comfort according to the exhortation of
Christ in the Gospel, which suffer persecution for the Mass, Math. 5.
since it is for righteousness sake, and that the persecutours seeing them selves
deceived, take better advise, repent, and amend: and that the truth of this
point be more clearly known: I think it good, and profitable, here to say
somewhat of Sacrifice in general, and of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

How be it this much at the beginning I confess, that, what is, and ever has been in the Church agreed upon, as a thing certain and clear, thereof reason
is, we should not dispute, least by disputing, we make the thing doubteful,
that is most certain. Therefore here, I mean in this Preface, I intend not
to bestow my labor, to the intent by Arguments I may seem to prove a thing,
that in the Church is already defined: but to this end rather mind I to
employ mine endeavor, that as touching this point of Divinity, I may confirm
it, not so much by way of reasoning, as by way of expounding: whereby it may
come to pass, that the truth being declared, the darkness of errors be put
away.

What things be intended in this Preface.
That I may proceed orderly, which I may not well do in my Reioindre following the
course of answering to M. Jewels co^fuse Reply: I will briefly declare, first,
what Sacrifice is: 2 Why Sacrifice is made, as a thing acceptable, and due unto
God: 3 that a visible Sacrifice is most convenient for our nature: 4 that God
has both engraffed in the minds of men the rite of Sacrificing, and also by
the Law commanded it, and for what cause: 5 then, that for love toward us,
Christ has instituted a Sacrifice for us at his last Supper, for larger
proof whereof I refer the Reader to this my Reioindre: 6 Furthermore, for so
much as in every Sacrifice four things are to be considered, according to the
doctrine of S. Augustine, August. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 14.
To whom offering is made, by whom it is made, what is offered, and for whom
any thing is offered: I will show in what sort these be in the Sacrifice of
the Mass: 7 After this, by what way this Sacrifice is available: 8 for what
causes, and persons it is available: 9 what effects it works: 10 Lastly,
that the Prayers, and the Ceremonies of the Mass, be good and godly, and void
of al superstition. Of these points some I will but briefly touch, of some I
will speak more largely, as the matter requires.

Whereas then M. Jewel, and his fellows do so much abhor and deteste the name
of Sacrifice, specially of the Sacrifice of the Mass, as a thing injurious to
the Cross of Christ, which nevertheless so much sets forth the merit
and benefit of the Cross, as nothing more: I would feign they had once
plainly signified to the world, that they them selves do rightly understand,
what a Sacrifice is.

What new devise they have, and what they imagine Heb. 5.
saying, Every Hye Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men, in the
things that apperteine to God, to the intent he offer up gifts, and Sacrifices
for sins. And again in the same Epistle, Heb. 8.
Every Hye Priest is ordained to offer up gifts, and Sacrifices. Whereof it
may be gathered, what Sacrifice is, What is Sacrifice as it is taken for the
thing that is offered.
specially the condition of these Correlatiues, Priest, and Sacrifice,
considered, between which there is a mutual relation of the one to the other, as
it is between Father and Son, Master and Servant: verily that it is, An
Host, which as a gift and a present, is offered by a public Minister unto
God for sins.

And thus may Sacrifice be defined, What is Sacrifice as, it is taken for the
action of sacrificing.
as the word signifies the gift offered, and the thing sacrificed. For
else, if we speak of Sacrifice, as it betokens the action of sacrificing,
for the word is common to both: then we understand a true Sacrifice, and such
as is convenient for our nature, to be made and offered, when we do consecrate
any gift to our Lord God, by which, some rite and ceremony according to
public ordinance about the gift observed, we profess him to be supreme and
chief of al, the beginning and end of our health and salvation, so as by that
we submit our selves, and all that is ours unto his divine Majesty. Herein Why
is Sacrifice made.


Neither do we thus offer gifts, and Sacrifices unto God, for that he has
any need of our things, who in him self is most sufficient, nor for that he
desires ought at our hands for cause of his own pleasure; as the carnal Jews
thought: but because in such gifts and presents, the recognition of his
supreme Majesty, is to him most acceptable. And for so much as of his goodness
he has created us after his own Image, Genesis 1.
and has ordained us to atteine the fruition of his own blessed presence,
where the true bliss is: it is right on our behalf, and to him acceptable,
that to thinte^t we may acheue this end, which to us is profitable, and not to
him, we give him wourship due unto him, and that by what means we can, we
stir our selves duly to do it: and that, if by committing sin, we have
dishonored, and offended him, and therefore deserve punishment, so far as
our frailty stretches, we make some satisfaction and recompense.

Sacrifice is the propre vvourship of God.
And although he be truly wourshipped with al good works, that be done to his
glory: Yet properly that wourship is due unto him, whereby, after the manner
that is convenient for us, we profess him to be Alpha and O, as much to say,
the beginning and end of al things, for this is propre to his only Majesty.
For in as much as that exceeding great excellency has infinite properties,
which for the infirmity of our nature we are forced with distinct
considerations to conceive, and because we are carried unto God by distinct
virtues with distinct affectes and desires, which follow the apprehensions of
our mind: that the virtues be not as an unordered heap confuse in the heart
of a just man, but that each virtue answer to his propre consideration,
whereby man is carried unto God (As, because God is true and faithful,
therefore we believe him, because he is mighty and liberal, therefore we hope
in him, because he is good, therefore we love him, which three virtues S.
Paul sets forth distinctly writing to the Corinthians) to the
consideration, 1. Cor. 13.
by which we conceive him to be verily our Lord and God, from whom, as being
the Father of Lights, Jacob. 1^ Religion,
every good thing descends, and in whom, as in the last end, we put our
highest felicity, properly the virtue of Religion answers, by which we are
wont to sacrifice, that is to wit, to offer up gifts, and presents in
recognition hereof, whereby we acknowledge and profess, him to be the
beginning of our creation, and the end of our bliss, to whom all that is ours
ought to be referred.

Therefore the people of Israel were commanded of God, as soon as they should
come into the land of promise, to take the first fruits of al manner of
corn, and to bring them to the Priest, and as he laid them upon the Altar,
Deute. 26
to say in this wise. I profess this day before thy Lord God, that I am
entered into the Land, which our Lord has sworn unto our Fathers that he
would give unto us. Our Lord has brought us out of Egypt with his mighty
hand, and stretched arm, etc. And therefore now I offer up the first fruits
of the corn of the land, that our Lord has given unto me.

Even so King David said unto our Lord, 1. Para. 29
after the great gifts had been given by him, and by his Nobles, toward the
building of the Temple: Al things are thine (O Lord) and what things we have
received at thy hand, we have given unto thee. And thus we offer gifts unto
our Lord, not for that he has need of them, or pleasure in them, with which
mind the Babylonians offered unto their Idol Bell: Daniel. 14
but because in the gifts so offered, there is a recognition of his Divine
Majesty, and a certain satisfaction for sins, that is to say, for the
temporal pains due unto sins.

That a visible Safice is most convenient for our nature. Joan. 4.
and being tied unto sensible things we can not exercise the proper operations
of the soul perfitely: such a Sacrifice is convenient for us, as with which
visibly we may confess and honor that Divine excellency of Majesty. For
although God, who is spirit, be delited with that wourship, which according to
the Scripture, proceeds of spirit, and truth, that is to say, of right faith
working by charity, and although it be a certain acceptable Sacrifice unto
him, when the soul with inward moving does consecrate it self to God: yet
truth it self, that is to say, right faith, requires also outward wourship,
for two causes.

Outward vvourship of God, required for two causes.
The one is, because the soul makes not that inward oblation of it self
conveniently, and perfitely, except it behold the same in some sensible
oblation of a gift, as in a sign and glass, that by this mean it may be
moved and stirred unto that internal Oblation, there to rest and stay, as when
we pray unto God, and praise him, we do it not only with the heart, but also
with sensible signs: not because otherwise he understands us not, but for
that so we stir and provoke ourselves the more fervently to pray, Romans 6.
and praise him. And therefore S. Paul admonishes us, that we exhibit, not
only our mind, unto God but also our members, to be armures of righteousness.

The other cause is, In Asceticis.
for that, as S. Basile says, we have not only our soul of God. And
therefore the wourship that is given unto him by the soul only, God is to be
honored not only with the soul, but also with the body, and with outvvard
things.
is imperfect. And for so much as we have received the body, and all that we
have besides of him: it is right, that we serve him with the body it self, and
with all things, acknwoleging that he is God, and Lord of al things, to whom
al things ought to do service. In consideration whereof the third brother
among the seven Machabees, putting forth his tongue out of his mouth (as he was
commanded) and holding up his hands, 2. Match. 7
both to be cut of by the tormentour, said, with a bold courage, E coelo ista
possideo, sed propter Deileges nunc haec ipsa despicio. From heaven I have
these things, but now for Gods Laws sake, I care not for them. And so gladly
he offered his tongue, his hands, and all the parts of his body, in Sacrifice to
God of whom he had received them.

And so the mother of those seven Machabees, The Mother of the Machabees.
a woman of manly fortitude, with free heart offered up her sons unto God,
because it was he (as she said) that had created them, and brought them into
this light, how so ever they had been conceived in her womb. Therefore she made
protestation as before God, and said unto them, I know not (quod she) how ye
appeared in my womb: for it is not I, that have given unto you spirit, and
soul, and life, it is not I, that have joined together the members of each of
you, but it is the Creator of the world. etc. As much to say in effect, as
this. Lord for so much as I have had these seven Sons of thee, for thy sake
gladly I give them, and offer them unto thee.

Job. 1.
That blessed man Job likewise, took the loss of al his goods patiently, and
so with free heart offered them to God, forasmuch as he acknowledged, that he
had received them at Gods hand. 1. Cor. 6.
S. Paul also exhorts, that we glorify, Romans 12.
and bear God in our body, and that we exhibit our bodies a lively Sacrifice
unto God. Matt. 22.
And in that great and first Commandment, in which the Law and Prophets do
depend, we are commanded to love God, not only with the soul, but also ( ex
omnibus viribus) with all our powers and strength. Luc. 10.


And as we sin against God, not by thought only, but with outward works
also, and outward things, as it is evident in fornication, gluttony,
theafte, sacrilege, and in the like: so we be bound seemly to serve him, not
only with inward motions of the soul, but also with outward things, that we
have received of his goodness. 1. Cor. 11.
Therefore S. Paul gave precepts unto them of Corinth men and women,
concerning the head to be vncoouered, or coouered, when they prayed, or
prophesied.

Christ also in the Gospel declaring, that internal faith only does not
suffice, says, He that confesses me before men, Math. 10.
I will confess him also before my Father. And S. Paul says, Romans 10.
that with the heart a man believes unto righteousness, but with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation, by the mouth understanding every external
work, whereby confession of our faith is made.

But what shall we say to those places of the Scriptures, in which it is
reported, that God has no liking in the outward Sacrifices? Osee. 6.
I will have mercy, says he, and not Sacrifice. Math. 9.
If thou would have had Sacrifice, I would have given it thee. Psalm. 50.
With burnt offeringes thou will not be delited. A troubled spirit is a
Sacrifice to God, the contrite and humbled heart, thou will not despise. I will
not rebuke thee for Sacrifices. Psalm. 49.
Of the like places in the Scriptures of the old Testament, we find great
numbers.

To all this S. Augustine answers. August. de Ciui. Dei. lib. 10. c. 5. In
what wise does God refuse the old Sacrifices.
Sic illa Deum nolle dixit, quomodo ab stultis ea velle creditur, velut suae
gratiae voluptatis. The Prophet said, that God would not have those Sacrifices,
in such sort as fools believe he would have them, as for his own pleasures
sake. For else, if he would not have had them at al, he would never have
commanded them in the old Law to be offered. And therefore they were (says
he) to be changed now in their due and certain ceason, least men should
believe, that they were such as might be desired of Gods part, or be
acceptable of them self in our behalf, and not rather those other Sacrifices
(he means internal Sacrifices) which by them were signified.

Now therefore that those old Sacrifices be changed and abrogated, The
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, or of the Altar.
the time being come, when Moses Law should cease, and have an end: Christ
in place of them has substituted the Sacrifice of the Euchariste, greater in
virtue, better in profit, easier in doing, and incomparably higher in
worthiness. So then that there may be a perfect profession of the supreme
Majesty, which is to be showed by very things them selves: we offer unto it a
visible gift of those things which we have received of our Lords hand, for
our sins, and for a thankeful recognition.

A certain change required in the things that be sacrificed. 2.2. q. 85. art.
3. arg. 3. Theoph. in cap. 8. ad Heb. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. Homil. 18.
Then is a gift said properly to be consecrated or hallowed unto God in
sacrifice, when it is deputed to divine service, with some rite of religion or
Ceremony obserserued, whereby some change is made about it. For it is not to
be thought, that every oblation is a Sacrifice, as it is well noted of S.
Thomas, Theophylacte, and S. Chrysostom. For as it appears in the book
named Leuiticus, In all the Sacrifices some rite was observed, whereby things,
that before were profane, were made sacred and holy to the honor of God. For
either they were slain, as the Beasts, or burnt, as the Incense, or sprinkled
over with oil, as bread, meal, and the first fruits, and baked in an Oven,
or fried in a pan, or roasted on a gredyern, Leuit. 2.
and al things were sauered and ceasoned with salt. Marc. 9.


A rite and ceremony of changing we do observe in our Sacrifice also now, the
bread (beside breaking and eating) by virtue of the words of consecration,
being changed into the body, and the wine, into the blood of Christ. By which
rite and ceremony we confess, that, for so much as we are by nature the
children of wrath, we have need of a great change, to be made worthy of God,
that we have need to put on the new man, that we protest all that is ours, to
be ready for his sake to be changed to be consumed, to be spent and lost, right
so as it shall be his pleasure. For who so ever does lose his soul for my sake
(says our Savior) he shall find his soul. Math. 16. That to offer Sacrifice
is natural.


Now let us come unto the fourth point, and declare that God has both
engraffed in the minds of men the rite of sacrificing, and also by Law
commanded it, and for what cause. This is soon done. The consideration of
nature, and general view of the world, lays the one before our eyes, and the
books of the old Testament, the other.

Natural reason tells man, that he is under some Superior, for the defectes,
which he feels in him self. In which defectes he has need to be helped
and directed of some Superior. And what so ever that is, it is that, as S.
Thomas says, which among al is called God. And as in natural things,
naturally the inferior things are under the superior things, even so
natural reason tells man according unto natural inclination, that he exhibit
to that which is above man, subjection and honor according to his manner. And
the convenient manner for man is, to use sensible signs to express some
things, because he takes his knowledge of sensible things. And therefore it
proceeds of natural reason, that man use certain sensible things, offering
them to God in sign of due subjection and honor, in like sort as they do,
who offer unto their Lords certain things, in recognition of their Lordship
or Dominion. This pertains to the nature of Sacrifice, and therefore the
offering of Sacrifice pertains to the Law of nature. Sacrifice has ever ben
general to al peoples. Cyprian. Sermon. de ratione Circu^cis.


Wherefore there lives no Nation in the world altogether without Religion, as
we may see, and hear, nor is Religion maintained without Ceremonies. And among
Ceremonies, the Nations of al ages have used outward Oblation, as the chief.
Although for the more part (as S. Cyprian says) they abhorred Circumcision,
as a thing cruel, and unfriendly to nature, yet the other Sacrifices they did
not likewise abhor: but following, the law of Nature in many things (says
he) they retained the custom of making Sacrifices. And this was fastened in
their minds by common consent in general, that God only ought to be
wourshipped with outward Sacrifice. With that kind of wourship who ever
judged, that any should be honored (says S. Augustine) but whom either he
knew, August. de Ciuit. Dei li. 10. c. 4.
or thought, or (at lest) imagined to be God? Of what antiquity this manner of
godly wourship is, the Sacrifices of the two first brethren, Cain, and Abel,
do show. Genesis 4.


For what cause has God engraffed in Man the rite of sacrificing.
As touching the cause, why it has pleased God to engraffe in the minds of men
the rite of sacrificing, what other can we render, but his great love toward
Mankind? In declaration whereof this much is to be considered.

Whereas our first parent Adam seduced by the envy and craft of the Devil,
Genesis 3.
brake Gods commandment, and through his sin brought sin into this world,
Romans 5.
yea such, and so great Sin, that al proceeding from him according to the
flesh, became by nature the Children of wrath, and therefore remained thral to
Gods anger, and just damnation: Ephesians. 1.
God of his own goodness not willing they should perish, whom he had created,
determined with him self, Genesis 3.12. and 22.26.28.
and promised to Adam at the beginning, and afterward to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Moses, David, and the other Fathers, to send that blessed seed, Jesus Christ
his Son, Deuteronomy. 18.
to reconcile us unto him self, to pacify his just wrath, to wash us clean
from our sins, and to redeem us from damnation, by Oblation of a singular
Sacrifice. Galat. 4.
When the fulness of time was come, and the days fully expired that God had
appointed, the Son of God our Savior came, took our sins upon him, The
true and chief Sacrifice, Christ's Death.
offered him self up a Sacrifice for us upon the Cross, appeased the wrath of
his Father, and entering once by his blood into the holy place (as S. Paul
says) found for us an everlasting Redemption. Heb. 9.


This Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, is the only Sacrifice, whereby we
are redeemed, and without this, is there no salvation. Heb. 10.
With one offering (says S. Paul) he has made perfect for ever them that be
sanctified. And in Esaie it is said of Christ, Esai. 63.
Torcular calcaui solus. The press have I trodden alone. And as without and
besides this Sacrifice nothing can save us, so this is a sufficient price to
satisfy God for the Dettes and sins of the whole world. 1. Joan. 2:
He is the propiciation (says S. John) for our sins, neither for our sins
only, but for the sins of all the world. This is the lamb, that takes away
the sins of the world, Johan. 1.
And God was reconciling the world in Christ unto him self, 2. Cor. 5.
says S. Paul. The virtue of this Sacrifice reaches from the beginning of
the world to the end, from the first man to the last, both Testamentes
taking their effect of it, and therefore S. John calling Christ the Lamb,
says, he was killed from the beginning of the world, Apocal. 13.
verily because his blood has cleansed the sins of men of al ages.

But albeit this be the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world,
Johan. 1.
and though it be the Sacrifice propiciatorie for the sinner of the whole
world, as S. John says: yet is not the whole world thereby saved. For sure we
are, the faithless Gentiles, Turks, Moors, Saracenes, unbelieving Jews, and
seined Christians, be not saved. What then shall we say? This Sacrifice is
sufficient to save al men, but it is not effectual to the salvation of al men.
The virtue of it is such, as is hable to save al, yet be not al saved. Whereof
comes this? The defecte is not in God, it is in man. Now behold the goodness
of God.

That this Sacrifice of his Son, as it is sufficient for all, so it may be
also effectual, for all: God has ordained certain means, whereby men may be
made hable to receive the merit of it, and whereby the virtue of it is
transferred, and applied unto them. These means be Sacraments, and
Sacrifices. As for Faith, Faith, hope, and Charity, first, and chiefly
required. Heb. 11. ^. Johan. 3 Sacraments. Sacrifices double, Inward
Sacrifices Heb. vlt.
Hope, and Charity, of necessity they are presupposed, without which neither
Sacraments, nor Sacrifices do ought avail. For without faith it is
impossible to please God, and who so ever loves not, he remains in death.
Likewise where is no hope, there Christ's mercy to salvation takes no place.

Of Sacraments some be propre to the old Testament, some to the new. Of
Sacrifices some be inward, some be outward. The inward be known, as the
sacrifice of a contrite Heart, an humbled spirit, the sacrifice of prayer,
praise and thankesgeuing, of mercy, and benevolence, and other the like. These
be common to both Testamentes.

Outvvard Sacrifices.
But as concerning outward Sacrifices, that men might be made partakers of the
Oblation of Christ, which has most sufficiently merited the salvation of al
men, and that they might transfer the fruit of it unto themselves, God has
even from the beginning of the world, both under the Law of Nature by Divine
inspiration stirred up the minds of men unto the rite of sacrificing for
witness whereof we have the example of Abel, Genesis 4.8.
Noe and Melchisedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, besides others, Job. 1.
and eftsoon at what time he gave the Law by Moses, he commanded sacrifices
to be made, and showed the diverse kinds of Sacrifices, Exodus 12.
as the Paschal Lamb, Number. 28.
the continual sacrifice, the sacrifice for the sins of the Priest, In
Leuitico. ca. 4.
of the Prince, of the people, for ignorance, forgeuing thanks, for peace, for
chastity, etc.

The use of al which outward Sacrifices was, not that they should reconcile
men to God, The use of the old Sacrifices.
and merit salvation by strength of their own nature, but that by them the
minds of men might be moved, and admonished, to remember the great Sacrifice,
that was to come, whereby God promised to redeem al men, that so their faith
might be confirmed, and the fruit of it be applied unto them, having faith and
trust in the Sacrifice to come. What strength they had in their degree against
sin; they had it not by their own nature, but by virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice upon the ^rosse, whereof they were figures and significations.

Of these outward Sacrifices so great an account is made in the Scriptures, as
necessary for the behoof of Gods people living under the Law, that the lack
of them is reputed in sundry places for an horrible plague. God threatening
the people of Israel, says by his Prophet Osee, Osee. 3.
that they should sit to many days (sine sacrificio, and sine Altari) without
sacrifice, and without an Altar. In an other place he threatened king Asa, and
his people, by the mowth of Azarias the son of Obed, that for a long time
they should be without a Priest. 2. Paralip. 15.
Azarias in Daniel l^mentably bewaileth the state of the Jews, as being
grievously plagued, for that they had neither burnt offering, Danil. 3.
nor oblation, nor incense, nor place where to offer.

Wherefore if Christ would his Church in the time of the new Testament to be
without external Sacrifice, and Priesthod propre to that state, he should seem
to have delivered unto his people, not the Testament of grace, but a state of
ire and wrath, yea of more wrath, then was the state of the Jewish people. But
whereas he says him self, Esai. 61.
that he came (praedicare annu^ Domini acceptu^) to preach the acceptable
year of our Lord, Luc. 4.
that is to say, the time of grace, mercy, and salvation, and since that S.
Paul says, 2. Cor. 6.
Behold now is the acceptable time, behold now is the day of salvation: verily
assured we are, forasmuch as to every law ordained by God Sacrifice and
Priesthod belongs, propre and convenient to the same: that God would not
suffer his most dear people of the new Testament, his best beloved spouse the
Church, to be without external Sacrifice, and Priesthod, the lack whereof was
sometimes threatened to the Jews for a grievous plague. Neither, to say the
troth, could it in any wise seem convenient, that that Religion, which of all that ever have been, is most absolute, should l^cke that Service and wourship,
whereby the external and propitiatory sacrifice is offered, which Service has
always ben most highly esteemed in every Religion, not only in that which is
true, and instituted of God, but also in that which is false, and devised by
the envy and suggestion of the Devil, wherein he endeavors all that he can,
that the Image of the true Religion, as much as may be, be expressed, and
lively set forth.

Forasmuch then as in the old Testament, The Sacrifice of the Church.
as S. Paul witnesses, there wanted perfection, by reason of the weakness,
and vnhablenes of the Leuitical Priesthood (for the law brought nothing to
perfection) it behooved, Heb. 7.
God the Father of mercy so disposing, that an other Priest after the order of
Melchisedek should rise, who might make perfect all that were to be sanctified.
This Priest was Jesus Christ our Lord and God. Who, whereas he came not to
loose the Law (in as much as it was Natural, Mat. 5.
or Moral) but rather to fulfill the Law: when he brought his new Law into the
world, so much promised before in Jeremy, Ierem. 31.
and the other Prophets: least he should have least it maimed, and imperfect in
this behalf, co^trarywise then the manner of the former laws (of nature, and
of Moses) was, either of which had outward sacrifice, furnished it with a
peculiar Sacrifice, and Priesthod. For it could not otherwise be, but that,
when a new Law took place, Sacrifice propre to that Law should go with it,
and Priests likewise, as Ministers of the same Sacrifice. For according to the
Doctrine of S. Paul, Law, Sacrifice, and Priesthode, go ever together.

Therefore though he would once offer him self Heb. 7.
unto God the Father upon the Altar of the Cross with Death, that he might
there pay the price of the raunsom of the world, and work everlasting
Redemption: yet because his Priesthod was not to be extinguished and ended by
Death, and every Priesthod requires a proper Sacrifice: at his last Supper, in
the night that he was betrayed, that he might leave unto his Dear Spouse the
Church a visible Sacrifice, as the nature of men required, whereby that
blouddy Sacrifice once to be made upon the Cross might be represented, and the
Memory of it kept, and the healthful Virtue of it appyled unto us, and God
duly recognized: at the same Supper declaring him self to be constituted a
Priest after the order of Melchisedek, according to the duty of Priesthood he
offered up unto God the Father, his body and blood under the forms of bread
and wine, and delivered the same unto the Apostles, whom then he made Priests
of the new Testament, that they should receive them, and by these words, Hoe
facite in meam co^memorationem, Luc. 12.
Do ye this in my remembrance, 1. Cor. 11.
(under: which request that his whole action is comprehended) he gave
commandment to them, and to their Successors in Priesthood, to offer up the
same. Thus the Church has always understood, thus it has taught, thus it
has believed. In witness hereof S. Ireneus speaking of that which Christ did
at his Supper, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32.
says, Noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem. He taught the new oblation of
the new testament. And this is the doctrine of the Catholic Church, touching
the Sacrifice of the new Testament, simply declared, which Sacrifice is now
according to our Lords Institution, and commandment offered daily by
Priests, in this office the Apostles successors.

Neither says S. Irenaeus of this Oblation, only, that it is the new
Oblation of the new Testament, Ibidem.
and that Christ taught it: but also that the Church receiving it of the
Apostles, does offer this Sacrifice to God (in vniuerso mundo) in the whole
world. Wherefore it is mere madness, yea (if we would speak as S. Augustine
speaks in every the like case) it is most insolent madness, August. Epist.
118. ad Ianuar.
to dispute, whether in the Mass there be a Sacrifice and oblation or no, and
whether the same ought to be continued, seeing that the whole Church through
the world does celebrate and frequent it.

For good proof of it we have the Scriptures, Auctorities for the sacrifice of
the Altar.
the Doctors of al ages, the ancient Councels, the sense, practice and use of
the universal Church. As for the Scriptures, I think it enough here only to
note certain places, Scripture for the Sacrifice,
that be alleged for it. They are these, the Institution of Christ described
in the Ghospel: the prophecy of Malachie: the Fignre of Melchisedek. Unto
which may be added the manifest place of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
Luc. 22.
where S. Paul says, Malach. 1.
they could not be made partakers of the Table of our Lord, Genesis 14.
who had defiled them selves with taking part of the Table of Devils: 1. Cor.
10.
where, by Table, he understands in both places the Altar, whereon the
profane meats were offered to Devils among the Gentiles, and the Euchariste
is consecrated, and offered up unto God among the true believers, whereof
Sacrifice is concluded. For by those words it is manifest, that S. Paul does
compare our Euchariste in respect of Sacrifice, to the Sacrifices of the old
law, and to the Sacrifices of the Devils. Which thing he would not have done,
unless he had been assured, and unless it had been well known to the Christian
people, that the Euchariste is so a true Sacrifice, as those that were offered
to God in the old Testament, and as those that of the Gentiles were offered to
Devils.

Doctors for prouf of the Sacrifice.
As for the Doctors, their witnesses for proof hereof be in manner infinite.
In all their writings whereof speak they so often, as of this Sacrifice? Many
of their sayings I will not here rehearse, many of good force I will dissemble,
and the sayings of Li 8^ Co^stitut. Apost. and Epist. 2.
S. Clement, Epist. 1
of S. Anacletus, Epist. 1.
of S. Alexander, Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3 part. 3.
of S. Dionysius, and Epist. ad Smyruen. and Trallian. Iren. li. 4. cap. 32.
Infra. fol. ^40. b. etc Cyprian. Lib. 2.
S. Ignatius I will not touch. Who as they were either in the Apostles time, or
soon after, and therefore are the rather to be hea^d: so of this Sacrifice
they have given forth in writing very plain witness.

Verily S. Irenaeus speaks so clearly of it in his fourth book against
Valentinus, that by no shifte it can be avoided, by no myste or cloud it can
be darkened. M. Jewel has beaten his wit very much about it, and has
travailed all that he could, to frame an answer to it in his Reply, but he
labors in vain, and shows more wilfulnes, then reason, more talk, then
learning, as by this Reiondre it shall appear.

S. Cyprian writing to Caecilius, says, that the Priest does then offer in the
Church a true and full sacrifice unto ^od the Father, if he begin so to
offer, even as he sees Christ to have offered. In which place he declares
how Christ offering his body and blood in the form of bread and wine at his
Supper, Epist. 3. Ambros. lib. 4.5.6. De Sacrament. and lib. 5.
exercised the office of his Priesthood after the order of Melchi^edech.

Here I might allege S. Ambrose, in sundry places of his books De Sacramentis,
and in his Epistle to the noble woman Marcellina his sister, Epist. 33.
where expressly he names the Mass, by the name of Missa, and the Oblation,
that it be not wrested to an other signification. S. Hierome in sundry places
of his works, but specially in his epistle to Euagrius, and to Hedibia,
quaest. 2. has a manifest testimony of this sacrifice. S. Augustine likewise
in many places of his works. De Ciuit. li. 17. c. 20
In the.17. book De Ciuitate Dei, speaking of the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, which he does exhibit after the order of Melchisedek,
says, Id sacrificium successit omnibus illis sacrificijs veteris Testamenti,
quae immolabantur in vmbra futuri. This Sacrifice has come in place of al
those sacrifices of the old Testament, which were sacrificed in the shadow of
the sacrifice to come. And to the intent we should understand this not to be the
blouddy Sacrifice of the Cross, but the vnblouddy Sacrifice of the Altar: he
adds these words to put the Reader out of doubt, pro illis omnibus
sacrificijs and Oblationibus corpus eius offertur, and participantibus
ministratur. For all those sacrifices and Oblations (of the old Law) Christ's
body is offered, and ministered unto the receivers.

In his book of Confessions, he speaks of this Sacrifice so clearly, as it
can not be denied, showing how it was offered for his Mother Monica that holy
woman at her burial. August. Confess. lib. 9. c. 12
His words be plain. Neque in eis precibus quas tibi fudimus, cum offerretur
pro eae Sacrificium precij nostri, ego fleui. Neither wept I in those prayers,
which we made unto the (he speaks unto God) at what time the Sacrifice of
our Price was offered up for her. In an other place he tells what a great
desire she had, not to have her body sumptuously and honorably buried, but to
be remembered at the Altar of God^ Ibid. ^.13.
vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam, qua deletum est Chirographum, quod
erat contrariumnobis, qua triumphatus est hostis computans delicta nostra, etc.
From whence she knew that holy host (or sacrifice) to be bestowed, by which
the handwriting that was contrary to us, was blotted out, by which the enemy
that reckeneth our offenses, was ouercomme. By these two testimonies, both the
Sacrifice offered at the Altar, and the Oblation of the same for the Dead, is
avouched.

If al were laid together that may be alleged out of S. Augustine in witness of
this Sacrifice, it would fill a book.

(...) sermon. 7. de Passione Domini.
At what time the matter was treated in Caiphas haul (says S. Leo) How Christ
should be killed, then he ordained the Sacrament of his body and blood; and
taught (his Disciples) what Sacrifice from thenceforth ought to be offered unto
God. Against these our Adversaries can take no exception, either for their age,
or for their authority.

Masses made by S. James, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambros.
What shall I speak of the Mass of S. James the Apostle, and the Mass of S.
Basil, allowed by the sixth general Council holden at Constantinople, and by all
the Greeks, of the Mass of S. Chrysostom, and of S. Ambrose, al which the
antiquity acknowleged, and now be extant? In those Masses this Sacrifice, and
Oblation is oftentimes spoken of, and it is declared, how it is offered.

Councels for witness of this Sacrifice. ^^cil. Nic^n. ^ae. 14^
Hereunto may be added the authority of many Councels, that contain most
clear witness of the Sacrifice of the Altar. Those holy and learned Fathers of
the great first General Council holden at Nice, say, that it is an unworthy
thing, that they which have not power to offer the Sacrifice (that is to say,
the Deacons) should give the body of Christ to them, that offer it. The first
Council. Ephesine likewise acknowledges the Vnblouddy Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ, Council. Ephesin^ in Epistola Cyrill. ad Nestoriu^.
and the true presence of that body, which is proper unto the Word. The
Testimonies of other Councels that followed these, might easily be alleged for
this point, in great number. But these may suffice.

M. Jewel impudently bears the world in hand, that nothing can be found in
the ancient Doctors, or Councels, M. Ievvel in his Challenge.
that makes clearly for the Sacrifice. Yea he pretends him self to be so
sure of it, that he offers freely to yield, and subscribe (which it seems
he minds not to do, what so ever be brought) if any learned man of his
Adversaries, or all the learned men alive, be hable to bring any one sentence
out of any one old Doctor, or Council for it. But his Master John Calvin,
as wicked an Heretic as he was, was never so shameless, as to deny a thing
so manifest^ nor so rash, as to grant so much. And therefore thus he writes.

Veteres Coenam Sacrificium vocasse notum est: neque possum veteris Ecclesiae
consuetudinem excusare, Caluin^^ de Coena domini^
quod gestu ac ritu suo speciem quandam sacrificij figuraret, ijsdem fere
ceremonijs, quae sub veteri Testamento in vsuerant, eo excepto, quod panis
hostia animalis loco vtebantur. Quod cum nimis ad Iudaisinum accedat, Calvin
acknovvlegeth the Sacrifice was in the ancient Church. M. Ievvel denies.
nec Domini institutioni consentaneum sit, minime probo. That the old Fathers
called the Supper a Sacrifice, it is knowen^ neither can I excuse the custom
of the ancient Church, for that with gesture, and outward rite, they did set
forth a certain form of a Sacrifice, with the same Ceremonies in a manner,
Calvin allows not the old Church: yet must we needs allow Calvin?
that were in use in the old Testament, save that they used the host of Bread
in place of a beast. Which thing since it comes to nigh to Iewishnes, neither
is agreeable unto the Institution of the Lord, I do not allow.

Thus M. Jewel should have told his tale, if he had followed the chief
Inuentour and founder of his Geneuian Gospel, for so besides heresy, he had
offended but in pride. But now he has so proclaimed his Challenge, that besides
heresy, and pride, he has also proved him self ignorant, rash, and impudent.
And thus is he confuted by his own chief Doctor, who being conuicte with
evident truth, with some modesty confesses that, he could not deny, though
with intolerable pride he disallowed that, which he was not hable to disprove.
So Lucifer knew, that his Creator was above him, yet not lyking well of it,
Esai. 14.
he said, I will be like unto the highest.

As concerning the Institution of Christ, that by a clear declaration of it,
The institution of Christ declared.
it may appear by the act of Christ, that at his Supper he offered up to his
Father his body and blood, it is to be considered, what he did. Do ye this
(said he) in my remembrance. What this? This very thing, that I now have done.
He took bread into his hands, and lifting up his eyes unto heaven, (as by
assured tradition the Church has received, Ambrosius De sacrament. li. 4.
cap. 5.
and S. Ambrose reports it as a thing undoubted) and showing it unto the
Father, as we read in S. James Mass he gave thanks unto him, as being the
author almighty of al things, Iacobus in Liturgia.
from whom all that good is, proceeds, and as it was accustomed to be done in
Sacrifices, with a certain rite of Religion he consecrated the bread, blessing
it, he brake it, and gave it unto his Disciples to eat, saying, This is my
Body that is given for you. To whom is it given? To my Father almighty, to whom
as being Lord of al, I have given thanks. It is given I say, to my Father
presently without bloodshed, and in a Mystery, but anonne for his wills sake
to be rent and torn, and to be put to death. Even so a little after he said,
lifting up his eyes also into Heaven, as it is in S. John, Johan. 17.
Pro illis ego sanctisico meipsum, I sanctify my self for them, fulfilling
that old Law in deed it self, Exodus 13.
which required, Number. 8.
that every first begoten should be sanctified unto our Lord, Luc. 2.
that is to say, be offered and appointed unto Gods holy service. Likewise he
took the Cup, after that he had supped saying, Mat. 26.
This is my blood of the new Testament, that for you and for many is shed,
Luc. 22.
in remission of sins.

This is the visible work, which we do according to the instruction of
Christ, with which by public authority (because Christ so ordained and
commanded) we profess God to be not only the beginning and end of al
things, the founteine of al felicity, and end of our desires, but also
through the Death of his own Son, the redemer of al men, and the repairer of
al things, which through sin we had lost.

That this commemoration ought to be celebrated externally with outward work,
S. Paul plainly signifies, saying to the Corinthians: So often as ye eat
this bread, 1. Cor. 1^.
and drink of this Cup, ye do show forth the Death of our Lord until he
come. For that showing forth can not be made with the internal commemoration of
the mind. Which sense is also signified by the verb of the present tense,
(...)
ye do show forth our Lords death, for so in the Greek S. Paul speaks.

Touching testimonies that may be alleged for further proof of this Sacrifice,
because it is declared and set forth at large both in my Answer to M. Jewels.
17. Article, and in this Reiondre, and for so much as the convenient brevity
of a Preface well bears not so large a treaty, as the dew opening of this
point requires, and furthermore least by treating of it here I should withdraw
thy desire Reader from perusing that, wherewith I have fortified and made good
my Answer: for these considerations I refer thee unto my Reioindre it self.

August. de Trinit. lib 4. c. 14.
be found in the most blessed Sacrifice of the Altar. 1 To whom oblatio^ is
made, 2 by whom it is made, 3 what is that which is offered, 4 and for whom it
is offered.

To vvho^ is Oblatio^ made in the Sacrifice of the Church.
Concerning the first, This doctrine of the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ, which now we are driven to defend against the Professors of this
new devised Gospel, was so certainly known, and generally holden of al men
in the first times of the Church, that the very Arians, who were Heretics,
and enemies of Christ, thought they had found an invincible Argument against
the Equality of the Son of God with the Father, because in this Sacrifice
the Son is offered up unto the Father. For it is certain, said they that he
which is offered, is less then he, to whom he is offered. To which Argument
that which Fulgentius an ancient Father writes, may serve for answer, who
shows learnedly writing to Monimus, that this Sacrifice is not offered to the
Father only, but to the whole Trinity.

If ^here be any Catholic beleuers (says he) that seemed hitherto to be
ignorant of this Sacrifice, Fulgen^tius lib. 2. ad Moninum.
from hence forth they ought to know, that al service of every wourship and
healthful Sacrifice, Oblatio^ is made to the most blessed Trinity.
is of the Catholic Church exhibited, both to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost, that is to say, to the Holy Trinity, in whose only
name, it is manifest, that the Holy Baptism also is celebrated. Neither is
prejudice gotten unto the Son, or unto the Holy Ghost, whiles prayer by him
that offers is directed unto the person of the Father, the ending of which
prayer, whereas it has in it the name of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
shows, that no discrime^
odds is in the Trinity: because whiles the words of honor be directed unto
the person of the Father only, with the Faith of him that well believes, the
whole Trinity is honored: and when the intention of him that sacrifices, is
directed unto the Father, the gift of the Sacrifice with one and the same
dewtie of the offerer, is offered unto the whole Trinity. Thus Fulgentius.

When Christ the Son of God, is offered up according to his body and blood,
that is to say, according to his human nature, according to which, he is
less then the Father, then him self, then the holy Ghost: he is consecrated
unto the holy Trinity. And so much does the Church in the lesser Canon, and
specially in the end of the Mass profess, August. de Ciuit. Dei li. 10. c. 20
with express words naming the Trinity it self.

Therefore S. Augustine saith^ that, whereas Christ Jesus in the form of God
takes sacrifice with the Father, Christ is sacrificed in the form of a
seruau^t^
with whom he is one God, yet in the form of a servant he had rather be a
Sacrifice, then take Sacrifice, least by this occasion some man should think,
that Sacrifice were to be done to any creature. By this he is a Priest, him
self both the offerer, and him self also the offering. Of which thing he
willed the daily Sacrifice of the Church to be a Sacrament, which Church
whereas it is the body of him self the head, is taught through him to offer up
it self.

Masses in honor and memory of Sanctes.
Although sometime the Church do celebrate certain Masses in the honor and
memory of Saints, yet it does not offer Sacrifice unto them, but unto the
Trinity only, that has crowned them, and giving thanks unto God for their
victories, sueth for their aides, and desires to be helped by their merits,
and prayers. Whereof S. Augustine treats, Lib. 8. De Ciuitate Dei. cap. v^t.
lib. 20. Contra Faustum. cap. 21.

By vvho^ is this Sacrifice made.
among some men there is some doubt thereof. For some say, that Christ
offers not, but that we only do offer. Others there be, that will Christ here
also to be the Priest, who will seem to lean to the authority of S. Ambrose,
Ambr. lib. 1. Officiorum. c. 48. De Su^ma Trinit. and fide Cath. cap. firmiter.
and of the Laterane Council. Now Christ is offered (says S. Ambrose) but he
is offered as man, as receiving passion, and he offers him self as a Priest,
to forgive our sins. The Council has thus. There is one universal Church of
the faithful, in which the self same Priest is the Sacrifice Jesus Christ.

If our Lord, because he is a Priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedeck, have an everlasting Priesthode, Heb. 7.
as S. Paul says, although he offered him self unto the Father with death in
the Altar of the Cross to pay the price of man's redemption: yet his
Priesthode was not extinquished by death. Wherefore, as in the Epistle to the
Hebrews S. Paul concludes, Heb. ^.
it is necessary, that he have also that, which he may offer. But whereas it is
not Christ him self in his own person, but a man Priest that stands at the
Altar, who with the words of Christ does consecrat and offer this Sacrifice,
as to this purpose he is assumpted: the learned Fathers of the Council of
Trent, Council. Trident. Sessi. 22. cap. 2.
have discussed this controversy with three words. For the Host (say they)
is one and the self same. He the same now offers by the ministry of
Priests, that offered himself upon the Cross with a diverse way only of
offering. Whereof it follows, that both Christ, and also we, here are
Priests, he, because he consecrateth by our ministry, we, because we
consecrate in his person, and with his words. For whereas he said to his
Apostles, Luc. 22.
Do ye this in my remembrance, after that he had offered him self vnbloudily
at the Supper, as he is now offered in the Altar: the Apostles so understood
him, the Holy Ghost giving them such sense, or Christ by express words so
teaching them, that they should consummate, and make perfect this Mystery, in
the person of him, and with his words. Which of an assured tradition of the
Church that can not be deceived, the ancient Fathers have always taught, and
the Church to this day observes.

This doctrine S Chrysostom confirms with these words. Chrysostom. homil. De
prodi^ione Iudae.
Now the time inuiteth us to come unto that dreadful Table with due reverence,
and agreeable watchefulnes. Let no Judas there be found, let no evil disposed
person thither come. For it is not man, that of the Co^secratio^ of our Lords
Table makes the things set forth the body and blood of Christ^. The words
be uttered with the Priests mouth, and with the power of God and his grace,
they are consecrated. This is my body, says, Christ: with this word the
things set forth be consecrated. And as that word, Genesis 1.
which says, Grow ye, and be ye multiplied and fill the earth, was once spoken,
but at al time feels his effect, nature working unto generation: Eue^ so that
word was once spoken, but it gives strength unto the Sacrifice, through all the Tables of the Church, until this day, and until his coming. Again he
says in an other Homily. Idem Homil. 2.
I will tell you further of a marvelous thing, and wonder not at it, let it not
trouble you. In 2. ad Timoth.
What is that? The holy Oblation it self, be it Peter, be it Paul, or of what
so ever merit the Priest be, that offers it, is the very same, that Christ
him self gave unto his Disciples, and that Priests now also do consecrate.
This has no whit less then that. Why so? Because they be not men, that
sanctify this, but Christ which consecrated that before. For as the words
that Christ spoke, be the same, which the Priests now also do pronounce^ so
the Oblation is the same. Chrysostom. Homil. 60 ad popul. Antioch.
Therefore he says in an other place: Ministrorum nos ordinem tenemus, qui
vero ipsa sanctificat, and transmutat, ipse est. We are but in the order of
Ministers, but he that sanctifies the things (brought forth) and changes
them (into the body and blood of Christ) is he him self, that is to say,
Christ.

Council. Florentinum.
Hereunto agrees the Council of Florence. The Priest (say those learned
Fathers) does consecrate this Sacrament speaking in the person of Christ. in
the person of Christ (they mean) sitting, and offering up him self at his
Supper. For the Church^ teaches not, that the words of consecration be
spoken by way of rehearsal only, and that the body and blood of Christ is made
at every pronounciation of them, as by a covenant made by Christ with us. But
as the brothers of Joseph in Egypt, fearing least he would bear in mind the
injuries, which he had suffered at their hands, caused this much to be said
unto him, Genesis vltimo.
Thy Father gave us in commandment before he died, that we should say these
unto thee with his words. I beseech thee to forgete the wicked deed of thy
brothers, the sin, and malice, which they wrought against thee. And we also
on our own behalf, pray thee to forgive the servants of thy Father this
iniquity: Even so the Church, first with the words of Christ, recording his
commandment, offers up unto the Father his body and blood. After that the
Priests in the person of the Church, whose public ministers they are in this
behalf, add further their own duty of offering with their own words.

These things being considered, In what part of the Mass is the holy
Oblatio^ made. Vide Tho 3 part. q. 82 art. 4. ad primum. Homil d^ proditione
Iud^.
that question is soon answered, that of some is demanded, where, and in what
part of the Mass, is this most holy Oblation made. For although from the
lesser Canon unto the Communion, it be with words and intention presented unto
the Father, yet forasmuch as the words of Christ (as S. Chrysostom speaks)
give strength unto the Sacrifice, and they are no where else pronounced:
properly and in deed then it is made, when the Priest speaking in the person
of Christ, says, this is my body, to wit, which for you is given and broken
(which is added in the Canon of S. James, and in S. Ambroses Mass) and, This
is my blood which is shed for you. For then do we that, which our Lord
commanded to be done in remembrance of him, saying, Do ye this in remembrance
of me. As for the things that be spoken before, and after, they are to be
referred unto that time.

For albeit al manner Consecration considered by it self, includes not
Oblation, yet considered, as it proceeds of the Priests Intention to offer
unto God by Consecration it self the thing consecrated, because unto God, and
unto the honor of him he consecrateth: it has the true nature of Oblation,
and Sacrifice.

Remembrance distinct from Sacrifice.
Although therefore our Lord commanded us to do this in remembrance of him,
yet is this Sacrifice a far other thing, then the remembrance it self, or
the praise of God, or thanks giving: since that the thing it self which is
commanded to be made, is in the very words of Christ, distincted from the
remembrance. For he said not, remember ye this, but, Do^ ye this (or make this)
in remembrance of me. The Sacrifice, and the Oblation ought to be made in the
remembrance of Christ, so that the remembrance it self is not the Sacrifice,
but the use and end of the Sacrifice, for which it ought to be offered for by
this unbloody Sacrifice, a commemoration of the Blouddy Sacrifice, that was
offered upon the Cross, is made unto the Father. And so says S. Augustine:
Augu. lib. 20. contra Faustum. cap. 18.
Christiani per acti Sacrificij memoriam celebrant sacrosancta Oblatione, and
participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi. The Christians do celebrate the
memory of the Sacrifice already done (upon the Cross) by the holy Oblation,
and participation of the body and blood of Christ. Whereof it is evidently
gathered also, that Oblation is distincted from Participation, although
Participation perteine to the perfection and full complement of the Sacrifice.

So here thou have Reader that, which was required in the second place, By
whom this holy Sacrifice is offered, to wit, In this sacrifice the Church
offers, and is offered.
by Christ through the Ministry of the Priest, and by the Priest in the
person of Christ. Where also we ought to join the Church withal, because of
the unity of Christ and the Church: and so we understand the Church also to
offer, August. de Ciuit. Dei. li. 10. cap. 6.
by the ministry of the Priest. For so S. Augustine teaches us with plain
words. In that Sacrament (says he) it is showed unto the Church, that in
that Oblation, which it offers, it self is offered.

Concerning the third point required by S. Augustine, What is the thing that
is offered^
that is to say, what is the thing that is offered: if we will admit the godly
exposition of the Church, the Prophet teaches us what it is, Psalm. 115.
where he says, what shall I give again unto our Lord for all that he has
given unto me? I will take the Cup of our Savior, and call upon the name of
our Lord, meaning by the Cup, his precious blood that upon the Cross was
shed for us, and is the price of our Redemption. Which blood together with the
body by virtue of Christ's word in the Euchariste, is made present.

Who refuses this exposition of the Prophet, if he will believe Christ him
self, Luc. 22.
who said, This is my body, which is given for you, Math. 26.
This is my blood which is shed for you, he can not be ignorant, what it is,
that is offered in this Sacrifice.

Whereas then God has so loved the world, Johan. 3.
that he has given his only begoten Son, Romans 8.
and has given unto us with him al things (for a Babe is borne to us, Esai. 9.
a Son is given to us, says Esaie): the whole merit of Christ, and the
price of the Redemption, which he got upon the Cross, is ours. And therefore
in this Oblation, the thing offered being the body and blood of Christ, which
as a most sufficient price he gave upon the Cross for Redemption of mankind,
and which of gift we have received of God: we present and give unto God, in
the person of Christ, that same true body and blood, that is to say, Christ
him self together with that great price and merit, not to purchase a new
Redemption, but in commemoration of his death, whereby the redemption is already
purchaced, in rendering of thanks for his benefits, in a certain satisfaction
for our sins and defectes, and for the temporal pains that be due unto our
sins (mortal sins and pains everlasting being forgeuen either in Baptism,
Cyprian. ad Ceciliu^. epist. 3. lib. 2.
or through the Sacrament of Penance) humbly beseching and as king in the
person of Christ, that so it be accepted. In consideration whereof S. Cyprian
calls it the Passion of our Lord, that we offer. And S. Augustine calls
it, Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 12.
Sacrificium pr^tij nostri, the Sacrifice of our Price, wherewith our Raunsom
is paid.

And hereof Reader thou may conceive, what answer is to be made unto them,
that move this question, which to some, though without just cause, seems to be
of great difficulty: whether the Sacrifices of the old Testament, the
Sacrifice that our Lord offered at his Supper, the Sacrifice of the Cross,
and that Sacrifice, which is daily made in the Church, whether al these have a
like and the self same consideration and being of a Sacrifice (to utter it
more plainly in Latin to the learned, in which tongue this matter would more
aptly be treated) an vniuoce Sacrificia dicantur. For although al these do
commonly agree in this, that they profess a supreme excellency of the Divine
Majesty, in deed it self, and sensibly: yet because, it pertains to the
consideration and nature of a Sacrifice, that after some manner it be
satisfactorie, as with which satisfaction may in some sort be made to our
Lord God, partly for sins, and for pains due to sins, partly for
benefits, which we have received, or be desirous to receive: only the
Sacrifice of the Cross has the most perfect, and most propre nature, of a
Sacrifice, as being that, by which only all the price of Satisfaction is
purchased and paid, and out of which al Sacrifices, as also al Sacraments, as
out of their first founteine do draw, and take their whole force and virtue,
and by which also only, it has been showed most fully, as much as can be
done, how great is the excellency of the Divine Majesty, and how great
things it is convenient that we do for the same.

But the Sacrifice of the Altar, and the Sacrifice of our Lords Supper,
forasmuch as they offer up the same thing, retain the propre, true, and after
their sort perfect, though very different consideration and nature of a
Sacrifice, because the host is the same that was offered upon the Cross. But
the Sacrifices of the law, be Sacrifices after a common and imperfect respect:
partly because there was little in them, that was worthy of the Divine Majesty,
partly because, as S. Paul writes to be Hebrews, Hebr. 9. and, 10.
they were not hable to take away sins, nor make a man perfect in conscience:
but they that sacrificed, obtained these benefits by faith, which by those
Sacrifices was declared. Of this diversity of these Sacrifices speaks S.
Augustine. lib. 20. Contra Faust. cap. 18. and lib. 1. Contra aduersarium Legis
and Prophetarum. cap. 18. Where thou shall learn Reader, that al Sacrifices
have respect unto the Cross, in which they have their perfection, and from
which they get virtue, August in psalm. 108. in illu^ ver, su^, and oration
eius fiat in peccatum.
or grace to please God, forasmuch as they stay al upon that, as also al our
thankesgeuing, and prayer, as the same S. Augustine teaches, writing upon the.
108. Psalm.

Now let us see for whom Oblation is to be made^ For in as much as our Lord
has need of nothing, but For who^ i^ this Sacrifice made.
he receives not gifts at our hands, but for our sakes and we acknowledging
this much, do offer unto him, to the intent to obtain some thing of him. For
else to what purpose were it to offer gifts unto him, who says, Psalm. 49.
Si esuriero, non dicam tibi: If I happen to be a hungered, I will not tell thee
of it: for mine is the round earth, and al wherewith it is filled. For as much
therefore, as in this Divine Sacrifice, the same self Christ is contained,
and is sacrificed vnbloudily, which in the Altar of the Cross once offered
up him self bloudily: we may soon see, for whom, I mean, for what persons,
and for what causes, it may, or ought to be offered.

For whereas this Sacrifice is instituted to this end, that the memory of the
bloody Sacrifice should be celebrated, and the fruit of it through this be
applied unto us, and for so much as by his word, Do ye this in remembrance
of me, he made no exception of persons, nor of causes, for which he would
offer the blouddy Sacrifice: it follows plainly, that the Sacrifice of the
Altar is offered for all in general, for whom lawfully we pray to God in the
name of Christ, and for whom Sacrifices in the Law, and before the Law, were
wont to be offered. For for all those Christ has died. And this only, and
singular Sacrifice succeeded in place of all the Sacrifices of the old law, as
S. Augustine teaches, which for diverse causes and persons were offered. De
ciuit. Dei. li. 17. cap. 20.
For as concerning persons, he gave him self (as says S. Paul) a redemption
for all men.

And as touching things to be looked for at Gods hand, ^. Tim. 2.
he that has not spared his own Son (says the same Apostle) but has
delivered him up for us al, Romans 8.
how has he not given to us also with him al things? How has he not given, I
say, in as much as for his sake he has proponed al things by him to be
obtained? Joan. 16.
For what so ever (says he) ye ask of my Father in my name, he will give it
you. Wherefore since that he commanded this Sacrifice to be offered in
remembrance of him, and nothing is more effectual to the obteining of any thing
by the Passion of Christ, then with thankeful commemoration to this end to
celebrate the memory of the same before the Father: what is there whereunto
the Death of Christ is available, For what causes were Sa^crifices offered
by the Fathers, before the law, and i^ the law.
that may not through this Sacrifice be most profitably asked, in which he him
self that has died, is presented?

Therefore we read, that the holy Fathers, which were before the law, and in
the time of the law, did not offer up Sacrifice only for thankesgeuing, and in
recognitio^ of the divine Majesty, but also for sins, and for what soever
their necessities, and needs, as the Scripture records of holy Job, Job. 1.
and ^lt.
and his friends, of Aaron, Samuel, David, the Machabees, and Onias the Priest.
So also in the law there were offered, not only Peace offeringes, called,
pacifica, or whole burnt offeringes, which were offered for thankesgeuing, and
for thobteining of Gods blessings: but also Sacrifices for sins: yea and
after the diversity of sins, diverse Sacrifices were instituted. Wherefore
they offered not only for those, whom they accounted for just, but also for
sinners, strangers, and infidels, for the quick, and the Dead.

Sacrifice offered for the whole world.
Neither did they sacrifice always for one alone, but also for the whole
people, yea and for the whole world. For it seems that the Sacrifice of No^,
whereof we read in Genesis, Genesis 8.
was offered for all mankind. Noe builded an Altar to our Lord (says the
Scripture) and taking some of all the clean beasts, and birds, he offered
burnt Sacrifices upon the Altar, and our Lord smelled the sweet savor, and
says unto him, I will no more curse the earth for men's cause, for the sense
and thought of man's heart are prone to evil from their youth, wherefore I will
no more strike every living soul, as I have done.

As touching that which was offered in the law, on the morn and even every
day, it was for the whole people, and for their common necessities: whereof we
read Numer. 28. Onias the chief Priest offered up an healthful host for
Heliodorus an infidel, ^^ Ma^h. 3
and a most wicked man. And the Jews that were carried away captive to
Babylon, sent money to Jerusalem, wherewith they that remained there, should
buy whole burnt offeringes, and incense, Baruc. ^.
and make ye manna (quod they) and offer ye for sin at the Altar of our
Lord our God, and pray ye for the life of Nabugodonosor king of Babylon, and
for the life of Baltazar his son, that their days may be as the days of
heaven upon earth, as we find in Baruch. Furthermore Judas that valiant
Captain of the Machabees, 2. Machab 12.
sent a great sum of money to Jerusalem, and commanded sacri^ice to be made
for the sins of the dead, whom he hoped to have died in godly estate.

Now Reader, I trow that we, to whom a Sacrifice has been leafte by our
Savior Christ of so much a more excellency, by how much the body of the
Son of God, is worthier then an unreasonable beast, are not in this behalf
in worse case, then the Jews were, but that the same may also for us be
profitable and available to al persons, to al causes, and to al necessities.
This much we find taught by S. Augustine, Epist. 59. By S. Chrysostom also,
Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in. 1. Tim. 2. and li. 6. de Sacerdotio.
and by the daily practice of the Church, which in the Mass prays always
for the whole world, as the Mass also of S. James has expressly.

But whereas a thing, that is good and profitable, is said to profit others by
more ways then one, as for example, either ex opere operato, as the
Shcolastical Doctors speak, After what way is this sacrifice auailable.
(as much to say, of the force, power, and strength of the thing or work it
self, which is done or wrought, without respect had unto the worthiness, or
merit of the party that does or works, as the Sacraments are said to work
ex opere operato, and to do that thing, for which they be adhibited unto a
person accordingly disposed, by force and virtue of the work that is wrought,
even as a man that puts fire unto a house, is said to set the house a fire
ex opere operato, by force of that very work done): or ex opere operantis,
as much to say, by the devotion, virtue, and goodness of the party that
works, as prayer, fasting, almose, and the like: Or else, by way of merit, or
satisfaction, which do claim a certain right: or lastly, by way of humble
prayer, which has hope in benignity only and liberality of him to whom
prayer is made: whereas, I say, a thing which is good and profitable, may be
said to profit by so many sundry ways: Here there arises no small difficulty
to discuss, by which of these means and ways, the Sacrifice of the Mass is
available to them, for whom it is offered: and whereof it comes to pass,
that it profits one more then an other.

To this question having consulted the writings of learned and grave men, thus
I answer: that because in the Mass many things do concur and meet
together, it is available by all means and ways, by which a good work may
be available: but yet that for the diversity of causes, and persons, for
which the Sacrifice is offered, it has diverse working. And generally, albeit
of it self, or (ex opere operato) by virtue of the thing offered and
sacrificed, it be available: yet not altogether after the same manner,
Sacraments, and Sacrifices diverse in the manner of vvorking.
that Sacraments be. For as touching the Sacraments, they be as instruments
that God uses in them to whom they be adhibited, and if they be disposed as
they ought to be, and through faith and charity be capable, they work health
and salvation, and confer grace. But the Sacrifice of the Mass (as the
nature of a Sacrifice requires) does work after a manner, which, though it
be of more efficacy, yet is like unto prayer. Of more efficacy, I say,
forasmuch as it is made in the person of Christ, a most acceptable, and most
sufficient gift being given and offered up, for whose sake God being appeased
and pleased, is moved to hear them, that so to him do sue and pray. Neither
is it to be doubted, but that thinstitution of Christ is much available to
increase the power, which this sacrifice has to obtain things behooful for
man's health. For he would never have delivered him self unto us, to the intent
we should offer him with our own hands unto his eternal Father: except he had
forseene and willed, that great commodity should redounde too men by this
Oblation.

In consideration whereof, Sacrifice comprehended under the name of prayer.
because it works an effect like unto prayer, the Scripture under the name
of prayer, oftentimes comprehends both Sacrifice in general, and also this
Sacrifice specially succeding in place of all the old Sacrifices, as though
Sacrifice it self also were a certain prayer, but a singular prayer. So the
writer of the story of the Machabees having made a rehearsal of the Sacrifice
of Judas, that he commanded to be offered for them that were dead, brings in
a general sentence, 2. Machab. 12.
saying, It is therefore a holy and a holesom thought, to pray for the dead,
that they may be loosed from their sins, signifying sacrifice to be contained
under prayer, as the Special is contained under the General.

And S. Paul expounding the definition of Christ as he is a Priest whose
duty is to offer up gifts, and Sacrifices, faith, Heb. 5.
that he in the days of his flesh (as much to say, when he was conversant here
among men) offering up prayers and supplications to him that was hable to save
him from death with strong crying, and with tears, was heard for his
reverence. Where manifestly he calls gifts and sacrifices by the name of
prayers. So S. Augustine in his.59. Epistle takes Orationes, that is to say,
Prayers in S. Paul. 1. Tim. 2. for Oblations and Sacrifices. So in the Acts,
Cap. 6. Nos orationi, and ministerio Verbi instantes erimus. We will attend
diligently to Prayer, and to the ministry of the Word. So whereas it is said
of the Priest in the book of Leuiticus, Leuit. 16.
Orabit prose, he shall pray for him self, S. Paul in the Epistle to the
Hebrews interprets it, Heb. 5.
offeret prose ipso, he shall offer for him self.

So where it is said in Esaie, Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur, Esaie. 56.
My House shall be called the House of prayer, it is not without cause judged,
that under the name of prayer, Mat. 21.
the Prophet comprehends Sacrifice. For the Temple was not appointed unto
prayer specially, and properly, but unto Oblation and Sacrifice. For prayer
might be made in every place, but Sacrifice could be made no where but in the
Temple. In deed prayer was evermore added unto the Sacrifices, wherewith they
asked that of God, for which they offered. Yet say we not that sacrifice is
prayer, as the name of prayer is taken properly, but that oftentimes it is
understood by the name of prayer, because in this it is like unto it, for
that it offers a gift unto God, to the intent to receive some thing of him,
wherein it appears to be a prayer, not in word, but in deed. And because it
gives to receive, it has also the nature of a certain satisfaction, as that
which gives one thing for an other.

The Sacrifice then of the Mass, The Sacrifice auailable ex opere operato in
what respect.
is auail^able, ex opere operato, that is to say, in respect of the virtue and
strength of the thing it self that is offered. of the thing it self I mean,
without consideration had of the priest, whether he be good, or evil, because
in the person of Christ, and by his commission, the body and blood of Christ
are offered up unto God. Which oblation it self for the worthiness, and
reverence of Christ, as a Prayer of greatest efficacy, and most worthy to be
heard, the Father beholds, and in regard of it, performs that, for which
the body and blood of his Son are so offered, according to the order of his
Divine disposition, and as it shall seem convenient to him self, forasmuch as
al judgment is given unto him. Johan. 5.


By the same consideration it has very great force and strength to satisfy
for temporal pains that be due unto sins, The Sacrifice satisfies for pains
which pains oftetimes in Scripture be called by the name of sins. For if
according unto the counsel of Daniel, Daniel. 4.
sins, that is to say, pains due to sins, are redeemed with almose, how
much more with the body and blood of the Son of God offered at the Altar?
If pains were loosed by the sacrifices of the old Law, shall they not much
more be loosed by the Sacrifice of the new Law? For else, what shall we say,
that the blood of Christ is of less price in the sight of God, then the
blood of a calfe? Although Sacrifices have their valor by way of Prayer, yet
when they bring a present that is worthy of Gods favor to remission of pains,
and of his gifts, they lean to a certain right and equity, as the Price
being exhibited, and so they be satisfactorie.

S. Augustine speaking of this way of working by the name of Christ, August.
co^tra literas Petiliani. lib. 2 cap. 54.
in Sacrifices, and otherwise, says to Petilian the Donatist, Gratias Deo,
quia tande^ confessus es valere inuocatu^ nomen Christi ad aliorum salute^,
etia^ si a peccatoribus inuocetur. God be thanked, for that thou have at length
confessed that the name of Christ called upon is available unto the health of
others, although it be called upon of sinners. If the name of Christ only
called upon be available unto health, shall not the blood of Christ be
available to procurement of health, specially if the person, for whom it is
offered, be through his own good disposition meet to receive such benefit?

Neither is this Sacrifice available only (ex opere operato) of it self, The
Sa^crifice Available (...) opere operantis.
and of the work done, but also in some degree, ex opere operantis, for, and
through the merit of the offerer. For in as much as the Priest does offer this
holy Sacrifice not as a private man, and in his own private name, but as the
public Minister of the Church, and in the name of the Church, assumpted
thereunto by public authority: whereas there never want great merits in the
Church, the merit of the offerer is never separated from the virtue of the
work that is wrought, that is to say, from the body and blood of Christ: so
that although the Priest that offers, and they that be present, be wicked,
yet the Sacrifice of the Mass is not void and frustrat, but much available to
the working of some good effect, according to the disposition of Gods merciful
providence. ^ugust. c^^. epist. Parmen. lib. 2.


And therefore no marvel is it, after the teaching of S. Augustine, that good
words which be said in the public Prayers for the people, though they be said
of evil Bishops, nevertheless be heard, not according to the peruersitie of
the Governors, but according to the devotion of the people. And yet it
skilleth much what the Governors be, seeing that their godliness through the
Sacrifice much helps the infirmity of the people. For which consideration,
as S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 4.
we ought not to elect any other to be Bishops, but such as be unspotted, and
whole, who offering up Sacrifices unto God worthily and holily, may be heard in
their Prayers, which they make for the safety of our Lords people. Gregor in
Pastorali part. 1. ca. 2.
For else, when he that is sent to make intercession, displeases: the mind of
the displeased is more grievously provoked, says S. Gregory speaking of
unworthy Priests.

But yet the Priests impiety can not let, but that the Sacrifice, The
impiety of the Priest is no hinderance to others touching the benefit of the
Sacrifice
which of it self, and being offered in the name of the Church, is so good
and acceptable a thing unto God, shall profit them, which besides the Priests
with godliness do offer it, according to the devotion both of them, that with
the Priests do offer, and of them, for whom it is offered. For true it is that
S. Augustine says to Petilianus the Donatiste: Nos dicimus tale cuique
Sacrificiu^ fieri, qualis accedit vt offerat. We say, that the Sacrifice to
each man is made such, August. contra lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 52 1. q. 1. cap.
Dominus.
as he is, that comes to offer.

Whereas then the well disposed people does offer up that same very Sacrifice by
devout affection, which the Priest offers by outward Ministry: the
wickedness of the Minister bereueth not any devout person of the benefit of
the Sacrifice.

Neither is this so to be taken, as though in this case nothing were to be
looked for above the merit of our devotion, for then to what purpose were the
Sacrifice? But what so ever benefit redoundeth of the virtue of the Sacrifice,
over and above the merit of devotion: the same is so much the more abundantly
of every one enjoyed, with how much more devotion toward Christ and his
Death he offers.

This devout disposition of the offerers our Lord prescribed, when
consecrating and making his Apostles Priests, Luc. 22.
he said, Do ye this in remembrance of me. In which commandment, 1. Cor. 11.
whereas there be two things contained, doing, and remembering, or
commemoration: this much our Lord therein signified, The Sacrifice profits
in diverse degrees.
that with how much the more grateful and devout memory they did it, so
much the more by this Sacrifice they should obtain: and again how much the
nearer any man came unto that doing, and action of offering, the more benefit
thereof he should receive. For though al they that be just may be said to
offer this Sacrifice by a certain generality, August. Epist. 23.
which S. Augustine seems to mean, for so much as it pleases them al, that
it be offered: yet they come nearer unto this action, who do it them selves,
who hear Mass deuoutely, who serve and attend upon the Priest to do that
actio^, who sustain him for his ministry, who with godly desire require
Mass of him.

Wherefore as a prayer profits them that pray them selves more, then an
other, for whom it is made: so this Sacrifice profits more them, that offer
it them selves, then it does them, for whom only it is offered. And as a Prayer
profits more, that is specially made for one, then that which is made only
in general for all: even so it is in the Sacrifice. But these things shall
appear more clearly by the effects, which we look for to enjoy, by the
Sacrifice of the Mass through the virtue of Christ's passion, if we rehearse
them particularly.

The first effect by consent of al men is the remission The effects that we
obtain by the Sacrifice of the Mass.
which the very just do daily commit, and also of temporal pains, unto
which they remain thral and bound, though damnation everlasting be forgeuen.

An other effect is, the increase of righteousness, and the continuance in good
life. These are expressly declared in the Institution of this Sacrifice by the
Institutor him self, who first offered it. This is my blood (says he) of the
new Testament, Luc. 22.
which for you, and Mat. 26.
for many is shed in remission of sins. That the Apostles understood the very
same also in the Consecration of the Body, the Mass of S. James does show.
Where after the pronouncing of those words, Liturgia Iacobi.
this is my body which for you is given, and broken: the Deacon forthwith
adds, in remissionem peccatorum, in remission of sins. By which words,
for so much as with them Christ to this effect offered him self, (albe it
peradventure they might be more generally understood) that at least may be
gathered, which now we have said of the remission of Venial sins, and
temporal pains, unto which the Apostles them selves were thral.

Touching the other, there is a manifest place in S. John. Christ speaking of
the Apostles, and of them that should through their preaching believe in him,
Johan. 17.
says: For them I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified in
truth. Which saying is truly understood of the increase of holiness, and of
continuance, in as much as the Apostles were now cleansed, and sanctified.

And unto these effects the Sacrifice of the Mass is available for all the
faithful that pertain to the body of Christ, that is to say, for the just,
not only by the devotion and merit of men that offer it, but by the virtue of
the Sacrifice it self: neither only by mean of a certain common Prayer,
which stands upon liberality, but of such prayer, as satisfies the
requests of Gods justice with presenting unto him the price paid for sins,
and with a gift given worthy to obtain that is asked, which is the proper
nature of a Sacrifice, which is to be satisfactorie, and to be offered by way
of satisfaction. And therefore S. Paul specially considering the worthiness of
this true Sacrifice, said in general, that every Bishop or Priest is ordained
to offer gifts and Sacrifices for sins.

Of this it is learnedly by the Divines gathered, that, for so much as
Infidels, and such wicked persons, as be not yet reconciled unto the Church,
or unto God, nor so disposed, that for them satisfaction may effectually be
made: Sacrifice for them is not properly offered. For whether they them selves,
or others for them do offer, God does not accept gifts for the wicked, to
this end for which properly they be offered, as it appeared in Cain. Genesis 4.
This is witnessed in the Scriptures, and in sundry other places. Prouer. 15
Eccles. 34


Therefore S. Augustine says writing to Renatus, Quis offerat Corpus Christi,
August, de origin animae. lib. 1. c. 9.
nisi pro eis, qui membra sunt Christi? Who may offer the body of Christ, but
for them, which are the members of Christ? The late holy general Council of
Trent approving this sentence of S. Augustine, Masses common not private, and
wherefore Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 6.
and declaring that the Masses, whereat no man communicates besides the
Priest, be not private, but common, says, that they ought to be judged common,
partly for that the people in them does communicate spiritually, partly for
that they be celebrated by the public Minister of the Church, not for him
self only, but for all the Faithful, that pertain to the Body of Christ.

When therefore Petrus a Soto that learned man was demanded in that Council,
whether Chaunteries might be erected, and Masses appointed to be said for
Infidels: he answered, that it was unlawful, because to ordeine Mass for any,
is to ordeine, that Sacrifice for them be offered, and that to them thereby
satisfaction be applied, which ought not to be done, because satisfaction
requires before a remission of the deadly fault. Yet well may it be, (said he)
that Prayer in the Mass for their Conversion be made.

Our Savior him self seems to have insinuated this property of the
Oblation, when offering up his body and blood at the Supper after the form
and rite of Melchisedek, not without cause he said, of the one, Lucae. 22.
which for you is given, of the other, which for you, Math. 26
and for many is shed (that is to say, is presently offered up and shed in
Mystery, anonne with outward violence to be shed) in remission of sins: For
as touching the valor of the price, it was offered upon the Cross, not for
many, but for all. And so the Sacrifice of Melchisedek obtained the benediction
for just Abraham, who is the example and pattern of all that follow him.

This judge I to be the chief cause why in the Primitive Church, as we find
in S. Dionysius the Areopagite, when true discipline was exactly kept,
Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3 part. 5.
the learners of the faith before they received Baptism, then called
Catechumeni, they that were possessed of unclean sprites, called Energumeni,
Public Sinners, and they that did public penance, were commanded by the
Deacon to depart out of the Church before the Oblation, that they should not
be present at it.

Yet as it is here before said, and as it is clear by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 2.
in a certain general and common respect we offer for all, forasmuch as we
present the body and blood of Christ unto the Father in his person, and by
his commission, and beseech his goodness, that in regard of his body and blood
he will have mercy upon them. But we do not present these gifts for all, as
a Price that is exhibited for them (which thing the propre nature of this
oblation comprehends in respect of release of the pains) because al be not
capable, that is to say, not apt vessels to receive such benefit.

As touching other things, which profitably be asked in the Mass, Benifites
redounding to us by the Mass.
as victory, peace, health, ceasonable wether, and such other the like,
wherewith man's misery is relieved and helped, the Sacrifice of the Mass is
available for them, according to the order of Gods eternal disposition, not
only by reason of the merit of the Priest, and of the Church that offers:
but also, and that more amply, by reason of the quality, and virtue of the
Sacrifice, which is consecrated in the person of Christ, and by his
commission.

But this is by way of Prayer: which Prayer, because it is not sitting the
words of Christ to be frustrate, by which he committed this Sacrifice unto
us: the Father very oftentimes hears. And whereas he hears it not, the
judgments of God be secret. For great is the virtue of the signs, and
Sacraments of the name of Jesus Christ, unto whose honor the very powers of
the Aier are commanded to yield and give place, though it be called upon by
evil, and for evil persons, as S. Augustine very learnedly teaches in his
book of.83. questions, Augu. lib. 83. quaest. quaest. 79.
or who else so ever is author of that book. For in no wise dare any sprites
(says he) to contemn these signs. For they tremble at these, where so ever
they behold them. but men being unwitting of it, by God an other thing
sometime is commanded. For whereas they give not place unto these-Signes, God
him self forbids, when he judges it just, and profitable. Thus S.
Augustine.

To this very aptly serves that he writes in his.22. book De Ciuitate Dei.
Where he tells of a house delivered from evil Sprites by the Prayers, and
Sacrifice of the Mass. August. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8.
Hesperius a noble man (says he) who dwells in our country, has in the
Lordship of Fussala, a Ferme, called Cubedi. Where when he understood, that
his house which he has there, sustained great hurt by evil Sprites, and that
his catail, and his Servants were much troubled: he besought our Priests in
my absence, that one would go thither, that by his Prayers they might be driven
away. One went, and offered up there the Sacrifice of the body of Christ,
praying, as much as he was ha^le, that the vexation might cease. Forthwith by
the mercy of God is ceased.

S. Gregory shows by many examples, that through the Sacrifice of the Mass
diverse received temporal benefits, Grego. in Dialogis.
who neither were present when Mass was said for them, nor thought at al of
it. Also certain special helps by this Sacrifice be obtained, which of the
Divines are called, prima gratia, for with these God does oftentimes help
them, for whom the Sacrifice is offered, that the motion of faith, and
devotion, and desire of the medicine of the Sacraments, be stirred up in them.

Thus thou see Reader, what power the Sacrifice of the Mass has. And as
this Sacrifice has virtue to remove al manner evils from us, so it has virtue
to get and procure al good things unto us, according to the disposition of
Gods Providence. What force the Sacrifice of the Mass has ^ouching the
remission of mortal sins.
Wherefore that also may easily be conceived, which of many men is called in
question touching the remission of mortal sins. Verily the blessed Martyr S.
Alexander fifth in the Regester of the Popes, says in his first epistle, that
Crimes, and sins be put out by these Sacrifices offered up unto our Lord.
And again, that our Lord is delited, and appeased with such Sacrifices, and
that (through them) he forgeueth great sins. Alexander epist. ad o^^s
orthodoxos.
For nothing (says he) can be greater in Sacrifices, then the body and blood
of our Lord.

Julius speaking likewise of the Sacrifices, says, that by them offered to God,
al crime and sin is quite put out. S. Gregory also says, Julius. De Cons.
Distinct. 2. Cu^ omne. Gregor. Dialog. 4. Cap. 58.
that this Sacrifice singularly saves the soul from everlasting destruction.
Al which, and sundry other the like sayings of certain Fathers, are so to be
understood, not as though we might obtain remission of such sins after
Baptism committed without Absolution of the Priest, who is the Ministre of the
Sacrament of Penance: but that this blessed Sacrifice does give such grace,
and works so together with the infirmity of the Penitentes, that they may by
the Priests be reconciled unto God. And it is so acceptable in the sight of
God, Sess. 22. Cap. 2.
that (as the Counsel of Trent teaches) being appeased by the Oblation of it,
granting grace, and the gift of Penance, he forgeueth Crimes, and sins,
yea that be right great.

As concerning them, The Sacrifice of the Mass profitable for the dead. 2.
Mac. 12 Joan. 11. August. in Enchirid. cap. 110.
that with godliness are departed this life and have taken their sleep, as the
Scripture speaks, and have not, as it behooued them, made full satisfaction,
whom we believe to remain in Purgatory: although now they be not in state to
merit any thing by any operation of their own will, or to do holesom Penance
for their sins: yet because they be the members of Christ, and fellow citizens
withal the Saints, fellows, and brothers with them: the Sacrifice of the Mass
profits them as it does the other just persons here, but that their own
propre devotion ca^ help them nothing, ^s now depending wholly of Christ, and
of the Church. For although God in the day of our departure hence (as it is
said of the wise man) do render to every man according to his ways: Eccle. 11.
yet after the doctrine of S. Augustine this much by their good works they have
deserved at Gods hand whiles they lived here: August. in Enchirid. ad Laure^ti.
cap. 11^
that these common duties of Christian fellowship might profit them also after
their departure hence. For else it should seem very unjust, and injurious unto
the body of Christ, if there were any members of it, to which being in
distress it could not procure succor. The motion of contrition and charity,
with which they departed hence (for else they remain not in Purgatory) is a
disposition, Athanas. in quaest. ad Antiochu^. q. 34. Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antioch. Homil. 69 and Sermo. 3. in epist. ad Philip. Damas. in Oratione, de
ijs qui hinc in fide migra^^n^.
which may suffice in their behalf, that Sacrifices, and other godly works,
offered and done for them, may help them. Wherefore as S. Athanasius, S.
Chrysostom, Damascen, and the more part of the ancient Fathers do witness,
it descended by Tradition from the Apostles, that this unbloody Sacrifice be
continually offered for them.

Now then Christian Reader thou have here declared unto thee, those points,
that I promised in the beginning: what is Sacrifice, being considered either as
it is taken for the Action of offering, or for the gift^ offered: for what
consideration it is due unto God: that it is most convenient for our nature
that it be visible: that the rite of sacrificing has been by God both
engraffed in the minds of men before the Law, and commanded in the Law:
That for love of his Church our Lord Instituted the singular Sacrifice of his
body and blood at his last Supper: How those four things be in this singular
Sacrifice, which S. Augustine teaches to be required in every Sacrifice:
lastly, for whom this Sacrifice is offered by what ways it is available for
man: what effects it brings forth.

Some here perhaps do wish, that I said somewhat The Prayers of the Mass
godly, and without superstition.
and of the Ceremonies, which the Church uses in the celebration of the
same: for our Adversaries by diverse ways labor to bring them in contempt. As
touching the Canon of the Mass, what part of it M. Jewel reproves as
blasphemous: in this Reiondre I do sufficiently defend, Page 123. b. item page
254. b. etc. Ambro. de Sacrament. lib. 4. c. 4.
as godly and holy, and such as may worthily seem mee^e to be said at the
celebratio^ of these Mysteries. As for all the rest that is said, for so much as
therein, as S. Ambrose says, Praise is deferred to God, prayer is made for the
people, for Kings, and for all men, and for all our necessities: briefly ^ith
nothing is done, but that which S. Paul exhorts to be done in his epistle to
Timothe, 1. Tim. 2.
whereof we spoke before: what is there that M. Jewel, or any of that side, or
Satan him self the great enemy of this Sacrifice, can find fault withal?

Concerning the Ceremonies used in the Mass, Ceremonies used in the
celebration of the Mass.
which consiste in the behavior, Gesture, Mouinges, and Signs of the Priest,
whereat also these men bear great spite: they be void of superstition, and
free from al just reproach, because they be only such, as put us in mind of
some special thing touching the Incarnation, Birth, Life, Preaching, Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, which pertains to the stirring up of Devotion, and
to the commandment of Christ the more conveniently to be observed. For
whereas he commanded us, Luc. 22.
that what he did, we should do the same: it may reasonably seem to be our
duty, that as he did, and after what manner he did, we also do likewise.
Verily the Ceremonies which we use, be of more antiquity, represent things of
more excellency, and through the practice of the whole Church of Christ be
of more authority: then that by the doctrine of any new Gospel, it may now
toward the time of Antichriste, seem either necessary, or convenient, that
they be changed.

And to the intent these ouerthrowers of al ancient Religion, and setters up of
their own Novelties, have ceremonies in less contempt: let us consider,
whether Christ him self (who first of al celebrated Mass at his last Supper,
1. Tim. 2.
and did those things, which S. Paul requiteth in his epistle to Timothee)
observed not certain Ceremonies, Ceremonies used by our Savior him self.
much like to ours. He laid down his garment, he girded him self, he kneeled
or stooped down, he washed his Disciples feet, he gave thanks to his Father,
he consecrated and offered up unto him his Body and Blood, Johan. 17.
he spoke unto his Disciples, he admonished, he taught, he comforted them, he
lifted up his eyes unto heaven, he prayed unto the Father for them, and for us.

1. Cor. 11.
S. Paul straightly forbids, a man to pray, or prophecy in the Church, with
coouered head. If the Catholics, without express Scripture, though moved with
the like reason that moved S. Paul, had so ordained: these men would have
cried out, that it had been superstitious. Touching this matter, here to speak
of al, it were very long, and a thing meet for a special book to be written
thereof, rather then for the brevity of a Preface. Therefore I let pass much
that might well be recited out of S. Dionyse the Areopagite, S. Iustine the
Martyr, Tertullian, Innocentius the first, and others, that of these things
have written.

How ceremonies may be used with out superstition.
Certain it is, that the Ceremonies we use, be not superstitious. For that we
judge to be superstitious, which being used in place of Gods service,
pertains not to the wourship of God, nor to the love of our neighbor. And
whereas the worship of God is double, for so much as we have from him both the
inward, and the outward good things: then is it duly, and lawfully, and
without al superstition done, when the outward things by some public
authority, as from God (for all power is of God) or by a certain leading of
nature be ordained unto an inward reverence, and a duetiful kindness toward
God to be stirred up, nourrished, and continued. For the moving it self of the
soul (as says S. Augustine) so long as it is yet lapped within earthly
things, August. ad Ianuar. epist. 119.
is but slowly inflamed, but if it be carried unto bodily likenesses, and
thence be carried unto the spiritual things, that by those likenesses be
figured: with the passing it self as it were (from the one to the other) it is
quickened, and being stirred as fire in a fyrebrande, it is enkindled, and with
a more ardent love it is pulled unto her rest and quiet. Therefore the use of
comely Ceremonies moves the mind more, then if the things by them signified
were uttered naked, and without similitudes of Sacraments, as there also he
says.

And this is the meaning of all the outward Rites, The meaning of the
Ceremonies used in the celebration of the Mass.
that be observed in the Mass. As for example, the Priests Vestimentes, do
signify either the garments of Christ, with which he was mocked, either the
new condition of the new man, or the Incarnation of the new King: His coming
unto the Altar, betokneth Christ's appearing, which was received with great
joy, and singing of Angels: Math. 27
the going from the one side of the Altar to the other, Luc. 2.
shows the translation of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and the returning of
it unto the Jews: by the washing of hands, the Priests cleanness of life,
by his bowing down, humility, by stretching of his Arms abroad, the Cross,
by his making of many signs of the Cross, every good effect to proceed of
the merit of the Cross, is signified. The like may be conceived of such
others more. For certainly as words be signs of things, so be these Rites in
the blessed Mass, signs of great Mysteries.

To be short, because through the infirmity of our condition, human
affection for the most part little estemeth common things, and such as be not
distinct from other things by some token of a more excellency, yea rather
dispiseth them (as Malachie the Prophet complained of the unclean, Malac. 1.
contemptible, and vile Oblations of his time) and woundereth and reuerenceth
those things, that by some show of excellency seem to surmount others: it
was necessary for the reverence of so holy an Oblation, and of the wo^rship of
so great a Majesty, that peculiar places, as Churches, Tabernacles, Aulters
also consecrated, Ecclesias. Hierarch. cap. 5. p. 1
as we find in S. Dionysius, special, and not common Vessels, and peculiar
Ministers were appointed for the same, whereby the cold minds of men might be
brought to think more reverently thereof.

As touching the practice of the Church, that is to say, of the holy and
learned Priests, and of all the people of God from the Apostles tim^ to these
da^es, what the Ancient Fathers have wr^^^en in pro^fe, and confirmation of
the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, which hereto might, be added:
for all this, I re^er^e the Reader unto my Reioindre.

Now then to conclude: Since that it is our duty to give and offer unto God
some gift and Sacrifice, whereby to render unto him due thanks for his
benefits, and to recognize him for our Creator, and Redemer, and nothing we
have to give either in it self better, or to him more acceptable, then the
body and blood of his Son Jesus Christ, and whereas we have commandment
to offer the same, and so great profit comes to men thereof, and whereas in
the Mass, in which this Sacrifice is offered by Christ, and the Church,
godly prayers be made for Kings, for them that be in authority, and for all
men, thanks be given, certain outward signs are showed, whereby the memory
of Christ's Passion is stirred up and to us renewed, and reverence to Godward
is enkindled: what forbids, why on the behalf of the most blessed Mass,
and of them who sustain persecution for this Sacrifice, I may not here utter
the words of the Holy Patriarch Jacob, by way of expostulation with our
Adversaries, Quam ob culpam nostram, Genesis 31.
and ob quod peccatum, quod in Missa committimus, Expostulation with the
persecutions of the Mass.
sic exarsistis post nos, and scrutaeti estis omnem suppellectilem nostram?
What is our trespace, and what is the sin that we have committed in saying,
and hearing the Mass, that ye are so wroth, and fume so much against us?

Ye have searched al stuff, as Jacob said to Laban, ye have examined our
doctrine, and what have ye found? Ye have examined us, ye have deprived us, ye
have condemned us, some to prisons, some to certain places, ye have debarred
us of liberty to see our dear friends, to enjoy our sweet Country, ye have
taken from us great sums of money, ye have thirsted our blood, ye have
oftetimes called for the Princes sword to be drawn against us, ye have given
the cause of the loss of many of our lives. This and much more, have ye done
touching our part.

But as touching Gods part, what injury, what dishonor, what pillages, what
robberies, what Sacrileges, what spoils, what profane and Turkish saggages of
Churches, what contempt, what despite, what villainies, ye and your brethren,
have done in sundry places of Christendom, what needs it any man to speak,
the secrets of hearts do speak, the sighing of Gods people speaks, the
Earth, the Heaven, God him self by his brute and dumme Creatures speaks. But
what avails it to make complaint unto them, that be not only far from al
grief of their evil doing, and from remorse of conscience, but also rejoice,
and glory in malice?

NOw therefore to return to thee good Reader, that thou may the better
understand our procedings, when at the first I took in hand to answer M.
Jewels Challenge, and to justify the Articles, that rashly, and wickedly he had
denied: amnog other things, I brought some of that I have here said, and what
else then to me seemed good, for proof, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which
in his.17. Article he denies. Thereto, as to the rest of my Answer, he has
made his Reply. In which Reply he has said, what he was hable to say, in
disprouse of that singular Sacrifice. But how insufficient his disprouse i^,
and of how little substance al is that he has brought, how little he amendeth
his common wont of falsifying his testimonies, what other false parts he
plays, and what gross errors he is fallen into: thou shall perceive, if
thou vouchesafe to read this Reioindre.

Whereas against this Sacrifice, by many men many words have been said, many
villainies have been wrought, many blasphemous books have been written (as is
before me^cioned) according to the sprite, that Satan the enemy of the
Sacrifice has enspired into their wretched breasts: Out of al M. Jewel, like
a Spyder, has suckte the most venomous iouice, and in his Reply has uttered
it, as it were spitting forth his poison. Which Reply; as perhaps it poisoneth
the lighter sort, who have delight to feed thereon: so to the wise, and those
that be steadfast in the Catholic Faith, all the stuff of his great book
appears, as it were but Cobwebbes. For in deed as with Cobwebbes nothing is
holden, but light mo^es, and weak flees: even so of a light wit, and feeble
Faith he shows him self to be, whom that Reply catches, and holds.

He has not one Ancient Doctor for him, not one Council, General, or
Prouincial, old, or new, not one Example of the Primitive Church, not one
sentence of the holy Scriptures. Not one I say for him, that is to wit, whereof
any clear conclusion may be gathered against the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ. These do I the rather make account of, because by his own
appointement, they be good ways and means, whereby to try points of Faith
in Controversy.

Now if M. Jewel have nothing out of al these for a clear disproufe of this
Sacrifice, after he has vewed all the books that by these new Masters have
been written in defense of his side, after that he has furnished him self
with all that ever Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Beza, and
the vpholders of their sects could devise against it, after that he has
co^ferred with his fellow Ministers and Superinte^dentes, who most readily join
their forces together against the Sacrifice yea after that he has learned the
Arguments of Satan him self the first Founder of this new Gospel, wherewith
he impugned the blessed Mass disputing with Luther, as he witnesses of him
self, if I say after all this, he be hable to bring nothing, whereby this
Sacrifice to any learned man may seem clearly disprooued: hereof thou may
soon conceive good Reader, how assured and certain the doctrine of the
Catholic Church is, that teaches the Body and Blood of Christ to be offered
up unto God under the forms of bread and wine by Priests, and the same to be
the Sacrifice propre to the new Testament, and how little there is to be said
against it.

Because in this treatise I do maintain my Answer, and disprooue what M.
Jewel has replied against it, that the whole process may seem the plainer,
and for that oftentimes I am driven by him falsely reporting my words, to
refer the Reader to that I said before: I have thought it necessary to set
forth my Answer, with his Reply, and my Reioindre together, the order of his
Divisions truly kept. Wherefore when M. Jewel bears thee in hand, that I
speak either absurdly, or untruly, or that I make a fond Argument: it may
please thee to return back unto the Answer, and vewing the place diligently,
to consider, whether thou find, as he reports. If this be done, I doubt not
but the chief advantage he seems to take against me, shall in thy judgment
appear to stand altogether upon manifest untruths.

Yea if thou will not be deceived by M. Jewel, How M. levvels vvritings are to
be read.
believe not at the first, what in proof, or disproufe of any thing, he
reports, as out of others. Examine the places from whence he brings his
testimonies. believe not his shows, believe thine own eyes. Compare the
authors text, The sleightes he uses in vvriting against the Catholics.
and his reports together. And doubtelesse wheresoever he allegeth ought that
disagreeth with the doctrine of the Catholic Church, thou may be assured
by diligent search to find, that he has corrupted and falsified the Doctor,
either by taking away, or by adding unto, by exchange of words, or by
perverting the order of the sentence, by conceeling the Circumstance of the
place, or by applying it to a sense contrary to the writers meaning, briefly by
one false mean or other, as al merchantes of such false wares, lack not
crafts and sleightes to help their utterance.

And as his sleightes of corrupting the Doctors be sundry and many, The
sleightes he uses in answering to the Catholics.
so be the means also many, and of no less craft, which he uses in
answering to certain their most plain testimonies, with which oftentimes he
is pressed. Some Doctors with him be utterly refused, some be of doubteful
authority, some be disliked for their age, some be avoided by a crafty
understanding, some that speak plainly, be told, they speak violently.
Which is a very poor shifte, and seems to have least weight of Learning, or
Reason.

When al other sleightes be spent, yet this serves him for the last refuge. He
draws this matter of the Sacrifice, to Phrases of speech, Tropes, and
Metaphores, and alleging some Tropical speech, that receives a reasonable
understanding somewhat diverse from the literal sownde of the naked words, he
requires the place that makes for the truth of the Sacrifice, to be in like
sort understood. This is a way whereby one may seem to say somewhat, when in
deed he says nothing. By such mean the truth in any controversy is
darkened, it is not discussed, and in the judgment of the unlearned, confusion
is wrought.

M. Jewels common Arguments.
What shall I speak of the force of his Arguments? Certainly they be such, as
very Boys that learn their Sophistry, may be a shamed to make. In manner he
never makes Argument against the Sacrifice, but wherein with one truth he
excludes an other truth, which kind of reason, of al other is the most
childish and fondest. As for example, Because the Fathers sometimes call the
Euchariste an Image, a Figure, a memory, a sampler of the Sacrifice, that was
made upon the Cross, thereof always he concludes, that it is not a true
Sacrifice. As though one might not by such Logique conclude, that the
Sacrifices of the old Law were not truly, and properly Sacrifices, because
they were al a Figure of that great Sacrifice, which Christ offered when he
died. Both Sacrifices are a sign of that one and the self same host, that of
the Law, was a sign of the host to come, ours of that is paste. Yet either
is a true Sacrifice.

Likewise of the affirmation of the Sacrifice of Praise, and Thankesgeuing, he
induces the denial of the true and real Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Euchariste, as though it were not both. But what need I here Reader,
to tell thee of M. Jewels manyfold shifts and sleightes, See the Preface before
my first Reioindre.
since I have spoken thereof otherwheres, and other men have detected them at
large? And in deed what else is contained in our books, but a discovering of
his Legierdemaine? For how could the truth have been set forth, except his
lies had been discried, and his falshoode confuted?

As for the Untruths, that be in his Reply to this part of my Answer, I
have not curiously noted the number of them, for so much as that has been
once done by D. Sander, and me in part, and by M. Stapleton more copiously.
whereas the number of his Untruths found in four Articles only of six and
twenty, amount to a Thousand and odd, and the same are not yet discharged of
M. Jewels part: I intend not to bestow much time about such a loathsome work.
It is more meet for Pinners, Pointers, and Nailesellers, to spend their time
about telling, and making such accomptes.

And though I had liked to have kept tale of them, yet the Margent of my book
would not have sufficed to contain them, the number is so great. Yet that his
lies, falsifyinges, corruptions, and untruths, appear to be of small number,
and that the shame, which would grow in respect of the multitude, if al were
severally told, be not to the hinderance of his estimation discoouered: I am
content, his whole Reply touching this article, be taken (as it is in deed
few things excepted, wherein gladly I agree with him) but for one Untruth.

Touching this Reioindre, I have here defended and confirmed my Answer to his
17. Article, which is of the Sacrifice, and all that he has replied against
it, I have fully refelled. God give thee judgment good Reader, to discern
truth from untruth. If perhaps I shall seem in some places over obscure, and
tedious, and not to have framed my writing meet for all men's capacities: thou
may think, that either learning failed, or that the matter would not suffer,
verily good will wanted not. To make hard things easy to be understood, and
to give light to things, that of them self be dark, and not to swerve from
the exact rule of truth, it is a point of great wit and cunning: neither is
it lightly performed, but of such as God has endewed with special gifts.
And as excellency of wit is required to utter them plainly: so it behooves
the Readers senses be well exe^cised, to understand them fully.

The doctrine of this Sacrifice in some part is hard, and obscure, such, as
commonly has rather ben rightly believed, then by many clearly declared. The
honor of holy Mysteries is better saved with reverent silence, then with bold
opening. Experience teaches into what danger of contempt they come, when they
are openly reveled to populare understanding.

Although both in the Scriptures, and in the Fathers, we have most sufficient
proufes, and testimonies for the real presence, and for the real Sacrifice: yet
they, that lived within the first six hundred years after Christ, wrote hereof
more secretly, then of other points of our Religion. The cause why the old
Fathers spoke so secretly of these mysteries.
For reverence of the Mystery, they thought it more convenient, to teach it
by mowthe, and by tradition, then by evident, and open declararion to commit
much to public writing, least so to the Infidels, occasion should be
ministered of despite and villainy. As for example, notwithstanding that
religious warenesse, we read in S. Augustine, how the Painimes charged the
Christians with the wourship of Ceres, August. co^tra Faust. Man^cha. lib. 20.
cap. 13.
and Bacchus their false Gods, because of the bread and wine, they used in
the celebration of their mysteries.

Thereof it is, that we find in the ancient Fathers so often commendation of
their silence. Chrysostom. in Liturg.
S. Chyistome says in his Mass, Conuiuij tui mystici hodie fili Dei communio
nem assumpsi, non tamen hostibus tuis mysterium di^^. I have received this day
the Communion of thy mystical banquet o Son of God, and yet I have not told
the Mystery unto thine enemies. Ambro. ^i. De ijs qui initiantur myster. c. 1.
S. Ambrose makes it a Treason, and betraying of the Mysteries, to show them
unto those that be not yet baptized. The like commendation of silence in this
behalf we find in Origin, Orige. homil. 9 in Leuit. c. 16
and in S. Augustines works not seldom. Aurelianus the Emperor, when he saw
him self, and the Roman Empire to be in great peril, for that the people
named Marcomanni grew strong over him by a great overthrow they had given him
in bataile, wrote to the Senate of Rome, that (which was wont to be done in
public distress) the Sibylles books should be looked in. Flauius Vopiscus
in Diuo Aureliano
In his Epistle he has these words. Miror vos Patres sancti, tam diu de
aperiendis Sibyllinis dubitasse libris, perinde quasi in Christianorum
Ecclesia, non in Templo Deorum omnium tractaretis. I marvel at you Reverend
Fathers, that ye have been afraid to open Sibylles books thus long, as though
ye had to do in the Church of Christians, and not in the Temple of all the
Gods.

By this it appears, what secretnesse and silence was used in the Primitive
Church touching these mysteries, and how fearful the holy Fathers were to
say, write, or do any thing, whereby the Miscreantes might come by knowledge
of them. For which cause it is not to be marueled, if they spoke not so
plainly, and so evidently of every point touching the Sacrifice, as the
sauciness of heretics requires in these days to be answered, and satisfied
withal. Yet they may seem to have spoken plainly enough to right beleuers, and
for the same we have no small number of good and clear testimonies, as by this
Reioindre it shall appear to them, that be not wilfully bent, either to shut
their eyes, because they would not see, or to wrangle contentiously, that they
^eeme not to be ouercomme, When began the Fathers to speak more plai^ly of
our mysteries
or to deny stubbornly, what so ever disliketh their fancy, be it never so
sufficiently proved.

But after that the Faith was once generally received of al where it was
preached and professed, and no Infidels remained among the Christians, that
durst openly to work despite against the holy Mysteries, which in sundry
Provinces came to pass before the first six hundredth year was determined, and
thenceforth: the learned Fathers that in those times wrote, as occasion was
given, spoke of the real Presence of the body an blood of Christ in the
blessed Sacrament, and of the oblatio^ of the same, no less plainly, and
clearly, then the Church now teaches. Which thing they find to be true,
that be conversant in the works of Cassiodorus, S. Gregory the Roman,
Isidorus, Gregorius Turonensis, Beda, Haimo, Rabanus, and other about that age.

If then for this Sacrifice we have (as in this Reioindre thou shall find) the
Scriptures, the testimonies of the Fathers of the first six hundred years of
sufficient clearenes, and the most manifest testimonies of the writers that
immediately followed that age, besides the authority of Councels, that were
within, and soon after that age, and so continually until the late Council of
Trent: the favorers of M. Jewels side may see, his Challenge fully answered,
touching this Article. And therefore ought they to consider, how safe it is for
them to contemn so great authority, and to be persuaded with such ^clender
Arguments against the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass, as M. Jewel sets
forth in his Reply, which he has borrowed of the Caluinistes, they received
of Luther, and Luther learned of Satan, when on a night he disputed with him
against the Sacrifice of the Mass, as he lay waking in his bed, as by his own
confession in his book De Missa priuata, he has witnessed unto the world. So
then if with Luther, Calvin, and M. Jewel they profess hatred against the
Mass, and deny the real Sacrifice of the Church: they show whose scholars
they be, and by whose sprite they are lead.

whether the Mass be to be taken for an evil thing, seeing Satan disputes
with Luther against it.
But perhaps some here will say, what is that this Reioinderer tells us of
Satan? Did Satan ever dispute with Luter against the Mass? Is this credible?
If it be so, then may I soon believe, that the Mass is a godly thing, and that
it proceeds from the holy Ghost. For if it were an evil thing, as by our
Preachers we are borne in hand it is: we may be sure, the Devil would not move
Luther to leave it. For so he should work the destruction of his own kingdom:
which to do is the office of Christ, and most contrary to the malice of
Satan's condition. This Reioinder^^ should do well here to clear him self of
the vehement suspicion of an untruth. And in deed shame it were to belie the
Devil, as they say.

The disputation of Satan the Devil with Luther against the Mass, truly
reported out of Luthers own Works.
In the Replie^ Division. 2. Page 2.
FOr as much then, as I understand, many doubt hereof, and M. Jewel calls it a
scorneful, and slanderous tale, blased abroad by Pighius, Hosius and
Staphylus, of malice, and hatred of the truth: to the intent the truth be known,
and that it be considered what Captain they follow, who make war against the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and that the memory of this thing remain to our
posterity: I will here truly and faithfully set forth the disputation, that was
betwixt Friar Luthe^ the first author and founder of the Protestants Religion,
and Satan the Devil, as Luther him self reports it in the seventh Tome of
his works, in a book entitled De Missa priuata, and Unction Sacerdotum. Who
soever is desirous to see the place, it is to be found in the seventh Tome
printed at Witte^berg by one Thomas Klug, in the year of our Lord. 1557.
Folio. 228. There thus writes Luther.

Luthers report of his Conference with the Devil.
COntigit me semel, etc. It befell me on a time, that after midnight suddenly I
awooke. Then Satan began disputation with me after this manner. Audi, inquit,
Luthere Doctor perdocte. Listen, quod he, ^ right learned M. Doctor Luther.

2 Thou know thou have celebrated private Masses these fiften years almost
every day.

3 What if such private Masses were horrible Idolatry?

Denial of Adoration of Christ's body, the Devils Doctrine.
4 What if it were so, that the body and blood of Christ were not present, but
that thou did adoure bread and wine only, and shewedst the same to be
adoured of others?

To whom I answered. I am an anointed Priest, I have recei^ed unction and
consecration of a Bishop, and al these things have I done 5 by commandment
of my Superiors. Why should I not have consecrated, since that I pronounced the
words of Christ seriously, and celebrated Masses in great earnest? The Devil
confesses outvvard Priesthod M. Ievvel deneeth.
This much thou know.

6 All this (quod Satan) is true.

7 But the Turks and the Gentiles also do al things in their temples upon
obedience, and make their sacrifices in ernest. The Priests of Ieroboa^ also
did al things with a certain zeal, and desire contrary to the true Priests
that were in Jerusalem.

8 And what if thy taking of Orders, and consecration were also false, as the
Turks, and Samaritanes Priests, are false Priests, and their worship is
false and wicked worship?

First thou know, quod he, 9 At that time thou had no knowledge of
Christ, nor true faith, and as touching faith, thou wast no better then any
Turk. For the Turk, yea all the Devils also do believe the story of Christ,
that he was borne, that he was orucified, that he died etc. But the Turk and
we rejected sprites do not trust in his mercy, neither have we him for a
mediator and Savior, but fear him as a cruel Judge.

This manner of faith, and none other thou had, when thou tokest vnctio^ of a
Bishop, and 10 al others, both the annointers, and the a^nointed, so thought
of Christ, and none otherwise.

For that cause ye fled 11 from Christ, as from a cruel Judge, to S. Marie, and
the Saints.

They were your mediators, between you and Christ: 12 so the glory was taken
from Christ.

13 This neither thou, nor any other Papist can deny. The Devil calls us
Papiste^.
Therefore ye are anointed, consecrated and shaven, and have sacrificed in the
Mass, as Gentiles, and Heathens, and not as Christians.

14 How then could ye consecrate in the Mass, and celebrate a true Mass, since
that (which thing after your own doctrine marreth altogether) there wants a
person having power to consecrate? etc.

A brief Reproufe of these Devilish Blasphemies.
1 In this insinuation the Devil claweth the vain glorious Friar by the back
as it were, where he knew him to itche, Right learned M. Doctor Luther. quod he.

2 Thou lie Satan, as thy wont is. Luther knew not, ne could not know that
which is false. For in that which is chiefly to be accounted of, the Mass is
publlque and common. Out of thy scoole the name of Private Mass in the sense
that Luther conceiueth, Pri^at Mass the Devils term.
first proceeded.

3 What if they were not? as this Sacrifice is the highest honor that can be
done unto God, being done, as it ought to be.

4 What if it were present? as it is present consecration duly made. And so
Luther him self teaches against the Sacramentaries, as it is known. Marcke
Reader, from whose school the doctrine comes, that teaches, the body and
blood not to be adoured in the blessed Sacrament.

5 Not only of them, but rather by commandment of Christ, who said, do this
in my remembrance.

6 Ergo, Luther was a Priest, specially, and properly, not as every faithful
is. Then had he authority and power to offer the Sacrifice. This much thou
co^fessest vnvvares, as it seems. M. Jew. denies. What, is he worse then
thee self?

7 Such obedience of Turks, and Gentiles, is not for Gods sake. And therefore
it is not obedience, as it is a virtue, and a service of God. It is the
servitude of thee, Satan. Wherefore therein the more earnest, the more
sinful. The Zeal likewise thou speak of was wicked, therefore the case
is not like and so thy reason is naught.

8 But what if it were true? as it was true.

9 Here thou lie Satan down right.

10 Auaunt Satan, thou beliest Gods servants.

It is not so thou enemy. When we beseech S. Marie, and the other Saints to
pray for us, we flee not from Christ, no more then S. Paul did, when he
desired the Romans, the Ephesia^s, and the Thessalonia^s to pray for him: Romans
15. Ephesians. 6. 2 Thessalonians 3. but we go to Christ with other helpers, and suitors,
as if having a suit to an earthly Prince, I make his mother, and his dearest
friends to go unto him with me, and speak for me.

12 By making the Saints intercessours for us to Christ, no part of his
glory is taken from him. Mark Reader, who it is that teaches thee, not to
c^^ to the Saints for their aides, and prayers.

13 This we al do deny, and know it to be false. It pleases us to be called
Papists of thee Satan. Auaunt blasphemous Sprite. In the blessed Mass, we
present, and offer to God that body^ that suffered upon the Cross and that
blood that was shed for us, whereby we are redeemed from thee and from thy most
grisly misery. By this tale we are faught to esteem anointing, consecration,
and ^haning, be^^o^, because the Devil likes it not.

14 The Devil proceeds to his Conclusion, as though his premises were true.
Wherein M. Jew. follows him, as the scholar the Master, and so do al
other the Sacramentaries, and Protestants.

And there afterward Folio. 229. b. it follows.

In his angustijs etc. Being in these 15 straightes, and in this conflicte
against the Devil, my will was to knock him again, with the weapons that I was
accustomed unto living in Papistrie, and I laid for me the Intention, and 16
faith of the Church, to wit, that I had celebrated private Masses in the faith,
and intention of the Church.

Albeit (quod I) 17 that I have not believed or thought rightly, yet in this
point the Church believes, and thinks rightly.

But then Satan laying at me more mightily, and more vehemently, Go too, quod
he, bring me forth,

18 where it is written, that a man, which is wicked and unbelieving, may
stand at the Altar of Christ, and consecrate in the faith of the Church?
Where has God bid or commanded this thing? How will thou prove, that the
Church does imparte unto thee, Intention to this thy private Mass?

19 If now thou have not the word of God for thee, but if men have taught thee
this thing without the word, then all this Doctrine is a lie. Behold your
boldness. etc.

15 Why did thou not bless thee, and arm thy self with the sign of the
Cross? Why did thou not call upon the name of Jesus? Thoughtest thou thy
self hable to match the Devil with words?

16 If thou had the Faith of the Church, why vventst thou from it? And if
thou had this Faith, then how beleuest thou not Christ, saying, Do this in
my remembrance?

17 By this thou impliest, that the rest of the Church, before thou brochedst
thy fifth Gospel, believed not Rightly, wherein thou folowest Satan, and beliest
thy self, and the Church. For the common profession of the Faith, was ^hen
right and sound.

18 To confound this Friar, the Devil joins a wicked man, and an unbeliever
together in the case of Consecration, and requires Scripture of him for that,
which neither was, ne never shall be done. An evil Priest, notwithstanding his
wickedness of life, may consecrate, though to his damnation, as he may baptize,
and absolve: but an unbelieving man, that is to say, an Infidel, can not
consecrate. And what absurdity is it to say, an unbelieving man to consecrate
in the Faith of the Church? If in the Faith of the Church, how is he
unbelieving? If unbelieving, how in the Faith of the Church?

19 For this Oblation, and Sacrifice, we have the word of Christ, Do ye this
in my remembrance.

And after this in the end of the Disputation (for it were to long to recite
al) thus it follows. Fol. 230.

Confessus quide^ sum, lege Dei co^uictus coram Diabolo, me peccasse, me
damnatum esse vt Iudam: sed verto me ad Christum cum Petro, etc.

20 Being cast by the law of God, I was feign to confess before the Devil,
that I had sinned, and that I was damned like Judas.

21 But I turn my self unto Christ with Peter etc.

20 Say not foolish Friar, thou were cast by the law of God, but by the Devil
for desert of thine own iniquity. Thou make Satan thy Ghostly Father, who
afterward taughtst, that confession ought not to be made to a Priest for
benefit of absolution.

21 No, no, thou turnedst thy self from Christ unto the Devil with Judas,
with Simo^ Magus, and with other Heretics. And so do al, that follow thee,
and thy doctrine.

This is the Sum of the conference and disputation that Satan had with Friar
Luther against the Sacrifice of the Mass, by which Luther was persuaded, not
only to say Mass no more, but also to write, preach, and work against it in
such wise, as became Satan's scholar.

And thus thou see Reader, that this is not a tale maliciously, and
sclaunderously blased abroad by Pighius, Hosius, and Staphylus, as M. Jewel
says: but that it is in great sooth reported, and in printed books published
to the world, by Luther him self. Though M. Jewel be ashamed to hear of it,
yet he allows Satan's Conclusion against the Mass. The person of such a
Schoolmaster he commends not, but the Scholar he praises, calling him, In
M. Jewels Reply. page 2.
that godly man Doctor Luther, and the doctrine he imbraceth.

By this we may conceive, what resistance the professors of this new Gospel
will make against Antichrist, when he shall come, among who^ the doctrine of the
Devil him self is so soon received, so well liked, so boldly defended. But o
foolish Friar, whose unsteadfast heart was so soon overthrown by Satan's wicked
suggestions, false lies, and vain reasons. And o light, and miserable souls,
that since with the wind of that lewd Friars doctrine have been carried away.
For what is there in all Satan's tale, in Luthers books, in the treatises of al
his Scholars of Germany, of Cranmare, Peter Martyr, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Calvin, Beza, of all the other Sacramentaries, briefly in the whole Reply of
M. Jewel, whose Puddel is filled with their Sinckes: that ought to withdraw any
learned, wise, or godly man, from that belief touching the Sacrifice of the
body and Blood of Christ, which the Catholic Church has always taught
from the beginning?

What so ever they have said, and what so ever they can say against this
blessed Sacrifice, assure thy self Christian Reader, the effect of al here
shall thou find, laid together in M. Jewels Reply. Al which, of how little
force it is, consideratly perusing, and weghing this Reioindre, thou shall
perceive. Although the authority of the Church be enough to stay thee, yet if
thou desire to see the Adversary encountered, and his Objections answered:
read what I have here written, and judge, not forgeting to call to God for the
assistence of his holy Spirit, to illuminate thy understanding, and to purge
thy affection: that thou may see, what is true, observe the same, and have a
full will to perform what is good, and acceptable before God.

The chief, and most common Argument, that the Protestants make against the
Sacrifice of the Mass.
S. Paul declares in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 9.
that Christ was but once only offered, and that he offers not him self
oftentimes. Cap. 9.
By his own blood (says the Apostle) he entered in once into the holy place,
and found eternal redemption. Again, He was but once offered to take away
the sins of many. And in an other place, With one oblation he has made
perfect them that are sanctified for ever. Heb. 10.
Ergo, to what purpose is it, that Christ is thus daily offered up unto God in
the Mass?

Solution.
This Argument is soon solued, if a man consider the scope, mark, and
purpose, whereunto S. Paul directs him self in that Epistle. This much
therefore is to be weighed. There were many of the Hebrews, that although
through the preaching, and miracles of the Apostles, were persuaded to believe
in Christ, yet remained in great estimation, and zeal of the Law, stickte
unto their old customs, and ordinances of Moses, and specially unto their
Sacrifices, which they were desirous to retain for their sins. And
therefore they found them selves agreeued with the Apostle, for that, whereas
he took away their old Sacrifices, they thought them selves to be destitute
of the benefits of the Law, and remedies for sin.

Hereunto the Apostle makes answer, and in effect teaches: That of such
Sacrifices as the Law ordained, now we have no need, for so much as the
Priesthood of Christ, who has once offered him self with sheadding of his
blood upon the Altar of the Cross having thereby fulfilled them, remains
and continues still with us, which is sufficient. We have (says he to them)
an Altar, whereof it is not lawful for them to eat, which do serve the
Tabernacle. Heb. 13.
And that ye see not hosts to b^ killed, and the blood of Calves to be shed
of us, the cause is, for that the only blouddy host of Christ has sufficed,
that now we have need of no other, but of that. That host is the founteine,
and endless treasure, which contains the sufficient price of our
Redemption. only it is need, that we be made partakers of it. Neither were
those Sacrifices of Moses law such, that by virtue and power of them being
but signs and figures of Christ, Heb. 9.
sins were remitted in conscience: but by them sins were brought to
remembrance, and signification was given out, that there was need of an other
blouddy Sacrifice, by whose virtue men in conscience should be made perfect.

And so the Apostle treats of the thing it self, that was shadowed in all the
Sacrifices of the Law, and is so acceptable unto the Father, that by his own
propre virtue and merit it sanctifies men, and remitteth sins, whereunto by
the ordinance of Gods justice the Blood of the Son of God was Requisite.
Such is the Host or Sacrifice of the Cross only, by whose virtue and merit
they be sanctified, whosoever from the beginning either by the Sacrifices of
the former times, or by the daily Sacrifice of the Church, are sanctified. By
which only for this cause al be said to be sanctified, because who so ever be
sanctified, be by that, and by the virtue of that, made clean. In case the
old Sacrifices, or the Sacrifice of the Mass also were such sufficient
prices of our redemption, without doubt both those, and this, had long
since ceased to be offered. For such a Sacrifice, which by his own proper
merit geteth sufficient price for sins, ought to be great in deed (soothly
by the Death of the Son of God) but one only suffices. Heb. 10.
Wherefore of a blouddy Sacrifice there is no more need, but of such a one,
as by which we may be made partakers of that great and most worthy Sacrifice.
Of which sort the Sacrifice of the Mass is, where, in the person of Christ,
that Death is presented for us unto the Father.

And what Host, or thing mystically offered, could either better set Christ's
Death before his Fathers sight, or more effectually derive the merits of his
Death unto us, then that very body, wherein he suffered? For which cause, when
he delivered the Sacrament of his Possion unto us, Lucae 22.
he said, Do ye this in remembrance of me. So that this Sacrifice of the
Mass, although it be in his kind a true Sacrifice, as it shall be proved here
after in this Reioindre: yet it takes his whole virtue, and power, of the
Sacrifice of the Cross, which is of it self the whole price of our
Redemption. Now S. Paul disputes with the Hebrews of that which with
bloodshed redeemed us, and not of that which without bloodshed applieh the
Redemption unto us. That was but once offered, this is, and must be often
repeated.

Faults escaped in printing.
Fa^lte leaf line Correction Accidententes 31. b. 24. Accidents Sigular 47. a
11. Singular and 56. b. 20. and in here 79. a. 4. is here the terms 94. a.
21. be terms end 108. b. 5. and sacrified 111. a. 3. sacrificed and iam number
117. b. 25. and iam nunc the unbloody 119. b. 33. the bloody taught them the
new test. 131. b. 26. taught them the nevve Oblation of the new Testament
argume 136. b. 30. argument neither he they 140. b. 13. neither be they and
circumstance 149. b. 23. any circumstance is the Mass, in one 195. b. 10. in
the Mass, is one and makes haste 208 a. 10. and make have he briefly examined
215. b. 15. be briefly examined

In the Epistle to M. Jew.
Page. 1. In the margent read. Math. 5. Item there page 11. Lin. 2. for now
broched, read, new broched. Item there page 13. Lin. 11. for hen. read, ben.
Item there Page 15. Lin. 14. for him, read, him.


A REIOINDRE TO M. JEWELS REPLY AGAINST THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.
The words of M. Jewels Challenge.
IF any learned man of our Adversaries, or if all the learned men that be alive,
be hable to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor
or Father, or out of any old general Counsel, or out of the holy Scriptures of
God, or any one example of the Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and
plainly be proved, that for the space of six hundred years after Christ, the
Priest had authority to offer up Christ unto his Father, I am content to
yield and to subscribe.

The words of the Answer first made to this Challenge. Of the Priests
authority to offer up Christ to his Father.
CHrist is offered up to his Father after three manners. Figuratively, Truly
with Bloudshedding, and Sacramentally, or Mystically. In Figure or
Signification he was offered in the Sacrifice made to GOD, both in the time of
the Law of Nature, and also in the time of the law written. And therefore S.
John calls Christ the Lamb, Agnus occisus est ab origin mundi. Apoc. 13.
Heb. 10. Lib. 6. c. 5.
which was killed from the beginning of the world, meaning in figure. The
Sacrifices of Abel, Noe, and Abraham, and al those of the people of Israel
commanded by the Law of Moses, figured and signified Christ. For which
respect chiefly, the law is reported of S. Paul, to have the shadow of the
good things to come. S. Augustine writing against Faustus the Heretic,
says: Testamenti Veteris Sacrificia omnia, multis and varijs modis vnum
Sacrificium, cuius nunc memoria^ celebramus, significauerunt: All the
Sacrifices of the old Testament signified by many, and sundry ways this one
Sacrifice, whose memory we do now celebrate. And in an other place he
says, D^ fide ad Petru^ Dia c^nu^. c. 19.
That in those Fleashly Sacrifices, there was a Signification of Christ's
Fleash, which he should offer for sins, and of his Blood, which he should
sheadde for the remission of our sins.

Truly, and with Bloudsheadding, Christ is offered on the Cross in his own
person, whereof S. Paul says: Tit. 2.
Christ gave hi^ self for us, Ephesians. 5.
that he might redeem us from al iniquity. And again, Christ has loved us,
and has delivered him self for us an Oblation, and Sacrifice to God into a
svvete savor.

Sacramentally, or in Mystery, Christ is offered up to his Father in the daily
Sacrifice of the Church under the Form of Bread, and Wine, truly and in
deed, not in respect of the manner of offering, but in respect of his very
Body, and Blood, really (that is in deed) present, as it has been
sufficiently proved here before.

M. Jewels Reply.
The greatter, and vvoorthier the work is, that our Adversaries have imagined,
that is, for a Mortal, and a Miserable man to offer up the Immortal Son of
God unto his Father, and that Really, and in deed, the more ought the same,
either by manifest words, or by necessary collection expressly, and
plainly to be proved. Hebr. 5.
For noman takes honor, and office unto him self, but he that is called, and
appointed thereto by God. But for ought that may appear by any clause or
sentence, either of the nevve Testament or of the old, God never appointed
any such Sacrifice to be made by any Mortal Creature. And Theophylacte says,
Jesus eiiciendo boues and columbas, Theophyl. in Matt. cap. 21.
praesignauit non vltra opus esse animalium Sacrificio, sed Oratione: Jesus
throvving the Oxen and Dooues out of the Temple, signified, that they should no
longer have need of the Sacrifice of beasts, but of prayer.

Harding.
WOULD God M. Jewel, that either your modesty were more, or that you had the
grace to see, how evil your sauciness becomes you. As at the first by open
Challenge you provoked all the learned men that be alive, as it were to try
maisterie with you: so in the entry of your Reply against my Answer to your
seue^tienth Article, you bear al men in hand, that until you came from the
schole of Rhetorike to reach the world this new Gospel, no priest ever
considered, how great and worthy a work it is, to offer up Christ unto his
Father, which apperteineth to Priestly office. Wherein you charge the blessed
Apostles, their successors, all the holy Fathers of the Church so many as were
Priests, all that have been to your time, briefly the whole Church it self, with
the crime of wicked presumption, for making this sacrifice. How ca^ you seem
otherwise to do? For whereas you say, it may not appear by any Clause, or
sentence of the old, or new Testament, that God ever appointed any such
Sacrifice to be made by any Mortal man, and most certain it is, that by the
Apostles, and the holy Fathers of the Church, and by the priests of God in
every age, it has been made: what conclude you hereof, but that they have
tra^sgressed the Scripture, and presumptuously taken honor and office unto
them selves, Hebr. 5.
not being called, nor appointed thereto by God? And so what may Christ be
thought to have meant in suffering such a heinous error so long to continue in
his Church, Esai. 59.
which he loves so derely, Johan. 14.
to which he promised the assistance of the holy Ghost the spirit of truth
for ever? Matt. 28.


But consider M. Jewel against whom, and how many, you strive. Will it do your
heart good to hear that spoken of Jewel which by the Angel of God was spoken of
Ismael. Manus eius co^tra oe^s, ^^n. 16.
et manus oi^m contra cu^? The hand of him against al, and the hand of al
against him? Stand you so far in your own conceit, as to think, you shall
be able to stand against al? Remember you not, what is said of the Church,
Cant. 6.
that it is, terribilis, ut castroru^ acies ordinata, terrible, like the
foreward of an Army set in battle raie?

But leaving to put you in mind of that, which might withdraw you from your
wicked doctrine, either for fear of God, or for shame of me^, having little
hope by words to do good with you, to the intent the weakness of your part laid
forth to be considered, the unlearned Reader, that perhaps is seduced by you,
may be admonished to beware of you, and to give no more credit unto you, then
a professed enemy of the Church, and a teacher of falshod deserves: I will
come to the examination of your Reply.

You seem to deduce an argument against this Sacrifice made by a priest, of the
baseness and vileness of human condition, as though man, who in deed is
mortal and miserable, and a mortal creature, as you term him, were not worthy,
ne could not be made worthy, to offer up the Immoral Son of God unto his
Father. True it is, Man of him self, is very unworthy of that high office:
neither ca^ he by any his own power or virtue, reach unto the worthiness of
that sovereign honor. But if it please God of his great love toward his own
dear creature, to admit man to that dignity, notwitstanding he be never so
unworthy of him self: so he is made worthy. Neither Anna, nor Elizabeth, nor
blessed Marie her self, nor any other woman was ever worthy of her self to
conceive, and bring forth The Immortal Son of God: yet the virgin Marie
through grace of him whom she bare, was made worthy to bear him. and therefore
she said, fecit mihi magna q pote^s est, he has don me great things, Luc. 1.
that is mighty. Else if consideration of the mortal and miserable co^ditio^ of
man, might be brought in argument for the contrary, what a wide door were
opened unto the scholars of Marcio^, Manichaeus, Apollinaris, and to other
Heretics, to rush in, and to thrust in again their old heresies against the
truth of the Flesh assumpted, and the Incarnation of Christ?

Gene. 18.
Abraham was a man, mortal and miserable as we are, dust and ashes, To how
great dignity a man mortal and miserable, has been admitted by God.
as he said himself: yet was he made worthy to have talk with God, and to
understand his purpose touching the destruction of Sodoma. Moses like wise,
though he were but a mortal and miserable man, was accounted worthy, with whom
God spoke mouth to mouth, and as the Scripture says, face to face, as a man is
wont to speak unto his friend, to see our Lord openly without obscure signs
and figures, Number. 12.
to be Gods Ambassador unto Pharao, Exodus 33. Exodi. 3. Exodus 19.
and the people of Israel, to enter into the Cloud upon the hill where God
was, and there to receive the Law written with Gods own finger.

And to come again unto the new Testament, what a dignity is it for John the
Baptist to baptize Christ, Mat. 3. Mat. 28.
for the Apostles and their successors to carry his name, Joan. 20.
and his word through out the whole world, to remit, and retain sins? Shall
we deny, or so much as call in question these great things, because they be
mortal and miserable men, to whom they are committed? Notwithstanding the
mortality and misery of mankind, yet behold what a high dignity men are
called unto by testimony of S. John: Joan. 1.
Dedit eis potestatem filios Dei fieri: He has given them power to be made the
sons of God. Unto which dignity S. Paul adds a farther degree, saying: Si
autem filij, Romans 8.
and haeredes: haeredes quidem Dei, cohaeredes autem Christi. If we be the
sons of God then we be also the heirs: the heirs of God, and fellow heirs
with Christ. That high degree of honor which S. Peter speaks of,
surmounteth al other, neither can any other unto it be co^parable. Which is,
that God through Christ has bestowed upon us so great gifts, 2. Pet. 1.
vt efficiamur Diuinae consortes naturae, that we be made partakers of the
Divine nature.

Verily of the high dignity that it has pleased God to admit man unto, in
these and other the like cases, that may well be said against M. Jewel, Esther.
6.
and all other the enemies of this Sacrifice, which King Assuerus commanded
openly to be proclaimed of good Mardochaeus against wicked Aman, Hoc honor
dignus est, quemcunque rex voluerit honorare. Of this honor is he worthy, who^
so ever the King (of al Kings) will have honored. And this is a sufficient
answer to M. Jewels secret objection against the Sacrifice, taken of the
baseness and misery of humanie condition.

He will say perhaps, M. Ievvel denies the Sacrifice of the Altar stoutely.
these examples and Scriptures prove in deed, that God has aduau^ced man unto
high honor, but not that he may offer up Christ unto his Father: For (says
he) for ought that may appear by any clause or sentence of the new Testament,
or of the old, God never appointed any such Sacrifice to be made. Such stout
asseuerations make but weak proufes. Here might be alleged for the Sacrifice,
first, out of the old Law the Figures Christ's fact, and precepte in the
new Testament. Last

What may follow, if al be taken away, that has not proof of Scripture.
Anabaptists.
But touching such kind of assertions, as this is of M. Jewels, if they may
take place, and if it shall be enough to say, for ought that may appear: shall
it not seem lauful to the Anabaptists to say, away with the baptizing of
infantes, For, for ought that may appear, the Scriptures give us no warrant so
to do? Will not the blasphemous Aria^s say, away with Co^substa^tialitie, and
equality of Christ with his Father? For, Arians.
for ought that may appear, it can not be avouched by any Clause, or sentence,
either of the new Testament, or of the old. Will not the folowers of Iouinian
and Heluidius say, Iouinianistes.
away with the perpetual Virginity of our blessed Lady Christ's Mother?
Heluidia^s.
For, for ought that may appear, the Scriptures be plain against it, rather
then with it. The Sabbataries, Sabbataries.
will not they cry out against keeping holy and solemn the So^day? For, for
ought that may appear (say they) the commandment to hallow the Saturday,
stands still in force, neither is there any clause, or sentence in the old,
or new Testament, bidding us to change it into the Sunday. To be short, what
Heretic ever was there in old time, or is at this day, whose turn this kind
of assertion ( for ought that may appear) may not serve, wherewith to
maintain his Heresy?

As touching the saying of Theophylact, M. Ievvel to prove his Negative, at the
first finds no auncie^ter Doctor, the^ Theophylacte a late writer.
wherewith this Replier would fortify his Negative, it gives evidence, how
weak his side is, that could not be maintained by any sentence of greater
force the^ this is, nor by any writer of more antiquity, the^ Theophylact is
with him. Who requires his cause to be tried by those Fathers only, that lived
within the first six hundred years. If he were hable to make any man believe,
that the Priests of the Church have at any time sacrificed beasts unto God, or
that Theophylact in that saying meant, that now there were need of nothing but
of prayer only, as prayer is taken in the common signification, and that al
other means to serve God were needelesse: the^ might the sentence be alleged,
and seem to serve his turn so far forth, as in consideration of his request
the author were to be esteemed. But now since Priests of the new Testament never
honored God with bloody sacrifices, and slaughter of beasts, that were
foresignified to cease by our Lords driving of the Oxe^ and dooues out of the
Temple, and Theophylact here uses no exclusive, whereby prayer alone, as it
commonly signifies, should be appointed a mean wherewith to serve God: the
saying was evil chosen, and with small judgment put into the Reply, as that
which nothing at al makes against the singular, external, and public
Sacrifice of the Church in mine Answer defended.

If M. Jewel would gather arguments out of this place, thus he ought to dispose
them. Theophyl. in Matthew. cap. 21.
In that Christ drove the oxe^ and dooues out of the Temple, he foresignified,
that there should be no more need of sacrifices of beasts, or of slaughters,
but of prayer. What argument may be co^clnded out of Theophylact here alleged.
So be the very words of Theophylacte in Greek, somewhat otherwise, then this
Replier has translated them. Thereof it is concluded, Ergo, now in the new
Testament there is need of prayer. Then further. In the new Testament there
is need of prayer, But the Mass whereat the priest offers up Christ unto
his Father, is no prayer: Ergo, in the new Testament the Mass is needless.
This is the best Argument he can make out of Theophylactes words. In which,
how so ever it be allowed for good, or otherwise, the minor or second
proposition is evidently false, and so he is stopped from his conclusion.
Wherefore Theophylact helps not the matter at al.

Theophylacte makes for the Sacrifice.
Yea rather by the manner of his speech he avouches the Sacrifice of the
Church, understanding it by the name of prayer. For whereas by his report,
which is expressed also in the Gospel, Christ dryuing out the oxe^ and dooues
foresignified the ceassing of the bloody and unclean sacrifices of the old
Law: Matt. 21.
certainly he showed thereby, that a new Sacrifice unbloody and pure, should
succeed in place of the old, because every law has a priesthod and a
sacrifice peculier unto it. Which in the new law is none other, Prayer.
then the Sacrifice of his body and blood consecrated with prayer, and offered
up to God with prayer by them, who under Christ be priests after Melchisedeks
order. And this chiefly is that which Theophylacte calls prayer. For in
as much as this Sacrifice (due matter presupposed) is consecrated by the Priest
with the words of our Lord, Matt. 26.
this is my body, this is the Cup of my blood, Luke. 22.
etc: which words the Fathers oftentimes name the mystical prayer: 1. Cor. 11.
he had regard to the form of the Consecration, and would speak, as the
chief of the ancient Fathers have spoken. And so the saying of Theophylacte
makes for the Sacrifice, it makes not against the Sacrifice, as to that
purpose of M. Jewel it is alleged.

Furthermore Prayer in this place may be taken not only for that which commonly
we understand by the name of prayer (that is to say for petition made to God
with words) but for every such mean, What is signified by the name of Prayer.
as God is served withal in his Church, according as it is taken in Esaias the
prophet alleged by Christ in the Gospel. Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur,
Matt. 21.
vos autem fecistis eam speluncam latronum. My house shall be called the house
of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. So that Prayer here being
set contrary to the bloody and unclean sacrifices of the old Law, signifies
al manner of service of God that is pure and clean, without bloudshedding. Ye
have made it a den of thieves. In dens of thieves slaughters and
bloudsheddinges are made, says Theophylacte.

Nicolaus de Lyra writing upon this place, Lyra in Comme^t. in 21. cap. Matt.
says: Non curaba^t de cultu Dei, sed magis de excoriatione populi per
astutias suas exquisitas. They took no care for Gods service, but rather how
by their fine crafty sleightes they might pille the people. Prayer taken
generally for the service of God.
Here what the prophet calls oratione^ prayer, the interpreter names it
cultum Dei, the service or worship of God. And to this agrees the general
definition of Prayer, oration est mentis eleuatio ad Deum, Prayer is the lifting
up of the mind unto God. And because among al kinds of prayer, that, wherein,
and whereby Christ is offered up unto his Father, is the chief, therefore may
Theophylact reasonably be thought in this place to have meant that prayer,
which the Church calls the Mass.

So then by Christ's driui^g of the Oxe^ and dooues out of the Temple, and by
co^me^di^g unto his Church the use of prayer, this Sacrifice ca^ not in any
wise seem to be excluded, but rather to be brought in, as that, which being
unbloody and pure, ought to succeed the bloody and impure sacrifices of the
Jews. About the administration of which Sacrifice (that Theophylact may also
the rather seem to have understood it by the name of prayer) after the mind
of S. Augustine, August. ad Paulinu^ epist. 59.
the request of S. Paul touching sundry kinds of prayer is accomplished.
Obsecro igitur primu^ fieri obsecrationes, orationes, 1. Tim. 2.
postulationes, gratiaru^ actiones pro oi^bus hominibus, pro regibus, and
oi^bus, qui in sublimitate constituti sunt. I beseech you therefore, that above
al things, supplicatio^s, prayers, intercessio^s, and giving of thanks be made
for all men, for Kings, and for all that be placed in high authority. To
conclude, al redoundeth to this end, that forasmuch as the special Sacrifice of
the Church is made and celebrated with prayer, so as it self be included
within the general name of Prayer: M. Jewel finds no help in this saying of
Theophylact toward the maintenance of his Negative, whereby he would utterly
deface and take the Sacrifice away. Which thing when he saw him self
evidently enough, he devised other shifts, and says.

Jewel.
How be it, the old learned Fathers, as they oftentimes delited themselves
with these words, Sabbatu^, Parasceue, Pascha, Pentecoste, and such other
like terms of the old Law, notvvithsta^ding the Observation, and Ceremony
thereof were the^ abolished, and out of use: Eue^ so likewise they delited
themselves oftetimes with these words, Sacerdos, Altar, Sacrificiu^, the
Sacrificer, Pachymeres. pa 401 (...). Romans 15. Origin. in Epist. ad Romans li.
10. Nazian. in Oration. ad Plebe^. Chryso. in Epist. ad Romans Homil. 29.
the Altar, the Sacrifice, notvvithsta^di^g the use thereof were the^ clearly
expired: only for that the ears of the people, as well of the Jews, as of
the Ge^tils, had been long acquainted with the same. Therefore Pachymeres the
Paraphraste vvriting upon Dionysius, says thus, Presbyteru^ appellat
Sacerdote^, vt etia^ in Coelesti Hierarchia: idque vsus ia^ obtinuit. Him, that
is the Priest, or elder, he calls the Sacrificer, as he does also in his
Celestial Hierarchy: And the same word, Sacrificer, is now obtained by
Custom. In this sense S. Paul says of him self, Sacrifico Euangeliu^ Dei: I
sacrifice the Gospel of God. And Orige^ says, Sacrificale opus est, anu^nciare
Eua^geliu^: It is a work of Sacrifice, to Preach the Gospel. So the learned
Bishop Nazia^zenus says unto his people, Hostiam vos ipsos obtuli: I have
offered up you for a Sacrifice. So says S. Chrysostom, Ipsum mihi Sacerdotium
est, Praedicare, and Eua^gelizare. Ha^c offero oblatione^: My whole priesthod
is, to teach, and to preach the Gospel. This is my Oblatio^, This is my
Sacrifice. Thus the holy Fathers alluding to the orders, and Ceremonies of
Moses Lavv^ called the preachi^g of the Gospel, a Sacrifice: notvvithstanding
in deed it were no Sacrifice.

Harding.
The effect of that has been said by the Replier hitherto, is this. The
Sacrifice wherein Christ is offered up unto his Father, is not appointed by God
to be made by man, for ought that may appear by any Clause, or Se^te^ce of the
Scripture, but yet it is reported, and ofte^tymes spoken of by the Old learned
Fathers. What means M. Jewel thus to teach? would he have me^ believe, that
the Holy Ghost the spirit of truth, who used the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists for his Secretaries to endite the Scriptures, agrees not with the
Holy Ghost, that since their time has spoken by the mouths of the holy
Doctors? Remembers he not, they were for the more part such, Act. 20.
as by report of S. Paul the Holy Ghost has made Bishops to govern the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his blood? If they have be^ made
governors of the Church by the holy Ghost, may we not boldly say, they have been taught the truth by the holy Ghost, wherewith they might instruct the
Church?

Either the Fathers were deceived, or the holy Ghost dissenteth from him
self, by M. Ievvel
Verily of this doctrine one of these two must follow. That either all the old
learned Fathers were deceived, and taught false doctrine, or that the holy
Ghost, who ruled the pen of them that endited the Scriptures, dissented from
himself speaking in their Successors the learned Fathers. For that the
Fathers either of their own heads, or of private inspiratio^, without al warrant
of Gods word instituted this Sacrifice: neither M. Jewel says it, nor is it
so much as to be suspected. The second, that is, that any dissension or
contrariety be ascribed to the holy Ghost, is heinous blasphemy. The first,
that all the learned Fathers should be deceived, and also deceive the Church,
is not to be granted. For in as much as they received the spirit of truth
which Christ promised to the Apostles, Joan. 14.
and were governed by the spirit of God, and by the same were lead into al
truth: it ought not to be thought of them in general, that they have inclined
unto falshod, specially in so weighty a matter.

Wherefore it stands M. Jewel upon, either to deny, that the old learned
Fathers have by their often mention of Priests, Aultars, and Sacrifice,
acknowleged the singular Sacrifice of the Church, or recant what he said of
the Scriptures, that by any clause, or sentence of them it cannot appear,
where God appointed any such Sacrifice to be made at al.

If he will say, as he seems to say: The Fathers confess not, ne acknowledge
not in deed the Sacrifice it self, but yet often times they use the word of
Sacrifice, that is to say, they speak of it, as also of the Priests, and
Aulters: to that may be answered, that by their words we understand their
meaning. Forasmuch as they confess it with words, and that very often, how can
we judge otherwise of them, but that they believed it also in heart? What,
makes he the ancient holy Fathers, Gods dear friends, placed in authority by
the holy Ghost to govern the Church of God, to be double men, such as say one
thing, and think an other? Why taught they so, but that the Church should
believe so? If they would al men to believe it, shall we say, they believed it not
them selves?

When M. Jewel minding to maintain his Challenge, A shifte devised by the
schole of this nevve Gospel, against the manifold testimonies of the Fathers,
for the Sacrifice.
had with him self considered this much, knowing right well, as thereof he
could not be ignorant, how easy a thing it were for the Catholics, to allege
infinite places out of the old learned Fathers for witness and proof of
their faith, and of the Churches faith concerning this Sacrifice: for some show
at least of a colorable answer to be made, he devised this shift, or rather
uses a shift inverted by the deuisers of this new Gospel, in whose school he
has learned his new divinity. As the Fathers (says he) delited themselves
with the words, Sabbatum, Parasce^e, Pascha, Pentecoste, and other terms of
the old Law, notwithstanding the observation and Ceremony thereof were then
abolished: so they delited themselves oftetimes with these words, Sacerdos,
Altar, Sacrificiu^, Sacrificer, Altar, Sacrifice, notwithstanding the use
hereof were the^ clearly expired.

This great matter is not so lightlye carried away M. Jewel. Although with
force of your sword, with your mattockes, and pickaxes, ye have cut, hewed,
and throwe^ down all the holy Aulters of the Churches of England, and
therefore of the Churches of Christ, have made the Synagoges of Antichrist:
yet with this sclender word of yours, ye ca^ not bereue the whole Church of
God, of the priesthod, of the Aulters, of the Sacrifice apperteining to the
new Testament. M. Ievvel makes the Fathers to speak one thing, and to mean
an other.
If there be no use of Priests, Aulters, and Sacrifice, is it to be thought,
the old learned Fathers hearts could serve them so oftentimes to speak, and
write of the^, and to deceive the people committed to their charge, for their
delight and pleasures sake? Belo^ged it to their gravity, holiness, and love
of truth, to delight and solace them selves with falshod? to use hypocrisy, and
as it were legierdemaine, by speaking one thing, and meaning another? to serve
Gods people with void and empty words, as it were with pipt nuttes? Whiles
they teach the^ a doctrine of great importance, to use words that co^tein not
the matter which their proper signification reports? This were crafty cifring,
it were not right and plain teaching.

Verily we ought to judge better of the holy Fathers, and to think, that men
endued with so great grace, swarued not from the upright conscience, touching
the use of terms, which one of the best learned of the^ speaks of. Whose
words be these, whereby it appears, how rightly, warely, and circu^spectly they
used to speak. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei libr. 10. cap. 23. Use and observation of
Sabbatu^, Pascha, Altar etc^ is double, old, and nevve.
Nobis ad certa^ regula^ loqui fas est, ne verboru^ lice^tia etia^ de rebus,
quae his significa^tur, impia^ gignat opinione^ It is right (says he) that we
speak after a certain rule, least the overmuch liberty of words inge^der an
opinion of the things, which by the^ be signified.

But for a full answer to you M. Jewel, where as you affirm the Observation and
use of that is signified by these words, Sabbatu^, Parasceue, Pascha,
Pe^tecoste, Sacerdos, Altar, Sacrificiu^, to be utterly abolished, and clearly
expired in the new Testament: you seem either of ignorance not to understand,
or of malice to disse^ble, that the observation and use of these things is of
two sorts, old, and new, Legal, and Euangelical: Jewish, and Christian. The
old, Legal or Jewish Observation and use of these, was clearly expired in
right, by the coming of Christ, specially at what time hanging on the Cross,
and now giving up the ghost, Joan. 19.
he said, Consummatum est, It is finished. The new, Euangelical, and Christian
observation and use hereof, remains in the Church, and shall remain so long
as the Church continues. The Jewish Ceremony of these is quite abolished, we
grant, neither be they now in Christ's Catholic Church used, as the Jews used
them. But the faithful Christians now keep, use, and celebrate their Sabbath,
that is to say, their restingtide, their Parasceue, or preparingtide, commonly
called Goodfriday, their Pascha, or Easter, their Pentecost, or Whitsontide,
their Priesthod, their Altar, their Sacrifice, in such manner, order, sense,
and meaning, as the new state and condition of the Church succeding the Jewish
Synagoge, requires: that is, not according to the figure, shadow, letter, or
signification, but according to the truth, the body, the spirit, and the very
things.

Jesus vetus testamentum consummabat, Ser. 7. de pass. Domini.
and nouum Pascha condebat, says the ancient and learned Father S. Leo.
Jesus made an end of the old Testament, and did set up the new Easter, or
Passover. And this new Easter do we keep and celebrate. The same Father says
also: Vt vmbrae cedere^t corpori, et cessare^t imagines sub praesentia
veritatis, antiqua obseruantia nouo tollitur Sacramento, hostia in hostiam
transit, sanguinem sanguis excludit, and legalis festiuitas dum mutatur,
impletur. That the shadows should give place to the Body, and the Images
cease in presence of the Truth, the Old Observance is taken away by the new
sacrament, host passes over into host, blood puts out blood, and the
holy solemnity of the Law, whiles it is changed, is fulfilled.

Again more plainly to this purpose in an other place. Leo. Ser. 13 de Pass.
Domini.
Nihil legalium instructionum, nihil propheticarum recedit figurarum, quod non
tatum in Christi sacramenta transierit. Nobiscum est Signaculum Circumcisionis,
sanctificatio Chrismatum, consecratio Sacerdotum. Nobiscum puritas Sacrificij,
Baptismi veritas, honor Templi, vt merito cessarint nuncij, postquam nunciata
venerunt. What so ever instructions be in the Law, what figures so ever be in
the Prophets, no jot of it departs quite away, but is gone over altogether
into the Sacraments of Christ. With us is the signet of Circumcision, the
hallowing of the holy Ointements, Priests.
the Consecration of Priests. With us is the pureness of Sacrifice, Sacrifice.
the truth of Baptism, Baptism
the honor of the Temple: Temple.
that for good cause the Messangers (that is to say the old law) ceased,
after that their tidinges came.

Were it not tedious, easily might a hundred such places be alleged out of the
Fathers, by testimony of which the observation and use of these things of the
old Testament, Pascha, Easter, Pentecoste, Priest, or Sacrificer, Host,
Altar, and Sacrifice, is acknowleged, as of things translated, established,
and having place in the new Testament. The old Observation is taken away by
the new Observation. For the old Altar that was in Salomons Temple at
Jerusalem, we have new Aulters in the Churches of Christians thoroughe out the
whole world, Optatus lib. 6.
on which the members of Christ be sustained, and in which the body and blood
of Christ Per cert^ mome^ta.
at certain times do dwell, as the ancient Father Optatus writes. New
Aulters I say because they serve to a new purpose, and to a new kind of
Sacrifice in respect of the old Sacrifices.

Concerning the host, for Oxen, sheep, goats, and dooues, we have the body
and blood of Christ. For the figurative Lamb, we have the true Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world. Joan. 1.
For the feast of the Old Passover, Exodus 12.
wherein the Jews solemnized the memory of the Striking Angels passing over
them or beside them, when he destroyed all the first begoten of the Egyptians,
and of their own safe passing over the red Sea out of Egypt, 1. Cor. 5.
we have our Passover or Easter, wherein we keep a holy and solemn feast in
remembrance that by the merit of Christ's blood, who is the true Lamb, the
plague of everlasting death is past over, and quite beside us, 1. Pet. 3.
that for our sake he has conquered al power that was against us, I. Joan. 3.
that he is passed over from death to life, and has translated and redeemed us
from death and hell, to be partakers of life, and glory everlasting in his
kingdom.

As the Jews had their Pe^tecost, so we have ours. For as when they were
delivered out of Egypt, the Law was given them in the Mount Sina upon the
Pentecoste, Exodus 20.
that is to say, the fiftith day after that the Lamb had be^ sacrificed: 1.
Cor. 5.
So upon the fiftith day after our Passover, in which the true La^be of God
was slain, the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, Act. 2.
and the company of the^ that believed: which holy Ghost from that day to the
end of the world continues with the Church, and works in the sons of God
the performance of Gods holy will by love and Matt. 28.
charity, as the Law wrought it, or rather moved men to it by threats and
terror.

Leo Ser. 1. de Pentecoste.
S^ Leo speaking of this Feast, says, Hodiernam solennitatem in praeci^^^^
festis esse ^^^^^^nd^m, omnium Catholicorum corda cognoscunt. The hearts of al
Catholic men know, that the solemnity of this day (of Pentecoste) ought to
be had in honor among the chief feasts. Remember M. Jewel, if your heart give
you, that there is no such feast of Pentecost to be observed in Christ's
Church, because the use of it is expired, What answer you M. Ievvel?
as you say: by whose verdite you are excluded out of the number of Catholic
men, and so pronounced gilty. To whether part will you answer? Does your heart
know it, or know it not? If your heart know it not, then you are not Catholic,
and therefore you ought not to be admitted to teach Gods people. If your heart
know it, and yet cease not to teach the contrary: then are you a damnable
dissembler, and a false deceiuer. So touching this point every way your doctrine
is to be shunned. Thus then it is made clear, the old learned Fathers followed
not their pleasure or vain delight, when they spoke of Sabbatu^, Parasceue,
Pascha, Pentecoste, Priest, Altar, Sacrifice: But uttered the truth seriously,
as men ready to give account of their doctrine before God and man, and as
speaking of things, that have use and place in Christ's Church, though the
Jewish observation and Ceremony of them be abolished.

M. Jewels reason reproved.
The reason why the Fathers used these terms, is, as M. Jewel says, only for
that the ears of the people, as well of the Jews, as of the Gentiles had been
long acquainted with the same. This reason is altogether without favor. For if
al manner use and observation of the things by these terms signified were
quite abolished, whereas words and terms serve to the end the hearers and
readers by them be taught, and the Fathers in all their writings intended to
teach Christ and his Law: what could the Jews or Gentiles learn touching
the faith of Christ, hearing and reading these terms, not signifying to them
the things which they did before their conversion? The more acquainted their
ears were with them before, the more by hearing the same now were they put in
mind of that they once signified. And so were they by the Fathers invited
either to return again to their old Iewishnes and Paganism, or at least to
conceive of their manner of speech, they knew not what, those terms
signifying nothing properly, that is extant, or put in practice.

This being supposed, which M. Jewel supposes, that there is no real
Priesthood, no real Sacrifice, no real Altar proper to the new Testamente:
again this being granted, as it is an undoubted truth, that the Priesthood,
Sacrifice, and Aulters of the old Law be abrogated, and those of the Heathens
detested: what thing does remain for these terms properly in the new
Testamente to signify? I say properly, For if any will replye, saying, that
every Christian man and woman is a Priest, and that contrition of heart,
thanks giving, praises, and such other the like be sacrifices, and our hearts
be Aulters to offer these sacrifices upon it may be answered, that these terms
applied to such things, be not taken in their first and proper signification,
but in a second and improper, or rather metaphorical meaning. And the things
be so called more for a similitude, then for any propriety.

That the term Sacerdo^, Priest, is used of the Fathers in proper
signification, for a Priest of the new Testament. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib.
20. ca. 10.
If M. Jewel say, that when so ever the old learned Fathers speak of these
things in express terms, they are to be understood metaphorically only:
he is sone confuted. For avoiding tedious prolixitie, it may suffice here to
prove the contrary in the term Sacerdos, Priest, only. Which being proved, the
like may be judged of the rest, for the mutual respect and relation, which
either of the two other terms has to the other, For this the authority of
that excellent learned Father S. Augustine may stand us instead of many. Thus
he says. Quod autem cum dixisset, In istis secunda mors non habet potestatem,
adiunxit, atque ait: Sed erunt Sacerdotes Dei and Christi, and regnabunt cum eo
mill annis, non vtique de solis Episcopis, and Presbyteris dictum est, qui
proprie iam vocantur in Ecclesia Sacerdotes: Apoc. 20.
sed sicut omnes Christianos dicimus propter mysticum Chrisma, sic omnes
Sacerdotes, quoniam membra sunt vnius sacerdotis. De quibus Apostolus Petrus,
1. Pet. 2.
Plebs (inquit) sancta Regale Sacerdotium. As touching that when the Apostle
had said: In these the second death has not power, he added and said: But
they shall be the Priests of God and Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years: that is not spoken of the Bisshops and Priests, who properly
are now called in the Church Sacerdotes, Priests: But as we do call al men,
Christians, for the mystical ointement, likewise al men, Priests, because they
be members of one Priest. Of whom the Apostle S. Peter says, Real Priesthod
is in the Church now, ergo, real Sacrifice.
a holy people, a kingly Priesthood.

Behold Reader, S. Aug^stine by express term avouches, that Bishops and
Priests are they, who be properly now in the Church of God called Sacerdotes,
Priests, or as M. Jewel commonly for spite translateth, Sacrificers. Whereby
it follows clearly, that the term Priest, being applied to al men and women,
who be not by a solemn sacrament ordered, not specially called and chosen to
the office of a Bishop, or Priest, is taken in an improper or mystical
signification. In that S. Augustine acknowlegeth the order of those to remain
now in the Church, which be called Sacerdotes, Priests, properly: he
excludes al metophorical, metonymical, and mystical signification of the
word. So then following the doctrine of S. Augustine, a very sufficient
witness of the says of Christ's Church, of, and before his time, we may
boldly say: that in the Church we have Priests, and Priesthood, speaking
properly, that is to say, a real Priesthood, and therefore a real Sacrifice,
which M. Jewel denies.

This then being proved, that in the state of the new Testamente there be
Priests in the proper signification of the term beside that mystical
signification, whereby al Christians be termed Priests: this also is clearly
proved withal, that the other two terms, Sacrifice, and Altar, properlye
taken, must remain in the Church of Christ, and not be construed, where so
ever the Fathers make mention of them, by a metaphorical or mystical
understanding, as though there were neither real Sacrifice, nor material
Altar. For a Priest properly taken, requires a Sacrifice properly taken,
which he may offer: and an Altar properly taken, whereupon he may make his
Sacrifice. Like as a Priest metaphorically taken, requires only Sacrifice,
and Altar of like signification.

Christian me^ in general be Priests after a metaphorical meaning, not in
proper speech, as likewise they be Kings.
That this matter be made more manifest, if it shall like thee Reader to return
again to the place of S. Peter forementioned by S. Augustine, wherein al
faithful beleuers have the name and title of Priests ascribed unto them: in
the same sentence shall thou find them called Kings, no less then Priests.
But how are they called Kings? By a proper kind of speech? Not so, but by a
similitude, or Metaphore. And by the same kind of speech every Christian
persons own body and soul, may be called his kingdom appointed him of God
king of kings to govern. The jurisdiction and dominion of infinite such
kings, we conceive to be bordered and enclosed within the narrow limits of
each one person, and the subjects to be fewer then may make a perfect number.
Shall we hereof infer, that there is nothing else in the world, that these
terms king and kingdom, may and do properly signify? Shall we hereupon
dissolve Monarchies, and plainly tell such whom the world calls kings,
that they have but the Metaphorical name of kings, and be no kings in deed,
bereuing them of all authority to rule their Subjects, and bidding them to be
content, as other meaner persons are, with their Metaphorical kingdom?

In deed this were the rediest way to bring al to confusion, and beastly
enormitie, in which state this new Gospel might sone be set up, or any other
religion besides that the holy Ghost has planted in the Church hitherto. And
this is that state, that Luthers holy sprite would have brought Germany unto,
and had prevailed, had not the Nobility resisted with all their force, the rash
and wiked stourdinesse of the vulgar people. We might say, and easy it were to
prove, that the like confusion must ensue in the Church, if this opinion be
once planted, and rooted in the hearts of the Laity, that each of the^ is as
truly, and as properly a Priest, as is his Curate, his vicar, his Person, or
his Bishop. But because this pertains not chiefly to the present purpose, I
will not stand about it. This which is now made evident by that is already
said, may boldly be avouched: That, as there be special kings bearing rule not
only over them selves, yea though perhaps not over them selves sometimes (which
may be said for some part of them) but at the least over their Subjects:
notwithstanding that all the faithful people through Christ, whose members they
are, be made by Baptism kings over their own souls and bodies: So there be
special Priests in the new Testament, called and appointed to that function,
albeit al Christians be spiritual Priests, as being the members of the highest
Priest Jesus Christ.

Here I think good to fore warn the Reader, that because I am constrained by
the Reply to make a distinction between these two terms Sacerdos, and
Presbyter, Presbyter, Sacerdos, Priest, Sacrificer.
by which the persons of the highest order in the Church be called, and in our
English tongue there want two distinct terms correspondent to them, the name
of Priest serving to both, as the common use has received: I will for a few
leaves, that my talk may be more distinct, and better perceived, use the
term Sacrificer, for the Latin word Sacerdos, and the term Priest, for the
word, Presbyter. When therefore I shall name a Sacrificer, that is to be
understood, which this word, Sacerdos, signifies, and likewise Priest shall
be that, which is signified by the word Presbyter. Thus I require the use of
an vnwoont term to be taken in good part for so good and profitable a cause.
After a few leaves I will return to the use of the accustomed term, Priest,
whether the Latin, where unto it shall answer, be Sacerdos, or Presbyter. And
now to come again from whence I have thus digressed.

If for the force of the former comparison, M. Jewel will confess, that there
be certain special persons chosen and sent to bear in the congregation
certain offices, which every man upon the commission of their general
Priesthod may not adventure upon without a special commission and appointement,
and those persons be of the Fathers by an abuse of the word called Sacerdotes,
Sacrificers, whereas in deed, and properly they are to be called Presbyteri,
Priests, Elders, or Ministers: to this I reply granting and confessing that
such persons called to these special functions, were at the beginning, and may
now also be called Priests and Ministers: That there be now in the Church,
who ought properly to be called Sacerdotes, that is, Sacrificers.
But I deny utterly, that the same may not, ne ought not properly to be called
Sacrificers. Yea doubtless the name of a Sacrificer, does more aptly and
properly agree unto the^, the^ does the term Priest, or Minister. For of these
terms the one rather declares the age, or ancient gravity, which is most
seemly in these persons, then expresses their office. The other through the
largenes of the signification is such, as may be applied as well unto Majors of
Cities, and temporal Judges ministering Justice, as unto those persons, that
minister and dispe^se the mysteries of God. But the term Sacrificer does
properly extend only to those, who have authority to co^secrat the Body and
Blood of Christ, and be by special vocation ministers and dispensers of most
holy things, which ministratio^ and dispe^satio^ is to be found in the Church
only.

To him that perhaps will reply, Why S. Paul calls them Priests, rather
then Sa^crificers.
and demand, why then did S. Paul, as it were of purpose shu^ning the term
Sacrificer, always call them Priests, or Ministers: I answer. S. Paul had
just cause so to do. The which cause learned men show to be, for that in his
time the old Law, and Priesthod of the same, was yet among the Jews fresh in
estimation, and stickte so in their conscience, as they could not upon the
soudaine be removed from the observation of their accustomed Religion,
delivered unto them of God by Moses his special prophet. S. Paul therefore
with other the first setters forth of Christ's Law the Gospel, preaching
continually of the end of the old Law, and of the ceassing and abrogatio^ of
the Sacrifices: thought it convenient for a time to forbear the name of
Sacrificer, and to call the spiritual officers, by the name of Priests and
Ministers, least the Jews hearing the terms of their own Religion, might
falsely suppose, no difference, or preemine^ce to be between the office and
officers of the new, and their Religion, that is to say, of the new, and old
Testament. And this warenesse of speaking continued until Jerusalem, After the
destruction of Jerusalem, the old term Sacrificer, was resumed and vsed^
and the Temple it self, where only their Sacrifices were to be made, were
destroyed: at what time the kingdom, Priesthode, and rite of Sacrificing of the
Jews, was quite ended and taken away. From thence forth to this time, the
learned Fathers have commonly without fear or doubt, resumed the terms of
Priesthod, and Sacrificers, and applied the^ to the spiritual ministry
administers of the Church. This cause being known and well weighed, bewrays
M. Jewels ignorance, or folie^ affirmi^g, the Fathers to have used the terms
Sacrifice, Sacrificer, and Altar for that the Jews and the Ge^tils ears were
well acquainted with these terms. Where as contrary wise the first Preachers of
Christian Religion absteined from those words, because the same were unto
them usual and familiar, least by the use of the^, some error, or
inconvenience might chance to grow.

Answer to M. Jewels authorities.
Now to answer the authorities: first, whereas Pachymeres is haled in whether he
will or no, to be a witness in this wrong cause: let it be considered how
injurious M. Jewel is, in that he binds other men to Doctors, and Councels
of the first six hundred years after Christ only, and here uses him self the
authority of so late a writer, as Pachymeres is. And therefore since that he
has first broken his own Law, and the bond of the couenances: we think it
right he bear with us, if sometime we allege Doctors, and Councels, though
some deal beneath the first six hundred years, yet auncienter, and of far
better authority, then Pachymeres a writer of Notes upon S. Dionyse has ever
ben accounted of.

Next how proves Pachymeres the purpose, for which he is brought in? Be it
granted, that S. Dionyse writing to Sopater being a Priest, calls him a
Sacrificer, and that custom has now obtained, a Priest, or Elder, to be named
a Sacrificer, as Pachymeres says. what can be concluded of all this? Will it
follow hereof, that Sopater was no true Sacrificer, but only a figurative
Sacrificer? And that the name of a Priest, does more aptlye express the office
of the stewardes of Gods Mysteries in the Church, then does the term
Sacrificer? Nothing less. This is it only that will follow, that the
dispensatours of those spiritual treasures were called by both the names of a
Priest, and of a Sacrificer, even from the beginning of the Church, a short
time only excepted, until the Jewish Synagogue was buried, and almost
forgotten. After which time, the Ecclesiastical writers were accustomed to
attribute unto the chief ministers of Gods mysteries as often (or oftener) the
title of Sacrificers, as of Priests, or Elders, as it may be tried by vewe of
the works written by S. Dionyse, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Leo, S. Gregory, and briefly by the
writings of al others, from age to age, unto these wretched times, when the
name and person of a Sacrificer, which al good men of times past ever
reverenced and honored, is despised, accounted Jewish or Heathenish, hated and
detested. So that the custom, which Pachymeres speaks of, to call a Priest a
Sacrificer, is now toward the end of the world, when Antichrist shall come, by
the worst sort of men his foreronners, interrupted and broken.

How be it I marvel, that M. Jewel, who has so great stoare of phrases,
wherewith to make show of somewhat against the Catholics, S. Dionyse vvri^ting
to Sopater a Priest, calls hi^ ^acrificer. (...).
and to bleare the eyes of the unlearned, had no better phrase, then this of S.
Dionyse, against the Sacrifice of the Church. Will it seem likely to any wise
man, that S. Dionysius was so far ouerseene, as to use one word for an other,
specially in that place, where he so ernestly aduertiseth one to utter nothing
that may be reproved? For that special counsel he gives Sopater in that
Epistle. And whereas writing Epistles to others, he gives to each one his due
title of honor and calling, as, To Gaius a (...).
Moonke, To Dorotheus a (...).
Minister, or Deacon by interpretation of Pachymeres, To Polycarpus a (...).
Bishop, To John the Divine, Apostle, and Evangelist: how shall we think he
failed only of the true name, that Sopaters vocation was called by? Verily had
not a Priest in his certain knowledge, and in the judgment of the learned
Fathers of that time the Apostles scholars, don true Sacrifice in deed by
offering up the body and blood of Christ unto God, he would not have called
Sopater the Priest a Sacrificer. But because they had the same faith concerning
this Sacrifice, that the Church ever since had, and we now have: he doubted
not to call a Priest a Sacrificer, as now he is commonly called. Neither used he
that term only in his Epistle to Sopater, but also in his Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, where he declared the manner how the Sacrifice was to be celebrated.
And the custom has now so prevailed, says Pachymeres. Which custom should
never so have prevailed in the universal Church of Christ, had not the term
in so weighty a matter been agreeable unto the truth. Thus S. Dionyse, whom M.
Jewel allegeth for him self, makes clearly against M. Jewel.

Unto Pachymeres M. Jewel adioineth S. Paul, Origin, S. Chrysostom, to prove
that preaching of the Gospel is called a Sacrifice, being none in deed, and
also S. Gregory Nazianzene, calling the people, his Sacrifice. These
authorities might as well have been brought in to prove, that Christ offered no
true and real Sacrifice upon the Cross, as that there is no external Sacrifice
in the Church, but only a reported Sacrifice by a metaphore. For if any man
allege to the contrary, the testimonies of the Scripture and Doctors, where
they call Christ's death a Sacrifice, following M. Jewel one may easily answer,
that both the Scripture and Doctors used the word improperly, alluding for
their delight unto the Sacrifices of the old Law. For behold, says he, this is
not strange. S. Paul, S. Chrysostom, and Orige^ do call preaching a Sacrifice,
whereas in deed preaching is no Sacrifice. And so by a phrase of speech the
Sacrifice of Christ's death, whereon our faith and hope, as the ground of our
salvation stays, were like to be removed and displaced.

What a fond kind of arguing is this? The absurdity of M. Jewels argument.
The term, Sacrifice, is sometimes used of the Fathers speaking
metaphorically: Ergo it is so to be taken, when they speak of the Sacrifice of
the Altar. The great absurdity of this argument may easily appear in the
like. As for example. Baptism is sometime taken in the Scripture by a
figurative speech, for tribulation and suffering of death, as when Christ said,
Baptismo habeo baptizari, Luc. 21.
et quomodo coartor, vsque du^ perficiatur? I have a Baptism to be baptized
withal, and how am I straighted, until it be accomplished? Ergo Baptism has
no proper signification in the last chapter of S. Matthew, where Christ gave
commandment unto his disciples, Mat. 28.
saying, Go ye and teach al nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: But Christ pronouncing the term of
Baptism, Mar. 7.
alluded only unto the obserua^ce and Ceremony of the Jews, whose custom
was, to baptize and wash them selves, when they returned home from the market
or common place.

For thy better instruction herein Reader, M. Jewels common Arguments deduced
from like to like.
thou may be advertised, that these Arguments a Simili, from one like thing
to an other, be the weakest of al others, and most deceivable, and are fitter
for a Rhetorical declamation, then for a probation of truth called in
controversy. And therefore it is a kind of Argument attributed unto the
Rhetorician, to explicate and make plain a matter, and not to the Logician,
strongly to convince, and piththily to prove a verity. Yet M. Jewel
notwithstanding is so in love with this kind of proving in his whole book of
Reply, that if his comparisons of one phrase with an other were cut of, which
he would have seem to be like: the rest of his book should appear of small
quantity.

How be it, though it be the slipperest way in reasoning, yet if M. Jewel had
compared phrases together, that were like in deed al circumstances observed, he
were the more to be borne withal. But most commonly he makes his comparisons
betwixt those phrases, that have little, or none affinity at al, either for
that the one is spoken by a Metaphore, and the other properly: or the one of
one matter, and the other of an other: or the one in one respect, the other in
an other. And by that means he confounds the Doctors sayings, M. Jewels
custom, to put away one truth by an other.
and thinks he has done the part of a learned man, if he may seem to foil,
and desplace one truth by an other truth. As for example. In our present case,
because S. Paul, and certain Doctors by a Figure do take Preaching for a
Sacrifice, which is a truth denied by no man, for it is in deed a kind of
spiritual Sacrifice: therefore he would have it seem, that the same Doctors
never speak of any real Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, whereas it is
most manifest (as it shall hereafter be proved) that they speak of both kinds
of these Sacrifices, and both may well stand together.

Romans 15. Origin. in Epist. ad To. lib. 10.
Where he says, S. Paul speaks of him self in this sense saying, Sacrifico
Euangelium Dei, I sacrifice the Ghospel of God, and Origin, Sacrificale opus
est annunciare Euangelium, It is a work of Sacrifice to preach the Gospel:
What sense means he? or what sense would he his Reader to conceive, since that
he spoke no word of any sense before? He spoke only of a certain delight,
that the old learned Fathers had in using words, which after the promulgation
of the Gospel, signified nothing extant nor practiced. I trow therefore he
meant, that S. Paul had also that delight, which he pretends. Now true it is,
that S. Paul has nowhere these very words, Sacrifico Euangelium Dei, I
sacrifice the Gospel of God. Neither be the words Origens, that he ascribes
to Origin, but S. Hieromes, who added unto, and took from Origens fifteen
imperfect books upon the Epistle to the Romans, and disposed that whole
work, as he thought best, as it appears by his Epistle to Heraclius.

The place which he means, Romans 15.
is, (...), for which the common Latin books have, sanctificans Euangelium
Dei, Erasmus, administrans, S. Augustine, consecrans, which word likes
Calvin, and the same he pteferreth before Erasmus word, which
notwithstanding the translatours of the English new Testament followed. Al
which interpretations be too obscure, Beza in Annot. in no. test.
as Beza judges, and therefore he likes his own best, Operans Euangelio Dei,
as his Master Calvin liked his own better, then that of Erasmus. S. Hierome
confesses it to be more highly, and with a more magnifice^ce spoken in Greek,
then he was hable fully to express in Latin. Yet as being destitute of a
fuller and perfiter word, he turns the Greek word, (...), into sacrificans,
and says, that to preach the Gospel, is a sacrificing work, and there
plainly declares how.

Now though it be granted, that both S. Paul alluded to the manner and
condition of the Sacrifices of Moses law, and S. Hierome considered the same
in his exposition of that place: yet thereof it will not follow, that when so
ever the old Learned Fathers speak of the external, visible, and singular
Sacrifice of the Church, they mean that there is no real Sacrifice in deed,
but only in a figurative speech.

M Ievvel for the most part so argues, that he impugneth one truth by an other
truth.
This Argument is naught pardy, as M. Jewel knows him self, S. Paul says,
he consecrated the Gospel as it were a Sacrifice, through preaching of the
same offering up the believers as Hosts unto God: Item, Saint Hierome for that
respect, calls preaching of the Ghospel a sacrificing work: Ergo, the
Fathers words spoken of the daily Sacrifice of the Church, are to be taken
metaphorically only, and not properly. Both manners of sayings be true in
their right sense, the one in figurative, the other in proper sense.

Who so ever answers M. Jewel, he must always sing one song unto him, that
his continual shift is, to impugn one truth by an other truth. The same answer
serves to the places by him alleged out of S. Gregory Nazianzen, and S.
Chrysostom: if S. Nazianzen have any such words at al. For amongst al his
Orations that be extant, none bears the title that is here noted in the
margent. Yet I acknowledge them to be such, as he might well have spoken them by
a metaphore. M. Ievvel falsifieth S. Chrysostom


The Testimony of S. Chrysostom he has foully falsified with untrue
translation. For whereas he found these words in S. Chrysostom, Ipsum mihi
Sacerdotium est praedicare and Euagnelizare: he has thus translated it into
English, My whole priesthood is, to teach, and to preach the Ghospel. As
though ipsum in Latin, signified, whole in English, and as though it were
true, that S. Paul's Priesthode consisted wholly and altogether in preaching the
Ghospel, whereas he confesses him self to have baptized Crispus, 1. Cor. 1.
and Caius, and the householde of Stephana: and it is not to be doubted, but he
consecrated and ministered also the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, and where occasion so required, loosed and retained sins. Which three
functions be diverse from the preaching of the Ghospel. Whereby it is clear,
that S. Paul's whole Priesthode consisted not in preaching.

But these men would feign enclose al Priestly office within the limittes of
preaching. For so should our whole Religion consiste in prating, so few
Sacraments would serve, so the continual Sacrifice should cease, so should
Hostlers, and Tapsters occupy the Pulpittes, and what other so ever lewd
Iackes could chatte and chapter their matters, they should be admitted to the
government of souls. And thus think they, Papistrie should quit be thrown
down, and their glorious Ghospel be set up.

But S. Chrysostomes meaning was, upon occasion of S. Paul's word (...), Romans
15.
whereby he signified the excellency of his Office, deducing his talk from
the inferior and common term, Latria, that apperteineth to al, whereof he
spoke in the beginning, to terms of an higher and more special dignity, to
wit, Liturgia, and Hierurgia, which import Priestly Office: his meaning I say,
was partly to declare, that S. Paul's preaching was a certain Priesthode,
forasmuch as by the same he offered up those that believed, as a sacrifice unto
God, their outward man killed, and carnal affections quite mortified, for
which cause he calls the Gospel his sword, Machaera mea Euangelium est, the
Gospel, which is the word of preaching, Chrysosto. in epist. ad Romanos homil.
29.
is my sword: partly also to signify, that of al other offices and duties,
the chief function of S. Paul's Priesthode was, to preach the Gospel,
according to that him self witnesses, Non misit me Christus baptizare, sed
euangelizare: Christ sent me not to baptize, 1. Cor. 1.
but to preach. Which words Thephylacte expounding, wherein he follows the
vain of S. Chrysostom, says expressly, that although the Apostle were not
sent specially to baptize, yet he was not forebidden to take that office upon
him.

M. Jewel not being ignorant of all this, I see not what he can pretend for any
colorable excuse of his false translation, specially directed to so wicked an
end, as of him it is: which is, either quit to abolish the external and true
Priesthode of the new Testament, or to abridge it only to a bare preaching of
Gods words, al other functions thereunto belonging, as to baptize, to loose
and bind sins, to consecrate and offer up to God the body and blood of
Christ, to minister the other Sacraments, and the like, clearly excluded.

Thus I hope, thou perceiuest Reader, what miserable and shameful an entry M.
Jewel has been driven to make, to come to his purpose, which was to impugn
the most worthy and healthful Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, and to
persuade unlearned souls, there is no such Sacrifice really offered unto God
by Priests of the new Testament. The sum of M. Jewels shifts against the
Sacrifice.
Whereupon I have stayed somewhat the longer, because I saw, how by guileful
persuasions he went about to engraffe at the beginning in the minds of the
unlearned, First, that man for cause of his miserable and mortal condition,
ought not to presume to offer up the Immortal Son of God in a real Sacrifice
unto his Father: next, that by Scripture there appears no grant af
authority or warrant, so to do: lastly, that the terms Sacrificer,
Sacrifice, and Altar, be only naked and empty terms, void of any substance
signified that is in the Church, as derived out of the Law of Moses, and
used by the old learned Fathers for their delight. Al which three points, how
far wide they be from truth, it may partly appear by that I have already
said, and shall more fully appear in the process of this Reioindre. Now let us
hear M. Jewel.

Jewel.
Now, to comme to M. Hardinges words, Three ways, says he, Christ is
offered up unto his Father, In a Figure, as in the Old Law: In Deed, and
Blouddily, as upon the Cross: In a Sacrament, or Mystery, as in the New
Testament. Of which three ways, the Blouddy Oblation of Christ upon the
Cross, is the very, true, and only Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of
the world. The other two, as in respect, and manner of Signifieing, they
are sundry, so in effect, and substance, they are al one. For, like as in the
Sacraments of the old Law was expressed the Death of Christ, that was to
comme: Even so in the Sacraments of the nevve Law of the Ghospel, is
expressed the same Death of Christ already paste. As we have Mysteries, so
had they Mysteries: As we Sacrifice Christ, so did they Sacrifice Christ:
As the Lamb of God is slaiue unto us, So was the same Lamb of God slain
unto them. S. Augustine says, August. De vtilitate poenitent. cap. 1.
Tunc Christus Venturus, modo Christus Venit. Venturus, and Venit, diuersa
verba sunt: sed idem Christus. Then was, Christ shall comme: Now is, Christ
Is comme. Shall comme, and, Is comme, are sundry words. But Christ is al
one. Again in like comparison bytvveene the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of
Christ, he says thus: August. in Ioannem tract. 26.
Videte, Fide manente, Signa variata. In Signis diuersis eadem Fides. Behold,
the Faith remaininge, the ( Sacraments, or) Signs are changed. The Signs, or
Sacraments being diverse, the Faith is one.

Harding.
Now then that after your Preface you come to my words M. Jewel, what have
you to replye against them, that to any learned man may seem to be to the
purpose? I said, Christ is offered after three manners, figuratively, truly
with bloudshedding, and sacramentally, or in Mystery. With which part of this
threefold Division find you fault? As for the two first parts, they be
clearly proved by the Scriptures. The third is that ye call in question, and
which you impugn. Because you had nothing to say against the two first, least
your matter should seem to have a foil, if you yielded to any thing that were
by me said, were it never so true: you go from the purpose, and enter into
other talk. M. Ievvel diuerteth from the purpose to impertine^t matter.
Whereof as part is false, so the whole is impertinent. What need was there to
tell us, that the bloody Oblation of Christ upon the Cross, is the
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world? As thereof no man
doubted, so no man spoke of it.

The point now treated, is not, whether the Sacrifice of the Cross be
Propitiatory, for it were superfluous thereof to dispute: but whether Christ
be now offered up in Mystery. Grant that first, and afterward we may proceed
further, to discuss whether the Sacrifice of the Altar be Propitiatory, and
in what sense it be Propitiatory.

Of what effect and substance so ever the Sacrifices of both Laws be, how so
ever the Death of Christ to come, or past, be expressed in the old and new
Sacraments, that they of the old Testament, as well as we, had Mysteries, of
the equality, and likeness of Sacrifices, and of like slaiyng of the Lamb of
God on their part, and ours: of all these things so particularly to speak,
the Division by me declared ministered you no just occasion. And all this might
well be suffered to go unanswered, as impertinent, had you not by the way as it
were spitten forth some poison of erroneous doctrine, to the infection of the
unlearned and unware Readers.

For by calling the bloody Oblation of Christ upon the Cross the very, true,
and only Sacrifice Propitiatory for the sins of the world (which no man
denies) your meaning is to insinuate, that the unbloody Sacrifice, which
Christ instituted at his last Supper of his body and blood, were not in deed
a Sacrifice in any sense or respect Propitiatory. Whereas if that of the
Cross was Propitiatory, the other must needs be Propitiatory, though in a
diverse degree of Propitiation, because in substance of the thing offered it is
one with the other, but diverse in the manner of offering, as being unbloody,
and done in a mystery, and the other bloody, and don in the form of a visible
body. And the force and virtue of Propitiation of the one, issues not from the
Priest, but from the Propitiation of the other, in whose co^memoration it is
offered. Cyprianus de coe. Do.
Verily S. Cyprian sticks not to call the holy Euchariste, Medicamentum ad
sanandas infirmitates, and holocaustum ad purgandas iniquitates. A medicine to
heal sickenesses, and a wholeburnt Sacrifice to cleanse iniquities. Baesilius
in Liturg.
S. Basile also in his Liturgy making his supplication, says thus. Da Domine,
vt pro nostris peccatis, and populi ignorantijs, acceptum sit Sacrificium
nostrum. Grant Lord, that our Sacrifice may be acceptable for our sins, and
for the ignorances of the people.

Whereas you affirm the other two ways, after which Christ is offered, that
is to say, the Sacrifices of the old Law, and the singular Sacrifice of the
Church now, to be one in effect, and substance, as they are sundry in
respect, Three untruths uttered at once by M. Ievvel
and manner of signifiyng: you utter three great untruths at once. For first,
as concerning the respect of signifiyng, in our Sacrifice the forms of Bread
and Wine do signify the Body and Blood of Christ, as the Sacrifices of the
old Law signified Christ. And although they signify Christ present, and the
other absent: yet in respect of signifiyng they agree, and therefore are not
sundry therein. The respect of signifiyng is one, and the thing signified is
one, though the manner of signifiyng be diverse.

That the substance of the Sacrifices of both testamentes is diverse.
Secondly, touching the substance, it is diverse in the Sacrifices of both
Testamentes. For the substance of the old Sacrifices was a brute beast,
meal, cakes, oil, wine, and such the like. But the substance of our Sacrifice
now frequented in the new Testament, is the Body and Blood of Christ. Luc. 22.
So both the Scripture teaches, showing how Christ having at his supper
consecrated his body and blood, commanded his disciples to do the same that
he had done in his remembrance, and S. Augustine declares in these words.
August. in lib. senten. Prosperi.
Hoc est quod dicimus, quod modis omnibus approbare contendimus, Sacrificium
Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare, visibili eleme^torum specie, and
inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi corpore and sanguine, and sacramento, and
re Sacramenti. This is that we say, that by all means we ernestly endeavor to
approve, that the Sacrifice of the Church is made of two things, and does
consiste of two things, of the visible form of the Elements, and of the
invisible body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Sacrament, and of
the thing of the Sacrament (that is to wit, of the body of Christ).

S. Ireneus agreably to this doctrine, Irene. lib. 4. ca. 34.
says, the Euchariste to consiste of two things, the one earthly, whereby he
means the form of the elements, the other heavenly, that is to say, the
body and blood of Christ.

Learn Reader by this doctrine of S. Augustine, The substance of bread and
wine has no place in our Sacrifice.
that the substance of bread and wine, which be called here the Elements, has
no place in our Sacrifice, which does consist of two parts, the one visible,
the other invisible. The forms of the Elements be the visible part. As for
the substance of bread and wine, it is utterly invisible. But the invisible
part of the Sacrifice, is the body and Blood of Christ. And therefore unless
we appoint two invisible parts of this Sacrifice, that is to say, the
substance of bread and wine, and also the body and blood of Christ, (which
were absurd to think) it must needs be confessed, that no place is here left
for the substance of bread and wine: but that the invisible thing or substance
of the Sacrament and likewise of the Sacrifice is the body and blood of
Christ. And thus it is evident, that the substance of the Sacrifices of the
old Law, and of the Sacrifices of the new Law is sundry and diverse. Whereof it
is concluded, that it is either ignora^tly and grossly, or heretically said if
it be stubbornly maintained, that our Sacrifice is one in substance with the
Jewish Sacrifices.

The effects of the Sacrifices of both Laws be different and diverse.
Now thirdly to speak of the effect of the Sacrifices of the old Law, and of
the Sacrifice of the Church, wherein Christ is offered up unto his Father in a
Sacrament and mystically, to wit under the form of bread and wine: certain it
is, the effects be diverse. To declare fully the manyfolde and heavenly
effects of our Sacrifice, far surmounting any effect that ever was ascribed
to the Sacrifices of the old Law, it would require a long treatise. The
difference of both may sufficiently appear by comparing two or three of their
effects together.

The blood of the Sacrifices of the old Law confirmed the same Law. The
blood of our Sacrifice confirms the new Testamente. Math. 26.
Hic est Sanguis meus noui Testamenti, this is my blood of the new
Testamente, says our Lord in the Gospel. How much diversity then is
between the new Testament and the old (which is incomparably great, the new
Law passing in excellency the old) so much differs, and so far surmounteth
the effect of the Sacrifice of Christ's Church, the effect of the Sacrifices
of the Jewish Synagogue.

Again, August. de fide ad Petrum cap. 19.
to use your own witness against your self, by report of Saint Augustine,
the old Sacrifices signified in Figures Christ's death to come, and to be
suffered. But the Sacrifice of the Church, represents with the real presence
of that body which has dyed, the death already past and perfited. And who
knows not, what difference there is between a promise, and the performance of
the promise? Performance I say, for although in our Sacrifice the death of
Christ be not performed a new, and again suffered: yet in the same is the
truth of that very body inuisibly present, which by suffering death has paid
the price of our Redemption. In consideration whereof S. Augustine speaking of
this Sacrifice offered unto God for that blessed woman S. Monica his mother at
her burial, Augustine. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 12.
whereby he means the Mass, calls it Sacrificium pretij nostri, the
Sacrifice of our Price, that is to say, wherewith our Ransom was paid.

S. Ignatius ascribes to our Sacrifice of a faithful person worthily received,
Ignatius in epist. ad Ephesios.
a marvelous effect, calling it (...), a medicine of immortality, and a
preservative whereby we may be kept from dying. Which marvelous benefit who
ever attributed to the Sacrifices of the old Law? Other the like effects
which the old learned Fathers have ascribed unto the blessed Sacrifice, be
many in number, and great in excellency, of which the old Sacrifices were
never hable to work any. Wherefore you ought to recant this your false
doctrine M. Jewel, that the Sacrifices of both Laws be of one effect, or
which is the same, one in effect.

No less false is that you affirm, that as we have Mysteries, so had they
Mysteries, specially if your word of comparison imply a likeness and equality
of Mysteries, as the purport of your other doctrine leads us to judge of you.
For although it be true, that they had Mysteries, and we also have Mysteries:
yet had not they the like Mysteries, nor equal in dignity, truth, and
plainness, to our Mysteries and Sacraments. How much ours are preferred
before theirs in the judgment of S. Augustine, August. in Psalm. 73.
it is evident by that he says speaking of both. Mutata sunt Sacramenta,
facta sunt faciliora, pauciora, salubriora, feliciora. The Sacraments (says
he) be changed, they be made easier, fewer, healthfuller, happier. And in the
same place: Sacramenta noui Testamenti dant Salutem, sacramenta veteris
Testamenti promiserunt Saluatorem. The Sacraments of the new Testamente give
salvation, the Sacraments of the old Testamente promised the Savior.
Wherefore M. Jewel either make us believe, that you are to be heard before S.
Augustine, and that better is worse, and worse better: or revoke your words,
by which you teach likeness and equality between the Mysteries and Sacraments
of both Testamentes.

M. Ievvel utterly takes away the real Sacrifice of the new Testament.
Where you say further, that as we Sacrifice Christ, so did they Sacrifice
Christ: you utterly take away the Real Sacrifice of the new Testamente.
Wherein being a very weighty point, you dissent from the Catholic Church,
for which you and your fellows be condemned of the Church, and holden for
Heretics. This have I avouched, and sufficiently proved in mine Answer to
this. 17. Article of your Challenge. What you reply against the same, here in
the process of this Reioindre by Gods grace I shall confute. To make your
untrue and heretical saying appear the more tolerable to the unlearned, you
join unto it a saying, that in a right construction may be admitted. As the
Lamb of God is slain unto us (say you) so was the same Lamb of God slain
unto them. In deed if you mean a new actual sleying of Christ, who is the
true Lamb of God, he is not now in the daily Sacrifice of the Church slain,
no more then he was slain in the daily sacrifices, or in the yearly Passover
of the Jews. But for as much as in our daily Sacrifice we have the true Body
and Blood of the Lamb of God, Joan. 1.
that takes away the sins of the world, laid upon the holy table (which is
the Altar) sacrificed of Priests (...), as the Nicen Council says, that is
to say, without killinge and bloodshed. In consideration hereof, you should not
have said, as we sacrifice Christ, so did they sacrifice Christ. For though in
our Sacrifice we sley not Christ, the true Lamb of God, as they slew the
Lambs, which prefigured Christ: yet so far as that is true, which the
Fathers of the Nicen Council report, and as by virtue of Christ's almighty
words according to his commandment and Institution his Body and Blood are
consecrate, and really present: we offer up Christ in deed unto God in the
Sacrifice of the Church.

For proof of the real presence, I refer the Reader, who understands not
the Latin tongue, to sundry learned works written in the English tongue in
our time thereof. In which he shall find the matter so largely, so clearly, and
so substantially proved, that he shall confess he sees the same, unless he
will as some do, wilfully blindefolde him self, and say in midday, it is dark
night. Forasmuch then as we sacrifice Christ truly, because we have and offer
up in our sacrifice the truth of the body and Blood of Christ in deed present
by the almighty power of his own word, after which sort the Jews had not
Christ present: therefore it is not true that you say, that as we sacrifice
Christ, so did they sacrifice Christ.

Diversity in the Sacraments of both Laws.
Touching the comparison you make between the Sacraments of both Laws (for now
soudeinly you chop from the Sacrifices into the Sacraments) in expressing
Christ's death then to come, and now paste, whereby you go about to prove the
equal valewe of both Sacraments: notwithstanding that both do express or
signify (though in diverse degree) the death of Christ, yet does our Sacrament
of the Altar far surmount theirs, because in ours is contained the very body
and blood of Christ, in theirs was nothing but a figure, in theirs the shadow,
in ours the body.

The place you allege out of the book de vtilitate Poenitentiae, that you
attribute to S. Augustine contrary to the censure of Erasmus, serves you to no
purpose. We agree unto it no less then your self. In that place the author
speaks of the spiritual meat, which the Jews did eat, the same as we do.
And that meat he will both to be Christ, teaching how they did eat Christ,
Aug. de Vtilitate Poenitentiae.
whom we do eat. The whole process there is to be understood of the
spiritual eatinge, for so he says. Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt,
eundem quem nos cibum spiritalem manducauerunt. Quicunque autem de Manna solam
saturitatem quaesierunt, patres infidelium, manducauerunt and mortui sunt. Sic
etiam eundem potum: Petra enim Christus. Eundem ergo potum, sed spiritalem, id
est, qui fide capiebatur, non qui corpore hauriebatur. Who so ever in the Manna
understood Christ, they did eat the same spiritual meat that we eat. But
who so ever sought only to fill their bellies by eating Manna, being the
Fathers of the unfaithful, they did eat, and dyed. So likewise they drank the
same drink. For the Rock was Christ. And therefore the same drink which we
drink, they drank, but spiritual, that is to say, which was received by
faith, not that which was taken in by the body.

Now what though Christ, whom both the Jews and we do eat spiritually, be
one spiritual meat, one Christ, and likewise one spiritual drink, as he is
eaten and dronken with spiritual eating and drinking? Shall that therefore
which, we receive in our Sacrament by sacramental eating and drinking under
the forms of bread and wine, be no better, then that which they did eat and
drink in the ceremony of their Sacraments? Christ that was to come, and
Christ that now is come, is one Christ, thereof who doubts? And though the
words shall come, and is come, be sundry, yet Christ is one, Christ is not
sundred with division of times.

And this is all that the auctour meant, wherein lies no controversy betwixt
us. But that you would prove, and can not prove, and we utterly deny, is
this, that the thing and substance of the Sacraments of both Laws be not
sundry, but one and the same, and of equal worthiness. We receive Christ both
sacramentally, to wit, his true and real body and blood in the Sacrament of
the Altar under the forms of bread and wine, and also spiritually, that is to
say, by faith. They received him only spiritually, because in Manna they
understood Christ. The like is to be said of the water, that flowed out of the
Rock which they drank, in comparison of the very blood of Christ, which we
drink, not only spiritually, but also sacramentally, and in deed under the
form of wine mingled with water, which blood is the true water of life, the
same that issued out of our Lords body the true Rock, after it was stricken
with the Rod, Exodus 15. Aug. Tractatu de vtilitate Poenitentiae.
that is to say, after that the Cross came unto it. For in figure thereof the
old Rock was stricken with woodde, and not with Iron, quia Crux ad Christum
accessit, vt nobis gratiam propinaret, because the Cross came unto Christ,
that it might Propinaret.
brince his grace unto us, as says S. Augustine, or who so ever was the author
of that book.

The other place that you pretend to allege out of S. Augustine, M. Jew.
forgeth sayings of his own, fathering them upon the Doctors
In Iohannem Tractat. 26. is soon answered: where so ever it be, it is not
there. Thus to forge sayings of your own, and to bear your Reader in hand,
it is S. Augustines, or any other learned Fathers, is a very false part, and
such as must needs much discredit you, when it is detected against you. And yet
by such false: dealing you, and your fellows have begyled many unlearned and
unstable souls. How be it if it were S. Augustines, or any other ancient
Doctors saying, it forced nothing. For true it is, the signs or sacraments
of the new Testament, be diverse from the sacraments of the old Testament:
the faith notwithstanding is not changed, because Christ signified by the
signs or sacraments of both, being that which faith reaches unto, remains
one and the same. Let us see whether your other stuff be any better.

Jewel.
But here has M. Hardinge done greatte, and open wrong unto S. Augustine,
vvilfully suppressing, and drowning his words, and vncourteousely
commanding him to silence in the midst of his tale. Wherein also appears
some suspicion of no simple dealing. S. Augustines words touching this
whole matter, Aug. De Fide ad Petrum Diacon. cap. 19.
are these: In illis carnalibus Victimis Figuratio fuit Carnis Christi, quam
pro nobis fuerat oblaturus, and Sanguinis, quem erat effusurus in Remissionem
peccatorum: In isto autem Sacrificio Gratiarum actio est, and Commemoratio
Carnis Christi, quam pro nobis obtulit, and Sanguinis, quem pro nobis idem Deus
effudit. In illis Sacrificijs, quid nobis esset donandum, Figurate
significabatur: In hoc autem Sacrificio, quid nobis iam donatum sit, euidenter
oftenditur. In illis Sacrificijs praenunciabatur Filius Dei pro impijs
occidendus: in hoc autem, pro impijs annuntiatur occisus. In those Fleashly
Sacrifices ( of the Jews) there was a Figure of the Fleashe of Christ, which
he would afterward offer for us, and of the Blood, which he would
afterward shead for the Remission of Sin: But in this Sacrifice ( of the
nevve Testament) there is a Thankesgeuinge, and a Remembrance of the Fleashe,
which he has already offered for us, and of the Blood, which he being God,
has already shead for us. In those Sacrifices it was represented unto us under
a Figure, what thing should be given unto us: But in this Sac^ifice it is
plainly set forth, what thing is already given us. In those Sacrifices it was
declared, that the Son of God should be slain for the wicked: But in this
Sacrifice it is plainly preached unto us, that the same Son of God has
already benne slain for the wicked.

Likewise again be says: Huius Sacrificij Caro, and Sanguis ante Aduentum
Christi per Victimas Similitudinum promittebatur: Aug. Contrae Faustum. lib.
20. ca. 21.
in Passione per ipsam Veritatem reddebatur: Post Ascensum vero Christi per
Sacramentum Memoriae celebratur. The fleashe, and Blood of this Sacrifice,
before the coming of Christ, was promised by Sacrifices of Resemblance: The
same in his Passion ( upon the Cross) was given in Truth, and in deed: But
after his Ascension it is solemnized by a Sacrament of Remembrance.

This is the Difference that S. Augustine notes bitvvene the Sacraments of
the Old Law, and the Sacraments of the Nevve. Therefore, the words, that
M. Harding has hereunto added, Christ is offered up unto his Father, and that
under the Forms of Bread, and Wine, yea and that truly, and in deed, are
his own only words, confidently, and boldly presumed of him self, never
used, neither by S. Augustine, nor by any other Ancient godly Father.

Harding.
Full evil does it become you to charge me with wrong done unto S. Augustine,
whereas in the very next sentence before, your self did him so much wrong, as to
father a saying upon him in that place, where he has none such at al. If he be
to be burdened with doing wrong unto the Doctors, that in alleging their
sayings does not with all circumstances of the place that serves to the
present purpose set them forth: then is there no man so much to be reproved, as
your self M. Jewel. For of all that ever wrote, we find none, that so much,
and with like falshode, and to so evil meaning, cutteth, pareth, and nippeth
their sentences, as you commonly do. Truly in laying this to my charge, you
have not so clearly proved me to have done wrong unto S. Augustine: as you
have with the scornful utterance of your words declared your own spite.

Concerning the thing it self, I have done S. Augustine no wrong at al. For
what needed me to rehearse his whole process to the end of the Chapter? M.
Jewels charge discharged.
I recited faithfully so much as apperteined to the proof of the matter for
which I alleged his authority. The sentence that follows belongs to an
other matter, whereby is declared (which no catholic man ever denied) that the
Sacrifice of the new Testament is a thanks giving, and a commemoration of
Christ's flesh and blood, which he has offered for us. But that member of the
division, which I went about to establish by S. Augustines authority, speaks
only of the Sacrifices of the old Law, that they prefigured the flesh of
Christ, which he would afterward offer, and the blood, that he would shed for
remission of sins. If I had rehearsed all that you blame me for leaving it out,
I had but made the book bigger, and wearied the reader with a long superfluous
saying, superfluous I say, because the same was in effect uttered in the next
sentence before, taken out also of the same S. Augustine. For all that you force
out of the long process there following, is only the co^memoration of Christ's
flesh and blood offered and shed, which (though in fewer words) was expressed
in the former sentence out of the books against Faustus the Manichey, as the
reader by conference may sone perceive.

The place of S. Augustine, for leaving out whereof you so much reprove me, and
wherein you repose the confidence of your doctrine, helps you nothing at al.
For there he says, not what is the substance of our Sacrifice, wherein lies
the question: but what thing is done in our Sacrifice, to wit, giving of
thanks, and the co^memoratio^ of our Lords flesh and blood, which he offered
and shed for us, and likewise what thing is showed and declared in the same,
that is to say, his death and passion. Al which we deny not. But that S.
Augustine ascribing unto the Sacrifice of the Church thanks giving, and
commemoration of the flesh and blood of Christ, does exclude the real
Sacrifice of his flesh and blood, by virtue of his word through the holy
Ghost made substantially present: that we deny utterly. And that was your
part to prove, else you prove nothing against the ancient doctrine of the
Church.

M. Ievvel cites one truth against an other truth.
But seeing your self not hable to perform so much, you thought it an easier
matter, after your common woonte, to set one truth against an other truth, to
wit, the commemoration or memory of the bloody Sacrifice of the Cross,
against the unbloody and mystical Sacrifice of the Altar. By the word
mystical, I exclude not the truth of our Lords body and blood, the substance
of this Sacrifice: but I signify the covert manner of their being in the same.
If S. Augustine had in that place affirmed in the Sacrifice of the Church a
thanks giving and remembrance of Christ's death only, wherein he should have
said untruly: in some respect then had he served your turn. Now that he says
not so, by the discourteous reproufe of me for leaving the words vnrehersed
which perteined not to my purpose, and help your doctrine nothing at al: it
appears how feeble the part is, that with the trompet of your vain
Challenge you would needs to be proclaimed, and that now with your
colorable Reply you have taken in hand to mainteyne.

S. Augustine contrariwise declaring with what kind of Sacrifices the Jews
gave a signification of Christ's Sacrifice that was to come, and with what
kind of Sacrifice the Christians do keep the remembrance of Christ's Sacrifice
now past: says expressly, that the substance of the Jews sacrifices were
brute beasts, and that of the Christians Sacrifice is the body and blood of
Christ^ his words be these. Augu. co^t. Faust. lib. 20. ca. 18.
Hebraei in victimis pecorum prophetiam celebrabant futurae victimae, quam
Christus obtulit. Vnde iam Christiani per acti eiusdem sacrificij memoriam
celebrant oblatione and participatione corporis and Sanguinis Christi. The
Hebrews celebrated a prophecy of the Sacrifice to come, which Christ
offered. Whereupon the Christians do now celebrate the memory of the same
Sacrifice already performed, by the offering, and receiving of the body and
blood of Christ.

This Sacrifice was in all times to be recommended unto the mind of man,
because thereof only depends the salvation of man. Before the Law, and
during the time of the Law, it was prefigured and foresignified by many and
sundry things, but specially by the sacrifices of beasts. In the time of
grace, wherein we now live, the Christians do preserve, keep, celebrate, and
solemnize the memory of it by a more lively and effectual representatio^, as
to whom more abundance of grace through Christ's Incarnation is dispensed, that
is, as Saint Augustine teaches, by the Oblation and participation of the same
body and blood, that was offered and shed for us. Now if it be not the true
body and blood of Christ, that we offer and receive: then neither can S.
Augustines words be duly justified, and the Sacrifice of the Christians shall
be less lively, less evident, less representative (as I may so say) and of
less valewe, then were the Sacrifices of the Jews. For what comparison is
there between a Lamb, and a piece of bread with a suppe of wine? And who
judges not the death of Christ to be more expressly represented by a lamb
slain, then by bare bread and wine?

Neither because our Sacrifice is done in commemoration or remembrance, thereof
follows it, that the presence of Christ's body and blood is not requisite. But
forasmuch as this is the commemoration, which alone makes God merciful unto
us, Origin. in Leuit. Hom. 13.
as Origin says: therefore to the working of so great an effect it is
necessary, that Christ's true body and blood be really present in our
Sacrifice.

M. Ievvel excludes one truth by an other.
And whereas you bring Testimonies of the Fathers to prove that our Sacrifice is
a remembrance, an example, a token, or sign of the true Sacrifice that was
made upon the Cross, you took more pains then need required. For that no
Catholic man denies. But the conclusion, which guilefully your endeavor is to
infer thereof, which is, that therefore Christ is not really present, and
offered by the Priest: we deny utterly. For both be true, that Christ is
present substantially and in deed, and is so offered by the Priest, and also
that the same is done in a remembrance. And this much is witnessed by S.
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. Homil. 17.
where he says. Pontifex noster ille est, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit.
Ipsam offerimus and nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem consumi non potest. Hoc autem
quod facimus, in commemoratione^ quidem fit eius, quod factum est. Christ is
our Bishop, who offered a Sacrifice cleasing us. We do offer the self same now
also. Which being then offered can not be consumed. That which we do, is done
in commemoration of that which was done.

Here we be taught by S. Chrysostom, that we offer now the self same host or
Sacrifice, that Christ our high Bishop offered, wherewith to cleanse us from
the filth of our sins: which was none other, but his own body and blood.
And nevertheless that which we do, is done for a remembrance of that, which
Christ did. Commemoratio^, example, and sign, do not exclude the real
presence, and real oblation.
So that by Chrysostoms judgment, neither the commemoration, nor example, nor
sign does exclude the real presence, and real oblation of Christ's body and
blood. But you M. Jewel after your common manner go about to put away one
truth by an other truth. Which your accustomed shifte is now very stale, and
moves few, that read your books with any mean judgment. For the
foolishnes of your argument is laughed at by every Baker, who having set forth
a loaf of bread upon his stal, can tell you, that that loaf signifies and
puts folk in mind, there is bread to be sold in his house, and that the
same notwithstanding is bread, as other his loaves be, and perhaps of the same
batche. Right so the body of Christ in the Sacrament, is both a sign of
Christ's body, and also his very true body in deed. And likewise his very flesh
and blood is offered in our dredful mysteries, in sign, commeration, and
remembrance of his flesh and blood, offered and shed upon the Cross.

YOu find great fault with that I said, Christ is offered up unto his Father
under the forms of bread and wine, truly, and in deed: and to make it seem
more odious, you affirm these to be mine own only words, confidently, and
boldly presumed of my self, never used before by any ancient Father. Whiles
you take delight in such Rhetorical amplifications, you do but increase the
number of your untruths, and make the world witness of your shameless
vanity. Though the ancient Fathers that wrote within in the first six hundred
years after Christ, have not these precise terms, yet they have the self same
doctrine: and that is enough. Your Sacrame^tarie heresy is not so ancient, the
Church was, as it were in quiet possession of the Catholic faith touching
this Article, for the space of a thousand years. If the flames of your heresy
had flashed abroad out of Hell in their days, there is no doubt, they would
have quenched it with streams of holesom doctrine uttered in the same terms,
whereof now you would feign take some advantage.

These terms, Christ is offered up to his Father under the forms of bread and
wine truly and in deed, proved not to be of my private devise.
HOw so ever it be concerning the ancient Fathers, certain it is these terms
be not of my only presumption, or devising. It is well known to all that read
the later Councels both general, and prouincial, the Scholastical Doctors, and
who so ever have written against Berengarius, Wikleff, Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Calvin, and those other late false teachers: that these be not
words of mine own invention, but common to others that have written in this
matter since your Heresy first sprang. Christ is in the Sacrifice of the
Church so offered, as he is present: for there he is made present by virtue of
consecration to be offered, and to be received. But he is present under the
forms of Bread and Wine, and that truly, and in deed. Ergo he is offered
under the forms of Bread and Wine, truly, and in deed. For proof of the
Minor, or second Proposition, for else nothing here I suppose you will deny:
that it may appear these words not to be of mine own only devising, let a
few testimonies suffice, where many might easily be brought.

In the great Council of Laterane thus you find this Article set forth. In
Actis Conc. Lateran. cap. 1. de fid. Cat.
Verum Christi corpus, and sanguis in Sacramento Altaris sub speciebus panis
and vini veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis pane in corpus, and vino in
sanguinem potestate Diuina. The true Body of Christ, and his Blood are
contained truly and in deed (for so much the word veraciter does signify)
in the Sacrament of the Altar, under the forms of bread and wine, the bread
being transubstantiate into the body, and the wine into the blood, by the
power of God.

The Council of Florence, whereat accord was made between the Greek and Latin
Church, has the very like, In Decret. Con. Flor. super vnio. Iacobin. and
Armenior.
or rather the same words touching the point by you denied. Sacerdos in
persona Christi loque^is, hoc conficit Sacrame^tum. Nam ipsorum verborum
virtute substantia panis in corpus Christi, and substantia vini in sanguinem
conuertuntur, ita tamen qood totus Christus continetur sub specie panis, and
totus sub specie vini, sub qualibet quoque part hostiae consecratae, and vini
co^secrati, separatione facta totus est Christus. The Priest speaking in the
person of Christ, co^secrateth this Sacrament. For by the virtue of the very
words the substance of bread is turned into the body of Christ, and the
substance of wine into his blood, yet so that Christ is contained whole under
the form of bread, and whole under the form of wine. Also if a division be
made^ Christ is whole under every part of the consecrate host, and of the
consecrate wine.

With this agrees the late learned Council of Trent, whose words these be
touching both the real presence, Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
and also the real Sacrifice. Christus in coena nouissima sacerdotem secundum
ordinem Melchisedech se in aeternum constitutum declarans, corpus and sanguinem
suum sub speciebus panis and vini Deo Patri obtulit, ac sub earundem rerum
symbolis, Apostolis, quos tunc noui testamenti Sacerdotes co^stituebat, vt
sumerent, tradidit, and eisdem, eoru^que in sacerdotio successoribus, vt
offerrent, praecepit per haec verba: Hoc facite in mea^ co^memorationem.
Christ in his last supper declaring him self to be ordained a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech, offered up unto God the Father his body and
blood under the forms of bread and wine, and delivered them under the signs
of the same things unto the Apostles, whom then he ordained Priests of the
new Testament, that they should receine: and gave commandment to them, and
to their successors in Priesthode, that they should offer the ^ame, by these
words, Do ye this in my remembrance.

Petrus Lombardus says, Sentent. lib 4. Distinct. 8.
Sub specie panis and vini, corpus and sanguinem suum discipulis tradidit.
Christ gave his body and his blood unto his Disciples under the form of
bread and wine.

S. Thomas also, In tertiae part Su^mae. quaestione. 75.
whom only I allege among so many Scholastical Doctors, says most plainly.
Quia non est consuetum hominibus, sed horribile, carnem hominis comedere, and
sanguinem bibere: proponuntur nobis caro and sanguis Christi sumenda sub
speciebus illorum, quae frequentius in vsum hominis veniunt, scilicet panis and
vini. Because it is not a thing customable for men, but a horrible thing, to
eat man's flesh, and drink man's blood: the flesh and blood of Christ are
set before us to be received under the forms of those things, which man is
commonly used unto, to wit, of bread and wine.

There was no need why I should recite so many testimonies for a thing so
clear, An impudent lie that can not be excused.
and so well known, I grant. Yet because you are either so ignorant, which I
believe not, or so shameless, which seems, as to say, these words, Christ
is offered up unto his Father under the forms of bread and wine, truly, and in
deed, to be my words only, confidently, and boldly presumed of my self, as
though I were the first that devised them of mine own head, and the first that
presumed to use them: I thought good to rehearse so much, to the intent I might
clear my self of such presumption, and give the world to understand, how
little you regard to use manifest and impudent lying for maintenance of your
doctrine, rather then you would seem to be overcome. It is a token ye care
little what ye say, when ye fear not to utter so open untruth.

If for this point you require testimonies of ancient Fathers, whom you
pretend to allow: as the same doctrine is by them most assuredly avouched,
which is enough, as I said before: so some of them have uttered it either with
the same words, or with the very like, and such, as in signification are
equivalent. S. Hilary says, Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 8.
Nos vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus. We receive the flesh of his
body under a mystery truly, or verily.

Augu. ad Bonifaciu^ Epist. 23.
S. Augustine says, Nonne semel oblatus est Christus in semetipso? Et tamen in
Sacrame^to non solum per omnes Paschae solennitates, sed omni die populis
immolatur. Was not Christ once offered up in him self? And yet nevertheless
he is sacrificed in a Sacrament for the people, not only through all the solemn
feasts of Easter, but also every day. Here you must either grant, that the
flesh of Christ's body to be received of us in, or under a mystery, and
Christ him self to be sacrificed in a sacrament, does importe his flesh to
be eaten, and him to be sacrificed under the forms of bread and wine, which be
our Sacrament, and the eating of Christ's body under the which, is an eating
mystical, or eating under a mystery: or else you must show us some other
matter, wherein as under a mystery, and as in a Sacrament, his body is eaten,
and him self is offered.

De consec. Distinct. 2. Hoc est quod dicimus.
But there is an other more manifest place in S. Augustine, where he uses the
very same terms and words, that you would needs to be mine only, and of my
self boldly and confidently presumed. His words be these. Caro eius est,
quam forma panis opertam in Sa^cramento accipimus, and sanguis eius, quem sub
vini specie and sapore potamus. It is the flesh of Christ, which we receive
covered with the form of bread in the Sacrament, and his blood, which we
drink under the show and taste of wine.

You see then M. Iewel^ these words be not only mine, they be S. Augustines,
whose authority you can not contemn. Neither can you reasonably reiecte the
book out of which they be taken, because your self even in this very place
have alleged it for your help. If, as he says, we eat the flesh of Christ
covered with the form of bread, then so is he also offered. For before it be
received of us, it behooves it be consecrate and offered. Therefore it is true
which I said, Christ is offered in form of bread: unless you make a
difference between Christ's flesh and blood in forms of bread and wine, and
Christ's flesh and blood coouered with the forms of bread and wine.

This is so plain, that you must needs yield unto it. As for the answer you
make to this place alleged by me in the.12. Article, In the Replie^ Page. 471.
lin. 6.
it is such, as any man that knows your Divinity, would sone judge it to be
a piece of your own coining. The whole is fooiled and glafed over with a false
color of a phrase of speech. As though words in all phrases were taken in one
and the self same ^ignification. Your answer is this. Because this word
Forma, form or shape in English, does signify the substance in S. Paul,
Phill. 2.
where he says, Christus seipsum exinaniuit formam serui accipiens, Christ
empted him self taking the form of a servant: therefore it must signify the
substance in this place of S. Augustine, Caro Christi est, quam forma panis
opertam accipimus, It is Christ's flesh, that we receive coouered with the
form of bread.

M. Jewels ignorance or malice.
In this answer you considered not, first that a thing can not in proper speech
be said to be coouered with the substance of an other thing, because the
substance of things is invisible. Next, that in some places this word Forma,
(...), forma.
or (...), which S. Paul in that place uses, is an Accident, and a mere
quality, as in Aristotle, in quarta specie Qualitatis, and is not always
taken for the name of nature, as it is taken of Aristotle, in 2. Physicorum.
Again you looked not unto the later part of S. Augustines sentence, where it
is likewise of the blood said, Sanguis est, quem sub vini specie and sapore
potamus. It is blood, that under the show and savor of wine we drink. By
these words, show and savor, the accidents of wine, and not the substance
must needs be understood. By conference of which two members of one sentence
together, you should have perceived, that S. Augustine speaking of Christ's
flesh, meant by the word, Forma, the same that he meant by the other words,
species, and sapor, where he spoke of the blood. If then we drink the blood
of Christ under the accidententes of wine, then it is a true construction to
say, that we receive his flesh coouered with the form, that is to say, with
the show and outward shape (which is an Accident) of bread.

operta.
As for the word, operta, which ^ignifieth coouered, in the same place you make
much a do, and rake together out of your Notebookes a heap of phrases and
words, by which, lying privy, hyding, coouering, keeping privy,
representation, resemblance, and any the like thing is signified: And al to an
heretical purpose, to exclude the true presence of Chistes body and blood out
of the blessed Sacrament, and to leave nothing in it but a bare signification.
And there in the end you shut up the matter with a false cast of
legierdemaine, falsifiyng a testimony of S. Augustine. For whereas S.
Augustine says, In veteri Testamento occultabatur nouum, August. de Baptis.
co^t. Dona tist. lib. 1. ca. 15
quia occulte significabatur: The new Testament was hidden in the old
Testament, because it was secretly signified: you have changed S. Augustines
word, quia, into id est, and say, that he expounds him self, M. Jewel
falsifieth S. Austine, changing quia, into id est.
occultabatur, id est, occulte significabatur, It was hidden, that is to say,
it was secretly signified. And therefore you would have the place which I
alleged out of S. Angustine, thus to be expounded and understood, Caro
Christi operta, id est, occulte significata: Christ's flesh is privily hidden,
that is to say, is privily signified, whereby you would exclude the real
presence.

And this you call S. Augustines exposition, as though S. Augustine had ever
said so, or meant so, and as though operta had in the place I alleged, been put
alone without an Ablative case, as the verb, occultabatur, is in the other
sentence. Now the true words of S. Augustine be these. Caro eius est, quam
forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus. It is his flesh, which being
coouered with the form of bread in the Sacrament, we receive.

And if you would needs have these words, Forma panis opertam, to be
expounded by Forma panis occulte significatam (though you have no warrant for
it) that we understand the flesh of Christ coouered with the form of bread,
to be as much as if we said it to be secretly signified by the form of bread,
wherein there is no great cause why we should much contend with you: what can
you thereof substantially conclude against the real presence? Will you make this
wise argument, The form or shape of bread signifies the body of Christ,
Ergo, the body of Christ is not in deed present? If you reason so, the Baker
must have you to schole, who showing you a loaf set upon his stal, can tell
you, that that loaf signifies bread to be in his house to be sold, One
truth put away by an other.
and yet that the same loaf also is bread, which I told you before. And yet
this is all the issue of your wrested interpretations, and heaped phrases. Once
leave your bad shifte of putting away one truth by an other truth. How
oftentimes must we tell you, the forms of bread and wine do signify the body
and blood of Christ present, not absent?

Again if for proof that these words, which report Christ to be present in
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or to be offered in the Sacrifice of the
Altar under the forms of bread and wine, be not only my words, I should
here also allege the place of Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, which I alleged in my
Answer to the tenth Article of your Challenge: what could you reasonably replye
to the contrary? That ancient Father says thus, using the very terms of the
Scholastical Doctors. Cyril. Hierosol. Catechisi. Mystagog.
Christ once changed water into wine, which is nigh unto blood, in Chana of
Galiley by his only will: and shall not he be worthy to be believed of us, that
(at his last supper) he changed wine into blood? For if being bidden to a
corporal wedding he wrought a woonderous miracle, shall we not much more
confess, that he gave his body and blood unto the children of the Spouse?
Wherefore with all assuredness let us receive the body and blood of Christ.
(Hitherto reason moving credit, now follow the words that are specially to be
noted. (...)
) Nam sub specie panis datur tibi corpus, and sub specie vini datur sanguis, vt
sumpto corpore and sanguine Christi, efficiaris ei comparticeps corporis and
sanguinis. For under the form (shape, show or figure) of bread the body (of
Christ) is given unto thee, and under the shape of wine his blood is given,
that having received the body and blood of Christ, thou may be made
co^partener with him of his body and blood. Here have you the express words,
teaching us the body of Christ to be present in the Sacrament under the form
of bread, and his blood under the form of wine, which you report to be words
of mine own only invention, never used by any ancient Father before my time.

Where you go about to answer to this place of S. Cyrillus in the tenth Article
of your Reply, to the intent the body and blood of Christ might not be believed
to be really present in the blessed Sacrament: I wish that al men saw both your
weakness, and also your falshod. You confess this learned Fathers words
touching this point of the real presence, Vvorde^ in M. Jewels judgment quick
and violent.
to be quick and violent. Whereby unawares as it seems, you confess him
therein to be clear, and resolute, as he is in deed. To say truly, violent he
is not, but a plain reporter of the truth. But in deed he is to quick, for
dull heretics, that believe their carnal senses, rather then Christ's own most
plain words.

In the tenth Article of ^he Reply. page 432.
Yet he him self in plainest wise (say you) opens, and clears his own
meaning. Truth it is, he does so, as every one that reads the place, as the
Author reports it, not as you have falsified him, may easily judge. Now
because every man has not the book of Cyrillus, nor the book of your Reply
at hand, for truths sake, and that your impudent falshod may appear: it shall
be to good purpose, to lay here before the Reader, what you make that holy and
ancient Father to say, and what he says him self. Thus then say you falsely.

M. Ievvel falsifieth S. Cyrillus Hiero solym. Cateches. Mystagogica. 4.
For thus he writeth^ Ne consideres, tanquam panem nudu^: Panis Eucharistiae
non est amplius panis simplex, and nudus. Consider not, as if it were bare
bread: The bread of the Sacrament is no longer bare and simple bread. Which
words are naturally resolved thus. It is bread, how be it not only bare bread:
but bread, and some other thing else beside. And there after a few words you
conclude thus. Of these words of Cyrillus we may well reason thus by the way.
The Sacrament is not only^ or bare bread: therefore it is bread, albeit not
only bare bread. And thus the same Cyrillus, that is brought to testi^ie, that
there remains no bread in the Sacrament, testifies most plainly to the
contrary, that there is bread remaining in the Sacrament.

Ca^echo. Mist. 4.
On the other side, S. Cyrillus truly alleged says thus. Ne consideres tanquam
panem nudum, and vinum nudum: corpus enim est, and sanguis Christi, secundum
ipsius Domini verba. Quamuis enim sensus hoc tibi suggesserit, tamen fides te
confirmet, ne ex gusturem iudices, quin potius habeas ex fide pro certissimo,
ita vt nulla subeat dubitatio, esse tibi donata corpus and sanguinem. Do not
consider it as bare bread, and bare wine: for it is the body and blood of
Christ, according unto the words of our Lord him self. For although thy
sense make that suggestion unto thee, yet let faith strengthen thee, that thou
judge not the thing by thy taste, but rather that of thy faith thou hold it as
a most certainty, so as thou be void of al doubt, that the body and blood are
given to thee.

These words being truly alleged, do clearly open the meaning of Cyrillus.
Your false forgeries and corruptions do undoubtedly declare, that you seek
not the truth, but intend deceit. False doctrine must be maintained, by false
means. If you had meant good faith and truth, you would truly and faithfully
have recited that holy Fathers words without such mangling and changing. Now
to use your own Rhetorike, you have done him great and open wrong, wilfully
suppressing and drowning his words, and discourteously commanding him to
silence in the midst of his tale. Why did you not consider the force of his
counsel, which is, that a Christen man regard not the suggestion of his
senses, but stay him self upon his faith, not judging of this high Mystery,
what the sense of sight or taste gives, but with a simple faith believing the
words that Christ spoke.

In all S. Cyrillus you find not this order of words, Panis Eucharistiae non
est amplius panis simplex and nudus, The bread of the Sacrament is no longer
bare and simple bread, as you turn it, and ascribe it unto S. Cyrillus. By
occasion of which words you tell us of your natural resolution, and bear us in
hand, it is bread, how be it not only or bare bread. Which is no natural
resolution gathered of S. Cyrillus words, but a crafty collusion wroong out of
your own forged words to enuegle the ignorant.

Now S. Cyrillus words be these, not in the fourth Catechesis, as you have
quoted your book, but in the third, where he speaks of the holy Oil.
Quemadmodu^ (says he) Panis Eucharistiae, In cateches. 3. My stigogica.
post sancti spiritus inuocationem, non amplius est panis communis, sed est
corpus Christi: sic and sanctum hoc vnguentum, non amplius est vnguentum nudum,
neque (si ita quis appellare malit) commune, post quam iam consecratum est.
etc. As the bread of the Sacrament, after the Holy Ghost is called upon it, is
no longer common bread, but is the body of Christ: so this holy ointment also
is no longer a bare ointment, nor (if any man had rather so to call it) a common
ointment, after that it is now consecrat. The words which you abuse to gyle,
simple bread, bare bread, only bread, be not there used of S. Cyrillus, as you
of purpose have falsified him. Mary speaking of the holy Oil, whose substance
is not changed into an other substance, and remains Oil still after it is
consecrate, he says, it is no longer after consecration bare Oil. But of the
bread he says that after consecration it is not common bread: As if it were
done of a great foresight, and of very purpose, to stop the wrangling of such
false Sacramentaries, and corrupt teachers, in consideration that after
consecration it is no longer bread, that is to say, Joan. 6.
common bread, but the body of Christ the bread of life, M. ^ewels ^alshode
plainly detected.
that came down from heaven. The like is to be judged of the cup.

What will thou have more good Reader? Christ faith of the one, Math. 26.
it is his body, of the other, it is his blood: Saint Cyrillus here says, Luc.
22.
it is not bread, it is not wine, but the body and blood of our Lord. And to
declare his meaning plainly against al cauillation of heretics, he bids us
not to call our senses, as sight, taste, or any other sense, to give us account,
what it is: but to stay our hearts upon faith, and to believe the words of our
Savior. M. Jewel contrariwise forging a saying of his own, and falsely
fathering it upon S. Cyrillus, as though he had said, it is not bare, simple,
or only bread, which that ancient Father says not: concludes his
Sacramentary doctrine, that it is bread. If thou had rather go out of the
way, and be deceived, then go right: thou have whom to follow. But how false
a guide he is, these things considered, thou can not be ignorant.

If after this large proof of the being of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine, which form of words you would
your Reader think to be mine only, and never to have been used before by any of
the ancient Fathers, if I say after all this, least you should seem fully
confuted, you will yet reply, and say, that I have nothing whereby to auouche the
true and real Sacrifice of Christ (for so much also do your words importe):
then omitting here an infinite number of other testimonies, for proof that
Christ is truly, That Christ i^ truly and in deed offered.
and in deed offered up of the Priests in Sacrifice, I will in this place
allege only the testimony of the first Nicene Council. The authority whereof
is, and has ever ben esteemed very great, as that, which declares not the
opinion of one man, but the faith of the whole Church of that time, uttered by
the mouths, and after mature and long deliberation confirmed with the
subscription of.318. the best learned, and most holy Bishops then living.

The holy Ghost by them published to the whole Church of God this doctrine.
Conc. Nic.
Exaltatamente fide consideremus situm esse in illa sancta mensa Agnum Dei, qui
tollit peccata mundi, qui a Sacerdotibus sacrificatur sine ^ruoris effusione.
Lifting up our mind let us consider by faith the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, to be laid upon that holy table, which is of
the Priests sacrificed without the sheddinge of blood, that is to say, not
after the manner of other sacrifices, where the host is slain, for so
signifies the word, (...).

Real, and true Sacrifice, and Sacrifice in deed.
What other thing does this addition, without the shedding of blood, importe,
but a true and real sacrificing of one and the same substance, that was before
sacrificed with blood shedding? For these two contrary Accidents be referred
unto one substance, and have their being in one substance. Saying then it was
the substance of Christ's most precious body and blood, that was offered
bloudily, truly, and in deed upon the Cross: it will follow by necessary
sequel of reason, that it is the same self substance of Christ, that is
sacrificed vnbloudily, unless perhaps you will imagine there be two Christ's
offered, the one bloudily, the other vnbloudily. If then it be the substance of
Christ, that is offered, it is a true and real Sacrifice. For where so ever
Christ's substance is offered, there is a true Sacrifice, and a Sacrifice in
deed. And thus is your discourteous reproach of my undue boldenes, and
presumption in uttering the true doctrine of the Church with the foresaied
words, answered, and clearly discharged. Now let us see, what other greater
fault or oversight you find in my Answer. Thus it follows in your Reply.

Jewel.
But where as he adds further, That Christ is in deed, and verily offered
by the Priest; al be it, as he says, not in respect of the manner of
offeringe, but only in respect of the presence of his Body, Either he
understands not, what him self means: or else with a vain distinction of
cloudie words without sense, he labors to dasle his Readers eyes. For
what a fantasy is this, to say, Christ is offered Verily, and in deed, and
yet not in Respect of the Manner of offeringe? What Respect? What Manner is
this? Wherefore comme these blind Mysteries abroad without a gloss? Which
of all the Old Doctors, or holy Fathers ever taught us thus to speak?
Certainly, as he says, Christ is Really offered, and yet not in Respect of
the Manner of Offering: So may he also say, Christ died upon the Cross, and
yet not in Respect of the manner of dieinge. By such manners, and such
Respects he may make of Christian Religion, what him lists.

If he think, Conc. Nic. (...)
somevvhat to shadovve the matter with these words of the Council of Nice,
Sine Sacrificio Oblatus, Let him consider a fore hand, it vvil not healpe him.
For the holy Fathers in that Council neither say, that Christ is Reallie
Offered by the Priest, nor seem to understand these strange Respects,
Contra Faustum lib. 20. ca. 21. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebrae. homil. 17.
and Manners of Offeringe. They agree fully in sense with that is before
alleged of S. Augustine: In this Sacrifice the Death of Christ is solemnized
by a Sacrament of Remembrance: And with that S. Chrysostom says, Hoc
Sacrificium, Exemplarillius est: This Sacrifice, is an Example of that
Sacrifice. Thus the Death of Christ is renewed before our eyes. Yet Christ in
deed neither is Crucified, nor dies, nor sheaddeth his blood, nor is
Substantiallie Present, August. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10 cap. 5.
nor Reallie Offered by the Priest. In this sort the Council says, Christ is
offered, (...) without Sacrifice. So Saint Augustine says, Quod ab omnibus
appellatur Sacrificium, Signum est Very Sacrificij: The thing, that of al
men is called a Sacrifice, is a Token, or a Sign of the True Sacrifice,
Likewise again he says, Vocatur ipsa Immolatio, quae Sacerdotis manibus fit,
De Conse. Dis. 2. Hoc est.
Christi Passio, Mors, Crucifixio, non rei veritate, sed Significante Mysterio.
The Sacrifice, that is wrought by the hands of the Priest, is called the
Passion, the Death, the Crucifieinge of Christ: not in deed, but by a Mystery
Signifieinge.

And where as M. Hardinge says further, Christ is offered only in respect
of the presence of his Body, Neither would the Real Presence, being
granted, importe the Sacrifice (for Christ was Really Present in his Mothers
Womb, and in the Cribbe, where notvvithstanding he was no Sacrifice) nor
has M. Harding hitherto any way proved his Real Presence.

Hardinge.
That the Sacrifice of the Altar, is a true and real Sacrifice.
The witness which I alleged out of the Nicen Council does declare
sufficiently, what I meant by saying, that Christ is sacrificed in the daily
Sacrifice of the Church truly, and in deed, not in respect of the manner of
offering, but in respect of his very body and blood, really, that is, in deed
present. For the Sacrifice that was true and real in all respects both of the
inward substance, and also of the outward manner, was not made without
bloodshed, and killing. This Sacrifice therefore of the Church being made
without shedding of blood or killing, lacks that one point of that most
perfect and true Sacrifice. Nevertheless for that it has the substance of the
bloody and most absolutely per^ite Sacrifice that was offered upon the Cross,
it is in that consideration a true and real Sacrifice.

And right well did I understand, what I meant by these words M. Jewel, and so
do you too, what so ever you say: but of a wilful and perverse frowardness you
would seem not to understand them, that in word you might reprove me, where in
deed you found nothing to be reproved. Yet, who marketh you, shall perceive, how
you bewray your own knowledge by thobiection you make against yourself of the
words of the Nicen Counsel, M. Jewel falsifieth the Counsel of Nice.
which you translate falsely into Latin, not englishing them, least they should
seem to make, as they do, for the Sacrifice, which ye deny. The Greek words
be, (...). Your untrue translation has for them, thus: sine sacrificio
oblatus, as much to say, offered up without a Sacrifice. Which translation
contains in it a contradiction. For if Christ the true Lamb of God (as the
Council calls him) be offered up, how is there not a Sacrifice? Therefore the
true translation of these words (...), had been, incruente sacrificatus,
sacrificed vnbloudily, or without blood shedding, Oecolampadius.
or, as a chief founder, and mainteiner of your Sacramentarie doctrine has
turned, non victimarum more sacrificatus, sacrificed not after the manner of
hosts (which be sacrificed with killing). And thus the place has been of
learned men hitherto translated, neither was there ever any so shameless, as
to swerve so far from the right and natural sense of the words, as you do,
were he never so spiteful an enemy to that blessed Sacrifice.

This term of the Nicen Council does express the respect of the manner of
offering which I spoke of, to put a difference between the Sacrifice of the
Cross, and the daily Sacrifice of the Church: because the one was with
shedding of blood, and with death, the other without shedding of blood, or
death.

The same respect of the manner of offering is uttered by the first Council of
Ephesus. (...)
Incruentum celebramus in Ecclesiis sacrificij cultum, we do celebrate in our
Churches the unbloody service of the Sacrifice. Council. Ephesians. in Epist. ad
Nestoriu^. Aug. Co^t. Faustum Manich. lib. 20. ca. 21.
The same does Saint Augustine mean, writing, that the flesh and blood of the
Sacrifice is celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance. The same does S.
Chrysostom understand, where he says, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. Homil. 17.
Non aliud Sacrificium sicut pontifex, sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem
recordationem sacrificij facimus. We make not a diverse sacrifice, as the high
bishop did, but always the self same, yea rather we celebrate a memorial of
the Sacrifice.

Here is plainly expressed both the truth, and realitie (if I may so call it)
of the Sacrifice always and continually offered, and also the manner of
offering, because it is done in remembrance of the Sacrifice, that was made
upon the Cross. To be short, these terms, remembrance, token, sign,
sampler, mystery, sacrament, and such like, be oftentimes used of the Fathers
to express this manner of offering, and in no wise to exclude the truth of the
substance of the thing offered.

This notwithstanding M. Jewel, you are not ashamed to pronounce, that the
Council of Nice, and the old Doctors, or holy Fathers, never understood
these respects and manners. And whereas you charge me with dazeling the
Readers eyes with a vain distinction of clowdy words (so it likes you to
control the doctrine of Christ's Church) it is you, that employe your whole
wit and cunning to enuegle and blind Gods people, and to bereue them,
wandering in the wilderness of this world, of the true Manna, that came down
from above all the clouds, and to dazel their understandings so, that they may
not discern the true body of our Lord from bare bread, and by your
fantastical, and uncertain phrases applied out of place, to undermine and
shake no small number of great and necessary truths by the Holy Ghost
founded, and so many hundred years sustained in Christ's Church.

As for the authorities which you bring either to weaken the doctrine of the
Church touching the Sacrifice of the Altar, M. Jew. takes advantage of his
own false translation.
or to strengthen your own contrary opinion, of how little force they are, it
is sone opened. First the Council of Nice makes clearly for us, which
reports the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world to be
situate upon the holy table (whereby is meant the Altar) and of the Priests
to be sacrificed, (...), that is to say, without bloodshed, and not after the
manner of beasts appointed to be killed in Sacrifice. Of these words you take
a small advantage, and that only by false translation. For whereas the Council
has, (...), the Lamb is sacrificed of the Priests vnbloudily, or, not after
the manner of killed hosts: you turn it thus barely, sine Sacrificio oblatus,
offered without sacrifice, but vntruly^ as I have said before. This place
serves you to no purpose, M. Jew. falsifieth S Augu^^ine.
because false translation ought not to make proof against the truth.

S. Augustines words against Faustus, Contra Faustum Manich. lib. 20. cap. 21.
you have also falsified, and least you should be taken with the manner, you
leave out the Latin, and allege them only in your own English. Whereas he
names the flesh and blood of this sacrifice, least they might seem to importe
a real presence of Cristes body and blood, as they do in deed: you have put
in steed thereof, the death of Christ. Which declares your meaning not to be
simple and plain, and the same in an other your self would not let pass,
without note of untrue dealing.

Chrysostom. In epist. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
And where S. Chrysostom says, Hoc sacrificium exemplar est illius, this
Sacrifice is a sampler of that Sacrifice: If you had meant good faith and
truth, you would not so have nipped that Father, and stopped him of his tale:
For it follows in the same sentence immediately, id ipsum semper offerimus, M.
Jew. falsifieth S. Chrysostom by nipping.
we offer always that one self Sacrifice. And that we should know
certaynely, that he meant not a sign or an example of the true sacrifice
only, as you do, but the same it self in substance: he says in the same
place, Pontifex noster ille est qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit: ipsam
offerimus and nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem consumi non potest. He is our high
Bishop, who has offered up the Sacrifice or host, that cleanses us: the same
do we also offer now, which then being offered can not be consumed.

Hereupon might a plain man demand of you, who is our high Bishop? Is it not
Christ? what is that host or sacrifice, which purges and cleanses us from
the filth of our sins? Is it any other, then the precious body of Christ?
What can you answer then to S. Chrysostom, saying, that we now also offer up
the same? And this is that, for which you make so much a do at me for saying,
that Christ is offered up in the Sacrifice of the Church under the forms of
bread and wine, truly, and in deed, not in respect of the manner of
offering, but in respect of his very body and blood really present. And thus
my words, which you would so feign carpe, be grounded as you see, upon a
truth taught by the Council of Nice, and by S. Chrysostom.

In the other place of S. Augustine you have very fowly demeaned your self. M
Ievvel corrupts S. Augustine.
You have snatched a piece of a sentence out of him, and having framed it to an
other sense then he meant by your common sleight of falsifying, and untrue
tanslation: you set it forth so, as to the unlearned it may make some show for
your side, against the Catholic doctrine that we maintain touching the
Sacrifice of the Altar. And some learned also may happily be deceived, if they
look not better to your fingers, and by view and conference of the book,
epsy out your false legierdemaine. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10. ca. 5.
S. Augustine says (say you) Quod ab omnibus appellatur sacrificium, signum
est very sacrificij. The thing, that of al men is called a sacrifice, is a
token, or sign of the true Sacrifice. Who reading these words, at the first
being persuaded you have played a true man's part in alleging them, would not
think, they made much for your negative doctrine, which denies the true and
real Sacrifice of the Church, and avouches all that is done in the Mass, to
be but a sign, a remembrance, and a void representation? Void I say, because
ye take away the substance of the thing it self, to wit, the body and blood of
Christ.

Now S. Augustine in that place, S. Augustine truly expou^^ded.
neither speaks as you make him speak, and much less means he, as with
your falsified allegation you would force upon him. In that chapter he treats
of outward sacrifices, and of the inward, or spiritual sacrifices. And
preferring the spiritual sacrifices before the other, he shows how the
outward sacrifices made by the Fathers of the old Testament with slaughter of
beasts, were significations of our spiritual sacrifices, that is to say, of
those things which be done by us to this end, that we cleave unto God, and
that unto the same end we help foreward our neighbor. Of these he says,
that God requires them, and that he is well pleased with them: Of the other,
that he requires not them, nor has great liking in them.

After certain places alleged out of the Scriptures for declaration and proof
hereof, at length he comes to the words, whereof you would take hold
against this special, and singular Sacrifice of the Church, and says: De
ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 5. Oseae. 6.
Per hoc, vbi scriptum est, misericordiam magis volo, quam Sacrificium, nihil
aliud quam Sacrificium Sacrificio praelatum oportet intelligi: quoniam illud
quod ab homenibus appellatur sacrificium, signum est very sacrificij. Porro
autem misericordia verum Sacrificium est, vnde dictum est, Heb. 13.
quod paulo ante commemoraui, Talibus enim sacrificijs placatur Deus. Whereas
it is written, I would have mercy, rather then sacrifice, hereby we must
understand nothing else, but that sacrifice is preferred before sacrifice:
forasmuch as that, which is called sacrifice of men, is a sign of a true
sacrifice. And as for mercy, it is a true sacrifice. In consideration whereof
it is said, whereof I spoke even now, with such sacrifices (that is to say,
with almose and deeds of charity) God is appeased.

In the end of that discourse he concludes thus. Quaecunque igitur etc. What
so ever things therefore we read to have been commanded by God diverse ways
concerning sacrifices in the ministry of the Tabernacle, or of the Temple,
they are referred to the love of God, and of our neighbor thereby to be
signified.

By due conference and consideration of this whole place, and of the discourse
there treated, thou may evidently see good Reader, how little M. Jewel is to
be trusted, when he brings ought out of any old Doctor, that seems not to
agree with the doctrine of the Catholic Church. He would thee to believe, that
S. Augustine spoke of the special and singular Sacrifice of the Church,
whereof we treat, which Sacrifice in deed is of al men called a sacrifice: and
worthily, for so it is. But that by verdite of S. Augustine it is a sign of
the true Sacrifice, as though thereby were meant, the same not to be the true
Sacrifice, and therefore no true and real Sacrifice at al: therein lies much
falshoode. For neither speaks Saint Augustine there of the Sacrifice of the
Church, neither understands he by a true sacrifice, the chief and most true
Sacrifice, which is that of the Cross, but any spiritual sacrifice in general,
wherein the effect of love toward God, or our neighbor is performed. And
therefore he much abuses the simplicity of the unlearned Reader by his futtel
and false translation, turning, illud quod ab hominibus appellatur Sacrificium,
that which of men is called a sacrifice, whereby S. Augustine understands any
of the Sacrifices of the old Law, into, illud quod ab omnibus appellatur
Sacrificiu^ etc. The thing, that of al men is called a sacrifice, is a toke^,
or a sign of the true Sacrifice: whereby he induces the Reader to conceive
the Sacrifice of the Church, and to believe the same not to be a true and real
Sacrifice, but only a sign of the true Sacrifice. And in that he turns
signum very Sacrificij, a sign or token of the true Sacrifice, he means
Christ offered upon the Cross, otherwise then S. Augustine did: whereas he
should have translated it thus, A sign of a true sacrifice. And what is there
meant by a true sacrifice, he could not be ignorant. For it follows
immediately, Porro autem misericordia verum sacrificium est, mercy is a true
sacrifice.

Difference between a true, and, the True Sacrifice
And who perceives not a difference between these two, whether we say, a True
Sacrifice, or the True Sacrifice? Any spiritual sacrifice, is a true Sacrifice.
The true Sacrifice, properly to speak, is Christ him self. Which S.
Augustine, after that he has treated of Sacrifices at large, calls, Summum
and verum Sacrificium, the highest, principal, August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10.
cap. 20.
or chief, and the True Sacrifice, whereof the Sacrifice of the Church (says
he) is a sacrament. The same Sacrifice of the Church, may also be called the
True Sacrifice, though not in respect of the old common manner of offering,
which was by killing the host offered: yet in respect of the thing offered,
which by virtue of the word is made really present, which is the same flesh
and blood, that was offered and shed upon the Cross. Here it is not so
offered, nor shed, but that offering and blood shedding, that is to say, the
death of Christ, is represented and recorded. The Sacrifice of the Cross is
the True Sacrifice in respect both of the thing offered, and of the common
manner of offering, for there Christ was killed: the Sacrifice of the Altar,
which is the Sacrifice of the Church, is also the True Sacrifice in respect of
the thing offered which is the body and blood of Christ, as truly present in
the Sacrament, though inuisibly, as upon the Cross, where it was visibly, albe
it in respect of the old common manner of sacrificing, it is not a Sacrifice
after that manner, and therefore is it called sacrificium incruentum, the
unbloody Sacrifice.

An other manner there is, singular, special, and proper to this mystical
Sacrifice, after which it is made, sacrificed, and offered, so as the Mystery
that Christ instituted, requires: which they know, that have grace rightly to
believe. Of which manner Oecumenius says, Oecum. in Epist. ad Heb. ca. 5.
Christus in Mystica coena modum illis tradidit huiusmodi Sacrificij. Christ
delivered unto Priests the manner of such a Sacrifice. This manner has ever
ben, and is to this day observed, even as the Apostles were taught it of
Christ, and as the Church has received it of the Apostles, and offers the
new Oblation of the new Testament in the whole world, as S. Ireneus writes.
Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32. Eusebius. de demonst. lib. 1. and lib. 5.
Eusebius speaking of the manner of this sacrifice, calls it Melchisedeks
manner, and says, in one place, it is offered after the new Mysteries of the
new Testament, in an other place, after the Ecclesiastical ordinances.

As for that S. Augustine says, The Sacrifice that is made by the hands (that
is to say, De Conse. Did. 2. Hoc est.
ministry) of the Priest, is called the Passion, the death, the Crucifying,
not in truth of the thing, but in Mystery signifying: I grant it to be true,
and such, as may well serve for answer to certain blasphemous objections made
by the Sacramentaries against this Sacrifice. How this makes any proof for
your doctrine, I see not. For though the Sacrifice be called sometimes by the
name of the Passion, the Death, and crucifying of Christ (as S. Cyprian says,
Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 3.
Passio est Domini sacrificium quod offerimus, The Sacrifice that we offer is
the Passion of our lord) because it represents and renueth the memory of
the Passion once performed and done, whereas in deed it is not the sensible
Passion, death or Crucifying, but the same is signified in mystery, for that
the body which suffered, died, and was crucified, is truly exhibited: yet this
takes not away the truth of a Sacrifice. Such a great Logician, as you would
seem to be, will not make this childish Argument, I dare say: That which the
Priest makes, signifies the Passion and Death of Christ, and is not the
Passion and Death in deed: Ergo, it is not a Sacrifice. That it be a true and
real Sacrifice, it is not necessary, that Christ suffer again, and be slain:
it is yenough the body of Christ that once suffered, and was slain, be truly
exhibited, and offered unto God. Which is done in our Mystery by them, who
have commandment to do, that Christ did, when he said, Do this in my
remembrance.

In the end of this your first Division you say, that Neither would the Real
presence being granted, importe the Sacrifice, nor that I have hitherto any
way proved the Real presence, which after your scoffing custom you call my
Real presence, as though it had not ben taught by the clear scriptures, by all
the old learned Fathers, and universally believed of Christen people, til the
wicked generation of the Sacramentaries came. But sir, whether the Real
presence of Christ, where so ever it be, do importe a sacrifice or no, it is
impertinent to our purpose here to dispute. How be it I am not ignorant, that
there want not learned men, who hold, that Christ's body from the time it was
first fourmed in, and of the body of the blessed virgin his mother, never
ceased, nor shall cease to be a sacrifice, according as S. Paul to the
Hebrews alleging the prophecy uttered in the Psalm, Hebr. 10.
teaches, Ingrediens mundum, dicit, hostiam and oblationem noluisti, Psalm. 39.
corpus autem aptasti mihi. Christ entering into the world, says, Sacrifice
and oblation thou would not have, but a body thou have made fit for me.

To your position briefly I answer, that although the Real presence of Christ
in other places, and times imported not a sacrifice, yet the same in the
Sacrament does necessarily infer a sacrifice, because according to the
general teaching of all the Fathers, Christ did institute it not only to be
received as a necessary food, but also to be offered as an healthful
Sacrifice, Cyprian. de Caen. Dom.
medicamentum and holocaustum existens ad sanandas infirmitates, and purgandas
iniquitates^ being a medicine and sacrifice to heal infirmities, and to purge
iniquities, as S. Cyprian says. Lib. 4.32.
He taught the new oblation of the new Testament, says S. Irenaeus,

That I have sufficiently proved, the Real presence of Christ's body and blood
in the Sacrament, the Answer I made to the fifth Article of your Challenge, does
witness to as many as be not lead with lewd and blind affection to your side.
As for the shifts of your Reply thereunto, they are so detected, and fully
confuted, and the Real presence otherwise so substantially proved by M. D.
Saunder, and M. D. Heskins, that every mean wit may easily see the weakness
of your cause.

The 2. Division.
The Answer.
THe two first manners of the offeringe of Christ, our adversaries acknowledge
and confess. The third they deny utterly. And so they rob the Church of
the greatest treasure it has or may have, the Body and Blood of our Savior
Christ once offered upon the Cross with paineful suffering for our
redemption, and now daiely offered in the blessed Sacrament in remembrance.
For which we have so many proufes, as for no one point of our Christian
religion more. And herein I am more encombred with store, then straighted with
lack, and doubt more, what I may leave, then what I may take. Wherefore
thinking it shall appear to the wise more skille, to show discretion in the
choice of places, rather then learning in recital of number, though we are over
peartely thereto provoked by M. Iuelles vauntinge and insolent challenge: I
intend herein to be short, verily shorter, then so large a matter requires:
and to bring for proof a few such auctorities (I mean a few in respect of
the multitude that might be brought) as ought in every man's judgment to be
of great weight, and estimation.

Jewel.
Touching the Oblation of Christ's Body, we believe, and Confess as much, as
the holy Ghost has opened in the Scriptures. Where as M. Harding says,
Christ's Body is offered up by the Priest unto God the Father, in remembrance
of that Body, that Christ him self offered upon the Cross, He seems not
to consider the inconstancy, and folly of his own tale. For it is well
known to al Creatures, not only Christians, but also Jews, Turckes, and
Saracenes, that Christ was Crucified upon the Cross: But that Christ should
be sacrificed by a Mortal man, Inuisibly, and, as they say, under the Forms of
Bread, and wine, and that Really, and in deed, it is a thing so far passinge
the common sense of Christian knowledge, that the best learned, and vvisest of
the Ancient learned Christian Fathers could never know it.

Therefore this is, not only the proouing of a thing known, by a thing
unknown: and of a thing most certain, by a thing uncertain: but also the
Confirmation of a manifest Truth, by an open Error.

Neither do we rob the Church of God of that most Heavenly, and most
comfortable Sacrifice of Christ's Body: But rather we open, and disclose the
errors, vvherevvith certain of late years have vvilfully deceived the
Church of God. Esaias. 53.
We know, That Christ's Body was rent for our Sins, and that by his
VVounds we are made whole: 1. Pet. 2.
That Christ in his Body carried our Sins upon the Tree: Heb. 9.
And by the Oblation thereof, once made upon the Cross, Actor. 4.
bath sanctified us for ever, and has purchased for us everlasting
Redemption: And That there is none other Name (or Sacrifice) under Heaven,
whereby we can be saved, but only the name (and Sacrifice) of Jesus Christ.
I recken^ who so teaches this Doctrine, leaves not the Church of God
without a Sacrifice.

Touching the multitude of Authorities, vverevvith M. Harding finds him
self so much encombred, the greater his stoare is, the more vvil wise men
require his discretion, and skill in the choice. His choice vvil seem
unskillful, if he allege his Authorities biside his purpose. His purpose, and
promise is to prove, that the Priest has good vvarrant, to offer up Christ
the Son of God unto his Father. Which purpose if he never vouchesaue once
to touch, but range abroad, as his manner is, and roaue idly at matters
impertinent, then must we needs say, He bevvraieth his want, and brings
his great Stoare out of credit. So shall the offer, that is gently made him,
seem to stand upon good, and convenient terms, of Truth, and Modesty. So
shall his stoareful Vaunte of al things, perfourming nothing, unto the wise
(to use his own words) seem pearte, and insolent.

Harding.
In your 2. Division though you be short, yet you spend many more words, then
either were nedeful, or imported any direct answer, M. Ievvel faineth me to
say, that I say not^ and thereto directs his Reply.
reason, or learning. You pretend that to be said by me, which I say not, and
then as your manner is, fighting with my shadow, which you set before you by
your own fained imagination, you come not to answer the point directly, but
speak altother inconsideratly.

Had that been my tale, which you tell for me, wherein show you inconstancy
and folly to be in it, whereof you note the fame? For (say you) not only
Christians, but also Jews, Turks, Saracens (you might have added also the
Devil, whose knowledge is great) know, that Christ was crucified upon the
Cross. This much I grant, what conclude you? But (say you again) that he is
sacrificed by a mortal man inuisibly, under the forms of bread and wine, the
ancient Fathers could never know it. Here I stop you, and this I deny. And
what cause I have to deny it, I have in the Division before showed. After this
you come unto your Conclusion, wherein appears in deed both the inconstancy
and folly of your tale. Therefore (say you of me in effect) I prove a thing
known by a thing unknown, and a thing certain by a thing uncertain, and
confirm manifest truth by open error.

Here if I would follow you, and set forth the peeuishnes of your Argument, by
telling you, how the Mayor, or first Prorosition is impertinent, the Minor
false, being the Negative of our Question (which being denied of me, was very
absurdly brought by you in the Premises) nor Mood, nor Figure, nor just
disposition of the terms duly observed, the Conclusion not following of the
Premises in right order of a Syllogismus: I should bestow many words to
prove that a foolish Argument, which thereof without any curiouse showing of
Logique, of it self gives witness.

What leads you to think, that by the unbloody Sacrifice of the Church,
which you call a thing uncertain, I go about to prove the Sacrifice of the
Cross, which I grant to be certain, and to confirm that most manifest
truth by this other Sacrifice, which you, and they of your side deny? By what
one word can you gather, that to have been mine intent? If it were not, as
most certainly it was not (for what need was there to bring any proof for
the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross?) why bestow you so many words to
prove your belief touching that Sacrifice?

I said not that ye robbed the Church of the Sacrifice done upon the Cross
(For of that being now paste, how can ye rob the Church?) But of the body
and blood of Christ, as it is daily offered at the Altar in remembrance of
his Death and Passion: of the Presence of the body and blood, and of the
Sacrifice of the same in mystery, which the Church from the Apostles time
hitherto has ever celebrated, you rob the Church, and of that spoke I
expressly, as my words be plain, and thereof your self could not be
ignorant.

Whether the Sacramentaries rob the Church of her greatest treasure.
But how do you avoid the crime of spoiling the Church of her greatest
treasure? Because forsooth ye know and teach, that Christ suffered death for
us upon the Cross. As though the Heretics have not always acknowledged, and
confessed the same. Arius confessed Christ was God, and the Son of God: yet
he robbed him of his equality of Godhed, of his coeternitie, and of his
consubstantialitie with, God his Father. In like sort although ye believe never
so constantly, and preach never so ernestly, that Christ shed his blood, and
died for us upon the Cross: yet shall ye be accounted to rob the Chruche of
her chief treasure, unless ye leave unto her the real flesh and blood of
Christ: by oblation, and participation whereof, the effect of the Sacrifice
made upon the Cross, is transferred unto us.

Cyprian. de coena Domini. Origin. in Lucam. Hom. 38. Concilium Nicenum.
Concilium Ephesin.
Ye shall defraude her touching food, Alimonia immortalitatis, and portione
vitae aeternae, of the food of immortality, and of the portion of life
everlasting, as S. Cyprian says: Pane vitae, epulo incorrupto, of the bread of
life, of the banquet that is incorruptible, as Origin writes: Of the Pledges of
our Resurrection, as the Nicen Council determines: Of the flesh verily giving
life, and proper to the Word it self, as the Council of Ephesus declares: to
be short, of the meat of Angels, as S. Ambros testifies.

Ye shall rob her touching the Sacrifice, Diony. Ecclesia. Hi^rarch. c. 3. Augu.
lib. 9. Confess. cap. 12. Council. Nicen.
Hostia salutari, of the healthful Host, as S. Dionyse calls it: of the
permanent and always continuing burnt offering, as S. Cyprian esteems it: of
the Sacrifice of our Ransom, as S. Augustine terms it: Finally of the Lamb
of God, that takes away the sins of the world, as the Council of Nice
teaches.

What judge you? They that violently take from the Church of Christ these
things, seem they not to rob her of the gratest treasure she has, though they
preach that Christ died upon the Cross for us never so busily? Do they not
leave her without a Sacrifice, and therefore without a Religion, according unto
S. Cyprians mind? Do not they take the next way to abolishe that, which faith
and co^trition presupposed, is the chiefest mean to apply unto us the benefit
of Christ's death, by abolishing the daily Sacrifice? S. Gregory says,
Gregor. Hom. 37. Dialog. 4. cap. 58.
Quoties ei hostiam suae passionis offerimus, toties nobi^ ad absolutionem
nostram ipsius passionem reparamus. As often as we offer unto him the Sacrifice
of his passion, so often do we repair and renew unto our self his passion to
our absolution.

All this notwithstanding, touching the Oblation of Christ's body, you say,
that ye believe and confess as much, as the Holy Ghost has opened in the
Scriptures. That Christ offered up his body at his last Supper.
But how untruly this is spoken, who understands not? For the holy Ghost has
opened in the Gospel, that Christ made an Oblation of his body and blood at
his last Supper, which you M. Jewel, and your fellows will not believe. That
Christ made such a Sacrifice, and that the same is reveled in the Gospel, if
you will not believe the Catholic Church, that is to be believed before any one
man: August. in Psalm. 33. Concio. 1.
yet may it please you to believe S. Augustine with these words recording the
same. Erat vt nostis, Sacrificium Iudaeorum antea secundum ordinem Aaron in
victimis pecorum, and hoc in mysterio. Nondum enim erat sacrificium corporis
and sanguinis, quod fideles norunt, and qui Euangelium legerunt quod
sacrificium nunc diffusum est toto orb terrarum. The sacrifice of the Jews
was, as ye know before, after the order of Aaron in Sacrifices of brute
beasts, and that in mystery. For the Sacrifice of the body and blood (of
Christ) which the faithful, and they that have read the Gospel do know, was
not as yet. The which Sacrifice is now dispersed abroad in the whole world.

The Sacrifice of Christ avouched in the Gospel, in the judgment of S.
Augustine.
Now mark good Reader, S. Augustine says, that the faithful, and so many as
have perused the Gospel, do know the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ. What shall we say then? Is not that Sacrifice opened by the holy Ghost
in the Scriptures? And least any man should mystake him, and think him to
speak of the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, made upon the Cross, on
the mount of Caluarie, without the gates of Jerusalem: he declares his
meaning, Sacrifice spread over the world.
and names plainly the Sacrifice, which is now spread and made thorough out
the whole world. Which Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood can be none
other, but that which the Church has been accustomed to offer up to God in the
Mass, under the visible forms of bread and wine, in remembrance of Christ's
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and other his great benefits.

Cauil not M. Jewel upon words, commonly used by the Church for a more
certain explication, and the better to repel the wrangling objections of the
Sacramentarie Heretics, since the time of Bere^garius. The Sacrifice that we
defend, is (which S. Augustine confesses) the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, which succeeded the Sacrifices of the Jews, that were of
brute beasts, which al Christian people, and the faithful that read the new
Testamente, do acknowledge and confess, which is now frequented and
celebrated in all parts of the world, where so ever the voice of the Gospel
has been sounded, and received.

Touching the stoare of auctorities, that may be alleged for good witness of
this Sacrifice, though your sprite stirs you to scoff at it, how great it
is, and of what number they are: unto the learned it is not unknown. And such
witnesses as I brought, how aptely they serve to this purpose, and how
directely they strike the mark: it does already (I doubt not) appear to such,
as with an indifferent eye have perused mine Answer to this your seventeenth
Article. And more evidently it shall appear with Gods grace by this process,
when the weakness and falshoode of your Reply shall be detected, and thereby it
shall be proved, that your vain Challenge being too malepertly and
presumptuously made, stands neither upon good, nor convenient terms, but
upon a deuilish denial, unmeet to proceed out of any Christian man's mouth.

The.3. Division.
The Answer.
THe Scripture it self ministering evident proof for the Oblatio^ of Christ to
his Father by the Priests of the New Testament, in the Institution of this
Holy Sacrament, in the figure of Melchisedech, and in the Prophecy of Malachie
the Prophet: the authorities of the Fathers needed not to be alleged, were
not the same Scripture by the ouerthwarte, and false interpretations of our
adversaries wrested, and turned to a contrary sense, to the horrible seducing
of the unlearned.

Jewel.
Alas, what tool is there so vveake, that M. Harding vvil refuse, to strike
vvithal? To prove his imagined Kind of Sacrifice, he has brought us forth out
of his great stoare, the example of Melchisedeck, and the Prophecy of
Malachie: As if he would reason thus, God says unto Christ, Thou art a
Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedek: Psalm. 110.
Or, God says by the Prophet Malachie, Malac. 1.
A pure Oblation shall be offered unto me in every place: Ergo, The Priest has
Authority, and power, to offer up the Son of God unto his Father. If he had
not had good choice, and stoare of Authorities, he would never have begone
with these.

But he adds further, as matter of greeuance, That these plain Scriptures, by
the ouerthwarte, and false Interpretations of his Adversaries, are wreasted,
and turned to a contrary sense, and that, ( as he says) to the horrible
seducing of the unlearned. Doubtless here is a very horrible accusation. How
be it, if we happily had mistaken these places, and our error therein were
fully proved: yet should not M. Harding in such horrible terms reprove us,
for doing that thing once, that he, and his fellows do so often. But by what
words, by what false Interpretation, into what perverse or Heretical Sense,
have we so horribly vvreasted these Scriptures? M. Harding is wise, is
eloquente, is vvatcheful, is circumspecte, is fast addicted unto his cause: he
dissembleth, and leaves nothing, that any way may sexue his purpose. If our
Errors be so horrible, he should not have spared them: If there be none, he
should not thus have touched them. If M. Hardinge vvinke at them, who can see
them? If M. Hardinge know them not, who can know them?

Harding.
Whether my tools be weak, as you jest, or of good strength, let it be
judged by the strokes they give, with which doubteles the heresy that ye
sustain aganst the outward and sigular Sacrifice of the Church, is stricken
down, and quite overthrown. And the same tools have the chief Doctors and
ancient Fathers of the Church used before me. By the tools I mean, as you
do, the Figure of Melchisedech, and the Prophecy of Malachie: by which the
doctrine of the Church concerning the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ, is avouched. And here to enter into that special point, little esteming
your other impertinent talk, which you think touches my person, and wise men
see helps not your cause: directing my words to the Reader, of whom I may
conceive better hope then I do of you: thus I say.

The Argument which M. Jewel here makes as on my behalf, albeit to the
learned, who know and understand the circumstances of the figure of
Melchisedech, and of the prophecy of Malachie, concludes sufficiently and
fully: yet thou may be well assured good Reader, I would never my self have
proponed it so nakedly, and without any declaration of the necessary
circumstances. Although there follow hereafter more proper plac^s to open the
figure of Melchisedech, and the prophecy of Malachie, where I bring them in
for proof of this intent: yet because M. Jewel has by prevention abruptly
fallen into them, and to the end noman be deceived by his cutted argument,
which in deed is good, if the circumstances were not guilefully conceeled:
here I think good to utter some of those circumstances.

To begin therefore with Melchisedech: It may please thee Reader to
understand, that he is recorded in the Scripture to be a Priest of God the
highest. Genesis 14.
Then being a Priest, it behooved him to offer Sacrifice according unto S.
Paul's doctrine, Heb. 5.
Every Bishop (or Priest) taken from among men, is for men appointed in those
things that belong to God to offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins. What
sacrifice then did he offer? He offered up bread and wine, as Arnobius that
ancient Father, That Melchisedek offered bread and wine.
beside sundry other Doctors does witness, notwithstanding the Scripture make
plain and express mention only of bringing forth bread and wine. His words
be these. Christus per mysterium panis and vinisacerdos sactus est secundum
ordine^ Melchisedech, Arnob. in Psalm. 109.
qui panem and vinum solus obtalit in sacerdotibus, dum Abraham Victor
reuerteretur de praelio. By the mystery of bread and wine Christ became a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech, who only among the Priests offered
bread and wine, when Abraham returned conqueror from bataile. Cyprian. epist.
ad Cecilium. lib. 2. epistola. 3.
This order (says S. Cyprian speaking of the order of Melchisedech) is here
coming of that sacrifice, (he means Melchisedeks sacrifice) and descending
from thens, that Melchisedech was the priest of the highest God, that he
offered bread and wine, that he blessed Abraham.

Here it is expressly affirmed, that Melchisedech offered bread and wine, and
moreover that Christ by doing the like, was made a Priest according to the
order of the same Melchisedek.

That Christ at his Supper showed him self a priest after the order of
Melchisedek.
But when, and where did Christ begin to show him self a Priest in
offering sacrifice after that Order? Verily at his last Supper: For of that he
did upon the Cross, whereof the Sacrifice of the Supper takes his merit,
now I speak not. And that he did so at his last Supper, S. Hierome in his
Commentaries upon the.26. chapter of S. Matthew, is an evident witness, where
he says thus. Hieron, in Mat. 26.
Post quam typicum Pascha fuerat impletum, and Agni carnes cum Apostolis
comederat, assumit panem, qui confortat cor hominis, and ad verum Paschae
transgreditur sacramentum, vt quomodo in praefiguratione eius Melchisedech
summi Dei sacerdos, panem and vinum offerens fecerat, ipse quoque veritatem sui
corporis and sanguinis repraesentaret. After that the figurative Passover had been fulfilled, and he had eaten with his Apostles the flesh of the Lamb, he
took unto him bread, that strengthens the heart of man, and passes over
unto the true Sacrament of Passover, that like as Melchisedech the Priest of
the highest God had done in offering bread and wine in a foregoing figure of
him: so he him self also might represent the truth of his body and blood. Who
can more plainly utter this matter, then S. Hierome has done in these words,
expressly saying, that Christ executed in deed at his last Supper that
Priesthode, which Melchisedech did prefigurate, when having taken bread, he
represented, that is to say, presently exhibited, not the figure or sign, as
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius teach, nor the power and virtue, as Calvin
teaches, but the truth of his body and blood.

Cyprian. lib. 2. epistola. 3.
S. Cyprian speaking of that Christ did at his last Supper, avouches the same
thing with words of like effect. Qui magis sacerdos Dei summi, quam Dominus
noster Jesus Christus, qui sacrificiu^ Deo patri obtulit, and obtulit hec idem,
quod Melchisedech, id est, pane^ and vinu^, suu^ scilicet corpus and sanguinem?
Who is more a Priest of the highest God, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who
offered a Sacrifice of God the Father, and offered the same, that Melchisedech
did that is to wit, bread and wine, as much to say, his body and blood.

Consider Reader, when Saint Cyprian had said, that Christ offered the same
sacrifice that Melchisedech had offered, which was, bread and wine: least any
man should mistake his meaning, and think, that Christ offered none other,
nor better thing, then bread and wine, and in so doing should not excel
Melchisedech: he adds an interpretation of his own words, to wit, that
although Christ's offering appeared to be bread and wine, yet in deed it was
his body and blood. Wherefore if thou will acknowledge Christ's excellency
above Melchisedech, and follow the interpretation, that S. Cyprian puts upon
his own words: thou must believe Christ and Melchisedech to offer one and
the same thing in outward form, and in mystery or sacrament, but not one in
substance and truth. The premises considered, it is most certain, that Christ
fulfilling the figure of Melchisedech at his Maundie, offered his body and
blood, that is to say, him self unto his Father.

Let us go a step foreward, That priests have authority to offer up Christ
unto his Father.
and consider one circumstance more, whereby it may appear, that priests also
have authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. How will that appear?
Forsooth because Christ, after that he had offered his body and blood him
self, and delivered the same unto his Apostles, gave them withal a
commandment to do the same, Luc. 22.
saying, Do ye this in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 1^.
No man, be he never so great an enemy unto the continual Sacrifice of the
Church, will deny, but that the Apostles had a warrant given them by this
commandment requiring them to do, that they had seen their Lord and Master
to have done before them. But it is proved already by sufficient authorities,
that Christ at his Supper did offer his body and blood unto his Father: Ergo
the Apostles had warrant to offer Christ's body and blood unto God his Father.

Now let us descend one step lower, and we shall come unto the very point,
at which M. Jewel unlearnedly, and wickedly makes such a woondering, as if
it were a monstrous, and most dangerous presumption, which is, that a priest
has authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. It is therefore to be
understood, that Christ gave not this commandment, and through virtue of
the same a warrant, to do the thing he had him self done before unto his
Apostles only, but also unto such as should succeed them in office of
Priesthode (whereunto they were admitted by Christ at the maundie) to the
worlds end. Which truth S. Paul does insinuate, 1. Cor. 11.
where he speaks of this blessed Sacrament, showing that it must be
celebrated in remembrance of his death until his last coming. Where of this
argument is easily gathered.

Continuance of Priests necessary
Our lords Supper is to be celebrated until his last coming. But that can not
be performed, unless some succeed the Apostles in the office, by virtue
whereof it is done: Ergo it is necessary, that some succeed the Apostles in
that office. The first proposition is proved by S. Paul. The second is
manifest, because the Apostles, to whom the commandment was given, were not
to continue a live in the Church until Christ's second coming. That
commandment therefore was given as well unto them who should succeed, as unto
the Apostles them selves: For that any should take upon them to execute so high
an office, who have no commandment thereto, or that the commandment was
given to al in general, it is to absurd to think.

To whom then has this office ben committed? By what name have these
successors ben called? Priests by special calling succeed the Apostles in
degree. Hieron. ad Heliodorum.
Verily it has been committed to the Priests of the Church, and to none else.
Of this special calling and condition of certain, S. Hierome gives us an
evident witness, saying. Absit vt de ijs quicquam sinist rum loquar, qui
Apostolico gradui succede^tes, Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt, per quos
and nos Christiani sumus. God forbid I should speak ought amiss of them, who
succeding into the degree of the Apostles, with their sacred mouth make the
body of Christ, by whom also we be made Christians. Thus we are taught, that it
is the office of Priests, to make or consecrate the precious body of Christ
by virtue of his word, by them, as Ministers, and substitutes of Christ
pronounced, for which S. Hierome acknowlegeth their mouth to be sacred and
holy, and for the same dignity, confesses them to succeed the Apostles in
that degree.

To the like effect we find in S. Cyprian a testimony worthy of note.
Cyprian. lib. 2. ep. 3.
Si Christus summus Sacerdos Sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc
fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit: vtique ille sacerdos vice Christi vere
fungitur, Priests, substitutes of Christ.
qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur. If Christ the highest priest him self
did first offer the sacrifice unto God his Father, and commanded the same to
be done in remembrance of him: then that Priest does truly supply the stead of
Christ, which follows that which Christ did.

This saying of S. Cyprian goes somewhat higher, then the former of S. Hierome.
There it was said, that Priests succeeded in Apostolic degree. Here a Priest
following the act of Christ in offering the Sacrifice, is said to be the
substitute of Christ him self. By S. Hieromes verdit they may consecrate the
body of Christ, as the successors of the Apostles: by S. Cyprians doctrine
they may offer the Sacrifice, as the Vicars of Christ. What think we then? May
any Christian man saving his profession, imagine, yea believe, and openly by
preaching, and writing publish unto the world, that the Apostles successors,
and Christ's substitutes want authority and commission to do that, unto
thoffice whereof they succeed, and be substitutes?

Now let these circumstances be gathered, and set together in fewer words, so
shall the necessary sequel the better be perceived. Melchisedech was a priest,
and figure of Christ by offering bread and wine. Christ fulfilled this figure
at his Maundie by consecrating, and offering his body and blood under the
forms of Bread and Wine unto his Father, him self being the true bread of
life, that came down from heaven: and gave commandment and authority to his
Apostles, and to their successors, to do the same in remembrance of him: The
successors of the Apostles in this behalf be the Priests of the new
Testament: Ergo, the Priests have a commandment, and thereby sufficient
auctority, to do that Christ did at his Maundie, that is, to consecrate and
offer the body and blood of Christ unto his Father. And so to conclude, these
circumstances thus considered, do clearly prove to the detection of M.
Jewels either blind ignorance, or cankred malice against the Church, this to
be a good and true consequent, which he proponed as absurd and ridiculous: God
the Father says unto Christ, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech: Ergo the Priest has authority and power to offer up Christ unto
his Father.

That the Prophecy of Malachie foresignifieth the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Touching the prophecy of Malachie, it does in conclusion importe as much as
the figure of Melchisedech, if the circumstances be well weighed and considered.
This Prophet enspired with the holy Ghost forsaw, that the sacrifices of the
Jews, which were gross, and in sundry respects unclean, yet for a time
allowable, should cease and have an end. Malach. 1.
And that instead of them, God would be honored with a pure and clean
Sacrifice, which should be offered unto his name not only in Iewrie, but also
among the Gentiles, from the rising to the going down of the sun. This is
the effect of that Prophecy.

Now, if we search never so exactly, and seek for that Sacrifice, which was not
used in the old Law, but succeeded in the room of al them of the old Law,
and has been frequented thorough out al nations: what other can we find, but
the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ? In this Sacrifice we perceive
most clearly all the conditions of that Prophecy fulfilled. All the conditions
of Malachies prophecy found in the Sacrifice of the Altar.
First, it is instead of many. Next, it is offered unto Gods most holy name.
Thirdly, it is celebrated and solemnized among the Gentiles, and thereby Gods
name is magnified. Fourthly, it is a most pure and sincere Sacrifice, because
the thing that is offered, is the immaculate Lamb of God, the body and blood
of him, 1. Pet. 2.
that was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the pure virgin, who never
committed sin, nor was any guyle found in his mouth: Fifthly, it is offered
through out all the world from East to West. Sixthly, it had beginning in the
new Testament, and was not used in the old Testament, but only by figures
foresignified. Sure it is, that none can be named beside this, in which al
these conditions by the Prophet specified be accomplished.

As for the Sacrifice of Christ's body upon the Cross, it was offered in one
special place, Sacrifices common to b^^h ^estaments.
in Golgoltha without the gates of Jerusalem. The sacrifices of thanks giving,
of praise, of almose deeds, of mercy, of a contrite heart, of preaching Gods
words, these and such like, succeeded not in the room of all the old
sacrifices, nor began they in the new Testament, but were used in the time
of the Law, as well as they be now in these days, as they which be common to
both Testamentes.

That this Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ That this Sacrifice
succeeded all the Sacrifices of the old Law.
succeeded all the Sacrifices of the old Law, which of the Fathers in their
learned treatises have not reported? It is needelesse to rehearse many
testimonies. The witness of S. Augustine alone for the plainness and
authority of it, might suffice. He writes thus. Vbi ait (Ecclesiastes) non
est bonum homini, August. de ciuita. lib. 17. ca. 20.
nisi quod manducabit and bibet, quid credibilius dicere intelligitur, quam
quod ad participationem mensae huius pertinet, quam sacerdos ipse mediator
Testamenti noui exhibet secundum ordine^ Melchisedech, de corpore and sanguine
suo? Id enim Sacrificium successit omnibus illis Sacrificijs veteris
Testamenti, quae immolabantur in vmbra futuri. Propter quod etia^ voce^ illam
in Psalmo tricesimo nono eiusdem mediatoris per Prophetiam loquentis
agnoscimus. Sacrificium and oblationem noluisti, corpus autem perfecisti mihi,
quia pro illis omnibus sacrificijs and oblationibus corpus eius offertur, and
participantibus ministratur. Whereas Solomon says, Eccles. 3.
a man has no good thing, but that he shall eat and drink, what thing is more
credible that he understands in so saying, then that appertains unto the
partaking of this table, which the Priest him self the mediator of the new
Testament does exhibit according to the order of Melchisedech, of his own body
and blood? For that Sacrifice has succeeded al those sacrifices of the old
Testament, which were sacrificed in shadow of that which was to come. For
which cause we do acknowledge that same voice of the self same Mediator
speaking by prophecy in the nine and thirteth Psalm, Sacrifice and Oblation
thou refusedst, but a body thou made perfect for me, because for all those
sacrifices and oblations his body is offered, and ministered unto the partakers.

The last cause of this testimony declares plainly, that S. Augustine meant
not the bloody Sacrifice made upon the Cross, but the unbloody Sacrifice
offered by the Priests in remembrance of the same, as the which is not only
offered up, but also ministered unto the partakers.

If this notwithstanding any yet remain in doubt, whether the Prophecy of
Malachie be to be understood of this unbloody Sacrifice, it may please him to
hear other old learned Fathers teaching the same doctrine. S. Chrysostom
writing upon the.95. Psalm, alleging this very Prophecy: Chrysostom. in Psalm.
95.
In omni loco Sacrificium offeretur nomini meo, and Sacrificium purum: In every
place a Sacrifice shall be offered unto my name, and that a pure Sacrifice: says
forthwith: Malac. 1.
Vide quam luculenter, quamque dilucide mysticam interpretatus est mensam, quae
est incruenta hostia. See how plainly, and how clearly he has declared the
mystical Table, which is the unbloody Sacrifice.

S. Irenaeus likewise writing against Valentinus the Heretic, Irene. lib. 4.
ca. 32. Aug. co^tra^ Aduersar. leg. et prophet. lib. 1. cap. 20. Iustmusin
Dialog. ad Tryphone^.
S. Augustine, also, and S. Justinius the martyr, do expound the prophecy for
the same Sacrifice. Whose sayings here to rehearse, to the proof of so
certain a doctrine, it were more tedious, then needeful.

Wherefore this being so sufficiently witnessed by the Ancient Doctors of the
Church (against whose authority no novelty is to be heard) as a most
undoubted truth, that the sacrifice, which Christ made of his body and blood
at his last supper, is that pure and Unbloody Sacrifice, which Malachie
prophesied should be offered up unto God from the East to the west: this also
being no less true, that Christ appointed and auctorized some to offer the
same (otherwise to what purpose was it instituted?) and since that we read of
none other appointed and auctorized thereto, but the Apostles, and their
successors, Priests of the new Testament, nor have we heard of any that
lawfully ever took upon them to offer the same, that were not Priests: with
what impudency is it denied, that the Apostles had, and Priests now have,
authority to offer up this pure Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ
unto his Father?

Thus thou may perceive good reader, the argument, which M. Jewel here
ascribes unto me, and would to seem ridiculous, to conclude rightly for the
truth, if the due consideration of the circumstances be not omitted. Withal
thou understand, that who so ever allegeth the figure of Melchisedech, and
the Prophecy of Malachie to prove, that the Priests of the new Testament
have authority and power to offer up Christ unto his Father, he makes no
evil choice of the stoare of authorities, by witness of which that point is
proved and confirmed.

As for the matter of greeuance M. Jewel, where of you complain so grievously,
which is, that I charge them of your side, with wresting by overthwart and
false interpretation the words of the Institution of this Sacrifice, the
figure of Melchisedech, and the Prophecy of Malachie: I uttered it upon very
just occasion, as the learned do know. The same ought to be grievous in deed
unto you, not because ye are told of it by me, but because it is true. Neither
thought I it good to exemplify the matter, staying the course of my brief
Answer to your Challenge, by descending unto the particulars: for that my scope
and chief intent was, not to confute the contrary Doctrine, but to prove and
establish the truth of this Article by you most wickedly denied.

If it be pleasure unto you to behold paricular places and points of your
false Legierdemaine disclosed, by reading over my Confutatio^ of your lying
Apology, my Reioindre to your Reply, that also which M. D. Sander, D.
Heskins, M. Rastel, M. Dorman, and M. Stapleton have written against you: your
lust may happily be satisfied. Take your fyl of that, until more come.

Jewel.
Perhaps he vvil say, Ye expound the Prophecy of Malachie, sometimes of
Prayer, and sometimes of the Preachinge of the Gospel. This was never the
Prophets meaning: This is an horrible vvreasting of the Scriptures. Thus, no
doubt, M. Harding vvil say: for otherwise he can say nothing. And yet he
knovveth and, being learned, can not choose but know, that this is the Old
learned Catholic Fathers Exposition, touching these words of the Prophet
Malachie, and not ours. He knovveth, that the Ancient Father Tertullian says
thus, Tertull. contrae Iudaeos. Tertull. contra Marcion. lib. 4. Hieron. in 1.
Caput Malach.
The pure Sacrifice, that Malachias speaks of, that should be offered up in
every place, Est Praedicatio Euangelij vsque ad finem Mundi: Is the Preachinge
of the Gospel until the end of the world: And in an other place, Simplex
Oration de Conscientia pura: The Sacrifice, that Malachie meante, is a devout
Prayer proceedinge from a pure Conscience. He knovveth, that S. Hierome
expounds the same words in this wise: Dicit, Orationes Sanctorum Domino
offerendas esse, non in vna Orbis Prouincia Iudaea, sed in omni loco: The
Prophet Malachie means hereby, That the Prayers of Holy people should be
offered unto God, not only in Iewrie, that was one province of the world, but
also in all places. He knovveth, that Eusebius calls the same Sacrifice of
Malachie, Eusebius. De Demonst. li. 1. (...).
The Sacrifice, and the Incense of Prayer. Thus the Holy Catholic Fathers
expounded these words of the Prophet Malachie: and yet were they not
therefore iuaged either ouerthvvarte vvreasters of the Scriptures, or horrible
deceivers of the people.

Now, of the other side, if it may please M. Harding to shevvfoorth but one
Ancient Doctor, or Father, that either by the Example of Melchisedech, or by
force of these words of Malachie, vvil conclude, that the Priest has
Authority, and Power, to offer up Verelie, and in deed, the Son of God unto
his Father, he may happily win some credit.

Harding.
In defense of your fellows, and of your self, you say, that whereas ye expound
the prophecy of Malachie sometimes of Prayer, and sometimes of the preaching of
the Ghospel, therein ye use no wreasting of the Scripture, nor falshod: because
the old learned Catholic Fathers have so expounded the place. And here you name
Tertullian, S. Hierome, and Eusebius. That the Preaching of the Gospel may be,
and is called a Sacrifice, I deny not. Mary that by th'auctoritie, which here
you pretend to allege out of Tertullia^ it is proved, and that by the same the
meaning of Malachies prophecy is to be drawn quit from the Sacrifice of
th'Aulter: this I deny utterly. And how far your deali^g in these weighty
matters concerning the faith of a Christian man is to be trusted by this to al it
may appear. M. Ievvel forgeth a saying of his own and puts it upon
Tertullian
First, whereas you bear al men in hand, that I know, that the Ancient Father
Tertullian says, as here you report: it is very false. for how can I know the
thing, that is not at al? Tertullian says not so. These words, The pure
Sacrifice, that Malachias speaks of, that should be offered up in every
place, est Praedicatio Euangelij vsque ad fine^ mundi, be not to be found in all
Tertullians book Co^tra Iudaeos. Yet you have put them in a distinct letter,
in which the sayings of the Doctors be printed, that your Reader should
believe, they were the words of Tertullia^. This is a forgerie wrought in your
own shop, fathered upon Tertullian. Phy M. Jewel, can neither shame, nor the
fear of God, withdraw you from using such forged sayings of your own, with
which being by you fathered upon some Ancient Doctor of the Church, your common
manner is to face out an untrue matter, as crafty players at Cards do as they
say, with a Card of ten?

Next, you swerve very much from the meaning and purpose of Tertullian. For he
says not, that the Preaching of the Ghospel is that clean Sacrifice, which
Malachie prophesied of, but far otherwise. Tertullian having spoken of the
two kinds of Sacrifices of the two peoples, the Jews and the Gentiles,
foreshewed at the beginning in the oblations of Cain, Genes. 4.
and Abel: demands, whereas Gods law given by Moses required the carnal
sacrifices to be made by the people of Israel in the land of promise, and
nowher else: why the holy Ghost afterward notwithstanding by Malachie, Psalm. 95.
and also by David fortelleth, that the Jews earthly and fleshly sacrifices
should cease, and that spiritual Sacrifices should be offered up to God over
the whole world. Unto this question he answers him self, Tertulliae. contra
Iudaeos.
and says. Indubitate, quod in omni terra exire habebat praedicatio
Apostoloru^, that is to say, Undoubtedly, because the preaching of The Apostles
was to come forth over all the world.

This assuredly is the true abbrigement and meaning of Tertullians words
there. Tertulia^s place truly declared.
And clear it is, he says not, that the Preaching of the Gospel is the pure
Sacrifice, that Malachie speaks of, as you untruly report of him: but only
that the holy Ghost foresignified by Malachie, and by David, that the Jews
sacrifices being abolished, pure sacrifices should be offered among al Nations
of the earth, because it should come to pass, that the Apostles should preach
over the whole world. So that by Tertullians verdite, the preaching of the
Gospel was not that pure Sacrifice it self spoken of by Malachie, but the
Apostles preaching that then was to come, was the cause, why Malachie and David
enspired of the holy Ghost, fortolde the ceassing of the Jews carnal
sacrifices, and the setting up, or use of the Gentiles spiritual Sacrifices.
More then this, which is nothing at al, Tertullia^ in that place makes not for
you.

Leave, leave M. Jewel for your credites sake (if nothing else can move you) to
deceive unlearned souls, whom Christ has so derely bought, with sayings of
your own forging, fathering them upon the ancient Doctors. It is a manifest
token what little good stuff ye have to defend your new ghospel withal, whereas
ye set forth your own pelf under the name of the ancient writer Tertullian.
Wherein ye follow false Lapidanies and Goldsmithes, who sell Cristal and glass,
for true precious stoanes, and gilted copper, for pure gold.

Your other three places, which you pretend to allege out of Tertullian, S.
Hierome, and Eusebius, be not with such form of words by those Fathers set
forth, as you here report them. The sleight of falsifiyng that you so commonly
use, in this place for your purpose makes but only a colorable show to the
ignorant, who believe what so ever you say: to the learned, who by diligent
examition will search what you say, a substantial proof in deed, it makes not.
Thymiama, oblatio munda.
Al be it I grant, whereas the Prophecy of Malachie speaks of two things,
thymiama, incense, and Oblatio munda, the clean Oblation or Sacri^ice: that
the best learned Fathers have expounded the Incense, of Prayer, and the clean
Oblation, of the Sacrifice of the Altar, that is now offered in the Church,
through the whole world.

Where Tertullian disputing with Marcion the heretic expounds it of Prayer,
Contra Marcione^ lib. 4.
either it is his private sense, which brings no prejudice unto the doctrine
of the Catholic Church: What Tertullian meant by pure prayer.
or he means it as the other Fathers do, of the Sacrifice of the Altar,
which is consecrate with prayer. For so the old learned Fathers call the words
of Consecration. Else if it should be expounded of al manner of prayer, or of
prayer in general, as it is made of each private man: it can not always seem to
be the clean Sacrifice prophesied of by Malachie, because the same is made by
those that be not altogether pure, Prouerbior. 20.
and without spot of sin. For so the Scripture witnesses: who can say, my
heart is clean, I am clean from sin?

But the Prayer, wherewith the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ is
consecrate, 1. Pet. 2.
being the words of our Lord, Esai. 53.
who never did sin, nor was guile found in his mouth: is both in that respect
pure and clean, and also for that it is pronounced by the Priest, as the
public minister of the Church, whose private uncleanness what so ever it be,
in that behalf impaireth not the worthiness of the sacrifice, nor of the
prayer, wherewith it is con^ecrate. Who also at what time he offered that
Sacrifice, ought specially to be of a pure conscience. And therefore Tertullian
having rehearsed the words of Malachie (though some what otherwise then either
the seventy Interpretours, or the Hebrew books have, and otherwise then he him
self rehearsed them writing against the Jews) in every place shall be offered up
in my name sacrifice, Tertullia. aduersus Marcion. lib. 4.
and the clean Sacrifice: might well add further by way of exposition,
scilicet, simplex oration de conscientia pura, to wit simple (or pure) prayer
from a clean conscience. In which prophecy the prophet fortelleth, that God
has disposed a better Sacrifice to be offered up unto his name, then the
sacrifices were, which the Jews offered.

Simple Prayer.
By simple prayer, he means such, as is not tempered and mingled with any
sinful infection of humane affections, of which sort is the prayer of
consecration of this Sacrifice, as that which is the word of our Lord, and
not the word of man. Whose prayer, as al other his actions, proceeding out of
his corrupt heart, is steined with some spotte of sin, wereunto our nature
corrupted in Adam is thral and subject.

The words of Consecration of the Sacrament, called by the name of prayer.
If to any it seem strange, the words, wherewith the body and blood of
Christ are consecrate, to be called a prayer: by reading the old learned
Fathers he shall find it so termed in sundry places. Instinus martyr in 2.
Apolog.
S. Iustine the Martyr speaking of the blessed Sacrament, names it (...), the
food which is made the Eucharist through the prayer of the word that we have
of him, he means Christ. Lo he calls the consecration, the Prayer of the
word, that Christ delivered unto his Apostles, and consequently to their
successors, Priests of the new Testament.

S. Augustine writing unto Paulinus, says, Precationes accipimus dictas,
Augustine. ad Paulinum. Epistol. 59.
quas facimus in celebratione Sacramentoru^, antequam illud quod est in Domini
mensa, incipiat benedici: Orationes, cu^ benedicitur and sanctificatur, and ad
distribuendu^ co^minuitur. We take Precatio^es to be called those prayers,
which we make in the celebratio^ of the sacraments, before that, which is on
our Lords table, begin to be blessed: and Oratio^es (we take for the prayers
that be said) when that (which is on our Lords table) is blessed and
sanctified, or consecrated, and broken to be distributed.

Again he says there, excepto nomine generali orationis, ea proprie
intelligenda est Oration, qua^ facimus ad votum, id est, (...). Vouentur aute^
omnia quae offeruntur Deo, maxim sancti Altaris Oblatio, etc. Beside the
general name of Prayer, that properly is to be understood prayer, which we
make at vow. And al things are vowed, which be offered unto God, chiefly the
Oblatio^ of the holy Altar. Since then that is properly a prayer, which is made
at vow, that is to say, when we vow ought unto God, and what things so ever we
offer unto God, the same be vowed, that is to wit, by the service of our heart,
be given, dedicated, and rendered unto God, thereby to protest our faith in him,
to thank him, to praise him, to honor him, to show ourselves myndeful of his
benefits, among al things the Oblation of the Altar being that which is
chiefly vowed: it follows that the Consecration is specially to be called and
accounted prayer.

S. Hierome likewise called the words of Consecration by the name of Prayer,
Hierony. ad Eu^grium.
where he says in his Epistle to Euagrius. Quid patitur mensarum minister, vt
super eos se tumidus efferat, ad quorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque
conficitur? What aileth the minister of tables, (whereby he meanetha Deaco^) to
swel and advance him self over them (he speaks there of Priests) at whose
Prayers, the body and blood of Christ is consecrated?

What shall I need to allege mo Fathers for proof of a thing so well known to
them, that be conversant in their books? Wherefore seeing the word of
Consecration is the word of prayer, whereby the body and blood of Christ,
the Sacrifice of our Raunsom, as S. Augustine calls it, Augustine. Confess.
libro 9. cap. 12.
is by us offered up and vowed unto God, that a remembrance of his death be
celebrated of our part, and that mercy be extended unto us of Gods part, for
that bodies sake represented and offered up which has dyed for us: and seeing
in the same we our selves are also offered up, dedicated, vowed, and rendered
unto God, because therein Christ our head, whereof we be members, is offered:
the word of Consecration in this consideration being most properly and truly a
prayer, yea (if I may so term it) an actual prayer, because it is such a
word, as fulfilleth the act of the Sacrifice: it stands with good reason
and learning, that Tertullian expounding the clean Sacrifice whereof Malachie
speaks of prayer, be understood to mean the oblation and Sacrifice of the
Altar, as being that, which is the highest kind of prayer, and of worshipping
God, that can be.

Thus that you bring out of Tertullia^, makes nothing for excuse of them of
your side, whom I noted for wresting the place of Malachie, for that by their
overthwart and false interpretations, they rack it from the meaning of the
Sacrifice of the Altar, offered up unto God in the new Testament in all places
among the Gentiles, by Priests after the order of Melchisedek, under Christ.

TOuching the two other Doctors, S. Hierome, and Eusebius, whom you allege for
you, as expounding this place of Malachie of prayer (whereby, though they so
did, you see the Sacrifice of the Altar is not excluded): let us see whether
in them you have used a more truth and fidelity, then you have in Tertullian.
Verily were you mine Adversary never so much, yet for truths sake I can not
but give you this commendation: You show your self always in your writing
one manner a man, which is a token of great constancy. I mean, that lightly
you never recite any Doctor, but you falsify him, The practice of falsifiers.
and corrupt his meaning, by clipping away of part, or by changing of
words, or by adding of your own, or by keeping close some what that goes
before, or comes after, or by conceeling the circumstances of the places
alleged by one way or other. He knows (say you meaning of me) that Saint
Hierome expounds the same words in this wise. Dicit, orationes sanctorum
Domino offerendas esse, non in vna orbis prouincia Iudaea, sed in omni loco:
The Prophet Malachie means hereby (so you interpret) that the prayers of
holy people should be offered unto God, not only in Iewrie, that was but one
province of the world, but also in all places.

For the right understanding of this point, I pray thee Reader peruse the place
of S. Hierome thy self, believe thine own eyes, believe not such false
iugglers. Which counsel I advise thee to observe not only for trial of this
one place, but also for trial of other places, which M. Jewel brings in
defense of any his negative Articles. Verily neither has S. Hierom these very
words in such order, M. Ievvel falsifieth S. Hierome.
as they be here laid forth, and the whole sentence vewed and considered
together, makes directly for the Catholic doctrine which I defend, and quite
against that M. Jewel says. To the intent I be plainer, though longer, here I
will rehearse the whole place, as we find it written in S. Hierome. Thus he
says.

Hieron. in Commen. in Malac. cap. 1.
Proprie ad Sacerdotes Iudaeorum sermo fit Domini, qui offerunt coecum and
claudum, and languidum ad immolandum: vt sciant carnalibus victimis spirituales
victimas successur as. Et nequaquam taurorum hircorumque sanguinem, sed
thymiama, hoc est, Sanctorum Orationes Domino offerendas: and non in vna orbis
prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna Iudaeae vrbe Jerusalem, sed in omni loco offerri
oblationem, nequaqua^ immunda^, vt a populo Israel, sed munda^, vt in
Ceremoniis Christianorum. Ab ortu enim solis vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen
Domini in gentibus, etc. The word of our Lord is now properly uttered unto
the Priests of the Jews, who do offer that which is blind, lame, and sickely,
to be sacrificed, to the intent they might know, that spiritual sacrifices should
succeed their carnal Sacrifices: And that the blood of bulls, and goats
should no more be offered unto our Lord, but Incense, that is to say, the
Prayers of Holy men and that not in Iewrie only, which is but one province of
the world, nor in Jerusalem only, which is but one City of Iewrie, but in
every place there is offered an Oblation, not an unclean one, as was offered
of the people of Israel, but a clean one, as is offered up in the Ceremonies of
the Christians. For from the rising of the sun to the setting, the name of
our Lord is great among the Gentiles.

This Prophet speaks of two things, Two things spoken of by Malachie.
the one don among the Jews, and now to be leafte of, the other to be done
among the Gentiles. Of each he has a double consideration. Concerning the first,
which is the sacrifice of brute beasts, that it was done but in one province
of the world, in Iewrie, and only in Jerusalem, a City of that Province.
Again, that the same thing was unclean and filthy. For how filthy a thing the
blood of Bulls, goats, rams, and other beasts, the smoke and savor of
their grese burnt in Sacrifice, was: it is sone conceived. Concerning the
second, which is Sacrifice to be done among the Gentiles, the consideration
thereof is also double, for that it is pure and clean, and also for that it is
frequented in every place.

This Sacrifice is of two sorts, the one mere spiritual and internal: the
orher external as touching the Ceremony of doing it, Prayer signified by
Incense. Apoc. 5. Lib. 4. ca. 33. Augu. contra aduersar. legis et Prophetarum
lib. 1. c. 20
spiritual also notwithstanding. The one, after the manner of the Prophets, who
be wont to express things of the new Testament, with words of the old
Testament, he calls Incense, and S. Hierome expounds it of prayer, which
ascends from our hearts unto the heavenly throne of mercy like a sweet
perfume of Incense. And so S. John in his revelation, as S. Irenaeus writes,
calls the sweet perfumes, the prayers of Saints.

The other he terms a pure Oblation, the which S. Hierom expounds of that
pure Oblation, which is offered every where, in the Ceremonies of the
Christians. Which can be understood of none other, but of the Sacrifice of
the Body and Blood of Christ offered up unto God by Priests of the new
Testament. For what other Oblation or sacrifice can be named, Four conditions
of the Mystical Oblatio^.
that has these four conditions, which S. Hierome here touches, but the
Oblation of the Altar? The conditions be these. That it succeed the Sacrifices
of the old Law, that it be pure and clean, that it be made in all places, and
that it be celebrated and solemnized in the Ceremonies of the Christians.

Of what so ever spiritual and internal Sacrifice the Gospellers will understand
this place, be it laud and praise, In his book Against the B. of Winchester.
li. 3. fol 425. and 443.
thanks giving, prayer, a contrite heart, mercy, or any such other, as
Cranmare understands it of laud, praise and thanks, and M. Jewel of prayer:
it shall quite be avoided by one or other of these conditions, specially by the
first, and the fourth. For how can laud and praise, or prayer, ar any other
mere spiritual sacrifice v^ed in the new Testament, seem to succeed the
Sacrifices of the old Testament, seeing al such spiritual Sacrifices be
co^mon^ to both Testaments, and that thing can not be said to succeed, that had
place before?

And if our Adversaries will cauil never so much, expounding the pure Oblation
that Malachie speaks of, Against the B. of Vvinster. lib. 3. fol. 99.
of some other thing, as Cranmare in one place expounds it in general of all the works that Christian people do to the glory of God: the same shall be
avoided by that it is restrained unto that Oblation, which is made (as S.
Hierom declares) in Ceremonijs Christianoru^, in the Ceremonies of the
Christians. For all these spiritual and internal sacrifices be done inwardly in
the heart of man: and what other works can they name done to the glory of God
in the public Ceremonies of the Christians, Ceremonies of the Christians.
which the prophet may reasonably seem to have meant? And what means S.
Hierome by the Ceremonies of the Christians, but the Ceremonies of the Church
used through all the world in the celebration and solemnity of the Mass,
wherein the Sacrifice of the Body and blood of Christ is made and offered by
the Priests, touching ministry, by the faithful people also, touching vow?
Which Ceremonies be the chief, the most ancient, the most reverent, the most
mystical, and most holy Ceremonies, that Christians have.

Wherefore, whereas Malachie, and likewise S. Hierome expounding his words,
speak of two things, of prayer, and of the pure Oblatio^, the same being that
Oblation which is offered every where from the East to the west in the
Ceremonies of the Christians by his interpretation: now it appears how falsely
M. Iuel demeaneth him self in this point, who makes S. Hierome so to
understand the place of Prayer, as though he understood the whole saying of
Prayer only, and not one part of it of Prayer, and an other part also of the
Sacrifice of the Church, whereas in deed he understands it of both, and most
expressly speaks of both, as I have now declared. Thus he never leaves to
iustle away one truth, with an other truth.

NOw to come to Eusebius, let us see, whether you entreat him with more truth,
then you have entreated Tertullian, and S. Hierom. He knows (say you likewise
of me) that Eusebius calls the same sacrifice of Malachie, the sacrifice and
the Incence of prayer. And for some show of proof for that you say, you put
in the margent of your book, this piece of a Greek sentence out of Eusebius,
Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 1.
(...), as much to say, the incense, or perfume that is made through prayers.

For answer here unto, It is to be remembered, as I said before, that Malachie
speaks of two things to be offered up unto God in all nations from the East to
the west, Incense, Incense, Pure Sacrifice.
and the pure Sacrifice. Eusebius, where he allegeth this place of Malachie, to
prove that Moses Law is ended, and that the new Law of the new Testament is
come in place: by Incense understands Prayer, as S. Hierome, M. Ievvel
falsifieth Eusebius.
and other old learned Fathers do. As for the Pure Sacrifice, whereof now we
speak, that he calls it the Sacrifice, and the Incense of Prayer, it is
utterly false. In that very place which you allege, Eusebius does so expound
Malachie, as to any man of judgment it shall evidently appear, how untruly you
report of him, and how aptly he makes for the catholic doctrine, and against
you.

Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 1.
The beginning of the sentence is this. (...) etc. In English the whole truly
turned word for word, sounds thus. That in every place Incense, and
Sacrifice is offered up unto God, what other thing does it signify, then that
the time shall come, when they shall offer up unto God that is above al, the
Incense which is made by Prayers, and that which is called the Pure Sacrifice,
that is made not by blood, but by Godly actions, not in Jerusalem, neither in
this or that determinate place, but in every country, and in all nations.
Behold Reader how he expounds the Incense or perfume, whereof Malachie
speaks, of the Incense that is made by Prayer, as afterward in the end of
that first book to that meaning he allegeth the words of the Psalm, Psalm.
140.
Dirigatur Oration mea sicut Incensum in conspectu tuo Domine: Let my Prayer o
Lord like a perfume be brought up into thy ^ight.

Touching the Pure Sacrifice, which is offered up unto God by pure and godly
actions, that thereby he understands most specially the External Sacrifice of
the Church, which is offered upon an Altar, the words following do manifestly
declare. For immediately to show what he understood by the Pure Sacrifice, he
brings forth a prophecy of Esaias foreshewing the same. There shall be an
Altar (says the Prophet Esaias as Eusebius recites) to our Lord in the
country of Egypt, Esai. 19.
and our Lord shall be known unto the Egyptia^s, and (God) shall send them a man
who shall save them: and the Egyptians shall know our Lord in that day, and they
shall offer up sacrifices, and make vows unto our Lord, and shall perform the
same, and they shall be converted unto our Lord, and he shall hear them, and
heal them.

For the better understanding of this place, by the Egyptians Esaias means, as
Eusebius there afterward expounds, al kind of me^, that before the coming of
Christ were Idolatours, as the Egyptians were. Now if Eusebius had understood
the Pure Sacrifice mentioned by Malachie of prayer, or only of mere spiritual
and internal sacrifices, he would not have alleged for further prouf and
declaration of it, that place of Esaias, where he makes expres mention of an
Altar to be set up among the Egyptia^s, that is, among all the Gentiles, who
were before given to Idolatry. The external Altar argues and presupposes an
external sacrifice. For else if the Sacrifice be inward only and spiritual, to
the doing of it, the building of an Altar is void and to no purpose.

If M. Jewel to avoid the force of this place alleged by Eusebius, will bring
phrases, as his manner is, whereby to declare, that Aulters oftentimes be
understood to be spiritual (which I acknowledge and confess that the Aulters
of our hearts be of the Fathers not seldom spoken of) and therefore will say,
that Eusebius understood this prophecy of Esaias of such a spiritual Altar: to
this I answer: Eusebius understands Esaias to mean such an Altar, as Moses
law forbad any where else to be set up, then in Iewrie, and that only in one
city of Iewrie. But it was never forbidden by Moses Law, but that the
spiritual Aulters of me^nes hearts might be prepared in more places then in one
only City of Iewrie, for Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, Ezdras, Tobias, and many
other holy Jews, and Israelites had such spiritual Aulters, and thereon offered
acceptable spiritual sacrifices unto God in other Countries besides Iewrie, and
in Cities far dista^t from Jerusalem: wherefore he meant of such Aulters, as
Christians have ever had in their Churches, which be made after the manner of
the Altar appointed by Moses, though the Sacrifice be of a far diners manner.

Visible, and external Altar.
Eusebius words be these, (...) etc. Moses ordained Altar and sacrifices to be
made in no Land elsewhere, but in Iewrie only, and that in one only, City
thereof. But this prophecy of Esaias says, that an Altar shall be set up unto
our Lord in the Land of Egypt, and that the Egyptians them selves shall offer
up the Sacrifices unto the Lord of the Prophets, and no longer unto their
Country Gods.

After that he has spoken what he thought good of this new manner of Altar,
and Sacrifice, of the translation of the Altar, and priesthod appointed by
Moses, and therefore consequently of the translation of the Law it self: in
conclusion thus he says. (...). As much to say, Now then is the time come,
that there is need of a new law to be made, that the foresaid things may
take place. But as for the spiritual Altar of men's hearts, and the mere
spiritual and inward sacrifices, as the sacrifices of prayer, of laud and
praise, of thanks giving, and such other: who understands not, that they
might well take place, and be frequented without necessity of any new Law to
be made, and that other where is, then only in one City of Iewrie? Verily the
use of such Aulters requires not a change of Moses law, and priesthode. For
such Aulters, and such sacrifices were in Egypt, and Chaldaea, among many
thousands of Jews, who lived in those Lands, long before Moses law was
dissolved. The Altar therefore and Sacrifice that Eusebius means in that place
for declaration of Malachies Prophecy, is the Altar and Sacrifice, whereupon
and which, the faithful people by ministry of Priests of the new Testament,
does continually offer unto God, to wit the body and blood of Christ, in
remembrance of his death, after the new Decrees and ordinances of the new
Testament, as he says in Lib. 1. De Demonstrat. (...).
one place, after the Decrees and ordinances of the Church, as he says in an
Lib. 5. De Demonstrat.
other place.

That no man should doubt of what Altar he meant, thus there he speaks of
it. Lib. 1. De Demonst.
To our one only Lord an Altar of unbloody and reasonable hosts, after the
new mysteries of the new Testament, throughout the whole world has been
erected, both in Egypt it self, and in the other nations being of like
conditions unto the Egyptians as touching wicked error. Verily these words
can not with any reason seem to be meant of the spiritual Altar of our hearts.
For though on the same we offer up unbloody and reasonable hosts, yet that is
not done after the new Mysteries of the new Testament. For in the old
Testament also no less then in the new, such mere spiritual and internal
sacrifices were offered up upon the spiritual Aulters of good men's hearts.

Luc. 22.
And what other be these new Mysteries of the new Testament, whereof this doctor
speaks, 1. Cor. 11.
but those that Christ taught the Apostles, and delivered unto them at his last
Supper, where he converted bread and wine into his body and blood, whom, as S.
Irenaeus says, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32.
he taught the new Oblation of the new Testament, which the Church receiving of
the Apostles, offers up unto God throughout the whole world?

Whereas then Eusebius expounding the prophecy of Malachie, speaking of
Incense, and pure Sacrifice, understands it to speak of two distinct sorts
of Oblations: therein appears either the ignorance, or the wilful malice of
M. Jewel, who refers al to one, that is to say, to Prayer, to the intent the
Mystical Oblation and Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, be quite
excluded. But as the weighing of that which is already alleged out of the
myddest of Eusebius first book. De Demonstratione Euangelica, detecteth M.
Jewels falshod not obscurely: so the due consideration of that he writes upon
the same place of Malachie in the end of that book, does the same most
clearly, and puts away al mystes and clouds of any objection to the
contrary.

For having alleged the prophecy of Malachie to prove the New state of the new
Testament, in which prophecy God says, that in every place, Incense shall be
offered up unto his name, and Pure Sacrifice: to declare what he understands
by either of them, first he shows, what is the Pure Sacrifice that we offer,
next, what Incense we burn, and what perfume we make.

Concerning Incense, What Eusebius understands by Incense in Malachie.
he makes it to be Prayer, and not only Prayer, but also other spiritual
Sacrifices, namely the sweet fruit of our right opinion touching God, the
sacrificing of our selves unto God, the purity of our bodies and minds, the
worshipping of God with sincere affection, Ad finem lib. 1. De Demonst.
and with doctrines of truth. For these (says he) do please him more, then the
multitude of sacrifices made with blood, smoke, and unsweet savors.

Touching the Pure Sacrifice, Pure Sacrifice.
he says, that we sacrifice unto God the sacrifice of praise. And least he
should seem to mean none other but the mere spiritual sacrifice, that is
declared by words, he declares with very express and apt terms, what
Sacrifice specially he meant, saying. Lib. 1. De Demonst. in fine.
(...). 1. Sacrificamus Diuinum, and venerandum, and sacrosanctum Sacrificium.
Sacrificamus noue secundum Nouum Testamentum Sacrificium purum. We sacrifice
the Divine, and the reverend, and most holy Sacrifice. We sacrifice after a new
manner according to the new Testament the Pure Sacrifice.

In these words Eusebius, does as it were with pointing of his finger direct
us unto the most blessed Sacrifice of the Altar: and withal touches the
manner how it is offered. For what other sacrifice is there in the Church, which
is set forth with so special, and so high titles of honor, but the Sacrifice
of the body and blood of Christ? For this above al other is Divine, as that
wherein Christ, God and man, but as man, unto God is offered. This chiefly is
reverend and honorable, and most worthily to be accounted holy, wherein is
contained, Sanctum sanctorum, the holiest of al holy.

As for the manner of sacrificing, what is that we offer up now in the Church
of God, after a new manner, and according unto the new Testament, but the
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, which Priests under Christ after
the order of Melchisedech offer up unto God, under the forms of Bread and
Wine? This new manner of offering, Christ taught his Apostles, the Apostles
delivered it unto the Church, to whom, after that he had taken bread into his
hands, given thanks, broken, and blessed, saying, Luke. 22.
this is my body, and likewise the cup, saying also, this is my blood, he
gave that he professed to be his body and blood, and commanding them, and in
them their successors, to do the same in remembrance of him, he taught (as S.
Irenaeas says) the new Oblation of the new Testament. Irenaeus. lib. 4.
capite. 32.


Let it be remembered now and considered, how many properties are attributed
unto this Sacrifice, that Malachie speaks of, partly by the other old
learned Fathers, but specially by S. Hierome, and Eusebius, whom M. Jewel has
brought for him.

First, that it succeed all the sacrifices of the old Law: Hieron. in Malachi.
Cap. 1.


Secondly, that it be offered in every place:

Thirdly, that it be pure and clean:

Fourthly, that it be done in the Ceremonies of the Christians:

Fifthly, (to come to Eusebius) that it be Divine, Eusebius. de Demonst. lib. 1.
reverend, and most Holy:

Sixthly, that it be offered after a new manner:

Seventhly, that it be offered according unto the Mysteries of the new
Testament:

Eighthly (that I may add certain properties out of Eusebius fifth book De
Demonstratione) that it be done according unto the rules, rites, and ordinances
of the Church:

Nienthly, (...)
that Christ does perform it after the form and manner of Melchisedech yet to
this day amon gest men by his ministers:

Tenthly, that it be such, as was first done by our Lord and Savior him self,
and afterward by Priests that (...)
proceed from out of him:

Eleuenthly, that the things which be offered contained under the forms of
bread and wine used in this Sacrifice, Lib. 1 De Demonst.
be (as Eusebius says) (...), that is to say, the very and true things, and
the principal paternes of the Images: by which word he means the Sacrifices
of Moses Law, which were Images in respect of this truth:

Twelfthly, (...)
that they be the things, whereof being then to come, Melchisech long before
used the Images, as Eusebius speaks, which Images were Bread and Wine,
wherewith (as he says) he blessed Abraham. S. Cyprian calls this, Genesis 14.
Cyprian. lib. 2. epistol. 3.
veritatem praefiguratae Imaginis, the truth of the Image, that went before in
figure.

Now let M. Jewel name, if he can, what sacrifice is that which we offer up
after a new manner according unto the new Testament, and has al these
conditions and properties. And if he have none to name besides the blessed
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, whereof we speak, as we are
assured he has none: then I wish his conscience would overcome shame, lead him
to recant, and consider of the false doctrine, whereby he enuegleth the people
of God, making them to believe, that this Sacrifice is to be understood only
of Prayer, as he him self takes Prayer: and that there is no such external
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ at al. This much I think to be
yenough for answer unto his.3. Division.

The.4. Division.
The Answer.
FOr, whereas the holy Evangelists report, that Christ at his last Supper
took Bread, gave thanks, Words of Oblatio^, without Terms of Oblatio^.
brake it, and said, This is my body, which is given for you: Again, this is
my Blood, which is sheadde for you in remission of sins: By these words
being words of Sacrificing and offering, they show, and set forth an Oblatio^
in Act, and deed, though the term it self of Oblation, or Sacrifice be not
expressed. Albeit to some of excellent knowledge, Datur, here sounds no
less, then offertur, or immolatur, that is to say, is offered, or Sacrificed,
specially the addition, pro vobis, withal considered. For if Christ said
truly (as he is truth it self, 1. Pet. 2.
and guile was never found in his mouth) then was his body presently given,
and for us given, at the time he spoke the words, that is, at his Supper. For
he said datur, is given, not dabitur, shall be given. And likewise was his Blood
sheadde in remission of sins, at the time of that Supper: for the text has
funditur, is sheadde. But the giving of his Body for us, and the sheadding of
his Blood in remission of sins, is an Oblation of the same: Ergo Christ
offered his body and blood at the Supper. And thus datur, signifies here as
much, as offertur.

Now this being true, that our Lord offered him self unto his Father at his
last Supper, having given commandment to his Apostles to do the same, yt he
there did, whom then he ordained Priests of the new Testament, saying, Do
this in my remembrance, as Clement does plainly show Lib. 8. Apostol.
Co^stitut. cap. vltimo: the same charge perteining no less to the Priests,
that be now the successors of the Apostles in this behalf, then to the
Apostles them selves: it does right well appear, how so ever M. Iuel assures
him self of the contrary, and what so ever the Devil has wrought, and by his
Ministers taught against the Sacrifice of the Mass, that Priests have
authority to offer up Christ unto his Father.

Jewel.
Here M. Harding begins to scanne his Tenses, to rip up Syllables, and to
hunte for Letters: And in the end builds up the highest Castle of his
Religion upon a gheasse. I marvel, that so learned a man vvoulde either use so
unlearned arguments: or, having such stoare of Authorities, as he pretends,
would ever make so simple choice.

He says, These words, Is Given, Is Shead, be words of Sacrificing, though
the Term it self of Oblation and Sacrifice, be not expressed. Here M. Harding,
besides that he has imagined a strange Construction of his own, that never
any learned man knevve before, and so straggleth alone, and svvarueth from all the Old Fathers, includes also a repugnance, and Contradiction against him
self. For, whereas words, and terms sound both one thing, the one being
mere English, the other borovved of the Latin, M. Harding says, Christ in
the Institution of his Supper, used the Words of Sacrificing, and yet
expressed not the Terms of Sacrificinge. Such Privilege these men have,
with shifte of terms to beguile the world. For if Christ used the words
of Sacrificing, how can M. Harding say, He used not the Terms of Sacrificing?
and if he used not the Terms (words, and Terms being one thing) how can he
say, He used the words?

Harding.
Little regarding what M. Jewel says in the lying and scoffing entry, that he
makes unto his Reply in this Division, The chief points of M. Jewels Reply
in the 4. Division.
I will first briefly note unto thee (good Reader) the points, wherein the
weight of his whole tale stands. That done, I will answer to them in such
order, as they shall be proponed. First, he would prove, that my words include
a repugnance Secondly, he charge me with controlling the Old Thirdly, he
would a contradiction to seem to be employed Fourthly, he burtheneth me with the
corruption and Fifthly and lastly, he avouches that Christ by these Luc. 22.
Do ye this in my remembrance, made not the Apostles Priests, nor gave them,
nor their Successors, authority thereby to consecrate and offer up in
Sacrifice his Body and Blood: but that what so ever was by these words
commanded to be done, it perteined unto the whole people, as well as unto the
Apostles. So he denies utterly the singular and external Sacrifice of the
Church, confounds the order of the Mysteries, and refers al to eating of
bread, and drinking of wine, in remembrance of Christ.


These be the points he treateh of in this Division, whereby his intent and
endeavor is, to reprove my Answer unto his Challenge. But with how substantial
and piththy reasons, or authorities he performs it, when they shall be examined
and disclosed, it will appear.

Touching the first, the matter is sone answered. Lies make no proof. This is
your common grace M. Jewel, M. Jewels custom.
for your advantage in one place, to make me say less then I do, in an other
place, more then I do, in every place other ^yse then I do. Why do you here
by false abbridging of my words, attribute that unto two verbes, Is given,
and, Is shed, which I ascribe unto the whole sentence?

In my Answer. fol. 165. b
Loathe I am to fyl up the paper with repeating that I said before: but your
impudency drives me unto it. Read the place again. There (as you know) I
say thus. Luc. 22.
Whereas the holy Evangelists report, that Christ at his last supper took
Bread, gave thanks, brake it, and said, This is my body, which is given for
you: Again, this is my blood, which is shed for you in remission of synnes^
By these words, being words of sacrificing and offering, they show and set
forth an Oblation in act and deed, though the term it self of Oblation or
Sacrifice be not expressed. Use as much pryieng as you can, in these words
where find you the Contradiction?

M. Ievvel ^aineth a lie upon his adversary, and therevpo^ desca^^eth.
I grant you, that words and terms, sound both one thing. But where said I,
that Christ in the Institution of his supper, used the words of sacrificing,
and yet expressed not the terms of sacrificing? For thus you make me to
speak, and thereupon you dally at your pleasure, and grounding your self upon
a lie, you seem to conclude absurdity against me, as though I had said, that
Christ used the words of sacrificing, and yet had denied that he used the
terms of sacrificing. Which had been very vain, and fond, words, and terms,
being one thing. Now the truth is, I said not the one, ne denied not the other.
Here one of us both must needs be found a liar. If it be not you, tell all the
world for clearing of your self, and for saving your Ministerships honesty,
where I say, that Christ used not the terms of sacrificing.

The words by which the Evangelists do describe what Christ did at his last
supper, do importe and implie the signification of sacrificing and offering.
Christ say they, took bread into his hands, gave thanks, brake it, and said,
This is my body, which is given for you. Again, This is my blood, which is
shed for you in remission of sins. Because these words do report and set
forth an oblation in act and deed: therefore I said, and might well so say,
they were words of sacrificing and offering. Yet in all this description, there
is not found this express term, Sacrifice, or Oblation. I referred me to the
Eua^gelistes description, and you refer al to the words of Christ.

If you mark my words well, you shall find therein reported, not only words,
but also an act of Christ, and by the Evangelists, who declare the whole, an
oblation showed and set forth in act and deed, this very term it self of
Oblatio^, or Sacrifice, not expressed, and this to be showed and set forth
(whereby I mean the Gospel written) not by Christ, but by the Eua^gelistes.
Again. whereas I said of the words of the Gospel, that they were words of
sacrificing and offering, M. Jewel falsifieth the words of the Answer.
and that the term it self Oblation, or Sacrifice, was not expressed: to make
my saying seem more absurd you falsify my saying, reporting me, to have
spoken of the terms of sacrificing, as though I had acknowledged the words of
sacrificing, and denied the terms of sacrificing.

But sir, what mean you? Has the long study of Rhetorique, driven out of
your head the remembrance of Logique? Have you quite forgoten the old
Distinction of implicit, and explicit, so much tossed in our Sophismes, when
we were young Sophisters at Oxforde? Things implied, though not uttered red in
express terms.
Remember you not that a thing may be employed in words, albeit the very terms
signifying that thing, be not expressed? As for example, where it is written in
the Psalm, Dixit Dominus Domino meo, sede a dextris meis: Our Lord (the
Father) said to my Lord (the Son) sit at my right hand, Psalm. 109.
is not the Omnipotency of God the Son, and his Equality with the Father in
these words signified, though the term it self of imnipotencie, or
equality, be not expressed?

It is written of king Saules wicked and miserable end, ^. Reg. 31.
Arripuit Saul galdium suum, and irruit super eum: Saul caught his own sword,
and ran upon it: does not the Scripture by those words show, and set forth
his murdering and kylling of him self, though the term it self of
murdering, or killing be not expressly uttered?

Likewise the Scripture signifies with very plain words the Aduoutrie that
David committed with Bethsabee, 2. Reg. 11.
and his murdering of Vrias her husband: and yet in what place these acts be
described, there is not at al expressed, the term of Aduoutrie, nor of Murder.

In the whole story of Christ's passion written by the Evangelists, it is not
with any express term of killing said, that the Jews or Soldiers killed
him. Yet I trow ye will not deny, but that in words it is implied. Actor. 2.
If you deny it, S. Peter shall control you, who said to the Jews, Hunc
interemistis, this man ye have killed. Actor. 7.
S. Steven also, who said unto them, cuius vos nunc proditores and homicidae
fuistis, ye have now ben the traitors and murderers of Jesus.

But what need we to use so many examples in a matter, that may be declared by
infinite examples? Right so (to be shorre) the words which the Evangelists,
No co^t^adictio^ ^roued by M. Ievvel to be in the Answer.
and S. Paul use in the Description of the Institution of the blessed
Sacrament at Christ's last supper, be words implying and importing a
Sacrifice, al be it this term it self of Oblation, or Sacrifice, be not
expressed. And who so ever affirms him that so says, to include a
Contradiction: is either a wrangler hunting for terms, not regarding the thing
employed, or very ignorant, not knowing the nature of a Contradiction.

But besides all this, The reproach of straggling alone an^vvered.
as M. Jewel has found in my words a Contradiction, where none is, so does
he also with like truth, and like proof, charge me with (as it pleases him to
term it) straggling alone, and swaruing from all the old Fathers, by a strange
construction of mine own, for that I have so construed the words used in the
Scripture to declare the Institution of the Eucharist, as to include and implie
a Sacrifice. For verily I have learned this construction of the old learned
Fathers, and have not been so presumptuous, as in so weighty a matter to trust
the devise of mine own head. Which Fathers do not only in equivalent, but in
express terms declare, that Christ offered a Sacrifice at his last supper.

Hesychius an old Father makes mention of three sundry Sacrifices, Three
sacrifices offered by Christian Hesychius in Leuit. lib. 2. cap. 8
that Christ offered: two at his Maundie, and the third upon the Cross. His
words be plain. Prius figur atam Ouem coenans cum Apostolis, postea suum
obtulit Sacrificium: and deinde sicut ouem seipsum occidit. That Christ
sacrificed hi^ self at his last supper
Christ supping with his Apostles, first offered the figurative Lamb,
afterward he offered his own Sacrifice: and then after that he killed him
self (that is to say, delivered up him self to be killed) like a Lamb.

S. Cyprian one of the most ancient Fathers of the Church, speaking of the
Figure of Melchisedech, gives most just occasion of this construction,
Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 3.
where he says, Quam rem perficiens and adimplens Dominus, panem and calicem
mixtum vino obtulit, and qui est plenitudo, Veritatem praefiguratae Imaginis
adimpleuit. Which thing our Lord perfourming and fulfylling (he means the
perfourmance of that which Melchisedeks Sacrifice did foresignifie) offered
bread, and the cup mingled with wine, and he who is the fullness, did fulfill
the Truth of the forefigured Image.

Theophylacte although not so old as the others, yet a schoolemaister old
yenough to teach a Christian man this construction, expounding the later words
of the Institution of the Sacrament, and speaking of the Sacrifice, says:
Theophylactus in Matt. 26.
Sicut Vetus Testamentum immolationem habebat and sanguinem, ita Nouum
Testamentum sanguinem habet ac immolatione^. Like as the Old Testament had
sacrifice and blood: even so the New Testament has blood and Sacrifice.
Here is to be considered, that if the wine by the almighty power of the Word be
not converted into the blood of Christ, but remain still wine, as before
consecration, which doctrine our Caluinistes teach, and the Lutherans impugn:
then will not this comparison of Theophylacte hold, neither is it true at al,
that now the New Testament has blood.

Euthymius also a Father of the Greek Church, Euthym. in Matt.
construed the same words of Christ in like sense, saying, Sicut Vetus
Testamentum hostias and sanguinem habebat, ita sane and. Nouum, Corpus
videlicet and sanguine^ Domini. Non dixit autem, haec sunt signa corporis mei,
and sanguinis mei, sed haec sunt corpus meum, and sanguis meus. As the Old
Testament had sacrifices and blood, even so truly has the New Testament also,
to wit, the Body and Blood of our Lord. He said not, these be the signs of my
body, and of my blood, but these be my Body, and my Blood.

These Fathers, and sundry others, whose ^ayinges here to rehearse I omit that I
be not tedious, auouching so plainly, that a Sacrifice was offered by Christ
at his Maundie: I marvel at the impudency of M. Jewel, It is M. Jew. that in
deed straggleth alone.
who solacing him self with the term of straggling alone, reports me in
this point to swerve from all the old Fathers, as though I had devised a new
construction, that any learned man never knew before. Verily in deniyng this
Sacrifice, he shows him self to be departed from Christ's fold the Church,
and like a lost sheep to straggle alone, and to wander from the saved flock.
Our Lord yet turn his heart, and keep him from the wolves and roaring Lion,
that never cease going about, 1. Pet. 5.
and seking whom he may devour.

Jewel.
Verify if this Latin word, Dare, be, Sacrificare: and, Geuinge, be
Sacrificinge, then, where as S. Paul ^aithe, If thine enemy be thirsty,
Give him drink: Roman. 15
And where as Judas says, What will ye Give me, Matt. 26. Matt. 25.
and I will deliver him unto you: And, where as the foolish Virgins say, Give
us part of your Oil etc. In every of these, and such other like places, by
this Nevve Divinity, M. Harding vvil be hable to find a Sacrifice.

Harding.
Forth you go, rather ieasting and scoffing, then proving ought, or disprouing.
If Dare, be Sacrificare, and giving be sacrificing, say you: then where so ever
in the Scriptures the word Dare, which signifies to give, is found, there
must be concluded a Sacrifice. And so sacrifice must be done unto Judas,
because he said, Quid vultis mihi dare, Matt. 26.
What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?

M. Ievvel fondly argues from the special to the general affirmatively.
The sadness of this matter M. Jewel, bears not well your lightness. Praised
be God, that his enemies wits find so little weight of reason, or learning,
in impugning his truth. You know, that I make not giving, to be sacrificing,
nor that Dare should always signify sacrificare. Which if it be not
presupposed, your Argument is peevish. For what if Datur, in the words of
Christ's Institution of the Sacrament (for thereto only my saying is
restrained) do found to some learned men, as much as offertur, specially in
that place, where the addition of these two words, pro vobis, for you, is
withal to be considered: will it thereof follow, that every where else, Dare, be
sacrificare, and that giving be sacrificing in general?

By this your Logique it will follow, that because this word calix, is taken
sometimes for passion, and tribulation, as where Christ said, Matt. 26.
transeat a me calix iste, let this cup pass from me, Luc. 22.
and likewise in other places: where it is written of Christ being at his last
supper, accipiens Calicem gratias egit, John. 18.
He took the Cup, and gave thanks, it must be interpreted, Christ took his
passion, and gave thanks: whereby it is concluded, that he suffered his
passion at his supper in the evening, and not on the morrow, unless it be said,
that he suffered his passion twice. By this it is made clear, how fondly you
reason.

How be it I judge, if you were well examined, your self would not deny, but
that Dare, Dare, used for offerre.
may signify offerre, where the circumstance of the place reports Christ to
give his body, or him self for us, or for our sins, specially when being
spoken of Christ, it is put with this Proposition pro. This if you deny, S.
Paul shall convince you, writing to the Galathians, Galat. 1.
Gratia vobis and pax a Deo Patre nostro, and Domino Jesus Christo, qui dedit
semet ipsum pro peccatis nostris, vt eriperet nos de praesenti seculo nequam.
Grace and peace be to you from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who
gave him self for our sins, to deliver us from this present wicked world.
Now if dare, be offerre in this place, why may it not signify the same in the
words of the Sacraments institution, where Christ also gave his body and
blood, not only unto us, to be a food, which no man denies: but also for us,
to be a Sacrifice, which our new Gospellers deny, and I now have proved?

Jewel.
Yet, says he, Certain men of excellent knowledge have thus expounded it.
It seems very strange, that these so notable men of excellent knowledge
should have no names. Perhaps he means Tapper of Louaine, or Gropper of
Colaine, of whom he has borovved the whole substance vvelneare of all this
Article. How be it, the demand was of the Ancient Doctors of the Church:
not of any of these, or other such petite Fathers.

Harding.
I said not, as you report me, that certain men of excellent knowledge have
thus expounded it, but that to some such men, Datur, here sounds nolesse then
offertur, specially in consideration of the addition, pro vobis. And therein I
said truly. And though I named them not, yet was there no cause, why you should
make so strange a matter of it, as though worthy men had no names. Because some
of them be yet living, I thought it better not to name them. If I had mea^t
Tapper of Louaine, Tapper, Gropper.
as I did not, or Gropper of Coulen: I had meant men in deed well known, and
commended unto the world, both for excellent learning, and singul^r virtue.
How so ever it please you in contempt to call them petite Fathers.

These, or others like them, if I follow, and help my self in this, or any
other question, with their or with any other men's knowledge: what skilleth
that, so that I maintain nothing but the truth? If you thought to abase mine
estimation with the report of helping my self with other men's labors, you
are deceived, the thing is lawful and commendable. Neither ought that to grieve
me being objected by you, who, as it is well known, have taken the parcels of
the false wares pack^ together in your Reply, out of other men's shoppes, I
mean the Lutherans, and Caluinistes of our age, who have impugned the
Catholic Religion, fithens Luther began to write against the Church.

Jewel.
But Christ says in the Present Tense: This is my Body, That is Given: not
in the Future Tense, That shall be Given. And likewise, This is my Blood, That
Presently is shead: not in the Future Tense, That shall be Shead. Therefore
Christ sacrificed his Body, and shead his blood presently at the Supper.

Here M. Harding is driven to control the old Common Translation of the new
testament, not only, that bears the name of S. Hierome, and has been evermore
generally received in the Church, and is allowed by the Council of Tridente,
but also, that is still used, and continued in his own Mass Book. Chryso. in
1. Corin. 1^ Origin. in Matthaeu^. tract. 35.
I grant, In the Greek it is written, Datur, Is Given: not Dabitur, shall be
Given. But here the Present Tense, according to the Common Phrase of the
Scriptures, is used for the Future Chrysostom reads it thus, Dabitur, shall be
Given: not Datur, Is given. Origin likewise reads, not, Effunditur, Is Shead
but, Effundetur, Shall Be Shead. And in this sort Chrysostom also expounds it:
Effundetur pro multis. Hoc dicens, ostendit, quod Passio eius Mysterium Salutis
humanae per quod etiam Discipulos consolatur. Shall Be shead for many. Thus
saying, he shows, that his Passion is the Mystery of the Salvation of
mankind: and by the same he comfort his Disciples. Chrysostom. in Caten^.
Again he says. De Passione, and Cruce sua loquebatur. Christ ( uttering the
words of the Sacrament) spoke of his Passion, and of his Cross.

Harding.
Touching that I noted Christ's words concerning his body and blood, to be
spoken in the present Tense, Datur, is given, and funditur, is shed: there was
no just cause, The old text by me not controlled, as M. Ievvel says.
why you should say, that I am driven to control the Old common Translation of
the new testament. Who so ever co^trolleth any thing, finds fault with the
same. As for the Old Translation of that place, I take not upon me to find
fault with it. It stands not with the humility and modesty of such as be
Catholic, to control that Translation, which has been corrected by S. Hierom
(as it is believed) so generally received in the Church, and also well allowed by
sundry Councels. We leave that pride, and temeritie unto the sauciness of them
of your side: who as well in Latin, as in their vulgar tongues, have presumed
of their own heads, to set forth very many new Translations, not one wholly
agreeing with an other. And yet each one must boldly and stoutely be avouched
to be Gods word.

As for my self, I do gladly embrace and follow the old common Translation,
confessing the sense and meaof the verbes in the future tense to be true
according to the Latin text. Never the less perceiving that all the Greeks,
in whose tongue the greatest part of the new Testament was first written, and
that many of the Latins, and their books, as S. Ambrose, Ambros. in 11. cap.
1. ^d Corint. Beda. In Luc. cap. 22.
and S. Bid, and the new Testament of Isidorus Clarius printed in Venis, with
others, do read those verbes datur, frangitur, effunditur, is given, is
broken, is shed, in the present tense, and that not without cause and reason: I
thought good thereon to ground an Argument for my purpose, and to take the
advantage of that text, without controlment of the other.

Chrysostom belied by M. Ievvel. Chryso. in 1. Corin. 1^
Chrysostom reads Dabitur, shall be given, say you, not datur, is given. For
truths sake, I must streine nourture, and tell you truly, you say false of
Saint Chrysostom. The Latin Chrysostom has in two places, tradetur, shall be
delivered: in both it is corrected in the Margent, where, for traditur, is
noted, frangitur, and in both those places the Greek has (...), which being
spoken of our Lords Body, is as much to say, as, broken, in the present tense.
As for your Dabitur, shall be given, it is of your own forging: the word is
not in S. Chrysostom in the place by you coted. And the old common text it
self in S. Luke, Luc. 22.
has datur, is given, and not dabitur, shall be given.

And as the Latin translatour has made S. Chrysostom to speak otherwise in
Latin, then he speaks in Greek, putting tradetur, for frangitur: even so
has he done, who so ever translated Origin, whom you allege, placing
effundetur, shall be shed, in the future tense, for effunditur, is shed, in the
present tense. Except therefore you can show us the Greek Origin, your Latin
Origin is to prove your future tense of that verb, of as small authority, as
the Latin Chrysostom is now showed to be, for proof of your false reported,
Reasons, why Origin seems to be belyed by M. Ievvel. Origin. in Matthew. tract.
35.
Dabitur.

How be it that Origin in his own tongue would say effunditur, and not
effundetur, it may partly be gathe^red by that follows in him a few lines
after the place, which you have alleged. For there thus we read in the present
Tence. Hic est Sanguis meus noui Testamenti, qui and bibitur, et effunditur,
etc. This is my blood of the new Testament, which both is droonke, and is
shed. But whereas Origin treats upon S. Matthew, how is it to be thought, that
he being a Greek writer, would recite the text of the Evangelist otherwise,
then he found it in the Greek, Matt. 26.
where it is not read effundetur, in the future tense, Marc. 14.
as you would have it, but, (...), quod effunditur, which is shed, by a
participle of the present tense?

As for that you bring out of Catena aurea of S. Thomas, S. Thomas in Catena,
falsified by M. Ievvel.
you have fowly falsified it. For neither has S. Chrysostom, nor S. Thomas,
as you rehearse the words. For these words, effundetur pro multis, be not
placed immediately before this sentence, Hoc autem dicens etc. Which S. Thomas
allegeth as out of an Homily of S. Chrysostom: For a saying of S. Remigius,
and certain other words, are put between, so that the same sentence is to be
referred to that went before, pro multis, or, in remissionem peccatorum.

S. Thomas again falsified by M. Jew.
Your other place also alleged out of Catena, contains the like falshod. For
whereas by your own forged parenthesis (uttering these words of the
Sacrament) you would restrain S. Chrysostomes words to the mention of the
Sacrament, which nevertheless in a right sense may be granted: thereby
craftily ye would bereue the blessed Sacrament altogether of the truth of
Christ's body and blood. Now S. Thomas in Catena allegeth S. Chrysostom thus.
In Catena in 26. cap. Matt.
Quia vero de passione and cruce eis locutus erat, consequenter eum qui de
Resurrectione est sermonem inducit, dicens, Dico autem vobis, non bibam ammodo
etc. Because he had spoken unto them of his Passion and Cross, ther^vpon he
brings in talk of his Resurrection, saying, I tell you, I will not drink
henceforth, etc. Now the talk that Christ had with his disciples of his
passion and Cross, appears other where is at his supper, then in the words of
the Sacrament. Matthew. 26
For there he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
Again, The son of man goes, as it is written of him, etc. Item, I have very
much desired to eat this Passover with you^ before that I suffer my passion.
Antequa^ patiar. Luc. 22.
In consideration of these, and other the like words spoken by Christ at his
last supper, and not only or chiefly of the words of the Sacrament, S.
Chrysostom says, M. Jewels falshod deprehended.
as he is alleged in Catena, that Christ had spoken of his passion and Cross.
And thus your falshod M. Jewel is disclosed on every side, so much, that in
manner your whole process against this Article hitherto, is found to be none
other but a continual lie.

But Sir, Real presence, and Sacrifice avouched by Saint Chrysostom, Dissembled
by M. Jew.
when you pryed so much in that Homily of S. Chrysostom, to find your forged
word, Dabitur, which is not in him to be found: what eyes had you, that you
saw not in him so plain, and so express mention, both of the real Presence,
and of the Sacrifice? Else if you saw it, why do you dissemble it? Yea, why do
you deny it?

There demanding of him self, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 11. Homil. 27.
wherefore he that eats this bread, and drinks the cup of our Lord
unworthily, shall be gilty of the body, and blood of our Lord: does he not
answer, because he has shed the blood, and so has showed the thing to be a
slaughter, and not only a Sacrifice? (...).
Does he not compare him that does communicate unworthily, unto the
tormentours, who, when they pearsed the body of Christ, did not pearse it to
the intent to drink, but to shed his blood? Now if there be no real blood at
al in the dredful Mysteries, but Symbolical and tokening wine only: what reason
were it so expressly to charge the unworthy receiver with the heinous crime of
shedding Christ's blood? Were your Sacramentarie doctrine true, the unworthy
communicant deserves otherwise to be reprehended, he can not truly be called a
shedder of Christ's blood. For where no blood is, there can not blood be shed
pardy.

Yet here to avoid the wicked carping of a Sacramentarie, In what sense is
slaughter committed by the unworthy receiuer^
where S. Chrysostom terms the unworthy receiving of Christ's blood, (...)
that is to say, slaughter, likewise spilling and shedding of his blood: we
know that it is not a slaughter in deed concerning Christ's part, for
Christ can no more be slain, and being now risen from the dead, Romans 6.
he dies no more, deah shall no more have maisterie over him: as S. Paul
says. But it is slaughter on the unworthy receivers part, because by his
unworthy receiving he does as it were shed and spille for so much as in him
lies, and cast away the blood of Christ. Which thing though he do it not
visibly, yet does he it truly not by sensible way of doing, but because
wickedly he presumes to abuse that, which is the very substance of the
precious blood, by virtue of the word of consecration made really present.

Sacrifice avouched by Saint Chrysostom.
To be short, verily in that.27. Homily upon the first epistle to the
Corinthians, S. Chrysostom calls the body of Christ present by consecration,
a Sacrifice sundry times, and in the.28. Homily that follows, he names it,
(...), illud puru^ Sacrificium, that pure Sacrifice, with the pronoune (...)
(which imports a special notification) signifying it to be Singular above
other Sacrifices.

Touching the Present Te^se, in which the words of the Institution of the
Sacrament be expressed, whereof I gathered an Argument for the Sacrifice at the
Supper: for answer thereto M. Jewel says, that it is the common Phrase of the
Scriptures, to use the present Te^se for the future. But this confuse and
uncertain answer, puts not away the force of my Argument. For what means
he? That the present Tense be taken for the Future, is it common to the whole
Scriptures, and to every part, or to some parts only? He will not affirm it
of the whole, I trow. For so he should be gilty of denying Christ to be come,
and of many other great untruths, and absurdities. So, whereas the voice of
God the Father said of Christ, Matthew. 3. and. 17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: we should take it, as
though God had mea^t, this is he that is not yet my son, but, that shall be my
son. And where Christ said to the Samaritane woman, Joan. 4.
I am Messiah or Christ, even I that speak with thee: that should we expound
of the time to come, that he shall be Messiah. Which doctrine makes a right way
for Antichrist, who is to come.

If he sooth his saying of some part of the Scriptures, the same I grant
also, specially of the old Testament, where prophecies are uttered of things
to come in the new Testament. But it had been his part to prove (unless his
profession be to prove nothing, and to stand only in denials) that in the
Institution of the Sacrament the Present Tense stands for the future, and
that so, as the thing signified may not by any convenient sense be verified in
the Present Tense. For else if it might, how much better were it to expound it
of both Tenses, then of one only, that Christ's saying might thoroughly, and
on every side appear true? And if it may appear true for the Present Tense,
then so far forth stands my reason in force, and is not yet repelled.

Whereas then I said in my Answer, That Christ gave his body for us, and shed
his blood at the supper, affirmed by certain Fathers.
that Christ gave his body for us, and shed his blood at his supper, which
again I affirm to be true in a right sense: that I said not the same
altogether without the authority of certain old and learned Fathers, and
therefore neither strangely, nor alone, as M. Jewel charge me: by that which
here follows, it shall appear. I report me to Gregory Nyssen S. Basils
brother, and to Theophylacte.

Gregor. Nyss. De Resurrectione Christi, Oration. 1.
Gregory Nyssen says thus. Pro ineffabili arcanoque, and qui ab hominibus
cerni nequit, sacrificij modo, sua dispositione and administratione praeoccupat
impetum violentum, ac sese Oblationem ac victimam offert pro nobis, Sacerdos
simul and Agnus Dei, qui tollit peccatum mundi. Quando hoc accidit? Quum suum
corpus ad comedendum, and sanguinem suum familiaribus ad bibendum praebuit.
Cuilibet enim hoc perspicuum est, quod oue vesci homo non possit, nisi mactatio
comestionem praecesserit. Qui igitur dedit discipulis suis corpus suum ad
comedendum, aperte demonstrat, iam perfectam and absolutam factam esse
immolationem. etc.

Christ after a manner of sacrifice, that is unspeakable, secret, and such as
can not be seen of men, by his own disposition and administration preuenteth
the violent assault (that afterward was made) and offers him self an
Oblation and Sacrifice for us, Christ at the supper, both Priest, and La^be.
being the Priest, and also the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the
world. When was this done? At what time he gave unto them of his householde
his body to be eaten, and his blood to be droonke. For to every one this is a
clear matter, that a man may not eat of the Lamb, except killing go before
the eating. Whereas then he gave unto his disciples his body to eat, he
shows evidently, that a perfect and absolute immolation (or Sacrifice) was
now made.

What can M. Jewel require more? This learned Father says, that Christ
prevented the violence and fury of the Jews, meaning that he did unto him
self that at the Supper, which was done on the morrow with the violence of them
that crucified him. Whereby nevertheless he understands the mystical Oblation
of him self, not the manner of his blouddy Oblation. For he confesses it to
be secret, invisible, and unspeakable. And that no man should doubt of this
Sacrifice, he ascribes unto him both the office of a Priest, and also of the
Lamb. As a Priest, he sacrificed, as the Lamb, he was sacrificed.

For the better understanding of this point, the Sacrifice at the Supper, and
that on the morrow upon the Cross, The sacrifice of the supper, and the
sacrifice of the Cross, one, and diverse, in diverse respects.
may truly be accounted and named one Sacrifice, and also diverse Sacrifices.
Neither is this Sophistry good Reader, as these new Gospellers will bear thee
in hand: by this true distinction, sophistical objections and wranglings of
the Gospellers may reasonably be answered. How then is it one, how be they
diverse? Learn it once, and be no more contentious, as they be, who having
heard it so oftentimes by the Catholics told them, will yet seem not to
understand it.

Before I answer to this question, Sacrifice, taken two ways.
this much is necessarily to be declared, that the name of Sacrifice, is wont
to be taken sometime for the thing that is offered unto God, sometime for the
action it self of sacrificing. Now then it is one Sacrifice in respect of the
thing offered and sacrificed, which is the body and blood of Christ. For that
is one and the self same in both, in the Supper, and upon the Cross. The
Action is of two manners, bloody, and unbloody. These Sacrifices be diverse in
respect of the manner of the Action and of the offering. For in the Supper it
was unbloody, and upon the Cross, it was bloody.

Concerning the former Sacrifice, in deed al depends of the real presence,
that is to say, upon the credit of Christ's word, whereby his body and
blood is both professed to be present, and is made really present. Which if it
were truly believed, al contention about the Sacrifice were sone ended. And yet
has that point of late been learnedly, and substantially entreated by D.
Heskins, and by D. Saunder, who has clearly answered, and refuted the
objections, what so ever Master Jewel in his Reply was hable to bring to the
contrary. Tertull. In praescript.
But what shall we say? These men's reasons may sone be answered, their
pertinacie can never be answered. Of such Tertullian says, overcome they may
be, persuaded they can not be.

Theophylact. in Matt. capit^. 28.
Now to come unto Theophylacte. His words be these, according to the Greek.
Quinta feria fecit Dominus coenam, and Discipulis dixit, Accipite, and comedite
Corpus meum. Itaque quia potestatem ex se habebat ponendi anima^ suam,
manifestum est, quod ex eo tempore immolauerit seipsum, quando tradidit
discipulissuis corpus suum. Nemo enim comedit aliquid, nisi prius fuerit
immolatum. Upon the fifth day our Lord made his Supper, and said unto his
Disciples, take ye, and eat my body. So that because he had power of him self
to put of his soul, it is manifest that from that time he sacrificed him
self, when he delivered his body unto his Disciples. For no man does eat any
thing (at the sole^nitie of a sacrifice, so he means) which is not sacrificed
before.

What can be uttered in plainer terms, then that we find in these two Fathers?
The one says, that Christ offered him self, when he gave his body and blood
unto his Disciples. The other, that he prevented the violence that was done
unto him on the morrow, and offered up him self an Oblation and Sacrifice,
performing the part both of a Priest, and of the Lamb. And least any man
should myssetake them, understanding it to have been done upon the Cross only:
with most express words they refer it unto the Supper. And so by their
doctrine be the verbes, Datur, fra^gitur, effunditur, is given, is broken, is
shed, verefied in the present Tense, and not only in the future Tense.

In these testimonies the cause, that both Nyssen, and Theophylacte gives, why
Christ offered his body, which he delivered unto his Disciples, is specially
to be noted: which is, because in the solemnity of Sacrifices, no man eats
that which is not before sacrificed. Wherein they allude unto the old manner
of Sacrifices, which always were offered up, before they were eaten. And so
the body and blood of our Savior Christ our true Paschal Lamb, was at his
Maundie, and now ought to be offered up, before it was then, or now is to be
eaten and drunk in the blessed Sacrament. Hesychius lib. 1. in Leuit. cap. 46.
Hesychius utters the like doctrine writing upon the book of Leuiticus.

Jewel.
To be short, if it be true, that Christ shead his blood at his Last Supper,
and that Verily, Really, and in deed, as M. Hardinge alone strangely
avouches, and no man else, I trovve, beside him, then can he no more say, The
same was an unbloody Sacrifice: And so must he yield up the strongest Tovver of
al his Hold. For if the Sacrifice, that Christ made at his Supper were
unbloody, how did Christ there shead his blood? If Christ as M. Harding says,
did there Shead his Blood, how can that Sacrifice be called Unbloody?

But to leave these fantasies, and vain shifts, Christ gave his Body to be
broken, and his Blood to be shead, not at his Last Supper, but only upon his
Cross, and no were else. There he bare our iniquities: there was he rent for
our Sins. Psalm. 53.
And in that only respect we receive his body, and embrace it, and have fruit
of it. In this respect S. Paul says, God forbid, Galat. 6.
I should rejoice in any thing, saving only in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Therefore, this new Article of the faith, of the real sacrificing, and
Sheadding of Christ's blood at the table, neither being true in it self, nor
hitherto by M. Harding any way proved, notvvithsta^ding the great Stoare, and
choice of his Authorities: for as much as Christ never gave, neither his
Apostles, nor any their successors Commission to do more in that behalf. then
he him self had done, To say, that any mortal man has power, and authority,
really, and in deed to Sacrifice the son of God, it is a manifest, and
wicked blasphemy: the great, and gross errors, vvherevvith the Devil, and
his Disciples in the time of his kingdom of darkness have deceived the
world, notvvithstanding.

Harding.
But here M. Jewel replieth, and would feign prove a contradiction to be
employed in this doctrine. I omit his falsifying of my Answer, affirming me to
say, that Christ did shed his blood at his last Supper verily, really, and in
deed (which I said not, though it may be so said in a right sense): and much
less meant I, as thereby his intent is to report unto the simple, to wit, an
external, and sensible shedding, which was done only at the time of his
Passion. That the matter might seem the more absurd and unreasonable, If (says
he) Christ's Sacrifice made at the Supper were unbloody, how then did he there
shed his blood? If he did shed his blood, how can that Sacrifice be called
unbloody?

Why Sir, will you needs have the Mysteries of this Singular and peerlesse
Sacrifice to be discussed by reason, and not to be conceived only by faith? Will
you require the mean of this Sacrifice to be set forth evidently unto you,
which is secret as Nyssen before mentioned says, invisible, and unspeakable?
S. Paul him self where he speaks of the Priesthood of Christ after the
order of Melchisedek, Heb. 5.
says he not, that thereof he has much to say, and that the things be hard to
expound? These howes and questions M. Jewel become Jews, Infidels, and
Heretics, much better then a true Christian man. Christ's blood was shed at
his Supper, so as it is now shed in the daily Sacrifice of the Altar: that is
to say, in a mystery, and in a Sacrament, by a mean to man invisible, and
unspeakable.

Because his blood is beneficial unto us to redemption, in that it was once
actually, externally, and with death drawn forth of his body: In consideration
thereof, where so ever that blood is by the almighty power of our Lords word
in the Sacrifice made and exhibited, we think it no absurdity, nor
inconvenience, to say, that his blood is shed in a mystery, and vnbloudily.
Whereby we mean, that not only his memory is celebrated, but also that the
effect of the bloody shedding of his blood, that is to say, the effect of his
death, is thereby applied unto us having faith, and being disposed, as we ought
to be, as if he were now hanging on the Cross, and presently bleeding before
our eyes. For to show this and that of the Cross, to be one and the self
Sacrifice, we offer him, says Theophylact, perinde ac si esset hoc tempore
immolatus, Theophylact. in cap. 10. ad Heb.
as if he were at this very time sacrificed. Again, hanc hostiam semper vt
praesentem offerimus: we offer up this host always, as if it were present,
says he, meaning the visible presence upon the Cross: for otherwise it is
present. And therefore it may truly be termed an unbloody shedding of blood,
the term of shedding being referred to the blood by the power of the word of
consecration made present, offered, presented, and verily exhibited, the term
unbloody, referred to the manner of offering and exhibiting it without any such
violence, as was done unto the person of Christ by the Soldiers, who with
thorns, nails, and spear, drew blood of him, when he hong on the Cross.

That no doubt remain, to speak so plainly as I can of this high Mystery,
thus it is. The blood of Christ (we confess) is the price of our Redemption,
in that it was once shed upon the Cross. That blood, and body whereof it
issued out, is the Host of our Salvation. That very blood is here made
present in the Sacrifice of the Altar by virtue of Christ's word, and is said
presently to be shed (which never the less we understand to be done in
mystery and in remembrance of that which was shed upon the Cross) because the
effect of that external shedding by this is applied unto us, as if it were now
in our sight offered and shed.

The unbloody shedding of blood.
This shedding may be, and is called unbloody, as the offering and the
Sacrificing of Christ, and as the death is called unbloody. For like as is the
Sacrifice, such is the Death. Where is bloody Sacrifice, there is bloody Death.
Where is the unbloody Sacrifice, there is the unbloody Death, and consequently
the mystical and unbloody Sheddding of blood.

But for better credit, and that it seem not strange, let us confirm this
point with some testimonies of Ancient Faters, where the like speeches are
uttered. S. Gregory says, Gregorius Dialog. 4. cap. 58. De consec. di. 2.
Quid sit.
Christus in seipso immortaliter viuens, iterum in hoc mysterio moritur^
Christ, who lives immortally in him self, in this Mystery dies again. S.
Augustine likewise. Semel immolatus est in semetipso Christus: and tamen
quotidie immolatur in Sacramento. Christ was sacrificed in him self once:
August. epist. 23. De Conse. did. 2. Semel. De Conse. did. 2. Iteratur.
and yet is he sacrificed daily in a Sacrament. Paschasius says in like
manner. Quotidie Christus mystice pro nobis immolatur, and Passio Christi in
Mysterio traditur etc. Christ is daily sacrificed for us mystically, and the
Passion of Christ is in a mystery delivered.

To be short, Eusebius Caesarienses, Cyrillus, S. Chrysostom, Theophylacte,
Euthymius, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and in manner all the other Fathers do call
this, Incruentam immolationem, the unbloody sacrificing, and unbloody Host. By
the which Christ to effect is so sacrificed for us, as to them who were
present, when he offered him self on the Cross, yet so, as this Sacrifice
take effect of that. And that there be truly and properly a Sacrifice, it is
yenough, that Christ's death be so now applied to remission of sin, as if he
him self now dyed.

In these former and the like sayings, the Fathers do set forth the way and
mean of this Sacrifice, of this Death, and consequently of this shedding of
Christ's blood: as they may seem to signify not obscurely their unableness
to express the same, terming it Sacrifice in a Sacrament, Death in a Mystery,
Sacrificing mystical. The which words, Sacrament, and Mystery, do not
importe a signification of absence of the thing reported to be sacrificed, to
be shed, and to dye: but the secret manner of sacrificing, shedding, and
dying. And because this oblation is not with shedding of blood, which blood
may presently be seen, but by application of the blood already shed: it is of
the ancient Fathers rightly called an unbloody Sacrifice.

S. Chrysostom joining Hostiam, an Host, and Incruentam, Chrysostom. in Psalm.
95.
Unbloody, together, could understand an unbloody shedding of blood in a
Mystery, and thought it not absurd. Yet nevertheless a man that stands well
in his own conceit, and skanneth al Divinity by Phrases, as M. Jewel does:
might find matter in it to utter a scoff or two, and demand of Chrysostom,
if it be an Host, how is it unbloody? If it be unbloody, how can it be an
Host, seeing that an Host has not been wont to be offered without
bloudshedding?

Likewise S. Gregory Nazianzen that great Divine, having respect unto the body
and blood of Christ offered by the Priests in the Sacrament, feared not to
set together (...), Gregor. Nazian. in Carminibus ad Episcopos.
sacrifices, and (...), unbloody, saying: (...), O ye Priests that offer up
unbloody Sacrifices! And to put al out of doubt, that he meant it of the
Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ: he adds further in the same
place: (...). O ye that bear the wrought work of Great GOD in your hands!
Whereby he means the true and real Body of Christ in the Sacrament.

Theophylacte also among other is very plain, where he says thus.
Theophylactus in 10. cap. ad Hebr.
Number and ipsi sine sanguine immolamus? Omnimo. Sed nunc reminiscimur mortis
Domini. Do we also sacrifice without blood? Yea verily. But now (in our
Sacrifice) we remember the death of our Lord. The Greek word, which
Theophylacte uses is such as properly signifies the killing of a living
thing. Here is a word alone for M. Jewel to utter his scoffing eloquence
upon. Do we kill? Then how without blood? If without blood, how then do we
kill? Thus the learned Fathers being persuaded, that through the almighty power
of Christ's words, his flesh and blood are really exhibited, and made
present in the Sacrament: thought it no absurdity in this singular Sacrifice,
to join those terms together, which in no truth could stand together in the
order and manner of offering the old sacrifices, or Christ's Sacrifice upon
the Cross.

If M. Jewel will here reply and say, that the joining of these vnagreeing
terms together is an Argument, that the Fathers meant not to auouche a true
and Real Sacrifice, but a figurative Sacrifice only: how can it not appear
most absurd, to think that, whereas they affirm Christ's Real flesh and
blood to be made present by virtue of his word, to the end it be the
Sacrifice of the new Testament, and likewise where as they teach this
Sacrifice and this host to be one with that of the Cross: they should mean
no true and Real Sacrifice, but only a Figurative Sacrifice?

And will thou understand Christian Reader, how the old Fathers of the Church
mean, where they report the Sacrifice of the Altar, to be one with the
Sacrifice of the Cross? In what sense the Fathers make the sacrifice of the
Altar, and of the Cross, one Sacrifice.
Verily they mean, as every where we teach, the Host, or the thing
sacrificed, to be one, and the very self same, upon the Altar, and upon the
Cross. For witness hereof hear S. Chrysostom. Having asked this question,
Quomodo vna est Hostia, and non multae? How is it one Host, and not many?
After a few words he says: Id ipsum semper offerimus. Nec nunc quidem alium
agnum, ^rastina alium, Chrysostom. homil. 17. in Epist. ad Heb.
sed semper eundem ipsum. Proinde vnum est hoc Sacrificium, hac ratione. We
offer up always the self same thing. Neither do we offer one Lamb to day,
an other to morrow, but always one the self same. Therefore this is but one
Sacrifice, by this reason, Hacratione.
or in consideration hereof, that is to say, because the thing which is
offered, is one. Christ is our high Bishop (there says he further) which has
offered up the host that cleanses us (of our sins) the same offer we now
also, which being then offered, can not be consumed. If we offer the same host
and sacrifice, that Christ offered, whereby we are made clean from our
sins, which is the sacrifice of the Cross: it follows, that this be a true
and real sacrifice (in respect of the thing sacrificed) as that was. By this
M. Jewel may understand, how lawful it is for me to speak, as the catholic
Church speaks, that Christ is offered up unto his Father by the Priests of
the new Testament, verily, really, and in deed. Now let us see what substance
there is in all that, wherewith he burdeneth me touching S. Clement.

Jewel.
As for Clemens, whom M. Harding so often calls the Apostles felovve, as he
is but lately start up, and comme abroad, and therefore has not yet gotten
sufficient credit, and in here brought in dumme, and saieing nothing, so is he
not worthy of further answer. How be it M. Harding does great vvrong,
otherwise to report his Authors words, then he finds them. Truly his
Clemens, what so ever he were, says not, The Priest has Commission, or
Power, to offer up the Son of God. Clemens Constit. Apostoli. lib. 6. cap.
30. Clemens Constit. Apostol. lib. 8.
His words are plain to the contrary: Antytipon Regalis Corporis Christi
offerte: Offer ye up ( not the Body of Christ, but) the Sign, or Sacrament
of the Roial Body of Christ. Likewise again he says, Offerimus tibi Regi,
and Deo iuxta Institutionem Christi, Hunc Panem, and hoc Poculum: We offer up
unto thee, our King and God ( not the very Body of thy Son Really, and in
deed, but) This Bread, and this Cup, according to Christ's Institution. It
is a great Prerogative for M. Hardinge, both to make Doctors of his own,
and also to give them his own Constructions.

Harding.
First, Philip. 4. Hierony. in peroratione tra^slatoris, ad finem
Co^me^tariorum Origenis in epist. ad Romanos.
he labors to put him out of credit, to that end using pretty light terms,
but never a weighty reason. He is but lately start up, and come abroad, says
he. For whereas I call him the Apostles fellow (and that not often as he says)
he should be offended with the Apostles, who so used him, and with S. Hierome,
who so calls him. Next, he reproves me after his scoffing manner, for that I
bring him in dumme, and saying nothing. Lastly, he charge me with reporting
my authors words otherwise then I find them.

That S. Clement can not truly be said, lately to have started up, as it
pleases M. Jewel to speak, I have in my Reioindre to his first Article,
sufficiently proved his Antiquity, Page.29. b
and authority, as there the Reader may see. S. Clement not brought in du^me.


I do not bring him in dumme. To refer the Reader unto a special place of a
writer, is not to bring him in dumme. So I in my Answer referred the Reader to
the eight book and last chapter of S. Clements Constitutions. There shall he
find a clear testimony for the unbloody Sacrifice, for the Priesthod, and
for the Institution, and commandment of the exercise of the same, al which M.
Jewel denies. The words for breuities sake I rehearsed not. To advertise the
Reader of the place, I thought it yenough.

Least M. Jewel charge me again with S. Clements dumnesse, Clemens in
Constitut. li. 8 cap. vlt.
certain of his words, here briefly to satisfy the man, I am content to
allege. Thus then he says. Christ the only begoten (son of God) by nature
is the first high Bishop, who took not honor unto him self, but was ordained
of his Father, Christ made Sacrifice before his Passion, and commanded the
same to be continued.
who for our sake being made man, and offering a spiritual Sacrifice unto God
and his Father, before his passion commanded us (his Apostles) alone to do the
same: albeit there were others present with us, that believed in him, but every
one that believes, is not forth with a priest, nor has Bishopply honor.

Here have we express, and plain mention of the Sacrifice, which Christ, as
high Bishop offered up unto God his Father, and commanded his Apostles to
offer the same, before his passion. This Sacrifice he calls Spiritual,
Spiritual.
in respect of the sacrifices of Moses law, which were gross and bodily of
brute beasts, meaning the sacrifice of his body and blood, spiritually, that
is to say, with spiritual manner, and not with visible shedding of blood
offered, and that before his passion, whereby he signifies the Sacrifice made
at the Supper. And that it be not understood of the Sacrifice of Praise, or
prayer only, S. Clement says it was such, as the Apostles only were
commanded to offer, for that they were Priests. A testimony for the
Sacri^fice of the Altar.


Of what other sacrifice can M. Jewel understand this, which Christ offered
before his passion, and commanded his Apostles, and Priests only to offer:
but of the Sacrifice of his Body and blood, which there after a few words is
called the pure and unbloody Sacrifice?

Of this Sacrifice he is to be expounded, where speaking of S. Steven in the
same chapter, he says thus. Whereas he was such, and so great a man, fervent
in spirit, and saw Christ on the right hand of God, and the gates of heaven
open: yet it appears no where, that he exercised those offices, which be not
convenient for the degree of Deaconship, as that either he offered the
Sacrifice, or laid hands upon any, but kept the order of a Deacon unto his
end. As for the inward spiritual Sacrifices, as praise, thanks, a contrite
heart, prayer and such the like: I trow M. Jewel will not deny, but that S.
Steven did them before his martyrdom, and that the same were not vnconue^ient
for the order and degree of Deacons. And so S. Clement gives us a plain
testimony for the Sacrifice of the Altar, the ministration whereof belongs
to the order of Priesthod only, which is above the order of Deaconship.

M. Ievvel taken in a manifest and foul co^tradict^o^.
But who would think, that M. Jewel, who is so busy to burden other men with
contradiction, yea where none is, would fall into the oversight of so foul a
Contradiction him self? For what can be a more open contradiction, then to
say, as he does, that S. Clement is brought in dumme, and saying nothing, and
yet his words be misreported? If he be brought in dumme, if he say nothing,
then where be his words, that be misereported? If his words be
misereported, how is he brought in dumme, how says he nothing? I have read,
where speech has been attributed to beasts, and Trees: but that a dumme man,
and one that says nothing, speaks, and utters words, as it is absurd in
nature, so no man was ever so mad, as once to feine it. Thus whiles M. Jewel
seeks to skoffe S. Clement out of credit, he has showed him self worthy of
small praise, and credit.

As touching the word, Antitypon used by S. Clement, whereof he takes hold:
Antitypon does not exclude the verity of the mysteries.
it makes little for his purpose. In what Logique learned he to make this
Argument, By S. Clement Priests are required to offer up antitypo^, that is to
say, the sign, figure, or sampler of Christ's body: Ergo, they have no
commission, nor power to offer up Christ him self? Where two things go to
gether, it is a foolish reason, that with the affirmation of the one,
concludes the denial of the other. By such Logique he may as well deny
Christ to be God, because he is Man.

For answer to this and the like cauilles made by the Sacramentaries against
the verity of Christ's body and blood in the blessed Sacrament, it shall be
necessary to inform the Reader of the doctrine of S. Augustine touching this
very point. Augu. lib. Sente^tiar. Prosperi. de Consec. Did 2. Hoc est quod.
His words be these. Hoc est quod dicimus, quod omnibus modis approbare
contendimus, Sacrificium Ecclesiae duobus confici, duobus constare, visibili
elementorum specie, and inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi carne and
sanguine: and Sacramento and re sacramenti, id est, corpore Christi. etc. This
is that we say, that we go about by all means to approve. That the Sacrifice of
the Church is made of two things, and consists of two things, the visible
form of the elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, both the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, that is to say,
the body of Christ.

Now where as the Sacrifice consists of two things, the visible form of the
elements, For what, antitypon is taken in S. Clement.
which are bread and wine, and the flesh and blood of our Lord: S. Clement
naming antitypon regalis corporis, the sign, figure, or sampler of Christ's
roial body means the visible form of the elements, as under them the body,
and blood is really contained. And so by this word antitypon, he
understands not the outward forms of bread and wine only, but (as in the
same sentence he plainly expounds him self) the whole Sacrament, otherwise
called the Euchariste. Which Sacrament is after consecration not without reason
termed antitypon, partly in consideration of the outward forms, partly because
the external breaking and division of the blessed Sacrament represents and
betokens Christ's passion and blood shedding. Also, because we have not yet
the fruition of Christ's body after such wise, as we shall have in the life to
come. Here we have Christ verily, in deed, and substantially, but as yet
covered in a mystery, and hidden under the outward forms. 1. Cor. 13.
But in the life to come we shall see him face to face, not as through a glass,
or dark contemplation: but even so as he is in truth of his own Majesty.

That the term antitypon, makes nothing for the Sacramentaries.
Because the Sacramentaries, where, with all their wit and cunning they impugn
the Sacrifice of the Altar, pretend to have great advantage against the
Catholics, for that S. Basil and certain other old Fathers use this term,
antitypon, where they speak of the most blessed Sacrament, calling it by that
name: It shall be good to show, how little the use of the same in the Fathers
writings makes for proof of their heresy, which they maintain against the
real presence.

First it is acknowledged and confessed of the Catholics, that the Sacrament
of the Altar is antitypon, that is to say, a sampler, or sign of Christ's
roial body: otherwise it could not be a Sacrament, which is a visible sign of
invisible grace. Thus far we agree on both sides. The point wherein we vary
from the Sacrame^taries, is touching the substance of the Sacrament, or (which
is al one though in diverse respects) the Sacrifice.

We say, that unless the flesh and blood of Christ be the substance of this
sampler or sign, it can not be a Sacrament meet for the dignity of the new
Testament: because it must be the truth of all the figurative Sacrifices of the
old Law, according to that S. Augustine teaches speaking of the Table^ Augu.
De ciuita. Dei lib. 17. ca. 20.
which Christ being a Priest aft^r the order of Melchisedech does exhibit and
give. Id enim Sacrificium successit omnibus illis Sacrificijs veteris
Testamenti, quae immolabantur in vmbra futuri. For that Sacrifice (says he)
has succeeded al those Sacrifices of the old Testament, which were offered in
the shadow of that to come.

Wherefore this Sacrifice being the body of those shadows, must excel in
substance the Sacrifices, that were the shadows. But how can that be, if the
substance of bread be the substance of our Sacrifice, for as much as the
substance of bread is no better (if it be so good being an artificial and dead
thing) then is the substance of a lamb, an Ox, or a goat, which are natural,
and living creatures, whose substances were substances of the old Sacrifices,
that were shadows.

S. Alexander therefore the fourth Bishop of Rome after S. Peter, considering
the excellency of our Sacrifice above the old Sacrifices, Alexand. epist. 1.
De Co^sec. did. 2. cap. Nihil in.
says, Nihil in Sacrificiis maius esse potest, quam corpus and sanguis
Christi, nec vlla oblatio hac potior est, sed omnes haec praecellit, etc.
Nothing can be greater in Sacrifices, then the body and blood Christ, neither
is there any oblation better then this, but this does far excel al others,
the which ought to be offered up unto God with a clean conscience, and to be
received with a pure mind, and of men to be wourshipped.

Thus our Sacrifice containing really the precious body and blood of Christ,
is a Sacrifice worthy of the new Testamente, most meet and hable to represent
unto us, and preserve in perpetual remembrance the same body and blood rent
and shed upon the Cross, and most effectual to derive and apply unto us, the
merits and fruits of that bloody Sacrifice.

And yet never the less being ministered under the outward forms not of the
body and blood it self, but of bread and wine for our infirmities sake, and
for the better practice of our faith: it is rightly called the sampler of the
roial body of Christ, so termed by a fit word in the greek tongue,
antitypon, which being taken in the best signification, Augu. lib. 2. quaest.
Euangel. cap. 3. What properly is signified by antitypo^.
(as it is reason it should so be taken, since it signifies a Sacrifice most
divine, and as S. Augustine terms it, Sacrificium Sanctum Sanctorum, the
Sacrifice that is of al holy things the most holy) does import a true and like
sampler, or counterpane equal in truth and worthiness with that which is the
(...), that is, the principal copy. For so much does the greek preposition
(...) signify in composition, as for example, Homere oftentimes calls that
man (...), as much to say, equal to God, who for some excellent quality seemed
to be nothing inferior (at least in that point) to them whom he feined to be
Gods. And in consideration hereof, learned men have translated the Greek word
(...), by this Periprasis or circumlocution, examplar similis formae, a sampler
of like form.

Now what thing is there any where, that is worthy to be, or may be a true
pattern or sampler of like form to the body and blood of Christ crucified and
shed, and now remaining visibly in heaven, but the body and blood of Christ
him self, which by virtue of his almighty word, he of his singular mercy so
makes and tempereth for us in the most holy mysteries, giving them us under
the forms of our common food bread and wine, that neither the Majesty of
them should deter and fray us from offering them, nor any lothsomnes, or
sight of flesh and blood, should cause us to abhor to eat and drink
them. And thus the body of Christ in the Eucharist, is, antitypon, that is to
say, a sign, a sacrament, a pattern, a sampler of his body that hoong upon the
Cross, and of his body that is now in Majesty at the right hand of God the
Father.

Neither is this a new doctrine of our devise, it was taught in Christ's
Church above eleven hundred years past. Let these words of S. Augustine
serve to witness the same. Augu. lib. Sentent. Prosperi. de Consec. Did. 2.
Hoc est.
Caro eius est, quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus, and sanguis
eius, quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus: Caro videlicet carnis, and
sanguis est Sacramentum Sanguinis, vtroque inuisibili, Spirituali,
intelligibili, signatur visibile Domini nostri Jesus Christi corpus and
palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutum, and diuina Maiestate. The flesh of
Christ it is, that being covered with the form of bread we receive in the
Sacrament, and his blood it is, which under the shape and savor of wine we
drink: soothly flesh is a sacrament of flesh, and blood a sacrament of
blood, by both being invisible, spiritual, and intelligible, the body of Jesus
Christ our Lord that is visible and palpable, full of the grace of al virtues,
and divine Majesty, is betokened.

Consider this doctrine well Christian Reader. First, that which we receive in
the Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine (S. Augustine tells thee) is
the flesh and blood of Christ. Next, he says, not that the outward forms of
bread and wine, but that the very flesh and blood, be sacraments of flesh and
blood. Lastly, to put al doubt away, and to make the matter clear, he shows
how this is true^ and says, that by both flesh and blood invisible, and
intelligible, the visible and palpable body of Christ is pointed to, notified,
and signified. Which is as much to say briefly, as that the body of Christ in
the Sacrament invisible, is a sign or sampler of Christ's body visible. All this if thou consider diligently and advisedly, thou may easily understand,
what both S. Clement in the place by M. Jewel alleged, and other learned
Fathers mean by this word, antitypon, in the matter of the blessed Sacrament:
soothly not to exclude the real presence of Christ's body, but to signify the
secret mean of the presence.

We grant therefore the Sacrament of the Altar to be a sign, as S. Clement
calls it, antitypo^. But when by any Sacramentarie the denial of the thing it
self is inferred of the affirmation of the sign, The kinds of Signs,
significatiue only, and exhibitiue.
we deny the Argument. For there be two kinds of signs. One is significatiue
only, the other exhibitiue, which does not only betoken or signify, but also
exhibiteth, and gives the thing signified. In the old Law the unleavened
bread signified only, that the feast of Easter was to be celebrated with
sincerity of heart and life. The corporal purgations signified only the
cleansing of minds. But Baptism in the new Law does not only signify, but
also exhibiteth, and works the Wasshing of sins, and is the ablution it
self, or wasshing away of sins. Likewise the holy Euchariste does not only
betoken or signify, the body and blood of Christ, but contineth, and
exhibiteth it present, Signu^ signatum, and exhibitiuu^
and is the very body and blood of Christ, it is signu^ signatu^, and
exhibitiuu^. Thus it appears, how the Sacramentaries Argument is naught, The
Sacrament is a sign, ergo it is not the body. For it is both a sign, and the
body it sefe. For if any will say, it is a sign significatiue only, it is to be
denied as false, and contrary to the manifest words of Scripture, and the
expositions of all the Fathers.

Now I report me to the judgment of the discrete Reader, what advantage M.
Jewel has gotten by the term, antitypon, alleged out of S. Clement against
the blessed Sacrifice of the Church. S. Clement corrupted by M. Ievvel.
On the other side, what advantage may justly be taken against him, for that
most falsely he has corrupted his author? For look Reader upon the short
testimony which he allegeth out of S. Clement, and thou shall find, that M.
Jewel has cut of out of the midst, two words of greatest force for the
understanding of that goes there immediately before: that by falshod he might
give at least some color unto his Reply, where in truth he had none at al.

The words falsely cut away be these, Clemen. Constitut. lib. 6. cap. 30.
acceptabilemque Eucharistiam. So that the whole sentence is this in S.
Clement, Antitypum regalis corporis Christi, acceptabile^que Eucharistiam
offerte in Ecclesiis and coemeteriis vestris. Offer ye up the sampler of the
roial body of Christ, and the acceptable Euchariste in your Churches, and
burying places.

These two words with the sleight of falsifying nipte away by M. Jewel, be so
requisite to the understanding of the authors meaning, that without them matter
of cauil by reason of the term, antitypon, may be ministered unto such, as be
more ready to impugn, then to defend the doctrine of the universal Church
touching the substance of the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the Altar.
Contrariwise being leaft in the sentence, considered, and rightly understood,
they exclude al occasion of doubt or cauil, that might rise through the other
term of more obscurity. For the Euchariste without doubt in that age being
taken for the body of Christ, how can it be conceived, that the other term,
antitypon, in the same place joined by a copulative together with it, should
importe the contrary?

That S. Clement meant by the Eucharist the true and real body of Christ, it
is evident by that we find in the learned Fathers of that age, namely S.
Ignatius, and S. Ireneus, who lived in, or sone after S. Clementes time. S.
Irenaeus says, Irenaeus lib. 4. ca. 34.
that the bread having received the calling upon of the name of God (whereby
he means the Consecration) is no more common bread, but Eucharistia ex duabus
rebus constans, terrena, and coelesti, the Euchariste consisting of two
things, the one earthly (whereby he understands the form of bread) the
other heavenly (which is the body of our Savior). The Euchariste makes our
bodies to be immortal.
And that it appear certainly, that he thought the Euchariste to be the body
and blood of Christ, he proves that our bodies shall not remain in
corruption, but have the resurrection that is hoped for, because they receive
the Euchariste, and be fed with the flesh and blood of our Lord. Ignat. ad
Smyrnen. apud theo dorit. li. 3. Dialog.


S. Ignatius likewise in an Epistle ad Smyrnenses, as Theodoritus allegeth him
in the third book of his Dialogues writing against certain Heretics, that
would have neither Euchariste, nor Sacrifice: avouches the Eucharist to be the
flesh of Christ. The Eutheriste is the flesh of Christ, that suffered for us.
These be his words. Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, eo quod non
confiteantur Eucharistia^ esse carne^seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quae pro
peccatis nostris passa est, and quam Pater sua benignitate suscitauit.
Eucharistes and oblations they will not admit, because they will not confess the
Euchariste to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered
for our sins, and which the Father of his goodness raised up from death.

Mark Reader, this ancient Father and blessed Martyr says not, the
Euchariste signifies Christ's flesh, but is Christ's flesh, yea that flesh,
which was crucified, buried, and rose again.

And although Theodoritus alleged this authority to prove, that it was the
human flesh, and not the Godhed of Christ, that suffered death, and rose
again, which he proves by the later part of the same: yet it principally
proves our purpose, that the Euchariste is the true flesh of Christ. Again
unless the self same flesh of Christ be in the Euchariste, which died upon
the Cross, and rose again: this authority auailed Theodoritus nothing to
prove, that Christ's flesh was crucified, and raised up again.

Wherefore for so much as it is clear by the testimonies of S. Ignatius, and
S. Irenaeus, who lived not long after S. Clements time, that the belief of
their age was, the Euchariste to be the flesh and blood of Christ: how can M.
Jewel keep his credit with any man that loves truth, and not seem to have
intended craft and deceit, in that of purpose, least the truth should appear
manifest, he falsified his auctor by clipping away those two words from the
midst of the sentence, that make directly against him, and put away al doubt
of contrary sense? Thus to maintain the false doctrine of his arrogant
Challenge, he fears not to violate the Fathers, to corrupt their writings, to
deceive the world, to purchase him self the most reprocheful name of a
falsifier. By such champions such quarrels are maintained.

Constitut. lib. 8.
As for the other place of S. Clement, where he says, offerimus hunc panem, and
hoc poculum, we offer this bread, and this cup: who now a days knows not
that the Sacrament sometimes is called by the name of bread and wine, not
because the substance of bread and wine remains: but because the outward
forms, taft, and other qualities of bread and wine be seen, felt, and
perceived: because before consecration it was bread and wine, and because it
is the true bread and wine, that came down from heaven. Neither does S.
Clement (which is to be noted) barely call it bread and a cup, but this bread,
This breade^ this Cup.
and this Cup, as S. Paul calls it likewise, this bread, and this Cup,
and that bread, and the Cup of our Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
By which manner of speech uttered with the Pronoune Demonstratiue, not common
bread, nor a common cup, but a singular, a divine, a heavenly, and the
supersubstantial bread, and the like cup in Saint Clement is signified: even
that bread and cup, which according to Christ's Institution was before
consecrated with the words of our Lord, Math. 26.
This is my body, This is my blood. Luc. 22.


Jewel.
Neither did Christ by these words, Do ye this in my Remembrance, erecte
any nevve Succession of Sacrificers, to offer him up Really unto his Father:
nor ever did any Ancient learned Father so expound it. Christ's meaning is
clear by the words, that follow. For he says not only, Do ye this, but
he adds also, In my Remembrance: Which Doing pertains, not only unto the
Apostles, and their successors, as M. Harding imagines, but also to the
whole people. And therefore S. Paul says, not only to the Ministers, but
also to the whole Congregation of Corinth, 1. Cor. 11
As often, as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, Ye shall show
forth, and publishe the Lords Death, until he come. Likewise S.
Chrysostom applies the same, Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch. Homil. 61
not only to the Cleregie, but also to the whole people of his Church of
Antioche. Thus he says, Hoc facite in memoriam Beneficij mei, Salutis vestrae:
Do ye this in Remembrance of my Benefit, and of your Salvation.

Of these vveake positions M. Harding without the vvarrante, or authority of
any learned Father reasons thus: Christ says, This is my Body, that is
given for you: Do this in my Remembrance:

Ergo, The Priest has power to offer up the Son of God unto his Father.

Harding.
What M. Jewel means by erecting a new succession of Sacrificers, Priests
now b^ made by election, and ordinatio^, an contine^ not by right of succession
I know not, but that he takes pleasure in his own skoffing wittte. And
whereas he was not hable with sound reasons, or good authorities to impugn
the Priesthod of the new Testament, it liked him to work his spite against it
with scorneful, profane, and Jewish utterance.

Who ever said, that Christ by those words, erected a new succession of
Sacrificers? If no man ever said it, why charge he us, as though it had been
said? Aarons Priesthode went by succession, and belonged to one Tribe. But
Priests of the new Testamente enter not into their Priesthod by right of
succession, as they of the Leuitical Tribe did: but by election, and lawful
ordination.

This Priesthod principally is Christ's, which continues without succession
for ever, as he is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Psalm. 109.
Neither be we that are Priests the Successors of Christ, and much less of
Aaron: we be the ministers of Christ in the function of this Priesthod, and
that which we do, we do it by virtue and power of Christ, and in the person of
Christ: yea rather Christ is said to do it through us. Oecum. in epist. ad
Heb. ca. 5.
For Oecumenius speaking of the daily execution of our Priesthood, and of
Priests that daily do sacrifice, says, per quos medios Christus sacrificat,
and sacrificatur, Christ by the means or mediation of the Priests that be
now (of whom there he spoke before) sacrifices, and is sacrificed.

Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 5.
Eusebius declaring the everlasting priesthod of Christ after the order of
Melchisedek, says likewise. Et sane oraculi exitus admirabilis est ei, qui
comtempletur, quomodo Seruator noster Jesus, Christus Dei, ipsius Melchisedech
ritu, ea quae sunt Sacrificij inter homines faciendi, (...).
etiam adhuc per suos ministros perficiat. And verily the accomplishment of the
oracle (which is, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek) is
marvelous to him that beholds, Psalm. 109.
how our Savior Jesus, the Christ of God, does perform even until this day,
those things that be of the Sacrifice, which is to be done among men.

Mark Reader, how is that accomplished, which the Father in the Psalm is
reported to have said unto Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedech. How remains he a Priest for ever, since concerning that
Oblation and sacrifice, which was once offered by him (says Oecumenius,
meaning the sacrifice of the Cross) he would not have said, in aternum for
ever? To this question that might be moved, both Oecumenius, and Eusebius do
answer: that even now Christ does the things that belong unto the Sacrifice,
which is to be made among men. Which is as much in sense, as Oecumenius says,
that now by the mediation of Priests ministry, Christ sacrifices, and is
sacrificed. And so he remains a Priest for ever.

But leaving these skorneful terms of erecting a new succession of
Sacrificers, to the school of Heretics, and using the common words of the
Church, If M. Jewel mean thereby to say, that Christ speaking these words,
Do ye this in my remembrance, did not ordeine the Apostles Priests, nor
thereby gave them authority to ordeine others, that for time to come should
succeed them in that order, and that so saying he gave not them power,
authority, and commission to offer up his body and blood: I say his meaning is
utterly untrue. And this also, which he says further, that never any learned
Father so expounded those words of Christ, I affirm to be very false, as
here it shall appear.

First let S. Clement be heard in this point, whom M. Jewel in a false cause
does here take hold of. That Christ made the Apostles Priests.
Because the place is somewhat long, it shall be sufficient to report it in
English truly translated. Thus he says. Of Moses most derely beloved of God,
Clemens^ Constitut. Aposto. li. 8. cap. vlt.
were instituted Bisshops, Priests, and Leuites^ Of our Savior we thirteen
Apostles. Of the Apostles, I James, and I Clement, and with us others, that we
reckon not al again. Commonly of al us, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and
Readers. The first high Bishop then by nature is Christ the only begotten,
rapuit
who caught not honor unto himself, but was constituted of his Father. Who
for our sake being made man, and offering spiritual sacrifice to God and his
Father, before his passion commanded us alone, to do the same thing, albeit
others were present with us that believed in him. But yet not every one that
believes is by and by a Priest, and promoted unto Bisshoply honor.

This testimony of S. Clement declares plainly, both that Christ made the
Apostles Priests, before his Passion giving charge and commandment to them
only, though others that believed were present, to do and make the thing,
which he had done, that is to say, to take bread and wine, to give thanks, to
bless, to break the bread, and to say in the person of Christ, this is my
Body, this is my Blood, etc. Which he calls offering of spiritual sacrifice,
because that body and blood of Christ are thus offered up spiritually, and in
a Mystery without bloodshed: And also that the Apostles afterward instituted
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and Readers.

S. Chrysostom excusing him self for that he presumed to minister unto Christ
at his holy table, and gathering boldness of that Christ him self had
commanded it, says: Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
Sacrificiorum ritum instituisti, ac solennis huius and immaculati Sacrificij
celebrationem nobis tradidisti, tanquam Dominus omnium. Thou (Christ) have
instituted the rite of sacrificing, and have delivered unto us the celebration
of this solemn and unspotted Sacrifice, as Lord of al. And afterward he says
moreover, having rehearsed what Christ did and said at the Supper, memoriam
igitur agentes salutaris huius mandati, we keep the memory of this healthful
commandment, meaning the commandment given by these words, Luc. 22.
Do ye this in my Remembrance.

When S. Chrysostom says, Christ delivered the celebration of this Sacrifice
unto us, it is to be considered, unto which us, and when he did deliver it. S.
Chrysostom was a Bishop, and therefore a Priest: so then naming us, he meant
Priests. The time when it was delivered, was at his last Supper. For the
Scripture gives no occasion to think, that Christ leafte to Priests the
celebratio^ of this Sacrifice any where else, but where he said unto his
Apostles: Luc. 22.
1. Cor. 11.
Do ye this in my remembrance.

S. Dionyse the Areopagite S. Paul's scholar, does acknowledge, and in most
plain words confess, that Christ by these words gave commandment to
Priests to offer up this divine Sacrifice. Thus he says. Quocirca Antistes
reuerenter and ex Pontificali officio, Dionys. in Ecclesiast. Hierarch. part.
3. c. 3.
post sacras diuinorum operum Lauds, quod hostiam salutarem, quae supra ipsum
est, litet, se excusat, ad ipsum primo decenter exclamans, Tu dixisti, hoc
facite in mei commemorationem. The Bishop therefore, after he has praised the
works of God, excuses him self reverently, and according to his Bishoply
office, for that he sacrifices the heathful host, which is above his
worthiness, semely first crying unto him, Thou (o Christ) have said, Do ye
this in my remembrance.

Thus it appears clearly by this ancient Bishop, and blessed Martyr, who is
to be thought to have learned the same of S. Paul him self, as also by sundry
other Fathers, of whom some be already alleged, some hereafter shall be
alleged: that Christ by these words, Do ye this in my remembrance, gave to
Priests authority and commission to offer up the healthful Sacrifice, which
can be none other but that of his body and blood: and that by the same words
they understood them selves both charged so to do, and also excused of
presumption in doing, the doing of it being a thing, that so far passes the
worthiness of human condition.

But M. Jewel to put away wholly the Sacrifice, whereas Christ said, do ye
this in my remembrance, says very strangely and boldly, M. Ievvel would, all the people to be Ministers of the Sacrifice.
that this doing pertains not only unto the Apostles, and their successors,
but also unto the whole people. And he bears the world in hand, that this
is the clear meaning of Christ, because of these words, in my remembrance.
As though because that heavenly Sacrifice is to be offered in remembrance of
Christ, therefore the common people and every one of them should have the
handling of the divine Mysteries, and be made the Ministers of them.

If this be true, weemen have much wrong, among whom in so many hundred years,
as have been since Christ gave this commandment, none was yet ever admitted
unto that administration. And if it perteine unto the whole people (as M. Jewel
says) why should weemen be excluded? In deed it were a great ease for these
holy Ministers, that their good wives ministered sometimes in the Co^gregations
for them, whiles they be playing with their children, or keeling the potre at
home.

He should have done well, to have proved this strange point, more
substantially, since there by he should do great pleasure to his fellow
Ministers, to many other good fellows, and specially to many good sad dames of
his own Gospel, whose curiosity would be well pleased, if they were admitted
to minister, and to do so much, as these words of Christ do importe, do ye
this in my remembrance. The devil having sowed hatred in M. Jewels breast
against the priesthod, and Sacrifice of the new Testament, has brought him
unto this foul absurdity.

Peradventure to avoid so great an inconvenience, he will say that these words
do principally perteine unto the Ministers, who have succeeded the Apostles in
this ministry, and secondarily unto the faithful people. If he say so, let
him withal consider, that being so understood they may well serve for the
Apostles to claim unto them selves the authority of Priesthod, to offer up
the Sacrifice, and also to ordeine priests to succeed them. For as touching
the office of a Priest, it is a confessed truth, that the Priest in offering
the body and blood of Christ, is the principal agent concerning outward
ministry, and as it were the instrument of the people, which by a certain
mean offers also, giving unto the Priests action their assent, and applying
their devotion. Much like to that we say of a multitude to make a supplication,
when one man is the speaker and chief dooer, and the rest only give their
consent to that is said and done.

And what though S. Paul say unto the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye shall show
forth our Lords death, until he come? will it follow thereof, that Christ
speaking these words, do ye this in my remembrance, would the whole people
to do that he at his supper did? That is to say, that every lay person, boy,
and woman (for they be of the number of the people) shall take bread, bless and
give thanks, and utter the words of consecration, This is my body, and
likewise the cup, saying; this is my blood, etc?

Does he not understand, there is great difference between this commandment of
Christ, and that saying of S. Paul? between, do this in my remembrance, which
Christ says: and, when so ever ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
show forth our Lords death, which S. Paul says? Sees he not the one to
belong unto the Priest, as he is the pronuncer of the Divine words, whereby
the holy Euchariste is consecrate and made: the other to be referred unto them,
that receive it after it is consecrate? And though both tend to one end, that
is, to celebrate the memory of Christ's death, yet be not the actions diverse?
and may they not be done by diverse persons, as it happeth when the people
receives the body of Christ at the priests hands?

This much may serve also for answer to the authority brought out of S.
Chrysostom. For the circumstance of the place declares evidently, that he
spoke there of the peoples receiving of the mysteries. And so in that place,
facere signifies only to receive, and not to consecrate and minister the
Sacrament.

M. Jew. corrupts S. Chrysostom.
And here M. Jewel, least he should not be always like unto him self, alters
and changes his authors words, and makes S. Chrysostomes words to sound
to the advantage of his own false purpose. For whereas S. Chrysostom says
thus, Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch.
Quotiescunque hoc feceritis, mortem Domini annunciabitis, hoc est, facietis
commemorationem salutis vestrae beneficij mei: As often as ye shall do this, ye
shall set forth our Lords death, that is to say, ye shall make a commemoration
of your salvation being my benefit: M. Jewel allegeth him thus. Hoc facite in
memoriam beneficij mei, salutis vestrae. Do ye this in remenbrance of my
benefit, and of your salvation. Wherein he falsifieth the Doctor, makes a
false translation of the place, and gives out a sense contrary to S.
Chrxsostomes meaning. Such aduenturing to alter Modes, and Tenses, to tell an
other tale, then the Doctor alleged tells, to leave out, to put in words of
private forgerie, is a most certain argument of untrue dealing, and of guile
intended of M. Jewels part.

The 5. Division.
The Answer.
THat Christ offered him self to his Father in his last Supper, and that
Priests by those words, Do this in my remembrance, have not only
authority, but also a special commandment to do the same, and that the
Figure of Melchisedech, and the Prophecy of Malachie pertains to this
Sacrifice, and makes proof of the same: let us see by the testimonies of the
Fathers, what doctrine The Apostles have left to ye Church.

Eusebius Caesariensis has these words, Eusebius. li. 1 de demo^strat.
Horrorem afferentia Mensae Christi Sacrificia Supremo Deo offerre, per
eminentissimum omnium ipsius Pontificem edocti sumus. We are taught (says he)
to offer unto our Supreme God the Sacrifices of Christ's Table, which cause us
to tremble, and quake for fear, by his Bishop highest of al. Here he calls
Christ in respect of his Sacrifice, Gods Bishop highest of al Bishops: the
Sacrifices of Christ's Table he calls, the Body and Blood of Christ,
because at the Table in his last Supper he Sacrificed and offered the same, and
for that it is his very Body, and his very Blood, imagination only,
Fantasy, and Figure set aparte, he terms these Sacrifices, as commonly the
ancient Fathers do, horrible, causing trembling and fear. And whereas he
says, we have been taught to offer these Sacrifices to God, doubtless he
means by these words of Christ: Do this in my remembrance, This is my
Body, which is given for you: This is my Blood, which is shed for you.
Clement in his eight Book often cited, speaking of the Sacrifice offered by
the Apostles, commonly adds these words, Secundum ipsius ordinationem, or,
ipso ordinante: whereby he confesses it to be Christ's own ordinance.

Jewel.
To prove, that the Priest offers up the Son of God, M. Hardinge has here
brought in Euse^ius an Ancient Father, that never once named any such Oblation
of the Son of God. So much is he oppressed, and encombred with his stoare.

True it is, The Ministration of the Holy Communion is oftentimes of the old
learned Fathers called a Sacrifice: not for that, they thought, the Priest had
Authority, to Sacrifice the Son of God, but for that therein we offer up
unto God, Thanks, and Praises for that great Sacrifice once made upon the
Cross. So says S. Augustine, August. ad Petru^ Diaco. ca. 19.
In isto Sacrificio est gratiarum actio, and Commemoratio Carnis Christi, quam
pro nobis obtulit. In this Sacrifice is a Thanks geuinge and a remembrance of
the flesh of Christ, Eusebius. De demonstr. li. 1. c. 10.
which he has offered for us. Likewise Eusebius says, Christ after al
other things done, made a marvelous Oblation, and a passinge Sacrifice unto
his Father ( upon his Cross) for the Salvation of us al: Nazian. in Apolog.
(...).
geuinge unto us to offer continually unto God a Remembrance in steed of a
Sacrifice. So Nazianzenus calls the Holy Communion, A Figure of that great
Mystery, of the Death of Christ.

This is it, that Eusebius calls, The Sacrifice of the Lords Table: Which
also he calls, Sacrificium Laudis, The Sacrifice of Praise.

Harding.
M. Jewels Replye in this Division is of small pith and substance. Least he
should seem to say nothing, whereas in deed he has nothing to say, whereby
clearly to avoid the force of Eusebius authority by me alleged: he darkeneth
the matter with many words partly of his own, partly of other Doctors to
little purpose rehearsed.

The effect of his whole tale consists in these.4. points. First, he denies
that Eusebius ever named any such Secondly, he adknowlegeth the Ministration of
the holy Communion (for so he calls it) of the old learned Thirdly, he
allows not the Argument made out Fourthly, he pretends to show causes,
why the heart to tremble.


Touching the first, what mean you M. Jewel by saying, that Eusebius never
once named any such oblation of the Son of God? Be you so addicted to the
precise terms of your own Challenge, M. Ievvel is driven from the matter, unto
precise words.
that other words of equal force may not be admitted? Verily this declares
the weakness of your cause, and opens your poor shifte to the world, which
is, that whereas you are conuicte by clear truth of things, yet you run for
succor unto the shadow of words.

You deny by the words of your Challenge, that by witness of any doctor
within the first six hundred years after Christ, we are hable to show, that a
Priest has authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. Now this are we
hable to prove as by diverse others, so in this place by testimony of Eusebius,
though expressly he name it not an oblation of the Son of God.

And for as much as you stand upon your own precise terms, you shall be driven
from your hold by a precise Argument. Answer it, if you can. What so ever we
that are Priests have been taught by Christ to do, to do the same we have
authority. But we have been taught by Christ to offer up Christ unto his
Father: Ergo, to offer up Christ unto his Father we have authority. Ergo, the
Priest has authority, etc.

The Minor or second proposition of this Syllogism, you deny, I doubt not.
For naught else with reason is here to be stickt at. (...) Eusebius. de Demo^str.
Eua^g. lib. 1.
That proposition then thus I prove by Eusebius, whom I alleged in my Answer.
We have been taught (says he) to offer up unto our Supreme God the dredful
Sacrifices of Christ's table, by his Bishop highest of al.

Whereat do you cavil? The proposition that you deny, and we affirm, being
this, The Priest has authority to offer up Christ unto his Father: what
lacks here, that answers not the purport of your own precise terms? We
have been taught by Gods bishop highest of al, says Eusebius, Ergo, The Priest
has authority. Require you the word, to offer? Behold here it is put
expressly, (...).i. offerre. Call you for the name of the Father? Look in
Eusebius, and you shall find, (...), as much to say, unto God that is over al.
there have you the Father of Christ plainly yenough expressed, unless you
deny that the Father of Jesus Christ is God over al. How be it we acknowledge
this sacrifice to be offered not only unto the Father, but also unto the Son,
in as much as he is God, and unto the holy Ghost. Now for Christ, you have
here expressed, the dreadful or honorable Sarifices of Christ's table.

But you will say. I hear the dreadful sacrifices of Christ's table, but
Christ him self, I hear not. Truth it is, Christ him self to be offered
you hear not in express terms, but those terms, which to our understanding
do import Christ's body and blood, you hear, and therefore Christ him self,
because of the vnio^ of both persons. For what other thing may we with any
reason understand by the dreadful Sacrifices of Christ's table, but the body
and blood of Christ? What cause had Eusebius to make mention of Christ's
table, Math. 26.
but to put us in mind of that table, Lucae 2^.
whereupon Christ at his last Supper consecrated and offered his precious body
and blood, 1. Cor. 11.
saying, this is my body which is given for you, this is my blood which is
shed for you, as the Scripture teaches us? Whereupon the bread, Cyprian. de
coenae Domini.
that Christ gave unto his disciples, changed not in shape, but in nature, by
the omnipotency of the word is made flesh, as S. Cyprian writes. Whereupon
is laid the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, Council.
Nicen. Optatus. lib. 6. Iren. lib. 5
as we find it reported by the Fathers of the first Nicen Council. Whereupon
the vows of the people, and the members of Christ be borne, as the Ancient
Father Optatus speaks. From whence our flesh is nourrished with the blood
and body of Christ, as S. Ireneus says. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 24.
From whence Christ has given us his flesh to fill us withal, as S.
Chrysostom preaches.

But M. Jewel understands by the Sacrifices of Christ's table spoken of in
Eusebius, the Sacrifice of thanks giving. For whereas I say in my Answer, that
the Body and blood of Christ, are called of Eusebius the Sacrifices of
Christ's table, because at the table in his last Supper he sacrificed and
offered the same: he controlleth me for so saying, and skoreth it up in the
margent for his: 222. Untruth, showing this cause why. For (says he) Eusebius
calls it the sacrifice of thanks giving. M. Ievvel belyeth Eusebius.
wherein he deserves an untruth, or rather a manifest lie to be scored up upon
him self. For neither names Eusebius a sacrifice in that place, which he
would, if he had meant the sacrifice of thanks giving, but sacrifices in the
plural number, yea expressly the dreadful or honorable Sacrifices of Christ's
table, neither names he there expressly, the sacrifice of thanks giving at
al: And never was it heard before, that any old, or late learned catholic
writer called thanks giving indefinitely, the dreadful Sacrifices of Christ's
table. For to give thanks it is not dredful, neither is it peculiar to the
mystical table, but common in respect of al times, places and services.

Certain it is, as it shall be evident to all that will peruse that place of
Eusebius, that by the dreadful Sacrifices of Christ's table, he meant the body
and blood of Christ: How be it he speaks so thereof, using the terms, of
memory, signs, and tokens, as it was most convenient for that time, when the
Christians lived among the Painimes and Infidels, to whom those secrets were
not to be reveled, Math. 7.
accordingly as Christ forebad a holy thing to be given to dogs, and
precious stones to be cast before swyne. By which way of utterance the old
learned Fathers intent was, not to exclude the true presence of the most holy
things, but to coouer them from the unworthy Painimes profane understanding,
and to insinuate unto the beleuers, the mystical and secret manner of their
presense.

To return to Eusebius, In the later part of his first book, De
demonstratione Euangelica, discoursing upon the excellency of the new
Testament in comparison of the old, having declared the figurative sacrifices
of Moses law to be abolished, Three kinds of Sacrifices of the new
Testament mentioned by Eusebius. Eusebius. li. 1 de demo^strat.
and that law it self to have his end by the coming of Christ into flesh:
at length he speaks of three kinds of Sacrifices of the new Testament,
proving each one to have been forespoken of by the Prophets. They are, the
Sacrifice of the Cross, the Sacrifice of the Altar, and the mere spiritual
Sacrifices.

The which we call the Sacrifice of the Cross, he names, the marvelous
oblation, and passing Sacrifice, which Christ offered unto his Father for the
salvation of us al. He terms it also in respcte of the thing sacrificed, the
(...)
fleshly presence of Christ, and his framed body, that God fitted for him,
alluding to the words of the Psalm, (...).
Corpus aptasti mihi. thou (o God) have framed or fitted to me a body.

That which of us is commonly called the Sacrifice of the Altar, Psalm. 39.
he calls, in respect of the action of offering, (...), etc. The memory of
this Sacrifice (of the Cross) celebrated upon a table. He calls it also in
respect of the thing offered, (...). The Divine, honorable, and holy Sacrifice.
And terming it also the pure Sacrifice, alluding to the Prophecy of Malachie,
he says, that we sacrifice it, (...), after a new manner according to the new
Testament. Which can not be understand of any other, then of the Sacrifices of
the Altar. Furthermore in respect of the body and blood being two things
that are offered, he calls it, the Sacrifices of Christ's table, as now the
Church commonly calls it the Sacrifice of the Altar.

Touching the third kind of sacrifices, he names them first in general, by
the term, of vnbodyly and spiritual sacrifices. Afterward particularly he
calls them, the sacrifice of praise, of prayers, of lifting up the hands, of
a contrite heart. The sacrifice of thanks giving, by these very terms, he
names not. In deed I confess, that where he says, we sacrifice the memory
of the great Sacrifice (meaning that of the Cross) celebrating it according to
the mysteries delivered unto us by Christ: There he says further, that we
offer up unto God by godly hymns and prayers, (...)
Eucharistiam pro salute nostra, the Euchariste for our salvation: which
peradventure M. Jewel had rather to call, the thanks giving for our salvation.

To show that the first and chief kind of sacrifice was prophesied of in the
time of the old Testament, he allegeth the Prophet David, Psalm. 39.
saying: Oblationem and sacrificium noluisti, corpus autem aptasti mihi.
Oblation and sacrifice thou refusedst, and had framed me a body.

For the sacrifices of the third kind, Psalm. 49.
he allegeth the known scriptures, offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, and
render unto the highest thy vows, and call upon me in the day of ^ribulation,
Psalm. 140. Psalm. 50.
and I will deliver thee. Again, The lif^ing up of my hands is an evening
sacrifice. Item, A contrite spirit is a sacrifice to God. etc. In this order
is to be placed the sacrifice of thanks giving, which M. Jewel strangely and
absurdly avouches to be that, which Eusebius calls by the name of the
Sacrifices of Christ's table.

Now concerning the second kind of Sacrifice, The Sacrifices of Christ's
table, what they are.
that Eusebius speaks of, which is the sacrifice of th'Aulter, or as the
terms it, the dreadful Sacrifices of Christ's table: whiles he allegeth the
prophecies of David, and of Esaias for it, he shows clearly, that he meant not
thereby the sacrifice of thanks principally, or praise for the Sacrifice once
made upon the Cross, nor the Ministration of the holy Communion, of which M.
Jewel confusely expounds Eusebius: but the holy Mysteries of Christ's table,
to wit, the Body and Blounde of Christ under the forms of bread and wine
offered at the table in remembrance of Christ's death. Which I confess never
the less always to be offered not without the Sacrifice of thanks, and
praise: and with that Sacrifice we do thank, and praise God most principally.

The saying of David propheciyng of the Sacrifices of this table, Psalm. 22.
as Eusebius allegeth, is this. Parasti in conspectu meomensam aduersus eos qui
tribulant me, Impinguasti in oleo caput meum, and calix tuus inebrians me quam
fortissime. Thou have prepared before mine eyes a table against those that
trouble me, thou have anointed my head with oil, and thy Cup makes me
drunk after a most strong wise. (...)
Expressly and manifestly in these words (says Eusebius) is signified the
mystical Chrisme (or ointment) and the dreadful (or honorable) Sacrifices of
Christ's table.

Verily this sovereign praise, that David after the mind of Eusebius gives
unto the mystical Cup of our Lords table, can not seem to be attributed unto
the Cup of the Sacramentarie Suppers, which contains in it no better thing,
then common wine. It is the blood of Christ, not a suppe of common wine, that
does moist and inebriate a man in that most strong wise, whereof David
prophesied. The Hebrew word importing signification of great abundance, makes
much for this sense, and quite contrary to the Sacramentarie doctrine.

From David he goes to Esaias the Prophet, alleging among other things a
saying out of him, signifiyng, that the Lord of bostes should do marvelous
things in all nations. What those things are, the prophet declares. They
shall have pleasant drink (says he) they shall drink wine. They shall be
anointed with an ointment in this hill. Upon these words of Esaias thus says
Eusebius. These marvelous things that Esaias speaks of, did promise not to
Israel, but to al nations, the anointing of a good sweet smelle, and of
ointme^tes, by reason whereof because of the anointing of the ointment, they
obtained to be called Christians, (that is to say the anointed). Then follow
the words, which declare what he meant by the Sacrifices of Christ's table.

Furthermore (says he) this prophet prophecieth unto the Gentiles of the
pleasantnes of wine, secretly signifying the Mystery of the new Testament of
Christ, which is manifestly celebrated at this time among al nations. Thus
Eusebius in that place expounding the prophecies of David, and of Esaias,
promising the inebriating Cup, and gift of wine unto the Gentiles, of the
blessed Sacrifice of Christ's table (which as it is called a table for that the
heavenly food is thence ministered unto us, so it is called also an Altar in
respect of the oblation and Sacrifice there made and solemnized) does plainly
signify what he understood by the Sacrifices of Christ's table, soothly not
the sacrifice of thanks giving principally, which seems to the unlearned to
consist only in words, but the Sacrifices of the body and blood of Christ,
and consequently Christ him self. And therefore that place of Eusebius is in
my Answer to the Challenge rightly and aptly to my purpose alleged, as the
which, proves against M. Jewel, that the Priest has authority to offer up
Christ unto his Father.

Yet if M. Jewel will not cease to call for his own terms, August. Epist. 174.
not being content with terms equivalent: I think good to answer him, as S.
Augustine answered Pascentius the Arian crying importunatly for the term
Homusion to be showed him in the Scriptures. Quid est contentiosius, quam vbi
de re constat, certare de nomine? What is a more contentious part, then to
strive about the name, when the thing it self is certainly known.

But now M. Jewel brings in S. Augustine, Eusebius, and S. Gregory
Nazianzen, to witness with him, that the ministration of the holy Communion is
called a Sacrifice, because therein thanks and Praises be offered up unto God
for the Sacrifice made upon the Cross.

To this I answer, that these Fathers can not be showed so much as once to have
named the Sacrifice of the Ministration of the Communion, nor that this
Ministration of the Communion is in any of their works expressly called a
Sacrifice. He should have done well, if he had made it clear, what he means
by this holy Communion, and what by the Ministration of the same. That the
Ministration of the Communion is a Sacrifice, I trow it is a speech never
heard of in the Church of God, before these Ministering prelates came to teach
us a new faith.

If he understand by the holy Communion, the new devise of the Caluinistes, The
ministratio^ of the new holy Communion made a new Sacrifice by M. Jew.
which they have set up like an Idol in their defourmed churches in place of
the blessed Mass, after a diverse manner in diverse Cities, and Countries,
according to the diverse fantasies of new Ministers, who daily please them
selves with changing what so ever likes others, in which sort of Communion
there is no substance of any better thing, then of bread and wine, no due
consecration made, no oblation, no real Sacrifice, no participation of the true
body and blood of Christ: If this be his meaning, as doubtelesse it is: most
certain it is, those ancient learned Fathers, never spoke of it, never knew
it: much less did they any where call the ministration of it, a Sacrifice.

S. Augustine says not, Augustine. ad Petru^ Diaconu^. cap. 19.
the ministration of the Communion is a Sacrifice, which M. Jewel by his words
takes upon him to prove: but, In this Sacrifice (says he) there is a
thankesgeuing, and a co^memoration of the flesh of Christ, which he offered
for us, and of the blood, which the same God did shed for us. In this
Sacrifice, says he, he says not in the ministration of the Communion. What he
meant by this Sacrifice, there he shows clearly. For having said in the
beginning of the chapter, that beasts were sacrificed unto Christ with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, by the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Priests of the
old Law, forthwith he adds these words. Cui nunc, id est, tempore Noui
Testame^ti, cu^ Patre and Spiritu sancto, cu^ quibus est illi vna Diuinitas,
sacrificiu^ Panis and vini in fide and charitate sancta Ecclesia Catholica, per
vniuersum orbe^ terrae offerre no^ cessat. Unto whom now, that is to say, in
the time of the New Testament, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, with whom
he has one Godhed, the holy Catholic Church does not cease to offer up
through the whole world, the Sacrifice of bread and wine in faith and charity.

M. Jewel thought to take advantage of this place, The Sacrifice of bread and
wine.
because this Sacrifice is here called the sacrifice of bread and wine, and
would needs this to be taken for the ministation of his new Communion, as
though because bread and wine is named (which is the substance of their
communion) the body and blood of Christ were excluded. But this reason is very
weak, besides that neither M. Jewel, nor any of the Caluinistes do use to call
this sacrifice, the Sacrifice of bread and wine. Neither do they bring their
bread and wine to church to make a sacrifice of it to God, but to distribute it
unto their Congregations. The sacrifice they pretend to make, is of thanks
and praises: any outward thing they sacrifice not at al.

True it is, this Sacrifice is sometimes called the Sacrifice of bread and
wine, as in this place, De Fide ad Petrum Diaconum, either because it
represents in outward forms, bread and wine: or because bread and wine are
the things, whereof of the change it self, which pertains to the nature of
a Sacrifice (for so much as it requires, that the thing that is offered be
sanctified by some change) takes beginning. And as in the old sacrifices of
the Jews, the Calfe both being yet alive, was called a Sacrifice, because it
was that thing, which by killing was to be sanctified, and also being killed,
because it was the Host now sanctified by sacrificing, which host so many as
did eat of, were made partakers of the altar: Even so in the Sacrament of the
Euchariste, the bread and wine may be called a Sacrifice, as being the things,
that by change made of them with consecration are to be sanctified. Therefore
in the beginning of the Canon of the Mass it is said of them, Supplices
rogamus ac petimus, etc. We humbly pray and beseech thee, that thou accept,
and bless, these gifts, these presents, these holy Sacrifices.

The body it self also, and blood of Christ contained under the form of
bread and wine, are called the Sacrifice, as being the things, into which the
holy change by virtue of the words of Consecration is made. of which it is
said in the end of the Canon: We offer up unto thy most honorable Majesty of
thy gifts and benefits, a pure Host, a holy Host, an unspotted host. Thus
we say, and so the Fathers speak both ways of this Sacrifice, that it is the
Sacrifice of bread and wine, that is to say, made of bread and wine (because
that which was bread and wine is now turned and changed into the body and
blood of Christ) and the Sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord, that
is to say, the very true host it self with a certain divine change
consecrated and made.

In other places most commonly it is named of the Fathers, the Oblation or
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, in consideration of the inward
substance of the Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine contained. As S.
Augustine writing against Faustus the Heretic, Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20^ ca.
18.
having spoken of the manifold Sacrifices of the old law, and of the Sacrifice
of the Cross, consequently says, whereby he signifies, what he understands
by this sacrifice of bread and wine: I am Christiani peracti eiusdem Sacrificij
memoriam celebrant, sacrosancta oblatione, and participatione corporis and
sanguinis Christi. The Christians do now celebrate the memory of the
Sacrifice of the Cross past and done, by the holy oblation, and participation
of the body and blood of Christ. So in diverse considerations both these
savinges be true, The holy catholic Church every where offers up to God the
sacrifice of bread and wine, and it offers the Sacrifice of the flesh and
blood of Christ.

And whereas our daily Sacrifice, which the Christians do now every where
offer, is the celebration of the memory of that which was done upon the
Cross, and therefore oftentimes of the Fathers is named a memory or
commemoration, as we find in Eusebius here also alleged by M. Jewel: Eusebius. in
Demonst. lib. 1.
the word Memory or commemoration excludes the truth of passion and death
(for now Christ suffers, Romans 6.
nor dies no more) the truth, or real presence of the body, which on the
Cross suffered and dyed for us, it excludes not. For with and by the holy
Oblation and participation of that flesh and blood (says S. Augustine) we
celebrate the memory of the Sacrifice that was made upon the Cross. So that
the substance of the Sacrifice of the Cross, and of that of the Altar, is one
and the same, the flesh and blood of Christ: only the manner of Oblation is
diverse. Which if these Gospellers would once confess, as S. Augustine here
witnesses, and Christ's Church has ever believed, and they them selves be not
ignorant of: we should not have need to write so many books, and the world
should sone draw to a better quiet.

As for the two other testimonies alleged out of Eusebius, and S. Gregory
Nazianzen, they prove not that for which they be alleged, which is, that the
Ministration of the Communion is of them called a sacrifice, whereby M. Jewel
would exclude the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. For first as
touching Nazianzen, by what Logique makes he this Argument good, He calls
the holy Communion, (...).
exemplar magnorum Mysteriorum, the Figure or sampler of the great Mysteries:
Ergo, the Ministration of the Communion, is called a Sacrifice? Verily in this
Argument is neither reason, nor good Logique.

What though Eusebius say thus being truly translated, Christ after al (the
Sacrifices of Moses Law) having sacrificed a marvelous sacrifice, and a
passing Host unto his Father, offered it up for all our salvation, (...).
having delivered unto us also a memory, to offer it up continually unto God
(...).
for a Sacrifice, so it is to be translated, not instead of a Sacrifice, as
Master Jewel has turned it? Will he conclude of this, that Eusebius calls
the Ministration of his Communion a Sacrifice? No, no, his purpose was not so
much to prove the ministration of their Communion to be called a sacrifice, as
to disprove the Sacrifice of the Altar, which Eusebius in my Answer alleged,
calls in respect of Christ's body and blood offered in the same, the
Sacrifices of Christ's table.

To that end he seems to have alleged Eusebius, A memory of the Sacrifice of
the Cross, excludes not the Sacrifice of the Altar.
because he names that, which Christ delivered unto us to offer up daily unto
God, a memory. As though Christ's body and blood could not be really present
in these holy Mysteries, if that which we do, be a memory or co^memoratio^ of
that which Christ did. Yeas forsooth M. Jewel, The Sacrifice that we offer, when
we do that which Christ at his last Supper commanded us to do, is the memory
of the body and blood of Christ, and in respect of the thing offered and
sacrificed, the very and true body and blood of Christ it self. And this is
according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20. cap. ^^.
who says, as is before rehearsed, The Christians do celebrate the memory of
the Sacrifice (of the Cross) now performed (which Eusebius in respect of the
thing offered calls the marvelous Sacrifice, and passing host) with the holy
Oblation and Participation of the body and blood of Christ If they do it
with the Oblation and participation of the body and blood of Christ, then is
the body and blood of Christ present, then is it offered, and participated,
which Eusebius for that cause calls the^ Sacrifices of Christ's Table.

Eusebius also (says M. Jewel) calls this a Sacrifice of praise. In deee, as
I declared before, Eusebius speaks of diverse Sacrifices. Of the Sacrifice of
the Cross, of the sacrifices of the table of Christ, of the Sacrifice of
praise, of prayers, of a contrite heart. And what if he speak of the Sacrifice
of praise, will it thereof follow M. Jewel by your new Logique, that the
Sacrifices of Christ's table be not taken in Eusebius for the body and blood
of Christ? And I pray you, may not the self same in one respect be a Sacrifice
of Praise, M. Jewels common custom to disprove one truth by an other truth.
and also in an other respect, the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood? When
will you leave your common wont, to disprove one truth by an other truth? If
one should say unto you concerning a sort of your Ministers standing before
you at a visitatio^, Sir these fellows be no Ministers of Gods word, and holy
Sacraments, for they be handy Craftesmen: would you not answer him, Sir your
reason is naught, for they be Ministers, and honest Craftesmen both? No better
is your reason, where you say, This Sacrifice, is a Sacrifice of Praise, and of
thanks giving, or it is a memory, and a sampler of the bloody Sacrifice,
ergo, it is not the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, it is not a
true, and a very Sacrifice. For there is no inconvenience in attributing these
names and terms unto the most blessed Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Altar,
diverse respects being considered. A plain testimony for the Sacrifice of the
Altar.


But M. Jewel, how happed it, that where you found in Eusebius, Sacrificium
laudis, the Sacrifice of Praise (the Greek whereof also you would needs to be
noted in the margent of your book, though with addition of an article more
then is in the Doctor: you saw not among the manifold sacrifices there
reckened, this Sacrifice so expressly set forth and commended with these
words? (...). Eusebius. lib. 1. de Demonst. in fine.
That is to say, we sacrifice the divine, and honorable, and most holy
Sacrifice. We sacrifice the pure Sacrifice after a new manner according to the
new Testament. By which description that, which we call the Sacrifice of the
Altar, is plainly signified.

Again how could you not see the manifest mention of the Altar, A testimony
for material Aulters.
whereon this Sacrifice is offered, there a little before expressed? And least
you might avoid the force of that clear testimony by expounding it of the
spiritual Altar of man's heart, remember that he speaks of such an Altar, as
might not by Moses law be set up, but only in Iewrie, and that as there he
says in one only City of that Province. As for the spiritual Aulters of men's
hearts, Moses Law did never forbid. An Altar (says Eusebius) of unbloody and
reasonable sacrifices, (...).
is now erected, according to the new Mysteries of the new Testament, over all the world, both in Egypt and in other nations, etc. What can be understood
by this Altar builded in witness of the abrogation of Moses Law, of his
Altar at Jerusalem, and of his unclean Sacrifices, as there Eusebius
discourses, and that according to the new Mysteries of the new Testament: but
the external Altar of the Church, whereupon the body and blood of Christ, In
Apologetico.
in form of bread and wine, the external Sacri^fice, as S. Gregory Nazianzen
calls it, is offered, and the most holy and dreadful Mysteries are celebrated?

Has Satan the enemy of this Sacrifice so blinded your heart with malice
against the same, that you saw the sacrifice of Praise, of Prayers, and other
mere spiritual Sacrifices, and this most Divine, most high, and most special
Sacrifice of the Church could not see, so evidently and with so express
colors set forth in the same place? What can be said in your excuse? Either
you saw this much in Eusebius your self, or you trusted your Greek friend of
Oxford, whose help for the fuller stuffing of your great book you used, as it
is known. If you saw it, and of purpose would concele it, and by rehersing
other Sacrifices thought so to coouer this Sacrifice: then great was your
malice. If you saw it not, but trusted your Grecian, and such other slipper
Merchantes, who knew well your humor, and perceived what should please your
appetite: then were you very rash and unwise, and thereby have given occasion
to al wise men to take good advise, how they believe you in so weighty matters.

Hitherto M. Jewel, as now unto the learned it is made clear, has said little
for good Answer to the testimony for the Sacrifice of the Altar, brought out
of Eusebius. But what falshoode he has used, it is partly disclosed. If thou
mark him well Reader, thou shall perceive this slight in him, that he never
reherseth the words of Eusebius, as I have alleged them. For in deed they
seem to grauel him, and to be so plain, as with plainness he sees no way
how to answer them. Craftily he dissembleth the Sacrifices of Christ's table
spoken of by Eusebius in the plural number, whereby he understands the body
blood of Christ, of which each one is a Sacrifice, that is to say, M. Jewels
guileful dealing.
the thing sacrificed, and consecrated severally in the several fourmes of
bread and wine, in Commemoration and Remembrance of the Body and Blood,
which were severed the one from the other by violence of the soldiers upon
the Cross: and names the Sacrifice of the Lords Table in the singular
number, for the better opportunity to deceive the unlearned Reader.

Jewel.
But Eusebius says further, This Sacrifice is dreadful, and causes the heart
to quake. M. Harding may not well geather by any force of these words, that
the Son of God is Really offered up by the Priest unto his Father. For all
things, what so ever, that put us in remembrance of the Majesty, and
Judgments of God, of the Holy Fathers are called Dreadful. S. Cyril says,
Cyril. in Apol. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. Hom. 49.
Lectio Diuinarum, and Terribilium Scripturarum: The reading of the Divine, and
Terrible Scriptures. S. Chrysostom calls the words of Baptism, Verba
arcana, and metue^da, and horribiles Canones dogmatum de Coelo transmissorum:
The Secret, and Dreadful words, and Terrible Rules of the doctrine, that came
from Heaven. And speaking of the Hand, and voice of the Deacon, he says thus,
Manu illa Tremenda, and continua Voce clamans, alios vocat, alios arcet: With
that Terrible Hand, and continual Voice crieinge, sum he calls in, and
sum he puts of.

This Sacrifice makes the Heart to tremble, for that therein is laid forth
the Mystery, that was hidden from worlds, and Generations: The horror of
Sin: The Death of the Son of God: That he took our heaviness, and bare
our sorrows, and was vvounded for our offenses, and was Rent, and Tormented
for our Wickedness: That he was carried like an innocent Lamb unto the
Slaughter: that be cried unto his Father, O God. O my God, why haste thou thus
forsaken me?

There we call to Remembrance all the causes, and circumstances of Christ's
Death: The Shame of the Cross: The Darkening of the Air: The Shaking of the
Earth: The renting of the Vele: The cleaving of the Rocks: The opening of the
Graves: The Descending into Hell: and the Co^quering of the Devil. Therefore
Chrysostom says, Qua^uis quis lapis esset, illa nocte audita, Chrysostom. in 1.
ad Corinth. Hom. 17.
quomodo cu^ Discipulis tristis fue^it, quomodo traditus, quomodo ligatus,
quomodo abductus, quomodo iudicatus, quomodo denique oi^a Passus, cera mollior
fiet, and terra^, and omne^ terrae cogitationem abijciet: Any man hearing of
the order of that night, how Christ was moorneful emonge his Disciples, how
he was delivered, how he was bound, how he was leadde away, how he was
arreigned, and how meekely he suffered al, that was done unto him, were he as
hard as a Stoane, yet would he be as soft as Wax, and would throw both
the Earth, and al Earthely Cogitations away from him.

Thus says Nicolaus Cabasilas, one of M. Hardings late Greek Doctors: Hoc
facite in mea^ Commemorationem. Sed quaenam est haec Commemoratio? etc. Do ye
this in Remembrance of me. But what is this Remembrance? How do we consider:
Our Lord in the Holy Ministration? What do we conceive him doing? How
dealing? what suffering? what think we? what speak we of him? Do we
imagine of him ( in that time of the Holy Mysteries) that he healed the Blind?
That he raised the Dead? That he stayed the VVindes? Or that with a few
loaves he fead thousands: which are tokens, that he was God Omnipotent? No,
not so. But rather we call to remembrance such things, as declared his
weakness: his Cross, his Passion, his Death: In respect of those things he
said, Do ye this in my Remembrance. The Priest both by his words, and also
by the whole Circumstance of doing, seems to say, Thus Christ came to his
Passion: Thus he was vvounded in the side: Thus he died: Thus Blood and Water
issued, and streamed from his wound. These considerations, thus laid before
our eyes, are hable to cause any godly heart to quake, and tremble. As for the
Real offeringe up of Christ in Sacrifice, that learned Father Eusebius says
nothing.

Verily, it is but a simple Sophisme to say, This Sacrifice is Dreadful, and
causes us to quake: Ergo, The Priest offers up the Son of God unto his
Father.

Harding.
Whereas I gather an Argument of a plain testimony for the Sacrifice of the
Altar, out of the whole sentence alleged: M. Jewel pretends to his Reader,
as though I took my chief and only hold of this one word, Dreadful,
Dreadful.
which being but one word in Eusebius, he makes to sound many words, and
says, that I may not gather by any force of these words, that the Son of
God is really offered up by the Priest unto his Father. Whereas in deed I
gather it not by force of that word, Dreadful (whereof for his advantage he
makes diverse words) only, nor chiefly: but of the whole saying, and
specially of the very express name of the Sacrifice of Christ's table, and
also of that Eusebius says, we have been taught by Christ him self to offer
them unto God. Which I expound, as they are to be expounded, of these words
spoken by Christ at his Supper, Luc. 22.
Hoc facite in meam commemoratione^, do ye this in my remembrance, as it is to
be seen in my Answer, and he dissembled to have seen it. As for the Son of
God really offered up, they be not my words, as the book is witness, they be
his, whereby he thought to take advantage, though the Proposition in those
terms also be true, in a right and due sense.

Because therefore he groundeth his Reply upon that which I say not, and
bestows many words in disprouing that I affirm not, and proving that I
deny not, and makes a long needelesse talk of the word, Dreadful, showing
sundry things to be called Dreadful (wherein he tells some truth) pretending
to the Reader thereby, as though because Eusebius is alleged calling this
Sacrifice Dreadful, thereof specially I had concluded the authority of
offering Christ unto his Father, which thing in deed I do not: And forasmuch
as this much is untruly attributed unto me, and therefore may with like
facility be denied, as it is without proof said, and the whole process of
the rest of this Division is utterly impertinent, and besides the purpose: I
think this much enough for answer unto it, that it is not worth the answering.

The.6. Division.
The Answer.
Hesychius lib. 1. c. 4.
THat Christ Sacrificed himself at his Supper, Hesychius affirms with these
words: Quod Dominus iussit (Leuit. 4.) vt Sacerdos vitulu^ pro peccato
oblaturus, Joan. 10.
ponat manu^ super caput eius, and iugulet eu^ cora^ Domino, Christu^
significat, quem nemo obtulit, sed nec immolare poterat, nisi semetipsum ipse
ad patiendu^ tradidisset. Propter quod non solum dicebat, Potestatem habeo
ponendi animan meam, and potestatem habeo iterum sume^di eam: sed and
praeueniens semetipsum in Coena Apostoloru^ immolauit, quod sciunt, qui
Mysteriorum percipiunt virtutem. That our Lord commanded (says he) the
Priest, which should offer a calfe for sin, to put his hand upon his head,
and to stick him before our Lord, it signifies Christ, whom noman has
offered, neither could any man Sacrifice him, except he had delivered him
self to suffer. For the which he said not only, I have power to lay down my
Soul, and I have power to take it again: But also preventing it, he offered up
him self in Sacrifice in the Supper of the Apostles: which they know, yt
receive the virtue of the Mysteries. By these words of Hesychius we learn,
that Christ offered, and sacrificed his Body and Blood twice. First in that
Holy Supper vnbloudely, when he took Bread in his hands, and brake it, etc:
Without Division of the Sacrifice, for it is but one and the same Sacrifice.
And afterward on the Cross, with Shedding of his blood, and that is it, he
means by the word, Preventing.

Jewel.
We deny not, but it may well be said, Christ at his last Supper offered up
him self unto his Father: Albeit, not Really, and in deed, but, according to
M. Hardinges own Distinction, in a Figure, Apocal. 13.
or in a Mystery: in such sort, as we say, Christ was offered in the
Sacrifices of the Old Law: and as S. John says, Agnus Occisus ab Origin
Mundi: The Lamb was shaine from the beginning of the World. As Christ was
slain at the Table, so was he Sacrificed at the Table. But he was not slain
at the Table Verily, and in deed, but only in a Mystery: Therefore he was
not Sacrificed at the Table Really, and in deed, but only in a Mystery.

So says S. Augustine, Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in s^m etipso?
August. Epist. 23.
Et tamen in Sacramento, non tantum per omnes Paschae Solennitates, sed etiam
omni die populis immolatur. Nec vtique mentitur, qui interrogatus, eum
responderit immolari. Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum,
quarum Sacramenta sunt, non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Was not
Christ once offered in him self? And yet in ( or, by way of) a Sacrament,
not only at the Solemn Feast of Easter, but every day he is offered unto the
people. And he says no untruth, that being demanded, makes answer, that
Christ is Sacrificed. His reason is this: For if Sacraments had not a
certain Likeness, or Resemblance of the things, whereof they be Sacraments,
then should they utterly be no Sacraments.

Harding.
The contents of M. Jewels Reply in this Division stand in.4. points. First,
he grants that Christ offered up him self him self really, he avouches
it to be reproved by plain words of S. Paul.


Of the falshode of the first point, though I have spoken somewhat already, yet
because M. Jewel ceasseth not to sing one song, and eftsoon repeateth the same
tale, standing upon his false Negative: some deal more seems here necessary
to be spoken: that it may appear how clear the truth is of our side, and how
weak the stuff is, that he brings against us.

Although he tell not his tale in most distinct, and plain wise, as this
doctrine of the unbloody Sacrifice of Christ ought to be uttered, using the
terms of Figure, and Mystery, confusely: yet his meaning is plain yenough,
verily more plain, then true: Which is, that Christ offered up him self unto
his Father at his last Supper in Figure only, and that, concerning both the
thing offered, and the manner of offering: For adding as it were an exposition
of his own words, M. Jewels doctrine touching the Sacrifice, is only
figurative.
In such sort, says he, as we say, Christ was offered in the Sacrifice of
the old Law. Now certain it is, that in the sacrifices of the old Law
Christ was offered in Figure only, whether we consider the substance that was
offered, or the manner of offering. The substance of those old Sacrifices, was
a brute beast, a sheep, a calfe, a goat, an Ox. Of which every one was but a
figure only of Christ^ the manner of offering was slaughter with bloodshed,
which slaughter was also a figure only of Christ's bloody death to be suffered
upon the Cross. So M. Jewels doctrine touching this point is figurative on
every side, that is to say, that Christ offered up him self at his supper in
Figure only.

Yet understanding with him self, and as it were, being gilty in his own
conscience, that this doctrine sounds very strangely, and would offend the
ears of the learned Catholics: in the conclusion he qualifieth his tale with
terms, and shunning the odious word of a Figure only, guilefully shifteth
in the word Mystery, saying, that Christ was not sacrificed at the Table
really, and in deed, but only in a Mystery.

Now that our disputation fall not into wrangling and cauilles, here he is to
be demanded, what he means by this term, only in a Mystery, in this
Proposition, Christ was not sacrificed at the Table really, but only in a
Mystery.

Only in a Mystery.
If he mean nothing else thereby, but to exclude the bloody manner of
sacrificing, as in deed properly to speak, the sacrificing of living things
is with bloudeshed and slaughter: in that respect we grant also, that at the
Table Christ was not really so sacrificed, but in Mystery only. For at the
Table we know, he was not stickte with a knife, as the brute beasts in the
old Law were, nor let blood with thorns, nails, or spear, as he was on
the next morrow upon the Cross.

Mary where the exclusive particle, Only, is added, though in a right sense we
might bear with it, as it is referred to the mystical manner of sacrificing:
yet we say, it is strangely used in this place, where it may have relation to
two things, either to the body and blood of Christ being the substance of the
Sacrifice, or to the manner of sacrificing.

But if by his term, Only in a Mystery, he exclude the Real presence of
Christ him self, and mean that his very body and blood (as much to say,
Christ him self because of the unity of the two natures) was not in Christ's
hands, and upon the Table in deed, when having taken bread he gave thanks,
blessed, Lucae 22.
brake it, and said, this is my Body, and concerning the Cup, this is my
Blood, ^e is not now in the Altar, Only.
when we consecrate, doing that Christ did, and bad us to do, but that he was
there then, and is here now at the Divine Celebration, in a figure, sign,
token, signification, memory, representation, or Mystery Only, or that a
figure, sign, token, or Mystery Only is present, and sacrificed, and not
very Christ him self: If this be his meaning, herein we dissent utterly from
him, and he dissenteth from the Church of God, from that the holy Ghost has
taught his Church, from that al faithful Christen people has ever believed,
from that Christ him self professed, saying, this is my body, this is my
blood: to be short, from that, which has been of late by certain learned
men against him, and his fellows sufficiently, and substantially proved.

But what need we to demand of M. Jewel, what he means by his clowdy
words? No cloud can hyde his Sacramentarie heresy, it is evident, as well by
that he says here, as by that he has said and written in sundry other places,
according to the purport of the Caluinists doctrine (unto which sect he has
adjoined him self) and by his open profession, that he stands in his
Negative, and holds opinion, that Christ offered not him self really at his
last Supper. Now the affirmative part, which is, that Christ offered him self
at that Supper really, truly, and in deed, and made a real Sacrifice, though it
be in my Answer already proved: yet here further for their sake, who break
not out of the Church by their own stubbornness, and wilful malice, but be
lead a side by simplicity, and ignorance: thus we prove.

If Christ offered not up him self really and in deed in a Sacrifice at his
last Supper, he leaft his new Law in worse state then was the condition of
them, who lived in the time of the Law of Nature, or in the time of the Law
written. But in worse state he leafte it not: Ergo, he sacrificed him self at
the Supper truly, really, and in deed.

The Minor, or second Proposition is such, as no Christen man (I judge) will
deny, or doubt of. The first Proposition, which is conditional, shall sone
appear true to him, who considers, that the good and godly people living
under the Law of Nature before any Law was written, Cyprian. Sermon de
ratione circu^cisionis.
by the inspiration of God (as S. Cyprian witnesses) offered up real
sacrifices, in which they protested their faith, and trust in Christ to come,
by whose Sacrifice to be made upon the Cross they looked, and heartily desired
to be saved. So did Abel offer up Sacrifice to God of the best of his flock.
Genesis 4. Genesis 8.
So did Noe offer up Sacrifice of the clean beasts, that had been with him in
the Arc. Genesis 22.
So Abraham, after that he had (for so much as in him was) offered up his only
son Isaac, did instead of him sacrifice the Ram, that was tied by the
horns among the brambles. So did other just and good men of that time, offer
up the like sacrifices to the same end.

As for the time of the law written, who is so ignorant, that knows not,
that real sacrifices of sundry beasts, beside other things were commanded to
be offered up for diverse particular ends, yet al to one chief end, to
foresignifie and prefigurate the most perfect Sacrifice of Christ to come? Al
these sacrifices although offered in a figure, and signification of benefit
that then was to come, yet were they real and true sacrifices notwithstanding,
as consisting of real and true substances. And thus we see, that by Gods
providence in the time of both Laws, of Nature, and of Moses, real sacrifices
were offered up unto him in figure and token of the Redemption to come.

Now then if Christ leafte to the new law, which he ordained, no real
Sacrifice (a Sacrifice being the chiefest worship that man can do unto God) but
endued it with a sacrifice, that is offered only in a figure: how did he not
leave it in worse case, then the law of nature, or the law written? And
certain it is, that he leaft it without any such Sacrifice, unless he
offering him self really at his Supper, did begin and institute it after the
order of Melchisedek. For in any time, or place else, instituted, and
commanded, it is not found. Concerning inward, and mere spiritual sacrifices,
they be common to al times and laws, as it is before proved.

If M. Jewel, and the mainteiners of this new Gospel, put us in mind of bread
and wine, and tell us, that the substance of bread and wine is our real
Sacrifice, being the signs and figures of Christ's body and blood in the
Lords Supper: to that we answer, that bread and wine are not appointed, and
ordained by Christ, to be the real Sacrifice of the Church: and if they were,
then were the state of the new Testament no better then that of the old
Testament, whereas the new far passing the old in every degree of
worthiness, as S. Paul in sundry places declares, the Sacrifice frequented
in the new law, ought to surmount the Sacrifices of the old law. Then has
the Church made a very mean exchange with the Jewish Synagog. For if we have
no better substance in our daily Sacrifice, then a piece of bread and a small
portion of wine: how was not a goat, a lamb, an Ox, as good, if not better,
and more worth?

Christ has not so solenderly dealt with the heirs of the new Testament, as
to leave so base and unworthy a sacrifice unto them (base and unworthy I say,
in comparison of the high dignity, that God through his sons death has
called them unto) but by his almighty power, and according to his passing great
mercy and love, has given no worse thing then him self, to be their true and
real Sacrifice.

Some one will say perhaps, I would believe this doctrine the rather, if it
were confirmed with the testimony of an Ancient learned Father. Let us hear
then, what S. Chrysostom says touching this point. Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. 10.
Ho. 24 A clear testimony for the Sacrifice of Christ in the Church.
His words be these. In veteri quidem Testamento, cum imperfectiores essent,
quem Idolis offerebant sanguinem, cum ipse accipere volait, vt ab Idolis nos
auerteret. Quod etiam inenarrabilis amoris signum erat. Hic autem multo
admirabilius and magnificentius facrificium praeparauit, and quum sacrificium
commutaret, and pro brutorum caede se ipsum offerendum praciperet. In the old
Testament, when men were more imperfect, Christ him self would take that
blood, which they offered up unto Idols, to the end to turn them from
Idolatry. Which thing was a sign of an unspeakable love. But here (in the
new Testament) he has prepared a much more marvelous and honorable Sacrifice,
both in that he changed the Sacrifice, and also for that instead of the
slaughter of brute beasts, he commanded his own self to be offered.

Here we have by testimony of this ancient Father, the abolishing of the worse
sacrifice, and the appointment of a better. That was made of brute beasts,
this of Christ him self. Now consider good Reader, whether reason will bear
it, that the worse and baser sacrifice should be both real, and also in figure
and signification (for so were all the Jews sacrifices) and the better be in
figure or mystery only, and not real, as M. Jewel will have the Sacrifice of
the Church to be.

But that our Sacrifice is real, and that it is Christ him self, and that he
is really and in deed sacrificed: the words above rehearsed, and others of
the like force in that place of S. Chrysostom do plainly auouche. For first
let this be examined, that, as he says, Christ commanded for the slaughter
of brute beasts, now in the new Testament, him self to be offered. Of what
Sacrifice can this be meant, but of that which he both made, and instituted him
self at his last Supper, and gave charge to be frequented and done, until he
come? For as touching the Sacrifice of the Cross, though he suffered him self
to be taken, and to be crucified, and to be offered up with shedding of blood
unto death, yet he commanded not so much to be done, for then had the wicked
workers of his death ben giltlesse.

Lucae 22.
This commandment then of offering up Christ him self, 1. Cor. ^1.
is understood to have been given at the Supper, when after that he had
consecrated his body and blood, he said, do ye this in my remembrance. And
therefore S. Chrysostom speaks thus unto Christ in his Liturgy or Mass,
Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
Memoriam igitur agentes huius salutaris mandati, etc. We keep the memory of
this healthful commandment.

If M. Jewel replye, and say, that Christ commanded at the supper a memory
only to be celebrate of the true and real Sacrifice upon the Cross: to that
we answer. That this Sacrifice, whereof we speak, is a memory of that, we
confess: but that it is a memory only, so as the real presence of Christ be
excluded, that we deny: and to the contrary S. Chrysostom says, that he
commanded, se ipsum, him self to be offered up.

Christ commanded him self to be offered up.
Neither can M. Jewel shifte the matter from him by expounding this word, him
self, of the sign or figure of him self, meaning the bread and wine, as the
Sacramentaries do: For if that, which is now daily in the Church offered up
at the Altar, were but bread and wine, the signs of Christ's body and blood:
S. Chrysostom would not, ne could not justly have said, that Christ has
prepared for us of the new Testament, multo admirabilius, and magnificentius
Sacrificium, a much more marvelous, and honorable Sacrifice. For how can we
conceive a piece of bread, and a cup of wine, to be in respect of sacrifice,
a thing much more marvelous, and magnificent, or honorable, then a sheep, a
goat, and an Ox, both these and those signifying al one thing, that is,
Christ him self? Nay things compared with things, are not the beasts of a
far more price?

I trow M. Jewel will not set a greater price upon the bread and wine used in
this Sacrifice, for that they signify a more precious thing, then the brute
beasts did in the sacrifices of the old law, to wit, Christ already come,
whereas they signified Christ to come. For so he should divide Christ, and
imagine him to be better and worthier in the new Testament, then he was in the
old. Verily though redemption performed be to us better, then redemption
promised: yet Christ before and after the perfourmance, that is to say,
Christ now come, and then to come, is one Christ, and of one worthiness.

It follows therefore by all means, that either S. Chrysostom said untruly,
affirming Christ to have prepared for the new Testament a far more wonderful
and magnificent Sacrifice, then were the sacrifices of the Jews, which I
suppose M. Jewel will not be so shameless as to say, what so ever he think: or
that we have now in the Sacrifice of the Church, Christ him self, truly,
really, and in deed, and that he him self is really offered up unto his Father
by Priests of the new Testament, Witness for the true and real blood of Christ
in the Sacrament.
according to the commandment he gave at his supper, saying, do ye this in
my remembrance.

And that it is the real and true blood of Christ, which we have in the
Sacrifice of the Altar, whereby the real Sacrifice touching the thing
sacrificed is proved: it is most clearly affirmed by S. Chrysostom in the
place before alleged. For thus he speaks there. Quid hoc admirabilius,
Chrysostom. in prior. ad Cor. Hom. 24.
dic quaeso, quid amabilius? Hoc and amantes faciunt, cum amatos intuentur
alienorum cupiditate allectos, suae vero contemnentes: proprijs elargitis
suadent, vt ab illis abstineant. Sed amantes quidem in pecunijs, vestibus,
possessionibus, hanc ostendunt cupiditatem, in proprio sanguine nemo vnquam.
What thing I pray thee, is more marvelous then this? What more loving? (He
speaks of the blood that is in the chalice, which he says to be the same
that ran out of Christ's side) This is a thing that lovers do, when they
behold them whom they love, to be allured with the desire of other men's
things, and to set little by theirs: they give them their own things, and
entreat them to abstain from others. But lovers show this their desire in
money, in garments, in possessions, in his own blood no man ever showed it.

Figure only excluded.
To prove that Christ loves us more, then ever any man loved an other, he
says, that he gives us his own blood. Which in this place of S.
Chrysostom, can in no wise be expounded of the Figure and token of his blood.
For worldly lovers give unto their beloved as much, and as good a thing as
that, namely money, garments, their possessions. As for a token or sign of
their blood, or of their persons, it were easy for them to give. But Christ
(says he) shows his love toward us, by that whereby no man ever showed his
love to an other. If the only token of blood, might at any time have declared
so certain and assured love, lovers would oftentimes have spared their money,
their garments, and their possessions: and would have given unto their dear
beloved, the figure of their blood, or of their whole persons.

Thus is the true and real presence of Christ's blood, and consequently of his
flesh, proved by witness of S. Chysostome. And by the same is that proved,
which we call the real Sacrifice of the Church. For by that we say Christ to be
really offered up unto his Father, we mean none other thing, but that the
substance, which we offer and sacrifice, is the real body and blood of
Christ. This much therefore may stand for answer to M. Jewels Reply in this
place: Christ in the Sacrifices of the old Law, was so offered in a Figure,
as he was not the substance of them. In the Supper he was, and in the Mass he
is so offered, as he is the substance present.

And because this real Sacrifice of Christ, being the Sacrifice of the New
Testament, and the worthiness of it, is much impugned by the enemies of the
Church in our time, yea villanously mocked, skoffed, and railed at by
Antichrists wicked brood: Reasons, whereby the Catholics may be armed
against the Sacrame^taries for defense of this Sacrifice.
the godly Catholics may by these reasons be sufficiently armed against them.

If it were necessary for the people of the old Law to have real sacrifices
to protest, and to maintain their belief in Christ's Death to come: why is it
not as necessary, that the faithful people of the New Law, have also a real
Sacrifice, to protest and keep in memory their belief in Christ's Death
already past?

Again, as the new Law is better, and excellenter then the old, so is it
necessary it have a better and excellenter Sacrifice. But if we take away the
Sacrifice of the Real flesh and blood of Christ, and leave only bread end
wine to be offered up in a figure, or mystery: then have we not a Sacrifice
proper unto the new Law, that in worthiness passes and excels the
Sacrifices of the old Law, as the which consisted of as good a substance, as
the other, and signified as good a thing, as the other, and expressed it by
slaughter, and shedding of pure and innocent beasts blood more lively, then
the other.

Contrariwise let the real body and blood of Christ be the substanee of the
Sacrifice of the new Law (as the truth teaches saying, Lucae 22.
this is my body which is given for you, this is my blood which is shed for
you, Math 26
etc. and the Church believes): then does it infinitely excel all the Sacrifices
offered in the Law of Nature, or in the Law written. And then shall the New
Law, as in greatenesse of graces, and promises, and plainness of Scripture:
so surmount and pass also the old Law in Majesty of the Sacrifice, and of
Priesthode, which have ever in all Laws ben accounted the two principal points
of the same.

To be short, how can it be conceived, that our Sacrifice should be but a
figure, a sign, or a mystery only, and no true and real Sacrifice better
then the old sacrifices: since that by the teaching of all the ancient learned
Fathers, it is the truth, and perfourmance of all the old sacrifices?

Having said this much for the real offering of Christ let us now examine M.
Jewels argument. Examination of M. Iuels Argument.
As Christ was slain at the Table (says he) so was he sacrificed at the
Table. But he was not slain at the Table verily, and in deed, but only in a
Mystery: Therefore he was not sacrificed at the Table, really, and in deed,
but only in a Mystery.

Christ was then, and is now also at the holy Table, both really sacrificed in
respect of his real and true body and blood by virtue of the Word made
present, and also in a Mystery, in respect of the outward forms of bread and
wine under which they are present, and of the mystical manner of sacrificing.
This being true, as before we have declared, and therefore the Conclusion being
false: let us see, which of the Premises of M. Jewels Argument is false. It is
the Mayor, or first Proposition. If the same be resolved into the parts
whereof it consists, the untruth will soon appear. The first part is this.
Christ was slain at the Table. That is false. The second is this. Christ was
sacrificed at the Table. That is true. So that one part is false, and the
other true. And so by this trial, which is the surest way to try such kind of
Propositions, the whole Proposition in it self is found false, and therefore
the Conclusion follows not.

For the better evidence of the thing it self, we most gladly acknowledge, and
protest to the world, that Christ was really and in deed slain, and put to
death once for ever, and never shall again suffer the pains of Death. Yet
nevertheless he is, and shall to the worlds end continue, the real and true
Sacrifice of the new Testament, according to his own merciful Institution at
his last Supper. As for the lack of any slaying, and shedding of blood, it is
no cause at al, why it was not at the Supper, is not now, or may not be a true
and real Sacrifice. For it is sufficient, that is was once offered up with
slaying, and bloudeshedding to pay the raunsom of our sins. He did then, and
we de now offer the same body and blood in consideration and remembrance of
that slaying, and shedding. He offered at the Supper his body, and blood, that
on the morrow was to be slain, and shed: we at the Altar do still offer that
body, and blood, that was slain, and shed, even the same self body, and
blood in number. For, as Theophylacte following S. Chrysostom says.
Theophylact. in ^0. c. ad Heb.
Eundem semper offerimus, Imo potius memoriam illius oblationis, qua seip^ sum
obtulit, facimus, ceu nunc iam facta sit, we offer up always the self same
(Christ) or rather we keep the memory of that oblation, whereby he offered
him self, as though it were even right now done.

In this point therefore this Sacrifice is clearly unlike the sacrifices of
the old law, wherein although beasts of one kind were offered daily, as for
example, this day a lamb, and to morrow likewise a lamb: yet it was not one
lamb, but diverse lambs. And therefore a new killing and shedding of blood was
daily required. But we do not offer this day one lamb, to morrow an other, but
always the self same, as S. Chrysostom says.

Chrysostom. in epist. ad Heb. Hom. 17. Ibidem.
Again this Host is such, as can not be consumed, though they be never so
many, that be made partakers of it, as he also says. Ipsam offerimus and nunc,
quae tunc oblata quidem consumi no^ potest. We do offer up now also the same
host, which being offered then (he means upon the Cross) can not be
consumed. Wherefore since it is continually the self same host, in number with
that, which was slain upon the Cross, albeit it be really again sacrificed,
to continue the memory of the real death of the same, and to be the real
Sacrifice of the new Testament: M. Jewel going about to abolish the truth of
our Sacrifice, for that it is not truly again slain, bewrays his own
penury of better and sounder reasons, and seems to reprove all the old
learned Fathers, for calling it the unbloody Sacrifice.

Jewel.
Notvvitstandinge, Hesychius expoundinge the Book of Leuiticus, to the intent
he may force the whole Story of the Life, and Death of Christ, to answer
every particulare Ceremony of the Law, is sometimes driven, Hesych. in
Leuit. li. 1 cap. 4.
to streatche, and strain the Scriptures to his pnrpose. So he says, Christ
is the Aultare: And, Christ Incarnate in the Virgins Womb, is the Sodden
Sacrifice.

Now as Christ was the Aultare, Li. 1. ca. 2. Sacrificiu^ Coctum.
and as he was Sacrificed in his Mothers Womb, even so he Sacrificed him
self at his Supper: not in proper, or usual manner of speech, but only in a
Mystery Signifieinge.

Otherwise S. Cyprian plainly opens the whole difference of these two
Sacrifices in this sort: Cyprianus de Unction Chrismatis.
Dedit Dominus noster in mensa, in qua Vltimum cum Apostolis participauit
Conuiuium, proprijs manibus Panem, and vinum: In Cruce vero manibus militum
Corpus tradidit vulnerandum. Our Lord at the Table, whereat he received his
last Supper with his Disciples, with his own hands gave ( not his very
Body, and very Blood Really, and in deed, but) Bread, and Wine: But upon
the Cross, he gave his own Body, with the Soldiers hands to be VVounded.
This, says Saint Cyprian is the difference bitvvene the Sacrifice of the
Table, and the Sacrifice of the Cross: At the one, Christ gave Bread, and
Wine: Upon the other, he gave his Body.

Therefore, vvherea^ M. Harding says, only upon his own vvarrante, That
Christ Really Sacrificed him self at two sundry times, and that he twice
Really Shead his Blood, First at the Table, and Afterward upon the Cross:
The untruth, and folly hereof is easily reproved by these plain words of S.
Paul: Hebrae. 9.
Semel Oblatus est, ad multorum exhaurienda peccata: He was once offered, to
take away the sins of many. Hebrae. 10.
And again, With one Sacrifice he has made perfect them for ever, that be
Sanctified. These places are clear, and without question: unless M. Harding
vvil say that, One, and, Two: and, Once, and Twice, be both one thing.

Harding.
Concerning the words of Hesychius, they be plain for the real sacrifice of
Christ at the Supper. For if he had there offered up him self in a figure, or
Mystery only, as M. Jewel means by his only mystery: he would never have
called it a prevention of the bloody Sacrifice, Hesychius In Leuit. li. 1. cap.
4.
neither would he have used the term praeueniens, preventing. For Christ to
offer up him self at the supper in a figure only, in such sort as he was
offered in the sacrifices of the old law, had not ben a prevention of his
bloody Sacrifice upon the Cross. Verily if M. Jewels understanding were
streatched and strained unto the obedience of faith, he would not say so
sawcily of that ancient and learned Father, that he is driven to stretche and
strain the Scriptures to his purpose. And what if it were granted, that so he
did sometimes (for more this Replyer says not him self) will it thereof follow,
that he has so done in this place?

As for the streatching and straining of the Scriptures, which he lays to
Hesychius charge, it is a very simple answer to the authority out of him
alleged. That he calls Christ the Altar, it is not strange, for so S. Paul
calls him, as there he allegeth. Neither was Christ by his report,
sacrified in his Mothers womb, he was incarnate in the virginis womb, and the
same Christ's incarnation, he calls the baked Sacrifice, for thereof he
speaks, and not of a sodden sacrifice, as the place is evident. The Oouen
wherein it was baked, was the Virgins womb, Hesychius in Leuit. li. 1. cap. 2.
Lucae 1.
because (as he says) she received from above the bread of life, to wit, the
word of God, in her womb, and the fire of the presence of the holy Ghost.
For the holy Ghost (says the Angel) shall come over into thee, and thee power
of the highest shall ouershadow thee.

And the same Christ, that was incarnate in the Virgins womb, sacrificed him
self at his Supper, although not in such manner, as the live hosts in the
old Testament were sacrificed, that is to say, with bloodshed, and slaughter:
yet in a mystery, but truly, and really, and after that manner of speech,
which is proper and usual to the Catholic Church speaking of this singular
Sacrifice, not only in a mystery signifying, that is to say, in a figure, or
signification only, as M. Jewel means, the substance of Christ's body and
blood excluded: but so in a mystery, as that most divine substance be believed
to be verily present, and by us in remembrance of his death presented to God.

Touching the place of S. Cyprian, S. Cypria^ falsified by M. Jewels ma^gling,
and hevving.
de unction Chrismatis, he is like to have small advantage, and less honesty
by alleging it, when it is known, how falsely he has done, in taking the
beginning of the sentence, which being set a part from the rest, seems to
give a sownde of his do^ctrine, and cutting away the end, that declares the
Doctors meaning, and quit overthrows the Sacrame^tary heresy. For
immediately after the words, that M. Jewel takes for his purpose, whereby is
signified, that our Lord at his last Supper gave unto his Apostles, bread and
wine with his own hands, and upon the Cross delivered his body to be wounded
with the hands of the Soldiers: this much follows in the same sentence. Vt
in Apostolis secretius impressa syncera veritas, Cyprianus De vnctio ne
Chrismatis.
and vera synceritas exponeret Gentibus, quomodo vinu^ and panis, caro esset
and sanguis, et quib^ ro^ibus causae effectibus co^uenire^t, et diuersa noi^a
vel species ad vna^ reducere^tur essentia^, et significa^tia et significata
eisde^ nacabulis ce^serentur. That the sincere truth, and true sincerity being
secretly imprinted in The Apostles might expound unto the Ge^tils, how wine and
bread should be his flesh and blood, and by what means the causes should be
agreeable to the effects, and diverse names and kinds should be brought unto
one substance, and the things signifying, and the things signified, should be
called by the same names.

Lo here it is declared, what bread and wine it was, as much to say, the flesh
and blood of Christ, which S. Cyprian says, he gave at his last Supper unto
his Apostles. This clear and sincere truth, or true synceritie (so he calls
either the true doctrine of this Sacrifice, or the Sacrifice it self in respect
of the sundry impure and typical sacrifices of Moses Law) he would secretly,
that is, with the inward knowledge of these secret mysteries, to be imprinted
and digested in The Apostles, to thinte^t they should expound unto the Gentiles,
the Jews with their old sacrifices being now rejected, how at this heavenly
banquet the bread and wine is flesh and blood: how the causes and effects be
agreeable, that is to say, how the words of Co^secratio^ duly pronounced by
the Priest, and the power of the holy Ghost, which are the causes, do produce
and make the body and blood of our Lord, which be the effects: how things of
diverse names, and diverse in nature, and therefore diverse kinds, be brought unto
one essence or substance, to wit, bread and wine, unto the substance of
Christ's flesh and blood, Transubstantiatio^^
whereby Transubstantiation is wrought: briefly to conclude, how, whereas bread
signifies the body, and wine the blood, the things signifiyng, and the
things signified, be called by the same names. Which thus appears to be
true, because that which before Consecration was, and afterward seems to be
bread, is called the flesh, and in like case wine is called the blood: and so
contrariwise sometimes the flesh is called the bread, and the blood is called
the wine. What can be said more directly against M. Jewels Sacramentarie
Heresy, and more piththily for confirmation of the Catholic doctrine touching
this point? And all this M. Jewel has leaft out.

The same very thing S. Cyprian does utter more plainly in other places.
Cyprianus De coena Domini.
In his Treatise of the Supper of our Lord he has these most evident words.
Panis iste, quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura
mutatus, Omnipotentia Verbi factus est Caro. This bread, Lib. 2. Epi^stola 3.
which our Lord gave unto his Disciples (at his supper) being changed not in
shape, but in nature, by the almighty power of the Word was made flesh.

Again writing to Ca^ilius, he says. Qui magis sacerdos, ^ Dominus noster
Jesus Christus, qui sacrificiu^ obtulit, et obtulit hoc ide^, quod
Melchisedech, id est, pane^ et vinum, suu^ scilicet corpus et sanguine^. Who is
more a Priest, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up a Sacrifice, and
offered the very same, that Melchisedech did, that is to say, bread and wine, as
much to say, his own body and blood. By these places S. Cyprian declares his
mind plainly, what he means by the bread and wine, that Christ either gave
at the Supper unto his Disciples, or offered unto his Father to render thanks
for the great benefit of his passion, soothly none other bread and wine, then
that which was made by the almighty power of the Word, his body and blood.
And behold Reader how uniform his utterance is, and how he agrees with him
self. In the Sermon De unction Chrismatis by M. Jewel with false leaving out
that which made for the truth, alleged, he says, that diverse, kinds are
reduced into one substance, in his Sermon De coena Domini, he says, the bread
by the omnipotency of the Word is made flesh, so bread and flesh being
diverse kinds, are brought to one substance. There the things signifying, and
the things signified, says he, be called with the same names, as how, I have
before declared. In his Epistle to Cecilius, naming bread and wine, he
expounds him self, thus, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem, as much to say,
his own body and blood. Where the body and blood bear the names of bread
and wine. By this it is clearly seen, what an impudent and wicked gloss is
that, which M. Jewel incloseth in his parenthesis added by way of exposition
unto the maimed sentence of S. Cyprian, wherewith to exclude the body and
blood of Christ, the true bread and wine.

What have you won here by S. Cyprian M. Jewel? Who cutteth and maimeth the
Doctors? Who is now to be asked, whether he have the chynecoffe, M. Jewels
Coffe.
which in a place of your Reply with out cause you twite me of? What kind of
coffe I shall call this, I wot not, I fear me the il matter of it lies not in
your chyne, a place so far from the heart, but in the heart it self. For
were not the same by Satan's work festred with the corruption of heresy, you
had not ben let, as with a coffe, from bringing forth the later part of S.
Cyprians saying, whose beginning you falsely abuse to obscure the clear truth.
Who so ever thus coffeth, I will not say, he has the chynecoffe, as you jest,
but verily (saving my charity) that he coffeth as like an heretic, as a
rotten yew cof^eth like a sheep.

Last of al, whereas he says, that I am reproved of untruth and folly by S.
Paul for saying, Three lies made by M. Jewel within three lines.
that Christ really sacrificed him self at two several times, and twice
really shed his blood, only upon mine own warrant: he makes no less then
three lies within three lines. For neither said I in this place, that Christ
twice really shed his blood, nor only upon mine own warrant said I, that
Christ sacrificed his body and blood twice, because I had the authority of
Hesychius here, as the authority of other Fathers before, namely Gregory
Nyssen, and Theophylacte, for my warrant. Nor for so saying am I reproved of
any untruth, or folly, by S. Paul. For my assertion is true, notwithstanding
any thing that S. Paul says.

What though S. Paul say, Heb. 9.
M. Jewel, Christus semel oblatus est ad multoru^ exhauriend^ peccata, Christ
was once offered, Heb. 10^
to take away the synn^s of Many: Again, with one Sacrifice he has made
per^ite for ever them, that be sanctified? Because in these two sayings you
find the terms, one, and once: therefore suppose you, that needs they must
reprove my assertion, auouching that Christ was twice really offered?

Two oblations of one body.
It seems you never considered, that there may be two oblations of one body,
one bloody, the other unbloody: one by his own virtue meriting, the other
applying the merit: the one open to the eyes of al, the other in a mystery:
the one employing death of the thing offered, the other representing and
recording the same death. Thus it may be, and yet the one shall not quit exclude
the other. And he that shall affirm, the bloody, the meriting, and the open
oblation to be but one, shall not reprove him, that says, having respect to
both these Oblations, that they be two, and that the body offered, is twice
offered.

Even so stands the case between that S. Paul says, and that I say. S. Paul
speaks of the Sacrifice of the Cross that employed the death of Christ, and
fully merited forgiveness of the sins of the world. Which appears by the
effect of the oblation added, ad multoru^ exhaurienda peccata, Heb. 9. Heb. 10.
to take away the sins of many, and in the other place, he made them that be
sanctified with one oblation perfect for ever. This Sacrifice was offered upon
the Cross. I speak both of that Sacrifice of the Cross, and of this which
Christ offered at his Supper, and commanded to be offered in his remembrance
until he come again.

The substance of these two Sacrifices being Christ, is al one. The manner of
offering, and end is diverse. That upon the Cross, Luc. 22.
was paineful bloody, ignominious, and ended in death. 1. Cor. 11.
This at the Supper, is impassible, unbloody, glorious, and free from death.
The end of that was to deserve, and purchase the salvation of the world, by
paying a raunsom superabundantly sufficient for the sins of mankind. And
that was done once for all. The end of this, is to commemorate, and represent
the death of Christ unto his Father, and in that co^memoration to beseech God
forgeuing us our sins, to take us into his favor through the merits of that
death, and to apply the benefit of it unto them, for whom being as they ought
to be, disposed, this Sacrifice is offered.

To prove that Sacrifice made upon the Cross and the merits thereof, there
need none other testimonies, then those which have been already cited out of S.
Paul. Of this, which was offered and instituted at the Supper, of the unity of
it with the other, and of the effects of the same, the learned Fathers have
made mention in sundry places. The oblation it self, and Institution, and one
effect, S. Cyprian comprehends in one sentence. Cyprian. lib. 2. epistol. 3.
Jesus Christus Dominus noster ipse est summus Sacerdos Dei Patris, and
Sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui commemorationem
praecepit. Jesus Christ our Lord, he is the highest Priest of God the Father,
and he him self first offered a Sacrifice, and commanded the same to be made
in his Remembrance.

The unity of it with the other in substance, and the same effect that S.
Cyprian speaks of, Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in epist. ad Heb.
S. Chrysostom most plainly utters. Quid ergo nos? etc. What then do we?
Do^ we not offer every day? We do offer verily, but we do it for remembrance
of his death. And this host (or Sacrifice) is one, not many. How is it one,
and not many^ Because it was once offered, it was offered up into the most holy
place. But this Sacrifice is a sampler of that other. The self same do we
offer up always. etc.

An other effect of this our Sacrifice, that is, the Applying of Christ's
Passion unto us, S. Gregory does express saying. Gregor. Hom. 37.
Quoties ei hostiam suae Passionis offerimus, toties nobis ad absolutionem
nostram illius Passionem reparamus. As often as we offer unto him the host of
his Passion, so often do we renew unto our selves his Passion to our
absolution.

And here to answer his skoffing Conclusion, I wonder, that skoffing at me for
saying, Christ was twice sacrificed, he forgotte, that in the self same
Division a little before, he alleged a place out of S. Augustine, where there is
express mention of two immolations or sacrificinges of Christ. S. Augustines
words be plain. August in. Epist. 23.
No^ne semel oblatus est Christus in semet ipso? Et tamen in Sacramento non
tantum per omnes Paschae solennitates, sed etiam omni die populis immolatur.
Was not Christ once sacrificed in him self? And yet notwithstanding in a
Sacrament he is sacrificed for the people, (so it is to be translated, and not
is offered unto the people, as M. Jewel falsely translateth it) not only through
all the solemn feasts of Easter, but also every day.

Why heard you not your self M. Jewel, reporting this plain saying of S.
Augustine, that Christ is twice offered? twice (I say) in respect of the
manner of offering, once openly, in him self, that is, upon the Cross: and
again in a Sacrament, after which manner he is offered up every day, whereby
the Sacrifice of the Altar is meant. Christ there, and Christ here is
sacrificed, for the substance of both Sacrifices is Christ. Of that you doubt
not, of this you should not doubt, believing him, who said, This is my body.

Thus then we answer your scorneful absurdity. One and Two, and Once and
Twice, may thus both be conceived to be said of one thing in this singular
Mystery in diverse respects. If Sacrifice signify the thing sacrificed, and
also the Act of sacrificing: then whereas One body and One Christ, was
sacrificed, yet the Sacrifices were Two. There have we One, and Two. Again
Christ was vnbloudely sacrificed at the Supper, and but once bloudily upon the
Cross. So he was in ^espect of diverse manners of offering, Once and Twice
offered. Yet in respect of the thing offered or sacrificed, it was One
Sacrifice, One offering, One Christ. Thus to a faithful man of the Catholic
Church, who has subdued his understanding unto faith, it appears
sufficiently, how in a due consideration, One, and Two, and Once, and Twice,
whereat M. Jewel skoffeth, may both be said of one thing. Thus he is overtaken,
and found unable to answer the place of Hesychius, the substance of this
Division.

The.7. Division.
The Answer.
ANd at the same very instant of time (which is here further to be added, as a
necessary point of Christian dostrine) we must understand that Christ
offered him self in Heaven inuisibly (as concerning man) in the sight of his
Heavenly Father, and that from that time forewarde that Oblation of Christ in
Heaven was never intermitted, but continues always for our atonement with
God, and shall without ceasing endure until the end of the world. For as S.
Paul says, Heb. 9.
Jesus has not entered into Temples made with hands, the samplers of the true
Temples, but into Heaven it self, to appear now to the countenance of God for
us. Now as this Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ endures in Heaven
continually, for as much as he is risen from the dead, and ascended into heaven
with that Body, which be gave to Thomas to feel, bringing in thither his
Blood, as Hesychius says, Lib. 1. c. 4.
and bearing the marks of his wounds, and there appears before the face of
God with that Thorneprickte, Naileboared, Spearepearsed, and otherwise wounded,
rent, and torn Body for us: (whereby we understand the virtue of his Oblation
on the Cross ever enduringe, not the Oblation it self with renewing of pain,
and suffera^ce continued) so we do perpetually celebrate this Oblation and
Sacrifice of Christ's very body and blood in the Mass, in remembrance of him,
commanded so to do, until his coming.

Wherein our Adversaries so foolishely, as wickedly scoff at us, as though we
sacrificed Christ again, so as he was Sacrificed on the Cross, that is, in
Bloody manner. But we do not so Offer, or Sacrifice Christ again: but that
Oblation of him in the Supper, and ours in the Mass, is but one Oblation, the
same Sacrifice, for this cause by his Divine ordinance leaft unto us, that as
the Oblatio^ once made on the Cross continually endures, and appears before
the face of God in Heaven for our behalf, continued not by new suffering, but
by perpetual intercession for us: So the memory of it may ever until his
second coming be kept amongst us also in earth, and that thereby we may apply
and bring unto us through Faith the great benefits, which by that one Oblation
of him self on the Cross he has for us procured, and daily does procure.

Jewel.
At the same very instant of time, says M. Harding, when Christ was sacrificed
upon the Cross, he offered up him self also in Heaven in the sight of his
heavenly Father. Which thing he enlarges Rhetorically with a Tragical
Description of a Thorneprickte, Naileboared, Spearepearsed, and otherwise
rent, and Torn Body. And this says he, is a necessary point of Christian
doctrine: And that he avouches constantly, albeit without the word, or
witness of any Ancient writer, only upon his own credit. Whereof also
grows some suspicion, that his Stoare of old Records, is not so plenteous,
as it is supposed.

But where he says, Christ was thus Inuisibly sacrificed in Heaven, I
marvel, he says not likewise, that Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, the Soldiers,
and the tourmentours were likewise in Heaven to make this Sacrifice. For
without this Company Christ's Blood was not shead: And without Sheadding of
Blood, S. Paul says, There is no Sacrifice for Remission of Sin. This
Fable is so vain, that, I believe, M. Harding him self is not well hable, to
expound his own meaning. Origin says, There were some in his time, that
thought, That, as Christ was Crucified in this world for the living, so he
should afterward suffer, Origin. in epist. ad Romans lib. 5. cap. 6.
and be Crucified in the world to come for the dead. But that Christ was
thus Thorneprickte, Naileboarde, Spearepearsed, and Crucified in Heaven, I
think, noman ever savv, or said, but M. Hardinge. The Apostles, the
Evangelists, the Old Doctors, and Ancient Fathers never knevv it. S. Paul
says, Semel seipsum obtulit: Once he offered up him self: Heb. 7. Heb. 9.
Semel introiuit in Sancta: Once he entered into the holy place. And therefore
hanging upon the Cross, and yelding up the Ghost, he said, Consummatum est, It
is finished, This Sacrifice is perfitely wrought for ever. This only
Sacrifice of Christ the Son of God the Scriptures acknovvlege, and none other.

Harding.
In this Division M. Jewels Reply contains little, that is worthy to be
answered. Yet least more substance of matter should be thought to be in it, then
is in deed: with some few words the vanity of it is to be detected. The
contents of M. Jewels Reply in the 7. Di^uision.
First, he skoffeth at an absurdity of his own Devise by his false report
attributed to me, as though I had uttered it. Secondly, he affirms that noman
denied, which is altogether impertinent, that Christ's Sacrifice upon the
Cross remains still in force. Thirdly, he finds fault with an Ancient
Prayer used to be said in the Mass. Fourthly, he goes about by a fond reason
to show, the Sacrifice of the Altar, not to be the same that was offered upon
the Cross.


For answer to his first part I desire no more, but that the words of my
book be circumspectly read over, and considered. Which done, I doubt not but
the reader shall easily epsy the lightness of his Reply, and the vanity of
his skoffes. For proof that our Savior Christ appears in heaven before the
face of his Father, with his rent and torn body for us, partly in my Answer I
touched a testimony taken out of Hesychius, as there it is to be seen: and
hard it was not other testimonies to have brought. If I wist that would
satisfy him, and bring him to recant, and return unto the catholic faith: I
would gladly prove that point with some good number of the old Learned
Fathers. That Christ appea^reth before the Father in heaven with his wounded
body.
But doubting much thereof, I think in a matter so generally believed and
confessed, a few testimonies may suffice.

First, Hesychius says thus, Cicatrices portans Passionum, a mortuis
resurrexit, vnde and suum corpus palpandum Thomae praebuit, atque ita in caelos
ascendit. Christ rose again from the dead bearing with him the skarres of his
stripes and wounds. Hesychius in Leuit. lib. 1. c. 4.
For so he offered his own body to Thomas to feel it, and so he ascended into
heaven.

Next S. Cyprians words be plain. Cypria^. de baptismo Christi.
Semper reseruatae in corpore plagae salutis humanae exigunt precium, and
obedientiae donatiuum requirunt. The wounds reserved still in Christ's body,
do demand the payment of Man's salvation, and require the reward of his
obedience. Now what were the wounds, that Christ received in his body at the
time when he suffered his Passion, but the prickinges of the Thorns, the
boaringes of the Nails, and the pearsing of the Soldiers spear? If these
wounds be reserved always in his body, and claim for payment to be made,
which payment is the salvation of Mankind, as S. Cyprian says: why makes M.
Jewel so much a do for that I said, that Christ appears continually before
the face of God, with that thorneprickte, naileboared, spearepearsed, and
otherwise wounded, rent, and torn body for us?

And whereas he calls this a Rhetorical enlarging of the thing with a
Tragical description: if it were so, what evil is therein committed? Do not the
best learned Fathers oftentimes to move devotion, and compassion, use
Rhetorical amplifications, and much more vehement speeches? Does not S. Cyprian
in the place above mentioned, tell us of certain words, quae emolliunt
animum, accenduntque deuotionis affectum, which do soften and supple our
mind, Cyprianus ibidem.
and enkindle the affection of devotion in us? If I had such a motion, when I
wrote those words, M. Jewel ought not to scorn, and skoffe at it.

An other learned Father touching the appearing of Christ in heaven before his
Father with such a body, writes thus. Theophylacte I mean, who, though he be
not one of the most ancient, yet reporteh that which he learned of the old
learned Fathers of the Greek Church: and so reports it, as he may seem to
expound what S. Cyprian meant, by claiming the payment or reward of Man's
salvation. These be his words. Etiam number vna cum corpore quod pro nobis
immolauit, Theophyl. in epistol. ad Hebr. cap. 5.
apud Deum and patrem intercedit, hoc est, quas pro nobis pertulit
afflictiones, vt multum commoueat, proponit etiam sine voce, reipsa nimirum
patriloquens: Pro humana natura filius tuus ego sustinui haec: miserere igitur
horum, pro quibus ego pati and mori sustinui. Christ even now by his body,
which he sacrificed for us, with God and his Father makes intercession, that
is to say, he sets forth to the intent he may much move him the afflictions
which he suffered for us, without voice, even by deed it self speaking unto
the Father (in this wise) I, which am thy Son have suffered these things for
mankind: have mercy therefore of them, for whom I have sustained to suffer
and dye.

What other thing in effect do my words importe, which M. Jewel so much
ieasteth at, and says I speak them upon mine own credit only without
witness of any Ancient writer: then that was spoken so long since by
Hesychius, S. Cyprian, and Theophylacte? For as concerning S. Chrysostom (who
says no less, Chrysosto. in caput. 9 ad Hebrae. Homi. 17.
though in fewer words, Cum Sacrificio ascendit, quod potuit propitiare
Patrem, Christ ascended into heaven with the Sacrifice, that was hable to
pacify the Father) and other ancient Fathers, by which they mean the body
that suffered upon the Cross: because they speak it more darkely, here I omit
to recite them. If then M. Jewels humor be such, as he must needs please him
self in mocking and skoffing, let him consider how it becomes him to skoffe
at Hesychius, S. Cyprian, Theophylacte, S. Chrysostom, and other holy and
learned Fathers.

That Christ was thus inuisibly sacrificed in heaven, M. Ievvel falsely
reports the Answer.
I say not: it is your false report M. Jewel, let my book be trial. This is
your common woonte, with shifting of your words in my words place, to frame
an absurd saying, and thereat to exercise the talent of your skoffing. Wherein
you fight but with your own shadow, you touch not my person.

Only I said, that Christ offered him self in heaven, when he was crucified
on earth, read my words who list. And that I said is true. And it is none
other thing, then was said by Hesychius above a thousand years paste. Hesych.
in Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Whose words these be. Quo tempore vitulus immolabatur in inferioribus, eo
tempore vt Pontisex ipse sibi Sacrificium offerebat in coelo. At what time the
Calfe (that is to say, Christ) was sacrificed beneathe in the earth, at the
same time Christ as the high Bishop, him self offered up Sacrifice to him
self in heaven.

As for your merry objection of Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, the Soldiers, and
Tourmentours, of whom you marvel, I said not, that they were likewise in heaven
to make this Sacrifice: you might have seemed to have some reason, if I had
said, or meant, that this Sacrifice was made in heaven, as you by falsifiyng my
Answer bear the unware Reader in hand I said. This Sacrifice, I say, by which
you mean the visible, paineful, and bloody Sacrifice, that was made upon the
Cross, and not in heaven: This Sacrifice, wherein Christ's Blood was shed,
without which company (say you) it was not shed. And yet where it was shed, I
trow you can not prove, that Pilate, Annas, and Caiphas were in the company of
the Soldiers that shed it.

Therefore where you say thus, That Christ was thus Thorneprickte,
Naileboarde, Spearepearsed, and Crucified in Heaven, I think noman ever saw,
or said, but M. Harding: I answer, that M. Harding never said it, as he
refers al to his book for trial, and I think, noman is so impudent, as in
so plain a matter so to belie him, but M. Jewel.

With what eyes did you read my book in this very place? Or think you other
men have not eyes to see these express words there put in by a pare^thesis,
to take away this very fond cauil that you make, whereby we understand the
virtue of his oblation on the Cross ever enduring, not the oblation it self
with renewing of pain, and sufferance continued? This once espied by the
Reader, how does not al your skoffiing lose his grace, and set forth your
impudency of lying?

And therefore you spend labor in vain, to prove that is not denied: Hebre.
7.
that Christ once offered up him self, and once entered into the holy place.
Which is true, once through shedding of his blood. Yet that Oblation
nevertheless endures for ever, and he with that very broken and torn body
still appears to the countenance of God in Heaven, making intercession for us.
And there, when we have sinned, if we repent, and call upon him, he is a
Propitiation for our sins, as S. John says, 1. Joan. 2.
not by a new shedding of blood, but by virtue of his blood once shed upon
the Cross, and of his Passion. Unto which manner of Oblation and appearing
before the face of the Father, which has continued from the hour of his
Passion to this time, and shall continue to the last day: the company of
Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, the Soldiers and Tormentous, as you skoffe, is not
necessary. They are appointed an other place, where is weeping and gnasshing of
teeth, Luc. 13.
where you are sure to have your part with them, unless you repent, and
return unto the Catholic Church.

Jewel.
How be it, like as the Prayers, that Christ once made, and the Doctrine,
that he once taught, remain still full, and effectual, as at the first: even so
the Sacrifice, that Christ once made upon the Cross, remains still in full
force, effect^al, and perfect, and endures for ever. Therefore S. Paul
says, Hebre. 7.
Christ has an everlasting Priesthode, and lives still, that he may still
pray for us. And therefore God the Father says unto him, and to none other,
either man, or Angel, or Archangel, Chrysosto^. in epist. ad Hebrae. Hom. 17.
Cyprian De Baptis. Christi.
Tu es Sacerdos in aeternu^: Thou art a Priest for ever. And therefore S.
Chrysostom compares this Sacrifice to a most sovereign salve, that being
once laid to the wound, heals it clean, and needs no more lai^inge on.
Likewise S. Cyprian saithe^ Nec Sacerdotij eius paenituit Deum: quoniam
Sacrificium, quod in Cruce obtulit, sic in beneplacito Dei constat acceptabile,
and perpetua virtute consistit, vt non minus hodie in conspectu Patris Oblatio
illa sit efficax, quam ea die, qua de saucio latere Sanguis, and Aqua exiuit:
and semper reseruatae in Corpore plagae salutis Humanae exigant pretium: It
never repented God of Christ's Priesthood: For the Sacrifice, that he offered
upon the Cross, is so acceptable in the good will of God, and so stands in
continual strength and Virtue, that the same Oblation is no less acceptable
this day in the sight of God the Father, then it was that day, when Blood, and
Water ran out of his VVounded side. The Skarres reserved still in his Body,
do weighe the price of the Salvation of man.

Harding.
Now comes M. Jewel to prove that no man denied. That the Sacrifice of
Christ upon he Cross continues still in force and effectual, as the Prayers
that he once made, and the doctrine that he once taught, remain effectual, as
at the first. All this is true M. Jewel, but how pertains it to your purpose?
Will you thereof conclude against us, and thus reason against the unbloody
Sacrifice: The unbloody Sacrifice continues always in force, Ergo, the
unbloody Sacrifice is superfluous? That is acceptable in the sight of God,
Ergo, this is unacceptable and displeasant.

If this be not your Argument, why said you so much for that, which every
faithful man confesses? If this be your Argument, we require you to learn
your Logique better, before you teach us new Divinity. For whereas there be
two things true, it is a fond kind of reasoning, to conclude the denial of
the one, by the affirmation of the other, as I must tell you oftentimes.

This much we confess also, that unless the Sacrifice whereof we speak, were
one and the same in substance of the thing offered, with the Sacrifice made
upon the Cross, though the manner of offering be diverse: it were superfluous,
and to God displeasant. For the new Testament acknowledges, nor accepts
none other real and external Sacrifice, but the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, which has succeeded, as S. Augustine, August. de ciuitate
Dei. li. 17. cap. 20.
and all the learned Fathers with one consent do confess, in place of all the
old Sacrifices.

Yet you will reply, and say. If that Sacrifice upon the Cross, be still
effectual, and continue in force for ever, what need is there of this
Sacrifice daily made upon the Altar?

Concerning this Reply, every man shall easily satisfy him self, if he will
consider it in a like case. Christ once prayed, and that prayer is effectual
to this day, and shall be to the worlds end. Nevertheless we must pray also,
if we will be partakers of his prayer.

Christ washed away the sins of the world, with the blood, that was shed
out of his body at his Passion: Notwitstanding we must, if we will be saved, be
baptized, that we be made clean from Original sin, and from Actual too, if
we have committed any before our Baptism.

Hebr. 10.
Christ has for ever perfited them that be sanctified, with one oblation. 2.
Cor. 7.
Yet S. Paul's counsel is, vt emundemus nos ab omni inquinamento carnis and
spiritus perficientes sanctificationem in timore Dei. That we cleanse our
selves from al filth of flesh, and spirit, perfiting our sanctification in the
fear of God. Here is special mention made of two perfitinges of our
sanctification, the one belonging to Christ, the other to our selves. If
Christ do perfect, what need we to perfect?

For the better assoiling of this doubt, let us call to mind, what S. Paul
writes in his Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, 1. Cor. 3.
Dei sumus adiutores. We are the helpers of God. What (will some say) has God
need of helpers? Yea truly. His goodness is such, that he vouchesaueth to take
us to be his helpers, not for any defecte, or vnhablenesse that is in him, but
because he would have us to be occupied in his service, and not to be idel. And
therefore he has appointed certain means and instruments to practice us
withal, as Faith, Baptism, Penance, Fasting, Prayer, Almose, and specially a
Sacrifice, wherein we may concur with him, not in the chief, first, and
general cause, which alone has wrought, and daily works: but as lively
instruments to derive unto our selves the effect of that chief, first, and
general cause, that as he generally has deserved and purchased a most full and
perfect salvation for all the world, which in it self can not be increased,
because it is perfect, ne can not be diminished, because it is infinite: so we
each of us by his grace using and putting in practice the means, that he has
appointed, may be made comparteners of the same salvation, which otherwise can
not be available unto us.

It should be over long, and beside my purpose, to stand about the proving,
that Baptism, Penance, Prayer, Fasting, Almose joined with Faith, that
works through Charity, That thi^ Sacrifice is a mean to derive the effect
of Christ's death unto us.
be means to derive unto us the effect of Christ's death. It shall suffice to
prove the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood upon the Altar, to be one of
those means.

This truth is proved not only by that which I have before alleged out of S.
Gregory, who says, that as often as we offer up unto him the host of his
Passion, so often we renew unto our selves his Passion for our absolution:
Gregor. Hom. 37.
but also by that which S. Augustine writes in a Prayer, which is to be found
in a treatise of devout Prayers entitled, Manuale. August. in Manuali. cap.
^1.
Where asking of God a contrite heart, and a fountain of tears, specially at
the time when he prays, he says thus. Dum sacris Altaribus licet indignus
assisto, cupiens tibi offerre illud mirabile and coeleste Sacrificium omni
reuerentia and deuotione dignum, quod tu Domine Deus meus sacerdos immaculate
instituisti, and offerre praecepisti, in commemorationem tuae charitatis,
mortis scilicet and Passionis pro salute nostra, pro quotidiana nostrae
fragilitatis reparatione. Give me I beseech thee o Christ Jesus, contrition of
heart, etc. Whiles I, although unworthy, do stand at the holy Aulters,
desirous to offer up unto thee that marvelous and heavenly Sacrifice, worthy of
al reverence and devotion, which thou Lord my God unspotted Priest did
institute, Luc. 22.
and commaundedst to offer up for a remembrance of thy charity, that is to
say, of thy death and passion for our salvation, and for the daily repairing of
our frailty.

Now whereas this Sacrifice offered up for the remembrance of Christ's death,
is here said to be profitable to save us, and to repair our daily ruins
happening unto us through our frailty: in what other sense can it be true, but
because thereby, as by a sovereign mean appointed by Christ, some particular
effect of that general and infinite salvation and reparation made upon the
Cross, is applied unto our sick and much decayed souls? And thus it is
declared, although not so largely as the worthiness of the matter requires,
how the Sacrifice of the Altar is auaialeble and requisite, although the
Sacrifice made upon the Cross remain still in full force, effectual, and
perfect, and endure for ever.

Jewel.
But M. Harding condemns us al for Foolish, and Wicked people. For
Foolish, I know not why. Neither is it thought a vvise-mannes part, either
greatly to mislike other men's vvittes, or ouermuche to like his own. How
be it, who so speaks, as never vvise-man spoke, and yet him self
understands not, what he speaks, as, in this case, it is thought, M.
Harding does, has no great cause, in this behalf, to charge others with
folly.

Harding.
M. Jewel is much offended for that I said, our adversaries no less foolishly,
then wickedly skoffe at us, us though when we celebrate the unbloody Sacrifice,
we sacrificed Christ again, so as he was sacrificed upon the Cross. But why
should you herewith be offended good sir? Is it not a foolish thing to tell us,
as ye do, that we shed the blood of Christ, and do such violence unto him at
the Altar, as the Soldiers did at the Cross? Though ye be so malicious as
to speak it, yet is there any man so simple, as to believe it? Who thus
speaks, I trow he speaks as foolishly, as he that goes about to make one
believe the Moon is made of green cheese. As that is a foolish persuasion, so
is this nolesse foolish, but more malicious. This notwithstanking, why I should
call them foolish, M. Jewel sees no cause. And no marvel. For a rare thing it
is to hear of a fool, that will acknowledge him self to be a fool, or to do
foolishly.

How be it, whereas M. Jewel, and his Companions do call in question and
disputation, whether many things, as well touching this unbloody Oblation of
the Church, as other points, be to be done of our part, which though not
expressly written, yet delivered from hand to hand be observed through out the
whole world, and therefore are presupposed to be retained, as commended and
decreed either by the Apostles them selves, or by General Councels, whose
authority in the Church is most wholesome: August. ad Ianuariu^. Epist. 118.
for this cause Saint Augustine condemns them not of bare folly, but of most
insolent madness. Thus to do, is a point, insolentissimae insaniae, of most
insolent madness, says he.

If then this be S. Augustines verdite of them for doubting, and reasoning of
such things, that be not expressly written in the Scripture, but be received
by custom: by what name deserves M. Jewel to be called, who flatly denies,
and with tongue, pen, and outward force of punishments, withstandeth the
Sacrifice of the Church offered and instituted by Christ, described in the
Gospel, Math. 26.
avouched of the old learned Fathers, frequented Luc. 22.
through out the whole Catholic Church of al ages, 1 Cor. 11.
and countries?

Neither has M. Jewel sufficient reason to conclude, that either I overmuch
like mine own wit, or mislike his wit, and his fellows, because I said,
they skossed foolishly and wickedly at us, touching this point. He, and they
may have wit enough, and yet for lack of grace do full foolishly. Esai. 6.
We read in the Scriptures of some who have eyes, Math. 13.
yet see not, ears, yet hear not, hearts, yet understand not. So there be
that have wit, yet many times do not wisely, but so as it may be said of
them, that fools have it in keeping. You have wit enough M. Jewel, I deny
not, ne envy not the praise of it: would God a good man had the occupying of
it.

Whereas I charged our Adversaries with folly, and wickedness, in that they
skoffe at us, as though we sacrificed Christ again with violent drawing of
blood out of his body, as he was sacrificed upon the Cross: M. Jewel
understanding him self therein touched, has full wisely put away from him the
blemish of folly, as now it is declared. It remains, he purge him self, and
his fellows, of the crime of wickedness. The same now he goes about to do.
But how, and with what reason, it is worth the consideration.

Jewel.
Of the other side, what so ever Mortal man presumes to offer up Christ in
Sacrifice, and dares to desire God the Father so favorably to behold his
own only Son, as in old times he beheld the Oblation of Abel, or of
Melchisedek, and is not afraid, therevvith to beguile the simple, and to mock
the world, as M. Harding does daily at his Mass: he can not well excuse him
self of open wickedness.

Harding.
To avoid the crime of wickedness, he again falsely accuses me, and in my
person, the whole Catholic Church of the same fault, as if a thief being
burdened with fellonie by some true man, would think him self unburdened of
that infamy, by charging the true man with theft on the other side. And what
is this great wickedness, that he lays unto our charge? Forsooth because
being mortal men we offer up Christ in Sacrifice, and dare to desire God the
Father, pronouncing the ancient Prayer of the Church in the Canon of the
Mass favorably to behold our oblation, and to accept it, as he vouchesaued
to accept the gifts of Abel, the Sacrifice of Abraham, and that which
Melchisedech offered. For so we do, and not altogether as M. Jewel reports.
This is that, whereof he says, we beguile the simple, and mock the world.

This is sufficiently answered before. For us to offer up to God the body and
blood of Christ, as executing thereby the plain commandment of Christ,
who at his last Supper having consecrated his body and blood, said, Luc. 22.
Do ye this is in my Remembrance: is neither to beguile the simple, nor to
mock the world. If we did it not, we should by not doing that we are
commanded to do, beguile the world, and defraude Gods people of the most
heavenly and precious tresoure, that our Lord left unto his Church.

And as touching the Prayer we are taught to make unto God, A defense of the
prayer v^sed to be said in the holy Canon of the Mass
wherein we humbly beseech him to accept our oblation of his Sons body and
blood, as he accepted the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech:
therein is no doubt made, but God the Father is best pleased with his only and
most dear Son Christ Jesus. The fear of our on worthiness moves us so to
pray, least that although the thing offered of it self be most acceptable, yet
the Father through our grievous sins displeased with us, will not admit, and
accept that most acceptable Sacrifice to our salvation, but rather to our
damnation. Like as it happeth sometimes a Prince to reiecte a very precious
Iuel offered by his enemy, or one that he favors not, not because the Iuel
misliketh him, but because the party that offered it, was his foe, or out of
his favor.

And whereas M. Jewel would have it seem absurd, that the Father should be
entreated with his merciful and favorable countenance to look upon the holy
bread of life everlasting, In Canone Missae.
and the cup of perpetual salvation, and to accept the same, as he
vouchesaued to accept the gifts and Sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and
Melchisedech, (for so the Priest prays at the Mass, and not as M. Jewel to
colorable advantage falsely reports it): I answer, that happy be we, if for
our behalf, he will so accept that our Sacrifice, as he did the Sacrifices of
those holy men his dear friends.

Furthermore M. Jewel is not ignorant, if he be so well learned, as he is
thought to be, that the aduerbe of simimilitude (Sicuti) As, Sicuti.
does not always signify a full equality, but only a likeness in some part
and degree. As for example, it does in that prayer, which Christ made unto his
Father for his chosen. Johan. 1^.
Pater sancte serua eos in nomine tuo, quos dedisti mihi, vt sint vnum, sicut
and nos. O Holy Father keep them in thy name, whom thou have given unto me,
that they may be one, as we are. In this Prayer Christ's meaning was not,
that the elect should be thoroughly in substance al one, as God the Father
and God the Son be: but one in charity, will, and concord, thinking al one
thing, and willing al one thing, Theophyl. in Johan. cap. 17.
as Theophilacte with other Doctors expounds the place. And whereas the
Scripture says in the person of God speaking unto Iosue, Sicut cum Moyse fui,
Iosue. 3.
ita and tecum sum, As I was with Moses, even so I am with the also: It is not
meant, that God was with Moses in no greater an higher degree of power and
virtue, then he was with Iosue. For Moses was admitted unto a peerlesse
friendship with God, and endewed with more special authority, then ever Iosue
was, as the Scriptures do evidently witness.

So does the Church beseech the Father to look upon that holy bread, and cup
of life and health everlasting, that is to say, the body and blood of his
Son Jesus Christ, with a merciful and clear countenance, as he did upon the
sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisede^: not that it is mistrusted, least
God be less, or not infinitely more pleased with the one Sacrifice, then with
the other: but that humbly we think, it shall be well with us, if he respect,
See what I say touching this Prayer of the Canon, in the last Division.
behold, and allow the ministry, and devotion of us, as far forth as he
did the devotion of the others. Of this M. Jewel gives me occasion to speak
more, in the last Division of this Article.

If M. Jewel had in his heart so much devout humility, or humble devotion, as
he seems to have deuilish arrogancy, or arrogant deuilishnesse: he would
never have accused me, or rather the Church, for using this humble and devout
Prayer in the Mass, which in spite he calls my Mass, being the common
Service, and Sacrifice of the whole Church of Christ.

But because like an unkind and degenerate, or rather a rebellious son, he
despises the authority of his Mother the Church, I will put him in mind of S.
Ambrose, that holy and learned Bishop, and excellent member of the Church,
yet doubting whether he will ought reverence one, after he has so insolently
contemned them al. Feign would I understand, with what soap or lie, he is hable
to scour out the spotte of so vain, wicked, and foolish an opinion, so
contrary to that S. Ambrose writes. Who to prove that this is the Sacrament,
the figure whereof went before, and to show how great a Sacrament it is,
brings in this Prayer used in the Mass, and wherein M. Jewel finds so
great beguyling of the simple, mocking of the world, and open wickedness: as
a most strong argument. His words be these, the same (very few words
excepted) that be in Canon of the Mass, that so confidently he reproves both
here, and also in the Sermon, wherein he made the first proclamation of his
vain Challenge.

Sacerdos dicit: Ambrosius de sacram. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Ergo memores gloriosissimae eius Passionis, and ab inferis Resurrectionis, and
in coelum Ascensionis, offerimus tibi hanc immaculatam hostiam, rationabilem
hostiam, incruentam hostiam, hunc panem sanctum, and calicem vitae aeternae,
and petimus, and precamur, vt hanc oblatione^ suscipias in sublimi altari tuo
per manus Angelorum tuorum, sicut suscipere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti
Abel, and sacrificium Patriarchae nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit summus
sacerdos Melchisedech. The priest says. Therefore being myndeful of his most
glorious Passion, and Resurrection from hell, and of his Ascension into heaven,
we offer up unto thee this unspotted host, this reasonable host, this
unbloody host, this holy bread, and cup of life everlasting: And we
beseech, and pray thee, that thou receive this Oblation in thy Altar on high,
by the hands of thy Angels, as thou vouchesauedst to receive the gifts of thy
child Just Abel, and the sacrifice of Abraham our Patriarch, and that which
Melchisedech the higest Priest offered up unto thee.

Lo good Reader, thus prayed S. Ambrose in his Mass, nor for so doing was he
ever thought to have begyled the simple, nor to have mocked the world. And the
whole Catholic Church has ever so far cleared him of al wickedness, not
only open, but also privy: that he is holden for a holy Confessor,
uncontrolled Doctor, and strong pillour of the Church, until M. Jewel a very
begyler of the simple, and mocker of the world in deed, came to pry out in
his doctrine, and prayer, being also the common prayer of the Church, a heinous
wickedness.

Jewel.
Notvvitstandinge this matter is easily ansvveared. For ( says he) we
Sacrifice not Christ again: The Oblation, that Christ made upon the Cross,
and ours in the Mass, is al one. And this Sacrifice Christ has commanded us
to continue until his coming. If M. Harding make the self same Sacrifice,
that Christ made upon the Cross, then is he A Priest ofter the order of
Melchisedeck: And so The king of Justice: The Prince of Peace: and a Priest
for ever, without Successor. For these titles be incident to the Priesthood
of Melchisedeck: which nevertheless, I think, M. Hardinge of his modesty
vvil not acknovvledge. And without the same, he can not offer up to God the
same Sacrifice, that Christ offered upon the Cross.

And where he says, Christ has commanded him, and his Fellows to make,
and continue this Sacrifice until his coming, If he had meante simply, and
plainly, he would have shevved, either when, or where, or by what words
Christ gave him this Commandment. For so large a Commission is worthy the
shevving: And it were great boldness, to attempt such a matter without
Commission.

Harding.
Last of al comes M. Jewel to declare the titles, and dignities of
Melchisedech, and says, that M. Harding, that is to say, any Priest of the
Catholic Church, can not offer up the same Sacrifice, that Christ offered
upon the Cross, because he is not a king of Justice, a Prince of peace, and a
Priest for ever without Successor. For these titles (says he) belong to
Melchisedeks Priesthode.

Here I must again warn the Reader to have a good eye to M. Jewel, and to
consider, first that now, as oftentimes before, he frames an Objection with
his own words, which I make not, and replyeth against it, as if it were
mine. Next, that in case I had said, as he pretends I said, nevertheless
when we say, the Priest offers the same Sacrifice which Christ offered upon
the Cross: the substance of the Sacrifice it self, that is, the thing
sacrificed, which is the body and blood of Christ, is meant thereby, and not
the manner of sacrificing. Of this M. Jewel, and his fellows be not, ne can not
be ignorant, being by the Catholics so oftentimes told of it. Yet ever they
will seem not to know it, least their common objection against the Sacrifice
of the Altar, wherewith they have never done, should appear frivolous. For
they jar always upon the false string of the manner of sacrificing, which we
touch not, but auouche the same substance of the Sacrifice that was offered up
upon the Cross.

If I had swarued so far from truth and reason, as to say, that I being a
Priest do offer up to God the same Sacrifice, which Christ offered upon the
Cross, and that in the same manner, and to the same effect and merit, which
is to usurp the office that is proper to Christ only: then with some reason
he might have replied, as he does: that I were a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, and so the king of Justice, the Prince of peace, and a Priest for
ever without Successor. Which titles of right belong to Christ only.

But now whereas I am far from saying, yea also from thinking any such thing:
he replieth with as much reason, as if he should tell one of the Judges of the
Realm, who executes his office under the Prince, and by Commission from the
Prince, Sir if you acquit men in England, and condemn me^ to die, then are you
a King of England: for what greater thing can a King do, then to save, and
condemn men? And if you be King of England, then of France also, and of
Ireland, and so defendour of the Faith, for these titles belong to the king of
England, or who so ever else succedeth in the kingly right. In this case might
not that Judge answer you again, and say, M. Superintendent, you may talk of
your Ministers, and your Ministering matters. You speak ye wot not what. I tell
you, I neither acquitte, nor condemn men to die of mine own power or
authority, but under the Prince, and by virtue of my Commission from the
Prince. And therefore you may go to school again to learn your Logique
better, and to make a wiser Argument.

The case between Christ, and those that execute the office of Priesthode under
Christ, stands in like condition. Albeit in Christ being Cod, Psalm. 44.
and man, annoin^ted of God him self with the oil of gladness above his
comparteners, Me^ offer this Sacrifice and be Priests after the order of
Melchise^dek under Christ
as in the Psalm it is of him prophesied, and being the highest Priest, the
foresaid conditions be most perfitely accomplished, that is to say, though by
nature he be the King of Justice, the Prince of Peace, and the most true Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech, without any other to succeed him: Yet
it is not necessary, the same sovereign conditions in all points be required in
those that be made Priests from among men, and be Priests under Christ, or,
as Eusebius speaks, Eusebius. de demonstr. lib. 5.
(...), Priests out of him. For whom it is sufficient, they be laufully chosen
and ordered, to be Ministers under Christ of his Mysteries, and of his
Priesthood, by mean of whom, and through whom Christ does celebrate after the
manner of Melchisehech the things that apperteine unto the Sacrifice that is
among men, (...).
even unto this day, as Eusebius says. Mark Reader, Eusebius says, after the
manner of Melchisedech, expounding the meaning of the word, Order, where it is
said of Christ, that he is a Priest after the Order of Melchisedek. Whereby
we understand, that he was a Priest, not only after the dignity of
Melchisedek, that is to say, because he was a King of peace, and of justice,
without father, without mother, without Genealogy, neither having beginning of
days, nor ending of life: but also after the rite, and manner of Melchisedek,
whose Sacrifice was in bread and wine. After which manner, Christ did at the
Supper, and we do now at the Altar, offer his body and blood, under the
forms of bread and wine.

And this much that ancient and learned Doctor would to be considered, Psalm.
109.
as the wonderful end and performance of the Oracle pronounced of Christ,
Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedek, Theophylactus.
because he continues his Priesthood by the ministry of Priests.
Theophylacte expounds it likewise. In epist. ad Heb. cap. 5.
Oecumenius also having conceived thereof the same sense, says, He would never
have said In aeternum, for ever, having respect unto the oblation that was but
once offered (upon the Cross) but referring consideration unto the Priests,
Qui quotidie offertur per Dei Ministros.
that be at this present, by whom as by means, Christ does sacrifice, and is
sacrificed, who also in his Mystical Supper delivered unto them the manner of
such Sacrifice. Ibidem.


And the later part of this Testimony does make answer in my behalf unto you
M. Jewel burthening me with no simple and plain dealing, for that I have not
showed, when, and where, or by what words Christ gave commandment to make
and continue this Sacrifice. By OEcumenius you have heard it told, that
Christ delivered unto Priests at his last Supper the manner of this
Sacrifice. And if it had liked you to have looked back, or to have remembered,
what I had said in the: 5. Division, you would never so without cause have
reprehended me for not telling, when, and where, and by what words Christ
gave commandment to make and continue this Sacrifice. For there even in the
beginning, the time when, the place where, and the words by which this
Sacrifice was instituded, and commanded, be plainly expressed. Now therefore
that our Commission may so easily be showed, twite us no more of great
boldness, as though we attempted to celebrate so high and so divine Mysteries
without Commission.

The.8. Division.
The Answer.
Now for further proof of the offering and Sacrificing of Christ of those
words of our Lord, Do this in my remembrance, to recite some testimonies of
the Fathers: First, Dionysius S. Paul's scholar, Dionys. eccles. Hier. p. 1.
cap. 3.
and Bishop of Athenes, writes thus: Quocirca reuerenter simul, and ex
Pontificali officio, post sacras diuinorum operum lauds, quod hostiam
salutarem, quae super ipsum est, litet, se excusat, ad ipsum primo decenter
exclamans, Tu dixisti: Hoc facite in meam co^memorationem. Wherefore the Bishop
(says he) reverently, and according to his Bishoply office, after the holy
praises of Gods works, excuses himself, that he takes upon him to offer
that healthful Sacrifice, which is above his degree, and worthiness, crying
out first unto him, in seemly wise, Lord thou have commanded thus, saying,
Do this in my remembrance. By these words he confesses, that he could not
be so hardy, as to offer up Christ unto his Father, had not Christ him self
so commanded, when he said, Do this in my remembrance. This is the doctrine,
touching this Article, that S. Paul taught his Scholars, which M. Jewel
denies.

Jewel.
Here may thou, gentle Reader, easily see, that M. Hardinge, either had not
that abundance of Stoare, whereof notvvitstandinge he has made us so large a
promise, or else had no great regard unto his choice. For Dionysius has no
toke^, or inkling of any such sacrificing of the Son of God unto his Father.
But clearly and in most plain wise he shows the difference, Dionys.
ecclesiast. Hierar cap. 3. (...).
that is bitvvene the Sacrifice of the Cross, and the Sacrifice of the holy
Communion. These be his words, The priest extolleth those things, that
Christ wrought in his Fleashe upon the cross, for the salvation of mankind:
and with Spiritual eyes, beholding the Spiritual understanding thereof,
draws near to the Figurative Sacrifice of the same. Here Dionysius calls
not the Ministration of the Holy Mysteries, the Sacrificinge of Christ unto
his Father, as M. Hardinge vvoulde force us to believe, but a Figurative
Sacrifice, that is, a Figure, or a Sign of that great Sacrifice. Pachymer
in.3. cap. Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
And Pachymeres the Paraphrast expounds the same words in this wise:
(...): He comes to the Bread, and the Cup.

Then the Priest, says Dionysius, after certain Prayers, and Holy Songs,
excuses him self, as not worthy to make that Sacrifice: and pronounces
these words out with a lovvde voice, Tu dixisti etc. Thou have said, Do
this in my remembrance. Hereof M. Hardinge concludes thus.

The Priest excuses him self, Ergo, He Offers up the Son of God unto his
Father. A young Sophister would never so unskillfully frame his arguments.
Otherwise the Responde^t might easily say, Nego Consequentiam, and
Consequens. For what order, or sequel is there in this Reason? How may this
Antecedente, and this Consequente agree together?

M. Harding knovveth, there he other sundry causes, wherefore the Priest
should excuse his vnvvoorthinesse, and not this only, that he imagines. The
Priest in the Liturgy, or Communion, that bears the name of S. Basile,
Liturgia Basilij.
prays thus: Fac nos idoneos, vt tibi offeramus Sacrificium Laudis: Make us
meet, to offer unto thee ( not Christ thine only Son, but) the Sacrifice
of praise. Nazian. in Apologet. (...)
In like manner Nazianzene says, How can they, or dare they offer unto God,
( he says not, The Body of Christ Really, and in deed but) the Figure of
these great Mysteries? But M. Hardinge being utterly void of other reasons,
proves his imagined Sacrifice of the Son of God, Ecclesiast. Hierar. ca. 2.
(...).
only by the vnvvorthinesse of the Priest.

This is the Just Judgment of God, that who so endeavors him self to
deceive, and blind others, shall be deceuied, and blind him self. For
Dionysius uses the very like words, speakinge of the Sacrament of Baptism:
Sacerdos cogitans negotij magnitudinem, horret, atque haesitat. The Priest
consideringe the weight of the matter, is in an horror, and in an agony.
Likewise S. Basile excuses his own vnvvorthinesse of hearing the Word
of God: Quae auris digna est magnitudine earum rerum, quae dicuntur? Cogitemus,
quisnam ille sit, qni nos affatur, what ear is worthy to hear the Majesty of
these things? Basil. He^amer. 1. (...); 2. Cor. 2. Cypria^ in Oration.
Dominica^
Let us consider, who it is, that speaks to us, S. Paul speakinge of the
glory, and puisance of the Gospel, in the end, in respect of his own
vnvvorthinesse, uses this exclamation, Et ad haec quis idoneus? And who is
mee^e to publishe, and to speak these things? S. Cyprian says, We are not
worthy to look up into Heaven, and to speak unto God. O, says he, what
merciful favor of our Lord is this, that we may call God our Father: and
even as Christ is Gods Son, so may we be called the children of God?
Quod nome^ nemo nostrum in oratione auderet attingere, nisi ipse nobis sic
permisisset orare. Which Name ( of Father) none of us in our prayers would
dare to utter, sauinge that he has given us leave so to pray. By these, the
s^lendernes of M. Hardinges reason may soon appear: The priest excuses his
own vnVVorthines: Ergo, he offers up the Son of God. It is a Fallax, Ex
meris particularibus, or, A non distributo ad distributum: and concludes in
Secunda Figura affirmative. An error known unto Children.

Harding.
Among other shifts of M. Jewels Rhetorique, this is very common, A Common
shifte of M. Jewels Rhetorique.
where in deed he is most pressed with weight of good authority, or reason:
there in word he shows forth greatest courage, and makes resemblance, as
al were naught, that is brought against him. But what say you good Sir? Has
not S. Dionysius in the place by me alleged no token at al, nor so much as an
inkling of our offering up of Christ unto his Father? what cream is grown
over your eyes, that you see not this truth in so clear a light? what moves
you so to say? what proof, what argument have you?

Mary say you, Dionysius clearly shows the difference, that is between the
Sacrifice of the Cross, and the Sacrifice of the holy Communion. What conclude
you? Ergo, he has no token nor inkling of sacrificing Christ unto his Father?
O valiant Argument, O cunning Logician! May not this man be allowed to find
fault with other men's Arguments, that thus makes an Argument him self,
without either good form, or true matter? For touching the form, let it be
granted, that S. Dionysius had put such a difference, as you imagine, will it
necessarily follow, that in the place alleged in my Answer, he makes not
mention of offering Christ unto his Father? This kind of reason in any matter
is faulty, but in this matter it is most faulty. For albeit the manner of the
oblatio^ or Sacrifice made upon the Cross, be diverse from that which Christ
made at his Supper, and is now continued by the Priests in the Mass: yet the
thing it self offered, and substance is al one in both Sacrifices, In epistol.
ad Hebr. Hom. 17.
as it has been clearly proved before by testimony of S. Chrysostom, and
others. So that the showing of some difference between them, does not exclude
the thing or substance of either of them, nor concludes them, so to be diverse,
but the one may well stand with the other.

Touching the matter of the former Argument, it is evidently false. For S.
Dionyse in that place treats not of difference between this, and that
Sacrifice, as you M. Jewel would have him appear to do by wilful falsifying
of the place, by putting in words of your own, and by clipping away words
of that holy Doctor. These be S. Dionyses words, Dionys. eccles. Hierarc.
Cap. 3. p. 3.
as they lie in the Greek, faithfully englished. Wherefore the Divine Bishop
standing at the Divine Altar, does praise the said holy and godly actions of
JESUS, for his heavenly providence toward us, which actions he (according to
the Scripture) perfited for the salvation of Mankind through the good pleasure
of his most holy Father in the Holy Ghost. And after that he has ended the
praises, and beholden the reverent and spiritual contemplation of those things
with the eyes of understanding: (...)
he comes unto the Mystical Sacrifice of them, and that according to Gods
tradition. By Gods tradition he means that which Christ taught his Disciples
at the Supper, how, and after what manner, Luc. 22.
they should offer this Sacrifice in remembrance of his death.

Now gentle Reader confer this testimony of S. Dionyse, and M. Jewels
falsified allegation together. Note first, that the Bishop, or Priest, is said
to stand at the holy Altar. Altar.
That clause M. Jewel has quite cut of. And by the way consider, to what
purpose serves an Aulther, M. Ievvel falsifieth S Dionyse.
unless there be a Real and outward Sacrifice to be made. Next, that there
is no mention at al made of the flesh or Cross of Christ, which terms he
has patched in of his own. Thirdly the good pleasure of the Father, and holy
Ghost, is leafte out. To be short, whereas the praises be rendered not only
for Christ's passion wrought in his flesh upon the Cross (albe it^ specially
for that) but also for the doings of his whole life, as for his birth, his
fasting, his praying, his preaching, and the rest: he to make his fained
difference to appear, has drawn them unto the things only wrought by
Christ upon the Cross. Such a licentious privilege this man takes unto him
self, to pare and hew less, and to enlarge at his own pleasure, the saynges
of the most ancient and learned Fathers.

Again, whereas the Greek has (...), for which the Latin translation uses
this circumlocution, sacra mysteria in signis celebranda, the holy Mysteries
that are to be celebrated in or under signs: he translateth it by the basest
word, that he could invent of that signification, calling it, Figurative
sacrifice, craftily intending to bring into the Readers mind and conceit
thereby, that this Sacrifice, wherein after praises in manner for all the
actions of Christ's life the body and blood of Christ are offered up: should
appear to be no better, then a bare figure, or then the figurative sacrifices
of the old law.

The premises considered, what man but M. Jewel, would have presumed to set
abroad to the world in printe, a sentence of an old writer so hewed and
hackled, so bodged and peeced, so corruptly translated? And who but he, could
epsy in that saying, any clear and plain difference between the Sacrifice of
the Cross, and the Sacrifice of the Altar (which guilefully he calls the
Sacrifice of the holy Communion) such a one, as he impudently avouches to be?

But here S. Dionyse (says he) calls not the Ministration of the holy
Mysteries the sacrificing of Christ. I grant. How could he so call it here,
that is to say, in this your falsified sentence, which S. Dionyse never
uttered? And sir, what if S. Dionyse do not so call it? What makes that to the
point, that presently we treat of? Mine endeavor was not to show, that S.
Dionyse calls the Ministration of the Mysteries the sacrificing of Christ:
but that in deed he sacrificed the body and blood of Christ, and
consequently Christ him self. And because it seemed to him very much, a mortal
man to offer up the body and blood of his Lord: reverently, and in seemly
wise, he makes his excuse, saying, Lord thou have said, Do ye this in my
remembrance. As who should say, Lord had thou not by thine express word
commanded us so to do, I would not be so bold, as to take that upon me,
which so far passes my worthiness.

Hunt not after words, and syllables M. Jewel. When ye have the thing it
self, whereof ye contend, what a vain wrangling is it, to require certain
precise terms? So when sometimes we bring you forth your own very words, then
you make a brabbling about the meaning. These be the poor shifts of such, as
being ouercomme, that by the confession of their silence they might not seem
ouercomme, will not hold their peace. This is that S. Augustine reproved in
Pascentius the Arian, whereof you were told before. August. epist. 174.
What is a more contentious part (says he) then to strive about the name (of
Homusion he means) where the thing it self is certainly known?

What can you demand more? Have you not here a manifest witness of
sacrificing the healthful Sacrifice, which S. Dionyse acknowlegeth to be above
his degree and worthiness? What other is that, then the body and blood of
Christ? What is to be accounted healthful in comparison of that, which is, as
S. Augustine calls it, August. Confess. lib. 9. ca. 12.
the Sacrifice of our Raunsom? That is to say, of that thing, whereby we have been bought from the Devil, from hell, and everlasting damnation.

If you say, this saying is to be expounded of the sacrifice of praise, and
thanks giving, tell us, who ever gave the title of so sovereign honor unto
such kind of Sacrifice? Though it be our duty, and also healthful for us, to
offer up the sacrifice of praise, and thanks: yet who ever called it hostiam
salutarem, the healthful host? The sacrifice of praise here I mean, as it is
our own spiritual work, for otherwise I confess, the blessed Sacrifice it
self of the body and blood of Christ, is also not seldom named the sacrifice
of praise, as your self have in this Division alleged a place out of S. Basils
Mass, where it is so called.

And that S. Dionyse meant not the Sacrifice of praise and thanks, it is
clear, in that he speaks of a Sacrifice to be offered, after that praises of
Gods works, and thanks for the same be given.

How be it, what so ever M. Jewel say there can be no doubt, what Sacrifice S.
Dionyse meant. For by alleging this Scripture, Do ye this is my remembrance,
for his warrant, he leads us directly unto the Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, which he offered up at his last Supper, Division. 6.
as it is before proved by S. Ireneus. S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, Hesychius,
Gregory Nyssen, and others. Which Sacrifice because Christ him self both
offered, and taught his Apostles likewise to offer in remembrance of him (for
then he taught them the new Testament, Iren. li. 4. cap. 32.
says S. Ireneus) and delivered them a form, how they should do it
afterward: in consideration hereof S. Dionyse, who believed Christ to be God,
The Tradition of God.
in this very place calls it the Tradition of God.

Again for further proof of this most honorable and heavenly Sacrifice, this
is to be considered in S. Dionyses Treatise. That S. Dionyse means the
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.
So long as the bishop, or Priest is attent to giving praises, and thanks, for
the great works of God (which is also a kind of sacrifice) so long we see
none excuse made of any unworthiness. But the praises being once finished, as soon as he comes unto the mystical Sacrifice, before he dare to adventure it,
he premitteth his humble suit for excuse to be obtained. What should the cause
be, why the Bishop or Priest before the offering of the one Sacrifice makes no
excuse of his unworthiness, and here as he enters unto it makes so humble an
excuse: but because there is a great difference between the excellency of the
one, and the other? In both sacrifices Christ's benefits be remembered, for how
can that be praised, that is not remembered? The difference must needs be in the
excellency of the thing offered. But what thing can be better and excellenter,
then the praise of God, and thanks giving, but only the body and blood of
Christ? Wherefore it must needs be the body and blood of Christ, which the
Bishop or Priest offered, premitting so humble an excuse, and appealing unto
Christ's own commandment for his warrant.

This much with the circumstances of the place duly considered, I doubt not
but any reasonable man will sone conceive S. Dionyse to speak of the Sacrifice
of the body and blood of Christ, and so consequently of Christ offered and
sacrificed unto God, to whom only Sacrifice is to be made: though M. Jewel be
so shameless as to say, that he has no token, nor inkling of any such
Sacrifice, and though in very deed the precise terms of Sacrificing Christ,
or the Son of God unto his Father, be not expressly set forth. The which
terms, as to express them, it was not necessary, so of great discretion and
wisdom, this holy learned Father, who lived in the Apostles time, eschewed:
and yet he so signified the thing, by other words, as of the faithful it might
be understood, and from the Infidels kept secret. Who if our Mysteries had
been with plain speech made open unto them, through lack of faith, would
have had them in derision, and trodden them under their feet, as swyne do
precious stones, and as Heretics do at this day. August. in Psalm. 33. and
epistol. 120.


For which cause S. Augustine, and S Chrysostom, and al other in manner the
old learned Fathers, speaking of this most reverent Sacrifice, Origin. in
Leuit. ca. 16. hom. 9
do use these or the like admonitions. The Sacrifice, which the faithful
know, and those that have read the Gospel. Again. The which Sacrifice, where,
and when, and how it is offered, thou shall know, At the begi^ning ^ge Fathers
spoke sec^etly of the Sacrifice at length when the faith had prevailed
generally, they spoke more plainly. Cassiodor. Psalm. 109.
when thou art baptized. etc.

But in the age that followed, when the faith was generally received over the
world, the learned Fathers spoke more plainly of it. As for example,
Cassiodorus that noble Senator of Rome, and learned writer, who lived about
the year of our Lord. 570. in his Commentaries upon the Psalms, expounding
the place of Christ's everlasting Priesthood in the.109. Psalm, says thus in
most plain wise. To whom can this truly, and evidently be applied, but unto
our Lord our Savior, who healthfully in the gift of bread and wine
consecrated his Body and Blood? As him self says in the Ghospel. Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have
life everlasting. But in this flesh and blood, let man's mind conceive,
nothing that is bloody, nothing that is corruptible, least i^ come to pass
which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.
he that eats the body of our Lord unworthily, eats to him self
condemnation: (the words that follow be these). Sed viuificatricem
substantiam, at que salutarem, and ips^us verbi propriam factam: per quam
peccatorum remissio, and vitae aeternae dona praestantur. But let (the mind of
man conceive it to be) the quickening, the healthful substance, and that which
was made the word it selfs own proper substance, by which the remission of
sins, and the gifts of everlasting life be given. The which order (of
Priesthode and Sacrifice) by mystical similitude Melchisedech that most just
king did institute, Genesis 14.
when he offered up unto our Lord the fruits of bread and wine. For it is
clear, that the sacrifices of beasts are quite gone away, which were of the
order of Aaron, and that Melchisedeks order rather remains, which in the
delivering forth of the Sacraments is celebrated in all the world. Which thing
the obstinate Jews do not yet understand, whereas it is certain, that both
their Priest, and Sacrifices are taken quite away.

This learned Father here sets forth plainly three things concerning the
Sacrifice we speak of. The first is, that Christ at his Supper consecrated
his body and blood, Page 19.
which you M. Jewel in your Reply of the first Article do deny. The second
is, what flesh, and what blood it is, that is so consecrated, to wit, unbloody
blood, and^ if it be lawful so to speak, vnfleshy flesh, and yet true shesh,
and true blood, even the quickening substance, that, which is proper to the
Word it self, and whereby Mankind is redeemed. The third is, that the
Priesthood after Melchisedeks order remains still, doubtelesse because as
Christ presents him self continually in heaven unto the Father for us: so
by Priests of the new Testament, his Vicars, he offers him self unto the
Father now also in earth under the forms of bread and wine, after the order of
Melchisedek. Which Sacrifice is now frequented over all the world, the Jews
sacrifices being utterly abandoned.

A clear testimony against those, that make this only a figurative Sacrifice.
Isidorus that holy and learned Bishop of Hispalis now called Siuile in Spain,
having declared out of the Scripture, that in the time of Sacrifices in the
old Law, the Levites sownded their trumpets, by way of comparison speaking of
the Offertories soong in the Church, says, that now we likewise do sing,
with deed and heart uttering forth praises to our Lord in the time of our
Sacrifice. In illo vero Sacrificio, cuius sanguine saluatus est mundus,
Isidorus de Eccles. Officijs. li. 1. ca. 14
be his words, that is to say, In that true Sacrifice, by the blood whereof
the world is saved. Here he calls it the true Sacrifice, whereby M. Jewels
wicked assertion of his only figurative Sacrifice, is quite dasshed, and
overthrown.

Ibidem. cap. 18.
Again in an other place, The Sacrifice (says he) which is offered up unto God
by the Christians, Christ our Lord and Master did first institute it, when
he gave unto the Apostles his body and his blood, before he was betrayed: as
it is read in the Gospel, Jesus (says the Evangelist took bread, and the
Cup, and having blessed, Math. 26.
gave to them. The which Sacrament Melchisedech King of Salem first offered up
figuratively in type (or token) of the body and blood of Christ: and the same
man first of al expressed imaginarily (or in image) the Mystery of this so
great a Sacrifice, foreshewing the likeness of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ the everlasting Priest. Imaginary. Psalm. 109.
To whom it is said, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. This Sacrifice the Christians have been commanded to celebrate,
the Jewish sacrifices leafte of and ended, which were commanded to be
celebrated, when the people of the old Law were under servitude. And so then
this thing is done of us, which our Lord him self did for us, which he
offered not in the morning, but afterward, for he did it in the evening.

By this it is clear, that Christ offered up his body and blood, before he
was betrayed, that is to say, at his last Supper, when he gave the same to his
Apostles, that he instituted, and commanded the same Sacrifice to be
celebrated of us: That this is the true Sacrifice, whereof Melchisedech in his
sacrifice expressed the Image, figure, and type. Whereby M. Jewels only
imaginatiue, figurative, and typical Imagination, to exclude the real presence
and substance of Christ's Flesh and Blood, is utterly condemned.

For the truth of the Real presence, and of this Sacrifice he speaks
afterward in the same place more plainly, if any thing may more plainly he
spoken. Exhorting married persons to abstain certain days from their carnal
imbracinges, and to give them selves to prayer, before they come to receive the
body of Christ, thus he says.

Ibidem.
Let us peruse the books of the Kings, and we shall find, that Abimelech the
Priest would not give to David, and his men any of the Shewbreades, 1. Reg. 21.
before he asked them whether they were pure from women, not from strange
women, but from their own wives. And except he had heard, that they had
absteined from the wedlock work from the time of yesterday and the day
before: he would never have granted them the breades, which before he had
denied to them. Now so great difference there is between the Shewbreades, and
the body of Christ, how much difference there is between the body, and the
shadow, between the Image, and the truth, between the samplers of things to
come, and the things them selves, which were figured by the samplers. Thus
Isidorus.

If the thing we have in the Sacrament of the Altar, were but a sign, figure,
or token of Christ's body, then would not this holy and learned Father, as
sundry other Fathers have done, so earnestly have exhorted married persons to
forebeare their wedlocke-worke before the receiving of it: yea specially then
would not he by comparing this with the Shewbread, so much have preferred this
before that. For that was also a figure of the body of Christ. And if that
which we have be no more but a figure, then was that as good as this. Now
Isidorus prefers this before that, as being the body it self, whereof that
was the shadow, the truth, whereof that was the Image, the thing it self,
whereof that was a sampler. Wherefore to conclude, this being the true and real
Body of Christ, whereas Priests offer up and sacrifice the same, as we must
grant they do, or deny the Fathers: it follows, that they offer up and
sacrifice Christ the Son of God unto his Father. The like, and plainer
sayings for the truth of this Sacrifice, if need were, might in great number
sone be recited out of the other Fathers, that wrote since the faith of
Christ was generally received where it was preached, and al superstition of
Gentilitie quite abolished^ but these may suffice.

Now whereas S. Dionyse calls this our Sacrifice of the Altar, In what
sense is the Sacrifice symbolical, or figurative.
(...) a sacrifice symbolical, or done in signs, or figure: we also grant it
to be symbolical, for under the signs that are visible and familiar to our
senses, the heavenly Mysteries, to wit, the body and blood of Christ, the
substance of our Sacrifice, are inuisibly contained. And we say, that S.
Dionyse is here to be understood to speak of a sign or figure, as proper to
the new, and not to the old Law, Gregor. Nazian. Hom. 4. de Pasch.
even so as S. Gregory Nazianzen means by a figure, when he says, Iam
Pascha fiamus participes, figuraliter tamen adhuc, and si Pascha hoc veteri sit
manifestius. Si quidem Pascha legale, audenter dico, figura figurae erat
obscurior. Let us now be partakers of the Passover, but yet figuratively as
yet, albeit this Passover be more manifest, then the Old was. For the
Passover of the Law was (I am bold thus to say) a darcke figure of a figure.
Here is our Passover, that is to say, our Sacrament, called a figure, but yet
much more manifest, then the old figures were, for they were but figures of
figures.

And why is our most blessed Sacrament a figure? S. Gregory even there shows
it to be so called in respect of the fruition of the same, which we shall
enjoy in Heaven, where we shall after an heavenly manner, eat, and drink it,
without any Fgure, or coouer. Such a Figure or sign does not only signify,
but contains also the thing signified. In consideration whereof S. Augustine
putting a difference between the Sacraments of the New and of the old
Testament, says, that The Sacraments of the New Testament give Salvation,
August. in Psalm. 73.
and the Sacraments of the Old Testament promised the Savior. Such signs
as give salvation, be meet Sacraments of the New Testament, of such kind of
sign or figure speaks S. Dionyse, where he uses the term Symbolical,
speaking of the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Answer to Pachymeres.
As for that M. Jewel allegeth out of Prchymeres the Paraphraste, who says, The
Priest comes to the Bread, and the Cup, whereof he would feign conclude,
that the invisible substance of the Sacrifice is not the body and blood of
Christ: it stands him in little stead. For in deed it is bread and wine,
when the Priest first comes unto them to celebrate the Sacrifice: But when
the words of Christ be comme unto them (as S. Ambrose says) that is to say,
Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 4 cap 5
when the Priest has duly pronounced the words of Consecration: then are
they made the body and blood of Christ, and so the Sacrifice of Christ.

And that Pachymeres was of this belief, it is clear by his own words,
which M. Jewel either knew not, and so speaks ignorantly, or knew well
yenough, yet dissembled, and so does maliciously. Because for some credit of
his purpose he cited his words in Greek (though by casting in one word of
his own which he found not in the text, after his common woonte he has some
deal falsified the sentence) I will also here truly cite the words in Greek,
by which Pachymeres shows him self to be Catholic in this point, and quite
contrary to M. Jewels Sacramentarie doctrine. They be these. (...). Pachymee.
in Dionys. Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 3. page 136.
As much to say in English. There be many that cast their eye upon the holy
signs only, as they who are not hable to conceive any higher thing. But the
Bishop him silfe is carried up unto those first samplers (or natural things) to
wit, the precious body, and blood it self of our Lord, believing that the
things which are set forth (that is to say, the bread and wine) be changed
into them by the holy and almighty Ghost.

Lo M. Jewel, here have you the clear testimony of Pachymeres him self, for
his true and Catholic belief touching the truth of Christ's body and blood
in the Sacrament. Which belief is, not only that the precious body and blood
of our Lord are of a right believer beholden, and conceived in the Sacrament
verily present, which the Lutherans do acknowledge: but also that the bread and
wine are by the power of the holy Ghost, Transubsta^tiation
into the same converted and changed, which neither ye, nor Luthers scholars
do believe: and so by Pachymeres transubstantion is avouched.

After all this M. Jewel disposes him self to dally at an Argument of his own
merry heads forging, M. Ievvel forgeth Argume^t^.
bearing the Reader in hand, it is mine. And this Argument forsooth is such,
and so unskillful, as a young Sophister (says he) would never have framed it.
What any young Sophister would do, I know not. But now certain it is, that be
it well, or otherwise, it is framed by as old a Sophister, as your self are M.
Jewel. If it be unskillfully framed, the blame is yours: for yours it is, not
mine.

Here that you be so full of your Arguments (which untruly you father upon me)
and so busy with your Logique, I answer you, as S. Augustine answered Julian
the Pelagian Heretic dealing with him, as you do with me, not only in this
place, but in manner in your whole book. Quantum tibi places, tantum grauibus
Lectoribus displices, Augustine. contra Julian. lib. 3. cap. 7.
and quod peius est, fingis me dicere quod non dico, concludere, sicut non
concludo, and caet. Look (says he) how much you stand in your own conceit,
so much you are out of conceit with the grave Readers, and, which is worse,
you feine me to say, that which I say not, to conclude, so as I conclude not.

If you would needs show your cunning in Logique, and dispute after the rules
of that art, why rehearsed you not the whole Antecedent? Though in this place I
frame no Argume at al, but only recite the saying of S. Dionyse applying it to
my purpose: yet if the whole should be disposed in form of an Argument, this
is the Argument, that thereof might be concluded, the circumstance of the place
considered.

The Bishop or Priest (by report of S. Dionyse) standing at the holy Altar,
An Argument gathered out of S. Dionyse for the Sacrifice.
after he has given praises to God for his Divine works, comes unto the
mystical Sacrifice, excusing him self for that he takes upon him to offer up
the healthful host or Sacrifice that is far above his worthiness, whereof
Christ at his last Supper having consecrated his body and blood, said, by way
of commandment and commission, Luc. 22.
Do ye this in my Remembrance: But this healthful Sacrifice whereof Christ so
said, and which he required to be offered, is the Sacrifice of his body and
blood under the forms of bread and wine: Ergo, by witness of that Ancient
and most worthy Father, the Bishop or Priest, offers up Christ's body and
blood, and consequently Christ him self. For where the body of Christ is,
there also is whole Christ, because of the inseparable unity of both natures.
And if Christ be thus offered, to whom is he offered, but to the Father? Albeit
I confess, that Christ is offered to him self also as being God, and to the
holy Ghost to the whole most blessed Trinity.

If you had thus set forth the Argument M. Jewel, and dealt simply and truly,
you should not have needed to trouble the reader with so much Sophistry and
Logique, as here for confutation of your own forged reason you have bestowed.
Because you knew your self not hable to avoid the force of the whole
Antecedent, slyly you answer to that part of it only, where it is said, the
Priest excuses him self, as though I had laid the chief ground of the
authority in that clause only. And thereof you take occasion to enter into a
needelesse common place, proouing by certain testimonies, which no man ever
denied, that sundry holy things are to be done not presumptuously and rashly,
but reverently, and with fear and trembling, as namely when we offer up the
Sacrifice of Praise, when we baptize, when we preach, or hear Gods holy
word, when we pray, and call God our Father. For the reverent and humble
demeanor that we ought to show in doing these holy things, you allege S.
Basil, S. Dionyse, S. Paul, S. Cyprian.

But what of all this? will it thereof follow, Ergo, though the Priest standing
at the Altar, and coming to offer the Mystical Sacrifice, excuse him self
(not for praying, preaching, praising, or baptizing, but) for offering the
healthful host, that far passes his degree, even the same, that Christ
offered at his last Supper, whereof he said, This is my Body, this is my
Blood, and gave commission to do the same: yet he offers not Christ unto
his Father? This is the just judgment of God M. Jewel, that you where you be
so busy in scorning at other men's good Arguments, be found your self to
frame most fond and childishe Arguments, by certain phrases eluding weighty
points of Christian Religion, and always impugning one truth by an other
truth, which way of reasoning is of al other the weakest.

Thus you see good Sir, that I have not proved this Sacrifice only by the
unworthiness of the Priest, as you say, but by other force clearly appearing
in the foresaid testimony of S. Dionyse.

Of all the authorities, that here to little purpose you have alleged, I had
thought to touch never a one, forasmuch as I yield to tbat by the same is
reported: had you not too shamefully falsified and corrupted a sentence of S.
Gregory Nazianzen, M. Ievvel falsifieth and fowly corrupted S. Gregory
Nazianzene.
both with your false interlaced gloss, and by changing the whole purporte
thereof. Thus you make that learned Father to speak. How can they, or dare
they offer unto God (he says not the body of Christ really, and in deed,
but) the figure of these great Mysteries? Gregor. Nazian. in Apologetico.


Now let us see S. Gregory Nazianzens own words. The whole sentence being
long, I will recite only the later end of it, which answers to your
allegation. S. Gregory Nazianzen acknowledges the external Sacrifice.
(...)? As much to say. How should I dare to offer up unto him (he means
God) the external Sacrifice, that is the sampler of the great Mysteries?

Compare this, and your own allegation together, and you shall perceive your
untrue dealinge and corruption of the sentence to be espied. You have changed
the first person singular, into the third person plural. Which is an
argument, that your self never saw the place it self in the Author, but
received it of some, that was appointed to gather notes for you such, as you
might frame to your purpose. Your Note-gatherer espying as he thought some
vantage in the later words of the Sentence, wrote them out only, leaving out
the beginning, where the pronoune (...) is expressly found. And so both you
and he were deceived in the verb, (...), which serves indifferently to the
first person singular, or to the third person plural, you of ignorance, as I
suppose, he of malice, specially if he were learned.

Although this be no little fault, yet is it not the greatest by many parts.
For you have quite hewed away a principal member of the sentence, to wit,
(...), that is to say, the external Sacrifice, for (...), that is, Sacrifice,
is there to be supplied. Whereby you show unto us, that, as you and your
companions have bannished the thing it self already out of the Churches of
England, so would you gladly also skrape the name and term out of the books
of the ancient writers, if by any means ye could. For this one clause, the
external Sacrifice, External Sacrifice.
overthrows al your doctrine against the Sacrifice of the Altar, and proves
your interlined Gloss to be false, and heretical. For if it be an external
Sacrifice, it can not be but real, and true, and a Sacrifice in deed.

The addition that follows in S. Gregory, (...), is nothing else, but a
declaration of what external Sacrifice he spoke, to wit, not of that great
external and open Sacrifice, which Christ offered upon the Cross, but of the
true sampler of the same. Which is the external Sacrifice of the Church, made
by the ministry of the Priest upon the Altar, one with the other in
substance, but diverse in the manner of offering, as we are driven by your
affectate and dissembled ignorance oftentimes to say. Antitypo^. Fol. 82. b.
and 83.
Of this term, (...), sampler, how it is to be taken, I have already, declared
before in the.4. Division. Here to rehearse the same again, it were superfluous.

Now I require thee to judge indifferently gentle Reader, whether M. Jewel be
to be accounted a true and a faithful dealer in these weighty causes concerning
our faith, and whether he be not worthy to be suspected, who has so fowly
falsified and corrupted this ancient and learned Father, by changing one
person into an other, one number into an other, by altering the true sense with
his heretical parenthesis, and by maiming the whole sentence with his cutting
away of a principal member.

In the end M. Jewel to leave in the Readers mind an opinion of his skill in
Logique, A new fallacy divised by M. Jewel.
which is known to be very small, repeating again the former Argument of his
own forging, and falsely ascribed unto me, says: It is a fallax a meris
particularibus, a kind of fallacy of his own invention, unknown to
Aristotle, and to all that have written since of deceitful Arguments. For all
skilful Logicians do know, that of two premises being both particular, a good
argument may be concluded, although it be not directly in any of the three
perfect Figures. And if the Argument be not faulty for this cause, yet it
proceeds (says he) A non distributo ad distributu^. Well, if it so proceed and
therefore be naught, let him self amend it, that made it. As for my ground,
it rests upon the authority of S. Dionyse the blessed Apostle S. Paul's
scholar.

An other fault in this Argument, is found contrary to the rules of Logique,
Behold reader the rare cunning this man has in Logique.
for that it concludes (says this great Logician) affirmatively in the second
Figure. What Sir? Have you forgoten your self so quickly? Said you not in the
line before, it was ex meris particularibus? If it be so, then is it neither in
the first, nor second, nor third Figure. So that either the first fault is
none, and this later one: or this later none, and the first one, or rather
neither this, nor that any at al. Beside this it is an Enthymema, consisting
only of two propositions. And then if it were mine Argument, how know you to
what Mode and Figure, by a little displacing of the terms, I were hable to
reduce it unto, if it should be denied?

Thus I abuse thy leisure gentle Reader with standing upon these trifles. But
I trust, thou will consider, how far I was enforced thereunto by M. Jewels
trifling in an ernest matter. Prouer. 26
And as by the advice of the wise man, we may answer a fool according to his
foolishnes, least he seem wise in his own conceit: so sometimes it is
profitable, to answer a trifler, according to his trifles, that he may behold
his own vanity and trifling wit. And thus stands S. Dionyses saying in
his full force.

The.9. Division.
The Answer.
IRenaeus received the same from S. John the Evangelist, by Polycarpus S. John's
scholar. He declares it with these words: Eum, qui ex creatura Panis est,
Lib. 4. cap. ^3.
accepit, and gratias egit, dicens, Hoc est Corpus meum, Et Calicem similiter,
qui est ex creatura quae est secundum nos, suum Sanguinem confessus est, and
Noui Testamenti nouam docuit Oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens,
in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. De quo in duodecim Prophetis Malachias sic
presignificauit, Malac. 1.
Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, dicit DOMINVS exercituum: and munus non
suscipiam de manu vestra. He took that, which by creation is bread, and gave
thanks, saying, This is my Body. And likewise the Cup full of that Creature,
which is here with us, and confessed it to be his Blood, and thus taught the
new Oblation of the Nwe Testamente, which the Church receiuinge of the
Apostles, does offer to God through the whole world, whereof Malachie one of
the twelve Prophets did prophecy thus: I have no likinge in you, says our
Lord almighty, neither will I take Sacrifice of your hands: because from the
risinge of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my name is glorified
among the Nations, and Incense is offered to my name in every place, and pure
Sacrifice, for that my name is great among Nations. What can be understood
by this new Oblation of the New Testamente other, then the Oblation of that,
which he said to be his Body, and confessed to be his Blood? And if he had
offered Bread and Wine only, or the Figure of his Body, and Blood in Bread
and Wine, it had been no New Oblation, for such had been made by
Melchisedech long before. Neither can the Prophecy of Malachie be
understood of the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross, forasmuch as that
was done but at one time only, and in one certain place of the world, in
Golgoltha, a place without the gates of Jerusalem, near to the walls of that
City. Concerning the Sacrifice of a contrite, and an humbled heart, and al
other Sacrifices of our devotion, that be mere Spiritual, they can not be
called the New Oblation of the new Testament, forasmuch as they were done
as well in the Old Testamente, as in the New, neither be they altogether
pure. Wherefore this place of Ireneus, and also the Prophecy of Malachie,
wherewith it is confirmed, must needs be referred to the Sacrifice and
Oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ daily throughout the whole world
offered to God in the Mass, which is the external Sacrifice of the Church,
and proper to the New Testament: which, as Ireneus says, the Church received
of the Apostles, and the Apostles of Christ.

Jewel.
Here at last, M. Harding has found out the name of a Sacrifice, that was
not denied him. But the Sacrifice, that he has so long sought for, and has so
assuredly promised to find, hitherto he has not found. For Ireneus not once
names, neither the Mass, nor this Real Oblation of the Son of God unto his
Father. Malac. 1.
Thus only he says, God has utterly misliked, Martialis ad Burdegalenses.
and refused the old Carnal Sacrifices of the Jews: and has taught us to
offer up the New Sacrifice of the new Testamente, according to the Prophecy of
Malachie. This Sacrifice, M. Harding imagines, Tertul. contra Iudaeos.
can be none other, but the offering up of Christ in the Mass. These
Conclusions be very sudden. The Old learned Fathers could never understand
so much. One of M. Hardings own Nevve found Doctors, Tertul. contra Marcio.
lib. 4.
Martialis, says thus, Oblatio munda, non tantum in Ara Sanctificata offertur,
sed etiam vbique: The pure Sacrjfice, which Malachie means, is offered, not
only upon the Holy Aultare ( or Communion Table) but also every where. M.
Harding says, Hieron. in 1. cap. Malach.
It is offered only upon the Altar: Martialis says, It is offered
euerywhere, and not only upon the Aultare. Certainly if Malachie meante the
Sacrifice, that may be offered in all places, Hieron. in Zacha. li. 2. cap. 8.
and without an Aultare, as Martialis says, then he meante not the Sacrifice
of the Mass. Tertullian says, That the Prophet Malachie by that pure
Sacrifice, meant the Preaching of the Gospel: the offering up of a Contrite
Heart: Aug. contra aduer. Legis, and Prophet. cap. 20.
and prayer proceeding from a pure Conscience. S. Hierom likewise expounds
the same of the Sacrifice of Prayer, and opens it by these Words of the
Prophet David: Let my Prayer be directed, as incense before thy sight. S.
Augustine calls the same, Sacrificium Laudis, and Gratiarum actionis: The
Sacrifice of Praise, Contra Liter. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 86.
and of Thankesgeuinge.

Harding.
What truth thou art like to find in M. Jewels Reply to the rest of this
Division, thou may sone conceive Reader, seeing he makes his entry with so
shameless, and so open a lie. Here at the last (says he) M. Harding has
found the name of Sacrifice. And but here at the last good Sir? As though
express mention of Sacrifice were not contained in sundry testimonies before
alleged. Where be your eyes? Nay where is your fidelity? Where is your
sincerity? Where is your honesty? Where is your shamefastness? Does not S.
Dionyse in the last Division before this name the Sacrifice, (...). Hesych. li.
1. cap. 4.
that is above his worthynesse? Does not Hesychius say, that Christ at his
Supper sacrificed him self? Does not Eusebius report unto you the dreadful
Sacrifices of Christ's Table? I leave the rest. Diony. Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
c. 1. p. 3.
For shame M. Jewel if you have no way to escape the just request of your
promised Subscription but by lying, yet have some regard of your estimation,
that the very simplest of the world espy not out your so gross lying.

And now touching the chief point of this Division, what, think you to avoid
the strength of S. Irenaeus testimony for the Sacrifice, because he names not
the Mass expressly, nor the real Oblation of the Son of God unto his
Father^ Why Sir then will you not stand to the matter, but cowardly fly away and
lurk in terms? How be it, the real Oblation of the Son of God unto his
Father (if you will needs put the trust of your cause in terms) if you
remember, be not the words of your own Challenge.

If this Argument be good, that here you make, S. Irenaeus not once names the
Mass, nor real Oblation of the Son of God unto his Father, Ergo, by him the
Sacrifice of the Church can not be avouched: why may not this also be as good:
Not one of the four Evangelists says expressly, that Christ offered or
sacrificed him self upon the Cross, nor once names that Sacrifice of
Christ: Ergo Christ was not sacrificed for us upon the Cross? If this
Argument shall be taken for good, then have the Arians ouercomme. For if the
Church shall be driven to show letters, syllables, and terms: neither can we
find the Co^substantialitie of the Son of God with the Father, nor the
Procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, nor certain other
great points of our Faith, which notwithstanding being reveled to the Church
by the holy Ghost the spirit of truth, and declared by the expositions of the
holy Fathers, we are bound to believe under pain of eternal damnation.

Knowing your self ouerborne with the force of this plain testimony of S.
Irenaeus, craftily you dissemble it, and keep your self a loofe of from
rehersing the words, pretending thereby that he never said so, as I have
reported him. But let the book be vewed, and it shall be found, will you nil
you, that I have truly alleged him. M. Ievvel forgeth sayings of his own
head, and reports them for the sayin^ges of S. Ireneus.
You on the other side, to conueigh the whole point to Malachie the Prophet,
where you thought rather to have some color of advantage: come in with a
forged saying of your own, and setting it forth in the lettre, that you caused
the Doctors sayings to be printed in, you ascribe it unto S. Irenaeus,
whereas the sentence which here you have inserted (pretending for credit your
solemn warrant with these words, Thus only he says) is not in S. Irenaeus.

You should have told us, M. Ievvel diuerteth from the testimony where with
he is urged, and enters into an other matter.
and with good authority have proved it, what other thing can be understood
by the new Oblation of the new Testament, whereof S. Irenaeus speaks, but
the Oblation of that, which Christ said to be his body, and confessed to be his
blood. To this you make no direct Answer, but slily carye away the reader
unto the saying of Malachie, whereof I have treated before. I urge you with S.
Irenaeus, and you shooting wide of the mark make answer to the place of
Malachie, whose saying is not in this place principally objected, but brought
in by the way as it were, by Saint Irenaeus, interpretinge the pure Sacrifice
by him mentioned, of the New Oblation of the New Testament.

The old learned Fathers (you say) never understood so much. So much? What so
much mean you? That the Oblation of Christ's body and Blood, is, the new
Oblation of the New Testament, Irenaeus li. 4. cap. 23.
which Christ taught his Disciples, which the Church received of the Apostles,
and now offers up unto God through the whole wrrlde, as S. Irenaeus says?
Did the Fathers never understand this much? What say you then to S. Irenaeus,
who understood so much, as by his words it is clear? What is this, but to
set the holy Fathers at variance with S. Irenaeus?

Yet you will needs seem to understand the Sacrifice that Malachie spoke of,
of Preaching, of a Contrite heart, of Prayer, of Praise, and thankesgeuing. For
credit hereof you allege Tertullia^, S. Hierom, and S. Augustine. Well, what if
it be so? What answer is that to S. Irenaeus? As for the place of Malachie, as
I said before, it is past, and answered. Certainly it can not be understood
of the pureness of man's heart, for of lack thereof he complains not, but of
polluted sacrifices. Again the pureness of man's heart, commonly is not so
great, as therefore, the name of God, should so much be magnified. And the same
was in many Jews then, no less then it is in the Christians now.

To that you bring out of Tertullian, and S. Hierome, concerning what is
meante by the Pure Sacrifice in Malachie, you have mine answer before in the
third Division. In the.3. Division fol. ^0. b. and deinceps.
What you bring here, you brought the same before. Sparing my labor, ink,
and paper, I remitte the Reader unto that place, where he shall find you to
have but a weak aid of Tertullian, and shamefully to have falsified S.
Hierome, as becomes such false shifters to do.

To prove that Malachie by the pure Sacrifice meant not the Sacrifice of the
Altar, you bring in S. Martialis ad Burdegalenses, whom you call one of mine
own new found Doctors. If you contemn him, why do you allege him? Will you
shun his authority, and yet crave help of him? If I would use your own
Rhetorique, here might I say, what tool is so bad, that Master Jewel will not
occupy, M. Ievvel falsifieth Martialis.
rather then seem to be without al weapon? Of what authority so ever he be,
once this is true, in your translation you have fowly falsified him, by putting
in words of your own forgerie. For he speaks nothing at al of Malachie,
nor in that place once names him. Whose name you added of your own unto the
sentence out of him alleged, to underprop your weak and ruinous building
with all.

In that Epistle ad Burdegalenses, S. Martialis understands by Ara
Sanctificata, one Special Altar, that in the City of Burdeaulx was
consecrated in the name of GOD, and S. Steven. Which Altar being in old time
dedicated to an unknown God, he at the overthrow of Idols Aulters there
caused to be reserved whole, and him self hallowed it. This much is declared in
the Epistle it self. And as you have falsified your Doctor with putting in
stuff of your own to the beginning of the sentence, so have you corrupted him
much worse, with cutting away from the midst the hinder part. Martialis
Epistol. ad Burdegal.
For these be his words, Nec solum in ara sanctificata, sed vbique offertur
Deo oblatio munda, sicut testatus est, cuius corpus and sanguinem in vitam
aeternam offerimus. Neither only upon the hallowed Altar, but every where is
the clean oblation offered up unto God, as he has witnessed, whose body and
blood we offer up to life everlasting. And what is that Christ has witnessed?
for of him he speaks. That Priests should offer up his body and blood in
every country, Luc. 22.
saying, Do this in my Remembrance. This served not your purpose, and therefore
you hewed it away.

Double oblation, one in spirit only, the other in the Sacrament.
If this answer do not satisfy you, may it please you to take this other. S.
Martialis speaks of two kinds of Oblations. The one is offered up in spirit
only. the other in mystery and in the Sacrament. The spiritual oblation is
offered up not only upon a sanctified Altar, but also euerywhere. But the
mystical and Sacramental oblation which is of the body and blood of Christ, is
offered up only upon a consecrated Altar, because thereon is the real presence
of the same. And of that kind of oblation in that very place which you have so
fowly corrupted, he says thus. Christ having a body both unspotted, and
without sin, because he was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the
virgin Marie, permitted it to be sacrificed on the Altar of the Cross. And
the same thing which the Jews sacrificed through envy, thinking so they
should abolish his name quite out of the earth, we set forth upon the hallowed
Altar for cause of our health, knowing that by this only remedy life is to
be given unto us, and death to be driven away. For our Lord him self
commanded us, to do this in remembrance of him. By this it is made clear,
that if you will stand to the authority of S. Martialis, you must recant your
Challenge denying the Priests to have power and commission to offer up Christ
unto his Father.

Upon the false construction you make of S. Martialis, you proceed, as if it
were the Gospel that you said. But your ground being false (for neither once
there names he Malachie, and of the Sacrifice he speaks plainly) al
likewise is false, that you build thereon, or conclude thereof.

S. Augustine (say you) calls the same Sacrifice (whereof Malachie speaks)
Sacrificiu^ Laudis, Aug. co^tra Aduers. Legis and Prophetarum. c. 20. Cont.
lit. Petiliani. li. 2. c. 86.
and gratiaru^ actionis, The Sacrifice of Praise, and of thankesgeuing. And
that it should appear, you allege him truly, you have by your cotation in the
margent, directed your reader unto two places. But in those places S. Augustine
calls it, Sacrificium Laudis, the Sacrifice of praise only: as for the
Sacrifice of thankesgeuing, it is of your own putting in, S. Augustine there
does not once name it. The matter is not great: yet your untruth is to be noted.
How be it what should I note this? There is in manner nothing by you in any
place alleged, which more or less by your craft of falsifying, you have not
altered and corrupted.

And though S. Augustine call the pure Sacrifice prophesied of by Malachie, the
Sacrifice of Praise, what conclude you thereof? Ergo, it is not the Sacrifice
of the body and blood of Christ? Thus you must conclude, for else it serves
you to no purpose. This being your argument, you show us as good Logique, as if
one should thus prove your ring not to be gold. This ring is metal, ergo, it
is not gold. For as metal is general to gold, silver, brass, and to other
things of that kind, and compriseth them within his generality, so as the
Argument is foolish, which from the affirmation of the general, deduceth the
denial of the special: No whit wiser, nor of better force is your reason, This
Sacrifice by report of S. Augustine, is the Sacrifice of Praise, Ergo, it is
not the Sacrifice of the Body and blood of Christ. For the Sacrifice of Praise
is general to al those Sacrifices, The Sacrifice of Praise, how general it is.
by which the name of God is praised, and is not only the Praise of God, that
is uttered by words proceeding out of our mouth. And God is praised by no
other thing so much, as by this unbloody Sacrifice, representing the oblation
of Christ upon the Cross. And S. Augustine him self writing upon the.49.
Psalm, calls the liberal almose of Zachaeus, who said, Luc. 19.
I give the half of my goods to the poor, and the two Mites, Mat. 12. Math.
10.
that the poor widow gave to the common Box, and the Cup of cold water,
that the poor host gave, as it is told in the Gospel, each of these (I say)
he calls Sacrificium Laudis, a Sacrifice of praise. This Sacrifice of Praise
(says he) had Zachaeus in his Patrimony, August. in Psalm. 49.
had the wydow in her purse, had the poor host in his tubbe.

So then M. Jewel, what you bring here out of S. Augustine, disprooueth nothing
at all the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, concerning that we call the
Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ celebrated in the Mass, whereof
Saint Irenaeus so plainly speaks, that you not being hable to avoid the
force of his clear words, are feign to shifte your hands of it, The
Sacrifice of the Altar is the Sacrifice of praise.
and turn away al your talk unto Malachie. Neither is it strange, that S.
Augustine calls it the sacrifice of praise. For whereby is the mercy of God
so much praised, as by the Sacrifice of the body and blood of his Son, which
we offer up in remembrnce of his Death?

But Sir why have you dissembled, and conceeled these other words, with which
S. Augustine in the very book and chapter that you allege, confirms the
Catholic doctrine on our behalf against you, and avouches that Sacrifice,
which most wickedly you deny? his words be these. Augustine. co^tra Aduers.
legis and proph. li. 1. c. 20.
This Church is Israel according to the spirit, from which that Israel
according to the flesh, is distincted, which served in the shadows of
sacrifices, by which the Singular Sacrifice was signified, that now Israel
according to the spirit offers up. Again a little after in the same place.
They that read, do know, what Melchisedech brought forth, when be blessed
Abraham. And now they are partakers of it, Ibidem. Genesis 14.
they see that kind of Sacrifice, now to be offered up unto God over all the
world.

What is this Singular Sacrifice, The Singular Sacrifice.
which the Church offers up, but the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ? For what so ever else you reckon, it shall appear common as well to
Israel according to the flesh, as to Israel according to the spirit. And what
sacrifice can you name us like unto that which Melchisedek brought forth when
he blessed Abraham, which they that read do know (by which manner of speech,
as by holding up a finger, S. Augustine is wont to point the Reader unto the
Sacrifice of the Altar) and which is now offered up unto God over all the
world, but the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, under the forms
of bread and wine? Thus we thank you M. Jewel for leading us unto those places
in S. Augustine, where our Doctrine is so substantially avouched, and your
heresy so plainly confuted.

Jewel.
In like sort Irenaeus also expounds his own meaning, Ecclesia offert Deo
cum Gratiarum action ex Creatura eius. Est ergo Altar in Coelo: Iren. lib. 4
cap. 34.
illuc Preces, and Oblationes nostrae diriguntur: The Church offers up to
God, ( not his own, and only Son, but) a natural thing of Gods
Creation. Neither is our Aultare here in earth, but in heaven. Thither our
Prayers, and Sacrifices be directed. Eusebius. de Demo^str. lib. 1. c. 10.
So likewise Eusebius says, Sacrificamus, and incendimus Memoriam Magni
illius Sacrificij, secundum ea, quae ab ipso tradita sunt, Mysteria
celebrantes, and gratias Deo pro salute nostra agentes: we Sacrifice, and
offer up unto God the Remembrance of that Great Sacrifice, vsinge the Holy
Mysteries accordingly, as Christ has delivered them, and geuinge God Thanks
for our Salvation.

And that Irenaeus meante not any such Real Sacrifice of the Son of God, nor
may not in any wise so be taken, it is euidente by the plain words, that
follow, touching the same. For thus he says, speaking of the very same
Sacrifice of the Nevve Testamente, that is mentioned by Malachie: Sacrificia
non sanctificant hominem, sed conscientia eius, qui offert, existens pura,
sanctificat Sacrificium. The Sacrifice does not Sanctify the Man: but the
Conscience of the offerer, being pure, sanctifies the Sacrifice. I trovve, M.
Harding vvil not say, The Priest is not sanctified by the Son of God: but
the Son of God is sanctified by the Conscience of the Priest: For that were
Blasphemy. And yet thus must he needs say, if Irenaeus meante the Real
Sacrificinge of the Son of God.

Harding.
After al these allegations brought by M. Jewel against the Sacrifice of the
Church, whereof not one ought at al helps his cause, With what sincerity
and truth M. Jew. ha^dleth S. Irenaeus.
as I have now proved: he returns unto S. Irenaeus again, and by his
accustomed craft of falsifying, he would make his Reader believe, that S.
Irenaeus expounds his own meaning so, as the Sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood be quite excluded. To bring this to pass, it is a wonder to see, what
foul shifts he makes. Of this blessed Fathes sentences he snatcheth here a
piece, and there a piece, taking the head without the tail, the body without
either, dismembring the whole. He joins together words, that be above thirty
lines a sund^r, and thereof frames a sense sounding to his false purpose,
clean contrary to the holy Doctors meaning. What shall I say of his own false
gloses, and additions, set forth with that letter, in which the Doctors
sayings be printed, of corrupting the Latin, of making his translation much
worse? Briefly he demeaneth him self so, as who so ever considers and
weighs the words of S. Irenaeus, and M. Jewels false sleightes together, he
will think, that he has utterly abandoned al truth, simplicity and
shamefastness, and puts his whole trust in lying.

Touching then that he first brings out of S. Irenaeus, I marvel what he
meant here to recite it. M. Ievvel Fovvly corrupts S. Irenaeus.
If he had set forth the whole sentence, as it lies in the Doctor, every
simple man would soon have perceived, that it furthereth his Challenge nothing
at al. Having spoken in the foreparte of the sentence of Oblation, that we must
offer up unto the Creator in pure meaning, in faith without Hypocrisy, infirm
hope, inferuent love: he comes to the later part, whereof M. Jewel has
pyked out a little piece with wyly falshod turning it to his purpose. This it
is, Et hanc oblationem Ecclesia sola pura offert Fabricatori, Iren. li. 4. cap.
34.
offerens ei cum gratiarum action ex creatura eius. And this oblation the
Church only offers up pure unto our Creator, offering unto him with giving
thanks out of his creature, that is to say, out of that he has created. There
it follows immediately, Iudaei autem non offerunt. etc. But the Jews do not
(so) offer, for their hands be full of blood. etc.

What makes this for M. Jewel? Mary were al true, that he adds to his
Doctors text, and in case that followed immediately, which he adioineth hereunto,
and with such terms, as he has devised of his own, and be not in S. Ireneus,
that is to say, if black were white: it were somewhat perhaps to his purpose.
But now he has falsified altogether, Foul corruption.
with these words falsely infarced into the sentence, not his own, and only
Son, but a natural thing: Also by putting these words, Est ergo Altar in
coelo, Illuc preces, and oblationes nostrae diriguntur next after the other, as
though even there they followed, which do not follow: but be found at the end of
the chapter. 36. lines after. Which nevertheless he tra^slateth also very
falsely, as the Reader may see. For these words, Neither is our Altar here in
earth, be of his own false addition, and be not at al in the Doctour^ and most
true it is, that we have Aulters in the Church to offer the Sacrifice of the
body and blood of Christ^ upon, which by virtue of his word be made really
present: though we have an Altar also in heaven.

Where as S. Ireneus is brought in by M. Jewel in the next paragraph, saying,
Sacrificia.
The sacrifices do not sanctify the man, but the conscience of the offerer
being pure, sanctifies the sacrifice: in that place he speaks not of the
Sacrifice of the Altar at al, but of the Sacrifices of the old Testament.
What so ever is offered unto God, it is not the thing offered, that of it self
sanctifies him that offers, But the pure and clean heart of the party that
offers sanctifies the sacrifice, that is to say, as S. Ireneus expounds
him self, praestat acceptare Deum quasi ab amico, causes God to accept it, as
at the hand of a friend. Else if a wicked sinner (says the Scripture there also
alleged) kill me a calfe, Esai. 66.
I had as leave he killed me a dog. In that place therefore he speaks
against them only, that thought to please God with their outward Sacrifices,
whereof he has no need, them selves inwardly being wicked, and having impure
consciences. To make this clearer by examples, and testimonies of Scripture, he
allegeth the example of Cain, of the Scribes and Pharisees, and certain
sayings out of Jeremy, and Esaye.

Now in the setting forth of this saying, Two lie^ of M. Ievvel.
M. Jewel deceives his Reader, but with two lies at once. The one is, in that
he says, it follows after the other before alleged. For it follows not, but
goes before it, as it may be seen in the book. The other lie is, in that he
avouches this holy Father to speak this much of the new oblation of the new
Testament, which is utterly false, as I have now declared.

Jewel.
But M. Harding has divised a great many replies to the contrary. First he
says, The offering up of prayer, Praises, and Thankesgeuinge can not be
called a New Sacrifice: for the same was made by Moses, Aaron, the Prophets,
and other holy men in the Old Law. This objection serves well to control
Tertullian, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, and other learned Fathers, that thus
have taken it: who, by M. Hardinges judgment, vvrote unadvisedly, they
knevve not what. Hereunto Irenaeus him self ansvveareth thus: Irenae. li. 4.
c. 34
Oblationes hic: Oblationes illic. Sacrificia in Populo Israel: Sacrificia in
Ecclesia. Sed species immutata est tantum. Quippe cum iam non a Seruis, sed a
Liberis offeruntur. There were Sacrifiees in the Old Testament: There be
Sacrifices in the new. There were Sacrifices in the People of Israel: there be
Sacrifices in the Church. Only the manner, or form is changed. For now they
be offered, not by Bond men (as before) but by Free men. In like sense
vvriteth Angelomus. Angelomus Anti^^^m. lib. 3.
Mandatum nouum scribo vobis: non alterum: sed ipsum, quod dixi Vetus, idem est
Nouum. I write unto you a New Commandment: None other, but that I called
the Old, the self same is the New. And it is called a Nevve sacrifice, says
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. contra Iudaeos. lib. 3.
Because it proceeds from a New mind, and is offered, not by fiere, and
smoke, but by Grace, and by the Spirit of God. And in this consideration
Irenaeus thinks, David said unto the Children of the Church of Christ,
Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 1.
O sing unto the Lord a New Song.

M. Hardinge says further, The words of Malachie may in no wise be taken
for the Oblation of Christ upon the Cross. For that, says he, was done at
one time only, and in one certain place, in Golgotha without the Gates of
Jerusalem, and not in every place. Yet M. Hardinge may easily understand,
that the Remembrance of that Sacrifice, and Thankesgeuinge for the same, may
be made at al times, and in all places. And therefore Eusebius as it is noted
before, Eusebius de demon. lib. 1. c. 10.
calls our Sacrifice, Magni illius Sacrificij Memoriam, The Remembrance of
that great Sacrifice: and, the Thankesgeuinge, which we yield unto God for
our Salvation, Dionysius calls it, Ecclaesia Hierar. cap. 3. Augustine. in
Psalm. 75^ Hiero. in Psalm. 147.
(...), a Figurative Sacrifice. And S. Augustine says, Cum credimus in
Christum, ex ipsis reliquijs cogitationis, Christus nobis quotidie immolatur:
When we believe in Christ, even of the very remanentes of our Cogitation (
in what place so ever we be) Christ is Sacrificed unto us every day.
Likewise S. Hierome says, Cum audimus Sermonem Domini, Caro Christi, and
Sanguis eius in auribus nostris funditur. When we hear the word of the
Lord, the Fleash of Christ and his Blood is povvred out into our ears. And,
whereas M. Hardinge says further, that the Spiritual Sacrifices of our
devotion cannot altogether be called pure, Esai. 64.
and therefore can not be the Sacrifices of the Nevve Testamente, Psalm. 50.
it must needs be confessed, that al our righteousness, in respect of many
imperfections, Eusebius. de demon. li. 1. cap. 6. Orationis sacrificiu^, quod
Mu^dum dictum est. Tertul ad Scapula^.
may be compared, as the prophet Esaias says, unto a filthy clovvte. Yet in
respect of Gods mercy, and in Christ, the Prophet David says, Thou
shall wash me, and I vvil be vvhiter, then the snow.

How be it, herein I vvil remit M. Hardinge to the judgment of them, vvhoes
Authorities he can not well deny. Eusebius calls our Prayers, Mundum
Sacrificium, A Pure Sacrifice. Tertullian says, We make Sacrifice unto our
God, for the safety of our Emperors, Pura prece, with a Pure Prayer. S.
Hierome speaking of the Sacrifice of Christian Prayers, says thus: A pure
Sacrifice is Offered unto me in every place: not in the Oblations of the Old
Testamente, but in the holiness of the Purity of the Gospel. To be short S.
Paul says, Hiero. in Zachar. lib. 2. c. 8.
Volo viros precari in omni loco, leuantes manus Puras: I vvoulde, that men
should pray in all places, lifting up Pure hands ( unto God)

Touching the Sacrifice of the Lords Table, In sanctitate Eua^gelicae
Puritatis.
Eusebius vvriteth thus: (...): He gave us a Remembrance in steed of a
Sacrifice to offer up continually unto God. And this he calls, Incruentu^, et
Rationabile sacrificiu^: The unbloody, 1. Tim. 2. Eusebius de demo^stra. lib. 1.
and Reasonable Sacrifice. This says Iraeneus, is the Sacrifice of the Nevve
Testament. This Sacrifice the Church received of the Apostles: and the same
the Apostles received of Christ, that made al things Nevve.

Harding.
Concerning the Sacrifices of our devotion (say I in my Answer) that be mere
spiritual, they can not truly be called the new oblation of the new Testament,
because they were offered up to God in the old Testament, as now they be in
the new. By this M. Jewels shifte is quite avoided, who has nothing to answer
to this place of S. Ireneus reporting Christ, after that he had consecrated
his body and blood, to have taught us the new oblation of the new Testament,
but that it is the pure sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, that is to say, a
contrite heart, or preaching of the Gospel, or prayer, or praise, and
thankesgeuing, or, he can not tell what. This objection (says M. Jewel) serves
well to control the old Fathers, namely Tertullian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome.

No No, M. Jewel, it controlleth the old Fathers nothing at al. It controlleth
our young Fathers, such as you, and your fellows be, who have most rashly, most
unlearnedly, most wickedly, and Antichristlike, abolished out of the Churches
of England, the most blessed Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, and
now being urged and pressed with this manifest place of this Ancient and
learned Father, who affirms it so clearly, ye have not what to answer. Your
whole book of Reply contains nothing in effect, but wyly sleightes, vain
shifts, shameless lies, and foul corruptions of the Doctors, and Councels,
above al measure. But of such Merchandise you make your show no where more,
then in this Article, in which you impugn the Sacrifice. And of al your
Divisions of the same Article hitherto, in this Division the vanity of your
shifts, appears most.

Yet you will not give over, Irenaeus corrupted by M. Jew
but that at least to the ignorant people it may seem you have enough to say
for your self, you come again to S. Irenaeus for help, and he helps your
cause nothing at al. Well, what says he? Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
Oblationes hi,c Oblationes illic. etc. The head of the sentence you have
lopped of. This is the whole. It is the kind of Oblations, that is rejected:
for there were Oblations both there (among the Jews) and there be Oblations also
here. There were sacrifices among that people, there be sacrifices in the
Church. But the Kind (or form) is changed only, for so much as they be not
bond men that offer now, but freemen.

What conclude you of all this M. Jewel? What makes this against the real
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ? Mary say you, Thus answers
Irenaeus to my Objection. What was my Objection? This is that I said in effect,
as is before rehearsed, that the mere spiritual sacrifices of our devotion, can
not truly be called the New Oblation of the New Testament, because they are
common to them of both Testamentes. How say you, is not this true? And what
have you to the contrary, in this saying of S. Irenaeus?

The kind, or form of their, and our sacrifices, is changed, you will say
perhaps. I grant this much: albe it S. Irenaeus refers this change, not to
the sacrifices, but to the offerers: because the old people of the Synagog
were bond men, and we of the Church are free men. But let it be, as you would
have it. Who understands not the kind of sacrifices to be changed, for that
they killed brute beasts, according to Moses Law, and we kyl them not, as
not being under that Law? But what? Will you of this conclude, that they
offered not up unto God the Sacrifices of a contrite heart, of prayers, of
praise and thankesgeuing, and such other spiritual sacrifices, because they
offered up beasts, and because we now offer these? I trow by that time you
have bethought your self, you will not stand in it. For, be not the Psalms,
and the sermons of the Prophets full of exhortations, to this end, that these
spiritual oblations should be made, and the like things done, that God
accepts for sweet smelling sacrifices? Would they so have exhorted the
people, except these things ought to have been done? And whereas they were to
be done, will you say, there were none, that did them? will you say, the holy
kings, and Prophets had not co^trite hearts, prayed not, nor praised, ne
thanked God? I suppose you will not say it. To what purpose then pyked you out
the former saying of S. Irenaeus? What makes it for you? what makes it
against us?

No more furthereth that your cause, which without opening and circumstance you
allege out of Angelomus, and S. Chrysostom. How much better had you done, if
confessing the truth, you had leafte out these obscure and impertinent places,
and had rehearsed unto your Reader certain other most plain sayings out of S.
Irenaeus, whereof this is one written in the same chapter, out of which you
piked the pieces that here you have patched together. Quomodo constabit eis,
etc. How shall they be assuredly certified (says this blessed Martyr) that
bread whereon thanks be given, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
to be the body of their Lord, and that Cup to be (the Cup) of his blood,
if they will not say, he is the Son of the Creator of the world, that is to
say, his Word, whereby the Vine brings forth fruit, founteines (of wine) do
run, and which (for bread to be had) gives first grass, afterward an ear,
and then at length full wheat in the ear? Again how say they, that the flesh
comes into corruption, and receives not life, which is fed of the body and
blood of our Lord? Therefore either let them change their opinion, or cease
from offering up the things, that are before said.

An other like saying there auouching our doctrine, is this. The Eucharist
consists of two things.
As the bread that is of the earth, receiving the calling upon of God, is not
now common bread, but the Euchariste, consisting of two things, earthly, and
heavenly: So our bodies receiving the Euchariste, be not now corruptible, but
have hope of the Resurrection.

How plain and clear testimony have we in these sayings, for the truth, and
Real presence of our Lords body and blood in the blessed Sacrament, for the
Oblation of the same, for the most sovereign effect, that thereby is wrought
in our bodies nourrished and fed therewith? At these M. Jewel you closed up
your eyes, because they confound the pride and wicked folly of your Challenge:
other words, and patches of sentences, you pryed and hunted after, by which
you might seem to avoid the clear authority in this Division alleged against
you out of S. Irenaeus, yet when you have al said, and shifted, your Reply is
found to weak, and insufficient.

Because you feel your self much pressed, and as it were borne down, with
the weight of this plain testimony of S. Irenaeus ( Christ having confessed
of the bread, that is was his body, and of the cup, that it was his blood,
taught his Apostles the new oblation of the new Testament) feign would you
find some way, how to ease your self of it, and therefore have you looked
over (as it seems) al your Notebookes, and searched the Doctors far and
near, to happen upon some for your relief, but none can you find. And here
you show your self to be graueled with these plain words, This sentence of
S. Ireneus graueleth M. Ievvel
Noui Testamenti noua^ docuit oblationem, Christ taught the new oblation of
the new Testament. To avoid this new oblation, that so much combreth you, you
have devised a new policy, which would serve you for some show and color,
were it not altogether stuff of your own counterfeyting and forging. What is
that? Behold Reader, and consider of it diligently.

Thus says M. Jewel. It is called a new Sacrifice, says Chrysostom, (now
follow the words pretended to be S. Chrysostomes in the distinct letter, that
he puts the Doctors sayings in) because it proceeds from a new mind,
and is offered, not by fiere and smoke, but by Grace, and by the Spirit of
God. But where says S. Chrysostom this much? You have put it in the letter of
the Fathers sayings, tell us where we may find the cause thus declared, why
this oblation of the new Testament, is called, New. By your cotation in the
margent you send us unto Chrysostom. contra Iudaeos. lib. 3. but there we find
no such thing at al. Neither be they Books, but Orations, that he wrote
against the Jews, and so Erasmus, who translated that work, calls them.

Mary in the second Oration we have trakte you, M Ievve^ foully abuses S.
Chrysostom.
and found out the place, that you abuse: abuse, I say, for it makes wholly
against you. There, S. Chrysostom, to prove unto the Jew, to whom he speaks,
that both their Law, and there Sacrifice is ended, and abolished, and that an
other Sacrifice is come in place of theirs, which is pure, and is to be offered
up through all the world, allegeth the prophecy of Malachie, from the rising
of the Sun to the going down, Malach. 1.
etc. a pure Sacrifice shall be offered unto my name. Upon this prophecy he
stayth him self, and declares at large, how it ought to be understood, and
how the Prophet may not seem to be repugnant to Moses, who appoints the
Sacrifice of the Jews unto one only place, and how, and for what respect,
the Sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, is pure, which S. Chrysostom
calls, Sacrificium nostrum, our Sacrifice. Among other many words spoken in
praise of this our pure Sacrifice, Whi our sacrifice i^ of Malachie called the
Pure Sacrifice, after the mind of S. Chrysostom.
thus he says there.

If one confer this Sacrifice with theirs, he shall find an exceeding great
difference, so that according to the proportion of comparison, this alone may
deserve to be called pure. And look what S. Paul said of the Law, and Grace,
that, that was not glorified at al, which was glorified, in comparison of the
high Glory: the same here also justly we may say, 2. Cor. 3.
to wit, that this Sacrifice compared with that (of the Law) ought alone to be
called pure. Then follow the words which M. Jewel has by falsifying, and
foul corruption abused to his purpose. Non enim per fumum ac nidorem, non per
sanguinem ac redemptionis precia, sed per spiritus gratiam offertur. For it is
not offered by smoke and gresy savor, Chrysosto. oratioee. 2 contra Iudaos.
not by blood and prices of redemption, but by grace of the spirit. With
these words he renders the cause, why the Sacrifice of the Church, is of
Malachie called pure, and not why it is called New, Chrysosto^ misreported by
M. Ievvel.
as M. Jewel has perverted the sentence.

Compare good Reader this Repliers words with S. Chrysostomes words, and thou
shall espy, what a corrupter and falsifier he is of the Doctors. Wherefore
seeing he can find no help at S. Chrysostomes hands (whom here he has much
injured, and misreported) nor at the hands of any other Doctor, nor can show
us what Sacrifice that is, which S. Ireneus calls the new Sacrifice, or new
Oblation of the new Testament that Christ taught, when he said of the bread
and Cup, this is my body, this is my blood, but the Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ: with right he may be required to subscribe, and yield.
Which will be best for him to do, least the time come, when not yielding he
shall be taken prisoner, and for his heresy and impenitent heart, be cast into
the owtward darkness, Matt. 22.
where shall be weeping, and gnasshing of teeth.

Because M. Jewel harpeth so much upon the prophecy of Malachie, and puts
the confidence of his cause therein, and has taken his advantage of S.
Chrysostom by falsifying his words: let us see how little cause he had so to
do, and how much S. Chrysostom being truly alleged, proves in that very
place which M. Jewel brings, treating of Malachie, the Catholic assertion.
Whereas Moses forbad sacrifice to be made in any other place, Deuteronomy. 16.
but in that place which our Lord had chosen, and Malachie says, that the
pure Sacrifice is to be offered up in every place from the East to the West:
that these two should not seem to be repugnant, S. Chrysostom says, that
Moses spoke of one Sacrifice, and Malachie prophesied of an other.

To prove this, he asks this question. Vnde hoc declaratur? Whereby is this
declared? There for declaration and proof hereof, among other things he
brings the argument of the place. For (says he) Malachie foretold that this
worship should be celebrated, not in one City, as the Jewish sacrifice was,
but from the rising of the Sun, to the going down. Then follow these
words: Co^clusio^s gathered out of S, Chrysostom. against M. Jew.
Praeterea ex Sacrificij modo, siquidem puram illam appellans, declarauit de
qua loqueretur. Furthermore this is declared by the manner of the Sacrifice,
for in that he calls that oblation (or worship) pure, he has declared of
what oblation (or worship) he spoke. This much S. Chrysostom there.

Hereof and of that S. Chrysostom says in that place, these Conclusions may
be gathered against M. Jewel. The First Concusion. Malachie in S. Chrysostomes
and thankesgeuing, Malachie can not seem repugnant to Moses, because Moses
never forbad them: Ergo, the Sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, is not to be
understood of mere spiritual sacrifices. Ergo, Malachie is not to be
understood of the mere spiritual Sacrifices. Praedixit hanc culturam
celebrandam, he fortolde that this worship should be celebrated, not in one
city, etc. But of any of the mere spiritual sacrifices of our devotion, no
learned Father ever said, that it is a worship to be celebrated, nor are these
terms convenient for them, or for any of them, for they are not, properly to
speak, a worship by us to be celebrated, but thereby and therewith we do
celebrate and worship God: Ergo, Malachie by S. Chrysostomes doctrine, speaks
not specially of the mere spiritual sacrifices of man's heart, but of an other
Sacrifice outwardly celebrated. sense, and the mere spiritual sacrifices of
man's inward devotion be not such: Ergo, Malachie meant not of them, but of an
other Sacrifice. The.5. Conclusion. Malachie by the exposition of Nostrum, that
is to say, ours, belonging to us, that be of the new Testament. But the
Sacrifice of a contrite heart, of Prayers, Praise, and thankesgeuing be theirs
of the old Testament, as well as ours: Ergo, of that kind of Sacrifice he
spoke not. That I make an end of Conclusions, the sixth and last Ergo, it is
an other kind of Sacrifice, which Malachie foretold.


So then it is, M. Ievvel reasonably required to yield.
if M. Jewel can not declare and clearly prove unto us, that Malachie
prophesying of a mere spiritual Sacrifice of man's devotion, might reasonably
seem to S. Chrysostom to be repugnant to Moses, that such a sacrifice should
abolish the Jews sacrifices, that it is called a worship to be celebrated by
us, that it is declared what it is, by the external manner of it, that in
proper and right speech it ought to be called our Sacrifice, or the Sacrifice
of the new Testament, and to conclude, that it is most singularly and most
excellently pure: if I say he can not make good these pointes^ as to every man
of mean judgment and learning most certain it is, he can not: judge discrete
Reader, how good reason we have, to require him to yield, and to deceive the
world no more by alleging the authority of S. Chrysostom, as though he so
understood Malachies Prophecy, and consequently were contrary to S. Irenaeus.

That S. Chrysostom is to be understood of the Sacrifice of the Altar,
And on the other side, who is so wilfully blind, that sees not al these
properties to be agreeable unto the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ? For this is not contrary to Moses, but it is the perfection of
Moses, the truth of the figure, the body of the shadow: the coming of this,
has abolished the Jewish Sacrifices: by this God is most highly praised,
thanked, and honored, and this it self is a worship most holyly to be
celebrated: In ^rat. 2. contra Iudaeos.
This, what it is, most plainly by the manner of offering is declared, for the
Priest says in the person of Christ, as by him he is taught to do, this is my
body, which is given for you, Luc. 22.
this is my blood, which is shed for you, and for many: Math. 26.
This by all right is our Sacrifice, in so much that if this be not ours, I
mean of the new Testament, whereas besides this there is none other external
and real sacrifice: then have we none at al, that is external and real. Which
if it were true, then neither had we a Priesthood, nor Lawe^ and so then were
we a people neither of the one Testament, nor of the other. To conclude, this,
and none other but this, is, touching the substance of it, the pure Sacrifice
in highest and supreme degree of pureness. For what ca^ be thought purer then
that body, which was conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of the most pure
Virgin, which is the proper body of the Word?

To the heap of Allegations, which M. Jewel in the end of this Division has
as it we^e with scoopes, cast^ together, because they importe little substance,
and be, some untruly, and al without sincerity brought in, the circumstance of
the places, whens they be taken out not declared, the opening whereof would
require many words, which should weary rather then profit the reader: I
esteem a just and particular Answer utterly nedelesse, specially what so ever
is of any importance, being already sufficiently answered.

The.10. Division.
The Answer.
NOw let us hear what S. Cyprian has written to this purpose. Because his
works he common, to be shorter, I will rehearse his words in English. If in
the Sacrifice, which is Christ, none but Christ is to be followed, soothly it
behooued us to obey, and do that, which Christ did, and commanded to be
done. For if Jesus Christ our Lord and God, very he him self be the high
Priest of God the Father, and him self first offered Sacrifice to God the
Father, and commanded the same to be done in his Remembrance: Verily that
Priest does occupy the office of Christ truly, who does by imitation the
same thing, that Christ did. And then he offers to God the Father in the
Church a true, and a perfect Sacrifice, if he begin to offer right so as he
sees Christ him self to have offered. This far S. Cyprian. How can this
Article be avouched in more plain words? he says that Christ offered him
self to his Father in his Supper, and likewise commanded us to do the same.

Here we have proved, that it is lawful, and has always from the beginning
of the New Testamente been lawful for the Priests to offer up Christ unto
his Father, by the testimonies of three holy Martyrs, two Greeks, and one
Latin, most notable in sundry respects, of antiquity, of the room they bare
in Christ's Church, of Learning, of Constancy, of Faith steadfastly keapte to
Death, suffered in places of same, and knowledge, at Paris, at Lions, at
Carthage.

Jewel.
This place of S. Cyprian, as it not once touches the real Sacrificinge of
Christ unto his Father, so it utterly condemns the Communion under One Kind:
the Common Prayers in a strange unknown tongue: and briefly the whole
disorder, and abuse of M. Hardinges Mass.

But S. Cyprian says, In Sacrificio, quod Christus est: In the Sacrifice, that
is Christ. If M. Harding think to find great advantage in these words,
August. in Johan. tract. 26.
it may please him to Remember, that S. Augustine says, Illis Petra erat
Christus: Unto the Jews the Rock was Christ. Verily, the Sacrifice after the
order of Melchisedek, which is the Propitiation for the Sins of the world,
is only Jesus Christ, the Son of God upon the Cross. And the ministration
of the Holy Mysteries, in a phrase, and manner of speech, is also the same
Sacrifice: because it lays forth the Death, and blood of Christ so
plainly, and so evidently before our eyes. So says S. Augustine, August. in
Psalm. 20
The very Remembrance of Christ's Passion sturreth up such motions within us,
as if we saw Christ presently having upon the Cross. Upon which words the
Common Gloss notes thus: De Conse. Dis. 2. Semel.
Christus immolatur, id est, Christi immolatio repraesentatur, and fit memoria
passionis: Christ is sacrificed, that is to say, The Sacrifice of Christ is
represented, and there is made a Remembrance of his passion. So S. Cyprian
says, Vinum exprimit sanguinem: Cypri. lib. 2. epist. 3.
In Aqua populus intelligitur: In Vino sanguis ostenditur. Itaque passionis
eius mentionem in Sacrificijs facimus. Passio enim Domini est Sacrificium, quod
offerimus. The Wine shows the Blood, in the Water we understand the
people: The Blood is expressed in the Wine. And therefore in our sacrifices
we make mention of Christ's passion. For the Sacrifice, that we offer, De
Conse. Distinct. 2. Quid sit.
is the passion of Christ. As the ministration of the holy Communion is the
Death, and Passion of Christ, even so, and in like sort, and sense may the
Sacrifice thereof be called Christ. Therefore S. Gregory says, Christus in
seipso immortaliter viuens, iterum in hoc Mysterio moritur. De Cons. Did. 2.
Quid sit.
Eius Caro in populi Salute^ patitur: Christ liui^g immortally in him self,
dies again in this Mystery. His Fleash suffers ( in the Mystery) for the
Salvation of the people. I reckon, M. Harding vvil not say, In Glosa. Chryso.
in Acta. Homil. 21.
that Christ Dies in deed, according to the force, and sound of these
words, or that his Fleashe verily, and in deed as tormented, and suffers in
the Sacrament. S. Gregory better expounds him self in this wise: Hoc
Sacramentum Passionem Vnigeniti Filij imitatur: Beda expo^nens illud^ Sicut
Moses exalta uit, etc.
This Sacrament expresses or represents the Passion of the Only begotten
Son. And the very Barbarous Gloss touching the same says, Christus Moritur,
and Patitur, id est, Mors, and Passio Christi repraesentatur: Christ Dies, and
Suffers, that is to say, Christ's Death, and Passion is represented.

So S. Chrysostom says, Johan. 3.
In Mysterijs mors Christi perficitur: The Death of Christ is wrought in the
Mysteries. Hieron. in Psalm. 97
So says Beda, Exaltatio Serpentis Aenei Passio Redemptoris nostri in Cruce:
The lifting up of the Brazen Serpent is the Passion of our Redeemer upon the
Cross. Ambro. d^ Virginib.
So says S. Hierome, Quotidie nobis Christus Crucifigitur: August. Quaest.
E^ua^ge. lib. 2.
Unto us Christ is daily Crucified. So S. Ambrose, Christus quotidie
immolatur: Christ is daily sacrificed. So S. Augustine, Tunc vnicuique
Christus occiditur, cum credit occisum: Then is Christ slain to every man,
Hieron ad Damas.
when he believes that Christ was slain. To conclude, so S. Hierome ^aith,
Semper Christus credentibus immolatur: Unto the faithf^l Christ is evermore
sacrificed. Thus may the Sacrifice of the Holy Communion be called Christ: to
vvitte, even so, as the ministration of the same is called the Passion, or the
Death of Christ.

Harding.
The first sentence of your Reply in this Division M. Jewel, consists of.4.
particles, and each of them is an impudent lie. By the spiteful words you
utter against the most holy Mass, you show us with what stamp you are
coined. As for S. Cyprian, neither does he in this place condemn the Church
for ministering the Communion under one kind, nor for having the public
Church service in the Latin tongue. Which in these Western parts of
Christendom is not, as you call it, a strange unknown tongue, but contrariwise
a tongue among al other best known in general, and common to al nations of the
West.

Touching the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, so clearly by S.
Cyprian here avouched, that so it is, you would never have denied, had not you
put the whole confidence of your cause in lying, and denying most evident
truths. And now therefore I must prove against such a cauiller and wrangler,
as you are, M. Ievvel stands altogether upon certain precise terms.
that there is light, where the Sun shyneth. And here once again you think
to find a lurking corner in your precise terms of the real sacrificing of
Christ unto his Father: as though I proved not that which in this Article you
deny, except the truth be affirmed in the same form of words, which your
self have devised. If you had good matter, I trow you would not thus stand only
upon terms.

But let us pull you out of your lurking corner, An evident place of S. Cypria^
for the Sacrifice of the Altar. Cyprian. lib. 2. epistol. 3.
as it were out of Cacus Den, and bring you abroad into the light. Answer me
Sir: Will it not appear by this place of S. Cyprian, that Christ offered him
self unto his Father at his last Supper? Be not these his very words, Jesus
Christ our Lord and God first offered a Sacrifice to God the Father, and
commanded the same to be done in his Remembrance? What Sacrifice was this? It
was not the Sacrifice of the Cross pardy. For that very same Sacrifice was not
commanded to be made again, it was once made for ever by Christ him self.
What can you name, but the unbloody Sacrifice of his body and blood? For if
you name us the mere spiritual sacrifices of devotion, as Prayer, Praise,
Thankesgeuing, or any such other the like: you must remember, Christ did not
first of al sacrifice the same. For the Patriarchs, and Prophets did so, long
before Christ was incarnate.

What is it then? S. Cyprian tells it him self expressly, saying, Christ
is the Sacrifice, In Sacrificio quod Christus est. He speaks of such a
Sacrifice, in which the Priest occupies the room, and does the office of
Christ truly, and in doing which, the Priest by imitation does the same thing
that Christ did. Then what did Christ, and where did he that the Priest is
commanded to follow? What need I to stand upon it? Who knows not,
Cyprian. ad Ceciliu^^
whereof S. Cyprian treats in that Epistle to Caecilius, and what Christ did
at his Supper? He took bread, Math. 26
and then the Cup, he gave thanks, blessed, Luc. 22.
and consecrated his body and blood saying, this is my Body, 1. Cor. 11.
Cyprian. lib. 2. epistol. 3.
this is my Blood, and so offered up (as S. Cyprian says) the same thing,
which Melchisedech had offered, that is to say^ bread and wine, to wit, his
own body and blood. Which Body and Blood, because both natures be
inseparably united together in one person, he calls also by the name of
Christ. In Sacrificio quod Christus est, in the Sacrifice which Christ is, for
here Christus, is the nominative case to the verb, est.

Whereas then Christ offered Christ to his Father, at his Supper, and
commanded Priests to do the same in Remembrance of him, until he come, that
being in every respect lawful, which he commands: it follows, that
Priests have authority to offer up Christ, who is the Son of God, unto his
Father, which is the point of this Article, that M. Jewel denies. And thus is
the real sacrificing of Christ unto his Father, proved by S. Cyprian, real, I
say, not in respect of the manner of sacrificinge that was upon the Cross,
but of the Body and Blood really present, and being the real substance of this
commemoratiue Sacrifice.

Here I needed not to proceed further in this Division, my Answer to the
Challenge being so sufficiently justified touching the unbloody Sacrifice, and
this being proved by S. Cyprians testimony, as it was proved before by
testimony of S. Irenaeus, that it is not only lawful, but also dutiful for
Priests, to offer up Christ unto his Father. Yet because M. Jewel, (who from
the beginning never intended to yield, how plain matter so ever were proved
against him) comes now in with his Phrases, having no plain and direct
authority whereby to prove his negative doctrine: Let us see, what pith his
obscure phrases, and tropical speeches do contain.

Where as S. Cyprian says plainly, Christ is the Sacrifice (meaning the
substance of the Sacrifice celebrated at the Supper and now at the Altar) he
wills me to remember, August. in Joan. tractat. 26.
that S. Augustine says, Petra erat Christus, the Rock was Christ. For that
he puts unto S. Augustine this word illis, interpreting it of the Jews: it
is his own addition, S. Augustine has it not. But what concludes he of this?
Not only S. Augustine, but S. Cyprian also in this very Epistle, and first of
al S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1^.
the Rock was Christ. I say to M. Jewel eftsoon, it may please him to
remember, that S. Augustine expounds him self immediately in the next
sentence, saying, Petra Christus in signo. The Rock was Christ.
The Rock was Christ in a sign, that is to say, the Rock was not Christ in
substance, and in deed, but signified Christ. If he intend thus to conclude,
as the Reply seems to report, As the Rock was Christ, so Christ is the
Sacrifice: but the Rock was not Christ in deed: Ergo, Neither Christ is the
Sacrifice: If he make this Argument, I deny his Mayor, or first Proposition.
For the Rock was Christ in sign only, but Christ's body and blood Really
made present, by the almighty power of the Word, is in deed the substance of
the commemoratiue Sacrifice. Wherefore no likeness touching the Phrase being
between these two Propositions, the Rock was Christ, and, Christ is the
Sacrifice: the one can not rightly be applied to overthrow the other. And
whereas M. Jewel makes his colorable advantage by making Sacrifice the
nominative case to the verb in this saing of S. Cyprian, In Sacrificio quod
Christus est: he is to be told, that he misconstrueth it, and that false
co^structio^ makes no proof. For S. Cyprian says not, the Sacrifice is
Christ, which also is true, and that takes M. Jewel for his purpose: but,
Christ is the Sacrifice. In consideration whereof the figurative saying, and
the Phrase of the Rock, and the great number of his other phrases, serves not
his turn.

That the Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech was not only upon the
Cross, but also at the Supper.
Upon this false constructio^ of S. Cyprians saying how so ever he proceeds,
speaking co^fusely of the sacrifice, which is after the order of Melchisedek,
and of the propitiation for the sins of the world: this I acknowledge, that
only Jesus Christ the Son of God, is the propitiatory Sacrifice for the
sins of the world, and that such a Sacrifice in most perfect wise, he was
upon the Cross, yea also after the order of Melchisedek, where, as Melchisedek
offered bread and wine, so he offered up his body and blood, Hieronym. in Psalm.
109.
the true bread, and the true wine, as s. Ierom says. For all though he
expressed the shadows of al Aarons sacrifices upon the Cross, yet there he was
a Priest after the order of Melchisedek. For so S. Paul in th'Epistle to the
Hebrews shows, by the dissimilitude of both Priesthods. But that he was a
sacrifice after the order of Melchisedek only, when he hoong upon the Cross,
that I deny. For he was a Priest, and also a sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedek at his last supper. at what time offering up his body, and blood
under the forms of bread and wine, he began to execute the office of the
Priesthod after the order of Melchisedek, and taught his Disciples the way,
Theophyl. in Matthew. cap. 28.
how after his death to make the same oblatio^. Upon which consideration
Theophylact, as it is before rehearsed, says, Tunc i^molauit seipsu^, ex quo
tradidi^ Discipulis corpus suu^, he sacrificed him self, at the time he
delivered his body to his Disciples. And S. Austine more plainly, August. de
ciuit. Dei, lib. 17. capit. 20.
expounding this place of Ecclesiastes, Non est bonu^ homini, nisi quod
ma^ducabit et bibet, where he says thus. Quid credibilius etc. What is more
credible we should think Salomo^ meant by those words, then that pertains
to the participatio^ of this table, which Christ him self a Priest and
mediator of the new Testament does exhibit after the order of Melchisedek, of
his body and blood? For that sacrifice did succeed al other sacrifices of the
old Testament, which were offered in the shadow of this to come. A little before
in the same chapter speaking of the Table which Christ prepared with bread and
wine, he gives an evident testimony for the Sacrifice and Priesthod after
the order of Melchisedek, where he says thus, Vbi apparet etia^ f^cerdotiu^
secundu^ ordine^ Melchisedech, that is to say, where also appears the
priesthod after the order of Melchisedek. By this authority it is clear, that
Christ at the table, where the blessed Sacrament was first instituted, and is
now daily celebrated in memory of his Passion, does exhibit that which is a
sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech, which can be nothing else, but the
Sacrifice of his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine. That
Christ merited the forgeuenes, and propitiatio^ of the sins of the world upon
the Cross only, that I gladly grant.

As for the Sacrifice and Priesthode after the order of Melchisedech, S.
Augustine in an other place says, August. in Psalm. 33. concion 2.
that Christ (at his Supper) instituted a Sacrifice of his body and blood
according to the order of Melchisedech. De corpore et sa^guine suo, of his body
and blood, says he, signifying his body and blood to be the matter of the
Sacrifice. Lo here again it is plainly avouched, that Christ instituted a
Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech before he was nailed upon the Cross,
yea the Sacrifice of his body and blood. For to the time of the Supper this is
to be referred, when both he taught them how, and commanded them to sacrifice.

Of this Sacrifice S. Augustine in the sermon there next before, gives us a
manifest testimony, where he says. Nondum erat Sacrificium corporis and
sanguinis Domini, quod fideles norunt, Ibidem in Psalm. 33. Co^cion. 1.
and qui Euangelium legerunt, quod sacrificium nunc diffusum est toto orb
terrarum. The Sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord was not yet in
place (he speaks of the time when beasts were sacrificed) which the faithful
do know, and they that have read the Gospel. Which Sacrifice is now spread
abroad in all the world. Let M. Jewel tell us, what i^ this Sacrifice of the
body and blood of our Lord, that is diffused and spread over all the world,
besides that is celebrated in the Mass: and then we will say he says somewhat
to his purpose.

NOw M. Jewel departs from our special point, which is (as it is avouched by
S. Ireneus, S. Cyprian and others) that Christ offered his body and blood
unto God at his Supper, and commanded the same sacrifice to be offered by
Priests of the new Testament in remembrance of his death: and comes to
prove that, whereof no question was moved: That the Ministration of the holy
Mysteries in a phrase and manner of speech, is the same Sacrifice. How be it
what he means by his ministerlike terms, well I wot not. He shows him
self inconstant in the use of them. In this one Division, he calls it first,
The ministration of the holy Mysteries. Next, the Ministration of the holy
Communion. Thirdly, the Sacrifice of the holy Communion. For the same he
allegeth a certain saying, as he tells us, out of S. Augustine upon the.20.
Psalm, where he has no such saying at al. The place he means is in Gratian.
Where it speaks not of M. Jewels Ministration of the holy Mysteries (which I
trow in his meaning is the Ministration of bread and wine at the Geuenian
Communion; for what other holy Mysteries they have I know not) nor of the
Sacrifice, that is daily celebrated in the Church, but of the solemnity which
once in the year upon Maundie thursday, and Good friday, is celebrated with
special ceremonies in remembrance of Christ's death and passing out of this
mortal life. This Anniuersary recordation says he (for so he calls it) does
represent that which was once done, De Consecrat. distinct. 2. Semel.
and causes us so to be moved, as if we saw our Lord present on the Cross.

Neither notes the Gloss, upon these words, that you report of it M. Jewel,
but upon the word immolatur, which is in the next chapter following. For
whereas Gratian recites S. Augustine speaking thus of the Sacrifice, August.
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
semel immolatus est in semetipso Christus, and tamen quotidie immolatur in
sacramento, Christ was once sacrificed in him self, (that is to say) he
suffered once in his own person in the form of man) and yet he is daily
sacrificed in a Sacrament: upon this last word immolatur, the Gloss, has
noted, that you bring, The Sacrifice, (meaning the bloody Sacrifice upon the
Cross) is represented, and a Memory of the Passion is made.

In the former chapter is declared, what is done at one certain time in the
year, touching the representation, and remembrance of Christ's passion, in the
next, what is done daily. M. Jewel having alleged the first, applies unto it,
the gloss of the second. And al is quite besides his purpose. For how hangs
this Argument together? The Service of the Church in the holy weke before
Easter, as the reading of the Passion, creaping to the Cross, the salutatio^
of the Cross, and other Ceremonies in old time used in England, and yet used
through the whole Catholic Church, do lively represent unto us Christ's
Passion: Ergo, the Priest doing that Christ did at his Supper, and that he is
commanded to do, does not offer up his body and blood to God. Logike must
needs be good cheap, where such Arguments be made good chaffer.

And forasmuch as M. Jewel him self (who craketh so much of Antiquity, M.
Ievvel craves help of the Gloss, that he calls Barbarous.
and will al controversies to be tried by the Fathers of the first.600. years)
is not a shamed here to crave help of the Common Gloss, which within few lines
after he calls barbarous: as he has brought it against us, though in deed
it be not against us at al: let him patiently suffer us to tell him, what he
saw in the same Gloss, in that very place, that is clear against him. De
Consecrat. Did. 2. Semel. In Glossa.
In this part of this distinction (says the Gloss) It is proved, that Christ
once having dyed, can dye no more, (yet) the truth of his flesh, and of his
blood is always in the Sacrament of the Altar. And there it sets
forth.10. verses declaring the sum of the catholic faith touching the most
blessed Sacrament. In which perhaps M. Jewel may epsy a fault touching the
rules of Poetry, but verily touching the rules of faith, he shall find no
fault. Al containing excellent sense, for avoiding prolixitie, to gratify the
Reader, here I will rehearse two.

Clauditur hoc vase nostri pia victima Phase. Ibidem.


Viua salutaris, semel in cruce, semper in aris. Here is enclosed in this
vessel the divine host of our Paschal lamb: the host that lives, that is
healthful, that was once on the Cross, and always is on the Aulters. Go forth
M. Jewel, and still for lack of good matter that makes for you, allege us
places, where your heresy is most evidently confuted and condemned.

Still you harp upon a wrong string, alleging S. Cypria^, and S. Gregory, to
disprove that which you feine me to say, or at least mistake me to say, as
reporting the words of S. Cyprian. Your part had been to yield, or to show
good reason, why you deny Christ, or, (which is al one) Christ's flesh and
blood, to be offered up unto God by Priests, Luc^. 22.
to whom in the Apostles he said, do ye this in my remembrance. I go not about
in this Division to prove, that the Sacrifice is Christ, In sacrificio, quod
Christus est.
whereof in your own conceit you have stuff to cauil and wrangle, though the
same be true, as I told you before: but I allege S. Cyprian to this end, that
the Christian Reader should believe, that Christ is the Sacrifice. How, and
wherewith, is there made in our Mysteries a memory and signification of
Christ, and of his death.
For so S. Cypria^ precisely englished says, In the Sacrifice which Christ is,
whereof by right construction ryseth this Proposition, Christ is the
Sacrifice. Which is true, though never so much it be said by some Fathers,
that the Passion and Death of Christ is represented in a mysterie^ both may
stand together full well.

In this Mystery there is a representation I grant, there is a signification,
there is a memory or commemoration made of Christ, of his Passion, and of his
Sacrifice upon the Cross: but how, and where withal? Figuratively, by
imagination, by thinking, by tokens and signs only, or by words of praise
and thanks only? Not so. By these, and with these partly, but specially by
offering and receiving the same body, that suffered death. So. S. Augustine
touching a memory or commemoration, teaches clearly writing against Faustus
the Manichee. Hebraei in victimis pecorum prophetiam celebraba^t futurae
victimae, August. co^t. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 18.
quam Christus obtulit. Vnde iam Christiani peracti eiusdem Sacrificij memoriam
celebrant sacrosancta oblatione, and participatione corporis and sanguinis
Christi. The Hebrews (says he) in their sacrifices of beasts did celebrate a
prophecy of the Sacrifice to come, which Christ offered. The Christians now
do delebrate the memory of the same Sacrifice that is past, by the most holy
Oblation and participation of Christ's body and blood. Lo, here have you ^he
memorie^ but withal the Oblation of that very body, whereby the memory of his
bloody Sacrifice is celebrated.

VVherin M. Ievvel and they of that side, are deceived of ignorance, or of
malice deceive other.
You seem to be much deceived in your thoughts, in that you think, that a
thing can not be exhibited really and also in a mystery, in a sampler, in an
Image, in a commemoration, in a representation, in signification, in figures,
signs, and tokens. And where so ever you find in the writings of the Fathers
any of these terms, thereof commonly you induce a Conclusion denying the truth
of the thing: wherein either you are deceived through ignorance (and then are
you very saucy to be so busy in teaching that you understand not) or of very
malice you travail all that you can to deceive others, least you should seem to
have craked more in your Challenge, then you are hable to maintain.

Concerning the point it self, do you not remember, that S. Paul does
attribute to the Law, Hebr. 10. Image, excludes not truth.
vmbra^ reru^, the shadow of things, and to the new Testament, Imaginem
rerum, an Image of things? If of the affirmation of the Image, you will infer
(as your manner is) the negation of the thing it self: shall you not so prepare
a way for the heinous heresy of the Arians, who denied the Son of God to be
of one substance with God the Father? For though it be most true, that he is
so, yet does not the Scripture call him the Image of the invisible God? Coloss.
^.


Does not S. Ambrose speaking of the bloody oblation of Christ upon the
Cross, call it an Image, in comparison of the true and everlasting Oblation
that is in heaven? Ambros. of ficiorum libr. 1. c. 48.
Hic vmbra, hic Imago, illic veritas, and caet. Here (says he) that is to say,
in this world, there is a shadow, here there is an Image, there (in heaven) is
the truth. The shadow in the Law, the image in the Gospel, the truth in
heaven. Before a lamb was offered, and a Calfe, now Christ is offered. But he
is offered as man, as receiving Passion, and he offers him self as being a
Priest to remit our sins, here in Image, there in truth, where, with the
Father as an Advocate, he makes intercession for us.

How say you Sir, if a man would follow the vein of your Logique, whereby you
conclude the denial of a real and true Sacrifice in the Mass, because you can
bring certain pieces of Doctors sayings reporting a representation,
commemoration, and image of it: might he not of this place of S. Ambrose,
deny, that Christ was ever offered up and sacrificed upon the Cross truly
and in deed, because he says, he was offered here in Image? And so should not
the Devil have a pretty devise to shake the foundation of our faith, and put the
simple in doubt, whether the work of our Redemption be yet truly performed or
no?

That S. Cyprian says, the Sacrifice which we offer, is the Passion of our
Lord, August. libro sen^ent. Prosperi.
S. Augustine declares how such sayings are to be understood. Vocatur ipsa
immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, Crucifixio,
non rei veritate, sed significante Mysterio. The oblation (says he) of
Christ's flesh which is made in the hands of a Priest, is called the Passion,
Death, and crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in a Mystery
signifying. Which is as much, as if he should say, it is not called passion,
death and crucifying, for that Christ dies or suffers again, but for that
in mystery it renueth, represents, signifies, and puts us in mind
again of his Death and Passion.

How Christ. dies again in this Mystery.
Where S. Gregory says, after that he has taken away al occasion of gross
imaginations, that Christ who dies no more, but lives immortally in him
self, dies again in this Mystery, and that his flesh suffers again for
the peoples health: De Consecrat. Distin. 2. Quid sit. August. Epist. 23. ad
Bonifacium.
it is the sooner understood, what he means, if his Antithesis be
considered, which consists in these words, in seipso, and in hoc Mysterio,
in him self, and in this Mystery. The like whereof we find in S. Augustine
before alleged, Christ was once sacrificed in seipso, in him self, and yet he
is daily sacrificed in sacramento, in a Sacrament.

In him self, that is to say, in his visible person, and in the form of man,
he dies no more: yet in this Mystery he dies again, that is to say, his
death is so for our behoof by us to the Father represented, and to us renewed,
and the virtue and effect of it is so applied, and transferred unto us: as if
he were now presently hanging upon the Cross. De Consecrat. Did. 2. Quid sit.
Haec salutaris victima illam nobis mortem vnigeniti per Mysterium reparat.
This healthful sacrifice does renew unto us the Death of the only begote^ by
this Mystery, says S. Gregory in the same place. does any man ask,
wherewithal, and whereby this is done? Verily as it is said before (touching
the memory) out of S. Augustine, by the Oblation and participation of the same
body, that suffered and died upon the Cross. For though the pains and
violence of Death be not here presently suffered, yet the body that once
suffered, Ibidem.
is present, and the blood that was shed on the hands of infidels, is now
shed into the mouths of the faithful, as S. Gregory him self here says. And
to the working of such a death of Christ again, and of his Passion to our
salvation in this Mystery, that is to say, to the repairing and renewing, and
applying of the effect of his death unto us, that which is done in this
Mystery without violent shedding of blood, is sufficient.

This doctrine S. Gregory teaches in other places, whereby he both declares
the virtue of the Mystical Sacrifice, and also expounds him self, how that
strange Phrase may be understood, which M. Jewel brings against the Real
and true Sacrifice. Gregor. lib. 4. Dialog. cap. 58.
Thus he says in one place. Haec victima singulariter ab aeterno interitu
animam s^l^at, quae illa^ nobis morte^ vnigeniti per Mysterium reparat. This
Sacrifice does singularly save the soul from everlasting destruction, which by
Mystery renueth unto us the. Death of Gods only begoten Son. Again in an
other place. Idem homil. 37.
Quoties ei hostiam suae Passionis offerimus, toties nobis ad absolutionem
nostram passionem illius reparamus. As often as we offer up unto him the host
(or sacrifice) of his Passion, so often we renew and repair his Passion unto
us for our absolution.

Now then because by this Sacrifice the Death of Christ is renewed and applied
unto us, for our absolution and remission of sin (which is the effect of his
Death) as if we had been present at the Cross, when he was crucified: therefore
S. Gregory was so bold as to say, that Christ living immortally in him
self, in this Mystery dies again. Such Sacrifice, such Death. If the
Sacrifice be bloody, then the Death must be bloody, or with shedding of blood.
If the Sacrifice be unbloody, Unbloody Death.
then is the Death also unbloody, and mystical, that is to say, the effect of
his death, as if it were now present. And that there be truly and in proper
speech a Sacrifice, it is enough, that the body and blood of Christ being
made present by virtue of his word, his Death be so applied unto us to
remission of sin, as if he were now a dying.

And this much may serve for Answer to the heap of your mangled and maimed
allegations, that here you have laid so thick together. Whereof not one
proves your purpose, which is, that in S. Cyprians judgment Christ in the
celebration of the Supper, is not a Sacrifice in true and proper speech and in
deed, but by a figurative speech only, as it is said, the rock was Christ.
For though the Fathers use sometimes figuratine speeches, yet thereof it
follows not, that S. Cyprian in this place of his Epistle to Cecilius spoke
figuratively, in saying, that Christ is the Sacrifice.

That he spoke truly, and meant according to the propriety of the speech, it
is clear by his own words in the same Epistle. For else having mentioned the
Sacrifice of Melchisedech, which consisted of bread and wine, he would never
have said these words, Quam rem perficiens and adimplens Dominus panem and
calicem mixtum vino obtulit, Cypria ad Cecil lib. 2. ep^^stola 3.
and qui est plenitudo, veritatem praefiguratae Imaginis adimpleuit. Our Lord
offered bread and cup mixte with wine perfiting and fulfilling the thing that
Melchisedech did, Christ his supp^^ fulfilled the figu^^ of Melchisede^^
and he that is the fulness, fulfilled the truth of the forefigured Image. Now
if Christ at his Supper (for thereof S. Cyprian speaks) offered not a true
Sacrifice of his body and blood in deed, and therefore a true and real
Sacrifice, under the forms of bread and wine, but only a sign and figure, or
an Image representing his body and blood: How then was he the fullness? How
did he fulfill the truth of the forefigured Image? For if al were but a sign
and token, Fulness (...) perfourmance.
memory, or representation, that he offered, then was not he the fullness,
neither fulfilled the truth. For signs, if they be only signs, be empty and
void of the truth, neither is fullness, but where the very things be present.
And by such interpretation, S. Cyprian should make the Sacrifice of Christ at
his Supper, no better then that of Melchisedech was, and, which is absurd, the
truth of a forefigured image should be but a figure, and fullness should be
void of the thing fulfilled.

How be it to prove the Sacrifice by witness of S. Cyprian, I stayed not my
self upon these words, In Sacrificio quod Christus est, M. Ievvel a^svvereth
as he thinks good to a word or two, and leaves the chief substance
vna^svvered.
specially: but upon the large process of that whole Epistle. Whereof I took
what seemed to make good proof of that I intended. And I pray you Sir, why
answer you not to the other manifest words? What Sacrifice is that, which, as
S. Cyprian says, Christ first of al offered up unto his Father, and
commanded the same to be offered in his remembrance? What Sacrifice is that,
in doing whereof the Priest does the office of Christ truly? What Sacrifice is
that, in offering up whereof the Priest does by imitation, the same thing that
Christ did? What is that true and perfect Sacrifice, that he offreth up to
God, if he begin to offer right so, as he sees Christ him self to have
offered? If you could have named us any other, besides the Satrifice of the
body and blood of Christ, is it to be thought you would have conceeled it to
so great hinderance of your cause? That whereby your Challenge is fully
answered, and the Catholic Doctrine plainly avouched, you ouerhippe and
dissemble: and upon a piece of a sentence by your self falsified, and by your
wrong translation wreathed from S. Cyprians meaning, you bestow many words,
and much of your common stuff, which consists of your Phrases, pyked out of
your Notebookes, and here without truth or judgment shuffled together

Jewel.
And that the weakness of M. Hardinges gheasses may the better appear,
understand thou good Christian Reader, that the Holy Catholic Fathers have
used to say, that Christ is Sacrificed, not only in the Holy Supper, but also
in the Sacrament of Baptism. S. Augustine says, August. exposition inchoat^
ad Romans
Holocaustum Dominicae Passionis eo tempore pro se quisque offert, qno eiusdem
Passionis Fide dedicatur: The Sacrifice of our Lords Passion every man then
offers for him self, when he is Confirmed in the Faith of his Passion. And
again, Holocaustum Domini tunc pro vnoquoque offertur quodammodo, In eod.
cum eius nomine Baptizando signatur: Then is the Sacrifice of our Lord In a
Manner offered for each man, In eod.
when in Baptism he is marked with the name of Christ. And again, Non
relinquitur Sacrificium pro peccatis: Chrysostom in epist. a Hebraeos hom. 16
Ambros. de poeni^ li. 2. ca. 2
id est, non potest denuo Baptizari: There is leafte no Sacrifice for Sin:
that is to say, He can be no more Baptized. And in this consideration
Chrysostom says, Baptisma Christi Sanguis Christi est: Christ's Baptism, is
Chtistes Blood. And likewise S. Ambrose, In Baptismo Crucifigimus in nobis
Filium Dei: In Baptism we Crucify in our selves the Son of God.

Harding.
Concerning the Sacrifice made in Baptism, August. i^ expositio^e inchoatae in
epistol. ad Romans
whereof you tell us out of the Ancient Fathers, That every one at that time
for his sins offers up the Burnt sacrifice of our Lords Passion, when in
the faith of the same Passion he is dedicated, as S. Augustine says: and that
in Baptism we crucify in us the Son of God, as S. Ambrose says: Ambros. de
poenit. li. 2. ca. 2.
by their own words they teach us to understand this spiritually, and not
as the words sound in proper speech. For S. Augustine in that place
qualifieth the manner of his utterance, and calls his reader back from
absurd imagination, by this word quodammodo, Quodammodo.
as much to say, in a manner. And S. Ambrose likewise says not simply, that in
Baptism we crucify Christ, but that we crucify him in us. Crucifigimus in
nobis Filium Dei, We crucify in us the Son of God, says he. Whereby they
mean, that in Baptism we put on Christ, that to sin we die with Christ,
and are buried with him into death, and are made conformable to the similitude
of his death, and that the effect, virtue, and benefit of his Passion, by
Baptism is applied unto us. And because as Moses sprinkled with blood the
book of the Old Testament, Leuit. 4.
the Tabernacle, Hebr. 9.
and the Vessels of Ministry, right so Christ with his own Blood cleanses
our minds, which be the books of the New Testament by interpretation of S.
Chrysostom, Chrysosto. in epist. ad Hebraeos. Homi. 16.
and with the same blood sprinckleth us, who are his Tabernacle for him to
dwell in, and to walk in, as he says him self, and his Vessels to serve him
in holy Ministeries, which great benefit is chiefly derived unto us in
Baptism: In consideration hereof, forasmuch as upon the Cross only his
precious blood ran out of his body, and then was he in him self sacrificed:
these Fathers feared not to say, Ambros.
the one, that in Baptism we crucify in us the Son of God, August.
the other, that when we are baptized, we offer up the Burnt sacrifice of his
Passion.

To conclude then, if certain Fathers in a figurative speech, and with a
qualification say, that when one is baptized, he offers up the Sacrifice of
Christ's Passion, or that in him self he crucifieth Christ, which is true in
a right sense: M. Jewel may not thereof conclude, that Christ at the
celebration of the Supper is not truly offered. For if he reason thus, Christ
is after a manner offered of us, when we are baptized, Ergo, he is not offered
of the Priest in the Sacrament of the Altar. M. Jew sets one tru^ against
a^ other.
Forasmuch as in Baptism he is only by grace, and in the blessed Sacrament
really, and in substance: Every man of mean understanding may soon espy the
fondness of the Argument. But not being hable directly to impugn this assured
truth, he makes such a proffer toward it as he can, by setting one truth
against an other truth.

The.11. Division.
The Answer.
OUR adversaries crake much of the sealing up of their new Doctrine with the
Blood of such and such, who be written in the book of lies, not in the book
of life, whom they will needs to be called Martyrs. Verily if those Mounkes,
and Friars, Apostates, and renegates, wedded to wives, or rather (to use their
own term) yoked to Sisters, be true Martyrs. then must our New Gospellers
pull these Holy Fathers, and many Thousands more out of Heaven. For certainly
the Faith, in Defense of which either sort died, is utterly contrary. The
worst that I wish to them is, that God give them eyes to see, and ears to
hear, and that he shut not up their hearts, so as they see not the light
here, Math. 25
until they be thrown away into the outward darkness, where shall be weeping
and grintinge of teeth.

Jewel.
This talk was utterly out of season: saving that it liked well M. Harding,
to sport him self with the Scriptures of God, and a little to scoff at the
words of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 9.
Which thing becoming him so well, may be the better borne vvithal, Philip. 4.
when it shall please him likewise to scoff at others. S. Paul calls
vviues, Heb. 13.
sometimes Sisters, sometimes Yokefellows: and thinks Matrimony to be
Honorable in all Persons: 1. Timo. 4.
and the forbidding of the same to be the Doctrine of Devils. Neither does it
any way appear, that ever honest godly Matrimony either displeased God, or
was thought uncomely for a Martyr, and witness of Gods Truth.

Harding.
Here M. Jewel you leave my Conclusion, and being grieved with certain terms,
you show your self much offended, and fare as if your soar were touched in
the quick. But sir, what need you of all the Gospellers, to take this matter so
hot? You are not yet married pardye. Marye if perhaps your fancy lie to a
woman, and you determine to take her to your wife, well mote you do, God send
you good luck, I intend not to forbid your Banes.

M Ievvel here digresseth from the purpose into a common place, to defend
Priests Marriages
But what meant you in this place to unlade your common stuff, that you have
gathered together in defense of Priests marriage? What just occasion had you
to treat thereof? What, feared you that the bulk of your book would not
arise huge enough, unless you brought unto it such heaps of unnecessary
common places? Or thought you rather, that your companions marriages should be
taken, as they be in deed, for detestable horedome, and abominable Inceste,
except they were by you defended? Or brought you in all this vnceasonable talk,
only to please your fellows the Apostates, and their strompets? Verily the
term, yoked to Sisters, which is a badge of your own liuerie, used by me as
it were by the way, speaking of an other matter, ministered not sufficient
occasion to enter into so large a discourse in defense of your filthy yokinges.

Why did you not rather reprove me for calling the Registre of your stinking
Martyrs, the book of lies? Why did you not prove your Lecherours married
Monks, and Friars, the chief Apostles of your Synagogue, not to be Apostates?
Why answered you not the point, that if they be true Martyrs, then must you pull
those holy Fathers, whom I alleged for the Sacrifice, out of heaven? For both
can not be placed there, the faith in defense whereof either sort dyed, being
quite contrary. This part of my talk was not al together out of ceason.

And wherein I pray you do I sport with the Scriptures, and scoff at the
words of S. Paul, for therewith you burden me. What, because having said of
your Monks, and Friars, that they were wedded to wives I corrected my term,
saying rather (to use your own manner of speech) that they were yoked to
sisters, is this sporting with the Scriptures of God? Is this scoffing at S.
Paul's words? You should first have proved your Apostates strompettes to be
their lawful wives, and then might you better have framed an objection against
me. Now that practice being contrary to the Scripture, which commands vows
to be kept and performed, Psalm. 75.
what Scripture have ye for such yoking? What relief have ye for it of S.
Paul?

Though in deed faithful and godly wives be together with us that believe, the
children of God, and in the primitive Church the name of Brother and Sister
was common among the beleuers, yet how prove you, that S. Paul calls wives,
sometimes Sisters, sometimes yokefellowes? Is it not shame for you, who
profess so great skill in the Latin tongue, and have such a helper at hand for
the Greek tongue, to ground your self upon the corrupt translation of your
English Bible?

Were it true that S. Paul called wives sometimes Sisters, sometimes
Yokefelowes, for which ye have nothing to allege, but the English Bibles
translation: yet how are ye hable to prove the yoking that is between your
blessed Brothers and Sisters, that is to say, between your holy Prelates,
Priests, Monks, Friars and Nonnes, who have bound them selves by solemn vow
to the contrary, to be true wedloke?

What meant S. Paul by A sister woman. 1. Cor. 9.
By you quotation you appoint your Reader to the.9. Chapter of the first Epistle
to the Corinthians. What is there, that makes for you? S. Paul says, Have
not we power to lead about a sister woman with us, as the other Apostles, and
the brethren of our Lord, and Cephas? What means he by (...), August. li. de
opere Monachoru^. cap. 4. Ambro. in Commen. Theophyl. in Common. Hiero. co^tra
Iouin. lib. 1.
sororem mulierem, a Sister woman, but a faithful or a Christian woman? For as
the men that believed were called Brothers, so the women were called Sisters. As
for your Translatour, who turns it, a Sister to Wife, whether for the Greek
he have delivered true English or no, let other judge, certainly he has
delivered us a false sense. For, as S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, the Greek
Scholies, and Theophylacte, and specially S. Hierome do expound the place, S.
Paul means not, that the Apostles carried their own wives about with them,
where so ever they preached: but that certain devout faithful women, having
wordly substance, desirous to hear our Lords doctrine, and to lead a holy
life, went about with them, and ministered unto them both sustenance of their
goods, and also necessary services, that they should have care of nothing, but
only attend the work of preaching. Wherein the Apostles followed the example
of Christ. For likewise when he went about and preached, certain holy women
went with him from Galiley, Luc. 8.
who of their goods ministered unto him what was necessary, namely Marie
Maudelen, Joan wife to Chusa Herod's steward, Susanna, and many others. This S.
Paul says was lawful for him to do being an Apostle, as the other Apostles
did, but yet he tells that he would not use that liberty.

Some not understanding this says Augustine (of whom M. Jewel seems to be
one, August. li de opere Monacho.
if it be not malice of his part, and not only ignorance) for Sororem
mulierem, a Sister woman, have interpreted sororem vxorem, a sister wife, or,
as the English Translation has, a Sister to Wi^e. The ambiguitie of the Greek
word has deceived them (says he) because in Greek a wife, (...).
and a woman, is named by one word. Lo M. Jewel here is your wife that S.
Paul speaks of, beco^me, not a wife precisely, but a woman, and the same a
Sister, not in respect of nearenesse of blood, but of faith, for that she is
a Christian.

By this we learn, what credit is to be given unto the chief Masters of this
new Gospel in the time of King Edward the sixth, Printed by Richard lugge.
who in the new Testamente perused (as in the same book we find) by the
commandment of the King and the Counsel, and by them auctorized, upon this
place of S. Paul have at the end of the Chapter put in this Note. By this
saying of S. Paul we have a full instruction, that the Apostles did carye about
their wives with them. By this Note, we hane a full instruction, that the
Translatours of the Bible, and the makers of such Notes, were false hartlots.

As for the Yokefelow, to whom S. Paul in the Epistle to the Philippians
commends the women that labored with him in the Gospel, Philip. 4.
that thereby is signified S. Paul's wife, (...) Germane Compar. Ambro. in 2.
Cor. 11. Hiero. co^tra Iouin. Epiphan. haeresi. 58. Chryso. in Commen. (...).
Compar.
besides that ye have neither reason for it, nor the propriety of the Greek
tongue clearly bearing it: it is gainesaid by S. Chrysostom, Theophylacte, and
the Author of the Greek Scholies in the same place, and by S. Ambrose, and S.
Hierom, and Epiphanius otherwheres, who deny utterly, that he had a wife. The
author of the brief commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistles printed with S.
Hieromes works, is of the opinion, that this Yokefelow, to whom S. Paul
speaks, was a man, named Germanus in Latin, which in Greek is (...). and
the Greek Scholiast judges (which S. Chrysostom also notes) that his name
was Syzygus, in Greek, that Lyra be not altogether lawghed to scorn, for
thinking that his name was Compar in Latin.

Whereas then these ancient learned Fathers liked not the interpretation of
certain before their time, that thought S. Paul in that Epistle to speak to
his wife, upon good warrant of their construction we may be bold to tell M.
Jewel, and M. Erasmus, whom always it liked well upon the least occasion that
was offered him, to swerve from the received exposition of the Scriptures: that
in the said place S. Paul spoke to no Yokefelow wo^man, but to a Yokefelow
man, Yokefe^low man
and that they are deceived in expounding it of S. Paul's wife, who by evident
likelihod gathered of his own words, 1. Cor. ^
and by judgment of all the old Fathers in manner, (Clement of Alexandria
except) never had wife.

Seeing therefore Monks, The wi^^dom of the vviued Apo^states.
Friars and Priests that be wyued, can not truly call their women wives, being
in deed no wives, but strompetes: they do wisely (according to the wisdom of
such a generation) to put upon so filthy a thing, the clean name of a Sister,
or of a Yokefelow, that whereas the marriage it self is naught, yea detestable
Sacrilege, and therefore of right they them selves should be called sacrilegious
aduoutrers, and their women sacrilegious harlots: yet by allurement of an
honest name women might be content to yoke with them, which, if they were
called by their true names, would never be induced to be made instruments of
so open abomination.

And where S. Paul says of matrimony (as you reporth him) that it is
honorable, Heb. 13. This word, Al, many times in Scripture admits
exception of many.
in all persons, he means not absolutely al (for your self I trow will
except it between Father and daughter, brother and sister, and such as have
impediments of nature) but only those persons, for whom it is lawful,
convenient, and godly to marrye. The case of a solemn vow makes matrimony
otherwise lawful and honorable of it self, to those that have made such vow to
the contrary, unlawful and reprocheful. Neither may we think always none to be
excluded, where the Scripture in term includes al. For though it say, that
Christ does illuminat (omne^ homine^ veniente^ in hu^c mu^du^) Joan. 1.
every man that comes into this world, and that God will (omnes homines
saluos fieri) al men to be saved, 1. Tim. 2.
and though Christ say in the Gospel, al, even as many, as came before me are
thieves and robbers: Joan. 10.
yet certain it is, that many remain in darkness, Math. 20.
and that (many being called and few chosen) mo shall be damned then saved, and
that the Patriarchs, Moses, and the Prophets, who came before Christ was
incarnate, were Gods true friends, and faithful servants.

S. Paul's words devvly examined, make not mari^age lavvful for all without
exception.
Furthermore touching this place of S. Paul by them of your sect so commonly
alleged in defense of Priests Marriages, what have you to answer, if it be
denied, the blessed Apostle to say, as you report him? The best learned
Fathers, who have expounded that Epistle, judge that saying to be an
exhortation to persons already married, that they keep their wedlock in
chastity and honesty, and defyle not their wedlock bed with unworthy
wantonness. And so after their judgment, for as much as the verb est, is, is
not in S. Paul, neither in the Greek, nor in the Latin (for his saying is,
honorabile in omnibus) and the circumstance of the place so bears it, in
which diverse things be uttered by way of exhortation: the saying is not to be
pronounced indicatiuely, but exhortatiuely, Let wedlock be honorable in all
(married persons) and (let) their bed be undefiled. Heb. 13.
Thus it is made clear, how little relief S. Paul by this sentence brings
to the defense of your sacrilegious Apostates incestuous and abominable
yokinges^ bear with your own term, for Matrimony, or wedlock it is not,
neither is the same a convenient term for such filth.

But S. Paul say you, 1. Tim. 4.
calls the forbidding of Matrimony the doctrine of Devils. I answer. To
forbid Matrimony in general, In what sense S. Paul calls the forbiddi^g of
Marriage, the doctrine of Devils.
and to condemn marriage in all persons, of what estate or degree so ever they
be, as Tatianus the Heretic did, and the Eucratites that followed him, who
said that Marriages were of the Devil, and were no better then fornications, and
therefore admitted none to their Communion that were married, men or women: this
is the doctrine of Devils. Of these, and such others, as the Manichees and
Marcionites, S. Paul is to be understood. To forbid the Marriages of
Votaries, as Monks, Friars, Priests and Nonnes, who by solemn vow for Gods
sake have bereued them selves of the common liberty: this is not the doctrine
of Devils, but of God, and the permitting of Marriage to such persons, is the
doctrine of Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

Lastely, if no man ever said, that honest and godly Matrimony displeased God,
if the same were never thought uncomely for a Martyr, whom charge you with
that odious saying? As certain it is, that many a good married man and woman is
a holy Saint in heaven: so ye will never be hable to show us, that your yoking
of Votaries unto such as ye call Sisters, was ever in Christ's Church accounted
for godly or honest Matrimony, or that a Vowebreaker was ever taken before
God, or good man, for a comely Martyr, or witness of Gods truth, unless
having loosed him self from his unlawful yokefellow, he repented truly of his
sin, and so by penance were restored unto the state of grace.

Jewel.
Ignat. ad Philadelp. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 30. Clemens Stromat. lib. 7.
S. Paul was Married, as it appears by Ignatius, Clemens, Eusebius: and yet
nevertheless was a martyr. S. Peter, the chief of the Apostles had a wife:
and yet nevertheless stood by, and gave her comfort, and constancy at her
Martyrdom. The twelve Apostles, says S. Ambrose, only S. John excepted,
were al married: and yet neuerthlesse, the same S. John only excepted, as it
is thought, were al Martyrs. Spiridion was a married Bishop: and yet as
Sozomenus vvriteth, he was thereby nothing hindered, Eusebius. li^ 3. cap. 30.
Ambros. in 2. ad Cor. ca. 11. Sozomen. lib. 1. ca. 11 Ad res diuinas nibilo
deterior.
neither to discharge his duty, nor to any other godly purpose. Tertullian
was a Priest, as appears by S. Hierome: and Married, as appears by his
own Book written to his Wife: and yet notvvithstanding, as some report,
was a Martyr. S. Hilarie was a Reverend Father, and Bishop of Poitiers, and
yet Married, as may be gathered by his Epistle written to his daughter Abra.

Harding.
Soft M. Jewel, doubteful points, flat lies, and true tales, must not be so
shuffled together. First touching S. Paul, that he was a Martyr, true it is,
but that he was married, if it be not utterly false, yet it is very uncertain,
whether S. Paul were married.
and more then unlikely. Very probable it is, that he was not married: for so
to think of him, his own words do lead us, where he says, Volo omnes
homines esse sicut meipsum. 1. Cor. 7.
My will is, that al men were, Ibidem.
as I am my self. And again, I say unto the unmarried, and unto the widows,
it is good for them, if they continue so as I do. Of these later words, how
can you make any literal sense probable, Epiphan. co^tra Valesios haere si. 58.
except S. Paul absteined from marriage, or else were a wydower? Truly
Epiphanius allegeth them for proof that S. Paul was a Virgin.

It is clear by S. Ambrose, Ambros. in exhortatione advirgines.
that he was never married. For thus he says, speaking to virgins, and
exhorting them to the continency of S. Paul: Volo vos imitatrices esse tanti
Apostoli, vt vitam eius sequamini, qui coniugij vinculum refugit, vt vinctus
esset Christi Jesus. Non potuisset ad tantam Apostolatus sui peruenire gratiam,
si fuisset alligatus coniugij contubernio. I will you to be the folowers of so
great an Apostle, that ye follow his life, who eschewed the band of wedlock,
that he might be the bound prisoner of Christ Jesus. He could not have come
unto so great grace of his Apostleship, if he had been tied unto the fellowship
of wedlock.

S. Augustine seems to be of the same opinion, August. de gratia and lib.
arbit. cap. 4.
whose words these be. Doctor Gentium and pudicitiam coniugalem, per quam non
fiunt adulteria, and perfectiore^ co^tinentiam, per quam nullus concubitus
quaeritur, sermon suo commendans, and hoc donum Dei esse monstrat, scribens ad
Corinthios and admonens coniuges, 1. Cor. 7.
ne se inuicem fraudent: quos cum admonuisset, adiecit Vellem autem omnes
homines esse sicut meipsum: quia vtique ipse ab omni concubitu continebat. S.
Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles commending with his word both the chastity
of wedlock, through which aduoutries be not done, and the perfiter
continency by which no carnal act is sought, shows this also to be the
gift of God writing to the Corinthians, Vide Augustine, in lib. De bono co^iug.
ca. 10.
and admonishing married persons, that they withdraw not dewtie the one from
the other. And having admonished them, he says further: but I would feign al
men were as I my self am: Ambros. de virgin. lib. 3. ad fine^.
because certainly he absteined from al carnal act.

S. Ambrose in an other place acknowlegeth S. Paul's virginity, saying thus
unto Virgins. Viuificet vos Paulus qui vos praecepit honorari, qui ait: bonum
est si sic maneant sicut and ego. honor prouocat, magisterio docet, inuitat
ex^emplo. Let Paul quicken you, who commanded you to be honored, who says:
It is good, if they contitinue so as I do. He stirs you (thereto) with
honor, he teaches with his doctorship, he inuiteth you by his example.

What shall we say then to S. Ignatius, Eusebius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, by
whom it appears that S. Paul was married? S. Ignatius is corrupted by them
that would al votaries and religious persons to marie. For the old written
copies have not S. Paul's name in the Epistle ad Philadelphienses, which for
that purpose is alleged. For sufficient credit hereof I report me to the
ancient copies, that be in sundry places, and specially to that of Maudelen
Colleges library in Oxford in my time much vewed of learned men for trial of
the same point. As for Eusebius, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 30.
he does but recite the words of Clemens. that he so thought him self of S.
Paul, it does not any way appear. Only then Clemens remains of all the
Antiquity, that says S. Paul had a wife. And the same he gathers of the
uncertain place that is in the Epistle to the Philippians, Philip. 4.
rogo te germane compar, where the Greek has (...): and of the.9. chapter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, wherein he is not allowed of the best
learned Fathers.

Epiphan: contra Valesios. Haeres. 58.
If this matter should be weighed by the authority of the Fathers, how shall
Clemens alone stand in balance against S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, S
Hierome, S. Augustine, and Theophilacte, which al except Epiphanius and
Theophylact, by verdite of your own great Rabbi Peter Martyr him self, Pet.
Martyr in Comment. in 1. Epist. ad Cor. cap. 9
be touching this point contrary to Clemens? S. Hierome says, Non sunt
audiendi, qui eum vxorem habuisse confingunt. They are not to be heard, which
feine of their own head, that S. Paul had a wife. Theophylacte is not a feared
to say, those which said that S. Paul exhorted his wife, Hieron. ad Eust. de
Virg. Theophilact. In Epist. ad Philip. cap. 4.
when he wrote those words, I beseech thee also my faithful yoke-fellowe etc.
to be deceived. his words be these. Some who be deceived, say, that Paul
exhorts his wife. But it is far otherwise. S. Chrysostom upon the same
place, says much like.

That S. Peter (whom you call the Chief of the Apostles, whereat I marvel) had
ones a wife, A ^la^te and an impude^tlye of M. Jewels.
it is clear by the Scripture, in which mention is made of his mother in law.
But that you report of S. Ambrose, that he should say, that the twelve
Apostles, only S. John excepted, were al married, Lucae. 4.
it is a flat and an impudent lie. Whether it be a lie or no, let the book
be a trial. S. Ambroses very words be these. Omnes Apostoli exceptis Ioanne
and Paulo vxores habueru^t. What is that in plain english, but this, All the
Apostles had wives except John and Paul? Is it one thing M. Jewel to say,
only John excepted, and except John and Paul? S. Paul's name you thought best
to nippe away, least you should destroy that you builded up a little before out
of Clemens.

But although S. Peter, and other Apostles had once wives, yet S. Hierome of
the Scripture gathers, that after they were called to Apostleship, they
forsook the company of their wives, Hierony. co^tra Iouin. lib. 1.
and lived the single life. Thus he says, Petrus and caeteri Apostoli, etc.
Peter and the other Apostles had wives I grant: but such, as they had taken
at that time, when they knew not the Gospel. Afterward being assumpted unto
the Apostleship, they leafte the office of wedlock. For whereas Peter said to
our Lord in the person of the Apostles, Math. 19.
Behold, we forsake al things, and have followed thee: our Lord answered him:
Verily I say unto you, that there is no man that has forsaken, house, Father
and Mother, or brothers, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of heavens sake,
but he shall receive much more in this world, and in the world to come life
everlasting. It appears by the answer of our Lord, that S. Peter saying, he,
and the rest of the Apostles had forsaken al things, meant that they had
forsaken, and given over the company of their wives. Which makes altogether
against M. Jewels carnal Doctrine, uttered here in favor of his fleshly
companions, our Apostates, the chief Prelates of their new Synagogue. S.
Augustine says, that the Apostles made this vow, to forsake wives and
altogether. August. de ciuita. Dei li. 17. c. 4.
Hoc votum potentissimi vouerant. They mightiest of al (so there he calls the
Apostles) had vowed this vow.

Spiridion.
Spiridion was a married Bishop, that is to say, made a Bishop after that he had been married, but neither he, nor any else was ever lawfully married after that
he had been Bishop or Priest. That he was thereby made never the worse touching
gods service (so says Sozomenus of him) it is reported for a strange thing.
As though a Bishop to have a wife and children, Sozomenus li. 1. ca. 11.
(as of Spiridion it is written) and yet to do his duty to Godwarde
nevertheless, it were in manner to be holden for a miracle, or at least for a
special grace of God.

How be it I trow, if Sozomenus words be exactly construed, they shall not seem
so much to importe, that Spiridion was a married Bishop, which you say of him,
as that he had been a married man, and had once had wife and children. For the
Greek word is (...), whereby may be signified indeterminately, that he had been, and not only that he was so, being a Bishop. That he had his wife living,
when he was a Bishop, sure I am Sozomenus says it not. And though he said it,
yet makes it nothing for your marriage of Priests, and votaries. He says that
Spiridion had been a man that (...)
lived by husba^dry, having wife and children. Now as wisemen think not, that
he continued his tillage of grownde, and feeding of catail, after that he was
called to be Bishop of Trimythus a City of Cyprus, but that he came into the
City, and there attended his spiritual charge in tilling and feeding souls
committed to his government: so there is nothing spoken by Sozomenus, that
forces this opinion, that he had his wife being Bishop. Which being so, it was
more boldly, then assuredly by learning of you said, that Spiridion was a
married Bishop.

By this place of Sozomenus you may as well prove, that ploughmen and shepeherds
may be Bishops (wherein I will not greatly strive with you, if you commend unto
us such as Spiridion was) or that Bishops may be ploughmen and shepherds: as
that Bishops may be married men. Yet I wish ye would not forgete, that we deny
not, but that in the Primitive Church Married men were made Bishops: but that
ever in the Catholic Church any man, after he was made Bishop, was married,
that do we utterly deny.

And whereas Sozomenus says of Spiridion by way of correction, tame^ ad res
diuinas nihilo deterior erat, and yet for all that he was never a whit the worse
disposed toward the service of God, which you have noted: the same may be
spoken as well in respect that he was a man that exercised Husba^dry, as that he
was married. For both the toil of Husbandry, and the care of wife and children,
and specially both these together, be some lettes to the quiet liberty of Gods
service. So that of Sozomenus by you alleged ye get no certain relief at al.
Fol. 77.
This very place you bring for Priests marriages in your Apology, if it be
yours. What I have answered unto it: the Reader may see in my Confutation of
the same.

Tertullia^
As for Tertullian, that he had a wife, and was a Priest, as no man denies, so
it helps nothing toward the defense of your Vowebreakers incestuous
marriages. One ancient example of a Priest lawfully married after holy orders
taken, had relieved your cause more, then all this number of married Apostles,
Bishops, and Priests. If ye can find none such, as we know ye can not:
bewray not the weakness of your cause by often telling us of that all the world
knows, Tertullia^ no Martyr.
and your self see, it served not your turn. Rhenan. in vita Tert. M. Ievvel
is very savvcy with S. Hilare, appointing him a wife, where as he had never
none.
That your Doctor Regino makes him a Martyr, he took more upon him, then he
was hable to justify. Had he ben a Martyr, S. Hierome, who favored him so
greatly, writing his life would not have omitted it. Therefore Beatus Rhenanus
believes it not, and thinks the Martyr was an other man of that name.

But I marvel how you durst be so saucy with that reverend Father, and constant
Bishop S. Hilarie, as to appoint him a wife, and to place him in the rank of
Married Priests. Can not your filthy yoking of Votaries be defended, but with
filthy lying? Wath learned man ever said or wrote, The forged Epistle of S.
Hilarie to Abra his daughter.
that S. Hilarie had a wife? Touching the foolish Epistle that you allege
written to Abra his daughter, had ye not been very needy of good stuff, and
imprudent in facing out a bad matter: ye would never for shame have mentioned
such a fond forged writing. Neither can you plead ignorance for your excuse.
For, that no man should be deceived with the Inscription of the Epistle, has
not Erasmus there given a plain warning of it? Be not these words set before
the beginning of it? Inter opera Hilarij
Haec Epistola merum est nugamentum hominis ociose indocti? What is this to
say, but, This Epistle is a tale of a tubbe written by some daw that wist not
how to spend his time? And now a Gods name it must be alleged in great
sadness by this worthy Superintende^t, to make good the abominable marriages
of Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nonnes. As well he might have alleged for them
the book of Beuys of Southampto^, or of Guy of Warwike, or the Song of Robin
Hoode. But thanks be to God, who reueleth to the world, with what rags they
coouer their unclean treachery.

Jewel.
And to leave infinite others, S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Ti^
Homi. 2.
Ita pretiosa res est Matrimonium, vt possis cum eo ad Sanctum Episcopatus
Solium subuehi. Vtere moderate nuptijs, and eris primus in Regno Coelorum. So
precious a thing is matrimony, that with the same thou may be promoted even
unto the Bishops Chaire-Vse Marriage with discretion, In epist. ad Hebr. Homi.
7.
and thou shall be the Chief in the Kingdom of Heaven. S. Hierome says,
Hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes habent Matrimonia: Even now a great number of
Priests live in Matrimony. Thus the Apostles of Christ, and many other
Learned Fathers, Hierony. contra Iouinianum.
and godly Bishopes were married, and, as M. Hardinge says, in his mirthe,
and pleasance, had their Sisters, and yoke fellows. But how, and with what
Sisters, or Fellows, a great number of the VViuelesse sort of M. Hardinges
side be yokte, for very regard of honesty, it may not be uttered.

Harding.
Say not M. Jewel, to leave infinite others. Your ambition is such, and your
cause so weak, that if ye had others, ye would not be so squeamish to bring
them forth. Now these two will help your need nothing at al. S. Chrysostom
upon the saying of S. Paul to Tite, Chrysosto. in 1. ca. ad Titum. homil. 2.
that a Bishop ought to be without crime, the husband of one wife, has these
words being truly translated. The Apostle stops the mouths of Heretics
which condemn Marriage, showing that it is not an unclean thing, but so
reverent, that with the same a man may ascend unto the holy Throne, by that he
means the state of a Bishop. It follows there further. And herewith he
chastises and restrains the unchaste persons, not permitting them who have
twice married, to atteine such rome. For whereas he keeps no beneuole^ce
toward his wife deceaced, how can he be a good governor? etc. Thus S.
Chrysostom.

Ye do well to make much of a little. And what little is that? Is it any other
thing, then we always have acknowleged, and granted unto you, that a married
man may be made a Bishop, and that by Gods express word marriage is not of it
self a let, but that therewith a man may be promoted unto the holy state of
a Bishop? Is there any more for you in this place of S. Chrysostom? Come to
the point M. Jewel. You and your fellows have uttered many hot words by mouth
and pen against us, as though we followed the Cerdonistes, Marcionistes,
Manichees, Tacia^s, Seueria^s, and other old pestilent heretics, who
condemned marriage, as a thing unclean and displeasing God. But how oftentimes
have ye ben told by us, that we are far from that wicked opinion? who is
ignorant how much the Catholics have written and preached in praise and
commendation of lawful and Godly wedloke? Is it not well known, that we give
unto it a far more honor then ye do? For do we not honor it with the name
of a holy Sacrament, whereas ye call it but a state of life?

The point whereabout we vary, The state of the question touching marriage.
is this. Ye hold that is is lauful for all persons to marie, be they Priests,
Monks, Friars, Nonnes, or of what state or degree so ever they be. We say,
that as it was lauful for such persons to marye before they promised God to
live the single life, and bound them self thereto by solemn vow: so after
the vow duly made, that it is unlawful. We stand upon the negative with the
Church of Christ, ye affirm, and say much, but to the purpose ye prove
nothing. And as for this place of S. Chrysostom, how can ye use it to any
relief of your cause? Shall this be your Argument, With Matrimony a man may be
promoted to the state of a Bishop: Ergo, a Bishop having made a solemn vow to
lead the single life, may take a wife, and be married? If this be not your
Argument, what else can ye make of it? If ye have no better Arguments then
this, ye may not be angry with them, that shall call your yokefellowes, Queanes,
and your children, bastardes. verily all the Burgeses of your Parlamentes, with
the help of al your brethren, shall never make them, honest wives, nor these,
true begoten.

And here remember M. Jewel, that as the first part of this saying of S.
Chrysostom, which you allege for you, makes nothing for your Marriage of
Votaries: so the later part is altogether contrary to the procedinges of your
fleshly fellows. For it condemns utterly their filthy bigamie, or second
yoking. Some of your companions, who being Priests, and religious, and
usurping the room of a Bishop (not far from Sarisburie) as you do, being
old of years, but full of lust, who for chastities sake (and God wot for none
other cause) their former old queanes being departed this life, have yoked
unto them young Strompets, contrary to S. Chrysostom, and also to S. Paul S.
after Chrysostomes judgment, would (I dare say) give you hearty thanks, and
well reward you too, if you could defend their second yoking. How I may term
it, I know not. For I trow it ought not to be called Bigamie, since the
first yoking was not marriage. For a fuller answer to all this brought here our
of S. Chrysostom, I refer the Reader to my Confutation of the Apology, In
the co^futation Fol. 75. etc.
where this Replier has set forth the matter for Priests Marriage, and
furnished it with the same stuff. If the Apology be not his workmanship, I
cry him mercy. Verily I am persuaded, and so be many mo, that this ambitious
Reply, and that rash Apology, be eggs of one hens laying. Chrysostom. in
epist. ad Hebraeos hom. 7.


Well let us see other your best stuff. Use marriage with discretion (says S.
Chrysostom by you alleged) and thou shall be the Chief in the kingdom of
heaven. Why sir, what avails this to the justifying and making good of the
incestuous contracte between men and women of your sects, that have vowed
chastity? As for example, what helps this the case of Martin Luther the
Austen Friar, who yoked him self to Caterin Bore the Nonne of Nymick in
Saxony, or of your great friend and Master, Peter Martyr yoked in Euangelical
wedlock to dame Caterin the Nonne of Metz.
Peter Martyr the regular Chanon of S. Augustines order, who likewise yoked him
self unto Dame Catherine the Nonne of Metz in Lorraine, that stale out of her
cloister by night, and ran away with an honest man's wife of Metz to
Strasburg, which honest man's wife married to Emanuel the Jew (that afterward
came to Cambridge, and there read an Hebrew lesson) her husband being a live,
Emannel the Jew to the Regesters wife of Metz her husband living.
as he told me the tale him self with weeping eyes at Metz, as I passed
toward Italy through Lorraine.

Whereas ye make S. Paul to say, that matrimony is honorable in all persons, I
judge ye will say, it was not very honorable in these two persons. And yet
forsooth it was allowed for good among your holy brethren of Strasburg, because
the true husband was a Papist. Moreover touching this saying of S. Chrysostom^,
how can they use marriage moderately, and with discretion, between whom it was
unlawful, and wicked from the beginning?

In the last place, as an authority of greatest force, to knit up the knotte
of the Vowebreakers marriages, S. Hieromes record is alleged. But o Lord, out
of which work of his is it alleged! Even out of the first book against
Iouinian the heretic, defending the sacrilegious wedlock of wiued Monks, and
husbanded Nonnes, as M. Jew. now does. What may thou (good Reader) more
wonder at in this Superintendent? His impudency, that is not a shamed to name
S. Hierom, as though he spoke any word for the maintenance of Votaries
wedlockes, who of set purpose most vehemently and learnedly wrote against them,
and against Iouinian the great patron of the same: or his crafty wickedness,
that would so begyle the simple and unlearned Reader with the authority of so
holy and so ancient a Father, dissembling the argument whereof he treated,
which being disclosed, it is easily perceived, how little he furthereth such
abominable bargains?.

But some will say. Be not the words alleged by M. Jewel to be found in S.
Hierome? I gra^nt they are found. So the words that Satan tempted our Savior
withal, Math. 4.
are found in the Scripture. Yet were they not truly alleged. Psalm. 90.
It is not hard to peeke a few words out of any writer, which being s^t alone
may seem to sound against some truth, yea against the writers principal
intent. How beit the words that be here alleged out of S. Hierom, be neither
against the writers purpose, nor for M. Jewels purpose. For only they prove,
that the custom of promoting married men to be Priests, was not quite grown
out of use in S. Hieromes time. For though he say, that in his days Priests
were made of married men, yet he seems not to mean, that they used to company
in bed with wives. Thereof thus he writes in the same book. Hieron.
aduersus Iouinian. lib. 1.
Si laicus and quicunque fidelis orare non potest, nisi careat officio
coniugali, Sacerdoti, cui semper pro populo offerend^ sunt sacrificia, semper
orandum est. Si semper orandum est, ergo semper carendum est matrimonio. If one
of the laietie, or any faithful person who so ever he be, can not pray (that
is to say, can not give him self wholly to prayer, as when he receives our
Lords body, for thereof he speaks specially) unless he cease from the duty
of wedlock: a Priest by whom Sacrifices must always be offered up for the
people, must always pray. If he must always pray, then must he always be
without matrimony, that is, without the work of matrimony.

Thus thou see good Reader, how evident and strong a truth it is, that he who
has ones vowed chastity, as Priests in the West Church, Monks, Friars, and
Nonnes have done, can not lawfully go back to Marriage, and that M. Jewel going
about to prove the contrary, that is to ^ay, that they may marry, is not hable
to bring one example of the Primitive Church, nor one testimony of any
ancient writer, that makes directely, or by necessary sequel for that
purpose, But diuerting from the point of the question, he allegeth places and
testimonies to prove, that married men were at the beginning made Priests and
Bishops (as we grant they were, for lack of others so meet as they were for
that function) being a truth denied by no man: and can not bring one example of
the old Church, sentence, or piece of sentence, whereby it may clearly
appear, that any man was ever first made Priest, and afterward married, and
was allowed for so doing.

Jewel.
Epiphanius vvriteth thus of certain of his time, Repudiant nuptias, at non
libidinem. Epiphan. (...).
In honor enim apud illos est, non sancti^as, ^ed Hypocris^s^ They re^use
Marriage, no^ (...). For they esteem not Holiness, but Hypocrisy. Who seethe
not, that in the (...) ^^vvitstandinge they be utterly forebidden to have
Wives, yet are easily allowed to have Concubines? They them selves have
confessed it by these words unto the world: Etiam in hac vrbe Romana
meretrices, vt Matronae incedunt per vrbem, seu mula vehuntur: quas a^^ectantur
de Media die Nobiles familiares Cardinalium, Clericique: Even here in this
City of Rome, harlottes pass through the streets, or ride upon their mules,
like honest Gentle women: And Gentlemen of the Cardinals bands, and Priests
at noone days wait upon them.

Harding.
You fly, you fly away M. Jewel out of the feelde. You run from the state
of the question to bye matters, M. Ievvel flies from proving his own case to
disproouing of our lives.
and void talk. You pretend to prove and make good the marriages of the
Apostates your lewd Brethren, who have by solemn vow bound them selves to
live single, and now seeing your self not hable to perform it, and not having
so much as one example, or any one sentence of an ancient Father for the
same: you divert from fortifiyng your own doctrine, to carping of others
faults. To be short, what so ever is evil, we blame it, nolesse then you. But
take this for a general lesson. The iniquity of other men's lives, shall never
be a justification of your false doctrine

What mean you here to allege Epiphanius? whom judge you? or whom sclaunder
you? Evil have he that evil thinks. Had your heart ben chaste and clean, your
mouth had not ben so foul, you would never have stirred that stinking puddel.
Howbeit to note, how uprightly you handle every matter: Epiphanius does not
write thus so much of certain of his time, as of the Heretics named
Origeniani in general, Origeniani.
that for the more part lived long before his time. Again the case between the
Catholic Clergy (to whom your slaunderours suspicion is directed) and those
heretics, The heresy of the Origenians.
is not like. They rejected and condemned marriage, because they had an evil
opinion of it, and judged Conception, to be of it self an evil thing. But
Priests and Clerks of the Catholic Church abstain from marriage, not
because they have any evil opinion of it, or of Gods ordinance, but for
conscience sake in consideration of their vow, which they know them selves
bound to keep.

Where you say, that in the Church of Rome, Priests, Bishops, A notorious and
sclaunderous lie.
and Cardinals are easily allowed to have Concubines, it is such a notorious
and sclaunderous lie, as becomes no man to make, but such a notorious liar,
and sclaunderer, as you are. God grant that once such Adders tongues be stayed
from irksom hissing, as their venomous teeth be yet stayed from deadly biting.

And what impudency is it to say, as you do, that Bisshops and Cardinals them
selves confess, that they are allowed Concubines? Where have they confessed
it? Gentle Reader look back, I pray thee, and read the words that he
allegeth, again. For the better understanding of the matter, The godly purpose
of Paulus tertius.
this much is to be known. Paulus tertius the Pope, moved with the spirit of
God, and desirous to reform the Church, gave charge to nine the best learned,
wisest, and most godly and zealous men that he knew, 4. Cardinals, 3. Bishops,
and.2. others (of whom the worthy man Cardinal Poole of blessed and famous
memory was one) to enquire and search out, what abuses and disorders were in
the Church, and specially in the court of Rome, and to signify the same unto
his Holiness, to the intent those being taken away, a holesom reformation might be
made.

They went together, applied their study and wisdom to that effect, and
brought to end, that they had in charge. In the number of abuses, they
signified this for one, which M. Jewel here by his false translation making it
worse then it is, In Co^cilio Delectoru^ Cardinalium.
grateth upon. In hac etiam vrbe meretrices etc. furthermore (say they) in this
City harlottes go in the streets, or ride on mule, like Matrones, and
Gentilmen of the Cardinals families, and Clerks go after them at midde day.
This is the disorder they complained of, and would to be redressed. Now of this
how can M. Jewel infer his sclaunderous conclusion, Ergo Priests, Bisshops,
and Cardinals, be easily allowed to have Concubines at Rome? Can not the young
Gentilmen of the Cardinals families be found in fault, but it must be laid to
the Cardinals charge them selves? What if certain of M. Jewels men were found
gylty of theft and murder, and therefore deserved hanging: were it reason to
say, that M. Jewel were a felon, and worthy to be hanged?

Moreover what hatred and malice bears this Minister to Priests, who here
for Clerici, odiously translateth Priests, whereas the word now signifies
generally those that be toward the Church, be they scolers, inferior
Ministers, singingmen, or such others? And all this to bring Priests into
contempt and hatred. But if his malice wanne credit among the ignorant, what
could that relyue his cause? Were it true that some Priests at a time were
seen following harlottes in Rome, yet will not that justify the Priests,
Mounkes, and Friars, that marye harlottes in England.

Jewel.
As touching them, whom, it so much greeueth you, M. Hardinge, to be called
Martyrs, you have slain, not only such, and such, whom it likes you, by your
own Name, if ye have not forgotten your own Name, to call Renegates, but
also great numbers of others more, Married, Unmarried, Learned, Unlearned, Old,
Young, Boys, Maids, La^emenne, Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, without
mercy. Ye scourged them with rods: ye set burning torches to their
hands, ye cut of their tongues, ye hanged them, ye beheadded them, ye burnte
them to ashes, ye took the poor innocent babe falling from the mothers
womb, and threvve it cruelly into the fire. Briefly, ye did with them, what
so ever your pleasure was.

Harding.
Answer to M. Jewels tragical complaint of Justice executed against heretics
in Queen Mary's time.
TO this tragical complaint, that here you have amplified, and with all your
Rhetorique enlarged, thus I Answer. So many of your Brothers, and Sisters, as
in Queen Mary's time (for thereof you speak) either for heinous heresy were
burnt, or for theft, and robberies were hanged, or for Treason and Rebellion
were beheadded, or by any way put to death^ they had no more then they
deserved and the Laws appointed. Concerning the manner of their executions
and punishments, you describe it so, as a man may point unto you, and say,
there goes a scholar of John Foxes. In his lying Acts and Monumentes you seem
to have been a great stude^t. When you shall have proved or any other for you,
that those incorrigible, and detestable heretics, thieves, Churcherobbers,
murderers, rebels, and Traitors, for whose deserved and just punishment you
make so grievous moan, were Innocents: then cry out hardely, O M. Harding what
reckening will you yield, when so much innocent blood shall be required at your
hands? Until you prove the Crow is whit, cry not so out upon us, I pray
you, but give us leave to think, and say still, the Crow is black. If you
have no better proufes for your new Doctrines, then such idle exclamations,
and void amplifications, you may sit still, spare your pains in writing great
books, and (without you repent) win Hell at the end with more ease.

Well to proceed further with you, and to rippe up this whole matter: That which
here you say of us, is either true, or it is false. If it be false, we are
cleared, the shame is yours. If it be true: It was either lawfully done, or
unlawfully. If lawfully, then are we not thus to be accused. If unlawfully, it
was the fault of men, it is not the fault of our doctrine. Admit the doctrine
of the Catholic Church, Laws to punish heretics by Death Henrici Quinti.
Anno. 2.
whereof we treat, and wherein just Laws shall condemn us, let us sustain
the due punishment.

If you find fault with the Law, that punishes heretics by death, blame us
who made it not, as ye know. Blame King Henry the fifth a Prince of renoumed
memory, Cod. de Haereticis and Manichaeis. li. 5 Cod. ne sanctum baptisma
iteretur. lib. 2.
and al states of our Country assembled in Parliament in his time, by whom this
Law was enacted and established. Blame Martianus, Gratianus, Honorius,
Theodosius, and Valentinianus, godly and famous Emperors, who made the like
Law: blame Constantine the Great, who so far detested the heresy of the
Arians, that (as Nicephorus writes) he commanded al their books to be burnt,
and al them to be put to death, that should be found to have any of those
books in their custody. Nicephor. Ecclesiast. Histor. lib. 8. cap. 18. and.
25.
Blame S. Augustine, who praises Nabuchodonosor, for that he made a decree of
death, against the blasphemers of God. Which decree he calls Piam and
laudabilem legem, a godly, and a laudable Law. Blame King Henry the eight,
August. ad Bonifaciu^ epist. 50. Contra literas Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 92. et
epist. 48
who (as ye know) made a Law for punishment of heretics holding and
mainteining false doctrine touching the six Articles. To conclude, Blame Beza,
and your great Rabbi John Calvin him self, who in printed books defend it
to be lawful, to put heretics to death, and at Geneua procured Michael
Seruetus a Spaniard, to be burnte for the Arians heresy.

Whereas you make all this grievous complainte against us, M. Ievvel would the
Civil Magistrates just correction, to be esteemed the Catholic Clergies
cruelty.
and burden us with cruelty, remember M. Jewel, what wrong you do us. For we
were not they, by whom your brethern were put to death. We, I say, who are
Clerks, and Ecclesiastical persons. It was the Civil power, the Prince I
mean, that executed the Law upon them, which is the common Law of al
Christendom: which Prince, as S. Paul says, is the Minister of God, to
revenge, and punish the dooers of evil, and bears not the sword without
cause. Romans 13.
The Church, as you know, proceeds no further against heretics, then to
excommunication. The Governors whereof when they find them desperate and
incorrigible, and wholly bent to peruerte others: by right of Gods word do
pronounce Excommunication against them, that the part, which is hole, be
preserved from infectio^. If the Princes for the time being, judge such
ennemies of the Faith unworthy to live in their realms and dominions, and
think it a more mercy to draw their sword of correction upon them, then to
further increase of their own damnation to suffer them to seduce others, and
to draw multitudes of their people into the same pit of perdition: what
cause have ye, why ye should so tragically cry out upon us therefore?

And to say somewhat for the Prince in this case, Al good men, I doubt not,
will allow the saying of S. Augustine. Aug. contra lit. Petili. lib. 2. cap. 67.
Sicut est plerunque crudelis fallax adulatio, sic semper misericors est iusta
correptio. As, most commonly deceitful flattery is cruel, so always just
punishment is merciful. Who ever was more charitable, and more pitiful then
Moses? In so much that praying to God to pardon the people for their heinous
offense, Exodus 32. Ibidem. cap. 86.
he said: O Lord, either forgive them this fault, or if thou will not, put me
out of thy book, which thou have written. Was he then (says S. Augustine)
suddenly become cruel, when coming down from the hill, he commanded so many
thousands to be slain? Would God you M. Jewel, and your fellows, who repine
so much at the due punishments of your lewd Brothers, and Sisters, would
commend to your minds the counsel that S. Augustine gave to the Donatistes in
his time, August. li. 3. ad epist. Parmen. cap. 6.
saying, Prius quid faciant, postea quid patiantur aduertant. Let them
consider, first, what they do, and afterward, what they suffer. Deuteronomy. 13.
The Law of God commands him, that brings the people by any persuasio^
from God to the worship of false Gods, to be put to death. Of the cause of
this Law expressed in these words, quiae locutus est vt vos auerteret a Domino
Deo vestro, because he has spoken whereby to turn you from your Lord God:
the mind of the lawemaker is to be understood. And true it is, they, that
teach heretical doctrine, and expound the Scriptures to an heretical and
perverse sense, do lead men from the true worship of God, and so do exhort
them unto the worship of false Gods. For it follows necessarily, that every
doctrine, which speaks of the worship of God, if it be not of God, it is of
the Devil. And therefore he that receives it, receives the Devil. and he that
uses persuasions to others that it be received, leads and carries them from
God. For S. Paul calls the prohibition of meats, 1. Tim. 4.
and of Marriage, Doctrinas Daemoniorum, the doctrines of the Devils.

What is to be judged of these Protestants Martyrs.
Whereas as you will needs have them to be called Martyrs, Lib. 3 ad epistolam
Parmeni. cap. 6.
and now be canonizate a Gods name by. M. Fox, and set in a solemn Calender,
that holy days and hye feasts be kept for them, who ca^ otherwise do, but
laugh at you? Augu. citatus in Beda. lie^ Cyprian. Aug. contra lit. Petil. lib.
2. cap. 83.
Martyre^ non facit poena, fed causa, It is not the pain, that makes a
Martyr, but the cause, says S. Augustine. Remember you not, what he writes of
such companio^s? It may serve very fitly, for to be said unto you. Tota
quaestio est (says he) vtrum vos non male agatis, quibus tanti schismatis
sacrilegium obijcit orbis terrarum, cuius quaestionis discussione neglecta,
superflua loquimini, and cum viuatis vt latrones, mori vos iactatis vt Martyrs.

The whole question is, whether ye do not evil, whom the world charge with
the mischeuous crime of so great schism, the due discussion of which question
ye leave, and speak void and vain words. And whereas ye live as Thieves, ye
brag that ye dye, as Martyrs.

Aug. contra secu^da^ Gaude^^ij. epist. c. 12.
In an other place likewise says he to such heretics, as being persecuted for
their desert, challenged unto them the glory of Martyrdom, as you and your
companions do, Recte ista dicerentur a vobis quaerentibus Martyrum gloriam, si
Martyrum causam haberetis. These things were well said of you seeking for the
glory of Martyrs, in case ye had the cause of Martyrs..

Augu. ad Bonifacia^ epist. 50. Two sorts of Martyrs. Psalm. 42.
According to his teaching there be true Martyrs, and false Martyrs. That voice
in the Psalm, he understands to be the voice of true Martyrs, being desirous
to be discerned from false Martyrs. Iudica me Deus, etc. Judge me o God, and
discern my cause from the people that is unholy. He said not (says S.
Augustine) discern poenam meam, sed discern causam meam, discern my pain,
but discern my cause.

Ibidem. Two sorts of persecutions.
And as there be true and false Martyrs, so he says, there be two sorts of
persecutions. There is (says he) an unjust persecution, which the wicked make
against the Church of Christ, and there is a just persecution, which the
Churches of Christ make against the wicked. The Church is blessed, that
suffers persecution for righteousness, they be miserable, that suffer
persecution for unrighteousness.

Now if ye can justify your cause no better, then ye have done hitherto,
crake, and brag no more of your Martyrdomes: Let M. Fox make no Martyrs. Or
if ye will needs allow him for a Martyrmaker still, let him be warned to use a
more discretion, then heretofore he has used, else his huge book of Acts and
Monumentes can not long keep credit. For what will wisemen think, even they of
your own side, when they shall consider, what persons he has canonizate, and
registered for Martyrs? As Robert King of Dednam, Robert Debnam of Elsbergholt,
Acts and Monumentes. Page 496.
Nicolaus Marsh of Dednam, who were hanged for Felony: William Cowbridge burnt
at Oxford, who as it is openly known, could not abide the name of Christ,
John Foxes holy Martyrs. Page 570. Page 571.
but said it was a foul name, and that Christ is not the redemer of the
world, and held many other blasphemous heresies: Peter the German, who
besides that he was a Sacramentarie, held opinion, that our Lord took not
flesh of the blessed virgin Marie his Mother: Dicke Adames hanged at Bristow
for felony, and William Flower, Page 1139.
that drew forth his hanger, and struck the Priest in S. Margaretes Church in
Westminster, as he was ministering the blessed Sacrament to the people. Al
these, and many others of like qualities, murderers, thieves, Churcherobbers,
rebels, and Traitors, and by your own confession detestable heretics,
have ye made Martyrs. I speak not of Sir John Oldecastel, and Sir Roger Acton,
Anno. 2. Henrici. 5.
put to death for high treason, whom nevertheless Fox has canonizate for
holy Martyrs: Neither of Dame Eleonor Cobham, bannished for conspiring the
death of King Henry the sixth by wytchecrafte, who in Foxes great book is
regestred for a worthy Confessor. Whereby it seems that he has a commission
(from whens I know not) to make, not only Martyrs, but also Confessors. As
for Virgins, I trow these men canonizate none, for their sprite brooketh not
very well, that holy state of life.

Whereas he is about to set forth his famous Acts and Monumentes again, as I
hear, if he had a desire to increase his number, and will take the pains to
come over into the Low country: He shall find stoare of new matter, yea of as
good Martyrs, as he has made any yet, ten, twelve, sixteen in a Clustre
hanging upon one bough by the ways side in sundry places. Their lives, and
Faithes were so notable, their hearts so stout and constant in contempt of the
holy Sacraments and al godly things: that I dare say, if he had the Registres
and instruments made of their examinations, answers, bold and hardy deeds
in burning liberaries, and religious Howses, in robbing and spoiling of
Churches, and Abbaies, in doing villainy to holy Nonnes by diverse ways, and in
rebelling openly against their lawful Prince: he could not find in his heart
for the Gospels sake, to let them pass not rewarded with the renome of his
Canonization. But now to come to the particulers of your tragical complaint.

It greeueth us, you say, to see your companions called Martyrs. No, no, M.
Jewel, we envy not you that felicity. It greeueth not us so much, that such
deuilish wretches be called Martyrs, as it greeueth us to see their pride,
their wilful blindenes, the efficacy of error, that S. Paul speaks of,
which for sin, God sends upon them, that they give credit unto lying, 2.
These. 2.
their malice, their stubbornness, their wickedness, their contempt of God,
and al godly things, their damnation. It greeueth us to see you and them to be
such, August. de vnita. Ecclesiae. c. 17.
and therefore ye persecute us more, in this respect, then we do you, as S.
Augustine says, that the son persecuteth the Father more by living il, then
the Father persecuteth him by chastesing. August. ad Bonifaciu^ epist. 50.
And in an other place he writes speaking of Dame Sara, and Agar her woman
servant, Si melius discutiamus, magis illa persequebatur Sara^ superbiendo,
quam illam Sara coercendo. As much to say, If we examine the matter exactly, we
shall find, that Agar did put Sara to more grief by her proud demeanor, then
Sara did Agar by correcting her.

What you mean by putting me in remembrance of the name of a Renegate, Answer
to the Objection of the name of a Renegate.
I do well understand, and see therein your malice, and mine own felicity. Had
you wist, how in more spiteful wise to wreake your rancour upon me, by this you
show, what desire you had openly to utter it to my disgrace. In good sooth I
can soon forgive you for it, because thereby you renew my joy, that thus am put
in mind, from how dangerous, and damnable, to how safe and good a state the
mercy of God has delivered me, in that by his grace he has reduced me from
straggling with heretics through common corruption of the time, to rest in the
fold of Christ's Church. As I repent that once I stragled with you, though
not so far from Christ's heard as you: so to confess, and acknowledge the
same, I see not why I should be greatly a shamed. For had I ben a stubborn and
a far gone heretic, as in truth mine error was human: nevertheless in
that case, who so ever is amended, by judgment of S. Augustine, his estimation
thereby is nothing impaired. For says he, Maioris ingenij est animosit at is
fla^mas consire^do exti^guere, ^ falsitatis nebulas intellige^do vitare. It is
a point of more wit, to quench the flames of stourdinesse by confessing
error, then to avoid the clouds of falshod by understanding as much to say
by shift of wit to escape. He is a Renegate, Who is a Renegate.
that forsakes God, and his truth, and wilfully departs from the Church,
not he that leaves error, and comes unto Gods truth, and reposeth him self
in the lap of the Catholic Church. I will not follow you here M. Jewel, and by
casting durte as it were upon your coat again, defile my hands. If I had
desire to prove the name of a Renegate to apperteine by right unto you, it
were soon done. Your own open, and unforced subscription at Oxford to this
very Article whereof now I treat, and to sundry others, which now you impugne^
must be an everlasting testimony against you.

The married, and unmarried, young, and old, boys, and Maids, and the rest
that you reckon up in your long roll, we have not slain (I tell you once
again) as maliciously you charge us: We, I mean, that are of the Clergy,
against whom specially you utter your spite. It was the Prince, that commanded
according to the ancient Laws of al Christendom, justice to be executed upon
them, for that they (beside robberies, Sacrilege, treason, rebellion, and other
heinous crimes committed by the more part of them) not only resisted the
truth, despised Christian religion, contemned the holy Sacraments, and were
open blasphemers of God: but also did what in their power was, stir others to
like wickedness.

Neither were boys slain, as you say. Justice was with more equity and
moderation executed upon the blasphemous, and traitorous offenders of al
sorts, then their horrible crimes deserved. Among them that suffered death,
there were no boys. As they were old in malice, so were they not boys in
years.

Bishops and Archbishops you put in your reckening, to aggrauate the matter.
Cranmare the Archbishop of Cantorburie.
Archbishop there was but one, yourselfe do know. But o Lord, what an
Archebisshop! The Sea of Cantorbury had never any such, since the English
nation received the Faith in S. Gregory's time. If he had been either good in
life, or constant in Faith, or true of promise made by solemn Oath to the Sea
Apostolic: he had never yielded him self to be made an instrument of so many
and so great evils, but with Bishoply authority, gravity, and constancy,
would have withdrawn the Prince, and his ambitious Ministers, from their
unlawful lusts, and wicked attemptes. Of this Archbishop ye have little cause
to crake. As, for wordly dignities sake, once he forsook his old Catholic
Faith, and fell to profess your new Gospelling Faith: So as soon as he had
lost his dignities, for life to be granted him, he was content to forsake your
new faith. And in witness thereof with his own hand he subscribed to a great
number of Bills containing the confession of the Catholic faith. Cra^mares
subscriptions.
At length when he saw, that for his deserts he should needs dye: for anger
he defied Catholic faith, Church, and al, and like a dog returned to his
vomit, so little grace had the manifold wickedness of his former life deserved.

Some were scourged with Rods, Scourgi^g with rods, an old punishment
used of Bishops.
you say. Whether this be true or no, I know not. The same is a meet
punishment for boys. Neither is it altogether a strange and an vnwount thing,
a Bishop to use such manner of correction. For S. Augustine in an epistle to a
noble man called Marcellinus, speaking of scourging with Rods, faith (Qui
modus coertionis and a Magistris artiu^ liberalium, August. epist. 159.
and ab ipsis parentibus, and saepe etiam in iudicijs solet ab Episcopis
haberi) that it was a manner of correction used of Schoolemasters, and
Parents, and also oftentimes of Bisshoppes in judgments.

Some (you say) had burning torches set to their hands. We will believe it, when
we understand it was so. Some had their tongues cut out of their head. If we
deny it, by what means can you prove it? Though the same be commonly done in
France toward heretics that will not recant, to the intent they be not heard
to blaspheme, as in Spain they put a Gagge in their mouths for the same
purpose: Cutting out of heretics tongues, an old punishment. Nicephor. lib.
17. c. 2
yet in England it has not ben used. And if any had his tongue cut out, as you
report, it was not done without example of antiquity. For so did Justinian
the Emperor cut out by the root the tongue of an heretic named Seuerus,
Bishop of Antioche. Better it were, that both tongue, and heart were cut out,
then that God should be blasphemed.

Some were hanged. True it is, but remember you wherefore? Verily either for
theft, or robbery, or for murder, or for sacrilege, or for treason, and
rebellion.

Wiat Headded.
Some were beheadded. I grant, as Wiate, and some others, that for Treason
had by Law deserved that death at the Princes hands. But how many thorough
great Clemency escaped with their heads, who had lost them, if mercy had
not tempered the rigor of Justice?

But some were burnt to Ashes. And that justly by the ancient Laws of al
Christian Realms. Why might not Queen Mary do in that case, as other Kings,
and Princes do in their Dominions, and as your Master John Calvin him self,
did to Seruerus the heretic at Geneua?

Yea, The fable of the woman of Garnsey burnt for heresy with a child in her
belly.
but a poor Innocent Babe falling from the mothers womb, was taken, and
thrown cruelly into the Fire. What if it were denied you, that ever any such
thing was done? Let us hear, how you are hable to prove it. O say you, it
must needs be true. For we find it so written by M. John Fox in his great
book of Acts and Monumentes. Why Sir dare you so constantly auouche this
fact only upon the report of Fox? As though he had not told us in his
false Martyrologe, a thousand mo lies then this? I pity you M. Jewel, that
craking so much of antiquity, and appealing continually to the Fathers of the
six hundred years, you are now driven to stay your credit upon Fox, who has
into that Huge volume infarced lies, more in number, and notabler for vanity,
then ever were raked together into any one heap, or book. This fable by
report of Fox was found, not certain, but probable.
Well, if al were false, that here you tell, then have you lost a ioily tale.
Fox him self reports, when Commissioners in London upon a complaint
examined the matter, that it was found but probable. And probable he means in
the judgment of them, who gladly find fault with all that was done touching
the punishment of heresy in Queen Mary's reign. Now the thing (if any such
thing were done at al) being so Notorious, so openly executed, so few years
then past since it was done, so many men yet living, that would have been
present at the examination in case they had been commanded, the charges of the
journey from Garnesey (where it is said to have been done) to London being
borne, and could have brought true witness, nevertheless to be found but
probable: I ween, it will not to any wise man appear very probable.

How be it let the Fable be a Story, and the same be taken for true, Of the
woman of Garnseis child falli^g out of her belly into the fire
according as Fox does describe it to the advantage, and as you M. Jewel
report it: That in Garnesey three women, that is, the mother, and her two
daughters were burnt, and that one of the Daughters was with child, and the
child issued from her womb being riued with the fire, and was consumed
together with the fire. What of all this? In whom was the fault, in the
officer, that took not the child out of the fire, or in the unnatural mother,
that brought it into the fire? In the Story there is mention made of a child,
and of the mother, but of the childs Father, there is no word spoken. It
appears very credible, that the historiographer was a shamed to name the
childs Father, least so he should have defaced the glory of the mothers
Martyrdom. For I would feign know who was the husband to the daughter. M. Fox
does not express it.

But you will say, how so ever the child was begotten, the mother being in that
case should have been by no Law, justice, or reason committed unto the fire.
True it is, a woman in that case may for once claim the benefit of her belly.
Mary I have heard Lawiers say, that if whiles she is in prison, she play the
strompet again, by Law the judge may deny her the benefit of her belly, and
give sentence of death upon her. But as for your pratteling parrat Paratine
(for so was her name as M. Fox registreth her) it was not known to the Judge,
Paratine of Garnesey.
that she was with child. Had it been known, doubtelesse her death had been
differred until she had been brought on bed. But the honest woman, because she
would not shame the Gospel, keeping it privy from the Magistrates, claimed not
the benefit of the Law, and so now not only like an harlot or Heretic, but
like a Murderer went desperately to the fire, and murdered both her self, and
her child conceived within her. So far the Devil carries them, whom he
possesses, and leads at his will. This abominable fact God by his most just
judgment reveled, to the condemnation both of her, and of the cause for which
she dyed, by suffering the child to fall from her womb, in the sight of all that stood by.

Judge now discrete Reader, to whom redoundeth the blame of the crime, whether
to the Ministers of Justice, who not knowing the thing, executed the Law: or
to the woman, that for avoiding a worldly shame, conceeling her own turpitude,
became a murderer of her own babe, before it came to perfection. So that she
died gilty of three heinous crimes, of heresy, lechery, and murder. And to
these theft may be added for the fourth. For it appears by the tale, that
Fox him self to her best estimation tells of her, that she was a thief, as
being accessorie to the honest woman Vincent Gosser, that stole a silver
gobblet. If the matter were well examined, I doubt not she would be tried an
honest woman, and a fit vessel to receive the glory of these new invented
Martyrdomes.

Here I appeal unto your own wisdom M. Jewel, What was to be don with
the dead
and demand of you, what you could, or would have done for that imperfect and
dead child in that case, better, then was done. Carcass of Paratines babe.
If they had taken it out of the fire, what should that have auailed? Life it
had none, and therefore was it not to be baptized. Sense it had none: and
therefore had it not ben helped by saving it from burning. As for burial, since
it was neither Christened, nor come to be perfect man: it was as well burnt, and
buried in earth, yea in some respect better, because being burnt with the
wicked mother, besides the more detestation of the horrible crime to the
example of others, it was a testimony against the mothers unnaturalness.
Neither in deed truly to speak, was it a poor innocent Babe, as to aggrauate
the fact, more rhetorically, then truly you report. For being a dead thing,
as it could not be rich, or hurtful, so neither properly ought it to be
called, poor, or innocent. This much considered, you have gotten little
honesty to your Gospel M. Jewel, by rehearsal of casting this poor innocent
Babe into the fire: And the mother your Sister in the Lord, is fownd but a
mean Martyr, and witness of the truth. Tybourn Martyrs.
Of the fruit of such Martyrdom, the famous Tree of Tybourne brings forth
good stoare.

Jewel.
The vvorste word that proceeded from them, was this, O Lord, forgive them,
They know not, what they do. O Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. In the mean
while, ye stood by, and delited your eyes with the sight. Ye dug up the
poor carcasses of Gods Saints, that had been buried long before: ye
served them solemnly with process, and ascited them to appear at your
Consistories, and by Public sentence adjudged them to die the second death:
and so, to the perpetual shame of your cruel folly, ye vvreak^e your anger upon
the dead. O M. Hardinge^ your conscience knovveth, these are no lies: They are
written in the eyes, and hearts of many thousands. These be the marks of your
Religion. O what reckeninge vvil you yield, when so much innocent Blood
shall be required at your hands? And where you say, We must pulle the Old
Martyrs out of Heaven to place our own, for that our Doctrine, and theirs (as
you bear us in hand) is quite contrary, all this is but a needeles ostentation
of idle words. If vauntes were proufes, then were this matter fully ended.
But we say, that in these cases, that I have moved, you are not hable to
allege one sufficient Clause, or Sentence of your side out of any of all the
Old learned Fathers. And hitherto your muster appears but very simple,
notvvithsta^ding the great promise of your Stoare.

Harding.
The patience of your stinking Martyrs, who (say you) uttered no worse word,
then, o Lord forgive them, o Lord Jesus receive my spirit: is by you hyely
commended. Patience in an evil cause is no sufficient trial of a true Martyr.
It is not suffering, Matt. 5.
but the cause of suffering, that makes a Martyr. Blessed are they that suffer
persecution, says Christ, but there he adds, propter iustitiam, for
righteousness. How many, Patience in dying, argues no Martyrdom.
thieves, murderers, and Traitors, see we to suffer their death patiently?
Yet are they not canonizate for Martyrs. Many among the Donatistes took their
Death with as great patience, and as heartily prayed for their Adversaries as
any of al your Martyrs did. Anno. Do- 1305.
Margarete the wife of Dulcinus, when she came to suffer death at Nouaria in
Lombardie for the filthy heresy of the Adamites, for which her husband had
died before, song Te Deum, and showed a marvelous patience, and co^tempte of
death. Peruse the Stories of Bohemia, and ye shall find, that both men and
women put to death for that abominable heresy, suffered their execution with
such quiet, patience, and constancy: that it seemed to learned men a worthy
thing to be Cronicled. Verily of the glory of patience showed at death, the
Anabaptists, that have been burnt in sundry places in our days, by all men's
judgment have won the garland from you, and from your brothers, and Systers,
be they Lutherans, or Caluinistes. Neither have al your Martyrs dyed with such
patience, and quiet words, as here you talk of.

Burning of Dead carcases, no new thing.
Touching the digging up of the Carcasses, not of Gods Saints, as you name
them, but of the Devils Champions, and the asciting of some that were before
buried, to appear at the Consistories: all this was not done for wreaking of
Anger, as you feine, but for examples sake, that others might be frayed from
following them, and for show, how detestable their heresy was, and the same not
without law custom, and well liking of Christian people. Neither altogether
without the example of the Scriptures. For in them we read, that the good king
Josias brake up the Graves of wicked Priests, 4. Reg. 23
and false Prophets, 2. Par. 34
and burned their bones to Asshhes. So that this complaint touches the holy
king Josias, no less then the Catholics.

Augustine. Epist. 50.
S. Augustine says, that if the crimes objected against Cecilianus, were true,
and could be plainly proved: ipsum iam mortuum anathematizaremus^ we would
accurse him now being dead. If a Curse may be extended upon an heretic, after
he is departed this world, which bannisheth the soul from the communion and
society of the saved company: why may not the Carcass of a notorious dead
heretic be for examples sake dug out of hallowed grownde appointed for the
reverent burial of those bodies, that when they lived were tabernacles of the
holy Ghost: that after death they rest not with the bodies of them, from whom
they divided them selves by schism and heresy, when they lived? And therefore
I advise you M. Jewel, and your brothers, not to bestow great charges about
your toumbes, and places of burial, least the time come, as certainly it shall
come, unless for sin God utterly forsake our Country: when your Carcasses
shall be dug out again, and be served as heretics Carcasses these many
hundred years have been: example whereof we have in the French Chronicles of
one Amalricus, In Chronicis Fra^cicis.
an heretic in S. Bernardes time, whose body at Paris was dug out of his
grave after his death, and burnt to Ashes, which punishment he was known
being dead to have deserved, when he lived. Your own brethren of Geneua are
reported of late years to have dug one out of his grave, and to have hanged
up his dead carcass upon a Gibbet, for that he repented him of your heresies
in his death bed, and received the blessed Sacrament, before he departed.

And how say you to your brethern of Basile? David Georges Carcass dug up
at Basil, and burnt with his Image.
Did they not dig up the carcass of David Georgius, and burn it with his
Image long after he had been buried? Shall it be lawful for you in England to
burn the bones of S. Thomas of Cantorburie the Martyr, and for your brethren
the Huguenotes in France to burn the holy Relics of S. Irenaeus that
blessed and so ancient Martyr, of S. Martin, and S. Hilarie: and may not the
Catholics burn the carcasses, and bones of blasphemous Sacramentaries, and
other heretics?

But now to conclude, what mean you M. Jewel, thus to complain of us, and to
accuse the Catholics of Cruelty? Are your selves giltles hereof? I mean
you, your brethren, and them of your side, specially the ministers, and
Superintendentes of England. Who are more cruel, they, that do but execute an
old Law of death under the Prince according to commandment, or they, that
having no law to put men to death, by all means procure, and cause such a
law to be made them selves? Who have so importunatly, so lowdely, so
maliciously cried out upon the Prince, to draw her sword against the
Catoliques? Who cried out still for the law of Praemunire to be extended against
them, and last of al for the law of death to be enacted against them, as in
cases of hye treason? How oftentimes have ye required this your own new law to
be executed upon learned, holy, and innocent men? Were it not that God stays
the heart of the Prince, and inclined her unto mercy and clemency, ye would
soon make all the world witness of the cruelty of your hearts.

I will not here say so much as I could, nor think I it good to grate much
upon this sore. Certain it is, God sees the cruelty of your hearts, and what
deadly hatred ye bear toward the Catholics. What is either in you, or in us
amiss, our Lord amend it. I wish you, and your brethren would well consider,
what S. Augustine says to the Donatistes, whom ye far pass in number, and
malice of heresies. Thus it is. Si quid a nostris Christianae charitatis modum
votumque non custodientibus, August. de vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 17.
odiose and perniciose patimini, non esse illos nostros cito dixerim, sed aut
futuros, si se correxerint, aut in fine separandos, si in malitia perdurarint.
Nos tamen nec propter pisces malos retiae rumpimus, nec propter vasa in
coutumeliam facta domu^ magnam deserimus. Quod si vos quoque illos a quibus
talia Caetholica patitur, non esse vestros eadem regula dicitis, probate animum
vestrum, corrigite errore^, amplectimini vnitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis. If
it be so that ye suffer any thing spitefully done unto you by them of our side
not keeping the mean and vow of Christian charity: I may soon say, that they
be not of our number, mary but that they shall be, if they amend them selves, or
that in the end they shall be separated from us, if they continue. How so ever
it be, yet will not we for the evil Fisshes sake break the Nets, neither
forsake the great House (that is to say, the Church) for their sakes, who be
Vessels made to dishonor. Now in case ye also, by like rule will say, that
they, at whose hands the Catholic Church suffers such things, be not of
your side: then try your own mind, amend your error, embrace unity of
sprite in the band of peace.

Jewel.
Certainly the holy Fathers, and Martyrs of God vvil say unto you, We know
not your Private Masses: we know not your Half Communion: we know not
your Strange Unknown Prayers: we know not your Adoration of Gorruptible
Creatures: we know not this Sacrificing of the Son of God: we know not
your Nevve Religion: we know not you. God open the eyes of your Hearts,
that ye may see the miserable state, ye stand in, and recover the place, that
ye have lost, and find your Names written in the Book of Life.

Harding.
In the end of this Division by a Rhetorical fiction you make the holy
Fathers, The holy learned Fathers tale to M. Jew and hi^ Co^panion^.
and Martyrs of God to say unto us, as your blasphmous heart does phontasie.
But as we fear not that any such thing by them shall be told us, so were they
now living, doubtelesse thus would they say unto you, and them of your sects,
as nevertheless in their books and learned works, they also do now in
effect say unto you daily. We know not your strange state, that is without
external Sacrifice and Priesthod, and consequently without a Law. We know not
your eating of common bread, and drinking of common wine at your new found
Suppers, in steed of receiving the true body and blood of Christ. We know
not your Justification by your special Faith only. We know not your perilous
doctrine of Predestination. We know not your new manner of baptizing without
holy oil, and other ancient rites and Ceremonies. We know not your
chaungeable new devised Co^munions. We knouwe not your monstrous Supremacy of
Princes in Ecclesiastical matters, that is to say, the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, the supreme Commission to feed Christ's lambs and sheep, and the
whole authority that Christ gave to S. Peter, and his Successors, so to be
united by a forced Parliament to the Crown of a lay Prince, that it be made a
matter of inheritance, so that the Prince for the time being be head of the
Church, and supreme governor in all things and causes, as well spiritual as
temporal, be it man or woman, or child sucking at the Nourses breast. We
condemn your negative Divinity, which denies man's freewil, merits of good
works done in grace, Prayers made to our blessed lady, the Apostles, Martyrs,
and other Saints, to be intercessours for us to God, Prayers for the dead. We
deteste your wicked and incestuous marriages of Priests, Monks, Friars, and
Nonnes, and of al such as have made solemn vow to live without the use of
wedlock. We deteste your impiety, in that ye refuse to adore and do godly
honor to the body and blood of your Creator in the Sacrament of the Altar.
We detest your pulling down of Aulters, your robbing of Churches, your
schisms and heresies, and rebellion against your lawful Princes, we detest
your profane contempt of al good religion and godlynes, we detest your
wickedness, we detest you.

As for you M. Jewel, I pray God to touch your heart so, as you may be induced
rather with some shame of the world to recant your heresies, and repent, to
save your soul: then with desperate continuing in that you have taken upon you
by your foolish and arrogant Challenge, to keep the vain estimation of
deceived men, and finally to lose your foul for ever.

The.12. Division.
The Answer.
Leaving no small number of places, that might be recited out of diverse other
Doctors, I will bring two of two worthy Bishops, one of Chrysostom, the other
of S. Ambrose, confirming this Truth. S. Chrysostomes words be these.
Chrysosto. in epist. ad Heb. homi. 17.
Pontifex noster ille est, qui hostiam mundantem nos obtulit: ipsam offerimus
and nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem consumi non potest. Hoc autem, quod nos
facimus, in commemorationem fit eius, quod factum est. Hoc enim facite, inquit,
in mei commemorationem. He is our Bishop, that has offered up the Host,
which cleanses us. The same do we offer also now, which though it were
then offered, yet can not be consumed. But this, that we do, is done in
Remembrance of that, which is done. For, do ye this, says he, in my
Remembrance. S. Ambrose says thus: Ambros. In Psalm. 38.
Vidimus Principem Sacerdotum ad nos venientem: vidimus, and audiuimus
offerentem pro nobis sanguinem suum: sequamur, vt possumus, sacerdotes, vt
offeramus pro populo sacrificium, etsi infirmi merito, tamen honorabiles
Sacrificio. Quia etsi Christus non videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertur in
terris, quando Christi Corpus offertur. We have seen the Prince of Priests
come to us: we have seen and heard him offer for us his Blood: Let us that
be Priests, follow him, as we may, that we may offer Sacrifice for the people,
being though weak in merit, yet honorable for the Sacrifice. Because al be
it Christ be not seen to offer, yet he is offered in earth, when the Body of
Christ is offered. Of these our Lords words, which is given for you, and,
which is shed for you, and for many, here S. Ambrose exhorts the Priests,
to offer the Body and Blood of Christ for the people: and wills them to be
more regarded, then commonly they be now a days, for this Sacrifice sake,
though otherwise they be of less desert.

Jewel.
This allegation argues no great abundance of stoare. For Chrysostom in
these words both opens him self, and shows, in what sense other
Ancient Fathers used this word, Sacrifice, and also utterly overthrows M.
Hardinges whole purpose touching the same. For, as he says, we offer up the
same Sacrifice, that Christ offered, so in most plain wise and by sundry
words, he remooueth al doubt, and declares, in what sort, and meaning
we offer it. He says not, as M. Hardinge says, we offer up the Son of
God unto his Father, and that verily, and in deed: but contrary wise thus he
says, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebr. Hom. 17.
Offerimus quidem, sed ad Recordationem facientes Mortis eius. Hoc Sacrificium
Exemplarillius est. Hoc, quod nos facimus, in commemorationem fit eius, quod
factum est. Id ipsum semper offerimus: Magis autem Recordationem Sacrificij
operamur: We offer in deed: but in remembrance of his Death. This Sacrifice,
is an Examlpe of that Sacrifice. This, that we do, is done in remembrannce of
that, that was done. We offer up the same, that Christ offered: Or rather
we work the Remembrance of that Sacrifice. Thus we offer up Christ, That
is to say, an Example, a Commemoration, a Remembrance of the Death of Christ.
This kind of Sacrifice was never denied: but M. Hardinges Real Sacrifice was
yet never proved. De Consecat. Distin. 2. Cu^ fra^gitur.
So says S. Augustine: Cum hostia frangitur, and sanguis in ora Fidelium
funditur, quid aliud, quam Dominici Corporis in Cruce Immolatio significatur?
Wen the Oblation is broken, and the Blood ( that is to say, The Sacrament of
the Blood) is powered into the mouths of the Faitheful, what other thing is
there signified, but the Sacrifice of Our Lords Body upon the Chrosse?

Harding.
How so ever it like you to scorn at our stoare, the multitude of clear
testimonies for proof of the Sacrifice, to the learned can not be unknown.
Were it so that ye had but one making so directly against it, as these two
here, and sundry others in this Article by me alleged make for it: ye would
have made no small stoare of it. In books and pulpites, in tauernes and
alebenches, your trompettes long er this should have proclaimed it. As for
these two places, let us see, how your sclender Reply is far to light, so to
carry away the weight of them.

First touching S. Chrysostom, with what plainer terms, with what more
effectual words could any man have expressed the truth of our Sacrifice? That
Priests have authority to offer up Christ unto his Father.
If we that be Priests, offer up now also the self same host, which our
Bishop Christ has offered upon the Cross, even that host which cleanses us
from our sins, as S. Chrysostom says: that being none other but the
precious flesh and blood of Christ, that is to say Christ him self (for he
offered him self to his Father to cleanse us) how have not Priests authority
to offer up Christ unto his Father, which is the express Article that you
deny? That every simple man may have in readiness an Argument against such
false teachers for the Sacrifice, An Arment for the unlearned to prove the
Sacrifice.
thus for their sake, it may be framed. Who so ever do offer up the self same
host, which Christ has offered, they offer up Christ. The Priests offer the
same that Christ offered: Ergo they offer up Christ. The Mayor is evident in
it self, the Minor is S. Chrysostomes, the Argument being good, the Conclusion
must needs be true.

That it may the better appear of what force M. Jewels Reply is, S.
Chrysostomes place examined with the Reply of M. Jew.
this much is to be considered: That in this place of S. Chrysostom consisting
of two parts, two things are avouched. In the first part, he gives us his
witness for the substance of this Sacrifice, which Priests do now offer in
the Church. In the second part he declares one end, wherein the Sacrifice
offered by Priests, does differ from the Sacrifice offered by Christ him
self. Christ our Bishop (says he) offered the cleansing host. Ad Heb. Hom.
17.
But we offer that ^oste in commemoration. Which is as much to say, The end of
the Sacrifice that Christ offered, was to cleanse us from our sins. The end
of the Sacrifice that is done by Priests, is to renew daily the memory of
this cleansing Sacrifice, and so consequently to derive and apply unto the
devout and faithful people, as also unto them selves, the fruit and effect of
it. In Epist. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
The identitie of the substance, of either Sacrifice, and the diversity of the
end of either Sacrifice, is plainly taught by S. Chrysostom in that Homily.

Now let us examine your Reply. Three things attributed to this saying of S.
Chrysost^ by M. Jew.
You attribute unto S. Chrysostom for having uttered the saying that I here
allege, three things. The first is, that in these words (mark Reader what
this man says) He opens him self. The second is, that he shows in what
sense other ancient Fathers used this word, Sacrifice. The third is, that he
overthrows M. Hardings whole purpose touching the Sacrifice. Surely this is
very much, and were it also true, I marvel why neither your self, nor any of
your fellows ever heretofore alleged it against the Sacrifice. But certain we
are, ye shall wring hard, before ye wring this much out of these words.

How S. Chrysosto^ opens him self against M. Jewel.
That in these words he opens him self, I may easily grant you. But that
opening is openly against your open Sacramentarie heresy. For whereas you
deny the oblation and Sacrifice of the Church, he says, that now also we
offer. whereas you deny, that we offer Christ to the Father, he says, we
offer now also the self same host, which our high Bishop Christ, has
offered. And to put it out of doubt, what host he means, he opens him
self, as you say, calling it, hostiam mundantem nos, the host that cleanses
us, which can be none other, but Christ him self. And because the hosts that
were offered in sacrifice in the old law, were forthwith consumed, to show
the excellency of this host, he says of it, that being then, that is to say,
upon the Cross, offered, it can not be consumed. And therefore in the same
Homily he says, that it is otherwise with us now, then it was with the Jews.
For they on diverse days offered diverse lambs. but we (says he) offer not one
lamb to day, and an other lamb to morrow, but always we offer one, and the
same lamb.

S. Chrysostom returned upon M. Ievvel.
Touching the second point, if in these words (let them be consideratly
perused) S. Chrysostom show, in what sense other ancient Fathers have used
this word, Sacrifice, then by the ancient Fathers your doctrine touching the
truth of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament, M. Jew. ouershot him self in
alleging this place of S. Chrysostom.
is quite overthrown. For he calls it most expressly, the Host that
cleanses us from our sins, which Christ our high Bishop offered up for us
upon the Cross. If the ancient Fathers, when so ever they speak of the
host that is offered up by Priests in the Sacrifice of the Church, mean
thus, as S. Chrysostom speaks, then are they of our side by your own
confession, then is the Catholic Doctrine concerning the Sacrament, and the
Sacrifice, by them against your heresy confirmed, and maintained. God be
praised, by whose providence the Truth is confessed, by the ennemies of Truth.
Certainly here you ouershote your self, in telling the truth against your
self unawares.

Here then I shall advertise the Christian Reader, to bear these words of S.
Chrysostom in memory, and to consider well of them, for so much as in them he
opens him self, as Master Jewel confesses, and shows what meaning the
ancient Fathers had, when they spoke of the Sacrifice of the Church.

But how in these words he overthrows my purpose touching the Sacrifice, or
rather the universal Doctrine of the whole Church, that neither I, nor M.
Jewel him self, nor any other man. I am sure, S. Chrysostom makes directly
for the real Sacrifice.
can perceive. In, these words, I say which be here alleged in my Answer to
the Challenge. Nay, how can they not seem most plainly, and directly to auouche
our doctrine touching the Sacrifice? Does he not set Christ, and Priests that
be now, together in the office of offering? He has offered, we offer also now,
says he. Does he not auouche the host, that Christ offered, and the host
that Priests now offer (for thereof he speaks) to be one, and the self same
host? And that no man should doubt, what host he meant, says he not, it is
that, which cleanses our sins? that, which then being offered (to wit,
upon the Cross with shedding of blood, with death, to cleanse sins, and to
redeem the world) can not be consumed? What host can this be, but the body of
Christ, but Christ him self? For nothing could cleanse our sins, but he,
who only is the Lamb of God, Joan. 1.
that takes a way the sins of the world. Thus then the substance of the
host, that Christ our Bishop offered, and of that we offer, is one, and the
self same. So it is clearly proved by these words of S. Chrysostom, that it
is not only a memory, an example, a similitude, a figure, or resemblance of
Christ's body, that we offer in our daily Sacrifice, but the self same host
in substance, that Christ offered to cleanse us, which is the substance of his
own body and blood, for it was not a figure that he offered for us, but his
true and real body.

But as the substance of his, and our Sacrifice is one, so the end and effect
by S. Chrysostom in this place, The end of Christ's Sacrifice, and of ours.
is diverse. He offered him self to death to cleanse the sins of the world,
to redeem mankind. We offer him in remembrance of that his death, to be
partakers of his redemption. But hereof I speak more particularly in my
preface before this Roioindre.

S. Chrysostom (say you) remoueth al doubt, and declares in what sort and
meaning we offer the Sacrifice. How so good sir, tell it us, I pray you, for I
account it well worth the learning. Mary (say you) he says not, as M. Harding
says, we offer up the Son of God unto his Father, and that verily, and in
deed. First it is a strange thing to me, that a man should remove al doubts,
and declare the certainty of things, by not saying, as you replye. Next,
what if he say not in express terms, that we offer up the Son of God unto
his Father? Will you now go from the matter, and fly for refuge to your own
precise terms?

Consider, I pray you, how this vain wrangling becomes the Person of the
Great Minister of Sarisburie. M. Jewels objection is but a vain wrangling.
Whereas S. Chrysostom says, that we offer up the self same Host, that
Christ our Bishop has offered, which cleanses us from our sins, is it not
as much, as if he had said, we offer up the Son of God? What host is that
which cleanses us? Is it not Christ only? Who is Christ? Is he not the
Son of God? And to whom is Sacrifice done, but to God? All this set together,
how much varieth he from S. Chrysostom, who says, that we offer up the Son
of God unto his Father? If you stick to that other word, verily, and in
deed, remember, you have by your translation, made S. Chrysostom in this very
place, so to speak your self. We offer in deed, be the words.

Now that you have told us, what S. Chrysostom says not, which helps your
cause nothing at al: you show us what he says. And here you bring in certain
pieces, and maimed sayings out of him, being a fraid to allege the whole
sentences, as they lie in that learned Doctor, least you should mar
altogether, as you should have done, if you had suffered him to tell his own
tale. Because the place is somewhat long, I had rather refer the Reader unto
the.17. Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is written, then
here to rehearse the whole. But let us see, what you pike out of that Homily
for your purpose, M. Iuels promise upon S. Chrysostom. how it is performed
and how much it relieueth your cause. Remember what you have promised to show
out of S. Chrysostom, that he remoueth al doubt, and declares in what sort
and meaning we offer the Sacrifice. You allege out of the said Homily, four
sentences, or rather four pieces of sentences.

The first is this. Offerimus quidem etc. We offer in deed, Chrysostom. Hom. 17.
in epist. ad Heb.
but in remembrance of his Death. These words by your interpretation declare
in what sort we offer the Sacrifice. Well, be it so, I will not much contend
with you, so that you mean by this sort, the excluding of the bloody manner
of oblatio^. But here I must put the reader in mind, what follows immediately
in that ancient Father. Which you have untruly conceeled. Vna est hostia, non
multae. The host that we offer (daily, for there he speaks of the daily
Oblation) is one, it is not many. If it be bread made by the hands of a man,
that we offer, and wine pressed out of the grape (for the Real Oblation of the
body and blood of Christ ye deny) albe it the same properly can not be called
an Host, how can you say, it is one Host, that we offer daily, and not many
Hosts, seeing that every day we take new bread, and new wine for our
Sacrifice?

In our Sacrifice we have the sampler, and the true thing it self, which
Christ offered.
Your second piece of a sentence is this. Hoc Sacrificium exemplar illius est.
This Sacrifice is an example of that Sacrifice. But what follows, Id ipsum
semper offerimus. We offer always the self same thing. And what thing is
that? There he shows. It is the Host that cleanses us, which Christ our
Bishop has offered. So then we see it called, both the real thing it self,
that was offered, and the sampler of the thing. In that he calls it a
sampler, thereby he puts us in mind, the order and manner of offering it
now, to be different from the manner of the oblation of the Cross. For there
it was bloody, here unbloody: there with suffering the tourments of death, here
with commemoration, representation and application of his death: there the
thing offered visible in proper form, here invisible, under the form of bread
and wine.

Your third piece of a sentence taken out of S. Chrysostom, is this. This
that we do, is done in remembrance of that that was done. Which words
declare, the thing that we do, to be done in remembrance of the Death of
Christ. And they follow immediately upon that he said of the cleansing Host,
which our Bishop Christ offered, and we also offer the same. So that the
difference between this, and that, is this. That was the Sacrifice that
cleanses our sins with his blood actually shed, and redeemed us by virtue of
it self. This is the Commemoratiue Sacrifice, which is offered in
commemoration of that, having for the substance of it, the same body and blood
of Christ, that was offered upon the Cross, by virtue of Consecration made
really present, and applies unto us the merit and effect of the cleansing,
and redemption wrought and performed upon the Cross.

Then immediately follows the last sentence of the Homily, a part whereof you
have taken for your purpose. Non aliud Sacrificiu^, sicut Pontifex, sed idipsum
semper offerimus, and caet. we offer not an other Sacrifice, as the Bishop (of
the old law did) but always we offer the very same that Christ offered, or
rather we work the remembrance of the Sacrifice. In the Discourse of S
Chrysostom, out of which M. Jewel has piked, and culled out certain pieces,
three things in effect are declared. First, that we offer, secondly, that our
manner of offering is other, then Christ's was, therefore ours is called a
sampler of that, and it is done in commemoration of his Death. Thirdly, that
the Host, or thing offered in either Sacrifice, is one and the same in
substance, which is the true body of Christ. Grant us the first, and the
last, that is to say, that we offer in deed, yea and that the same Host,
which Christ offered: and to al men of reason and judgment, though our
Sacrifice be a sampler of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross, and though it be
done for commemoration of that, shall our Real Sacrifice be sufficiently proved.
For what is our endeavor in this Article, but to prove, that we offer unto God
that, which Christo our Bishop has offered, which is Christ him self?

And whereas making up your Epiphonema, you say with more brauarie, then truth,
Thus we offer up Christ, that is to say, an example, a commemoration, a
remembrance of the Death of Christ: I never heard of such a that is to say,
before, specially if the real presence by these words be excluded as your
meaning is. O what impudency is this? Difference between the host and the
commemoratio^.
Does not S. Chrysostom by your self alleged make a plain distinction and
difference between the host offered, and the remembrance, saying, that which we
do, is done for a commemoration? Does it not thereby appear, that somewhat
must be done before, and besides the Commemoration? Who ever so confounded
things, as as by your absurd and false interpretation you do, making the
body and blood of Christ, or Christ him self, and the remembrance of
Christ's death, one thing? What, is this your meaning, as though the substance
of the Sacrifice, were nothing else, but the remembrance of Christ's death? Let
this once be granted, and why may not any man, or woman, make us as good a
Sacrifice at their table at home in their own house, as your self can at the
Communion table in our Ladies Church at Sarisburie? For at that homely table
may Christ's death be remembered, as well as at your Communion table.

This kind of Sacrifice (say you speaking of the commemoration of Christ's
Death) was never denied. As in a right sense it is very true, and was never by
us denied (for the devout remembrance of Christ's Death by it self
considered, is a kind of spiritual Sacrifice) so if you mean thereby to
exclude the truth of the thing offered, which is the body and blood of
Christ, M. Ievvel alvvaies concludes the denial of one truth by thaffirmation
of an other truth.
and serve us with a show, and a remembrance only distinct from the true
thing it self that is offered, which seems to be your whole drifte: this
part of your doctrine we utterly deny, and tell you, that for maintenance of
the same, you use a fond and vain reason. For what an Argument is it, when two
things be both true, by the affirmation of the one, to conclude the denial of
the other? As for example, what wit will allow this Argument. The Sun
shines, Ergo, it raineth not, or, Ergo, it is not cold: whereas many times we
see it rain, and feel it cold, when the Sun shyneth clear and bright?
Right so we tell you, and never stint telling you (which nevertheless ye
dissemble to understand) that this your common Argument is naught, the
Sacrifice which we offer, is a sampler, or a commemoration of that which
Christ offered: Ergo, it is not the same, which Christ offered. For in diverse
respects it is both, as now we have proved by S. Chrysostom.

It is the same in substance, that is to say, the substance of that was offered
upon the Cross, and of that is offered by Priests is the Mass, in one, and
the same: but it is diverse in the manner of offering. For that was offered
bloudily, this vnbloudily in mystery, and by way of commemoration. So it is
the body and Blood of Christ offered, and also a commemoration of the bloody
offering.

The testimony of S. Augustine (I marvel what you meant to allege it) makes
quite against you. For both it reports the real presence, which you deny,
and shows a difference betwixt the thing which is offered, and Christ's Death
by the same signified, which you co^founde. We grant with S. Augustine, when
the host is broken, De Consec. Dict. 2. Cum frangitur.
and the blood is powered into the mouths of the faithful, the Sacrificing of
our Lords body is signified. It is not your false translation of the Oblation,
for the host, nor your Sacramentarie exposition of the Sacrament of the
blood, for the blood, that can rack S. Augustine to the defense of your
doctrine. If you grate upon the word, Significatur, and therefore will needs
have it to be a signification of Christ's Sacrifice: as we deny not the
signification, so we require you to acknowledge the real body and blood of
Christ, by breaking whereof under the form of bread, and pouring whereof into
the mowthes of the faithful under the form of wine, the same signification,
and commemoration of Christ's Death is made. You handle this place of S.
Augustine, as it seems, as you handled the place of S. Chrysostom before.
Sweeping clean away the host, and wyping away the blood, you leave remaining
only a signification or token. And thus you feed your people with signs and
tokens, in steed of the most wholesome and substantial meat and drink.

Thus have you not weakened the strength of S. Chrysostomes testimony by your
feeble answer, thus it remains still in good force against your Challenge, thus
by your sclender Reply you have given al men occasion to think, how good and
sufficient our Stoare is for the proof of the external Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ, in scoffing whereat you take so much pleasure. It
remains that we try, of what substance and pith your Reply is, to the place
by me alleged out of S. Ambros.

Jewel.
Even so S. Ambrose says, Ambrosi. in Psalm. 38 Apocal. 5.
Christ is offered here in the Earth (not Really, and in deed, as M. Hardinge
says) but in like sort, and sense, as S. John says, The Lamme was slain
from the beginning of the world: that is, not Substantially, or in Real
manner, but in signification, in a Mystery, and in a figure. And thus S.
Ambrose expounds his own meaning, Ambros. in Psalm. 38.
even in the same place, that is here alleged. Primu^ Vmbra praecessit: Secuta
est Imago: Erit Veritas. Vmbra in lege: Imago in Euangelio: Veritas in
Coelestibus. Ascend homo in coelum, and videbis illa, quorum hic Vmbra erat,
vel Imago. First the Shadow went before: The Image followed: The Truethe
shall be. The Shadow in the Law: The Image in the Gospel: The Truth in the
Heavens. O Man, go up into Heaven: and thou shalt see those things, whereof
here was an Image, and a shadow. Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 5. ca. 7
To like purpose S. Ambrose vvriteth thus: Vidimus eum, and oculis nostris
perspeximus, and in vestigia clauorum eius digitos nostros inseruimus. Videmur
enim vidisse eum, quem legimus: spectasse pendentem, and vulnera eius Spiritu
Ecclesiae scrutante tentasse: we have seen him and lookte upon him, with our
eyes: and we have thrust our fingers into the dentes of his nails. The reason
hereof is this: For we seem to see him, that we read of: to have beholden
him hanginge on the Cross: and with the feelinge Sprite of the Church to have
searched his wounds. Hieron. in Psalm. 86.
So S. Hierome says, Quod semel natum est ex Maria, quotidie in nobis
nascitur: Christ that was once borne of Marie, is borne in us every day.
Now as S. Ambrose says, We see Christ even with our eyes hanginge upon
the Cross: and thruste in our fingers, and search his wounds: Even so, do
we see Christ Coming unto us, and Offeringe him self in Sacrifice unto
God. And as S. Hierome says, Christ is Borne every day, Even so, and none
otherwise, Ambros. de Virginib. lib. 2.
S. Ambrose says, Christ is Sacrificed every day. In like manner S. Ambrose
vvriteth unto certain Virgins: Vestras Mentes confidenter Altaria dixerim, in
quibus quotidie pro Redemptione Corporis Christus offertur: I may boldly
say, Your hearts be Aultars, upon which Hearts Christ is daily offered for
the Redemption of the Body. Hitherto M. Hardinge has found no manner taken
of that, he sought for.

Harding.
This Even so (if I may be so bold with you, as to use a homely proverb) is
as even, as a rams horn. And Sir, is this place of S. Ambrose so soon
answered? Is it enough for you to say as you do, and prove nothing? Is it
lawful for you to say what you list, and deny what you list, without any
proof at al? And if ye stand so al ways in your Negatiues, what a coomber
shall it be unto us, to prove any never so certain a truth to such a wrangler?
How oftentimes have you now said, that Christ is none otherwise offered in
earth, then he was offered in the Sacrifices of Abel, of Abraham, or of them of
the old Testament? And all this upon warrant of this saying of S. John, Apoc.
5.
The lamb was slain from the beginning of the world, which makes nothing
against the daily Sacrifice of the Church? How sufficiently, and by how many
authorities has this Sacrifice been proved? Yet forth you go, as if nothing
had been said.

If our Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament be not real,
If our Mysteries be excellenter then the Sacrifices of the old Law, then are
they not significatiue only.
and substantial, but only figurative and significatiue, as you say: then how
be our Mysteries of more excellency, then the Jews Sacraments were? Nay how
do not the live beasts, which they sacrificed, pass a dead piece of bread,
for better ye esteem it not? If our Sacrifice be no better then their
Sacrifices were, then is our Priesthod of the new Testament no better then
their Priesthode was. If our Priesthod be no better, Heb. 7.
then is the Law of the Gospel, wherein we live, no better then the old Law
of Moses was, under which the Jews lived. For these three, Sacrifice,
Priesthod, and Law be so proportionate together, be so of cousinage, and
always go so together by the doctrine of S. Paul as you know, that the
bettering of either of them, does in far the bettering of the other. Now let
the Christian reader make his choice, Ambro. in Psalm. 38.
whether he will believe the whole Church of Christ, and S. Ambrose, or you.
He says, Christ is offered on the earth, when the body of Christ is offered:
you say. Neither Christ, nor the body of Christ is offered on the earth. but all that is done, is but a token and a figure.

Here were it to good purpose, to prove the truth of the body and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, for else we labor in vain, a wrangling and
contentious wit ever finding shifts by running always to his Negatiues. But
because that Article has been already proved, Article. 5.
partly by me in my Answer to your Challenge and more amply by Doctor Heskins,
and Doctor Saunder, as also by sundry other learned and worthy men, before you
and your companions russhed into the Church by the window: I mind not to enter
into that large feelde now, nor think it nedeful to do that is well done
already. That point then being clear by Gods word, and besides substantially
proved, determined by the Church in General Councels according to the
Scriptures, believed ever of al Christian and faithful people, and granted by
the Fathers of your religion the Lutherans: let us consider of that you bring
against the Sacrifice avouched by S. Ambrose.

Image, what it signifies and how it excludes not the truth^
As touching your other place of S. Ambrose, whereby you would seem to expound
the former by me alleged, it makes for the Sacrifice, it makes nothing
against the Sacrifice. Neither can you take any advantage of the word, Imago,
Image. For by that word the truth is not excluded, but signified, yet so, as
thereby we be admonished, that we behold things more obscurely here, then we
shall behold them in heaven, and that the things here be but an Image, in
comparison of the true things in heaven. The truth is here, no less then in
heaven. But because it is not so truly seen here, Ambro. li. 1. officioru^ cap.
48. In Psalm. 38.
as there, therefore S. Ambros considering the diverse degree of our knowledge,
calls in sundry places (according to S. Paul writi^g to the Hebrews) the
state here an Image, and the state there, the truth.

And if we may expound S. Ambrose by S. Ambrose, Heb. 10.
he shows his meaning clearly in an other place. Which is, by the term,
Image, in respect of the state of the Gospel, not to exclude the Truth of
things, but to insinuat an obscurer manner of exhibeting the truth in
comparison of the state of heaven. Ambro. de interpellatione David.
His words be these. Ecclesia est imago coelestiu^, etenim postqua^ vmbra
praeterijt, imago successit. Vmbra, synagoga est. In vmbra lex, in Euangelio
veritas. The Church is an image of heaven (or of heavenly things) for after
that the shadow was gone away, the Image succeeded. The shadow, is the
Synagogue. In the shadow was the Law, in the Gospel is the Truth. Lo whereas
he said in the place by you alleged, the image is in the Gospel, here
expounding his mind more plainly, he faith, in the Gospel is Truth, calling
that Truth, here, which he called Image, there.

But sir with what face, M. Ievvel falsifieth S. Ambrose.
I say not with what conscience, durst you so fowly in translating this place
of S. Ambrose to falsify his words and sense? Why did you tra^spose his
words, setting the former word in the second place? and why did you turn,
and, for, or? The later sentence truly translated is this. O man, go up into
heaven, and thou shall see those things, whereof here was a shadow, or an
Image. Which last words you falsified thus, whereof here was an Image and a
shadow.

By this chopping and changing of words, your evil intent was, to bring your
reader in belief, that the Sacraments of the old Law be of equal worthiness
with the Sacraments of the new Law. By your sclender Reply, and by such
false legierdemaine, I doubt not but the wiser sort will be moved to try your
strange doctrine better, then heretofore of many it has been tried, before they
believe it.

M. Ievvel confounds one truth with an other truth. Lib. 5. Comme^t. in
Luc. cap. 7.
From this place to the end of the Division, this Replier does nothing else, but
endeavor to confound things, that in them selves be distinct, that so at least
he might cast some myste as it were before the readers eyes. As for example,
because the reading of the story of the Gospel shows unto our understanding
and faith, Christ hanging upon the Cross, as S. Ambrose says, his side opened
with the soldiers spear, his hands and feet pierced through with the
nails, and the Sacrament also of Christ's body and blood, does represent and
commend unto our memories the same:

Hieron. in Psalm. 86.
Again, because Christ being virtus Patris, the virtue of his Father, is borne
in us every day, when any virtue is wrought by us, as S. Hierome says:
Therefore (by this man's Logique) Christ is not really, but by a similitude
or figure only sacrificed of Priests every day. Furthermore, because the
minds of holy virgins be meet Aulters for Christ daily to be offered upon (to
wit, by daily meditation of his Passion) as S. Ambrose sticks not to say:
Ambro. de Virginib. lib. 2.
therefore Christ is no more really present upon the real Aulters of the
Church, when the Sacrifice of his body and blood is offered by the Priest,
then he is in the mind of a pure and holy virgin devoutly thinking of his
death. Seem not these reasons to proceed from a profounde Divinity? What is
this, but to confound one truth with an other truth, and to undo al proper
speeches, by figurative and metaphorical Phrases? He should have remembered,
that even they of his own side do teach, that we ought not to run unto
tropes for the understanding of any point, unless there fellow a great
absurdity, if the words be taken in their proper signification.

That this myste of M. Jewels confusion be discussed and put a way, who is so
unskillful in matters of our faith, that puts not a manifest difference between
the setting forth of Christ's death unto our understanding by reading the
Scriptures, and the representation and co^memoration of the same unto our faith
by the Sacrament of his body and blood? The difference of Christ's being in
the Sacrifice, and in the reading of the story of the Gospel.
In that a Description only by words is made of the order and manner of
putting Christ to death, whereby an Image thereof is imprinted in our
understanding and memory. In this the body of Christ, that was put to death,
is present, laid before us according to his word, This is my body which is
given for you. That is a general mean to come to the knowledge of Christ's
death. This is a special mean to remember his death. Luc. 22.
That is common unto the Infidel reading the story of the Gospel, as well as
unto the faithful. This is proper to the true Christian giving credit to Gods
word. That may be conveniently read by every private man at al times, and in all places. This can not duly be consecrate and ministered, but by a Priest
lawfully ordered, and that in time and place appointed. That may be read by a
wicked man without increase of his sin. This can not be consecrate nor
received of any being in deadly sin without increase of his farther
damnation. This is, and ever has been by the Church called and taken for the
very body and blood of Christ. That neither is, nor ever has been commonly so
called or taken. This is a Sacrament, and the Sacrifice of the new Law. That
is neither of them both. Finally, that feeds the understanding only. This is
the food both of soul, and body to life everlasting. These differences being
so apparent, so great, and of such importance, who can otherwise judge, but
that Christ's presence in the Sacrifice of the Church, must be after a more
substantial and real manner, then in the letter of the Gospel, or in the
reading thereof?

Moreover if he be present in the Sacrament and Sacrifice, none otherwise then
he is at the reading of the Gospel, then is the Sacrifice and Sacrament
superfluous. For to stir up in our minds the remembrance of Christ's Death,
it should suffice to read, or to hear readen daily the story of the Passion
without any celebration of the Sacrament. But Christ knowing the dullness of
our hearts to be such, M. Ievvel acknowledges Christ's presence in the Bless.
Sacrament no otherwise the^ in the story of the Gospel, when it is read and
heard.
that words be not sufficient to repair our memory, and to stir up our
affection without the presence of some thing of more Majesty then words be,
of his tender love leafte to his dear spouse the Church besides his Gospel, a
thing of most excellent Majesty, his own flesh and blood: that we being
assured through faith of his real presence in our Mysteries, should more
dreadfully reverence him, more expressly remember him, more affectuously love
him, and by the worthy receiving of it, be made partakers of the fruit of his
Passion. Of this presence, and of this great fruit, would M. Jewel with all his
lewd heart bereue us, by making Christ present in the Mysteries none
otherwise, then he is at the reading of the story of the Gospel, that is to
say, only by the comprehension of our understanding and by faith: And that he
is as truly now hanging upon the Cross, when we read the story of his
passion, and do by the eyes our of Imagination behold him hanging, as he does
sacrifice him self, when his body is sacrificed, as S. Ambrose before alleged,
speaks.

Touching the right understanding of this place of S. Ambrose, We see Christ
ha^ging on the Cross and grope his vvou^des, two ways.
we see Christ hanging upon the Cross, and thrust our fingers into the dentes
of his nails, two ways. either by faith, or by charity. Faith has eyes to
see, and fingers to feel. But what manner eyes, and fingers? spiritual.
Through faith we see Christ hanging upon the Cross, How we see the vvou^des
of Christ by faith.
and feel his wounds. That is to say, The benefit of his Passion through the
merit of faith is imparted unto us nolesse, then if we beheld him with our
eyes hanging upon the Cross, and with our fingers touched his wounds. Of
them that have this faith our Lord says in the Gospel, Ioan^ 20.
Beati qui non viderunt, and crediderunt. Blessed by they, that have not seen
(with bodily eyes) and believe. Neither says S. Ambrose plainly, that we see
Christ with our eyes hanging upon the Cross, Ambros. In Luc. lib. 5. c. 7.
and that we thrust in our fingers, and search his wounds, as to your
advantage you report him: but correcting him self, he says, Videmur vidisse
eum etc. We seem to have seen him, and with the searching sprite of the
Church to have groped his wounds. He attributes al to the spirit, which
through faith sees, and feels.

By charity we behold Christ ha^ging upon the Cross, and thrust our fingers
into his wounds, How we see Christ ^uffering^ by Charity.
because through charity we are in that body of Christ, to wit the Church,
which sees Christ so hanging, and thrusts the fingers into his wounds. For
what grace, virtue, miracle, or other excellency so ever is in the Body of the
Church, through the merit of charity, which causes participation of al good
things to be common, every one that is of that body, Augu. sermon. 188 De
tempore.
may say, that he has the same. In consideration whereof S. Augustine says
notably: If any will say to one of us, thou have received the holy Ghost, How
speaks the Church with al tongues.
why speak not with all tongues? He ought to Answer, I speak with all
tongues, because I am in that body of Christ, in the Church, which speaks
with all tongues.

But how may it be understood, that the Church speaks with all tongues?
Augu. sermon. 186. De Tempore.
In as much as some of the Church do speak with all tongues. Therefore in an
other place he says. In some Saints the Church works Miracles, in other
Saints it speaks the truth, in other Saints it keeps virginity, Guerricus
abbas Igniacensis. Sermo. in die Purificat. inter opera Bernardi.
in other Saints it keeps the chastity of wedlock, in others this, in
others that. Certain virtues (says a holy Father) though al persons have not,
yet let them love him, who has that, which they find not in themselves, and
then have they in him that, which in them selves they see not, as Peter in
John has the merit of virginity, so John in Peter has the reward of
Martyrdom. 1. Joan. 1.


The Church beholds Christ, and touches his vvou^des.
In whom then does the Church see Christ hanging upon the Cross, and feel
his wounds? In S. John the Church sees him, who says, That which from the
beginning, we have heard, we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have
touched, etc. In the Apostles it beholds with eyes Christ upon the Cross,
in S. Thomas it touches his wounds. That this seem not strange, even so
says S. Ambrose in the book and chapter above me^cioned. Sed etiam nos
vidimus in Iohanne, Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 5. ca. ^
oculis nostris perspeximus in Apostolis, and manibus nostris perscrutati sumus
in Thomae digitis. Yea we also have seen Christ in John, with our eyes we
have beholden him in the Apostles, and with our hands we have serched his
wounds in the fingers of Thomas.

Now if this body the Church, and consequently every one that is a member of
this body, see Christ hanging upon the Cross, and with the fingers touch his
wounds, either because he has the light and sight of faith, or because
through Charity he is incorporate and made a member of that body, and so sees
and touches by participatio^: what makes this against the real Sacrifice of
the body and blood of Christ, frequented in the Church? Because this manner of
seeing Christ, and of touching his wounds, whether it be through virtue of
faith, or merit of charity, is not real and in deed, will you thereof gather an
Argument, that Christ in the Sacrifice of the Church is not really offered? O
that you would make this Argument in Louaine, or Paris, or in any other famous
School of Divinity in the world, this Argument I say, Christ is not now
seen hanging upon the Cross, neither be his wounds touched really and in
deed: Ergo, he is not of the Priests offered up in the Mysteries really: You
may be sure the Audience with hissing, and trampling would drive you out of the
School.

If you say, I do you wrong in reporting your Argument to disadvantage, which
is your common practice toward me: I am content you frame it to your best
advantage. Let your own Argument stand, as your self have set it forth. An
Argument I may call it, for by your Mayor, any man may sone understand, what
should be your Minor, and conclusion. Your Argument then is this. As we see
Christ eue^ with our eyes hanging upon the Cross, and thrust in our fingers,
and search his wounds: Even so do we see Christ coming unto us, and
offering him self in Sacrifice unto God. Your Minor, or second proposition,
must be this. but really and in deed so we see not Christ, neither do we so
with our fingers search his wounds: Ergo, really and in deed we see not
Christ coming unto us, and offering him self in Sacrifice.

Why sir all this I grant. For in deed we see not now Christ coming unto us,
nor offering him self: But our controversy is not of seeing Christ coming,
and offering him self: but of the offering of his body in Sacrifice. And to
that I alleged S. Ambrose, saying, Et si Christus non videtur offere, tamen
ipse offertur in terris, quando Christi corpus offertur. Although Christ be not
seen to offer, yet him self is offered in the earth, when the body of Christ
is offered. Lo he says expressly, he is not seen to offer, and yet he is
offered. Your part is to impugn the offering, and because you cannot, you
impugn the seeing of him coming and offering him self. We see him not, and
yet he is offered in earth, as S. Ambrose says.

Now then, whereas you are driven from this, if thus you make your Argument, as
in effect you do, and as your fetch is to conclude: As Christ is seen of us
hanging upon the Cross, and as his wou^des be touched with our fingers, so he
is by Priests offered, but he is not seen ha^ging upon the Cross really and in
deed, nor his wou^des be so touched with our fingers: Ergo, he is not offered
really and in deed: As I grant the Argument to be good in form, so I deny
the matter to be true. For the Mayor, or first proposition is false. For
Christ's hanging on the Cross, and the print of his wounds, is seen, and
felt of us by faith, or by charity, as I have now declared: but Christ is
offered up in Sacrifice really, and in deed, because his body is really and in
deed present in the Sacrament, as it has been against you M. Jewel by the
Catholics most sufficiently proved by scriptures, Fathers, and the faith of
the Church, and as you know in your own gilty conscience.

The saying which you attribute unto S. Hierom, M. Ievvel forgeth words of
his own and attributes them to S. Hierom. Hierony. in Psalm. 86.
Quod semel natu^ est ex Maria, quotidie in nobis nascitur, Christ that was
once borne of Marie, is borne in us every day: is an inue^tion of your own. S.
Hierom has it not, you may sone fill your book with such authorities, being
made at home in your own forge. S. Hierome expou^ding an obscure place of
the.86. Psalm tropologically, says this much, I grant, Si volumus, quotidie
nascitur Christus, If we will, Christ is borne daily. There he calls the doing
of every virtue, the begeting and bringing forth of Christ, because Christ is
the virtue and wisdom of his Father. But what makes this saying against the
real Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ? By occasion of these words,
you reason thus, as it may be conceived. As S. Hierom says, Christ is borne
every day, Even so and none otherwise, S. Ambros says, Christ is sacrificed
every day. But Christ is not borne every day really. Ergo, S. Ambrose means
not, that he is sacrificed every day really. I answer. Your Mayor is false. For
there is a manifest dissimilitude between the parts compared together. When we
bring forth good virtues, and Christ therefore is said to be borne in us: this
is spoken by a Metaphore, and is true only in a tropological, or morale sense,
and not in the litteral sense. The other part of the comparison, Christ is
offered day, when his body is offered, as S. Ambrose says, is a proper
speech, and the same is true in the litteral sense, as now we have proved.

Lastly, that I let not pass the other place of S. Ambrose, where he calls
the minds of holy virgins, Aulters: the reason you gather thereof is naught.
For of the affirmation of an internal Sacrifice, Ambros. de Virginib. lib. 2.
M. Jewels peculiar Sophistry to put away one truth by an other.
you infer the denial of the external Sacrifice, and so you would drive out
one truth by an other truth, after your common wount. Which kind of reasoning
is very fond and childish. For both may, and ought to stand together. Your
Argument, if you conclude ought, must be this. Christ is offered in the minds
of virgins, which therefore may be called Aulters, internally, and spiritually:
Ergo, he is not offered on the true Aulters in the Church externally, and
really. The Argument is naught, as every young Sophister knows, because he is
offered both ways. As well you might reason thus, Christ is God, Ergo, he is
not man^ or contrariwise, Christ is man, ergo, he is not God.

Thus thou may easily perceive good Reader, what guileful Sophistry M. Jewel
uses, putting away the visible and outward Sacrifice of the Church, by
alleging places of Fathers, commending unto us, the inward and mere spiritual
Sacrifices of man's heart. Withal thou see also, what so ever M. Jewel
says, that I have found in S. Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose, that I sought for.

The.13. Division.
The Answer.
Now for proof of the Sacrifice, and Oblation of Christ by the Doctors
mind upon the figure of Melchisedech: First S. Cyprian says thus. Qui magis
Sacerdos Dei summi, Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
quam Dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui Sacrificium Deo patri obtulit, and
obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedech, id est, Panem and Vinum, suum, scilicet,
Corpus, and Sa^guine^. Who is more the Priest of the highest God, then our
Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the
self same, that Melchisedeck did, that is, Bread and Wine, that is to say,
his own body and Blood? S. Hierome in an epistle, that he wrote for the
virtuous women Paula, and Eustochium to Marcella, has these words. Recurre
ad Genesim, and Melchisedech Regem Salem. Huius Principem inuenies ciuitatis,
qui iam in typo Christi Panem, and Vinum obtulit, and Mysterium Christianum in
Saluatoris sanguine, and corpore dedicatrit. Return to the Book of Genesis,
and to Melchisedek the King of Salem. And thou shall find the Prince of that
City, who even at that time in the figure of Christ offered Bread and Wine,
and dedicated the Mystery of Christians in the Body, and Blood of our
Savior. Here this learned Father makes a plain distinction between the
Oblation of the Figure, which was Bread and Wine, and the Oblation of the
Truth, which is the Mystery of Christen people, the Blood and Body of
Christ our Savior. Of this S. Augustine speaks largely in his first Sermon
upon the.33. Psalm, and in the.17. book De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 20.

Jewel.
If M. Harding mean plainly, and vvil have S. Cyprians words taken as they
lie, without Figure, then must he say, That Melschidek offered up verily, and
Really^ Christ him self. For S. Cyprians words be clear, Cyprianus Lib. 2.
Epist. 3.
Christus obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedek obtulerat^ Christ offered up the
same thing, that Melchisedek had offered.

Harding.
Sir I assure you I mean plainly would God you did so too verily if you did,
we should not thus find you always starting a side to figures, and phrases.
Following my prefixed order, in my Answer I come now to prove the Sacrifice by
the witness of two ancient Fathers, S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, alleging for
it, the figure of Melchisedek. First touching S. Cyprian, let his words be
taken as they lie, without figure, fold, or wrinckle: how thereof will it follow,
that Melchisedek offered verily, and really Christ him self? For (say you) S.
Cyprians words be clear: Christ offered the same thing, that Melchisedek had
offered. The clearer the words be, the less they serve your obscure purpose.

If we granted your translation to be true, who have turned, hoc idem, the
same thing, where it ought rather to be turned, the same (Sacrifice) being
referred to Sacrifice, that goes there before immediately, If we wincked at you
for this, I say: Yet I pray you, how follows this Argument, Christ offered the
same thing that Melchisedek had offered, Ergo Melchisedek offered up Christ him
self verily and really? If you would have gonne the right way to work, thus
you should have argued. Christ offered the same thing, that Melchisedek had
offered: Melchisedek had offered bread and wine, Ergo, Christ offered bread
and wine. But because, if you had thus rightly framed your Argument, you had
concluded with us against your self by S. Cyprian, by whose interpretation the
bread and wine, that Christ offered, was his body and blood: rather then you
would grant so much, it liked you better to use false Logique, then true
Divinity.

The words then of S. Cyprian taken in their plain and litteral sense,
Christ offered the true bread and true wine at his Supper.
and without any figure do signify, that Melchisedek offered bread and wine,
as much to say, a bare figure: and that Christ fulfilling that Figure,
offered also bread and wine. But what bread and wine? His body and blood, the
true bread, and the true wine. Which body and blood, because they feed and
sustain both body and soul to life everlasting, the common bread and wine
that Melchisedeck offered^ having virtue to feed only the body, and that but
for a final time: are for good cause called the true bread and wine.

But perhaps you stick to the word, hoc ide^, the same Sacrifice, The
Sacrifice of Melchisedek, and the Sacrifice of, Christ, both diverse, and the
same.
or, the same thing, if you will needs have it so. If Christ offered the same,
say you, whereas Melchisedek offered but bread and wine, how offered Christ
him self truly and really? True it is, the Sacrifice of either, or the thing,
that either of them offered, is both diverse, and also the same. How diverse? And
how the same? Diverse in substance, the same in Mystery. The diversity of
substance not only S. Cyprian in the Epistle to Cecilius, but also S. Hierome
confesses, writing upon the.109. Psalm. Hierony. in Psalm. 109
Quomodo Melchisedech obtulit panem and vinum, sic and tu offeres corpus tuum
and sanguinem, verum panem, and verum vinu^. Like as Melchisedek offered bread
and wine: so thou shall offer thy body and blood, the true bread, and the true
wine. What difference then and diversity is between the figure, and the thing
forefigured, that is to say, between Melchisedeks bread and wine, and the body
and blood of Christ: such diversity of substance is there in the things
which they offered.

The Christ offered the same, that Melchisedek had offered, for the
understanding of it, it may be said, both in consideration of the Mystery, and
of the thing it self in a right sense, either because the forms of bread and
wine remained after consecration, or because it was bread and wine in deed
before Christ had consecrated and offered. We read in the Gospel, Joan. 2.
that when our Savior at the Marriage had turned water into wine, he commanded
the waiters to draw, and bring it unto the Vssher of the Haul. They brought it,
and the Vssher tasted water made wine. Now true it is to say, that the waiters
did draw, and bring, and the Vssher tasted the same thing, that the waiters
had filled the waterpottes withal a little before, that is, water. But what
water? Forsooth water made wine. Likewise it was truly said of S. Cyprian,
that Christ offered the same thing, that Melchisedech had offered before him,
that is, bread and wine. But what bread and wine? Forsooth bread and wine made
his body and blood. So the Scripture says, that Aarons Rod devoured the
Rods of the Enchaunters. Exodus 7.
What rod was that? It was the Rod made a serpent. By this it appears,
how sclender your Argument is, which here you gather against the Real Sacrifice
out of S. Cyprians words, and how you seek not so much the truth, as to
gainesay, and ouerthwarte the Authorities, that for the same I alleged. Let us
examine the rest of your Reply.

Jewel.
Notvvithstanding it is certain, that the Sacrifice, that Melchisedek made, if
it were granted to be a Sacrifice, yet in plain, and Common manner of
speech, was not Christ the Son of God, but only material Bread, and
Wine, and other like provision of Victualles prepared for Abraham, and for his
men. And therefore the Old learned Fathers say not, Melchisedek offered the
same in Sacrifice unto God: but He brought it forth, as a present, as the
manner was, to refreashe them, after the pursuitte, and chase of their
enemies. And S. Hierome in his Translation turns it not, Obtulit, He
Sacrificed: but, Protulit, He brought it forth. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 1.
cap. 11.
Josephus reports the matter thus: Melchisedek milites Abrahami hospitaliter
habuit, nihil illis ad victum deesse Passus: Simulque ipsum adhibuit Me^sae:
Melchisedek feasted Abraham's Soldiers, and suffered them to want nothing,
that was necessary for their provision: And likewise he received Abraham him
self unto his Table. Chrysostom. in Gene. Homil. 35. Epiph. co^t. Melc. lib. 2
(...).
Chrysostom, and Epiphanius say thus, He brought forth unto them Bread and
Wine. Tertullian says, Abrahamo reuertenti de praelio obtulit Panem and
Vinum: Melschisedek offered Bread, and Wine ( not unto God, but) unto Abraham
returninge from the fight, So S. Ambrose, Occurrit Melchisedek, and obtulit
Abrahamo Panem, and Vinum Melchisedek came forth to meet, and offered ( nor
unto God, but) unto Abraham Bread, and Wine.

By these fevve it may appear, that Melchisedek brought forth Bread, and
Wine, Tertull. co^tr. Iudaeos.
and other provision, not as a Sacrifice unto God, but as a Relief, and
Susteinance for Abraham, and for his Company.

Harding.
It is a world to see your doublenes. What, are ye not resolved, whether the
Sacrifice that Melchisedek made, were a Sacrifice, or no? Sir, the Sacrifice he
made, that is to say, the thing which he offered in Sacrifice, was not Christ
the Son of God, pardy. Who ever said, it was? Well, what was it then? Mary,
only material bread, and wine, say you. So say we too. and that by the same,
the Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood under the form of bread and wine,
What was Melchisedeks Sacrifice by M. Jew
was forefigured. But was this all that Melchisedek offered? Not al, by you. For
you reckon up also the provision of victuals, that were prepared for Abraham,
and his men, that were in number.318. Then of likelyhod this was a ioyly
Sacrifice. For Melchisedek being a King, as he was, like it is, that he
provided biefe, veale, and mutton, pigge, goose and capon, baakte, boiled, and
roste. For such victuals are mete for the provision of an Army. And did
Melchisedek sacrifice al these things? This is more, then ever I read, or
heard of before, or you either, I am bold to say. For your credites sake you
should have alleged but one Doctor of good same, old, or new, that so writes.
Because ye have none to allege, we take it for a forgerie of your own shop
set out to the intent bread and wine only named, should not represent to the
memory of men the body and blood of Christ, whereof the bread and wine were
figures. Verily Eusebius writes lib. 5. De Demonstrat. that he never offered
bodyly Sacrifices, that is to say, things that had living bodies, but only
bread and wine. (...). The like is reported in S. Hierome Epist. ad Euagrium.

As for Josephus that learned Jew, Josephus.
we admit him for an eloquent writer of a story, not for an assured teacher of
Divinity. And yet his authority being admitted, Melchisedeks feasting of
Abraham's people infers no Argument against his Sacrifice in bread and wine.
For why might he not do the duty of a Priest first, satisfying the mystery,
and the duty of a liberal Prince afterward in refresshing that weary and
hungry company? And therefore touching the word, Protulit, Protulit.
whereby you would prove, that Melchisedek brought forth bread and wine, and
your other provision of victuals, I can not tell what, for Abraham's men: you
take great pains in vain. As we are well hable to prove, obtulit, I mean,
that Melchisek offered (to with bread and wine) so we deny not protulit: that
is to say, that he brought those things forth. But good sir I pray you, in
what school learned you to make this Argument, Melchisedek brought forth bread
and wine to refresh Abraham, and his men, ergo, he offered not bread and wine
to God in sacrifice? Whereas the scripture after mention made of bred and wine,
Genes. 14.
forthwith adds, erat eni^ Sacerdos Dei altissimi, for he was the Priest of
God the highest: unless that cause be unaptly applied, we must understand,
that he was wont to offer up those things to God, which then he brought forth
unto Abraham, giving the same to him for meat, to God for Sacrifice.

That Melchisedeck offered, and made his sacrifice in bread and wine.
Because you seem coouertly to deny, that Melchisedeck offered bread and wine
in Sacrifice, which some of your side let not openly to deny, (which you also
would do, but that by your Challenge you have bound your self to admit the
old Doctors) for that the word of the text is protulit, and not obtulit: I
think it good to put you in mind of learned Fathers two, or three, by whom it
is avouched, that he offered, and that he made his Sacrifice in bread and wine.

Arnobius. In Psalm. 109.
Arnobius, who lived above thirtien hundred years past, says, Panem and vinum
solus obtulit in sacerdotibus, Melchisedech alone among Priests offered bread
and wine. S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Melchisedeck was the Priest of the highest God, and (panem and vinum obtulit)
offered bread and wine. S. Hierome says, Hieron. in Psalm. 109.
that he offered bread and wine, Melchisedech obtulit panem and vinnm, be his
words. The same he has in his epistle written for Paula to Marcella. S.
Ambrose says it with the same words expressly in two places. De Sacramentis
lib. 4. cap. 3. and lib. 5. cap. 1. And al these use the word, obtulit, which
you can not away with in the sense of sacrificing. If you demand for other
witnesses of Melchisedecks Sacrifice in bread and wine, it may please you to
read Eusebius lib. 5. De Demonstratione Euangelica. S. Augustine. in Psalm. 33.
Concione. 1. and in many other places. S. Chrysostom in the Homily de
Proditione Iudae. Damascen. lib 4. cap. 14. Cassiodorus in Psalm. 109. To be
short, few Doctors can be named, in whom this Sacrifice is not most plainly
avouched. So that you would never have douted of it, had you ben learned, much
less denied it, had you not ben impudent.

As for that you allege out of Tertullian, and S. Ambros, who say that
Melchisedek ( obtulit Abrahamo panem and vinum) offered to Abraham bread and
wine: Obtulit for dedit.
it relieueth your cause never a whit. For there the word obtulit, signifies
as much as exhibuit, or dedit, gave, or presented: and thereof your self being
so good a Grammarian, as you are, could not be ignorant. So much the more you
show your self a false handler of this high Mystery, in twice putting in
your false parenthesis, ( not to God, but) as though Melchisedek had not
offered to God any Sacrifice at al.

Jewel.
S. Paul compares Christ with Melchisedek, Ambros. de Sacrament. li. 4.
cap. 3.
In that, like unto Melchisedeck, he was the king of Justice: In that, he was
the Prince of peace^ as Melchisedek was: And in that, he had neither Father,
nor Mother: For so is it likewise written of Melchisedeck. But of the Sacrifice
of Bread, Hebrae. 7.
and Wine he speaks nothing. Yet notwithstanding, the Ancient holy
Faethers oftentimes resemble the same present of Melchisedek unto the
Sacrifice, that Christ made upon the Cross. And in that respect S. Cyprian
says, Christ offered the same thing, that Melchisedek offered. That is to
say, as M. Hardinge him self must needs expound it. The same thing in
perfourmance of Truth upon the Cross, that Melchisedeck had before offered in
a Figure.

So says S. Augustine, Illis Petra Christus: Unto them the Rock was Christ:
August. in Joan. tractat. 26.
And yet not Really, and in deed: but only by way of Signification, because
it Signified, and Represented Christ.

Harding.
S. Paul speaks not of it, ergo, it is not, a common Argument with the
Ministers and here used by M. Jewel.
I grant that, whereas S Paul extolleth the Priesthod of Christ, which is
after the order of Melchisedek, above the Leuitical Priesthod, speaking of
certain things, wherein Christ and Melchisedek were like, speaks nothing of
the Sacrifice of bread and wine. What of that? Will ye thereof conclude, that
Melchisedek did not offer unto God bread and wine? What a fond and Ministerlike
kind of Argument is this, S. Paul spoke it not, Ergo it is not? S. Paul
says not in all that Epistle, that Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost,
borne of the virgin Marie: shall it be lawful for us therefore to deny it?

We may well think, that therein S. Paul used the counsel, Joan. 16.
that Christ once used, when he said, I have many things to tell you, that ye
can not bear away now. S. Paul shows so much him self, Epistola ad
Euagrium. In principio To. 3. operum Hieronymi. Heb. 5.
where beginning to speak of Melchisedek, he does exaggerate, and very much
confess the difficulty of that high mystery with this Pro^me, as S. Hierome
notes. Super quo multus nobis sermo, and ininterpretabilis. We have a long
process to utter touching Melchisedek, and such as can not be expounded: Not
because the Apostle could not expound it, but because it was not a matter
convenient for that time, Hieron. ad Euagrium. Mysteries kept secret.
says S. Hierome. And wherefore? Because he persuaded with the Hebrews, that
is to say, the Jews, not yet come to the faith, that he might not reuele that
sacred and secret Sacrament. And whereas the vessel of Election (says he) is
astoined at that Mystery, and confesses the matter whereof he disputes, to be
unspeakable (or vndeclarable) how much more ought we seely worms and gnattes,
confess the only knowledge of our vnskil? etc.

S. Augustine speaking unto his hearers, August. in Psalm. 109.
of whom some were Cathecumens or learners of the faith, thought not good to
utter plainly the doctrine of Melchisedeks Sacrifice. Fidelibus loquor, etc. I
speak to the faithful (says he) if there be any Catechumens, that understand
it not, let them put away slewth, and makes have to have knowledge. It is not
needeful to open the Mysteries, let the Scriptures tell you what the Sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedek is.

If S. Augustine thought it good not to show and publish these mysteries
abroad, at what time almost the whole world professed the faith of Christ: what
good cause had S. Paul not to open the same unto such as were yet but babes in
the faith, and were to be fed with milk and pappe, rather then with sownde
meat, and were not of capacity for such Mysteries? By consideration of this
much it appears, of what force your Argument is: S. Paul speaks nothing of
Melchisedeks Sacrifice of bread and wine: Ergo, Melchisedek made no such
Sacrifice at al. You, that so scornefully reiecte other men's Arguments,
should have taken better advise of your Logique, before you had made such
peevish Arguments your self.

Why S. Paul spoke not of the manner of Melchisedeks Sacrifice in bread and
wine.
Thus it may be said, and reasonally, that the greatness of the Mystery, and
the unmeet time and disposition of them, to whom S. Paul wrote, was the
cause, why he spoke nothing touching the manner and mystery of Melchisedeks
Sacrifice in bread and wine. An other cause of as much importance, or more, was
this.

S. Paul's chief intent in this place was, for better mean to allure the
Jews unto the faith, to show the excellency of Christ's Priesthod, which is
after the order of Melchifedek, in co^pari^on of the Leuitical Priesthod. This
to perform, Heb. 7.
he sets forth the prerogative of the same above the Leuitical Priesthood,
partly on the behalf of the person of the Priest, partly on the behalf of the
exercise of the Priesthod it self. Touching the one, Melchisedek in dignity
above Abraham.
because Melchisedek was the type and figure of Christ, and bare the person of
Christ, he does according to the Scriptures attribute great dignities unto
him, as that he was King of Justice, King of Peace, the Priest of God the
highest, without father, without mother, having neither beginning of days, nor
end. Which dignities perteined not unto his own person in truth, but as he
bare the person of Christ the true Melchisedek.

Touching the other he declares out of the book of Genesis, Genesis 14.
how he blessed Abraham, and how Abraham gave unto him tithes of al things, in
both which consisted the exercise of Priesthood, and thereby Abraham is proved
to be of lower degree, then Melchisedek. For without controversy he is less
which receives blessing, Heb. 7.
and the geuer of blessing is the greater, by verdit of S. Paul.

The priesthod after the order of Melchisedek far^ passes the Leuitical
Priesthod.
And as concerning the tithes, that Melchisedek received of Abraham, Leui him
self also, who received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham, for he was yet in the
loins of Abraham, as S. Paul says, when Melchisedek met him. Now whereas the
Leuitical Priests are commanded according to the Iawe to take tithes of the
people, and have thereby a Dignity above the people: Melchisedeks taking of
tithes of Abraham their chief Patriarch, Prince and head of the whole progeny
(and consequently of Leui also and his children the Priests of that order, for
that they were then in his loins) does prove, the preemine^ce and excellency
of that Priesthod, in comparison of the Leuitical Priesthod, in so much that in
comparison of the same, the Levites be but Lay men, and of the popular order.

By these, and certain other Arguments S. Paul proves, and sets forth
the excellency of Christ's Priesthod after the order of Melchisedek, above the
Leuitical Priesthod. Among which he makes no mention of the manner of
Melchisedeks Sacrifice. Because if he had alleged, that Melchisedek sacrificed
in bread and wine, the Hebrews would soon have replied, that their
sacrifices in that behalf far excelled, as the which being of living
beasts, had a more glorious show and countenance, then the Sacrifice of bread
and wine. Thus you have two causes declared, why S. Paul, where he treats so
much of the dignity of Melchisedek, and of the Priesthod that is after his
order, speaks nothing, at least manifestly, of his Sacrifice in bread and
wine.

If the Fathers have oftentimes resembled this present of Melchisedek unto the
Sacrifice that Christ made upon the Cross, as you say: why do you not show
us, where we may find it? Will any wise man (trow you) believe it only upon
your bare word? If it be a thing done oftentimes, it was the easier for you to
show it once. But your oftentimes in the end will prove never. That
Melchisedek gave to Abraham a present of bread and wine, being returned from
the battle, it is not denied. but that ever any ancient learned Father
resembled that present, as you call it abhorring the name of Sacrifice, as it
had the condition of a present, unto the Sacrifice that Christ made upon the
Cross: I utterly deny it. If any where they resemble the bread and wine that
Melchisedek made his Sacrifice of unto the Sacrifice of the Cross, they do it
in respect that the thing signified by it, that is, the body and blood of
Christ, was one both in the Sacrifice made at the Supper, and also in that
which was made upon the Cross: and not that the manner of Sacrifice made upon
the Cross which was bloody, was semblable unto it. And so in respect had to
the body and blood of Christ offered upon the Cross, and not unto the manner
of offering, I grant the exposition you make of S. Cyprians words to be true.
that is to say, that Christ offered the same thing in performance of truth
upon the Cross, that Melchisedek had before offered in figure. But that
performance of truth is by the learned Fathers commonly acknowleged in the
Sacrifice of the Supper. In which Christ offered his body and blood under the
forms of bread and wine after the order of Melchisedek for thankesgeuing,
which he offered upon the Cross for redemption.

August. in Joan. Tract. 26.
Your common figurative saying taken out of S. Augustine, Illis Petra Christus,
unto them the Rock was Christ (though it be not altogether so reported of S.
Augustine in the place by you coted) is abruptely brought in, to what purpose I
see not, but to beguile the unlearned, as I suppose: who thereby may be moved to
think, that our Sacrifice is as mere a figure, as the figures of the old law
were. To this I have answered once or twice before. In all the frayes ye make
against the most holy Mysteries, this bad tool is ever at hand with, you to
strik withal.

Jewel.
Sometimes they compare it with the Sacrifice of Thankesgeuinge, and with the
Ministration of the holy Communion, and make it equal with the same.

S. Augustine says, August. in quaest. Noui, and Veter. Testament. quaest 109.
Melchisedek Abrahae primum, quasi Patri fidelium, tradidit Eucharistiam
Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini: Melchisedek gave first unto Abraham, as unto
the Father of the Faithful, the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ.
So S. Hierome says, Melchisedek in typo Christi Panem, and Vinum obtulit, and
Mysterium Christianorum in Saluatoris Corpore, Hiero^. ad Marcella^.
and Sanguine dedicauit: Melchisedek in the Figure of Christ offered Bread,
and Wine: and dedicated the Mystery of Christians in the Body, and Blood of
Christ. These Authorities might serve, to make some show, that Melchisedeck
said Mass, and Consecrated the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ,
and offered up Christ in Sacrifice unto his Father: But of M. Hardinge, or any
other such Priest, they touch nothing.

Harding.
You shall never show us, where either the Present that Melchisedek gave to
Abraham (by which term you would abolish the Sacrifice) or the Sacrifice which
he made in bread and wine, was compared with the Sacrifice, of thankesgeuing,
unless it be the Euchariste, which also bears that name, wherein, the real
body and blood of Christ is present.

As for the ministration of the holy Communion it is false to say; It is
compared with the ministration, that is to say, with the act of the ministering
the Communion. But I grant, it is compared to the thing it self, that is to
say, to the body and blood of Christ consecrated, offered, and received in the
holy Communion. Provided always, that by the holy Communion, we mean not your
new toye now practiced in England by your Ministers that be no Priests where
there is no holy thing consecrated to make it holy, Dionys. in Ecclesiast.
Hierarchia.
but the holy Communion of the Catholic Church, which S. Dionyse calls
(...), and (...).

The authority you allege under the name of S. Augustine, is not S.
Augustines. If I had alleged it against you, a great deal of your scoffing
Rhetorike should have been bestowed, both to reprove the book, and also me for
alleging the same. I am sure, if you have read either the work it self with
any judgment, or the Censure of Erasmus upon it: you are persuaded, it is an
unworthy piece of work to be fathered upon so worthy a Doctor. As for the very
Question it self, out of which you bring your authority, I marvel you
considered not, what Erasmus says of it. Quaestione, CIX. multa garrit, vt
ostendat Melchisedek non fuisse hominem. In the.CIX. question (says he) this
author makes a great bible babble, to show that Melchisedeck was not a man. In
the same line there, he speaks of him, as it were of your self, saying.
Quaest. 125. scurram agit.

But who soever, and what so ever the author of that work be, the place is
alleged without any dependence, or coherence, as though you cared not in what
order you allege testimonies, so you make up a heap. Either for haste, or
(which is more likely) for guile, you leafte out both the beginning, and the
end of it, whereby the meaning is clearly declared. Melchisedek (says the
author) gave unto Abraham, Quaest. Veteris and noui testament. q. 109.
as unto the Father of the faithful, the Eucharist (or Sacrament) of the body
and blood of Christ. But what was it that he gave? It follows in the same
sentence. Vt praefiguraretur in Patre, quae in filijs futura erat veritas. That
the truth which was to come in the children, might be foreshewed by a figure in
the Father. Do not these later words most evidently declare, that Melchisedek
gave only the figure of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to Abraham
the Father of the faithful, and that the truth of that figure, which is the
body and blood of Christ is amongst us, that are in respect of faith his
children?

That he calls the thing, which Melchisedek gave to Abraham, by the name of
the Eucharist, it is no great marvel. Whether S. Augustine him self would so
have spoken, it may be doubted. Verily it is no strange thing in the old
learned Fathers, to give the name of the thing signified, unto the figure, that
signifies, and contrariwise.

This nipping of sentences, M. Jewels Nipping of sentences.
specially of such as words as open the truth, and overthrow your doctrine,
does euerywhere bewray your guileful intent. The whole sentence considered, as
it is uttered by the author, does so clearly serve for confirmation of the
real Sacrifices of Christ's body and blood in the new Testament: as a more
clearer any faithful man would not desire.

The saying you take out of S. Hierome, I marvel what you meant to allege it.
It makes fully for our part that is to say, for establishing of the Catholic
belief. There is mention made both of the Figure, bread and wine offered by
Melchisedek, and of the verity, the body and blood of Christ offered by the
Christians in their Mysteries. God be praised, through whose power, his truth
is uttered by the mouths of his enemies. As for your pleasant collection, and
scorneful ieasting, how much it pleases you, or becomes the person you have
taken upon you, I know not: Sure I am the holy mysteries of Christian
religion, should with more fear of God be treated of. The room you occupy,
is to reverent, the matter we handle, too holy, the days ye ruffle in, too
lamentable, the stage you play this part on, too sad M. Jewel, for you thus to
play Hick scorner, I should have said, Jack scorner. But what may we say?
Kind will show it self.

The English communion compared with Melchisedeks Sacrifice, which M. Jew.
calls Melchisedeks Mass.
If Melchisedek said any Mass, it was like, unto the English Communion, that
offers nothing else, but bare bread and wine, if it offer ought at al, and
feeds the people with figures, in steed of the truth. Nay this Communion is
not by many parts so good, as Melchisedeks oblation, and blessing of Abraham
was. For he offered in a figure, and blessed according to his Priesthod, being
in time of figures before the truth was come into the world: But our pretty
Communion of England, brings forth bare shows of bread and wine now in the
time of grace, the truth being come, and accepted.

Jewel.
And least any maen happen of simplicity to be deceived, thinkinge that S.
Hierome hereby meante M. Hardinges Real Presence, for that he says,
Melchisedek dedicated the Christian Mystery in the Body and Blood of
Christ, It may please him to consider, that both S. Hierome, and also other
ancient Fathers have often used the same manner of speech in other cases,
wherein M. Harding can have no manner suspicion of Real Presence. Hieron.
aduers. Iouin. lib. 1.
S. Hierome says, Euangelium Passione, and Sanguine Domini Dedicatur: The
Gospel is Dedicated in the Passion, and Blood of Christ. S. Augustine says,
Quid est mare Rubrum? August. in Psalm. 80.
Sanguine Domini Consecratum: What is the Red sea? He ansvveareth,
Consecrate in the Blood of Christ. Again he says, August. in Joan.
tractat. 11.
Vnde rubet Baptismus Christi, nisi Christi Sanguine Consecratus? Whereof is
Christ's Baptism read, but that it is Dedicate in the Blood of Christ? Thus
Melchisedek Dedicated the Christian Mystery in the Blood of Christ.

Harding.
All that here follows to the end of the Reply to this Division, touches not
at al any thing by me written or faid. But it is inferred by M. Jewel upon
occasion of a testimony of S. Hierom which he him self alleged, fearing in
the conceit of his own imagination, that S. Hierome will be found against him
in the very place, where he craved help of him, as he is directly against him
in deed. M. Iuels fear, least the Eucharist be accounted a better thing, the^
bread and wine.
And here is a great fear conceived, least forsooth the reader should be
deceived, and think, that S. Hierome in this place meant the real Presence.
Then tell us good Sir, unless the body and blood of Christ be really present
in the Mystery of the Christians, how is not the Figure of Melchisedech, who
dedicated the same, as good and as worthy, as is the Mystery it self of the
Christians, which was dedicated?

But, say you, where so ever any thing is said to be dedicated in the body and
blood of Christ, there his body and blood are not consequently present, as
it may appear by the example above alleged, and by many other the like. I
grant this much, what then? Will it thereof follow by necessary cousequent,
that in the Mystery of the Christians, whereof Melchisedeks Oblation was a
figure, and which was by him dedicated in a figure, Matt. 26.
the body and blood of Christ is not really present? Luc. 22.
specially whereas Christ him self does in terms pronounce, Marc. 14.
This is my body, 1. Cor. 11.
this is my blood? What need you here to talk so much of the real presence?
You know pardy, I stay not upon this saying of S. Hierome for proof of the
real presence, as though we had not many other, and manifester proufes for it.

I confess, if Christ had never spoken those words, and had never made
promise, that he would give us in our Mystery the self same flesh, Joan. 6.
that he would give for the life of the world: S. Hieromes testimony of it
self were not a sufficient proof, like as neither his saying, that the
Ghospel is dedicated by the Passion and blood of Christ, does force us to
grant, that the Ghospel is the real blood of Christ for lack of Christ's
own word pronouncing, that the Ghospel is his blood. And likewise for lack
of the word of Christ saying, that Baptism is his very blood, which is shed
for remission of sin, although it be said by S. Augustine, not only of
Baptism it self, but also of the Read Sea which was a figure of it, that they
were read, as being consecrate in the blood of Christ: yet neither of them
is in deed Christ's blood.

Concerning your phrase of dedicating, What S. Hierom understood by the term
of dedication.
alleged out of S. Hierome, I see not to what purpose it serves you, but to
dazel the eyes of the unlearned. The circumstance of the place does easily
show, what he meant by saying, The Gospel is dedicated by the Passion and
blood of Christ, for so it is to be turned. Because Iouinian the heretic,
against whom he wrote making marriage equal with virginity, Hieron. lib. 1.
aduersus Iouinianu^.
after that he had in his book alleged examples of the old testament,
following his order, pretented to come to the Gospel, and then in commendation
of Marriage brought forth Zachary, Elizabeth, and Peter with his wives mother,
as perteining to the time of the new Testament, and to the Gospel: S. Hierome
takes him up roundly, and twiteth him of ignorance, saying, Consueta Vecordia
non intelligit istos quoque inter eos qui legi seruierint, debuisse numerari.
Neque enim Euangelium ante Crucem Christi est, quod Passione and sanguine
ipsius dedicatur. Thorough his accustomed doltishnes he understands not, that
they also ought to have been numbered among them, that were under the law. For
the Gospel is not before the Cross of Christ (that is to say before Christ
was crucified) which is dedicated by his Passion and blood.

S. Hierome means by these last words, that the time of the Gospel began,
when Christ had suffered his Passion, and shed his blood, and not before. And
here this worde^ Gospel, Gospel.
signifies not the book written by the Evangelists, but the state and (...)
of the new Testament. Which took force, and was dedicated, that is to say,
was consecrated, and made holy to the service and honor of God, by the Passion
and blood of Christ. Therefore he notes Iouinian to be but a dolte, in that
he did attribute the Marriages of Zachary and Elizabeth, and Peter, to the
Gospel, which in deed belonged unto the law of the old Testament, because
the law continewed, til Christ had suffered his Passion, Johan. 19.
as he said him self, Consummatum est, it is ended. In like sense S. Hierome
uses the word of Dedicating in the same book a little before, saying,
Virginitatem a Saluatore virgin dedicari, that virginity is dedicated by our
Savior being a virgin, for that now it is otherwise with us, then it was with
them of the old law, and with those to whom it was said, Genesis 1.
Grow ye, and be ye multiplied, and that virginity is now since our Savior
came in flesh, more generally commended, then it was before among them, who
(as there S. Hierome says) have given us types and figures of things to come.

August. in Psalm. 80.
The red Sea is consecrate in the blood of our Lord, faith S. Augustine.
Again, Baptism (says he) is read, being consecrate in the blood of
Christ. August. in Joan. Tract. 11.
The meaning hereof is, As our sins be taken away and cleansed in baptism
taking virtue and effect of the blood of Christ through faith: So to the Jews
was forefigured the blood of Christ in the red Sea. Baptism is red with
the blood of Christ, and is consecrate by the same. Thus it is said, because
it is ordained by Christ to be a mean, whereby the effect and merit of his
blood is through ^aith imparted into us. This much weighed and considered, it
may soon to any man appear, how little relief M. Jewel shall find in these
pharses.

The.14. Division.
The Answer.
OF al other Oecumenius speaks most plainly to this purpose upon this place
of S. Paul alleged out of the Psalm, Oecumen. in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 5. Psalm.
119.
Tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum Ordinem Melchisedech. Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedek. His words be these, Significat sermo,
quod non solum Christus obtulit incruentam hostiam (siquidem suum ipsius corpus
obtulit) verum etiam qui ab ipso fungentur Sacerdotio, quorum Deus Pontifex
esse dignatus est, sine sanguinis effusione offerent. Nam hoc significat (in
aeternum). Neque enim de ea, quae semel a Deo facta est Oblatio, and Hostia,
dixisset in aeternum, sed respiciens ad praesentes Sacrificos, per quos medios
Christus sacrificat, and sacrificatur, qui etiam in Mystica Coena modum illis
tradidit huiusmodi Sacrificij. The meaning of this place is (says he) that
not only Christ offered an Vnblouddy Sacrifice, for he offered his own
Body, but also that they, which after him shall do the office of a Priest
(whose Bishop he vouchesaueth to be) shall offer without shedding of Blood. For
that signifies the word (For ever.) For concerning that Oblation, and
Sacrifice, which was once made by God, he would never say, (In aeternum) for
ever. But (he said so) having an eye to those Priests, that be now, by the
mediation of whom Christ sacrifices, and is sacrificed: who also in his
Mystical Supper taught by tradition the manner of such a Sacrifice.

Concerning the Prophecy of Malachie, for proof of this Oblation, though the
place of Irenaeus above recited may stand in steed of many auctorities, yet I
will not let to rehearse the sayings of a Father or two, for confirmation of
this Article.

Chrysostom says very plainly, In omni loco Sacrificium offertur nomini meo,
In Psalm. 95.
and Sacrificiu^ purum. Vide quam luculenter, quamque dilucide Mysticam
interpretatus est Mensam, quae est Incruenta hostia. In every place a Sacrifice
shall be offered to my name, and that a pure Sacrifice. See, how plainly, and
clearly he interpreted the Mystical Table, which is the Unbloody Sacrifice.

Jewel.
Here might I justly take exception against this Doctor, as findinge him
without the compass of the first six hundred years. How be it, He says
not, That the Priest has power, or Authority, to Sacrifice the Son of God,
nor seems any way to fauer M. Hardinges purpose. Therefore we shall not
need to touch his credit.

Harding.
In this Division M. Jewel, you set forth as it were in a moustre, a number of
authorities, and not one to the purpose. Yet few things excepted, you tell us
little here, that you have not told us before. One apt and plain testimony
would have helped your cause more, then all this impertinent and confuse number.
It is not hard for one that is furnished with stoare of Notebookes of common
places, as you are, to fill the paper with heaps of allegations. This kind of
writing, as to the ignorant it makes a false show of stoare of learning, so
to the learned, brings assured evidence of lack, both of truth, and
judgment. You are much beholding to your Phrases, and metaphorical speeches.
For in them at least, as in a smooddering smoke, you trust to convey your self
away, that the weakness of your part appear not openly, as it should, if
you would directly answer to the points, wherewith the truth of our side is
confirmed. By this you show your self to be minded not to yield and to
subscribe according to your promise, what so ever, and how much so ever be
proved against you.

Concering Oecumenius in my Answer alleged, Oecumenius.
you might justly take exception against him, you say for that he falls
without the compass of the first six hundred years. As though an Author
allowed by the best learned of the Church for the speace of an unknown time,
should be of less credit, then an other, that wrote one hundred years before
him. As though also after the first six hundred years the holy Ghost forsook
the Church, and therefore least it unfurnished of good and learned teachers.
Of what age he was, I trow it is not certainly known: but that he is of
great antiquity, it is certain. Neither can ye refuse him for a Papist,
because he was of the Greek Church, which your self have cleared of
Papistrie. Well touching his credit, forasmuch as upon a brave show of a
confidence in your cause, you are so good Master unto him, as not to take
exception against him: we take that ye give. Let it then stand for good and
allowed, as in deed, M. Ievvel speaks directly against his own knowledge
touching Oecumenius.
there is no cause but so it should.

Because you pretend in word (knowing the contrary in heart) that this
testimony of Oecumenius makes no proof for the Sacrifice against your
Challenge: whether it be so, or no, let it he briefly examined. First, says he
not, that Christ him self offered an unbloody Sacrifice? By the epipheton
Unbloody, added to Sacrifice, is it not manifest, that this Sacrifice was
distinct and diverse from the Sacrifice, that he made upon the Cross, which
was bloody? Next, least any man might happen to doubt, what the substance
was, which was offered vnbloudily by Christ, does not this Author declare it
by his plain Parenthesis, saying, for he offered his own body? That Christ
offered his own body vnblouddily.
Is it not clear then, that Christ's body was the substance, which he offered
vnbloudily? Note then good Reader, that the substance, which was offered
bloudily upon the Cross, and vnbloudily at the Supper (for that was the time
when the unbloody Sacrifice was made) by this testimony is al one, to wit the
body of Christ. the body of Christ, I say, and not only thanks giving,
praises, and remembrance, of his Death, whereunto only you M. Jewel would draw
it. Thus it is evident, that Christ him self offered to his Father, not only
a bloody, but also an unbloody Sacrifice.

Let us see, whether by Oecumenius it may appear, that Priests have
authority to offer up the unbloody Sacrifice. That Prie^stes have authority to
offer the unbloody Sacrifice.
Verily it appears most manifestly. For says he, Not only Christ offered
the unbloody Sacrifice, but also they, which from him shall do the office of
Priests, shall offer without shedding of blood. Mark M. Jewel, The Priests,
that shall have authority from Christ their hye Bishop to execute the office
of Priesthod, shall offer vnbloudly. But what shall they offer? What other thing,
but that which Christ offered? What offered Christ? An vnblouddy Sacrifice.
What was the substance, of that unbloody Sacrifice? His very body. Suum ipsius
corpus obtulit, he offered his own body, says Oecumenius. Therefore the
Priests shall offer the unbloody Sacrifice, which is Christ's body, and the
same shall they do upon good authority, for that in so doing, they shall
execute the Priesthod, which they shall receive, ab ipso, from him, that is,
from Christ.

If you can tell us of any power and warrant more sufficient, than that which
comes from Christ unto the Priests of his Church, then shall you require me
to yield, and with you to confess, that Priests do without good authority
presume to offer up Christ unto his Father in their daily Sacrifice.

You will say perhaps. I hear that Priests shall offer Christ's body without
shedding of blood, but that they have any authority granted them so to do,
yet I hear not. It may please you for this to consider, what follows in
Oecumenius. This term, In aeternum, for ever, signifies so much, as that
Priests shall offer in executing their Priesthod from Christ, his unbloody
Sacrifice. For the Prophet David would never have said, that Christ was a
Priest for ever, Psalm. 109.
in respect of the Sacrifice, which Christ made once only upon the Cross:
but in respect of the Priests, that be now living, by whom as by means and
instruments, or rather ministers, Christ both does offer Sacrifice, and is
offered in Sacrifice. Lo here by the ministry of the Priests, Christ does
presently sacrifice, and is sacrificed. so that they do their office of
Priesthode presently, and accomplish that in deed, whereby the Priesthod of
Christ after the order of Melchisedek is daily put in practice, and so
continewed for ever, not only in power and virtue, but also in act and
effect.

Where gave Christ to Priests auctorite to sacrifice his body.
It remains it be showed, where, and when, Christ gave them authority thus
to do. Oecumenius in the end of this allegation says it more plainly, then
it may be doubted of, much less denied. Qui etiam in mystica coena modum illis
tradidit huiusmodi Sacrificij. Christ in his Mystical Supper delivered unto
them the manner of such a Sacrifice. I presuppose no man to be so vain a
wrangler, as to cauille for that Oecumenius says not, he delivered them
authority, but the manner how to offer this Sacrifice. For the delivering of
the manner how to do it, had nothing auailed, unless he had withal delivered
authority lawfully to executeat. Thus have you in this one authority
expressed all the terms of your Challenge, to wit, that Priests have authority
to offer up Christ unto his Father in Sacrifice. For here is mention made of
Priests, of sacrificing vnbloudily, of the body of Christ, and therefore of
Christ him self, of authority, because they execute Priesthod in the person
of Christ, from Christ, and for Christ, in that they be means by whom
Christ sacrifices, and is sacrificed. The same authority is further avouched,
by that, that Christ delivered unto them in his last Supper, the manner of
such a Sacrifice.

How be it I was deceived in saying, that all the terms of your Challenge be
expressed in this testimony: for here lacks the name of the Father. But the
Father of heaven be thanked, that it forces not much, whether his name be
expressed or no, seeing it is so necessarily included. For to whom should
Christ offer Sacrifice, but to his Father? To whom ought man offer Sacrifice,
but to God only, as to whom and to none other, that kind of service is due?

If you require a plain place witnessing that Priests have authority to
offer up Christ, This sacrifice avouched by the Nicen Council.
hear what the Fathers of the first Nicen Council say. The Council is
advertised (say they) that in certain places, and Cities, Diacons give the
Sacraments unto Priests. This neither Rule, Council. Nicen. Cano ne. 14.
nor Custom has delivered unto us, that they who have not power to offer up
the Sacrifice, should deliver the body of Christ unto them, that have power to
offer it. Here you may see it expressly avouched, that Priests have
authority and power to offer up, the body of Christ. Now let us see, what you
answer to the plain place of Oecumenius.

Jewel.
The whole Contents of his words are these: That there is in the Church an
Vnblouddy Sacrifice, and that Christ him self offers up the same by the
mean, and Ministry of the Priest, and that Christ him self is that
Sacrifice. Which words with due construction, and in the sense, Hieron. in
Psalm. 86.
and meaning of the Ancient Fathers, may well be granted. For like as S.
Hierom says, as it is alleged before, Quod natu^ est ex Virgin, Hieron. in
Psalm. 97.
nobis q^otidie nascitur: Christus nobis quotidie crucifigitur: Christ, that
was borne of the Virgin, is borne unto us every day: Augustine. quaest. Eua^.
lib. 2.
Christ unto us is daily Crucified: And, as S. Augustine says, Tum Christus
cuique occiditur, cum credit Occisum: Then is Christ presently slain to every
man, when he trusts wholly in his Death, August. de verbis Domini Secu^. Luc.
Sermon. 38.
and believes he was slain: And as the same S. Augustine says, Tibi Christus
quotidie Resurgit: Christ Rises again to thee every day: And, as
Chrysostom says, In the Holy Mysteries is wrought, and perfited the Death of
Christ: Briefly, as Gregory says, Christus iterum in hoc Mysterio Moritur:
Christ is slain in this Mystery, Chrysostom. in Acta. hom. 21.
and dies again: Even so, and in the same sense, and meaning, and none
otherwise, Oecumenius says, Christ is offered in the Holy Supper.

De Cons. distinct. 2. Quid sit^
But, as Christ neither is daily Borne of the Virgin, nor daily Crucified, nor
daily Slain, nor daily Rises from the dead, nor daily Suffers, nor daily
Dies, but only in a certain manner of Speech, not verily, and in deed: Even
so Christ is daily Sacrificed, only in a certain manner of speech, and in a
Mystery: But Really, verily, and in deed he is not Sacrificed.

Harding.
Great points contained in the testimony of Oecumenius by M. Ievvel
disse^bled.
There is more comprehended in the words of Oecumenius, then you report. For
he says, that Christ has offered the Unbloody Sacrifice, which he expounds
to have been the oblation of his own body. Which can not be otherwise
understood, then of the Oblation made at the Supper, as only being unbloody,
for the Oblation made upon the Cross was bloody, as you konwe. Again, he
says, that Christ's Priesthod after the order of Melchisedek endures for
ever, for that even to this day he sacrifices, and is sacrificed, by the mean
of Priests now being. Furthermore, that Christ in his last Supper delivered
to them the manner of such a Sacrifice. These be points contained in this
testimony of Oecumenius, besides those which you have noted, and be such as
you and your fellows can not well brook, and therefore your policy was to
dissemble them.

To the whole place you answer by comparing it (as your manner is to do) unto
certain phrases, M. Jew. ro^neth to his phrases and figurative speeches for
answer to that which is spoken in proper speech and literally.
and figurative speeches of the Fathers, in which they say one thing in sound
of word, and mean an other, or at least, in which their meaning is to be
understood Mystically, and not exactly to be construed after the rigor of
the precise terms. Six sentences, or rather pieces of sentences you pretend to
allege, which you will needs have to be like unto this testimony of Oecumenius.
Of which six, the first is your own, and not S. Hieromes at al, Shifts not to
be borne with in a preacher.
as you utter it. As for the second, there is no such thing in his Commentaries
upon the Psalm. 97. as your cotation directs: the fourth is not to be found
in the.38. Sermon of S. Augustine De verbis Domini secu^dum Luca^, as you note,
because he never made of that matter but.37. Sermons. The fifth is falsified, S.
Chrysostom utters it otherwise. The third, and the sixth, if you had alleged
them whole, Answer to the first authority alleged out of S. Hierom.
as they lie in the authors, would seem to make nothing for you, as here it
shall be declared.

If humanity required me not to deal rigorously with you, but gentilly to
bear with you, not to reuele your false sleightes to your discredit, but for
your honesties sake to wink at them: then thus should you be answered. 1.
Where S. Hierome says, Si volumus, quotidie nascitur Christus, Hieron. in
Psalm. 86.
If we will, Christ is borne every day: the word Christ, is not taken in
proper signification for the second person, but for any virtue, that man may
work, 1. Cor. 1.
because it is said of him, that he is the virtue and wisdom of his Father, as
I have before declared. Now where Oecumenius says, Christ has offered an
unbloody Sacrifice (for he has offered his own body): Christ has
vouchesaued to be our Bishop, Christ sacrifices, and is sacrificed by means
of the Priests that now be, Christ delivered unto them the way and manner of
such Sacrifice in his mystical Supper: in all these speeches Christ is the name,
not of virtue and power indefinitely, but of the only begoten Son of God, the
second Person in Trinity, that was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of
the virgin Marie. Therefore there is no similitude or likeness between the
Phrase of S. Hierome (which in truth is as here I allege, and not as you forge
it) and this saying of Oecumenius. Whereas then your Argument is this, As
Christ is borne every day, so is he offered by Priests every day, But he is
not really and in deed borne every day: Ergo neither is he offered by Priests
every day: If this be your Argument, your Mayor, or first proposition, is
false, because (as I have showed) the similitude holds not, and the case is
not like. And so S. Hierome does nothing help your cause. Crucifying of
Christ considered two ways.


Touching your other places, one Answer in manner may serve for them al. 2.
Christ unto us is daily crucified, says S. Hierome perhaps some where, or
some other Father, for your cotation is false. This much is to be considered.
The crucifying of Christ, is of two sorts. The one external, and bloody. The
other mystical, and unbloody. In that, Christ's blood was shed, to be the
general redemption: In this the blood of Christ already shed is applied unto
us, that is to say, the effect of his blood to particular remission of
sins, and pains dew to sins, as if he were now hanging upon the Cross.
This application of Christ's death unto us, is sometimes of the Fathers called,
his Crucifying, sacrificing, Death, and killing. After the first way, he was
never crucified but once. After the second way, he is crucified daily, and so
often as the Death of him that was crucified, is (the sacrament of
Reconciliation presupposed) applied unto us to effect.

Neither is the doctrine of Application of Christ's Death strange. Application.
The substance of it has been taught in diverse respects by the learned Fathers
of the Church both old, and new. Albeit the term of Application be more
common in the Scholastical Doctors, Tertul. lib. 1. aduersus Marcion. Hierony.
in Matthew. cap. 26.
who have treated most exactly of these points, then in the most Ancient
writers. Tertullian writing against Marcion, and S. Hierom upon S. Matthew, to
signify the real presence, use the term of Representation, whereby is
signified in Latin the exhibiting of a thing present. Representation.


S. Gregory expresses the same meaning that Application conteneth, Gregorius
Homi. 37.
by the term of Repairing, or renewing. So often as we offer up unto him (says
he) the host of his Passion, Reparation or repairing
so often we renew and repair his Passion unto us for absolution. Dialog. 4.
cap. 58.
Again in an other place. This host ( or Sacrifice, says he) does singularly
save the soul from damnation, which by Mystery renueth unto us the Death of
the only begoten Son of God.

S. Augustine signifies this much by the word of Insinuation. Insinuation.
Now who so ever does insinuate a thing to an other, that is to say, puts it
in his bosom (for so much the word signifies) the same does also apply it
unto him. For declaration hereof S. Augustines testimony by your self here
alleged, serves very aptly. Which if you had with more sincerity and truth
alleged, you had dealt more like a true man: but then had you hindered your
evil cause. His words be these, where he expounds the Parable of the Riotous
Son written by S. Luke, Lucae. 15. August. Quaestion. Euangel. lib. 2.33.
making Vitulum saginatum, the fatted calfe to be Christ. Our Lord (says he)
was this fatted Calfe, who according to flesh was filled with reproaches. Quod
autem imperat vt adducant eum, quid aliud est, nisi vt praedicent eum, and
annunciando venire faciant in exhausta fame viscera filij esurientis? S.
Augustine understands by the killing of Christ now, the insinuatio^ of his
death.
Nam etiam vt occidant eum iubet, hoc est, vt mortem eius insinuent. Tunc enim
cuique occiditur, cum credit occisum. Whereas he commands them to bring him,
what is that to say else, but that they preach him, and by telling of him,
cause him to come into the bowels quite famished for hunger of the hungry
son? For he commands also that they kill him, that is to say, that they
insinuate and show his Death: For then he is slain to every man, when he
believes, that he was slain.

3. Thus S. Augustine expounded him self, who makes the killing of Christ
now, to be none other, but the insinuation of his Death unto us by preaching.
Christ was once killed corporally and in deed. And now he is killed, as
concerning the Application of the benefit of his Death, that is to say, his
death is insinuate and applied unto us, when we believe hat he was killed for
us. Which Death nevertheless, to wit, the effect of his Death, is applied unto
us not by faith only, but also faith presupposed, by mean of the Sacraments.

So Christ is said by S. Augustine to rise again to us every day,, In what
sense M. Jewels mystical speeches alleged out of the Fathers be true.
because we believe that he rose again.

S. Chrysostom says not simply, as you report, the Death of Christ is
wrought, and perfited in the holy Mysteries: but illa mors perficitur, that
Death is perfited, as much to say, the unbloody and Mystical Death, that is, the
virtue and effect of his Death is applied unto us in these Mysteries.

So meant S. Gregory saying, Dum illa mors perficitur.
that Christ, living immortally in him self, dies again in this Mystery.
That is to say, as there he expounds him self, this healthful Sacrifice
repaireth and renueth unto us, (and applies unto us) by mystery, the Death of
Gods only begoten Son.

Whereas then the learned Fathers speak thus of Christ's daily birth, De
Consecrat. did. 2. Quid sit.
of his daily crucifying, his daily killing, and his daily resurrection, they
mean not a real and a carnal presence of his body to be borne, to be
crucified, to be slain, and to rise again from the Dead: but al is spoken
mystically, and the same is true in a manner of speech, and in a mystical
sense, as now I have declared.

But where they speak, as Oecumenius here speaks, of th'vnbloudy host, or
Sacrifice, naming it (by way of exposition) Christ's own body, saying of it,
that they, who have Priesthod from him, do offer it up in Sacrifice without
shedding of blood, and that for their continual offering of the same, Psalm.
109.
Christ is called a Priest for ever, by whom he sacrifices, and is
sacrificed, to whom also at his Mystical Supper he delivered the manner of such
Sacrifice, where so ever they speak of this Sacrifice, and after this manner:
there they mean a true and real Sacrifice, and thereby signify, that Christ
is sacrificed verily, really, and in deed. Which notwithstanding is to be
understood in respect of the body of Christ, really, and in deed by virtue
of Christ's words made present in the Sacrament, being the thing sacrificed,
and not in respect of the common blouddy manner of sacrificing. Which manner,
until Christ was sacrificed upon the Cross, who is the truth and end of al
Sacrifices that were before, was for the most part with shedding of blood,
and with slaughter of living things.

In what sense and respect is Christ now Srcrificed, and not sacrificed.
Romans 6.
To be plain, and short, in respect of that old and common manner of
sacrificing, we deny, as you do, that Christ is now really, verily, and in
deed sacrificed. For having been once dead, he dies no more, as S. Paul
says. But in respect of the substance of the Sacrifice (which thing the old
leraned Fathers have ever taught, and the Church practices, as delivered,
commanded, and taught by Christ at his last Supper, as S. Irenaeus says)
which substance is the body of Christ, Irenaeus li. 4. cap. 32.
and consequently Christ him self the Son of God: We affirm, and believe,
and promise to defend with our blood, that Christ in our Mystery is most
truly, really, verily, and in deed sacrificed.

Jewel.
The rest, that follovveth in Oecumenius, only expresses the two several
Natures in Christ, the Godheade, and the Manheade: That, touching his
Manheade, he was Sacrificed: touching his Godheade, he was the Priest, and
made the Sacrifice: And further to M. Hardinges purpose it makes no thing. So
Beda says, although somevvhat otherwise: Beda in Episto. ad Ephesians. c. 2.
Filius Dei, and Orat pro nobis: and Orat in nobis: and Oratur a nobis. Orat
pro nobis, vt Sacerdos: Orat in nobis, vt caput: Oratur a nobis, vt Deus: The
Son of God both Prays for us: and Prays in us: and is Prayed of us. He
Prays for us, as our Priest: He Prays in us, as our Head: He is prayed of
us, as our God. Epiphanius says, Epipha. de Melchisedechian. lib. 2.
Christus est Victima, Sacerdos, Altar, Deus, Homo, Rex, Pontifex, Ouis,
Agnus, omnia in omnibus pro nobis factus: Christ is our Sacrifice, our Priest,
our Altar, God, Man. King, Bishop, Sheep, La^me, made for oursakes al in all.
Thus is Christ our Sacrifice: thus is Christ our Sacrificer, not to be offered
by the Priest, as M. Harding imagines: but as the old Masters, and Fathers
of the Church have taught us. offered by him self upon the Cross. Augu. D^
Tempore. Sermon. 13^.
S. Augustine says, Ecce illic oblatus est: Ibi seipsum obtulit: Simul and
Hostia, and Sacerdos. Et altar erat Crux: Behold there was he offered: There
he offered him self: He was both the Priest, and the Sacrifice: And his Cross
was the Aultare.

Harding.
This answer is far fetched, and proceeds from a great insight. Few men
but M. Jewel could have seen so far in Ocumenius words, as to see in them
that which by him was never meant, nor so much as dreamed of, M. Ievvel either
of ignorance, or of Malice utters manifest heresy.
yea that, which also is very false, and an heinous heresy, if it be
obstinatly maintained.

But Sir wot ye what ye speak, or speak you at al adventure? Surely here you
are taken. Neither can you escape, but must needs confess your error and
yield. Was Christ touching his Godhead a Priest, and touching the same made he
Sacrifice? Who ever said so, but you? What M. Jewel besides other heresies,
shall we have an Aria^ of you? Will you take that name upon you, or confess,
that you lack the principles of Divinity? Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20. ca. 21.
To offer Sacrifice, is it not a kind of worship called Latria, that is due
unto God only, and to no creature? Now shall we make Christ, as he is God, to
do worship, and not to receive worship only done to him by others? Is not God
the Son, equal with God the Father? Or will you make us a great God, and a
less God, as we read that Arius did? Philip. 2.
Says not S. Paul, Whereas he was in the form of God, he thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God? As he is God, how does he the office of the
Priest? How does he Sacrifice? Is not he that sacrifices, inferior to him, to
whom sacrifice is done? The creature worshippeth God, and offers Sacrifice
unto him. That God worshippeth ought, and does Sacrifice, there was never any
so ignorant, and blasphemous, as to speak it. This doctrine smells of the
Arians, who affirm, the Son of God to be inferior to his Father. Our Lord
save his people from such blind guydes, and false Prophets.

Christ sacrifices as man, not as God, but as God receives Sacrifice. August.
de Ciuitat. Dei. li. 10. cap. 20.
S. Augustine is more worthy to be heard, who far otherwise teaches us, that
Christ receives Sacrifice as God, and offers Sacrifice as man. His words
be these. Verus ille mediator, in quantum formam serui accipiens, mediator
effectus est Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus, cum in forma Dei Sacrificium
cum Patre sumat, cum quo and vnus Deus est, tamen in forma serui Sacrificium
maluit esse, quam sumere, ne vel hac occasion quisquam existimaret, cuilibet
esse sacrificandu^ creaturae. Per hoc and Sacerdos est, ipse offerens, ipse and
oblatio. That the true mediator, in as much as he took the form of a
Servant, was made the mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
whereas in the form of God he takes Sacrifice with the Father, with whom he
is one God, yet in the form of a Servant he had rather be a Sacrifice, then
take (Sacrifice) least through this occasion some man might think, that
Sacrifice were to be made to any what so ever creature. By this he is a Priest,
him self being he that offers, and also the thing that is offered. In this
testimony S. Augustine says expressly, that Christ as touching his manhead,
and as he is man, is both the Priest that offers, and the Sacrifice offered:
and that touching his Godhead, and as he is God, he receives Sacrifice. Which
is quite contrary to that you here affirm.

Answer me to this question M. Jewel. Believe you that Christ was a Priest
after the order of Melchisedek, before he became man, or only after that he
became man? If your answer be, that he was Priest of that order after he had
taken our flesh, I have nothing to say against you. For that is the truth. But
if your answer shall be, that he was such a Priest before flesh taken, as you
must answer, if you will defend this your doctrine: then will I turn you over
unto S. Augustine, who I am sure in all wise men's judgment ouermatcheth you,
and is to be credited before you, and al your Scoolemaisters of Zurich, or
Geneua.

This profounde learned Father expounding these words of the Psalm, August.
in Psalm. 109.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, says, Ad hoc
natus ex vtero ante luciferu^, vt esses Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordine^
Melchisedech. Thou wast borne from the womb (of the virgin) before the day
sterre, that thou might be a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek.
And there eftsoon. Secundum id quod natus est de Patre Deus apud Deum, Non
Sacerdos.
coaeternus gignenti, non Sacerdos: sed Sacerdos propter carnem assumptam,
propter victimam, quam pro nobis offerret a nobis acceptam. As touching that
Christ was borne of the Father God with God, he is equally everlasting with
him that begotte him, not a Priest: but a Priest for the flesh assumpted, for
the host, that he should offer for us, being taken of us. Nothing can more
plainly be spoken against you M. Jewel, which now begin to teach the
world a new heresy, and prepare a way to the recidiuation of Arius heresy,
by affirming that Christ was a Priest, and made Sacrifice, according to his
Godhead. Whereof it must follow, that as being God, he was not equal with his
Father.

M. Jewels promise made in his last Sermon at Poules Cross.
Be not a shamed M. Jewel, to recant this foul and gross error. I understand
you said in your Sermon at Poules Cross the.xv. of June last, that if you had
ever either spoken in Pulpit, or written in book any thing that may be proved
false, your mouth should confess it, and your hand should retracte it. By this
it shall appear to al men, how far your word is to be trusted.

The words of Beda, Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, which here you allege, I see
not to what purpose they serve you. For they prove no more that Christ,
touching his Godhead was ever a Priest and a Sacrificer, then that the Moon is
made of green cheese, if I may use so gross a Proverb in reproouing your so
gross an error. Neither will these testimonies, or any of them conclude
against the offering of the body and blood of Christ in the daily Sacrifice of
the Church, M. Jewels common Logique is, to put away one truth by an other
truth.
unless you follow your accustomed Logique in excluding one truth by an other
truth. It were good for you once to remember, that one truth always drives
not out an other truth, as one wedge drives out an other wedge. Will you thus
reason, Christ was offered upon the Cross, and the Cross was then the Altar
(which S. Augustine alleged says), Ergo, he is not offered in the Church by
the Ministry of Priests (which Eusebius and Oecumenius say) and the Aulters
of the Church serve not to any such purpose? Eusebius. De Demonstr. lib. 1.
As well may we thus argue, John is a Minister, Ergo, John is not an honest man.
Which Argument, though perhaps it hold touching the matter, yet for the form,
I am sure you will not allow it. This pelting kind of Argument you use through
your whole Reply, and in manner none other. That if a learned man would
examine that you write, he should find, that never man wrote so loosely.

I doubt not good Reader, but thou look for a larger, truer, and apter
Reply, then M. Jewel has hitherto made to Oecumenius. But what could he say?
No smoke ca^ wholly take away the light of the bright Sun. Considering his
own vnhablenes to answer the place keeping his side vnsteyned, he slyly
passes from it, as one that would feign rid his hands of so busy a comber.
Oecumenius speaks most plainly and distinctly of a double oblation and
Sacrifice, the one once made upon the Cross, in respect whereof Christ by
his interpretation is not called a Priest for ever, the other offered up by the
Priests continually, by whose mediation and ministry Christ sacrifices,
and is sacrificed. In that I term it a double oblation and Sacrifice, I have
regard to the manner of offering: which is diverse upon the Cross, and in the
Eucharist. Otherwise the substance of the Sacrifice, and the thing it self
that is sacrificed, is one and the same in either. Now it had been M. Jewels
part to tell us, what Sacrifice is that, wherein Christ by the mean of Priests
that be now, sacrifices, and is sacrificed, and the manner and order whereof
he taught the Apostles, and consequently Priests, in power and office of
sacrificing their Successors, in his Mystical Supper. What Sacrifice this is,
Christ's most plain words do declare. who at his last Supper, after he had
taken bread, and the Cup into his hands, Luc. 22.
given thanks, broken, and blessed, said, take, eat, 1. Cor. 11.
drink, this is my Body, this is my blood, do ye this in my remembrance. By
doing which thing, and saying which words, he taught them the way and manner
how to do such Sacrifice. by this he taught (as S. Ireneus says) the new
Oblation of the new Testament. Iren. li. 4. cap. 32.
Here M. Jewels Phrases, Metaphores, Allegories, Tropes, and Figures will not
serve his turn. Therefore he conueyeth him self to an other testimony by me
alleged out of S. Chrysostom, interpreting the known place of Malachie, of
this Sacrifice. Whereunto he makes answer of as little substance, as his other
is to Oecumenius. And here is to be noted, that to obscure both the order and
force of my Answer, he has caused the Printer co^fusely to set that I bring in
touching Malachie, together with that goes before, that the Distinction of
things might not appear, which I by my new beginning of the line caused to be
disticted from the former matter. Let us hear what he says.

Jewel.
This word, Incruentum, that M, Harding has here alleged out so Chrysostom,
is thought to bear great weight: but being well considered, of that side, it
is alleged for, as it shall appear, it vveigheth nothing. The Holy learned
Fathers apply that word, sometime to Prater, and other devotion of the
mind: and sometimes to the Ministration of the holy Communion.

For the better opening hereof, it may please thee good Christian Reader, to
understand, that in the time of Moses Law, the Priests, and Levites
offered up unto God Oxen, Calves, Rams, and Goats: and with the Blood
thereof sprinkled the Book, the instruments of the Ministry, the whole
Tabernacle, Heb. 9.
and all the People: and as S. Paul says, In the Ceremonies of that Law
without Bloudsheadding there was no remission of Sin. Likewise the
Heathens killed and offered up their cattaile unto their Idolles, sometimes an
hundred sat Oxen in one day. Sometime they proceeded further, and made their
Sacrifices of Man's Blood. Clemens in Orat. cont. Gentes.
Erichtheus of Athens, and Marius of Rome killed, and offered up their own
Daughters in the honor of Pallas. The Nobles of Carthage in honor of their
Idol Saturnus killled, and offered up.lxx. of their own male Children in one
Sacrifice.

In respect of these gross, and Fleashely, and Blouddy Sacrifices, our
Christian Sacrifices in the Gospel, Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 1. ca. 6. (...)
because they are mere Spiritual, and proceed wholy from the heart, are
called Vnblouddy. Eusebius says. Incendimus Orationis suffitum, and
Sacrificium, quod appellatur Purum, non per Cruores facimus, sed per puras
actiones: We burn the Incense of Prayer: and we offer up the Sacrifice, that
is called Pure, not by sheadding of Blood, but by Pure, and godly doings.

So Chrysostom, Chrysostom. cont. Iudaeos. Ora. 3.
Offerimus, non per Fumum, Nidorem, aut Sanguinem, sed per Spiritns Gratiam:
we make our Sacrifices, not by Smoke, Smell, and Blood, but by the Grace of
the Holy Sprite. He adds further, For God is Spirit, and he that adoureth
him, must adoure in Sprite, and Truth.

And this is the Unbloody Sacrifice. So says Eusebius, Offerent illi
Rationabiles, Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 2. (...).
and Incruentas Hostias: They shall offer unto him Reasonable ( or Spritual) and
Unbloody Oblations. And the same he expounds, The Sacrifice of Praise.

In like sort S. Hierome seems to say, In sinceritate azima epulamur: we
feast in Pureness without leaven. In like consideration the Sacrifices, that in
old times were made unto Fides, and Terminus, Hieron. in Epist. ad Galat. 4.
were called (...), Vnblouddy, because they consisted only in Suffumigations,
and Odours, and were not imbrued with any Blood. And for the like cause
Thucydides calls certain of the Heathen oblations (...), Pure Sacrifices.
Cyrillus ad Reginas.
Likewise Cyrillus calls the Prayers, and Melody of the Angels, and blissed
Spirits in Heaven continually praising, and glorifieing the name of God,
Incruenta Sacrificia: Unbloody Sacrifices. Gyrillus co^tra Julian. li. 10
Again he says, Nos, relicto crasso ministerio Iudaeorum, praeceptum habemus,
vt tenue, and Spirituale, and Subtle Sacrificium faciamus. Itaque offerimus
Deo in odorem suauitatis virtutes omne genus, Fidem, Spem, Charitatem: We,
having lea^te the gross Ministry of the Jews, have a Commandment, to make
a Fine, Thin, and Spiritual Sacrifice. And therefore we offer unto God al
manner Virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, as most sweet savors.

For this cause the Sacrifices of our Prayers, and other like devotions, are
called Unbloody, for that they require no Fleashly Service, or Sheadding of
Blood, as did the Sacrifices of the Jews, and Heathens, but are mere
Ghostly, Eusebius. De Demonst. lib. 1. (...).
and Spiritual, and stand wholy in the lifting up, and elevation of the mind.

In like manner the Ministration of the Holy Communion is sometimes of the
Ancient Fathers called an Unbloody Sacrifice: not in respect of any Corporal,
or Fleashely presence, that is imagined to be there without Bloudsheaddinge,
but for that it represents, and reports unto our minds that One, and
everlasting Sacrifice, that Christ made in his body upon the Cross. Therefore
Eusebius says, Excitamus illi Altar Incruentorum, and Rationabilium
Sacrificiorum, secundum Noua Mysteria: We erecte unto God an Altar of
unbloody and reasonable, or Spiritual Sacrifices, accordingc to the New
Mysteries. Again, In eodem libro.
Sacrificium incendimus illi, Memoriam magni illius Sacrificij: We burn a
Sacrifice unto God, that is, the Remembrance of that great Sacrifice. In
eodem: (...). Hieron. ad Euagrium August. de Gratia noui Testa. ad Honoratum.
Justinius Martyr in Dialogis cum Tryphone.
Likewise again: Christus obtulit Mirabile Sacrificium pro salute omnium
nostrum iubens nos offerre Memoria^ pro Sacrificio: Christ offered up that
Marvelous Sacrifice for our Salvation, commaundinge us to offer a Remembrance
thereof, instead of a Sacrifice. So likewise says S. Hierome, although not
altogether in like respect, Pane, and Vino, Puro, and Simplici Sacrificio
Christi dedicauit Sacramentum: He dedicated the Sacrament of Christ in
Bread, and Wine, which is ( not a Bloody, or loathsome, but) a Pure, and a
Simple Sacrifice.

This Remembrance, and Oblation of praises, and Rendering of thanks unto God
for our Redemption in the Blood of Christ, is called of the old Fathers, An
Unbloody Sacrifice, and of S. Augustine, The Sacrifice of the New Testament.

Justinius Martyr says, Esaias non pollicetur Cruentarum Victimarum
instaurationem: sed veras, and Spirituales Oblationes laudis, and Gratiarum
actionis: Esaias promises not the restoaringe of Blouddy Sacrifices: but True,
and Spiritual Oblations of Praises, and Thankesgeuing.

S. Chrysostom says, Non iam Sanguinem, aut adipem offerimus etc. We offer
not now the fat, Chrysos. in Epist. ad Hebr. Homil. 11.
or Blood of Beasts. Al these things are abolished. And in steed thereof
there is brought in a Reasonable, or Spiritual dewtie. But, what is this dewtie
that we call Reasonable, or Spiritual? That it is, that is offered by the Soul,
and Sprite.

Harding.
What needs all this long process upon the word, Incruentum, Unbloody? Go
to the purpose M. Jewel. By the place alleged out of S. Chrysostom, it is
evident, that he understands Malachies prophecy of the unbloody Sacrifice,
which Christ offered at his Mystical Table in his Last Supper, and is now daily
offered by Priests according to his Institution. Examine the words well. See
how plainly, and clearly (says he) the Prophet has interpreted the
Mystical Table, Chrysos. in Psalm. 55.
which is the vnblouddy Sacrifice. Yet so plain and clear as it is, you can
not see, or rather you will not see it: And by all your wit and cunning you
endeavor so to dasel the eyes of others, that they may not see it.

But why do you turn al your long talk only to the word, M. Ievvel
turns al his Reply to the word, unbloody, leaving other matter, that he is
not well hable to answer
Unbloody? Why do you not as well speak of the Mystical Table? Can ye not away
to hear thereof? Say what you list of the term, Vnblouddy, and allege so
many sentences of Doctors, as would fill a whole book: yet must S.
Chrysostom to al men of learning appear to expound the Prophecy of Malachie
of that which is vnbloudily sacrificed at the Mystical Table. What Mystical
Table can ye name us now in the Church, but that, whereon the Body and Blood
of Christ are sacrificed, whereof it is named an Altar, Altar. Table.
and from whens they are of the faithful received, for which it is named a
Table? Verily this place presses you so, that you are feign to flee as it were
out of the feelde. And yet least you should seem to flee away cowardly, by long
needeles talk upon the word, Unbloody, as it were by holding up your shilde,
you make a show, as though you faught still.

In effect, two things you go about to prove. The first is, that the
Sacrifice of our Prayers, and devotion of mind, is called of the Fathers,
Unbloody. The second is, that the Ministration of the holy Communion (which
term is very common with you) is called also an unbloody Sacrifice.

Touching the first, you have taken great pains to little purpose. For it is by
noman denied. Touching the second, what so ever you mean by your Ministering
term of the Ministration of the Holy Communion, we say, that the Host of the
Mystical Table, which is none other, but the body and blood of Christ, is
both of S. Chrysostom here, and otherwheres of the learned Fathers, called the
unbloody Sacrifice, not for that it represents and reports unto our minds
the Sacrifice of the Cross, as you say (for in that respect it ought rather to
be called representative or commemoratiue): but for that being the same in
substance with that, which was offered upon the Cross with shedding of
blood, Bloody, and unbloody, referred to one subject.
it is here offered vnbloudily. And so both these terms, Bloody, and Unbloody,
be referred to one subject, or thing offered, whereby the diversity of the
manner of offering is signified.

Furthermore whereas you say, that the Christians Sacrifices be mere spiritual,
and proceed wholly from the heart, if you mean, that al our Sacrifices be such,
and that no external thing is offered in any of them: it is untruly spoken.
For the Sacrifice of Christ's body and Blood is not so mere spiritual, that it
may be said to proceed only from the heart of the offerer, but it requires
an external action of the Minister, to wit an external pronouncing of the
sacramental words, This is my body etc. Besides this, external bread and
wine be also necessary, without the which this Sacrifice can not be made. And
herein after that by the power of the words of our Lord by the Priest
pronounced, there is made the Divine change of the substance of the bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ: August. de ciuita. Dei li. 10. c. 20
then is there, as S. Augustine calls it, the true Sacrifice, as S. Gregory
Nazianzen terms it, Nazian. in Apologetico. (...).
the external Sacrifice of the new Testament.

Consider wisely with thy self good Christian Reader, whether M. Jewel be to
trusted or no, in that he traueleth so much to abolish the mystical Table, the
unbloody Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, whether M. Ievvel be to be
trusted.
which is the most honorable and the chief Sacrifice of the Church. Whereas S.
Chrysostom declares diverse kinds of Sacrifices to be among the Christians, as
there were in old time among the Jews: M. Jewel acknowlegeth al, save that
which is most worthy and chief. In an Homily that he wrote upon the.95.
Psalm, he reckeneth in order ten kinds of Sacrifices, Ten ki^des of
Sacrifices.
which be sitting (says he) for the grace of the Gospel. That I may speak of
the first and chief after that the others be accounted, the second, is
Martyrdom: the third, is the Sacrifice of Prayer: the fourth is, of Iubilation
or joyful synging out a loud: the fifth, of Justice: the sixth, of Almose
giving: the seventh, of Praise: the eighth, of Compunction: the ninth, of
Humility: the tenth, of Preaching, each one of these there he proves by
Scripture.

These nine M. Jewel can find in his heart to confess. But the first, Satan,
and he may not abide. And that is the Sacrifice, wherein Christ him self is
offered. Which Sacrifice of S. Chrysostom in that Homily is called by these
names. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95. Tom. 1
Mystica mensa, coeleste summeque venerandum Sacrificium: Spirituale illud and
mysticum donum: hostia salutaris, salutare donum. The mystical Table, the
heavenly and most honorable Sacrifice: That spiritual and Mystical gift: The
healthful host, the healthful gift.

And we that should not doubt, what thing this first and chief Sacrifice is,
with these plain words he describes it. Ephesians. 5.
Est primum Sacrificium, Spirituale illud and mysticum donum, de quo Paulus
ait, Imitatores estote Dei, etc. The first and chief Sacrifice is, that
spiritual and Mystical gift, whereof S. Paul speaks. Be ye the folowers of
God, as beloved children, and walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and
delivered him self unto God for us a sacrifice and oblation into a sweet
savor. By which words he gives us to understand, that among all the kinds of
Sabrifices which we have, being ten in number, as there he reckeneth, the
first and chief of al, is Christ him self, who gave him self to be
sacrificed bloudily for us upon the Cross, and now in the Mystical Table
offers him self, and is offered vnbloudily. In consideration whereof he
calls it, the spiritual and mystical gift, the pure, healthful, and unbloody
host of the Mystical Table.

If there were none other proof for this Sacrifice, M. Jew. by false and
crafty silence bevvraieth his side, and justifies the catholic doctrine.
the only consideration of M. Jewels dealinge with S. Chrysostom, in that he
conceeleth, and suppresseth the manifest mention of it in that place, from
whens he takes testimonies for proof of the mere spiritual Sacrifices, were
yenough to persuade a man, who is not desperately addicted to thopinions of his
private lyking, the doctrine of the Church touching this point to be true, and
M. Jewels to be false.

If he would have wrought directly to the purpose, he should have proved, that
the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mystical Table, were nothing else, but Prayers,
Thankesgeuing, Praises, and a remembrance of Christ's Death. For we grant,
that al these do concur upon that Table. But that they be there only, that
is to say, without the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ: we deny
upon S. Chrysostomes authority, who annumbreth this Sacrifice distinctly, and
alone from the rest.

Again if he would fully have acheeued his intent, it stood him upon to prove,
that they only are unbloody Sacrifices, and that this is not. For otherwise
we will always stand to this truth, that both be unbloody Sacrifices, and so
this is an unbloody Sacrifice. yea this more properly, then the other. For
those mere spiritual Sacrifices be of them selves neither bouddy, nor
vnblouddy, but in mere respect of certain external Sacrifices, which were
offered in the old Law with shedding of Blood. But the Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ offered in the Church, is so called, in consideration of
the one and the same substance, which once was bloudily offerred, and is now
offered without Bloodshed in a Mystery. In the Council of Ephesus Cyrillus
calls it, Ephesin. Council. in Epist. Cyril. ad Nestor.
incruentam Sacrificij seruitutem, the unbloody worship of the Sacrifice.

Now good Reader will thou see, how M. Jewel does always like him self, and
what small shifte of reasoning he has? Mark whether of the affirmation of the
mere spiritual Sacrifices of the mind, he infer not the Denial of the
external and real Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood: that is to say,
whether he make not one truth to put away an other truth. The thing he takes
in hand to prove, is this. That the Sacrifice offered at the Mystical Table,
is not the unbloody Sacrifice of the Church. Remember wtihal, that his
conclusion should be this, that by the vnblouddy host of the Mystical Table,
S. Chrysostom meant not the Vnblouddy Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
Christ. His reason then is this. The Holy learned Fathers do apply the
term, M. Jewels argument against the unbloody Sacrifice as the Catholics take
it.
Vnblouddy, to Prayer, to Thanks giving, to Praises, to the Melody of Angels
praising God in heaven, yea to faith, hope, and charity, and to other virtues:
Ergo, S. Chrysostom meant not the pure and unbloody offering of Christ's Body
and Blood, by the Vnblouddy Sacrifice at the Mystical Table. This is the whole
effect of his prooufe, and this is his Argument.

Let it be lawful form that the force of this reason be opened, to use the
like form of Argument in an other matter, that by comparison the lewdnes of his
Argument may appear. The holy learned Fathers do apply this term,
Necessary, to Faith, hope, penance, patience, fasting, praying, and to almose
deeds, saying, they be necessary for a Christian man. Ergo, the same Fathers
thought not, that Charity was necessary for a Christian man. Is not here a
denial of a truth inferred upon the affirmation of an other truth? Right so
does M. Jewel prove, that Christ's Body and blood is not the Vnblouddy
Sacrifice of the Church, because other spiritual Sacrifices be called
Vnblouddy. As though the Term might not, or were not by the Fathers applied
to both. Every child may sone epsy this absurdity and folly. Because there
is no pith in this confuse number of authorities, that be here by heaps laid
together, neither prove they any thing contrary to that we defend: I think
it better to pass them over as altogether impertinent, and superfluous, then
by discussing of them to be tedious unto the reader. And that which follows to
the end of this Division, is no better stuff then the other before. Thus he
says.

Jewel.
This Kind of Sacrifice, because it is mere Spiritual, and grows only from
the Mind, therefore it needs not any material Altar of Stoane, or Timber to
be made upon, as does that Sacrifice, that M. Harding imagines in his Mass.
Chrysostom says, Chrysos. in Psalm. 95.
Munus Euangelij sine Sanguine, sine Fumo, sine Altari, caeterisque sursum
ascendit: The Sacrifice of the Gospel ascends up without Blood, without
Smoke, without Aultare, and other the like. In the Second Council of Nice it is
written thus: Nos Christiani propemodum quid sit Ara, and quid sit Victima,
nescimus: What Sacrifice, or Altar means, we being Christian people, in a
manner can not tell.

Hieron. in Psalm. 26. August. de Tempore Sermon. 125.
S. Hierome says, Vnusquisque Sanctus Altar Domini in se habet, quod est
Fides: Every Holy man has in him self the Altar of God, which is Faith. To
be short, S. Augustine says, Sacrificium Noui Testamenti est, quando Altaria
Cordis nostri munda, and pura in conspectu Diuinae Maiestatis offerimus: The
Sacrifice of the New Testamente is, when we offer up the Aultrrs of our hearts
pure, and clean in the sight of the Divine Majesty. In these respects our
Prayers, our Praises, our Thankesgeuinge unto God for our Salvation in the
Death of Christ, is called an Unbloody Sacrifice.

Hereof the sclendernesse of M Hardinges gheasses may soon appear. For thus
he vvoulde seem to reason: The Ministration of the Holy Communion, and our
humble Remembrance of the Death of Christ is called an Vnblouddy Sacrifice:
Ergo, The Priest has power to offer up the Son of God in sacrifice unto his
Father.

Harding.
If the Sacrifice of the Church, whereof we treat, were nothing else, but
Prayers, Praises, thanks giving, and a remembrance, and had no substance at
al, which consists without and besides the mind of man: then might we
grant, that al Aulters of Stoane, or Timber, were needelesse. But seeing that
the Ancient learned Fathers make often mention of Aulters in their Churches,
and of their Sacrifices thereon: it follows necessarily, that their Sacrifices
consisted not wholly of Prayers, Material Aulters.
thanks, and of such other devotion of the mind: but of some such thing
also, which required a place, whereupon it may be laid. What that thing is,
Optatus that ancient and learned Bishop of Mileuitum in Afrik does declare,
Optatus libro. 6.
giving withal an evident record for the use of Aulters. Thus he says writing
against the Donatistes.

Quid tam sacrilegum, quam Altaria Dei, in quibus and vos aliquando obtulistis,
An external Altar argues the real presence, and an external Sacrifice.
frangere, radere, remouere? Quid enim est Altar Dei, nisi seeds and Corporis,
and Sanguinis Christis? What greater Sacrilege can there be, then to break,
raze, and quite remove away, the Aulters of God, upon which your selves once
offered? For what other thing is an Altar, then a seat both of the Body, and
of the Blood of Christ?

These terms of breaking, rasing, and removing, do convince the Aulters were
material, as made of Stoane, or Timber. The use also is expressed manifestly,
which is to be a seat for the body and blood of Christ to be laid upon, when
they be consecrate and sacrificed. Whereof may be gathered an Argument of the
real presence, and of the external Sacrifice. For a seat serves to place real
and external substances, and not mere spiritual things, of which sort,
contrition of heart, Prayers, thanks, and praises, are.

If I thought it needeful in this place to allege auctorities for proof of
this use of material Aulters, it were easy to allege no small number for the
same, out of the most ancient Fathers, and Councels. The thing being so
clear, and so well known of all that have any skill of antiquity, it may
suffice to join the testimony of S. Augustine, with that of Optatus. Who
speaks both of building of Aulters in Churches, whereby it is certain they
were material, and also of sacrificing upon them. August. de Ciuitat. Dei. li.
22. cap. 10.
His words be plain. Nos autem Martyribus nostris non Templa, sicut Dijs, sed
memorias sicut hominibus mortuis, quorum apud Deum viuunt spiritus, fabricamus.
Nec ibi erigimus Altaria, in quibus sacrificemu^ Martyribus, sed vni Deo, and
Martyrum, and nostro, sacrificium immolamus. As for us (says he) we build for
our Martyrs, not Temples, as for Gods, but Memories (by Memories he means
Chapels, or Churches builded in the memory of Martyrs) as for dead men, whose
Spirits be living with God. Neither do we there set up Aulters, that on them
we may sacrifice to Martyrs, but to God only we offer Sacrifice, Aulters
avouched
who is the God both of Martyrs, and of us also.

By this saying it is witnessed unto us, that the Aulters erected in Martyrs
Churches, were material, as the Churches were, and that on them Priests made
Sacrifice unto God.

Whereas then M. Jewel admits none other kind of Sacrifice in the new
Testament, than such, as for offering whereof any material Altar is not
required, and S. Augustine speaks of a Sacrifice, that is offered unto God
upon the material Aulters: by this we understand this new doctrine of M. Jewel
touching the Sacrifice, to dissent from the old Doctrine of S. Augustine.
Consider well of it Christian Reader, how safe it is for thee to forsake the
Church, to contemn S. Augustine, Optatus, and al other the old learned
Fathers, in whose works we find often mention of material Aulters, and the
Sacrifice thereupon daily offered: and to pin thy faith on M. Jewels sleeue,
who, as thou see, has no sure ground, but only denies al, and for color
of some defense, shuffleth together by heaps, patches, and pieces of the
Fathers sayings, whereby a confusion is sought, no certainty is taught.

If he will replye against this, Table, and Altar.
saying, that the Fathers call the Altar a table (as to get some authority
unto his remoueable Communion Table he is wont commonly to translate a Table
for an Altar) it may please him to understand, that the Fathers do truly call
it by both names, according to the double use of the Euchariste, which is
ministered upon the same. For the Euchariste is both a Sacrament, and a
Sacrifice. As it is a Sacrament, so is it our heavenly food and sustenance: As
it is a Sacrifice, so is it our daily offering. Unto the which two uses S.
Cyprian having respect, says of the bread and Chalice consecrated by solemn
blessing, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
that it is both a medicine, and also a Sacrifice, to heal our infirmities,
and to purge our iniquities. Therefore the Fathers call it a Table, in
consideration we receive from thens our substantial food. And for that cause
it is always covered with a white linen cloth. They call it an Altar, for
that we offer upon it the heavenly Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, and
for that cause also it is fastened to the place where it stands. Wherefore
the Table does not exclude the Altar, nor does the Altar exclude the Table.
But both are one in deed, and yet double in respect of the double use of the
thing wrought upon it. So that to turn the Altar into a Table, is but a seely
shifte, and a poor refuge.

This much being now known, it will be easy to perceive, that the authorities
by him alleged be to be understood, either of the Aulters, Sacrifices, smoke,
and other Ceremonies used in the old law, or of mere spiritual Sacrifices,
which require none other Altar, than the heart of man. Chrysostom. Homil. in
Psalm. 95.
So is the saying of S. Chrysostom here to be taken. The gift of the Gospel
(whereby is meant what so ever man offers to God now in the state of the new
Testament) ascends up unto God without blood without smoke, without Altar,
and without the other Ceremonies, for so is it in the author. Who sees not by
these words, the filthy shedding of blood, the stinking smoke, and therefore
also the Altar of the Jews in the old law, to be signified? Our Sacrifice
is pure and clean, without the smoke of burnt grease and flesh, and so
without that Altar, whereon such things were burnt.

But what is to be said unto the authority alleged out of the second Council of
Nice? M. Jewel here craves help at the second Nice^ Council, which
other^wheres he despises.
what Sacrifice, or Altar means, we Christians in a manner can not tell,
says Leontius cited in that Council. What M. Jewel, will you crave help to the
overthrowing of Aulters of that Council, at which your self, and your
companions do so rage and rail, as being wicked, and contrary to the word of
God for allowing the Images of Christ, and his Saints, and for cursing the
ouerthrowers and breakers of them? I perceive you be not so scrupulous, nor
timorous, but you will take an Apple at your ennimies hand. You are more hardy,
then Laoocon was, Aeneid. 2.
who said, as the Poet reports, Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes.

Touching the matter it self, you overmuch abuse your Readers M. Jewel. If ever
you have read the place your self, and have not only trusted your gatherers
and serchers, you could not be ignorant, that it makes nothing at al against
the Aulters used in Christian Churches, but that only it declares, the
Aulters, and sacrifices of the Paynimes, wherewith they honored their Idols,
to be now so far grown out of use, that the Christians skarse knew, what
was meant by them. The words going before, and following do declare the meaning
of the place. Which I think good here to rehearse, both for the Readers better
instruction, and that your false dealing be plainly detected.

Thus then the holy Bishop Leontius says, writing against the Jews, Council.
Nicen. 2. Session. 4.
who charged the Christians with idolatry for worshipping God, and his
Saints, before their Images. Qua tandem front Iudaei nos vocant Idololatras?
Vbi nunc sunt, quae olim ab ipsis oblatae sunt Idolis, boum, ouiu^, and
filiorum quoque victimae? Vbi sacrificioru^ fumi? Vbi Arae, and profusiones
sanguinum? Nos vero Christiani propemodu^ quid ^it Ara, quid victima,
ignoramus. Nam Graeci adulteris quibusdom hominibus, homicidis, impuris and
scelestis templa dicarunt, eorumque Idola cum illis ipsis Deos fecerunt, neque
sane vel Prophetarum, vel Sanctorum Martyrum nomine Templum, aut aram
appellantes. With what face do the Jews call us Idolaters? where be now
becomme the sacrifices of Oxen, of sheep, and of Children also, which they once
offered to Idols? Where is the smoke of the sacrifices? The Aulters and
Sacrifices of the Panimes, be unknown to the Christians.
Where are the Aulters, and sheddinges of blood? As for us that be Christians,
we are well nigh ignorant, what an Altar, and what a sacrifice is. The Gentiles
dedicated Temples to certain men being aduoutrers, murderers, filthy, and
abominable, and made their Images (or Idols) and them selves to be taken for
Gods, and yet never called they temple, or Altar by the name of Prophets,
or holy Martyrs.

Who sees not at the first reading, of what kind of Aulters, and Sacrifices,
this place is to be understood? And to speak likewise of the Christians that
be in our time, how many be there, that in manner know not, what such an
Altar and what such a sacrifice is? In all England who ever saw any such? If
they have not been seen, how can they be known, unless it be by reading of
the books of the Gentiles? Neither does Leontius find fault with the
Gentiles, for having Temples, and Aulters, but for dedicating them to Idols,
and not to God, and for not calling them by the names of Gods friends, as of
the Prophets, or holy Martyrs, so as Christian people does use to name their
Churches, Chapels, and Aulters, some of S. Marie, some of S. Peter, some of S.
Paul, some of S. Laurence, etc.

Yet nevertheless they erecte not temples, or Aulters unto any Martyr, but
only unto him that is the God of Martyrs, though for the memories of Martyrs.
For what Prelate standing at the Altar (says S. Augustine) in the places of
Saints bodies, August. co^tra Faust. lib. 20. c. 21
has ever said, We do offer unto thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian? But that
which is offered, is offered unto God that crowned the Martyrs, at the Toumbes
of them, whom he crowned, to the end that by the suggestion of the places
themselves, greater affection may rise to whette our charity both toward
them, whom we may be hable to follow, and toward him, by whose aid we may be
made hable.

In this sense spoke the Learned Bishop Leontius those words, M. Iuels falshod
disclosed.
not to disanulle Aulters in the Churches of Christ, for which purpose you M.
Jewel have alleged them. Neither meant he to signify, that in his time, the
name of Aulters simply and generally, had been strange among the Christians. He
meant only Idolatry Aulters. It was guilefully done of you, to take out a few
words of the whole saying, which being set apart, and divided from that goes
before, and that comes after, seem to make against the ancient custom of
having Aulters in Christian Churches. But the whole place vewed, it soon
appears, how little it serves to your purpose, and how much it discloseth
your wicked falshod. Where is conscience? Where is shame? If you fear not God,
yet think, what the world will say of you. But such a cause would have no
better Advocates.

As for that you bring out of S. Hierome, what makes it for you? Hieronyin
Psalm. 25.
Expounding this verse of the.25. Psalm, I will wash my hands among
Innocents, and I will compass thy Altar rownde about o Lord, makes Altar,
in a moral sense to signify Faith, as hands also to signify works. Now
says he. Altar is as much to say, as Faith. I will compass (this Altar)
rownde about with good-workes. That is to say, I will not put my trust in Faith
alone. I will join unto it also good works. Vnusquisque sanctus altar Domini
in se habet, quae est fides. Every Saint (says he) has the Altar of our
Lord in him, that is Faith. As the real hosts, and Sacrifices, which are
offered up unto God, are laid upon the Altar, and thens are offered: So al our
good works, which be spiritual sacrifices offered up unto God, must be laid
upon Faith, as upon an Altar, and from thens only being offered, they be
acceptable in Gods sight. For without Faith no work is good, ne pleases God.
Now what Argument you can gather out of this place for your purpose, I see not,
Al M. Jewels arguments be such, as of the affirmation of one truth infer
the denial of an other truth.
unless it be this. The spiritual Altar, whereupon our spiritual sacrifices
be offered up to God, is Faith: Ergo, there ought to be no external Altar to
offer up the external Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ upon, which
is the external Sacrifice of the new Testament. But still we answer. Your
Arguments be childish, and of no force, which of the affirmation of one truth,
conclude the denial of an other truth.

Touching that you allege here as out of S. Augustine, I doubt whether any
such saying be in S. Augustine. Certain it is, your quotation is false. And
therefore it may be suspected. Albe it if he say it in some place, it makes
nothing against the real and external Sacrifice of the Church. For the
spiritual Sacrifices of our hearts, exclude not the real Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ: and the pure Aulters of our hearts may well, and do well
stand with the material Aulters of Christian Churches, whereon the unbloody
Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood are offered.

Hereof then, and of that is before in this Division by you said, the
sclendernesse of your Arguments does soon appear. For thus you reason.

The Sacrifices of Prayers, The best Arguments that M. Jew. makes against the
Sacrifice.
Praises, thanks giving, and other the like devotions, are of the Fathers
called unbloody: Ergo, the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ now
offered by Priests of the new Testament, is not called the unbloody
Sacrifice. Item, By report of the ancient Bishop Leontius alleged in the
second Nicen Council, Christen people in manner know not, what an Altar of
Idolatrous Paynimes, and what their Sacrifice is: Ergo, they know not what the
Aulters of our Churches now, nor what the dreadful Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ, is. Item, The Fathers speak much of the spiritual Aulters
of our heart, and of mere spiritual sacrifices: Ergo, they deny, that there be
any material Aulters, and that thereon the real and external Sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood is offered.
Logique is good cheap, where these Arguments be allowed. But he that lacks
a Recorder, may yet pype with an oten reed. If Logique can not handsomely be
applied, to maintain M. Jewels glorious Challenge, yet Rhetorique will do good
service. And yet in Rhetorique it self these Arguments be but childish. As
well might one prove, there is none other heaven, besides our hearts, because S.
Augustine says, August. de Tempore. Sermon. 44
in a Sermon. Corda fide lium coelum sunt. The hearts of the faithful be
heaven. Ergo, heaven that is said to be out of this world, is but a tale. As
well one might say, Christ is not the Son of God, because he is the son of
man. And in a matter of less weight, as well, and by like Logique, one shrewde
boy might say to an other, Jack, I will prove thou have no nose. Thou have
great lolling ears, Ergo, thou have no nose. Of such Arguments we have great
stoare in M. Jewels writings, and in manner none other. For which cause to any
grave and learned man, he seems rather worthy of contempt, then of Answer.
Who so ever co^sidereth, not the number of his words, but the weight of his
sentences, not the multitude of his patched and peeced allegations, but the
force of the matter by the same avouched: shall judge no less. God be thanked,
that heresy has so weak a defense.

The.15. Division.
The Answer.
S. Augustine has many evident sayings touching this matter in his works. One
shall suffice for all, which is in a little treatise, he made contra Iudaeos,
uttered in these words. Cap. ^.
Aperite oculos tandem aliquando, and videte ab Orient sole vsque ad
Occidentem, non in vno loco, vt vobis fuit constitutum, sed in omni loco
offerri Sacrificium Christianorum, non cuilibet Deo, sed ei, qui ista
praedixit, Deo Israel. Open your eyes at last you Jews, and see, that from the
rising of the Sun to the setting, not in one place, as it was appoincted to
you, but in every place the Sacrifice of the Christian people is offered, not
to every God, but to him, Malach. 1.
that prophesied of these things before, the God of Israel. And even so with
that protestation, which S. Augustine made to the Jews, I end this tedious
matter consistinge in manner altogether in allegations, to M. Jewel. Open your
eyes at last M. Jewel, and see how all the holy, and learned Fathers, that have
preached the Faith of Christ from the rising of the Sun to the setting,
have taught this Doctrine, by word, and writing left to the posterity, that
they which under Christ do use the office of a Priest after the order of
Melchisedek, have not only Authority, but also express commandment, to
offer up Christ unto his Father.

The proof of which Doctrine, although it depend of the weight of one place,
yet I have thought good to fortify it with some number, that it may the better
appear to be a most undoubted Truth, not moved greatly with the blame of
tediousnes, where no thanks are sought, but only the defense of the Catholic
Religion is intended.

Jewel.
S. Augustine, as in these words he neither touches, nor signifies this
new manner of offeringe up Christ unto his Father, so in sundry other places
he opens his own meaning plainly, and fully, touching the same. In his
Treaty against the Jews he vvriteth thus: Sacerdotium Aaron iam nullum est
in aliquo templo. August. ad uersus Iudaeos. c. 1
At Christi Sacerdotium aeternum perseuerat in coelo: The (Blouddy) Priesthode
of Aaron is now in no Temple to be found: But the Priesthood of Christ
Continues still ( not upon any Earthely Altar, But) in Heaven. Cont. Aduers.
legis, and proph. lib. 1. ca. 1.
Again: The Priest offers up the Sacrifice of Praise, not after the Order of
Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedek. Eius Sacrificij similitudinem
celebrandam in suae Passionis Memoriam commendauit: and illud, quod Melchisedek
obtulit Deo, iam per totum orbem terrarum videmus offerri. Christ has leafte
unto us a likeness, or Token of that Sacrifice in Remembrance of his Passion:
August. in lib. 80. quast. qu. 61.
And the same, that Melchisedek offered unto God, we see is now offered
throughout the whole World. Holocausti eius Imaginem ad Memoriam Passionis
suae in Ecclesia celebrandam dedit. Christ has given us, to celebrate in his
Church, In eadem quaestione.
an Image or Token of that Sacrifice, for the Remembrance of his Passion. Huius
Sacrificij Caro, and Sanguis ante Aduentum Christi per victimas similitudinum
promittebatur: Augustine. co^t. Faust li. 20. c. 21 De Cons. dis. 2.
Sacrificium. August. de Ciuit. Dei li. 10. c. 5.
In Passione Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur: Post Ascensionem Christi
per Sacramentum Memoriae celebratur. The Fleashe, and Blood of this Sacrifice
before the Cumminge of Christ was promifed by Sacrifices of Resemblance: The
same was performed in deed in the time of Christ's Passion: But after
Christ's Ascension, it is frequented by a Sacrament of Remembrance.
Sacrificium hoc Visibile, Inuisibilis Sacrificij Sacramentum, id est, Sacrum
Signum est. This Visible Sacrifice is a Sacrament, Nazia^. in Apologet.
that is to say, a Token, or Sign of the Sacrifice Invisible. Quod Appellamus
Sacrificium, Signum est, and Repraesentatio Sacrificij: The thing, that we
call a Sacrifice, is a Sign, and Representation of a Sacrifice.

Thus many ways S. Augustine him self teaches us, what he meante by this
word Sacrifice: An Oblation of Praise: A Similitude: a Resemblance: a
Likeness: an Image: a Remembrance: a Token: a Sign: a Representation of a
Sacrifice. So Nazianzene calls it, (...): The Figure, or Token of the Great
Mysteries. To conclude S. Hierome says thus, Hieron. in Psalm. 51.
Tunc acceptabis Sacrificium, vel cum te pro nobis offers Patri: vel cum a
nobis Lauds, and Gratiarum actiones accipis: Then shall thou receive
Sacrifice, either when thou offerest thee self (upon thy Cross) for us unto
thy Father: or when thou receiuest of us Praises and Thankesgeuinge.

Harding.
What this man lacks in weight, he makes up in number. If a controversy
might be decided by a multitude of forged, peeced, maimed, corrupt, and
impertinent sentences shuffled together, this matter were fully concluded. The
Prentises, the common deceived people, the Ministers comen of late from their
shoppes, and handy crafts, and others that can not judge of these points,
think perhaps, that he has acquitted him self like a great Clerk, because
they see such a number of authorities heaped together, and behold the Margent
of his book so painted with quotations. But the wise, who have skill hereof,
whereas among so many places alleged out of the Fathers, never a one proves
his purpose: see well enough, that he is utterly destitute of good matter, and
that he only sets forth an idle show of words.

The two first authorities be not found in the places by him quoted, which
causes suspicion. Notwithstanding the matter is not of great importance. First,
what if S. Augustine say, as here he is made to speak, The Priesthod of Aaron
is now to be found in no temple: The Priesthod of Christ continues still both
in heaven, and in the Church.
but the Priesthod of Christ continues still in heaven? If he reason thus, The
Priesthod of Christ continues still in Heaven, Ergo, it continues not in the
Church: I deny the Argument. For it continues both in heaven, and also in
the Church, though otherwise there, otherwise here. In heaven it continues,
because he is a Priest by nature. And what dignity he has by nature, that
has he not lost, ne put of, by his entering into heaven. And therefore he
continues a Priest there, not by passible renewing of his Sacrifice, but by
presenting him self to God, and by his merciful interpellation and appearing
for us before God with that body, that was once sacrificed for us, Heb 9.
as S. Paul says, Christ is entered into heaven for to appear now in the
sight of God for us. Again, Heb. 7
Evermore he lives, to make suit (unto God) for us.

His Priesthod continues in the Church that is in earth, by the ministry of
men, that under him be Priests of the new Testament, by mean of whom (as
Oecumenius before allegeth, says) he sacrifices, and is sacrificed. Eusebius
declaring the Prophecy of Christ's everlasting Priestod after the order of
Melchisedek, says. The event (or end) of that Prophecy is marvelous to one
that considers, Eusebius. de Demonst. Eua^g. lib. 5 (...).
how our Savior Jesus Christ after the manner of Melchisedek does by his
Ministers even to this time celebrate those things, that apperteine to the
Sacrifice which is among men. And thus your false interlined gloss denying
Sacrifice to be done upon an earthly Altar, which you have impudently added by
a parenthesis unto your Doctor, is controlled and confuted.

The second authority falsely quoted, is this. The Priest offers up the
Sacrifice of praise, not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of
Melchisedek. What conclude you hereof? Ergo, he offers not the real Sacrifice
of the body and blood of Christ? The Argument is naught. For he offers up
both the Sacrifice of praise, and also the body and blood of Christ under
the forms of bread and wine, and therefore after the order and manner of
Melchisedek. This is very simple Logique.

If you had directed the Reader by a true quotation unto the place, where this
authoritne is written, you should have sent him thither, where S. Augustine
makes clearly against you. And therefore of very falshod by wrong quotation
you thought it policy to deceive your Reader. The testimony is to be found
contra aduersar^ legis and Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 20. Per Episco^porum
successiones certis^ma^
Where he says thus. The Church continues from the Apostles time to our
time, and so foreward, by most certain successions of Bishops: and
sacrifices unto God in the body of Christ the Sacrifice of Praise. etc. For
this Church is Israel after the spirit, from whom that Israel after the flesh
is distincted, which served in the shadows of Sacrifices, by the which was
signified THE SINGVLAR SACRIFICE that Israel after the Spirit does now offer
up, The singular Sacrifice.
etc. Out of this Isreal's House God takes not Calves, neither Goats from his
heardes. This (Israel) sacrifices unto God the Sacrifice of Praise, not after
the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedek.

Yet a little after in the same place speaks S. Augustine more plainly of
this Sacrifice. They which read do know (says he) what Melchisedek brought
forth, when he blessed Abraham. And now they be partakers of it, and they see
such a Sacifice now to be offered up unto God in the whole world. He speaks
thereof, as he is wont to speak, when he comes to this Mystery, making
this preface before, They know that read. As who should say, This Mystery is
not to be reveled in open writing, least the despite of Infidels and Heretics
reach unto it. but the beleuers that read the place of Genesis, where it is
spoken of, know what it means. And they are partakers of it by receiving the
Sacrament: and see such kind of Sacrifice to be offered now through the whole
Church, that now is dispersed over the whole world. Behold he speaks of a
Sacrifice that is received of the faithful, and seen euerywhere to be offered.
Which argues the same to be an external, and visible Sacrifice. Al these
properties can not reasonably seem to perteine to a mere spiritual Sacrifice,
but only to the Sacrifice of the Euchariste. Thus teaches S. Augustine there.

Touching the first sentence, if it be true that S. Augustine says, A mark to
know the true Church, which these Gospellers do lack^.
in what rank shall we place you, and your fellows M. Jewel? If ye will challenge
unto you the name and estimation of the Church, by S. Augustines doctrine ye
must show us your continuance from the Apostles time, to these days, and so
foreward to the end (not by a few wrested, falsified, and misconstrued places
of writers seming to blame things that ye like not, but) by most certain
Successions of Bishops. But because ye shall never be hable to show us
Bishops, that have succeeded one after an other in profession of your strange
Doctrines, from the Apostles age to this present time: ye shall not be angry
with us, but with that holy learned Father S. Augustine, if we account your
scattered troops, not for the Church of Christ, nor any part thereof, but
for Dens of thieves, and Synagogues of Antichriste.

Neither do ye sacrifice unto God the Sacrifice of Praise in the body of
Christ, which the Church does, as S. Augustine says: for ye acknowledge no
Sacrifice of the body of Christ at al, in which God is chiefly praised and
thanked for his benefits. The Singular Sacrifice that S. Austine speaks of,
is the Sacrifice of the Eucharist.


Furthermore what Sacrifice is that, whereof the sacrifices of Israel according
to the flesh, were significations, which S. Augustine here calls the Singular
Sacrifice, that Israel after the spirit offers up now? What other is it,
then the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, after an unbloody manner
daily offered in the Church? For of the Sacrifice of the Cross, ye can not
expound it, because the same is done once already, and is not now offered up.
Neither can ye understand it of mere spiritual Sacrifices, for they are not
Singular, neither offered only now, that is to say, in the time of the new
Testament, but are common to the faithful persons, and times of both
Testamentes.

By this it is evident, that the Sacrifice of Praise, which Israel after the
spirit, that is to say, the Church, offers up unto God, not after the order
of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedek, as S. Augustine writes, is the
Sacrifice of the Euchariste, in which the body and blood of Christ is
offered up under the fourmes of bread and wine, Genes. 14.
in which Melchisedek made his Sacrifice forefiguring this.

Your third authority, which you have somedeale corrupted by nipping away
certain words, and by false translation, makes for proof of our Sacrifice,
it helps your Negative nothing at al. The whole sentence truly translated,
August. li. 83. quaestion. q. 61
is this. Christ has commended unto us a likeness of his bloody Sacrifice (for
of that he speaks there) to be celebrated in remembrance of his Passion, to
the end we may see now that, which Melchisedek offered unto God, to be offered
in the Church of Christ through the whole world. Here are touched three
Sacrifices, the Sacrifice of the Cross, Three Sacrifices.
the Sacrifice of the Altar, the Sacrifice of Melchisedek. On the Cross
Christ was sacrificed truly; according to the truth of substance of the thing
sacrificed, and of the manner of sacrificing, which was by shedding of blood,
and killing the host that was to be sacrificed. In the Supper then, and in the
Altar now, he is truly sacrificed, as touching the truth of the substance of
the thing that is offered, that is to say, the body and blood of Christ. For
he said, Luc. 22.
This is my body, this is my blood, do ye this in remembrance, of me: 1. Cor.
11.
But not according to the truth of such manner of sacrificing. For he is
sacrificed vnbloudily, and in Mystery. The body that now is offered, is a live
body. For it is the same in the Sacrament that hong upon the Cross, and that
is now in heaven. But though Christ's body be now a live in the Sacrament, and
the blood in the Body: yet neither is the body of us offered, because it is a
live, and now to be killed, nor the blood, because it is in the body as again
to be shed: but because the body was once killed, and the blood once shed.
that, which is now done, is done in remembrance of that. And hereof it comes,
that this Sacrifice, is oftentimes called of the Fathers in respect of the
bloody Sacrifice of the Cross (as it is in the third, fourth, and fifth
testimony of S, Augustine here alleged to be seen) a likeness, an Image of that
Sacrifice, a memory, or Sacrament of memory. From the affirmation of which
likeness, Image^ memory, Sacrament, representation, or figure, to infer the
denial of a true presence and Sacrifice, is besides al rules of Logique, and
reason, since both stand well together. And yet this is in manner the only
kind of reason and Argument, that M. Jewel uses through his whole Reply, and
otherwheres. Which kind of Arguments they must needs use, if they will use any
at al, who by opening the truth of any question by due distinctions, see their
false doctrine confuted, and therefore make their apparent advantage of
confusion. Which Confusion is soonest wrought by heaps of undiscussed
authorities without declaration of the circumstances, patchedly, and by piece
meal alleged, and iumbled together, as M. Jewel is wont to do.

Likeness and Image, how they signify in the new testament being spoken of the
sacrament.
And remember good Reader, that, whereas S. Augustine here alleged speaks of a
Similitude, or likeness, he means not every common kind of likeness, but a
likeness, that is a Sacrament of the new Testament: Which is a holy effectual,
and visible sign of invisible grace. If thou take away the body and blood of
Christ from this likeness, it shall lack the invisible grace, and so shall it
not be such a likeness, as S. Augustine here speaks of.

Image.
An Image also (which term he uses likewise) in the new Testament considered
in Christ, or his Sacraments, does not signify a bare figure void of the
thing whose Image it is: But rather signifies the true thing it self
exhibited in the form of an other thing, and not in proper shape. De Cons.
Did. 2. Hoc est quod dicimus.
So is Christ Imago Patris, the Image of his Father, appearing in the form
of man. So is the Sacrament of Christ's body the Image of the same body
crucified, yea the body of Christ in the Sacrament invisible, is a Sacrament
and sampler of the same body visible. For so S. Augustine speaks, Caro
videlicet carnis, and sanguis est sacramentum Sanguinis, carne and sanguine,
vtroque inuisibili, spirituali, intelligibili, signatur visibile Domini nostri
Jesus Christi corpus, and palpabile; plenum gratiae omnium virtutum, and diuina
Maiestate. The flesh (of Christ in the Sacrament) is the sacrament of his
flesh, and the blood is a sacrament of his blood. By his flesh and blood
both invisible, spiritual, intelligible, is betokened the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that is visible, palpable, full of the grace of al virtues, and
divine Majesty.

Neither makes it ought for M. Jewel, that S. Augustine calls this
Sacrament, a Sacrament of remembrance. Sacrament of reme^^brance.
Because it were not a Sacrament of remembrance fit for the new Testament,
unless the body and blood of Christ were really contained therein, according
to the saying of Christ, Lucae. 22.
this is my body, this is my blood. For we have no warrant of the Scripture,
that bread and wine is the Sacrament of remembrance.

The.6. authority taken out of S. Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, S. Augustine
falsified by M. Jew.
is falsified by casting unto it, this Pronoune ( hoc) this. Whereby M. Jewel
deceives the unlearned Reader, and such as do not examine his allegations,
causing them to think, that S. Augustine spoke specially of the Sacrifice of
the body and blood of Christ, whereof now we treat, whereas he spoke in that
place of the Sacrifices of the old law, in which brute beasts were slain.
Albeit true it is generally, that visible Sacrifice is a Sacrament, that is to
say, a holy sign, of invisible Sacrifice.

If of this place of S. Augustine M. Jewel will thus frame an Argument against
the real Sacrifice of the Church, August. de ciuita. Dei li. 10. c. 5.
The external and visible Sacrifice of the Church, is a Sacrament, that is, a
sign of the invisible Sacrifice, Ergo, it is not a true and real Sacrifice:
The Argument is to be denied. For by like reason he should prove, that all the
Sacrifices of the old law were no Sacrifices at al, because they were (as S.
Augustine in the place before mentioned says) Sacraments and signs of
internal, invisible, and spiritual Sacrifices.

Sacrifice of two sorts, inward, and outvvard
The.7. authority is with other words reported, then S. Augustine wrote.
Wherein was false meaning. The same helps his cause nothing at al. For
Answer, this much may be said. We are taught by S. Augustine in that place,
that Sacrifice is of two sorts. the one in the reputation of man, August. de
ciuita. Dei li. 10. c. 5.
the other in the sight of God, which in comparison of that other, he calls,
verum Sacrificium, true Sacrifice. Whereas it is written (says he) I had
rather have mercy, then Sacrifice, none other thing is to be understood,
Osee. 6.
but that Sacrifice is preferred before Sacrifice: in as much as that which of
men is called Sacrifice, is a sign of true Sacrifice. And as for mercy, it is
a true Sacrifice. Of all this nothing can be concluded, but that an outward
Sacrifice, is a sign and token of an inward Sacrifice. Whereby it is evident,
that one and the same thing is a Sacrifice, and the sign of a Sacrifice.
Wherefore of the affirmation of a sign or token, by good Argument the Denial
of the thing, can not be inferred.

Al M. Jewels Arguments fail for lack of good logique. for still, he
infers the denial of one truth, of thaffirmatio^ of an other truth.
Whereas then M. Jewel impugneth the Sacrifice with this common Argument, The
Sacrifice of the Church, is a similitude, a likeness, an Image, a remembrance,
a Sacrament of remembrance, a sign, a token of a Sacrifice, and a figure, or a
sampler of great Mysteries, as S. Nazianzen calls it, Ergo, it is not a true
Sacrifice: we tell him, his cause must needs have a fall for lack of a good
Argument, and we counsel him to go to school again to learn better Logique.
How be it more profitable it were for him, to learn better Divinity.

By an example it may be made manifest, how it is both a memory, and
nevertheless the thing it self. Paulus Aemylius that noble man of Rome, and
C. Julius Caesar, and many other noble Romans, after they had acheued great
victories in war, and conquestes, were received into the City of Rome with
Triumph. Every triumph was a memory, and solemn celebration of the memory
of victories by them obtained, and for memories sake of worthy and famous
deeds, each Triumph was kept. Now what a folish Argument were this, if one
had then said: This triumph is celebrated and kept in memory of the great
Conquest, and of the Conqueror, Ergo, the Conqueror him self is not present?
For at such Triumphs the Conquerours were present riding most gloriously in
their chariotes. And every one at such a solemnity was both the Conqueror
him self, and was there in memory of him self having done the worthy Acts,
for which he deserved the honor of a Triumph. So in this Mystery the memory
of Christ's Passion and Death is celebrated, and Christ him self
nevertheless is present, and by the Priest offered up to his Father.

Alleging the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nazianzen falsified
by M. Jew.
calling the blessed Sacrament (...), a pattern, or sampler of great Mysteries,
he has done very falsely, in that he leaves out of the sentence those other
words, (...), as much to say, the external Sacrifice, for (...) is to be
understood. Of which words it follows necessarily, that it is a real and
true Sacrifice. It is a sign he regards not so much the truth, as he
seeks, how by some craft or shifte, he may make an appare^t defense of his
vain Challenge.

Last of al, the place of S. Hierome seems to have been thrust in to make up
the number, and increase the heap. How it relieueth his side, I see not,
unless he will bear men in hand, that the Sacrifice of Praises and
thankesgeuing, must in any wise exclude the Sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ. Which thing when he shall make men believe, then, and not else, may
this place of S. Hierome serve his purpose. Hitherto he has said little to any
purpose. Now comes he in with new Divinity, and utters plain heresy.

Jewel.
Neither has God appointed any certain order of outvvarde Priesthode to make
this Sacrifice. Every Faitheful Christian man has Authority, to offer up, and
to make the same. How be it, this I mean, not of the Ministration of the
holy Sacraments, which only pertains unto the Minister, but only of the
Oblation, and making of this Spiritual Sacrifice. Cypria. De unction Chrsyma.
Thus much I say, least any man, either of malice take occasion, or of
ignorance be deceived. S. Cyprian says, Omnes, qui a Christi nomine dicuntur
Christiani, offerunt Deo Quotidianum Sacrificium, ordinati a Deo Sanctimoniae
Sacerdotes: Al, Orig. in Leuit. hom. 9 1. Pet. 2.
that of Christ be called Christians: offer up unto God the daily Sacrifice,
being ordained of God Priests of holiness. Origin says, Omnes, quicunque, and
caet. Al, that are bathed with the holy ointement, August. in Expositio^e
inchoata, ad Romans Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11. Chrysostom. i^ 2. Corint. Homi. 18.
are made Priests, even as Peter says unto the whole Church, you are the
Chosen Stock, and kingely Priesthode. S. Augustine says, Holocaustum
Dominicae Passionis offert quisque pro peccatis suis: Every man offers up the
Sacrifice of our Lords Passion for his own sins. S. Ambrose says, Inuicem
expectate, vt multorum Oblatio simul celebretur: Wait ye one for an other,
that the Sacrifice of many may be offered together. S. Chrysostom says, In
Mysterijs nihil differt Sacerdos a Subdito: In the holy Mysteries ( the
Ministration only excepted) the Priest differs nothing from the People.

It appears by these Ancient Learned Fathers, that every Christian man is
bound, to offer up the Vnblouddy, and Daily Sacrifice of the Nevve Testamente,
and that in as full, and ample sort, as is the Priest. And therefore M.
Hardinge him self says even in the very Canon of his Mass, Memento Domine
famulorum, famularumque tuarum, and omnium Circumstantium, pro quibus tibi
offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt hoc Sacrificium Laudis: Remember, o Lord, thy
Servants, and al them, that stand about, for whom we offer unto thee, or
else, which do offer unto the, this Sacrifice of Praises.

Out of S. Augustines words M. Hardinge in the end concludes, thus: Christ
is a Priest after the order of melchisedek: Ergo, The Priest has Authority,
to offer up the Son of God in Sacrifice unto his Father. It were hard to
tell us, how this Antecedente, and this Consequente came together. No man has
Authority thus to mince his Logique, but M. Harding.

Harding.
If the Sacrifice be external, That this sacrifice is external.
it behooves the Priesthode also be external. That this Sacrifice is external,
it is clear. For to the making of this Sacrifice external things be
requisite, as bread and wine mixte with water, for the matter: the words of our
Lord outwardly pronounced, for the form: a Man ordered and consecrated into
a Priest, for the Minister. The body also, and blood of Christ it self,
which is the substance offered, though it be spiritually understood, and not
with any outward sense of man perceived, is a real thing of it self consisting
besides, and without the soul, spirit, or mind of man, and may be received
of man's body by the office of the mouth, and is not a mere spiritual thing,
as love, mercy, faith, hope, joy, sorrow, contrition of heart, and such other
things, that have their being only in the mind and spirit.

For proof that it is external by witnesses, no testimony can be plainer,
then that of S. Gregory Nazianzen, whereof the three only later words M
Jewel has three times in this Article alleged, suppressing the other with
crafty silence, because he saw they made directly against him. Nazianz^ in
Apologetico.
Thus he says, (...)? How should I be so bold, as to offer up unto him, the
external Sacrifice, the which is the true sampler of the great Mysteries?

Let no man charge me with falsifying this Father by adding this word, (...),
unto the sentence. the same is in that place necessarily to be understood,
and there it should have been placed expressly by the Author, but that he
thought it better, the Article, (...), to have relation unto (...), thrice put
before in the same sentence, then by ^o often repetition of one word, as with
an unpleasant sound, to offend learned ears, to whose good liking in that
Oration, as also commonly in all his other exact writings, following Polemon in
his manner of writing, as it is reported of him, he much attempered his style.

Double Priesthod double Sacrifice in the nevve Testament.
Now as touching Priesthode, in the new Testament it is double, internal or
spiritual, and external, as our Sacrifices also be double internal and mere
spiritual, and this the chief and singular Sacrifice of the Church, external.
The Internal Priesthode is common to al godly persons, Internal Priesthod.
because they be members of Christ the high King and Priest, and the members
be partakers of what good thinks so ever the head has. God endeweth al with
this Priesthode, whom he washes clean from their sins in the blood of
Christ, consecrating and anointing them with none other oil, then with the
oil of his Grace.

Of this Kind of Priesthode speaks S. Peter and S. Ihon the Apostle. 2 Pet
i. 2.
This Pristhode as we acknowledge, Apoc. 1.5.
so do our Adversaries not deny. For it is neither a degree, nor order, nor
office, nor ministry in the Church. And verily this Priesthode sometimes is
worthier, and of more excellency in a woman, or a child, then in a Bishop,
yea perhaps then in the Pope him self. For in him it is none at al, if he
hap to fall into mortal sin.

Whereas then al Christian persons be Priests, anointed with that Ointment,
1. Joan. 2.
of which S. John speaks, Vos vnctionem habetis a Sancto, ye have the
ointment of the Holy, they ought to offer up and sacrifice somewhat unto God,
soothly them selves, and their bodies, Romans 12.
a lively, holy, and acceptable host to God, as S. Paul admonished. 1. Pet. 2.
And S. Peter calls the faithful, a holy Priesthode, offering spiritual, and
acceptable sacrifices unto God through Jesus Christ.

The other Priesthode is external or owtwarde in the Church, External Priesthod
which is communicated unto certain persons by Consecration, and by Imposition
of hands of Bishops, Character indelebilis.
imprinting into the soul of him that is made a Priest, a mark or Printe,
that can not be put out, the like whereof is imprinted in them, that receive
the Sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation.

Of this Priesthode so communicated by Imposition of hands, and ordination of
a Bishop, speaks S. Paul to Timothe. ^. Tim. 4.
Noli negligere Gratiam, quae in te est, quae data est tibi per prophetiam cum
impositione manuum Presbyterij. Despise not the gift, which is in thee, that
was given thee through Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of
Priesthode. 2. Tim. 1.
Again to him. Stir up the grace of God, that is in thee, through the laying
on of my hands. And in the Epistle to Tite. Tit. 2.
For this intent I leafte thee in Crete, that thou should amend the things
that want, and ordeine Priests in every City, even so as I took order with
thee. Act. 14.
S. Paul also and S. Barnabas did ordeine Priests in every Church, in
Prayer, and fasting, as now a days the custom is observed, when holy orders
be given.

This outward Priesthode, and the ministry of it, is very necessary in the
Church militant. Neither be the Priests deprived of it, if at any time they
fall into mortal sin, as Wiclef held opinion, VViclef.
and was condemned for it in the Council of Constantia. For this Priesthode is
not such a grace given, as makes one acceptable, called of the Divines, Gratia
gratum faciens. It is an office, a dignity, a Degree, and a grace freely
given, Gratia gratis data, as the Divines term it. Neither can the prin^e,
that is imprinted in a Priest, ever be put out by any mortal sin.

Authority to create Priests least to the Church.
That the Church has authority and power to create and ordeine Priests, of
the Apostles, and that the Apostles received the same of Christ, it may be
proved by that Christ said at his last Supper, hoc facite in meam
commemorationem, Luca. 22.
1. Cor. 11.
Do ye this in my remembrance. For if this, which he bad them to do, was a
Sacrifice, as now it has been proved it was: then verily did he institute his
Apostles Priests, except we will say, he bad them to do, and gave them no
authority to do, which were absurd. Now to make and consecrate the body and
blood of Christ, to the end we do our Sacrifice unto God, because it is above
nature, without faculty and power from God it can not be done. Deriuatio^ of
priestly duty.
And because our Lord commanded this Sacrifice to be made until he come, it
is necessary, what leave and power to make the continual and perpetual
Sacrifice Christ gave unto the Apostles, that they transfunded and delivered
over unto their afterco^mers the same, along through al times and ages. For so
after the exposition of Oecumenius, and Eusebius, as it is before mentioned,
the Priesthode of Christ after the order of Melchisedek is everlasting among
men.

Whereas then M. Jewel denies God to have appointed any certain order of
owtward Priestode to make this Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, and
avouches every faithful Christian man to have authority to offer up and make
the same: though there be little hope of good to be done with him, yet for thy
sake good Reader, that thou may see, what trusty teachers these fellows be: I
will here allege some testimoonies of the old learned Fathers for the owtward
Priesthode (albe it the same is proved already because the Sacrifice is
owtwarde) and for that this Sacrifice is to be made by those, that be Priests
by proper and special ordination, and not by every faithful person.

Testimonies for outward Priesthod, and for the Sacrifice to be made by the
special Priests.
LEt us begin with the blessed Martyr, and learned Bishop S. Cyprian, who to
declare the excellency of the Church of Christ that now is, above the old
Synagogue of the Jews, that was under Moses: among other prerogatives
numbreth this for one. Cyprian. de unction Chrismatis.
that in the Church, Non sunt haereditariae successiones Pontificum, vel vni
Leuiticae tribui ministeria assignata, sed de omni tribu, and gente, and
lingua, quos dignos and idoneos Diuinae probat electio, secundum vitae, non
generis meritum, statuit Sacerdotes, quibus Calicem sanguinis sui inexhaustae
plenitudinis abundantia semper refertum conseruandum tradidit, and erogandum.
The successions of Bishops come not by heritage, neither the ministeries be
assigned unto the Leuitical tribe only, but whom Gods election approves to be
worthy and meet, he ordeineth them Priests, out of every tribe, nation, and
tongue, according to the desert of their life, and not of their birth, to whom
he has delivered the Chalice of his blood filled always with infinite
abundance, to be kept, and distributed.

Here the election of God appointing certain special persons to be Priests,
allowed for worthy and meet in respect of good life, not of noble parentage,
the function and ministry whereunto they be ordained, which is to attend
upon the Chalice of Christ's blood, to consecrate, offer up, and distribute
the same (for thus to do belongs to Priests): these things do argue
manifestly, an outward Priesthode, and show as it were to the eye, that they,
who be thus chosen of God, and to whom such ministry and office is committed
in the Church, are special Priests. For certainly, what answer so ever may
be made by a wrangler touching the rest of S. Cyprians saying, Erogatio^ of
Christ's blood
the Erogation here spoken of, that is to say, the giving and distributing of
Christ's blood, pertains not to every Christian man, but to him that
properly and specially, and by consecration of a Bishop is made Priest.

The holy and eloquent Father S. Leo speaking of the Priesthode of Christ
after the Order of Melchisedek, gives us a most plain testimony for the
special and outward Priesthode. Leo. Sermon. 2.
When the Sacrament says he) of this Divine Priesthode comes unto human
functions (that is to say, when men be made Priests) it runs not by way of
generations, neither is that thing chosen, which flesh and blood has
created: but the privilege of Fathers having no place, and the order of
families set aparte, the Church takes those governors, whom the holy Ghost
has prepared: Vt in populo adoptionis Dei cuius vniuersitas sacerdotalis atque
regalis est, non praerogatiua terrenae originis obtineat vnctionem, sed
dignatio coelestis gratiae gignat Antistitem. That in the people of Gods
adoption, whose university is Priestly, and Kingly (that is to say, who in
general and universally are Priests and Kings) it be not the prerogative of
earthly progeny, that shall obtain the anointing, but that he be made a high
Priest, whom the heavenly grace vouchesaueth to ordeine.

Lo to the function and ministry of the Sacrifice of Christ that is after
the order of Melchisedek, the people, whom God has adopted and chosen for his
be not admitted, be they never so much universally Priests and Kings, as the
Scripture calls them, for offering up pure Sacrifices from the Altar of
their heart, and for ruling their flesh, and subduing fleshly lusts unto the
spirit, which are priestly and kingly parts: neither is any of them for doing
this duty a Priest after the Doctrine of S. Leo, but only he, whom the holy
Ghost has prepared, and promoted to have the special anointing of the
external Priesthode, and so is ordained a Priest: for else as touching the
universal Anointing of the holy Ghost, every spiritual Priest, that is to
say, every faithful person, has it.

Leo hom. 3. in Anniuers. die suae As^u^pt.
The same S. Leo gives us yet a more evident testimony for the outward and
special Priesthode in an other place, saying thus: Omnes in Christo
regeneratos, Crucis signum efficit Reges. Sancti vero spiritus vnctio consecrat
Sacerdotes, vt praeter istam specialem nostri ministerij seruitute^, vniuersi
spiritales and rationales Christiani agnoscant se regij generis, and
sacerdotalis officij esse consortes. The sign of the Cross, makes all that be
regenerate in Christ Kings. But the anointing of the holy Ghost does
consecrate Priests, Special Priesthod
that besides this Special service of our Ministry, al spiritual and
reasonable Christians universally acknowledge them selves to be partakers of a
Kingly lineage, and of a Priestly office. Here he acknowlegeth a special
Priesthode, and an universal Priesthode: that, is the external, this, is the
internal and spiritual Priesthood. That, pertains to certain called thereto
and anointed by the holy Ghost, this, to al in general that be faithful
Christians. And though he confess al Christians to be Priests, yet he
acknowledges some to be Priests after an other manner, who be chosen and
admitted Ad specialem Ministerij Seruitutem, that is to say, to do a special
service of Priestly ministry.

This special and external Priesthode S. Augustine understands, August. ad
Hieronym. epist. 19.
where he writes thus unto S. Hierome a Priest, him self being a Bishop.
Quanquam secundum honorum vocabula, quae iam vsus Ecclesiae obtinuit,
Episcopatus Presbyterio mayor sit, tamen Augustinus Hieronymo minor est. Albe
it after the rate of words of Dignities, which the custom of the Church has
now obtained, Bisshoprike is greater then Priesthode, yet is Augustine less
then Hierome.

S. Ambrose expounding the place of the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ambros. in
Epist. ad Ephesians. 4.
where S. Paul speaks of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors by Christ placed in the Church: by Apostles, understands Bisshops,
and by Prophets, he understands them, that be first in degree after Bishops,
which Order may now be the Order of a Priest, qui ordo nunc potest esse
Presbyteri.
says he, meaning the Special Priesthood given by Consecration of a Bishop.

Of this Priesthode is to be understood the.3. Canon of the.4. Council of
Carthage, in which those two hundred and fourteen Bishops, Council. Carthag. 4.
Can. 3.
among whom S. Augustine was one, as it is certain by his own subscription,
describe a form how a Priest ought to be ordered, that is, consecrated into
that holy Order.

Of this Priesthode speaks S. Augustine writing Against the Epistle of
Permenian, Augustine. lib. 2. co^tra epist. Parmen. c. 13.
where making mention, of Baptism and of power to baptize, he says thus.
Vtrumque Sacramentum est, and quadam consecratione vtrumque homini datur, illud
cum baptizatur, istud cum ordinatur. Ideoque in Catholica vtrumque non licet
iterari. Either (of them) is a Sacrament, and by a certain Consecration either
is given unto a man, that, when he is baptized, this, when he is ordered. And
therefore in the Catholic Church either may not be iterated, or taken twice.
For the outward and special Priesthod these few may suffice.

That the Sacrifice is not to be consecrate and made, but only by the Special
Priests.
NOW touching that this Sacrifice is to be consecrated, and made, not by every
faithful Christian person, but by those that by special consecration be ordered
Priests, let us allege the testimonies of some Fathers.

What force is in the word of our Savior, Do ye this in my remembrance, Luc.
22.
spoken to none but to the Apostles, 1. Cor. 11.
for they only were present at the Supper, if it were ernestly urged, the
learned do well conceive. But because these men will not soon be confuted by
Scripture, for that they can not be brought to take it in that sense, in which
the Church has always been taught by the holy Ghost to understand it: let
us hear the voice of the Church uttered by some learned and ancient Father.

The Bishop (says S. Dionyse the Areopagite S. Paul's scholar) of reverence
and Bisshoply duty, Dionysius in Ecclesiastic. Hierar. cap. 3. part. 3.
that he offers up the healthful Sacrifice, which passes his worthiness,
excuses him self, in seemly wise first crying out unto him, Thou (o Lord)
have spoken the word, Do ye this in my remembrance. If it were lauful for
every Christian to perform this duty, Bisshoply duty.
what needed S. Dionyse to speak of Bishoply duty? Again in that he allegeth
the word of Christ, Do ye this in my remembrance, for excuse of his
boldness: he signifies this office to apperteine, not to every faithful
person, but to that special order of men, who have succeeded the Apostles, to
whom only that word was first spoken, that is to say, to them that be called
to the special Priesthode, whereunto Christ then promoted his Apostles, by
that word giving power, office, and commission.

S. Iustine Philosopher and Martyr says likewise. Justinius Martyr.
The Apostles in their Commentaries (or books) which are called (Euangelia)
Gospels, have recorded, that Christ gave commandment unto them so, that they
should consecrate this meat by the prayers of the word of him self, that he
took bread, and after he had given thanks, said: Do ye this in remembrance of
me, This is my body. Item, that he said having taken the Cup, after he had
given thanks, This is my blood, and that he gave it to them alone. Mark here
(good Rearde) by witness of this blessed Martyr, who was so nygh unto the
Apostles time, the commandment to do that which Christ did at his supper,
that is to say, to consecrate, and offer the body and blood of Christ, was
given to the Apostles, and consequently to their successors (for he bad them
so to do until he come), and to none else. Of his words this Argument may
well be gathered.

They only have commandment to do that Christ did at the Supper, to whom
he gave the Sacrament, but by report of S. Iustine he gave the Sacrament to
the Apostles only: Ergo, the Apostles only, and such as in the function of
Priesthod there instituted do succeed them, have auctorite to do that which
Christ did. Now Christ consecrated his body and blood, and offered the same,
and made this Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedek. Therefore they be
Priests only (Priests I mean Hierarchical) that be appointed, by Christ,
and have authority to consecrate, and make this Sacrifice, which is the point
that M. Jewel here denies, but how impudently he denies it, any man may see,
that has eyes to see.

That this authority, and ministry, pertains not to every faithful
Christian man, as M. Jewel holds opinion, but to Priests only, the old
learned writer Tertullian, acknowlegeth with these words. Eucharistiae
Sacramentum nec de aliorum manu, Tertullia^. lib. de Corona militis.
quam Praesidentium sumimus. We receive not the Sacrament of the Eucharist, of
the hand of others, then of the Rulers, by that he understood Priests.

Of this authority speaks S. Ambrose expounding this place of S. Paul to
Timothe. 1. Tim. 4.
Despise not the grace, which has been given unto thee through prophecy with
laying on of hands of Priesthode. These be his words. Prophetia est, Ambros.
in 1. Tim. 4.
qua eligitur quasi Doctor futurus idoneus, manus vero impositiones verba sunt
mystica, quibus confirmatur ad opus electus, accipiens auctoritatem test
conscientia sua, vt audeat vice Domini sacrificium Deo offerre. Prophecy is,
says he, by which is chosen, as a man would say, one that shall prove a fit
teacher, but the layinges on of hand are words mystical, by which he that is
chosen, is confirmed unto the work, receiving authority his own conscience
being witness, that he may be so bold as in the stead of our Lord to offer
up the Sacrifice unto God.

This place of S. Paul, and the witness of conscience, as he says, tells
them, who be made Priests by lawful imposition of hands, what authority they
have, and how little they ought to be a fearde (being in them selves duly
examined and approved) to offer up unto God the most holy Sacrifice of the
Euchariste, in the steed of our Lord.

And here is to be noted, that we make this Sacrifice, and offer it up unto
God, not as of our selves, and in our own persons, but vice Domini, in the
steed of our Lord. Christ it is that consecrateth, In this Sacrifice, what
is Christ, what are we.
that offers, that sacrifices. He is the Priest and the Sacrifice.
Nevertheless we, that have received the holy Order of Priesthode by lawful
imposition of hands, do also in our degree consecrate, and sacrifice. But how?
As ministers, in the person of Christ, in the steed of our Lord. Christ
only and alone (we confess) is the true Priest. Priests are Christ's vicares
in man making this Sacrifice.
For by the Oblation of his own body he only has done the office of the true
Mediator, and has reconciled us to God. And with that body he appears
before his Father now in heaven. We are vicarij Sacerdotes, his Vicars, and
vicegerentes in this behalf, and do the office of Priesthode in steed of him.

Eusebius says notably, that the event and issue of David's Prophecy, Thou art
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek, is seen in this, that
Christ perfourmeth (...), the things that belong to the Sacrifice which is
among men, Oecumen. in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 5.
yet to this day by his ministers. We are but (...) ministers, and by the
mediation or mean of these ministerial and vicare Priests, Christ
sacrifices, and is sacrificed, says Oecumenius.

To further proof hereof S. Basil says in Liturgia, Basil. in Liturgia.
speaking unto Christ. For thine unspeakable and incomprehensible goodness,
without any change and turning thou have been made man, and have ben called
our hye Bishop, (and huius ministratorij and incruenti Sacrificij
consecrationem nobis tradidisti) and thou have delivered unto us the
consecration of this Ministratorious and unbloody Sacrifice. Lo he calls this
Sacrifice, the Ministratorious Sacrifice, because in making it wear but
Ministers of our Lord, and do his steed Unbloody he calls it, because it is
offered up without bloodshed, being the same that was offered upon the Cross
with bloodshed. And here appears the vain cauil of M. Jewel, who refers
the term, unbloody, Unbloody, spoken of the Sacrifice of the Altar.
only to the mere spiritual sacrifices of our devotion. In offering whereof we
are not only Ministers of Christ, but being endewed with grace, we offer up
such kind of Sacrifice in our own person.

This much have I thought good here to inculcate, and make plain, the rather,
because both the folowers of M. Jewel cease not to utter unseemly and lewd
talk against Priests, saying in scorn, that they make God, and because M.
Jewel him self in the beginning of his Reply to this Article, makes so much
a do for that a Mortal, and a Miserable man should offer up the Immortal Son
of God unto his Father. Reply. page. 555.
Where he says further, that God never appointed any such Sacrifice to be
made by any Mortal Creature. As well he might find fault with Kings, and
Judges of the world, for that being mortal and miserable men, they take upon
them to rule and judge, whereas in deed and truth Christ only is King of al,
and Judge of al. For to me al power is given in heaven and in earh, says he,
Matthew. 28. And S. John says. Johan. 5.
Omne iudicium dedit Filio: God has given al judgment to his Son.

In the former testimony of S. Basil, Power to consecrate by Christ delivered
unto the special Priests only.
it is to be considered, that he says to Christ in his Mass, thou have
delivered the Consecration of this Sacrifice unto us, meaning, when Christ
said, Do ye this in my remembrance. Whereby we understand M. Jewels general and
common Priests quite excluded. Else let him show, if he can, where ever
Christ delivered power to consecrate the body and blood of Christ, to the
Lay people, that be not Priests, but as al Christian folk in general, men,
women and children are.

S. Hierome says writing to Heliodorus, Hieron ad Heliodor.
Absit, vt de ijs quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes,
Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt: per quos and nos Christiani sumus. God
forbid, that I should speak any sinistre (or evil) thing against them, who
succeding in degree of the Apostles, do with their sacred mowthe consecrate
the body of Christ: by whom also we are Christians.

Again in his Dialogue against the Luciferians he says, Hieron. Co^tra
Luciferianos
that one Hilarious could not consecrate the Euchariste, because he was but a
Deacon. If one that has received the holy order of Deaconship, can not
consecrate and make this Sacrifice, but to do this it must be a Priest, as S.
Hierome teaches: How shall we believe M. Jewel, who tells us here, that every
faithful Christian man has authority to make it, and to offer it?

The policy of Satan, and M. Jewel, is, to abandon the external Priesthode, To
what end tends M. Jewels doctrine against the blessed Sacrifice.
and to set the lay people a work, bearing them in hand, they have
authority, to make, and offer up this Sacrifice: to the intent they may bring to
pass, first, that the most holy and dredful Mysteries be contemned, next,
that when there is none, that has authority to consecrate the body, and
blood of Christ, and to remitte sins, the remembrance of Christ's Death
vanish away, and the people remain fast bound in the bands of their sins.
Our Lord, who came to dissolve the works of Satan, confound the wicked
attemptes, 1. Joan. 3.
and damnable doctrine of Satan's Minister.

The Churches determination touching this point
I trust so many as fear God, and have care of their souls, in this weighty
matter will little regard, what he says, but rather consider, how much safer it
is to hearken unto the determination of the Chuche in the great general Council
of Laterane uttered by these words. Hoc vtique Sacramentum nemo potest
conficere, Council. Lateranen.
nisi Sacerdos fuerit rite ordinatus secundum claues Ecclesiae, quas ipse
concessit Apostolis, and eorum successoribus Jesus Christus. Noman can make (or
consecrate) this Sacrament, except he be a Priest duly ordered according to
the keys of the Church, Mat. 16.
which Jesus Christ him self has granted unto the Apostles, Joan. 20.
and their Successors. Here I have said yenough of the outward Priesthode, and
that this Sacrifice can not be made, but by a Priest laufully ordered, and
consecrated with due laying on of hands.

But whereas M. Jewel gives authority to every faithful Christian man, that
is to say, to Lay men, women, boys, gyrles, and children (for they be
contained under the name of Faithful Christian men) to make, and offer up this
Sacrifice, he makes this Prouiso, M. Jewels prouiso.
and puts in as it were a Caveat, that it be not understood of the
Ministration of the Sacraments, For that pertains, says he, only to the
Minister, but only of the Oblation, and making of this Spiritual Sacrifice.
Verily I doubt whether this Minister understands, what he speaks, 1. Tim.
1.
and whereof he affirms. So confuse is his tale. Every Christian man by him
may make this Sacrifice. But none can minister the Sacraments, but a Minister.
I can not well reason with him, unless I knew where to have him, what he
means by This Sacrifice, what by making, what by his Minister, what by
Ministration, what by Sacraments. For our whole Religion by these men now
turned vpside down, and the old terms being of them abused to signify other
things, then before they did: al Disputation with them must needs be obscure.

Concerning the Sacrifice, he names it, This Spiritual Sacrifice. If he had
spoken indefinitely of Spiritual Sacrifice, every Lay faithful person may (I
grant) and ought to make, and offer up unto God Spiritual Sacrifice. For
besides other, Contrite heart.
a Contrite heart by report of Scripture is such a Sacrifice, that al are bound
to offer up unto God. But calling this Sacrifice, whereof our controversy is,
spiritual, he seems to use sutteltie, and to provide him self a starting
hole, if he happen to be chafed and pursued. In respect of understanding, it
is spiritual, for that which is hid under the forms of bread and wine, with
understanding it is conceived, and is not with bodily sense perceived. But in
respect of the substance of it, which is the Real body and blood of Christ,
it is not properly, and altogether spiritual, specially as Spirit does exclude
the vetitie of Body. Affirming then that every faithful man has authority to
make, and offer this Sacrifice, what sowndeth this tale, but that every such
has authority to make, and consecaate, and offer up the body and blood of
our Lord, which belongs only to them that properly be Priests, as now I
have proved? This is both a Sacrament, and a Sacrifice. If none may minister
this Secrament, but the Minister (for he speaks of Sacraments generally):
how much less may any make, that is to say, consecrate, or outwardly offer
this Sacrifice, but he that is duly made Priest by Bishoply Consecration,
External oblation propre to Priests, internal pertains also to the faithful
people.
and laying on of hands? Outwardly offer I say, whereby I mean the actual,
external, and ministerial offering: For else I acknowledge, that by vow,
affection, and devotion of heart, the faithful and godly people does also offer
up unto God this Sacrifice.

Touching the testimonies here alleged, where S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. de
vnct. Crismat.
All that of Christ be called Christians, do offer unto God Daily Sacrifice,
ordained of God Priests of holiness: he means it of the common spiritual
sacrifices of our devotion, which of bounden duty we offer up daily, and not
of this Singular Sacrifice, which, because it is daily offered for that we
daily sin, that a remembrance of Christ's Death be renewed, being the chief
of all the Sacrifices, that we daily offer up unto God: the learned Fathers
oftentimes have called, Quotidianum Sacrificium, the daily Sacrifice.

Wherefore M. Jewel does very untruly, The daily Sacrifice, and A daily
Sacrifice.
and contrary to his own knowledge, in this place to turn it, The Daily
Sacrifice: as though S. Cyprian had meant of this Sacrifice of the body and
blood of Christ. Of what Sacrifice it is to be understood, it is soon
judged, by that he makes al Christians the offerers of the same. Therefore in
his translation he should have called it, not The daily Sacrifice, but a daily
Sacrifice.

That he allegeth here out of Origin, Origin. in Leuit. Homil. 9.
makes nothing against the Catholic Doctrine touching this Sacrifice. Origin
only teaches, which we also do teach, that al good Christian folk are
spiritual Priests. Such Sacrifices, Spiritual sacrifices, spiritual Priesthod.
such Priesthode, and such Priests. The Christians common sacrifices be mere
spiritual, for they offer up them selves, Praises, thanks, Confession, a
contrite heart, a troubled spirit, and such other the like, which are mere
spiritual. Of the same rate is their Priesthode.

The pieces of sentences cut out of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and S.
Chrysostom, as they do nothing relieve M. Jewels cause: so do they nothing
hinder ours. And because they be idly, and to no direct purpose alleged, but
as it seems, only to increase the heap: it is not worth labor in setting
forth the large circumstance of them to spend time, and to answer unto them.
Yet be the two last in my Reioindre to the first Article of M. Jewels Challenge
sufficiently answered.

Chrysostom. in. 2. Cor. Hom. 18.
But as for S. Chrysostom, he is by M. Jewel so impudently falsified in this
place, that I should injury the Truth, if I dissembled it. He makes S.
Chrysostom thus to say, In Mysterijs nihil differt Sacerdos a Subdito. In the
holy Mysteries the Priest differs nothing from the people (whereby he would
persuade, M. Jew. fovvly falsifieth S. Chrysostom.
that touching the Sacrifice duly to be made, beside the Ministration, by which
he means only his Ministers giving of bread and wine at the new found
communion, the priest does no more then the people) whereas S. Chrysostom
says far otherwise. Est vbi nihil differt Sacerdos a subdito, vt quando
fruendum est horrendis Mysterijs. There is a time (says he) when the Priest
differs nothing from the subject (that is from one of the Laietie) as when
they must receive the dreadful Mysteries.

Is there no difference, whether one say, there is a time, or place, where the
Priest differs not from the people (which exception negative manifestly
includes an affirmation of a difference in a certain time, or place) or
generally, the Priest differs nothing from the people? Out upon such
shameless corruption.

Touching the true understanding of the place, when the Sacrifice is to be
received, which is the body and blood of Christ, the subject, that is, any
Lay person what so ever, Leuit. ^^. and 22.
has as good part, and receives as worthy a thing, as the Priest. For it is
not now, as it was in the old Law (so much S. Chrysostom says there) when
the Priest received one piece of the Beasts sacrificed, and the people an
other piece, but when we come to receive the Mysteries, we al participate of
one heavenly bread, to al is proponed (says he) one body and one cup. Both
Priest and people offers, and how each.


That thus we pray in the Canon of the Mass, Remember o Lord thy Servants,
and al them, that stand about, for whom we offer unto thee, or else, who do
offer unto thee, this Sacrifice of praise: all this gladly we grant. For not
only the Priests, but also the faithful Christian people do offer up this
Sacrifice, which here M. Jewel calls the unbloody, and Daily Sacrifice of
the new Testament, meaning notwithstanding thereby, not the body and blood of
Christ, but a mere spiritual Sacrifice of Praise, thinking by the name of the
Sacrifice of Praise, to exclude the Real Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood,
whereas none other is so much a Sacrifice of praise, and thanks, as this
Sacrifice is. Touching the Priests, and the peoples part in this behalf,
look what the people does in good affection and vow, the same do the
Priests in Ministry, says the learned Pope Innocentius Tertius.
Innocentius. 3. De officio Missae. li. ^ cap. 20.


As for the Argument, which M. Jewel says I conclude out of S. Augustines
words, he may scoff at it, as he list, being the invention of his own meery
head by me not so much as once dreamed of. It is not so hard, to tell, how the
Antecedent and Consequent of it came together, as it is for him to show, how I
have so concluded out of S. Augustines words. For in this place, as S.
Augustine alludeth to the Prophecy of Malachie, so of Melchisedek he speaks
not so much as one word. No man has a grace to fight with his own shadow instead of his adversary, but M. Jewel. What he means by mincing of my
Logique, I wot not. But verily by this, and a thousand mo places, it is now
well known, what a number of lies and corruptions he has minced and shrid
together, to fill up the Hotchepotte of his Reply.

Jewel.
Christ only is that Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedek:
He has made an endless Sacrifice: He him self has offered up him self unto
God his Father upon the Cross. Therefore God the Father says unto him: Thou
art that Priest forever: not any mortal Creature, Hebrae. 7. and. 9.
or vvorldly vvight, but thou (only) being both God, and man, Psalm. 110.
art that Priest for ever. S. Paul says, We ar made perfect, and
Sanctified by that one Sacrifice once made upon the Cross. Hebrae. 9.


1. Joan. 2.
S. Ihon the Evangelist says: He is the propitiaton, and Sacrifice for our
sins.

1. Pet. 2.
S. Peter says. He carried our sins in his Body upon the Tree. 2. Cor. 5.
S. Paul says, God was in Christ reconcilinge the world unto him self.
Therefore S. John the Baptiste says, Johan. 1.
Behold^ that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

If M. Hardinge, and his fellows doubt hereof, as they seem to do, let
Ceriste him self bear witness to the price of his own Blood. Hanging
upon the Cross, and yeldinge up the Sprite, he sealed up al with these
words, Consummatum est: That is to say, This is the Sacrifice for sin:
Hereby my Fathers wrath is paci^ied: hereby al things are made perfect.

Thus Sacrifice is but one: we may look for none other. It is full, and
perfect, we may look for no better.

Harding.
What need so many words in a matter confessed? Who denies, but Christ is a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek? Yea he is not That Priest so
only, (upon which word you harp much) but that men may be Priests under
him, and Ministers of the same Priesthode, as before I have proved by witness
of Eusebius, and of Oecumenius. And S. Augustine also says, August. de Ciuit.
Dei lib. 17. cap. 17.
Iam vbique offertur sub Sacerdote Christo, quod protulit Melchisedech, quando
benedixit Abraham. Now is that offered up every where under the Priest Christ,
which Melchisedek brought forth when he blessed Abraham: whereby he
understands not only the bare figure bread and wine, but more specially the
body and blood of Christ now really contained under the forms of bread and
wine after consecration, and then signified and forefigured by bread and wine.

True it is, no mortal Creature, or worldly wight, as you speak, is that
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. To what end bring you this in?
Christ also is the Lamb of God, Joan. 1.
that takes away the sins of the world: He is the propiciation, and
Sacrifice for our sins. What conclude you of al your needeles number of
allegations? Whereas you say, that I, and my fellows seem to doubt hereof, you
say like your self. The words of Dronckerdes, of Skoldes, and of Common
Liars, must not always be taken for a sclaunder.

This Sacrifice is but one, say you, we may look for none other, it is full and
perfect, we may look for no better. Is this the matter, for which you have
spent so many words and textes? Why sir I pray you, is there any man so far
an ennemie to Christ, and to his Death, that now tells you of mo
redemptions, then one? of an other Redeming Sacrifice besides that of the
Cross? of any perfiter, and better, then that? If there be any such, let him
be punished (in Gods name) to the example of al blasphemers: yea if ye will, let
him be handled as il, as ye would longer this, have handled Bishop Boner that
constant Confessor of God, if ye could have had so much law thereto as ye had
malice: Or as ye would have handled me, when M. Grindal procured some of the
Queen's Guard with his own men to be sent out by night in all haste, unto a
place in Essex, I know not where, to take me, and bring me prisoner to London,
being at good rest in my bed at Louaine.

Touching this point, we tell you, and this is not the first time we have told
it you. There is but one Sacrifice of it self sufficient for the Redemption of
Mankind. There is but one Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world:
Joan. 1.
and that one Lamb was never but once killed for taking away sins. The
Sacrifice that now is daily offered, in the Church, is done in remembrance of
that was once done for our Redemption upon the Cross. We pretend not to make
a new work of Redemption, as though that which Christ wrought upon the
Cross, were insufficie^t, and imperfect. For better declaration of that which
we do, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebr. Homil. 17,
S. Chrysostom demands, Do we not offer every day? Yeas, says he, we do
offer: but we do it for remembrance of his death. And this Sacrifice is one,
not many. How one, and not many? In as much as it was once offered, it was
offered up into the most holy of al holy. But this Sacrifice is a sampler of
that, we offer up always the self same thing. August. co^tra Faust. lib. 6.
c. 5. Ibid. lib. 20. ca. 21. August. li. De fide ad Petrum. cap. 19.
All the Jews sacrifices by many and diverse ways signified the one Sacrifice,
the memory of which now we celebrate, says S. Augustine. After Christ's
Ascension it is celebrated by the Sacrament of memory, says he in an other
place. Item, In this Sacrifice (says he) there is a thankesgeuing and
commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he offered for us, and of his
blood, which he shed for us.

But you will say, we grant that a memory is celebrated, we deny the real
Sacrifice. And we tell you, that the memory or commemoration excludes not the
real Sacrifice. It is both commemoratiue, This Sacrifice is both
Co^memoratiue and Real.
and Real. For there is both the memory of Christ's death, and the thing it
self that suffered death. For prouse hereof it may please you to consider one
sentence of S. Augustine in steed of many, that it were easy to allege. Thus
he says. Augu contra Faust. lib. 20. ca. 18.
Iam Christiani peracti eiusdem Sacrificij memoriam celebra^t sacrosancta
oblatione and participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi: The Christians do
celebrate the memory of the same Sacrifice (that was made upon the Cross) now
done and paste, by the holy oblation, and participation of the body and blood
of Christ. Lo M, Jewel, here you see it to be a memory, and nevertheless the
body and blood to be offered, which are the thing, and the substance it self
of the Sacrifice.

The weakness of your cause is such, that unless your Arguments proceed so,
as you may iustle away one truth by an other, you have nothing to say. And thus
always you reason, though to no purpose, least ye should seem to say nothing,
and so to be without al defense of the Doctrine, that ye deceive Gods people
withal. For if that appear openly, ye stand in fear, least ye should lose
your lyuinges, your Dignities, your wives, your wanton fleshly pleasures, and
what else, I know not.

Jewel.
S. Peter says, Christ offers up us unto God his Father. S. Paul says,
1. Pet. 3.
Through Christ we have access to the Throne of Glory. Heb. 4.
What then means M. Hardinge, thus to tell us, and to bear the world in
hand, that contrary wise, he has Authority, to offer up Christ, and to
present him before the Throne of Glory? Or how dares he, to desire God, to
receive his only begoten Son into favor, and favorably and fatherly to
look upon him at his request? For thus he bids his prayer even in his
Canon, even in the secreteste, and deuoutest part of his Mass. Super quae
propitio, ac sereno vultu, etc. Upon these things ( that is to say, says
Gabriel Biel upon the Body, and Blood of Christ thy Son) O Lord look
down with a merciful, and cheereful countenance: and receive the same ( the
Body, and Blood of thy Son (as thou did in old times receive the
Sacrifice of Abel, and of Abraham (which was a vveather, or a calfe, or some
other like thing). Thus he, not only takes upon him, to pray for Christ,
but also compares the Sacrifice of the Son of God with the Sacrifice of
brute Cattaile. If he deny any part hereof, his own Canon, his own
Massebooke vvil reprove him. If this be not Blasphemy, what thing can be
called Blasphemy?

Harding.
To answer to all that is objected, in order, first, S. Peter says not
altogether, as you report him. But thus he says. 1. Pet. 3.
Christ once died for our sins, the Just for the unjust, to the end he
might offer up us unto God. Neither speaks S. Paul, as you have set him to
school, and teach him to speak, but otherwise. Adeamus cum fiducia ad
thronum gratiae eius, etc. Let us go unto the seat of his grace with
confidence, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help at need. Now
Sir to justify that you have here said, Heb. 4.
A priest to offer up Christ unto his Father in the Euchariste, how can you
prove it to be done contrariwise to ought, that either S. Peter, or S. Paul
here says? Thus you reason, your Allegations supposed to be just. Christ
offers up us unto God, M. Jewels Argument.
Item, Through Christ we have access to the throne of Grace: Ergo, a Priest
has not authority to offer up Christ unto God in the Sacrament.

O profounde Logique, O sharp wit, O invincible Disputer. Here your own
skoffing Rhetorique might well be returned upon you. It were hard to tell us,
how this Antecedent, and Consequent came together. No man has authority thus
to mince his Logique, but M. Jewel. Why Sir, must it needs follow, that if
Christ (who, is the head of his Church, under which name both he, and the
Church be oftentimes contained) have offered up us unto God, that we may not
offer up Christ unto God?

I marvel that so learned a Minister, as by purporte of your Arrogant fond
Challenge it appears you take your self to be, should be ignorant of that S.
Augustine writes notably in his tenth book De Ciuitate Dei: August. de Ciuit.
Dei li. 10. c. 20.
where speaking of this very Sacrifice, calling it the daily Sacrifice of the
Church, he says, Ipsius Corporis ipse est Caput, and ipsius Capitis ipsa est
Corpus, tam ipsa per ipsum, quam ipse per ipsam suetus offerri. Christ him
self is the head of his body (the Church) and the Church is the body of that
Head, as well the Church by him, as he by the Church is wount to be offered up.

Lo here you see a mutual Oblation. Christ offers us to God, and we offer
Christ to God: so far of it is, that his offering of us, should exclude our
offering of him. Thus appears the peeuishnes of your Argument.

Of like force, and wit is the reason, if it be deduced of the other
scripture alleged as out of S. Paul. For what though through Christ we have
access unto the throne of grace, Ergo, may not a Priest offer up Christ to
the Father in the Sacrament? You must devise us a new Logique, as you have
devised us a new Divinity, before ye shall prove these Arg^mentes to be ought
worth.

A defense of the Canon of the Mass against M. Jewels scoffs.
YOU find great fault with the holy Canon of the Mass, uttering the spite of
your blasphemous heart against it with vile terms of skoffing, as though in it
the Priest desired God (for these be your words) to receive his only begotten
son into favor, and favorably and fatherly to look upon him at his
request. And further to aggrauate the matter, you say, that he takes upon him
not only to pray for Christ, but also that he compares the Sacrifice of the
Son of God, with the Sacrifice of brute Cataile. For proof hereof you
refer your Reader to the Canon of the Mass, and to the Mass book, Gabriel
Biel also for color of your better credit you bring in as a witness, who
wrote upon the Canon.

All this is a false and a slanderous lie. And albeit you direct your whole
talk to my person, yet with the same you inueigh not only against me, but
also against all the Priests of Christ's Church, that be, or have been since
the Apostles, yea against that learned and ancient Bishop S. Ambrose, who
has, and allows the same prayer in his book de Sacramentis. And furthermore
against all the holy people of God, for they specially bid that prayer, as it is
expressed in the Canon (sed and plebs tua sancta) though the words be
pronunced by a Priest.

For answer this we say. The Priest in the Canon of the Mass prays not for
Christ the natural Son of God, that God be favorable unto him, who can not
but infinitely above the reach of man's understanding fauer, and love him, of
whom he said, This is my derely beloved Son, Matthew. 3.
in whom I am well pleased: But humbly he besecheth God, that he vouchesafe
favorably to look upon the gifts, which the Canon names, the holy Bread of
eternal life, and Cup of everlasting salvation, and to accept them to our
behoof. And though Gabriel Biel by the same understand (as true it is) the
Body, and blood of Christ, yet he expounds the place in such wise, that
had you ever read it, shame (if any were in you) should have withdrawn you
from making mention of his name.

Whereas the Priest besecheth God, that he with his merciful countenance
vouchesafe to behold those gifts, and take them in good worth, as in old
time he took the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedek, the which were
figures of this Sacrifice: by this it is not meant, that the Son of God be
received into favor and be accepted of God, but that he vouchesafe to accept
and take in good worth, the Action of the Priest, whereby he offers up unto
him in Mystery, Christ the pure Lamb, under the forms of bread and wine.

Basil. in Liturgia.
In this sense S. Basil prays in the Canon of his Mass, where he says thus.
Respice super nos Deus, and super hanc nostram Latriam, and suscipe eam, sicuti
suscepisti munera Abel, sacrificium Noe, holocaustum Abrahae, etc. Look upon
us o God, and upon this our worship, and receive it, as thou did receive
the gifts of Abel, A true exposition of the prayer that M. Ievvel reproves
out of Gabriel Biel. Lectione. 55.
the sacrifice of Noe, the burnt offering of Abraham. etc.

This prayer (of the Canon) says Gabriel Biel, whereby God is besought to
accept and mercifully to fauer, pertains to the offerers. For they being
afraid of their sins, and distrusting their own virtue, offer up an
acceptable Sacrifice, and beseech God, that through the same they may be
accepted, which they doubt not of, but that it is accepted. Wherefore they
pray, that he will accept it, as touching the behalf of them that offer.

S. Chrysostom in his Mass prays. for the precious gifts. Chrysostom. in
Liturgia.
That this manner of prayer seem the less strange, and the less subject to
the reproach and spite of Heretics, it is to be considered, that S.
Chrysostom in his Mass has the like. Where he prays for these most holy
and precious gifts. His words be these. Pro oblatis and sanctificatis
preciosis Donis, Dominum deprecemur. For the precious gifts offered, and
sanctified, let us pray unto our Lord. Go your way now M. Jewel, and like an
Hicke Scorner ask of S. Chrysostom, how he dares to pray to God, for the
Son of God. For these gifts being duly sanctified and consecrated by the
Priest, he takes for the body and blood of Christ, and therefore for Christ
him self the Son of God.

Upon this place of S. Chrysostomes Mass, thus writes Nicolaus Cabasilas the
Grecian in his exposition. Cabasilas in expositione Liturgiae.
Let us pray to our Lord for the sanctified gifts, not that they receive
sanctification (for to that end he named them sanctified, that thou should
not so think) but that they imparte him unto us, that is to say, his grace.
Again he says there. Oremus, inquit, pro Donis, vt in nos operentur, ne ad
hanc gratiam non sit potens, sicuti quando cum hominibus versabatur hoc
omnipotens corpus, in nonnullis Ciuitatibus non potuit signa facere propter
eorum incredulitatem. Let us pray (says Chrysostom) for the Gifts, that they
may work upon us, least he be not of power to the working of this grace, as
this almighty Body, when it was conversant with men, in certain Cities Marc. 6.
was not hable to work Miracles, for their unbelief. Beware Reader thou
understand not this of Christ's absolute power, but of the dispensation then
taken in hand. For of his absolute power he was hable to work Miracles,
whether they believed, or otherwise. Though he be hable always to heal us, and
to work miraculously with us, yet oftentimes the river of his Divine virtue,
by our ingratitude and incredulity, is so stopped from his course, that it is
not powered upon us. Which I thought good to note, that thou be not deceived.

According to this former meaning, the Priest may well pray in his Mass, that
God wol vouchesafe mercifully to look upon, and to accept those gifts, to
wit, the body and blood of Christ, that they may have virtue to work the
effect of grace in us, that is to say, that the course of grace, which their
virtue is to work on their behalf, be not stopped from us, by our
unworthiness.

And here it is to be considered, that when a condition of a suit is by secret
meaning annexed unto a gift presented, which most commonly happeth, the party
that presents it, besecheth him to whom it is presented, to receive it with
good will, and take it in good worth. Which if he profess to do, then the
presentour trusts to obtain his suit secretly contained in the condition of
the gift. Now as when either by him self, or by an other he desires, that
his gift may be accepted, his meaning is specially, that he him self making
suit, or that his request be accepted: so in the Canon of the Mass the
Priest, and in him Gods holy people prays, that God favorably receive those
gifts, meaning, that they them selves, and their suit be favorably received,
as being a condition annexed by inward intention to their offering of the
gifts. So that in this sense al has relation to them that present and offer.

Chysost. in Liturgia.
And therefore S. Chysostome after that he has said, Let us pray to our Lord
for the precious gifts offered, and sanctified: forthwith adds, vt clemens
Deus, qui suscepit ea in sancto and coelesti intelligibili. Altari suo, mittat
nobis propterea gratiam and donum sancti Spiritus. That our merciful God, who
has received them in his holy and heavenly intelligible Altar, vouchesafe to
send us for the same, the grace and gift of the Holy Ghost. Behold Reader,
he prays for the precious gifts, that for them God send his grace. What is
this to say, but that he prays not for the gifts considered in them self,
but for grace to be given to the offerers, through the gifts, and for the
gifts sake? This is one sense, whereby the Prayer of the Canon is cleared of
al reproach.

AN other sense there is, The Cano^ of the Mass defended by an other
declaration.
according to which this Prayer of the Canon may reasonably seem to contain
nothing, that is absurd. For clearenes hereof this saying of S. Augustine is
here to be considered. Hoc est Sacrificium Christianorum. Multi vnum Corpus
sumus in Christo, quod etiam Sacramento Altaris Fidelibus noto frequentat
Ecclesia, August. de Ciui. Dei. lib. 10. c. 6
vbi ei demonstratur, quod in ea Oblatione quam offert, ipsa offeratur. This is
the Sacrifice of the Christians, says he. We being many are one body in
Christ, which thing the Church also frequenteth in the Sacrament of the
Altar known to the Faithful, In this S^crifice the Church is offered.
where it is showed unto the Church, that in that Oblation which it offers,
(the Church it self is offered.

Mark good Reader, in that oblation which the Church offers up unto God,
the Church it self is offered, because it offers Christ, in whom the
Church, that is to say, the number of the Faithful, is one body, he being the
head, they the members. And forasmuch as the head and members make one body,
that is not separated: where Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar is offered,
there also is the Church offered. According to this doctrine the prayer of the
Priest pronouncing the Canon of the Mass, may be referred to Christ being
offered, in respect of the Church, which Church is offered up whole, that is
to say the body with the Head. So then thereof this sense redoundeth. O
heavenly Father look mercifully upon these gifts, and vouchesafe to accept
them, as touching the Church, which is offered.

Neither is it a strange thing in the Scriptures, the words of Christ spoken
as of Christ him self, to be referred to the Church, as to the whole body,
yet so, as sometimes the speech be understood of the head only, sometimes
of the body only, which is the Church. For example may be alleged the words of
the Psalm, which our Savior Christ spoke hanging on the Cross. Deus meus,
Psalm. 21.
Deus meus, quare me dereliquisti? My God, my God, Math. 27
why have thou forsaken me? S. Augustine having rehearsed, Why have thou
forsaken me? says, Quare dicitur, nisi quia nos ibi eramus, August. in Psalm.
21. expositione secu^da.
nisi quia Corpus Christi Ecclesia? Wherefore is this said, but because we were
there, but because the Church is the body of Christ? Likewise there a little
after. Dixit vtique de me, de te, de illo. Corpus enim suum gerebat, id est,
Ecclesiam. He speak thus (says he meaning Christ) of me, of thee, of him.
For he bare his dody, that is, his Church. Again of certain things spoken
in that Psalm by Christ, yet not truly understood of Christ, but of the
Church, he says, Illa vox, membrorum ipsius vox erat, non Capitis. That
voice, was the voice of his members, not of the head. So the prayer of the
Priest in the Canon of the Mass being referred to the Church, which is the
body of Christ, and not specially to the person of Christ, as he is considered
besides and without the Church, contains nothing whereat M. Jewel, or any
other such Scorner, can skoffe, or reprove.

Verily if there had been any thing worthy of reprehension in those words of
the holy Canon, The prayer of the holy Cano^ found in S. Ambrose.
S. Ambrose that ancient and worthy Bishop would not have alleged the same, as
he does, to set forth the greatness, and worthiness of this Sacrament. Thus he
rehearses the prayer, that M. Jewel skoffeth at, as it is before set forth.
Sacerdos dicit, Ergo memores, etc. The Priest says: We therefore being
myndeful of that most glorious Passion, Ambros. de sacramentis. li. 4. cap. 5
and resurrection from Hell, and ascension into heaven, do offer unto thee (o
God) this unspotted Sacrifice, reasonable Sacrifice, unbloody Sacrifice, this
holy bread, and cup of life everlasting, and we beseech and pray thee, that
thou receive this Oblation in thy hye Altar by the hands of thy Angels, as
thou did vouchesafe to receive the gifts of thy just Child Abel, and the
sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that which thy highest Priest
Melchisedek offered up unto thee.

Thus appears both the auncientie, and the authority of the Roman Canon,
since it is brought in as of good authority, by S. Ambrose, as if it were a
thing in his time commonly used in the Church, and reverently esteemed. And
therefore M. Jewel, as I said before, your skornes and skoffes touch not me,
they touch al Priests, the holy people of God, S. Ambrose, and the Church
that was in and before his time. The less cause have I to be moved therewith,
and you the more to be ashamed of your self, would God it were enough to drive
you to repent of such wicked follies.

ALso whereas you say in great spite, that in the prayer of the Canon I compare
the Sacrifice of the Son of God, with the Sacrifice of brute Cataile: it is
as false and slanderous, as the rest of your scorneful tale is. We desire God,
that he vouchesafe to accept these gifts at our hands, as he vouchesaued to
accept the gifts, and sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedek. In which
prayer, Sacrifice is not compared with Sacrifice in them selves, but Gods good
acceptance of our doing is prayed for, comparable to that, wherewith God
accepted the doing of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedek in offering their
Sacrifices. The Aduerbe, Sicuti, Sicuti (as) in the Canon reports not
equality, but a likeness.
that is to say, As, in this prayer, as in many other places, signifies, not
an equality, but a likeness. God forbid, but we should acknowledge and
confess, this Sacrifice, which is Christ, to be infinitely more acceptable
to God, then the Sacrifice of Abel, were it sheep, goat, or calfe, then the
Sacrifice of Abraham, whether it were his Son Isaac, or the ram, that was
tied by the horns in the brambles, or the Sacrifice of Melchisedek, Genesis 22.
Genesis 14.
which was bread and wine. For there is no Sacrifice comparable to this, this
passes al. And therefore for the right construction of the Canon, we must
consider similitude, rather then equality. such similitude I mean, as might
be of the figure toward the truth.

Neither yet does the Aduerbe, Sicuti (as) note an equality of similitude or
likeness, according to the self same degree of likeness as touching the
Sacrifices them selves, but a certain deegree of likeness, as touching the
offerers. So then the sense shall be this. Accept these gifts o God, as thou
did accept the gifts or Sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedek,
which were acceptable to thee not for their own worthiness, but for the
worthiness of that Sacrifice, which they prefigured, and for the faith, and
devotion of them that offered the same, Genesis 4.
for the Scripture says, God looked upon Abel, and upon his gifts. Even so
that our Sacrifice may be made acceptable unto thee, besides that of it self
it pleases thee always, let it also please of our part that offer it, that
is to say, make us that do offer it, by faith, and devotion such, as Abel,
Abraham, and Melchisedek were. He that calls this blasphemy, shows him
self to be without al sense of piety and godliness.

Jewel.
But God vvil answer such a Blasphemous, and rash Sacrificer: I know my
Son: In him my heart is pleased. But what art thou? Who bade thee thus to
pray? Who required such Sacrifice at thy hand?

Harding.
God grant that he accept us, and this Sacrifice at our hands, until he
answer thus unto us. This is not, ne shall never be Gods answer. It is the
answer of an heretic, the ennimie of God, and of the Sacrifice. God knows
his Son, in him he is pleased, therefore this Sacrifice being the Body and
Blood of him, can not be to him, but of al other most pleasant. Thus to pray,
we have been taught by the Apostles, their Successors, and by the Church
always governed by the holy Ghost. If by prayer, Consecration of the Host be
meant, which, as I have showed before, is not seldom called by the name of
Prayer: the same, as the Sacrifice it self, we have been taught of Christ,
who at his last Supper took bread, gave thanks, blessed, brake, Luc. 22.
gave to his Disciples saying, Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Likewise it is
to be said of the Cup. By doing this, he taught us the new Oblation of the
new Testament, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32.
which the Church received of the Apostles, and offers it unto God through
the whole world, as S. Irenaeus says.

Neither has he only taught us this in and by his Apostles, Christ commanded
this Sacrifice to be made.
but has also commanded them, and us their Successors in this office, to do
the same. Which I show the rather, for that M. Jewel asks, who requires
this Sacrifice at our hand. S. Chrysostom calls it plainly a
Commandment, where after consecration of the blood, he says, Memores igitur
salutaris huius mandati, Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
etc. te laudamus, te benedicimus, tibi agimus gratias. Being therefore
mindeful of this healthful Commandment, etc. we praise thee, we bless thee,
we give thanks unto thee, and beseech thee our God. Therefore S. Germanus
Archbishop of Constantinople writes thus. Ipse dixit, Hoc est Corpus meum,
hic Sanguis meus. Germanus in consideratione rerum Ecclesiast.
Ipse and Apostolis inssit, and per illos vniuersae Ecelsiae, hoc facere. Hoc
enim, art, facite in meam commemorationem. Non sane id facere iussisset, nisi
vim inditurus fuisser, vt id facere liceret. He him self said, This is my
body, this is my blood. He him self both gave commandment to the Apostles,
and through them to the whole Church, to do this. For do ye this (faith he)
in my remembrance. Verily he would not have commanded them to do it, except
he would have given them power, that it might be lauful for them to do it.

Let M. Jewel demand of S. Chrysostom, who required him to make this
Sacrifiee, who says thus in an other place. Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. hom. 24.
In the time of the old Testament, when men were more imperfect, the blood
that they offered up unto Idols, God would take him self, that he might so
turn them away from Idols, which was a sign of an unspeakable love. But
now in the new Testament he has prepared a far more wounderful, and
honorable Sacrifice, both whereas he changed the Sacrifice, and also
commanded (seipsum offerendum) him self to be offered in place of the
slaughter of brute beasts.

Let him demand of S. Cyprian, how he durst to be so bold, as to write,
Jesus Christus Dominus Deus noster, Cyprian. li. 2. epist. 3.
Sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui
commemorationem praecepit. Jesus Christ our Lord and God offered the
Sacrifice first him self unto God his Father, and commanded this to be made
in remembrance of him. And that this Sacrifice is his body and blood, there he
declares. M. Jewel should do well for his credites sake, to allege us but one
so plain a place, as these places are, where any Catholic learned Doctor,
old, or new ever said, that this Sacrifice is not to be made. Were there any
such, it should not have been kept in silence all this while, we may be well
assured.

Jewel.
O M. Hardinge, God open the eyes of your heart, that you may se^ the
miserable nakedness of your side. Deceive not your self. Mock^ not the world.
Consider better of your Authorities. Of all the holy Learned Fathers, of whom,
ye tell us, ye have such st^are, ye are not yet hable to show us one, either
Greek, or Latin: or Heritique, or Catholic: from the risinge of the Son,
to the Son goeinge down, that ever said, as you say, A mortal man has
Authority, and power, to offer up in Sacrifice the Son of God.

Talk of your stoare, when ye have tried it better. Thras^ vvil talk of
that, he has not. And somevvhat it may serve to fraie the simple. But the
wise vvil think it folly.

Harding.
O M. Jewel, God give you a simple and an humble heart, that grace may enter.
God open your eyes to see the wretched malice, wherewith your heart is fraught
against the Church of Christ. Beware you continue not in this desperate
mind, and purpose: least you cast your self, and so many as by you shall be
deceived, into everlasting damnation. If that move you not, yet let not the
fillie folly of this vain world amaze your senses. Let not the pleasure of
this fickle felicity, which presently you enjoy, wholly withdraw your mind
from consideration of that, which is to come hereafter. Take heed, your
deceived favorers with their light praise, and fawning flaterie, make not a
fool of you. Kick no more against the prick: go not obout to darke^ the
bright Sun, with smoothering smokes.

Touching the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, what stoare of
testimonies (whereat you cease not to skosse) I have brought for it, how little
you have to say against it, and all that you have said, of how little pith and
substance it is: al may see, that have eyes to see. The learned, and al they
that can judge, do see it, and consider of it, I doubt not. And that is
enough, touching my part, and the defense of the Catholic doctrine. Would
God, it were enough also touching the holesom persuasion of the people. Your
self also now doutlesse do see it. Yet for your worldly estimations sake,
having made such an Arrogant Challenge, you may not seem to see it. At least
what so ever you see, you will not confess your errrour.

Thus in oversight to boast of sight, in darkness to crake of light, Who
plays Thraso his part, the Chalenger, or Defender.
in weakness to speak of strength, in matters, for which of your side no
learning can be showed, to challenge al men alive: this is the part of Thraso.
But in this Article of the Sacrifice, for which we have so manifest Scripture,
so many Doctors, so many Councels, so common, and so long continued custom,
and faith of the Church, for proof thereof to auouche stoare of testimonies:
it is not the part of Thraso, it is the confidence of him, that knoweth^ how
sufficiently the Catholic Religion may be defended against heretics. This
serves not to fray the simple, as you say. it serves to call back the
presumptuous rashness of a new Gospeller, to animate right believers, and to
stay the simple. As for the wise, whether they will more condemn of folly, me,
for showing just confidence in defense of the truth, or you, for making such
a proud Challenge against the truth: I leave it to their secret judgments.

Bring us but one plain sentence of any Scripture, ancient Doctor, or Council
making clearly for you, that a Priest has not authority, and therefore may
not offer up Christ in the Euchariste, as I have brought many for proof of
the contrary: and I will be content the name of Thraso be not returned upon
you. If ye have none to bring, as sure I am ye have not: for your Thrafonical
Challenge, that name will become you better then me, that (how so ever you
wrangle) promise no more, then I perform.

That the Reader go not far for one such sentence among many of our part,
let the very last, alleged out of S. Chrysostom, be considered. In which he
says plainly, Ch^ysost. in 1. Cor. H^st. 24.
that Christ commanded him self to be offered. Which can not be referred to
the Sacrifice of the Cross. For if he had commanded the Jews to Crucify
him, they had not been gilty of his Death. Neither permits the circumstance
of the place, any other to be understood, then the Sacrifice of the Altar,
in which Christ him self, according to his commandment; Do ye this in my
remembrance, is, as I have now proved, really offered.

If in defense of your side you can not show us so much as one sentence of
like clearenes, you must bear with wise men, if they think the great stir
you have made with your Challenge, to be great folly. And likewise must you
bear with your Adversaries, if they report, you have more show of words,
then substance of matter.

To conclude, go plainly to work M. Jewel. The handling of these matters
requires honesty, sincerity, fidelity, truth, conscience, and the fear of
God. Set us forth the light of true things, if ye have any: leave the dark
clouds of youy Phrases, and Figures. Conclude your Doctrine with some firm
Arguments, confirm it with good and sufficient authorities. Be ashamed of
your loose and childish Arguments, by which in manner always you infer the
denial of one truth, by the affirmation of an other truth. Let the world see,
that you allege your testimonies, truly, jointly, and wholly, that you falsify
them not by your divisions, taking one piece here, and an other piece there, by
nipping of, by adding unto, by hewing, mangling, and, when you do least, by
wrong and wrested understanding.

Otherwise if you shall continue to set matters of Faith upon uncertain Phrases,
and Figures, and Tropical speeches, to confound one truth with an other, to
corrupt, to patche together, to mangle, and by other ways to falsify, as
hitherto you have done: be the cotations of your Books Margent never so
thick, be the number of your unlearned and partial Favorers never so great:
the wise, the godly, the learned, shall judge you, as they find you, to be but
a Master of Phrases, a confounder of Truths, a patcher, a mangler, a shifter,
a Falsifier.

THE TABLE.
A
ABra by M. Jewel reported to be S. Hilaries daughter. 172. b This word (Al)
in Scripture ofttimes admits exception of many. 168. a. b. Amalricus his
carcass dug up, and burnt in Paris. 187. a. Anathema pronounced against the
dead. 186. b. Antitypon excludes not the verity of the Mysteries. 80. b.
Antitypon, how it is taken in S. Clement. 81. a. The term Antitypon makes
not for the Sacramentaries. 81. b. Antitypon what it signifies properly. 82. b
Apostles made Priests by Christ at the last Supper. 87. a. b. and in sequent.
The Apostles made vow to forsake al things. 171. b. The Apostles forsook the
company of their wives. Ibidem. Application of Christ's Death no strange
Doctrine. 219. a. Application of this Sacrifice proved. 114. b. 121. a. 162.
a. b. 219. a. Aulters used of the Christians. 9. a. b. 99. a. Altar. 61. a.
130. a. 225. b. 230. a. Altar visible and external. 60. b. 130. a. 143. a.
229. a. and b. Aulters material. 99. a. 229. a. and sequent. External Altar,
argues external Sacrifice. 229. a. Authority given to Priests to offer up the
dreadful Sacrifice. 88. a. 128. a.
B.
Baptism. 9. b. Baptism does not only signify, but also exhibit wasshing of
sins. 83. b. Beza. 17. a. Beza defends it to be lawful, to put Heretics
to death. 179. a. The Bible corrupted by the Protestants. 167. a. b. Bishoply
duty. 246. a. Blouddy, and unbloody referred to one subject. 226. a Burning
of Heretics Dead carcasses no new thing.186. b. and sequent.
C.
Calvin defends it lawful to put Heretics to Death. 197. a The Canon of
the Mass defended against M. Jewels scoffs. 123. b. 254. b. 257. a. The
prayer of the holy Cano^ found in S. Ambrose. 258. a. Ceremonies of the Jews
changed. 9. a. and sequent. Ceremonies of the Christians. 59. a. The Chalenger
plays Thraso his part. 261. b. How we see Christ suffering by Charity.
200. b. Christ truly and in in deed offered. 35. a. Christ offered up his
body at his last Supper. 45. a. 48. a. Christ sacrificed him self at his
Supper. 67. b. 79. b. and sequent. Christ gave his body, and shed his blood at
the Supper, affirmed by certain Fathers. 73. a. Christ sacrifices, and is
sacrificed, by the means or mediation of Priests. 86. a. 127. a. Christ
dies again in this Mystery, and how. 161. b. 162. a. Christ at the Supper
both Priest, and Lamb. 73. b. Christ commanded him self to be offered. 79.
b. 106. b. 259. b. Christ appears before the Father in heaven with his
wounded body. 117. a. 118. a. The Rock was Christ and how 1^7. a. Christ's
being in the Sacrifice and in reading of the Story of the Gospel is different.
199. a. Christ offered the true bread and the true wine at his Supper. 48. a.
204. a. Christ consecrated his body and blood at his Supper. 133. a. The
Church speaks with all tongues. 200. b. The Church beholds Christ and
touches his wounds. 200. b. A mark to know the true Church, which the
Gospellers lack. 237. a. The Church has authority to create Priests. 242.
b. The Churches determination touching the consecration of the Sacrament. 248.
a. Most insolent madness to call in question things generally received in the
Catholic Church. 122. a. Commemoration, example, and sign, exclude not the
real presence, and real oblation. 28. a. 97. b. 98. a. 253. a. Commemoration
and the host different. 194. b. Communion of England compared with
Melchisedeks Sacrifice, which M. Jew. calls Melchisedeks Mass. 211. b.
Conclusions out of S. Chrysostom against M. Jewel. 152. a. and b. 153. b
Contrite heart a Sacrifice. 249. a. Cranmere, and his subscriptions. 183. a.
Crucifying of Christ considered two ways. 259. a.
D
Dare, used for, offerre. 69. a. The Daily Sacrifice, and a Daily Sacrifice.
250. a. David Georges carcass dug up and burnt with his image at Basile.
187. a. Dedication, what thereby is meant in S. Hierome. 213. a. Dicke Adams
hanged at Bristowe for felony, Foxes Martyr. 181. a.
E.
EMamuel the Jews euangelical wedlock to an other man's wife. 175. a The
Euchariste makes our bodies immortal. 84. b. 150. a. The Euchariste what it
is. 83.. b. and sequent. The Euchariste consists of two things. 150. a. The
Eucharist is the Singular Sacrifice. 237. a. External Sacrifice. 138. a. and b.
229. a. 241. a. External Priesthod. 242. a. External Oblation proper to
Priests. 249. b
F.
How we see Christ's wounds by Faith. 200. a. The Faith of the Fathers of
the old Testament, and ours, remains one and the same. 25. a. Either the
Fathers were deceived, or the holy Ghost dissenteth from him self. 7. b
Falsifiers practice. 57. a The holy learned Fathers tale to M. Jewel and his
fellows. 188. a Figure only, excluded. 107. b. Foxes holy Martyrs. 181. a
G.
The fable of the Garnsey woman burnt for heresy. 184. a. Of the woman of
Garneseys child falling out of her belly into the fire. 184. b. Germane Compar,
what thereby is meant in S. Paul. 167. b. Gospel, what it signifies
sometimes. 213. a.
H.
Heretics rob the Church of the greatest Treasure. 44. a. b Heretics
punished by death. 178. b and sequent. Heretics scourged with rods, an old
punishment. 183. a Heretics tongues cut out, an old punishment. 183. b Host,
and vnblouddy joined together. 77. b.
I
M. Jewels objection against the sacrifice taken of the baseness of ma^kinde,
answered. 4. a M. Jewel to prove his Negative, at the first finds no
auncienter doctor, then Theophylacte, a late written. 5. a M. Jewel makes the
Fathers to speak one thing and think an other. 8. b M. Jewel excluded out of
the number of Catholics by Leo his judgment. 10. b M. Jewels reason, why
Priesthood, Aulters, sacrifice, and such other terms, were used of the
Fathers, reproved. 10. b. 11. a M. Jewel utterly takes away the real sacrifice
of the new testament. 22. b M. Jewel makes it a dangerous presu^ptio^, that a
Priest has authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. 49. a M. Jewel like
to false Lapidaries and goldsmithes. 54. b. M. Jewels Custom, for advantage
against his Adversary. 65. a M. Jewel straggleth alone like a lost sheep. 68.
a That absurd to M. Jewel, which S. Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen,
Theophylact, and the holy Fathers allow. 77. b. 78. a M. Ievvel skanneth
Divinity by Phrases. 77. b Scorneful terms used by M. Jewel 86.87. M. Jewels
Greek friend of Oxford trusted of him to much. 99. b M. Jewels scorneful
absurdity of, one and two, once and twice, answered. 115. a M. Jewels
argument absurd. 16. a. 228. a. 254. a. fond. 136. b. forged. 68. b. 207. b.
M. Jew. falsifieth S. Chrysostom. 17. b. 38. b. 70. b. 89. b. 151. a. b. 250. b
M. Jewels shifts against the Sacrifice. 19. b. 155. b. M. Jewels diuerting
from the purpose to impertinent matter. 19. b. 137. b. 142. a. 165. b. 166. b.
176. b. 225. b. M. Jew. forgeth sayings of his own, fathering the^ upon the
Doctors. 24. b. 34. a. 53. b. 54. b. 142. a. 200. a. 202. a. M. Jew. labors
to prove, that the thing and substance of the Sacraments of both Testamentes,
be not sundry, but one. 24. a. b. M. Jewel changes the Doctors words. 32. a.
111. a. 239. b. M. Jewel takes advantage of his own false translation. 38. a.
M. Jew. faineth his Adversary to say that he says not, and thereto directs
his Reply. 43. b. 101. a. 126. a M. Jew. falsifieth S. Augustine. 32. a. 38.
a. 39. a. 239. a. M. Ievvel falsifieth S. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus. 33. b. M.
Jewels falshod plainly detected 34. b. 71. b. 232. a. M. I. falsifieth the
counsel of Nice. 37. a M. Jewel forgeth a saying of his own, and puts it
upon Tertullian. 53. b. M. Jewel falsifieth S. Hierom. 57. b. M. Jewel
falsifieth Eusebius. 59. b. 92. b. M. Jewel falsifieth S. Thomas in Catena
Aurea. 71. a. and b. M. Jewel taken in a foul contradiction. 80. b. M. Jewel
corrupts S. Clement. 48. a. M. Jewels guileful dealing. 100. a. 139. a. 150.
b. 163. b. M. Jewels howes and Ifs, whom they become. 76. a. M. Jew.
falsifieth the words of the answer. 66. a. 75. b. 118. a M. Jewel adds of
his own. 57. a M. Jewel falsely reports the Answer, where it is said
inuisibly offered, he says, inuisibly sacrificed 116. a. 118. b M. Jewel a
begyler of the simple, a mocker of the world, a controller of S. Ambrose, and a
condemner of the whole Church. 1^5. a M. Jew. allegeth the words of the
Authors, of which none be extant bearing the same title. 17. b M. Jewel uses
false translation. 17. b 18. a. 37. a. 40. a. 98. a. 114. b. 177. b 195. b.
204. a. M. Jewel swarueth from the meaning of the Fathers. 54. a. 90. a. M.
Jewel conceeleth the circumstances of places alleged. 57. a. 102. b. 145. a.
149. b. 193. b. 211. a. 227. a. b. 231. b. 241. b. M. Jewel finds
contradiction where none is. 67. a. M. Jewel dissembleth truths (as the Real
presence) found in the Authors. 72. a M. Ievvel labors to put the Fathers
out of credit, and to that end uses light terms. 79. a. 110. a. b M. Ievvel
takes the beginning of a Sentence, and cutteth away the end. 111. a. b. M.
Ievvel deuiseth impudent gloses, and sets them in by way of a Parenthesis.
112. b. M. Jewel reports the Canon of the Mass falsely, to colorable
advantage. 123. a. ^. M. Jewels doctrine only figurative. 103. a. 218. a. M.
Jewel falsifieth S. Cyprian. 111. a M. Jewels coffe. 112. b A Common shifte of
M. Jewels Rhetorique. 129. a M. Jewel falsifieth S. Dionyse. 130. a M. Jew.
falsifieth Pachymeres. 136. a M. Jewel falsifieth S. Gregory Nazianzene. 138.
a. 240. a M. Jewels Logique. 139. a. 239. b. M. Jewel falsifieth Martialis.
143. a. M. Jewel falsifieth S. Irenaeus. 146. a. and b. 149. a. M. Jew. must
yield by reason. 153. a M. Jewels open subscription at Oxford. 182. b. M.
Jewels wrangling. 193. a. M. Jew. falsifieth S. Ambrose. 198. a How M. Jew.
acknowlegeth Christ's presence in the b. Sacrament. 199. b. and sequent. M.
Jew. nipping of sentences. 211. a. M. Jewel speaks directly against his own
knowledge touching Oecumenius. 215. b M. Ievvel dissembleth great points in
Oecumenius. 217. b. and seq. M. Ievvel utters manifest heresy. 221. a. and
sequent. M. Jewels promise in his last Sermon at Paul's Cross. 222. b M.
Jewels trustines. 226. b M. Ievvel by his false and crafty silence justifies
the Catholic Doctrine. 227. a M. Ievvel craves help at the second Nicen
Council, which otherwheres he despises. 231. a M. Jewels best Arguments
against the Sacrifice. 233. a M. Jew. joins together words that be thirty
lines a sunder, and thereof frames a sense to his own purpose. 146. a M. Jew.
makes false gloses, and additions, and sets them forth with that letter,
in which the doctors sayings be printed. 146. a. b. 236. a. That which the
author speaks to one effect, he brings to another. 147. a. 151. a. b M.
Ievvel joins together doubtful points, flat lies, and true tales. 169. b
M. Jew. commonly brings in pieces, and maimed sentences of the Fathers. 193.
a. b. 211. a M. Ievvel leaves out the nominative case, and changes the first
person singular into the third person plural. 138. a. b M. Jew. heweth away
the principal membre of a sentence. 138. b M. Jew. deuiseth a new fallacy.
139. M. Jew. confuted by the places he brings. 145. a. b. 160. a. 191. a. b
M. Jew. graueled with Ireneus. 150. b M. Jew. confidence in lying, and deniing
most manifest Truths. 155. b M. Jewel inconstant in his terms. 159. a. M.
Jew. allegeth S. Augustine where he has no such thing at al. 159. a M. Jew.
craves help of the gloss, which he calls barbarous. 159. b M. Jew.
groundeth him self upon the false translation of the English Bible. 166. b M.
Jew. a scholar of Ihon Fox. 178. b M. Ievvel would the civil Magistrates
justice to be esteemed the Catholic Clergies cruelty. 179. a The end of M.
Jewels doctrine against the blessed Sacrifice. 248. b Image what it
signifies, and how it excludes not the Truth. 161. a 197. b. Image and
likeness how they signify, being spoken of the Sacrament. 238. a Incense, pure
Sacrifice. 59. b Prayer signified by Incense. 57. b 58. a. 62. a Insinuation of
Christ's Death what it means in S. Augustine. 219. b Internal priesthod. 241.
b Internal oblation pertains to al faithful people. 249. b
K
KAterine the Nonne of Metz Peter Martyrs wife. 175. a Christen men in general
how they be Kings and Priests. 12. b
L
Laws to punish Heretics by death. Henrici. 5. an. 2. 178. b. and sequent.
Lies impudent in M. Jewel. 30. a 118. b. 141. a. 147. a. 155. b. 171. a. Three
lies made by M. Ievvel within three lines. 113. a. A notorious and
sclaunderous lie. 177. a
M
MAN mortal and miserable admitted by God to great dignity. 3. b. and seq. In
Manna Christ understood. 24. b Margaret wife of Dulcinus an Adamite. 186. a
Marriage of Priests. 165. b. and seq. Marriage not lawful for all without
exception. 168. b The State of the question between us and the Protestants for
marriage. 174. a In what sense S. Paul calls forbidding of Marriage the
doctrine of Devils. 169. a Martyrdom not argued by patience in dying. 186. a.
Martyrs of two sorts. 180. b The holy Martyrs of John Fox. 181. a Tybourne
Martyrs. 185. b. The prophecy of Malachie foresignifieth the sacrifice of the
Mass. 50. b. 52. a Chrysostom in his Mass prays for the precious gifts.
255. b. Melchisedech a figure of Christian 50. a. 203. b. 208. b The Sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedech was not only upon the Cross, but also at the
Supper. 157. b. Christ at his Supper fulfilled the figure of Melchisedech.
162. a Mechisedek offered bread and wine. 47. b. 133. a. 203. a. 204. b. 206.
and seq. Melchiedeks Sacrifice, and Christ's both diverse, and the same. 204. b
Melchisedech in dignity above Abraham. 208. b. Me^ helpers of God, and how.
120. b. Men offer this Sacrifice, and be Priests after Melchisedeks order
under Christ. 126. b Michael Seruetus procured to be put to death for heresy,
by Calvin and Beza. 179. a Ministers of this Sacrifice be all the people by M.
Ievvel. 88. b The Ministration of the new Communion a new Sacrifice by M.
Ievvel. 95. b Mysteries of the old testament not equal in dignity, truth,
etc. to ours of the new testament. 22. b Wherein consists the memory of
Christ's Death in our Mysteries. 160. a. and seq. How Christ dies again in
this Mystery. 161. b Our Mysteries not significatiue only. 197. a Mysteries
kept secret, and for what cause. 207. b. in the preface. 33. a
N
NIcolas Marsh of Dednam, hanged for felony, made a Martyr by Fox. 181. a
O
OBlation double, one in spirit only, and the other in the Sacrament. 143. b
Four conditions of the Mystical Oblation. 58. b Two Oblations of one body.
113. b Words of Oblation without terms of Oblation. 63. b Oecumenius. 4. 1.
a. 215. a. and seq. Sir Ihon Oldecastle and Sir Roger Acton, traitors, by Fox
made Martyrs. 181. a Of the term Only 103. and sequ. Only in a Mystery,
how it is meant by M. Jew. 103. b. 104. a. Only figurative Sacrifice
overthrown. 133. b. Optatus for the real presence. 92. Origin alleged to have
words which he has not. 17. a. Origin for the sacrifice. 27. b Origin
belied of M. Ievvel, and reasons why. 71. a The Origenians heresy. 177. a
Holy Oil. 34. b
P
PAchymeres proves not M. Jewels purpose. 14. b Patience in dying argues not
Martyrdom. 186. a Pachymeres ansvvered. 135. b. and seq. Paratine of Garnesey.
184. and seq. Paulus tertius godly purpose. 177. a S. Paul whether he were
married. 169. b. S. Paul his Pristhod consisted not altogether in preaching.
18. a. Of what Sacrifice. S. Paul speaks Heb. 9. and 10. 113. b.
Persecutions of two sorts. 180. b. Peter Martyrs Euangelical wedlock. 175. a
Peter the German Foxes Martyr. 181. a. Prayer. 5. b. What is signified by
the name of Prayer. 6. a Prayer taken generally for the service of God. Ibid.
Pure Prayer what it signifies by Tertullian. 55. a. by Eusebius. 62. a. Simple
Prayer. 55. b The Prayer of the Canon defended. 123. b The Prayer of the Canon
expounded. 255. b The Prayer of the Canon of the Mass defended. 123. b. etc.
254. b and sequent. The Sacrifice of Praise how general it is. 144. b. and seq.
Christ a Priest at his last Supper. 73. b. Priests now by ordination and
election, not by succession. 86. a. Christ made the Apostles Priests. 87. a.
The Priesthod after Melchisedechs order far passes the Leuitical Priesthod.
209. a The Priesthod of Christ continues still both in heaven, and in the
Church. 235. b Internal Priesthod. 241. b External Priesthod. 242. a.
Authority to create Priests leafte to the Church. 242. b Deriuation of
Priestly duty. 243. a Special Priesthod. 244. b. and seq. Priests Christ's
vicars and substitutes in making this Sacrifice. 50. a. 247. a. Both Priest,
and people offers, and how each. 25^. a The people offer by giving assent to
the Priests action, and applying their devotion. Ibid. Real Priesthod in the
Church now, ergo real Sacrifice. 11. b Christen men how they be Priests in
general, and also kings. 12. b. Priest in english a name common to Presbyter
and Sacerdos. 13. a. Why S. Paul calls rather Priests, then Sacrificers.
14. a. Priests have authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. 49. a. 50.
a. b. 90. a. b. 143. b. 144. a. 190. b. 216^ a. Continuance of Priests
necessary. 49. b. Priests succeed the Apostles in degree. 49. b. 64. a. Just
punishment, merciful. 179. b
R.
REal presence. 42. a. 72. a. 92. b. 105. b. 107. b. 111. b. 112. a. Real
presence and Sacrifice avouched by S. Chrysostom, dissembled by M. Ievvel. 72.
a Real Sacrifice. 35. b. 42. a. 253. a The name of a Renegate, ansvvered. 182.
a. Who is a Renegate. Ibid. b Reparatio^, repairing, or renewing and
Representatio^ of Christ's Death. 219. a. Robert King of Dednam, and Robert
Debnam of Elsbergholt, hanged for felony, Foxes Martyrs. 181. a.
S
SAbbatum old, and new. 8. b. 9. a Real Sacrifice in the Church. 11. b. 105.
b The substance of the Sacrifice in both Testamentes diverse. 20. b The
substance of bread and wine has no place in our Sacrifice. 21. a The effects
of the Sacrifices of both Laws diverse. Ibi. b. and seq. Real and true
Sacrifice, and Sacrifice in deed. 35. b The Sacrifice of the Altar a true and
real Sacrifice. 36. b. 80. a. 98. b Difference between a true, and the true
Sacrifice. 40. b The Sacrifice that we offer is the Passion of Christ, and
why. 41. b. Christ's body never ceased, nor shall cease to be a Sacrifice. 42.
a The fruictes of this Sacrifice. 44. b. 45. a. The Sacrifice of Christ
avouched in the Gospel by S. Augustines judgment. 45. b Sacrifice spread over
the world. Ibi. In the Sacrifice of the Altar all the conditions of Malachies
prophecy are found. 51. a Sacrifices common to both Testamentes. 51. a The
Sacrifice of the Altar succeed all the Sacrifices of the old Law. 51. b. The
properties attributed to this Sacrifice by Malachie. 63. a Sacrifice avouched
by S. Chrysostom. 72. b. 78. b. 105. b. 114. b. 119. b. 189. a. 192. a. 214.
b. 226. b. The Sacrifice of the Supper, and the Sacrifice of the Cross, one,
and diverse, in diverse respects. 74. a. 78. b. This Sacrifice avouched by the
Nic^n Council. 217. a. How Christ sacrifices. 221. b Ten kinds of
Sacrifices. 226. b Three Sacrifices noted by S. Augustine. 237. b Sacrifices of
two sorts, inward, and outvvard. 239. b This Sacrifice is external. 241. a
Sacrifice taken two ways. 74. a This Sacrifice called Spiritual, and why.
79. a Three kinds of Sacrifices of the new Testament by Eusebius. 93. a A
memory of the Sacrifice of the Cross excludes not the Sacrifice of the
Altar. 98. a Reasons for this Sacrifice. 108. a. 137. b. 190. b. This
Sacrifice is a mean to derive the effect of Christ's Death unto us. 121. a.
This Sacrifice called the tradition of God. 131. b. and sequent. Why the
Fathers spoke at the beginning secretly of this Sacrifice. 132. b. And in the
Preface. 33. a In what sense the Sacrifice is Symbolical, or Figurative. 135. a
S. Dionyse for the Sacrifice. 137. a S. Gregory Nazianzene for the external
Sacrifice. 138. a The Sacrifice of the Altar, the Sacrifice of Praise. 145. a
The Singular Sacrifice. 145. a. 236. b. 237. a Our Sacrifice is the pure
Sacrifice, and why. 151. a S. Cyprian evident for the Sacrifice. 156. a The
Sacrifice after Melchisedeks order both on the Cross, and also at the Supper.
157. b A plain argument for the Sacrifice out of S. Chrysosto^. 190. b. and
seq. The end of Christ's Sacrifice, and of ours. 192. b If Christ leaft no
real Sacrifice to his people, the new Law was left in worse case then the old
etc. 104. b. and 105. a Our Sacrifice a much more marvelous and honorable
sacrifice, then al other. 105. b The substance of the Sacrifice on the Cross,
and Sacrifice on the Altar al one. 113. b The Sacrifice why of Malachie called
the pure Sacrifice. 151. a The Sacrifice of Praise, how general it is. 144. b
Sacrifice, Priesthod, Law go so together, that the bettering of either of them
does infer the bettering of the other. 197. a The difference of Christ being in
the Sacrament, and in the reading of the story of the Gospel. 199. a The
Sacrifice not to be consecrate, but only by the Special Priests. 245. b. and
seq. 248. a. In this Sacrifice what is Christ, what are we. 247. a This
Sacrifice both Commemoratiue, and real. 253. a In this Sacrifice the Church is
offered. 257. a Spiritual Sacrifice, as a contrite heart and such like, not the
proper Sacrifice of the new testament. 140. b Sacerdotes, that is, Sacrificers
be now properly in the Church. 13. b The term Sacerdos, Priest used of the
Fathers, and how. 7. a. and seq. 11. b. The old term Sacrificer used after
the destruction of Jerusalem. 14. a. The term Sacrificer used by S. Dionyse.
15. a. Why S. Paul calls the public persons of the Church Priests,
rather then sacrificers. 14. a Sacrament and Mystery do not importe a
signification of absence of the thing reported to be sacrificed etc. but the
secret manner of sacrificing. etc. 77. b. Why the Sacrament is given us in
form of bread and wine. 82. b. 83 a. The Sacrament called by the name of bread
and wine. 85. b The Sacramentaries Argument. It is a sign of the body, ergo,
not Christ's true body, stark naught. 83. b. The true and real blood of
Christ in the Sacrament. 107. a Sacrament of Remembrance. 239. a If al be
taken away that has no proof of Scripture, what inconvenience vvil follow.
4. b. A Shifte of the new Gospellers against the Fathers testimonies for the
Sacrifice. 8. a. 218. a Sicuti (as,) in the Cano^ reports not equality, but
likeness. 124. b. 258. b Signs of two sorts, significatiue only, and
exhibitiue. 83. b. A Sister woman, what it means in S. Paul. 166. b. and
seq. Spiridion made bishop after he had been married. 171. b Spiridion not
proved by Sozomenus to be a married Bishop. 172. a. Spiritual Sacrifices,
Spiritual Priesthod. 250. a. The reproach of Straggling alone answered. 67. a.
and sequent.
T.
TAble. 225. b. 230. a Temple. 9. b Things signifying, and things signified
called by the same names, and how. 111. b. 112. a. b Things implied though
not uttered in express Terms. 66. b. Thraso his part played by the
Chalenger, rather then by the defender. 261. b. The old translation of the
testament not controlled by Catholics. 70. a Translatours of the Bible into
English false harlots. 167. b Tertullian no martyr. 172. b How the Church
speaks with al tongues. 200. b Transsubstantiation. 29. a. b. 33. a. 84^ b.
92^ b. 112. a. 136. a. ^ne Truth put away by an other truth, M. Jewels common
custom. 16. b. 17. b. 26. b. 27. b. 32. b. 59. a. 98. b. 165. a. 195. a. 198.
b. 202 b. 223. a. 227. b. 233 a. 239. b. Truth not excluded by Image. 161. a
V.
Unbloody Sacrifice. 37. a. b. 41. a. 52. a. 77. a. b. 78. a. 102. a. 214. a.
b. 227. a. b. Unbloody shedding of blood. 76. b 77. a. and b. Vnblouddy Death.
16^. b. Unbloody spoken of the Sacrifice of the Altar. 247. b Christ offered
his own body vnblouddily. 215. b Blouddy and vnblouddy referred to one
subject. 226. a. Untruths uttered by M. Ievvel, three at once. 20. b. 113. a.
147. a. An impudent untruth and lie that can not be excused. 30. a^ 34. b. 171.
a. 177. a. Use and observation of of Sabbatum Pascha, Altar etc. double, old,
and nevve. 8. b. 9. a
W.
Why Christ gave his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine. 30.
a. Wiat beheadded. 183. b. VViued Apostares, and their vvysedom. 168. a.
VViclef. 242. b. Words used of the Fathers to express the manner of this
blouddy Sacrifice. 77. a. William Cowbridge, Foxes Martyr. 181. a William
Flovver Foxes Martyr. Ibid. a.
Y.
Yoke fellow man. 168. a.
Liber iste lectus est and approbatus a viris sacrae Theologiae, and Ang^ici
Idiomatis peritissimis, quibus, sicut and ipsi Authori M. N. Thomae Hardingo,
tuto credendum iudico. Qu^re sine scrupulo edend^n. esse existimo, and magnam
ex hoc argumento vtilitatem spero.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Pe^^i.
Louanij. 23. Augusts. An. 1567.

