A brefe Comedy or interlude concerning the temptacyon of our lord and sauer
Jesus Christ, by Satan in the desert. Compyled by Johan Bale, Anno M.D.XXXVIII.



Jesus was led from thens of the sprece into the wyldernes, to be tempted of
the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nyghtes, he was at
last an hungered. Mathei iiij. Interlocutores, Jesus Christus. Angelus primus.
Satan tentator: Angelus alter.
Balcus Prolocutor.

Praefatio.
Balcus Prolocutor. AFter his baptyme* Christ was Gods son declared.
By the fathers voice, as ye before have heard,
Which sygnyfyeth to us, that we ones baptized
Are the sons of God, by his gift and reward*
And because that we, should have Christ in regard,
He gave unto him, the mighty autoryte,
Of his heavenly word, our only teacher to be.
Now is he gone fourth, into the desert place,
With the holy Ghost, his office to begin.
Where Satan the devil, with his assaults apace,
With colors of craft, and many a subtyle gynne,
Will vndermynde him, yet nothing shall he win,
But shame and rebuke, in the conclusyon fynall,
This tokenneth our raise, and his vnrecurable fall.
Learn first in this act, that we whom Christ does call.
Ought not to follow, the fantasyes of Man,
But the holy Ghost, as our gyde special,
Which to defend us, is he that will and can,
To persecucyon, let us prepare us than,
For that will follow, in them that seek the truth.
Mark in this process, what troubles to Christ ensuth.
Satan assaulteth him, with many a subtyle dryft,
So will he do us, if we take Christ's part.
And when that helps not, he seeks an other shyft,
The rulers among, to put Christ unto smart,
With so many else, as bear him their good heart.
Be ye sure of this, as ye are of daily meat*
If ye follow Christ, with him ye must be beat.
For assaults of Satan, learn here the remedy*
Take the word of God, let that be your defense.
So will Christ teach you, in our next Comedye,
Ernestly prent it, in your quyck intellygence.
Resyst not the world, but with meke pacyence,
If ye be of Christ. Of this herafter ye shall,
Perceive more at large, by the story as it fall.

Incipit Comoedia.
Jesus Christus. IN to this desert, the holy Ghost has brought me,
After my baptyme, of Satan to be tempted*
Thereby to instruct, of Man the imbecyllyte,
That after he has, Gods holy sprete received,
Dyuer^ely he must, of Satan be impugncd,
Least he for Gods gift, should fall into a pride.
And that in parell, he take me for his gyde.
Think not me to fast, because I would you to fast,
For than ye think wrong, and have vain judgment*
But of my fasting, think rather this my cast,
Satan to provoke, to work his cursed intent,
And to teach you ways, his myschefes to prevent,
By the word of God, which must be your defense,
Rather than fastings, to withstand his vyolence.
I have fasted here, the space of forty days,
Perfourmynge that fast, which Moses had in figure,
To stop their mouths with, which babble and prate always
Thus ded our fathers, My name and fame to dysuygure.
Therefore now I taste, of fasting here the rygure,
And am right hungrye, after long abstynence.
This mortal body, complayneth of indygence.

Satan tentator. No where I fourther, but every where I noye,
For I am Satan, the commen aduersarye,
An enemy to Man, him seeking to destroy
And to bring to naught, by my assaults most craftye.
I watch every where, wantynge no polycye,
To trappe him in snare, and make him the child of hell.
What nombre I win, it were very long to tell.
I heard a great noise, in Iordane now of late,
Upon one Jesus, soundynge from heaven above.
This is mine own son, which has withdrawn al hate,
And he that does stand, most hyghly in my love.
My wits the same sound, does not a little move.
He comes to redeem, the kind of Man I fear,
High time is it than, for me the cooles to steare.
I will not leave him* till I know what he is,
And what he entendeth, in this same border hear.
Subtyltie must help, else all will be amys,
A godly pretense, outwardly must I bear,
Semynge relygyouse, devout and sad in my gear.
If he be come now, for the redempcyon of Man,
As I fear he is, I will stop him if I can. Hic simulata religione Christum
aggreditur.
It is a great joy, by my holydome to se,
So virtuous a life, in a young man as you be.
As here thus to wander, in godly contemplacyon.
And to live alone, in the desert solytarye.

Jesus Christus, Your pleasure is it, to utter your fantasye.


Satan tentator. A brother am I, of this desert wilderness,
And full glad would be, to talk with you of goodness*
If ye would accept, my simple cumpanye.

Jesus Christus. I dysdayne nothing, which is of God truly.


Satan tentator. Than will I be bold, a little with you to walk.


Jesus Christus. Do so if ye list, and your mind freely talk.


Satan tentator. Now forsooth and God, it is joy of your life,
That ye take sech pains, and are in virtue so ryfe.
Where so small joys are, to recreate the heart.

Jesus Christus. Here are for pastyme, the wild beasts of the desert,
With whom much better, it is to be conuersaunt,
Than with sech people, as are to God repugnaunt.

Satan tentator. Ye speak it full well, it is even as ye say,
But tell me how long, ye have been here, I you pray.

Jesus Christus. Forty days and nyghtes, without any sustenaunce.


Satan tentator. So much I judged, by your pale countenance.
Then is it no maruele, I trow, though ye hungrye.

Jesus Christus. My stomach declares, the weakness of my body.


Satan tentator. Well, to be pleyne with you, abroad the rumor does ro^ne
Among the people, that ye should be Gods son.
If ye be Gods son, as it has great lykelyhode,
Make of these stones bread, and give your body his fode.

Jesus Christus. No offense is it, to eat when men be hungrye,
But to make stones bread, it is vnnecessarye.
He which in this fast, has been my special gyde,
Fode for my body, is able to provide.
I thank my lord God, I am at no soche need,
As to make stones bread, my body so to feed.
Wha^ I come in place, where God has appointed meat,
Geuynge him high thanks, I shall not spare to eat,

Satan tentator. Not only for that, this symylytude I bring,
But my purpose is* to conclude an other thing.
At the fathers voice, ye took this life in hand,
Minding now to preach, as I do understand.
In case ye do so, ye shall find the office hard.
My mind is in this, ye should your body regard,
And not vndyscretelye, to cast your self away.
Rather take some ease, than ye should so decay.
I put case ye be, Gods son, what can that further?
Preach ye ones the truth, the bishops will ye murder.
Therefore believe not, the voice that ye ded hear,
Though it came from God, for it is unsavory gear.
Beyond your cumpas, rather than ye so run,
Forsake the office, and deny yourself Gods son.

Jesus Christus. Ye speak in that point, very vnaduysedlye,
For it is written, in the eyt of Deutronomye,
Man lives not by bread, or corporal fedynge only,
But by Gods promise, and by his scriptures heavenly.
Here ye persuade me, to recreate my body,
And neglected Gods word, which is great blasphemye.
This caused Adam, from innocencye to fall,
And all his ofsprynge, made miserable and mortal.
Where as is Gods word, there is both sprete and life,
And where that is not, death and dampnacyon is ryfe.
The strength of Gods word, myghtyly sustained Moses,
For forty days space, thereof soch is the goodness.
It fortyfyed Helias, it preserved Daniel,
And help in the desert, the children of Israel.
Sore plages do follow, where Gods word is reject,
For no persuasyon, will I therefore neglect,
That office to do, which God has me commanded,
But in all meekness, it shall be accomplyshed.

Satan tentator. I had rather nay, considering your feblenesse,
For ye are but tuly, ye are no strong person doughtlesse.

Jesus Christus. Well, it is not the bread, that does a man uphold,
But the lord of heaven, with his graees manyfolde.
He that Man create, is able him to norysh,
And after weakness, cause him again to florysh.
Gods word is a rule, for all that man should do,
And out of that rule, no creature ought to go.
He that it follows, can not out of the way,
In meat no^ in drink, in sadness nor in play.

Satan tentator. Ie are styfnecked, ye will follow no good counsel.


Jesus Christus, Yes, when it is soch, as the holy scripture tell.


Satan tentator. Scriptures I know non, for I am but an hermyte I*
I may say to you, it is no part of our stody.
We relygyouse men, live all in contemplacyon,
Scriptures to stodye, is not our occupacyon.
It longs to doctors. Howbeyt I may say to you,
As blind are they as we, in the understanding now.
Well shall it please ye, any farther, with me to walk,
Though I little profyght, yet does it me good to talk.

Jesus Christus. To tarry or go, it is all one to me.


Satan tentator. Let us than wander, into the holy cite,
Of Jerusalem, to se what is there a do.

Jesus Christus. I shall not say nay, but am agreeable thereto.


Satan tentator. My purpose is this, A voice in your ear ded ring,
That ye were Gods sone, and well-beloved darlynge,
And you believe it, but ye are the more unwise,
For to deceive you, it was some subtyle practyse.
Well, upon that voice, ye are given to persyghtnesse
Not else regarding, but to live in ghostlynesse.
Ye watch, fast and pray, ye shine in contemplacyon,
Leadynge here a life, beyond all estymacyon,
No meat will ye eat, but live by Gods word only*
So good are ye w^^t, so perfyght and so holy.
I will bring ye (I trow) to the well of ghostlynesse,
Where I shall fill ye, and glutt ye with holiness.
What, holy, quoth he? Nay, ye were never so holy,
As I will make ye, if ye follow hansomlye.
Here is all holy, here is the holy city,
The holy temple, and the holy prestes here be.
Ye will be holy? well, ye shall be above them all,
Because ye are Gods son, it does ye so befall.
Come here, on the pynnacle, we will be by and by.

Jesus Christus. What mean ye by that? show fourth your fantasy,


Satan tentator. When ye were hungrye, I ded ye first persuade,
Of stones to make bread, but ye would non of that trade.
Ye laid for yourself, that scripture would not serve it,
That was your bucklar, but now I am for ye fyt.
For the suggestyon, that I now shall to ye lay,
I have scripture at hand, ye shall it not denaye.

Jesus Christus Keep it not secret, but let it than be hod.


Satan tentator. If ye do believe, that ye are the son of God,
Believe this also, if ye leap down here in scoff,
From this high pynnacle, ye can take no harm theroff.
And therefore be bold, this enterprise to ieoparde^
If ye be Gods son, cast down your self here backwarde.

Jesus Christus. Truly that need not, here is other remedy,
To the ground to go, than to fall down folyshlye.
Here are gresynges made, to go up and down thereby,
What need I than leap, to the earth presumptuously.

Satan tentator. Say that ye ded it, upon a good intent.


Jesus Christus That were neither good, nor yet conuenyent.
Dangers are doubtful, where soch presumpcyon is.

Satan tentator. Tush, scripture is with it, ye can not fare amys.
For it is written, how God has given a charge,
Unto his Angels, that if ye leap at large,
They shall receive ye, in their hands tenderly,
Least ye dalhe your foot, against a stone thereby.
If ye do take scath, believe God is not true,
Nor just of his word, And than bid him adewe.

Jesus Christus. In no wise ye ought, the scriptures to de praue,
But as they lie whole, so ought ye them to have.
No More take ye here, than serve for your vain purpose
Leaving out the best, as ye should tryfle or gloss
Ye mind not by this, toward God to edyfye,
But of sincere faith, to corrupt the innocencye.

Satan tentator. Why, is it not true, that soch a text there is?


Jesus Christus. Yes, there is soch a text, but ye wrast it all amys.
As the Psalm does say, God has commanded Angels,
To preserve the just, from daungerouse plages and parels.

Satan tentator. Well, than I said true, and as it lies in the text.


Jesus Christus. Yea, but ye omytted, four words which follows next,
As (in all thy ways) which if ye put out of sight,
Ye shall never take, that place of scripture a right.
Their ways are soch rules, as God has them commanded,
By his living wo^de, iustlye to be observed.
If they pass those rules, the Angels are not bound,
To be their sauegarde, but rather them to confound.
To fall down backwarde, of a wanton penyshnes,
Is non of those ways, that God ever taught doughtles.
Then if I ded it, I should tempt God very sore,
And deserve to have, his anger evermore.
I will not so do, for their fathers in the desert,
Ded so tempt him ones, and had the hate of his heart*
The clause that ye had, makes for no^ outward workynge,
If ye mark the Psalm, thoroughly from his beginning.
But what is the cause, ye went not fourth with the next verse^

Satan tentator. It made not for me, if ye will, ye may it rehearse.


Jesus Christus. Thu shall (says the Psalm) subdue the cruel serpent,
And tread under foot, the lion and dragon pestylent.

Satan tentator. No nyghar (I say) for there ye touch fre hold.


Jesus Christus. Some love in no wise, to have their rudeness told.
To walk in Gods ways, it becomes a mortal man,
And therefore I will, obey them if I can.
For it is written, in the sext of Deutronomy,
Thu shall in no wise, tempt God presumptuousely.

Satan tentator. What is it to tempt God? after your judgment.


Jesus Christus. To take of his wo^de, an outward experyment,
Of an idle brain, which God neither thought not meant.

Satan tentator. What persons do so? Make that more euydent.


Jesus Christus. All soch as forsake, any grace or remedy,
Appointed of God, for their own polycye.
As they that do think, that God should fill their bellye,
Without their labors, when his laws are contrary.
And they that will say, the scripture of God does slay,
They never searching, thereof the veryte.
Those also tempt God, that vow presumptuouslye,
Not having his gift, to keep their contynencye.
With so many else, as follow their good intentes.
Not grounded on God, nor yet on his commandments.
These throw themselves down, into most deep da^pnacyon.

Satan tentator. Little good get I, by this communycacyon.
Will ye walk farther, and let this pratlynge be?
A mountain here is, which I would you to se,
Trust me and ye will, it is a commodyouse thing.

Jesus Christus. If it be so good, let us by thydre going.


Satan tentator. Lo, how say ye now, is not here a plesaunt sight?
If ye will ye may, have here all the worlds delyght.
Here is to be seane, the kyngedome of Arabye,
With all the regyons, of Affryck, Europe; and Asye,
And their whole delyghtes, their pomp, their magnyfyce^ce*
Their riches* their honor, their wealth, their concupysce^ce.
Here is gold and silver, in wonderful habundaunce,
Sylkes, veluetes, tyssues, with wynes and spyces of plesaunce.
Here are fair women, of countenance ameable,
With all kinds of meats, to the body dylectable.
Here are camels, stout horses, and mules that never will tire,
With so many pleasures, as your heart can desire.

Jesus Christus. Well, he be praised, which is of them the geuer.


Satan tentator. Alas it greueth me, that ye are soch a beleuer.
Nothing can I lay, but ever ye avoid me,
By the word of God. Leave that point ones I pray ye*
If I bid ye make, of stones bread for your body,
Ye say man lives not, in temporal feadynge only.
As I bid ye leap, down from the pynnacle above,
Ye will not tempt God, otherwise than you behoue.
Thus are ye still poor, thus are ye still weak and nedye,

Jesus Christus. And what suppose ye, will that need remedy?


Satan tentator. Forsake the believe, that ye have in Gods word,
That ye are his son, for it is not worth a torde,
Is he a father, that se his son thus famysh?
If ye believe it, I say ye are to folysh.
Ye se these pleasures. If you be ruled by me,
I shall make ye a man. To my words therefore agree.
Look on these kyngedomes, and incomparable treasure,
I the lord of them, may give them at my pleasure.
Forsake that father, which leaves the without confort,
In this desolacyon, and hens fourth to me resort.
Knowledge me for head, of this world universal.
And I will make the, possessor of them all.
Thu shall no longar, be desolate and hungrye,
But have all the world, to do the obsequye.
Therefore knele down here, and worshypp me this hour,
And thu shall have all, with their whole strenth and pour.

Jesus Christus. Avoid thu Satan, Thu devil, thu aduersarye,
For now thu perswadest, most damnable blasphemye.
As thu art wicked, so is thy promise wicked,
Not thine is the world, but his that it created.
Thu cannyst not give it, for it is not thine to give,
Thus dedyst thu corrupt, the faith of Adam and Eve.
Thus dedyst thu deceive, both Moses and Aaron,
Causynge them to doubt, at the lake of contradyccyon.
Get the hens thu fyende, and cruel aduersarye,
For it is written, in the tenth of Deutronomye.
God thu shall worshypp, and magnyfye alone,
Hold him for thy lord, and make to him thy moan.
He is the true God, he is the lord of all,
Not only of this, but the world celestyall.
Thy perswasyon is, I should not his word regard,
O venemouse serpent, dampnacyon is thy reward.
Provide will I so, that thy kyngedom shall decay,
Gods word shall be heard, of the world though thu say nay.

Satan tentator. Well, than it helps not, to tarry here any longar,
Advantage to have, I se I must go farther.
So long as thu lyuest, I am like to have no profyght,
If all come to pass, I ma ye sit as much in your light,
If ye preach Gods word, as me think ye do intend,
Ere four years be past* I shall you to your father send,
If pharysees and scrybes, can do any thing thereto,
False prestes and bishops, with my other servants mo.
Though I have hynderaunce, it will be but for a season,
I dought not, thine own, herafter will work some treason
Thy vycar at Rome, I think will be my frynde,
I defye the therefore, and take thy words but as wind.
He shall me worshypp, and have the world to reward,
That thu here forsakest, he will most hyghlye regard.
Gods word will he tread, underneath his foot for ever,
And the hearts of men, from the truth thereof dyssener,
Thy faith will he hate, and slay thy flock in conclusyon.
All this will I work, to do the utter confusyon.

Jesus Christus, Thy cruel assaults, shall hurt neither me nor mine,
Though we suffer both, by the prouydence dyuyne.
Soch strength is ours, that we will have vyctorye,
Of sin death and hell, and of the in thy most furye.
For God has promised, that his shall tread the dragon,
Underneath their fete, with the fearce roarynge lion.
Hic angeli accedunt, solacium administraturi.
Angelus primus. The father of confort, and heavenly consolacyon,
Has sent us hither, to do our admynystracyon.
We come not to help, but to do our obsequye,
As servants becomes, to their lord and mastre mekelye.
If our office be, to wait on creatures mortal,
Why should we not serve, the mastre and lord of all?

Angelus alter. It is our confort, it is our whole felycyte,
To do our service, and in your presence to be.
We have brought ye fode, to confort your weak body,
After your great fast, and notable vyctorye.
Unto all the world, your birth we first declared,
And now these vytayles, we have for you prepared.

Jesus Christus. Come nyghar to me. Sweet father thanks to the,
For these gracious gifts, of thy lyberalyte.
Hic coram angelis ex appositis comedet.
Angelus primus. How meke art thu lord, to take that nature on the?
Which is so tender, and full of infyrmyte.
As Mannys nature is, both feeble faint and werye,
Weak after labor, and after fasting hungrye.
Forsooth heaven and earth, yea, hell may be astoyned,
The Godhede to se, to so frail nature joined,

Angelus alter. In his own he is, for he the world first create,
Yet seems the world, to have him in great hate.
About thirty years, has he been here among them,
Some time in Iewrye, and some time in Jerusalem.
But few to this day, have done him reverence,
Or as to their lord, showed their obedyence.

Jesus Christus, My coming hither, is for to seek no glory,
But the high pleasure, and will of my father heavenly.
He will require it, at a certain day, no dought,
And shall revenge it, look they not well abought.

Angelus primus. Plebem alloquitur. The lord here for you, was borne and
circumcysed,
For you here also, he was latelye baptized.
In the wilderness, this lord for you has fasted,
And has ouerremen, for you the devil that tempted.
For you fryndes for you, this heavenly lord does all,
Only for your sake, he is become man mortal.

Angelus alter. Take the shy elde of faith, and learn to resyst the devil*
After his teachynges, that he do you non evil,
Full sure shall ye be, to have us on your side,
If ye be faithful, and hold him for your gyde.

Jesus Christus If they follow me, they shall not walk in darkness,
But in the clear light, and have felycyte endless,
For I am the way, the life and the veryte,
No man may attain, to the father but by me.

Angelus primus. In mannys frail nature, ye have conquerred the enmye.
That man over him, should always have vyctorye.

Angelus alter* Our manner is it, most hyghlye to rejoice,
When Man has confort, which we now declare in voice.
Hic dulce canticum coram Christo depromunt.
Balcus Prolocutor. Let it not grieve you, in this world to be tempted,
Considering your lord, and your high bishop Jesus,
Was here without sin, in every purpose proved,
In all our weakness, to help and socour us,
Farthermore to bear, with our fragylyte thus.
He is unworthy, of him to be a member,
That will not with him, some persecucyon suffer.
The life of Man is, a proof or hard temptacyon,
As Job does report, and Paul confirms the same.
Busye is the devil, and labors his dampnatyon,
Yet have no dyspayre, for Christ has got the game.
Now is it easy, his cruelnesse to tame*
For Christ's vyctorye, is theirs that do believe.
Where says take rotynge, the devil can never grieve.
Resyst (says Peter) resyst that roarynge lion,
Not with your fastings, Christ never taught ye so.
But with a strong faith, withstand his false suggestyon,
And with the scriptures, upon him over go,
Then shall he no harm, be able you to do.
Now may ye be bold, ye have Christ on your side,
So long as ye have, his veryte for your gyde.
What enemies are they, that from the people will have,
The scriptures of God, which are the mighty weapon,
That Christ left them here, their sowles from hell to save.
And throw them headlondes, into the deuyls domynyon.
If they be no deuyls, I say there are deuyls non,
They bring in fasting, but they leave out, Scriptum est,
Chalk they give for gold, soch fryndes are they to the Beast.
Let non report us, that here we condemn fasting.
For it is not true, we are of no soch mind.
But this we couere, that ye do take the thing,
For a fruit of faith, as it is done in kind,
And only Gods word, to subdue the cruel find.
Follow Christ alone, for he is the true sheparde,
The voice of strangers, do never more regard.

Thus ends this brefe Comedy concerning the temptacyon of Jesus Christ in
the wyldernes. Compyled by Johan Bale, Anno M.D.XXXVIII.

