A RELATION OF A VOYAGE TO GVIANA.

DESCRIBING THE CLIMAT, Situation, fertility, provisions and commodities of
that Country, containing seven Provinces, and other Signiories within that
Territory: Together, with the manners, customs, behauiors, and dispositions of
the people.

Performed by ROBERT HARCOVRT, of Stanton Harcourt Esquire.

The Pattent for the Plantation of which Country, his Majesty has granted to
the said ROBERT HARCOVRT under the Great Seal.

NOMB. 14. 7, 8. The Land which we walked through to search it, is a very good
Land.
If the Lord love us, he will bring us into this land, and will give it us.
AT LONDON Printed by JOHN BEALE, for W. WELBY, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Swan. 1613.

To the high and Mighty Prince, CHARLES, Prince of GREAT BRITAIN:
Having had trial (most worthy Prince) of your most renowned Brother Prince
He^rie his many favors toward me, and princely furtherance of my humble
suit unto his Majesty your royal Father, and our dread Sovereign, for
obtaining for me his gracious Letters Pattents for the planting and inhabiting
of all that tract of Land, and part of Guiana, between the rivers of Amazones,
and Dessequebe, situate in America, under the Equinoctial Line: Whereof I
have taken possession to his Majesty's use, and discovered the maritime parts.
I was greatly thereby encouraged to proceed in the enterprise, and had (under
his Majesty's favor) devoted my self unto his service. But now seeing (by
Gods permission) your excellent Brother his princely Honor, by right of
succession is fallen upon your Highness, and verily hoping, that you will not
only equal, but also exceed him in virtuous exercises, and advancing all
honorable actions, and worthy enterprises; I have in like manner religiously
vowed the best fruits and effects of my indeauors unto your Highness service.
And for as much as that part of the world which we now call America, was
heretofore in the year of our Lord 1170. discovered, Gutyn Owen.
conquered, and possessed by Madoc, one of the sons of Owen Gwyneth prince of
North Wales: I therefore (in all humble reverence) present the prosecution of
this high Action unto your gracious Patronage, principally belonging of right
unto you, being the honorable, true, and worthy Successor to the Principality
of Wales. If my travel and service therein shall perform ought, worthy of
your Princely regard, I shall much glory thereat, and account it my happiest
fortune, and greatest honor: And shall heartily pray unto the King of Kings,
to continue in your Highness a pious, and invincible heart; and to give you a
conquering and victorious hand; and the dominion of many rich and mighty
Kingdoms in this world, and in the world to come, a Crown of Glory, in his
eternal Kingdom.

Your Highness most humble devoted servant, ROBERT HARCOVRT.

To the Readers, ADVENTVRERS, FAVORERS, and wel-willers to the Plantation in
GVIANA.
IT is the part of valiant and noble spirits to apply their endeavors to
honorable and worthy atchiuements: but chiefly to frame their actions
therein by the rule of virtue, and accomplish the end for which they were
created, which is in their vocations to serve and glorify GOD, and to do good
unto others: For the better performance of their duties in that behalf, let
them examine their inclinations and dispositions in the course of their life,
and what they find themselves most inclined unto, to that let them seriously
bend their forces; either to cherish or suppress it; to follow or forsake it,
according as it tends to virtue or vice; to honor or disgrace.

As touching the courses of life, inclining to the better part, some men are
naturally given to be scholars, either in Divinity, Philosophy, or other
learning; some are more inclined to be Statists; some to be Soldiers, and
travelers; some desire to be Citizens, and Merchants; and some like best to
lead Coun^trey life, and follow husbandry; and othersome are wholly inclined
to the Mechannicall trades, and handy crafts. In all which professions, as men
are naturally addicted more, or less, they attain to perfection, and may
thereby accomplish the end for which they were created. But to undertake any
profession contrary to a man's natural inclination, is a loss of time, a work
that yeldeth no profit, but breeds many inconveniences, and destroys
nature: For the mere Scholar will never be good Statist, Soldier, Merchant,
nor Mechanical tradesman, (yet learning is a singular help in all these
professions) neither will the professed Soldier ever attain to exquisite
perfection in learning, or in the other professions; so likewise of the rest.
The natural inclination of man, may be somewhat restrained, corrected, and
reformed, but is rarely and hardly altered.

Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurret In these and all other
professions whatsoever, men may so proceed in their particular societies, that
each several company in his proper vocation, may be a help, comfort, and
support unto the rest: and they are firmly bound both by the law of God, and
Nature, to exercise and follow their professions for the benefit of others: not
coueteously seeking their own gain only thereby; but charitably, respecting
first the glory of God, and then the honor of their Prince, and profit of
their Country, which is the end for which they were created

To the end therefore that our Countrymen of all professions in this Kingdom
may be worthily induced to perform their duties in that kind not only at
home in their own Country, but also abroad in foraigne parts, wheresoever
any of our Nation shall be employed, either by discovery or conquest, for the
reducing of unknown and barbarous people (void of all knowledge of God, and
civil government) to Christianity and the subjection and obedience of of our
Sovereign, and that such others as want employment, or competent means to
follow their professions, and are slipped aside from virtuous exercises, and
honorable enterprises, to idle wantonness, effeminate disorders, and other
extrauagant courses of life, may be recalled, reformed, and encouraged (by
better endeavors) to perform their duties to God, their Prince, and their
Country. I thought it convenient to propound unto them a worthy and memorable
enterprise: (for the prosecution and accomplishing whereof, it has graciously
pleased his Majesty to grant me privilege by Pattent) namely, the discovery
and plantation of a part of the great, rich, and mighty Empire of Guiana:
wherein they shall find variety of employments to spend their times worthily
in their several vocations; plentiful means to supply all wants and
necessities; and many worthy adventures to obtain immortal renown and
perpetual fame.

And for as much as all men's actions are subject to miscensure, and some
(perhaps) may think the labor lost, which is bestowed in this enterprise,
foreiudgeing the Country being rude, barbarous and heathen, to be
unprofitable; I will therefore here particularly show wherein our Countrymen
of the several professions before mentioned, may profitably labor in this
work, and perform thereby to God a service most acceptable, and register
their fame to all posterity.

First, the Scholar in divine learning may worthily labor the conversion of
infinite numbers of unbelieving people, who may be reduced to a quiet, sober,
and civil life: the scoller in Philosophy, and other Learning, may do much
good by training up of the youth in the knowledge of the litterall arts, and by
the practice of his skill in Physic and Surgery: the Statist may highly
advance his Princes service, and his Countries good, by giving aid unto this
action, and his discreet and provident furtherance in managing the business
thereof: The Soldier and Traveler, by bearing arms in the execution of this
noble enterprise, and by memorable discoueries of strange and unknown
Countries and Nations, may open the way to increase and enlarge the Dominion of
our Sovereign: the Merchant by assisting the plantation there, and by erecting
convenient factories for that purpose, may highly increase the trade of
merchandise, by returning thence the riches and commodities there found and
gathered. The Countryman that professes busbandry and tillage of the earth,
may also be sufficiently employed for the increase of corn and catell, and in
planting, gathering, and getting as many rare and necessary fruits and
provisions, as shall be needful for the life of man. And lastly, the
Mechannicall tradesman, and such as exercise the handy crafts, (in which
company I include all sorts of laborers) may by this action of Guiana, highly
advance their trades and occupations, to their own unspeakable profit, and
benefit of others, by their diverse and sundry works for several uses, and for
persons of all quallity whatsoever; and may teach the people of that Country
(being once converted to christianity, and brought to the knowledge of civil
government) such several trades, as our experience shall find necessary for
them, and convenient for us.

Having here particularly showed wherein our Contrymen of diverse
professions may worthily follow their vocations, and employ their endeavors in
this action: I leave the matter whereon they are to work, to be more fully
expressed in the following discourse.

And because they may the better be encouraged in this enterprise, by examples
of the like nature: let us look into the discoueries and conquests, performed
by the Spaniards, in the East and West Indies; but chiefly in the West: where
with a small number, and as it were with a handful of men, Hernando Cortez a
Spaniard, in the year of our Lord 1519. discovered and conquered that great,
mighty, and rich Kingdom of New Spain, and the City of Mexico.

And in the year of our Lord 1531. Don Francisco Pizarro attempted the
conquest of the great Kingdom of Peru; he vanquished Atibalipa, the King of
that Country, conquered and subdued many spacious and rich Provinces; and in
the end after infinite perils and dangers by practice of the Indians and much
variety of fortune, by civil wars with his own Nation, he atchiued his
enterprise. The particulars of these discoueries and conquests, are more at
large recounted by Peter Martyr in his Decades, by Benzo, and diverse other
Authors, to which for breuities sake I refer you. The honor these Spaniards
gained by these discoueries and conquests, was doubtless great: but the
benefit that ensued to the Crown of Spain, and all the Spanish Nation
thereby, was infinite beyond expectation, as amply may appear in the Authors
late mentioned, and in the Natural and Morrall history of the East and West
Indies, written by Josephus Acosta.

Let us also note the wonderful works of God in those Countries, and his
great mercy thereby showed to the Indians, who by their continual conversation
with Christians, are reduced from their abominable life and cruel manners, to
the knowledge of God and their former infidelity, and to the fruition of the
holy Ghost in Baptism; for in all those great Provinces, conquered in New
Spain, the people are generaly converted to Christianity: for about the year
of our Lord 1524. there went diverse learned men into those parts, who by
learning the Indians languages, and their painful diligence in teaching and
instructing youth, did so effectually proceed in that laborious work, that
within the limits of many hundred leagues, there are few or none unchristened.
The beginning of that Work was very difficult, by reason of the unaptness of
the Indians, so long imbrued in cruel sacrifices of humane blood, and
abominable Idolatry, and by the continual malice of the devil, rebelling
against God, and striving to maintain his own kingdom: but in the end their
constant and painful endeavors so far prevailed, that Christian religion
increased amongst them, to the establishing of many Bishoprics in New Spain,
besides diverse Schools of learning. So likewise in Peru, and diverse other
Countries, conquered by the Spaniards, the conuersions of the people have
proceeded to no less admirable effects.

As touching the state of common wealth, they have all sorts of Governors, and
magistrates in great honor and reputation; houses of Nobility and Gentry
flourish, and increase amongst them; Soldiers, and travelers are regarded
highly, and worthily rewarded; Merchants, and tradesmen prosper, and gather
wealth in extraordinary measure; what shall I say more, there be few or no
professions or trades amongst us, in these parts of Christendom, but the same
are used, followed, and practiced in great perfection, both in New Spain,
Peru, and other parts of the Indies, where the Spaniards have prevailed by
their Conquests.

By these memorable examples may our Nation (being in valor inferior to none
other under Heaven) be moved and stirred up to the undertaking of this noble
action of Guiana; which in respect of the climate, firtility of the soil, and
tractable disposition of the people (whereof in the following discourse I have
spoken more at large) does assure us that (with Gods favor and assistance) as
great effects may be wrought in the conversion of these Nations, and as great
benefit, and commodity may arise to the Realm and Crown of England, both in
general, and particular, as ever was performed or obtained by the Spanish
Nation, since the first beginning of their travels and discoueries.

For if they in New Spain, and Peru, have Cuchenille, Anir, and Cotton wool;
we in Guiana have also Cotton wool Tobacco, Suger-Canes, diverse good
commodities for Dyers, and likewise in all likelihood Cuchenille; and sundry
sorts of excellent wood for ioyners work, and other uses. If they have variety
of Apothecary drugges, and Balsome for Physic, and Surgery; so also have
we, and those that are of admirable virtue. If they have gold, silver, and
other mettalls; Pearls, and precious stonnes; so doublesse we in time may
have the like, having had good testimony thereof already; as plainly shall
appear hereafter, when time better serves.

Moreover, in singular advantage we have before them to further, and advance
our enterprise, by the peculiar love and affection of the people in those
parts, toward our Nation before all others. For whereas the Spaniards were
constrained by great labor, bloody battles, and much cruelty (for which they
lost their hearts) to subdue the Indians; we contrariwise are well
entertained, and friendly received by them, being willing to hold commerce with
us; whereby we have a more secure and ready mean, to establish a peaceable
and assured Commonwealth amongst them, for the employment of all the several
professions of men mentioned before.

Finally, for your better inducement to the worthy undertaking of this high
action; let us call to remembrance one excellent and material observation;
that is the discovery of this Country of Guiana, was heretofore attempted by
Sr. Walter Raleigh, who made an honorable entry thereinto by the river of
Orenoque; what he then, and there discovered, and how great and assured his
hopes were, of gaining to our Country inestimable riches, and subduing to the
Crown of England a potent Empire, was effectually, and faithfully published to
the world by his own pen; which excellent discourse I wish you to peruse,
preceding from so wise and judicial an Author; who if some known fortunes
had not crossed his first intendiments, for the prosecuting of that enterprise)
had (in all likelihood) long before this time increased the honor of our
Nation, by the reputation of the most famous and rich discovery and conquest
that the world could afford.

Let us herewithal observe, that before his time it was often attempted by the
Spaniards, but to small effect; for either by misfortune of shipwreck,
discention amongst the most eminent persons in their Troops, mutiny of the
soldiers, mistaking of the Commanders, or violent fury of the Indians (who
bear an inueterate and mortal hatred against them) they have ever failed of
their purpose: whereof the said discourse of Sr. Walter Raleigh makes
particular mention more at large.

The continual loss, and great misfortunes that have followed the Spaniards
from time to time, in all their attempts of this discovery and conquest, for
the space almost of an hundred years; and the fortunate success that most
happily favored the other in his first attempt thereof, may be a great
presumtion, and may give us an assured hope, that the powerful hand of God
does work for us in this behalf; and has reserved the execution of this
action for honor of our Nation.

Which forcible considerations, gave me great encouragement to repair the
decay of so worthy an enterprise, not with intent to rob him of his honor, who
first of all our Nation (nobly with great judgment and valor) gave the onset;
but rather to do him more honor, by working upon his foundation, and
prosecuting this project, according to his first designs, which doubtless
aimed at the glory of God, his Sovereigns service, and his Countries good.

Hereupon I made trial of my fortune in the attempt, and have found the
success so prosperous and hopeful, (although it has been chargeable unto
me) and my acceptance so free and friendly amongst the Indians, that it has
given not only to my self, but also to the rest of my associats, (who with the
love and good liking of the people, have lived and remained in Guiana for the
space of three years) good assurance of repaying the charge past with trebble
recompense; and a resolved courage to proceed in the enterprise, to the
prosecution whereof, we have devoted both our substance and our selves.

And because the life of this Action consists in the timely progress
thereof, and requires the assistance of many Adventurers; I thought it very
needful to lay before you these former examples, and material considerations:
and therewithal do recommend unto your view this following Discourse (wherein
I have compiled the hopeful fruits of my painful travels) thereby to move
you to wipe away from your eyes, the cloudie incredulous blindness that
possessed our forefathers in the days of Henry the seventh, when they rejected
the offer made by Batholomew Columbus, in the behalf of his brother
Christopher Columbus, and thereby lost the fruition of those inestimable riches
in the West Indies, which now we see possessed by the Spanish Nation: And also
do inuit and summon my Countrymen in general, to rouse up their valor, to
quicken and spur on their endeavors, to be coadi^utors with us in this
action, both of honor and profit.

And because it may be objected to the discouragement of such as may have
otherwise a desire to inhabit Guiana, that the Spaniards inhabiting about
Cumana, Margarita, and Trinidado, may disturbour Plantation, and endanger the
lives of those that shall make the first settlement there; I thought good to
resolve all such as have affection to make themselves Conquerors of that goodly
Country, that from the King of Spaines Indies nothing can offend them; for
Guiana being seated in the head of the Brises, and to the wind-ward of all the
Spanish Indies, the current also of the Sea setting to the West, makes it
impossible for any Shipping to turn it up from the forenamed places toward
us. The Spaniard therefore can no way offend us but by a preparation out of
Spain it self. And whenever he shall find himself at so great leisure, as
to send a Fleet out of Spain to seek us out upon the shallow coast of Guiana,
either we shall frustrate that attempt by raising a Fort defensible for two or
three months (for they must famish if they stay longer) or else by setting our
selves above two or three of the ouerfalles of the Rivers, where one hundred
men will defend themselves against five thousand. But I am persuaded that the
Spaniards will take great deliberation, and be well advised of all ensuing
accidents, before they give any attempt upon us: for we do not find that they
have yet attempted any thing upon Virginia, which lies in their way homeward
from the West Indies, albeit there have passed many years since the first
Plantation there. And surely, if Virginia had not a sharp Winter, which Guiana
has not (which Country of Guiana is blessed with a perpetual Summer, and a
perpetual Spring) and that it had that store of victuals which Guiana has, it
would in a short time grow to be a most profitable place. But thus much I can
auow truly, that from Guiana, without any great labor, there may be returned
within the year, good store of Cotton Wool, very rich Dies, diverse sorts of
Gummes, many sorts of Feathers, all kinds of rich Woods, Balsamums, Jasper, and
Porpherie stone, Wax, Honey, and Tobacco, and so every year may we pay the
Transportation, until we increase in people to make Sugars, and discover Mines.

If the pains past bestowed in my first attempt, may taste of your grateful
acceptance, and that I may obtain your willing furtherance in the future, I
shall then think my pains well employed, and delight my self in laboring
for your profit; and we all shall gain honor and reputation, by undergoing
the burden of so worthy a work; whereby our Nation shall be greatly enriched,
the Dominion of our Sovereign much enlarged, and Gods service in those
Countries highly advanced.

R. H.

A RELATION OF A VOYAGE TO Guiana performed by Robert Harcourt of Stanton
Harcourt in the County of OXFORD Esquire.
IN the year of our Lord 1608. and the three and twentieth of March, 23, of
March 1608.
when I had furnished my self with one ship of fourscore Tons called the
Rose; a Pinnesse of six and thirty Tons called the Patience; and a Shallop
of nine Tons called the Lilly, which I built at Dartmouth; and had finished
my other business there, and prepared all things in readiness to begin my
voyage, the wind reasonably serving, I then embarked my company, as follows.

In the Rose, The Rose.
I was accompanied with captain Edward Fisher, captain Edward Haruey, master
Edward Gifford, and my cosen Thomas Harcourt: And besides them, I had of
Gentlemen and others one and thirty land men, two Indians, and three and
twenty Mariners and Sailors.

In the Patience, The Patience.
my brother captain Michael Harcort had with him of gentlemen and others
twenty land-men, and eleven Mariners and Sailors.

In the Lilly, The Lilly.
Iesper Lilly the Master, had one landman, and two Sailors: so that my just
number (too great for so few ships of no greater burden) was in all fourscore
and Land men 60.
seuenteen, whereof threescore were land-men.

Being thus embarked, we set sail from the Rainge at Dartmouth the said three
and twentieth of March; but the wind altering upon a sudden, They set sail
the 23. of March.
put us back again that evening; and about two of the clock the next morning
(it coming better for us) we weighed anchor, and put to Sea: the evening
following we lost sight of the Lyzart, and steered away for the Canaries.

Upon Saturday the first of April 1609. The first of April 1609.
toward the evening the wind increased and grew so violent, The Shallop in
danger to be lost.
that my Shallop (which we towed in a Cablet by reason of the foul weather)
was that night separated from us; for by the rage and fury of the wind and
Sea, the Cablet brake in sunder, and the little Bark was in great danger to be
cast away, but it pleased God to preserve her, for the next morning we discryed
her to Leeward of us, contrary to our expectation, having given her lost.

Then holding on our course, the seventh day we fell with Alegranza and
Lancerote, two Islands of the Canaries: we stood in with Alegranza and came
to anchor on the South-west side thereof; They ariue at Alegranza.
that evening and the next day I landed my company to exercise their limbs on
shore: in this Island we found no inhabitants, nor fresh water, neither
fruitful tree, plant, herb, grass, nor any thing growing that was good,
only an abundance of unwholesome Sea-foule, which after one meal were unsavory
and distasteful, and a few wild Captitos, or wild Goats, which the craggy
rocks defended from our hands, and hungry mouths.

The eighth of April we departed from Alegranza, and directed our course for
Tenerife, Tenerife.
another of the Islands. The eleventh day I sent the Pinnesse, and the
Shalloppe to water at the calmes, and there to attend my coming; but with my
Ship I held my course for Orotauo, a town on the other side of the Island,
in hope to get some wine amongst the Merchants there; but not being able (by
reason of a contrary wind) to double Punta de Nega, we altered our course
from wine to water. And the twelfth day we Passed by Santa Cruz, and watered
that evening at the Calmes.

This watering place is very convenient for all such as pass by those Islands,
An excellent watering place.
and is thus to be found; there is a wooden cross near unto it, the high
Pike of Tenerife bears due North from it. There is also a ledge of rocks to
the Eastward of the landing place, which is a short Sandy bay. When you are
landed, you shall find* the place about forty or fifty yardes from the Sea
side.

The next day we met again with the Pinnesse and the Shalloppe, who missing of
the right place, had not yet watered, wherefore we stood back again to guide
them to it; but the wind preventing us, enforced them to seek for water
elsewhere, which with some dificulty they obtained upon the fifteenth day in
the morning.

Then we stood on our course for the river of Wiapoco in Guiana, having
aprosperous wind, fair weather, and a smooth Sea. The ninth day of May, we
fell into the current of the great and famous river of Amazones, The river of
Amazones.
which puts out into the Sea such a violent and mighty stream of fresh
water, Fresh water in the Sea 30 leagues from land.
that being thirty leagues from land, we drunk thereof, and found it as fresh
and good as in a spring or poole.

This river for the great and wonderful breadth, (containing at the mouth
near Sixty leagues) is rightly termed by Josephus Acosta the Empress and
Queen of all floods: Iosepth Acosta.
and by Hieronimus Giraua Tarraconensis: Hieron. Giraua Tarraconensis.
it is said to be the greatest not only of all India, but also of the whole
world; and for the greatues is called of many the sweet Sea: It rises and
flows from the Mountains of Peru, and draws out her streams in many
windings and turnings under the Equinoctial, for the space of one thousand and
five hundred leagues and more: although from her fountains and springs unto
the Sea it is but six hundred. When we entered into the aforesaid current, we
sounded, and had fouerty fouer fadome water, sandy sounding. The tenth day the
color of the water changed, and became muddy, whitish, and thick; then we
sounded again at twelve of the clock at noone, and had thirteen fadome; and
seauenteene at four in the after noone. The 11 of May they made land in Guiana.
The eleauenth day at eight of the clock in the morning we made land, the
uttermost point thereof bearing West from us, and came to anchor in five fadome
water.

At night the Patience putting in to near the shore came to anchor in 2
fadome water upon the flood, which fell from her upon the ebb, The Patience in
danger of wrack.
and left her dry upon the Oaze, and the next flood coming in, did so shake
and beat her against the ground, that before she could get off, her rudder
was beaten away, and her ribs so rent and crased, that if Almighty God had
not preserved her, she had been wrackt: but (God be thanked) with much ado
she came off into deeper water, and mended her rudder, as well as the time and
place would afford means. Then we followed on our course, coasting along to
the North-north-west, the land so trending. It is very shoale all along this
coast, the ground soft oaze, but no danger to be feared, keeping our ship in
five fadome water.

When we came to the latitude of two degrees and a half, Islands called
Carripapoory.
we anchored in a goodly bay, by certain Islands, called Carripapoory I did
at that time forbear to make particular discovery of this coast, intending (if
God spare me life) to make a perfect discovery of the famous river of Amazones,
and of her several branches, and countries bordering upon it, and of all this
tract of land from the Amazones, unto the river of Wiapoco, which contains
many goodly Provinces, and Signiories, which are in this discourse, but
briefly mentioned: For at this time I purpose only to prosecute my first
project, which hastened me unto another place.

From hence I stood along the coast, The Bay of Wiapoco.
and the seventeenth of May, I came to anchor in the Bay of Wiapoco: where the
Indiands came off unto us in two or three * Canoes, Indian boats.
as well to learn of what Nation we were, as also to trade with us, who
vnerstanding that we were English men boldly came aboard us one of them could
speak our language well, and was known to some of my company to be an
Indian, that sometime had been in England, and served Sr. John Gilbert many
years: they brought with them such dainties as their country yields; as
hens, fish, pinas, platanaes, potatoes, bread of Cassaui, and such like
cates, which were heartily welcome to my hungry company: In recompense whereof,
I gave them knives, beads, Jews trumpes, and such toies, which well contented
them. But when I had awhile entertained them, and made known unto them the
return of the Indian Martyn their country man, whom I brought with me out of
England, they seemed exceeding joyful, supposing that he had been dead, being
above four years since he departed from them.

The Indian before mentioned to have served Sr. John Gilbert (whose name was
John) whilst he lived (for he is now dead, and died a Christian) was a great
help unto us, because he spoke our language much better then either of those
that I brought with me, and was ever firm and faithful to us, until his
death. By him I understood that their town was situate upon the east side of
the hill in the mouth of Wiapoco, and was called Caripo: that the Indian Martin
was Lord thereof, and that in his absence his brother was chief. Moreover he
certified me that the principal Indian of that river was called Carasana, (who
by good fortune) was then at Caripo, A village called Caripo.
and so having spent sometime in other conference and friendly entertainment,
they took their leave, and departed for that time. I sent one of my company
with them to give notice to Carasana, and the rest of the Indians of Caripo, A
messenger sent to the Indians.
that I had brought home their Countrymand Martin, whom they all thought to be
dead, and another of their Nation also, who had kindred and friends amongst
them: to desire him to come aboard my ship, and to bring with him the
principal Indians of Caripo, that I might declare unto them the cause of my
coming into their Country, and confer with them of other matters intended
for their good. The next day I came into the river of Wiapoco, and Anchored
over against the Sandy Bay.

The day following the Indians came aboard as I had desired and brought us good
store of their Country provision: The Indians came aboard.
Carasana, and one or two more of them were attired in old clothes, which they
had gotten of certain Englishmen, who (by the direction of Sir Walter Raleigh)
had traded there the year before; the rest were all naked both men and women;
and this I observed amongst them, The chief men of the Nation of the Yaios
cover their priuities.
that although the better sort of men (especially the Yaios) do cover their
priuities, by wearing over them a little piece of Cotton cloth pretily wouen
after their manner; yet did I never see any of their women covered in any part,
The women generally go all naked.
either above or beneath the waste, albeit they daily conuersed amongst us, but
were all (as the plain proverb is) even stark belly naked.

At their coming aboard my ship; first Carasana as the principal amongst
them, and after him the rest, saluted and welco^med us after their rude manner.
I used them with all courtesy, and entertained them as well as the straight
room would give me leave, giving them good store of Aquauitae, which they love
exceedingly: I presented to their view their two countrymen, Martyn the Lord of
their town, and Anthony Canabre, who was a christian, and had lived in England
fourteen years, both which I had brought home unto them: when they beheld them,
and after salutations, and some conference knew to be the same persons, whom
they supposed had been long since dead, they expressed much joy and
contentment: and understanding (from their own mouths) how well I had used
them, they seemed to be better pleased with our coming: and when their rude
salutations to their new come countrymen were ended, I took them apart, and
thus declared the cause of my coming.

First, Their conference with the Indians.
I brought to their remembrance the exploits performed by Sr. Walter Raleigh in
their country, in the reign of our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, when (to
free them from servitude) he most worthily vanquished the Spaniards at
Trinidado: burned their town: took their Governor Don Anthonio de Berreo
prisoner; delivered five of the Indian Kings imprisoned, and bound by the neck
with collers of Iron; and with great labor and peril discovered the river of
Orenoque, and the countries adjoining, as far as the Province of Aromaya, the
country of Topiawary, and the river of Caroly beyond it. And that their
countrymen called the Orenoqueponi, The Orenoqueponi rendered themselves
subjects to Queen Elizabeth.
(who are the borderers of the Orenoque) did then most willingly submit and
render themselves under the subjection of the late Queen; all which they well
remembered, and said, that Sr. Walter Raleigh promised to have returned again
unto them long since.

Then I excused his not returning according to his promise, by reason of other
employments of great importance imposed upon him by the late Queen: showing
them moreover, that when he could not (for that cause) return himself, he
sent Captain Keymis to visit them, and to bring him true intelligence of
their estate, (supposing that he had left no Spaniards behind him at Trinidado
of power to molest them) to the end that releef and aid might be prepared for
them, according to their necessities, and oppression of their enemies. Then I
told them of the death of the late Queen, whereby that business of theirs was
again hindered.

Moreover I declared unto them, that our gracious Sovereign Lord King JAMES,
who now reigns over v3, (being the only right and lawful heir, and
Successor, to the Crown and dignity of the Realm of England, after the death
of the late Queen) was throughout the whole land proclaimed King of England;
and so coming to reign over us, has been ever since busied in ordering the
State and affairs of the Kingdom, which being (by his great wisdom) settled
in tranquillity and peace, like a good, gracious, and worthy King, does now
permit his subjects to travel abroad into foreign Countries, and Nations to
aid and assist all such as are unjustly molested by their enemies. Whereupon I,
and the rest of these worthy Gentlemen my associats and friends, Possession of
the Country taken at Wiapoco, by Captain Lee to his Meiestics use.
having intelligence by some that had been followers of Captain Charles Lee,
(who was a man well known amongst them, and heretofore had taken possession of
their Country to his Majesty's use, and was planted diverse years in Wiapoco,
where he lies buried) of the great variance and discord depending between
them the allied nations, the Yaios, Arwaccas, Sappaios, and Parago^tos; and
their enemies the Charibes; (all inhabiting between the rivers of Amazones,
and Dessequebe) have made a long and dangerous voyage into those parts, to
appease their discentions, and defend them against the Charibes, or other
enemies that shall molest or oppress them: and now being there arrived, do
intend to make search in those Countries for convenient places, where such of
our Nation as shall hereafter come to defend them, may be fitly seated to
dwell amongst them; that if any of those Nations shall attempt at any time to
disturb the quiet living of their neighbors, they may have store of English
friends at hand and amongst them, that will not spare their pains to appease
their discords, nor their lives to defend them from harm.

When I had thus declared unto them the cause of my coming, they made this
answer; that with our coming they were well pleased; but our number of men
they thought too great, that they wanted means to provide us bread sufficient
for them all, having but a small Town, few gardens, and slender provision for
their own companies, because since Captain Lee his death, and his men's
departure from them, they never made provision for any strangers.

I replied, that albeit their town was small, and their gardens few, (for the
grounds wherein they plant their Cassaui, whereof they make their bread, they
call their gardens) yet their Country was full of inhabitants, and had store
of gardens to supply our wants of bread, and was plentifully stored with other
provisions sufficient for a greater number, which I desired might be weekly
brought unto us, as need required, for that I meant not to take it without
recompense, but would give them for it such commodities as should well please
them, which they wanted: as axes, hatchets, knives, beads, lookingglasses,
Jews trumps, and such like things wherein they most delight.

Then they desired to consult amongst themselves, The Indians go to council.
which I permitted, and expected their answer above two hours, which time
they spent in debating the matter after their manner, and drinking Aquauitae,
and in the end desired my presence, and made me this answer.

That they were contented and well pleased we should live amongst them; Their
answer.
that they would furnish us with houses to lodge in, and provide all
necessaries for us in the best manner they could. But whereas I said our King
would permit his people to live and abide amongst them, and defend them against
their enemies; they answered, it was a thing they greatly desired, and had
expected long, and now they made much doubt thereof, and said they were but
words, having heretofore been By Sr. Walt. Raleigh, and Capt. Lee.
promised the like, but nothing performed. To resolve that doubt, and make good
my speeches, I told them that what I had spoken should certainly be
performed, and to that end would leave my brother in their country, and some
of my company with him, to dwell amongst them, until a greater supply might
be sent from England for their better defense. Then they seemed to give credit
to my words: And so after much talk, and many complements to please the naked
people, I gave to Carasana a sword, and to the rest some other things, which
pleased them well: and then after their manner taking their leave, they
departed. The next day the Indian Martyn went ashoare, The Indian Martyn goes
ashoare.
and seemed joyful that he had again recovered his own home.

The day following I took land, with my companies in arms and colors
displayed, and went up unto the town, The English take land.
where I found all the women and children standing at their doors to behold
us. The principal Indians came out unto me, and invited me into the Captains
house, which until the return of Martyn belonged unto his brother, The
English feasted by the Indians.
as chief Lord in his absence: I went up with them, and was friendly feasted
with many kinds of their Country cates; when I had well eaten and refreshed my
self, The grateful offer of Martyn.
Martyn took me by the hand and said, that he had not any thing wherewith to
require my kindness toward him, in such manner as he desired; neither had
he such delicate fare, and good lodging for us, as in England heretofore we
had been used unto: but humbly entreated me to accept of his house in good
part for my self, and the Gentlemen of my company; and the rest should be
lodged in other Indian houses adjoining: and that such provisions as the
Country yielded, should be provided for us. His speech was approved by the
rest of the Indians present, who took me by the hand one after another, and
after their manner bade me welcome. I gave them many thanks, and some rewards
for their kind entertainment; and the^ disposed my company in convenient
lodgings: but yet I kept a continual guard, as in time of war.

When I had thus settled my company at this village, The English settled at
Caripo in Wiapoco.
I went out to view the situation of the place, The strength of the place.
and the advantages for defense thereof. It is a great rockie Mountain, not
accessable by reason of fast woods, and steep rocks, but only in certain
places, which are narrow foote-paths, very steep and easy to be defended:
whereby we were lodged as in a Fort, and most conveniently in respect the
harbor was so near, for our ships did ride at anchor underneath us, over
against the foot of the hill.

Being thus arrived upon the Coast, I found the time of the year so
unseasonable for our purpose, that (by reason of continual raines) we were
constrained to lie still and do nothing for the space of three weeks, or a
month; in which idle time I conferred with the Indians, so metime with one,
sometime with another; and by help of my Indian Anthony Canahre, and the
Indian John above mentioned (whom I used for my interpreters) I gathered from
them as well as I could, the State of their Country; the manner of their
government and living; how they stood with their neighbors in terms of
peace, and war; and of what power and strength they were. I inquired also of
the seasons of the year in those parts: of their division, and account of
times, and numbers; of the provisions of their Country for victuals, and other
necessaries; and made a diligent inquiry of all the commodities their Country
yields, and what things were of most estimation amongst them; all which I
have briefly declared unto your Highness in this following discourse.

This goodly Country, and spacious Empire, is on the North part bounded with
the Sea, The bounds and limits of Guiana.
and the great River of Orenoque, wherein Sr. Walter Raleigh performed his
worthy and memorable discovery: on the East and South parts, with the famous
River of Amazones; and on the West part with the Mountains of Peru.

The westermost branch of the River of Amazones that falls into the Sea;
Arrapoco a branch of Amazones.
is called Arrapoco; upon which river are seated many goodly Signiories well
deserving a particular discovery, which shall (by Gods permission) be
performed hereafter. To the North of Arrapoco is the river of Arrawary,
Arrawary.
which is a goodly river, discovering a gallant Country. From Arrawary unto the
river of Cassipurogh extends the Province of Arricary; containing the
Signiories of Arrawary, Maicary, Maicary.
and Cooshebery; Anaky-v-ry chief of the Yaios.
of which Anakyury is principal, who by Nation is a Yaio, and fled from the
borders of Orenoque for fear of the Spaniards, to whom he is a mortal enemy.
He has seated himself in the Province of Arricary, Morooga.
and now dwells at Morooga in the Signiory of Maicari. To the N. Norwest of
which, there falls into the Sea a river called Conawini, Conowini.
whereupon the Signiory of Cooshebery bordereth; Cooshebery.
whereof an Indian named Leonard Ragapo is Chief, Leonard Rapago Lord of
Cooshebery.
under the subjection of Anaki-v-ry. This Indian is christened, and has been
heretofore in England with Sr. Walter Raleigh, to whom he bears great
affection; he can a little understand and speak our language, and loves our
Nation with all his heart. During my abode at Wiapoco, having intelligence of
him, and of his Country, and that certain stones were found therein, supposed
to be Diamonds: I sent my Cozen Captain Fisher to discover the same, and to
fetch some of those stones, to be resolved of the truth.

At his coming thither, Leonard entertained him with all kindness, not after
the ordinary rude manner of the Indians, but in more civil fashion, and with
much respect and love, he furnished him with guides to conduct him through the
Country to the place where the Stones were found, being fifty miles Southward
up into the Land: beyond which place there is an high Mountain appearing in
sight, called Cowob, and on the top thereof (as the Indians report) a great
Lake or Poole, A Mountain called Cowob.
full of excellent fish of diverse kinds. The Country was as pleasant and
delightful, as ever any man beheld; but the Stones not Diamonds: yet they were
Topases, which being well cut, and set in Gold by a cunning workman, Topases in
Cooshebery.
do make as fair a show, and give as good a luster as any Diamond whatsoever:
which yield good hopes of better to be found hereafter: For where the Topas is
found on the Mountains of Tenaseren, in the East Indies, the greatest store of
Diamonds are also found.

When my kinsman returned, Captain Leonard came with him to Wiapoco, (being
above an hundred miles from his own Country) only to visit me and my
company; for the great love he did bear to Sr. Walter Raleigh, and our
Nation. I much marvelled to see him, for assuredly he is the brauest Indian of
all those parts.

After he had been with me a day or two, he earnestly requested me to send
some of my company into his Country, which he greatly commended for the
wholesome air, and plenty of victuals, alleging that the place where then we
lived (by his own experience) was very unhealthful; that our men would there
be subject to sickness, and die: and for an instance he named Captain Lee,
and his company, who formerly were planted there, and almost all dyed by
sickness in the same place: But he assured me that his own Country
Cooshebery was of a good air, pleasant, and healthful; that there they might
have room sufficient to build English houses in, (for those were the words he
used) that thither they should be welcome and should want nothing. Much he
persuaded to draw me to his desire, which by his importunity I granted, and
accordingly performed it; finding his Country answerable to his report; being
for the most part champian ground, The quality of the Province of Cooshebery.
naturally intermixed of plain fields, fruitful meadows, and goodlywoods, in
such admirable order, as if they had been planted artificially by handy labor.
The fields appearing above the meadows in pleasant and delightful manner,
presenting here and there unto the eye, from stately Mounts, most beautiful
and lively prospects: the meadows bordering on every side between the fields
and woods, the woods growing in the lowest valleys betwixt the meadows, and
commonly are watered with sweet and pleasant fresh stremes running through
them: which strange and rare mixture of Mounts, valleies, meadows, fields, and
woods, afford as excellent and healthful habitations as can be wished or
desired, but is not greatly peopled.

From the river of Cassipurogh N. Westward to the river of Arracow, and up
further into the land toward the West, and Southwest, as far as the river of
Arwy, (which falls into Wiapoco above the ouerfalles) extend the Provinces of
Arracoory, Arracoory and Morrownia
and Morownia, which also to the landward (by the relation of my Brother
Captain Michael Harcourt, and Captain Haruey, who have traveled and
discovered those parts) are pleasant and delightful plain Countries, like
unto Cooshebery. The Arracoory Country is well peopled, and their chief
Captain is called Ipero. Betwixt the Wiapocoories and Arracoories there is no
hearty love and friendship, yet in outward show they hold good quarter. In
Morrownia, there is also store of people, which are friendly Indians. In that
Province there is a very high Hill called Callipuny, An exceeding high Hill
called Callipuny.
fashioned like a Sugerloafe, or a Pyramides, which ouervieweth and discovers
all the Territories adjoining above an hundred miles.

Beyond the Country of Morrownia to the Southward bordering the river of Arwy,
is the Province of Norrak; Norrak.
the people thereof are Charibes, and enemies both to the Morrowinnes the
inhabitants of Morrownia, and to the Wiapocoories; who are also under the
subjection of Anaky-v-ry, Anaki-v-ry.
the Principal and greatest Lord, or Cassique of all the Yaios in those
Provinces, bordering upon the Sea betwixt the Amazones, South-eastward, and
Dessequcbe North-westward.

From the river of Amazones to the Bay of Wiapoco; there fall into the Sea
these rivers following: Rivers falling into the Sea between Amazones and
Wiapoco.
Arrapoco (a branch of Amazones) Arrawary, Micary, Conawini, and Cassipurogh:
In the Bay of Wiapoco to the East of the said river, there falls into the Sea
the river of Arracow; and into Arracow falls the river of Watts. To the North
of Wiapoco there is a small creek called Wianary, Wianary a creek.
which lets in the Sea a days journey Westward up into the land: some take
this creek to be a river, but they do err in that opinion, it having
neither spring nor fountain from whence it falls. To the North, and N. west
of the said creek, there is a ridge of high Mountains running toward the
river of Apurwaca, the soil whereof is excellent and fertile for Tobacco, and
bears the best of all those parts; so are the Sugarcanes there growing the
best and fairest that are found upon the Coast: and all the tract of Land
betwixt the rivers of Wiapoco, and Apurwaca, is accounted the Province of
Wiapocoory, The Province of Wiapocoory.
containing the Signiories of Wiapoco, and Wianary. Beneath the ouerfalles in
Wiapoco, (which are forty miles distant from the Sea) there is much people,
both of Yaios, and Arwaccas: Carasana.
of the Yaios in this river Carasana is chief. Of the Arwaccas, Arriquona.
Arriquona is Principal. In Wianary there are few Indians, Casurino.
and Casurino is their chiefetaine.

To the N. west of the Bay of Wiapoco, there fall into the Sea the rivers of
Apurwaca, Cowo, Wio, and Caiane. Rivers faling into the Sea, to the N. West of
Wiapoco.
Apurwaca is a goodly river, and well inhabited; Cowo is void of inhabitants;
Wio is a fair river and leads many days journey into the high land, and
discovers a firtile and hopeful Country. At Caiane there is an excellent
harbor for shipping of any burden, which heretofore by Captain Lawrence
Keymis was called Port Howard: On the Starboord side as you enter this harbor
there is an Island of low land called Muccumbro, Muccumbro an Island.
situate betwixt the rivers of Caiane and Meccoria, containing in circuit
about sixteen leagues. In this Island there are two Hills, the one called
Muccumbro, whereof the Island takes the name; the other called Cillicedemo:
from these Hills the greatest part of the Island may be ouerviewed, which
contains many goodly pastures, and meadows intermixed with some woods, and is
full of Dear, both red and fallow.

On the Larboord side, as you enter Caiane there is another Island of high
Land, called Mattoory in quantity much like unto the first; Mattoory an Island.
this Island for the commodious situation, is of great effect for the defense
of the harbor, affording naturally two such notable convenient places for the
planting of Ordinance for that purpose, as no industry of art could devise
better, or more auailable.

The inhabitants of this Province of Caiane, are Charibes, Arrawicary chief
Captain of the Caiane.
their principal commander is called Arrawicary, who dwells at Cillicedemo
before mentioned: we have found him trusty and faithful to our Nation; but to
our friend Leoanard of Cooshebery, Four or five men placed at Caiane.
he is a mortal enemy. At this man's house I left four or five of my
company, thereby to hold amity and friendship with the Charibes, to learn
their language, and to keep peace between them and the Yaios, Arwaccas, and
other nations their allies.

To the South-westward of these Provinces above mentioned toward the high
land, there be many others which hereafter shall be more exactly discribed by
a second discovery.

These Provinces and Signiories to the Landward are not plentifully inhabited;
the greatest numbers of people, are seated near unto the rivers, and travel
from place to place in Canoes. The manner of their government.
There is no settled government amongst them, only they acknowledge a
superiority, which they will obey as far as they please. In every Province or
Signiory there is a Chief Cassique, or Captain, commanding all: So likewise
in every Town and Village, Murder and Adultery punished by death.
they commonly chastise murder and adultery by death, which only are the
offenses punished amongst them, and certain persons are appointed by them to
execute those punishments. The Indians take wives over whom they are extremely
jealous, The Indians by nature jealous over their wives.
and expect great continency in them; for if they take them in adultery, they
presently cause their brains to be beaten out. The better sort of persons have
every one of them two or three wives, The Indians have many wives.
or more, the rest but one; accounting him that has most wives, the greatest
man. Their wives (especially the elder sort) are as servants unto them, for
they make their bread and drink, dress their meat, serve them at meals, and
do all the other business about the house.

These Provinces are peopled with diverse Nations of several languages, Diverse
languages in Guiana.
namely, Yaios, Arwaccas, Sappaios, Paragotos, and Charibes. The Charibes most
ancient upon the sea coast.
The Charibes are the ancient inhabitants, and the other Nations are such as
have been chased away from Trinidado, and the borders of Orenoque. And
forasmuch as they have united themselves in those parts, the Charibes have held
them in continual wars, but the Yaios and the other Nations their Allies,
are grown so strong, that they have constrained the Charibes of the Sea cost
to contract a peace with them, yet bear no hearty love the one Nation to the
other: But with the Charibes inhabiting the inland parts upon the Mountains,
they have as yet no peace at all; for they do often times come down upon them
in great numbers, The Indians make war for their weomen.
spoil and burn their houses, kill their men, and carry away their weomen,
which is the greatest cause of war and hatred amongst them: whereof our men
have seen experience in Cooshebery; where happened an accident worth the
observing, which I will here declare unto your Highness. The Indian Leonard
Ragapo, before mentioned, is a Yaio, who finding the Country of Cooshebery
slenderly inhabited, has seized upon it for his own Siguiorie; and at his
earnest request, I sent four Gentlemen of my company to remain there with
him. The natural inhabitants that dwell upon the uttermost bounds thereof,
toward the South, and West, are Charibes, and enemies to him, and to his
Nation: for while our men (unknown to the Charibes) stayed at Cooshebery, The
Charibes war upon Leonard.
they assembled themselves together to the number of 200. or more, and came
down into his Signiorie, burned and spoiled houses, roasted one woman, took
many prisoners, and intended to assault him also: which to prevent he armed
about 50. of his Indians, The usual weapons of the Indians.
with their usual weapons; which are Bows and Arrows, long staves sharpened
at the point, and with fire hardened: wooden Swords and Targets very
artificially made of wood, Leonard desires and of the English.
and painted with Beasts, and Birds; He requested also our men to aid and
assist him with their muskets, which I commanded them to do, upon all such
occasions offered: And so being all in readiness, Leonard (as their captain)
led them on to intercept his enemies; and as I have heard by Mr. Henry Baldwin,
(who then was present, and (to observe the manner of their wars) gave him
leave to command all) he bravely performed that exploit, in good order after
their manner, and with great judgment and resolution. For in the Front, he
first placed our four Englishmen, The manner of ordering their men in the
wars.
by two in a rank; next to them, two Indians armed with wooden Swords and
Targets; then two archers; and after them two men with sharpened staves, instead
of pikes: and in like manner ordered, and ranked all his Company. Being thus
prepared, he marched against the Charibs, who (near at hand) were coming in
the same order toward him; but when they approached, and (unexpected) perceued
our English men amongst the Yaios, they were much amazed, and made a sudden
stand: The Charibes amazed at the sight of the English.
which Leonard perceiving, guessed rightly at the cause, and instantly did make
good use of that advantage. He commanded his own company to keep their
Station, himself with a sword in his hand (which I had given him) and a Target
of his own fashion, went boldly toward them to parley with their Captains.
And having called them out, Leonard speaks to the Charibes.
he reproved them for coming (as enemies) into his Signiory, for burning and
spoiling his houses, and his people; he demanded satisfaction for the hurt
done, and restitution of the prisoners taken; and warned them forthwith to
depart out of his Signiory, and desist from war: which if they refused to
fulfill, he was there ready with his friends the Englishmen to fight with
them, and revenge his wrongs: and said further, that if in the conflict any of
the English men were slain, or hurt; he would then fetch all the rest from
Wiapoco, and return to burn their houses, and cut them all in pieces. Thus he
boldly spoke, with such a courage, showing also our men unto them, The Charibes
agree to peace for fear of the English.
(who had their match in cock ready to discharge) that he struck such a fear
into them all, by reason of our men's presence, that they presently agreed to
peace, performed what conditions he required, and then departed home with all
their company. Here may your Highness note, the factions among the Indian
Nations; the discipline and order they hold in war, the fear the Charibes
conceived at the sight of our Englishmen, and the policy of the Indian Leonard
to take advantage by their fear, and make our men his Guard, and chief
protection against them. These things in time will much avail us, being well
observed, and rightly applied according to occasion. But to our former
discourse.

The power and strength of these Countries (being so thinly peopled,) is not
very great to withstand the might of foreign enemies; the usual weapons of
the Indians, are before described, saving that their arrows are oft-times
poisoned. But since our trade and commerce with them, they have gotten a few
good swords, muskets, caliuers, and some small quantity of shot and powder; and
have learned to handle their pieces very orderly, and some of them are good
shot.

The seasons of the year upon this coast, The season of the year in Guiana.
and in this climate are diverse, for in the East parts of Guiana toward the
Amazones, the dry weather, which we call their Summer, Teh summer begins in
August.
begins in August; and the violent raines and tempestuous winds, which we
count their winter, do begin in February: But in the Western parts, The
winter begins in February.
toward Orenoque, the dry season begins in October, and the raines and
winds in April. There is little difference of heat and cold in this
diversity of seasons being so near the Equinoctial, where the day and night
are always equal, the sun ever rising and seting at six of the clock or
near thereabout: which climat by the ancient Philosophers (in respect of the
neerenes of the Sun, which causes excessive drowth and heat) was accounted
the uninhabitable and burning Zone: The burning Zone.
but our daily experience does assure us of their certain mistaking in that
point: for in those parts we find, that when the Sun declineth furthest
from them toward the Tropicke of Capricorn, the air is then cleerest, and
the season of the year most dry; as in the Eastern parts of Guiana in August,
September, October, November and December: and when the Sun returns toward
the Tropicke of Cancer, then do the raines begin, increase, and decrease, from
February to July: but sometimes they begin to fall, and the rivers to rise,
swell, and ouerflow sooner or later by a month; and the year is sometimes
more or less windy and wet, according to the disposition of the heavens, and
of the Planets: and as the Sun approaches, or declineth little, or much, even
so the earth wants or abounds with water and moisture.

The reasons of these strange diversities from other regions without the
Tropickes, are very excellently declared by Joseph Acosta in the second book of
his natural and moral history of the Indies, Joseph Acosta.
to which Author I refer you for your better satisfaction therein: but withal
I must advertise you, that when you read his first and second books, you have
regard to the place where they were written, which was in Peru, reputed by us
to be beyond the Equinoctial, toward the South, or Pole Antarticke, lest you
err by mistaking his meaning: for in those two books, when he mentions any
place beyond the Equinoctial, he means toward the North, or Pole Articke.
And also you must note that this general rule for the heavens temprature, is
only limited to the Region of the burning Zone, within the Tropickes.

They have no division or account of times or numbers; Their account of times
and numbers.
they only reckon by the Moons, as one, two, three, four, or five Moons: or
by days in like manner. Their numbers they reckon thus, one, two, three, and
so to ten: then they say ten and one, ten and two, ten and three, etc.
And to show their meaning more certainly, they will hold up one, two, three,
or more of their fingers, expressing the numbers, still making signs as they
speak, the better to declare their meaning: when they will reckon twenty, they
will hold down both their hands to their feet, showing all their fingers and
toes, and as the number is greater, so will they double the sign. When they
appoint or promise any thing to be done by a time limited, they will deliver a
little bundle of sticks equal to the number of days, or Moons, that they
appoint, and will themselves keep another bundle of the like number: and to
observe their appointed time, they will every day, or Moon take away a stick,
and when they have taken away all, then they know that the time of their
appointment is come, and will accordingly perform their promise.

As touching Religion, they have none amongst them, They use no sacrifice, nor
religious worship to anithing.
that I could perceive, more then a certain observance of the Sun and Moon,
supposing them to be alive, but use no religious worship toward them, nor
offer sacrifice to any thing: unless they use a superstition in their drinking
feasts, by sacrificing Iarres of drink: for at the death of any of their
Cassiques, Captains, The manner of their drinking feast at the death of their
Captains.
or great friends whom they esteem, they will make a solemn feast, (their
chiefest provision being of their best and strongest drink, which they call
Parranow) which feast shall continue three or four days, or as long as their
liquor lasts, spending their time in dancing, singing, and drinking
excessiuely: in which vice they exceed all other nations whatsoever,
accounting him that will be drunk first, the brauest fellow; during this
solemnity of their drinking, some woman being nearest of kin unto the party
dead, does stand by and cry extremely; thus their manner is until their
drink be spent, and then the feast is ended. Whether they use any
superstition in this custom I know not; time will reveal, and also reform
it. Their Peeaios or Priests have conference with the devil.
It is most certain that their Peeaios, (as they call them) Priests, or
Southsayers, at some special times have conference with the devil, (the
common deceiuer of mankind) whom they call Wattipa, and are by him deluded;
yet notwithstanding their often conference with him, they fear, and hate him
much, and say that he is naught: and not without great reason, for he will
often times (to their great terror) beat them black and blew. Their opinion
of the dead.
They believe that the good Indians when they die, go up, and will point
toward the heavens, which they call Caupo; and that the bad Indians go down,
pointing to the earth, At the death of a Cassique, they kill an Indian to serve
him in the other world.
which they call Soy. when any Cassique, Captain, or chief man dies amongst
them, if he have a slave or prisoner taken from their enemies, they will kill
him; and if he have none such, then will they kill one of his other servants,
that he may have one to attend him in the other world. The quality of the Land.


The quallity of the land in those Countries, is of diverse kinds, by the Sea
side the land is low, where the heat would be most vehement, if it were not
quallified and tempered by a fresh Easterly wind or Brieze, most forcibly
blowing in the heat of the day: in many places this low land is very
unhealthful, and little inhabited, by reason of the ouerflowing of the waters:
but for the most part it has goodly nauigable rivers, a fertile soil, much
people, and is a healthful habitation. Upon the Mountains there is a high
land, where the air is coldest, in some places it is fruitful, in others not:
but generally is full of Mineralls, and mines of metals, and yields as many
as any part either of the East, or West Indies, both of the best, and of the
basest whereof we shall (by Gods permission) give good testimony, to the
benefit of our Country, and honor of our Nation in time convenient: and in
most places upon the Mountains there is sound and healthful dwelling. There
is also a middle sort of land, which is of a mean height, and is most
temperate, healthful, firtile, and most inhabited of all other; it abounds
in meadows, pastures, and pleasant streams of fresh water, in goodly woods,
and most delightful plains, for profit, pleasure, sport, and recreation: and
also is not void of Minerals.

The provisions of this country for victuals, The provisions for victuals.
are many; First of the root of a tree called Cassaui, they make their bread,
The root of Cassaui makes their bread and drink.
in manner following; they grate the root upon a stone, and press out the
juice thereof, which being raw is poison, but boiled with Guinea pepper,
whereof they have abundance, it makes an excellent and wholesome sauce, then
they dry the grated root, and bake it upon a stone, as we bake our Oaten
cakes in England. This bread is very excellent, much like, but far better then
our great Oaten cakes, a finger thick, which are used in the Moorlands, and
the ^eake in Staffordshire and Darbyshire.

There is a kind of great wheat called Maix, Maix, or Guinea wheat.
of some it is called Guinea wheat, which grain is a singular provision in
those Countries, and yields admirable increase, even a thousand or fifteen
hundred for one, and many times much more: It makes excellent meal, or flower
for bread; and very good malte for beer or ale, and serves well for sundry
other necessary uses for the relief of man. Their diverse kinds of drink.
Of the aforesaid Cassaui bread, and this wheat the Indians make drink, which
they call Passiaw: it will not keep long, but must be spent within four or
five days: they make another kind of drink of Cassaui, An excellent drink
made of Cassaui.
called Parranow, very good and strong, much like unto our best March beer in
England, and that kind of drink will keep ten days; many sorts they have
which I have tasted, some strong, some small, some thick, some thin, but all
good, being well made, as commonly they were amongst the Yaios, and Arwaccas,
which are the cleanliest people of all those Nations.

There is great store of honey in the Country, Store of honey
and although it be wild (being taken out of trees, and buries in the earth)
yet is it as good as any in the world; of which may be made an excellent drink
much used in Wales, called mead. The honey and the wax, are also good
commodities for merchandise.

There be no Vines in that country, The soil excellent for Vines.
but the Soil being rich and ferlile, and the climate hot, if they were
planted there, they would prosper exccedingly, and yield good Sackes, and
Canary wines, which in those parts we find to be very wholesome.

Many other necessary provisions sufficient for the sustenance of man, Sundry
kinds of beasts in Guiana.
do there abound in plenty: Namely, Dear of all sorts, wild Swine in great
numbers, whereof there are two kinds, the one small, by the Indians called
Pockiero, Swine which have the nauile in the back.
which has the nauile in the back; the other is called Paingo, and is as
fair and large as any we have in England. There be store of Hares, and Conies,
but of a kind far differing from ours: There be Tigers, Leopards, Ounces,
Armadils, Maipuries which are in taste like beef, and will take salt: Baremoes
or Ant-Beares, which taste like Mutton, and other small beasts of the same
taste, colored like a fawn, Elks, Monkies, and Marmosites of diverse sorts,
both great and small: of these beasts there be innumerable, and by experience
we have found them all good meat. Many other kinds of beasts there are of
sundry and strange shapes, which hereafter shall be figured in their true
proportion according to the life with their names annexed.

Of Fowls there be diverse kinds; Great variety of Fowls
namely, Wildducks, Widgins, Teates, Wild-geese, Herons of diverse colors,
Cranes, Storks, Pheasants, Partriges, Doves, Stock-doues, Black-birds,
Curlewes, God-wits, Wood-cockes, Snits, Parrats of sundry sorts, many other
kinds of great and small birds of rare colors; besides great ravenous fowls;
and Hawks of every kind.

Of Fish the variety is great, Diverse kinds of fish.
first of Seafish, there is Sea-breame, Mullet, Soale, Scate, Thorneback, the
Sword-fish, Sturgion, Seal, a fish like unto a Salmon, but as the Salmon is
red, this is yellow; Shrimps, Lobstars, Oysters hang upon trees.
and Oysters which hang upon the branches of trees: There is a rare fish called
Cassoorwa, which has in each eye two sights, A fish having 4. eyes, and the
ribs, and back like a man.
and as it swimmeth it bears the lower sights within the water, and the other
above: the ribs and back of this fish resemble those parts of a man, having
the ribs round and the back flat, with a dent therein, as a man has; it is
somewhat bigger then a Smelt, but far exceeding it for dainty meat; and many
other sorts there be most excellent. Of fresh water fish many kinds unknown in
these parts, but all exceeding good and dainty: And I dare be bold to say, that
this Country may compare with any other of the world, for the great variety of
excellent fish both of the Sea, and fresh waters. There is also a Seafish
which usually comes into the fresh waters, especially in the winter and wet
season; it is of great esteem amongst us, and we account it half flesh, for
the blood of it is warm; it comes up into the shallow waters in the drowned
lands, and feeds upon grass and weeds: The Sea-cow like beef.
the Indians name it Coiumero, and the Spaniards Manati, but we call it the
Seacow; in taste it is like beef, will take salt, and serve to victual ships,
as in our knowledge has been proved by our Countrymen: Of this fish may be
made an excellent oil for many purposes; the fat of it is good to fry either
fish or flesh; the hide (as I have heard) will make good buffe: and being dried
in the Sun, and kept from wet, will serve for Targets and Armours against the
Indian arrows: In the wet season the store of them are infinite; some of these
hides were heretofore brought into England, by Sr. Walter Rawleigh.

The several kinds of fruits are many, Sundry kinds of fruits.
the Pina, Platana, Potato, Medler, Plummes of diverse sorts, (...) Nuts of
strange kinds. The excellency of the Pina I cannot express, Pina.
for I dare boldly affirm that the world affords not a more delicate fruit:
In taste it is like Strawberries, Claret wine and Sugar. The Platana is also a
very good fruit, Platana.
and tastes like an old Pippin. Potato.
The Potato is well known. The Medler exceeds in greatness. Medler.
The Plummes I cannot commend, Plummes.
for to eat much of them does cause Fluxes, which in those Countries are
dangerous. The Nuts are good being moderately eaten. Having thus (most
excellent Prince) declared the several sorts of provisions for victuals and
necessary foods, Nuts.
it remains that I now make mention of the variety of commodities found in
the Country for the trade of Merchandise, which in few years, by our pains
and industry, may be brought to perfection, and so settled in those parts, that
not only the undertakers may receive reward for their endeavors, but our
country also may grow rich, by trading for the fruits of our labors.

The first and principal commodity of estimation, are the Suger-canes, The
variety of Commodities.
whereof in those parts there is great plenty; Sugar canes.
the soil is as firtile for them as in any other part of the world: They do
there grow to great bigness in a short time; by orderly and fit planting of
them, and by erecting convenient works for the boiling and making of Sugers,
(which at the first will require some charge and expense) may be yearly
returned great benefit and wealth: the long experience of the Portugals, and
Spaniards, in Brasill, and the Island of the Canaries; and of the Moors in
Barbary, may give us certain assurance, and full satisfaction thereof.

The Cotton wool is a general commodity, beneficial to our Merchants, Cotton
woll.
and profitable to our Country, by making of sustians, and serving for
bumbast, and other uses: for making of Hamaccas, which are the Indian beds most
necessary in those parts, and also of a fine cotton cloth for clothing of the
people. There is a natural Hemp or Flax of great use, Natural hemp or flax.
almost as fine as silk as it may be used; we have now found out the best
use of it; and for making of linen cloth it is most excellent.

There be many rare and singular commodities for Diers, Diverse commodities for
Diers.
of which sort there is a red Berry called Annoto, which being rightly prepared
by the Indians, dies a perfect and sure Orange tawny in silk; Annoto.
it has been sold in Holland for twelve shillings starling the pound, and is
yet of a good price. There is another berry that dies blew. There is also a
gum of a tree, A gum which dies a yellow in grain.
whereof I have seen experience, that in cloth dies a sure and perfect
yellow in grain. There be leaves of certain trees, which being rightly
prepared, do dye a deep red. There is also a wood which dies apurple, and is
of a good price; and another that dies yellow. There is yet another wood which
dies a purple when the liquor is hot, and a crimson when the liquor is cold.
Many other notable things there are (no doubt) not yet known unto us, which by
our diligent labor and observation in time will be discovered and found.

The sweet gummes of inestimable value and strange operation in Physic and
Surgery, Sweet Gummes.
are innumerable; there is yellow Amber, Gumma, Lemnia, Colliman, or Carriman,
Barratta, and many more which I omit. The Colliman has been proved by Mr.
Walter Carry of Wickham in Buckingham-shire, (a Gentleman of great judgment and
practice in Physic) to be of special regard for many purposes: The virtues
of Colliman or Carriman.
this gum is black and brittle, much like in show to common pitch; if you put
a little of it upon burning coals, it fills all the room with a most sweet
and pleasant savor. He further reports of it, that certainly if you hold
your head over the fume thereof three, or four times a day, it cures the
giddiness of the head, and is also a most excellent comfort and remedy for a
cold, moist, and rheumaticke brain: it is olso good against the resolution (or
as the common sort call it) the dead Palsy, whereof the giddines of the head
is often a messenger, and the fore-teller of that most pernicious grief. It is
also of great use for the pain that many woomen have in the lower part of
their backs: which is very common to such as have had children: for remedy
whereof, it is to be melted in a pewter vessel with a gentle fire, then with
a knife it must be spread lightly upon a piece of leather, and laid warm to
the place grieved, until it come of it self. This Plaster is also very good
for aches, and does greatly comfort and strengthen the sinews. Thus much has
Mr. Carry written and reported of it, and has proved by his own experience.
The Colliman helps the gout.
This Gum is also approved to be an excellent remedy against the Gout; and
of singular virtue in the cure of wounds.

The Barratta is a most sovereign Balsamum far excelling all others yet
known: Barratta a rare Balsamum.
which by the same Gentleman's experience is of admirable operation in the cure
of green wounds: and being burned upon coals, is of a sweet and odoriferous
savor.

There be many other sweet Gummes of great use for Perfumes; A perfume like
sweet Margerome.
whereof one does make a very rare perfume, much like unto the sent of sweet
Margerome, very pleasant and delectable.

For physic there be also many excellent Druggs; Druggs and simples for
physic.
namely, Spiknard, Cassia, Fistula, Seen; and the earth yields
Bole-Armoniacke, and Terra-Lemnia, all which are known unto us. There be
other Druggs and simples also of strange and rare virtue, in these parts
unknown; of which sort there is a little green Apple, An apple which
provoke sleep to death.
by the Indians called in their language the sleeping Apple; which in operation
is so violent, that one little bit thereof does cause a man to sleep to death:
the least drop of the juice of it, will purge in vehement and excessive manner,
as dangerously was proved by my Cosen Vnton Fisher, who first found it: for
biting a little of it for a taste, and finding it to burn his mouth in some
extremity, did suddenly spit it out again, but some small quantity of the
juice (against his will) went down into his stomach, which for two or three
days space did provoke in him an extraordinary sleepiness, and purged him
with 60. seats. This Apple, for the purging virtue in so small a quantity, is
like to be of good price, and great estimation in the Practice of Physic; for
the learned Physicions do well know how to correct the sleeping quality thereof
wherein the danger rests. There is a Berry in those parts very excellent
against the bloody-fluxe, A berry curing the bloody Flux.
by the Indians it is called Kellette. The juice of the leaf called vppee, A
leaf curing the wounds of the poisoned arrows.
cures the wounds of the poisoned arrows. The juice of the leaf called
Icari, is good against the headache. Many other Druggs and simples are there
found of singular properties both in Physic and Surgery, A leaf curing
the headache.
which if they should be severally described according to their value and
worthiness, would contain a large volume.

Moreover the Tree wherewith they take their fish, A wood that makes fish
drunk.
is not a little to be esteemed, but chiefly the great goodness of God
therein is highly to be praised and admired, who amongst so many admirable
things by him created, and planted in those parts, has vouchsafed to bestow
upon those barbarous people so great a benefit, and natural help, for the
present getting of their food and sustenance. These Trees are commonly growing
near unto the places of their habitation for their present use: for when, at
any time, they go to fish, they take three or four little sticks of this
tree, and bruise them upon a stone, and then go into certain small creekes by
the Sea shore, which at a high water are usually full of very good fish of
diverse kinds, which come in with the tide; and there they wade up and down the
water, and between their hands rub those small bruised sticks therein, which
are of such virtue, that they will cause the fish to turn up their bellies,
and lie still above the water for a certain time: In which space they
presently take as many as they please, and lade them into their Canoes, and so
with little labor return home sufficiently provided.

There is also a red speckled wood in that Country, called Pira timinere, which
is worth 30 or 40. pounds a tun: It is excellent for Ioyners work; as
Chaires, Stools, Bed-steds, Presses, Cupboords, and for Wainscot. There are
diverse kinds of Stone of great use, and good price, as Jasper, Purphery, and
the Spleene-stone.

There is yet another profitable commodity to be reaped in Guiana, Tobacco.
and that is by Tobacco, which albeit some dislike, yet the generality of men
in this kingdom does with great affection entertain it. It is not only in
request in this our Country of England but also in Ireland, the Neatherlands,
in all the Easterly Countries, and Germany; and most of all amongst the Turks,
and in Barbary. The price it holds is great, the benefit our Merchants gain
thereby is infinite, and the Kings rent for the custom thereof is not a
little. The Tobacco that was brought into this kingdom in the year of our
Lord 1610. was at the least worth 60. thousand pounds: And since that time the
store that yearly has come in, was little less. It is planted, gathered,
seasoned, and made up fit for the Merchant in short time, and with easy
labor. But when we first arrived in those parts, we altogether wanted the
true skill and knowledge how to order it, which now of late we happily have
learned of the Spaniards themselves, whereby I dare presume to say, and hope to
prove, within few months, (as others also of sound judgment, and great
experience do hold opinion) that only this commodity Tobacco, (so much sought
after, and desired) will bring as great a benefit and profit to the
undertakers, as ever the Spaniards gained by the best and richest Silver mine
in all their Indies, considering the charge of both.

The things which the Indians desire from us by way of trade in exchange for
the above named commodities, The commodities most esteemed by the Indians.
(whereby we hold society and commerce with them) are Axes, Hatchets,
Bil-hookes knives, all kind of Edge tools, Nails, great Fishhookes,
Harping-irons, Iewes-Trumps, looking-glasses, blew, and white Beads, Crystal
Beads, Hats, Pinnes, Needles, Salt, Shirts, Bands, linen and woollen Clothes,
Swords, Muskets, Calliuers, Powder, and Shot: but of these last mentioned, we
are very sparing, and part not with many, unless upon great occasion, by way
of gift to special persons.

For these toies, and such like trifeling things the Indians will sell unto you
any of the above mentioned commodities that can be gotten or prepared by them;
or any thing they have, or that their Country yields; and will perform any
reasonable labor for them. Thus have I delivered unto your Highness, the
particulars of the several commodities, which hitherto we have discovered, and
found likely to be profitable in Guiana; (whereof examples are remaining to
be seen in the hands of Mr. Henry Houenaer a Dutchman, who in the year of
our Lord 1610. performed a voyage to Guiana, to the places where our Company
was seated, and now abides in Thames-streete, near unto Cole-harbour: and I
make no doubt, that by continuance of time, our painful travels, and diligent
observations, we shall discover and get knowledge of an infinite number of
others, as rich, necessary, and beneficial as these already spoken of, or any
other whatsoever: if it please Almighty God to favor and bless our
proceedings.

When the raines ceased, which was in July, I began to trauaell abroad in
search of those Golden Mountains, promised unto us before the beginning of our
voyage, (by one that undertook to guide us to them) which filled my company so
full of vain expectation, and golden hopes, that their insatiable and covetous
minds (being wholly set thereon) could not be satisfied with any thing but
oenly Gold. Our guide that vainly made those great promises, being come unto
the wished place to make performance, was then possessed with a shameless
spirit of ignorance, for he knew little, and could perform nothing. What
other intelligences (of Mines already fouud) I had from other men in England,
and from the Mr. of my ship, who had bin heretofore in those parts, I found
them by experience false, and nothing true concerning Mines, that was in
England reported unto me.

Our greedy desire of Gold being thus made frustrate, diverse unconstant persons
of my unruly company began to murmr, Disorders by mutiny.
to be discontented, to kindle discords and discensions, and to stir up
mutiny, even almost to the confusion and ruin of us all: and were upon the
point to shake off all obedience to their commanders; to abandon patience,
peace, and unity, and wilfully to break out into all mischief and wretched
disorder, only because they were deceived of their golden hopes and
expectations: but with good words, and comfortable persuasions, I pacified them
for the time, and made them acquainted with my better hopes conceived of the
commodities above mentioned. I persuaded them in general from idleness, to
travel abroad, to search and seek out amongst the Indians what other
novelties they could (though gold were wanting) whereby we might hereafter
benefit our selves; and still I employed them some one way, and some another,
to occupy their minds by doing something, the better to prevent discention,
which commonly is bred of idleness, the slothful mother of all filthy vices.

As I daily conuersed amongst the Indians, it chanced one day, that one of them
presented me with a half Moon of metal, which held somewhat more then a
third part Gold, the rest Copper: another also gave me a little Image of the
same metal; and of an other I bought a plate of the same (which he called a
spread Eagle) for an Axe. All which things they assured me were made in the
high Country of Guiana, The high Country of Guiana abounds with Images of
Gold.
which they said did abound with Images of Gold, by them called Carrecoory.
These things I showed to my company to settle their troubled minds, which gave
much contentment to the greater part of them, and satisfied us all that there
was Gold in Guiana. Shortly after that my Indian Anthony Canabre, brought me a
peec of a rock, of white Sparre, whereof the high Country is full: And if the
white Sparres of this kind, The rocks of the purest white Sparre are Mines of
gold or silver.
which are the purest white of all others, (for every sort of Mine has a
sparre, and for the most part white) be in a maine rock, they are certainly
Mines of Gold, or Silver, or of both I made trial of a piece of Sparre, which
the same Indian discovered unto me, and I found that it held both Gold, and
Silver, which (although it was in small quantity) gave me satisfaction that
there be richer Mines in the Country to be found: but the best lie deeper in
the earth, and we had not time nor power to make search for them.

Being thus informed, and sufficiently resolved of the commodities of the
Country, and well satisfied of the Minerals; I bent all my endeauours to find
out the fittest places, and most convenient for our first plantations: at the
last I found out many, and some of special note, which are (for many respects)
of great importance; and when time serves, our forces and number of men being
answerable, I will lay them open to the knowledge of the world: and for wealth
I hope they shall fully answer all men's expectations.

I traveled up the river of Wiapoco, to view the ouerfalles, but the waters
being high and strong, I could not pass them. In August when they are fallen,
with some labor they may be passed. Many ouerfalles in Wiapoco.
This river has very many ouerfalles, lying one a good distance beyond
another, even to the head thereof. Above some of the first falls there
dwells an Indian, called Comarian, who is an old man of a free disposition;
by him I learned that a certain distance above the first falls, the river
Arwy falls into Wiapoco; moreover that certain days journey beyond him
toward the high land, upon the borders of Wiapoco, there is a Nation of
Charibes having great ears of an extraordinary bigness, People having great
ears, who worship an Idol of stone.
hard to be believed, whom he called Marashewaccas: amongst these people (as
Comarian reports) there is an Idol of stone, which they worship as their
God; they have placed it in a house made of purpose for the greater honor of
it, which they keep very clean and hansome.

This Idol is fashioned like a man sitting upon his heels, The proportion of
the Idol.
holding open his knees, and resting his elbowes upon them, holding up his
hands with the palms forwards, looking upwards, and gaping with his mouth wide
open. The meaning of this proportion he could not declare, although he has
been many times amongst them, and has often seen it. What other Nations were
beyond these he did not know, having never travailed so far, but he says
they be Charibes, and also enemies unto them. It seems there be many Nations
of those great eared people: for in the River of Marrawini I heard also of the
like, who dwell far up toward the high land, as hereafter you shall hear
and I suppose, by the trending of the Rivers of Wiapoco, and Marrawini, are all
one people.

Upon the 14. day of August I went unto a Mountain, called Gomeribo, being the
uttermost point of land to the Northward in the bay of Wiapoco; I found the
soil of it most excellent for Tobacco, Maix, Cotton trees, Annoto trees,
Vines, and for any other thing that should be planted there. When I had taken
good view of the place, and found it commodious for many purposes; Possession
taken for the king at Gomeribo,
then in the presence of Capt. Fisher, diverse Gentlemen, and others of my
company, and of the Indians also, I took possession of the land, by turfe and
twig, in the behalf of our Sovereign Lord King JAMES: I took the said
posession of a part, in name of the whole continent of Guiana, lying betwixt
the rivers of Amazones and Orenoque, not being actually possessed, and
inhabited by any other Christian Prince or State; wherewith the Indians seemed
to be well content and pleased.

In like manner my Brother Capt. Michael Harecourt, and Capt. Haruey, (whom I
left as his associate, and he esteemed as an inward friend,) in a notable
journey, which (to their great honor) they performed, to discover the River of
Arrawary, and the Country bordering upon it, (near adioining to the river of
Amazones) did take the like possession of the land there, The like possession
taken at Arrawary.
to his Majesty's use.

The dangers and great difficulties which they in that attempt incountred, were
memorabe, and such, as hardly any of our Nation in such small Canoes (being
only somewhat longer, but not so broad as our Thames wherries, and flat
bottomed,) ever overcame the like. First the number of their own attendants
besides themselves, was only one man, and a boy: Their troop of Indians 60.
persons. Their journey by Sea unto the River of Arrawary was near 100.
Leagues: wherein (by the way) they met with many dreadful plunges, by reason of
a high going sea, which breaks upon the flats and shoales; especially, at the
next great cape to the North of Arraway, which, in respect of the danger they
passed there, they named Point Perilous. Point Perillus.
Then their discovery up the river, was 50. leagues more: where they found a
Nation of Indians, which never had seen white men, or Christians before, and
could not be drawn to any familiar commerce, or conversation, no not so much
as with our Indians, because they were strangers to them, and of another
Nation. The discovery of this river is of great importance, and special note,
affording an entrance more behouefull for the* searching and discovery of the
inland parts of Guiana, then any other river yet known upon the Coast; for
trending Westward up into the land, it discovers all the Countries and
Nations to the Southward of Arricary, Cooshebery, Morrownia, and Norrack, which
I have mentioned before.

Many weeks they spent in this adventure, still taking up their lodgings in
the woods at night. Provision of meat they wanted not, A great argument of
plenty in the Country.
for Fish were ever plenty, and at hand: and the woods yielded either Dear,
Tigers, or Foul: their greatest want was of bread and drink, which only
defect did hinder (at that time) the accomplishment of that discovery. For when
the Indians perceived their bread to be near spent, and their drink to be
corrupted, they could not be persuaded to proceed, having no means to supply
their wants amongst the Arrawaries, the Indians of that river, who would not
freely trade with them upon this first acquaintance, but always stood upon
their guard, on the other side of the river, where they inhabited: yet they
desiring to obtain some of our English commodities, and make trial of our
Indians friendship, afforded some small trade for their present relief
during their aboade in that river: So that of force they were constrained to
break off their discovery, and hasten homeward.

But here their dangers ended not, for as they returned, arriving at certain
Islands called Carripoory, and passing between them and the main land, much
against the wills of all the Indians, who knowing the danger of the place, and
more respecting their safety, then their own, (being themselves all expert
swimmers) would have dissuaded them from that hazard: but they being ignorant
of the peril, would needs pass onne, and at the last met with such a Boore
(as the Seamen term it) and violent encounter of two tides coming in, A
dangrous Boore at Carripoory.
which like two furious enraged Rams, or Bulls, rushed together, and often
retired back, to return again with greater violence, until the one (by force
had ouerborne the other: that if next under God) the diligent care and pains
of the Indians had not preserved the^, they had been there destroyed, and
swallowed up by that merciless Boore or breach of waters; which (God be
thanked) they escaped, and returned home in safety.

Here may your Highness fitly note and observe two things, Two special things
to be observed.
the one, the assured love and fidelity of the Indians to our Nation; who
having in their power for six weeks space, four only of our company, and two
of those the chiefest of the rest; and if they had been false and trecherously
minded toward them, The fidelity of the Indians
might easily have drowned, starued, or slain them; yet did not only forbear
to practice harm against them, but did also safely row their boats; night by
night prepare their lodgings in the woods, and daily use their care and best
endeauours to discover and prevent all dangers that might happen to them, and
to guide them, serve them, and provide them meat. Such trust and faithfulness
is rarely found amongst such barbarous infidels, and yet we have had three
years experience thereof. The other thing to be observed here, The plenty of
victuals.
is the store and plenty of victuals in Guiana; where sixty four persons
together in one company, without any provision of victuals (bread and drink
excepted) before hand made, could travel abroad for six weeks space, most
commonly lodging in the woods, seldom in any town or village, and yet in all
places wheresoever they came, could readily get meat sufficient for them all:
which blessing God has given to Guiana; for the comfort of all such as shall
be willing to be planters there.

This, and much more could my Brother have truly avouched, if he had lived;
but (since his return into England) it has pleased God, who gave him life,
and preserved him from many dangers, to take him to his mercy. But the other,
Captain Haruey, suruiueth, whose life has ever suited with a generous and
worthy spirit, professing Arms, and following the wars: who also is
generally well known, to be a Gentleman, both honest, and of spotless
reputation; he will auerre and justify for truth, what here is mentioned.
But I will now return from whence I have digressed.

When I had (as before) taken possession at Gomeribo, Gomeribo delivered to an
Indian as the Kings tenant.
in presence of the said parties, I delivered the possession of that Mountain
to my India^ Anthony Canabre, To have, hold, possess, and enjoy the same, to
him, and to his heirs for ever, of our Sovereign Lord King James, his Heirs
and Successors, as his subject; Yielding and paying yearly the tenth part of
all Tobacco, Cotton wool, Annoto, and other commodities whatsoever, which
should hereafter be either planted or growing within the said Mountain, if it
were demanded. The Indian most gladly received the possession upon these
conditions, and for himself, and his posterity, did promise to be true
subjects unto the Kings Majesty: his heirs, and successors: And to pay the
duties imposed upon them: and so that business being finished, I returned again
to Wiapoco.

Now (most worthy Prince) there came unto my knowledge, an inconvenience
happened by the careless negligence of the Master of my ship, who had the
charge of providing and laying in the provisions and victuals for the voyage,
The only cause of loss by the Voyage.
which was the cause that I gained no present profit by it, but left off all my
discoueries in the first beginning. I had a purpose at that time to perform a
business, which might have proved profitable, and honorable unto us, if I had
been able to have stayed the time, but it was not my chance to be so
fortunate: for the Master, his Mates, and the Steward of my Ship, came unto
me, and told me plainly, that if I made any longer abode in that Country, I
would never in those Ships return into England: or if I did adventure it, my
self, and all my company would starve at Sea for want of Beer, Syder, and
water, for all my Caske was spoiled, because it was not Iron-bound; the wooden
hoopes flew off, by reason of the heat of the Clymate; and our Beer, and
Syder, (whereof we had good store) did leake about the ship, that we could
hardly save sufficient to relieve us, if we made a longer stay upon the Coast;
which was the Masters fault, having had a special charge to be careful of
that only point. By this default, I was constrained to make a virtue of
necessity, and prepare my self for England, and leave my former purposes to
be accomplished hereafter, which shall be done (God aiding me) in time
convenient.

Then disposing of my company, Capt. Michael Harcourt left commander of the
company.
I appointed my Brother Captain Michael Harcourt to remain in the Country,
as chief Commander in my absence, and to continue the possession on the Kings
behalf; I gave him directions to travel abroad, as (occasion served) to
discover the Country, to spend sometime at Cooshebery, and sometime also in
other places; but to make his chiefest residence at Wiapoco, (the only
Rendeuous for ships that trade upon that Coaste) and there to plant good
store of Maix, for our relief of bread and drink, which is the chiefest thing
to be respected in those parts; for other victuals we need not take much care
being always easily provided. He performed his charge with great reputation,
discovered many goodly Provinces, and spacious Countries; and worthily
continued the possession full three years complete. I left with him for his
assistance, Captain Haruey, above mentioned, who has nobly vowed his time and
fortune to be employed in the prosecution of this honorable action. For his
Liuetenant I appointed Mr. Edward Gifford, Twenty men left with Captain
Harcourt at Waipoco.
a valiant and worthy Gentleman; and I left also with him of Gentlemen and
others, about twenty more, with all such necessaries as I could spare, and
thought convenient for them: and so commending them to God the eighteenth day
of August I departed from Wiapoco, and the day following arrived at Caiane.

At my coming to Caiane my Pinnesse received a leake, The Pinnesse received a
leake at Caiane.
which would have proved dangerous, if we had been far at Sea; whereby
enforced to attend the stopping thereof, and new trimming of the Pinnesse; and
unwilling to be idle in the mean space doing nothing, I left my ships there
to repair their defects, and in my ship-boate departed thence, the twenty
three of August: taking with me Captain Fisher, who has ever been (since we
first crept into the world) my chief companion, both in Arms and travels; I
took also with me his brother Vnton Fisher, Mr. Cradle the Masters mate of my
ship, and about six more. I followed the Coast to the Westward stering due
West, R. Meccooria.
and passing by the river of Meccooria, I lodged that night in the mouth of the
river Courwo: R. Courwo.
which has a narrow deep entrance, and within affords a good harbor, which
may in time to come (for some special purpose) be of great use.

The next day, and the night following I proceeded Westward with full sail,
and passing the rivers of Manmanury, Rivers to the West of Courwo*
Sinammara, Corassowini, Coonannonia, Vracco, and Amanna; I arrived the twenty
five day at the river of Marrawini, which opens a fair river, but is shoale
upon the Bar, which lies two or three Leagues off at Sea, having but two
fadome water: within the Bar, the Channel is three, four, five, and six
fadome deep. Five leagues within the ruier we passed by certain Islands
called Curewapory, Islands called Curewapory.
not inhabited, for at the rising of the waters they are always overflowed, of
which sort the river has very many: we lodged that night a little beyond these
first Islands at a village called Moyemon, on the lefthand, the Captain
thereof is called Maperitaka, of the Nation of the Paragotos, a man very loving
and faithful to our Nation, whereof we have had good proof. The next day we
proceeded up the river three leagues, and stayed at a town called Coewynay on
the right hand, at the house of Minapa, (the chief Charib of that Signiory) to
provide two Canoes to prosecute our journey for the discovery of this river.

The twenty eight day we went forward passing many villages and towns, They
proceed in discovery of Marrawini.
which I forbear to name, and having gone about twenty leagues from the Sea,
we found the river in a manner barred up with rocks, over which the water
falls with great violence, yet notwithstanding we adventured to proceed, The
river full of ouerfalles.
and the further we went, the more dangerous we found the ouerfalles, and more
in number; but when we had passed the first Mountain, toward the high
Country of Guiana, called Sapparow, and discovered far off before us other
high Mountains called Matawere Moupanana, They went six days journey up the
river.
and had proceeded 6. days journey up the river (which was more the^ forty
leagues) we met with such shoale rocky stream, and great ouerfalles, that
there to our griefour iourny ended.

Being thus for that time debarred from our intended discovery, we prepared
our selves with Patience to return toward our ships, and the third day of
September we turned down the river, shooting the ouerfalles with more
celerity then when we came up, dispatching three days journey in one, and the
fifth day returned safe to Moyemon; but before I departed thence, Captain
Fisher told me of certain plants which he had then found, much like unto
Rose-trees, growing about half a yard in height, whereof (for the strangeness
of them) I cannot forbear to add a word or two.

These plants or little trees had assuredly the sense of feeling, Trees which
had the sense of feeling.
as plainly appeared by touching them: for if you did but touch a leaf of the
tree with your finger, that leaf would presently shrink, and close up it
self, and hang down as if it were dead; and if you did cut off a leaf with a
pair of cisers, then all the other leaves growing upon the same tree would
instantly shrink and close up themselves, and hang down as if they were dead
and withered, and within half a quarter of an hour, would by degrees open
themselves again, and flourish as before; and as often as you did either touch
or cut off any of them, they would do the like; which did evidently show a
restriction of the spirits, inuincibly arguing a Sense. Howsoever this may
seem strange and incredible to your Highness, and to them that have not seen
it, Scallger, Exercit. 181. sect. 28.
yet forasmuch as Scaliger, and Bartas make mention of the like, I dare be
bold to affirm it upon my credit, Bartas, Eden, 1. day, 2. week.
having seen and showed it to forty others: I gathered two of the plants, and
did set them in pots in their own earth, and carried them aboard my ship,
where I kept them fairly growing almost a fortnight, until they were
destroyed by certain Munkies that brake loose, and pulled them in pieces:
which might have been prevented, but that I was constrained to set them in the
open air, the better to preserve them.

The seventh day I went to Wiawia, a great town of Paragotos, Viawia a Town
of 20 houses.
and Yaios, four leagues to the West of Marrawini, whereof Maperitaka above
mentioned, and Arapawaka are chief Captains. At this town I left my Cozen
Vnton Fisher, Mr. Vnton Fisher and two others left at Wiawia*
and Humfrey Croxton an Apothecary, to bear him company, and one servant to
attend him called Christopher Fisher, having first taken order with Maperitaka
for their diet, and other necessaries, both for travel, and otherwise: who
ever since (according to his promise) has performed the part of an honest man,
and faithful friend.

I gave directions to my Cozen Fisher to prosecute the discovery of Marrawini,
and the inland parts bordering upon it, when the time of the year, and the
waters better served; and if it were possible to go up into the high Country
of Guiana, and to find out the City of Manoa, mentioned by Sr. Walter Raleigh
in his discovery. He followed my directions to the uttermost of his ability,
being of a good wit, and very industrious, and enabled to undergo those
employments, by obtaining the love, and gaining the languages of the people,
without which helps, there is little or no good to be done in those parts.

When the waters of Marrawini were risen, and the river passable, Mr. Fisher
traveled eleven days journey up the river of Marra, viz. 100 leagues.
(much differing from the river of Wiapoco, which is not to be traveled, but
in the lowest waters.) He began his journey for the discovery thereof, in
company of the Apothecary, his servant Fisher, the Indian Maperitaka, and
eighteen others, and proceeded eleauen days journey up the river, to a town
of Charibes called Taupuramune, distant from the Sea above an hundred leagues;
The Province of Moreshegoro.
but was four days journey short of Moreshego, which is also a town of
Charibes, situate upon the river side in the province of Moreshegoro: the
chief Captain thereof is called Areminta: who is a proud and bold Indian,
much feared of all those that dwell within his Territories, Indians with rough
skins like Buffe.
having a rough skin like unto Buffe leather, of which kind there be many in
those parts; and I suppose proceeds of some infirmity of the body.

He understood by relation of the Indians of Taupuramune, and also of
Areminta, that six days journey beyond Moreshego, there are diverse mighty
Nations of Indians, having holes through their ears, cheeks, nostrils, and
nether lips, which were called Craweanna, Pawmeeanna, Diverse mighty Nations
of Indians far up in Marrawini, toward the high land.
Quikeanna, Peewattere, Arameeso, Acawreanno, Acooreo, Tareepeeanna,
Corecorickado, Peeauncado, Cocoanno, Itsura, and Waremisso: and were of
strength and stature far exceeding other Indians, having Bows, and Arrows
four times as big: what the Indians also report of the greatness of their
ears, I forbear to mention, until by experience we shall discover the truth
thereof. Moreover he learned that there fall into Marrawini diverse great
rivers, Rivers falling into Marrawini.
called Arrennee, Topannawin, Errewin, Cowomma, Poorakette, Arroua,
Arretowenne, Waoune, Anape, Aunime, and Carapio: whereof some he has seen
himself. Twenty days journey from Taupuramune to the head of Marraw*
That it was twenty days journey, from Taupuramune, to the head of Marrawini,
which is inhabited by Arwaccas, Sappaios, Paragotos, and some Yaios; and that a
days iourny from thence to the land-ward the Country is plain, The Country
above the head of Mar. is plain, and Champian ground.
and Champian ground, with long grass. He passed in this journey above eighty
ouerfalles of water, and many of them very dangerous: of some of them I had
experience the year before. He proceeded no further at that present, being
unprovided for so long a journey, supposing that it had been nearer (then he
found it) to the head of the river by a fortnights travel: and so returned
back in six days space, intending better preparation for a second journey:
but his purpose was prevented by an untimely death: for shortly after he was
drowned by misfortune; whereby we see, that man determines, but God disposes.

The tenth day of September being Sunday, The tenth of September they left
Guiana.
I left the main of Guiana, and in my ship-boat stood off into the sea to seek
my ships, which were forced to ride four leagues from shore, by reason of the
shoales; but as we passed over them, They were in danger to be cast away.
we were in danger to be cast away by the breach of a sea, which verily had
sunk our boat, if with great celerity we had not lightened her, by heauing
ouerbord many baskets of bread, of Cassaui, Maix, Pinas, Platanas, Potatoes,
and such like provision, wherewith our boat was laden; by which means it
pleased God to deliver us from present destruction, and to bring us safe unto
our ships.

When I came aboard, we weighed anchor, and steered away from the Island of
Trinidado, and upon the 18. day in the morning, They find three English
ships at Pu^ta de Galea.
we arrived at Punta de Galea, where we found three English ships at anchor,
which was no small comfort unto us, considering our great defects and wants.
One of these ships was called the Diana, belonging to Mr. Lula Dutch merchant
dwelling in London. The other two, the Penelope, and the Endeavor, belonging to
Mr. Hall, a merchant also of London. We stayed at this place 6. days to mend
our bad caske, and to take fresh water: during which time I was kindly
entreated, and feasted by the Merchants, and had supply of al such things as I
stood in need of; which courtesy I requited in the best manner I could for the
present.

Upon Sunday the twenty four of September we weighed anchor, so likewise did
the Diana (the other two ships being gone two or three days before us,) but
the wind shifting to the north-east* enforced us back again almost to the
same place from whence we departed. The twenty five we weighed again, and
plied along the shore toward Cape Brea, Pitch gotten in the earth, which
melts not with the Sun.
about three leagues. This Cape is so called of the Pitch which is there gotten
in the earth, whereof there is such abundance, that all places on this side of
the world may be stored therewith.

It is a most excellent Pitch for trimming of ships that pass into these
Regions and hot Countries, for it melts not with the Sun, as other Pitch
does.

The twenty six day we stood along again, the wind being still contrary and
variable, intermixed with many calmes, They arrive at Port ae Hispania.
and so continued until the second of October, when we arrived at Port de
Hispania.

Within two days after our arrival there, Don Sanches de Mendosa, Don Sanches
de Mendosa comes aboard their ship.
the Teniente for that year, with certain other Spaniards came aboard us: we
gave them the best entertainment that our means, the time, and place would
afford, and had much friendly conference together. They told me, that they
lately had a conflict with the Charibes, wherein they had lost seven or eight
of their men, and had many others hurt and wounded, whereof some came to my
Surgeon to have their wounds dressed during our abode there. And they
plainly confessed that they are very much molested by the Charibes, The
Spaniards much molested by the Charibes.
and knew not how by any means to suppress them.

We stayed at Port de Hispania until the seventh day, in hope to get some
good Tobacco amongst the Spaniards, who daily fed us with delays and fair
words, but in truth they had none good at that present for us, which we
perceiving, They depart from Trinidado.
departed thence upon the 7. day, about one of the clock in the morning,
leaving the other ships to attend their trade, and stood away for the passages,
called Les^^iot boccas de Drago, and disembogued about eight of the clock the
same morning. Then we steered away for an Island called Meues, They arrive at
Meues.
and leaving the Islands of Granado, Saint Vincent, Guadalupa, and Monserate,
in our starboord side, we arrived there the twelfth day, where we stopped to
take in Ballast, and more water, for our ships were very light.

In this Island there is an hot Bath, An excellent hot Bath at Meues.
which as well for the reports that I have heard, as also for that I have seen
and found by experience, I do hold for one of the best and most sovereign in
the world. I have heard that diverse of our Nation have there been cured of the
Leprosy, and that one of the same persons now, or lately dwelt at Wollwich
near the river of Thames, by whom the truth may be known, if any man desire
to be further satisfied therein. As for my own experience, although it was
not much, yet the effects that I found it work both in my self, and others of
my company in two days space, do cause me to conceive the best of it. For at
my coming thither, An extreme cough cured by the Bath.
I was grievously vexed with an extreme cough, which I much feared would turn
me to great harm, but by bathing in the Bath, and drinking of the water, I
was speedily cured: and ever since that time, I have found the state of my body
(I give God thanks for it) far exceeding what it was before, in strength and
health. Moreover, one of my company named John Huntbatch (servant to my
brother) as he was making a fire, A man's hand burned with Gunpouder, and by the
Bath cured in 24 hours.
burned his hand with Gunpowder, and was in doubt thereby to loose the use of
one or two of his fingers, which were shrunk up with the fire, but he went
presently to the Bath, and washed, and bathed his hand a good space therein,
which soopled his fingers in such manner, that with great ease he could stire
and stretch them out, and the fire was so washed out of his hand, that within
the space of twenty four hours, by twice or thrice washing and bathing it,
the soreness thereof was cured, only the eyesore for the time remained.
Furthermore, two or three others of my company having swellings in their
legs, Swellings in the legs cured in a day.
were by the Bath cured in a day. This can I affirm, and boldly justify,
having been an eye witness thereof.

Hence we departed the sixteenth day of October, They depart from Meues.
in the afternoon, and leaving the Islands of St. Christopher, St. Martin, and
Anguilla on the Starboord side, we dissembogued through the broken Islands on
the North side of Anguilla upon St. Lukes day, where I think never Englishma^
dissembogued before us: for we found all our Sea-charts false concerning that
place, those broken Islands being placed therein, to the Southward of Anguilla,
between it and St. Martins, and we found them scituat to the Northward thereof.

When we had cleared our selves of the broken Islands, we stood away
North-East, shaping our course the nearest way we could for Flores, and
Corues, and so continued with fair weather, the wind still mending upon us,
until the thirtieth day of October: about twelve of the clock that day there
began a storm, with contrary winds, still variable, which continued until
4. the next day in the afternoon. In this storm we lost the company of the
Pinnesse in the night, but had fight of her again upon the fourth of November
late in the evening, and the next day she came up unto us, at two of the
clock in the afternoon. Then the wind came fair at West, They left the
Pinnesse to follow after them.
and we steered away East by North, and E. N. Eastamong. The seventh of
November I relieved the Pinnesse with more bread, and left her to follow after
us, not being able to keep way with us before the wind, which then blew
strongly at West: for I was very unwilling to loose the benefit of a speedy
passage, which the co^tinua^ce of that fair wind was like to afford us. And
so following our course, on the eleventh day in the morning we had sight of
Fayal, They fell with Fayal.
one of the Islands of the Terceras, which we left on our starboord side, and
steered away for England, the wind continuing fair until the twenty four
day. But then it changed, first to the East by North, and then to the East
south-east, and became so violent and furious, that for three days space we
were not able to bear out sail, but did drive before the wind at the least
three leagues a watch, They are driven by a storm into Ireland.
out of our course; and the first land we made was Cape Clear in the
South-west part of Ireland, where against our wills we arrived at Crook Haven
the twenty nine of November.

Our arrival there at that present, Their great necessity and want.
was happy for us, considering our extreme wants, and great necessities; for
of all our store, we had remaining but one hogshed of water, half a hogshed of
beuerage (all our beer being spent and wasted by leakage) six pieces of
beef, and three of Porke, which was all our provision: we had neither fish,
butter, oil, cheese nor pease left to relieve us, whereby we had fallen into a
lamentable distress, if almighty God had not in time brought us unto this
harbor where we supplied our wants, by the help of Captain Reignolds
commander of his Majesty's Pinnesse called the Moon, whom we fortunately met
there altogether unexpected. But the wind continuing contrary at the East, and
like to hold still in that corner, presaged new wants to ensue, if a speedy
remedy was not provided. To prevent the worst, I resolved to go by land to
Yoghall, near unto which place remained some friends and acquaintance of mine,
by whom I might provide my self of means to defray my charge, until my
return into England: and therefore gave commandment to the master of my
ship to wage a Pilot, and upon the first shift of wind (if it favored him
in any time) to bring the ship about to Yoghall, where I meant to abide his
coming, resolving thence to go for Bristol. And I appointed (if the wind did
hold against him) to send him money to supply their victuals, until it pleased
God to alter it: but he regarding his own private ends, more then my command
and direction, upon the first shift of wind went away with my ship (without
my knowledge) to Dartmouth in the west Country, and left me behind in Ireland:
whereof as soon as I had intelligence, I presently took the opertunitie of a
speedy passage in a bark then reddy bound for Bristol, and so the next morning
being the fifteenth of December, I departed from Yoghall, and arrived at
Bristol the seuententh day.

My Pinnesse which we left at Sea to follow after us, The Pinnesse first
arrived in Ireland, and afterward at Bristol.
was likewise by the aforesaid storm driven into the west of Ireland, to a
place caled Dingen le Coushe: and there remained along time wind-bound: but at
the last (by Gods permission) arrived at Bristol the second day of February.

During the time of my voyage, we left but one landman, who died in Guiana: and
one sailer, and an Indian boy, The number of those that died.
who died at Sea in our return: and during the space of these three years
last past since the voyage, of all the men which I left in the country, being
in number about thirty, there died but six, whereof one was drowned: another
was an old man of threescore years of age: and another took his death by his
own disorder; the rest died of sickness, as pleased God the giver of life: for
which small loss, his holy name be blessed now and ever.

Having thus (most noble Prince) declared the whole course of my voyage to
Guiana, performed in the year of our Lord 1609. I hold it needful for the
better satisfaction of the favorers, and wel-willers of this action, by adding
of a special note or two, and by a brief reremembrance of some points
mentioned in the former discourse, to express the worthiness of the
enterprise, being of importance, and not to be regarded lightly.

In every foreign action undertaken by the subjects of a Christian Prince,
Three principal ends to be observed in every foreign action.
they ought to have especial regard to three principal ends and designs.
First, that it may be for the glory of God: Secondly, for the honor of their
Sovereign: Thirdly, for the benefit and profit of their Country. Which three
principal ends and intendements, if they faithfully prosecute, and labor to
advance with constant resolution, they shall infallibly bring their
undertakings to blessed, prosperous, and honorable end. And now if it shall
appear that this enterprise for discovery and plantation in Guiana, is
chiefly grounded upon these three designs; I hope there is not any man (be
he never so malicious and full of envy) that can with just exp^^^tions
scandalize it, or worthily contemn it.

First then for the glory of God, 1. The glory of God.
it has been, and ever will be held clear and unquestionable, that God
cannot be more honored, nor his holy name by any means more glorified, then
by the prosperous grouth and happy increase of his Church, through the
conversion of those that be heathen and barbarous Nations to the knowledge of
him our true God, his Son Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, the blessed
individual Trinity, and to the profession and practice of Christianity; which
heavenly and ever memorable work, may through Gods good blessing and
assistance (without which (indeed) all our travel therein, and all the labor
of the world is but lost) be easily effected and accomplished in Guiana* the
people thereof being of a loving and tractable nature toward the English, whom
they love and prefer before all other strangers whatsoever: and by whom (next
under God) I verily hope, and am constantly persuaded, it will be their
blessed hap to be freed from the servitude of the devil, that now so
tyranizeth over them, and to be led out of that infernal darkness wherein
they live, and be drawn to Christianity: for they will come unto us (already)
at time of prayer, show reverence, and be very attentive all the while,
although they understand nothing: they will be content that we baptize their
children, and will after call them by the Christian names we give them, suffer
us to bring them up, and in a sort acknowledge their ignorance, and show a
kind of willingness to be instructed and reformed.

As touching the second, by what means may our gracious Souraigne the Kings
Majesty do God better service, 2. The honor of our Sovereign.
and honor him more, or under him be more honored, then by obtaining and
gaining the Sovereignty of so many great, spacious, and goodly Countries and
Territories, not yet actually possessed, and inhabited by any Christian Prince
or Sat whatsoever? which in that Region, by the timely and worthy undertakings
of his Subjects, (without bloodshed, and with the love and affection of the
people) may be possessed, planted, and annexed to his Crown, as the Nations
and Countries beyond, by the Emperor Charles the fifth, were annexed to the
Crown of Spain, whereby, what honor and benefit the Spaniards have gained,
and to what a degree of greatness they are thereby grown, these parts of the
world can witness, and we for our parts have had trial, and might have had
woeful experience of, if our God that always took our parts, An. 1588.
had not crossed their bloody designs, and put them to flight and confusion.

And for the third, The profit of our Country.
who can deny but that our Country by this worthy action may be enriched,
through diverse and sundry commodities of great worth, in those parts daily
found, and easily obtained? which before are mentioned more at large, from page
31. to page 37. and therefore needeles here to be again repeated.

And for their further satisfaction, and more encouragement in this enterprise,
let them consider the nature and disposition of the climate in this Region of
Guiana, which for healthful and wholesome air, (some few places only
excepted) I hold generally to be inferior to none other under Heaven: for
notwithstanding it be situate under the Equinoctial, by the ancient
Philosophers called the burning Zone; The burning Zone habituable.
yet such are the wonderful works of God for the benefit of man, that
contrary to their opinion, we find by late experience, that those Regions
which were in times past by them accounted uninhabitable, through extremity of
drougth, and heat; are now found out to be inhabited, temporate, and
healthful Countries, as plainly appears in diverse patts of the East and West
Indies, and especially in this Country of Guiana, whereof I have taken
possession to his Majesty's use, being plentifully inhabited by people of
diverse Nations: the climate there pleasant, and agreeable to our constitutions,
The clmate pleasant, fruitful, and healthful.
and the soil fruitful, as before has been declared; affording as many
admirable helps toward the leading of an happy life, as any known part of
the world: for whatsoever is necessary for the relief of man: either for
food, Physic, or Surgery, or for clothing and architecture, is here (by
the providence and goodness of God the creator) in plentiful store even
naturally provided.

Moreover the good inclination of the people toward our Nation, The love of
the people toward our Nation.
being willing to trade with us, and become subjects to his Majesty, our
Sovereign; their loving and gentle entertaining of us, desiring to have us
live and abide amongst them; and their tractable conversation with us, not
refusing to be instructed in Christianity; and coveting to imitate and learn
any trade, or work, that they see used or practiced by our men: are no small
motives to persuade the prosecution of this action, and plantation in Guiana.

Furthermore, A good motive to those that want employment.
all young Gentlemen, Soldiers, and others that live at home in idleness,
and want employment, may here find means to abandon and expel their
slothful humors, and cast off their fruitless and pernicious designs; and
may worthily exercise their generous spirits in honorable travels, and famous
discoueries of many goodly and rich terretories, strange and unknown Nations;
and a multitude of other rarieties, hitherto unseen, and unheard off in these
parts of the world: which may be thought incredible, but that our own
experience, and the general and constant report and affirmation of the
Indians, does assure us thereof.

And to conclude, An Empire may be gained to our Sovereign.
we may by the gracious assistance of our good God, gain unto our Sovereign
the dominion of a rich and mighty Empire, which if it may be once possessed
by his Majesty, and inhabited by his English Subjects, will absolutely be
invincible, to the unspeakable honor and renown of our nation in all after ages.

All these things respectively considered, what may be more required? to move
and induce all noble and worthy dispositions, loving honor, and honorable
attempts; all Merchants desiring wealth and riches; and generally all the
inhabitants of this Kingdom, freely to give assistance toward the advancement
of this noble action, and plantation; so much tending to the glory of God; the
honor of our Sovereign, and the benefit of our Country.

The names of the Rivers falling into the Sea from Amazones, to Dessequebe, and
of the several Nations inhabiting those Rivers.
RIVERS. NATIONS.
Charibs. 1 Amazones. 2 Arrapoco, a branch of Amazones. 3 Arrawary.
Yaios and Charibs. 4 Maicary. 5 Connawini.
Arracoories 6 Cassipurogh. 7 Arracow.
Yaios and Arwaccas. 8 Wiapoco. 9 Wianary, a creek or inlet of the sea.
10 Cow, not inhabited. Charibs. 11 Apurwacca. 12 Wio. 13 Caiane. 14
Meccooria. 15 Courwo. 16 Manmanury 17 Sinammara.
18 Oorassowini, not inhabited. Arwaccas. 19 Coonannoma 20 Vracco.
Paragotos, Yaios, Charibs, Arwac. 21 Marrawini.
Charibs. 21 Amanna. 23 Camoure, or Comawin, a branch of Selinama. 24 Selinama,
or Surennamo. 25 Surammo. 26 Coopannomy 27 Eneecare.
Arwaccas and Charibs. 28 Coretine. 29 Berebisse.
Arwaccas. 30 Manhica. 31 Wapary. 32 Micowine. 33 Demeerare.
Charibs. 34 Matooronnee 35 Quiowinne, branches of Dessequebe.
Arwaccas and Charibs. 36 Dessequebe.

The Plantation in Guiana is most easy to be performed, as is at large
expressed in the former Treatise: And may in brief appear by these notes
following, which are here added for the better comfort and encouragement of the
Adventurers and Planters of the meaner sort.
FIrst, the climate in Guiana, although it be hot, yet is it habitable; The
nature of the climate. Page. 23.
and affords healthful habitations: for in three years space that my
Brother Captain Michael Harcourt and his company, remained in the Country, of
thirty persons there died but six.

The natural inhabitants of that Country are a loving, The disposition of the
people.
tractable, and gentle people, affecting, and preferring the Englishmen before
all other Nations whatsoever, and desiring commerce and conversation with them:
with those barbarous people we may live in safety, without suspicion of
treachery, or dread of danger; if wilfully we offer them abuse, and harm
issue, the fault is ours; for a worm being trodden on, will turn again. If
they at any time do give offense to us, they will suffer and abide such
moderate chastisements, as we in our discretions shall think fit to lay upon
them.

The soil of the land there, The quallity of the land. Page 27.
as is said before, is exceeding rich, never yet broken up, nor ouerworne with
tillage, but still remains in the greatest perfection of fertility.

The provisions of that Country for victuals, are already mentioned before.
But it is fit they be again remembered for the comfort of the ordinary people,
The provisions of the Country page 27. 28. 30. and 31.
that in person shall adventure in this action. There are great store of Dear
of all sorts; wild Swine, Hares, and Conies; besides diverse other beasts
unknown in these parts, Phesants, Partriges, wild foul of all sorts, and
every house has Cocks, Hens, and Chickens, as in England; and the variety of
Fish is wonderful, without compare: but the chiefest comfort for our
Countrymen is this, that the beast called Maypury, and the fish called the Sea
Cow (being severally as big as a Heifer of two years old, A beast and a fish
like Beef
and of which kind there are very many) are in eating so like unto our English
beef, that hardly in taste we can distinguish them, and may as well as beef
be salted, and kept for our provision.

There is also a beast in color like a Fawn, A Beast like Mutton.
but fuller of white spots; in stature somewhat less then a small sheep, and
in taste like Mutton, but is rather better meat: the Baremo is also of the same
taste.

These for the time will give us good content, until we can be stored with
the breed of our English sheep and cattle.

The store of Maix, Good bread.
or Guinea wheat in Guiana, is very plentiful, which grain does make an
excellent good bread, and very wholesome. So likewise does the Cassaui, whereof
there is also great abundance; and much more may be, Drink like March beer.
as we please to plant.

Of the Cassaui bread, the Indians do make good drink, which in color, taste,
and strength, does equal our March beer in England.

Of the Guinea wheat, Excellent strong Ale.
we may make good Malt, which also makes as excellent strong Ale as can be
possible.

The soil being rich, fruitful, and never nipt with frosts does give us hope
that in few years space by planting vines, Sack, and Canary wine.
we shall make good store of Sack, and Canary wine, which in those parts are
needful, and very wholesome, and will greatly comfort and lighten the hearts
of our Countrymen, and make them iouiall and courageous to undertake and
execute the greatest labors, and most difficult adventures of discovery.

The commodities already found in Guiana, are at large declared in the former
discourse; The commodities of the Country. page 31, and 32.
yet for the better memory of those that are disposed to adventure in this
action, I have again in brief remembered them. First within a year without
much labor, there may be transported thence good store of Cotton wool;
diverse kinds of rich dies; sundry sorts of gummes, drugges, and feathers; many
kinds of rich woods: Jasper, and Purphery stone; Balsamum, wax, honey, and
Tobacco. And hereafter within few years, we shall return thence great plenty
of Sugers: and I hope discover as rich Mines, as ever the Spaniard found,
either in new Spain, Peru, or any other part of the Indies.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased his Excellent Majesty, for the planting and
inhabiting of all that part of Guiana, or continent of America, lying between
the river of Amazones, and the river of Dessequebe, to grant his gracious
Letters Pattents to Robert Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt in the County of Oxford
Esquire, Sir Thomas Challener Knight, and John Rouenzon Esquire, and to the
heirs of the said Robert Harcourt, of all the said Countries, Lands and
Territories between the said two rivers of Amazones and Dessequebe, and of all
Islands, Lands and Territories within twenty Leagues adjacent thereunto, etc.
Together with all Prerogatives, Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges,
Franchises and Preheminenses, both for Government, Trade, Traffic, and
otherwise, in as large and ample manner, as either his Majesty, or any of his
noble Progenitors, or Predecessors, have heretofore granted to any
Adventurers, or Undertakers of any Discoueries, Plantations, or Traffic, of,
in, or into any foreign parts whatsoever. To have, hold, possess, and enjoy
all and singular the premises, to the sole and proper use of the said Robert
Harcourt, and his heirs for ever. And for that diverse honorable personages,
Gentlemen, and others, who are willing and desirous, for the Glory of God, and
the Honor of our Nation, to give aid and assistance, either in person, or
purse, to the undertaking of this worthy Action, and Plantation, may truly
understand and know, how, and in what manner they shall receive benefit and
profit by their adventures, and trauells therein; It is thought fit and
necessary, for their better content and satisfaction, to publish these Articles
ensuing.

THe Planters in general, are all Adventurers either in person, or purse.

The meanest Aduenturer in Person, shall have five hundred Acres as a single
share.

Every one that aduentureth twelve pounds ten shillings, shall have five
hundred Acres as a single share; and so ratably according to the adventure, be
it more or less.

The Plantation and Adventure is intended to be partly General, and partly
Particular.

In the General Plantation and Adventure, all persons of all conditions and
estates, even to the poorest servants, and laborers, men, women, and children,
may adventure as much or as little as they please, from ten shillings upwards,
and shall have in fee simple the assured ratable increase and gain according
to the quantity of his adventure; So as for every ten shillings adventured, he
shall have twenty Acres in inheritance, and so much yearly profit as those
twenty Acres may yield.

A Register shall be truly kept of the names of every Aduenturer in person,
and of every Aduenturer in money, and of the sum by him adventured, to the end
that they may proportionably receive the full benefit of their Adventures.

During the first three years, the whole benefit shall go toward the
advancement of the Plantation.

At the end of those three years, a fourth part of the clear profits
remaining shall be divided betwixt all the Adventurers in purse or person,
ratably according to their shares, and adventures.

Yearly for seven years after the first three years ended, three parts of
the whole clear yearly profit upon every return shall be in like manner
divided; and the other fourth part shall go toward the advancement of the
Plantation.

In those ten years the Land may be surueyed, and fit distributions and
alotments made thereof to the Adventurers and Planters.

After those ten years it shall be free for every one to make his best of
his alotment at his own discretion by himself, or else to trade and deal in
common, as he did before with others, which perhaps will be most convenient
for all small Adventurers: And a settled order shall for that end be continued,
for a continual, joint, and common trade and commerce for ever; for otherwise
it might prove hard for Adventurers of small sums to reap any benefit after
the ten years ended: but by a common continued commerce, they, or their
heirs, or assigns, shall be sure to have it.

A Treasurer general for the Plantation shall be resident in London, and when
the return of profit diuidable shall be, he shall forthwith deliver to a
particular Treasurer resident in every shire, the proportionable part or profit
due to the Adventurers of that shire, which particular Treasurer shall deliver
to the high Constables of every Hundred, the proportionable part due to the
Adventurers of that Hundred: And the high Constables shall deliver to the
Constables and Minister of every Parish within their Hundreds, where any
Adventurers shall be, the proportionable part due to the Adventurers of that
Parish. And the Constable and Minister shall deliver to every person in that
Parish his due, according to the proportion of his adventure.

To this end a Register shall be kept by the Constable and Minister of each
parish, of the names of each Aduenturer in that Parish, with their several
adventures, and the time when they brought in the same; So as such as he
removed out of a Parish where they adventured, to some other place, shall
either themselves, or their heirs, or assigns receive his proportionable
profit in the parish where he adventured, without further trouble or travel.

The like Register shall remain with the high Constables, of the Adventurers
in their Hundred.

And the like with the particular Treasurer of that shire, of the Adventurers
of that shire.

And the like of all the Adventurers whatsoever, with the Treasurer general
for the Plantation.

But yet such as adventure not before this next intended voyage; (which we
account the first voyage for the Plantation) or before the second, but stay
longer expecting the event, must not expect equal shares with the first
Adventurers: but if his adventure come in after the second voyage, and before
the third, he shall want a fifth part of that which the first Adventurers shall
have. And such as come in before the fourth voyoge, shall want two fifth parts.
And such as come in before the fifth voyage, shall want three fifth parts. And
such as come in before the sixth voyage (which perhaps may be the last voyage
in the first three years, a voyage being ses forth every half year) shall
want four fifth parts of what the first Aduenturer shall have. And so a single
share for so late an Aduenturer of twelve pound ten shillings, will be but
one hundred Acres in inheritance, and his profit accordingly in proportion, and
so for a greater or lesser rate, so lately adventured,

Every Aduenturer in person, if he die having neither wife, nor child in
Guiana living, his next kinsman that will go in person at the next voyage or
sending after his decease, shall have his share or part: but if none such will
go in person, then the next heir of the deceased in England, shall have a
fifth part of that share in inheritance, being about one hundred Acres: And the
residue being four hundred Acres, shall be disposed of to some other that will
go in person, that so by the death of the party deceased, the number of the
Planters in person may not be diminished, and that yet his next heir here, may
have some competent benefit by the adventure of his kinsmans person.

If a man and his wife go, each of them shall have five hundred acres; yet so,
that the share of the wife be at the husbands dispose, as is used by husbands
in England, that marry women heirs, who cannot alien the same without the
wives consent.

If a man and his wife go, the suruiuor shall have the others share, if they
have no children borne in Guiana; but if they have children borne there, then
only the suruiuor shall have the share of the deceased, until the child be
one and twenty years old, and then the child shall have it, for that the
share of the personal adventure of the suruiuor, will be competent
maintenance, so as the child may well have the other share.

If a man and his wife, and a child of theirs go, each shall have five
hundred Acres.

The shares of Commanders, Officers, and men of place, and quality, that
adventure in Person, are not to be rated according to single shares of
inferior and common persons, that adventure in person: but according to their
place, quality, and merit, in such sort as shallbe fit to give them content,
and encouragement to adventure their persons in so honorable and worthy an
Action.

Divine Preachers that will imitate the glorious examples of the Apostles (who
ceased not to travel amongst all sorts of Heathen and savage people for the
plantation of the holy Gospel) are worthily numbered amongst the persons of
place and quality, and shall have such worthy shares, for the adventure of
their persons, in (...) service of the blessed Trinity, as shall give them
good content. Thus much concerning the General Adventure and Plantation.

In the Particular Plantation and Adventure, there shall be certain Signiories
or other Portions of land allotted and granted to such as like not to be
partakers of the General Plantation and Adventure; but have otherwise a desire
to join together in several companies or corporations of select friends and
acquaintance, or else to plant apart, and single by themselves, as Lords of
Manors, or as Farmers.

These Signiories or Portions of Land shall be conveyed and assured unto them in
Fee simple, with all such Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and
Commodities, as shall be fit and necessary for the advancement of their
Plantations, and can (by virtue of the Pattent) be granted unto them.

They shall plant and people the same at their own proper costs and charges,
and convert the profits thereof to their own use and behoof, under the
conditions following.

They shall yearly pay unto such Officers as shall be appointed for that purpose,
the fifth part of all Ores of Gold and Silver, as shall at all times hereafter,
be found and gotten within the bounds and limits of the Signiories and Lands
granted unto them, which fifth part of Oar, is by the Pattent reserved to his
Majesty.

The fifth part being deducted for his Majesty, they shall also pay to the
Patentees, or unto their Officers for that purpose appointed, all such rents
and duties, as betwixt the said Patentees, and them, shall be agreed upon, and
such as have been usually paid by the planters and inhabiters of the like
Plantations, whereof there are extant many presidents: And also from time to
time shall observe, pay, and perform, all such other customs, impositions,
reseruations, and limitations, as are mentioned and expressed in the said
Patent.

And for their safety and defense in all the said particular Plantations, they
shall be aided, protected, and defended, both by Sea, and Land, against all
assaulters, inuaders, and intruders, according to the power and strength of the
Undertakers of the General nerall Plantation, which I hope (with Gods
assistance) shall be sufficient to resist and repel the malice of our greatest
enemies.

FINIS.

