GODS GOODNESS AND MERCY.

LAID OPEN IN A SERMON, PREACHED AT PAVLS-CROSSE ON THE LAST OF JUNE. 1622.

BY Mr ROBERT HARRIS, Pastor of the Church of GOD at HANVVELL in Oxfordshire.

GAL. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good to all men,
especially to them that are of the household of Faith.

LONDON Printed by JOHN DAVVSON for JOHN BARTLET, and are to be sold at the
Guilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheap Side.

1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir BAPTIST HICKS, Justice of Peace in Middlesex,
Grace and Peace.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
I Should much forget my self, if (whilst I press others to Goodness and
Mercy) I should forget yours to my native Country; Campden in Glouc. shyre.
there you have done good, (to the house of God) not only in outward buildings
and ornaments, M. Lilly.
but in settling a Preacher, where before was none, and such a one as cannot
easily be equalled in eminency of gifts: There also, you have exercised (Mercy)
in building such an Almes-house, as that, I know not what may be added thereto,
unless hereafter, you shall see cause to set over the blind and lame, and
deaf (who are less able to repair to, and profit by the public Ministry)
a more private Teacher and Catechist. Sir, I thank God, I could never yet the
Art of flattery, neither will your Wisdom (if I know you) brook the trade.
It suffices, that I have in a line or two recommended to others practice your
example; and conveyed to Posterity, my thankfulness, with your bounty. If
God make me able, I shall (happily) do it hereafter in a better manner, In the
mean, I beseech you to accept my present thanks wrapped up in a dead Letter,
and sick Epistle, and still continue to love his Country, who still rests

Hanwell in Oxon: shire, July 9. 1622. Your WORSHIPS in all thankefulnes and
duty ROBERT HARRIS.

In this Psalm, we have 1. A duty, Thankfulness, described from its common
nature, Confession. 2. Arguments, from the object of our praises, God,
considered 1. In himself. 1. In his simple being, Jehovah, verse. 1. 2. In his
second being, viz. his properties, reduced to 1. Graciousnes 1. Simply good. 2.
Respectively merciful.
2. Greatness. 1. Power is his. verse. 2. 2. Dominion is his. v. 3.


2. In his works delivered 1. In general, they are all wonderful. verse. 4. 2.
In special. 1. Such as concern the whole world. Creation in the parts
thereof. verse. 5 6. 7. Preservation and government. verse. 8.9.
2. Such as concern the Church. 1. In her first Plantation verse. 10-23. 2. In
her settled estate, her blessings Privatiue. v. 23.24. Positive. Earthly. verse.
25. Spiritual. verse. 26.







To the Christian Reader.
GENTLE READER;
Understand, that I was then Summoned to the Cross, when I was not in case,
either to Study or to speak; the former straight, (when I could not be
excused) forced me to a familiar and easy Text, the later to a brief and
short kind of speech, which carried with it an appearance of that, which I ever
shund, Affectation and Obscurity. It may be, thine Eye will conceive me
better then thine Ear, and therefore I yield to importunity, and present my
self to thy view, entreating 2. things of thee, 1. Charity, 2. Conscience,
Charity toward the Printer, in case some faults (in my absence) escape him:
toward me, in case so frequent quotations offend thee: my now practice agrees
with my ancient Judgment; at home, my people neither understand nor desire
tongues, and humane Authorities, and therefore I am sparing, on the other side,
when I fall upon an Auditorie that conceiues and receives both, I use both, as
I see my advantage. All is thine if thou can be content, and wilt add
conscience (the second thing) to charity. It grieves my soul to see the guise
of many hearers; they desire novelties: when they have heard, they judge the
man and his method* and then sit down, seldom practicing what is preached.
Reader be not such an hearer, lest thou cosen thy self James 1.22. thou here
see, that if thou be of God, and Gods goodness, and special mercy shall be
thine, thou must be good, and do good, be merciful and show mercy, the times
require this, the Lord expects this, our unthankfulness and unfruitfulness has
welmost undone us, if we, who have more peace in the State, more preaching in
the Church, then any other known Nation under Heaven, be not more fruitful and
abundant in goodness, then other people, our light will be turned into darkness,
our Sun into blood: what shall I say? or to whom shall I turn my self? we
call til we are hoarse, we speak till we spit forth our lungs, yet will not the
Sons of Men hear us, they will not hear, I say (with tears) they will not
hear, we can do no good: O Lord persuade Iaphet for we can not, and be
merciful to this barren Country: Reader I leave thee, adding to the Martyrs,
Fox his Martyrol. etc.
pray, pray, pray, work, work, work.

Thine in the Lord, TO. HARRIS.

GODS GOODNESS AND MERCY, LAID OPEN IN A Sermon at Paul's Cross, on the last of
June. 1622.
Psalm 136. verse 1. Praise ye the Lord, because he is good: for his mercy
endures for ever etc.


THis Psalm cleeres it self, and therefore a Title needed not, it answers all
occasions: and therefore the Arguments are general, it was sung by course, and
therefore the burden is still the same: In it we have a Duty pressed, and
Arguments pressing: the Duty is thankfulness, delivered from its common
nature; Confession: (our praises are but acknowledgments of Gods excellencies.)
The Arguments are drawn from the Object of our praises, God, considered first
in himself; Secondly, in his works: in himself considered, he is apprehended
by a first and second Act of our understanding; First, in his most simple being
(confess to Jehovah.) Secondly, in his second being, (to speak as we
conceive things) in his properties. These mentioned are, first, Gratiousnesse;
Secondly, Greatness; for the first, he is first simply (Good) and then in a
respect (Merciful,) for the second, his is Power, he is (Gods of Gods) Gods in
the plural, because al powers are his, (God of Gods) in an hebrew superlatiue,
because he is far above all Gods, whether so reputed or deputed; that great,
that strong God, as Moses expounds the phrase. Deuteronomy. 10.7. next, Kingdom is
his: He is (Lords of Lords) in the same sense, that is the Monarch and
Emperor, of Princes and States; now if power be his, and Kingdom his, Glory
is his also, therefore (...) confess it, says the Psalmist: this is the first
Argument from Gods blessed self, the second, from his works, we leave for
have, etc.

Of the Action (Confess,) the Object (Jehovah) some thing at home. Goodness
and Mercy, offer themselves next; and first, Goodness as the more general.

God is good. This point is plain, a principle not needing proof; there be
(says nature in the Philosopher) some confessed goods, (...) Arist. Rhet. li
1. c. ^ and inde:
of these, God is the chief, nay all these in one, like an absolute pearl,
that contains all beauties in it self, no Marcion will deny goodness, where
he yields a Godhead, we have therefore said enough for proof, when we have
once said what goodness is, and how it is affirmed of God.

Goodness is the perfection of things, for which they are desirable,
perfection imports freedom from all defects, and fulness of all excellencies,
and is cheifely seen in the being, working, end of things; that which has the
noblest being, and therefore end, and therefore operations, is ever best and
most desirable: Desire is the reaching of the Soul after that that likes us,
because it is like us: Now the All-sufficient God is his own Being, his own
Act, or rule in Action, Bonum onmis boni. Aug. de Trinit. li. 8.
yea he is the Author of all good, and end, and desire (in natural respects)
and therefore the perfection of all, and all perfection and goodness.

essentially good, good without goodness, (says Austin). Creatures be good,
but not goodness; their nature is good, but goodness is not their nature, but
the nature and substance of God (says the Christian Philosopher) is goodness,
nature and goodness differ not in him, but only in a respect.

Secondly, causally good; v. Aqui. quast. de bon^.
not as the form of particular goods, but as the worker of all; the end, that
terminates and perfects all.

Thirdly, (which follows upon the former) eminently good: first, in Order,
Nature, Worth; and lastly, originally, and absolutely the only good.

This Doctrine calls more for practice then proof, because as in nature, so
here, the sweetest things are most abused, and being abused, prove most
dangerous. God is good, let us put it to a good use; Humbling, see what we were
once, good: for of goodness, can come nothing but goodness; secondly What we are
now by nature, bad; for first, we are sunk as far from God as Hell is from
heaven; he is holy, we profane, he wise, we foolish, he true, we false, he
good, we naught. Secondly from this disproportion grows hatred of Gods
holiness, in his word, worship, people, presence, every way. Thirdly, from
this hatred springs love to his Enemies, the World, Flesh* Satan. Fourthly from
this love a listening to what flesh shall propound, and Satan suggest, and thence
a capacity and possibility of being monstrous in life, and blasphemous to the
death.

Oh what a piece of ground is man's heart now become wherein no spiritualnes
thrives, unless Power it self plant it? wherein, Pride, Murder, Whoredom,
Sodomy, Blasphemy, Atheism, either does or soon may seed? this cursed
nature, this renders us as odious, as goodness does amiable, and this must be
seen, if ever we will be saved. Now the glass that detects badnes is Gods
goodness, by his nature and works we see ours, as by the sun we see motes,
and filth by light; but God is a light too strong for our sense; Strato. apud
Justin. lib. 18.
True, therefore we must with him (in the story) look for the Sun in the
West, not in the East: behold the Lord, as he is reflected and refracted, first
in the glass of his creatures, and his works, Secondly, in the face of his
dearest Son, so we shall see (at one view) unspeakable beauty, and
deformity; that in God, this in us: so way and overture will be made for that
first, second, and third of Christianity, true humility: Aug. Epist.
so Gods goodness will be admired; man's wickedness abhorred all the errors of
the times, and incongruities of action will be soon resolved into their first
principle, estrangement from, and distrust in this goodness of God.

Plut.
and therefore (says the Philosopher) imitable. Now the 119. Psalm. verse. 68.
tells us, that God is good, and duth good, and he is our Copy and rule.

Quoad externa^ disciplinam, as to come to Church, to hear, etc.
First we must have the patience to hear (what soever wanton wits may talk of
the wills virginity or other exemptions of the higher faculties) that in our
flesh dwells no spiritual goodness, all our goodness dwells out of our selves in
Christ.

Secondly, that it is Gods own hand, that slends us from the first, and sets
us in the second Adam. And thirdly that he does this by his own means, and
therefore we must tender our selves to his means, waiting till he (who speaks
in working, and works in speaking) shall please to speak life into the Soul,
by the ear.

Thus are we made trees, Esaias 55.3.
being such, we must in the second place, bear: and here lies our business,
our errand hither, is not to please or preach man, but to call for fruit Mat.
21.34. you are trees in Gods vineyard, well planted, fenced, husbanded, what is
your fruit? your Land is good, your Law is good, your City good, your
Sermons good, what be you? Is your truite none? Hear our blessed Savior,
every Tree, every Man, House, City, Nation, Math. 7.19.
that bears not fruit, is for the fire: Is 18.
your fruit bad? Hear again, a good Tree can not bring forth bad fruit, and
the ground that brings forth briers after showers must be burnt. Heb. 6.8. You
have received the rain of Heaven, and must be as the rain and dew, Mic. 5.7.
else the curse is near. Is your goodness only Moral? hear your Savior,
Every branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away. Ioh. 15.2. Your
works must be the works of God, wrought from God, for God, in God, according
to God, else they are but shining sins. Is your goodness spiritual? hear
again, unless a man abide in me he is cast out, cast into the fire and burnt,
John 15.6. Behold, if an other should cry fire, fire, fire, thus in your
streets, you would be all awakened; our blessed Savior cries fire, if your
fruit be none, fire, if bad, fire, if not spiritual, fire, if not lasting.

Oh be afraid of this consuming fire, and as you hear the words, so do the
works of God. Religion, (we must know) is not a name, goodness a word, it is
active like fire, communicatiue like light, as the life of things stands in
goodness, so the life of goodness in action. The chiefest goods are most
active, the best good a mere Act, and the more good we do, the more god-like
and excellent we be; what is the excellency of meats? goodness, what of
wines? goodness, what of grounds? goodness, what of all? goodness: what is man's
comfort in life? what in death? what after? whatever? goodness. This is the man,
Eccle. 12.
the whole man, no crown to this in life, no comfort to this in death, no
tomb to this after death, no gain to this in the day of accounts. Well done
good servant, enter into thy masters joy. Glory, and honor, and peace, is to
every worker of goodness, Romans 2.
whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, rich or poor, wise or simple, weak or
strong; if a worker of righteousness, he is accepted, assisted, rewarded,
therefore work.

Now as you must be pressed to, Tit. 3. 1.
and rich in every good work, so cheifely in the best, for kind or use, that
is, good spiritual, and common, for the first, as spiritual gifts, so acts
are most desirable. Man never lives till the life of God live in him, and all
that he does be either a spiritual act, or (at least) spiritually acted, Zach.
14.
holiness must be written ( Zachary tells us) upon our bridles, when we war;
upon our cups, when we drink: In short, the kingdom of God, must first be
sought and set up in us and ours; and, what we may, advanced among others, in
the means of it and maintenance for it. And here the rich may join in one
both these goods (spiritual and common) some Churches (you see) want men, some
men Churches and means, I blush, I bleed to speak it, able men are ready to
hire out themselves for bread, and excellent wits hang the head, for want of
watering, gasping like fishes out of the water, being out of all, both means
and hopes; if there be any true blood yet running in your veins, you that can
feed Birds and Dogs, starve not Grace and Learning. Children might be
Scholars, Obad. last verse.
Scholars Preachers, Preachers Saviors, and that of Thousands did not dogs
eat the Childrens bread.

Secondly, you must aim at the common good, for that is still the greatest
good; and here two rules, first, if you will be for the public, you must be
good in private: bear your own fruit, Psalm. 1.
work in your own hines, man your own oars, and make good your own
standing. Happy is that body, wherein the eye sees, the ear hears, the liver
sanguifies etc. Happy that house, wherein the Master rules, the man runs, the
head leads, and the body follows; Happy that State, wherein the Cobbler
meddles with his last, the Tradesman with his shop, the Student with his book,
the Counselor with State, the Prince with the Scepter, and each Creature lives
in his own Element; but woe be to the Heathens army, when all will be
Captains, and none Soldiers, woe to that body that will be all head; members
misplaced are neither for use nor ease.

Secondly, we must shoot at the common white, that is, though you be private
in your standings, yet you must be public in your affections, and intendements.

For the first; Richard 1.
as King Richard bestowed himself diversely, at his death, so must we in life;
Bohemia claims a part in our love, the Palatinate a part, the Churches abroad,
our Brethren at home, a part: at home, in selling we must be buyers, in lending
borrowers, in visiting patients, in comforting mourners; abroad, we must in our
own peace consider their wars, feel them panting, see them bleeding, hear
them scriching; O husband, O wife, O my child, my child, O mother, mother,
mother, my father is slain, my brother is torn, my leg is off, my guts be
out, half dead, half alive, worse then either, because neither. O that we
had hearts to bleed over them, and to pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

For the second, our thoughts must all meet in the common good, like so many
lines in a Center, streams in the Sea; Christ Jesus pleased not himself says
Saint Paul, he dyed for us, says Saint John, therefore we must for our
brethren; one member will die for all, one heathen for many; if we must die
for the common good, must we not live to it? If all must, must not the more
public person? Yes you Lawyers (to Instance) must be common blessings, and not
seek your own, you must (with Papinian) reject bad causes, and ripen good,
there goes but a pair of Sheares beween a protracting Lawyer and cheating
Mountebanke, that sets his Client backward and foreward like a man at Chesse,
and proves a butcher to the silly sheep, which ran to him from the Grasier.

You Landlords must be common too, v. Grin Epist. ad Synopsin Hist. bominis.
if with that Duke you will trust your Tennants with your throat, you must not
hurt theirs, you are heads of Towns, the head should care for the least toe,
enclosure if it wound not the heart, yet treads it heavy on the toes of a
State; force not men by wracking rents, by over laying Commons, and picking
quarrels to undo themselves, betray not Towns as Rome did Carthage with a
distinction, we will save the Cittic, but destroy the Town: a poor man in
his house is like a Snayle in his shell, crush that, and you kill him, say
therefore with thy self, my Tennant is a man, not a beast, were he a beast,
yet a righteous man is merciful to his beast, a breeding Bird must not have
her nest destroyed, a young kidd must not be sod in his mothers milk, what will
become of me and mine, if I destroy the nest of breeding Christians, and having
chopped them to the pot, Mich. 3.3.
seethe old and young in one another blood?

You Patrones must be for the common good also, prefer many souls to one
tenth, when you be to choose a Shepherd; let the question be that of theirs in
the Gospel, who is worthy? and the decision, detur digniori; when you present,
present not a Prometheus sacrifice, skin and bone without flesh; when you have
presented, Zach 5.4.
fear Zacharies curse against perjurie and sacrilege, if perjurie dwell in
the Parsonage, and robbery in the Manor, the curse of God will pull down
both. Lastly, when you have a Prophet, be you Patrones, study his peace, as
he does yours, what Law it may be, after vows to enquire I do not know, sure
I am, Solomon says, it is destruction, destruction of some estates, of many
souls; whilst the nurse wants bread the children want milk, so both cry and
both are heard, and woe be to him that has a cry of Souls against him.

Nobles, I know not whether they frequent this place or not, if so, I would
entreat them to remember, what the Story says of some men, that they are
Medicinable from top to toe, Plin. li. 28. c. 3.
and such should they be. First, they should heal themselves, because their
actions are all exemplary; then their families, by establishing Nebuchadnezzars
order, Dan. 3.29.
that no man speak (much less do) any thing amiss against the God of
Heaven; thirdly, the oppressed and wounded; they should rescue the poor, as
did noble Job; plead for them, ride for them, speak to Majesty it self for
them, where poverty has not access. So shall they be common blessings, Filij
heroum noxae.
and prevent the censure of former Ages.

We close this Use with Magistrates and Justices (Itinerant, or others); Romans
13. (...)
Saint Paul tells them their errand; it is the common good, and chalkes out
their way; they must be terrors and comforts: first, terrors to the evil, else
evill-doers will be a terror to them, for sin is impudent and incroaching, as
experience has taught us: bribery will be sometimes bolder then innocence,
falsehood then truth; a man that does more then deliberate of Rebellion (which
yet a Tacitus could call Rebellion), Lib. 2. Histor.
he will embarke himself in actions of State, embroyle Kingdoms, transfer,
for his public good, v. Carer. l. 2. ae potesst. To: Pont. c. 19.
any Crown, speak most basely of anointed Princes, and yet such a man as
this will be, near hand, heard as loud from the Bar, as Justice from the
Bench; a Gentleman-swearer, drunkard, whore-master, stabber, will soon
out-stare a Justice, an Alderman; and a Noble-mans man's man will so amaze
Justice (if she take not the more heart) that she is left speechless a long
time after. O Job, Phineas, Nehemiah, etc. what is become of your spirit? You
would drive sin and sinners into their holes; now they dare the light, and
stare Justice in the face, as if they would outface her: arise (ye living
Images of God) cloth your selves with zeal as with a cloak, put on Justice as
a garment, understand, that there is a King in Israel, a God in heaven; and
make sin understand, that you have zeal in your hearts, and a sword in your
hands.

Secondly, You must be incouragers of goodness; goodness (I say) both
spiritual and moral, religion, and righteousness; for Religion, where is
zeal comely, if not there? when, if not now, when false zeal blazeth, and
true cooles? View a zealous Papist (in that name and respect, better then a
mere Newter) and he dares tell us to our heads, that our Religion is error,
our selves heretics, our end destruction; that one Heaven cannot hold us
hereafter, one Church now, that living and dying Lutherans, Came. ca. 10. Barel.
Paraen. Brist. Mot. 36. Coster res^ad Ruf. Luc. Osiand: etc.
we shall be certainly damned; if we be not, he will be damned for us: Now if
our Faith stand upon better pillars then his, why should not we be as resolute
and confident as he? View again the Atheist, and he flies upon Religion, as a
Bird upon the Candle; he disgraces it, and will not you then grace it? He
smites it, and will not you defend it? Yes, Religion calls in your sword to her
succor, chiefly when she is opposed in her Prophets, they are the men of
sorrows; Reru^ Vocabula amisimus and Salust.
they find the Historian true, that we have lost the names again the Atheist,
of things: Darkness is called light, light darkness; the Shepherd is
hunted, and the Fox hunts him: Many a man cries out of blasphemy against God
and the King, and the blasphemy is but this; Naboth will not part with a piece
of his Fleese; many a fearful Bill is framed against a Preacher, when the
Enditement should run thus; Bonus vir, sed ideo malus, quia Christianus,
Tertull: Apolloget.
at lest Christinuncius. My Fathers, and reverent Judges, open your mouths in
the cause of the afflicted; remember, that you owe your Hoods, Gowns, Lives,
selves to the Gospel; did not our Ministry awe men's Consciences, nor you, nor
the world would be one year elder; should you cease to countenance us in our
righteous causes, you should betray your right hand with the left.

Now as Religion brings the greatest good, and therefore must be most
respected; so Justice the next, and therefore must be carefully administered.
And here we shall not need to mind you of the Orators dust, or the Heathens
note, Tac: l. 15. Annal.
How that many more offend by seeking favor, then offending; it shall suffice
to refer your wisdoms to two Scriptures in Job; the first, Chap. 15.34.
is Chap. 15. verse. 34 and its this; Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
Bribery: if Bribery (however disguised) get into the house, whether by the
master or mistress, or son, or servant God will fire it out, or fire the
house over it. The second, is Chap. 13. verse. 10. Chap. 13.10.
He will surely reprove you, if you secretly accept persons. Carry it never so
smoothly, yet if underhand, you prefer a Laick to a Churchman, a Lord to a
Plough-man, a kinsman to a stranger, a Courtier to a peasant, and take away the
righteousness of the innocent, God will certainly reprove you, chide, smite,
curse you for it, and so set it on, as no man shall be able to take it off;
that God that will not suffer you to be partial for the poor, Job 13.
for himself, will never brook other warpings, and partialities: Oh, then
look upward, pervse your Oath, deal equally between party and party, plea and
plea; and if you will needs hear any in private, hear the poor man speak,
whose counsel dares not speak (sometimes) in public; and if you will hasten
any hence, hasten him who languisheth, whilst head and body stand a hundred
miles a-sunder. And when you ride circuit, I beseech you remember, that you
ride circuit, not post, take time to hear poor men's grievances your selves,
lest in a Reference, you leave the Hare in the Hunts-mans-hands, and the
Commissioner deputed, vmpire the matter, as once they did at Rome, The Aedeates
and Aricini, etc.
between Neighbors; the ground is neither the Plaintifs nor Defendants, it is
the Judges. To wind up all, nor you, nor we of the Ministry (to whom I had
more to say if the place suited) nor any present, have done the good we
should; let us say for the time past, That we have been unprofitable servants;
and henceforward, resolve with the Church, of old; Nos non cloquimur magnased
vivimus.
Not to talk, but to live.

The maine dispatched, we would speak the rest, if we could, with one breath.
Is God good? Then love him; v. Minut. in Octav.
for, Goodness is the object of love: now love is a desire of union, it unites
us to God, by conforming and transforming us, so that then our love shall
appear to be true, when out of a desire to be made one with God, we conform
to his ordinances, and be transformed into his image.

Again, is God good? then let him be justified, and every mouth stopped; we
instance.

As B^llar: and Wright, and others charge us.
First, sins are committed; Do me make God a cause of it? What as much as
man? What more then man? What more then Satan? O blasphemy! O impudency! Did
it ever come into any of our hearts so to think? No, no, we yield that sin
cannot comport with a glorified estate, much less with glory it self: We
hold, that God being goodness it self, and All Sufficiency, cannot be a
cause, either moral or Physical, of that which is (formally) nothing but
deficiency; and if our own words may not be taken in our own cause, let some
consult SVAREZ, v. Suar: Opus. v. Arm: These. Vorst: Apol: Pro eccl. Orthod.
and their own Schools; others their Arminius, and Verstius, and then tell
us, what we say more then they, or they less then we (for substance) about
the cause of sin.

Secondly, the world (Christian) is embroyled, yet God is good; in this
Confusion he sees order, and in this double-faced world, the side to Godward
is beautiful, when that to-vs-ward is deformed.

Thirdly, Disputes arise, touching Reprobation, which trench far upon Gods
rights; say still, he is good, all that he decrees and does is of himself, and
for himself, and therefore best, because from, and for the best.

Lastly, Discontents arise; say still, God is good; the times are hard, yet he
is good; men are naught, yet he is good; we have our wants; yet he is good to
us, and where can we mend our selves? Were we in France, in Bohemia, in
Polonia; nay, were we not Christians but Heathens, not men but beasts, not
beasts, but ghosts in hell, twere duty to say, God is good (for where power,
justice, wisdom are, there goodness is) and if goodness must be
acknowledged there, must it not in England, the face of Europe; in London, the
eye of England? Behold, the Creatures refresht with GODS goodness triumph; the
Fields laugh; the Corn sings; the Birds chirp; Plut. of tranq. of mind.
the Beasts skip; yea, (says the Heathen) we love to hear them sing, not
howl, not roar, not bellow; and shall we (in the midst of their rejoicing)
whine and cry? Doubtless, what ever the times be, or our estates be, God is
good; and goodness is excellent, and excellency challenges honor, therefore
do the LORD right. How ever it be (says the Prophet) God is good to Israel;
Psalm. 73.1.
Let the Israel of God taste it, relish it, confess it, Psalm. 34.
live in the strength of it, die in the sense of it, and ever continue in the
fear of Goodness, as Hosea speaks, Cap. 3. vlt.

Thus far of Goodness.

Gods Mercy.
NOw follows the second; Mercy. Where, first, the thing: secondly, the
adjunct. For the first, though ((...)) be somewhat General, yet our Translation
is justified by our Savior, Math. 9.13. who renders it ((...)) secondly, by
our Prophet, who severs it from goodness; this being a general Mercy, that a
particular Goodness, respecting misery and want.

For the second, it is Everlasting; everlastingnesse (or eternity) is a perfect
possession all at once of an endless life (says Boeth:) Everlasting Mercy
then is perfect Mercy, De Consola.
which shuts out all the imperfections of time, beginning, end, succession, and
such is Gods mercy. First, his Essential mercy is everlastingnes it self; for
it is himself, and God has not, but is, things; he is beginning, end, being,
and that which is of himself, and ever himself, is eternity it self:
secondly, his Relative mercy (which respects us, and makes impression on us) is
everlasting too, in a sense; for the Creatures, ever since they had being in
him or existence in their natural causes, did ever and ever well need Mercy,
either preserving or conserving. Mercy in the first sense, is Negatiuely
endless, that is, incapable of end, because vnboundable for being: in the
second sense, it is Privatiuely endless, it shall never actually take end,
though in it self it may, and some ways is bounded; the first is included in
the latter, but the latter chiefly here intended; and therefore the Point
arises to be this* Gods mercy (chiefly to his Church) is an endless Mercy, it
knows no end, receives no interruption. Gods nature; he is good. Mercy pleases
him. Mic. 7.18.
First, it is no trouble for him to exercise mercy: secondly, It is his
delight; we are never weary of receiving, therefore he cannot be of giving;
for, as it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive; so, God takes more
content in that, then we in this. his unchangeable word and covenant, thus
says the Lord, though the Mountains should remove, etc: and though my
Covenant with the Heavens should fail, yet not this. Esaias. From our need;
Every Creature is compounded of perfection and imperfection: the first, is the
ground, the second is the Object of Mercy; for the first, that which moves to
mercy is propriety, therefore we pity man, because he is our own flesh,
Esa. 58.7.
therefore a Christian man, because we be in the body. Heb. 13.2. Amat nos
tanquam aliquid sui, Aquinas.
We pity still our own, and therefore God shows mercy to us, because he
has an interest in us, and we be his own, either as creatures, or children,
and so concur with him in some degree of perfection: for the second; the Object
of Mercy, v. Aqui: secunda secundae q. 30. etc.
is not misery, unless in (the Schoole-mans sense, that is) a general sense,
but defectiuenesse; for whatsoever has not all things in, of, by it self,
stands ever at the mercy of another; and in these circumstances stands every
Creature, As compounded ex ente and non ente.
he partly is and is not, and therefore needs, and therefore receives mercy
from God, where he entends its perpetuity.

Endless? then (to say nothing of those uncouth disputes, touching that
Apocryphal invocation of Saints, De vener: sanctorum.
as Eccius acknowledges it touching excision and intercision of grace, the
precedence of some Creatures above Christ, in point of Mercy, and other the
like monsters of opinion and blasphemy) Let us learn of the Church, to dwell
upon the mercies of God; here a man may let out himself without danger; God
offers more mercy to our eyes then we can see; to our thoughts, then we can
conceive; and when we have done all, he is above all praises: Neh. 9.
hereby our hearts will be won to God; power without mercy, amazes, wisdom
confounds, justice affrights, but mercy seen in all (as in this Psalm)
unites and melts, here is daily employment, for he lades us daily with
blessings, and his mercies are fresh every morning; we provoke him, Lam. 3.
and he is patient; we put him to it, and he is clement; we be empty, and he
is bountiful; we be miserable, and he is pitiful, good to our bodies, souls,
estates, names, friends, towns, Church, State, Court, Kingdom: Oh, let these
Mercies soke into our hearts, till they draw forth tears, as they did from
Bradford; Let the house of Levi say, his Mercy endures for ever; Let the house
of Judah say, his Mercy endures for ever; Let the fields say, it is his mercy
that we be not all spoiled; led; Let our Cities say, it is his mercy that we be
not all burnt; Let our Churches say, it is his mercy that we be not all rasde,
yea, let this Land (of all Lands) say, it is his mercy that sword and fire and
pestilence, and other miseries, do not prey upon me, as upon my
Sister-Kingdomes; O Lord, who is a God like to thee? thus to bear thus to
bless; had not thy Mercies exceeded all limits, our sins ere this had sunk
us all.

ever merciful? Then the Argument is ever good, Joel 2. Iona 3. etc. Romans 2.
Turn to the Lord say the Prophets, repent says the Apostle, this the use,
that Mercy must be put to, the better God has bin to us, the more we must
bleed under his reproves; O my people says God Mich. 6.3. -- 6. etc. he
spoke it once to Judah, now to England, O my people, what is the matter that I
cannot win you? Wherein have I wronged your Names that you tear mine? When
did I grieve you that you grieve me? when was I hard to you, that you so
hardly afford me one day in seven? What ails you, what ails you, that you
will not be ruled by me? I would have you leave your sins, you will not; I
would have you holy, happy, you will not, I would have a Covenant of Salt
betwixt us, that I might never leave you, you will not; no words, no strokes,
no fights abroad, no love, no kindness, no patience at home can melt you.

O that yet, yet, yet we of this land would meet the Lord and make our peace
with him, whilst peace is in our gates. Now what the whole Land in general,
that this Chamber in particular must do, I will suppose your Government, your
selves present, to be good, but what shall we say of many in the City? I
must turn to Ezekiel. 22. and speak that to our Jerusalem, which the Prophet
there does to his London. In thee are they that make Idols, v. 3.4 7 etc.
in thee they shed blood, in thee they set light by Father and Mother, in thee
they oppress, in thee they despise my Holiness, and profane my Sabbothes, in
thee they carry tales, they cate upon the Mountains, in thee they commit
Whoredom and abominable filthiness, in thee they take bribes and usury, in
thee thy Rulers take dishonest gain, thy Priests hide their Eyes from my
Sabbothes, thy Prophets daube with untempered Mortar, thy people (generally)
vex, oppress, rob, and wrong one another; thus the Prophet then: now I report
my self to you, whether a Prophet may not still take up his words against this
place, and if so, then hear what the Lord further adds I sought for a man
among them that should stand in the gap for the Land. O unspeakable Patience
and Mercy, when they sought not God, God sought them, when the most were
desperate, he sought for some few to stand in the breach, and a few should
have ransomed multitudes. Now then (Much honored and beloved) are there any
men amidst you? any that can weep for the Abominations of the place? that can
pray, and wrestle with heaven? Let these stand in the gap, Let these stand
between the living and the dead with their Censers, Let them lie betwizt the
Porch and the Altar, and say, O thou God of Mercies spare our City, our
houses, our Churches, our streets, and be Merciful to our sins, for they
are great.

And what I say to all, I speak to every one now present, turn: Ho thou that
have been an Idolater, a Swearer, an Adulterer, a Wanton, a Murderer etc:
Make this use of Gods patience and kindenes to thee, to wit, Repent.

O but my sins are many? yea, but his mercies are more; O but they are great?
his mercies are greater; O but I am exceeding bad; how bad? as Manasses? he had
mercy for him; as Magdalen? he had mercy for her; as Adam? he had mercy for
him; o but it is now too late, al his mercy is spent; no, his mercy endures
for ever. Beloved, the Lord has sent this day the chief of Sinners to
proclaim thus much in your ears, that never yet any perished for want of
mercy in God; be it that thy sins be sins of darkness, sins of death,
of blood, of hell, yet if thou can find a heart to repent, God will find in
his heart to pardon, see thou thy sins, confess, bewail, abhor, forsake
them, seek thou the face of God, lie at his foot, Call, Cry, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: get his Son, his Image, and new Obedience, and thy
case is blessed, nay if thou can not thus repent, yet thirst, Math. 5.
nay if thou can not thirst, yet mourn, nay if thou can not mourn, yet
be poor in spirit, and being so in truth, the blessing is thine, and the
blood of Jesus Christ shall cleanse thee from all, all, (I say again) all thy
sins.

ever merciful? then be ye merciful, as is your heavenly Father, Math. 5.
nay he does not only practice mercy but also commands it, nay commends it,
nay rewards it, nay, plagues the neglect of it, even to utter destruction; your
Elder brother Christ is also merciful, and interprets every kindness done to
his done to himself, besides, Mercy graces Religion, glads the Church, fills
her mouth with Gods praises, stops the mouth of all adversaries, yea mercy
preserues the afflicted, and refreshes the bowels; for Strangers, it winns
upon them in point of Religion, for thy self, it comforts thy Soul as an
evidence of thy truth, eases thy body, being a lighter burden then what else
will oppress, (fiercenes and cruelty) crowns thy name, being that grace that
exempts from persecution, Cypt. de op: and elecmos.
and is most attractiue, improues thine estate, sanctifies thy present portion
to thy self, and settles the remainder upon thy posterity; arms thee against
sickness and death Psalm. 41. etc. against oblivion in the grave, Acts 9. v.
39. against judgment at the resurrection, James 2. v. 13. Mat. 25. so that if
we either respect our Father, God, or our Savior, Christ, or our Mother the
Church, or our brethren, Christians, or our observers, Enemies, or our own
selves and souls, here or hereafter, we must be merciful.

If you ask me, how this mercy must be exercised? I must (in this have)
refer Scholars to the Casuists, and the rest of you to other Authors, for a
fuller answer, the sum is this: Mercy must have, first a good root, Faith
in God, Love to God and man: Secondly, a good end, Gods glory, in man's good
and our thanks, not merit, not satisfaction, not impetration, as they.
Thirdly, a good rule, the word must order us, both for persons and things, for
persons, we must begin with God, and with the Macedonians give our selves to
him. 2. Cor. 8. v. 5. that done, we must proceed to the Common State, then to
those next, that touch us nearest in the strongests ties; and so pass on till
(like good stomachs) we have dealt something to the most removed members. For
things, respect must be had to the Soul first, then to the Name, then to the
body, then to the estate: Fourthly our Alms must be good for the matter of
it, first, in it self being wholesome and our own, next for the receiver,
being suited to his needs, (for the purpose) comfort, if tempted, Counsel, if
distracted, succor, if oppressed, clothes if naked, either work or a whippe,
if Idle.

Would you know (in the third place) what mercy you must show? I answer such
a mercy as God shows, universal mercy, to men's souls; bodies, estates, and
(that which the worlds is little acquainted with) specially toward Rulers,
mercy to men's Names.

Everlasting mercy, the righteous (says David) is ever giving, lending etc.
Alas Mercy breaks now as fast as trading, fair houses be shut in, mercy is
run the Country, and is like to perish, for it will hardly line without a
house; where a poor house is kept, there is something for mercy to feed and
work upon, some rags, some scraps, some fuel, some thing; but when
(Midas-like) all we touch is gold, our bread gold, our fuel gold, all turned
into the penny, I mean so, that we cannot give, till we have past through
three or four Locks, and scene and felt our alms, then certainly we shall
part with it most unwillingly. The housekeeper (if he want not an heart (has
opportunities more then any, for the exercising of mercy; be not ye weary of
this well doing, the World (I know) is importunate in Comparisons, and impudent
in pressures upon the free hearted, but do you your duties, and fear not
Swine that are well neither full nor fasting.

Now as Housekeepers, so others in their places must be ever merciful; all
ever receive mercy, Let all ever show; all have opportunities, let all
apprehend them; the poor (says our blessed Savior) are ever with you, if
ever, now. Mercy needs not ride abroad to seek work in these days step but
into thy Neighbors house, and thou shall find poverty in the Chimney, in the
Cupboard, leanesse sitting on the Cheeks, and cleaving to the ribbs of old and
young. O but we have not for them? Why where is the want? your houses be as trim,
as ever, your Children as fine, your Tables as full, your wastfulnesse as much
as ever, and can you be ever near, nay ever prodigal, and not ever merciful?
What Is become of Religion now? Is all turned into words, as once in Saint James
his time? Time was when Christians would sell their plate Chalices, their
Roabes and Jewels, their Lands and possessions to relieve the Churches
necessity, and shall not we part with superfluities? tell me (you that read
Saint John) how you satisfy his question, and your own Consciences? 1. John
3.17.
if any Man has these worlds goods, and sees his Brother there want etc. how
dwells the love of God in him? Will you say, we have not this Worlds goods?
Then dissemble not, now ye stand in a cross point to good Araunah, he spent
like a Subject, gave like a King; 2. Sam. 24.23
you build fair, go like Princes, and will you give like Bankrupts? Nay your
Tavernes, your Feasts, and Plays, will rise up against you: you have means
to feast the Rich, and do not you remember Christ's Cavear, Mercy before
kindness? You have a pint of wine for any Friend, and not a penny for Christ?
you can find a Tester for some game, some show, some stage Play, and what,
nothing for Mercy? Or will yon say we see no need? Why, what else can you
see? Men want stock, want bread, want work, want money, and when that is
dear, nothing is cheap, and is not here need? but there is no extremity?
Woe is me, there be many at her stay, I have a little meal and oil in a
Cruyce, 1. Reg. 17.12.
I will bake, eat, die, they are now sinking, sinking, if you come not quickly
to their succor, they are loft, is not this an extremity? But where be
means? find you hearts, I will yet find means.

the Back may lend you something, your golden fingers might cloth some, and
be never the Colder, your great Ruffes might feed others, and be never the
vnhandsomer, the Groves and Grownds upon your backs (as Tertullian speaks)
might lodge others, De habit: mul: and li. de cult. Faem.
and yet sit never the worse upon your own and childrens backs.

the Belly might spare you something with advantage to your health, and
strength, one meal saved in a week, one dish at a meal, one cup of wine, one
pipe of Tobacco in a day would come to something in the year. I quake to
think what Christians we be, some surfeit, some starve, all at once; rather
then we will not pine the poor, we will cramme and choke our selves.

our Houses might lend us something, for howsoever (with them of old) we
feed, as if we would die presently, yet we build as if we would live for
ever: It is a world to see how curious we be in suting every Room, whilst
the members of Christ go not like one Fathers children, nay it is not
necessary they should be all in a Suit, only if Christ may be heard, he that
has two coats, should give one to the naked.

borrow of our Enemy Sin, and here if you will not hold, I know not what to
say, but that, the Heathen says, Senec.
he is a bad Physician that despayres of his cure; we have money for braules,
for bribes, for the feeding of pride, revenge, ambition, lust, and shall we
feed foes, and starve friends? let me speak it once for all, had we as much
zeal to mercy, as to sin, to men, as to birds and monkies, to Christians and
Preachers, as to Claw-backs, Iesters, Fiddlers, Fools, we would find means to
relieve them; means for the present, but how shall our own do hereafter?
Why, is not mercy as sure a grain as vanity? Is God like to break? says not
he, He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and he will pay him? I have
nothing to spare; thou have for thy friends, for Gods Enemies, Pride, Vanity,
if none for Christ; receive thy doom, He that stops has ear at the cry of
the Poor etc. Pro 21.13. James 2.13.
Judgment without mercy, to him that showed no mercy, depart from me ye
cursed, you had meat, drink, cloth, house-roome, for sinful men, horses,
dogs, carts, none for me. But the poor be as sine as my self? I pray thee,
be said with reason; if others be not sit to receive, thou art not tied to
give; If thou be fit to give, and they to receive, dispute no longer, rather
hear the Apostle, Put on the bowels of mercy, Col. 3.12. verse 5.
and to that end take his directions, first slay unmortified lusts, next
steep thy thoughts in the Mercies of God, and they will dye thine, Ephe.
318.19.
as the dye-fart does the cloth, that done, be rich in faith and good works;
first, in the Inwarce acts of mercy, pity the afflicted, bleed with them,
mourn with them, thirst their good, cast their good. Secondly, In outward acts
of mercy, go to them, sit with them, pray for them, lend them, speak for
them, give them, forgive them, and if all thy ability amount but to one cupp
of cold water it shall be accepted rewarded. Math. 10.


ever merciful, let us then leave the laboring Church in his everlasting
arms as Moses speaks. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
Lets recommend our Israel to him, whose mercy has prevented and will
preserve us, if we constantly fly unto him, and let every one that is capable
of mercy, being Fatherless, that has obtained mercy, Hos. 14.3
being Penitent, and Merciful, stay himself here: The Mercy of God endures
for ever, my strength may fail, my estate may, my friends may, my outward
comforts, my inward feelings may, but the Mercies of God never fail, all
miseries have an end, Gods Mercy (which is my Mercy) is endless, is
boundless: It endures for ever. ()

FINIS.

