AN APOLOGY.
1. Or rather a retractation. 2. Or rather a recantation. 3. Or rather a
recapitulation. 4. Or rather a replication. 5. Or rather an examination. 6. Or
rather an accusation. 7. Or rather an explication. 8. Or rather an exhortation.
9. Or rather a consideration. 10. Or rather a confirmation. 11. Or rather all
of them. 12. Or rather none of them.
WHen I had finished the precedent pamphlet, and in mine own fantasy very
sufficiently euacuated my head of such homely stuff, of which it might seem
it was very full charged, and showed how little conceit or opinion I had of
mine own ability to handle stately matters, by choosing so mean a subject to
discharge my self upon: I thought now to rest me a while, and to gather some
strength, by feeding on some finer meats, and making some cullesses and
restoratiues for my self out of some other men's kitchins, and not open this
vain any more. But I labored all in vain to stop such a vain: for certain
people of the nature of those that first dwelt in the Canaries, have forced me
to a further labor. For whether Canaries were so called, of the dogs that
were found in them.
it were ouer-watching my self at primero, or eating too much venison, which
they say is a very melancholy meat: I know not how, but betimes one morning
when we use commonly to take our sweetest sleep, namely between eight and
half hour past ten, I was either in so strange a dream, or in so strong a
melancholy, that me thought there came to me a nimble dapper fellow (I can not
hit on his name) one that has pretty petifogging skill in the law, and has
bin an vnder-shiriffe (but not thrice) and is now in the nature of an Attorney,
this honest The saying is Thrice an un dershiriffe and ever a knave.
friend told me this solemn tale; I was (says he) yesternight at supper at ()
Ordinary, and there met M. Zoilus, M. Momus, and three or four good natured
Gentlemen more of the same crew, and toward the end of supper they fell to
talking (as their manner is) of certain books lately come forth. And one of
them told how Lipsyas the great Politic (that learned to speak so good
English but a while since) had written a book de Cruce, protesting that though
he understood not the language, yet it offended his conscience, to see so many
crosses in one book, and he have so few in his purse; then they spoke of M.
Raynolds book against Bellarmine, but they could find no fault with it, for
they said it was of a matter they used not to trouble themselves withal:
thirdly they descanted of the new Faerie Queen and the old both, and the
greatest fault they could find in it, was that the last verse disordered their
mouths, and was like a trick of xvij. in a sinkapace. Finally they ran over
many men's writings, saying some wanted rhyme, some wanted reason, and someboth.
One they said, was so young, that he had not yet learned to write, another so
old, he had forgotten to write, and was fit now to be donatus rude, as Horace
says. But to make short, at last one of them pulled out of his bosom, a book
that was not to be sold in Paul's churchyard, but only that he had borrowed it
of his friend, and it was entitled The metamorpho-sis of AJAX, at which they
began to make marvelous sport: and because it was a rainie night, they agreed
to read over the whole discourse to pass the time with. First they read the
authors name, and though they understood it not, yet that it might not pass
without a jest, they swore that it signified Myse in a sack of moss. They read
the letters, and stumbling once or twice on a figure called Misacmos.
Prolepsis or prevention, they were angry their scoffs were so prevented. But
when they found Rabbles named, then they were at home, they looked for pure
stuff where he was cited for an author. The letters being ended, they perused
the pictures, they swore they were fit for a go^gfarmer and a chimney-sweeper.
Then And they both be honester occupations, then Zoylus and Momus.
they fell to the Metamorpho-sis, it pleased them well, they said it was
scurrill, base, shallow, sordidous; the dittie, the dirge, the etymology, the
pictures, gave matter of jest, of scorn, of derision, of contempt. At last,
they came to the true intent (as they thought) of the whole discourse of
reforming Master AJAX ill breath, why, they were so pleased with it, they were
ready to untruss, and thought to have gone to it presently; but when they
came to the exposition of the name Misacmos, and found it was a hater of filth,
it was such a ierke, that they were half out of countenance with it; swou^ds
says one of them, this fellow is an enemy to us, for we are counted but
filthy fellows among the grave gray-beardes. But at last, when they were come
to the double distichon, directly entitled to the^ by name, they had no sooner
read it, but there was such spitting and spalling, as though they had been
half choked, they thought they should never get the taste out of their mouths,
yet they took immediately fifty pipes of Tobacco between Martial says
Quincuncies puto post december peractos.
five of them, and an ownce or two of kissing comfits. And soon after,
swearing over a Pater noster or two, and cursing two or three Credoes, (I mean
the pox and three or four small curses) they vowed a solemn revenge, and
taking pen and ink, they fell to quoting of it, meeting with some matter
almost in every page, either to deride or to carpe at, and when they had done
(for it would make a book to tell all that passed among them) at last one of
them, that had some more judgment, but not less malice then the rest, said in
great choler, Does this idle headed writer, because he can tell a tale of old
Stercutius out of S. Augustine, think that his wit will serve him to find means
to amend the ill savors in Ritchmond and Greenwich? No, if Hercules that
served Augeus, if Atlas that sustained the world, if S. Christopher that is
painted at Richmond with his carriage, qui tollit peccata mundi, if all these
should join with him, I doubt if it could be done. Yet said another of them
(in scoff) we may thank him for his good meaning. Nay rather, said a third
man in earnest, let us plague him for his mallapertnesse. In conclusion they
all laid their heads together as near as they could for their brow antlers,
and devised to indite you at a privy Sessions. Some said, you could not be
indicted, That they found in the 44. page.
except you were put out of the peace first; but straight one alleged a
president in Wiltshire, of a Justice indyted for a barreter: Now therefore
(said my little Attorney) advise you how to answer it, for the Session will be a
purchased Session sooner then you look for. He had but new ended his speech,
and I had scarce leisure to thank him, when me thought there rushed into my
chamber, a thick well trussed fellow, with a badge just over his heart, and
commands me in the name that I love above all names, to go immediately with
him. I must say truly, that though I blessed the name he used, and the badge he
ware; yet I beshrewed his heart for bringing me no better news next my heart,
but with him I went (for needs he must go whom the Devil drives) and yet why
should I belly the Devil? I think for forty shillings more then his fee, he
would have been seeking me a month in every place save where I was. But to
proceed, me thought this gentle purseuant brought me before an austere and
grave Magistrate, whom I greatly loved and honored, to answer to diverse
objections and articles that I never expected to be charged with, I comforted
my self as well as I could with an old adage or two, qui vadit plane vadit
sane, the plain way has the surest footing, and magna est veritas, and
praeualet, great is the truth, and prevails, and then answered my accusers as
I could.

The manner of the accusation, was not much unlike the assault of a town: for
first they skirmished as it were with small shot, which I bare off with the
armor and shield of plain dealing and honest simplicity, but finding their
forces increase, I was glad to retire me into the castle of innocence, where
they made a sore battery, with Rabbinets, Minions, Sakers, and Demica^nons.
For as God would have it, they had no Cannons, but thus Cannons signify rules
of law. Now they are not right ca^nons but bastard canno^s, that batter
innocence.
they objected, and thus I answered.

Some laid to my charge, I was an idle fellow, and showed by my writings I had
little to do. Alas said I, it is too true, and therefore if you know any man
that has an office to spare, you may do well to prefer me to it: for it
were a bad office that I would not change for this I have taken upon me; and
if I had another, I would be content this were divided among you.

Some said I was (...) such a fool to think 2
seriously the devise worthy to be published and put in practice; as a common
benifite, trust me that is true to.

Some supposed, that because my writings now lay dead, and had not been 3
thought of this good while; I thought (as Alcibiades cut of his dogs tail, to
make the people talk of his curtall) so I would send my Muse abroad, masking
naked in a net that I might say.

Nunc iterum volito viua per ora virum. Of my honor that is not true. Will you
deny it on your oath? No by our Lady, not for a thousand pounds.

Some said plainly, because my last work was an other man's invention, and that 4
some fine phrase-making fellows, had found a distinction between a versifier
and a Poet, I wrate this to show I could be both when I listed, though I mean
to be neither, as Thales Milesius, by making himself rich in one year shewde
his contempt of riches. The devil of the lie that is.

Some surmised against me, that because the time is so toying, that wholesome 5
meats cannot be digested without wanton sauce, and that even at wise men's
tables, fools have most of the talk, therefore I came in with a babble to have
my tale heard, I must needs confess it.

Some said that in emulation of outla^dish wits, and to be one of the first
English, 6
that had given the venture to make the title of his work the worstpart of it;
I was persuaded to write of such an argument, I will never deny that while I
live.

Some affirmed that I had taken this laughing liberty to grace some that have 7
fauord me, and grate against some that had galled me, guilty my Lord.

Alas poor Gentleman (say the standers by) he will be condemned certainly
for this that he has confessed already, if he be not saved by his book: let us
hear what he will answer to the rest of the indictment.

You did mean some disgrace in the 8
letter before the book and in many passages of the book it self, to Ladies
and Gentlewemen. Who I? God damn me if I love the^ not, I fear more to be
damned for loving them too well.

You did think to scoff at some Ge^tlemen 9
that have served in some honorable services, though with no great good
success. As Iam a Gentleman not guilty: neither do I mean any, but such as
will needs be called M. Captains, having neither carried out with them, not
brought home with them, worth, wealth, or wit.

You did seek to discredit the honest 10
meaning and laudable endeavors of some zealous and honest men, that seek for
reformation, and labor faithfully and fruitfully in the word. To this in all
and every not guilty, provided they rail not against bishops nor against the
Communion book.

You did intend some scorn to great 11
Magistrates and men in authority, either alive or deceassed, under covert names
to cover some knavery. Knavery? no as God Judge me my Lord, not guilty, the
good year of all the knauerie and knaves to for me. By who^ will you be tried?
By the Queen and the Ladies, by the Counsel and the Lords. What saucy
younker will not meaner trial serve you? No good faith my Lord, I loved
always to be the worst of the company.

Well sir this is the Judgment of the Court, that because there is hope you
may prove a wiser man hereafter, and that you have some better friends then
you are worthy of, you shall have this favor; if the indiment happen to be
found, you shall trauers it, and you shall choose xij. free holders bonos and
legales homines, that shall enquire of the quality of your discourse, and bring
in their verdict quindena Paschae and if they find you guilty, you shall have a
hole bored in your ear. What to do? to wear my Mrs. favor at? Now, God save
your Mrs. life my Lord. Clarcke of the peace draw his endyteme^t upon the four
last articles that he denied, and upon the Statute of Sca^dala, for I tell you
Anno 1. 2. Ph. M. Cap. 3. Anno. 23. Elis. Cap. 2.
we must teach you to learn the laws of the Realm, as well as your rules of
Poetry. Laws? I trow I have the law at my fingers ends.

Aures perde^tes super and sint Pillory stantes,
Scanda rumantes in Regis consiliantes,
Aut in magnates noua sediciosa loquentes,
Non producentes autores verba serentes.
Their ears must on the Pillory be nayld',
That have against her highness counsel rayld',
Or such as of the Peers foul brutes do scatter,
And cannot bring their author for the matter.
Wherefore you shall find I will keep me safe enough from scandaling. And if
you do, it is the better for you.

What is your name? Misacmos. What it is a Welche name I think? of whence do
you write your self? Misacmos of Carnarua^ Gentleman. Who made you of
Carnarua^? She that made you of England. Well you shall fare never the worse
for that, but look to the answering I mean no Lawyer of our time, but one
that Martial speaks of.
of your endytement I advise you. What must I have no counsel? Straight a
big fellow with a beggin on his head, and his gown of of one shoulder, cries
no, the Queen is a party. But I had rather your gown were of the other,
shoulder and your head after, then you should make her a party against me, and
yet as ill as I love you, I would my second son had changed possibillities
with your eldest for a thing that I know, and thus after a few wrangling
words, me thought the Court rose for that time, and suddenly my man came
busling into my chamber and told me, that all the Gentlemen that had been
riding on the heath were come back again, and that it was near xi. of the
clock, and straight I called for my suit of Abrizetta, and made all the have I
could to make me ready, not so much as tarying to say my prayers, least I
might not come time enough to the peace of God at the closet, and so I might be
in danger to loose my dynner.

But having somewhat better ponderd with my self this foresaid fancy, I was
somewhat troubled with it, not so much for those hanging Metaphors, for as a
good Knight of our country said, gogs soul sirs, the best Ge^tlema^ of us all
need not forswear ha^ging, but that I thought that my Genius hereby presaged
to me some peril to my reputation, of the sundry sensures I should incur by
letting such a Pa^phlet fly abroad at such a time, when every thing is taken
at the volley, and therefore I held it not unnecessary, as much as in me lay,
to keep it from the view and censure of all such as were like to deride it,
despise it, or disgrace it, and to recommend it only to all such as I thought
would allow it and approve it. For to confess the truth frankly to you my good
cosins (...), I desire not altogether to have it co^cealed, least some hungry
promoting fellows should beg it as a concealment, and beg the author also,
for writing a thing that he were ashamed to show, but if I might govern the
matter as I would, I would generally reco^mend it only to such as have houses
and families of their own. For I remember I have read of a certain king of the
Lacedaemonians, that being one day private in his garden, was teaching one of his
sons of five years old to ride on a stick, and unawares a great Ambassador
came to speak with him, and found him in the manner: at which, both the king,
and the Ambassador in the kings behalf began to blush at first; but soon
after, the king put away the blush, and the hobbie horse together, and with a
pretty smile asked the Ambassador, if he had any little children of his own?
He answered no. Then said he, I pray you tell not what you found me doing, till
you have some little ones of your own, and then tell it, and spare not.

For even so, I would request men to forbear reading of this discourse, or at
least reproving of it; till they had of their own that, that would make them
know the commodity and cleanlynesse of it, and for those that will not, I
would but wish them (as Martial wishes to Charinus. Quid imprecabor o severe
Liue^ti. Opto Mulos habeat and suburbanum) so I would, they could ride on their
footcloth, and had a house, and A IAX of their own. Yet surely it may be, it
were the wisest way to show it to none at all, and so I half wish sometimes,
but because every general rule must have his exception, you shall see whom I
would be content both the discourse, and the devise may be showed unto.

First to a good and judicious scholar, 1
for he will read it, ear he will judge of Directions for showing the book.
it, and say omnia probate; and then perhaps after he has read it, he will
smile, and say it is some young scholars work, that would have showed more
wit if he had had it; but it is well, ridentem dicere veru^ quis vetat, etc:
and then he will say, it were good, some of his friends would advise him to
spend his talent, and his time on some better subject. But some supercilious
fellow, or some stale scribe, that think men will not judge them to be
learned, except they find faults; they will swear, a man would have written
as well, that had read but Marcus Aurelius.

Secondly, I would have it showed to a 2
housekeeper, that has much resort to him, for it were not only a deed of
charity to help such a one, but a sin to hide it from him; for else he may
pick a quarrel (and say) that this same company has so stencht up his
house, that he A common excuse of such as break up house.
must be forced to lie at London, till his house be made sweeter.

Thirdly, if one be a builder and no 3
housekeeper, let him see it to, for he loves to have all fine for his heir;
and perhaps I would be content for the love I have had to that humor, that my
master his son, were married to his mistres my daughter; as Heywood says of a
lusty old widower that woed a young woman, and boasting how well he would
provide for his son. In a short tale, when his long tale was don:
She prayed him go home and send her his son.


But if one be a builder, and a housekeeper both; then I will come home to his
house to him, I will read him a lecture of it, I will instruct his workman, I
will give him plots and models, and do him all the service I can: for that is a
man of my own humor, and a good common wealthsman; but yet I will give him a
caveat in his ear, that I learned of Sir Thomas More, if his purse be not well
furnished.

Aedificare domos multas, and pascere multos, est ad pauperiem, semita laxa
nimis.

The way from wealth, and store, to want, and need,

Is much to build, and many mouths to feed.

Fourthly, if you would know whether 4
you should show it to Ladies? Yea in any wise to all manner of Ladies, of the
Court, of the country, of the City, great Ladies, lesser Ladies, learned
ignorant, wise simple, foul welfauoured, (painted unpainted) so they be
Ladies, you may boldly pre fer it to the^. For your milkmayds, and country
housewiues, may walk to the woods to gather strawberies, etc. But greater
states cannot do so; and therefore for the^ it is a commodity more the^ I will
speak of, yet for a touch upon this point, make me but a good ryme to this
line after dinner. Within yon tower, there is a flower, that holds my heart.

Howbeit, you must not show it after one fashion to all, but to the wise and
sober, after a plain fashion; to the wanton and waggish, after another
fashion; as namely, if they cry (fie for shame) when they hear the title read,
or such like; do but you say (for company) that it is a mad fantastical book
indeed, and when you have done hide it away, but where they may find it, and
by the next day, they will be as cunning in it as you: for this is not the first
time that I have said of such a kind of book. In Brutus presence, Lucrece
will refuse it,
Let him but turn his back, and sh'ill peruse it.


Fifthly, you may show it to all amorous young youths, that will scratch their
head but with one finger at once (as Cato noted of Caesar) and had rather be
noted of three disorders in their lives, then of one in their locks; and
specially if they be so cleanely, that they will not eat pottage (no not alone)
but that they will wipe their spone between every spone-full, for fear least
their upper lip should infect the neither: for I would think certainly, that
such a one, if he be so cleanly as he would seem to be, would make great
account of A IAX so well reformed. But yet the world is so full of
dissimulation, and hypocrisy, that we of the plainer sort may be easily
deceived; for I heard of one the last day, in a town a hundred mile from
London, that had engrossed all the fine fashions into his hands; of the
curling, perfuming, wyping the spone, etc: and yet after all this cleanlynesse,
went to as common, and as deformed A IAX of the feminine gender, as any was in
the town, and then alas, what will such a one care for my device. Lastly, I
would have it showed to all good fat corpulent men, that carry with them a writ
of Corpus cum causa, for Praise (...) fat men.
they are commonly the best natured me^ that be; without fraud, without
treachery, as Caesar said of Anthony, and Dolobella, that he never mistrusted
them for any practice, because he saw they were fat, but rather Casca and
Cassius, that were lean hollow fellows, and cared not for a good dinner: And
therefore I would be censured by those good fellows that have less gall, and
the rather, because I look every day for press money from the Captain, to be
employed in the conquest of that country, and this engyn of Lubbet land.
mine is like to be in great request for those services. But me thinks, you
may say that here is a marvelous restraint made of showing this discourse of
mine; not much unlike to our stage keepers in Cambridge, that for fear least
they should want company to see their Comedies, go up and down with vizers,
and lights, puffing and thrusting and keeping out all men so precisely; till
all the town is drawn by this revel to the place; and at last, tag and rag,
fresh men and subsizers, and all be packt in together, so thick, as now is
scant left room for the Prologue, to come upon the stage: for so you may
suppose, that I would bar all from this Pamphlet of mine, save those, that
can write, or read, or understand. But if you take it thus, you do much mistake
it; for there be diverse from who^ I would keep it, as I would from fire and
water, as for example.

First, from a passing proud fellow, such 1
a one as Naaman the Syrian, that would Four sorts of men, that
disdain to wash in Jordan, though it would cure him of the Leprosy, or the
will mislike of the bo(...)
pox; and to such for my part, I would wish they might lay all in their gold
breeches, rather then to abase their high conceits, so much, as to think upon
poor Master A IAX.

Secondly, from all manner of fools 2
and iesters, whether they be artificial, or natural; for these be so dull;
they cannot taste the salt, in a piece of well powdered writing; and those be so
tart, they will rather loose a friend the^ a jest: yet if their railing were
allaide a little, with the two excellent virtues, of flattring, and begging; one
might hope for some kindness at their hands.

Thirdly, if you spy a fellow with a bay 3
leaf in his mouth, avoid him, for he carries a thing about him worse then
Master A IAX, that all the devises we have cannot reform.

Fourthly, if you see a stale lean hungry 4
poor beggarly thridbare Kaualliero, like to Lazorelloes master, that when he
dined at his own house, came forth with more cru^mes of bread on his beard,
then in his belly, and that being descended of diverse Nobilities, will do a
mean gentleman the honor to borow ten shillings of him: show it not him, for
though he can say nothing against it, yet he will leere under his hat, as
though he could speak more then he thinks: For such a one that mak's not a
good meal at home once in a month, has not a good stool above once in a
week, and then he will never say us Gramercie for it: and this I may say to
you, is a consideration of no small importance, for though I must acknowledge,
that is not one of the meritorious works* I look to be saved by, yet to have
a prayer or two from some, that perhaps never say prayer any where else, would
do me no hurt, nor them neither. And me think I might much better deserve a
kn-aue Merry to be said for me, where my stately A IAX is admitted, and stands
men in steed; then he, for whose soul the young Gentleman, the first time he
co^sumated his marriage with his wife, said a Pater noster; and being asked for
whom he prayed, he told his wife, it was for his soul that had taken the
pains to make his way, so easy for him. Oh Sir said she, it is a sign you
have traveled such ways more then an honest man should have done that you are
so cunning, and so they became good friends. But ware riot hoe, whither am I
running? I said I would keep me from scandaling, but if I stop not betime,
some will think to have their action in the case against me; yet it is good to
cast the worst. Suppose that for my bad indyting I should be indyted, as it is
twenty to one but if the grau^d Jury were packt by a bad Shiriffe, out of
those four last mentioned suits Proud Fools Beggars.
(and of three of them, you shall have a full apparaunce in most Courts of
Christendom) they will sure say billa vera, though they should say of right
nothing but ignoramus. But see see, even with thinking of it I fall again into
my former melancholy, me think the indyteme^t is found, I am arraigned, I
plead not guilty, I would still be tried by the Nobility, by such as build
stately palaces and keep great Courts, but it will not be granted me, I must
have none but freeholders; I chafe at it, and would appeal; they cry it is
not the course of the common law, I praise the Civil law; for there a man may
hold play with appealing, if he have a little idle money to spend, three or
four year. At last comes the little dapper fellow my honest Attorney, that
knew better the course of these matters then I did, and he roundes me in the
ear, and tells me that for forty shillings to Master high Shiriffes man that
wears the russet satin doublet, and the yellow silk stockings, he will
undertake, I shall have a Jury of good freeholders: but for the Nobility it
is out of their co^missio^; and Sir (says he) what need you to stand so much
on the Nobility, considering you desire to have none, but great housekeepers,
and builders? For suppose you could get 3. or four to appear. One at
Petworth, an other hard by, there at Coudrey (where in the old Vicou^ts time
Jupiter hospitales is said to have dwelt) and the young Lord I hear does patry
sare, or rather I should say Auisare, (and that is a good word, if he will
mark it.) Say also another dwelt at Ragland in Monmouth shire, where I heard a
good Knight of Glostershire affirm, the most honorable house of that Realm
was kept: and a fourth at Nonesuch, where the housekeeper for true English
Noblesse and honor, deserves the name, better then the house. But when you
shall think to make up the Tales, where will you have them? some will be non est
inuentus in baliua, some that you love best, will not be perhaps intra quatuor
maria; wherefore the Judge was your friend more then you were aware, that gives
you choice of freeholders.

Believe me (said I) I think it is so in deed, hold thee my little dappert
knave, there is forty shillings for Master Shiriffes man, to buy him another
pair of silk stockings, and there is forty pence Wooden stocks were fitter
for the^ then silk stockings.
for thy good counsel, and see you find me a Jury of substantial
freeholders, that are good housekeepers to try my honesty by. He goes and
ere an Ape can crack a nut (as they say) he brings the names, and Master
Crier he comes twenty shillings in his shoes, and calls the^ though he be sure
they cannot hear him. As follows.

John Harington of Exton, in the Cou^tie of Rutland Knight, alias John Har: 1
of Burleigh, in the County aforesaid, alias of Comb, in the County of
Warwick, alias of Ooston, in the County of Leicester; come into the Court, or
else, etc. Has he free hold? Yea he is a pretty freeholder in all these
shires: Moreover says a third man, though he be a freeholder; yet he has
married his daughter to one, that for a grandfather, for a father, for two
uncles, and three or four auntes, may compare with most men in England. Lastly
a fourth said, and four hundred confirm it, that he relieues many poor, and
sets them to work; he builds not only his own houses, but Colleges, and
Hospitals. Mary Sir, then shall he be foreman of my Jury with all my very
heart, a builder and a housekeeper both, you cannot devise to please me better.
I would there were a december tales in every shire in England, and on that
condition, I would be glad to be one of them. Well, what have you to say to Sir
John Harington? Mary this. Here is one Misacmos, that is accused by some
diligent officers and good But enquire what the good Lord of Bedford called
them.
servants of the state, to be a writer of fantastical Pamphlets, to corrupt
manners; the same suspected of diverse untruths, and treasons, not sparing the
Majesty's of Kings, and great Emperors (saying one was a cuckold and a fool,
an other had an ill face, as in the Pamphlet it self more plainly appears)
now because it seems he is a Gentleman, and of reasonable good breeding; he
craves to be tried by a substantial Jury, of which, for many respects, he
will have you to be the forman. He pleads to all the principal matters not
guilty, and iustifies, that those things they call untruth, and treason, are
truth, and reason. He is to be tried, by God and country, which country you
are, wherefore your charge is (if it please you) to read the whole Treatise at
your leisure, and then to say how you like it. He says further, he cares not
to have you sworn, because your word will be taken for a greater matter then
this, by ten thousand pounds without oath. Jury Harington.

Who is next? Sir John Peeter of ^^^^ Thorneden 2
in the County of Essex Knight, a good housekeeper, and a builder both. Has
he free hold? Yea so so, I think he may we are velvet and satin, by the
Statute of (4. and 5. Phil. Ma*) for he may dispend twenty marks a year
vltra reprisas. Well, because he is a builder and a housekeeper, I hope he
will not deny me to be of my Jury. The same charge, etc: that Sir John
Harington took you, etc: and so long may you keep a good house. Jury Peeter.

Sir John Spenser Knight, a good substantial freeholder in Northampton 3
shire, and a good housekeeper, and so was the father before him: Oh I remember
him, he had a poor neighbor once dwelt at Holmeby, that made four verses if
I have not forgot them, were forty shillings out of his way. Erupuit sors dura
mihi, sors alter a reddit,
Haec loca quae veteri, rudere structa vides:
Aeternos viuat, Magna Elisabetha per annos,
Quae me tam grato, laeta fauore beat.


By S. Mary he had good cause to say, well fare a good Mistress, or else
Holmby had bin joined to your freehold. How say you worthy Knight (and the best
man There were Earls of the Spensers.
of your name that is, but not that has been) will you be of our Jury? You
will say you know not this same Misacmos. It may be so very well; for I think
the fellow does scarce know him self at this instant, and yet he learned (...)
twenty years ago. Well, I presume you will not refuse it: for though you
never heard of him, it seems he has heard of you. I will tell you two or
three good tokens, you have three or four sisters, good well favored, well
featured, well statured, well natured women, for plain country wenches; and
they were married to men, a step, or two, or three, or four, above the best
yeoma^ of Kent (well fare all good tokens) and one of them is a widow, I beshrow
their hearts, and I would their wives were widows that made her so. I trow it
was Sir James Harington, and your father, that went a begging to make a purse
to marie their daughters; but you will make a hundred of us go a begging, if we
should follow you: will you have any more tokens yet? you had a brother of
Lincolnes Inn; and an other they say keeps a good house, for I ween the best
housekeeper in England was at his house; yet one token more, you have a
learned writer of your name, make much of him, for it is not the least honor
of your honorable family. Jury Spencer.

Thomas Stanop Knight, of Shelford in the County of Notingham a housekeeper, 4
a builder, a substantial freeholder, come into the Court. Alas Sir he is
lame he cannot come. Is he so indeed? I am sorry for it: I have heard that he
has borne some sway in his country, yet bid him not forget the old proverb, a
good friend in the Court, is worth a penie in the purse at all times. Well, if
he cannot come let us have an other. Oh Sir (says one) stay but a Pater noster
while, and you may have his son in his place. What (Master John Stanop my
old Schoolefellow, an honest and valiant Gentleman) I will tarry for him with
all my heart. To the next.

Matthew Arundell Knight, of Warder 5
in the County of Wiltshire a good freeholder, and a builder. Tush he is no
housekeeper, so said one that dwells three score mile to Trent Northward. Is it
so? I will know within this month, if it be so or no; In the mean season, I
will venture to take him if I can meet with him. For first I doubt, if he him
self that said so, have spent so much in honorable services as this
freeholders son has done. Secondly, I have seen both Lords, and Ladies, as
well entertained in his poor house, and served in as fine plate, and Porslin,
as any is in the North. And admit he were no housekeeper, yet I would have him,
because I hear he is a good horsekeeper, a red dear keeper, a fallow
Horse-keeper.
dear keeper, and other such base things, as may enable him for my Jury. Come
on old father Peleus, he looks like Prester John in his furred night cap; but
he has more wit under that cap, then two or three of his neighbors. Will it
please you Sir, to be of our Jury? It shall cost the life of one of the bald
faced buckes else. What are you angry, I call you Peleus? If I were but an
other Promotheus, I would swear your fortune should be; to be like Peleus: for
the time was, that one wrate of your Thetis, when she waited on Diana at
Hatfield. Who marketh well her grace, thereby may plainly see,
A Laura in her face; and not a willoughbee.


Whist? peace (says my little Attorney in mine ear) you that are so full of
your Poetry, we shall have a new endytement framed against you upon the Statute
of Rogues. For telling of fortunes. Have you a verse for that too? Yes Mary
have I Sir. Fati narrator, Aegiptus, Praestigiator,
Aure perura^tur, simul atque flagella sequa^tur.
All fortune tellers, Iugglers, and Egiptions,
Are burnd in the ear, or whipped by laws prescriptions.
Notwithstanding I trust a man may by poetica licentia, and by example of
Virgill, tell fortunes that be past; yet little said is soon amended; howbeit,
I will not forget to be thankful to this good Knight, for one special favor
he did me. And that was; he made me go when I was with him at Warder, to as
stately AJAX house (for a summer house) and as sweet, as any can be; in a
standing made in an Oak, that hanges over a ponde, and marvel not I call it
stately: for this Master AJAX, if you bring but an Angle rod, and a crosbow
with you; will afford choice of three royal sports, to kill dear, foul, and
fish; now this I take it, was more then common kindness, and so much for Jury
Arundell.

Frauncis Willoughby Knight, of 6
Wollerton in the County of Nottingham, a good freeholder, a housekeeper, and
a great builder. Oh my neighbor, that dwells a hundred mile from me, and yet
but a hedge parts our land; good morrow neighbor, with the fair house, the
fair wife, and the fair living. Tout beau, tout beau. I pray you let us have
a fair verdict from you in our matter; or else I will promise you, I will
rather lie in the worst Inn in Notingham, then in the fairest bedchamber in
your house; and if you will be of our side, I will pray that all your fayres,
may be the fayrer, one for an other. Jury Willoughby.

John Berin Knight, of the same Cou^tie, 7
a great good housekeeper. Marie Gods blessing on his heart for it. Indeed I
remember they would say, that Sir John Berin for Notinghamshire, was as great a
housekeeper, as Sir Edward Baynton in Wiltshire: and then I will be sworn, he
was a good one. Well, let us make much of him, for there is but a few of the^
left; I trust he will not refuse me, for my Jury. Jury Berin.

George Sampoole Knight, a Lincolnshire man, and a Lincolns Inn man; a good
freeholder, and keeps a goodhouse in his country (as I hear) but I know my
neighbors of Bath will affirm, that he kept good hospitality there: and that
he and his fair Lady both, are a worthy, virtuous, and a godly couple. Well,
let them be as godly as they may, and as perfect in the Scripture as Priscilla
and Aquila; I hope they will not deny, but I have good authorities, for my
teshe, and give a friendly verdict. Jury Sampoole.

Raph Horsey Knight, the best housekeeper in Dorsetshire, a good freeholder, a
Deputy Lieutenant. Oh Sir, you keep hawks, and hounds, and hunting horses;
it may be some mad fellow will say, you must stand in the Bath up to the
chinne, for spe^ding five hundred pounds, According to the tale, in the hundred
merry tales.
to catch hares, and partridges, that might be taken for five pounds. But if
you do come to Bath (so you will be one of my Jury) I will stand as deep in
the bath as you, and it is odds, but at the spring and fall, we shall meet good
company there. I pray you give a friendly verdict, for old acquaintance between
Kings College, and Trinity College. Jury Horsey.

Sir Hugh Portman of Orchard, in the County of Somerset Knight, a good
housekeeper, a builder, and a substantial freeholder. Marie Sir I might ill
have spared him. Come my good Knight, I have kept you in store for a dead lift;
I hope you will stick close to us, for the Law; for you have as much if you
list to show it, as some that wear coyfes. Besides, you have that same
sovereign medicine against the consumption, called aurum potabile: and I know
your neighbors of Taunton say, you are liberal of it; and for your good
hospitality, your neighbors of the Court will say, you are no niggard of your
meat. Yet I remember one day, when I told a good friend of yours; that I was
sure you never took usury: well (says he) though I grant he does many men
kind pleasures, yet he does them not all gratis. I promised him I would tell
you so, and to pick a further thank, I will tell you what I answered him. (For
I guessed at his meaning, by means I had once some smattering of the Latin
tongue) if your gratis (quoth I) Gratis signifies to tha^kfull persons. But
gratis the aduerbe signifies freely.
be an adjective, the fault is theirs, and the praise is his.

Well Sir Hugo, I will come shortly and see your new builded Orchard (I think
there is not two better Orchards in England, and put Kent to it) and when we
have conferred, for reforming one fault there (you can smell my meaning I am
sure) then would I ask your opinion, which makes a man happier, to be wise, or
rich. I asked a Philosopher once, and (he said) he could not tell, because he
still saw the wise men wait, at the rich men's doors. Well happy are you if
you can decide this question, and happier if you cannot decide it. A rich man,
a wise man, a builder, and specially a bacheler. Franco, sciolto, slegato, o
che felice stato. Wherefore keep you so still, and believe me it is the
happiest state, yet tell not my wife that I say so, for (of my honesty) she
will make me unsay it again, with all my heart. Jury Portman. Crier count them.

Sir John Harington, one. Sir John Peeter, two. Sir John Spencer, three. Sir
Thomas Stanop, four. Sir Matthew Arundell, five. Sir Frauncis Willoughby, six.
Sir John Berin, seven. Sir George Sampoole, eight. Sir Raph Horsey, nine. Sir
Hugh Portman, ten: whop, why how now Master K. Shiriffes man? Here is but ten,
Give me a noble, of my 40. shillings back again. Oh speak soft Sir, you shall
have a tales for two more, the best we can get, but we can find you no more
Knights. There is two names more for you. Who have we here? Raph Sheldon of
Beeley, in the County of Worcester Esquire. Thomas Markham Ge^tleman. First
let us see what this same Sheldo^ is. Has he freehold? Yea Sir. He is a good
freeholder, a great housekeeper, a builder, an excellent common wealths man
as any is in all his country; I will warrant you, he will be for you. Not too
much of your warrants. What said Harry Tuttle What is a knaves warrant worth? A
by word of Somerset shire.
to his grau^dfather? Give me leave I pray you a little, I have heard he is an
unthrift, I have forgotten at what game it was, but I am sure it was said; if
he had not had fair play played him, he was in danger within these two years,
to have lost his la^d, by one plea or other. By the mass it is true, there was
such a matter. Well, let And let him pray for Traia^s soul. with S. Gregory.
him thank a guiltless conscience, and a gracious Princess, that he sped no
worse. Oh these same oues, and boues, and pecora ca^pi, a flock of white
sheep in a green field, and a new house on a high hill; I tell you, they be
perilous tempting marks to shoot at.

It is strange to see the world, not half a year before I heard one that was
a great Courtier say, that he thought him one of the sufficientest wise men of
England, and fittest to have been made of the Counsel, but for one matter; and
indeed by Cornelius Agrippa his rule, that is a right Courtiers commendacion:
For after they have roued three or four idle words to praise a man, straight
they mar all at the buts: I would to God for their own sakes, and mine too,
they could leave it. Well Master Sheldon, I pray you be of our Jury, for you
have made a fine house at Weston (but I know one fault in it. Now though I
praise your house like a Courtier with a but, you must bring in your verdict,
like a plain countryman, without the but.

Thomas Markham Ge^tlema^ come to the Court, which Markham is this? black
Markha^ keeper of Bescowd, why he is a Squire, I trow I have a verse for it,
made by a most honorable Poet. To Thomas Markham the gentle Squire,
Whom Sir Fulke Greeuill called a grim sire.


Yea it is true; but the case is altered since: for that same good Knight is
lame, or else I dare answer he would have appeared on this Jury him self
(and his son is an honorable Gentleman and a great states man may do a man
displeasure about the Queen, it is not good troubling of him.) If it be that
Markham I will none of him, for I heard a noble Philosopher of the same coat
that the Poet was, say that he is a Stoicke, and I will no Stoickes of my
Jury; of the two extremes I would rather have Epicures. Besides that, I would
have no such black fellows, for we shall have some of these Poetry men say,
as one said of Sir Harry Goodyeare when he wrote Candida sint comitu^ Goodyeeri
nil nisinigrum, he wrate underneath it. Hic niger est, hunc tu Regina caueto, a
goodyeare on him for his good caucat, for he has had since some young scholars
that have learned to put in the like caueats. Cave credas take heed you trust
him not, but Tullie says in his Oration pro Ligario; no^ne omnem humanitatem
exuerunt? Have they not cast away all sense of humanity? And a little after
says the same Tully of Cave ignoscas; Haec nec hominis, nec ad hominem vox:
qua qui apud te C. Caesar vtetur, suam ipsi citius abijcient humanitate^, quam
extorquebunt tua^, thus in England. Take heed you pardon not. O lewd speech,
not fit to be spoken of a man nor to a man, which speech, whosoever shall use to
thee (o more then Caesar) shall sooner discover their own cruel inclination,
then extort from thee thy natural clemency. O divine Tullie, is not this
Christianly spoken of a heathen? were not that heathenishly spoken of a
Christian? Well he that should put in such a caveat for me, I would follow
presently a quare impedit, why I might not present him for a cnave at little
Brainford and less honesty.

Thomas Markham Gentleman, come to the Court; Yet again? I tell thee I will
none of him, one said he looked black on him: yea, but he that found such fault
with In memoria aterna erit iustus.
his complexio^, I heard one tell him was dead, and he answeredverie
charitablie; young he was, and poor he was, and knave accused and said, Lopus
had bid him say, he was a dangerous man, with Cave credas. Tanqua^ stercus,
memoria impiorum.
he was, and so God have mercy on his knaves soul. Faith that is like enough
to be his answer. The^ it may be he is clear otherwise, though he look black.
Clear, yea on my word. Ca^dido piu nel cuor che di fuor Cigno. What is that?
Rara auis in terris nigroque simillima Cigno; just as Iermins lips, now you
have compared him well, as white as a black swan. Well I have no mind to have
him of my Jury, he is but a poor freeholder, he has no credit. No credit?
why his bond has been taken for twenty thousand pounds. Has it? more fool
he, I will never trust him for half so much, I pray thee look me some better
freeholder. Why Sir? I advise you do you not scorn him, though he be no
Knight, he had a Knight to his father, and has a Knight to his son, you may
well admit him of your Jury. I tell thee my little knave, thou do press me
beyond good manners, I will not have him. Hark in your ear, they say he is
Mal-content. A lewd libell made at the death of the Lord Chancellor Hatton.
Who says so? Nay who says not so? Vnto^ is undone, Markham is mal-content.
Who has not heard that? wherefore make no more a do, but send me for his
nephew Robert that came of the elder house, and of the blood of La^caster, he
that Master Secretary Walsingha^ gave the Arabian horse, I would have him, he
is a fairer co^plectioned man by half, and in sadness I wish him well. Hey
hoe: what do thou sigh? Alas sir he would come with all his heart, but he is
busy sitting on a commission, (I have forgotten in what Benche it Kings Be^ch.
is) and when he has done there, he must go they say to an other Be^che at
Oxford. Penilesse Bench.
What Robert Markham of Cottam, so honest a Gentleman, so good a housekeeper,
so well descended, so well affected in Religion, and become such a Bencher,
that when he is called is forth coming, but not coming forth, I am sorry I
can do him no pleasure, I would his best cosen did know it. The time has been
that if he could have walked with a little stick like a ragged staff on his
sleeue, or if he had had but a walking hynde, or a ramping stag, or the white
bird, that is such a beauty to the Thamis, he should not have layne so long
after his resting. Well then I perceive the world goes hard on all the
Markhams sides; I think they be all Mal-conte^ts, they shall none of the^ be
of my Jury, I pray God they do not say that I am of kin to them, for indeed
my name Misacmos begins with an M. what if one should write Miscamos is mal
content? I would leap upon the letter, and reply. By your leave you lie, like
a lowt lewd Master Libeller. But Markham is mal-content, how prove you it?
Scriptum est enim, for it is written, but it is in libro fictitio I would you
could name me your author; yet let us examine this ignoto, if he say true. Let
us do him the favor that men do to Astronomers, if they tell but Agrippa.
one true tale, believe him in a hundred lies, sure you lied in all the rest
good M. Libeller, for first he that you said was undone, The Libell is thus.
Vmpton is undone. Markham is mal-content.
lived to do more service for his country, then ever you will do, and many
things are left undone by his death, that might perhaps have bin much better
Flower fades.
done; and he that you said fades, does now flourish with a guilt axe in his
hand, Swale waileth.
in a much more honorable service, and he Dodge doubts.
that you said wayled, is well and merry (he thanks you not) and he you said
was Bancroft is bankrout.
bankrout, pays the Queen more subsidy, then you and I both, I dare lay a
wager; Hatton is, Hat of.
and the other two, the one need not go bare head, for want either of hat or
hair, and the other will neither dodge nor doubt to show his face as you do.
Wherefore M. Libeller (though in this matter you are cited, and believed better
then S. Austen) yet I believe you not in saying Markhams be mal-contents; and
yet at a venture, I would you had the causes of discontent that they have, so
they had none of them; but thus I will distinguish upon the authority alleged;
that taking Mal-content as an honest man might take it; namely a man sorrowful
for the grievous loss of his greatest friend; the ungrateful re quitals of
most kind and friendly offices; the unadvised revolt of his dear son, the
unaccustomed frown of his dread sovereign, if a man felt no discontent in
these, I would say he were a stock and not a Stoicke, but understanding it as I
know you would be understood, that they be Mal-content as ill affected to their
Prince, I dare say you lie in plain English, but there is one will come home
shortly I trow, that will tell you, if you be so full of the French, as I take
you to be Tuments par la gorge. But good M. Libeller and your fellows, I know
your meanings, you would feign make mal-contents, and it grieves you you
cannot, the water is to clear for your fishing, you catch nothing but
goodgins, Statute of fishing, anno. 1. Elis. that the meashe must be two inches
and a half.
the great fishes be too wary, and now you are feign to lesson your meashes
contrary to Statute, being willing to play any game rather then sit out. Or I
think you have read the policy of Richard the third, who to give his wife a
preparatiue to her death, gave out first she was dead, hoping that this corsiue
(cordial I would have said) might break her heart, as it did indeed. So you
worthy members of your country (God amend you, for I was saying, the plague
take you all) when you would make Mal-contents then your policy gives out
first that they be so. Oh take heed of such a one; he is a dangerous man. A
Purita^, why so? He will not swear nor ride on a Sunday, then he wishes to
well to the Scottish Church, note him in your tables. An other is a Papist. How
know you? He said he hoped his grandfathers soul was saved. Tush but he goes
to Church. Mary they be the most perilous men of all. And why so I pray you?
if they will ve^ter their souls to please their Prince; what do you suspect
them of. Oh if they be Catholic, they are Spanish in their hearts, for he is
their Catholic king. By my say that is somewhat you say, but I pray you, you
that are not Spanish but all for the French, what Religion is the French king
of? Oh no more of that, you will answer that when Callis is French again.
Fare you well Sir.

Thomas Markham Ge^tleman, come into the Court, and pluck up thy old spirits.
Is not this he should have been controuler, and now he is affrayd rather to be
controlled. What evil has he done? His second son grew so great he could
not find room enough in England. Alas poor boy, God punishes often the sin
of the father on the children, but never but once that I have read of, the
sons offense on the father. Is there no body has a son so far of? I trow
there is. And yet he a true and worthy Gentleman. Thomas Markham Gentleman her
Majesty's servant extraordinary, come to the Court. Why was he once ordinary?
Yea that he was. Ask old Hatfield me^, and ask them quickly to, for they be
almost all gone. Why man he was standerd bearer to the worthy ba^d of
Gentlemen Pe^tioners. What did he leave such a place gratis? yea gratis the
aduerbe. Why would he leave it? Because it asked such perpetual attendance? Oh
now you have answered me, he shall be none of my Jury for that. Had he so
little wit? Well sir says my Attorney, I pray you dally no more but take him,
for you may have a worse else. I say unto you he is a right English man, a
faithful, plain, true, stout Ge^tleman, and a man of honesty and virtue. Out
ass. What do thou tell me of these stale fashions of the sword and buckler
time? I tell thee they are out of request now, (honest, and virtuous) I durst
as leave you had told me a tale of an old Iakes. Of A IAX? Marie that I ca^ do
to. I assure you he loves an easy cleanly Iaxe marvelous well, and he is a
very good fellow at the Iax, for if one be his dear friend, he will let him
tarry with him, while he is at his business. I think he says his prayers
there, for I will be sworn, I heard him say often times, I thank God I have had
a good stool, etc. May I believe this of your word? Yea be bold of it, I can
prove both this and all the rest by very good witness. Why did thou not say
thus much at the first? I would have had him, though I had gone to Barwick on
foot for him. What a good freeholder, a builder, and a house keeper, and loves
a sweet Iax too; though he cannot be Alpha of my Jury, yet he shall be Omega.
Come on M. Markham, I must crave less acquaintance of you as grim as you
look, did not a Lady say once, that I should fare the better for that good
face of yours, and God thank her for it so I did indeed yet now some will
make me believe, I fare the worse for it. Be of good cheer man. What makes you
so sad I have comme^dations for you from your old friend, Thomas of Ormo^d has
A most honorable Earl, and true friend.
sent you a hawke will make you live one year the longer. I cannot make him
look verily on me for all this, he sees he can not live long, he must think of
his grave. Tush man though you cannot line long, you may linger (an please
God.) as others have done, some 3, or 4 and twenty years yet. What say you? no
life? M. Richard Drake has you commended, and would have you get the Queen an
other gelding, for Gray Markha^ will have his old masters fault and fortune
both, he will be old and then they will not care for him. Not a word yet? I will
make him speak anon. You shall have your son joined patent with you for
Bescood; if he will come home and be a true Knight to the crown. What say you
to that? Mary Gospel in your mouth; and if he can be proved other, Irenounde
him for my son. Oh have you found your roung now? Well Sir, I have a suit to
you, I pray you appear on my Jury, and give a good verdict of our book called
M. A IAX. You know the book well enough, I read you a sleep in it once or
twice as we went from Greenewitch to Westminster. Out upon it, have you put it
in Print? did not I tell you then, Charles Chester and 2. or three such
scoffing fellows would laughe at you for it? Yes: and did not I tell you
again, that I would laugh too, and so we might all be merry? Well grim sire,
let me have a friendly verdict, if it be but for teaching you to mend a fault
at Bescood, that I felt there 24. winters ago; and if you do not say well of
it, I will cause one or other that has bin at M. A IAX with you, report it in
Court to your disgrace, and your Ioane shall be disgraced too for tying your
Points, and sitting by you so home lie (yet I would I had given 100. pounds she
never had had worse nor vntruer tale told of her) and so fare you well good M.
Markham, and God send you many a good stool. And thus with much a do the
Jury was Impanneld. Now began I to have a good hope, nay rather a firm
assurance of my acquitall; having got a Jury of so good sufficiency, so great
integrity, so sound ability: but it is commonly seen that in matters depending
in controversy, the greatest danger is bred by to much security: For the
accusation was so hard followed, that some of the Jury began to be doubtful of
their verdict, the witnesses were so many, their allegations so shroud, and
the evidence so pregnant. And not only the faults of this present Pa^phlet
but my former offenses which were before the pardon (contrary to the due
course of all Courts) were enforced against me. As first to prove I had wro^ged
not only Ladies of the Court, but all women's sex; they had quoted a Stanse in
Hary Osto beginning thus. Ye Courtly Dames, that are both kind and true,
Unto your Lords, if kind and true be any;
As sure I am in all your lovely crew,
Of so chaste mind, there are not over many:
^ ^ Now he began to hold his wife excused,
His anger now a little is relented,
And though that she her body had abused
And to a servant had so soon consented.


And after in the person of Rodomont. Ungrateful, false, crafty you are, and
crewell,
Borne of our burning hell to be the fuel.


^ And lastly in this Pamphlet to compare, or rather to confound bawdie houses
and I will not tell you which four, for a 100 pounds.
Iakes houses, Courtisans and Carters, with Angels and Hermits, there were 3.
or 4. of the Jury (that said) the time had bin, they would have thought it no
good manners. But Alpha and Omega that have ever thought chastity a virtue,
acquitted me at last, saying, to scorn vice, showed a love of virtue. And for
the rest I pleaded not only a general but a special pardon. Yet least the
standers by should think I had bin guilty, or that I had bin burnt in the hand
for the like fact before. I answered, that in the verse I did but follow my
author. The whole work being enjoined me as a penance by that saint, nay rather
goddess, whose service I am only devoted unto. And as for the verses before
alleged, they were so flat against my conscience, that I inserted somewhat,
more then once, to qualify the rigor of those hard speeches. For example
against railing Rodomont, I said thus. I tremble to set down in my poor verse,
The blasphemies that he to speak presumes;
And writing this, I do know this that I
Often in my heart, do give my pen the lie.


And in another place, to free me from all suspicion of pretended malice, and
to show a manifest evidence of intended love, where my author very sparingly had
praised some wives, I added of mine own () so much as more I think was Mine
own sub auditur verse or wife which you will.
never said for them, which I will here set down ad perpetuam rei memoriam,
and that all posterity may know how good a husband I would be thought. Lo
here a verse in laud of loving vviues,
Extolling still, our happy married state,
I say they are, the comforts of our lives,
Drawing a happy yoke, without debate:
A play-fellow, that far off all grief drives,
A Steward, early that prouides and late;
Faithful, and kind, sober, and sweet, and trusty,
Nurse to weak age, and pleasure to the lusty.


Further for the faults escaped in this fore alleged Pa^phlet, I protested I
was ready to make a retractatio^ for their better satisfaction; as namely,
First, for that homely comparison that I made between my Lady Cloacinas house,
and my Lady Floras Nymphs, I take it not to hold in general, but with this
exception. Except it be a very foul and deformed harlot; or a very clean and
reformed AJAX.

Secondly for the rules of taming a shrew, that I commended for the wiser; I
here protest against that rule: for if it have not been followed within the
first year or a day, it is too late to prove a new rule afterward. And
therefore I hold it as a rule or maxim, proved by natural Philosophy,
confirmed by ancient history, Aristotle ruled by his wife. Semiramis asked
leave to rule but a week, but you know what followed.
and therefore may here be concluded in our poor Poetry in this sort.
Concerning wives take this a certain rule,
That if at first you let them have the rule,
Your self at last with them shall have no rule,
Except you let them evermore to rule,


At this, the whole Jury were merry and agreed all to quite me. And as for
those that articuled against me, some of them are so tickled with this answer
as I am sure they will never accuse me for an enemy to Ladies any more.

The next Article was for abusing the name of a great soldier, both in that
being a Grecian, I make him speak in Latrina lingua: and that having bin so
renowned for his vallew in wars, I would say his picture was set in so homely a
place, that it might also thereby seem to have bin called after his name in
English. Now this matter was followed very hotly by half a dosen galla^t
soldiers, that never saw naked sword out of Fleetstreet, and these came in
swearing that I had touched them in honor, and they would therefore fight with
me about it. The Jury seemed to make but light of the matter, but yet to
satisfy the Gentlemen specially 2. of them, that had been likened to Brutus
and Cassius and called vltimi Ruffinoru^. They wished me to answer them which I
did in this sort. I said I was loath to fight for the iestification of my wit:
and further I could name them 2. honest Gentlemen that had offered M. A IAX as
great abuse as this, and he had put it up at their hands, they asked who they
were? I told them they were 2. of his countrymen one they called him M. Plato,
the other M. Plutark, Plato 10. de Repub. Plutark. 9. book Sump. seono. c. 5.
of whom the one in his 10. book de Repub. says, that the soul of A IAX went
into a Lion, and the other says, it had bin as good for it to have gone into
an ass, and both agree that it went into hell. And if reading of this will
satisfy you, I will turn you to the place, and lend you the book in Latin or
in French, for that I think is your better language; and I protest to you, it
is an excellent chapter wherein the same Plutarke very divinely shows how
predestination, and free will, and chance may all stand together. The pox of
Plutarke and you to (says on of these fighting fellows,) read him who list
for I will never read him, but why should he or you either abuse a soldiers
name? Oh sir said I, good words I pray you, though I dare say you wish me no
worse then you have your self: for I know you are a Ge^tleman of 3. dece^ts,
but if that be beyond your reading, let me come within compass of your study,
I know you have read old Scogins Jests. Did not he when the French king said
that he had set our kings picture in the place where his close stool stands.
Sir says he, you do the better, for every time you look on him, you are so
frayd that you have need of a close stool. Now I hope I offer A IAX no greater
scorn then that was, yet thanks be to God their successors remain good
friends. This did somewhat better answer them, but not fully. Nay Masters
(quoth I) if you stand on the puntillios with me: whomsoever this answer will
not serve, let him send me the breadth of his buckler (I should say the length
of his rapier) and draw himself as lineally from Captain Medons grandfather
as I have derived A IAX from Stercutius; and I will presently make a
recantation Recantare, is to sing the same song again.
of all I have said. At last to take up the quarrel Sir M. A. and M. R. S. set
down their order, that he should not be called any more Captain A IAX, nor
Monsieur A IAX, but Don A IAX, and then to this second article they all agreed
not guilty.

These swearing fellows being thus discharged, there comes a couple of formal
fellows in black cloaks faced with velvet, and hats suitable to the same; and
under their hats little night caps, that covered their Epimetheus, but not their
Prometheus; having special care to keep their brain warn (yet one of them was
said to be a hot brained fellow,) the other had no great fault that I know,
save that he would say too long a grace before dinner, in so much that one of
his own coat told him one day, that if he had thought to have hard a
collatio^, he would have sung a Psalm before it. These whisperd two or three of
the Jury in the ear, and after having made a ducking courtesy or two, bad the
Lord to guide their worships; and so went back to their chambers (at the sign
of the Bible: leaving a mad fellow their Attorney to urge the accusation they
had brought, which was in shewverie sharp and heinous, to this effect. That
they supposed All that defend the Queens proceedings are counted no better
then Papists with these hot fellows, and they call my Lord of Cant. our Pope.
me to be in heart a Papist. Straight I searched every corner of my heart, and
finding no such thought in it, I asked why any man should say so? I know (said
I) some of you would see my heart out by your wills: but for that you shall
pardon me. But this you know ex abundantia cordis, os loquitur, out of the
abundance of heart the mouth speaks. And here I protest to you all, I never
defended any opinion of Religion, either by way of argument or writing, that in
any point gainsaith the Communion book. Let my accusers say so if they can.
Yes Sir says their zealous Attorney. I heard one testify viua voce in a
Pulpit, that you had defended a Popish opinion, of a second coming of Elias.
He lies like an ass (said I) and so tell him. And if I mistake him not much; I
trow his good living grows not so fast with his new benefice, as his good name
withers with his ill behavior. But if he use no better behavior, then to tell
me my faults at Bath, when I am at London; I may fortune play the bad horseman,
and spur him at London for stumbling so ill fauoredly at Bath. Or if I would
ride like a hotspurre, he might hap like a dull Jade (ass he is) be wrong on
the withers, as one of his coat was for such a matter in the same place. It may
be he thinks he has advantage of me because he can prate in a Pulpit cum
licentia, but he shall see by this little, that I have liberty if I list, to
reply in Print cum priuilegio. And my replication may fortune be as forcible
as his answer.

More I would have said (for I was in choler) but some of the Jury wished me
for satisfying of the company, to tell what Religion I was of. It was a
strange For some of them I hope are but Protestants of anno primo Eliz.
question to be asked me a fore such a Jury (considering I came not thither to
be Catachysed) and therefore I determined to make them as strange an answer,
such as should please them all, or displease them all ere I had done. First I
said, neither Papist, Protestant, nor Puritan. Then all said they would
condemn me as a newter or nulli fidian, except I gave a better answer.

Then I said, I am a protesting Catholic Puritan. Tush say they, how can that
be? Forsooth even thus, to believe well, do well, and say well, to have good
faith, good works, and good words, is not that a good Religion? Yes indeed,
so done, were very well said. But said they, directly we exspect your answer,
what you count to be true Religion. Why the^ directly thus I answer; out of S.
Iustus Epistle the two last verses, you shall see who be of a wrong Religion,
and who be of the right. Iustus? Oh, says one by and by, I think he means
James, and straight he pulls a little book out of his sleeue; that looked like
Ianus picture; with two faces standing East and West (but it was a testament
bound to the backside of David's Psalms) and turning to the place, he read as
follows. If a man think him self Religious, not refrayning To have a bad
tongue is bad Religion.
his tongue, but seducing his heart, this man's Religion is vain. Pure Religion
and undefiled before God, even the father, is this, to visit orphans and
widows in their afflictions, and to keep your self undefiled from the world.
Why then, says one, if you profess so pure a Religion, it seems you are a
Puritan. Even so. More time would have bin spent in this matter, but that sir
H. P. told them these things belonged to the high Commissioners, and therefore
wished them to proceed to the next. Now for the last article, because it was
concerning only the Pamphlet it self, the whole Jury referred the censuring
thereof to Sir H. P. to say if any thing therein were against the law, because
he was well seen in the law.

He told them that indeed he had read it more then once: and that for ought he
could observe in it, it did not in any point offend either common or Statute
law. But (said he) there is a law (as I take it,) more common then Civil, that
says things must be as they be taken. Yet for my part in my verdict I Judge
Markham would have been of that opinion in the time of Ed. the iiij. and Judge
Portman your grandfather in Ed* the vj.
would not say any man's ears are horns. What the rest said I could not tell,
for I was sent away, yet I ouer-heard one of them say, he would talk with a
Counselor to inform him better of the law. But I finding that to grow so
doubtful, that I thought would have bin so clear, began now to think it my
safest course to sue for a pardon. And with that I awaked, Sapie^tis est nihil
praestare praeter culpam.
vowing I would never write any more such idle toys, if this were well taken:
praying the readers to regard it but as the first line of Isops Fables.

Gallus gallinaceus du^ vertit stercorariam inuenit gemmam.

FINIS.

