THE MOST ELEGANT AND WITTY EPIGRAMS OF Sir John Harrington, Knight, DIGESTED
INTO FOUR Books: Three whereof never before published.

Fama bonum quo non foelicius vllum.

LONDON Printed by G. P. for John Budge: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1618.

THE EPISTLE TO ALL Readers, that Epigrams must be read attentively, that
Legere and non intellegere, est negligere.
WHen in your hand you had this Pamphlet caught,
Your purpose was to post it over speedy,
But change your mind, and feed not ouer-greedy:
Till in what sort, to feed you first be taught.
Suppose both first and second course be done,
No Goose, Porke, Capon, Snites, nor such as these,
But look for fruit, as Nuts, and Parma-cheese,
And Comfets, Conserues, Raisons of the Sun.
Then taste but few at once, feed not too fickle,
So shall you find some cool, some warm, some biting,
Some sweet in taste, some sharp, all so delighting,
As may your inward taste, and fancy tickle.
But though I wish Readers, with stomachs full,
Yet fast nor come not, if your wits be dull.
For I had liefe you did sit down and whistle,
As reading, not to reed. So ends the Epistle.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE Marquis Buckingham, Viscount Villeirs, Baron of
Whaddon, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases
beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his Majesty, and one of the Gentlemen of
his Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of England and Scotland.
Most Honored Lord,
THis posthume book is furnished with worth, but it wants a Patron. A
worthier the^ your self the Book could not find, nor your Lordship a more
patheticall Poet to Patronize. If in Poetry, Heraldry were admitted, he would
be found in happiness of wit near allied to the great Sydney: yet but near;
for the Apix of the Coelum Empyrium is not more inaccessable then is the height
of Sydneys Poesy, which by imagination we may approach, by imitation never
attain to. To great men our very syllables should be short, and therefore I
make my Conclusion a Petition; That your Lordshippes acceptance may show how
much you favor the noble Name, and nature of the Poet, and Book. Which
deigned by your Lordshippe, I shall think my pains in collecting, and
disposing of these Epigrams well placed, and ever rest.

Your Lordships most bounden servant, I. B.

Sir JOHN HARRINGTONS Epigrams, the first Book.
Against MOMVS. 1 That his Poetry shall be no fictions, but mere truths.
SCant wrate I sixteen lines, but I had news,
Momus had found one fault, past all excuse,
That of Epistle I the name abuse.
No, gentle Momus, that is none abuse,
Without I call that Gospel that ensues.
But read to carpe, as still has been thine use:
Fret out thine heart to search, seek, sift and pry,
Thy heart shall hardly give my pen the ly.
2 Against Sextus, a scorner of Writers.
OF Writers, Sextus known a true despiser,
Affirms, that on our writings often he looks,
And confesses he grows never the wiser.
But Sextus, where is the fault? not in our books.
No sure, it is in your self (I Will tell you wherefore)
Books give not wisdom where was none before.
But where some is, there reading makes it more.
3 Against Lesbia, both for her patience and impatience.
LEsbia, I heard, how ere it came to pass,
That when old P^leus called thy Lord an Ass,
You did but smile; but when he called him Ox,
Straight-waies you cursed him with all plagues and pox.
There is some secret cause why you allow
A man to scorn his brain, but not his brow.
4 Of a poynted Diamond given by the Author to his wife, at the birth of his
eldest son.
Dear, I to thee this Diamond commend,
In which, a model of thy self I send,
How lust unto thy joints this circlet sits,
So just thy face and shape my fancies fitteth.
The touch will try this Ring of purest gold,
My touch tries thee as pure, though softer mold.
That metal precious is, the stone is true
As true, as then how much more precious you?
The Gem is clear, and has nor needs no foil,
Thy face, nay more, thy fame is free from soil.
^oule deem this dear, because from me you have it,
^ deem your faith more deer, because you gave it.
This pointed Diamond cuts glass and steel,
Your loves like force in my firm heart I feel.
But this, as all things else, time wastes with wearing,
Where you, my Jewels multiply with bearing.
5 Against Writers that carpe at other men's books.
THe Readers, and the Hearers like my books,
But yet some Writers cannot them digest.
But what care I? For when I make a feast,
I would my Guests should praise it, not the Cooks.
6 Of a young Gallant.
YOu boast, that Noble men still take you up,
That when they bowl or shoot, or hawke or hunt,
In Coach, or Barge, on horse thou still art wont,
To run, ride, row with them, to dine or s^p:
This makes you scorn those of the meaner sort,
And think your credit does so far surmount;
Whereas indeed, of you they make no count,
But as they do of hawks and dogs, for sport.
Then vaunt not thus of this your vain renown,
Lest we both take you up, and take you down.
7 To my Lady Rogers, the Authors wives mother, how Doctor Sherehood comm^nded
her house in Bathe*
I Newly had your little house erected,
In which I thought I had made good conueiance,
To use each ease, and to shun all annoyance,
And prayed a friend of judgment not neglected,
To view the rooms, and let me know the faults.
He having viewed the lodgings, stairs, and vaults,
Said all was excellent well, save here and there.
You think he praysd your house. No, I do swear,
He has disgraced it clean, the case is clear,
For every room is either there, or here.
8 Of Lesbia, a great Lady.
LEsbia does laugh to hear sellers and buyers
Called by this name, Substantial occupyers:
Lesbia, the word was good while good folk vsd it,
You mard it that with Chawcers jest abusd it:
But good or bad, how ere the word be made,
Lesbia is loath perhaps to leave the trade.
9 Of one that begd nothing, and had his suit granted.
WHen thou do beg, as none begs more importunate,
And art denied, as none speeds more unfortunate,
With one quaint phrase thou do enforce thy begging,
^y mind unto thy suite in this sort egging.
^las, sir this? It Is nothing, once deny me not.
^ell then, for once content, henceforth belly me not.
Your words so wisely plaste, do so inchaunt me,
Since you do nothing ask, I nothing grant ye.
10 Another of asking nothing.
SOme think thee Lynus of a Friar begotten,
For still you beg where nothing can be gotten;
Yet often you say, for so you have been taught,
^ir, grant me this, it is but a thing of naught.
And when indeed you say so, I believe it,
As naught, unto a thing of naught I give it.
Thus with your begging, you but get a mock,
And yet with begging little, mend your stock.
Leave begging Lynus for such poor rewards,
Else some will beg thee in the Court of Wards.
11 Of liberality in giving nothing.
I Hear some say, and some believe it too,
That craft is found even in the clouted shoo*
Sure I have found it with the loss of pence,
My Tenants have both craft and eloquence.
For when one has a suite before he ask it.
His Orator pleades for him in a basket.
Well Tenant well, he was your friend that taught you*
This learned Exordium, Master, here cha brought you.
For with one courtesy and two Capons giving,
Thou sauest ten pounds in buying of thy living.
Which makes me say, that have observed this quality
In poor men not to give, is niggerality.
12 Of learning nothing at a Lecture, upon occasion of D^ Reynolds at Oxford,
before my Lord of Essex, and diverse Ladies and Courtiers, at the Queens last
being there, on these words: I do him nihil est, An Idol is nothing.

WHile I at Oxford stayed, some few months since,
To see, and serve our dear and Sovereign Prince*
Where graciously her Grace did see and show
The choicest fruits that learning could bestow,
I went one day to hear a learned Lecture
Read (as some said) by Bellarmines correcter,
And sundry Courtiers more then present were,
That understood it well save here and there:
Among the rest, one whom it least concerned,
Asked me what I had at the Lecture learned?
I that his ignorance might soon be guile*
Did say, I learned nothing all the while.
Yet did the Reader teach with much facility,
And I was wont to learn with some docilitie.
What learned you, Sir, (quoth he) in swearing mood?
I nothing learned, for naught I understood,
I thank my Parents, they, when I was young,
Barred me to learn this Popish Roman tongue,
And yet it seems to me, if you say true,
^ without learning learned the same that you,
Most true, said I, yet few dare call us Fools,
That this day learned nothing at the Schools.
13 A Paradox of Doomes day.
SOme Doctors deem the day of Doom draws near:
But I can prove the contrary most clear,
For at that day our Lord and Savior says,
That he on earth shall scant find any faith,
But in these days it cannot be denyde,
All boast of only faith and naught beside:
But if you seek the fruit thereof by works,
You shall find many better with the Turks.
14 Against a foolish Satyrist called Lynus.
Help, friends, I feel my credit lies a bleeding,
For Lynus, who to me bears hate exceeding,
I hear against me is even now a breeding,
A bitter Satyr all of Gall proceeding:
Now sweet Apollos Judge, to be his speeding,
For what he writes, I take no care nor heeding.
For none of worth will think them worth the reeding.
So my friend Paulus censures them who swears,
That Lynus verse fuits best with Mydas ears,
15 Of a fair woman; translated out of Casaneus his Catalogus gloriae mundi.
THese thirty things that Hellens fame did raise,
A Dame should have that seeks for beuties praise*
Three bright, three black, three red, 3. short, 3. tall,
Three thick, three thin, three close, 3. wide, 3. small:
Her skin, and teeth, must be clear, bright, and neat,
Her brows, eyes, privy parts, as black as Ieat:
Her cheeks, lips, nails, must have Vermillian hiew,
Her hands, hair, height, must have full length to view.
Her teeth, foot, ears, all short, no length allows,
Large breasts, large hips, large space between the brows,
A narrow mouth, small waste, straight ()
Her fingers, hair, and lips, but thin and slender:
Thighs, belly, neck, should be full smooth and round,
Nose, head and teats, the least that can be found.
Since few, or none, perfection such attain,
But few or none are fair, the case is plain.
16 Of a Hous-hold fray friendly ended.
A Man and wife strove erst who should be master,
and having changed between the^ hous-hold speeches,
The man in wrath brought forth a pair of wasters,
and swore those 2. should prove who ware the breeches.
She that could break his head, yet give him plasters,
Accepts the challenge, yet withal beseeches,
^^at she (as weakest) then might strike the first,
and let him ward, and after do his worst.
^e swore that should be so, as God should bless him,
and close he lay him to the sured lock.
^e flourishing as though she would not miss him,
^^id down her cudgel, and with witty mock,
^he told him for his kindness, she would kiss him,
that now was sworn to give her never knock.
^ou swear, said she, I should the first blow give.
and I swear I Will never strike you while I live.
^n flattring slut, said he, thou dare not fight.
^ am no Lark, quoth she, man, do not dare me,
^et me point time and place, as it is my right
By Law of challenge, and then never spare me.
Agreed, said he. Then rest (quoth she) to night,
To morrow at Cuckolds haven, I Will prepare me.
Peace, wife, said he, we will cease all rage and rancor,
Ere in that Harbor I will ride at Ancor.
17 Of Blessing without a cross.
A Priest that erst was riding on the way,
Not knowing better how to pass the day,
Was singing with himself Geneua Psalms.
A blind man hearing him, straight begged an alms.
Man, said the Priest, from coin I cannot part,
But I pray God bless thee, with all my heart.
O, said the man, the poor may live with loss,
Now Priests have learned to Bless without a cross.
18 Of writing with a Double meaning.
A Certain man was to a Judge complaining,
How one had written with a Double meaning*
Fool, said the Judge, no man deserves trouble,
For Double meaning, so he deal not Double.
19 Against Cosmus a great Briber.
THis wicked age of ours complains of Bribing,
The want of justice most to that ascribing:
When Judges, who should hear both with equality
By one side bribed, to that show partiality.
But Cosmus in this case does well provide,
For ever he takes Bribes, of every side:
Wherefore on him complain can no man rightly,
But that he still may sentence give uprightly.
I first would choose one that all Bribes does loath,
I next could use him that takes bribes of both.
20 Of a Precise Tailor.
A Tailor a man of an upright dealing,
True, but for lying, honest, but for stealing,
Did fall one day extremely sick by chance,
And on the sudden was in wondrous trance.
The Friends of hell mustring in fearful manner,
Of sundry colored silk displayed a banner,
which he had stolen, and wished as they did tell,
^^at one day he might find it all in hell.
^he man affrighted at this apparision,
upon recovery grew a great Precision.
^^e bought a Bible of the new translation,
and in his life, he showed great reformation:
^e walked mannerly, and talked meekely;
^e heard three Lectures, and two Sermons weekly;
^e vowed to shun all companies unruly,
and in his speech he used none oath, but truly:
and zealously to keep the Sabboths rest,
His meat for that day, on the e'ue was dressed.
And lest the custom, that he had to steal,
Might cause him sometime to forget his zeal,
He gives his iournymen a special charge.
That if the stuffes allowance being large,
He found his fingers were to filch inclined,
Bid him but have the Banner in his mind.
This done, I scant can tell the rest for laughter,
A Captain of a Ship came three days after,
And brought three yards of Velvet, and three quarters
To make Venetians down below the garters.
He that precisely knew what was enuffe,
Soon slipped away three quarters of the stuff.
His man espying it, said in derision,
Remember, Master, how you saw the vision.
Peace (knave) quoth he, I did not see one ragge
Of such a colored silk in all the flagge.
21 Of one Paulus a great man that expected to be followed.
PRoud Paulus late advanced to high degree,
Expects that I should now his follower be.
Glad I would be to follow ones direction,
By whom my honest suits might have protection.
But I sue Don Fernandos heir for land,
Against so great a Peer he dare not stand.
A Bishop sues me for my tithes, that is worse,
He dares not venture on a Bishops curse.
Sergeant Erifilus bears me old grudges,
Yea but, says Paulus, Sergeants may be Judges.
Pure Cinna over my head would beg my Lease,
Who my Lord. -- Man, O hold your peace.
Rich widow Lesbia for a slander sues me.
Tush for a woman's cause, he must refuse me.
Then farewell frost: Paulus, henceforth excuse me.
For you that are your self thrall'd to so many,
Shall never be my good Lord, if I have any.
22 Of a terrible Temporal non-resident.
OLd Cosmus has of late got one lewd quality,
To rail at some that have the cure of souls,
And his pure sprite their avarice controules,
That in their livings is such inequality,
That they that can keep, no good hospitality,
And some that would, whose fortune he condoles,
^ant means: which comes, he says, in generality,
because of these same To^^^^ts, and Plurality;
Affirming as a sentence full discust,
One Clergy man have but one living must.
^ut he, besides his sundry civil offices,
^ath brought in fee, five fat Impropriations,
^welue Patronages rights, or Presentations,
^ll which he keeps, yet preaches not nor prophesies.
^el Cosmus hold thy tongue, else some will scoff at this.
Thoud'st have us think a Priest should have but one,
We Will think, nay say, nay swear thou should have none.
^l suits it thee to blame, then for non Residents,
That give thereof such foul and shameful Presiden^^.
23 A Tale of a Roasted Horse.
ONe Lord, 2. Knights, 3. Squires, 7. Dames at least,
My kind friend Marcus bade unto his Feast,
Where were both Fish and Flesh, and all acates,
That men are wont to have that feast great States.
To pay for which, next day he sold a Nagge,
Of whose pace, color, Rain, he used to brag.
Well, I Will never care for red, or fallow Dear,
And if a Horse thus cookt can make such cheer.
24 Of Madam Dondrages with her fair breast.
A Favorite of Charles late King of France,
Disporting with the King one day by chance,
Madam Dondrages came among the rest,
All bare, as still she used (...) her breast.
The King would needs have notice of his Minion;
Of this free Dame what was his frank opinion?
I say, and dare affirm, my liege, quoth he,
That if the crupper like the pertrell be,
A King a Love I worthy can account,
Upon so brave a trapped beast to mount.
25 The Author to his wife, of a woman's eloquence.
MY Mall, I mark that when you mean to prove me
To buy a Velvet gown, or some rich border,
Thou calst me good sweet heart, thou swearst to love me,
Thy locks, thy lips, thy looks, speak all in order,
Thou think, and right thou think, that these do move me
That all these severally thy suit do further:
But shall I tell thee what most thy suit aduances?
Thy fair smoothe words? no, no, thy fair smoothe banches.
26 Of Peleus ill-fortune in burying his friends.
OLd Peleus plains his fortune and ill chance,
That still he brings his friends unto the grave.
God Peleus, I would thou had led the dance,
And I had pointed thee what friends to have.
27 To my Lady Rogers, of breaking her bitches leg.
^Ast night you laid it (Madam) in our dish,
How that a maid of ours, whom we must check,
^^d broke your bitches leg, I straight did wish
^^e baggage rather broken had her neck:
(...) took my answer well, and all was whish.
But take me right, I meant in that I said,
Your baggage bitch, and not my baggage maid.
28 Of Paying.
A Captain late arrived from loss of Sluice,
Hearing some friend of mine did him abuse,
^ow'd he would pay him when he met him next.
^y friend with these great threats nothing perplexed,
Prayed that the promise faild not of fulfilling,
For three years past he lent him forty shilling.
29 The Author, of his own fortune.
TAke fortune as it falls, as one advises:
Yet Heywood bids me take it as it rises:
and while I think to do as both do teach,
(...) falls and rises quite beside my reach.
30 Of the cause of dearth.
I Hear our Country neighbors often complain,
Their fruits are still destroyed with too much rai^
Some guess by skill of Stars, and Science vain,
Some watery Planet in the heavens does reign:
No, Sin does reign on earth, the case is plain
Which if we would repent, and then refrain,
The skies would quickly keep their course again.
Now that with lewdness we be luld asleep,
The heavens, to see our wickedness, do weep.
31 To Sir Hugh Portman, in supping alone in too much company.
WHen you bade forty guests, to me unknown,
I came not, though you twice for me did send,
For which you blame me as a sullen friend.
Sir, pardon me, I list not suppe alone.
32 Of Sextus, a bad husband.
HAd I, good Sextus, well considered first,
And better thought on phrases of civility,
When I said, you of husbands were the worst,
I should have said, excepting the Nobility.
Well, none, to speak more mannerly and true,
The Nobles, and great Statesmen, all foreprised,
^n husband worse then you, I never knew.
^hen mend, yet thus in mending be advised:
Be no good husband, for as some have thought,
Husbands that will be good, make huswifes naught.
33 Of writing with double pointing. It is said, that King Edward of Carnaruan
lying at Berkly Castle prisoner, a Cardinal wrote to his Keeper, Edwardum
occidere noli, timere bonum est, which being read with the point at timere, it
cost the King his life. Here ensues as doubtful a point, but I trust, not so
dangerous.
DAmes are indude with virtues excellent?
What man is he can prove that they offend?
Daily they serve the Lord with good intent:
Seld they displease their husbands: to their end
Always to please them well they do intend:
Never in them one shall find shrewdnes much.
Such are their humors, and their grace is such.
34 To my Lady Rogers.
GOod Madame, in this verse observe one point,
That it seems the Writer did appoint
With smoothest oil of praise your ears to noynt;
Yet one his purpose soon may disappoint.
For in this verse disparting but a point.
Will put this verse so clearly out of joint,
That all this praise will scant be worth a point.
35 To her Daughter, upon the same point, reading the same verse with another
point.
DAmes are indude with virtues excellent?
What man is he can prove that? they offend
Daily: they serve the Lord with good intent
Seld: they displease their husbands to their end
Always: to please them well they do intend
Never: in them one shall find shrewdness much.
Such are their humors, and their graces such.
36
MY Mall, the former verses this may teach you,
That some deceive, some are deceived by shows.
For this verse in your praise, so smooth that goes,
With one false point and stop, did ouer-reach you,
And turn the praise to scorn, the rimes to prose,
By which you may be slanderd all as Shrowes:
And some, perhaps, may say, and speak no treason,
The verses had more rhyme, the prose more reason.
37 Comparison of the Sonnet, and the Epigram.
ONce, by mishap, two Poets fell a-squaring,
The Sonnet, and our Epigram comparing;
And Faustus, having long demurd upon it,
Yet, at the last, gave sentence for the Sonnet,
Now, for such censure, this his chief defense is,
Their sugared taste best likes his likresse senses.
Well, though I grant Sugar may please the taste,
Yet let my verse have salt to make it last.
38 Of an accident of saying grace at the Lady Rogers, who used to dine
exceeding late. Written to his wife.
MY Mall, in your short absence from this place,
My self here dining at your mothers board,
Your little son did thus begin his grace;
The eyes of all things look on thee, o Lord,
And thou their food do give them in due season.
Peace boy, quoth I, not more of this a word,
For in this place, this Grace has little reason:
When as we speak to God, we must speak true.
And though the meat be good in taste and season,
This season for a dinner is not due:
Then peace, I say, to lie to God is treason.
Say on, my boy, says she, your father mocks,
Clownes, and not Courtiers, use to go by clocks.
Courtiers by clocks, said I, and Clownes by cocks.
Now, if your mother chide with me for this,
Then you must reconcile us with a kiss.
39 Of Don Pedro and his Poetry.
SIr, I shall tell you news, except you know it,
Our noble friend Don Pedro, is a Poet.
His verses all abroad are read and shown,
And he himself does swear they are his own.
His own? it is true, for he for them has paid
Two crowns a Sonnet, as I heard it said.
So Ellen has fair teeth, that in her purse
She keeps all night, and yet sleeps never the worse.
So widow Lesbia, with her painted hide,
Seemed, for the time, to make a handsome bride.
If Pedro be for this a Poet called,
So you may call one hairie that is bald.
40 A comfort for poor Poets.
POets, hereafter, for pensions need not care,
Who call you beggars, you may call them liars,
Verses are grown such merchantable ware,
That now for Sonnets, sellers are, and buyers.
41 Against a foolish Satyrist.
I Read that Satyr thou intitlest first,
And laid aside the rest, and ouer-past,
And swear, I thought, that the author was accursed,
That that first Satyr had not been his last.
42 An Epitaph in commendation of George Turberuill, a learned Gentleman.
WHen rimes were yet but rude, thy pen ende^uore^
To pollish Barbarism with purer style:
^he^ times were grown most old, thy heart perseuered
^incere and just, unstained with gifts or guile.
^ow lives thy soul, though from thy corpse disseuered,
^here high in bliss, here clear in fame the while;
To which I pay this debt of due thanksgiving,
My pen does praise thee dead, thine graced me living
^3 To the Queens Majesty, when she found fault with some particular matters
in Misacmos Metamorphosis.
O Read Soueraign, take this true, though poor excuse,
Of all the errors of Misacmos Muse,
(...) hound that of a whelpe my self has bred,
and at my hand and table taught and fed,
When other curres did fawn and flatter coldly,
^id spring and leap, and play with me too boldly:
For which, although my Pages check and rate him,
Yet still my self does much more love the^ hate him.
^4 To the Ladies of the Queens Priuy-chamber, at the making of their perfumed
privy at Richmond,
The Book hanged in chains says thus:
Fair Dames, if any took in scorn, and spite
Me, that Misacmos Muse in mi^th did write,
(...) satisfy the sin, lo, h^re in chains,
^or aye to hang, my Master he ordaines.
^et deem the deed to him no derogation,
But doom to this device new commendation,
Since here you see, feel, smell that his conueyance
Has freed this noisome place from all annoyance.
Now judge you, that the work mock, envy, taunt,
Whose service in this place may make most vaunt:
If us, or you, to praise it, were most meet,
You, that made sour, or us, that make it sweet?
45 To Master Cook, the Queens Attorney, that wa^ incited to call Misacmos
into the Star Chamber, but refused it; saying, he that could give another a
Ven^e, had a sure ward for himself.
THose that of dainty fare make dear provision,
If some bad Cooks mar it with dressing evil,
Are wont to say in jest, but just derision,
The meat from God, the Cooks came from the devil.
But, if this dish, though draffe in apparision,
Were made thus sawst, a service not uncivil,
Say ye that taste, and not digest the Book,
The Dee'le go with the meat, God with the Cook.
46 Against Lynus, a Writer, that found fault with the Metamorphosis.
LYnus, to give to me a spightfull frumpe,
Said that my writings sauourd of the Pumpe,
And that my Muse, for want of matter, takes
An Argument to write of from the Iakes.
Well, Lynus, speak each Reader as he thinks,
Though thou of Scepters wrat'st, and I of sinks,
Yet some will say, comparing both together,
My wit brings matter thence, thine matter thither.
47 Of Garlic to my Lady Rogers.
^F Leckes you like, and do the smell disleeke,
Eat Onions, and you shall not smell the Leeke:
(...) you of Onions would the sent expel,
^ate Garlic, that will drown th'Onyons smell.
But sure, against Garlicks savor, at one word,
I know but one receipt, what is that? (go look.)
48 A dish of dainties for the Devil.
A Godly Father, sitting on a draught,
To do as need, and Nature has us taught,
^umbled, as was his manner, certain prayers:
and unto him, the Devil straight repaires,
and boldly to revile him he begins,
^lleaging, that such prayers are deadly sins;
and that it proved he was deuoyd of grace,
^o speak to God in so unfit a place.
^he reverend man, though at the first dismayed,
^et strong in faith, thus to the Devil said;
^hou damned Spirit, wicked, false, and lying,
^espayring thine own good, and ours envying:
^ach take his due, and me thou can not hurt,
^o God my prayer I meant, to thee the dirt.
Pure prayer ascends to him that high does fit.
Down falls the filth, for fiends of hell more fit.
49 Of Don Pedro his sweet breath.
HOw is it, Don Pedros breath is still perf^m'd,
And that he never like himself does smell?
I like it not, for still it is presumed;
Who smells ever well, smells never well.
50 Misacmos against his Book.
THe Writer and the matter well might meet,
Were he as eloquent, as it is sweet.
51 Of Cloacina and Sterquitius.
THe Romans ever counted superstitious
Adored with high titles of Divinity,
Dame Cloacina, and the Lord Sterquitius,
Two persons in their State of great affinity.
But we, that scorn opinions so pernicious,
Are taught by Truth well tried, to adore the Trinity.
And, who-so care of true Religion takes,
Will think such Saints well shrined in AJAX.
52 To the Queen when she was pacified, and had sent Misacmos thanks for the
invention.
A Poet once of Traian begd a Lease,
( Traian, terror of War, mirror of Peace)
^^d doubting how his writings were accepted,
^^inst which he heard some Courtiers had excepted;
^^ came to him, and with all due submission,
^^liuered this short Verse, with this Petition:
^^are Sovereign, if you like not of my Writings,
(...) this sweet cordial to a spirit daunted.
(...) if you read, and like my poor enditings,
(...) for reward let this small suit be granted.
Of which short Verse, I find insu'd such fruit,
The Poet, of the Prince obtained his suit.
53 A Poets Privilege.
PAinters and Poets claim by old enroulement,
A Charter, to dare all without controulement.
54 To Faustus.
FAustus finds fault, my Epigrams are short,
Because to read them, he does make some sport:
I thank thee, Faustus, though thou iudgest wrong,
Ere long I Will make thee swear they be too long.
55 Against Faustus.
WHat is the cause, Faustus, that in dislike
Proud Paulus still does touch thee with a Pike?
(...) breeds in my mind a great confusion,
^o think what he should mean by such elusion.
Trowst thou he means, that thou might make a Pikema^?
That cannot be, for that thou art no like man.
Thy crazed bones cannot endure the shocke,
Besides, his manner is to speak in mock.
Or is it, because the Pike's a greedy Fish,
Deuoures as thou do many a dainty Dish?
And in another sort, and more unkind,
Wilt bite, and spoil those of thy proper kind?
Or does he mean thou art a quarrell-piker,
That amongst men, were never thought a striker?
In this he says, thou art a Christian brother,
That stricken on one ear, thou turnest the other.
Or does he mean that thou would pick a thank?
No sure, for of that fault I count thee frank.
How can thy tale to any man be grateful,
Whose person, manners, face and all is so hateful?
Then, Faustus, I suspect yet one thing worse,
Thou have picked somewhat else. What Is that? a purse?
56 Of mis-conceiuing.
LAdies, you blame my verses of scurrilitie,
While with the double sense you were deceived.
Now you confess them free from inciuilitie.
Take heed henceforth you be not misconceiu'd.
57. How the Bathe is like Purgatory.
WHether it be a Fable, or a Story,
That Beda and others write of Purgatory:
^ know no place that more resemblance has
With that same Purgatory, then the Bathe.
Men there with pains, do purge their passed sins,
Many with pains, purge here their parched skins:
^rying and freezing are the pains there told,
Here the chief pain, consists in heat and cold.
Confused cries, vapor and smoke and stink,
^re certain here: that there they are, some think
There fire burns Lords and Lowts without respect,
Our water for his force works like effect:
Thence none can be delivered without praying,
Hence no man is delivered without paying.
But once escaped thence, has sure salvation,
But those go hence, still fear recidiuation.
58 Of going to Bathe.
A Common phrase long used here has been,
And by prescription now some credit has:
That diverse Ladies coming to the Bathe,
Come chiefly but to see, and to be seen.
But if I should declare my conscience briefly,
^ cannot think that is their Arrant chiefly.
For as I hear that most of them have dealt,
They chiefly came to feel, and to be felt.
59 Of Plain dealing.
MY writings often displease you: what is the matter
You love not to hear truth, nor I to flatter.
60 Against Paulus.
BEcause in these so male contented times,
I please my self with private recreation;
In reading or in sweetest contemplation,
Or writing sometime prose, often pleasant rimes:
Paulus, whom I have thought my friend sometimes,
Seeks all he may to taint my reputation:
Not with complaints, nor any heinous crimes,
But only saying in his scoffing fashion,
These writers that still savor of the schools,
Frame to themselves a Paradise of fools.
But while he scorns our mirth and plain simplicity,
Himself does sail to Affricke and Ind.
And seeks with hellish pains, yet does not find
That bliss, in which he frames his wise felicity.
Now which of twain is best, some wise men tell,
Our Paradise, or else wise Paulus hell.
61 Of Caius hurts in the war.
Caius of late returned from Flemmish wars,
Of certain little scratches bears the skarres,
And for that most of them are in his face,
With tant plus beau he shows them for his grace.
^et came they not by dint of Pike, or Dart,
^ut with a pot, a pint, or else a quart.
But he never makes his boast, how, and by whom,
He has received a greater blow at home.
62 Of two Welsh Gentlemen.
I Heard among some other pretty Tales,
How once there were two Gentlemen of Wales,
Of Noble blood, descended of his House,
That from our Ladies gown did take a Louse.
These two (thus goes the tale) upon a day,
Did hap to travel upon London way:
and for 'twas cumbersome to wear a boot,
^or their more ease, they needs would walk afoote.
Their fare was dainty, and of no small cost,
^or every meal they called for baked and roast.
and lest they should their best apparel lack,
Each of them bore his Wardrobe at his back.
Their Arrant was, but sore against their wills,
^o Westminster to speak with Master Milles.
^o marvel men of such a sumptuous Diet,
Were brought into the Star Chamber for a Riot.
These Squires one night arrived at a town,
To look their lodgings, when the Sun was down.
And for the Inne-keeper his gates had locked,
^n haste, like men of some account they knocked.
The drowsy Chamberlain does ask who is there.
They told that Gentlemen of Wales they were.
How many, quoth the man, is there of you?
Quoth they, Here is John ap Rice, ap Jones, ap Hue;
And Nicholas ap Steven, ap Giles, ap Dauy.
Then Gentlemen, adue, quoth he, God save ye.
Your Worships might have had a bed or twain,
But how can that suffice so great a train?
63 To Master Mayor of Bathe, that Bathe is like Paradise.
SIr, if you either angry were or sorry,
That I have lik'ned Bathe to Purgatory:
Lo, to re-gaine your favor in a trice,
I Will prove it much more like to Paradise.
Man was at first in Paradise created,
Many men still in Bathe are procreated.
Man lived there in state of Innocence,
Here many live in wit, like Innocents.
There sprang the heads of four most noble streams
From hence flow springs, not matched in any Realme^
Those springs and fruits, brought help for each disease
These unto many maladies bring ease.
Man, there was monylesse, naked and poor.
Many go begging here from door to door.
Man there did taste the Tree he was forbidden.
Here many men taste fruits, makes them be chidden
Angels dwell there in pure and shining habit.
Angels like faces, some this place inhabit.
Angels let in all are admitted thither,
Angels keep in all are admitted hither.
Many are said to go to heaven from thence,
Many are sent to heaven, or hell, from hence.
But in this one thing likeness most is framed,
That Men in Bathe go naked, not ashamed.
64 Of Don Pedro's debts.
DOn Pedro's out of debt, be bold to say it,
For they are said to owe, that mean to pay it.
65 Of one that vowed to dis-inherit his son, and give his goods to the poor.
A Citizen that dwelt near Temple-barre,
By hap one day fell with his Son at Jar;
Whom for his evil life, and lewd demerit,
He often affirmed, he would quite dis-inherit,
And vowed his goods, and lands, all to the poor,
His son what with his play, what with his whore,
Was so consumed at last, as he did lack
Meat for his mouth, and clothing for his back.
O crafty poverty! his father now,
May give him all he has, yet keep his vow.
66 Of a Precise Cobbler, and an ignorant Curat.
A Cobbler, and a Curat, once disputed
Before a Judge, about the Queens Injunctions,
And since that still the Curat was confuted,
One said 'twas fit that they two changed functions.
Nay, said the Judge, that motion much I loathe,
But if you will, we will make them Cobblers both.
67 Of Lynus Poetry.
WHen Lynus thinks that he and I are friends,
Then all his Poems unto me he sends:
His Disticks, Satyrs, Sonnets, and Exameters,
His Epigrams, his Lyricks, his Pentameters.
Then I must censure them, I must correct them,
Then only I must order, and direct them.
I read some three or four, and pass the rest,
And when for answer, I by him am pressed,
I say, that all of them, some praise deserve,
For certain uses I could make them serve.
But yet his rhyme is harsh, vneu'n his number,
The manner much, the matter both does cumber.
His words too strange, his meanings are too mistic^
But at one word, I best endure his Disticke:
And yet, might I persuade him in mine humor,
Not to affect vain praise of common rumor,
Then should he write of nothing: for indeed,
Gladly of nothing I his verse would read.
68 Of one that seeks to be stellified being no Pithagorian.
AN use there was among some Pithagorians,
If we give credit to the best Historians:
How they that would observe the course of Stars,
To purge the vapors, that our clear sight tarres,
And bring the brain unto a settled quiet,
Did keep a wondrous strict and sparing diet,
Drink water from the purest heads of springs,
Eat Herbs and Flowers, not taste of living things:
And then to this scant fare, their books applying,
They called this sparing Diet, Stellifying.
Then think thou, professed Epicure,
That never could virtuous pains endure,
That eat'st fat Venson, bowzest Claret Wine,
^o'st play till twelve, and sleep till after nine,
And in a Coach like Vulcans son do ride,
That thou art worthy to be stellified?
69 Against Momus.
LEwd Momus loves, men's lives and lines to skan,
Yet said (by chance) I was an honest man.
^ut yet one fault of mine, he strait rehearses,
Which is, I am so full of toys and verses.
True, Momus, true, that is my fault, I grant.
^et when thou shall thy chiefest virtue vaunt,
I know some worthy Sprites one might entice,
To leave that greatest Virtue, for this Vice.
70 Of Galla, and her Tawny fan.
WHen Galla and my self do talk together,
Her face she shroudes with fan of tawny Fether,
And while my thought somewhat thereof deuiseth,
A double doubt within my mind arises:
As first, her skin or fan which looks brighter,
And second whether those her looks be lighter,
The^ that same Plume wherewith her looks were hidden,
But if I cleared these doubts, I should be chidden.
71 To his Wife for striking her Dog.
YOur little Dog that barkt as I came by,
I struck by hap so hard, I made him cry,
And straight you put your finger in your eye,
And lowering sat, and asked the reason why.
Love me, and love my Dog, thou did reply:
Love as both should be loved. I will, said I,
And sealed it with a kiss. Then by and by,
Cleared were the clouds of thy fair frowning sky.
Thus small events, great masteries may try.
For I by this, do at their meaning guess,
That beat a Whelpe before a Lioness.
72 Against a Wittall Broker that set his wife to sale.
I See thee sell Swords, Pistols, Clokes, and Gowns,
With Dublets, Slops, and they that pay thee crowns;
Do, as it is reason, bear away the ware,
Which to supply, is thy continual care.
But thy wives ware, far better rate does hold,
Which unto sundry chapmen's daily sold.
Her Fair lasts all the year, and does not finish,
Nor does her ware ought lessen, or diminish.
73 Of his translation of Ariosta.
I Spent some years, and months, and weeks, and days,
In Englishing the Italian Ariost.
And straight some offered Epigrams in praise
Of that my thankelesse pains, and fruitless cost.
But while this offer did my spirits raise,
And that I told my friend thereof in post:
He disapprou'd the purpose many ways,
And with this proverb proved it labor lost:
Good Ale does need no sign, good Wine no bush,
Good verse of praisers, needs not pass a rush.
74 Of Cinna's Election.
PVre Cinna makes no question he is elect,
Yet lewdly lives: I might believe him better,
If he would change his life, or change one letter,
And say that he is sure he is eiect.
An holy, true, and long preserved purity,
May hap, and bu^ perhap breed such security.
75 The Author to a Daughter of nine year old.
THough pride in Damsels is a hateful vice,
Yet could I like a Noble-minded Girl,
That would demand me things of costly price,
Rich Velvet gowns, pendents, and chains of Pearl
Carknets of Aggats, cut with rare device,
Not that hereby she should my mind entice
To buy such things against both wit and profit,
But I like well she should be worthy of it.
76 To the Earl of Essex, of one envious of Ariosto translated.
MY Noble Lord, some men have thought me prou^
Because my Furioso is so spread,
And that your Lordship has it seen and read,
And have my vein, and pain therein alowd.
No sure, I say, and long time since have vowed,
My fancies shall not with such baits be fed,
Nor am I framed so light in foot or head,
That I should dance at sound of praises crow'd:
Yes I Will confess this pleased me when I heard it,
How one that ever carpes at others writings,
Yet seldom any shows of his enditings:
With much ado gave up this hungry verdit,
'Twas well he said, but 'twas but a translation.
Is 't not a Ram that buts of such a fashion?
77 Of a speechless woman. To his wife.
A Cursed wife, of her husbands dealings doubting,
At his home coming silent was and mute,
and when with kindness he did her salute,
^he held her peace, and lowering sat and pouring,
Which humor that he thought to check with flouting:
He caused one secretly to raise a brute
That she lay speechless: straight the Bell does toule,
and men devoutly given, prayed for her soul.
Then some kind Gossips made a special suit
^o visit her, her hard case to condole:
^he wondered at the cause: but when she knew it,
from that time forward, so her tongue did role,
that her good man did wish he had been breechlesse,
When first he gave it forth, that she was speechless.
Well then, my Moll, lest my mis-hap be such,
Be never dumb, yet never speak too much.
78 Of a dumb Horse.
WHen you and I, Paulus once Hackneys hired,
Rode late to Rochester, my Hackney tired:
You that will lose a friend, to coin a jest,
Played thus on me, and my poor tired beast.
Mark, in Misacmos Horse, a wondrous change,
A sudden Metamorphosis most strange.
His horseway lay at rising of the Sun,
And now you plain may see his Horse is down.
Well, Paulus, thus with me, you please to sport,
But thus again, your scoff I can retort.
Your hair was black, and therein was your glory:
But in two years, it grew all gray and hoary.
Now like my Hackney worn with too much travel,
Mired in the clay, or tired in the gravel.
While two year more over your head are run,
Your hair is neither black, nor gray, it is dunne.
79 Of Leda that played at Tables with her Husband.
IF tales are told of Leda be not Fables,
Thou with thy Husband do play false at Tables.
First, thou so cunningly a Die can slurre,
To strike an Ace so dead, it cannot stir.
Then play thou for a pound, or for a pin,
High men are low men, still are foysted in.
Thirdly through, for free entrance is no fearing,
Yet thou do ouerreach him still at bearing:
If poor Almes-ace, or Sincts, have been the cast,
Thou bear too many men, thou bear too fast.
Well, Leda, hear my counsel, use it not,
Else your fair game may have so foul a blot,
That he to lose, or leave, will first adventure,
Then in so shameful open points to enter.
80 Of Soothsaying, to the Queen of England.
MIght Queens shun future mischief by foretelling,
The^ among Soothsayers 'twere excellent dwelling:
^ut if there be no means, such harms expelling,
The knowledge makes the grief, the more excelling.
Well, yet dear Liege, my soul this comfort does,
That of these Soothsayers very few say sooth.
81 How an Ass may prove an Elephant.
^T has been said, to give good spirits hope,
A Knight may prove a King, a Clarke, a Pope*
^ut our young spirits disdaining all old Rules,
Compared by holy Writ, to Horse and Mules:
It Is vain with ancient Proverbs, to provoke
^o virtuous course, with these such bear no stroke.
Then their old pride, let my new Proverb dant,
An Ass may one day prove an Elephant.
82 Of a Precise Lawyer.
A Lawyer called unto the Bar but lately,
Yet one that lofty bare his looks, and stately,
And how so e're his mind was in sincerity,
His speech and manners showed a great austeritie.
This Lawyer hoped to be a bidden ghest,
With diverse others to a Gossips feast.
Where though that many did by intercourse,
Exchange sometimes from this, to that discourse:
Yet one bent brow, and frown of him was able,
To govern all the talk was at the table.
His manner was, perhaps to help digestion,
Still to Divinity to draw each question:
In which his tongue extrauagant would range,
And he pronounced Maxims very strange.
First, he affirmd, it was a passing folly,
To think one day more then another holy.
If one said Michaelmas, straight he would chide,
And tell them they must call it Michaels tide.
If one had sneezde to say (as is the fashion)
Christ help, 'twas witchcraft, and deserved damnation*
Now when he talked thus, you must suppose,
The Gossips cup came often from his nose.
And were it the warm spice, or the warm wether,
At least he sneezed twice or thrice together.
A pleasant ghest, that kept his words in mind,
And heard him sneeze, in scorn said, Keep behind
At which the Lawyer taking great offense,
Said, Sir, you might have used save reverence.
I would quoth the other, save I feared you
Would then have called save reverence witchcraft too.
83 A Prophecy when Asses shall grow Elephants.
1 WHen making harmful gunnes, unfruitful glasses,
Shall quite consume our stately Oaks to ashes:
2 When Law fills all the land with blots and dashes,
3 When land long quiet, held concealed, passes.
4 When war and truce plays passes and repasses,
5 When Monopolies are given of toys and trashes:
6 When courtiers mar good clothes, with cuts and slashes,
7 When Lads shall think it free to ly with Lasses,
8 When clergy romes to buy, sell, none abashes,
9 When foul skins are made fair with new found washes,
10 When prints are set on work, with Greens and Nashes,
11 When Lechers learn to stir up Lust with lashes,
When plainness vanishes, vainenesse surpasses,
Some shall grow Elephants, were known but Asses.
84 To my Lady Rogers of her servant Pain.
YOur servant Pain, for Legacies has sued
Seven years. I asked him how his matter passes.
He tells how his Testator left not assets.
By which plea him th'executor would allude.
^ in this Lawyers French both dull and rude,
Replide, the plea my learning far surpasses.
Yet when reports of both sides I had viewed
In Forma paper, this I did conclude;
He was left Pauper, and all his Counsel asses:
Yet you would give a hundred crowns or twain,
That you could clear discharge your servant Pain.
84 Of one that is unwilling to lend money.
WHen I but buy two suites of rich apparel,
Or some fair ready horse against the running,
Rich Quintus, that same Miser, slye and cunning,
Yet my great friend, begins to pick a quarrel,
To tell me how his credit is in peril;
How some great Lord (whose name may not be spoken,
With him for twenty thousand crowns has broken.
Then, with a fained sigh, and sign of sorrow,
Swearing he thinks these Lords will quite undo him,
He calls his servant Oliver unto him,
And sends to the Exchange, to take on use
One thousand pou^ds, must needs be paid to morrow.
Thus would he blind mine eyes with this abuse,
And thinks, though he was sure I came to borrow,
That now I needs must shut my mouth for shame.
Fie, Quintus, fie, then when I speak deny me.
But to deny me thus, before I try thee,
Blush and confess that you be too too blame.
85 Against Promoters.
BAse spies, disturbers of the public rest,
With forged wrongs, the true man's right that wrest:
^acke hence exiled to desert lands, and waste.
And drink the cup that you made others taste.
But yet the Prince to you does bounty show,
That does your very lives on you bestow.
86 Against too much trust.
^F you will shrowde you safe from all mis-haps,
And shun the cause of many after-claps:
Put not in any one, too much belief:
Your joy will be the less, so will your grief.
87 Of dangerous reconciling.
DIcke said, Beware a reconciled foe,
For, though he sooth your words, he seeks your woe:
^ut I would have my friend late reconciled,
^eware then Dicke, lest he be worst beguiled.
88 Of Leda that says she is sure to be saved.
SInce Leda knew that sure she was elected,
She buys rich clothes, fares well, and makes her boast:
Her corpse, the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
Must be more cherrished, and more respected:
But Leda lives still to sin subjected.
Tell Leda, that her friend Misacmos fears,
That till she get a mind of more submission,
And purge that corpse with Hysope of contrition,
And wash that sinful soul with saltish tears,
Though Quails she eats, though Gold and Pearl she wears,
Yet sure she does with damned Core and Dathan,
But feed and clad a Synagogue of Satan.
89 To the Lady Rogers, of her unprofitable sparing.
WHen I to you sometimes make friendly motion,
To spend up your superfluous provision,
Or sell the same for coin, or for devotion,
To make thereof among the poor division;
Straight you answer me, half in derision,
And bid me speak against your course no more:
For plenty you do love, store is no sore.
But ah, such store is enemy to plenty,
You waste for fear to want, I dare assume it:
For, while to sell, spend, give, you make such dainty,
Keep corn and cloth, till rat and rot consume it,
Let meat so mould, till musk cannot perfume it,
And by such sparing, seek to mend such store,
Sore is such store, and God offending sore.
90 Against Church-robbers, upon a picture that hangs where it is worthy.
THe Germans have a byword at this hour,
By Luther taught, by Painters skill expressed,
How Satan daily Friars does devour,
Whom in short space he does so well digest,
That passing down through his posterior parts,
Tall soldiers thence he to the world delivers,
And out they fly, all armed with pikes and darts,
With halberts, and with muskets and caliuers.
According to this Lutheran opinions,
They that devour whole Churches and their rents,
I mean our favorites and Courtly Minions,
Void Forts and Castles, in their excrements.
91 A Tale of a Bayliffe distraining for rent. To my Lady Rogers.
I Heard a pleasant tale at Cammington,
There where my Lady dwelt, called The fair Nun,
How one that by his office was Deceiuer,
My tongue often trips) I should have said Receiver,
Or to speak plain and true, an arrant Baylie,
Such as about the Country travel daily,
That when the quarter day was two days past,
Went presently to gather rents in have.
And if, as often it hapt, he brake good manner,
He straight would plead the custom of the Manor,
Swearing he might distraine all goods and chattell,
Were it in moueables, or else quick cattle.
This Bayliffe, coming to a tenement,
In the Tenants absence, straynd his wife for rent;
In which the beast so pliable he found,
He never needs to drive her to the pound.
The Tenant, by intelligence, did guess,
The Bayliffe taken had a wrong distress:
And to the Bayliffes wife he went complaining,
Of this her husbands usage in distraining;
Requesting her like courtesies to render,
And to accept such rent as he would tender.
She, whether moved with some strange compassion,
Or that his tale did put her in new passion,
Accepts his payment like a gentle wench;
All coin was current, English, Spanish, French:
And when she taken had his sorry pittance,
I think, that with a kiss she sealed the quittance.
When next these husbands met, they chaft, they cursed*
Happy was he that could cry Cuckold furst.
From spightfull words, they fell to daggers drawing*
And after, each to other threatened lawing.
Each party seeks to make him strong by faction,
In several Courts they enter several action,
Actions of Battery, actions in the Case,
With riots, routes, disturbed all the place.
Much blood, much money had been spilt and spent,
About this foolish straining for the rent;
Save that a gentle Justice of the Peace,
Willing to cause such foolish quarrels cease,
Prevailed so with the parties by entreatie,
Of concord both agreed to have a treaty:
And both referred the matter to the Justice,
Who having well observed what a jest is:
To think two Cuckolds were so fairly parted,
Each having taken the blow, that never smarted,
He charged each of them shake hands together,
And when they meet, to say, Good morrow, brother.
Thus each quit other all old debts and dribblets,
And set the Hares head, against the Gooses giblets.
92 Of casting out Spirits with fasting, without Prayer.
A Virtuous Dame that for her state and quality,
Did ever love to keep great Hospitality,
^er name I must not name in plain reciting,
^ut thus the chiefest instrument in writing,
Was, by Duke Humfreys ghests so boldly haunted,
that her good mind thereby was shrewdly daunted.
^he sighing said one day to a careless Iester,
^hese ill bred ghests my board and house so pester,
that I pray God often times with all my heart,
that they would leave this haunt, and hence depart:
^e that by his own humor hap'ly ghest,
What manner sprite these smel-feasts had possessed,
Told him, the surest way such spirits out-casting,
Was, to leave prayer awhile, and fall to fasting.
93 Against Itis a Poet.
ITis with leaden sword does wound my Muse,
Itis whose Muse in uncouth terms does swagger*
For should I wish Itis for this abuse,
But to his leaden sword, a wooden dagger:
94 Of Wittoll.
CAyus, none reckned of thy wife a point,
While each man might, without all let or cu^be^
But since a watch over her thou did appoint,
Of Customers she has no little number.
Well, let them laugh hereat that list, and scoff it,
But thou do find what makes most for thy profi^
The end of the first Book.
Sir JOHN HARRINGTONS Epigrams, the second Book.
1 To the Lady Rogers, the authors wives Mother.
^F I but speak words of a pleasing sound:
Yea though the same be but in sport and play,
^ou bid me peace, or else a thousand pound,
^uch words shall work out of my childrens way.
When you say thus, I have no word to say.
^hus without Obligation, I stand bound,
^hus, wealth makes you command, hope me obey.
^ut let me find this true another day:
^lse when your body shall be brought to ground,
Your soul to blessed Abraham's bosom, I.
May with good manners give your soul the lie.
2 Of the Bishopric of Landaffe.
A Learned Prelate late disposed to laffe,
Hearing me name the Bishop of Landaffe:
You should say, he aduising well hereon,
Call him Lord Aff: for all the land is gone.
3 Of Don Pedro's Diet drink.
DOn Pedro drinks to no man at the board,
Nor once a taste does of his cup afford.
Some think it pride in him: but see their blindness
I know therein, his Lordship does us kindness.
4 Of Leda and Balbus.
LEda was Balbus queen, yet might she have denide it.
She weds him, now what means has Leda left to hide it?
5 Of Cinna his Gossip cup.
WHen I with thee, Cinna, do dine or sup,
Thou still do offer me thy Gossips cup:
And though it savor well, and be well spiced,
Yet I to taste thereof am not enticed.
Now since you needs will have me cause allege,
While I strain curt'sie in that cup to pledge:
One said, thou made that cup so hot of spice,
That it had made thee now a widdower twice.
I will not say it is so, nor that I think it:
But good Sir, pardon me, I cannot drink it.
6 Of Leda's Religion.
MY lovely Leda, some at thee repining,
Asked me unto what sect thou art inclining?
Which doubts shall I resolve among so many,
Whether to none, to one, to all, to any?
Surely one should be deemed a false accusant,
That would appeach Leda for a Recusant.
Her fault according to her former using,
Was noted more in taking, then refusing.
For Lent, or Fasts, she has no superstition,
For if she have not changed her old condition:
Be it by night in bed, in day in dish,
Flesh unto her more welcome is then Fish.
Thou art no Protestant, thy fals-hood says,
Thou can not hope to save thy self by faith.
Well, Leda, yet to show my good affection,
I le say thy sect is of a double section.
A Brownist lovely brown, thy face and breast,
The Families of Love, in all the rest.
7 That favorites help the Church.
OF late I wrote after my wanton fashion,
That favorites consume the Churches rents:
But moved in conscience with retraction,
I Will show how sore that rashness me repents.
For noting in my private observation,
What rents and schisms among us daily grow:
No hope appears of reconciliation,
By help of such as can, or such as know.
My Muse must sing, although my soul laments,
That Favorites increase the Churches rents.
8 Of Cinna his courage.
PVre Cinna says, and proudly does profess,
That if the quarrel he maintains be good:
No man more valiant is to spend his blood,
No man can dread of death, of danger less.
But if the cause be bad, he does confess,
His heart is cold, and cowardly his mood.
Well, Cinna, yet this cannot be withstood,
Thou have but evil luck, I shrewdly guess,
That biding whereas brawles are bred most rife,
Thou never had good quarrel all thy life.
9 Of a Lawyer that deserved his fee.
SExtus retained a Sergeant at the Laws,
With one good Fee in an ill-fauor'd cause.
The matter bad, no Judge nor Jury plyent,
The verdit clearly past against the Clyent.
With which he chaft, and swore he was betrayed,
Because for him the Sergeant little said:
And of the Fee, he would have barred him half.
Whereat the Sergeant wroth, said, Dizzard Calfe,
Thou would, if thou had wit, or sense to see,
Confess I had deserved a double Fee,
That stood and blushed there in thy behalf.
10 Of Don Pedro.
A Slave thou were by birth, of this I gather,
For ever more thou sai'st, my Lord, my Father.
11 Against Lynus a writer.
I Hear that Lynus grows in wondrous choler,
Because I said, he wrote but like a scholar.
If I have said so, Linus, I must grant it,
What ere I speak thy scholler-ship concerning,
I never thought, or meant, that thou have learning:
But that hereof may grow some more recital,
I Will teach thee how to make me full requital.
Say thou to breed me equal spite and choler,
Misacmos never writes, but like a scholar.
12 Of Don Pedros bonds.
DOn Pedro cares not in what bonds he enter.
Then I to trust Don Pedro soon will venture.
For no man can of bonds stand more secure,
Then he that means to keep his payment sure.
13 Against Cayus that scorned his Metamorphosis.
LAst day thy Mistress, Cayus, being present,
One hapt to name, to purpose not unpleasant,
The Title of my mis-conceiued Book:
At which you spit, as though you could not brook
So gross a Word: but shall I tell the matter
Why? If one names a Iax, your lips do water.
There was the place of your first love and meeting,
There first you gave your Mistress such a greeting,
As bred her scorn, your shame, and others lafter,
And made her feel it twenty fortnights after:
Then thank their wit, that make the place so sweet,
That for your Hymen you thought place so meet.
But meet not Maids at Madam Cloacina,
Lest they cry nine months after, Help Lucina.
14 Against an Atheist.
THat heavens are void, and that no gods there are,
Rich Paulus says, and all his proof is this:
That while such blasphemies pronounce he dare,
He lives here in ease, and earthly bliss.
15 Of Cosmus heir.
WHen all men thought old Cosmus was a dying,
And had by Will given thee much goods and lands,
Oh, how the little Cosmus fell a crying*
Oh, how he beats his breasts, and wring his hands!
How fervently for Cosmus health he prayed!
What worthy Alms he vowed, on that condition:
But when his pangs a little were allayd,
and health seemed hoped, by the learned Physicion,
Then though his lips, all love, and kindness vanted,
His heart did pray, his prayer might not be granted.
16 Of Faustus, a stealer of Verses.
I Heard that Faustus oftentimes reherses,
To his chaste Mistress, certain of my Verses:
^n which with use, so perfect he is grown,
that she poor fool, now thinks they are his own.
^ would esteem it (trust me) grace, not shame,
^f Dauis, or if Daniel did the same.
^or would I thank, or would I quarrel pike,
^ when I list, could do to them the like.
^ut who can wish a man a fowler spite,
^hen have a blind man take away his light?
A begging Thief, is dangerous to my purse:
A baggage Poet to my Verse is worse.
17 Misacmos of himself.
Muse you, Misacmos fails in some endeavor.
Alas, an honest man's a Nouice ever.
Fie, but a man's disgraced, noted a Nouice.
Yea, but a man's more graced, noted of no vice.
18 Of the corn that rained.
I Handled, tasted, saw it with mine eyes,
The grain that lately fell down from the skies:
Yet what it tok'ned could I not devise,
And many doubts did in my mind arise.
At last, I thus resolved, it signifies
That this is our sole mean, to mend this dearth,
To ask from heaven, that we do lack on earth.
19 To his wife, at the birth of his sixth Child.
THe Poet Martial made a special suit
Unto his Prince, to grant him under seal,
Right of three children, which they did impute
A kind of honor, in their Commonweal.
But for such suit, my self I need not trouble,
For thou do seal to me this Patent double.
20 Against Feasting.
Kind Marcus, me to supper lately bad,
And to declare how well to us he wishes,
The room was strow'd with Roses and with Rushes,
And all the cheer was got, that could be had.
Now in the midst of all our dainty dishes,
Me think, said he to me, you look but sad,
Alas (said I) it is to see thee so mad,
To spoil the skies of Fowls, the seas of fishes,
The land of beasts, and be at so much cost,
For that which in one hour will all be lost.
That entertainment that makes me most glad,
Is not the store of stewed, boiled, baked and roast.
But sweet discourse, mean fare; and then believe me,
To make to thee like cheer, shall never grieve me.
21 Against Cosmus covetousness.
COsmus, when I among thine other vices,
That are in nature foul, in number many,
Ask thee what is the reason thee entices,
To be so basely pinching for thy penny?
Do thou not call upon thy self a curse,
Not to enjoy the wealth that thou have won:
But save, as if thy soul were in thy purse?
Thou straight reply'st, I save all for my son.
Alas, this re-confirmes what I said rather:
Cosmus has ever been a Penny-^ather.
22 Against Vintners in Bathe.
IF men ought those in duty to commend,
That questions of Religion seek to end,
Then I to praise our Vintners do intend.
For Question is twixt Writer old and latter,
If wine alone, or if wine mixed with water,
Should of the blessed Sacrament be matter?
Some ancient Writers wish it should be mingled,
But latter men, with much more zeal in kindled,
Will have wine quite and clean from water singled.
Our zealous Vintners here, grown great Divines,
To find which way antiquity enclines,
For pure zeal mix with water all our wines.
Well, plainly to tell truth, and not to flatter,
I find our wines are much the worse for water.
23 To Bassifie, his wives mother, when she was angry.
MAdam, I read to you a little since,
The story of a Knight that had incurd
The deep displeasure of a mighty Prince:
For fear of which, long time he never sturd,
Till watching once the King that came from Chapel,
His little son fast by him, with his Gardon,
Enticed the Infant to him with an apple;
So caught him in his arms, and su'd for pardon:
Then you shall turn your angry frown from lafter,
As often as in mine arms you see your daughter.
24 To his wife, of Poppea Sabynas fair heir.
MAll once I did, but do not now envy
Fierce Neroe's bliss, of fair Poppeas rays,
that in his lap, koming her locks would lie,
^ech hair of hers, a verse of his did praise,
^ut that praised beauty, fruitless spent her days.
^o young Augustus ever called him Dad.
^o small Poppeas with their pretty plays,
^id melt their hearts, and melting make them glad:
^ut thou in this, do pass his fair Sabyna,
that have seven times been succor'd by Lucina.
^hy womb in branches seau'n, it self displayes.
Then leave I Nero, with Poppeas heirs:
To joy, and to enjoy thee, and thine heirs.
25 Against Lalus an ill Preacher.
Young Lalus took a Text of excellent matter,
And did the same expound, but m^rre the latter,
^is tongue so vainly did and idly chatter,
^he people naught but hem, and cough and spatter.
Then said a Knight not used to lie or flatter:
Such Ministers do bring the Devils blessing.
That mar us so good meat, with so ill dressing.
26 Against Paulus an Atheist.
LEwd Lalus, led by Sadduces infection,
Does not believe the bodies resurrection:
And holds them all in scorn, and deep derision,
That tell of Saints or Angels apparision;
And swears, such things are fables all, and fancies
Of Lunatiques or Fools, possessed with franzies.
I have (said he) trauail'd both near and far,
By sea, by land, in time of peace and war.
Yet never met I sprite, or ghost, or elfe,
Or ought (as is the phrase) worse then my self.
Well, Paulus, this, I now believe indeed,
For who in all, or part, denies his Creed;
Went he to sea, land, hell, I would agree,
A Fiend worse then himself, shall never see.
27 To Galla going to the Bathe.
WHen Galla for her health goes to the Bathe,
She carefully does hide, as is most meet,
With aprons of fine linen, or a sheet,
Those parts, that modesty concealed has:
Nor only those, but even the breast and neck,
That might be seen, or shown, without all check^
But yet one foul, and unbeseeming place,
She leaves uncovered still: What Is that? Her fac^
28 To one that had meat ill dressed.
KIng Mithridate to poisons so inured him,
As deadly poisons, damage none procured him.
So you to stale unsavory food and durtie,
Are so inured, as famine never can hurt ye.
29 Of giving much credit.
OF all the Town old Codros gives most credit:
Who he, poor soul! Alas that ere you sed it.
How can he credit much, and is so poor?
He Is blind: yet makes he love to every whore.
30 Of honest Theft. To my good friend Master Samuel Daniel.
PRoud Paulus late my secrecies revealing,
Has told I got some good conceits by stealing.
But where got he those double Pistolets,
With which good clothes, good fare, good land he gets*
Tush, those, he says, came by a man of war.
That brought a Prize of price, from countries far.
Then, fellow Thief, let us shake together hands,
^ith both our wares are filcht from foreign lands.
You Will spoil the Spaniards, by your writ of Mart:
And I the Romans rob, by wit, and Art.
31 Against Faustus.
IN skorne of writers, Faustus still does hold,
Naught is now said, but has been said of old:
Well, Faustus, say my wits are gross and dull,
If for that word, I give not thee a Gull:
Thus then I prove that holds a false position,
I say, thou art a man of fair condition,
A man true of thy word, tall of thy hands,
Of high disent, and left good store of lands,
Thou with false dice and cards have never played,
Corrupted never Widow, Wife, nor Maid,
And as for swearing none in all this Reame,
Does seldomer in speech curse or blaspheme.
In fine, your virtues are so rare and ample,
For all our sons thou may be made a sample.
This I dare swear, none ever said before,
This I may swear, none ever will say more.
32 Of Free will.
I Know a foolish fellow has a fashion,
To prove that all is by Predestination,
And teach's, nor man, nor spirit has free will
In doing, no, nor thinking good or ill.
I am no Doctor at this disputation,
Nor are deep questions fit for shallow skill:
Yet I Will renounce, with learned men reputation,
If I disprove not this by demonstration:
He prove so plain, as none can it resist,
That in some things, three things do what they list:
The wind, says Scripture, where it list does blow,
His tongue talks what it lists, his speeches show,
My heart believes him as it list, I know.
33 Of a drunken Paracelsian.
WHen Pilo other trades of thrift had mist,
He then professed to be an Alcumist,
That Is all too much, Chimist you might him call,
And so I think twere true, and leave out all:
He takes upon him, he can make a mixture,
Of which he can extract the true elixar,
Tinctur of Pearl and Currall he does draw,
And Quintessence the best that ere you saw,
He has the cure, except Aqua Mirabilis,
Only he wants drammes Auri potabilis,
He does of nature so the secret ferrit,
That he of every thing can draw the spirit:
Spirits of mines, spirits of stones and herbs,
Whose names can scant be told with nownes and verbes,
But of all spirits my spirit does divine,
His spirit best does love the spirit of wine.
34 Of Misacmos his success in a suite.
MIsacmos has long time a suter been,
To serve in some near place about the Queen
^n which his friends to work his better speed,
Do tell her Highness, as it is true indeed,
That he is a man well borne and better bred,
In humane studyes seen, in stories read,
Adding unto an industry not small,
Pleasant conceit and memory withal.
And chiefly that he has been from his youth,
A zealous searcher of Eternal Truth:
Now never wonder, he his suite does miss:
What I have told you, that the reason is.
35 A Groom of the Chambers religion in King Henry the eights time.
ONe of King Henry's Favorites began,
To move the King one day to take a man,
Whom of his Chamber he might make a Groom,
Soft, said the King, before I grant that room,
It is a question not to be neglected,
How he in his Religion stands affected.
For his Religion, answered then the Minion,
I do not certain know what is his opinion:
But sure he may, talking with men of learning,
Conform himself in less then ten days warning.
36 To Doctor Haruey of Cambridge.
THe proverb says, Who fights with durty foes*
Must needs be foyld, admit they win or lose.
Then think it does a Doctors credit dash,
To make himself Antagonist to Nash?
37 An infallible rule to rule a wife. To his wives mother.
COncerning the wives hold this a certain rule,
That if at first, you let them have the rule,
Your self at last, with them shall have no rule,
Except you let them euer-more to rule. Probatu^ est.
38 Why Paulus takes so much Tobacco.
WHen our good Irish neighbors make repair,
With Lenton st^ffe unto Bridgewaters Fair,
At every Boothe, and Alehouse that they come,
They call for Herring straight, they must have some.
Hostis, I pre^dee have ^ee any Herring?
Yea, sir: O passing mea^! a happy Her^ing.
Herring they ask, they praise, they eat, they buy;
No price of Herring can be held too hie.
But, when among them i^ is closely mu^ter'd,
Those Herring^ that they bought, to sell are ^tter'd.
Then give them Herring, Poh, away with these:
Pree dee good Hostis, giue's some English Cheese.
Hence I have learned the cause, and see it clearly,
Why Paulus takes Tobacco, buys it ^earely,
At Tippling-houses, where he eats and drinks,
That every room straight of Tobacco stinks,
He swears it is salve for all diseases bred,
It strengthens ones weak back, comforts the head,
Dulls much flesh-appetite, it is cordial durable,
It cures that ill, which some have thought incurable*
Thus while proud Paulus has Tobacco praised,
The price of every pound, a pound is raised.
And why's all this? because he loves it well?
No: but because himself has store to sell.
But having sold all his; he will pronounce
The best in Cane not worth a groat an ounce.
39 Of a formal Minister.
A Minister, affecting singularity,
And preaching in the Pulpit of his theme,
Borne with the current of the common stream,
Extolling faith and hope, forgetting charity.
For while he was most busy in his Text,
He spyde a woman talking with her next,
And straight ^e crid to her, Dame, leave thy babbling
Wherewith the good poor woman shrewdly vexed,
Could hold no longer, but fell flat to squabbling:
Beshrew thy naked heart, she does reply.
Who babbled in this place more? thou, or I?
40 Of a lawful wife.
AT end of three years law, and suit, and strife,
when Canon laws, and common both command he^
Cys married thee; now sue them for a slander,
That dare deny she is thy lawful wife.
41 Against Feasting.
LAst day, I was unto your house invited,
And on the lord were forty diverse dishes,
Of Sallets, and of flesh and fowls and fishes,
With which (God knows) I little am delighted.
Became, I came, I took that you did bid me,
But now, I rather think, you did forbid me.
42 Against Lynus, that said the Nobility were decayed.
YOu Lynus, say, that most of our Nobility
Are much decayed in valor and in wit:
Though some of them have wealth, and good ability,
Yet very few for government are fit.
^oole, see thou not, that in our stately buildings,
^laine massy stones the substance does sustain,
^et colloms wreathed and staid, set out with guildings,
Must in high rank for ornament remain:
So men of noble birth, the State adorn,
But by the wise, stout, learnd, the sway is borne.
43 To Itis, alias Ioyner, an uncleanly token, conuayd in cleanly terms.
TOrquato Tasso, for one little fault,
That did perhaps deserve some small rebuke,
Was by his sharp and most ungrateful Duke,
Shut up close prisoner in a loathsome vault;
Where wanting Pen and Ink by Princes order,
His wit, that walls of Adamant could pierce,
Found means to write his mind in excellent verse:
For want of Pen and Ink, with piss and ordure.
But thy dull wit damned by Apollos crew,
To dungeon of disgrace, though free thy body,
With pen, nay Print, does publish like a noddy.
Base taunts, that turned upon thy self, are true,
And wanting salt thy wallowish style to season,
And being of uncouth terms a senseless coyner,
Thou call'st thy self improperly, a Ioyner,
Whose verse has quite disseuer'd rhyme and reason:
Deserving for such railing, and such bodging,
For this, Torquatos Ink, for that, his Lodging.
44 To his wife.
WHen I to thee my Letters superscribe
Thus, To mine own; Leda thereat does iybe.
And ask her why? she says, because I flatter.
But let her think so still, it makes no matter:
If I do flatter, only thou can try,
Suffiseth me, thou think I do not lie.
For, let her husband write so, for my life,
He flattereth himself more then his wife.
45 Sir John Raynsfords confession.
RAynsford, a Knight, fit to have served king Arthu^,
And in Queen Mary's days a demi Martyr:
For though both then, before, and since he turned,
(Yet sure, per ig^^^^ hanc, he might be burned.)
This Knight agreed with those of that profession,
And went, as others did, to make confession:
Among some P^ccadilios, he confessed,
That same sweet sin, that some but deem a Jest,
And told, how by good help of bawdes and varlets,
Within 10. months he had six times twelve harlots*
The Priest, that at the tale was half astonished,
With grave and ghostly counsel him admonished
To fast, and pray, to drive away that devil,
That was to him causer of so great evil,
That the lewd spirit of Lechery, no question,
Stird up his lust, with many a lewd suggestion:
A filthy Fiend, said he, most foul and odious,
Named, as appears, in holy writs, Asmodius.
Thus, with some Pennanto that was never performed,
Away went that same Knight, smally reformed.
Soon after this, ensued religions change,
That in the Church bred alteration strange,
And Raynsford, with the rest, followed the stream.
The Priest went rouing round about the Realm.
This Priest, in clothes disguised himself did hide,
^et Raynsford, three years after him had spyde,
And laid unto his charge, and sorely pressed him,
To tell if'twere not he that had confessed him.
The Priest, though this Knights words did sore him daunt,
Yet what he could not well deny, did grant,
And prayed him not to punish, or controul^
That he had done for safety of his soul.
No, knave, quoth he, I will no harm procure thee,
Upon my Worship here I do assure thee:
I only needs must laugh at thy great folly,
That would persuade with me to be so holy;
To chastise mine own flesh, to fast, and pray,
To drive the spirit of Lechery away.
'Sownds, foolish knave, I fasted not, nor prayed,
Yet is that spirit quite gone from me, he said:
If thou could help me to that spirit again,
Thou should a hundred pound have for thy pain.
That lusty Lord of Lechery Asmodius,
That thou cal'st odious, I do count commodious*
46 A pretty question of Lazarus soul well answered.
ONce on occasion two good friends of mine
Did meet at meat, a Lawyer and Divine:
Both having eaten well to help digestion,
To this Divine, the Lawyer put this question:
When Lazarus in grave four days did stay,
Where was his soul? in heaven, or hell I pray?
Was it in hell? Thence no redemption is.
And if in heaven: would Christ abate his bliss?
Sir, said the Preacher, for a short digression,
First, answer me one point, in your profession:
If so his heirs and he had fallen to strife,
Whose was the land, if he came back from life?
This latter question moved them all to lafter,
And so they drunk one to another after.
47 Against long suits in Law.
IN Court of Wards, ^
Kings Bench, and Common place
Thou followed have one suit, this seven years space.
Ah wretched man, in mothers womb accursed,
Thou could not rather lose thy suit at furst.
48 Of an importunate prater, out of Martial.
HE that is hoarse, ^
yet still to prate does please,
Proves he can neither speak, nor hold his peace.
49 Against Jealousy. To my friend.
RIght terrible are winds on waters great, ^

Most horrible are tempests on the sea,
Fire merciless, that all consumes with heat,
Plagues monstrous are, that Cities clean decay:
War cruel is, and pinching famine cursed:
Yet of all ills, the jealous wife is worst.
50 Against Quintus, that being poor and prodigal, became rich and miserable.
SCant was thy Living, Quintus, ten pound clear,
When thou did keep such fare, so good a table,
That we thy friends praid God thou might be able,
To spend, at least, an hundred pounds a year.
Behold, our boon God did benignly hear.
Thou go^st so much by Fortune favorable,
And four friends deaths to thee both kind and dear:
But suddenly thou grew'st so miserable,
We thy old friends to thee unwelcome are,
Poore-^ohn, and Apple-pyes are all our fare.
No Salmon, S^urgeon, Oysters, Crab, nor Cunger.
What should we wish thee now for such demerit?
I would thou might one thousand pounds inherit,
The^, without question, thou wold'st starve for hunger.
51 To my Lady Rogers.
GOod Madam, with kind speech and promise fair,
That from my wife you would not give a rag,
But she should be Exector sole, and heir.
I was (the more fool I) so proud and brag,
I sent to you against S. James his Fair,
A Teerce of Claret Wine, a great fat Stagge.
You straight to all your neighbors made a feast,
Each man I met has filled up his panch,
With my Red-deere, only I was no ghest,
Nor ever since did ^aste of side or ^aunch.
Well, Madam, you may bid me hope the best,
That of your promise you be sound and staunch,
Else, I might doubt I should your Land inherit,
That of my Stagge did not one morsel merit.
52 Of Sextus mis-hap coming from a Tavern.
NOw Sextus twice has supt at Sarazens head,
And both times, homewards, coming drunk to bed:
^e by the way his Pantoffles has lost,
and grieved both with the mock, and with the cost,
To save such charges, and to shun such frumps,
He goes now to the Tavern in his Pumps.
53 How Sextus laid claim to an Epigram.
WHen Sextus heard my Rhyme of Rainsford reeding,
With laughter loud he cries, and voice exceeding,
that Epigram was mine, who ever made it.
^ told him that conceit, from me, he had it.
^h barbarism, the blinder still the bolder!
Will Sextus never grow wise? growing older,
When Phidias framed had in marble pure,
^oues goodly Statue, would a man endure
^ Pyoner to challenge half the praise,
That from the quar^ the ragged stone did raise:
Or should a Carman boast of his desert,
Because he did unload it from his Cart:
^ think that Sextus self would never say 't,
^o in like manner, Sextus, that conceit
Was like a rugged stone, dig'd from thy foolish head,
Now it is a Statue carved by us, and polished.
54 Of an Aborne Rabbet.
LAte coming from the Palace of the best,
(The center of the men of better sense)
My purse grown low, by ebb of long expense:
And going for supplies into the West,
My host to whom I was a welcome ghest,
Makes me great cheer, but when I parted thence,
My trusty servant William took offense:
(Though now God wot, it was too late to spare)
That in the shot things too high prized are.
And namely for two Rabbets twenty pence.
The Tapster well enured to prate and face,
Told they were white, and young, and fat, and sweet:
New killed, and newly come from Alborne chase:
For that good fare, good payment is most meet.
I willing to make short their long debate,
Bade my man pay the reckoning at his rate:
Adding, I know, a miser of his money,
Gives more then ten pence for an Alborne Coney.
55 Of hearing Mass.
MEn talking, as often times it comes to pass,
How dangerous it is now to hear a Mass;
A valiant Knight swore for a thousand pound,
He would not present at a Mass be found.
A Noble Lord stood by, and hearing it*
Said, Sir, I then should much condemn your wit.
For were you found, and followed never so nearely,
You gain nine hundred pound and upward clearly.
56 Of a Preacher that sings Placebo.
A Smooth-tong'd Preacher that did much affect
To be reputed of the purest sect.
Unto these times great praises did afford,
That brought, he said, the sunshine of the Word.
The sunshine of the Word, this he extold,
The sunshine of the Word, this still he told.
But I that well observed what slender fruits
Have grown of all their preaching and disputes,
Pray God they bring us not, when all is done,
Out of Gods blessing, into this warm sun.
For sure, as some of them have used the matter,
Their sunshine is but moone-shine in the water.
57 Of the naked Image that was to stand in my Lo: Chamberlaines Gallery.
ACtaeon, guiltless unawares espying
Naked Diana, bathing in her bower,
Was plagued with horns, his dogs did him devour.
Wherefore take heed, ye that are curious prying,
With some such forked plague you be not smitten,
And in your foreheads your faults be written.
58 Of the same to the Ladies.
HEr face vnmask't, I saw, her corpse vnclad,
No veil, no cover, her and me between:
No ornament was hid, that beauty had,
I blushed that saw, she blushed not that was seen.
With that I vowed never to care a rush,
For such a beauty, as does never blush.
59 Of Don Pedroe's threats.
DOn Pedro thinks I scorn him in my Rhyme,
And vows, if he can prove I use detraction,
Of the great scandal he will have his action:
I that desired to clear me of the crime,
When I was asked, said, No, my Lord, I have not.
Then swear, said he, Not so, my Lord, I cannot.
Since that I never heard news of this action:
Wherefore, I think, he has his satisfaction.
60 Against bravery.
WHen Roman Mutius had in country quarrel,
The servant killed, to the Masters terror:
What time his eye deceived with rich apparel,
Did cause his hand commit that happy error:
The King amazed at so rare resolution,
Both for his safety, and his reputation:
Removed the fire, and stayed that execution:
And for his sake, made peace with all his Nation.
Perhaps it is from hence the custom springs,
That often in Court Kn^ues go as well as Kings.
61 Of Leda's unkindness.
Fair Leda late to me is grown malicious,
At all my works in prose or ^erse repining:
because my words, she says* makes men suspicious,
that she is to the Purit^nes inclining.
Leda, what ere I said, I did suspect,
Thou were not pure enough, in one respect.
62 Of an Abbot that had been a good f^llow.
AN Abbot that had led a wanton life,
And cited now, by deaths sharp Sumner, sickness,
^elt in his soul, great agony and strife,
His sins appearing in most hideous likeness.
The Monks that saw their Abbot so dismayed,
and knew no less his life had been lascivious:
^et for his final comfort, thu^ they said,
^hinke not, dear Sir, we will be so obliuious,
^ut that with fasting, and with sacred ringing,
and prayer, we will for yo^ such grace attain,
that after requie^^ and some Di^ges singing,
^ou shall be freed from Purgatories pain.
Ah, thanks my sons, said he, but all my fear
Is only this, that I shall ne'r^ come there.
63 Against Cinna a Brownist, that says he is sure to be saved.
IF thou remain so sure of thine election,
As thou said, Cinna, when we last disputed,
That to thy soul, no sin can be imputed:
That thy strong Faith, has got so sure protection:
That all thy faults are free from all correction.
Hear then my counsel, to thy state well suited,
It comes from one, that bears thee kind affection*
It Is so infallible, that no objection
There is, by which it may be well confuted.
Leave, Cinna, this base earth with sin polluted.
And to be free from wicked men's subjection,
And that the Saints may be by thee saluted,
Forsake wife, friends, lands, goods and worldly pelf*
And get a halter quickly, and go hang thy self.
64 To Master Bastard, a Minister that made a pleasant Book of English
Epigrams.
THough dusty wits of this ungrateful time,
Carpe at thy book of Epigrams, and scoff it:
Yet wise men know, to mix the sweet with profit.
Is worthy praise, not only void of crime.
Then let not envy stop thy vein of Rhyme:
Nor let thy function make thee shamed of it:
A Poet is one step unto a Prophet:
And such a step, as it is no shame to clime.
You must in Pulpit treat of matters serious:
As best beseeme^ the person, and the place,
There preach of Faith, Repentance, hope and grace,
Of Sacraments, and such high things mysterious.
But they are too severe, and too imperious,
That unto honest sports will grant no space:
For these our minds refresh, when those weary us,
And spur out doubled spirit to swifter pace.
The wholesom'st meats that are, will breed sacietie,
Except we should admit of some variety.
^n music notes must be some high, some base.
And this I note, your Verses have intendment,
Still kept within the lists of good sobriety,
To work in men's ill manners, good amendment.
Wherefore if any think such verse unseasonable:
Their Stoicke minds are foes to good society,
And men of reason may think them unreasonable.
^t is an act of virtue and of piety,
To warn v^ of our sins in any sort,
In prose, in verse, in earnest, or in sport.
65 Of a kind unkind Husband.
A Rich old Lord did wed a rich young Lady.
Of good complexion, and of goodly stature,
And for he was of kind and noble nature,
He loved to see her go as brave as may be.
A pleasant Knight one day was so presumptuous,
To tell this Lord in way of plain simplicity,
It Is you, my Lord, that have this worlds felicity:
To have a Dame so young, so sweet, so sumptuous.
Tush, said the Lord, but these same costly Gowns,
With Kirtle^* C^rknets, plague me in such sort,
That every time I ^aste of Venus spor^,
I will be sworn, cost me one hundred Crowns.
Now, fie Sir, said his wife, where is your sense;
Though it is too true, yet say not so for shame,
For I would wish to clear me of the blame:
That each time cost you but a hundred pence.
66 Of Galla's goodly Petiwigge.
YOu see the goodly hair that Galla wears,
It Is certain her own hair, who would have (...)
She swears it is her own: and true she swears:
For hard by Temple-barre last day she bought it.
So fair a hair, upon so foul a forehead,
Augments disgrace, and shows the grace is borrowed
67 Of Master John Dauies Book of Dancing. To himself.
WHile you the Planets all do set to dancing,
Beware such hap, as to the Friar was chancing*
Who preaching in a Pulpit old and rotten,
Among some notes, most fit to be forgotten;
Unto his Auditory thus he vaunts,
To make all Saints after his pype to dance:
It speaking, which as he himself aduances,
To act his speech with Iestures, lo, it chances,
Down falls the Pulpit, sore the man is bruised,
Never was Friar, and Pulpit more abused.
Then bear with me, though yet to you a stranger,
To warn you of the like, nay greater danger.
For though none fear the falling of those sparks,
^And when they fall, 'twill be good catching Larkes)
Yet this may fall, that while you dance and skip
With Female Planets, sore your foot may trip,
That in your lofty Caprioll and turn,
Their motion may make your dimension burn.
68 To Paulus.
TO love you, Paulus, I was well inclined:
But ever since you honor did require,
I honored you, because 'twas your desire:
But now to love you, I do never mind.
69 Of Table-talke.
I Had this day carroust the thirteen cup,
And was both slipper-tong'd, and idle-brain'd,
and said by chance, that you with me should sup.
You thought hereby, a supper clearly gained:
and in your Tables you did quote it up.
^n civil ghest, that has been so ill trained!
Worthy thou art hence supperlesse to walk,
That take advantage of our Table-talke.
70 Of the commodities that men have by their Marriage.
A Fine young Clerk, of kin to Friar Frappert,
Prompt of his tongue, of person neat and dappert*
Not deeply read, yet were he put unto it,
One that could say his service, and would do it.
His marks and hair, showed him of excellent carriage
This man one day happened to talk of marriage,
And proved not only, that it is honorable,
But that the joys thereof are admirable.
He told the tale to me, and other friends,
And straight I learned it at my fingers ends.
Which joys that you may better understand,
^
I Will place on each finger of my hand.
Four joys, he said, on married Priests he casts,
A wife, and friends, and coin, and children last.
And first the wife, see how at bed, at board,
What comfort, and what joys, she does afford.
Then for her friends, what joy can be more dear,
Then loving friends, dwell they far off or near.
A third joy then it is, to have the portion,
Well got, and void of strife, fraud or extortion.
And fourthly, those sweet Babes, that call on Dad,
Oh, how they joy the soul, and make it glad!
But now, Sir, there remains one observation,
That well deserves your due consideration.
Mark then again, I say, for so 'twere meet,
Which of these joys are firm, and which do fleet
First, for the wife, sure no man can deny it,
That for most part, she sticks most surely by it.
But for thy friends, when they should most avail you,
By death, or fortunes change, often times they fail you.
Then for the portion, without more forecast,
Whiles charge increases, money fails as fast.
And last the children, most of them out-liue you,
But ill brought up, they often live to grieve you.
Now mark upon the fingers, ^
who remain,
The Children and the Wife, only these twain.
71 To Marcus that would borrow.
YOu sent to me, Marcus, for twenty mark:
But to that suit, I would by no means hark:
But straight next day, you sent your man in post,
To tell me how a Lord with you would host.
And I must lend, to entertain this State,
Some Basins, Ewres, and some such other plate.
Are you a Fool? Or think you me a fool,
That I should now be set again to school?
Were not my wisdom, worthy to be wondered,
Denying twenty marks, to lend one hundred?
72 To his wife after they had been married four year.
TWo Pre^tiships with thee I now have been,
Mad times, sad times, glad times, our life has seen,
Souls we have wroght 4. pair since our first meeting
Of which, 2. souls, sweet souls, were to be fleeting,
My workmanship so well does please thee still,
Thou would not grant me freedom by thy will:
And I Will confess such usage I have found,
Mine heart yet never desired to be unbound.
But though my self am thus thy Prentice vowed,
My dearest Mall, yet thereof be not proud,
Nor claim no Rule thereby; there is no such cause:
For Plowden, who was father of the Laws
Which yet are read and ruled by his Enditings,
Does name himself a Prentice in his writings,
And I, if you should challenge undue place,
Could learn of him to alter so the case:
I plain would prove, I still kept due priority,
And that good wives are still in their minority:
But far from thee, my dear, be such Audacitie:
I doubt more thou do blame my dull Capacity,
That though I travail true in my vocation,
I grow yet worse and worse at th'occupation.
73 Of a Bequest without a Legacy.
IN hope some Lease or Legacy to gain,
You gave old Titus yearly ten pound pension.
Now he is dead, I hear thou do complain,
That in his will of thee he made no mention.
Cease this complaint that shows thy base intention.
He left thee more, then some he loved more dearly,
For he has left thee ten pound pension yearly.
74 Of one that lent money on sure band.
WHen Lynus little store of coin is spent,
And no supply of office or of Rent,
He comes to Titus known a wary spender,
A pleasant wit, but no great money-lender,
And pressed him very hard for twenty pound,
For which small kindness he were greatly bound,
And lest (quoth he) you deem it might presumption,
If I should offer you my bare assumption,
I swear All-hallows, I will make repayment,
Yea though I pawn mine Armor and my Raiment,
And for your more assurance, you shall have
What Obligation you your self will crave,
Or Bill or Bond your payment to perform,
Recognizance, Statute or any form.
Now Titus by report so well did know him,
That he might scant trust him so far as throw him,
And said he should have so much at his hands,
Forthwith if he might point the form and bands.
Agreed, quoth Lynus straight, and does him thank.
But Titus brings a Foorme of four Inch-Plancke,
Two of the Guard might scantly well it lift,
And ere that Lynus well perceived the drift,
^ast to that Foorme he binds him hands and feet:
Then brought the money forth and let him see it,
And swear till, he his fashions did reform,
None other bands could serve nor other form.
75 Of light Merchandise.
IN Rome a Crier had a Wench to sell,
Such as in common Stews are wont to dwell,
Her name, nor his, I shall not need to tell.
But having held her long at little price,
And thinking that some chapman to entice,
He clipped her in his arms as nothing nice,
And so he kissed her more then once or twice.
What might he gain, think you, by this device?
One that before had offered fifty shilling,
To give one fifth part, seemed now unwilling.
76 Of father Peleus stable.
OLd Peleus burned a Stable to the ground,
Which now to build does cost three hundred pound
That Is but one Gennets price with him, no force,
A Stable? No: He did but lose a horse.
77 Of a censurer of English writers.
THat Englishmen have small, or no invention,
Old Guillam says, and all our works are barren
But for the stuff, we get from Authors foreign.
Why, Guillam, that same gold thou take in pension,
Which mak's thee love our Realm more the^ your ow^
And follow still our English Court, and camp.
Now that it has our dearest Sovereigns stamp,
Is English coin, though once 'twere Indian growne^
Except not then against English wits, I pray,
You that accept so well of English pay.
78 Of Titus boasting.
A Kind companion Titus all his days,
And till his last, a pleasant wit and tongue;
^f he had heard a man his own strength praise,
Would tell what he would do when he was young.
And having, with oaths, his speeches bound:
Thus would he speak: I would at twelve score pricks,
Have shot all day an arrow of a pound,
Have shot the flight full forty score and six,
^ would have ouer-lifted all the Guard,
Out-throwne them at the bar, the sledge, the stone,
And he that is in wrestling held most hard,
^ would in open plain have overthrown.
Now, say some by, Was Titus e're so strong?
Who he? the weakest man a hundred among.
Why tells he then such lies in serious sort,
What he could do? Nay, sure 'twas true, though sport.
He said not he could do. That were a fable.
He said, He would have done, had he been able.
79 To Doctor Sherhood, how Sack makes one lean.
^ Marueld much last day, what you did mean,
To say that drinking Sack, will make one lean:
But now I see, and then mistook you clean:
For my good neighbor Marcus, who I tro,
Fears fatness much, this drink has plyde him so,
That now except he lean, he cannot go.
Ha, gentle Doctor, now I see your meaning,
Sack will not leave one lean, 'twill leave him leaning.
80 Of swearing first between the wife and the Husband.
CIs, by that Candle, in my sleep, I thought,
One told me of thy body thou were naught:
Good husband, he that told you, lyde, she sed,
And swearing laid her hand upon the bread.
Then eat the bread (quoth he) that I may deem
That fancy false, that true to me did seem.
Nay Sir, said she, the matter well to handle,
Since you swore first, you first must eat the Candle.
81 To his Wife.
BEcause I once in verse did hap to call
Thee by this loving name, my dearest Mall,
Thou think thy self assured by the same,
In future ages, I have given thee fame.
But if thou merit not such name in verity.
I mean not so to mis-informe posterity.
For I can thus interpret if I will,
My dearest Mall, that is, my costliest ill.
82 To a prattling Epicure.
^F thou love dainty fare at others tables,
Thou must their humor and their hours endure:
Leave arg'ments, contouling thwarts and brables.
Such freedom suits not with an Epicure.
83 Of Don Pedro.
THe wise Ulysses loathing foreign Iarres,
Feigned himself mad, to keep him from the wars:
But our Don Pedro seeks our Martial schools,
Prefers before wise cowards Martial fools.
And fearing faining mad will not suffice,
To stay him from the wars, faines himself wise.
84 To Master Bastard, taxing him of Flattery.
IT was a saying used a great while since,
The subjects ever imitate the Prince,
A virtuous Master, makes a good Disciple,
Religious Prelates breed a godly people.
And evermore the Rulers inclination,
Works in the time the works and alteration.
Then what is the reason, Bastard, why thy Rimes
Magnify Magistrates, yet taunt the times?
I think that he to taunt the time that spares not,
Would touch the Magistrate, save that he dares not.
85 Ouids confession translated into English for General Norreys. 1593.
TO live in Lust I make not my profession,
Nor in my Verse, my vices to defend:
But rather by a true and plain confession,
To make men know my meaning is to mend.
I hate, and am my self that most I hate,
I load my self, yet strive to be discharged,
Like sterelesse ship vnstai'd, runs my estate,
Bound by my self, I sue to be enlarged.
No certain shape, my fancies does inflame:
A hundred causes kindle my affection,
If sober look do show a modest shame,
Straight to those eyes my soul is in subjection.
A wanton look, no less my heart does pierce,
Because it shows a pleasant inclination.
If she be coy like Sabines sharp and fierce,
I think such coyness, deep dissimulation.
If she be learned, I honor gifts so rare,
If ignorant, I love a mild simplicity.
If she do praise my writings, and compare
Them with the best, in her I take felicity.
If she dispraise my Verses, and their Maker,
To win her liking, I my love would lend her.
Goes she well graced? Her gate would make me take her*
If ill, perhaps to touch a man, would mend her.
Is she well tuned in voice, a cunning singer?
To snatch a kiss, even thus I feel a will.
^layes she on Lute with sweet and learned finger?
What heart can hate a hand so full of skill?
But if she know with heart her arms to move,
And dance Carantoes with a comely grace,
T'omit my self that quickly fall in love,
Hippolitus would have Priapus place,
Like the ancient Heroyes I count thee tall,
Me thinks they fill a brave room in the bed:
Yet comlier sports are found in statures small,
Thus long and short have aye my liking bred.
If she go plain, then what a piece were this?
Were she attyr'd, if brave, I love her bravery,
Fair, nut-browne, sallow, none does look amiss,
My wanton lust is thrald in so great slavery.
If hair like Iet, her neck like Iuory cover,
Ledas was black, and that was Ledas glory.
With yellow locks, Aurora pleased her lover.
Lo thus my fancy suits to every story:
The Matron grave, the green young girl and pretty,
^ like for age, for manners vnsuspicious,
In fine, ^o all in Country, Court and City,
My love does press to prove it self ambitious.
86. A witty speech of Heywood to the Queen.
WHen old Queen Mary with much pain and languish,
Did on deaths bed in lingering sickness languish:
Old pleasant Heywood came her Grace to vis^^e:
For mirth ^o such does often more good then Physic,
Whom, when the sickly Princess had espyde,
Ah, Heywood! here they kill me up, she cryde:
For, being smotherd quite with too much heat,
Yet my Physicians prove to make me sweat;
But it does prove so painful to procure it,
That first I Will die before I will endure it.
Heywood, with cheerful face, but cheerelesse soul,
Thus her bad resolution did control.
Sweet Lady, you must sweat, or else, I swear it,
We shall all sweat for it, if you forbear it.
87 To my wife, from Chester.
WHen I from thee, my dear, last day departed,
Summond by Honor to this Irish action,
Thy tender eyes shed tears: but I, hard-harted,
Took from those tears a joy, and satisfaction.
Such for her Spouse (thought I) was Lucrece sadness,
Whom to his ruin Tyrant Tarquin tempted.
So mourned she, whose husband feined madness,
Thereby from Trojan wars to stand exempted.
Thus then I do rejoice in that thou greeuest,
And yet, sweet fool, I love thee, thou beleeuest.
88 Against lying Lynus.
I Wonder Lynus, what thy tongue does ayle,
That though I flatter thee, thou still do rail?
^hou think, I ly, perhaps thou think most true:
^et to so gentle lies, pardon is due.
^ lie, well told to some, tastes ill restoritie;
^esides, we Poets lie by good authority.
But were all lying Poetry, I know it,
Lynus would quickly prove a passing Poet.
89 Of lending our Pri^y-seales.
A Friend of mine, to me made mickle moan
About some moneys lending in the lone;
^lleaging, that to lend, were little grief,
(...) of repayment men have firm belief.
^ut other men's examples make us dread,
^o speed as some in other times have sped.
^or if one fail, who then will care for us?
^ow I, to comfort them, replied thus,
While God preserues the Prince, never be dismayed,
But, if she fail, be sure we shall be paid.
90 In defense of Lent.
Our belly-gods dispraise the Lenton fast,
And blame the lingering days, and tedious time,
and swear this abstinence too long does last.
those folly I refute in this my rhyme,
^ethusalem, nine hundred years was fed
^ith naught but herbs, and berries of the field;
John Baptist thirty years his life had led
With Locusts and wild Honey woods did yield.
He that the Israelites from Egypt brought,
Where they in slavish thraldom long did dwell,
He home to heaven the fiery Chariot rought;
Yea, Christ himself, that saues us all from Hell:
These three, as holy Scripture does repeat,
In forty days did neither drink, nor eat.
Why then should we against this Law repine,
That are permitted every kind of Fish?
Are not forbid the tastes of costly Wine,
Are not debard of many a dainty dish:
Both Sugar, Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, and Mace,
And Sinnamon, and Spice of every kind,
And Reysons, Figs, and Almonds in like case,
To please the taste, and satisfy the mind:
And yet forsooth, we think we should be mard,
If we from flesh but forty days be bard.
91 Mal^m been positum ne moueas.
A Judge, to one well studied in the Laws,
That was too earnest in his Clyents cause,
Said, Stir't no more; for as the cause does sink
Into my sense, it seems like a stink.
92 To King David.
THou Princes Prophet, and of Prophets King,
Grown from poor Pastoralls, and Shepherds fold,
To change the sheephooke to a Mace of gold,
Subduing sword and spear, with staff and sling:
Thou that did quell the Bear and dreadful Lion,
With courage vnappald, and active lymmes;
Thou that did praise in it, enduring Himms
With Poetry divine the God of Syon;
Thou son in Law to King and Prince appointed:
Yet, when that king by wrong did seek thy harm,
Did help him with thy Harp, and sacred charm:
And taught, no not to touch the Lords Anointed.
Thou, thou great Prince, with so rare gifts replenished
Could not eschew blind Buzzard Cupids hooks,
^ apt in the bayt of Bersabees sweet looks:
With which one fault, thy faultles life was blemished.
Yet hence we learn a document most ample,
Our flesh then strongest is, when weak'st our faith.
And that the sin forgiven, the penance staieth;
Of Grace and Justice both a sweet example.
^et no man then himself in sin imbolden
By thee, but thy sharp penance, bitter tears,
May strike into our hearts such godly fears,
As we may be thereby from sin withheld.
Since we, for ours, no just excuse can bring,
Thou had one great excuse, thou were a King.
93 Of Monsters. To my Lady Rogers.
STrange-headed Monsters, Painters have described*
To which the Poets strange parts have ascribed,
As Ianus first two faces had assigned him,
Of which, one looked before, the other behind him:
So men, may it be found in many places,
That underneath one hood can bear two faces.
Three-headed Cerberus, Porter of Hell,
Is faind with Pluto, God of wealth to dwell.
So still with greatest States, and men of might,
Dogs dwell, that do both fawn, and bark, and bite.
Like Hydras heads, that multiply with wounds,
Is multitude, that mutiny confounds:
On what seu'n-headed beast the Strumpet sits,
That wears the scarf, sore troubles many wits,
Whether seven sins be meant, or else seven hills,
It is a question fit for higher skils.
But then of these, if you can rightly conster,
A headless woman is a greater Monster.
94 Of a pleasant Broker.
A Broker that was hyr'd to sell a Farm,
Whose seat was very sound, fruitful and warm^
Thinking to grace the sales man with the tale,
Said thus: Friends, Marius sets this land to sale;
But think not this for debt or need to sell:
For as for money he is stored so well,
He has at all times ready in his chest,
And some beside, he has at interest.
Then were the chapmen earnestly in hand,
To question of the Title of the land:
Why should one sell, say they, that lets to use?
The Broker driven to seek some new excuse,
Did study first, and smyling, thus replide,
His Worships beasts, and sheep, and Hindes there did;
Since which, he never could the place abide.
Now though in this the foolish Broker lyde,
Yet the report thereof did so much harm,
That now, poor Marius cannot sell his Farm.
95 To the L. To.
TO praise my wife, your daughter (so I gather)
Your men say, she resembles most her father.
And I no less, to praise your son, her brother,
Affirm that he is too much like his mother.
I know not if we judge a ^ight, or err:
But let him be like you, so I like her.
96 To his wife, in excuse he had called her fool in his writing.
A Man in show that scorns, in deed enuies
Thy fervent love, and seeks the same to cool.
Finds fault, that in a Verse I called thee Fool:
And that it could be kindly taken, denies.
But thou did kindly take it, then he lies.
Well, therefore I wish him a wife most wise,
Noble descended from great De la Poole:
Learned to set her husband still to school,
So fair to draw to her all amorous eyes.
Let flattering tongues protest she does deserve,
That great Commanders her should sue to serve:
Then let him walk and with Acteons luck,
Amid the Herd, say, Welcome, fellow Bucke.
Mean while, my Mall, think thou it is honorable
To be my Fool, and I to be thy Babble.
97 Of the growth of Trees to Sir H. Port.
AT your rich Orchard, you to me did show,
How swift the Trees were planted there, did grow
Namely, an Elm, that in no long abode,
Did of a twigge, grow up to be a load.
But you would quite condemn your trees of slout^
Compared to our trees admirable grouth.
Our planters have found out such secret skils,
With pipe and barrell-staues, and iron Mils;
That Oaks, for which none ten years since were wi^ling
To give ten groats, are grown worth thirty shilling
At which I waxt so wood, I said in rage,
That thirst of Gold, makes this an Iron age.
98 Against promoting Lynus.
THou, Linus, that love still to be promoting,
Because I sport, about King Henry's marriage:
Think this will prove a matter worth the carriage.
But let it alone, Lynus, it is no booting,
While Princes live, who speaks, or writes and teaches
against their faults, may pay for speech, and writing:
^ut being dead, dead men, they say, leave biting:
Their eyes are sealed, their arms have little reaches.
Children they are, and fools that are afeard,
To pull, and play, with a dead Lions beard.
99 The Story of Marcus life at Primero.
FOnd Marcus ever at Primero plays,
Long winter nights, and as long Summer days:
and I heard once, to idle talk attending,
^he Story of his times, and coins mis-spending.
^s first, he thought himself half way to heaven,
(...) in his hand he had but got a seven.
^is Fathers death set him so high on slote,
^ll rests went up upon a seven, and coat.
^ut while he draws for these gray coats and gowns,
^he gamesters from his purse drew all his crowns.
and he never ceast to venture all in prime,
^ll of his age, quite was consumed the prime.
^hen he more warily, his rest regards,
And sets with certainties upon the Cards,
On six and thirty, or on seven and nine,
If any set his rest, and says, and mine:
But seeld with this, he either gains or saues,
For either Faustus prime is with three knaves,
Or Marcus never can encounter right,
Yet drew two Ases, and for further spite,
Had color for it with a hopeful draught,
But not encountered, it auail'd him naught.
Well, since encountering, he so fair does miss,
He sets not till he nine and forty is.
And thinking now his rest would sure be doubled,
He lost it by the hand, with which sore troubled,
He ioynes now all his stock, unto his stake,
That of his fortune, he full proof may make.
At last both eldest hand and five and fifty,
He thinks now or never (thrive unthrifty.)
Now for the greatest rest he has the push:
But Crassus stopped a Club, and so was flush:
And thus what with the stop, and with the pack,
Poor Marcus, and his rest goes still to wrack.
Now must he seek new spoil to set his rest,
For here his seeds turn weeds, his rest, unrest.
His land, his plate he pawnes, he sels his leases,
To patch, to borrow* and shift, he never ceases.
Till at the last, two Catch-poles him encounter,
And by arrest, they beat him to the Counter.
Now Marcus may set up, all rests securely:
For now he is sure to be encountered surely.
100 Lesbias rule of praise.
LEsbia, whom some thought a lovely creature,
Does sometimes praise some other woman's feature:
Yet this I do observe, that none she praises,
Whom worthy fame, by beauties merits praises*
But only of their seemly parts she tells,
Whom she does sure believe, her self excels.
So, Linus praises Churchyard in his censure,
Not Sydney, Daniel, Constable, nor Spencer.
101 Another of Table-talke.
AMong some Table-talke of little weight,
A friend of mine was asked by one great Lady:
What sons he had? My wife (says he) has eight:
^ow fie, said she, it is an ill use as may be.
(...) would you men would leave these fond conditions,
(...) enure on virtuous wives such wrong suspicions.
^ush, said her Lord, you give a causeless blame,
^he Gentleman has wisely spoke, and well:
^o reckon all his sons perhaps were shame,
^is wives sons therefore he does only tell.
Behold, how much it stands a man in steed,
To have a friend answer in time of need.
102 Of old Haywoods sons.
OLd Haywoods sons did wax so wild and youthful,
It made their aged father sad and wrathful.
A friend one day, the elder did admonish
With threats, as did his courage half astonish,
How that except he would begin to thrive,
His Sire of all his goods would him deprive.
For whom, quoth he? Even for your younger brother*
Nay then, said he, no fear, if it be none other.
My brother's worse then I, and till he mends,
I know, my father no such wrong intends,
Since both are bad, to show so partial wrath,
To give his younger unthrift that he has.
The end of the Second Book.
Sir JOHN HARRINGTONS Epigrams, the third Book.
1 Young Haywoods answer to my Lord of Warwick.
ONe near of kin to Heywood by his birth,
And no less near in name, and most in mir^h,
Was once for his Religions sake committed,
Whose case a Noble Peer so lately pitied:
He sent to know what things with him were scant,
And offered frankely to supply his want.
Thanks to that Lord, said he, that will me good,
For I want all things saving hay and wood.
2 To the great Ladies of the Court.
I Have been told, most Noble courtly Dames,
That ye commend some of my Epigrams:
^ut yet I hear again, which makes me pensive,
^ome of them are, to some of you offensive.
Those that you like, I Will give, and ask no guerdon,
So that you grant those you mislike, you pardon.
Both are the fruitless fruits of idle hours,
These for my pleasure read, and those for yours.
3 Of a Lady that gives the check.
Is It for a grace, or is it for some disleeke,
Where other kiss with lip, you give the cheek?
Some note that for a pride in your behavior:
But I should rather take it for a favor.
For I to show my kindness, and my love,
Would leave both lip and cheek, to kiss your Glove.
Now with the cause, to make you plain acquainted,
Your gloue's perfumed, your lip and cheek are painted.
4 Of Balbus a Poet.
BAlbus of Writers reckoning up a Rabble,
Thinks their names are by him made honorable:
And not vouchsafing me to name at all,
He thinks that he has grieved me to the gall.
I galled? Simple fool! nor yet gulled,
To think I may thee pray for such a dull head.
Those that are guilty of defect, and blame,
Do need such testimonials of their fame.
Learn then, untaught, learn then you envious elues.
Books are not praised, that do not praise themselves.
5 To Leda.
IN Verse, for want of Rhyme, I know not how,
I called our Bathes the pilgrimage of Saints,
You Leda much the praise do disallow,
And think this touch your pure Religion taints.
Good Leda, be not angry, for God knows,
Though I did write of Saints, I meant of shrowes.
6 To Sextus, an ill Reader.
THat Epigram that last you did rehearse,
Was sharp, and in the making, near and tearse,
But thou do read so harsh, point so perverse,
It seemed now neither witty nor verse.
For shame point better, and pronounce it cleerer,
Or be no Reader, Sextus, be a Hearer.
7 Of Bathes cure upon Marcus.
THe fame of Bathe is great, and still endures,
That often it works admirable cures.
The barren by their virtue have conceived,
The weak and sick, have health and strength received:
And many Cripples that came thither carried,
Go sound from thence, when they a while have tarried.
But yet one cure on Marcus lately shown,
My Muse does think most worthy to be known;
For, while he bathes with Gascoyne wines and Spanish,
Thereby old aches from his lymmes to banish,
Hunts after youthful company, entycing
Them to the sports of bowling, carding, dycing:
His wantonness breeds want, his want enforces
Marcus, by one and one sell all his horses.
Lo, how the Bathe has searched his sickness root,
He can, nay more, he must go thence afoote.
8 Of a Lady that sought remedy at the Bathe.
A Lady that none name, nor blame none has,
Came the last year with others to the Bathe:
Her person comely was, good was her feature,
In beauty, grace and speech, a lovely creature.
Now as the Lady in the water staid,
A plain man fell a talking with her maid,
That leaned upon the rail, and asked the reason,
Why that fair Lady used the Bathe, that season?
Whether 'twere lamenesse, or defect in hearing,
Or some more inward evil, not appearing?
No, said the Maid to him, believe it well,
That my fair Mistress sound is as a Bell.
But of her coming, this is true occasion,
An old Physician moved her by persuasion.
These Bathes have power to strengthen that debility,
That does in man or woman breed sterrilitie.
Tush, said the man, with plain and short discourse,
Your Mistress might have taken a better course.
Let her to Oxford, to the University,
Where young Phisicians are, and such diversity
Of toward spirits that in all acts proceed,
Much fitter then the Bathe is for the deed.
No, no, that will not serve, the Maid replide,
For her, that Physike has already tried.
9 To Sir Morris Barkly.
YOur father gave me once a Dormant warrant:
But sending at Saint James tide to the keeper,
My men came back as from a sleeuelesse Arrant,
And in a box, I laid my warrant sleeper.
You Noble Sir, that are his heir apparent,
Will give henceforth, I hope, a waking Warrant.
10 Of Faustus the Fault-finder.
OF all my Verses, Faustus still complains,
I writ them carelessly: and why forsooth?
Because, he says, they go so plain and smooth.
It shows that I for them never beat my brains.
I, that men's errors never love to sooth,
Said, they that say so, may be thought but noddies.
For sample mark, said I, your Mistress bodies,
That sit so square, and smooth down to her raines.
That, that ^^ne waste, that wealth and wit does waste.
Think you her Tailor wrought it up in haste?
No: ask him, and heel say he took more pains
Then with old Ellens double-welted frock,
That sits like an old felt on a new block.
Who cannot write, ill judge of Writers veins.
The work of Taylers hands, and Writers wits,
Was hardest wrought, when as it smoothest sits.
11 Of an ill Physician for the body, that became a worse Surgeon for the soul.
A Certain Mountebanke, or paltry Leach,
Finding his Physic furdred not his thrift,
Thought with himself to find some further drift.
And though the skill were far above his reach,
He needs would prove a Priest, and falls to preach.
But patching Sermons with a sorry shift,
As needs they must that ere they learn will teach:
At last, some foes so nearly do him sift,
And of such words and deeds did him appeach,
As from his Living quite they did him lift,
And of the Patron straight they begd the gift:
And so the Mountebanke did ouer-reach.
Who when he found he was pursued so swift,
Gave place unto so sharp and fierce a breach:
Shutting up all with this shrewd muttering speech,
Well, though, said he, my Living I have lost,
Yet many a good man's life this loss shall cost.
A stander by, that would be thought officious,
Straight, as an heinous matter of complaint,
Does with his speech the Justices acquaint:
Alleging, as it seemed, indeed suspicious,
That to the State his meaning was pernicious.
The Leech thus touched with so shrewd a Taint,
Yet in his look nor answer did, nor faint;
Protesting, that his mind was not malicious.
But if the course that he must take be vicious,
He flat affirmed it was cursed constraint:
^or, of my Living having lost possession,
^ must, said he, turn to my first profession;
In which, I know too well, for want of skill,
My Medicines will many a man kill.
12 Of Sir Philip Sydney.
^F that be true the latter Proverb says,
^ Laudari a laudatis is most praise;
^ydney, thy works in Fames books are enrold,
^y Princes pens, that have thy works extold,
Whereby thy name shall dure to endless days.
^ut now, if rules of contrary should hold,
^hen I, poor I, were drowned in deep dispraise,
Whose works base Writers have so much debased,
That Lynus dares pronounce them all defaced.
13 Of impudent Lynus.
NOt any learning, Lynus, no, God knows,
But thy brute boldness made some to suppose,
That thou might have been bred in Brazen-nose.
A murren on thy pate, 'twould do thee grace,
So were thine head so armed in every place,
A Steel scull, Copper nose, and Brazen face.
14 Against an unthrifty Lynus.
MAny men marvel Lynus does not thrive,
That had more trades then any man alive;
As first, a Broker, then a Petty-fogger,
A Traveler, a Gamster, and a Cogger,
A Coyner, a Promoter, and a Bawd,
A Spy, a Practicer in every fraud:
And missing thrift by these lewd trades and sinister,
He takes the best, yet proves the worst, a Minister.
15 Of Faustus.
I Find in Faustus such an alteration,
He gives to Paulus wondrous commendation:
Is Paulus late to him waxt friendly? No.
But sure, poor Faustus feign would have it so.
16 Of a devout Usurer.
A Merchant, hearing that great Preacher, SMITH,
Preach against Usury, that art of biting,
The Sermon done, embraced the man forthwith,
Unto his board most friendly him inuiting.
A friend of his, hoping some sweet aspersion
Of grace would move him to some restitution,
Wist him, in token of his full Conversion,
Release some Debtors, held in Execution.
Fool, said he, think you I Will leave my trade?
No: but I think this Preacher learned and painful,
Because the more from it he does persuade,
It Is like to prove to me more sweet and gainefull.
Was ever Jew of Malta, or of Millain,
Then this most damned Jew, more Jewish villain?
17 Of a reformed Brother.
IN studying Scriptures, hearing Sermons often,
Thy mind is grown so pliable and soft,
That though none can attain to true perfection,
Thy works come near the words of their direction.
Thy counsel often to fast, and ever pray,
Thou love often to feast, and ever play:
^ackcloth and Cinders they advise to use,
^ack, Cloves, and Sugar, thou would have to choose:
^hey wish our works, and life, should shine like light.
Thy works and all thy life is passing light,
They bid us follow still the Apostles lore,
Apostata's thou follow'st evermore.
They bid refresh the poor with Almes-deedes,
Thou ravish do the poor with all misdeedes.
They promised joys eternal never wasting,
You merit noyes infernal everlasting.
18 Of Sheep turned Wolves.
WHen hearts obdurate make of sin an habit^
High frowning Nemesis was wont to sen^
Bears, Lions, Wolves, and Serpents, to this end,
To spoil the coasts whereso good folk inhabit.
Now since this age, in habit and in act,
Excels the sins of every former age,
No marvel Nemesis in her just rage,
Does like, or greater punishment exact.
And for this cause, a cruel beast is sent,
Not only that deuoures and spoils the people,
But spares not house, nor village, Church nor Steepl^
And makes poor widows mourn, Orphants lame^^
You muse (perhaps) what beasts they be that keep*
Such beastly rule as seld was seen before!
It Is neither Bear, nor Lion, Bull, nor Bore:
But Beasts, then al these beasts, more harmeful she^^
Lo then, the mystery from whence the name
Of Cotsold Lions first to England came.
19 Of Lynus, borrowing.
WHen Lynus meets me, after salutations;
Courtsies, and complements, and gratulations,
He presses me, even to the third denial.
^o lend him twenty shillings, or a royal:
But of his purpose, of his curtsie failing,
He goes behind my back, cursing and railing.
Fool, thy kind speeches cost not thee a pen^y,
And more fool I, if they should cost me any.
20 Of one Master Careless.
WHere dwells Mr. Careless? Iesters have no dwelling.
Where lies he? in his tongue by most men's telling.
Where bords he? there where feasts are found by smelling
Where bites he? all behind, with all men yelling.
Where bides the man? oh sir, I mist your spelling.
^ow I will read, yet well I do not wot:
^ut if that I to him shall point his lot,
In Shot-ouer, at Dogs-head in the pot.
For in that sign his head often ouer-shot.
21 Against Momus, in praise of his dog Bungey.
BEcause a witty Writer of this time,
Does make some mention in a pleasant rhyme,
Of Lepidus and of his famous dog,
Thou Momus, that do love to scoff and cogge,
Prat'st amongst base companions and giue'st out,
That unto me herein, is meant aflout.
Hate makes thee blind, Momus, I dare be sworn,
He meant to me his love, to thee his scorn,
Put on thy envious spectacles and see,
Whom does he scorn therein, the dog or me:
The Dog is graced, compared with great Banks,
Both beasts right famous, for their pretty prankes,
Although in this, I grant, the dog was worse,
He only fed my pleasure, not my purse:
Yet that same Dog, I may say this and boast it,
He found my purse with gold when I have lost it.
Now for my self, some fools like thee may judge,
That at the name of Lepidus I grudge,
No sure: so far I think it from disgrace,
I wished it clear to me and to my race:
Lepus or Lepos, I in both have part,
That in my name I bear, this in mine heart.
But, Momus, I persuade my self that no man,
Will deigne thee such a name, English or Roman,
I Will wage a But of Sack, the best in Bristo,
Who calls me Lepid, I will call him Tristo.
22 Of Faustus.
NOw Faustus says, long Epigrams are dull.
Lowt, Larks are lothsom when ones panch is ful^
Yet whom the short do please, the long not weary,
I wish them never weary, ever merry.
23 Of summum bonum.
WHile I of summum bonum was disputing,
Propounding some positio^s, some confuting,
^ld Sextus says that we were all deluded,
and that not one of us aright concluded.
^nowledge, says he, is only true felicity,
^traightwayes a stranger asked me in simplicity,
^ Sextus learned? no quoth I, by this light,
^hen without light, how judges he so right?
He does but aim, as poor men vallew wealth,
The feeble value strength; the sick man health.
24 To Mall, to comfort her for the loss of her Children.
^Hen at the window thou thy doves art feeding,
Then think I shortly my Dove will be breeding,
^^ke will love like, and so my liking like thee,
(...) I to doves in many things can like thee,
^oth of you love your lodgings dry and warm,
^oth of you do your neighbors little harm,
^oth love to feed upon the firmest grain,
^oth for your livings take but little pain,
Both murmur kindly, both are often billing,
Yet both to Venus sports will seem unwilling;
Both do delight to look your selves in Glasses,
You both love your own houses as it passes;
Both fruitful are, but yet the Dove is wiser,
For, though she have no friend that can advise her,
She, patiently can take her young ones loss,
Thou, too impatiently do bear such cross.
25 Of the excuse of Symony.
CLerus, I hear, does some excuse allege
Of his, and other fellows sacrilege:
As namely, that to some, against their wills,
That men are bound to take the less of ills;
That they had rather, no man need to doubt,
Take Livings whole, then such as his without:
And therefore we must lay this heinous crime,
Not unto them forsooth, but to the time.
Alas! a fault confessed, were half amended,
But sin is doubled that is thus defended.
I know, a right wise man sings and believes,
Where no Receivers are, there be no Thieves.
26 In commendation of Master Lewkeners sixth description of Venice. Dedicated
to Lady Warwick. 1595.
LO, here is described, though but in little room,
Fair Venice, like a Spouse in Neptunes arms;
For freedom, emulous to ancient Rome,
Famous for counsel much, and much for Arms:
Whose stories erst written with Tuscan quill,
Lay to our English wits, as half concealed,
Till Lewkners learned travail and his skill,
In well graced style and phrase has it reueald.
Venice, be proud, that thus augments thy fame;
England, be kind, enricht with such a Book,
Both give due honor to that noble Dame,
For whom this task the Writer undertook.
27 Of one that gave a Benefice.
A Squire of good account, affirmed he went,
A learned man a Living to present:
But yet that Squire, in this did break no square,
He purposed thereof to keep a share;
^o set two sons to school, to make them Clarks,
He does reserve each year an hundred marks.
Ah, said the Priest, this card is too too cooling,
I set your sons; nay, they set me to schooling*
28 Of Faustus fishing.
WIth silver hook Faustus for flesh was fishing,
But that game biting not unto his wishing,
He said, he did (being thus shrewdly matched)
Fish for a Roach, but had a Gudgen caught.
Faustus, it seems thy luck therein was great,
For sure the Gudgen is the better meat.
Now bayt again, that game is set so sharp,
That to that Gudgen, thou may catch a Carpe.
29 To his friend. Of his Book of Ajax.
YOu muse to find in me such alteration,
That I, that may denly to write was wont,
Would now set to a Book so desperate front,
As I might scant defend by incitation.
My Muse that time did need a strong Purgation,
Late having taken some bruise by lewd reports;
And when the Physic wrought, you know the fashi^^
Whereto a man in such a case resorts:
And so my Muse, with good decorum spent
On that base titled Book, her excrement.
30 Of a Seller of Time.
WHen of your Lordship I a Lease renewed,
You promised me before we did conclud^
To give me time, namely, twice twelve months day,
For such a Fine as I ^greed to pay.
I bade a hundred pound, 'twas worth no more*
Your Lordship set it higher by a score.
Now, since I have by computation found,
That two years day cost me this twenty pound.
Sir, pardon me, to be thus plainly told it,
Your Lordship gave not two years day, you sold it.
31 Of the Earl of Essex.
GReat Essex, now of late incurred has
His Mistress indignation and her wrath:
And that in him she chiefly dissalouth,
^he sent him North, he bent him to the South:
Then what shall Essex do? Let him henceforth,
Bend all his wits, his power and courage North.
32 Of himself.
BEcause in this my selfe-contenting vain,
To write so many Toys I borrow leisure,
^riends sorrow, fearing I take too much pain,
^oes envy, swearing, I take too much pleasure.
I smile at both, and wish, to ease their griefs,
That each with other would but change reliefes.
30 To Doctor Sherwood, of Bathe.
BEcause among some other idle glances,
I, of the Bathes say sometimes as it chances,
That this an only place is in this age,
To which fair Ladies come in pilgrimage,
You fear such wanton gleekes, and ill report,
May stop great States that thither would resort.
No, never fear it, pray but for fair weather:
Such speech as this, will bring them faster thither.
31 Of Marcus courtesy.
WHen I some little purchase have in hand,
Straight Marcus kindly offers me his band.
I tell him, and he takes it in great snuff,
His is a Falling Band, I wear a Ruff.
But if you marvel I his help refuse,
And mean herein some meaner man's to use:
The cause is this, I mean, within a week,
That he of me like courtesy will seek.
32 Of one that had a black head, and a gray Beard.
THough many search, yet few the cause can find^
Why thy beard gray, thy head continues black^
^ome think thy Beard more subject to the wind.
^ome think that thou do use that newfound knack,
Excusable to such as hair do lack:
^ quaint Gregorian to thy head to bind*
^ome think that with a comb of drossie Lead,
^hy silver locks do turn to color dark:
^ome think it is but the nature of thy head:
^ut we think most of these have mist the mark.
For this think we, that think we think aright,
Thy beard and years are grave, thy head is light.
33 Against an old Lecher.
SInce thy third carriage of the French infection,
Priapus has in thee found no erection:
^et eat'st thou Ringoes, and Potato Roots,
and Caueare, but it little boots.
^esides the beds-head a bottle lately found,
Of liquor that a quart cost twenty pound.
^or shame, if not more grace, yet show more wit,
^urcease, now sin leaves thee, to follow it.
Some smile, I sigh, to see thy madness such,
That that withstands not, stands thee in so much.
34 To his wives Mother, reproving her inconstancy.
LAst year while at your house I hapt to tarry,
Of all your goods, you took an Inuentory:
Your Tapistry, your linen, bedding, plate,
Your sheep, your horse, your cattle you did rate:
And yet one moveable you did forget,
More moveable then this, therein to set.
Your wavering mind, I mean, which is so moveable*
That you for it, have ever been reproueable.
35 Of a Cuckold that had a chaste Wife.
WHen those Triumvers set that three man's song,
Which stablished in Rome a hellish Trinity,
That all the town, and all the world did wrong,
Killing their friends, and kin of their affinity,
By tripartite Indenture, parting Rome,
As if the world for them had wanted room,
Plotyna wife of one of that same hundred,
Whom Anthony prescribed to lose their life,
For beauty much, for love to be more wondered,
Su'd for his Spouse, and told she was his wife.
The Tyrant pleasant to see so fair a suter,
Does kiss her, and embrace her, and salute her.
Then makes, nay mocks, a love too kind, too cruel
She must, to save her husband from proscription,
Grant him one night, her husbands chiefest Jewel:
And what he meant, he showed by lewd description:
Vowing, except he might his pleasure have,
No means would serve, her husbands life to save.
Oh motion! loving thoughts, no thoughts, but thorn^
Either he dies, whom she esteems most dearly:
Or she her self subject to thousand scorns.
Both fears do touch a Noble Matron nearly.
Lo, yet an act, performed by this woman,
Worthy a woman, worthy more a Roman:
To show more then her self she loved her Spouse,
She yields her body to this execution.
Come, Tyrant, come, perform thy damned vows,
Her single heart has doubled thy pollution.
Thou pollute her? No, fool, thou art beguiled:
She in thy filthy lap lies undefiled.
Honor of Matrons, of all wives a mirror!
He swear with thee, thy husband wears no horn:
Or if this act, convince mine oath of error,
It Was a most precious one, an Unicorn.
If ought I know by hearing or by reading,
This act Lucretias deed is far exceeding.
36 Of the Lady that looked well to her borders.
A Lady of great Birth, great reputation,
Clothed in seemly, and most sumptuous fashion:
Wearing a border of rich Pearl and stone,
Esteemed at a thousand crowns alone,
To see a certain Interlude, repaires,
Through a great prease, up a dark pair of stairs.
Her Page did bear a Torch that burnt but dimly.
Two cozening mates, seeing her decked so trimly,
Did place themselves upon the stayres to watch her,
And thus they laid their plot to cunny-catch her:
One should as 'twere by chance strike out the light;
While the other that should stand beneath her, might
Attempt, (which modesty to suffer lothes)
Rudely to thrust his hands under her clothes.
That while her hands repeld such gross disorders,
His mate might quickly slip away the borders.
Now though this act to her was most displeasant,
Yet being wise (as women's wits are present:)
Straight on her borders both her hands she cast,
And with all her force she held them fast.
Villains, she cryde, you would my borders have:
But I Will save them the other it self can save:
Thus, while the Page had got more store of light,
The coozening mates, for fear slipped out of sight.
Thus her good wit, their cunning ouer-matcht.
Were not these conycatchers conycatcht?
37 The Hermaphrodite.
WHen first my mother bore me in her womb,
She went to make inquiry of the gods,
First of my birth, and after of my tomb.
All answered true, yet all their words had ods.
Phoebus affirmed, a Male child should be borne:
Mars said it would be female, Juno neither:
But I came forth, alas, to natures scorn,
Hermaphrodite, as much as both together.
Then for my death, Juno foretold the sword:
Phoebus assigned me drowning for my fa^e:
Mars threatened hanging, each performed their word,
As note how well proved true in several rate.
A Tree fast by a brook I needs would clime,
My sword slipped out, and while no heed I took,
My side fell on the point, and at that same time,
My foot in boughs, my head hanged in the brook:
That I thus borne a Male, a Female neither,
Did drowned, and h^ng'd, and wounded all together.
38 Of a sickness grew with a Tobacco pipe.
Unto a gentle Gentlewomans chamber*
Her Peddler came, her husband being thence,
^o sell fine linen, Lawnes and Musk and Amber.
^he frank of favors, sparing of expense,
^o bargained with her, ere he parted thence,
that for ten Else of Holland, five of Lawne,
^o grant dishonest pleasures, she was drawn.
^ext day the man repenting of his cost,
^id study means, to get him resolution:
^r to be paid for that he there had lost,
and thus he puts his thought in execution:
^e turns to her, with settled resolution,
and in her husbands presence unawares,
^e asks fifty shillings for his wares.
^er husband ignorant what cause had bred it,
^y wife, said he, had you so spent your store,
^ou must with petty chapmen run on credit?
Now for my Honors sake, do so no more.
No Sir (quoth she) I meant it to restore.
I took it of him only for a trial,
And find it too high prised for a Royal.
Thus never changing countenance, she does rise*
With outward silence, inward anger choking.
And going to her closer, she espies
Tobacco in a pype, yet newly smoking.
She takes the pype, her malice her provoking,
And laps it in his linen, coming back,
And so the Peddler put it in his pack,
And packes away, and joys that with his wyle,
He had regayn'd the stuff, yet gayn'd his pleasure.
But having walked scarcely half a mile,
His pack did smoke, and smell so out of measure,
That opening it unto his great displeasure,
He found by that Tobacco pype too late,
The fiery force of feeble female hate.
And seeking then some remedy by laws,
Unto a neighbor Justice he complains:
But when the Justice understood the cause,
In her examination taking pains,
And found 'twas but a fetch of women's brains:
The cause dismissed, he bids the man beware,
To deal with women that could burn his ware.
39 A good answer of a Gentlewoman to a Lawyer.
A Virtuous Dame, that saw a Lawyer rome
Abroad, reprou'd his stay so long from home:
and said to him, that in his absence thence,
^is wife might want her due benevolence.
^ut he straight quit himself of such disgrace,
^nswer'd it thus, with putting off a case.
^ne owes one hundred pounds, now tell me whether
(...) best? To have his payment all together:
^r take it by a shilling, and a shilling,
^hereby the bag should be the longer filling?
^ure, said the Dame, I grant 'twere little loss,
^one received such payments all in gross.
Yet in your absence this may breed your sorrow,
To hear your wife for want might twelve pence borrow.
40 Of one that took thought for his wife.
NO sooner Cynnas wife was dead and buried,
But that with mourning much and sorrows wearied
Maid, a servant of his wives, he wedded,
and after he had boorded her, and bedded.
And in her Mistress room had fully plast her,
His wives old servant waxed his new master.
41 Sir John Bauynsfords choice of a man.
RAinsford, whose acts were many times outragiou^
Had special care, to have his men courageous:
A certain friend of his one day began,
Unto his service to commend a man,
One well approved, he said, in many iarres,
Whereof in head arms, hands, remained the skarres*
The Knight the man, his marks and manners viewed*
And flat refusing him, did thus conclude:
This is no man for me, but I suppose,
He is a tall fellow that gave him all these blows*
42 Of Linus and his Mistress.
CHaste Linus, but as valiant as a Gander,
Came to me yet, in friendly sort as may be:
Lamenting that I raised on him a slander,
Namely, that he should keep a gallant Lady.
Beg me (said I) if I prove such a babie,
To let my tongue, so false and idly wander.
Who says that you keep her, lies in her throat,
But she keeps you, that all the world may note.
43 Inpraise of a Lady and her Music.
Upon an Instrument of pleasing sound
A Lady played More pleasing to the sight.
^ being asked in which of these I found
Greatest content, my senses to delight?
Ravished in both at once, as much as may be,
Said, Sweet was Music, sweeter was the Lady.
44 Of Riding-rimes.
Fair Leda reads our Poetry sometimes,
But says she cannot like our Ryding-rimes;
^ffirming that the Cadens falls sweeter,
^hen as the Verse is placed between the Meeter.
^ell, Leda, leave henceforth this quarrel-piking,
and since that one between is to your liking,
You shall have one between; yet some suppose,
Leda has loved both Riding-rime, and Prose.
45 Of devout Parents and children.
A Husband and a wife often disagreeing,
And either weary of the other, being
^choller great, either devoutly prays
(...) God, that he will shorten the others days:
But more devout then both, their son and hei^e
Prays God that he will grant the^ both their prayer.
46 In commendation of two valiant Scottish Knights, that defended their King
from the Earl Gowry: Sir Thomas Erskin, Sir John Ramsey.
THe Persian Monarch, who by faithful spyall
Was safe preserved from slaves intended slaughter,
By him whose Cousin and adopted daughter
Unawares he did endow with scepter royal;
When reading in his bed a good while after,
He found in true records that service loyal,
Then with most grateful mind to make requital,
And to increase Mardoches great renown,
Upon his head (such was their use that season)
He caused to be set his royal Crown.
But greater should be your reward in reason;
He but revealed, but you revenged a Treason.
47 In praise of the Countess of Darby, married to the Lord Chauncellor.
THis noble Countess lived many years
With Darby, one of Englands greatest Peers;
Fruitful and fair, and of so clear a name,
That all this Region marueld at her fame.
But this brave Peer, extinct by hastened Fate,
She stayed (ah too too long) in widows state:
And in that state, took so sweet State upon her,
All ears, eyes, tongues, heard, saw, and told her honor:
Yet finding this a saying full of verity,
It Is hard to have a Patent of prosperity,
She found her wisest way and safe to deal,
Was to consort with him that keeps the Seal.
48 Of Cosmus, that will keep a good house hereafter.
OLd Cosmus to his friends thus out does give,
After awhile, he like a Lord will live.
After awhile, hele end all troublous suites,
After awhile, retain some men of quality,
After awhile, of riches reap the fruits,
After awhile, keep house in some formality,
After awhile, finish his beauteous building,
After awhile, leave off his busy buying:
^et all the while he lives but like a hilding,
^is head grows gray with fresh vexations toyling.
^ell, Cosmus, I believe your heir does smile,
^o think what you will do after awhile:
For sure, the Proverb is more true then civil,
Blessed is the son whose Sire goes to the Devil.
49 Of neat Galla.
THe pride of Galla now is grown so great,
She seeks to be surnamed Galla the neat,
But who their merits shall, and manners scan,
May think the term is due to her good man.
Ask you, Which way? Methinks your wits are dull:
My Shoomakes resolve you can at full,
Neats Leather is both Oxe-hide, Cow, and Bull.
50 Of reuersing an error.
I Did you wrong, at least you did suppose,
For taxing certain faults of yours in Prose:
But now I have the same in Ryme reherst,
My error, nay your error is reuerst.
51 Of good Sauce.
I Went to suppe with Cinna the other night,
And to say true (for give the devil his right)
Though scant of meat we could a morsel get,
Yet there with store of passing sauce we met.
You ask what sauce, where pittance was so small?
This, Is not hunger the best sauce of all?
52 Of a slander.
ON Lesbya, Lynus raised had a slander,
For which when as she thought to take an actio^*
Yet by request she took this satisfaction,
That being drunk, his tongue did idly wander:
Came this from Viderit vtilitas?
Or else from this, In Vino veritas?
53 Of a Lady early up.
LEsbya, that wonted was to sleep till noone,
This other morning stirring was at five:
What did she mean, think you, to rise so soon?
I doubt we shall not have her long alive.
Yes: never fear it, there is no such danger,
It seems unto her course you be a stranger:
For why, a dancing, banqueting, and play,
And at Carowsing many a costly cup,
She sat the night before, until it was day,
And by that mean, you found her early up*
Oh, was it so? why then the case is clear,
That she was early up, and never the near.
The end of the third Book.
Sir JOHN HARRINGTONS Epigrams, the fourth Book.
1 To an ill Reader.
THe verses, Sextus, thou do read, are mine;
But with bad reading thou will make the^ thine.
2 In lectorem inuidum.
WHo reads our verse, with visage sour and grim.
I wish him envy me, none envy him.
3 Of Table friends.
YOu think his faith is firm, his friendship stable,
Whose first acquaintance grew but at your Table:
^e loves your venison, snytes, quails, larks, not you:
^ake me such fare, and take my friendship too.
4 The Author to his wife, of partition.
SOme Ladies with their Lords divide their state,
And live so when they list, at several rate;
But I Will endure thee, Mall, on no condition,
To sue with me a writ of such partition.
Twice seven years since, most solemnly I vowed,
With all my worldly goods I thee endowed,
Then house, plate, stuff, not part, but all is thine:
Yet so, that thou, and they, and all are mine.
Then let me go, and sue my writ of dotage,
If I with thee part house, or close, or cottage.
For, where this is my Lords, and that my Ladies,
There some, perhaps, think likewise of their babie^
5 Of Treason.
TReason does never prosper, what is the reason?
For if it prosper, none dare call it Treason.
6 Of the wars in Ireland.
I Praised the speech, but cannot now abide it,
That war is sweet, to those that have not tried it:
For I have proved it now, and plainly see it,
It is so sweet, it makes all things sweet.
At home Canarie wines and Greek grow loathsome:
Here milk is Nectar, water tastes toothsome.
There without baked, roast, boyld, it is no cheer.
Biscuit we like, and Bonny Clabo here.
There we complain of one rear roasted chicke:
Here viler meat, worse cookt, never makes me sick.
At home in silken spa^uers, beds of Down,
We scant can rest, but still toss up and down:
Here I can sleep, a saddle to my pillow,
A hedge the Curtain, Canopy a Willow.
There if a child but cry, oh what a spite!
Here we can brook three larums in one night.
There homely rooms must be perfumed with Roses:
Here match and powder never offends our noses.
There from a storm of rain we run like Pullets:
Here we stand fast against a shower of bullets.
Lo then how greatly their opinions err,
That think there is no great delight in war:
But yet for this (sweet war) I Will be thy debtor,
I shall for ever love my home the better.
7 Of Women learned in the tongues.
YOu wished me to a wife, fair, rich and young,
That had the Latin, French and Spanish tongue.
I thank't, and told you I desired none such,
And said, One Language may be tongue too much.
Then love I not the learned? yes as my life;
A learned mistress, not a learned wife.
8 The Author to his wife, of the twelve Signs, how they govern.
Mark here (my Mall) how in this dozen lines,
Thus placed are the twelve celestial Signs:
And first, the Ram bears rule in head and face,
The stiffe-neckt Bull in neck does hold his place,
And Twins mine arms and hands do both embrace.
Then Cancer keeps the small ribs and the breast,
And Leo back and heart has aye possessed.
Then Virgo claims the entrails and the panch,
Libra the navel, reins, and either hanch.
Scorpio pretends power in the privy parts,
Both thighs are pierst with Sagitaries darts.
Then Capricorn to knees his force does send,
Aquarius does to legs his virtue lend.
Pisces beneath unto the feet descend.
Thus each part is possessed; now tell me, Mall,
Where lies thy part? in which of these? In all.
In all? content. Yet sure thou art more jealous
Of Leo's part and Scorpio's, then their fellows.
9 Against Swearing.
IN elder times an ancient custom was,
To swear in weighty matters by the Mass.
But when the Mass went down (as old men note)
They swear then by the cross of this same grote.
And when the Cross was likewise held in scorn,
Then by their faith, the common oath was sworn.
Last, having sworn away all faith and troth,
Only God dam'n them is their common oath.
Thus custom kept decorum by gradation,
That losing Mass, Cross, Faith, they find damnation.
10 Of little pity.
WHen noble Essex, Blount and Danuers died,
One saw them suffer, that had heard them tried:
And sighing, said; When such brave soldiers dye,
Is^t not great pity, think you? No, said I:
There is no man of sense in all the city,
Will say, It Is great, but rather little pity.
11 Of a Book called the Gentle Craft.
I Past this other day through Paul's Churchyard,
And heard some read a book, and reading laughed,
The title of the book was Gentle Craft.
But when I marked the matter with regard,
A new-sprung branch that in my mind did graft,
And thus I said, Sirs, scorn not him that writ it:
A gilded blade has often a dudgeon haft,
And well I see, this writer roues a shaft
Near fairest mark, yet happily not hit it.
For never was the like book sold in Poules,
If so with Gentle Craft it could persuade
Great Princes midst their pomp to learn a trad^
Once in their lives to work, to mend their soule^
12 Of the games that have been in request at the Court.
I Heard one make a pretty Observation,
How games have in the Court turned with the fashion
The first game was the best, when free from crime,
The Courtly gamesters all were in their prime:
The second game was Post, until with posting
They paid so fast, 'twas time to leave their boasting.
Then thirdly followed heauing of the Maw,
A game without Ciuility or Law,
An odious play, and yet in Court often seen,
A saucy knave to trump both King and Queen.
Then followed Lodam, hand to hand or quarter,
At which some maids so ill did keep the Quarter,
That unexpected, in a short abode
They could not cleanly bear away their load.
Now Noddy followed next, as well it might,
Although it should have gone before of right.
At which I saw, I name not any body,
One never had the knave, yet laid for Noddy.
The last game now in use is Bankerupt,
Which will be played at still, I stand in doubt,
Until Lauolta turn the wheel of time,
And make it come about again to Prime.
13 The Author to Queen Elizabeth, in praise of her reading.
FOr ever dear, for ever dreaded Prince,
You read a verse of mine a little since,
and so pronounst each word, and every letter,
^our Gracious reading, graced my verse the better.
^ith then your Highness does by gift exceeding,
Make what you read, the better in your reading,
Let my poor Muse your pains thus far importune,
To leave to read my verse, and read my fortune.
14 Of King Henry's wooing.
Unto a stately great outlandish Dame,
A Messenger from our King Henry came,
^ Henry of famous memory the eight)
^o treat with her in matter of great weight;
^s namely, how the King did seek her marriage,
because of her great virtue and good carriage.
^he (that had heard the King loved change of pasture)
^^pli'de, I humbly thank the King, your Master,
And would, (such love his fame in me has bred,)
My body venture so, but not my head.
15 Two witty answers of Bishop Bonner.
BOnner, that late had Bishop been of London,
Was bid by one, Good morrow Bishop quondam:
He with the scoff, no whit put out of temper,
Replied incontinent, Adieu knave Semper.
Another in such kind of scoffing speeches,
Would beg his tippet, needs, to line his breeches.
Not so (quoth he) but it may be thy hap,
To have a foolish head to line thy cap.
16 Of Lynus borrowing.
LYnus came late to me, six crowns to borrow,
And swear God damn him, he would repai't to morrow.
I knew his word, as current as his band,
And straight I gave to him three crowns in hand;
This I to give, this he to take was willing,
And thus he gaind, and I saved fifteen shilling.
17 A good answer of the Poet Dant to an Atheist.
THe pleasant learned Italian Poet Dant,
Hearing an Atheist at the Scriptures jest,
Asked him in jest, which was the greatest beast?
He simply said; he thought an Elephant.
Then Elephant (quoth Dant) it were commodious,
That thou would hold thy peace, or get thee hence,
Breeding our Conscience scandal and offense
With thy profaned speech, most vile and odious.
Oh Italy, thou breedst but few such Dants,
I would our England bred no Elephants.
18 Of Quintus alms.
WHen Quintus walks out into the street,
As soon as with some beggar he does meet,
Ere that poor soul to ask his alms has leisure,
He first does chafe and swear beyond all measure,
And for the Beadle all about he sends,
To bear him to Bridewell, so he pretends.
The Beggar quickly out of sight does go,
^ull glad in heart he has escaped so.
Then Quintus laughes, and thinks it is less charges,
To swear an oath or two, then give a larges.
19 Of Marcus his drunken feasting.
WHen Marcus makes (as often he does) a feast,
The Wine still costs him more then all the rest.
Were water in this town as dear as hay,
His horses should not long at livery stay.
^ut tell me, is it not a most foolish trick,
^o drink to others healths till thou be sick?
^et such the fashion is of Bacchus crew,
^o quaffe and bowze, until they belch and spue:
Well, leave it, Marcus, else thy drinking health,
Will prove an eating to thy wit and wealth.
20 A good jest of a Crow.
A Baron and a Knight, one day walking
On Richmond green, and as they were in talking,
A Crow, that lighted on the rail by Fortune,
Stood becking, and cried kaw with noise importune.
This bird, the Baron said, does you salute,
Sir Knight, as if to you he had some suit,
Not unto me, the Knight replied in pleasance,
It Is to some Lord he makes so low obeisance.
21 Of kissing the foot.
A Courtier, kind in speech, cursed in condition,
Finding his fault could be no longer hidden,
Went to his friend to clear his hard suspicion,
And fearing lest he might be more then chidden,
Fell to a flattering and most base submission,
Vowing to kiss his foot, if he were bidden.
My foot? (said he) that were too submisse,
But three foot higher you deserve to kiss.
22 Of a saucy Cator.
A Cator had of late some wild-fowle bought,
And when unto his Master them he brought,
Forthwith the Master smelling nigh the rump,
Said, Out, thou knave, these savor of the pump.
The man (that was a rude and saucy Lout)
What Sir, said he, smell you them thereabout?
Smell your fair Lady there, and by your favor,
Your fortune may meet with a fulsome savor.
23 Of a certain Man.
THere was (not certain when) a certain preacher,
That never learned, and yet became a Teacher,
Who having read in Latin thus a Text
Of erat quidam homo, much perplexed,
He seemed the same with study great to scan
In English thus; there was a certain man.
But now (quoth he) good people, note you this,
He says there was, he does not say there is:
For in these days of ours, it is most certain,
Of promise, oath, word, deed, no man is certain:
Yet by my text you see it comes to pass,
That surely once a certain man there was.
But yet I think, in all your Bible no man
Can find this text; there was a certain woman.
24 Of Lesbia.
OLd widow Lesbia, after husbands five,
Yet feels Cupids flames in her revive.
And now she takes a gallant youth and trim.
Alas for her, nay, nay, alas for him.
25 The horn Cinqu^-apace.
WHo wishes, hopes, and thinks, his wife is true,
To him one horn, or unicorn is due.
Who sees his wife play false, and will not spy it,
He has two horns, and yet he may deny it.
The man that can endure when all men scorn,
And pardon open faults, has treble horn;
Who brings fine Courtiers often to see his bride,
He has one pair of horns on either side.
But he that swears he did so happy wiue,
He can be none of these, let him have five.
26 Of cursing Cuckolds.
A Lord that talked late in way of scorn,
Of some that ware inuisibly the horn,
Said he could wish, and did (as for his part)
All Cuckolds in the Thames, with all his heart.
But straight a pleasant Knight replied to him,
I hope your Lordship learned has to swim.
27 Of the pillars of the Church.
IN old time they were the Churches pillars,
That did excel in learning and in piety,
And were to youth examples of sobriety,
Of Christ's fair field the true and painful tillers:
But where are now the men of that society?
Are all those tillers dead? those pillars broken?
No, God forbid such blasphemy be spoken;
I say, to stop the mouths of all ill-willers,
Gods field has harrowers still, his Church has pillars,
28 Of Exchange.
OLd Caius sold a wench, to buy a bark.
Young Titus gave the ship, to have the slut.
Who makes the better mart, now let us mark,
The one loves to roue, the the other goes to rut.
29 Of Lesbias kissing craft.
LEsbia with study found a means in the end,
In presence of her Lord to kiss her friend,
Each of them kissed by turns a little Whelpe,
Transporting kisses thus by puppies help.
And so her good old Lord she did beguise:
Was not my Lord a puppy all the while?
30 Of six sorts of Fasters.
Six sorts of folks I find use fasting days,
But of these six, the sixth I only praise.
The sick man fasts, because he cannot eat.
The poor does fast, because he has no meat.
The miser fasts, with mind to mend his store.
The glutton, with intent to eat the more.
The hypocrite, thereby to seem more holy.
The virtuous, to prevent or punish folly.
Now he that eats fast, and drinks as fast,
May match these fasters, any but the last.
31 Of Cinna.
PVre Cinna gets his wife a maiden Cook
With red cheeks, yellow locks, and cheerful look.
What might he mean hereby? I hold my life,
She dresseth flesh for him, not for his wife.
32 Of Claudia.
CLaudia, to save a noble Romans blood,
Was offered by some friends that wished his good,
A jewel of inestimable price;
But she would not be won by this device:
For she did take his head, and leave the jewel.
Was Claudia now more covetous, or cruel?
33 A rule to Play.
LAy down your stake at play, lay down your passion:
A greedy gamester still has some mis-hap.
To chafe at play, proceeds of foolish fashion.
No man throws still the dice in fortunes lap.
34 Of a drunken Tobacconist.
WHen Marcus has carrowst March Beer and Sack,
And that his brains grow dizzy therewithal,
Then of Tobacco he a pipe does lack,
Of Trinidade in cane, in leaf, or ball,
Which taken a little, he does spit and smacke,
Then lays him on his bed for fear to fall,
And poor Tobacco bears the name of all.
But that same pipe which Marcus brain did lade.
Was of Medera, not of Trinidade.
35 Tristis es and foelix, sciat hoc fortuna Caueto. To a Lady.
FRoward yet fortunate? if fortune knew it,
Believe me, Madam, she would make you rue it.
36 A Salisbury tale.
Fair Sarum's Church, beside the stately tower,
Has many things in number aptly sorted,
Answering the year, the month, week, day and hour,
But above all (as I have heard reported,
And to the view does probably appear)
A pillar for each hour in all the year.
Further, this Church of Sarum has been found,
To keep in singing service so good form,
That most Cathedral Churches have been bound,
Themselves ad vsum Sarum to conform:
I am no Cabalist to judge by number,
Yet that this Church is so with pillars filled,
It seems to me to be the lesser wonder,
That Sarums Church is every hour pill'd.
And since the rest are bound to Sarums use,
What marvel if they taste of like abuse?
37 Of a fair Shrew.
Fair, rich, and young? how rare is her perfection,
Were it not mingled with one foul infection?
I mean, so proud a heart, so cursed a tongue,
As makes her seem, nor fair, nor rich, nor young.
38 Of Gods part.
ONe that had farmed a fat Impropriation,
Used to his neighbors often exhortation,
To pay to him the tithes and profits duly,
Affirming (as he might affirm most truly)
How that the tithes are God Almighties part,
And therefore they should pay't with all their heart.
But straight replied one amongst the rest,
(One that had crossed him often, but never blessed.)
It is Gods part indeed, whose goodness gave it;
But yet often times we see the Devil have it.
39 Of Lalus symoniacall horse-coursing.
PVre Lalus gate a benefice of late,
Without offense of people, Church, or State;
Yea but ask echo how he did come by it,
Come buy it? No with oaths he will deny it.
He nothing gave direct, or indirectly.
^ie, Lalus, now you tell us a direct lie:
Did not your Patron for an hundred pound,
^ell you a horse was neither young nor sound,
No Turk, no Courser, Barbary, nor Iennit?
^imony? No, but I see money in it.
Well, if it were but so, the case is clear;
The Benefice was cheap, the Horse was dear.
40 An addition to the same Epigram.
PEter for Westminster, and Paul for London,
Lament, for both your Churches will be undone,
If Smithfield find a fetch forth of a stable*
Laws to delude, and Lords of Council table.
The same in Latin by the Author.
NEc populo infenso, nec ruptis legibus vllis,
Lelus noster habet pingue sacerdotium,
Vnde sed hoc venit, vaen it tibi personet echo,
Echo, misodes, dicito an emit, emit.
Ilia ducentem, fructumque: senilibus annis
Illi patronus vendit auarus equum,
Aurea pro vetulo dat bis centena caballo,
Cui nec Turca pater, nec patria Italia est:
Ergo sacerdotium Regina pecunia donat,
Magno equitat precio, praedicat exiguo.
Additio.
Iam vos templorum properam sperare ruinam,
Et tu Petre tui, tu quoque, Pa^le, ^ui
Sordida fabrili si nata astutia campo,
Legibus and sanctis patribus imposuit.
41 Of Cinna.
Five years has Cinna studied Genesis,
And knows not what in Principio is;
And grieved that he is graueld thus, he skips,
Ore all the Bible, to the Apocalips.
42 Of bag and baggage.
A Man appointed, upon loss of life,
With bag and baggage at a time assigned.
^o part a town; his foul unweildy wife,
^esired him that she might stay behind.
^ay, quoth the man, I Will never be so kind,
As venture life, for such an ugly hag
That looks both like a baggage and a bag.
43 Of a woman's kindness to her husband.
ONe that had lived long by lewdest shifts,
Brought to the Court that Corn from cockle sisis,
^archamber, that of Justice is the mirror,
^as senten'st there, and for the greater terror,
^diudged, first, to lie a year in fetters,
^hen burned in his forhead with two letters,
and to disparage him with more disgrace,
^o slit his nose, the figure of his face.
The prisoners wife with no dishonest mind,
To show her self unto her husband kind,
Sued humbly to the Lords, and would not cease,
Some part of this sharp rigor to release.
He was a man (she said) had served in war,
What mercy would a Soldiers face so mar?
Thus much said she: but gravely they replied,
It was great mercy that he thus was tried:
His crimes deserve he should have lost his life,
And hang in chains. Alas, replied his wife,
If you disgrace him thus, you quite undo him,
Good my Lords hang him, pray be good unto him.
44 Of Don Pedro.
DOn Pedro never dines without red Dear;
If red Dear be his guests, grass is his cheer.
I, but I mean, he has it in his dish,
And so have I often what I do not wish.
45 The Author to his wife.
MAll, once in pleasant company by chance,
I wished that you for company would dance,
Which you refused, and said, your years require,
Now, Matron-like, both manners and attire.
Well Mall, if needs thou will be Matron-like,
Then trust to this, I will a Matron like:
^et so to you my love may never lessen,
(...) you for Church, house, bed, observe this lesson.
(...) in the Church as solemn as a Saint,
^o deed, word, thought, your due devotion taint.
^aile (if you will) your head, your soul reveal
^o him, that only wounded souls can heal.
(...) in my house as busy as a Be,
^auing a sting for every one but me,
^uzzing in every corner, gathering honey.
^et nothing waste, that costs or yields money.
and when thou see my heart to mirth incline,
(...) tongue, wit, blood, warm with good cheer and wine,
Then of sweet sports let no occasion escape,
But be as wanton, toying as an Ape.
46 Of Lelia.
WHen lovely Lelia was a tender girl,
She hapt to be deflowred by an Earl;
^las, poor wench, she was to be excused,
^^ch kindness often is offered, seld refused.
^ut be not proud; for she that is no Countess,
and yet lies with a Count, must make account this,
All Countesses in honor her surmount,
They have, she had, an honorable Count.
47 Of a drunken Smith.
I Heard that SMUG the Smith, for ale and spice
Sold all his tools, and yet he kept his vice.
48 Of Soothsaying.
MIght Kings shun future mischief by foretelling
The^ amongst Soothsayers 'twere excellent dwe^ling
But if there be no means such harms repelling,
The knowledge makes the sorrow more excelling.
But this, dear Sovereign, me comfort does,
That of these Soothsayers, very few say sooth.
49 A good request of a Lawyer.
A Pleasant Lawyer standing at the bar,
The Causes done, and day not passed far,
A Judge to whom he had professed devotion,
Asked him in grace, if he would have a motion:
Yes Sir, quoth he, but short, and yet not small,
That whereas now of Satieants is a call,
I wish (as most of my profession do)
That there might be a call of Clyents too:
For sure it brings us Lawyers mickle cumber,
Because of them we find so small a number.
50 Of Friendship.
NEw friends are no friends; how can that be true?
The oldest friends that are, were sometimes new.
51 Of Caius increase in his absence.
WHile Caius does remain beyond the Seas,
And follows there some great important suit,
^is Lands bare neither Oats, nor Beans, nor Pease,
^ut yet his wife bears fair and full-growne fruit.
What is the cause that brings his Lands sterility,
and his wives fruitfulnes and great fertility?
His Lands want occupyers to manure them,
But she has store, and knows how to procure them.
52 Of a toothlesse Shrew.
OLd Ellen had four teeth as I remember,
She cought out two of them the last December;
^ut this shrewd cough in her reigned so unruly,
^e cought out the other two before it was July.
^ow she may cough her heart out, for in sooth,
^he said shrewd cough has left her never a tooth.
But her cursed tongue, wanting this common curb,
Does more then erst the household all disturb.
53 To Doctor Sharp.
LAte I took leave of two right noble dames,
And hasted to my wife as I protested:
You willed me stay awhile, and thus you iested:
You Sir, may please your Wife with Epigrams.
Well said, 'twas Doctor-like, and sharply spoken,
No friendship breaks, where jests so smooth are (...)
But now you have new orders taken of late,
Those orders, which (as you expound Saint Paul)
Are equal honorable unto all;
I mean of marriage the holy state,
I hope, in Lent, when flesh grows out of date,
You will, in stead of the other recreation,
Be glad to please your wife with some Collation
54 Of the Papists Feasts, and the Brownists Fasts.
A Papist dwelling to a Brownist near,
Their servants met, and vanted of their chee^
And first, the Papists man did make his bost,
He had each festival both baked and roast,
And where (said he) your zealous sort allow,
On Christmasse day it self to go to plow,
We feast, and play, and walk, and talk, and slumb^^
Besides, our holy days are more in number:
As namely, we do keep with great festiuity,
Our Ladies, both assumption and nativity;
S. Paul's conversion, S. John's decollation,
S. Laurence broyld, S. Swithens moist translation,
S. Peter's chains, and how with Angels vision
He brake the prison, quite without misprision.
^ grant, the the other said, you seem more gainesome,
But for your sport, you pay too dear a ransom.
We like your Feasts, your Fastings bred our greeues,
Your Lents, your Ember weeks, and holy Eeues.
But this conjunction I should greatly praise,
The Brownists fasts, with Papists holy days.
55 Of Mile the glutton.
MIlo with haste to cram his greedy gut,
One of his thumbs unto the bone had cut:
Then straight it noysed was about by some,
That he had lost his stomach with his thumb.
To which one said, No worse hap fall unto him:
But if a poor man find it, 'twill undo him.
56 Of Fortune.
FOrtune, men say, does give too much to many:
But yet she never gave enough to any.
57 Of devotion and promotion.
I Met a Lawyer at the Court this Lent,
And asking what great cause him thither sent,
He said, that moved with Doctor Androes fame,
To hear him preach, he only thither came:
But straight, I wished him softly in his ear,
To find some other sense, else some will swear,
Who to the Court come only for devotion,
They in the Church pray only for promotion.
58 Of a painted Lady.
I Saw dame Leda's picture lately drawn,
With hair about her ears, transparent Lawne,
Her Iuory paps, and every other part,
So limd unto the life by Painters Art,
That I that had been long with her acquainted,
Did think that both were quick, or both were painte^
59 Of Galla's gallantry.
WHat is the cause our Galla is so gallant,
Like ship in fairest wind, top and top gallant*
Has she of late been courted by some Gallant?
No sure: How then? Galla has quaft a gallon.
60 In Cornutum.
A Thais? no, Diana thou did wed:
For she has given to thee Acteons head.
61 Of Paulus, a Flatterer.
NO man more servile, no man more submisse,
Then to our Sovereign Lady Paulus is.
He does extol her speech, admire her feature,
He calls himself her vassal, and her creature.
Thus while he dawbes his speech with flatteries plaster,
And calls himself her ^laue, he grows our Master,
Still getting what he list without control,
By singing this old song, re mi fa sol.
62 Of Lynus, an ill ghest.
Ask you what profit Kew to me does yield?
This, Lynus, there I shall see thee but seeld;
^or where good ghests may take a cottage grateful,
There, such as thou do make a Palace hateful.
63 Against Pius Quintus, that excommunicated Queen Elizabeth.
ARe Kings your Foster-Fathers, Queens your nurses,
Oh Roman Church? Then why did Pius Quintus
With Basan bulls (not like one pius intus)
Lay on our sacred Prince unhallowed curses?
It is not health of souls, but wealth of purses
You seek, by such your hell-denouncing threats,
Oppugning with your chair, our Princes seats,
Disturbing our sweet peace; and that which worse is
You suck out blood, and bite your Nurses teats.
Learn, learn, to ask your milk, for if you snatch it,
The nurse must send your babes pap with a hatchet
64 Of finding a Hare.
A Gallant full of life, and void of care,
Asked his friend if he would find a Hare?
He that for sleep more then such sports did care,
Said, Go your ways, and leave me here alone;
Let them find Hares that lost them, I lost none.
65 Of Merit, and Demerit.
A Knight, and valiant seruitor of late,
Playn'd to a Lord and Councellor of State,
That Captains in these days were not regarded,
That only Carpet Knights were well rewarded:
For I, says he, with all my hurts and maimes,
Get not the recompense my merit claims.
Good Cousin (said the Lord) the fault is yours,
Which you impute unto the higher Powers,
^or where you should in Pater noster pray,
Give unto us our daily bread to day;
Your misdemeanors this petition needs,
Our trespasses forgive us, and misdeeds.
66 Of Faustus, Esquire.
FAustus, for taking of a wrong possession,
Was by a Justice bound unto the Session:
The Crier the Recognizance does call,
^austus, Esquire, come forth into the Hall.
Out (said the Judge) on all such foolish Cryers,
Devils are Carpenters, where such are Squires.
67 Of Peleus friendship.
WHen Peleus is brought up to London streets,
By Process first to answer weighty suits,
Oh then how kind he is to all he meets!
How friendly by their names he them salutes!
Then one shall have a Colt of his best race,
another gets a warrant for a Buck:
^ome deeper bribed, according as their place
May serve his turn, to work or wish good luck.
But when his troubles all to end are brought
By time, or friendly pains on his behalf,
Then straight (as if he set us all at naught)
His kindness is not now so much by half.
Since then his suites in Law his friendship doubles,
I for his friendships sake could wish him troubles
68 Of enclosing a Common.
A Lord, that purposed for his more avail,
To compass in a Common with a rail,
Was reckoning with his friend about the cost
And charge of every reule, and every post:
But he (that wished his greedy humor crossed)
Said, Sir, provide you posts, and without failing,
Your neighbors round about will find you railing*
69 The Author to his wife, of too much stomach*
LAte having been a fishing at the Foord,
And bringing home with me my dish of Trouts
Your mind that while, did cast some causeless doubts
For while that meat was set upon the board,
You sullen silent, fed your self with powts.
I twice sent for you, but you sent me word,
How that you had no stomach to your meat.
Well I feared more, your stomach was too great.
70 A witty choice of a Country fellow.
A Rich Lord had a poor Lout to his ghest,
And having sumptuous fare, and costly dressed,
^aru'd him a wing of a most dainty Bird;
^ffirming seriously upon his word,
Those birds were sent him from his loving cosen,
and were well worthy twenty marks a dozen*
^e that for such great dainties did not care,
^^id, I like well your Lordships courser fare:
For I can eat your Beef, Pig, Goose and Cony,
But of such fare, give me my share in money.
71 To a great Magistrate, in Re and in Spe.
THose that for Princes goods do take some pain
(Their goods to who^ of right all pains we owe)
^eeke some reward for service good to gain,
Which often their gracious goodness does bestow:
I for my travel, beg not a reward,
I beg less by a syllable, a Ward.
72 A comparison of a Book, with Cheese.
OLd Haywood writes, and proves in some degrees,
That one may well compare a book with cheese;
(...) every market some buy cheese to feed on,
At every mart some men buy books to read on.
All sorts eat cheese; but how? there is the question
The poor for food, the rich for good disgestion.
All sorts read books, but why? will you discern?
The fool to laugh, the wiser sort to learn.
The sight, taste, sent of cheese to some is hateful,
The sight, taste, sense of books to some's ungrateful
No cheese there was, that ever pleased all feeders,
No book there is, that ever liked all Readers.
73 A Scottish verse.
ROb. Will. and Dauy,
Keep well thy Pater noster and Aue:
And if thou will the better speed,
Gang no further then thy Creed:
Say well, and do none ill,
And keep thy self in safety still.
74 To beggars of Books.
MY friend, you press me very hard,
my books of me you crave;
I have none, but in Paul's Churchyard,
for money you may have.
But why should I my coin bestow
such toys as these to buy?
(...) am not such a fool I trow:
forsooth no more am I.
75 In Paulum Athaium.
PRoud Paulus, led by Sadduces infection,
Does not believe the bodies resurrection,
But holds them all in scorn and deep derision,
That talk of Saints or Angels apparision:
And says, they are but fables all, and fancies
Of Lunaticks, or folks possessed with frensies.
^ have, says he, trauell'd both near and far,
By land, by sea, in time of peace and war,
^et never met I spirit, or ghost, or Elfe,
Drought (as is the phrase) worse then my self*
^ell, Paulus, this I now believe indeed,
That who in all, or part, denies his Creed;
Went he to sea, land, hell, I would agree,
A Fiend worse then himself, he could not see.
76 Of double Fraud.
A Fellow false, and to all fraud inured,
In high Starchamber court was found perjured,
And by just sentence judged to lose his ears:
A doom right fit for him that falsely swears.
Now on the Pillory while he was preaching,
The Gaolor busy for his ears was searching:
But all in vain, for there was not an ear,
Only the places hid with locks of hair.
Thou knave, said he, I will of thee complain
Unto the Lords, for cousonage again.
Why so, said he? their order me does bind
To lose mine ears, not you mine ears to find.
77 Of taking a Hare.
Unto a Lawyer rich, a Client poor
Came early in the morning to his door,
And dancing long attendance in the place,
At last, he gat some counsel in his case;
For which the Lawyer looked to have been paid:
But thus at last the poor man to him said,
I cannot give a fee, my state's so bare:
But will it please you, Sir, to take a Hare?
He that took all that came, with all his heart,
Said that he would, and take it in good part.
Then must you run apace (good Sir) quoth he:
For she this morning quite out-stripped me.
He went his way, the Hare was never taken.
Was not the Lawyer taken, or mistaken?
78 The Author to his Wife.
YOur maid Brunetta you with news acquaints,
How Leda, (whom, her husband wanting issue,
Brought erst to Bath, our pilgrimage of Saints)
Wears her gown velvet, kirtle, cloth of tissue,
A figured Satin petticote Carnation,
With six gold parchment laces all in fashion,
Yet never was Dame Leda nobler borne,
Nor drank in Gossips cup by Sovereign sent,
Nor ever was her Highness woman sworn,
Nor does her husband much exceed in rent.
Then Mall, be proud, that thou may better wear them.
And I more proud, thou better do forbear them.
79 Of too high commendation in a mean person.
A Scholar once, to win his Mistress love,
Compared her to three Goddesses above,
And said she had (to give her due deserts)
Juno's, Minerua's, and fair Venus parts.
Juno so proud, and cursed was of her tongue,
All men misliked her both old and young.
Pallas so soul, and grim was out of measure,
That neither gods nor men in her took pleasure.
Venus unchaste, that she strong Mars entices,
With young Adonis, and with old Anchises.
How think you, are these praises few or mean,
Compared to a shrow, a slut, or queen?
80 Of trusting a Captain.
AN Alderman, one of the better sort,
And worthy member of our worthiest City;
Unto whose Table diverse did resort,
Himself of stomach good, of answers witty,
Was once requested by a Table friend,
To lend an unknown Captain forty pound.
The which, because he might the rather lend,
He said he should become in statute bound.
And this (quoth he) you need not doubt to take,
For he is a man of late grown in good credit,
And went about the world with Captain Drake.
Out (quoth the Alderman) that ere you sed it,
For forty pounds? no nor for forty pence.
His single bond I count not worth a chip:
I say to you (take not hereat offense,)
He that has three whole years been in a ship,
In famine, plagues, in stench, and storm, so rife,
Cares not to lie in Ludgate all his life.
81 In Cornutum.
WHat curld-pate youth is he that sits there
So near thy wife, and whispers in her ear,
And takes her hand in his, and soft does wring her,
Sliding his ring still up and down her finger?
Sir, it is a Proctor, seen in both the Laws,
Retained by her, in some important cause;
Prompt and discreet both in his speech and action,
And does her business with great satisfaction.
And think thou so? a horne-plague on thy head:
Art thou so like a fool, and wittoll led,
To think he does the business of thy wife?
He does thy business, I dare lay my life.
82 A Tragical Epigram.
WHen doom of Peers and Judges fore-appointed,
By racking laws beyond all reach of reason,
Had unto death condemned a Queen anointed,
And found, (oh strange!) without allegiance, treason;
The Axe that should have done that execution,
Shunned to cut off a head that had been crowned,
Our hangman lost his wonted resolution,
To quell a Queen of nobleness so renowned.
Ah, is remorse in hangmen and in steel,
When Peers and Judges no remorse can feel?
Grant Lord, that in this noble I Will, a Queen
Without a head, may never more be seen.
83 Of reading Scriptures.
THe sacred Scriptures treasure great affoords,
To all of several tongues, of sundry Realms.
For low and simple spirits shallow Foords,
For high and learned Doctors deeper streams,
In every part so exquisitely made,
An Elephant may swim, a Lamb may wade.
Not that all should with barbarous audacity,
Read what they list, and how they list expound,
But each one suting to his weak capacity:
For many great Scriptureans may be found,
That cite Saint Paul at every bench and board,
And have Gods word, but have not God the word.
84 The Author to his wife: a rule for praying.
MY dear, that in your closet for devotion,
To kindle in your breast some godly motion,
You contemplate, and often your eyes do fix
On some Saints picture, or the Crucifixe;
It Is not amiss, be it of stone or mettle,
It serves in thy mind good thoughts to settle;
Such images may serve thee as a book,
Whereon thou may with godly reverence look,
And thereby thy remembrance to acquaint,
With life or death, or virtue of the Saint.
Yet do I not allow thou kneel before it,
Nor would I in no wise you should adore it.
For as such things well used, are clean and holy,
So superstition soon may make it folly.
All images are scorned and quite dis-honoured,
If the Prototype be not solely honored.
I keep thy picture in a golden shrine,
And I esteem it well, because it is thine;
But let me use thy picture never so kindly,
'Twere little worth, if I used thee unkindly.
Since then, my dear, our heavenly Lord above
Vouchsafes unto ours to like his love:
So let us use his picture, that therein,
Against himself we do commit no sin;
Nor let us scorn such pictures, nor deride them,
Like fools, whose zeal mistaught, cannot abide them.
But pray, our hearts, by faith's eyes be made able
To see, what mortal eyes see on a Table.
A man would think, one did deserve a mock,
Should say, Oh heavenly Father, to a stock;
Such a one were a stock, I straight should gather,
That would confess a stock to be her Father.
85 Poenitentia poenitenda: Of a penitent Friar.
BOund by his Church, and Trentin Catechism,
To vow a single life, a Cloystered Friar,
Had got a swelling, called a Priapisme,
Which seld is swag'd, but with a femall fire.
The Leach (as oftentimes Physicians use)
To cure the corpse, not caring for the soul,
Prescribes a cordial medicine from the Stews,
Which lewd prescript, the Patient did condole:
Yet strong in Faith, and being loath to dye,
And knowing that extremes yield dispensation,
He is resolved, and does the medicine try:
Which being done, he made such lamentation,
That diverse thought he was fallen in despair,
And therefore for his confirmation praid.
But when that they had ended quite their prayer;
After long silence, thus to them he said:
I wail not, that I think my fact so vicious;
Nor am I in despair: no, never doubt it;
But feeling female flesh is so delicious,
I wail, to think I lived so long without it.
86 Of a picture with a Ferriman rowing in a tempest, with two Ladies in his
boat, whereof he loved one, but she disdained him, and the other loved him,
but he not her: now a voice came to his ear, that to save his boat from
being cast away, he must drown one of the Ladies: in which perplexity he
speaks these passions.
IN troublous seas of love, my tender bote,
By Fates decree, is still tossed up and down,
Ready to sink, and may no longer flote,
Except of these two Damsels one I drown.
I would save both: but ah, that may not be:
I love the tone, the the other loves me.
Here the vast waves are ready me to swallow.
There danger is to strike upon the shelfe.
Doubtful I swim between the deep and shallow,
To save th'vngrate, and be ungrate my self.
Thus seem I by the ears to hold a wolf,
While feign I would eschew this gaping gulf.
But since loves actions, guided are by passion,
And quenching does augment her burning fuel,
Adieu, thou Nymph, deserving most compassion,
To merit mercy, I must show me cruel.
Ask you me why? oh question out of season!
Love never leisure has to render reason.
87 The old man's choice.
LEt sovereign Reason, sitting at the stern,
And far removing all eye-blinding passion,
Censure the due desert with judgment clear,
And say, The cruel merit no compassion.
Live then, kind Nymph, and joy we two together:
Farewell th'vnkind, and all unkind go with her.
88 In Philautum.
YOur verses please your Reader often, you vaunt it:
If you your self do read them often, I grant it.
89 To an old Bachelor.
YOu praise all women: well, let you alone,
Who speaks so well of all, thinks well of none.
90 Of two that were married and undone.
A Fond young couple, making haste to marry,
Without their parents will, or friends consent,
After one month their marriage did repent,
And su'd unto the Bishops Ordinary,
That this their act so indiscreetly done,
Might by his more discretion be undone.
Upon which motion he awhile did pause:
At length, he for their comforts to them said,
It had been better (friends) that you had staid:
But now you are so hampered in the Laws,
That I this knot may not untie (my son)
Yet I will grant you both shall be undone.
91 In commendation of a straw, written at the request of a great Lady, that
ware a straw Hat at the Court.
I Vowed to write of none but matters serious,
And lawful vows to break, a great offense;
But yet, fair Ladies hests are so imperious,
That with all Vows, all Laws they can dispense:
Then yielding to that all-commanding Law,
My Muse must tell some honor of a straw.
Not of Jack Straw, with his rebellious crew,
That set King, Realm, and Laws at hab or nab,
Whom Londons worthy Mayor so bravely slew,
With dudgeon daggers honorable stab,
That his successors for that service loyal,
Have yet reward with blow of weapon royal.
Nor will I praise that fruitless straw or stubble,
Which built upon most precious stones foundation:
When fiery trials come, the builders trouble,
Though some great builders build of such a fashion,
To learned Androes, that much better can,
I leave that stubble, fire, and straw to scan.
Now lift I with Philosophers to range,
In searching out, (though I admire the reason)
How simpathising properties most strange,
Keep contraries in straw, so long a season.
Ye, snow, fruits, fish, moist things, and dry and warm,
Are long preserved in straw, with little harm.
But let all Poets my remembrance wipe,
From out their books of Fame, for ever during,
If I forget to praise our Oaten pipe,
Such Music, to the Muses all procuring:
That some learned ears preferred it have before
Both Orpharyon, Violl, Lute, Bandore.
Now if we lift more curiously examine,
To search in straw some profitable points,
Bread has been made of straw in time of famine,
In cutting off the tender knotted joints:
But yet remains one praise of straw to tell,
Which all the other praise does far excel.
That straw, which men, and beasts, and fowls have scorned,
Has been by curious Art, and hand industrious
So wrought, that it has shadowed, yea adorned
A head and face of beauty and birth illustrious.
Now praise I? No, I envy now thy bliss,
Ambitious straw, that so high placed is.
What Architect this work so strangely matched?
An yuory house, doors, rubies, windows touch
A gilded roof, with straw all ouerthatcht.
Where shall pearl bide, when place of straw is such?
Now could I wish, alas, I wish too much,
I might be straw-drawne to that lively Tuch.
But herein we may learn a good example,
That virtuous Industry their worth can raise,
Whom slanderous tongs tread under foot and trample.
This told my Muse; and straight she went her ways:
Which (Lady) if you seriously allow,
It is no toy, nor have I broke my vow.
92 In Romam.
HAte, and debate, Rome through the world has
Yet Roma Amor is, if backward read.
Then is it not strange Rome hate should foster? No: spread,
For out of backward love, all hate does grow.
FINIS.

