A Caveat o(...) Common Curseto(...)
Uagabones, set forth by The(...) utility and profit of his nature(...) larged
by the first Author(...) the tale of the second tal(...) Crank, with the
true(...) or, and also his puni(...) dissembling, mos(...) hearer or
reader(...) Newly Imprinted. ANNO 1573.


This Cart at his tail does draw all about,
Such pylfering pickers, that to it is tied:
The whip with his whiskes, the blood fetches out,
The Baudes for baudery, and Hores therein ryed.
their kind, will wind^


A besom of byrche for babes very feet,
A long lasting lybbet for loubbes as meet:
A with to wind up that these will not keep,
Bind all up in one, and use it to sweep.

To the right honorable and my singular good Lady Elizabeth Countes of
Shrewsbury, Thomas Harman wishes all joy and perfect felicity, here and in
the world to come.
AS of Ancient and long time there ^^^^ and is now at this prefent many good
godly profita^^ ^^wes and acts, made and set forth in this most noble and
flourishing Realm, for the relief, succor, com^orte and sustentacion of the
pore, nedy, impotent and miserable creatures, being and inhabiting in all
parts of the same. So is there (right honorable and mine especial good Lady)
most wholesome estatutes, ordinances and necessery laws, made, set forth and
published, for the extreme punishment of all vagarants ^^ sturdy vagabonds as
passes through and by all parts of this fam^^^yle, most idelly and wickedly:
and I (by good experience) w^^^ standing and considering your most tender,
pitiful, gentle and ^^^^ nature, not only having a vigilant and merciful eye
to your poor indige^t and feeble parishioners: yea not only in the parish where
your honor most happily does dwell, but also in others inuironing or nighe
adjoining to the same As also abundantly pouring out daily your ardent and
bountiful charity upon all such as comes for relief unto your luckly
gates.

I thought it good, necessary, and my bounden duty to acquayn^ your goodness
with the abominable, wicked and detestable behauior of all these rowsey,
ragged rabblement of rakehelles, that under the pretense of great misery,
diseases and other innumerable calamities, which they feign through great
hypocrisy, do win and gain great alms in all places where they wyly wander,
to the utter deludinge of the good geuers: deceyiing and impouerishing of al
such poor householders both sick and fore, as neither can or may walk abroad
for relief and comfort (where in deed most mercy is to be showed,) And for
that, I (most honorable Lady) being placed as a poor gentleman, have kept a
house these twenty years, where unto poverty dyily has and does repair, not
without some relief as my poor calling and ability may and does extend: I
have of late years gathered a great suspicion that all should not be well: and
as the proverb says: Some thing lurcke and lay hyd that did not plainly
appear. For I having more occasion (through sickness) to tarry and remain at
home. then I have been accustomed, do by my there abiding, talk and confer
daily with many of these wyly wanderars, of both sorts, as well men and women,
as boys and gyrles: by whom I have gathered and derstand their deep
dissimulation and detestable dealing, being marvelous subtle and crafty in
their kind, for not one amongst twenty will discover, either declare their
scelerous secrets: yet with fair flattering words, money, and good chere, I
have attained to the typpe by such as the meanest of the^, has wa^dered these
xiii. years, and most xvi. and some xx. and upward, and not without fatihful
promise made unto them, never to discover their names or any thing they
showed me: for they would all say, if the upright men should understand
thereof, they should not be only grievously beaten, but put in danger of
their lives, by the said upright men. There was a few years since a small
brief set forth of some zealous man to his country, of whom I know not, that
made a little show of their names and usage, and gave a glymsing light not
sufficient to persuade of their peuish pelting and pyncking practyses, but well
worthy of praise. But (good ma^^me) with no less travel then good will, I
have repaired and rigged the ship of knowledge, and have hoyssed up the sails
of good fortune, that she may safely pass about and through all parts of this
noble realm, and there make port sale of her wished wares, to the confusion
of their drowsey demener, and unlawful language, pylfring, pycking, wyly
wandering and lyking lechery, of all these rablement of rascales that raunges
about all the costs of the same, so that their vndesent doleful dealing and
execrable exercyses may appear to all as it were in a glass, that thereby the
Iusticers and Shreeues may in their circuites be more vigilant to punish
these malefactores, and the Constables, Baylifes and householders, setting aside
all fear, sloth, and pity, may be more circumspect in executing the charge
given them by the aforesaid Iusticers. Then will no more this rascal rablement
raunge about the country. Then greater relief may be showed to the poverty of
each parish. Then shall we keep our horses in our pastures vnstolen. Then
our lynnen clothes shall and may lie safely on our hedges untouched. Then shall
we not have our clothes and linen hooked out at our windows, as well by day
as by night Then shall we not have our houses broken up in the night, as of
late one of my neighbors had and two great buckes of clothes stolen out, and
most of the same fine linen. Then shall we safely keep our pigges and
poultrey from pylfering Then shall we surely pass by the high ways leading
to markets and faires unharmed. Then shall our shops and bothes be vnpicked and
spoiled. Then shall these uncomely companies be dispersed and set to labor
for their living, or hastily hang for their demerites. Then shall it encourage
a great number of gentlemen and others, seeinge this security, to set up
houses and keep hospitality in the country, to the comfort of their
neighbors, relief of the poor, and to the amendment of the common wealth.
Then shall not sin and wyckednes so much abound among us. Then will gods
wrath be much the more pacified toward us. Then shall we not taste of so many
and sundry plagues as now daily reigns over us. And then shall this famous
Empire be in more wealth and better floryshe, to the inestimable joy and
comfort of the Queens most excellent maiestitie, whom God of his infinite
goodness, to his great glory, long and many years make most prosperously to
raygne over us, too the great felicity of all the Peers and nobles, and to
the unspeakable joy, relief and quietness of mind of all her faithful commons
and subjects. Now, me thinks I see how these peuish, perverse and pestilent
people begin to freat, fume, swear, and stare at this my book, their life
being laid open and apparently painted out, that their confusion and end
draws on apace: where as in deed if it be well wayed, it is set forth for
their singular profyt and commodity, for the sure sauegard of their lives here
in this world, that they shorten not the same before their time, and that by
their true labor and good life, in the world to come they may save their
souls, that Christ the second person in Trinity has so derely bought with
his most precious bloudso that hereby I shall do them more good then they could
have devised for themselves. For behold, their life being so manifest wicked,
and so apparently known: the honorable will abhor them: the woorshipfull
will reiecte them: the yeoman will sharplye tawnte them: the husband men
utterly defye them: the labouringe men bluntlye chyde them: the women with a
loud exclamation wonder at them: And all children with clappynge hands cry
out at them. I many times musing with my self at these mischeuous myslyuers
marueled when they took their original and beginning, how long they have
exercised their execrable wandringe about: I thought it meet to confer with a
very old man that I was well acquainted with, whose wit and memory is
marvelous for his years, being about the age of four score, what he knew
when he was young of these lousey lewterars. And he showed me that when he
was young, he waited upon a man of much worship in Kent, who dyed immediately
after the last Duke of Buckingham was beheaded, at his buryall there^ was such
a number of beggars, besides poor householders dwelling there abouts, that
uneath they might lie or stand about the house: then was thereto prepared for
them a great and a large barn, and a great fat ox sod out in Furmenty for
them with bread and drink abundantly to furnish out the premises, and every
person had two pence for such was the dole When night aproched the pore
householders repaired hom^ to their houses, the other wayfaring bold beggars
remained all night in the barn, and the same barn being serched with light in
the night by this old man and then young and others, they told seven score
persons of men, every of them having his woman, except it were two women that
lay alone together for some especial cause. Thus having their makes to make
merry withal: the burial was turned to bousing and belly cheer, mourning to
mirth, fasting to feasting, prayer to pastyme, and pressing of paps and
lamenting to lecherye. So that it may appear this uncomely company has had a
long continuance but then nothing given so much to pylferinge, pyckinge and
spoling, and as far as I can learn or understand by the examination of a
number of them, their language which they term peddelers French or Canting,
began but within these xxx. years or little above, and that the first inuenter
thereof was hanged all save the head, for that is the final end of them al,
or else to dye of some filthy and horrible diseases: but much harm is done in
the mean space by their continuance as some x. xii. and xvi. years before
they be consumed; and the number of them does daily renew. I hope their sin
is now at the highest, and that as short and as speedy redress will be for
these, as has been of late years for the wretched, wyly wandering vagabonds
calling and naming them selves Egyptians, deeply dissembling and long hyding
and covering their deep deceiteful practices, feeding the rude common people
wholly addicted and given to novelties, toys, and new inventions, delyting
them with the straungenes of the attire of their heads, and practicing
paulmistrye to such as would know their fortunes. And to be short, all thieves
and hoores (as I may well write) as some have had true experience, a number can
well witness, and a great sort has well felt it. And now (thanks be to
God) through wholesome laws and the due execution thereof, all be dispersed,
banished, and the memory of them clean extinguished, that when they be once
named hereafter, our Children will much marueill what kind of people they
were: and so I trust shall shortly happen of these. For what thing does
chiefly cause these rowsey rake helles thus to continue and daily increase?
surely a number of wicked persons that keep typling houses in all shiers,
where they have succoure and relief, and what so ever they bring, they are
sure to receive money for the same, for they sell good penny worthes. The buyers
have the greatest gain, yea if they have neither money nor ware, they wylbe
trusted, their credit is much I have taken a note of a good many of them, and
will send their names and dwelling places to such Iusticers as dwells nere or
next unto them, that they by their good wisdoms may displace the same, and
authorize such as have honesty. I will not blot my book with their names,
because they be resident. But as for this fleeting fellowship, I have truly set
forth the most part of them, that be doers at this present with their names
that they be known by. Also I have placed in the end thereof their lewd
language, calling the same pedlers French or Canting. And now shall I end my
prologue, making true declaration (right honorable Lady) as they shall fall in
order of their vntemely tryfelinge time, leude life, and pernicious practices,
trusting that the same shall neither trouble or abashe your most tender,
tymerous and pytyfull Nature, to think the small mode should grow unto you for
such alms so given. For God our merciful and most loving father, well knows
your heart and good intent, the gyuer never wants his reward, according to
the saying of Saint Augustine: as there is (neither shall be) any sin
unpunished even so shall there not be any good deed unrewarded But how
comfortably speaks Christ our Savior unto us in his gospel (give ye and it
shall be given you again) behold further, good Madam that for a cup of cold
water, Christ has promised a good reward. Now saint Austine properly
declares why Christ speaks of cold water, because the poorest man that is,
shall not excuse him self from that charitable work, least he would
peradventure say that he has neither wood, pot nor pan to warm any water
with. See further what God speaks in the mouth of his prophet Esaye. Break
thy bread to him that is a hungered, he says not give him a whole lofe: for
peraduentute the poor man has it not to give, then let him give a piece. This
much is said because the poor that has it should not be excused, now how much
more then the rich. Thus you see good Madame, for your treasure here
dispersed, where need and lack is, it shall be heaped up abundantly for you in
heaven, where neither rust or moth shall corrupt or destroy the same. Unto which
triumphant place after many good happy, and fortunat years prosperously here
dispended, you may for ever and ever, thero most joyfully remain.

Amen.
FINIS.
The Epistle to the Reader.
ALthough; good Reader I write in plain terms, and not so plainly as truly,
concerning the matter, meaning honestly to all men, and wish them as much
good, as to mine own heart, yet as there has been, so there is now, and
hereafter will be curious heads to find faults: wherefore I thought it
necessary now at this second Impression, to acquaynt thee with a great fault,
as some takes it, but not as I mean it, calling these Uagabondes Cursetors,
in the Intytuling of my book, as runners or rangers about the Country,
derived of this Latin word ( C V R R O) neither do I write it Cooresetores with
a double oo, or Cowresetors with a w, which has an other signification: is
there no diversity between a gardein, and a garden, maynteynance, and
maintenance: Streytes, and streets: those that have understanding, know there
is a great difference: who is so ignorant in these days, as knows not the
meaning of a vagabone? and if any ydell leuterar should so be called of any
man, would not he think it both odyous and reproachful? will he not shon
the name? ye and where as he may and dare with bent brows, will revenge that
name of ignominy: yet this plain name vagabone is derived as others be of Latin
words, and now use makes it common to all men: but let us look back four
hundred years since, and let us see whether this plain word vagabon, was
used or no? I believe not, and why? because I read of no such name in the old
estatuts of this realm, unless it be in the margent of the Book, or in the
Table, which in the collection and printing was set in, but these were then the
common names of these lewd leuterars, say tores, Robardesmen, Drawlatches, and
valiant beggars. If I should have used such words, or the same order of
writing, as this realm used in King Henry the third, or Edward the firstes
time. Oh what a gross, barbarous fellow have we here, his writing is both
homely and dark, that we had need to have an enterpreter, yet then it was very
well and in short season, a great change we see, well this delycatage shall
have his time on the othersyde, eloquence have I none, I never was acquaynted
with the Muses. I never tasted of Helycon. But according to my plain order, I
have set forth this work, simply and truly with such usual words and terms,
as is among us well known and frequented. So that as the proverb says
(although truth be blamed, it shall never be shamed,) well good reader, I
mean not to be tedious unto thee but have added five or six more tales,
because some of them were done while my Book was first in the press, and as
I trust I have deserved no rebuke, for my good will, even so I desire no
praise for my pain, cost, and travel. But faithfully for the profyt and
benefyte of my country, I have done it, that the whole body of the Realm,
may see and understand their lewd life and pernicious practices, that all may
speedely help to amend that is amiss. Amen say all with me.

FINIS.
A Rufflar.
THe Rufflar, because he is first in degree of this odious order: and is so
called in a statut made for the punishment of vagabonds: In the xxvij. year of
king Henry the eight late of most famous memory: He shall be first placed as the
worthiest of this vnraly rableme^t. And he is so called when he goes first
abroad, either he has served in the wars, or else be has been a serving man
and weary of well doing, shaking of all pain, does choose him this idle life,
and wretchedly wanders about the most shyres of this realm. And with stout
audacity h^ demands where he thinks he may be bold, and circumspecte
enough, as he sees cause to ask charity, rufully and lamentably, that it
would make a fiynty heart to relent, and pit his miserable estate, how he has
been maimed and broused in the wars, and peradventure some will show you some
outward wound, which he got at some dronken fraye, either haltinge of some
pre^y wound ^estred with a fylthy fiery flankard. For be well assured that the
hardiest soldiers be either slain or maimed, either if they escape all
hassardes, and return home again, if they be without relief of their
friends, they will surely desperately rob and steal, or either shortly be
hanged or miserably dye in prison, for they be so much ashamed and disdain to
beg or ask charity, that rather they will as desperately fight for to live and
mainteyne them selves as manfully, and valiantly they ventred them selves in
the Princes quarrel. Now, these Rufflars the outcastes of seruinge men when
begginge or crauinge fayles, then they pick and pylfer from other inferior
beggars that they mee^e by the way, as Roges, Pal^yardes, Mortes, and Doors:
yea if they meet with a woman alone ridinge to the market, either old man or
boy, that he well knows will not resist, such they filche and spoil.
These Rufflars after a year or two at the farthest become upright men, unless
the^ be prevented by twinde ^empe.

I had of late years an old man to my tenant, who customablye a great time,
went twice in the week to London, either with fruit or with pescodes, when
time served therefore. And as he was coming homewarde on black heathe, at
the end thereof next to shooters hill, he ouertoke two Rufflars, the one
manerly waiting on ye other, as one had been the master, and the other the man
or servant carrying his master cloak: This old man was very glad that he
might have their company over the bill, because that day he had made a good
market, for he had seven shillings in his purse, and an old angel, which this
poor man had thought had not been in his purse, for he willed his wife over
night to take out the same Angel, and lay it up until his coming home
again. And he verily thought that his wife had so done, which in deed forgot
to do it. Thus after salutations, had this master rufflar entered into
communication with this simple old man, who ryding softly beside them commoned
of many matters. Thus feding this old man with pleasant talk, until they were
on the top of the hill where these rufflars might well behold the coaste
about them clear, quickly steps unto this poor man, and takes hold of his
horse brydell, and leads him in to the wode, and demands of him what and
how much money he had in his purse. Now by my troth quoth this old man, you ar
a merry gentleman, I know you mean not to take away any thing from me, but
rather to give me some if I should ask it of you. By and by this servant
thief casts the clok that he carried on his arms about this poor man's face,
that he should not mark or view them, with sharp words to deliver quicly that
he had and to confess truly what was in his purse. This poor man then al
abashed yielded and confessed he had but just seven shillinges in his purse and
the truth is be knew of no more. This old angel was falen out of a little purse
into the botome of a great purse. Now this seven shillings in whyt money they
quickly found, thinkinge in deed that there had been no more, yet farther
groping and searching, found this old angel. And with great admiration this
gentle man these began to bless him, saying: good Lord what a world is
this, how may (quoth he) a man believe or trust in the same, see you not
(quod he) this old knau^ told me that he had but seven shillinges, and here is
more by an angel, what an old knaeu and a false knave have we here (quoth this
rufflar) our lord have mercy on us, will this world never be better, and
therewith went their way, and less the old man in the wood doing him no more
harm. But sorrowful sighinge this old man returning home declared his
misaduenture, with all the words and circumstances above showed, whereat for the
time was great laughing, and this poor man for his losses among his loving
neighbors well considered in the end.

A Upryght man, Cap. 2.
A Upright man the second in sect of this unseemly sort must be next placed of
these rainging rablement of rascales, some be serving men, artificers, and
laboring men, traded up in husba^dry: These not minding to get their living
with the sweat of their face, but casting of all pain, will wander after their
wicked manner, through the most shyres of this realm.

As Sommerset shyre, Will shyre. Bark shyre, Oxforde shyre, Harforde shyre,
Myddilsex, Esse^, Suffolk, Northfolke, Suffex, Surrye, and Kent, as the chief
and best shyres of relief. Yea not without punishment by stocks, whyppinges,
and imprisonment, in most of these places above said: yet notwithstanding they
have so good lyking in their lewd lecherous loyteringe, that full quicklye all
their punishments be forgotten. And repentance is never thought upon, until
they clyme three trees with a ladder. These vnrewly rascales in their roylinge,
disperse them selves into several companies, as occasion serves, sometime
more and sometime less. As if they repair to a poor husbandmans house, he
will go alone or one with him, and stoutely demand his charity, either
showing how he has served in the wars and their maimed, either that he
seeks service and says he would be glad to take pain for his lyuinge,
although he means nothing less: If he be offered any meat or drink, he
utterly refuses scornefullye, and will naught but money, and if he espy young
pigs or poultry, he well notes the place, and then the next night or shortly
after, he will be sure to have some of them, which they bring to their
stawlinge kens, which is their tippling houses, as well known to them
according to the old proverb (as the beggar knows his dishe.) For you must
understand every Typplyng ale house will neither receive them or their wares
but some certain houses, in every shyre, especially for that purpose, where
they shall be better welcome to them, then honester men For by such have they
most gain, and shall be conuayd either into some loft out of the way, or other
secret corner not common to any other, and thither repair at accustomed times
their barlotes which they term mortes and Doors, not with emty hands, for they
be as skillful in picking, riffling and filching, as the upright men, and
nothing inferior to them in all kind of wickedness, as in other places herafter
they shall be touched. At these foresaid pelting penish places and unmannerly
meetings, O how the pottes walk about, their talking tounges talk at large:
They howl and house one to anther, and for the time bowsing belly chere. And
after their ruysting recreatio^ if there be not rome enough in the house, they
have clean straw in some barn or back house nere adioining, where they couch
comely together, as it were dog and byche, and he that is hardyest mays have
his choice, unless for a litlte good manner, some will take their own that they
have made promise vnto^ until they be out of sight, and according to the old
adage (out of mind) Yet these upright men stand so much upon their reputation,
as they will in no case have their women walk with them, but separate
themselves for a time, a month or more. And mete at fayres or great markets
where they mete to pilfer and steale^ from staules, shoppes, or boothes. At
these fayres the upright men, use commonly to lie, and lingar in hye ways by
lanes, some pretty way or distance from the place, by which ways they be
assured that company passes still to and fro, and there they will demand with
cap in hand and comely curtesye, the devotion and charity of ye people. They
have been much lately whipped at fayrs. If they ask at a stout yemans or
farmers house his charity, they will go strong as three or four in a company:
where for fear more then good will they often have relief, they seldom or
never pass by a Iuststes house, but have by ways, unless he dwell alone, and
but weakly manned, thither will they also go strong after a slye subtle
sort, as with their arms bound up with kercher or list, having wrapped about
the same filthy clothes, either their legs in such manner be wrapped halting
down right, not unprovided of good codgils, which they carry to sustain them,
and as they feign to keep dogs from them, when they come to such good
gentlemen's houses, if any searthe be made or they suspected for pilfering
clothes of hedges, or breaking of houses which they commonly do, when the
owners be either at the market, church, or other ways occupied about their
business, either rob some sely man or woman by the hye way, as many times they
do. Then they high them into wodes, great thickets, and other ruff corners
where they lie lurking three or four days together, and have meat and drink
brought them by their mortes and Doors: and while they thus lie bidden in
conert, in the night they be not idle neither as ye common saying is (well
occupied) for then as the wyly fore, creping out of his den, seeks his pray
for pultery, so do these for ^nnen and any thing else worth money, that lies
about or nere a house. As sometime a whole buck of clothes carried away at time.
When they have a greatter booty, then they may carry away quickly to their
stawlinge kennes as is above said, they will hyde the same for a three days in
some thick, covert and in the night time carry the same like good water
Spannels to their foresaid houses, to whom they will discover where or in what
places they had the same where the marks shall be picked out clean, and conuayd
craftily far of to sell if the man or woman of the house want money themselves:
and if these upright men have nether money nor wares, at these houses they
shall be trusted for their vitalles and it amount to twenty or thirty shillinges:
yea if it fortune any of these upright men to be taken, either suspected or
charged with felony or pety brybrye don at such a time or such a place, he
will say he was in his hosts house. And if the man or wife of that house be
examined by an officer, they boldly vouche that they lodged him such a time,
whereby the truth cannot apeare. And if they chance to be retained into
service, through their lamentable words, with any welthy man they will tarry
but a small time, either robbing his master, or some of his fellows. And some
of them uses this policy, that although they trauaill into all these shyres
above said, yet will they have good credit, especially in one shyre, where at
diverse good farmers houses they be well known, where they work a month in
place or more and will for that time behave themselves very honestly and
paynfully. And may at any time for their good usage have work of them, and to
these at a dead lift or last refuge, they may safely repair unto, and be
welcome, when in other places for a knacke of knavery that they have played they
dare not tarry. These upright me^ will sildom or never want, for what is gotten
by any Morte or Door, if it please him he does command the same: and if he
mete any beggar, whether he be sturdy or impotent, he will demand of him
whether ever he was stalled to the roge or no. If he say he was, he will know
of whom, and his name y^ stalled him. And if he be not learnedly able to show
him the whole circumstance thereof, he will spoil him of his money, either of
his best garment if it be worth any money, and have him to the bowsing ken:
which is, to some typpling house next adioyninge and lays there to gage the
best thing that he has for twenty pence or two shillings: this man obeys for
fear of beating. Then does this upright man call for a gage of bowse, which
is a quarte pot of drink and powers the same upon his peld pate, adding
these words I. G. P, do stalle thee W. T. to the Roge, and that from
henceforth it shall be lawful for thee to Cant, that is to ask or beg for
thy living in all places. Here you see y^ the upright man is of great auctority
for all sorts of beggars are obedient to his hests, and surmounte^^ all
tothers in pylfring and stealing. I lately had standinge in my well house which
stands on the backeside of my house a great cawdron of copper being then full
of water, having in the same half a dosen of pewter dishes well marked and
stamped with the con^zance of my arms: which beeinge well noted when they were
taken out were set a side, the water powered out, and my caudron taken a way,
being of such bigness that one man unless he were of great strength was not able
far to carry the same. Notwithstanding the same was one night within this two
years, conuayed more then half a mile from my house, into a commen or heth,
and there bestowed in a great firbushe. I then immediately the next day sent one
of my men to London and there gave warning in Southwark. Kent street, and Barm^
sey streat, to all the Tynckars there dwelling, that if any such Caudron came
thither to be sold, the bringar thereof should be stayed, and promised twenty
shillings for a reward. I gave also intelligence to the watermen that kept the
^erres that no such vessel should be either conveyed to London, or into Essex,
promising the like reward, to have understanding thereof. This my doing was well
understand in many places about, and that the fear of espying so troubled the
conscience of the stealer, that my Caudron lay untouched in y^ thick^ firbushe
more then half a year: after which by a great chance was found by hunters for
conne^s: for one chanced to run into y^ same bushe where my caudron was, and
being perceived, one thrust his staff into the same bushe and hit my caudron a
great blow, the sound whereof did cause the man to think and hope that there
was some great treasure hidden, whereby be thought to be the better while he
lived. And in further searching he found my Caudron, so had I the same again
unlooked for.

A Hoker or Anglear. Cap. 3.
THese hokers or Anglers be perilous and most wicked knaves, and be derived or
proceed forth from the upright men, they commonly go in freese yerkynes and
gally ^loppes, points beneth the knee: these when they practice their
pilfryng, it is al by night, for as they walk a day times from house to house
to demand charity, they vigilantly mark where, or in what place they may
attain to there pray, casting their eyes up to every window, well noting what
they see there, whether apparel or linen, hanging near unto the said
wyndows, and that will they be sure to have y^ next night following, for they
customably carry with them a staff of v. or vi. foot long, in which, within
one inch of y^ top thereof is a little hole ^ored through: in which hole they
put an iron hoke, and with the same they will pluck unto them quikly any
thing yt they may reach therewith, which hoke in the day time they covertly carry
about the^, and is never seen or taken out till they come to the place where
they work their feat, such have I seen at my house and have often talked with
them and have handled their staves not the^ understanding to what use or intent
they served, although I had and perceived by their talk and behavior great
likelihode of evil suspicion in them, they will either lean upon their staff
to hyde the hole thereof, when they talk with you, or hold their hand upon the
hole, and what stuff either woollen or linen, they thus hoke out, they never
carry the same forthwith to their stauling kens, but hides the same a iii. days
in some secret corner, and after conueis the same to their houses abouesaid
where their host or hostys gives them money for the same but half the value
that it is worth, or else their Doxes shall a far of sell the same at the like
houses. I was credibly informed that a hoker came to a farmers house in the
dead of the night, and putting abacke a draw window of a low chamber, the bed
standing hard by the said window, in which lay three persons, a man and two
big boys: this hoker with his staff plucked of their garments which lay
upon them to keep them warm, with the couerlet and shete, and left them lying
a sleep naked saving their shyrtes, and had away all clean and never could
understand where it became. I verily suppose that when they were well waked with
cold, they surely thought that Robin good fellow, (according to the old saying)
had been with them that night.

A Roge. Cap. 4.
A Roge is neither so stout or hardy as the vpryght man: Many of them will go
fayntly and look piteousely when they see either meet any person, having a
kercher as white as my shoes tied about their head, with a short staff in
their hand, halting although they need not, requiring alms of such as they
mete or to what house they shall come. But you may easily perceue by their
color yt they carry both health and hipocrisy about them, whereby they get gain,
when others want that cannot feign and dissemble. Others there be that walk
sturdely about ye country, and faineth to seek a brother or kinsma^ of his,
dwelling within some part of ye shier either that he has a letter to deliver to
some honest householder dwelling out of an other shyre, and will show you the
same fair, sealed, with the superscription to the party he speaks of,
because you shall not think him to run idelly about the country, either
have they this shifte, they will ^ary a certificat or pasport about them from
some Iusticer of the peace, with his hand and seal unto the same, how he has
been whipped and punished for a vagabonde according to the laws of this realm
and that he must return to^ T. where he was borne or last dwelt, by a certain
day limited in the same, which shall be a good long day, And all this feigned,
because without fear they would wickedly wander, and will renew the same
where or when it pleases them: for they have of their affinity that can write
and read. These also will pick and steal as the upright men, and has their
women and meetings at places appointed, and nothing to them inferior in all
kind of knavery There be of these Roges Curtales, wearing short ^lokes, that
will change their apparel as occasion serves, and their end is either
hanging, which they call Trming in their language, or dye miserably of the
pockes

There was not long since two Roges that always did associat themselves
together and would never seperat themselves unless it were for some especial
causes, for they were sworn brothers, and were both of one age and much like of
favor: these two traueling into east kent, resorted unto an ale house, being
weried with traueling, saluting with short courtesy (when they came into the
house) such as they saw fitting there: in which company was the parson of the
parish, and calling for a pot of the best ale, sat down at the tables end: the
liquor liked them so well that they had pot upon pot, and sometime for a little
good manner would drink and offer the cup to such as they best fancied and to be
short they sat out all the company, for each man departed home about their
business: when they had well refreshed themselves, then these rowsy roges
requested the good man of the house with his wife to sit down and drink with
them: of whom they inquired what priest the same was and where he dwelt, then
they faining that they had an uncle a priest, and that he should dwell in these
parts which by all presumptions it should be he, and that they came of purpose
to speak with him, but because they had not seen him since they were sire
years old, they durst not be bold to take acquaintance of him until they were
farther instructed of the truth, and began to inquire of his name, and how long
he had dwelt there, and how far his house was of from y^ place they were in,
the good wife of the house, thinkinge them honest men without dilceit, because
they so far enquired of their kinsman, was ^ut of a good zealous natural intent,
showed them cheerfully that he was an honest man and well beloved in the parish
and of good wealth, and had been there resident xv. years at the least, but
says she, are you both brothers? yea surely said they, we have been both in
one belly and were twins: mercy God quoth this folishe woman, it may well be,
for ye be not much unlike, and went unto her hall window calling these young men
unto her, and looking out pointed. with her finger and showed them the house
standing alone, no house near the same by almost a quarter of a mile, that
said she is your uncles house: nay says one of them he is not only my uncle,
but also my Godfather, it may well be quoth she, nature will bind him to be
the better unto you: well quod they, we be weary and mean not to trouble our
uncle to night, but to morrow god willinge, we will see him and do our duty.
But I pray you does our uncle occupye husbandry, what company has he in his
house? alas says she, but one old woman and a boy he has no occupying at
all: tush q this good wife you be mad me^, go to him this night for he has
better lodging for you then I have, and yet I speak folishly against mine own
profit, for by your taring here I should gayn ye more by you Now by my troth q
one of them, we thank you good hosts for your holsom counsel, and we mean to
do as you will us, we will pause a while and by that time it will be almost
night, and I pray you give us a reckening (so manerly paying for that they
took) had their host and hosts farewell with taking leave of the cup:
marched merelye out of the doors toward this parsons house, vewed the same
well round about and passed by two bowshotes of into a young wood where they
lay consulting what they should do until midnight, quoth one of them (of
sharper wit and subtiller then the other) to his fellow, thou see that this
house is stone walled about, and that we cannot well break in, in any part
thereof: thou see also that the windows be thick of mullions, that there is
no kreeping in between, wherefore we must of necessity use some policy when
strength will not serve. I have a horse lock here about me, says he, and this
I hope shall serve our turn: so when it was about xii of the clock they came
to the house and lurked near unto his chamber window: the dog of the house
barked a good, that with the noise, this priest waketh out of his sleep, and
began to cough and hem: then one of these roges steps forth necrer the window
and makes a rufull and pityfull noise, requiring for Christ sake some relief
that was both hungry and thirsty and was like to lie without the doors all
night and starve for cold, unless he were relee^ed by him with some small piece
of money. Where dwell thou, qthis parson? alas sir says this roge. I have
small dwelling, and have come out of my way: and I should now says he, go to
any town now at this time of night, they would set me in the stocks and
punish me: well quoth this pitiful parson, away from my house, either lie in
some of my outhouses until the morning and hold here is a couple of pence for
thee. A God reward you, quoth this roge, and in heaven may you find it. The
parson opens his widow and thrusts out his arm to give his alms to this
roge that^ came whi^ing to receive it, and quickly takes hold of his hand and
calls his fellow to him, which was ready at hand with the horse lock and
clappeth the same about the wrest of his arm that the mullions standing so
close together for strength, that for his life he could not pluck in his arm
again, and made him believe, unless he would at the least give them i^^ pound,
they would smi^e of his arm from the body, so that this poor parson in fear
to lose his hand, called up his old woman that lay in the loft oner him, and
willed her to take out all the money he had, which was iiij. marks, which he
said was all y^ money in his house, for he had lent vi. pound to one of his
neighbors not iiij. days before. Well q they, master parson if you have no
more, upon this condition we will take of the lock that you will drink xij.
pence for our sakes to morrow at the ale house where he found you and tha^k the
good wife for the good chere she made us: be promised faithfully that he would
so do: so they took of the lock and went their way so far ere it was day, that
the parson could never have any understanding more of them: now this parson
sorowfully slumberinge yt night between fear and hope, though it was but folly
to make two sorows of one, he used co^tentation for his remedy, not forgettyng
in the morning to perform his promise but went betimes to his neighbor that
kept tippling, and asked angerly where the same two men were that drank with her
yester day: which two men qthis good wife? the strangers that came in, when I
was at your house with my neighbors yesterday: what your neuewes q she. My
neuews q this parson, I trow thou art mad. Nay by god q this good wife, as
sober as you, for they told me faithfully that you were their uncle, but in
faith are you not so in deed, for by my troth they are strangers to me, I
never saw them before. O out upon them q the parson, they be false thieves, and
this night they compelled me to give them all this money in my house.
Benedicite q this good wife, and have they so in deed? as I shall answer
before god, one of them told me besides yt you were godfather to him and that
he trusted to have your blessinge before he departed, what did he, quoth this
parson, a halter bless him for me, me thinks by the mass by your
countenance you looked so wildly when you came in quoth this good wife, that
something was amis^ I use not to jest quoth this parson when I speak so
earnestly, why all your sorrows go with it quoth his good wife, and sit down
here and I will fill a fresh pot of ale to make you merry again, ye says this
parson fill in and give me some meat, for they made me swear and promise them
faithfully that I should drink xij. pence with you this day? what did they
quoth she, now by the mary mass they be merry knaves, I warrant you they
mean to bye no land with your money: but how could they come unto you in the
night, your doors being shut fast? your house is very strong, then this parson
showed her all the whole circumstance how he gave the^ his a^mes, out at the
window, they made such lamentable cry, that it pitied him at the heart, for he
saw but one when he put out his hand at the window, he ruled by me quoth this
good wife, wherein quoth this parson^ by by troth never speak more of it when
they shall understand of it in the parish they will but laugh you to skorne, why
then quoth this parson^ the devil go with it, and their an end.

A Wild Roge. Cap. 5.
A Wild Roge is he that is borne a Roge, he is more subtle and more given by
nature to all kind of knavery then the other, as heastly begotten in barn or
bushes, and from his infancy traded up in treachery: yea and before rypenes of
years does permit, wallowing in lewd lechery, but that is counted amongst them
no sin. For this is their custom, that when they meet in barn at night,
every one gets a mate to lie withal, and there chance to be twentye in a
company, as their is sometime more, and sometime less: for to one man that
goes abroad, there are at the least two women, which never make it strange
when they be called, although she never knew him before. Then when the day
does appear, he rouses him up and shakes his ears, and away wandering where
he may get ought to the hurt of others. Yet before he skyppeth out of his
couche and departs from his darling (if he like her well) he will appoynte
her where to meet shortly after, with a warning to work warely for some
chetes, that their meeting might be the merier.

Not long since, a wild roge chanced to mete a pore neighbor of mine who for
honesty and good nature surmounteth many. This poor man riding homeward from
London, where he had made his market: this roge demanded a penny for Gods sake
to keep him a tru^ man. This simple man beholding him well, and saw he was of
tal^ personage with a good quarter staff in his hand, it much pi^ied him as he
said to see him want, for he was well able to serve his prince in the wars.
Thus being moved with pity, looked in his purse too find out a penny, and in
loking for the same, he plucked out viii. shillings in whyt money, and raked
therein to find a single penny, and at the last finding one, does offer the same
to this wild roge but he seeing so much money in this simple man's hand, being
stricken to the heart with a covetous desire, hid him forthwith to deliver all
that he had, or else he would with his staff beat out his brains: for it was
not a penny would now quench his thirst seeing so much as he did: thus
swallowing his spittell gredely down, spoiled this poor man of all the money
that he had, and lept over the hedge into a thick wood, and went his way as
merely as this good simple man came home sorowfully. I once rebucking a wild
Roge, because he went idelly about: he showed me that he was a beggar by
inheritance, his Grandfather was a beggar, his father was one, and he must
needs be one by good reason.

A Prigger of Prauncers. Cap. 6.
A Prigger of Prauncers be horse stealers, for to prigge signifies in their
language to steal, and a Prauncer is a horse, so being put together, the
matter was plain. These go commonly in Ierkins of leather or of whyt freese,
and carry little wands in their hands, and will walk through grounds and
pastures, to search and see horses meet for their purpose, and if they chance
to be met and asked by the ownners of the ground what they make there, they
feign strayghte that they have lost their way and desire to be instructed the
best way to such a place. These will also repair to gentlemen's houses and
ask their charitie^ and will offer their service. And if you ask the^ what
they can do, they will say that they can keep two or three Geldings and wait
upon a Gentleman. These have also their women that walking from them in other
places, mark where and what they see abroad, and shows these Priggars
thereof, when they meet, which is within a week or two, and look where they
steal any thing, they convey the same at the least three score miles of or
more.

There was a Gentleman, a very friend of mine, ryding from London homeward into
Kent, having with in three miles of his house business, alyghted of his
horse, and his man also, in a pretye village, where diverse houses were, and
looked about him where he might have a convenient person to walk his horse,
because he would speak with a Farmer that dwelt on the back side of the said
villag^ little above a quarter of a mile from the place where he lighted and had
his man to weight upon him^ as it was mete for his calling, espying a Priggar
there standing, thinking the same to dwell there, charging this pretty prigging
person to walk his horse well, and that they might not stand still for taking
of cold, and at his return (which he said should not be long) he would give
him a penny to drink, and so went about his business. This pelting Priggar,
proud of his pray, walks his horse up and down, till he saw the Gentleman
out of sight, and ^eapes him into the saddell, and away he goes a main. This
Gentleman returninge, and fynding not his horses, sent his man to the one end
of the village, and he went himself unto the other end^ and enquired as he
went for his horses that were walked^ and began somewhat to suspecte, because
neither he nor his man could see nor find him. Then this getleman diligently
enquired of three or four town dwellers there, whether any such person,
declaring his stature, age, apparel, with so many linaments of his body as he
could call to remembrance. And vna voce all said that no such man dwelt in
their streat, neither in the parish that they knew of, but somy did well
remember that such a one ^^ey saw there lyrking and huggering two hours before
the Gentleman came thither and a stranger to them. I had thought quoth this
Gentleman, he had here dwelled^ and marched home manerly in his botes far from
the place he dwelt not. I suppose at his coming home he sent such ways as he
suspected or thought meet to search for this Prigger, but hitherto he never
hard any tidings again of his palfreys. I had the best gelding stolen out of
my pasture that I had amongst others, while this book was fi^^ a printing.

A Pallyard. Cap. 7.
THese Palliards be called also Clapperdogens, these go wit patched clokes, and
have their Morts with them which they call wives: and if he go to one house to
ask his alms, his wife shall go to an other, for what they get, as bread,
cheese, malte, and wol^, they s^l the same for ready money, for so they get
more, and if they went together, although they be thus divided in the day, yet
they meet ^ompe at night: if they chance to come to some gentilmans house
standinge alone, and be demanded whether they be man and wife, and if he
perceive that any doubts thereof, he shows them a Testimonial with the
ministers name and others of the same parish, naminge a parish in some shyre
far distant from the place where he sheweth^ the same. This writing he carries
to salve that sore: There be many Irish men that go about with counterfeat
licenses, and if they perceive you will straightly examine them, they will
immediately say they can speak no English.

Farther understand for truth, that the worst and wickedst of all this beastly
generation ar scarce comparable to these prating pallyards. All for ye most
part of these will either lay to their legs an herb called Sperewort, either
Arsnicke, which is called Ratesbane. The nature of this Spereworte will raise a
great blyster in a night upon the soundest part of his body, and if ye same be
taken away, it will dry up again and no harm. But this Arsnick will so poison
the same leg or sore, that it will ever after be incurable, this do they for
gayn and to be pitied. The most of these that walk about be walchmen.

A Frater. Cap. 8.
SOme of these Fraters will carry black bores at their girdel, wherein they have a
brief of the Queen's majesty's letters patents given to such poor spittle
house for the relief of ye poor there, which brief is a coppie of the letters
patents, and utterly fained, if it be in paper or in parchment without the
great seal: also if ye same brief be in print, it is also of authority For ye
printers will sae and well understand before it com in press, that the same is
lawful. Also I am credibly informed that the chief Proctors of many of these
houses, that seldom travel abrod themselves, but have their factors to gather
for the^, which look very slenderly to the impotent and miserable creatures
committed to their charge^ and die for want of cherishi^g whereas they and their
wives are well cra^med and cloted and will have of the best And the founders of
every such house, or the chief of the parish where they be, would better see
unto these proctors, that they might do their duty, they should be well spoken
of here, and in the world to come abou^dantly therefore rewarded. I had of late
an honest man and of good wealth, repaired to my house to common with me about
certain affairs. I invited the same to dinner, and dinner being done, I
demanded of him some news of these parties were he dwelt. Thanks be to God
sir (says he) all is well and good now. Now (quoth I) this same now declares
y^ some things of late has not been well. Yes sir ( q he) the matter is not
great, I had thought I should have been well beaten within this seventh night:
how so (quoth I) mary sir said he, I am Constable for fault of a better, and
was commanded by the Iusticer to watch. The watch being set, I took an honest
man one of my neighbors with me and went up to the end of the town as far as
the spittle house: at which house I heard a great noise, and drawing near
stood close under the wall, and this was at one of the clocks after midnight^
where he hard swearinge, pratinge, and wagers laying, and the pot apace
walking, and xl. pence gaged upon a match of wrestling, pitching of the bar,
and casting of the sledge: and out they go in a fustian sum into the back
side, where was a great Axiltry, and there fell to pitching of the bar, being
three to three: the Moon did shine bright, the Constable with his neighbor
might see and behold all that was done. And how the wife of the house was
rosting of a Pyg, while her gestes were in their match. At the last they could
not agree upon a cast and fell at words, and from words to blows. The
Constable with his fellow runs unto them to part them, and in the parting
lyckes a dry blow or two. Then the noise increased, the Constable would have
had them too the stocks. The wife of the house runs out with her good man to
entreat the Constable for her grstes, and leaves the Pyg at the fire alone. In
comes two or three of the next neighbors being waked with this noise, and
into the house they come and find none therein but the Pygge well roasted, and
carries the same away with them, spit and all, with such bread and drink also
as stood upon the table. When the goodman and the good wife of the house had
entreated and pacified the Constable, she winge unto him that they were
Proctors and Factors, all of Spyttle houses, and that they tarried there but to
break their fast, and would ride away immediately after, for they had far
to go, and therefore mente to ride so early. And coming into their house
again, fyndinge the Pygge with bread and drink al gone, made a great
exclamation, for they knew not who had the same.

The Constable returning and hearing the lamentable words of the good wife how
she had lost both meat and drink, and saw it was so indeed, he laughed in
his sleue, and commanded her to dress no more at unlawful hours for any
gestes: for he thought if better bestowed upon those smell feasts his pore
neighbors, then upon such sturdye Lubbares. The next morninge betymes, the
the spitte and pottes were set at the Spittle house door for the owner? Thus
were these Factours begyled of their breakfast, and one of them had well beaten
an other: and by my troth (quoth this Constable) I was glad when I was well ryd
of them. Why quoth I, could they cast the bar and sledge well? I will tell
you sir (quoth he) you know there has been many games this summer, I thinck
verily, that if some of these Lubbars had been there, and practysed amongst
others. I believe they would have carried aways the best games: for they were so
strong and sturdy that I was not able to stand in their hands. Well (quoth I)
at these games you speak of, both legs and arms be tried: yea (quoth this
officer, they be wicked men. I have seen some of them since with cloutes
bound about their legs, and ha^^^^ng with their staff in their hands.
Wherefore some of them (by God) be all naught.

A Abraham man. Cap. 9.
THese Abraham men be those that fayn themselves to have been mad, and have
been kept either in Bethelem, or in some other prison a good time, and not one
amongst twenty that ever came in prison for any such cause: yet will they say
how pityously and most extreemely they have been beaten and dealt with all.
Some of these be merry and very pleasant, they will dance and sing, some
others be as cold and reasonable to talk withal. These beg money, either
when they come at y^ armoures houses, they will demand Baken, either cheese,
or wool or any thing that is worth money, and if they espy small company
within, they will with ^^rce countenance demand somewhat. Where for fear
the maids will give them largely to be ryd of them.

If they may conveniently come by any cheat, they will pick^ and ^^eale as the
upright man or Roge, poultrey or lynnen. And all women that wander, be at their
commandment. Of all that ever I saw of this kind, one naming him self
Stradlinge, is the craftiest and most dissemblingest knave. He is able with
his tongue and usage, to deceive and abuse the wysest man that is. And surely
for the proporcion of his body, with every member thereunto appa^^^ning, it
cannot be amended But as the proverb is (God has done his part.) This
Stradling says he was the Lord Sturtons man, and when he was executed for
very pensiuenes of mind he fell out of his wit, and so continued a year
after and more, and that with the very grief and fear, he was taken with a
marvelous palsy, that both head and hands will shake when he talks with any
and that apace or fast, whereby he is much pytied, and gets greatly. And if
I had not demanded of others both men and women, that commonly walks as he
does, and known by them his deep dissimulation, I never had understand the
same. And thus I end with these kind of vagabondes.

A fresh water Mariner or Whip^acke. Cap. 10.
THese fresh water Mariners, their ships were drowned in the plain of
Salisbury. These kind of Caterpillars, counterfeit great losses on the sea,
these be some Western men, and most be Irish men. These will run about the
country with a counterfeit license, fayninge either shipwreck, or spoiled by
Pirates, near the coaste of Cornwall or Deuonshyre and set a land at some
haven town there, having a large and formal writing, as is above said, with
the names and seals of such men of woorshippe at the least four or five as
dwells near or next to the place where they feign their landing. And near
to those shyeres will they not beg until they come into Wylshyre, Hamshyre,
Barkeshyre, O^fordshyre, Harford shyre, Middelsex, and to London, and down by
the river to seek for their ship and goods that they never had, then pass
they through Surrey, Sussex, by the sea coasts, and so into kent, demanding
alms to bring them home to their country.

Sometime they counterfeit the seal of the Admiraltie, I have diverse times
taken away from them their licenses of both sorts, with such money as they
have gathered, and have confiscated the same to the poverty nighe adioyninge
to me. And they will not be long without an other, for at any good Town they
will renew the same. Once with much threatninge and fair promises, I
required to know of one company who made their license. And they swear that
they bought the same at Portsmouth of a Mariner there, and it cost them two
shillings, with such warrants to be so good and effectual, that if any of the
best men of law or learned about London should peruse the same, they were
able to find no fault therewith, but would assuredly allow the same.

A upright man Nicolas Blunt. The cou^terfet Cranke. Nicolas Genings.




These two pictures lively set out,
One body and soul, God send him more grace:
This monstrous dissembler, a Cranke all about.
Uncomly coveting of each to embrace,
Money or wares, as he made his race.
And sometime a Mariner, and a serving man:
Or else an artificer, as he would feign than.
Such shifts he used, being well tried,
Abandoning labor till he was espied:
Conding punishment for his dissimulation,
He surely received with much exclamation.
A counterfeit Cranke. Cap. 11.
THese that do counterfeit the Cranke be young knaves and young harlots, that
deeply dissemble the falling sickness. For the Crank in their language is the
fallinge evil, I have seen some of these with fair writing^s testimonials,
with the names and ^eales of some men of worship in Shropshyre, and in other
Shires far of, that I have well known and have taken the same from them. Many
of these do go without writings, and will go half naked, and look most
pitiously. And if any clothes be given them they immediately sell the same, for
wear it they will not, because they would be the more pitied, and we are
filthy clothes on their heads, and never go without a piece of white soap
about them, which if they see cause or present gayn, they will privily convey
the same into their mouth, and so work the same there, that they will foam as
it were a Boore, and maruelosly for a time torment them selves, and thus
deceive they the common people, and gain much. These have commonly their
harlots as the other.

Upon Alhallonday in the morning last Anno Domini 1566. or my book was half
printed, I mean the first impression, there came early in the morninge a
counterfeit Cranke under my lodginge at the white Friars within the cloister, in
a little yard or court wherabouts lay two or three great Ladies, being without
the liberties of London, whereby he hoped for the greatter gain: this Cranke
there lamentably lamenting, and pitifully crying to be relieved, declared to
diverse there his paynful and miserable disease. I being risen and not half
ready, hard his dolful words and ruful mournings, hear i^ him name the fallen
sickness, thought assuredlye to my self, that he was a deep desembler: so
coming out at a sudden, and beholding his ougly and yrksome attire, his
lothsom and horible cou^tinance, it made me in a marvelous perplexity what to
think of him, whether it were fained or truth for after this manner went he: he
was naked from y^ wast upward, saving he had an old Ierkin of leather, patched
and that was lose about him, that all his body lay out bare a filthy soul
cloth he ware on his head, being cut for the purpose, having a narow place to
put out his face, with a bauer made to trusse up his beard, and a string that
tied the same down close about his neck, with an old felt hat which he still
carried in his hand, to receive the charity and devotion of the people, for
that would he hold out from him, having his face from the eyes downward, all
smerd with fresh blood, as though he had new fallen, and bin tormented with his
paynefull panges, his ierken being all berayde with durte and mire, and his
heart and hosen also, as though he had wallowed in the myer: surely the
sight was monstrous and terrible. I called him unto me and demanded of him
what he ayled. A good master, quoth he, I have the grievous and payneful
disease called the falling sickness: why, quoth I, how comes thy ierkin, hose
and hat so berayd with dirt and myer, and thy skin also? A good master I fell
down on the backesyde here in a foul lane hard by the water side, and there I
lay almost all night, and have bled all most all the blood out in my body.
It raynd that morninge very fast: and while I was thus talking with him, a
honest poor woman that dwelt thereby, brought him a fair lynnen cloth, and
bid him wype his face therewith, and there being a tobbe standing full of rayn
water, offered to give him some in a dishe, that he might make himself clean,
he refuses the same: why do thou so quoth I? A sir says he, if I should
wash my self, I should fall to bleding a fresh again, and then I should not
stop my self: these words made me the more to suspecte him.

Then I asked of him where he was born, what his name was, how long he had this
disease, and what time he had been here about London, and in^ what place ^ sir
(says he) I was borne at Leycestar, my name is Nicholas Genings, and I have
had this falling sickness viij years, and I can get no remedy for the same, for
I have it by kind, my father had it and my friends before me, and I have been
these two years here about London, and a year and a half in Bethelem: why wast
thou out of thy wits, quoth I? yea sir that I was.

What is the kepers name of the house? his name is (quoth he) John Smith^ then
quoth I, he must understand of thy disease, if thou hadest the same for the
time thou want there, he knows it well, ye not only he, but all the house
beside, quoth this Cranke, for I came thens but within this fortnight. I had
stand so long reasoning the matter with him, that I was a cold and went into
my chamber and made me ready, and commanded my servant to repayr to bethlem
and bring me true word from the keeper there, whether any such man has been
with him as a prisoner, having the disease aforesaid, and gave him a no^e of
his name and the keepers also: my servant returning to my lodging, did assure
me that neither was there ever any such man there, neither yet any keeper of any
such name, but he that was the keeper sent me his name in writing,
affirminge that he lets no man depart from him, unless he be fet aways by
his friends, and that none that came from him begged about the City: then I
sent for the Printer of this book, and showed him of this dissembling Crank,
and how I had sent to Bethelem to understand the tr^th, and what aunsweare I
received again, requiringe him that I might have some servant of his to watch
him faithfully that day, that I might understand trustely to what place he
would repair at night unto, and thither I promised to go my self, to see
their order, and that I would have him to associate me thither: he gladly
granted to my request, and sent two boys that both diligently and
vigilantly, accomplished the charge given them, and found the same Cranke about
the Temple, where about the most part of the day he begged, unless it were
about xii. of the clock, he went on the backsyde of Clementes Ine without
Temple bar, there is a lane that goes into the Fields, there he renewed
his face again with fresh blood, which he carried about him in a bladder, and
dawbed on fresh dyrte upon his, ierken, hat and hosen.

And so came back again unto the Temple, and sometime to the Water side, and
begged of all that passed by: the boys beheld how some gave grotes, some sire
pence, some gave more: for he looked so ougley and yrksomly, that every one
pitied his miserable case that beheld him: to be short, there he passed all
the day till night approched^ and when it began to be some what dark, he went
to the water side and took a Skoll^er, and was set over the water into Saint
Georges fields, contrary to my expectation: for I had thought he would have
gonne into Holborne, or to saint Gylles in the field: but these boys with
(Argues and Lynces ties) set sure watch upon him, and the one took a Boat
and followed him, and the other went back to tell his master.

The boy that so followed him by water, had no money to pay for his boat hyre,
but laid his Penner and his ^nckhorne to gage for a penny, and by that time the
boy was set over: his master with all celeritie had taken a Boat and
followed him a pace. Now had they a sight still of the Cranke, which crossed
over the fields toward Newington, and thither the went, and by that time
they came thither, it was very dark. The Printer had there no acquaintance,
neither any kind of weapon about him, neither knew he how far the Cranke
would go, because he then suspected that they dogged him of purpose, he
there stayed him, and called for y^ Constable, which came forth diligently, to
inquire what the matter was. This zealous Printer charged this officer with him
as a malefactor, and a dissembling vagabond: the Constable would have laid him
all night in the Cage that stood in the streat: nay says this pytyfull
Printer, I pray you have him into your house, for this is like to be a cold
night and he is naked, you keep a vittelling house, let him be well cherished
this night, for he is well able to pay for the same, I know well his gaynes
has been great to day, and your house is a sufficient prison for the time, and
we will there search him: the Constable agreed thereunto, they had him in
and caused him to wash himself: that done, they demanded what money he had
about him, says this Cranke, so God help me I have but xij. pence, and
plucked out the same of a little purse. Why have you no more quoth they? no
says this Cranke, as God shall save my soul at the day of judgment. We must
see more quoth they and began to strip him, then he plucked out another purse
wherein was xl. pence. Tush says this Printer I must see more, this Cranke
says, I pray God I be damned both body and soul, if I have any more: No says
this Printer, thou false knave here is my boy that did watch thee all this day,
and saw when such men gave thee pieces of sire pence, grot^s and other money,
and yet thou have showed us none but small money. When this Cranke heard this,
and the boy vowing it to his face, he relented and plucked out another purse
wherein was eight shillings and od money, so had they in the whole that he had
begged y^ day. xiij. shillings iij. pence half penny: then they stripped him
stark naked, and as many as saw him, said they never saw hansommer man, with a
yellow fleren beard, and fair skinned without any spot or greffe, then the
good wife of the hause fet her goodmans old cloak, and caused the same to be
cast about him, because the sight should not abashe her shamefast maidens,
nether loath her squaimish sight. Thus he set him down at the Chemnes end, and
called for a pot of Beer and drank of a quart at a drafte, and called for
another, and so the third, that one had been sufficient for any reasonable man:
the drynk was so strong, that I my self the next morning tasted thereof, but
let the reader judge what, and how much he would have drunk if he had been out
of fear. Then when they had thus wrong water out of a flint, in spoyli^g him to
his evil gotten goods, his passing pence and fleting trashe. The Printer with
this officer were in ioly ioylitie, and devised to search a barn for some
roges, and upright men, a quarter of a mile from the house, that stood alone in
the fields, and went out about their business, leaving this cranke alone with
his wife and maidens: this crafty Cra^k espying al gone, requested y^ good wife
that he might go out on the backsyde to make water and to exonerat his pa^^ch,
she had him draw the ^atch of the door and go out, neither thin king or
mistrusting he would have gone away naked: but to conclude when ^e was out, he
cast away the cloak, and as naked as ever he was born he ran away over the
fields to his own house, as he afterward said. Now ye next morning betimes I
went vnto^ Newingto^ to vnder^stand what was do^ because I had word or it was
day ye there my printer was, and at my coming thither I hard ye whole
circumstance, as I above have written: and I seeing the matter so fall out, took
order with the chief of ye parish ye this xiij shillings and iij. pence halfpeny
might he the next day equally distributed by their good discretions to the
poverty of the same parish, whereof this crafty cranck had part him self, for
he had both house and wife in the same parish, as after you shall hear. But
this iewde lewterar could not lay his bones to labor having got once the taste
of this lewed laysy life, for all this fair admonition but devised other suttell
sleights to maintain his ydell living, and so craftily clothed him self in
Mariners apparel, and asociated him self with another of his companions, they
having both Mariners apparel, went abroad to ask charity of y^ people, fayning
they had lost their ship with all their goods by casualty on the seas,
wherewith they gained much. This crafty Cranke fearing^ to be mistrusted, fell
to another kind of begging as bad or worse, and apparelled himself very well
with a fair black freese cote, a new^ pair of white hose, a fine felt hat on
his head, a shert of flaunders work, esteemed to be worth xvi. shillings: and
upon new years day came again into the whyt friars to beg: the Printer
hauing^ occas^on to go that ways, not thinking of this Cranke, by chance met
with him who asked his charity for Gods sake: the printer vewing him well did
mistrust him, to be the counterfeit Cranke which deceived him vpon^ Alhollen
day at night, demanded to whence he was and what was his name, forsooth says
he, my name is Nicolas Genings, and I came from Lecester to seekeworke, and I
am a hat maker by my occupation, and all my money is spent, and if I could get
money to pay for my lodging this night: I would seek work tomorowe amongst the
hatters. The printer perceiving his deep dissimulation putting his hand into
his purse seeming to give him some money, and with fair allus^ons brought him
into the street, where he charged the Constable with him, affirminge him to be
the counterfeit Cranke that ran away upon Alholon day last. The Constable
being very loath to meddle with him, but the printer knowing him and his deep
disceit, desired he might be brought before the Debutie of the ward, which
straight was accomplished, which when he came before the debu^y, he demanded
of him of whence he was and what was his name, he answered as before he did
unto ye printer: the Debutie asked the Printer what he would lay unto his
charge, he answered and aleged him to be a vagabond and deep deceyuer of the
people, and the counterfeit Crank that ran away upon Alhallon day last from the
Constable of Newington and him, and requested him earnestly to send him to
ward: the debuty thinking him to be deceived, but nevertheless laid his
commandment upon him, so that the Printer should bear his charges if he
could not justify it he agreed thereunto. And so he and the Constable went to
carry him to the Counter, and as they were going under Ludgate, this crafty
Crank took his heels and ran down the hill as fast as he could drive, the
Constable and the Printer after him as fast as they could, but the Printer of
ye twayn being lighter of foot, ouertoke him at fleet bridge, and with strong
hand carried him to the Counter, and safely delivered him. In ye morrow ye
printer sent his boy that stripped him upon Alhalon day at night to view him
because he would b^e sure, which boy knew him very well: this Crank confessed
unto the Debuty, ye he had hosted the night before in Kent street in Southwarke
at the sign of the Cock, which thing to be true, the printer sent to know and
found him a liar, but further, inquiring at length found out his habitation,
dwelling in master Hills rentes, having a pretye house well stuffed with a
fair join table, and a fair Cubbard garnished with peuter, having an old
ancient woman to his wife. The Printer being sure thereof, repaired unto the
Counter, and rebuked him for his beastly behavior, and told him of his false
fayning, willed him to confess it and ask forgiveness: he perceived him to
know his deep dissimulation, relented and confessed all his disceit, and so
remaining in the counter three days, was removed to Brydwel where he was
stripped stark naked, and his ougly attire put upon him before the masters
thereof, who wondered greatly at his dissimulation: for which offense he stood
upon the Pillery in Cheapsyde, both in his ougly and handsome attire. And after
that went in the myll while his ougly picture was a drawing, and then was
whypped at a Carts tail through London, and his displayed banner carried before
him, unto his own door, and so back to Bryde well again, and their remained
for a time, and at length let at liberty on that condition he would prove an
honest man and labor truly to get his living. And his picture remains in
Brydewell for a monyment.

A Dommerar. Cap. 12.
THese Dommerars are lewd and most subtle people, the most part of these are
Walch men, and will never speak, unless they have extreme punishment but will
gape, and with a marucious force will hold down their toungs doubled, groninge
for your charity, and holding up their hands full piteously, so that with
their deep dissimulation they get very much. There are of these many, and but
one that I understand of has lost his tongue in deed: having on a time occasion
to ride to Dartford to speak with a priest there, who makes all kind of
co^serues very well, and uses stilling of waters. And repayring to his house,
I found a Dommerar at his door, and the priest himself perusing his license,
under the seals and hands of certain worshipful men, had thought the same
to be good and effectual. I taking the same writing and reading it over and
no^ing the seals, found one of the seals like unto a seal that I had about
me: which seal I bought besides Charinge cross, that I was out of doubt it
was none of those Gentlemen's seals that had subscribed. And having
understanding before of their pe^ish practices, made me to conceive that al was
forged and naught. I made the more have home for well I wist that he would and
must of force pass through the parish where I dwelt, for there was no other
way for him. And coming homeward, I found them in the town according to my
expectation, where they where staid, for there was a Palliard associate with the
Dommerar and partaker of his gaynes, which Pallyards I saw not at Darford. The
staiers of them was a gentleman called Chain, and a servant of my Lord
Keepers, called Wostestow, which was the chief causer of the staying of them,
being a Surgien and cunning in his science, had seen the like practices, and
as he said had caused one to speak before that was dome. It was my chance to
come at the beginni^g of the matter. Sir ( q this Surgien) I am bold here to
utter some part of my cunning, I trust (quoth he) you shall see a miracle
wrought anon: for I once (quoth he) made a domme man to speak. Quoth I you are
well met, and somewhat you have prevented me^ for I had thought to have done no
less or they had passed this town, for I well know their writing is
feigned, and they deep dissemblers. The Surgien made him gape, and we could see
but half a tongue. I required the Surgien to put his finger in his mouth, and
to pull out his tongue, and so he did, notwithstanding he held strongly a pretty
while: at the length he plucked out the same, to the great admiration of many
that stood by: yet when we saw his tongue, he would neither speak nor yet
could hear. Quoth I to the Surgien, knit t^o of his fingers together and
thrust a stycke between them, and rub the same up and down a little while,
and for my life he speaks by and by. Sir quoth this Surgien, I pray let me
practice an other way, I was well contented to see the same. He had him into a
house, and tied a halter about the wrestes of his hands and ^oysed him up
over a beam, and their did let him hang a good while at length for very pain
he required for gods sake to let him down. So he that was both deaf and dume
could in short time both hear and speak. Then I took that money I could find
in his purse, and distributed the same to the poor people dwelling there,
which was xv. pence halfpeny, being all that we could find. That done, and
this merry miracle madly made. I sent them with my servant to the nect Iusticer,
where they preached on the pyllery for want of a pulpet, and were well whypped,
and none did bewail them.

A Dronken Tinckar. Cap. 13.
THese dronken Tinckars called also prygges, be beastly people, and these young
knaves be ye worst: these never go without their doors and if their woman have
any thing about them, as apparel or linen that is worth the selling, they lay
the same to gage or sell it out right (for been house) and their bowsing ken.
And full sone will they be weary of them, and have a new When they happen one
work at any good house, their Doors linger alooft, and tarry for them in some
corner, and if he taryeth long from her, then the knows he has work, and
walks near, and sits down by him. For besides money he looks for meat
and drink for doing his dame pleasure. For if she have three or four holes in
a pan, he will make as many more for spedy gain. And if he see any old
kettle, chafer or pe^ter dish abroad in the yard where he works, he quickly
snappeth the same up, and into the booget it goes round. Thus they live with
deceyte.

I was credibly informed by such as could well tell^ that one of these tippling
Tinckers with his dog robbed by the high way iii^. Pallyards and two Roges six
persons together. and took from them above four pound in ready money, and hidd
him after in a thick wood a day or two and so escaped untaken. Thus with
picking and stealing, mingled with a little work for a color, they pass
their time

A Swadder or Peddler. Cap. 14.
THese Swadders and Pedlers be not all evil, but of an indifferent behavior.
These stand in great awe of the upright men, for they have often both wares and
money of them. But for as much as they seek gain unlawfully against the laws
and statutes of this noble realm, they are well worthy to be registered among
the number of vacabonds: and undoubtedly I have had some of them brought
before me when I was in commission of the peace as malefactors for brybering
and stealing. And now of late it is a great practice of the upright man, when
he had gotten a bo^ye to bestow the same upon a packeful of wares, and so
goes a time for his pleasure, because he would live without suspicion.

A Iarke man, and a Patrico. Cap. 15.
FOR as much as these two names a Iarkeman and a Patrico be in the old briefs
of vacabonds, and set forth as two kinds of evil doers, you shall understand
that a Iarkeman has his name of a Iarke, which is a seal in their Language,
as one should make writings and set seals for licenses and pasports. And for
truth there is none that goes about the country of them that can either
write so good and fair a hand, either indite so learnedly as I have seen and
handled a number of them: but have the same made in good towns where they
come, as what can not be had for money, as the proverb says, Omnia venalia
Romae, and many has confessed the same to me Now also there is a Patrico^ and
not a Patriarcha, which in their language is a priest that should make
marriages till death did depart but they have none such I am well assured. for I
put you out of dout that not one amongst a hundredth of them are married, for
they take lechery for no sin, but natural fellowship and good liking love, so
that I will not blot my book with these two that be not.

A Demaunder for glymmar. Cap. 16.
THese Demaunders for glymmar be for the most part women, for glymmar in their
language is fire: these go with feigned lycences and counterfayted writings,
having the hands and seals of such Gentlemen as dwells near to the place
where they feign themselves to have been burnt, and their goods consumed with
fire. They will most lamentably demand your charity and will quickly shed salt
teares^ they be so tender hearted. They will never beg in that shyre where
their losses (as they say) was. Some of these go with states at their backs,
which is a sheet to lie in a nights. The upright men be very familiar with
these kind of women, and one of them helps another.

A Demaunder of glymmar came to a good town in Kente, to ask the charity of
the people, having a feigned license about her that declared her misfortune by
fire done in Somershet shyre, walkinge with a wallet on her shoulders wherein
she put the devotion of such as had no money to give her, that is to say,
malte, wool, baken, bread and cheese: and always as the same was full, so was
it ready money to her when the emptyed the same, where so ever she traueled.
This harlot was (as they term it) snowt fair, and had an upright man or two
always attending on her watch (which is on her person) and yet so
circumspect, that they would never be seen in her company in any good Town,
unless it were in small villages, where typling houses where, either traueling
together by the high ways, but the truth is by report) she would weekly be
worth vi. or seven shillings with her begging and bychery. This glymmerynge
Morte repayring to an Ine in the said town where dwelt a widow of fifty year
old, of good wealth, but she had an unthrifty son, whom she used as a
chamberlain to attend gestes when they repaired to her house, this amerous man
beholding with ardant eyes: this glymmering glauncer, was presently piteousely
persed to the heart, and lewdly longed to be clothen under her livery, and
bestowing a few fond words with her, understood straight that she would be
easily persuaded to liking lechery, and as a man mased, mused how to attain to
his purpose, for be had no money. Yet considering with him self that wares
would be welcome where money wants, he went with a wanion to his mothers
chamber and there seeking about for odd ends, at length found a little
wishell of silver that his mother did use customably to wear on, and had
forgot the same for haste that morning, and offeres the same closely to this
manerly marian, that if she would meet him on the backesyde of the town, and
courteously kys him without constraint, she should be mystresse thereof and it
were much better: well says she you are a wanton, and beholding the wishell,
was farther in love therewith, then ravished with his person, and agreed to
meet him presently and to accomplish his fond fancy: to be short and not
tedious, a quarter of a mile from the town he merely took measure of her under
a baudy bush (so she gave him that she had not, and he received that he could
not) and taking leave of each other with a courteous kiss, she pleasantly passed
forth on her journey, and this untoward lecherous chamberlayne repaired
homeward. But or these two tortylles took their leave, the good wife had
missed her whishle, and sent one of her maidens into her chamber for the same,
and being long sought for, none could be found, her mystres hearing that,
diligent search was made for the same, and that it was taken a way, began to
suspecte her unblessed babe, and demanded of her maidens whether none of them
saw her son in her chamber that morning, and one of them answered that she
saw him not there but coming from thence, then had she enough, for well she
wist that he had the same, and sent for him, but he could not be found: then
she caused her hosteler, in who^ she had better affiance in for his truth, and
yet not one amongst twenty of them but have well left their honesty (as I
hear a great sort say) to come unto her, which attended to know her pleasure,
go seek out says she my untoward son, and bid him come speak with me. I
saw him go out says he, half an hour since on the backsyde, I had
thought you had sent him of your arrant. I sent him not quoth she, go look
him out.

This hollow hosteler took his staff in his neck, and trudged out apace that
way he saw him before go, and had some understanding by one of the maidens that
his mistres had her wishell stolen and suspected her son, and he had not gone
far but that he espied him coming homeward alone, and meting him, asked where
he had been? where have I ben q he, and began to smyle, now by the mass thou
have ben at some baudy banquet: thou haste even told troth q this
chamberlayne: surely q this hosteler, thou had the same woman that begged
at our house to day, for the harms she had by fire, where is she q he? she is
almost a mile by this time q this chamberlayne, where is my mistres whishel
quoth this hosteler, for I am well assured that thou had it, and I fear me
thou have given it to that harlot. Why, is it missed quoth this chamberlayn?
yea q this hosteler, and showed him all the whole circumstance what was both
said and thought on him for the thing. Well I will tell thee quoth this
chamberlayne, I will be plain with thee. I had in deed and have given the same
to this woman, and I pray thee make the best of it, and help now to excuse
the matter, and yet surely and thou would take so much pain for me as to
overtake her, for she goes but softly and is not yet far of and take the
same from her, and I am ever thine assured friend. Why then go with me quoth
this hosteler, nay in faith quoth this Chamberlayne what is frear then gift,
and I had preaty pastime for the same: hade^t thou so quoth this hosteler? now
by the mass and I will have some to, or I will lie in the duste or I come a
gain. Passing with have to overtake this paramoure within a mile from y^ place
where he departed he ouertoke her having an vprightma^ in her company a strong
and a sturdy vacabond, somewhat amassed was this hosteler to see one familiarly
in her company, for he had well hoped to have had some delicate daliaunce as his
fellow had, but seeing the matter so fall out, and being of good courage, and
thinking to him self that one true man was better then two false knaves, and
being on the high way thought upon help if need had been, by such as had
passed to and fro: demanded fiercely the whishel that she had even now of his
fellow: why husband quoth she, can you suffer this wretch to slander your
wife? auaunt verlet quoth this upright man and letes drive withal his force at
this hosteler, and after half a dosen blows he stricks his staff out of his
hand, and as this hosteler stepped back to have taken up his staff again: this
glymmerynge Morte flinges a great stone at him and struck him on the head, that
down he fales with the blood about his ears, and while he lay thus amassed,
the upright man snatches away his pursse, where in he had money of his
mistresses, as well as of his own, and there let him lie and went away with
speed, that they were never heard of more. When this dry beaten hosteler was
come to himself he fayntly wandereth home, and creeps into his couche and
restes his ydell head: his mystres heard that he was come in, and laid him
down on his bed, repaired straight unto him, and asked him what be ayled, and
what the cause was of his so sodden lyinge on his bed? what is the cause q this
hostele, your whyshell, your wishell, speaking the same piteously three or
four times: why sole quoth his mystres, take no care for that for I do not
greatly way it, it was worth but three shillings four pence. I would it had been
burnt for sour years agon. I pray thee why so quoth his mystres? I think thou
art mad. Nay not yet quoth this hostler, but I have been madly handled: why,
what is the matter q his mystres, and was more desirous to know the case: and
you will forgive my fellow and me. I will show you, or else I will never do
it: she made him presently faithful promise that she would, then says he
send for your son home again, which is ashamed to look you in the face. I
agree thereto says she, well then quoth this hosteler, your son has given
the same mort that begged here, for the burninge of her house, a whishell, and
you have given her five shillings in money, and I have given her ten shillings
of mine own: why so quoth she, then he sadly showed her of his mishap, with all
the circumstance that you have heard before, and how his purse was taken away,
and xv. shillinges in the same, whereof v. shillings was her money, and x
shillings his own money. Is this true quoth his mystres? I by my troth quoth
this hosteler and nothing greeues me so much, neither my beatynge, neither the
loss of my money, as does my evil and wretched luck. Why, what is the matter
quoth his mystres? your son says this hostler had some chere and pastime for
that whishell, for he lay with her, and I have been well beaten and have had my
pursse taken from me, and you know your son is merry and pleasant and can
keep no great council, and then shall I be mocked and laoghed to skorn in all
places, when they shall hear how I have been served. Now out upon you knaves
both, quoth his mystres, and laughes out the matter, for she well saw it would
not otherwise prevail.

A Baudy Basket. Cap. 17.
THese Baudye Basketes be also women, and go with baskets and Capcases on
their arms, where in they have Laces, pinnes, nedels, white inkel, and round
sylke gyrdels of all colors. These will bye conueskines, and st^ale linen
clothes of on hedges. And for their tryfles they will procure of maiden
servant, when their mistres or dame is out of the ware, either some good
piece of beef, bake^ or cheese, that shall be worth xii. pe^ce for ii. pence of
their toys. And as they walk by the way, they often gain some money with
their instrument, by such as they suddenly mete withal. The upright men have
good acquayntance with these, and will help and relieve them when they want.
Thus they trade their lives in leude loathsome lechery. Amongst them all is but
one honest woman, and she is of good years: her name is Ione Messenger I have
had good proof of her, as I have learned by the true report of diverse.

There came to my gate the last summer Anno Domini 1566. a very miserable man
and much deformed as burnt in the face, bler^ eyde, and lame of one of his
legs that he went with a crouche. I asked him where he was borne and where he
dwelt last, and showed him that thither he must repair and be releued, and not
to range about the country, and seeing some cause of charity, I caused him to
have meat and drink, and when he had dronk, I demanded of him whether he was
never spoiled of the upright man or roge, yes that I have q he, but yet these
seven years, for so long have I gone abroad I had not so much taken from me nor
so evil handled as I was within these iiij. days why, how ^so q I? in good
faith sir quoth he, I chanced to mete with one of these baudy baskets which
had an upright man in her company: and as I would have passed quietly by her,
man says she unto her mate, do you not see this ilfauored windshaken knave?
yes q the upright man, what say you to him, this knave owes me ij. shillings
for wares he had of me half a year a go, I think it well said this upright
man: syrra said he, pay your deths, said this poor man I owe her none, nether
did I ever bargayne with her for any thing, and as I am advised I never saw her
before in all my life, mercy god quoth she what a lying knave is this, and he
will not pay you husband beat him surely, and the upright man gave me three or
four blows on my back and shoolders and would have beat me worse and I had
not given him all the money in my purse, and in good faith for very fear I was
fayn to give him xiiij. pens which was all the money that I had: why said this
baudy basket have thou no more, then thou owe ten pence still, and be well
assured that I will be paid the next time I meet with thee. And so they let
me pass by them. I pray god save and bless me and all others in my case from
such wicked persons quoth this poor man, why whether went they, then quoth I,
into east Kent, for I met with them on this side of Rochester. I have diverse
times been attempted but I never lost much before. I thank God there came still
company by, before this unhappy time. Well quoth I, thank God of all, and
repair home into thy native country.

A Autem Morte. Cap. 18.
THese Autem Mortes be married women, as there be but a few: For Autem in their
language is a Church, so she is a wife married at the Church, and they be as
chaste as a Cow: I have y^ gooeth to Bull every moon, with what Bull she
cares not. These walk most rymes from their husbands company a month and
more together, being associate with another as honest as her self. These will
pilfer clothes of hedges some of them go with children of ten or xij. years of
age^ if time and place serve for their purpose they will send them into some
house at the window to steal and rob, which they ^all in their language,
Milling of the ken, and will go with wallets on their shoulders and slates at
their backs, there is one of these Autem Mortes, she is now a widow of fifty
years old, her name is Alice Milson, she goes about with a couple of great
boys, the yo^gest of them is fast upon xx. years of age, and these two do lie
with her every night, and ^he lies in the mids, she says y^ they be her
children that be^cled be the babes borne of such abominable belly.

A Walking Morte. Cap. 19.
THese walking Mortes be not married, these for their unhappy years does go as
a Autem Morte, and will say their husbands died either at Newhauen Ireland, or
in some service of the Prince. These make laces upon staves and purses that
they carry in their hands and white vallance for beds. Many of these has
had, and have children: when these get ought, either with begging bychery or
brybery as money or apparel, they are quickly shaken out of all by the upright
men, that they are in a marvelous fear to carry any thing about them that is of
any value. Wherefore, this policy they use, they leave their money now with
one and then with another tru^ty householder, either with the good man or good
wife, some time in one shire, and then in another as they travel: this have I
known y^ iiij. or v. shillings, yea x. shillinges left in a place, and the
same will they come for again within one quarter of a year or some time not in
half a year, and all this is to little purpose, for all their p^nishe
policy: for when they bye them lynnen or garments, it is taken away from
them and worse given them, or none at all.

The last Summer Anno Domini 1566. being in familiar talks with a walki^g
Mort, that came to my gate. I learned by her what I could, and I thought I had
gathered as much for my purpose as I desired, I began to rebuke her for her
lewd life and beastly behauior, declaring to her what punishment was prepared
and heaped up for her in the world to come for hit filthy living and wretched
conversation. God help q she how should I live, none will take me into
service, but I labor in harvest time honestly. I think bat a while with
honesty q I. Shall I tell you q she, the best of us may be amended, but yet I
thank God, I did one good deed within this xii. months, wherein q I. Says she
I would not have it spoken of again: if it be meet and necessary, q I, it
shall lie under my feet: what mean you by that quoth she. I mean q I, to hide
the same and never to discover it to any. Well q she and began to laugh as much
as she could and swear by the mass that if I disclosed the same to any she
would never tell me any thing. The last summer q she I was great with child
and I traueled into east kent by the sea coast, for I lusted maruelously after
oyster and m^skels and gathered many, and in the place where I found them, I
opened them and eat them still, at the last in seeking more, I reached after
one and stepped into a hole and fell in, into the wast and their did stick, and I
had been drowned if the tide had come, and espying a man a good way of, I cried
as much as I could for help. I was alone, he hard me and repaired as fast to
me as he might, and finding me their fast sticking, I required for Gods sake
his help, and whether it was with stryuing and forcing my self or for joy I
had of his coming to me, I had a great color in my face and looked red and
well colored. And to be plain with you, he lyked me so well (as he said)
that I should there lie still, and I would^ not grant him that she might lie
with me. And by my troth I wist not what to answer, I was in such a
perpleritie, for I knew ye man well, he had a very honest woman to his wife and
was of some wealth and on the other side, if I were not help out, I should
there have perished, and I granted him that I would obey to his will, then be
plucked me out. And because there was no convenient place near hand, I required
him that I might go wash my self and make me somewhat clenly, and I would
come to his house and lodge al night in his barn, whether he might repair to
me and accomplish his desire, but let it not be quoth she before nine of the
clock at night, for then there will be small styrring. And I may repair to the
town q she to warm and dry my self, for this was about two of the clock in
the after none, do so quoth he, for I must be busy to look out my cattle
here by before I can come home. So I went away from him and glad was I, and why
so quoth I, because quoth she his wife my good dame is my very friend, and I am
much beholding to her And she had done me so much good or this, that I were
loath now to harm her any way. Why so quoth I? what and it had been any other
man and not your good dames husband. The matter hadd been the less quoth she.
Tell me I pray thee quoth I, who was the father of the child, she studied a
while and said that it had a father, but what was he quoth I? Now by my troth
I know not quoth she, you bring me out of my matter, so you do, well say on
quoth I, then I departed strayte to the town and came to my dames house. And
showed her of my misfortune, also of her husbands usage in all points and that
I showed her the same for good will and bydd her take better heed to her
husband and to her self, so she gave me great thanks and made me good
cheer, and bid me in any case that I should be ready at the barn at that time
and hour we had appointed for I know well quoth this good wife my husband will
not break with thee. And one thing I warn thee that thou give me a watch
word a loud when he goes about to have his pleasure of thee, and that shall be
fie for shame fie, and I will be hard by you, with help. But I charge thee
keep this secret until all be finished, and hold says this good wife here is
one of my pe^^cotes I give thee. I thank you good dame quoth I, and I warrante
you I will be true and trusty unto you. So my dame left me sittinge by a good
fire with meat and drink, and with the oysters I brought with me, I had
great cheer, she went strayte and repaired unto her gossipes dwelling thereby,
and as I did after understand, she made her moan to them, what a naughtye lewed
lecherous husband thee had, and how that she could not have his company for
har^ottes, and that she was in fear to take some filthy disease of him, he was
so common a man, having little respect whom he h^dde to do with all, and quoth
she now here is one at my house a poor woman that goes about the country
that he would have had to do with all, wherefore good neighbors and louinge
gossypes as you love me and as you would have help at my hand another time,
deuyse some remedy to make my husband a good man, y^ I may live in some suerty
without disease, and that he may save his soul that God so dearly bought.
After she had told her tale they cast their perstnge eyes all upon her, but
one stout dame amongst the rest had these words: As your pacient bearing of
troubles, your honest behavior among us your neighbors, your tender and
pitiful heart to the poor of the parish, does move us to lament your case, so
the insatiable carnaliti of your faithless husband does instigate and stir
us to deuyse and invent some spedy redress for your case and the amendment of
his life. Wherefore this is my counceld and you will be advertised hyme I say to
you all, unless it be this good wife, who is chefely touched in this matter I
have the next cause, for he was in hand with me not long ago, and company
had not ben present which was by a marvelous chance, he had (I think) forced
me. For often he had been tempting with me, and yet have I sharply said him
nay, therefore let us assemble secretly into the place where he has appointed
to meet this gyllot that is at your house and lyrke pryuely in some corner
till he begin to go about his business. And then me thought I hard you say even
now, that you had a watch word, at which word we will all stepp forth being
five of us besides you, for you shall be none because it is your husband, but get
you to bed at your accustomed hour, and we will carry each of us a good
byrchen rod in our laps, and we will all be muffeled for knowing, and see that
you go home and acquaint that walking mort with the matter forwe must have her
help to hold, for always four must hold and two lay on. Alas says this good
wife, be is to strong for you al, I would be loath for my sake you should
receive harm at his hand: fear you not q these stout women, let her not give
the watch word until his hosen be about his legs, and I trow we all will be
with him to bring before he shall have leasuce to pluck them up again: they
with one voice agreed to yt matte^r that ye way she had devised was the best:
so this good wife repaired home: but before she departed from her gosseps she
showed the^ at what hour they should privily cum in on ye backside and there to
tarry their good hour, so by ye time she came in, it was almost night and found
the walking morte still sitting by the fire and declared to her all this new
devise above said, which promised faithfullye to fulfill to her small power as
much as they had devised, within a quarter of an hour after, in comes ye
good man who said yt he was about his cartell, why what have we here wife
sitting by the fire, and if she have eat and dronk send her into the barn to
her lodging for this night, for she troubles the house: even as you will
husband, says his wife, you know she comes once in two years into these
quarters. Away says this good wife in your lodginge: yes good dame says she
as fast as I can, thus by loking one on the other each knew others mind, and so
departed to her comely couche, the good man of the house shrodge him for joy,
thinkinge to him self I will make some pastime with you an one. And calling to
his wife for his supper set him down and was very pleasant and drank to his
wife and fell to his mammerings and mou^ched a pace, nothing understanding of
the banquet that was a preparing for him after supper, and according to the
proverb (that sweet meat will have sour sauce,)^ thus when he was well
refreshed, his spirits being revived entered into familiar talk with his wife,
of many matters how well he had spent that day to both their profytes, saying
some of his cattle were like to have bin drowned in the diches, dryuing others
of his neighbors cattle out that were in his pasturs, and mending his fences
that were broken down. Thus profitably he had consumed the day, nothing
talking of his helping out of the walking mort out of the mier, neither of his
request nor yet of her promise. Thus feding her with friendly fantasies consumed
two hours and more. Then fayning how hes would see in what case his horse
were in and how they were dressed, repaired covertly into the barn whereas his
friendly foes lyrked privily unless it were this manerly Morte, that comely
couched on a bottell of straw. What are you come q she, by ye mass I would not
for a hundredth pound that my dame should know that you were here either any else
of your house. No I warrant thee says this good man, they be all safe and fast
enough at their work, and I will be at mine anon And lay down by her and
straight would have had to do with her, nay fie says she, I like not this
order, if ye lie with me you shall surely vntxusse you and put down your hosen
for that way is most easiest and best, say thou so quoth he, now my troth
agreed: and when he had untrussed himself and put down, he began to assalt the
insatiable sort, why quoth she that was without shame, sauinge for her promise,
and are you not ashamed? never a whyt says he, lie down quickly, now fie
for shame, fie says she aloude (which was the watch word) At the which word
these five furious sturdy muffeled gossips flynges out and takes sure hold of
this betrayed person, sone plucking his hosen down lower, and bindinge the same
fast about his feet, then binding his hands and knittinge a hand char^her
about his eyes, that he should not see, and when they had made him sure and
fast, then they laid him on until they were windles: be good says this Morte
unto my master for the passion of God, and laid on as fast as the rest, and
still ceased not to cry upon them too be merciful unto him, and yet laid on a
pace, and when they had well beaten him that the blood braste plentifully out
in most places they let him lie still bound, with this exhortation, that he
should from that time forth know his wife from other men's, and that this
punishment was but a flebyting in respect of that which should follow, if he
amended not his manners. Thus leaving him blustering, blowing and foming for
pain and malencolye, that he neither might or could be revenged of them: they
vanished away and had this morte with them, and safely conuayd her out of the
town: soon after comes into the barn one of the good man's boys to set
some hay for his horse. And fynding his master lying fast bound and
gr^euously beaten with rods, was suddenly abashed and would have run out
again to have called for help, but his master hyd him come unto him and
unbind him, and make no words quoth he of this. I will be revenged well
enough, yet notwithstanding after better advise, the matter being dishonest, he
thought it meeter to let the same pass, and not as the proverb says (to
awake the sleeping dog.) And by my troth quoth this walking morte, I com now
from that place and w is never there sythens this part was played, which is
somewhat more then a year. And I hear a very good report of him now, that he
loves his l^yfe well and uses him self very honestly: and was not this a
good act, now how say you? It was pretely handeled quoth I, and is here all?
yea quoth she, here is the end.

A Doxe. Cap. 20.
THese Doors be broken and spoiled of their maydenhead by the upright men, and
then they have their name of doors and not af^re. And afterward she is common
and indifferent for any that will use her, as homo^ is a common name to al men.
Such as be fair and somewhat handsome, keep company with the walking Mortes,
and are ready always for the upright men, and are chiefly maynteined by them,
for others shall be spoiled for their sakes, the other interior sort will resort
to noble men's places, and gentlemen's houses standing at the gate, either
lurking on the backsyde about back houses, either in hedge rows or some other
thycket, expectynge their pray, which is for the uncomely company of some
courteous gest of whom they be refreshed with meat and some money, where
eschaunge is made ware for ware: this bread and meat they use to carye in
their great hosen, so that these beastly brybinge breeches, serve many times
for bandy purposes. I chanced not long sitbens familiarly to common with a
Door that came to my gate, and surely a pleasant harlot, and not so pleasant
as witty, and not so witty as boyde of all grace and goodness I found by her
talk that she had passed her time lewdly eightene years in walking about. I
thought this a necessary instrument to attain some knowledge by, and before I
would grope her mind, I made her both to eat and drynk well, that done I made
her faithful promise to give her some money if she would open and discover to
me such questions as I would demand of her and never to bewraye her, neither
to disclose her name. And you should says she I were undone: fear not that
quoth I. but I pray thee quoth I, say nothing but truth. I will not says she,
then firsts tell me quoth I, how many upright men and roges do thou know or
have thou known and been ^dnuersant with, and what their names be? she paused
a while and said, why do you ask me, or wherefore? For nothing else as I said,
but that I would know them when they come to my gate. Now by my troth (quoth
she) then are yes never the nearer, for all mine acquaintance for the most part
are dead, Dead quoth I? how dyed they for want of cherishing or of paynfull
diseases? Then she sighed and said they were hanged. What all quoth I, and so
many walk abroad as I daily see? By my troth quoth she I know not paste six
or seven by their names, and named the same to me. When were they hanged quoth
I? Some seven years agone, some three years, and some with in this fortnight,
and declared the place where they wear erecuted, which I knew well to be
true, by report of others. Why (quoth I) did not this sorrowful and fearful
sight much grieve thee, and for thy time long and evil spent. I was sorry quoth
she, by the mass, for some of them were good loving men, for I lack not when
they had it, and they wanted not when I had it, and diverse of them I never did
forsake, until the Gallows departed us. O merciful God quoth I, and began to
bless me. Why bless ye quoth she? Alas good genttleman, every one must have a
living. Other matters I talked of, but this now may suffice to show the reader
as it were in a glass the bold beastely life of these Doxes. For such as
has gonne any time abroad, will never forsake their trade, to dye therefore.
I have had good proof thereof. There is one notorious barlot o^ this
affinity called Besse Bottomely, she has but one hand, and she has
murdered two children at the least.

A Dell. Cap. 21.
A Dell is a young wench, able for generation, and not yet known or broken by
the upright man. These go abroad young, either by the death of their
parents, and no body to look unto them or else by some sharp mystres that
they serve do run away out of service, either she is naturally borne one,
and then she is a wyld Dell: these are broken very young, when they have been
lain withal by the upright man, then they be Doors, and no Dell. These wild
Dels being traded up with their monstrous mothers, musts of necessity be as
evil or worse then their parents, for neither we gather grapes from green
briars, neither fygges from I h^stels. But such buds, such blossems, such evil
seed sown, well worsse being grown.

A Kynching Morte. Cap. 22.
A Kynching Mort is a little Gyrle, the Mortes their mothers carries them at
their backs in their slates, which is their shetes, and bringes them up
sauagely, till they grow to be ripe, and soon ripe, soon rotten.

A Kynchen Co. Cap. 23.
A Kinchen Co, is a young boy traded up to such p^euish purposes, as you have
hard of other young ympes before, that when be grows unto years, he is
better to hang then to draw forth.

Their usage in the night. Cap. 24.
NOw, I think it not unnecessary to make the Reader understand how and in what
manner they lodge a nights in barnes or back-houses, and of their usage there,
for as much as I have acquaynted them with their order and practices a day
times. The arch and chief walkers that has walked a long time, whose
experience is great, because of their continuing practice, I mean all Mortes
and Doxes, for their handsomnes and diligence, for making of their couches. The
men never trouble themselves with that thing, but takes the same to be the duty
of the wife. And she shuffels up a quantity of straw or hay, into some pretty
corner of the barn where she may conveniently lie, and well shakes the same,
making the head some what bye, and dryues the same upon the sides and set like
a bed: then she lays her wallet or other little pack of rags, or scryppe
under her head in the straw, to bear up the same, and lays her peticote or
cloak upon and over the straw, so made like a bed and that serves for the
blanket: then she lays her slate which is her sheet upon that, and she
have no sheet, as few of them go without, then she spreddeth some large
cloutes or rags over the same, and makes her ready and lays her drousely
down. Many will pluck of their smockes and lay the same upon them in steed
of their upper sheet, and all her other pelte and trashe upon her also, and
many lies in their smockes. And if the rest of her clothes in cold weather be
not sufficient to keep her warm, then the takes straw or hay to perform
the matter. The other sort that have no slates, but toumble down and couche a
hogshead in their clothes, these be still lou^y and shall never be without
vermin, unless they put of their clothes, and lie as is above said. If the
upright man come in where they lie, he has his choice, and creeps in close
by his Door, the roge has his leauings. If the Mortes or Doors lie or be
lodged in some Farmers barn, and the door be either locked or made fast to
them, then will not the upright man press to come in, unless it be in barnes
and out houses standing alone, or some distance from houses, which ^e commonly
known to them: as saint Quintens, three Cranes in the ^intrey. Saint Tybbes,
and Knapsbery. These four be within one mile compass near unto London. Then
have you four more in Middlesex, draw the pudding out of the fire, in Harrow
on the hill parish, the Cross keys in Crayford parish, saint In^^ans in
Thystell worth parish, the house of pity in North hall parish. These are their
chief houses near about London, where commonly they resort unto for lodging,
and may repair thither freely at all times. Sometime shall come in some roge,
some pycking knave, a nimble Prygge, he walks in softly a nights, when they
be at their rest and plucketh of as many garments as be ought worth, that he
may come by, and worth money, and may easily carry the same, and runs away
with the same with great selerity, and makes port sale at some convenient
place of theirs, that some be soon ready in the morning, for want of their
Casters and Togemans. Where instead of blessing is cursinge, in place of
praying, pestilent pratinge with odious oaths and terrible threatenings. The
upright men have given all these nycke names, to the places above said. Yet
have we two notable places in Kent, not far from London, the one is bettwene
Detforde and Rothered called the Kings barn, standinge alone, that they haunt
commonly: the other is Ketbroke standinge by black heath ^alse a mile from any
house, there will they boldly draw the latch of the door and go in, when the
good man with his family be at supper and sit down without leave and eat and
d^ink with them, and either lie in the hall by the fire at night or in y^ barn
if there be no room in the house for them. If the door be either bolted or
locked, if it be not opened unto them when they will, they will break the same
open to his farther cost. And in this barn sometime do lie xl. vp^ight men
with their Doors together at one time. And this must the poor Farmer suffer,
or else they threaten him too burn him, and all that he has.

The names of the upright men, Roges, and Pallyards.
HEre follows the unruly rablement of rascals, and the most notorious and
wickedst walkers that are living now at this present with their true names as
they be called and known by. And although I set and place here but three
orders, yet good Reader understand, that all the others above named are
derived and come out from the Upright men and Roges. Concerning the number of
Mortes and Doxes, it is superfluous to write of them. I could well have, done
it, but the number of them is great, and would ask a large volume.

Upright men.
Antony Heymer. Antony Iackson. Burfet. Bryan Medcalfe. Core the Cuck^lde.
Christouer Cook. Dowsabell skylfull in fence. David Coke. Dycke Glouer. Dicke
Abrist^we. David Edwards. David Holland. David Jones. Edmund Dun a singing man.
Edward skiner, alias Ned Skinner. Edward Brown. Follentine Hills. Fardinando
Angel: Griffyn. Fraunces Dawghton. Great John Braye. George marynar. George
Hutchinson. Hary Hills, alias Harry Godepar. Harry Agglyntyne. Harry Smith,
he dryue^eth when he speaks Harry Ionson. James Barnard. John Myllar. John
Walchman. John Jones. John Tedar. John Braye. John Cutter. John Bell. John
Stephens. John Graye. John White. John Rewe John Morres. John a Ferdinando.
John Newman. John Win alias Williams. John a Pycones. John Thomas John Arther.
John Palmer alias Tod. John Geffrey. John Goddard. John Gray the great. John
Gray the little. John Williams the Longer. John Harwod a maker of wels, he
will take half his bargayne in hand, and when he has wrought ii. or iii.
days, he runs away with his earnest. John Peter. John Porter. John Appowes.
John Arter. John Bates. John Comes. John Chiles, alias great Chyles. John Leuet
he makes tappes and fausets. John Louedall a master of fence. John Louedale
John Mekes. John Appowell. John Chapel. John Gryffen. John Mason. John
Humfrey with the lame hand. John Stradling with the shaking head. John Frank
John Baker. John Bascafelde. Lennard just. Long green. Laurence Ladd. Laurence
Marshall. Nicolas wilson. Ned Barington. Ned wetherdon. Ned Holmes. Phillip
Green. Robart Grauener. Robart Gerse. Robart King. Robart Egerton. Robart
Bell. brother to John Bell. Robart Maple. Robart Langton. Robyn Bell. Robyn
Top. Robart Browswerd he wears his hear long. Robart Curtes. Richard
Briminish. Richard justice. Richard Barton. Richard Constance. Richard Thomas.
Richard Cadman. Richard scate good. Richard Aprice Richard Walker. Richard
Coper. Steven Neuet. Thomas Bulloke. Thomas Cutter. Thomas Garet. Thomas
Newton. Thomas Web. Thomas Graye his toes begone. Tom Bobell. Thomas Wast.
Thomas Dawso^ alias Thomas Iacklin. Thomas Basset. Thomas^ Merchant Thomas Web.
Thomas Awefeld. Thomas Gibbins. Thomas Lacon. Thomas Bate. Thomas Allen. well
arayd Richard. William chamborn William Panell. William morgan. William Belson.
William Ebes. William Garret. William Robinson William Umberuil William David's.
Will Pen. William Jones. Will Powell. William Clarke. Water Wirall. William
Brown. William Grace. William Pickering.
Roges.
Arch Douglas a scot. Black Dycke. Dycke Durram. David Dew neuet a counterfeit
Crank. Edward Else. Edward Anseley. George Belberby. Godman. Gerard Gybynes, a
counterfeit cranke. Harry walls with ye little mouth. Humfrey ward. Harry
Mason. John Warren John Don with one leg. John Elson. John raynoles Irish man.
John Harrys James Monkaster a counterfeit Crank. John Dew. John Crewe with one
arm. John Brown a great stammerar. Little Dycke. Little robyn. Lambart rose.
Nicholas Adames. Nicholas Crispin. Nicholas Blunt, alias Nicholas Genins, a
counterfeit Crank. Nicholas Lynche. Richard Brewton. Richard Horwod, well near
lxxx. year old he will bite a vi. penny nail asunder with his ^e^h and a baudy
dronkard. Richard Crane he carries a Kynchen Co at his back. Richard Jones.
Raffe Ketley. Robert Harrison. Symond King. Thomas Paske. Thomas Beer Irish
man. Thomas Smith with the skalde skin. Thomas Shawneam William Carew. William
wastfield. Wylson. William Gynkes with a white beard, a lusty and strong man, he
runs about y^ country to fecke work with a big boy his son, caryinge his
toles as a dawber or playsterer, but little work serves him.
Pallyardes.
Bashford. Dick Sehan Irish. David Powell. David Jones a counterfeit Cranke.
Edward Heyward has his Mort following him, which faineth the Cranke. Edward
Jews, a Dummerar. Hugh Jones. John Persk a counterfeit cranke. John David's.
John Harison. John Carew. James Lane, with one eye Irish. Iehu Fisher. John
Dew. John Gilford Irish. with a ^ounterfet license Laurence with the great
leg. Nicholas Newton carries a feigned license. Nicholas Decase. Prestone.
Robart Lacley. Robart Canloke. Richard Hilton carries ii. kinche^ mortes about
him. Richard Thomas. Soth guard. Swanders. Thomas Edwards. Thomas David's.
William Thomas. William Coper with the harelyp. Will Pettet bears a kiche^
mort at his back. wylliam Bowmer.
There is above an hundredth of Irish men and women that wander about to beg
for their living, that has come over within these two years. They say they
have been burned and spoiled by the Earl of Desmond and report well of the
Earl of Urmond.

All these above written for the most part walk about Essex, Middlesex,
Sussex, Surrey and Kent. Then let the Reader judge what numbers walks in other
Shieres. I fear me to great a number, if they be well understand.

Here follows their pelting speech.
HEre I set before thee good Reader, the lewd louse^ language of these
leutering Luskes, and laysy Lorels, wherewith they bye and sell the common
people as they pass through the country: which language they term Peddelers
French, an unknown tongue only, but to these bold beastly bawdy beggars, and
vain vacabonds, being half myngled with English, when it is familiarly
talked, and first placing things by their proper names, as an Introduction to
this peevish speech. Nab a tongue. prat hosen. a head. Crashing chetes a
buttocke. stampers Nabchet teeth. stampes shoes. a hat or cap. Hearing chetes.
legs. a mofling chete glasyers ^ares. a caster a napkin. eyes. fambles a
cloak. a belly chete a smelling chete. hands. a ^ogman an apren. a nose. a
fambling chete a coat. dudes began a ring on thy hand. a commission clothes. a
mouth. quaromes a shirt. a lag of dudes a prattling chete. a body. drawers a
bucke of clothes. a slate or slates pek a house. woman. a sheet or shetes.
meat. a stauling ken the quier cuffyn lybbege poppelars a house that will
receive stolen wares. the iusticer of peace a bed. porrage. the harma^ beck
boung ruff pek a bowsing ken the Constable. a purse. baken. a ale house. the
harmans lowre a grunting chete or a patricos kinchen a lypken the stocks.
money. a house to lie in. quyerkyn mynt alybbeg a prison house. gold. a pygge
a bed. quyer crampringes a board a cakling chete glymmar a shilling. a coke
or capon. fire. boltes or fetters. half a board a margeri prater Rome bouse
tryning six pence. a hen. wine. hanging. flagg a roger or tyb of the butery
lag chattes a groat. water. the gallows. a wyn a gose. a skypper the ^ygh pad
a penny. a quaking chete or a red shanke a barn. the high way. a make
strommell the ruffmans a halfepeny. a drake or a ducke. straw. the wods or
bushes bowse grannam a gentry cofes k^ a smelling chete drink. corn. a noble
or gentleble man's house. a garden or orchard crasting chetes been a lowhing
chete a gyger appels, pears, or any other fruit. good. a Cow. a door.
benship a bleting chete bufe to fylche very good. a calfe or sheep. a dog.
to rob. quier a prauncer the lightmans to nyp a boung. naught. a horse. the
day. to cut a purse. a gage autem the darkemans To skower the crampringes a
quart pot. a Church. the night. a skew Solomon Rome vile to wear boltes or
fetters. a cup. a altar or mass. London. yannam patrico dewse a vile to heue
a b^ ugh bread. a priest. the country. to rob or rifle a boweth. cassan
nosegent rome mort cheese. a Nun. the Queen. to cly the gerk^ param a gyb a
gentry cofe to be whipped. milk. a writing. a noble or gentleman to cut benle
lap a Iarke a gentry mort to speak gentle. butter milk or whey. a seal. a
Noble or gentle to cut been a ken whydds. to see. to rob a house. a woman
eatnally. to speak or give good words. to ^ouse, to pr^gge stow you, to
drink. to ride. hold your peace. to ^^tte quyer whyddes. to maunde to dup y^
gyger, ^ynge a waste to give evil words to ask or require. to open the door.
go you hence. or evil language. to stall. to couch a hogs head to the ruffian
to make or ordain to the Devil. to cut. to cante to ly down and sleep the
ruffian cly thee. to say. to speak. to nygle to tower. to mill a ken to have
to dowith the devil take thee.

The upright Cofe cateth to the Roge, The upright man speaks to the roge.
Upright man. Been Lightmans to thy quarromes in what lipken have thou lipped
in this darkemans, whether in a lybbege or in the strummell.

Good morrow to thy body, in what house have thou line in all night, whether
in a bed or in the straw?


Roge. I couched a hogshead in a Skypper this darkemans.
I laid me down to sleep in a barn this night.

Upright man. I tower the strummel trine upon the nabchet and Togman
I see the straw hang upon thy cap and coat.

Roge. I say by the Solomon I will lage it of with a gage of been bouse then
cut to my nose watch.

I swear by the mass I will wash it off with a quarte of good drink, then
say to me what thou will.


Upright man. Why have thou any lowre in thy bonge to bouse.
Why, have thou any money in thy pursse to drink?

Roge. But a flagge, a wyn and a make.
But a groate, a penny and a half penny.

Upright man. Why, where is the ken that has the been bouse.
where is the house that has the good drink.

Roge. A been morte here by at the sign of the prauncer.
A good wife here by at the sign of the horse.

Upright man. I cut it is quyer bowse, I bowld a flagge the last darkmans.

I say it is small and naughty drink, I drank a groat there the last night.


Roge. But bowse there abord, and thou shall have benship.
But drink there a shilling, and thou shall have very good.
Tower ye, yander is the ken, dup the gyger and maunde that is beneship.
See you, yonder is the house, open the door, and ask for the best.

Upright man. This bowse is as good as Rome bowse.
This drink is as good as wine.
Now I tower that been bowse makes nase nabes.
Now I see that good drink makes a dronken head.
Maund of this morte what been pecke is in harken.
^ Ask of this wife what good meat she has in her house.

Roge. She has a Cacling chete, a gruntinge chete ruff pecke, cassan, and
poppelars of yarum.

She has a hen, a pygge, baken, cheese, and milk porrage.


Upright man. That is benship to our watch.
That is very good for us.
Now we have well bold, let us strike some chete.
Now we have well drunk, let us steal some thing.
Yonder dwells a quier cuffen, it were beneship to myll him.
Yonder dwells a hoggish and chorlishe man, it were very well done to rob
him.

Roge. Now byng we a wast to the high pad the ruffmans is by
Nay let us go hence to the high way, the wood is at hand.

Upright man. So may we happen on the harmans and clye the Iarke or to the
quierken and skower quiare cramprings and so to trining on the chates.

So we may chance to sit in the stocks, either be whypped either had to
prison house, and their be shackeled with boltes and setters, and then to hang
on the gallows.


Roge. Gerry began the Ruffian clye thee.
A torde in thy mouth, the devil take thee.

The upright man. What stowe you been cofe and cut benar whyddes and byng we to
Rome vile to nyp a bounge, so shall we have lower for the bowsing ken, and when
we byng back to the deuseuyle, we will fylche some duddes of the Ruffmans or
myll the ken for a lage of duddes.

What hold your peace good fellow and speak better words, and go we to
London to cut a purse, then shall we have money for the ale house, and when we
come back again into the country, we will steal some lynuen clothes of some
hedge, or rob some house for a bucke of clothes.


By this little ye may holy and fully understand their untoward talk and
pelting speech mingled without measure, and as they have begone of la^e to
deuyse some new terms for certain things: so will they in time alter this and
devise as evil or worse. This language now being known and spread abroad,
yet one thing more I will ad unto, not meaning to English the same, because I
learned that of a shameless Doxe, but for the phrase of specehe I set it forth
only.

There was a proud patrico and a nosegent, he took his Iockam in his famble,
and a wapping he went, he dockt the Dell he prygge to praunce, he byngd a wast
into the darkemans, he fylche the Cofe without any fylch man.


A Stocks to stay sure and safely detayne,
Lasy lew^ Leuterers that laws do oftend:
Impudent persons, thus punished with pain,
Hardle for all this, do ^cane to amend.

Fetters or shackels serve to make fast,
Male malefactors, that on mischief do muse
Until the learned laws do quite or do cast
Such subtle searchers as all evil do use.

A whyp is a whysker that will wrest out blood,
Of back and of body, beaten right well:
Of all the other it does the most good.
Experienee teaches, and they can well tell.
Odolefull day, now death draws nere,
His bitter styng does pearce me to the heart:
I take my leave of all that be here,
Now piteously playing this tragical part.
Nether strypes nor teachings in time could convert,
Wherefore and ensample let me to you be,
And all that be present, now pray you for me.


Thus I conclude my bold Beggars book.
That all estates most plainly may see,
As in a Glass well pollished to look,
Their double demeaner in each degree.
Their Lives, their language, their names as they be,
That with this warning their minds may be warmed
To amend their misdeedes and so live unharmed.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton dwelling in Fletestreat at the sign of
the Faucon: and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones Churchyard. An. 1573.


