A brief and true report of the new found land of Virginia of the commodities
and of the nature and manners of the natural inhabitants. Discovered by the
English Colony there seated by Sir Richard Greinuile Knight In the year 1585.
Which Remained Under the government of twelve months, At the special charge
and direction of the Honorable SIR WALTER RALEIGH Knight lord Warden of the
stanneries Who therein has been favored and authorized by her MAJESTY and
her letters patents: This fore book Is made in English BY Thomas Hariot
servant to the abouenamed Sir WALTER, a member of the Colony, and there
employed in discovering

CVM GRATIA ET PRIVELEDIO CAESMATIS SPECIALI

FRANCOFORTI AD MOENVM TYPIS IOANNIS WECHELL, SVMITIRVS VERO THEODORI DE BRY
ANNO CD D XC. VENALES REPERIVNTVR IN OFFICINA SIGISMVNDI FEIRABENDII

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND HONORABLE, SIR WALTER RALEGH, KNIGHT, SENESCHAL OF
THE DVCHIES OF Cornwall and Exeter, and L. Warden of the stannaries in Deuon
and Cornwall. T.B. wishes true felictie. AMORE ET VIRTVE


SIr, seeing that the part of the World, which is between the Florida and the
Cap Breton now nammed Virginia, to the honneur of yours most souueraine Laid
and Queen Elizabetz, has been descouuerd by yours means. And great chardges.
And that your Collonye has been theer established to your great honor and
praise, and noelesser proffit unto the commonwelth: Yt is good raison that
every man euertwe him self for to show the benefit which they have receue of
yt. Theerfore, formy part I have been all ways Desirous for to make you know
the good will that I have to remain still your most humble servant. I have
think that I cold faynde noe better occasion to declare yt, then taking the
pains to cott in copper (the most diligent ye and well that wear my possible
to do) the Figures which do leuelye represent the form and manner of the
Inhabitants of the same country with theirs ceremonies, sollemne, feasts, and
the manner and situation of their Towns, or Villages. Addinge unto every
figure a brief declaration of the same, to that end that every man cold the
better understand that which is in represented. Moreover I have think that
the aforesaid figures wear of greater commendation, If sum Histoire which
traitinge of the commodites and of the said try wear Joined with the same,
therefore have I serve miselfe of the which Thomas Hariot has lattely set
forth, and have booth together to be printed for to dedicated unto you, as a
thing which by does allreadye apparteyne unto you. Therefore do I creaue that
you will keep this little Book, and take yt In good partte. And desiringe
that favor that reccueme in the number of one of your most humble seruantz,
lord to blese and further you in all yours good doings and actions, and also
to preserve, and keep you always in good health. And so I comitt you unto
the almyhttie, from Franckfort the first of Apprill 1590.

Your most humble servant,
Theodorus de Bry.
TO THE ADVENTVRERS, FAVORERS, AND VVELVVILLERS OF THE ENTERPRISE FOR THE
INHABITTING and planting in Virginia. Since the first undertaking by Sir Walter
Ralegh to deal in the action of discovering of that Country which is now
called and known by the name of Virginia; many voyages having bin thiter made
at sundry times to his great charge; as first in the year 1584. and
afterward in the years 1585. 1586. and now of late this last year of 1587.
There have bin diverse and variable reports with some slanderous and shameful
speeches bruited abroad by many that returned from thence. Especially of that
discovery which was made by the Colony transported by Sir Richard Greinuile in
the year 1585. being of all the others the most principal and as yet of most
effect, the time of their abode in the country being a whole year, when as
in the other voyage before they stayed but six weeks; and the others after
were only for supply and transportation, nothing more being discovered then
had been before. Which reports have not done a little wrong to many that
otherwise would have also favored and adventured in the action, to the honor
and benefit of our nation, besides the particular profit and credit which
would redound to them selves the dealers therein; as I hope by the sequel of
events to the shame of those that have avouched the contrary shall be manifest:
if you the adventurers, favorers, and welwillers do but either increase in
number, or in opinion continue, or having bin doubtful renew your good liking
and furtherance to deal therein according to the worthiness thereof already
found and as you shall understand hereafter to be requisite. Touching which
woorthines through cause of the diversity of relations and reports, many of
your opinions could not be firm, nor the minds of some that are well
disposed, be settled in any certainty.

I have therefore thought it good being one that have been in the discovery
and in dealing with the natural inhabitants specially employed; and having
therefore seen and known more then the ordinary: to imparte so much unto you
of the fruits of our labors, as that you may know how injuriously the
enterprise is slaundered. And that in public manner at this present chiefelie
for two respects.

First that some of you which are yet ignorant or doubtful of the state
thereof, may see that there is sufficient cause why the chief enterpriser with
the favor of her Majesty, notwithstanding such reports; has not only
since continued the action by sending into the country again, and replanting
this last year a new Colony; but is also ready, according as the times and
means will affoorde, to follow and prosecute the same.

Secondly, that you seeing and knowing the continuance of the action by the
view hereof you may generally know and learn what the country is, and there
upon consider how your dealing therein if it proceed, may return you profit
and gain; be it either by inhabitting and planting or otherwise in furthering
thereof.

And least that the substance of my relation should be doubtful unto you, as of
others by reason of their diversity: I will first open the cause in a few
words wherefore they are so different; referring my selue to your favorable
constructions, and to be adjudged of as by good consideration you shall find
cause.

Of our company that returned some for their misdemenour and ill dealing in
the country, have been there worthily punished; who by reason of their badde
natures, have maliciously not only spoken ill of their Governors; but for
their sakes slaundered the country it self. The like also have those done
which were of their consort.

Some being ignorant of the state thereof, notwithstanding since their return
amongst their friends and acquaintance and also others, especially if they
were in compaine where they might not be gainesaide; would seem to know so
much as no men more; and make no men so great trauailers as themselves. They
stood so much as it may seem upon their credit and reputation that having
been a twelve month in the country, it would have been a great disgrace
unto them as they thought, if they could not have said much wheter it were
true or false. Of which some have spoken of more then ever they saw or
otherwise knew to be there; othersome have not bin ashamed to make absolute
denial of that which although not by the^, yet by others is most certainly
and there ple^tifully known. And othersome make difficulties of those things
they have no skill of.

The cause of their ignorance was, in that they were of that many that were
never out of the Island where we were seated, or not far, or at the leastwise
in few places else, during the time of our aboade in the country; or of that
many that after gold and silver was not so soon found, as it was by them
looked for, had little or no care of any other thing but to pamper their
bellies; or of that many which had little understanding, less discretion, and
more tongue then was needful or requisite.

Some also were of a nice bringing up, only in cities or towns, or such as
never (as I may say) had seen the world before. Because there were not to be
found any English cities, nor such fair houses, nor at their own wish any of
their old accustomed dainty food, nor any soft beds of down or feathers: the
country was to them miserable, and their reports thereof according.

Because my purpose was but in brief to open the cause of the variety of such
speeches; the particularities of them, and of many envious, malicious, and
slau^derous reports and devises else, by our own country men besides; as
trifles that are not worthy of wise men to be thought upon, I mean not to
trouble you withal: but will pass to the commodities, the substance of that
which I have to make relation of unto you.

The treatise where of for your more ready view and easier understanding I
will divide into three special parts. In the first I will make declaration of
such commodities there already found or to be raised, which will not only
serve the ordinary turns of you which are and shall be the pla^ters and
inhabitants, but such an overplus sufficiently to be yielded, or by men of
skill to be provided, as by way of traffic and exchange with our own
nation of England, will enrich your selves the prouiders; those that shall deal
with you; the enterprisers in general; and greatly profit our own country
men, to supply them with most things which heretofore they have been feign to
provide, either of strangers or of our enemies: which commodities for
distinction sake, I call Merchantable.

In the second, I will set down all the commodities which we know the
country by our experience does yield of it self for victual, and sustenance
of man's life; such as is usually fed upon by the inhabitants of the country,
as also by us during the time we were there.

In the last part I will make mention generally of such other commodities
besides, as I am able to remember, and as I shall think behoofull for those
that shall inhabit, and plant there to know of; which specially concern
building, as also some other necessary uses: with a brief description of the
nature and manners of the people of the country.

THE FIRST PART, OF MARCHANTABLE COMMODITIES.
Silk of grass or grass Silk.
There is a kind of grass in the country upon the blades where of there
grows very good silk in form of a thin glittering skin to be stripped of. It
grows two foot and a half high or better: the blades are about two foot in
length, and half inch broad. The like grows in Persia, which is in the self
same climate as Virginia, of which very many of the silk works that come from
thence into Europe are made. Here of if it be planted and ordered as in Persia,
it cannot in reason be otherwise, but that there will rise in short time great
profit to the dealers therein; seeing there is so great use and vent thereof
as well in our country as else where. And by the means of sowing and pla^ting
in good ground, it will be far greater, better, and more plentiful then it
is. Although notwithstanding there is great store thereof in many places of the
country growing naturally and wild. Which also by proof here in England, in
making a piece of silk Grogran, we found to be excellent good.

Worm Silk.
In many of our iourneyes we found silk worms fair and great; as big as
our ordinary walnuttes. Although it has not been our hap to have found such
plenty as elsew here to be in the country wehaue heard of; yet seeing that
the country does naturally breed and nourish them, there is no doubt but if
art be added in plantig of mulbery trees and others fit for them in
commodious places, for their feeding and nourishing; and some of them carefully
gathered and husbanded in that sort as by men of skill is known to be
necessary: there will rise as great profit in time to the Virginians, as
there of does now to the Persians, Turks, Italians and Spaniards.

Flax and Hemp.
The truth is that of Hemp and Flax there is no great store in any one place
together, by reason it is not planted but as the soil does yield it of it
self; and howsoever the leaf, and stem or stalk do differ from ours; the
stuff by the judgment of men of skill is altogether as good as ours. And if
not, as further proof should find otherwise; we have that experience of the
soil, as thas there cannobee showed any reason to the contrary, but that it
will grow there excellent well; and by planting will be yielded plentifully:
seeing there is so much ground whereof some may well be applied to such
purposes. What benefit hereof may grow in cordage and linnens who can not
easily understand?

Alum.
There is a vein of earth along the sea coast for the space of forty or
fifty miles, whereof by the judgment of some that have made trial herein
England, is made good Alum, of that kind which is called Roche Alum. The
richness of such a commodity is so well known that I need not to say any
thing thereof. The same earth does also yield White Copresse, Nitrum, and
Alumen Plumeum, but nothing so plentifully as the common Alum; which be also
of price and profitable.

Wapeih.
Wapeih, a kind of earth so called by the natural inhabitants; very like to
terra sigillata: and having been refined, it has been found by some of our
Phisitio^s and Surgeons to be of the same kind of virtue and more
effectual. The inahbitants use it very much for the cure of sores and wounds:
there is in diverse places great plenty, and in some places of a blewe sort.

Pitch, Tar, Rozen, and Turpentine.
There are those kinds of trees which yield them abundantly and great store.
In the very same Island where we were seated, being fifteen miles of length,
and five or six miles in breadth, there are few trees else but of the same
kind; the whole Island being full.

Sassafras.
Sassafras, called by the inhabitants Winauk, a kind of wood of most pleasand
and sweet smell; and of most rare virtues in physic for the cure of many
diseases. It is found by experience to be far better and of more uses then
the wood which is called Guaiacum, or Lignum vitae. For the description, the
manner of using and the manifold virtues thereof, I refer you to the book
of Monardus, translated and entitled in English, The joyful news from the
West Indies.

Cedar.
Cedar, a very sweet wood and fine timber; whereof if nests of chests be there
made, or timber thereof fitted for sweet and fine bedsteads, tables, deskes,
lutes, virginalles and many things else, (of which there has been proof made
already) to make up fraite with other principal commodities will yield profit.

Wine.
There are two kinds of grapes that the soil does yield naturally: the one is
small and sour of the ordinary bigness as ours in England: the other far
greater and of himself iushious sweet. When they are planted and husbandeg as
they ought, a principal commodity of wines by them may be raised.

Oil.
There are two sorts of Walnuttes both holding oil, but the one far more
plentiful then the other. When there are milles and other devises for the
purpose, a commodity of them may be raised because there are infinite store.
There are also three several kinds of Berries in the form of Oak akornes,
which also by the experience and use of the inhabitants, we find to yield
very good and sweet oil. Furthermore the Bears of the country are commonly
very fat, and in some places there are many: their fatness because it is so
liquid, may well be termed oil, and has many special uses.

Furs:
All along the Sea coast there are great store of Otters, which being taken by
wears and other engines made for the purpose, will yield good profit. We
hope also of Marterne furs, and make no doubt by the relation of the people
but that in some places of the country there are store: although there were
but two skins that came to our hands. Luzarnes also we have understanding of
although for the time we saw none.

Dear skins.
Dear skins dressed after the manner of Chamoes or undressed are to be had
of the natural inhabitants thousands yearly by way of traffic for trifles:
and no more wast or spoil of Dear then is and has been ordinarily in time
before.

Ciuet cattes.
In our travails, there was found one to have been killed by a saluage or
inhabitant: and in an other place the smell where one or more had lately been
before: whereby we gather besides then by the relation of the people that there
are some in the country: good profit will rise by them.

Iron.
In two places of the country specially, one about fourscore and the other
six score miles from the Fort or place where we dwelt: we found near the
water side the ground to be rockie, which by the trial of a mineral man, was
found to hold Iron richly. It is found in many places of the country else.
I know nothing to the contrary, but that it may be allowed for a good
marchantable commodity, considering there the small charge for the labor and
feeding of men: the infinite store of wood: the want of wood and deerenesse
thereof in England: and the necessity of ballasting of ships.

Copper.
A hundred and fifty miles into the maine in two towns we found with the
inhabitaunts diverse small plates of copper, that had been made as we
understood, by the inhabitants that dwell farther into the country: where as
they say are mountains and Rivers that yield also white graynes of Metal,
which is to be deemed Silver. For confirmation whereof at the time of our
first arrival in the Country, I saw with some others with me, two small
pieces of silver grossly beaten about the weight of a Testrone, hangyng in the
ears of a Wiroans or chief Lord that dwelt about fourscore miles from us;
of whom through enquiry, by the number of days and the way, I learned that it
had come to his hands from the same place or near, where I after understood
the copper was made and the white graynes of metal found. The aforesaid
copper we also found by trial to hold silver.

Pearl.
Sometimes in feeding on muscles we found some pearl; but it was our hap to
meet with rags, or of a pide color; not having yet discovered those places
where we heard of better and more plenty. One of our company; a man of
skill in such matters, had gathered to gether from among the savage people
about five thousand: of which number he chose so many as made a fair chain,
which for their likeness and uniformity in roundnesse, orientnesse, and
pidenesse of ma^ny excellent colors, with equality in greatness, were very
fair and rare; and had therefore been presented to her Majesty, had we not
by casualtie and trough extremity of a storm, lost them with many things else
in coming away from the country.

Sweet Gummes.
Sweet Gummes of diverse kinds and many other Apothecary drugges of which we
will make special mention, when we shall receive it from such men of skill in
that kind, that in taking reasonable pains shall discover them more
particularly then we have done; and than now I can makc relation of, for want
of the examples I had prouited and gathered, and are now lost, with other
things by causualtie before mentioned.

Dies of diverse kinds.
There is Shoemake well known, and used in England for black; the seed of an
herb called Wasewowr: little small roots called Chappacor; and the bark of
the tree called by the inhabitaunts Tangomockonomindge: which Dies are for
diverse sorts of red: their goodness for our English clothes remain yet to be
proved. The inhabitants use them only for the dying of hair;and coloring of
their faces, and Mantles made of Dear skins; and also for the dying of
Rushes to make artificial works withal in their Mattes and Baskettes; having
no other thing besides that they account of, apt to use them for. If they will
not prove merchantable there is no doubt but the Planters there shall find
apt uses for them, as also for other colors which we know to be there.

Oade.
A thing of so great vent and use amongst English Diers, which cannot be
yielded sufficiently in our own country for spare of ground; may be planted
in Virginia, there being ground enough. The grouth thereof need not to be
doubted when as in the Islands of the Asores it grows plentifully, which is
in the same climate. So likewise of Madder.

Sugar canes.
When carried thither Sugar canes to plant which being not so well preserved as
was requisite, and besides the time of the year being past for their setting
when we arrived, we could not make that proof of them as we desired.
Notwithsta^ ding seeing that they grow in the same climate, in the South part
of Spain and in Barbary, our hope in reason may yet continue. So likewise for
Orenges, and Lemmons, there may be planted also Quinses. Wherbi may grow in
reasonable time if the action be diligently prosecuted, no small commodities in
Sugers, Suckets, and Marmalades.

Many other commodities by planting may there also be raised, which I leave to
your discret and gentle considerations: and many also may be there which yet
we have not discovered. Two more commodities of great value one of certainty,
and the other in hope, not to be planted, but there to be raised and in short
time to be provided and prepared, I might have specified. So likewise of those
commodities already set down I might have said more; as of the particular
places where they are found and best to be planted and prepared: by what
means and in what reasonable space of time they might be raised to profit and
in what proportion; but because others then welwillers might be therewithal
acquainted, not to the good of the action, I have wittingly omitted them:
knowing that to those that are well disposed I have uttered, according to my
promise and purpose, for this part sufficient.

THE SECOND PART, OF SVCHE COMMODITIES AS VIRGINIA IS known to yield for
victual and sustena^ce of man's life, usually fed upon by the natural
inhabitants: as also by us during the time of our abode. And first of such as
are sowed and husbanded.
Pagatowr, a kind of grain so called by the inhabitants; the same in the West
Indies is called Mayze: English men call it Guinney wheat or Turkey wheat,
according to the names of the countries from whence the like has been
brought. The grain is about the bigness of our ordinary English peaze and not
much different in form and shape: but of diverse colors: some white, some red,
some yellow, and some blew. All of them yield a very white and sweet flower:
being used according to his kind it makes a very good bread. We made of the
same in the country some malt, whereof was brued as good ale as was to be
desired. So likewise by the help of hops thereof may be made as good Beer. It
is a grain of marvelous great increase; of a thousand, fifteen hundred and
some two thousand fold. There are three sorts, of which two are ripe in an
eleven and twelve weeks at the most: sometimes in ten, after the time they are
set, and are then of height in stalk about six or seven foot. The other sort
is ripe in fourteen, and is about ten foot high, of the stalks some bear
four heads, some three, some one, and two: every head co^taining five, six,
or seven hundred grains within a few more or less. Of these grains besides
bread, the inhabitants make victual either by parching them; or seething them
whole until they be broken; or boiling the flower with water into a pappe.

Okindgier, called by us Beans, because in greatness and partly in shape they
are like to the Beans in England; saving that they are flatter, of more diverse
colors, and some pide. The leaf also of the stem is much different. In
taste they are altogether as good as our English peaze.

Wickonzowr, called by us Peaze, in respect of the beans for distinction sake,
because they are much less; although in form they little differ; but in
goodness of taste much, and are far better then our English peaze. Both the
beans and peaze are ripe in ten weeks after they are set. They make them
victual either by boiling them all to pieces into a broth; or boiling them
whole until they be soft and begin to break as is used in England, either
by themselves or mixtly together: Sometime they mingle of the wheat with them.
Sometime also being whole soddeu, they bruise or pound them in a mortar, and
thereof make loaves or lumps of dowishe bread, which they use to eat for
variety.

Macocqwer, according to their several forms called by us, Pompions,
Mellions, and Gourdes, because they are of the like forms as those kinds in
England. In Virginia such of several forms are of one taste and very good,
and do also spring from one seed. There are of two sorts; one is ripe in the
space of a month, and the other in two months.

There is an herb which in Dutch is called Melden. Some of those that I
describe it unto, take it to be a kind of Orage; it grows about four or
five foot high: of the seed thereof they make a thick broth, and pottage of
a very good taste: of the stalk by burning into ashes they make a kind of
salt earth, wherewithal many use sometimes to season their brothes; other
salt they know not. We our seiues, used the leaves also for pothearbes.

There is also another great heabe in form of a Marigolde, ahout six foot in
height; the head with the flower is a spanne in breadth. Some take it to be
Planta Solis: of the seeds hereof they make both a kind of bread and broth.

All the aforesaid commodities for victual are set or sowed, sometimes in
grounds a part and severally by themselves; but for the most part together in
one ground mixtly: the manner thereof with the dressing and preparing of the
ground, because I will note unto you the fertility of the soil; I think good
briefly to describe.

The ground they never fatten with mucke, dounge or any other thing; neither
plow nor dig it as we in England, but only prepare it in sort as follows.
A few days before they sow or set, the men with wooden instruments, made
almost in form of mattockes or hoes with long handles; the women with short
peckers or parers, because they use them sitting, of a foot long and about
five inches in breadth: do only break the upper part of the ground to raise
up the weeds, grass, and old stubbes of corn stalks with their roots. The
which after a day or twoes drying in the Sun, being scrapte up into many
small heaps, to save them labor for carrying them away; they burn into
ashes. (And whereas some may think that they use the ashes for to better the
ground; I say that then they would either disperse the ashes abroad; which
we observed they do not, except the heaps be too great: or else would take
special care to set their corn where the ashes lie, which also we find they
are careless of.) And this is all the husbanding of their ground that they use.

Then their setting or sowing is after this manner. First for their corn,
beginning in one corner of the plot, with a pecker they make a hole, wherein
they put four grains with that care they touch not one another, (about an
inch asunder) and cover them with the moulde again: and so through out the
whole plot, making such holes and using them after such manner: but with this
regard that they be made in ranks, every ra^ke differing from other half a
fadome or a yard, and the holes also in every rank, as much. By this means
there is a yard spare ground between every hole: where according to discretion
here and there, they set as many Beans and Peaze: in diverse places also among
the seeds of Macocqwer, Melden and Planta Solis.

The ground being thus set according to the rate by us experimented, an English
Acre containing forty pearches in length, and four in breadth, does there
yield in croppe or ofcome of corn, beans, and peaze, at the least two hundred
London bushelles: besides the Macocqwer, Melden, and Planta Solis. When as in
England forty bushelles of our wheat yielded out of such an acre is thought
to be much.

I thought also good to note this unto you, if you which shall inhabit and
plant there, may know how specially that country corn is there to be
preferred before ours: Besides the manifold ways in applying it to victual,
the increase is so much that small labor and pains is needful in respect that
must be used for ours. For this I can assure you that according to the rate we
have made proof of, one man may prepare and husbane so much ground (having
once borne corn before) with less the^ four and twenty hours labor, as
shall yield him victual in a large proportion for a twelve mo^eth, if he
have nothing else, but that which the same ground will yield, and of that
kind only which I have before spoken of: the said ground being also but of
five and twenty yards square. And if need require, but that there is ground
enough, there might be raised out of one and the selfsame ground two haruestes
or ofcomes; for they sow or set and may at any time when they think good
from the midst of March until the end of June: so that they also set when
they have eaten of their first croppe. In some places of the country
notwithstanding they have two haruests, as we have heard, out of one and the
same ground.

For English corn nevertheless whether to use or not to use it, you that
inhabit may do as you shall have farther cause to think best. Of the grouth
you need not to doubt: for barlie, oats and peaze, we have seen proof of, not
being purposely sown but fallen casually in the worst sort of ground, and yet
to be as fair as any we have ever seen here in England. But of wheat because
it was musty and hat taken salt water we could make no trial: and of rye we
had none. Thus much have I digressed and I hope not unnecessarily: now will I
return again to my course and entreat of that which yet remains
appertaining to this Chapter.

There is an herb which is sowed a part by it self and is called by the
inhabitants Vppowoc: In the West Indies it has diverse names, according to the
several places and countries where it grows and is used: The Spaniardes
generally call it Tobacco. The leaves thereof being dried and brought into
powder: they use to take the fume or smoke thereof by sucking it through pipes
made of claie into their stomach and head;from whence it purges superfluous
fleame and other gross humors, opens all the pores and passages of the body:
by which means the use thereof, not only preserves the body from
obstructio^s; but also if any be, so that they have not been of too long
continuance, in short time breaks them:whereby their bodies are notably
preserved in health, and know not many grievous diseases wherewithal we in
England are oftentimes afflicted.

This Vppowoc is of so precious estimation amongst then, that they think
their gods are maruelously delighted therewith: Whereupon sometime they make
hallowed fires and cast some of the powder therein for a sacrifice: being in a
storm upon the waters, to pacify their gods, they cast some up into the air
and into the water: so a wear for fish being newly set up, they cast some
therein and into the air: also after an escape of danger, they cast some into
the air likewise: but all done with strange gestures, stamping, sometime
dancing, clapping of hands, holding up of hands, and staring up into the
heavens, uttering therewithal and chattering strange words and noises.

We our selves during the time we were there used to suck it after their manner,
as also since our return, and have found maine rare and wonderful experiments
of the virtues thereof; of which the relation would require a volume by it
self: the use of it by so many of late, men and women of great calling as
else, and some learned Physicians also, is sufficient witness.

And these are all the commodities for sustenance of life that I know and can
remember they use to husband: all else that follow are found growing
naturally or wild.

Of Roots.
Openavk are a kind of roots of round form, some of the bigness of walnuts,
some far greater, which are found in moist and marish grounds growing many
together one by another in ropes, or as though they were fastnened with a
string. Being boiled or sodden they are very good meat.

Okeepenavk are also of round shape, found in dry grounds: some are of the
bigness of a man's head. They are to be eaten as they are taken out of the
ground, for by reason of their dryness they will neither roste nor sees.
Their taste is not so good as of the former roots, notwithstanding for want of
bread and sometimes for variety the inhabitants use to eat them with fish or
flesh, and in my judgment they do as well as the household bread made of rye
here in England.

Kaishucpenauk a white kind of roots about the bigness of hen eggs and nere of
that form: their taste was not so good to our seeming as of the other, and
therefore their place and manner of growing not so much cared for by us: the
inahbitants notwithstanding used to boil and eat many.

Tsinaw a kind of root much like unto the which in England is called the China
root brought from the East Indies. And we know not any thing to the contrary
but that it may be of the same kind. These roots grow many together in great
clusters and do bring forth a brier stalk, but the leaf in shape far
unlike; which being supported by the trees it grows nearest unto, will reach
or climb to the top of the highest. From these roots while they be new or
fresh being chopped into small pieces and stamped, is strained with water a juice
that makes bread, and also being boiled, a very good spoonemeate in manner of a
gelly, and is much better in taste if it be tempered with oil. This Tsinaw is
not of that sort which by some was caused to be brought into England for the
China root, for it was discovered since, and is in use as is before said: but
that which was brought hither is not yet known neither by us nor by the
inhabitants to serve for any use or purpose; although the roots in shape are
very like.

Coscushaw, some of our company took to be that kind of root which the
Spaniards in the West Indies call Cassauy, whereupon also many called it by
that name: it grows in very muddie pooles and moist grounds. Being dressed
according to the country manner, it makes a good bread, and also a good
sponemeate, and is used very much by the inhabitants: The juice of this root is
poison, and therefore heed must be taken before any thing be made therewithal:
Either the roots must be first sliced and dried in the Sun, or by the fire,
and then being pounded into flower will make good bread: or else while they are
green they are to be pared, cut into pieces and stamped; loves of the same to
be laid near or over the fire until it be sour, and then being well pounded
again, bread, or spone meat very good in taste, and wholesome may be made
thereof.

Habascon is a root of hot taste almost of the form and bigness of a
Parseneepe, of it self it is no victual, but only a help being boiled
together with other meats.

There are also Leekes differing little from ours in England that grow in many
places of the country, of which, when we came in places where, we gathered
and eat many, but the natural inhabitants never.

Of Fruits.
Chestnvts, there are in diverse places great store: some they use to eat raw,
some they stamp and boil to make spoonemeate, and with some being sodden they
make such a manner of dowe bread as they use of their beans before mentioned.

Walnvts: There are two kinds of Walnuts, and of then infinite store: In many
places where very great woods for many miles together the third part of trees
are walnuttrees. The one kind is of the same taste and form or little differing
from ours of England; but that they are harder and thicker shelled: the other
is greater and has a very ragged and hard shell: but the kernel great,
very oily and sweet. Besides their eating of them after our ordinary manner,
they break them with stones and pound them in morters with water to make a
milk which they use to put into some sorts of their spoonmeate; also among
their sodde wheat, peaze, beans and pompions which makes them have a far
more pleasant taste.

Medlars a kind of very good fruit, so called by us chiefly for these
respects: first in that they are not good until they be rotten: then in that
they open at the head as our medlars, and are about the same bigness:
otherwise in taste and color they are far different: for they are as red as
cheries and very sweet: but whereas the cherie is sharp sweet, they are
lushious sweet.

Metaqvesvnnavk, a kind of pleasant fruit almost of the shape and bigness of
English pears, but that they are of a perfect red color as well within as
without. They grow on a plant whose leaves are very thick and full of
prickles as sharp as needles. Some that have bin in the Indies, where they
have seen that kind of red die of great price which is called Cochinile to
grow, do describe his plant right like unto this of Metaquesunnauk but whether
it be the true Cochinile or a bastard or wild kind, it cannot yet be
certified; seeing that also as I heard, Cochinile is not of the fruit but
found on the leaves of the plant; which leaves for such matter we have not so
specially observed.

Grapes there are of two sorts which I mentioned in the marchantable commodities.

Straberies there are as good and as great as those which we have in our
English gardens.

Mvlberies, Applecrabs, Hurts or Hurtleberies, such as we have in England.

Sacqvenvmmener a kind of berries almost like unto capres but some what
greater which grow together in clusters upon a plant or herb that is found in
shalow waters: being boiled eight or nine hours according to their kind are
very good meat and wholesome, otherwise if they be eaten they will make a man
for the time frantic or extremely sick.

There is a kind of reed which bears a seed almost like unto our rye or
wheat, and being boiled is good meat.

In our travails in some places we found wild peaze like unto ours in
England but that they were less, which are also good meat.

Of a kind of fruit or berrie in form of Acornes.
There is a kind of berrie or acorne, of which there are five sorts that grow
on several kinds of trees; the one is called Sagatemener, the second Osamener,
the third Pummuckoner. These kind of acorns they use to dry upon hurdles made
of reeds with fire underneath almost after the manner as we dry malt in England.
When they are to be used they first water them until they be soft and then
being sod they make a good victual, either to eat so simply, or else being
also pounded, to make loaves or lumpes of bread. These be also the three kinds
of which, I said before, the inhabitants used to make sweet oil.

An other sort is called Sapummener which being boiled or parched does eat and
taste like unto chestnuts. They sometime also make bread of this sort.

The fifth sort is called Mangummenauk, and is the acorne of their kind of
oak, the which being dried after the manner of the first sorts, and afterward
watered they boil them, and their servants or sometime the chief themselves,
either for variety or for want of bread, do eat them with their fish or flesh.

Of Beasts.
Dear, in some places there are great store: near unto the sea coast they are
of the ordinary bigness as ours in England, and some less: but further up into
the country where there is better seed they are greater: they differ from ouis
only in this, their tails are longer and the snags of their horns look
backward.

Conies, Those that we have seen and all that we can hear of are of a gray
color like unto hares: in some places there are such ple^tie that all the
people of some towns make them mantles of the furre or flue of the skins of
those they usually take.

Saquenuckot and Maquowoc; two kinds of small beasts greater then conies
which are very good meat. We never took any of them our selves, but sometime
eat of such as the inhabitants had taken and brought unto us.

Squirels which are of a gray color, we have taken and eaten.

Bears which are all of black color. The bears of this country are good
meat; the inhabitants in time of winter do use to take and eat many, so also
sometime did we. They are taken comonlie in this sort. In some Islands or places
where they are, being hunted for, as soon as they have spiall of a man they
presently run away, and then being chased they clime and get up the next tree
they can, from whence with arrows they are shot down stark dead, or with
those wounds that they may after easily bekilled; we sometime shot them down
with our caleeuers.

I have the names of eight and twenty several sorts of beasts which I have
heard of to be here and there dispersed in the country, especially in the
maine: of which there are only twelve kinds that we have yet discovered, and of
those that be good meat we know only them before mentioned. The inhabita^nts
sometime kill the Lion and eat him: and we sometime as they came to our hands of
their Wolves or woluish Dogs, which I have not set down for good meat, least
that some would understand my judgment therein to be more simple than needs,
although I could allege the difference in taste of kinds from ours, which by
some of our company have been experimented in both.

Of Foul.
Turkey cocks and Turkey hens: Stockdoues: Partridges: Cranes: Hernes: and
in winter great store of Swannes and Geese. Ofal sorts of foul I have the
names in the country language of four escore and six of which number besides
those that be named, we have taken, eaten, and have the pictures as they were
there drawn with the names of the inhabitaunts of several strange sorts of
water foul eight, and seventeen kinds more of land foul, although we have
seen and eaten of many more, which for want of leisure there for the purpose
could not be pictured: and after we are better furnished and stored upon
further discouety, with their strange beasts, fish, trees, plants, and
herbs, they shall be also published.

There are also Parats, Faulcons, and Marlin hawks, which although with us
they be not used for meat, yet for other causes I thought good to mention.

Of Fish.
For four months of the year, February, March, April and May, there are
plenty of Sturgeons: And also in the same months of Herrings, some of the
ordinary bigness as ours in England, but the most part far greater, of
eighteen, twenty inches, and some two foot in length and better; both these
kinds of fish in those months are most plentiful, and in best season,
which we found to be most delicate and pleasant meat.

There are also Troutes, Porpoises, Rays, Oldwiues, Mullets, Plaice, and very
many other sorts of excellent good fish, which we have taken and eaten, whose
names I know not but in the country language; we have of twelve sorts more
the pictures as they were drawn in the country with their names.

The inhabitants use to take then two manner of ways, the one is by a kind of
wear made of reeds which in that country are very strong. The other way which
is more strange, is with poles made sharp at one end, by shooting them into
the fish after the manner as Irishmen cast darts; either as they are rowing in
their boats or else as they are wading in the shallowes for the purpose.

There are also in many places plenty of these kinds which follow.

Sea crabbes, such as we have in England.

Oystres, some very great, and some small;some round and some of a long shape:
They are found both in salt water and brackish, and those that we had out of
salt water are far better than the other as in our own country.

Also Muscles, Scalopes, Periwinkles, and Creuises.

Seekanauk, a kind of crustie shell fish which is good meat, about a foot
in breadth, having a crustie tail, many legs like a crab; and her eyes in
her back. They are found in shallowes of salt waters; and sometime on the
shore.

There are many Tortoyses both of land and sea kind, their backs and bellies
are shelled very thick; their head, feet, and tail, which are in appearance,
seem ougly as though they were members of a serpent or venomous: but
notwithstanding they are very good meat, as also their eggs. Some have been
found of a yard in breadth and better.

And thus have I made relation of all sorts of victual that we fed upon for
the time we were in Virginia, as also the inhabitants themselves, as far
forth as I know and can remember or that are specially worthy to be
remembered.

THE THIRD AND LAST PART, OF SVCH OTHER THINGS AS IS BE HOOfull for those
which shall plant and inhabit to know of; with a description of the nature and
manners of the people of the country.
Of commodities for building and other necessary uses.
Those other things which I am more to make rehearsal of, are such as concern
building, and other mechanical necessary uses; as diverse sorts of trees for
house and ship timber, and other uses else: Also lime, stone, and brick, least
that being not mentioned some might have been doubted of, or by some that are
malicious reported the contrary.

Oaks, there are as fair, straight, tall, and as good timber as any can be,
and also great store, and in some places very great.

Walnut trees, as I have said before very many, some have been seen excellent
fair timber of four and five fadome, and above fourscore foot straight
without bough.

Fur trees fit for masts of ships, some very tall and great.

Rakiock, a kind of trees so called that are sweet wood of which the inhabitans
that were near unto us do commonly make their boats or Canoes of the form of
trowes; only with the help of fire, harchets of stones, and shells; we have
known some so great being made in that sort of one tree that they have carried
well xx. men at once, besides much baggage: the timber being great, tal,
straight, soft, light, and yet tough enough I think (besides other uses) to be
fit also for masts of ships.

Cedar, a sweet wood good for seelings, Chests, Boxes, Bedsteedes, Lutes,
Virginals, and many things else, as I have also said before. Some of our company
which have wandered in some places where I have not been, have made certain
affirmation of Cyprus which for such and other excellent uses, is also a wood
of price and no small estimation.

Maple, and also Wich-hazle, whereof the inhabitants use to make their bows.

Holly a necessary thing for the making of birdlime.

Willowes good for the making of wears and weeles to take fish after the
English manner, although the inhabitants use only reeds, which because they
are so strong as also flexible, do serve for that turn very well and
sufficiently.

Beech and Ash, good for caske, hoopes: and if need require, plow work, as
also for many things else.

Elm.

Sassafras trees.

Ascopo a kind of tree very like unto Laurel, the bark is hot in taste and
spicie, it is very like to that tree which Monardus describes to be Cassia
Lignea of the West Indies.

There are many other strange trees whose names I know not but in the
Virginian language, of which I am not now able, neither is it so convenient
for the present to trouble you with particular relation: seeing that for timber
and other neceslary uses I have named sufficient: And of many of the rest but
that they may be applied to good use, I know no cause to doubt.

Now for Stone, Brick and Lime, thus it is. Near unto the Sea coast where
weedwelt, there are no kind of stones to be found (except a few small
pebbles about four miles off) but such as have been brought from farther out
of the maine. In some of our voiages we have seen diverse hard raggie stones,
great pebbles, and a kind of gray stone like unto marble, of which the
inhabitants make their hatchets to cleeue wood. Upon inquiry we heard that a
little further up into the Country were of all sorts very many, although of
Quarries they are ignorant, neither have they use of any store whereupon they
should have occasion to seek any. For if every household have one or two to
crack Nuttes, grind shelles, whet copper, and sometimes other stones for
hatchets, they have enough: neither use they any digging, but only for graves
about three foot deep: and therefore no marvel that they know neither
Quarries, nor lime stones, which both may be in places nearer than they wot of.

In the mean time until there be discovery of sufficient store in some
place or other convenient, the want of you which are and shall be the planters
therein may be as well supplied by Brick: for the making whereofin diverse
places of the country there is clay both excellent good, and plenty; and also
by lime made of Oister shells, and of others burnt, after the manner as they use
in the Isles of Tenet and Shepy, and also in diverse other places of England:
Which kind of lime is well known to be as good as any other. And of Oister
shells there is plenty enough: for besides diverse other particular places where
are abundance, there is one shallowe sound along the coast, where for the
space of many miles together in lenght, and two or three miles in breadth, the
ground is nothing else being but half a foot or a foot under water for the
most part.

This much can I say further more of stones, that about 120. miles from our
fort near the water in the side of a hill was found by a Gentleman of our
company, a great vein of hard ragge stones, which I thought good to remember
unto you.

Of the nature and manners of the people
It rests I speak a word or two of the natural inhabitants, their natures
and manners, leaving large discourse thereof until time more convenient
hereafter: now only so far forth, as that you may know, how that they in
respect of troubling our inhabiting and planting, are not to be feared; but
that they shall have cause both to fear and love us, that shall inhabit with
them.

They are a people clothed with loose mantles made of Dear skins, and aprons
of the same round about their middles; all else naked; of such a difference of
statures only as we in England; having no edge tools or weapons of iron or
steel to offend us withal, neither know they how to make any: those weapons
that they have, are only bows made of Witch hazle, and arrows of reeds; flat
edged truncheons also of wood about a yard long, neither have they any thing to
defend themselves but targets made of barcks; and some armours made of sticks
wickered together with thread.

Their towns are but small, and near the sea coast but few, some co^taining
but 10. or 12. houses: some 20. the greatest that we have seen have been but
of 30. houses:if they be walled it is only done with barks of trees made fast
to stakes, or else with poles only fixed upright and close one by another.

Their houses are made of small poles made fast at the tops in round form
after the manner as is used in many arbories in our gardens of England, in most
towns covered with barks, and in some with artificial mattes made of long
rushes; from the tops of the houses down to the ground. The length of them is
commonly double to the breadth, in some places they are but 12. and 16. yardes
long, and in other some we have seen of four and twenty.

In some places of the country one only town belongs to the government of
a Wiroans or chief Lord; in other some two or three, in some six, eight, and
more; the greatest Wiroans that yet we had dealing with had but eighteen
towns in his government, and able to make not above seven or eight hundred
fighting men at the most: The language of every government is different from
any other and the farther they are distant the greater is the difference.

Their manner of wars amongst themselves is either by sudden surprising one an
other most commonly about the dawning of the day, or moon light; or elsby
ambushes, or some subtle devises: Set battles are very rare, except it fall out
where there are many trees, where either part may have some hope of defense,
after the delivery of every arrow, in leaping behind some or other.

If there fall out any wars betwee^ us and them, what their fight is likely
to be, we having advantages against them so many manner of ways, as by our
discipline, our strange weapons and devises else; especially by ordinance great
and small, it may be easily imagined; by the experience we have had in some
places, the turning us of their heels against us in running away was their
best defense.

In respect of us they are a people poor, and for want of skill and judgment
in the knowledge and use of our things, do esteem our trifles before things
of greater value: Notwithstanding in their proper manner considering the want
of such means as we have, they seem very ingenious; For although they have no
such tools, nor any such crafts, sciences and arts as we; yet in those
things they do, they show excellency of wit. And by how much they upon due
consideration shall find our manner of knowledges and crafts to exceed
theirs in perfection, and speed for doing or execution, by so much the more is
it probable that they should desire our friendships and love, and have the
greater respect for pleasing and obeying us. Whereby may be hoped if means of
good government be used, that they may in short time be brought to civility,
and the embracing of true religion.

Some religion they have already, which although it be far from the truth,
yet being at it is, there is hope it may be the easier and sooner reformed.

They believe that there are many Gods which they call Mantoac, but of
different sorts and degrees; one only chief and great God, which has been
from all eternity. Who as they affirm when he purposed to make the world,
made first other gods of a principal order to be as means and instruments
to be used in the creation and government to follow; and after the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, as petty gods and the instruments of the other order
more principal. First they say were made waters, out of which by the gods was
made all diversity of creatures that are visible or invisible.

For mankind they say a woman was made first, which by the woorking of one of
the gods, conceived and brought forth children: And in such sort they say
they had their beginning.

But how many years or ages have passed since, they say they can make no
relation, having no letters nor other such means as we to keep records of
the particularities of times past, but only tradition from father to son.

They think that all the gods are of humane shape, and therefore they represent
them by images in the forms of men, which they call Kewasowok one alone is
called Kewas; Them they place in houses appropriate or temples which they call
Mathicomuck; Where they woorship, pray, sing, and make many times offerings
unto them. In some Machicomuck we have seen but on Kewas, in some two, and in
other some three; The common sort think them to be also gods.

They believe also the immortality of the soul, that after this life as soon
as the soul is departed fiom the body according to the works it has done,
it is either carried to heaven the habitacle of gods, there to enjoy perpetual
bliss and happiness, or else to a great pit or hole, which they think to
be in the furthest parts of their part of the world toward the sun set,
there to burn continually: the place they call Popogusso.

For the confirmation of this opinion, they told me two stories of two men
that had been lately dead and revived again, the one happened but few years
before our coming in the country of a wicked man which having been dead and
buried, the next day the earth of the grave being seen to move, was taken up
again; Who made declaration where his soul had been, that is to say very
near entering into Popogusso, had not one of the gods saved him and gave him
leave to return again, and teach his friends what they should do to avoid
that terrible place of tormenr.

The other happened in the same year we were there, but in a town that was
threescore miles from us, and it was told me for strange news that one
being dead, buried and taken up again as the first, showed that although his
body had lien dead in the grave, yet his soul was alive, a^nd had travailed
far in a long broad way, on both sides whereof grew most delicate and
pleasant trees, bearing more rare and excellent fruits then ever he had
seen before or was able to express, and at length came to most brave and
fair houses, near which he met his father, that had been dead before, who
gave him great charge to go back again and show his friends what good they
were to do to enjoy the pleasures of that place, which when he had done he
should after come again.

What subtilty soever be in the Wiroances and Priests, this opinion works so
much in many of the common and simple sort of people that it makes them have
great respect to their Governors, and also great care what they do, to avoid
torment after death, and to enjoy bliss; althought notwithstanding there is
punishment ordained for malefactors, as stealers, whoremoongers, and other
sorts of wicked doers; some punished with death, some with forfeitures, some
with beating, according to the greatness of the factes.

And this is the sum of their religion, which I learned by having special
familiarity with some of their priests. Wherein they were not so sure
grounded, nor gave such credit to their traditions and stories but through
conuersing with us they were brought into great doubts of their own, and no
small admiration of ours, with earnest desire in many, to learn more than we
had means for want of perfect utterance in their language to express.

Most things they saw with us, as Mathematical instruments, sea compasses,
the virtue of the loadstone in drawing iron, a perspectiue glass whereby was
showed many strange sightes, burning glasses, wildefire works, gunnes,
books, writing and reading, spring clocks that seem to go of themselves, and
many other things that we had, were so strange unto them, and so far
exceeded their capacities to comprehend the reason and means how they should
be made and done, that they thought they were rather the works of gods then of
men, or at the leastwise they had bin given and taught us of the gods. Which
made many of them to have such opinion of us, as that if they knew not the
truth of god and religion already, it was rather to be had from us, whom God
so specially loved then from a people that were so simple, as they found
themselves to be in comparison of us. Whereupon greater credit was given unto
that we spoke of concerning such matters.

Many times and in every town where I came, according as I was able, I made
declaration of the contents of the Bible;that therein was set forth the true
and only God, and his mighty works, that therein was contained the true
doctrine of salvation through Christ, with many particularities of Miracles
and chief points of religion, as I was able then to utter, and thought fit
for the time. And although I told them the book materially and of itself was
not of any such virtue, as I thought they did conceive, but only the doctrine
therein contained; yet would many be glad to touch it, to embrace it, to kiss
it, to hold it to their breasts and heads, and stroke over all their body with
it; to show their hungry desire of that knowledge which was spoken of.

The Wiroans with whom we dwelt called Wingina, and many of his people would be
glad many times to be with us at our prayers, and many times call upon us both
in his own town, as also in others whither he sometimes accompanied us, to
pray and sing Psalms; hoping thereby to be partaker of the same effects
which we by that means also expected.

Twice this Wiroans was so grievously sick that he was like to die, and as he
lay languishing, doubting of any help by his own priests, and thinking he
was in such danger for offending us and thereby our god, sent for some of us
to pray and be a means to our God that it would please him either that he
might live or after death dwell with him in bliss, so likewise were the
requests of many others in the like case.

On a time also when their corn began to wither by reason of a drouth which
happened extraordinarily, fearing that it had come to pass by reason that in
some thing they had displeased us, many would come to us and desire us to
pray to our God of England, that he would preserve their corn, promising that
when it was ripe we also should be partakers of the fruit.

There could at no time happen any strange sickness, losses, hurtes, or any
other cross unto them, but that they would impute to us the cause or means
thereof for offending or not pleasing us.

One other rare and strange accident, leaving others, will I mention before I
end, which moved the whole country that either knew or heard of us, to have
us in wonderful admiration.

There was no town where we had any subtle devise practiced against us, we
leaving it unpunished or not revenged (because we sought by all means
possible to win them by gentleness) but that within a few days after our
departure from every such town, the people began to die very fast, and many
in short space; in some towns about twenty, in some forty, in some sixty,
and in one six score, which in truth was very many in respect of their
numbers. This happened in no place that we could learn but where we had
been, where they used some practice against us, and after such time; The
disease also so strange, that they neither knew what it was, nor how to cure
it; the like by report of the oldest men in the country never happened before,
time out of mind. A thing specially observed by us as also by the natural
inhabitants themselves.

Insomuch that when some of the inhabitants which were our friends and
especially the Wiroans Wingina had observed such effects in four or five towns
to follow their wicked practices, they were persuaded that it was the work of
our God through our means, and that we by him might kill and slai whom we
would without weapons and not come near them.

And thereupon when it had happened that they had understanding that any of
their enemies had abused us in our iourneyes, hearing that we had wrought no
revenge with our weapons, and fearing upon some cause the matter should so
rest: did come and entreat us that we would be a means to our God that they
as others that had dealt ill with us might in like sort die; alleging how
much it would be for our credit and profit, as also theirs; and hoping
furthermore that we would do so much at their requests in respect of the
friendship we profess them.

Whose entreaties although we showed that they were ungodly, affirming that
our God would not subject him self to any such prayers and requests of me^:
that in deed all things have been and were to be done according to his good
pleasure as he had ordained: and that we to show our selves his true servants
ought rather to make petition for the contrary, that they with them might live
together with us, be made partakers of his truth and serve him in
righteousness; but notwithstanding in such sort, that we refer that as all
other things, to be done according to his divine will and pleasure, and as by
his wisdom he had ordained to be best.

Yet because the effect fell out so suddenly and shortly after according to
their desires, they thought nevertheless it came to pass by our means, and
that we in using such speeches unto them did but dissemble the matter, and
therefore came unto us to give us thanks in their manner that although we
satisfied them not in promise, yet in deeds and effect we had fulfilled their
desires.

This marvelous accident in all the country wrought so strange opinions of us,
that some people could not tell whether to think us gods or men, and the rather
because that all the space of their sickness, there was no man of ours known
to die, or that was specially sick: they noted also that we had no women
amongst us, neither that we did care for any of theirs.

Some therefore were of opinion that we were not borne of women, and therefore
not mortal, but that we were men of an old generation many years past then
risen again to immortality.

Some would likewise seem to prophecy that there were more of our generation
yet to come, to kill theirs and take their places, as some thought the purpose
was by that which was already done.

Those that were immediately to come after us they imagined to be in the air,
yet invisible and without bodies, and that they by our entreaty and for the
love of us did make the people to die in that sort as they did by shooting
invisible bullets into them.

To confirm this opinion their physicians to excuse their ignorance in curing
the disease, would not be ashemed to say, but earnestly make the simple people
believe, that the strings of blood that they sucked out of the sick bodies,
were the strings wherewithal the invisible bullets were tied and cast.

Some also thought that we shot them our selves out of our pieces from the
place where we dwelt, and killed the people in any such town that had offended
us as we listed, how far distant from us soever it were.

And other some said that it was the special work of God for our sakes, as
we our selves have cause in some sort to think no less, whatsoever some do
or may imagine to the contrary, specially some Astrologers knowing of the
Eclipse of the Sun which we saw the same year before in our voyage
thytherward, which unto them appeared very terrible. And also of a Comet which
began to appear but a few days before the beginning of the said sickness.
But to exclude them from being the special an accident, there are farther
reasons then I think fit at this present to be alleged.

These their opinions I have set down the more at large that it may appear
unto you that there is good hope they may be brought through discreet dealing
and government to the embracing of the truth, and consequently to honor,
obey, fear and love us.

And although some of our company to wards the end of the year, showed
themselves too fierce, in slaying some of the people, in some towns, upon
causes that on our part, might easily enough have been borne withal: yet
notwithstanding because it was on their part justly deserved, the alteration of
their opinions generally and for the most part concerning us is the less to
be doubted. And whatsoever else they may be, by carfulness of our selves
need nothing at all to be feared. The best nevertheless in this as in all
actions besides is to be endeavored and hoped, and of the worst that may happen
notice to be taken with consideration, and as much as may be eschewed.

The Conclusion.
Now I have as I hope made relation not of so few and small things but that the
country of men that are indifferent and well disposed may be sufficiently
liked: If there were no more known then I have mentioned, which doubtless and
in great reason is nothing to that which remains to be discovered, neither
the soil, nor commodities. As we have reason so to gather by the difference we
found in our trauails: for although all which I have before spoken of, have bin
discovered and experimented not far from the sea coast where was our abode and
most of our travailing: yet sometimes as we made our iourneies farther into the
maine and country; we found the soil to be fatter; the trees greater and to
grow thinner; the ground more firm and deeper mould; more and larger
champions; finer grass and as good as ever we saw any in England; in some
places rockie and far more high and hilly ground; more plenty of their
fruits; more abondance of beasts; the more inhabited with people, and of
greater policy and larger dominions, with greater towns and houses.

Why may we not then look for in good hope from the inner parts of more and
greater plenty, as well of other things, as of those which we have already
discovered? Unto the Spaniardes happened the like in discovering the maine of
the West Indies. The maine also of this country of Virginia, extending some
ways so many hundreds of leagues, as otherwise then by the relation of the
inhabitants we have most certain knowledge of, where yet no Christian Prince
has any possession or dealing, cannot but yield many kinds of excellent
commodities, which we in our discovery have not yet seen.

What hope there is else to be gathered of the nature of the climate, being
answerable to the Island of Iapan, the land of China, Persia, Jury, the Islands
of Cyprus and Candy, the South parts of Greece, Italy, and Spain, and of many
other notable and famous countries, because I mean not to be tedious, I leave
to your own consideration.

Whereby also the excellent temperature of the air there at all seasons, much
warmer then in England, and never so violently hot, as sometimes is under and
between the Tropikes, or nere them; cannot be unknown unto you without
farther relation.

For the holsomnesse thereof I need to say but thus much: that for all the
want of provision, as first of English victual; excepting for twenty days,
we lived only by drinking water and by the victual of the country, of which
some sorts were very strange unto us, and might have been thought to have
altered our temperatures in such sort as to have brought us into some grievous
and dangerous diseases: secondly the want of English means, for the taking of
beasts, fish, and foul, which by the help only of the inhabitants and their
means, could not be so suddenly and easily provided for us, nor in so great
numbers and quantities, nor of that choice as otherwise might have been to our
better satisfaction and contentment. Some want also we had of clothes.
Furthermore, in all our travails which were most special and often in the
time of winter, our lodging was in the open air upon the ground. And yet I
say for all this, there were but four of our whole company (being one hundred
and eight) that died all the year and that but at the latter end thereof and
upon none of the aforesaid causes. For all four especially three were feeble,
weak, and sickly persons before ever they came thither, and those that knew
them much marueyled that they lived so long being in that case, or had
adventured to travail.

Seeing therefore the air there is so temperate and wholesome, the soil so
fertile and yielding such commodities as I have before mentioned, the voyage
also thither to and fro being sufficiently experimented, to be performed
thrice a year with ease and at any season thereof: And the dealing of Sir
Water Raleigh so liberal in large giving and grau^ting land there, as is
already known, with many helps and furtherances else: (The least that he
has granted has been five hundred acres to a man only for the adventure of
his person:) I hope there remain no cause whereby the action should be misliked.

If that those which shall thiter travail to inhabit and plant be but
reasonably provided for the first year as those are which were transported the
last, and being there do use but that diligence and care as is requisite, and
as they may with eese: There is no doubt but for the time following they may
have victuals that is excellent good and plenty enough; some more English
sorts of cattaile also hereafter, as somehaue been before, and are there yet
remaining, may and shall be God willing thiter transported: So likewise our
kind of fruits, roots, and herbs may be there planted and sowed, as some
have been already, and prove well: And in short time also they may raise of
those sorts of commodities which I have spoken of as shall both enrich them
selves, as also others that shall deal with them.

And this is all the fruits of our labors, that I have thought necessary to
advertise you of at this present: what else concerns the nature and manners of
the inhabitants of Virginia: The number with the particularities of the voyages
thither made; and of the actions of such that have been by Sir Water Raleigh
there in and there employed, many worthy to be remembered; as of the first
discouerers of the Country: of our general for the time Sir Richard
Greinuile; and after his departure, of our Governor there Master Rafe Lane;
with diverse other directed and employed under their government: Of the
Captains and Masters of the voyages made since for transportation; of the
Governor and assistants of those alredie transported, as of many persons,
accide^ts, and things else, I have ready in a discourse by it self in manner of
a Chronicle according to the course of times, and when time shall be thought
convenient shall be also published.

Thus referring my relation to your favorable constructions, expecting good
success of the action, from him which is to be acknowledged the author and
governor not only of this but of all things else, I take my leave of you, this
month of Februarii, 1588.

Finis.
THE TRVE PICTVRES AND FASHIONS OF THE PEOPLE IN THAT PART OF AMERICA NOW
CALLED VIRGINIA, DISCOWRED BY ENGLISMEN sent thither in the years of our Lord
1585. at the special charge and direction of the Honorable SIR WALTER RALEGH
Knigt Lord Warden of the stannaries in the duchies of Corenwal and Oxford who
therein has bynne favored and auctorised by her MAAIESTIE and her letters
patents.

Translated out of Latin into English by RICHARD HACKLVIT.

DILIGENTLY COLLECTED and DRAOWne by IHON WHITE who was sent thiter specially
and for the same purpose by the said SIR WALTER RALEGH the year abouesaid 1585.
and also the year 1588. now cut in copper and first published by THEODORE DE
BRY at his wone chardges.

THE TABLE OF ALL DE PICTVRES CONTAINED IN this Book of Virginia.
I. The carte of all the coast of Virginia.

II. The arrival of the Englishemen in Virginia.

III. A Weroan or great Lord of Virginia.

IIII. On of the chieff Ladies of Secota.

V. On of the Religeous men in the town of Secota.

VI. A young gentill woeman daughter of Secota.

VII. A chieff Lord of Roanoac.

VIII. A chieff Lady of Pomeiooc.

IX. An ageed manne in his winter garment.

X. Their manner of careynge there Childern and atyere of the chieffe Ladies of
the town of Dasamonquepeuc.

XI. The Coniuerer.

XII. Their manner of making their Boats.

XIII. Their manner of fishynge in Virginia.

XIIII. The browyllinge of their fish over the flame.

XV. Their seetheynge of their meat in earthen pottes.

XVI. Their Sitting at meat.

XVII. Their manner of prayinge with their Rattels about the fire.

XVIII. Their danses which they use at their high feasts.

XIX. The town of Pomeiooc.

XX The town of Secota.

XXI. There Idol Kiwasa.

XXII. The Tomb of their Werowans or chieff Lords.

XXIII. The marckes of sundry of the chief mean of Virginia.




To the gentle Reader. Although (frendlye Reader) man by his disobedience,
wear deprived of those good Gifts where with he was endued in his creation, yet
he was not berefte of wit to provide for him self, nor discretion to devise
things necessary for his use, except such as appartayne to his souls
health, as may be gathered by this savage nations, of whom this present work
entreats. For although they have noe true knoledge of God nor of his holy
word and are destituted of all lerninge, Yet they pass us in many things, as
in Sober feedinge and Dexteritye of wit, in making without any instrument of
metal things so neat and so fine, as a man would scarsclye believe the same,
Unless the Englishemen Had made proof Thereof by their travails into the
contrye. Consideringe, Therefore that yt was a thing worthy of admiration, I
was very willinge to offer unto you the true Pictures of those people which by
the helfe of Master Richard Hakluyt of Oxford Minister of Gods Word, who first
Encouraged me to publish the Work, I creaued out of the very original of
Master Ihon White an Englisch paynter who was sent into the contrye by the
queens Majesty, only to draw the description of the place, lynelye to
describe the shapes of the Inhabitants their apparel, manners of Living, and
fashions, at the special Charges of the worthy knighte, Sir Walter Ralegh,
who bestowed noe Small Sum of monnye in the search and Discouerye of that
country, From te years, 1584. to the end of The years 1588. Morouer this
book which entreats of that part of the new World which the Englishemen
call by the name of Virginia I here set out in the first place, being
thereunto requested of my Friends, by Raeson of the memory of the fresh and laue
performance there of, albeyt I have in hand the Historye of Florida which should
be first set forth because yt was discouured by the Frencheman long before
the discouerye of Virginia, yet I hope shortly also to publish the same, A
Victory, doubtless so Rare, as I think the like has not ben heard nor seen.
I craeued both of them at London, an brought, Them hitherto Franckfurt, where I
and my sons haven taken ernest pains in grauinge the pictures there of in
Copper, seeing yt is a matter of noe small importance. Touching the style of
both the Discourses, I have caused yt to be Reduced into very Good French
and Latin by the aid of very worshipful friend of mine. Finallye I hartlye
Request thee, that if any seek to Contrefaict these my bookx, (for in this
days many are so malicious that they seek to gain by other men labors) thou
would give noe credit unto such conterfaited Drawghte. For diverse secret
marks lie hiddin in my pictures, which will breed Confusion unless they be
well observed.

II. The arriual of the Englishemen in Virginia.


The sea coasts of Virginia arre full of Ila^ds, wehr by the entrance into the
main la^d is hard to find. For although they be separated with diverse and
sundry large Division, which seem to yield convenient entrance, yet to our
great peril we proved that they wear shallowe, and full of dangerous flatts,
and could never perce opp into the main la^d, until we made trialls in many
places with or small pinness. At length we fownd an entrance upon our men's
diligent search thereof. Affter that we had passed opp, and sailed there in for
ashort space we discovered a migthye river fallnige down in to the sownde over
against those Islands, which neuerthelesswee could not sail opp any thing far
by Reason of the shallewnes, the mouth there of being annoyed with sands driven
in with the tide therefore saylinge further, we came unto a Good bigg yland,
the Inhabitante thereof as soon as they saw us began to make a great an
horrible cry, as people which meuer befoer had seen men apparelled like us,
and camme a way making out cries likewild beasts or men out of theirwyts. But
beenge gentlye called back, we offered the^ of our wares, as glasses, knives,
babies, and other trifles, which we thougt they deligted in. So they stood
still, and perceuinge our Good will and courtesy came fawninge upon us, and
bade us welcome. Then they brought us to their village in the island called,
Roanoac, and unto their Weroans or Prince, which entertained us with Reasonable
courtesy, althoug the wear amassed at the first sight of us. Such was our
arrival into the part of the world, which we call Virginia, the stature of
bodee of which people, their attire, and maneer of lyuinge, their feasts, and
banketts, I will particullerlye declare unto you.

III. A weroan or great Lord of Virginia.


The Princes of Virginia are attyred in such manner as is expressed in this
figure. They wear the hair of their heads long and bind opp the end of
the same in a knot under their ears. Yet they cut the topp of their heads
from the forehead to the nape of the neck in manner of a cokscombe, stirkinge
a faier long pecher of some berd at the Begininge of the creste vppun their
foreheads, and another short one on both seides about their ears. They hang
at their ears either thickepearles, or somewhat else, as the clawe of some great
bird, as comes in to their fansye. Moreover They either pownes, or paynt their
forehead, cheeks, chynne, body, arms, and legs, yet in another sort then
the inhabitantz of Florida. They wear a chain about their necks of pearls or
beads of copper, which they much esteem, and there of wear they also braselets
ohn their arms. Under their breasts about their bellyes appeir certain spotts,
whear they use to let them selves blood, when they are sick. They hang
before the^ the skin of some beast very feinelye dresset in such sort,
that the tail hangs down behind. They carye a quiver made of small rushes
holding their bow ready bent in on hand, and an arrowe in the other, radie to
defend themselves. In this manner they go to war, or tho their solemn feasts
and banquetts. They take much pleasure in huntinge of deer where of theris
great store in the contrye, for yt is fruit full, pleasant, and full of Goodly
woods. Yt has also store of rivers full of diverse sorts of fish. When they
go to battle they paynt their bodies in the most terible manner that they can
devise.

IIII. On of the chieff Ladies of Secota.


The woeme^ of Secotam are of Reasonable good proportion. In their goinge they
carrye their hands danglinge down, and air dadil in a deer skin very
excelle^tlye well dressed, hanginge down from their navel unto the mydds of
their thighs, which also covers their hinder partz. The rest of their
bodies are all bare. The forr part of their hair is cut short, the rest is
not over Long, thin, and soft, and falling down about their shoulders:
They wear a Wrrath about their heads. Their foreheads, cheeks, chynne, arms
and legs are pownced. About their necks they wear a chain, either pricked or
painted. They have small eyes, plain and flatt noses, narrow foreheads, and
broad mowths. For the most part they hang at their ears chains of long
Pearls, and of some smootht bones. Yet their nails are not long, as the
women of Florida. They are also deligtted with walkinge in to the fields, and
besides the rivers, to see the huntinge of deers and catchinge of fische.

V. On of the Religeous men in the town of Secota.


The Priests of the aforesaid Town of Secota are well stricken in years, and
as yt seems of more experience then the common sort. They wear their hear
cut like a creste, on the topps of their heads as other do, but the rest are
cut short, sauinge those which grow above their foreheads in manner of a
perriwigge. They also have somewhat hanginge in their ears. They wear a short
clock made of fine hares skins quilted with the hair outward. The rest of
their body is naked. They are notable enchaunters, and for their pleasure they
frequent the rivers, to kill with their bows, and catch wild ducks, swannes,
and other fowls.

VI. A young gentill woeman daughter of Secota.


Virgins of good parentage are apparelled altogether like the women of Secota
above mentionned, saving that they wear hanginge about their necks in steed
of a chain certain thick, and rownde pearls, with little beads of copper,
or polished bones between them. They pounce their foreheads, cheeckes, arms
and legs. Their hair is cut with two ridges above their foreheads, the rest
is trussed opp on a knott behind, they have broad mowthes, reasonable fair
black eyes: they lay their hands often upon their Shoulders, and cover their
breasts in token of maydenlike modestye. The rest of their bodies are naked, as
in the picture is to be seen. They deligt also in seeinge fish taken in the
rivers.

VII. A cheiff Lord of Roanoac.


The chief men of the yland and town of Roanoac reace the hair of their
crounes of their heads cut like a cokes co^be, as these other do. The rest
they wear long as women and truss them opp in a knott in the nape of their
necks. They hang pearls stringe copper a thread at their ears, and wear
bracelets on their arms of pearls, or small beads of copper or of smoothe
bone called minsal, nether paintinge nor powncings of them selves, but in token
of authority, and honor, they wear a chain of great pearls, or copper beads
or smoothe bones about their necks, and a plate of copper hinge upon a stringe,
from the nauel unto the midds of their thighs. They cover themselves before
and behind as the woeme^ do with a deers skin handsomley dressed, and
fringed, More over they fold their arms together as they walk, or as they
talk one wjth another in sign of wisdom. The isle of Roanoac is very
pleisant, and has plaintie of fish by reason of the Water that enuironeth
the same.

VIII. A cheiff Lady of Pomeiooc.


About 20. milles from that Island, near the lake of Paquippe, there is another
town called Pomeioock hard by the sea. The apparel of the chief ladies of
dat town differs but little from the attire of those which live in Roanaac.
For they wear their hair trussed opp in a knott, as the maiden do which we
spoke of before, and have their skins pownced in the same manner, yet they
wear a chain of great pearls, or beads of copper, or smoothe bones 5. or 6.
fold obout their necks, bearinge one arm in the same, in the other hand they
carye a gourde full of some kind of pleasant liquor. They tie deers skin
doubled about them crochinge higher about their breasts, which hang down
before almost to their knees, and are almost altogether naked behind.
Commonly their young daugters of 7. or 8. years old do waigt upon them
wearinge about them a girdle of skin, which hangs down behind, and is
drawn under neath between their twiste, and bownde above their nauel with mose
of trees between that and their skins to cover their priuiliers withal.
After they be once past 10. years of age, they wear deer skins as the older
sort do. They are greatly Diligted with puppetts, and babes which wear
brought out of England.

IX. An ageed manne in his winter garment.


The aged men of Pommeioocke are covered with a large skin which is tied
upon their shoulders on one side and hangs down beneath their knees
wearinge their other arm naked out of the skin, that they may be at more
liberty. Those skynnes are Dressed with the hair on, and lyned with other
furred skins. The yonnge men suffer noe hairr at all to grow upon their
faces but as soon as they grow they put them away, but when thy are come to
years they suffer them to grow although to say truth they come opp very
thin. They also wear their hair bownde op behind, and, have a creste on
their heads like the others. The contrye about this plase is so fruit full and
good, that England is not to be compared to yt.

X. Their manner of careynge there Childern and a tyere of the cheiffe Ladies of
the town of Dasamonquepeuc.


In the town of Dasemonquepeuc distant from Roanoac 4. or 5. milles, the
women are attired, and pownced, in such sort as the women of Roanoac are,
yet they wear noe worathes upon their heads, nether have they their thighs
painted with small pricks. They have a strange manner of bearing their
children, and quite contrary to ours. For our women carry their children in
their arms before their breasts, but they taking their son by the right hand,
bear him on their backs, holdinge the left thighe in their left arm after a
strange, and conuesnall fashion, as in the picture is to be seen.

XI. The Coniuerer.


They have comonlye coniurers or iuglers which use strange gestures, and often
contrary to nature in their enchantments: For they be very familiar with
devils, of whom they enquier what their enemies do, or other such things.
They shave all their heads sauinge their creste which they wear as other do,
and fasten a small black bird above one of their ears as a badge of their
office. They wear nothing but a skin which hangs down from their gyrdle,
and covers their priuityes. They wear a bagg by their side as is expressed
in the figure. The Inhabitants give great credit unto their speech, which
oftentimes they find to be true.

XII. The manner of making their boats.


The manner of making their boats in Virginia is very wonderful. For whereas
they want Instruments of iron, or other like unto ours, yet they know how to
make them as handsomelye, to sail with whear they list in their Rivers, and
to fish with all, as ours. First they choose some long, and thick tree,
according to the bigness of the boat which they would frame, and make a fire
on the grownd about the Root thereof, kindlinge the same by little, and little
with dry moss of trees, and chipps of wood that the flame should not mount
opp to high, and burn to much of the lengte of the tree. When yt is almost
burnt thorough, and ready to fall they make a new fire, which they suffer to
burn until the tree fall of yt own accord. Then burninge of the topp, and
bowghs of the tree in such wise that the body of the same may Retain his
just length, they raise yt upon potes laid over cross wise upon forked
posts, at such a reasonable heighte as rhey may handsomlye work vppo^yt. Then
take they of the bark with certain shells: thy reserve the, innermost part
of the lennke, for the nethermost part of the boat. On the other side they
make a fire according to the length of the body of the tree, sauinge at both
the ends. That which they think is sufficientlye burned they quench and
scrape away with shells, and making a new fire they burn yt again, and so
they continne somtymes burninge and sometimes fcrapinge, until the boat have
sufficient bothowmes. This god in dueth thise savage people with sufficient
reason to make things necessary to serve their turns.

XIII. Their manner of fishynge in Virginia.
They have likewise a notable way to catch fish in their Rivers. for whear as
they lack both iron, and steel, they fast unto their Reeds or long Rodds,
the hollow tail of a certain fish like to a sea crabb in steed of a
point, wehr with by night or day they stricke fishes, and take them opp into
their boats. They also know how to use the prickles, and pricks of other
fishes. They also make wears, with settinge opp reeds or twigges in the
water, which they so plant one within another, that they grow still narrower,
and narrower, as appears by this figure. There was never seen among us so
cunninge a way to take fish withal, whereof sondrie sorts as they fownde in
their Rivers unlike unto ours. which are also of a very good taste. Dowbtless
yt is a pleasant sight to see the people, somtymes wadinge, and goinge
somtymes sailinge in those Rivers, which are shallowe and not deep, free from
all care of heapinge opp Riches for their posterite, content with their state,
and living frendlye together of those things which god of his bountye has
given unto them, yet without giuinge him any thanks according to his desarte.
So savage is this people, and deprived of the true knowledge of god. For they
have none other then is mentionned before in this work.



XIIII. The brovvyllinge of their fish over the flame.


After they have taken store of fish, they get them unto a place fit to
dress yt. There they stick up in the grownde 4. stakes in a square room, and
lay 4 potes upon them, and others over thwart the same like unto an hurdle, of
sufficient heigthe. and layinge their fish upon this hurdle, they make a fire
underneath to broile the same, not after the manner of the people of Florida,
which do but schorte, and harden their meat in the smoke only to Reserve
the same duringe all the winter. For this people reseruinge nothing for store,
they do broile, and spend away all at once and when they have further need,
they roste or seethe fresh, as we shall see heraffter. And when as the hurdle
can not hold all the fishes, they hang the Rest by the fyrres on sticks set
up in the ground a against the fire, and than they finishe the rest of their
cookerye. They take good heed that they be not burntt. When the first are
broyled they lay others on, that wear newlye brought, continuinge the
dressinge of their meat in this sort, until they think they have
sufficient.

XV. Their seetheynge of their meat in earthen pottes.


Their women know how to make earthen vessels with special Cunninge and that
so large and fine, that our potters with lhoye wheles can make noe better: ant
then Remove them from place to place as easelye as we candoe our brassen
kettles. After they have set them upon an heap of earth to stay them from
fallinge, they putt wood under which being kyndled one of them takes great
care that the fire burn equallye Round about. They or their women fill the
vessel with water, and then putt they in fruit, flesh, and fish, and let all
boil together like a galliemaufrye, which the Spaniarde call, olla podrida.
Then they put yt out into disches, and set before the company, and then
they make good cheer together. Yet are they moderate in their eatinge where by
they avoid sickness. I would to god we would follow their exemple. For we
should be free from many kynes of diseasyes which we fall into by sumptwous
and unseasonable banketts, continuallye deuisinge new sawces, and provocation
of gluttonnye to satisfy our insatiable appetite.

XVI. Their sitting at meat.


Their manner of feeding is in this wise. They lay a matt made of bents one the
grownde and set their meat on the mids thereof, and then sit down Rownde, the
men upon one side, and the women on the other. Their meat is Mayz sodden, in
such sort as I described yt in the former treatise of very good taste, deers
flesche, or of some other beast, and fish. They are very sober in their
eatinge, and trinkinge, and consequentlye very long lived because they do
not oppress nature.

XVII. Their manner of prainge with Rattels about te fire.
When they have escaped any great danger by sea or land, or be returned from
the war in token of Joy they make a great fire about which the men, and
women sist together, holdinge a certain fruit in their hands like unto a
rownde pompio^ or a gourde, which after they have taken out the fruits, and the
seeds, then fill with small stons or certain bigg kernellt to make the more
noise, and fasten that upon a stick, and singinge after their manner, they
make merry: as myself observed and noted down at my being among them. For
it is a strange custom, and worth the observation.



XVIII. Theirdanses which they use at their high feasts.
At a Certain time of the year they make a great, and solemn feast whereunto
their neighbors of the towns adioninge repair from all parts, every man
attyred in the most strange fashion they can devise having certain marks on
the backs to declare of what place they be. The place where they meet is a
broad plain, about the which are planted in the grownde certain posts carved
with heads like to the faces of Nonnes covered with their vayles. Then being
set in order they dance, singe, and use the strangest gestures that they can
possiblye devise. Three of the fairest Virgins, of the company are in the
mydds, which imbrassinge one another do as yt wear turn about in their
dancinge. All this is done after the sun is set for auoydinge of heat.
When they are weerye of dancinge. they go out of the circle, and come in
until their dances be ended, and they go to make merrye as is expressed in
the 16. figure.





XIX. The Town of Pomeiooc.
The towns of this contrie are in a manner like unto those which are in
Florida, yet are they not so strong nor yet preserved with so great care.
They are compassed about with poles starcke fast in the grownd, but they are
not very strong. The entrance is very narrow as may be seen by this
picture, which is made according to the form of the town of Pomeiooc. There
are but few howses therein, save those which belong to the king and his
nobles. On the one side is their tempel separated from the other howses, and
marked with the letter A. yt is builded rownde, and covered with skin matts,
and as yt wear compassed about. With cortynes without windows, and has noe
ligthe but by the door. On the other side is the kings lodginge marked with
the letter B. Their dwellinges are builded with certain potes fastened
together, and covered with matts which they turn op as high as they think
good, and so receue in the light and other. Some are also covered with
boughs of trees, as every man lusts or likes best. They keep their feasts
and make good cheer together in the midds of the town as yt is described in
they 17. Figure. When the town stands fare from the water they digg a great
poude noted with the letter C. wherhence they fetch as much water as they
need.



XX. The Town of Secota.
Their towns that are not enclosed with poles air commonly fayrer. Then
such as are enclosed, as appears in this figure which liuelye expresses the
town of Secotam. For the howses are Scattered here and there, and they have
gardein expressed by the letter E. wherein grows Tobacco which the inhabitants
call Vppowoc. They have also groaues wherein they take deer, and fields vherin
they sow their corn. In their corn fields they build as yt wear a
scaffolde where on they set a cottage like to a rownde chair, signiffied by F.
wherein they place one to watch. for there are such number of fowls, and
beasts, that unless they keep the better watch, they would soon devour all
their corn. For which cause the watcheman makes continual cries and noise.
They sow their corn with a certain distance noted by H. other wise one
stalk would choke the growthe of another and the corn would not come unto his
rypeurs G. For the leaves therofare large, like unto the leaves of great
reeds. They have also a several broad plotte C. whear they meet with their
neighbors, to celebrate their chief solemn feasts as the 18. picture does
declare: and a place D. whear after they have ended their feast they make
merry together. Over against this place they have a rownd plott B. where they
assemble themselves to make their solemn prayers. Not far from which place
there is a lardge buildinge A. wherein are the tombs of their kings and princes,
as will appear by the 22. figure likewise they have garden notted bey the
letter I. wherein they use to sow pompions. Also a place marked with K. wherein
the make a fire at their solemn feasts, and hard without the town a river L.
from whence they fetch their water. This people therefore void of all
covetousness live cherfullye and at their hearts ease. Butt they solemnise their
feasts in the nigt, and therefore they keep very great fyres to avoid
darkness, ant to testify their Joy.





XXI. There Idol Kivvasa.


The people of this cuntrie have an Idol, which they call Kiwasa: yt is carved
of wood in length 4. foot whose head is like the heads of the people of
Florida, the face is of a flesh color, the breast white, the rest is all
black, the thighs are also spottet with whitte. He has a chain about his
neck of white beads, between which are other Rownde beads of copper which
they esteem more then gold or silver. This Idol is placed in the temple of
the town of Secotam, as the keeper of the kings dead corpses. Sometime they have
two of these idols in their churches, and somtine 3. but never above, which
they place in a dark corner where they show tetrible. These poor souls have
none other knowledge of god although I think them very Desirous to know the
truth. For when as we kneeled down on our knees to make our prayers unto
god, they went about to imitate us, and when they saw we moved our lips, they
also did the like. Wherefore that is very like that they might easelye be
brongt to the knowledge of the gospel. God of his mercy grant them this grace.

XXII. The Tomb of their Werovvans or Cheiff Lords.
The build a Scaffolde 9. or 10. foot hihe as is expressed in this figure
under the to^bs of theit Weroans, or chief lords which they cover with matts,
and lai the dead corpses of their weroans theruppon in manner followinge. first
the bowels are taken forth. Then layinge down the skin, they cut all the
flesh clean from the bones, which the dry in the son, and well dried the
enclose in Matts, and place at their feet. Then their bones (remaininge still
fastened together with the ligaments whole and uncorrupted) are covered a gain
with leather, and their carcass fashioned as if their flesh wear not taken
away. They lapp each corpse in his own skin after the same in thus handled,
and lay yt in his order by the corpses of the other cheef lords. By the dead
bodies they set their Idol Kiwasa, where of we spoke in the former chapter:
For they are persuaded that the same does keep the dead bodies of their chief
lords that nothing may hurt them. Moreover under the foresaid scaffolde some
on of their priests has his lodginge, which Mumbleth his prayers night and
day, and has charge of the corpses. For his bed he has two deares skins
spredd on the grownde, if the wether be cold he makes a fire to warm by
withal. These poor souls are thus instructed by natute to reverence their
princes even after their death.



XXIII. The Marckes of sundry of the Chief mean of Virginia.


The inahbitants of all the cuntrie for the most part have marks rased on
their backs, whereby yt may be known what Princes subjects they be, or of what
place they have their original. For which cause we have set down those marks
in this figure, and have annexed the names of the places, that they might more
easelye be discerned. Which industry has god endued them withal although they
be very sinple, and rude. And to confess a truth I cannot remember, that
ever I saw a better or quietter people then they.

The marks which I observed a monge them, are here put down in order
folowinge.

The mark which is expressed by A. belongs tho Wingino, the chief lord of
Roanoac.

That which has B. is the mark of Wingino his sisters husband.

Those which be noted with the letters, of C. and D. belong unto diverse chief
lords in Secotam.

Those which have the letters E. F. G. are certain chief men of Pomeiooc, and
Aquascogoc.

SOME PICTVRE, OF THE PICTES WHICH IN THE OLD time did habit one part of the
great Bretainne.

THE PAINTER OF WHOM I HAVE had the first of the Inhabitans of Virginia, give
my also thees 5. Figures fallowinge, fownd as hy did assured my in a oolld
English cronicle, the which I would well set to the end of thees first
Figures, for to show how that the Inhabitants of the great Bretannie have bin
in times past as sauuage as those of Virginia.

The trvve picture of one Picte I.
In times past the Pictes, habitans of one part of great Bretainne, which is
now nammed England, wear sauuages, and did paint all their body after the
manner followinge. the did let their hair gro we as fare as their Shoulders,
sauinge those which hang upon their forehead, the which the did cut. They
shave all their berde except the mustaches, upon their breast wear painted the
head of some bird, ant about the pappes as yt waere beams of the sune, upon
the bellye sum feere full and monstreus face, spreedinge the beams very fare
upon the thighs. Upon the tow knees some faces of lion, and upon their legs
as yt has been shelles of fish. Upon their Shoulders griffones heads, and
then they has serpents about their arms: They carried about their necks one
ayerne ringe, and another about the midds of their body, about the bellye, and
the said hang on a chain, a cimeterre or turkey soorde, the did carye in one
arm a target made of wode, and in the other hand a pick, of which the ayerne
was after the manner of a Lick, whith tassels on, and the other end with a
Round boule. And when they has ouercomme some of their ennemis, they did
never fell to carye a we their heads with them.



The trvve picture of a women Picte II.
The women of the pictes above said wear noe worser for the wars then the
men. And wear painted after the manner followinge, having their heads bear,
did let their hairre flyinge. about their Showlders wear painted with griffon
heads, the low parts and thighs with lion faces, or some other beast as yt
comes best into their fansye, their breast has a manner of a half moon, with
a great stare, and four lesser in booth the sides, their pappes painted in
manner of beams of the son, and among all this a great litteninge star
upon their breasts. The said of some points or beams, and the hoolle bellye
as a son, the arms, thighs, and legs well painted, of diuerses Figures:
The did also carye about their necks an ayern Ringe, as the men did, and such
a girdle with the soorde hainginge, having a Pick or a lance in one hand,
and twoe dardz in the other.



The trvve picture of a young dowgter of the Pictes III.
The young dougters of the pictes, did also let their hair flyinge, and wear
also painted over all the body, so much that noe men could not faynde any
different, if the has not use of another fashion of paintinge, for the did
paint themselves of sondrye kinds of flours, and of the fairest that they cowld
feynde. being fournished for the rest of such kinds of weappon as the women
wear as vou may see by this present picture a thing trwelly worthy of
admiration.



The trvve picture of a man of nation neigbour unto the Picte IIII.
Therwas in the said great Bretainne yet another nation nigbour unto the
Pictes, which did apparel them selfues with a kind of cassake other cloth
Ierkin, the rest of the body wear naked. The did also wear long hears, and
their moustaches, butt the chin wear also shaued as the other before. The did
were alardge girdle about them, in which hang a croket soorde, with the
target, and did carye the pick or the lance in their hand, which has at the
low end arownde bowlle, as you may see by this picture.



The trvve picture of a women nigbour to the Pictes V.
Their women wear apparelled after this manner, butt that their apparel was
opne before the breast, and did fastened with a little less, as our women do
fasten their peticott. They let hang their breasts outt, as for the rest the
did carye such waeppens as the men did, and wear as good as the men for the
war.



A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS THAT are contained in this History, after
the order of the Alphabet.
A.
Alum 7

Applecrabs 17

Ash 23

Ascopo. 23


B.
Bears 17

Beech. 23


C.
Cedar 9.23

Chestnuts 17

Ciuet Cattes 9

Conies 19

Coscuhaw 15

Copper 9

Cranes 19

Creuises 21


D.
Dear 19

Dear skins 9

Dies of diverse kinds. 11


E.
Elm. 23


F.
Faulcons 19

Flax and Hemp 7

Fiere trees 23

Furs 9


G.
Geese 19

Crappes 17


H.
Habascon 15

Hau they bwild their houses 24

Hawks 19

Hernes 19

Herrings 19

Holly 23

Hurleberies. 17


I.
Iron. 9


K.
Kaishucpenauk 15

Kewasowok 26

Kewas. 26


L.
Leekes 17

Lions. 19


M.
Macocqwer 16

Mangummenauk 19

Maple 23

Maqwowoc 19

Marlin 19

Machicomuck 26

Medlars 17

Melden 16

Metaquesunnauk 17

Mulberies 17

Mullets 19

Muscles. 21


N.
Natu^re ofthe Virginiens: 24


O.
Oade 11

Of beasts 12

Of foul 19

Of fruits 17

Ofthe Vengeance 29

Okindgier 14

Oldwiues 19

Oil 9

Openauk 15

Orepenauk 15

Oystres. 21


P.
Pagatowr 13

Parats 19

Partridges 19

Pearl 9

Periwinckles 21

Pitch 9

Plaice 20

Planta Solis 14.16

Popogusso 26

Porpoises 16


R.
Rays 19

Rakiock 23

Rafe Lane 32

Richard Greinuile 32

Roanoack 8

Rozen 9


S.
Sacquenummener 17

Sagatamener and all his kinds 19

Sapummener 19

Saquenuckot 19

Sassafras 9

Sassafras trees 23

Scalopes 21

Seekanauck 21

Sea crabbes 21

Silk of grass or grass Silk 7

Squirels 19

Stockdoues 19

Straberies 17

Sturgeons 19

Sugar cannes 11

Swannes 19

Sweet gummes 11

Stones 24


T.
Tar 9

Their manner of fishinge 20

Their manner of making boats 20

The soil better 31

The strange oppinion the have of englishemen 27

The climat of Virginia 31

Their Relligion 25

Tsinaw 15

Troutes 19

Tortoyses 21

Turpentine 9

Turkey cocks 19

Turkey hens 19


V.
Virginiens willinge to make themselves Christiens. 27

Virginiens do estime the things of Europe 27

Unknown sickness 28

Vppowoc. 16


W.
Walnuts 17

Walnut trees 23

Wapeih 7.8

Wasewowr 11

Weapons of the Virginiens 24

Which hazle 23

Wickenzowr 14.16

Wild peaze. 19

Willowes 23

Winauck 9

Wine 9

Wiroans Wingina 27.28

Wiroances 26

Wolves 19

Worm Silk. 7



Finis.
Faults escaped in the impression. the first nombre signiffie the page, the
second the Linne.
Page.1.lin.22. read, and page.14.lin.14. read sodden. lin.27.read, about.
page 16.lin.19.read, sacrifice. page.20. lin.18.read Discovery. page.23.li 3.
read hatchets.

In the preface of the figures lin.17.read lively.lin.23.read late.figure
2.lin.1. readewher.lin.7.read fallinge lin.10. read never. 18. body.

Fig.3.lin 5.read upon.fig.7 lin.11 read and, fig.8.lin.2.read that.
fig.12.lin. 11.read they.lin.16.read scrapinge. fig.13.lin. 10. read
also.fig.16.lin.6.drinkinge. fig.21.lin.12.about.

The rest if any be the discreet reader may easily amend.

AT FRANCKFORT, INPRINTED BY IHON WEchel, at Theodore de Bry, own coast and
chardges.

MDXC.

Americae pars, Nunc Virginia dicta, primum ab Anglis inuenta. sumtibus Dn
Walteri Raleigh, Equestris ordinis Viri Anno Dni^.M.D LXXXV regni Vero
Sereniss: nostrae Reginae Elisabethae XX.VII hujus vero Historia peculiari
Libro descripta est, additis etiam Indigenarum Iconibus



