A PROPHECY of Cadwallader, last King of the Britains:

Containing a Comparison of the English Kings, with many worthy Romans, from
William Rufus, till Henry the fifth.

Henry the fifth, his life and death.

Four Battles between the two Houses of York and Lancanster.

The Field of Baubery.

The loss of Elizabeth.

The praise of King James.

And lastly a Poem to the young Prince.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreete, over against the Conduit. 1604.

TO THE NO LESS Virtuous then Honorable Gentleman Sir Philip Herbert, Knight
of the most noble order of the Bathe.
RIght worthy Sir, the honor which I bear,
And ever will unto your worthy line,
Makes me presume (presumption cannot fear)
To tender you this little Book of mine:
Whose substance if your honor will approve,
My lines shall limits want, so does my love.
That man of men whose fatal name you bear, S. P. S.

Of his unnumbered worthes the chief were these:
Three glorious wreathes upon his brow to wear,
Which said he, loved learning, war, and peace.
O aemulate this man the son of Fame, Baye.

Have all his virtues, though but half his name. Olive, and Oak.

Pursue thy first designments (noble Knight)
Affect thy Country, and admire thy King:
The Epistle Dedicatorie.
Be as thou art, sincere in all men's sight,
Do this, and I thy praise will ever sing.
I smoothe not I, nor do I hope for gain,
Accept my love, and so requite my pain.
The admirer of your virtues, whose life is devoted to your love. William
Harbert.

THE AVTHOR TO HIS Poem.
TRace the wide stage of spite and proud disdain,
And mount the steps of scornful enuies staire,
Imperfect embrion of an idle brain,
Soar not aloft, use mean, do not despair,
The best way is between the sea and air:
Be like thy self, be neither proud nor base,
One envy gets, the other gaynes disgrace.
Be not too huge in show, in strength a child,
These imateriall Epithites eschew,
Be to the scornful proud, the humble mild,
Put not thy censure to an open view,
Speech envy often, but Silence never knew.
When thou see good then praise, when bad be blind,
Then wit will bear with thee, and fools be kind.
To the Reader.
I Which in silence nest so many days
Smoothered the slight of my unfeathered quill,
Because I knew it could not merit praise,
Here where the Muses sang and showed their skill,
For this did seem to be Parnastus hill:
But this amazed my mind, and grieved mine eye
To see the Buzards with the Eagles fly.
To see a troop of Soldiers never tried,
Besiege a fort by nature fenced on high,
I was ashamed to see the heirs of pride,
Debase in vnexperienc'd Poetry,
The immortal virtues of great Majesty,
I these are they that do the Muses stain,
One wanton pen makes all be judged vain.
I which securely on these errors gazed,
And safely stood upon the silent shore,
When others Ships by enuies rocks were crazed,
Love me constrained, as pride did them before,
To trust the rocks and leave the silent shore:
The love of friends, not praise did me persuade,
Against my will, against the streams to wade.
Therefore to you whose judgment is sincere,
If any fault, as many faults there be,
Seem harsh and iarring to a tuned ear,
Impute the blame to those, and not to me,
Who made my pen show his infirmity:
If any good as small there is you see,
Reap you the profit, yield but thanks to me.
A PROPHECY OF Cadwallader, last King of the Britains.
SItting with Clio by the gliding Them, Description of Fortune.

near to her silver girt the verdant strand,
I saw Rhamusis so adornd by fame:
Dancing in measures, on the farther sand,
Holding a Ball of gold within her hand:
She stood on that, that never stood but went,
So must all those that trust her government.
Then did this Queen, her wandering coach ascend,
Whose wheels were more inconstant then the wind,
A mighty troop this Empress did attend,
There might you Caius Marius caruing find,
And martial Scylla courting Venus kind:
Times alter, and in times we changed be,
Chance only constant is in leuitie.
There might you see how Archimedes art, Geometry

As a strong bulwark guarded Syracuse:
How Scipio fought and Cato stabd his heart,
How Anthony did wrong the sacred muse,
And Cleopatras body did abuse.
How Mago fell in Spain, and Hanniball
Did pitch his tents before Saturnias wall.
His stratagems, his snares, unequal fightes,
Scipio, Sempronius, and Flaminius slain:
Aemilius dead amidst his wounded knights,
How chance his youth with praise did entertain,
And in his age how Fortune wrought this pain:
All this she did, oh man her fraud perceive,
And trust her not, for she will thee deceive.
How Alexander rose at Darius fall,
Lysimachus within the Lions den:
How Scypio did besiedge Numantias wall,
And many thousands more which escape my pen,
Amongst this fatal troop of Fortunes men:
I saw an aged king except I err,
That cleaped was the high Cadwallader.
He was the last, save three of Fortunes train,
Those were a Danea, Saxon, and a Norman king:
Hengist the first, next was Denmarkes swayne,
The last was Normanes bastard, which did bring
Plenty of Joy; whose praise the English sing.
William, William the Conqueror.
whose valor mixed with happy fate,
Brought bondage to the Iuthes and Augles state.
The Britain Monarch ware a simple Crown, Cadwallader last King of the
Buranes, his land being vexed with the scourge of Pestilence, went to Rome,
where he undertook the habit of a Friar

Having small beads of Amber by his side:
A silver Cross, a Friars white frize gown,
Upon an humble Ass this King did ride,
As white as snow, or as the silver tide.
One hand a staff, the other held a book,
On which his eyes continually did look.
Wherein were charactred in lines of gold,
Locrinus wars, and Humbers tragedy:
The King himself by Gwendoline controld,
The Scythians paramour of Germany
Estrilda drowned, the praise of Hungary.
Sabrina thrust in Seuerns flowing maine,
Poor Madan by the curres of Ireland slain. Wolves.

The Britain Manlius, Madans second son.
not the Roman knight,
Thinking to slay Mempricius Madans son:
Himself was by his brother slain in fight,
And he by wolves (as Madan was) undone,
For Sodomes gilt to lust his mind had won.
The foremost book did Britains reign relate,
The next of Swayne, the third of Saxens state.
The fourth and last did write of Williams reign,
In which there was an ancient prophecy:
Written of yore, confirmd by Merlins twain,
What should ensue to Williams progeny,
Was there at large expainde in poetry.
The wars of England for the crown of France,
There many battles with their mournful chance.
The civil wars of York and Lancaster,
The Cambrian helmet changde for Englands crown:
How true descent did Tudors blood prefer,
The brow of peace dispearced Mars his frown, The helmet was the ancient crest
of the Teudors.

The land of war is ruled by justice gown.
These shall have end, then shall arise a King
Which plenty shall conduct, in concords string.
He with unnumbered linkes of reasons chain,
Shall three in one, and one in three unite:
Britain should be the name, for Brute does reign,
A King commands no Princes favorite,
This he intreates, for this his pen does write:
Cease to command, learn subjects to obey,
Reason where justice rules, bears greatest sway.
Is it not peerlesse praise with peace to gain,
That for the which, our fathers spent their blood:
And never age but ours could reobtaine?
O happy men if that you saw such good,
But will is masked still with errors hood.
Let ture obeisans up this diet break,
So Caesar wills, so Cicero does speak.
The fect was this, the prophecy was such
Which he had read with careful industry,
And quoted every line with judgments touch,
A midst his study casting up his eye,
Seeing his mistress Fortune was not nigh.
His book he slightly set into his gown,
Which on the yellow sand fell quickly down.
Thence posted he on his maiestique Ass,
Like some slow rider pacing to the race:
Than Isis silver channel did I pass,
And thither went, where as mine eyes might gaze
On that fair book, clad in a golden case.
I past the Annals, for it pleased mine eye,
To muse upon that sacred prophecy.
When I had read unto the latter line,
I saw the aged king return with speed?
Kind Sir (quoth he) saw you a book of mine?
I Sir (quoth I) if this be he indeed
I gave it him; he gave me thanks for meed.
He posted thence, I to my study went,
Where on this matter many hours I spent.
At last I was resolved for to relate
In Poetry the things mine eyes did see:
Which was the uncertainty of humane state,
To paint the things a right with equity,
I did implore the aid of memory.
Which she denide; Oh worthies pardon me,
If ought I write amiss which you shall see.
Not Orpheus trees, and birds enchanting quill,
Nor Homers art here (Reader) shall thou see:
Expect not Ouids verse, nor Maroes skill,
For if you do, you shall deceived be:
If bad it is, pray gentles bear with me.
Say it is mean, thou do me much commend,
I Would have it mean, because I mean to mend.
Mistake me not, I live in hope to please:
Dispraise me not, before thou know me well:
Maugre sweet, not revenge, my lines love peace,
Do not my shame before thou see it tell:
Mark every line, and each words nature spell.
Ere thou beginst to read, look, bear in mind
Of whom I write, yea how, and in what kind.
Fair Englands Peers with Romans I compare,
Their wars, their spoils, their fightes and victory,
Their filthy vices, with their virtues rare:
Their laud, dispraise, their praise and infamy,
Their conquests triumphs with their treachery.
Then does our muse declare intestine wars,
Kings conquering fields, and Princes wounding iarres.
Then does she mount the air with Eagles wings,
Then to the North she goes, and passes Twidet
And sings his praise, which endless glory bringes,
Who like a Pilot does this Island guide,
Which like a bark, within the Sea does ride.
This land is seated like to Venice state,
The waves, the walls, and every ship a gate.
Least that my Gates be wider then my town,
And that Diogines my folly see:
My proems prologue I Will set quickly down,
And bend my muse unto the Prophecy:
Where you may read art mixed with industry.
Needs must I err, to err all men are bent,
To persevere, is a bad beasts intent.
The Comparison.
O What a sea of blood shall England spill, So called for assisting Godfrey of
Bullion, in his expedition to Judaea. Bassianus and Geta.

When Normans Prince, and Palastinas friend,
With burgonets of steel our fields does fill,
Brothers must strive as did Seuerus kind,
Envious ambition makes just nature blind.
Arunce and Brutus dead, Alarums cease,
Publicola does live, and loves peace.
When Brutus did, Valerius then did reign,
When Arunce fell, Henry the 2. son of Mawd the Empress, and Stephen Earl
of Blois, Nephew to Henry the first.
the Tuscan Emperor fled:
When Tirrolls shaft shall enter Rufus brain,
When Henry's life with Roberts lights are fled,
When all these sleep in natures earthly bed.
Norfolk shall give to Stephen, Henry's due,
Peace then shall be, but war shall soon ensue.
Flora is fled, stout Hiems wears her crown,
Attired like Mars in furniture of steel:
Aniow and Blois strive for the Imperial Crown,
A grief surpassing grief does England feel,
Whilst doubtful Fortune turns her doubtful wheel.
Camillus comes, the Frenchmen fear his voice,
Alba is freed, and Albion has her choice.
When Rome was sacked, Camillus ended strife,
And made Bellinus brother to despair: Brennus.

When Germans Empress Mawd shall end her life,
Henry shall claim the crown, as lawful heir,
His Eame in grave, but he in regal chair
Is placed, and rules his princely Peers with peace,
His sons rebel, and concord gins to cease.
Now springs the plant, Henry the 2. the first Plantaginet.
from hence our joy shall spring,
Victorious Aniow crowned in regal state:
Living, adopts an heir, inuests a King,
Vagratefull child spurd by a woman's hate, Richard 2.

Sturd foreign foes the land to ruinate.
Romes sword is Consul, Marcellus, so called by Hanniball.
foe-men tribute paies,
Both Henry's dead, Christ's friend the Septer swaies.
Marcellus which did Syracusa burn,
Made Affricks praise, ^^nniball.
to praise his matchles mind,
And place his ashes in a golden vrne:
So Aibious lion sprung from lions kind,
When death the king and prince in cords shall bind.
Heel spend his treasure, for Iehouas good:
But woe alas, a slave shall spill his blood.
Designed John disuests young Britains Duke,
But Antichristians prince, our saviors foe:
Bringes Lewis in, and does him straight rebuke,
Egles of England, yield to Swans of Poe,
A Monarch falls by Monks, ^i^us Flam. ^^s slain at ^^e batle of ^hrasimenus
^^ose death is by his ^^nne ^^enged in the ^^isoning of ^anniball.
fates wills it so.
Titus suruiues, though flames Flaminius burn,
Worster is safe, and Lewis does return.
At Thrasimenus valiant Titus fell,
In Prusias Court, his son reuengde his death:
Form happy heaven, though John to haples hell
Headlong did slide, his son shall wear the wreath,
The Dolphen flies, and Mars begins to breath:
Tempestuous whitle-windes, ^enry the 3.
break the Temple gate
Of Peace; the peers the king, the prince the Baron hate.
Civil dissension and dislovall arms,
Clearly declares Clares hidden enmity:
A fatal star foretells future harms,
The legions meet, each does the other spy,
Echo resounds, S. George, S. George, both cry:
Gracchus is stabd, young Scipio peace maintains,
The Barrons tamed, all conquering Longshanckes reigns.
Romes envious Tribunes that ignoble Tribe,
The vicious issue of a virtuous dame:
Did the base minds of poor Plebeians bribe,
To gain them honor, Caius and Tiberius Gracchus.
with their Countries shame:
They dead; the world did ring with Romans feign.
So Clare and Mountford shall, who being slain,
Edward shall vanquish Calidonias plain.
Acon is taken, and Tunis fears his strokes,
He loved peace, The saying of Leoline himself, as Powell has laid down in
his life.
yet bare a warriors shield:
Cambria disdained to wear her sisters yoke,
The Ensigns spread, both strive to win the field,
The bridge is past, and Leoline must yield:
Marius departs, Proscriptio^s gin to cease,
The Prince of war shall end his days in peace.
Destruction grazed on fertile Italy,
Till Syllas legions vanquished Marius might:
So civil wars shall feed on Britany,
Till Leolinus that all daring Knight,
Is taken by Edward in unequal fight:
When Marius fell, Concordia began to smile,
So Wales will amplify fair Englands style.
Resplendant Juno, Queens Isabel wife to Edward the ^. was next heir to
Charles king of France whose title our present king does enjoy
leaves her sacred throne,
Young Gaueston bewitched great Edwards heart:
The minor Gods bewail Saturnias moan,
Bohume and Beaumount takes the Marchers part,
And false Matreners stabbes Carnaruans heart:
For Caesar's office Scipio strives in vain,
And March too soon retells his triple gain.
When that the Roman Eagles graspt of yore,
Scipio with ancient Lentulus did strive: Scipio and Lentulus two worthy To
strove vehemently in the camp of Pomper: for the Bishopric of Rome, but the
battles joining and Caesar winning, their strife ended with their lives

For Julius priesthood, whose deserts were more,
But when that Pompeys legions did not thrive,
They tasted gall within the honies hiue.
So Wigmore seeks in vain to get a Crown,
But by Lord Mountaoute is tumbled down.
Terras proud issue tamed, immortal Jove
Rides in his Chariot, through the azurde sky:
Adornd with Valor, Mercy, Peace and Love,
So Caesar rode in Rome with majesty,
Scipio would live, life Cato does deny.
So Wigmores honor seeks, but must not part,
Matreuers hand, has stabd Matreuers heart.
Wars thunderbolt, Ed. the third, married Phillip daughter to the Earl of
Henault.
with his Egiptian pearl,
Illustrious Venus and her martial Bride
Phillips fair sister, with great Mercias Earl,
Submits to Henaults mounting-minded bride,
Vengeance and Fury scourge inhumane pride.
Egypt is lost, and Authony must die,
March is immurde, and twice he may not fly.
When Anthony did Cleopatra love, Lord Roger Mortimer Earl of March and Queen
Isabel, compared to Anthony and Cleopatra:

And did Augustas chamber-bed forgo:
Bellona Caesar's irefull mind did move:
To work revenge on chaste Octauias foe,
Marcus is slain, he must his Love forgo.
As Anthony and Cleopatra were,
So is Queen Ifabel and Mortimer.
Depressed waters element, some think,
Is down suppressed by powers most divine:
Some judge that Terra does the moisture drink,
Yet certes shall men see with mortal evne,
When deadly water shall with air combine,
Great Mortimer whose name from waters sprang,
Shall wave in waves of air, and there shall hang.
Vermilion colored clouds of purple war,
Are by the radiant beams of Edwards reign:
Form Englands territors exiled far,
But stay (me thinks) Bellona soundes again: Edward the black Prince
compared to Geranicus.

And calls forth Mars to fight in Aquitaine,
Stay Caesar stay, let valiant Drusus go:
Great Arthurs heir, can vanquish Artois foe.
When that Tiberius did the Septer sway, Edward the black Prince aided the
Earl of Artois against King John of France.

Of Albas Empire, great Saturnias king:
Germanicus whose head was decked with bay,
Fought still abroad, and conquest home did bring:
So Edward did whose praise the Spaniards sing,
Let Beaumount witness fearful Phillips flight.
And John which yielded to the Gascoigne knight.
The wandering Planets of the burnisht sky,
Are by the vncomprised Sphere of love,
Thrust here and there, as men condemned to dye,
Heaven were naught, if Heaven did not move:
So nature taught, so natures son did prove.
Like unto these, Aristotle.
or like a Comet bright,
Through every region Caesar sent his light.
The Zodiaks lamp in the Eclipticke line, ^ermanicus ^^peased Ger^any, but
end^d his days by ^oison in As^i^a.

Twice vrgd his courser to a swift careere: ^dward prince of Wales re^^ored
Peter ^ing of Spain unto his King^ome by the ^onquest of Henry his basard
brother, at ^he battle of Nazers.

The Hitrurian son does in the East decline,
In Europes West his praise did first appear,
Oh Climatericall disaster year:
Caesar thy glory in the West did rise,
The poisoned East, thy rain did devise.
So silver streams and toplesse Apenine,
Which do confront terrestrial Paradise:
Must not great Edwards wandering Fame confine, ^ohn Lord ^eaumont, ^ooke part
with the eng^ish against the French nation, but afterward ^e favored the
^actio^ of John, king of France.

Mars and Bellona stratagems devise:
That he with Honors wings should mount the skies.
Exiled Peter does implore his aid,
Iberia quakes, to see the cross displayed.
Reuolting Henault, and relenting John,
Are terrified at Bruise and Balliols fall:
No Salike law, can bar bold Phillips son, The lord Audley at the battle of
Poytiers behaved himself most valiant, as Crasinius did in Pharsalia, who bad
Caesar be of comfort, and take courage before he fought and that day he should
praise him alive or dead, which he performed, for he lost his l^e in the
pursuit of honor, and for the safety of Caesar.

His matchless valor caused a kingdoms thrall:
Whilst slothful Charles immured him in a wall.
Germanias terror wan a glorious field,
So Cambrias monarch made a King to yield.
Careless of death, like to a thunderbolt,
Englands Crasinius with a massy lance:
And not unlike a fierce untamed Colt,
Glides like the silver Rheine through yielding France,
Blinded with age great Boheme falls by chance.
Caligula is borne, the sink of shame,
Richard misled, deserves an endless blame.
The worlds fair mistress, Empress of the earth,
Ordaines a triumph for Augustus heir:
So Gascoigne triumphs at young Gascoignes birth,
Wonder of Arms set in Victorias chair,
To Troynouant with Tropheys does repair.
Romes Senators attended Albas star,
So Albion Peers did wait on Albious carre.
Two glorious sons, rules the celestial Globe,
Cheering the world with their transpearcing rays:
Garnisht with Saphires, and a Jasper robe,
(Untimely chance) times wonder ends his days,
Aemilius mournes amidst his Tropheys praise. Ed. the 3. compared to Paulus
Aemi^ who in his greatest glory lost his chiefest joy, namely his t^^ sons.

Troies hope is dead, and Priams Hector slain:
Edward has lost his son, his son a reign.
Impartial death maskt in a sable weed,
Passes the Romans watch and Praetors guard:
And to Tiberius royal tent does speed,
Physic resists, and death by art is bard,
But art does yield, for death was too too hard:
He laid in grave, his nephews son does reign,
The scourge of Rome, and Europes Empress slain.
So when that death of Edward made an end,
Essence of value, substance of renown:
Whom peace for justice, wars for rule commend,
Exalting virtue, putting vices down,
His bones entombd, his worthy sons do crown:
Their nephew Richard second of that name,
The first, though not the last disgraced by fame.
Me^omene thou dismal muse appear,
And moralize the Anthemes which I bring;
Richard misled by Bushy, Poole and Vere,
Ignoble Scroope in his new Empires spring,
Inchaunting charms unto his ears did sing:
Flattry corrupts kings, but good advise
Makes Counselors gracious, and the Princes wise.
When Neroes son was borne in Neroes camp,
Quirinus father Rheas valiant spouse,
In his red Sphere enlightened had his lamp,
Leaving his iron roabes and brazen house,
Did to Bellona cups of blood carowse.
Saturn then joined with Mars, which did foretell
That Neroes son for murder should excel.
Whom Brutus freed by death from Tarquines strokes, Romans.

Princes of peace, for wars admirde of all:
The worlds Arch monarchs rent their chained yoakes,
Consulls and Tribunes do a Senate call,
Their voice is one Caligula must fall.
Nature does swerve and from her limits pass,
The Imperious Lion, got an abject Ass.
So when chaste Alice Richard forth shall bring,
In Edwards Camp, Victorias sacred seat:
Prophets like stars, ensuing harms shall sing,
The Peers (like Albas knights) were all repleate
With wrath, disdain was in a mighty sweat
In working ways, the king for to depose,
Which being done, the Nobles Darby chose.
The Northern Planet great Northumberland,
Whose peerles issue never shall decaie:
Till Nature does confound both Sea and land,
And shapeles Chaos comes his part to play,
Virtue must live though men be turned to claye.
This glorious Moon true badge of Honor bright, The half Moon is t^^ arms
of the Percies Ea^^ of Northu^^

Disdaynes the Sun, and did not borow light.
Foreseeing Gaunt like to a careful fire,
Seeing that lost by Sloth which Labor won:
Does contermaund his Sovereigns hot desire,
And like a blast does caulme the scorching Sun,
Which by illuding Sycophantes is won, Hen. Bussi^^brooke D^^^ of Heref. w^^
accused by Th. Mowb^^^ Duke of N^^folke of tre^son, which (...) not being (...)
to prove, w^^ contented t^ maintain (...) allegation (...) combat, (...) his
aduersa^^ did accept. But better ^^uice being ^^^ken, they w^^^ both banish^^
the land, He^^ford for the term of ten years, and Mowbray (...) the date of
(...)

Two Combatants on their earth threatening steedes,
Attend the trumpets sound in iron weeds.
The reverent Consulls York and Lancaster,
Do conuocate a Senate of the Peers:
And equalizing Woodstocke did prefer,
Due banishment to those ambitious Peers,
The Barons joined to this; the Champions swears
Mowbray for aye, ten years must Harford part,
Grief galls the one, and kills the others heart.
The gallant Courser in the listed race
Dismounts the Ryder, scorns his curbing rain:
Stamping with joy, his freedom does embrace,
And does his pristine servitude disdain,
Leaving his Ryder breathless on the plain.
So raging Burdeux tumbles down his kin,
And runs from sin to vice, from vice to sin.
In his Imperial Palace Pleasures Bower, Caligula slain by his own friends

Romes mighty Monster did himself repose:
Sacking Cytheress fort, fair Venus Tower,
The stone where the Kings of Englands chair is placed at their Coronatio^s,
is reported to be that stone whereon Jacob laid his head when the Angel appeared
to him in his dream
The raging multitude their wrath disclose,
For his Praetorian guard, they did insclose:
Chaerea did split his heart; oh happy thing!
It Was good he did, it was bad to kill a King.
So Honors spur did prick the Percies blood,
To tumble Richard from his bloody Throne:
Wishing great Herford to transpasse the flood,
To come and sit on Iocobs sacred stone,
Where he might reign as King, and rule alone.
As Claudius rose, so Herford came to reign,
As Nero fell, so Edwards son was slain.
Genes. brought from Scotland by Edward the first.
Now Gaunts great issue in his Throne is set,
Whose sacred Science this my Muse should tell:
For Margarets sake, that sprang from Sommerset,
For her it should, if Cambria did not tell,
For laws unheard, this Monarch did excel.
Who gave him wings to mount, Henry 4. The extremity of his laws are set
down at large in Powels Annals.
he threw to ground,
Claudius who ran so fair, is Claudus found.
In Silence vault my Muse shall hide his fame,
Who did the Gray goose wings with purple red:
Praise he deserved, though he deserved blame,
Sertorius like his warlike troops he led, Owen Gle^dour compared to Sertorius.

For by alluring hope they both were fed.
Had men and Fortune equaliz'd his mind,
His Conquests Seuernes never had confinde.
Victorious Hotspurre and his valiant sire,
The kings great Steward, Wosters reverent Lord:
With never daunted Douglas do conspire,
Whose endless praise our Annals do record:
With these do Glendowre join, Edmund Mo^timer Earl o^ March was d^signed
heir apparent in the days o^ Richard the 2. if the King dye^ without issue.
and Wigmors Lord,
To pull the Scepter from the tyrants hand,
And give it him that should by right command.
Douglas and Hotspurre peerlesse for their might,
Are ouermatcht by Henry's matchless son:
Who like a lion roused him in the fight,
Glendowre himself is by himself undone,
Northumberland is sick and cannot come: The battle at Shaftsbury

Like to a Tiger in his eager chase,
Great Monmouthes praise does run from place to place.
Tumults appeased and armor set aside, Henry the 5. borne at Monmouth shire in
Wales.

The stately Cirty of the highest God
Divine Jerusalem, Iehouas bride,
Being whipped with war, and famines pinching rod,
Implores the help of this all-conquering Lord:
His soul defilde with sin, by merits sought
That to redeem which Jesus blood had bought.
His royal Navy like a sea of wood,
Attends his princely presence in the bay:
But see how meager death still envying good,
With fatal stroke his enterprise does stay,
The Caedar falls in time, so Kings decay.
Why stay you ships, he treades the sacred path,
Jerusalem his soul and body has.
Henry the fifth, his life and death.
AVaunt proud Rome and brag not of thy men, Henr. 5.

Nor thy aetheriall Caesar's wars declare:
Cease peerlesse Plutarch with thy sacred pen,
The worlds Archmonarches aptly to compare,
Reason does urge, and this allege I dare,
That Englands Homer portraid has his war,
Which does excel the worthiest Caesar's star.
What telst thou me of famous Hasdruball,
Of Cannas chance, and Varros overthrow:
Aemisius death, and conquering Hanniball,
Of Syllas Legions, and a Parthian bow,
Of Titus valor, Catos wrinckled browe,
Of Syracuse, and strong Namantias wall,
Or Phillip, Persia, Iugurth Iubas fall.
Of Noble Drusus and proud Saturnine,
Of Scipios death, and Gracchus infamy:
Of Marius trophies, and stern Cataline,
How Caesar vanquished France and Germany,
And twice returned as foild from Britany.
The world admir;d their victories to see,
Yet none of these must be comparde with thee.
Let Athens praise the laws which Solon gave,
And Marathon extol Miltiades,
Write Caria of Mansolus stately grave,
And let Cycilia wish Demosthenes,
But Salamina praise Themistocles.
Greece did admire their tryumphes for to see,
Yet all of these cannot comparewith thee.
Let Sparta now conceal Lycurgus fame,
And Lacedaemon hide Lysanders praise:
Cease Argos now, to show th'Olimpicke game,
Let silence cloud or mask those golden days,
When Epires Monarch acted Tragic plays: Pyrrhus.

But what of him? or what are these to thee?
For thou alone do far exceed those three.
Though Alexander wan Darius Crown,
And forced the Eastern Emperor leave his tent:
Burning Persopolis that regal Town,
Seeing thy valor freely gives consent
That two bright sons should rule the Element:
With thee great Prince we aptly may compare,
Rich Europes Paragon, and Phaenix rare. The Duke of York and Earl of
Suffolk, were the only men of Nobility that ended their lives in the battle
of Agincourt.

Thou did not want Parmenios aiding hand,
Nor valiant Perdicas aspiring mind:
Which might Alansons quarrels fierce withstand,
As long as Langlies gallant issued mind
Had faithful Suffolkes love to him combinde.
They wan, they lost, they live though they are dead,
They live in heaven, Crassinius was the first Captain that charged the enemy
in the Field, which office of valor, Edward the Duke of York enjoyed at
Agincourt.
and did in Conquests bed.
France did ten years withstand the Romans might,
Both parties often with equal courage plaide;
Yet that before the Sun showed twice his light,
Madst great Mompensier fly as all dismaide,
To see thy kingly Banner forth displaide,
Like to Crassinius York the yaward led,
True valor is by hope of honor bred.
Henry two Diadames does now combine,
Europes fair daughters, eldest sisters twain:
By marriage of a maid a Mimph divine,
Whilst Lewis lives, as Emperor he mustraigne,
Henry as heir apparent does remain:
When Katherin is betrothd his beauteous wife,
Peace conquers war, and concord ends strife.
Immortalized virgin sacred Queen,
Britains Aurora harbinger of day:
Fairer then thought could think or eye has seen,
Rich Virtues port, and Honors cleerest bay,
Thrice blessed womb framed of aetheriall clay,
Which did enclose that glorious Theodore,
Whose son did Britains regalty restore.
Her Amber-tresses like to wyers of gold,
That shadowed her white vermilion face:
Like Vulcans chain did Venus champion hold,
Who triumphed erewhile, now sues for grace,
Indecent action for a Captains place:
Thy eyes are now bewitched with eyes divine,
Thy heart consents to honor Katherine.
If I had Zeuxes at to paint thy looks,
Did I enjoy Maeonian Homers quill:
To pourtraiture thy praise in golden books,
Thy virtues rare would aequalize my skill:
Thy sacred paps sweet Nectar did distill.
Had not thou been, our eyes should never view
Our present peace and pleasures to ensue.
Stay ranging Muse, thy wandering course restrain,
When jove's all-seeing eyes did view this King:
He sent his Harauld to that spacious plain,
Where the three fatal Sisters, then did spinne:
To know when Henry's life did first begin.
And if his thread were not already spunne,
That Lachesis should make it quickly run.
His wisest son did place his golden wings,
Holding a silver rod all-charming wand:
Wherewith he could inchant all mortal things,
With this attire he claue the aetheriall land,
Where love and luno does the Gods command:
When that he came unto the appointed place,
He told his message with a comely grace.
Sisters (quoth he) for so they were indeed,
The omnipotent and all-commanding Jove: Mercuries Oration.

Which does on Nactar and Ambrosia feed,
Juno, Apollo, and Cythereis love:
With all the Gods that rules the sphere above,
Entreats, commands, of you fair sisters three,
To end his life, though not his dignity.
Atlas you know is old Alcides dead,
You know the weight of Heavens massy throne: He dyed in a Chamber at the Deane
of Westmi. lodging named Jerusalem.

The Planets houses covered all with lead,
Jove's palace varnisht with rich Rubies stone,
The gates of Iuory and Indian bone:
He that does heavens heauiest weight sustain,
Must patience have to tolerate his pain.
Therefore (quoth he) this is my Fathers will,
(For Jove his Father was, or Fame does lie)
That you which power have great kings to kill,
Would shorten Henry's life that he might dye,
A heavenly thought deserves aeternitie.
Atlas is old, and Atlas must have aid,
All fear the heft, Henry was nere afraid.
The Sisters stood amazde at his request, The Fates ^nswere.

Each look at others eyes as in a glass:
Whereat stern Clotho eldest of the rest,
Brother quoth she (for Jove their Father was)
Shall Fates be ruled by Gods? ahlas, ahlas,
They revel still, but we poor wretches work,
We labor, they in Caves of pleasure lurk.
The worlds poor Impes may justly now complain
Of humane sorrow, man's still growing grief:
How birds and beasts a longer life do gain
Then man, poor man; And man's commanding chief
If you deny them help, where is relief:
Men say that Fates are certain, now they see
Jove made us constant in inconstancy.
The angry God invelloped with ire,
Wrath in his face, and fury in his looks,
His eyes more read then was the reddest fire:
Shows ancient Monuments of sacred books,
Which erst he wrote by the Idalian brooks.
There might you see what Act the Gods did frame,
Amongst the rest Jove might the Sisters blame.
Out of this place he draws his argument,
And does confute their sugared Sophistry:
Then reads another Act of Parliament,
Which did confirm Jove's royal Empery,
His great prerogative and dignity.
Then does he power forth sacred Eloquence,
Selected flowers of learnings Quintessence.
What if proud Terras issue Briareus,
Would combat with your great aetheriall Sire? Mercinys reply.

Fntring Castalia, where the sacred Muse
Lives still inspirde with young Apollos fire?
What if the Giants could so high aspire,
Would not they touch the christalized sky,
Vntuning heavens sweetest harmony?
What God should then the heavens weight sustain,
Whilst Bacchus in his Indian Tigers Carre
Would shake the Orbs and that celestial plain,
When fair Victoria conquering Queen of war,
Brighter then Venus, or the brightest star,
Does give to Jove a Crown bedeckt with gold,
Could Atlas then heavens heauiest weight uphold?
His age is great, and years will strength remove,
Therefore fair Sisters well advised be:
To answer love and all the Gods above,
Though loath they were, yet all did well agree
To cut his thread for mere necessity.
Then Atlantiades did soon depart,
And Atropos did stabbe great Henry's heart.
Thus did the Phaenix of the vastie round,
Whose worth my Muse should ever memorize:
And Eccho-like his martial deeds resound,
Put that he did his Country scandalize
In following Henry which did tyranize.
She gave thee breath to live and men to fight,
Yet thou depriu'st her of her cleerest light.
When noble Henry ended has his days.
Bedford with conquering swords Vernoi shall fill,
And spend his blood to gain immortal praise:
Beauford and Beaumount shall good Humfrey kill,
And Warwick gain the popular good will.
Poole is exilde from woeful Margaret,
And York malignes the Duke of Somerset.
Mars mounts his Ensigns on our highest towers,
And decks our helmets with Ambitions plumes:
Revenge sad massacres and scarlet showers
Distills, Cities are burnt, whose dankish fumes
Contaminates the Air, now York presumes
With Sarums Earl and Warwickes willing hand,
To gain the Crown, and with the Crown the land.
The Civil Wars.
PLutonian Princess sacred Proserpine,
License Megaera and C^esiphone,
Which never saw the Suns all-pleasing shine
Enter this vale of humane misery,
And consecrate to endless memory
These Civil broils in Characters of brass,
Set forth these wars which did all wars surpass.
Heers Mars pauilion, there Bellonas tent,
The Lanciers here, and there the Carbines stands:
The Bilmen strikes, the Archers bows are bent,
Here raging Fury flies with burning brands,
Distorted limbs are pilde on purple sands:
Here Gassamores are cract, there helmets crazd,
Here Gorgets cut, there Veins of Azure razd.
Now does the Courser neigh, the Clarions sound,
And wrath mounted on a flaming steed:
Does both the Legions fortitude confound,
The moistlesse earth for very grief does bleed,
To see the Gardner spoil the sown seed.
Here might you see what age could never tell,
Whilst Lions fought, the forests Barons fell.
Here Ambuscadoes watch the sallying Scout,
There Hanniball entraps Marcellus train:
Here wings are placed and squadrons round about,
Scipiades must leave disloyal Spain,
And like Anebises clippe the Elizian plain.
Nature has digd for men more kind of graves,
Then Indian Ganges has translucent waves.
No valiant Martius stout Coriolaene,
Did now the raging multitude withstand:
Tumultuous winds have left the rocky lane,
Where stern Hypoaates with Mace in hand,
Their lawless force, by force does countermaund.
Eurus will blow and shake the Islands King,
Rebels will rise, and belles of discord ring.
Unworthy I, to mount that sacred hill,
And Clodius-like see female sacrifice:
Virgill sang this, and none but Virgill will
Adventure valures worth to memorice;
Thrice glorious object fit for Princely eyes.
Pardon great Homer, my all-daring muse,
Let Cherills folly, Cherills fault excuse.
The lesser stars makes Phoebe shine more bright,
So may my infant Muse comparde to thine,
Make thy heroicke Poems splendant light,
Seem fairer far in men's iuditious eyne,
Comparison makes Virtue seem divine.
Yet give me leave with my unworthy pen,
To blazon forth the Acts of worthy men.
Cease mournful Rome thy sad enlangoring,
Those fatal Fields near to Campania sought,
Wherein the very prime of Marius spring, The civil wars of Marius and Sylla.

The spring of grief which Carbo deerly bought,
Ambitious Conquest ruled great Syllas thought.
Speak not of these proud Rome, nor make thy moan,
Or if thou speak, make not comparison.
What of stout Varro, The battle Spain, when Caesar was victor.
and Affranius lost,
Massilias ruin Scaeuas pierced shield:
Home by Brundusium, Caesar's ships were tossed,
Ever renowm'd Pharsalias bloody field,
How Iuba fell, and Diator did yield.
Pompey in Egypt by Pothinius slain,
And endless shame which Ptolomy did gain.
Caesar is stabd, Caesar slain the Court of Pompey.
and Albas does lament,
Antonius does the Tyrants plea refute:
Irefull Octauius to revenge is bent,
Cascas and Cassius, The battle (...) Phillippia.
Cicero and Brute,
For Countries freedom frame a faithless suite.
Laws silent are when armies rule the town, The feelde at Actium.

Who conquered Kings, by Kings are tumbled down.
Envious desire of honor, love to reign,
Seuers their minds whom nature did combine:
Two Roman nauyes cut the Ocean maine,
One brothers loss, does cause another gain,
Nothing is worse then Potentates disdain.
Rome simild with joy, when civil wars did cease,
England admired more at perfect peace.
In thirteen battles Englands strength was tryde,
Gauntes issue strives with Clarence progeny:
Through every place destructions steed did ride,
Making debate and endless enmity,
Twixt subjects love, The first of Saint Albons barrells.
and Princely sovereignty.
The Lords conspire, and at Saint Atbons meet,
Here Is Warwickes tent, there York does man the street.
Under the Castle Somerset is slain,
Here Clsfford falls, and there Northumberland,
Great Buckingham renewes the fight again,
In vain the Lion does the Bear withstand,
Where Warwick leads his all subduing band: Daysie in ^rench, signi^^eth
Margaret

The Rose does wither, and the Daysie spring.
The Queen escapt, but Warwick has the king.
O whither shall she fly? whose ay de expect?
Who is encombred with a thousand woes:
What peasant boore will princes griefs respect?
By flight she scapes the fury of her foes:
Thus to the North this Amazonian goes.
Grief flies to those, who are oppressed with grief,
Society in woe is some relief.
When Romes two Scipios fell, two glorious stars
In Andeluzia or illuding Spain:
None durst but Scipio undertake those wars,
Even so when Clifford was for England slain,
And Percies pride lay breathless on the plain, At Wakefield, Rich. Duke of
York being taken by the Lord Clifford, in revenge of his fathers Ideath slain
at S. Albons, I crowned the Dukes head with paper.

None durst the Ragged Staff and Bear withstand,
But Cliffords son and great Northumberland.
The Trumpets wake the Champions to the field,
Who rode in triumph through Epaeons town
To Westmerland; and Margaret must yield,
Whose virtues did deserve a golden Crown:
His brows are circulizde with paper brown.
Themistocles does yield to Xerxes might,
York ouermatcht, gives place to Heuries right.
Penthisilea bends her course to Troy,
Showing the spoils of Larisseas King,
And Henry like to Priam smiles with joy,
Seeing his Queen such Tropheys home to bring:
And all the Phrigian Virgins Io sing.
Like unto this, or like a brauer wight,
Courageous Margret does return from sight.
Never discouragde Warwicks royal Peer,
Unconstant Clarence, constant Montacute,
Seeing the Southern coast of Albion clear,
Did Essex, Suffolk, Surrey resalute,
Norfolk does Mowbray Captain constitute.
Both Armies join, The secon^ Battle of S* Albons.
and to Saint Albons came,
They fly their foes, where first they overcame.
Mowbray to Suffolk, Warwick with the rest,
In haste, post haste, to Cambrias borders fly:
New rising March does rowse his spangled Crest,
And understanding by a sallying spy
His Fathers friends, and favorites were nigh,
With decent gesture does them entertain,
Imploring aid his right to reobtaine.
Warwick who was the speaker for them all,
In modest sort, as well became his age:
Not Duke of York but does him Sovereign call,
A name so great does virtue equipage,
Now each to other does his honor gage.
Like Caesar now he ioynes with Anthony,
And like to him does foster enmity.
When Brutus hand had stabd great Caesar's heart,
Octauius honor every where did find:
Antonius takes the stout Caesareans part,
But when revenge had satisfide her mind,
Whom marriage chaste with friendship had combinde,
Ambition makes them strive for endless reign,
And with their blood to dye the crimson main.
So Edward and renowned Sarums son
Join to revenge dead Richards injury: thard Earl Warwick.

But when that Gaunts great issue was undone,
Warwick does envy Yorkes prosperity,
And much disdaines his peerlsse Sovereignty.
Witness when Edward durst not here abide,
And Barnet field where noble Warwick did.
Henry's fair Queen, ^argret daugh^^r to Reino ^^rle of Aniow ^ho entitled
^^mself King of Naples, Sycil, and ^erusalem, but ^^ioyed none.
great Neapolitane,
Blinded with masked fate, unconstant chance,
Did never fear her future fatal bane,
Like a sierce coult this Iennet proud did prance,
Smiling with joy to see her smiling chance.
Hark how the Drum does summon to the field,
See how she takes her ill beseeming shield.
Stay Naples pride Sicilian Empress stay, That day in which Caesar lost his
(...) in the Court of ^ompe^, a poor man tendered him a petition which he
light^y regarded, the contents whereof if he had perused, his life might have
been preserved

Will France for ever showers of vengeance reign?
Thy first approach presage this fatal day,
Fire flew from heaven and made our Turrets plain,
When thy Armados cut the Ocean maine.
Had Caesar read that which the poor man gave,
Egypt had never been Antonins gratre.
Had but great Henry, great in Majesty
Joined with that match which Bedford first did make,
He had not tasted base seruilitie,
But when his minion Suffolk did forsake,
That Nymph of joy, great heir to Arminake,
Then Yorkes depressed issue began to rise,
An abject Prince each Subject will despise,
Clifford and Percy proppes of Henry's state;
(Seeing the Southern Lords entend to fight,)
Does the fierce Tigers anger instigate,
Proposing arguments of Henry's right,
How her decayed, augmented Edwards might.
In Hampton first she did our woe begin, At her first c^ming, landin^ at
Southham^ton, some pa^^ of Paul's st^^ple. and many other Church^^ in England
were set on fi^^

Two Hamptons cannot end her endless sin.
Fury awakes the murthred Lions whelpe,
And like poor Hector his deceased sire,
Craves of his kinsemen their supporting help,
Their smotherd hate has kindled murders fire,
Which none can quench till they have quenched desire,
Where Nemssis of late did murder end,
There she begins heroicke blood to spend.
Like the worlds Monarch, Yorkes apparent heir
Ioynes with his Fathers friend, great Neuils race:
They to Northampton with their troops repair,
Where Aniowes Tamiris with martial grace
Cliffords triumphant Arms did embrace:
Clifford whose name as Taibot did in France,
Made Warwick fear his Colors to advance.
Octauius now, A compari^on of Edward and Warwick with Octaui^s and Anthony.
and chaste Octauias Bride,
Conspire the death of tyranizing Brute.
Clifford must fall, in top of all his pride,
Who did by Arms great Muusters plea refute,
Does plead his cause, but Warwick gains the suite.
A headless arrow piercst his armed throat,
Who in his youth did sail in Conquests boat.
If Homer lived and dwelt in Castalie,
And daily tasted of Parnassus Well,
Inspirde with furious sacred Poesy,
Yet would he not our Virgils worth excel,
Whose Paeans did these fierce massacres tell.
Delia is praisd with thy all-praysing hand:
No wonder, for thou dweltst in Delos land.
Eight several Battles shall escape my Muse,
Least pride it self should me esteem as proud:
Let Maros quill that sacred path peruse,
Cover my temples with a sable cloud,
Cimerian wreathes my head of sorrow shroud:
Give me a brazen Pensill not a Pen,
Some drops of blood to portraiture these men.
The Field of Banbery.
NOw war is mounted on rebellions Steed,
And discontent persuades willing Pride,
His crest to raise, and wears an Iron weed:
Long smothred Envy does the Army guide,
Which made firm love from true obedience slide:
'T was that great Neuill made proud George rebel,
Whose haughty spirits Warwick knew too well.
Warwick that raisde the race of Mortimer,
Whose eyes did see too soon, thy death says so:
The downfall of immortal Lancaster,
'T was he that did, what could not Warwick do?
Make Kings and Queens to love and fear him too.
'T was that great Peer, who with one warlike hand,
Crowned and vncrown'd two kings who ruled the land.
Thus while these Royal but disloyal Peers,
Maugre revenge to him that knew not fear,
Unnumbered bands of men and swarms appears
In North and South, East, West, yea every where
They throw away their Coats, and Corslets wear.
Wives, maids, and Orphants eyes are stuffed with tears,
And cannot see the Spades transformed to Spears.
The Shepherds hook is made a soldiers pike,
Whose weather-beaten hands must learn aright
His spear to traile, and with his sword to strike
Upon the plumed beauer of a knight,
None must be sparde by wars impartial might.
If every soldier were a King, what then?
Princes should die as fast as other men.
The Senator must leave his skarlet gown,
And keep him in some Turret of defense:
When wars once flourish, Justice must go down,
Laws to correct, is lawless wars pretense,
Valor does grieve to see ill gotten pence.
To see a man without deserts to rise,
Makes war such men, not Justice to despise.
You that in peace by use of golden hoords
Your dunghill race to Barons did erect:
You that by English phrase and chosen words
Make heavens envy your toplesle Architeck,
Your Angels cannot you from wars protect.
The Camp and Court in manners different are,
Words may in Peace, but deeds prevail in War.
For Robes of honor furred with Miniuere
You must have brest-plates of well tempred steel,
And on your aged heads strong Helmets wear,
All states must turn when Fortune turns her wheel,
That man which pleasure tastes must sorrow feel.
Who sees the wrack of mighty Empery,
He loves his life too well that will not dye.
When Kings must fight, shall subjects live in peace?
What Coward is of such a crauant race,
That loves not honor more than idle ease?
Great Roman I applaud thy worthy Phrase,
To live with shame, is worse then dye with praise.
All which have being, always cannot be,
For things corrupt must die, and so must we.
Could Cressus mighty mines from Cyrus hand,
His captive carcass or his state defend?
Wealth cannot war, nor silver spears withstand:
By strife we see the greatest states have end,
And most they mar by war, who most would mend.
When old wars cease, then straight their springs anew,
For harms still harms, and evils do ills ensue.
No sooner had the gladsome eyes of peace
Beheld this warlike sea inuiron'd I Will,
But disobedience heir to sluggish ease,
Did weak belief subdue with subtle style,
Grace winnes the heart, but words the ears beguile.
It Was Warwicks tongue, whose speech did all men please
Whose words were such, or very like to these.
The Earl of Warwicks speech.
YOu know great Lords, your very eyes did see
The spotless honor which my house and I
Did ever bear this kingdom; who but we
Did check the pride of wilful tyranny:
And with our Grandsires we esteemde it good,
For Englands weal to spill our dearest blood.
Witness the dismal fall of Salisbury
And Richard Duke of York in Wakefield slain,
The wrack of my decayed family,
Why did we this, what profit did we gain?
It Was but to show our country our good will,
Which now we also do, and ever will.
How many times have I in complete steel
Yea mounted on my steed pursude the chase?
Witness these weary limbs, for age must feel,
If youth has runn'd astray or tedious race.
Witness these silver hairs which now appears,
Cares makes us old, though we be young in years.
When as these eyes, impartial eyes of mine,
Beheld my king illuded and misled
By baser men, true honor did repine
To see great majesty with baseness wed:
For which I waged war, and warring wan,
And winning, chose a Tiger for a Lamb.
Both you and I great Lords, yea all the state
With universal voice adiudg'd him wise:
Who now has proved a tyrant and ungrate,
Humility makes time obseruers rise.
For you I chose him king and spent my blood,
But trial says, good seeming is no good,
Now therefore friends let Warwicks tongue entreat,
Since that our hopes of Edwards love despair,
That Lancaster may repossesse his seat,
Whom we unkindly thrust from honors chair,
The reason is which gouernes our pretents,
Tyrants are worser far then Innocents.
Thus this enraged Lord does instigate
With spurlike words swift coursers to the race:
Envy ambition breeds, ambition hate:
Hate discontent breeds, discontent disgrace,
These be wars angry sounds, pernicious race.
These vices by Injustice nourisht are,
Affection in a Judge is worse then war.
Blessed that state, thrice happy is the land
Where sacred Justice is esteemde divine:
And where the Judge on one ear holds his hand,
My pen applaudes that sentence just of thine,
Romes holy Prince, peace loving Antonine,
As I am Marcus, I am not thy foe,
But being Judge, I must be just also.
That law deryding Peer, disdaining Lord,
Warwick does his rebellious Ensigns rear:
And vows revenge on Edward with his sword,
Hastings and Stanley do withstand the Bear,
True honor never yields to servile fear.
He is a friend that loves when Fate does frown,
He shall have thousands that does wear a Crown.
Thus while these threatenings like some blazing star,
The wrack of some great Emperor do portend:
Their friends on either side address for war,
Great William Earl of Pembrooke does entend,
Ere war begin to make of war an end.
And for that purpose for his friends he sent,
To whom as thus he showed his right intent.
The Earl of Pembrookes Oration.
YOu that did ever with your swords maintain,
The undoubted title of the whiter Rose:
By whose great aid great Edward did obtain,
The Royal crown and homage held of those,
Which now rebel, dear friends correct this sin,
It Is as much praise to keep, as praise to win.
If speech might spur you to this glorious race,
Where endless honor is the purchased fee:
Selected words my ruder speech should grace,
We prick in vain his sides whose feet are free.
You ever did the house of York adore,
True love increases daily more and more.
Give not occasion to the envious pen,
To brand you with the badge of infamy:
Be firm in resolution worthy men,
And think upon your ancient liberty.
Behold why Warwick does these wars entend,
A bad beginning has a worser end.
Look with indifferent, not respecting eyes,
Upon these two coriualls in the war:
Edward a King, courageous, honest, wise,
Warwick whose name is like a blazing star,
That some ensuing harms does foretell,
Envy does still work ill, but never well.
For whom does he this bloody battle wage?
For aged Henry, and the Prince his son:
Who but for him had led a quiet age,
But they poor Princes, were by him undone.
I find it true which has been often sed,
Bears must sometime with humane flesh be fed.
It is not love to either of these twain,
That does enforce this proud ignoble Peer:
These wandering troops of rebels to maintain,
But it is ambition whom he holds most dear,
That does compel his willing hands to fight:
Unsettled brains blood still respect, not right.
Nay, what if Henry should enjoy the wreath,
Think you by yielding favor to enjoy?
Friends, when wars rise say kings should never breath,
Princes in need men of regard employ.
To this just action loyal friends be moved,
The firmest faith in danger great is proved.
THus has this Lord as with a touchstone tried,
The courage of his contrymen and love:
The voice of all is on wars, wars they cride,
The Princes virtues do the subjects move,
Dangers and perils eminent to prove.
The noble Earl with speed pursues his fate,
Delay brings danger to the surest state.
When Fame reported this to Edwards care,
Hope vanquished fear and gave encouragement:
To see them firm who ever faithful were.
Then to Lord Stafford, Southwike Earl he sent,
To muster all his friends incontinent:
Then gave he joint commission to these twain,
As equalles when they came in Camp to reign.
Thus these two Captains as those two of yore,
When Romes selected youth in Cannas bled,
Equal in power, but not in Judgments store,
As Varro, Stafford from the battle fled,
As Paulus, so renowned Pembrooke sped.
Thus Lord-like stout Aemilius forth does go,
To chase the pride of his rebellious foe.
Stafford and he weak staff to lean upon,
No Stafford he, nor sprung from Buckingham,
Nor let that name so base a man bemoane,
His cowardice escandalizde his fame.
Lassiuious lust did explaiten his shame.
These two to Banbary with Armies bend,
Thence Stafford fled, there Herberts life did end.
There might you see a troop of warlike men,
Conducted by the glories of their Clyme:
Unworthy I, with my unworthy pen,
To aeternize in Lays indecent Rhyme,
Their memories, which live in spite of time.
These two as Fabius and Marcellus wear,
Romes guarding target and offending spear.
Richard was valorous, but his brother wise,
Youth made him forward, age the other stayde:
Richard for action, Pembrooke for advise,
If both their worths were in a balance way de,
Neither should Fates partiallitie vprayde,
The differences between these brothers are,
One peace affected most, the other war.
There might you see the Champions of the Bear,
Mounted on Iustie Coursers, scour the plain:
There might you see the son of Latimer,
With rashness charge, with fear return and slain,
They never fear, who never feeled pain.
There might you see, O I am grieved to say,
What years confirmed, consumed in a day.
There might you see that worthy man of men,
Richard with his victorious sword in hand,
Like a fierce Lion passing from his den,
Or some stern Boar, whose anger plowes the land,
Securely pass through every conquered band.
As a round bullet from a Canon sent,
This Knight alone through forty thousand went.
And back returned to his amazed train,
But more enraged with anger then before:
Begins to kill, where he before had slain,
Like a close myzer he augments his store,
The more he slaies, to slaie he loves the more.
All this thou did, what latter age can tell,
Of one that better did, or half so well.
Thus like Alcides all composde of ire,
Whose fiery lights shut sparks of fortitude:
This Champion does to greater deeds aspire,
Still pressing on the Hydra multitude,
Till like to sheep they fled in order rude.
Then to his Tent with triumph he does go,
Valor does love to spoil, not chase the foe.
But see unconstant chance, and seeing weep,
For every word requires a silver tear:
Whiles careless victory did sweetly sleep,
And conquest by desert did honor wear,
(When most we live secure, we most should fear)
Six hundred men conducted by a Squire,
Made those that chaste with praise, with shame retire.
But ere that these confused warriors fled,
Whom unexpected horror did amaze:
They sold their lives for lives ere they were dead,
Their conquering blood their honors did emblaze,
Bnt all were not derived from one race.
Some Stallions in a field, some Asses be,
And so of men there be, of each degree.
Richard thou can not mount thy steed and fly,
Nor thou great Lord experience makes thee stay,
To fear the name of death is worse then dye:
But men borne base, a baser word will say,
I care not how I escape so live I may.
Ye slaves to fear whom I abhor to see,
That love life more, then praise or honesty.
Still do they strive till that unnumbered press
Like Bees of Hybla swarmed every where:
Courage in danger does it self express.
Submission to a Lion breeds but fear,
But ravenous beasts their prostrate subjects tear:
By such great Richard falls, and Pembrooke dies,
Conquering twice twenty thousand enemies.
Mount sacred spirits with clear conscience wings
To the ninth heaven whereas your glorious eye
May gaze on the immortal king of kings:
Live you in peace, but we in misery,
Man cannot happy be before he dye.
Unto your glorious tombs I sacrifice,
These dismal Anthems and sad Elegies.
CEase mournful Muse, to chaunt these Civil broiles,
Uncivil wars, and sence-amizing times:
Brothers by brothers spoild, unnatural spoils,
The guilt whereof to Jove's tribunal climes,
Oh subject fit for Thaeban Statius rimes.
All wars are bad, but final end does tell,
Intestine wars all other wars excel.
Witness the same the Macedinian down,
When Pompey did the Senates cause defend,
And Caesar sought the worlds Imperial Crown:
Witness Philippes and Antonius end,
Mild Othos death which Authors so commend.
Richard now rises at his Nephews fall, Richard. 3.

A conscience clear is like a brazen wall.
Now Englands Traiane sprung from Troiane race,
Does Oxford help and Darbies aid implore,
Froth-faced Neptune with his trident mace
Does guide his Argosies to Milfords shore,
At Bosworth field he slaies the tusked Boar. The battle o^ Bosworth.

Leicestrian Dales their crimson goare did fill,
A scarlet stream from Richard did distill.
Cheiney thy arms and sinews are not strong
Enough to match with Albions martial king:
Brandon thou do thy youthful vigor wrong,
To combat him who to the field did bring
Those cruel parts which Collingbourne did sing.
Now consolations wings does rear my mind,
To show his praise, who sprang from Priams kind.
Great Impe of kings, Henry. 7.
heroicke Theodore,
Englands Augustus, famous Prince of peace,
Great Treasurer of sacred Virtues store,
Eden of pleasure, Arthur.
which did all men please,
Comfort of Albion, Henry.
and they Countries ease: Margaret.

From the four golden Fountains did arise
Like unto those that sprang from Paradise. Mary.

Oh that I had all wits excelling wit,
To eternallize thy deeds immortal king:
My pen thy trophies should, and tryumphes writ,
The triple lauor of this round should ring
With thy great name, which my great muse should sing.
But since that Nature did the same deny,
Accept my will, aetheriall dietie.
Elizabeth, Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edw. the 4. was married to Henr. the 7
by which marriage the both houses of York and Lancaster so long severed were
united
O Princely perfect name,
Combinde with thee, oh cheerful cordial knot:
No private quarrel could white Albion fame:
With blood and rapine fierce dissension blot,
Fury it self, within it self did rot.
Two parted Roses which so long did strive,
Grew on one stalk, and both began to thrive.
From that fair stalk great Arthur first did rise,
Arthur who matched with Castiles Katherine,
Childlesse he did, and death he did despise,
His body was intombde in gorgeous s^rine,
His soul ascended, for it was divine.
Henry then Prince and heir apparent was,
Henry which did all former Henry's pass.
The snow-white Cliffes which Albion do confine,
Whose subject sands are decked with Margarites: Henry 8.

Clearer then is the clearest Christaline,
The towering waves, which rule the narrow streights,
Which do adumbrate sleepy rocks deceits,
Could not debar his thoughts, but he did go
To conquer France, and Englands greatest foe.
Wolsey then lived, Christ Chur^^ in Oxford.
high minded worthy Clarke,
Which did erect those glorious Towers of yore:
Learnings receptacle, Religions park,
Oh that some Eagle-mounting thought would so are
To finish that which he began before.
Oh that some Prince (for none but Princes can)
Would perfect that, that excellent work of man.
The silver Isis and the gliding Them,
Whose billows resalute the verdant strand,
Should warble Paans to his mighty name,
The leaden age is past which ruled the land,
Saturn is come, and Saturn does command:
Whose hopes were dead, rich students never fear,
(Most rich in hope) some will your turrets rear.
Nurse of ingenious spirits Athens praise,
Chief benefactor of what ere is mine:
O might I see some mighty Monarch raise
Those half built walls and parted towers combine,
Then Christ might yet be justly termed thine:
As Christ is best, so should his houses be,
And in perfection have a sympathy.
Henry's triumphant carcass laid in grave, Edward 6.

Covered with gold in Caesar's ancient tower:
Edward succeeds, a Prince though young, yet grave,
The sky which whilome smilde begins to lowre,
And showers of sorrow on the land to power.
He ends his life before it scarce began,
What is more short then shortest life of man.
When nature framed this Prince, oh goodly creature,
Composed of pure and elementall fire:
Turned in a heavenly mowld diuinest feature,
She saw her self deceived, and wroth with ire,
When life began, his end she did desire.
What envy so could thee proud Nature sting,
Nothing should make and mar the self same thing.
The Gods did envy man's felicity,
And therefore did to Nature condescend:
That this young King, great King of Majesty,
In sixteen years his vital course should spend,
His life has end, and all our joys have end.
Nature does hasten to the house of death.
And she consents to steal away his breath.
Now Spain and England ioynes, Queen Mary married with Phillip Prince of
Spain.
that peace I love,
That concord does augment the common state:
Pray God it does both firm and faithful prove,
But for to match with Spain, oh cruel fate,
Could Mary so her country ruinate?
Guiltless she was, but those that made the match,
Under their wings did eggs of Serpents hatch.
Oh now me thinks I could in dismal black
Shadow my looks, and never wish the light:
Writing red lines of blood, more black then black,
The massacres of man's amazing sight,
After these duskie clouds comes elearest light.
Mary is dead, Elizabeth does reign,
Her conscience clear, no corasiue could stain.
The loss of Elizabeth.
Fair Virgin, Empress, royal Princely maid,
Sprung from the Damask Rose the Roses bud:
It Is true as truth it self which men have said,
The end is best, though all the means be good,
She was the last and best of Henry's blood.
Henry did well in all, excel in this,
In getting of this Maid, our greatest bliss.
He vanquished Bolleine, and strong Turnus town,
And rode in triumph through the English Pale:
Placing the Diadem of France, that regal Crown,
Upon his sisters temples; and withal
Made the twelve Peers to fear their final fall.
But what of these? if Bullain had not bin,
We all had lived for aye in endless sin.
Astronomers did dream and fondly said,
That twelve designed signs did rule a Sphere:
Virgo did guide the earth, oh heavenly Maid;
But now sky-teachers wise men never fear,
To say she is in heaven, for sure she is there.
Oh she is gone, with her our pleasures fled,
They lived in her, they did when she was dead.
Bright Gem of honor, Albions glorious star,
The Cynosure of Englands Hemispheare:
Princessse of peace, Cytherian queen of war;
Rides through the clouds on her caelestiall bear,
Conquering deaths Ebon dart and sharpest spear.
Fathers of peace put on triumphant weeds,
A gracious King, a gracious Queen succeedes.
Reasons first founder, Natures eldest son,
The Stoikes prince did also err in this:
Repugnant natures never reign in one, ^^^stotle. (...).

Perfect my grief, more perfect is my blis,
I smile with joy, yet tears my cheeks do kiss.
A present salve has cured a pensive sore,
Britain is now, what Britain was of yore.
The wandering Brute, who sprang from Priams kind,
Though artlesse men with their malignant muse:
Still bearing burning envy in their mind,
Britains first Monarch warlike Brute abuse,
Of all the Northern world, this Isle did choose.
With fire and sword he did obtain his suit
With peace and joy we choose a second Brute.
Peace, valor, learning, science he did bring,
Thou fear of God, whom thou do only fear:
Imperial Monarche, truth and concordes King,
No champion then did weild his fruitless spear,
No chain did tie the mild untamed Bear.
Saturn then lived, no Sinon did amiss,
All men were free, (no slave by Nature is.
Oh sacred age, and blessed times of yore,
When just Astraea ruled this circled plain:
Then each man lived alike, and lived withstore,
No Persian blood did Salamina stayne,
No Vandals Rome, nor Roman gouernd Spain.
No Cannas chance did cause Saturnia mourn,
No senseless Nero wished new Troy to burn.
No Manlius sought a Diadem to gain,
No just Papirius sude for Fabius blood:
Claudius as then did not Virginia stayne,
No Consulls fell at Alias flaming flood,
Red Charea was not dewde with Fabys blood.
Albans and Romans knew no single sight,
Saffetius did not yield to Martius might.
The unspotted spowse of martial Collatine,
Did not consent to Sextus lawless lust:
Each virgin was ybound with Vestas line,
Camillus needed not the Ardeans trust,
Nor Sceuola his hand in flames to thrust.
But see, oh see how age does follow age,
Worse after worse, as Actors on a stage.
Thrice happy Britain, strong united I Will,
Disioynted was by her first monarchs fall:
Then Albanact was slain by Humbers guile,
Caesar then conquered it, who conquered all,
Hunes, Pictes and Danes tryumph't in Britains fall.
Veil sorrows roabes, Jove's father comes again,
The golden age begins with Jacobs reign.
The Lords great Stuart, Albions mighty King,
Our second Brute like to the morning star,
To Englands Court does light of comfort bring,
Now Concords boult does Ianus temple bar,
Binding in chains the sternest god of war.
Virtue and valor triumph evermore,
Augustus lives adornd with Crassus store.
TO THE MAJESTY OF King James, Monarch of all Britayne.
ALl hail great Monarch of the greatest I Will,
The Northern worlds united lawful King, James the 1. of England, and 6. of
Scotland.

Pardon my rudest reed indecent style,
Though I want Skill in thy new Empires spring,
Yet do I love, and will thy praises sing.
Me thinks I do on Clarps Kingdom stand,
No marvel, for Apollo rules the land.
On true obedience knee I pardon ask
Of thy divine heroicke Majesty,
It was thy merits great imposed this task
On my weak pen, badge of infirmity,
Too weak indeed to praise thy excellency.
Each Cherrils muse does now salute thy grace,
Shall I alone be mute and hide my face?
Mar^ extold Augustus peaceful days,
The Liricke Poet sung Mecenas fame:
Ennius did Scipio Affricanus praise,
If all they lived and saw thy sacred name,
Each verse they made should sure containethe same.
But if they read thy gift, Basilicon Doron.
oh Princely work!
For shame they would in vntrode deserts lurk.
If Englands Load-starre pride of Poesy, Chaucer, so called by M. Camdon.

Could the firm Centers regiment transpearse:
And formalize his peerlesse ingeny,
Thy all-surpassing virtues to rehearse,
A Princely matter fitts a princely verse:
Yet were his wit too weak thy deeds to praise,
Which brought us joys, in our most mournful days.
Could Lidgat pass the tower of Proserpine,
And like to Virbius live a double age,
Penning thy Trophies in a golden skrine,
Yet could he not thy mertis equipage,
Admiring most would use a tapinage,
Bocchas and Gowre, the Virgils of their time,
Could not unfold thy praise in antique rhyme.
If these four Poets lived like Lions four,
They should thy famous Coach of glory draw
From Vertures temple, to true honors tower,
Each should a kingdom have, thy foes should know
Thy might, and fear their final overthrow.
But what should muses sing? the world does see,
And seeing, fears united Britany.
Still living Sidney, Caesar of our land,
Whose never daunted valor princely mind,
Imbellished with Art and Conquests hand,
Did expleiten his high aspiring kind,
(An Eagles heart in Crows we cannot find.)
If thou could live and purchase Orpheus quill,
Our Monarchs merits would exceed thy skill
Albions Maeonian, Homer natures pride,
Spenser the Muses son and sole delight:
If thou could through Dianas kingdom glide,
Passing the Palace of infernal night,
(The Sentinels that keeps thee from the light)
Yet could thou not his retchlese worth comprise.
Whose mind contains a thousand purities.
What fatal chance is this, and lucklesse fate,
That none can aptly sing thy glorious praise,
And tell the happiness of Englands state,
O barren time, and temporizing days,
Foul Ignorance on sacred Learning prays.
But now I do a Diapazon see,
None but thy self (great King) can sing of thee.
That Macedonian star, first Prince of Greece, Philip Aristotle

Sent for that wandering learned Stagirite,
To teach his Son knowledge of knowledges:
His sword was keen, his sense could ill indite:
Thy sword is shape, and who can better write?
He had another to instruct his son,
What he by others did, thy self has done.
Some Caesar deemde the happiest mortal wight,
That breathed the air, or did ascend the sky,
For conquering Scipios force, and Pompeis might,
Some did Augustus judge more happy, why?
Because the vanquished Aegypts Anhtony,
Romes holy Prince, said Nerua did surpass,
For leaving such a son as Traian was.
If those old Wisards which of yore did sing,
Read with impartial eyes thy peerlesse deeds,
(Great Prince of war, of peace thrice happy King)
Concord should reconcile their striving reeds,
And sensures join, which censures envy breeds.
Caesar's acts, Augustus peace, good Neruas kind,
In thee alone, in non but thee we find.
The silver Moon placed in her circle round,
At her increase, her equal distant horns
Upwards ascends, as scorning abject ground,
So when the worlds great honor first was borne,
That fair arising Sun, clear faced morn,
Her mounting thoughts did to the heavens Tower,
Scorning the earth, or any terrene Bower.
But when that Virgins Goddess does decrease,
Her picked forkes their course to Terra bend:
So when our Englands Lunas light did cease,
The Artike Clime an Unicorn did send,
Whose radiant Iusture, night shall never end:
Phoebes clear light seems dark, whilst he does shine
He borrowes perfect light of God divine.
Those that do read the secrets of the sky,
Whose judgment is in heaven conversant:
Which portraiture the signs in heavenly die
Might asseuere that Virgo was on high,
I saw a star of late from heaven fly:
Why cannot this star then fair Virgo be?
A star more chaste I think we cannot see.
O now my thoughts can diue into the deep,
Our all ships guiding star was fixed there:
And when Eliza did with honor sleep,
Mounted upon her praise deserving bear,
She did obtain of him she loved so dear,
That she might have his seat, he rule the land
Which she of late as Empress did command.
The Anatomizers of our learned days,
Affirm that Virgo do the belly guide:
No wonder then that Albions wondrous praise,
That Virgin Queen which here on earth did bide
So nourisht each poor hunger-bitten side.
Now she is dead, oh who will them reliue?
The present star does present comfort give.
I heard an aged woman often say,
That she did see a star from heaven descend:
Which was as true me thought, as trees did bray:
For she alleged the same, and did commend
A certain Crow, whose wit she did defend.
Pardon me Age, for now mine eyes do see
A star on earth, more bright than star can be.
To whom shall I this Northern star compare*
To Caesar which did first subdue the state:
To Horsus who no limb of Christ did spare,
Damming his soul this land to ruinate,
Great Williams conquest and the Normanes hate.
Thus does my Muse all wanting art begin,
To sing thy virtues, and to show their sin.
Caesar was twice repulst ere he could see
This little world from all the world remote:
Before we saw thy face we sent to thee,
As to a Pilot for to guide our boat:
Which did in Seas of sudden sorrow floate.
He lost his sword before he conquest wan,
We yield thee all our hearts, and all we can.
Horsus by cruel tyrant treachery,
Subdude Ambrosius that wise Prince of peace:
Witness the hidden knives at Salisbury,
He travail brought, but thou do bring us ease,
Thy true descent makes greedy wars to cease.
A Wolf possessed his heart, a Lion thine,
He worse then man, thou better more divine.
William was fierce in war, and so art thou:
In counsel sage, thou do him aequalize:
His sword forced foes their trembling knees to bow,
Thou conquerst hearts, by thy hearts winning eyes
By force he wan, by merits thou do rise.
He brought subjection, thou do freedom bring.
He loved war, but thou of peace art King.
Rufus was rude, thou civil, gentle, kind:
He was austere, thy brows has mercies frown:
He had a Neros heart, thou Caesar's mind:
He hunting loved, for pleasure tumbled down
Many a Castle fair, and stately Town:
Thou love the chase, yet Cities do adorn,
Thou were for all the worlds great profit borne,
Henry was graced with arts, thou do excel:
Children did bless his age but soon did dye:
Children thou have in health and perfect well,
(God prosper them with pure prosperity,)
Adorn their hearts with loving piety:
He was a worthy King, thou worthier far,
Thou art our Northerne-Pole, harts-guiding star.
Soar humble thoughts, and let my abject pen
Touch the high mounted Artike Northern star,
And there compare this man excelling men:
We should compare the things that equal are,
And who is like this light, this lamp, this star?
Mine eyes distill sweet tears, the tears of joy,
To see Troyes issue reign in new found Troy.
Let Barland cease to write of wisest Kings,
And Mellificius with his tuned voice,
From whose sweet tongue sprang learnings sweetest springs?
Sing not of Persians praise, or Caldeans joys,
The Grecians Emperor, Europs worthiest choice.
These three combinde, each sought the others fall,
Britain is joined, and Concord guides it all.
When Alexander saw that precious stone,
Under whose Isye wings Achilles lay,
Shedding ambitious tears, he said with moan,
Unhappy I, and ten tunes happy they,
Whose ensigns praise, sweet Homer did display:
Then happy art thou King, whose reign we see
Homer does sing thy praise, for thou art he.
The Majesty of Marius fearful face
Did terrify the Cymbrians crauen mind:
Though he were armde with Clothos fatal mace,
And solemn oath to murder did him bind,
A wandering Bucke did fear the Eagles kind:
So did thy Princely looks and grace of God
Protect thy issue from a Traitors rod.
Now does my Ship in plenties Ocean sail,
Pusht with a pleasant gale of pleasures wind:
But stay I here an envious Momist rail,
Thy toothlesse threate does not amaze my mind,
Bark, for thou can not bite, I scorn thy kind,
That which I write, I read, and both are true,
I dare not, nor I will not tell what will ensue.
My hope is good that we shall happy be,
Hopeless our foes, they fear, we still secure:
We peace, they war: Ye endless peace shall see,
We plenty have, they poverty endure,
Religion we sincere, but they impure.
They living seem to dye, we dying gain
To live with Saints in Paradisus plain.
What said the learned, those that learning love,
If causes perish, then effects decay,
Pray for the cause, yea, pray to God above
That he may long the Albion Scepter sway,
Who shinde like Sol in our Cimmerian day.
Live, and live long, great King, live many days,
Use that fair Theme, Be as thou art always.
FINIS.
TO THE WORTHY AND Honorable Gentleman Sir Philip Harbert, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Bathe.
THe second time does my unworthy muse
Salute thy mild aspect thrice noble Knight,
Let gracious censure his defects peruse,
Whose Genius waits on thy heroicke spright,
Whose love and life are bent to honor thee:
And whilst breath lasts use both them and me.
These Poems which my infant labors send
As messengers of duty to thine ears,
Are of small value, but if nature lend
Some perfect days to my unripened years,
My pen shall use a more judicious vain,
And sing thy glory in a higher strain.
Your Honors at command. William Harbert.

TO THE JUDICIOUS Reader.
I Which in bloody wars have sleep'd my pen,
Whose Muse the passing bell of peace did wring,
And how the world did loose a world of men,
Now choose to touch a more concordant string,
My Prince his praise, whose praise I Will ever sing.
It Is no mechanicke hope of hired gain
That moved my mind these labors to sustain.
No, that ignoble baseness I abjure,
It was the love I ever bare the place
Where first I breathed life did me allure,
In pleasant pains for to consume a space,
And her to praise, though with mine own disgrace:
With my disgrace, why? though my verse be ill,
I do not doubt to please the good with will.
To thee Judicious Reader do I send
These fruits of youth, it is thee I hope to please:
If that my muse the ignorant offend,
No lines of mine their fury shall appease,
I set just war before an unjust peace,
I rail not I, though I with Plato say,
To please the wise, must be the wisest way.
THe lotted servant to rhy Infant age,
Thrice glorious issue of a gracious King,
Least that her twelue-monthes fearful tapynage,
Ingratitude suspect to thee should bring,
Me, though unworthy, chose thy praise to sing
Her mourning garments she has cast aside,
And hopes ere long to entertain her Bride.
The Clergy with the Barons borrowed light,
Is now obscured by thy transplendant shine:
The Rochet nor the Border has no right
To rule, but that which does from thee decline,
She joys and glories to be only thine:
She deemes it honor, count it no dispraise
For thee with her to spend thy younger days.
No matchles Machauil, nor Arietine,
Does her plain meaning breast with envy breed,
Her wits do modern seem, and not divine,
Loyal her love though lowly is her weed,
A sympathy there is of word and deed:
Such as these are, in Wales thine eyes shall see,
Thousands that will both live and dye with thee.
O was she ever false, untrue, unkind?
Since her obedience did augment thy style?
Or since the parted Roses were combinde,
Did ever rebels blood her breast defile?
Or did she ever Englands hopes beguile?
Witness the world, and those that live therein,
Her spotless soul did never taste that sin.
Search Truths Records, not times illuding lines,
Then shall thy Princely thoughts and eyes be fed
With the strange wonders of those warlike times,
When thy great Grandsyres made our channels red
With blood of those that on our shoares lay dead.
Teaching great Caesar how to run away,
That never knew to slye before that day.
Ten years did Rome and all the world admire,
For all the world and Rome ten years did fear
The lusture of thy Bekons set on fire,
Great Odonisis King, Character,
Whose endless worth my worthless Muse shall rear
To that bright Sphere where honor does remain,
She loves thee dead, thy life her love did gain.
What honor or what glory did thou win
With the earthes strength to conquer but an I Will,
Master of the worlds mistres, mighty King?
Only this graced the greatness of thy style,
Claudius with blood did not his hands defile.
This triumph Rome did thee as highly grace,
As when by Scipio Affrique conquered was.
How many Legions Caesar did thou send?
How many Consuls did return of thine,
Which sought what others marred, by wars to mend?
How many Emperors Britain did repine,
To see thy honor rise, their praise decline.
Let Tacitus unto the world declare,
No land save Rome might with this land compare.
I know young Prince, and am agreeu'd to see
The leeuy'd looks of squint-cyde Theonyn:
Who says this sault is proper unto me,
To judge all others base our selves divine,
No envious Momist it is no fault of mine:
That seem are so, I must confess it is true,
All are not bad of us, nor good of you.
The mellow fields have tares as well as corn,
And thistles grow amidst the greenest grass:
An Anacharse in Tartary was borne,
Virtue and vice do meet in every place,
Clodius in Rome as well as Milo was.
Both good and bad in every land we see,
And so are you, if of a land ye be.
Curb the malignant pride of enuies rage,
And check the stubborn stomachs of disdain,
These penny Poets of our brazen stage
Which always wish, O let them wish in vain,
With Rossius gate thy government to stain,
Make them more mild, or be thou more austere,
It Is veretue, unto vice to be severe.
I speak not this unto the learned wise,
For them I love, because the truth they love:
It Is the bleard judgment of seditious eyes,
That does my muse and my affection move,
A most unwilling Satirist to prove:
Nature has made me mild, but these hard men
Turned my soft quill into a brazen pen.
Play not the Satyr peace affecting muse,
I doubt not but their conscience will provoke
These Lucilists their follies to refuse,
And make them soft, though they were hard as oak,
Conscience makes bad men good, so wise men spoke
I leave them to their spurs, my muse shall fly
Unto that Sphere where envy dares not prye.
Unto that Sphere whose circuit does contain
The never spotted essence of his soul,
Whose sacred intellect no worldly stain
Could with desires rebelling aid control:
This gilded Sphere is like a golden boule,
Which many lesser mazers does contain,
So many virtues in this one do reign.
Why parriall nature stepdame to my birth,
Ye mixed elements affections slaves,
Why did ye frame this vessel but of earth?
An equal matter to the dead men's graves,
And joined thereto a spirt like the waves:
Low as the earth although my Genius be,
Yet does it touch sky threatening Majesty.
O were my wit but equal to my will,
Were I as wise as I am ignorant,
Here were a place that would deserve my skill,
Had I as great experience as I want,
Then would I in a book of Adamant,
And Ink compoz'd by water made of gold,
With pens of Diamond thy praise unfold.
Let Justice rule the organ of thy speech,
And Clemency adorn thy Princely browe:
Unto thine ears long absent patience teach,
By these which good men wish, let all men know,
None but thy self, thy self can overthrow.
Let pity check the rod when we offend,
That makes the good more good, the bad to mend.
I witness call the seven hilled Queen,
How we obeyed, when Laws obeyed were:
And shall not we be now as we have been?
Fear made us then unnatural bondage bear,
We now securely live, and cannot fear.
Doubt not thereof, Cornelius Tanitus in the life of Agrippa.
but come experience have,
We love to serve, but loathe the name of slave.
Our gazing expectation longes to see
The true admired Image of thy Sire:
Which Nature has so rightly grau'd in thee:
As Physic causes seemed, they did conspire
To shape the like to him whom all admire.
So Sions sacred singer David says,
Good trees bring forth good fruit, good fruit always.
Do not sweet Sallets spring from soundest seed?
And is not man like God, which man did make?
Can bad effects from causes good proceed?
Do we see fruit on any withered stake?
Or do we see in sea a bush or brake?
How can thou then not good and perfect be,
That were engraft on such a goodly tree?
FINIS.

