A SERMON PREACHED IN the City of Glasco in Scotland, on the Tenth day of
June, 1610. At the holding of a general Assembly there. By CHRISTOPHER
HAMPTON, Doctor in Divinity, and Chaplain to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Henry Fetherstone, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Rose. 1611.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND RENOWned Prince, JAMES, by the grace of God King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland: Defender of the faith, etc.
MOST gracious Sovereign, I have presumed to offer this Copy of my Sermon to
your Majesty, as an accomptant for that which I did in your service. Not for
any doubt I have of the Serenitie of your alowance: but to convince the
calumniations of a tragical trifler, so far transported for the loss of his
Helena, that he forgets all duties, becomes a reuiler of the Prince of the
people, a false accuser of the brethren, and an inhumane disquieter of a soul
that lives with God. Tantaene ais coelestibus irae? The brethren to whom he
sends his narration, are Reverend in deed, but so respective of the Churches
tranquillity, that the idle sound of his Trumpet will make no Alarm. Their
consents did run in the action: or if a small number were doubtful for a
while, some persons of Honor, and right good place, are yet alive to testify,
that most of them came willingly at the end of this Sermon; to acknowledge
their satisfaction. Where such independencie is, as he insinuates, it may be
showed fairly and regularly, without his Potlids or staves in corners. But if
our premises have incongruous conclusions: what validity is there in his
conclusions, that have no premises at all? Superbo oculo veritas non videtur,
syncero patet. God open his eyes that he may see the Princely care,
singleness, and zeal of your Royal heart, sparing no charge for settling this
government, which has been most ancient and profitable in the Church: That
he may praise God for the sweetness of your Nature, as his countrymen use to
do: And pray to God for the length of your days, and continuance of your
happy Reign, as all your subjects have just cause to do. So submitting my
poor labors to the censure of your clemency, I will ever rest

Your Majesty's dutiful subject and devoted Chaplain Christopher Hampton.

THE COPY OF A SERMON PREACHED AT GLASCO; IN THE general Assembly, 1610.
PSALM. 122. I rejoiced greatly when they said unto me, we will go into the
house of the Lord.
YOU shall better understand the occasion that induced the Prophet David to
write this Psalm, if you will first remember certain things written of the
Tabernacle, in the Book of Exodus and elsewhere.

It was called, The Tabernacle of the Congregation, because the people did
assemble together at it for the service of God: of Testimony, because it
carried manifest evidences of Gods presence amongst them. It was portable, and
all things belonging to it were so, because the people themselves had then no
settled place of abode, but wandered like pilgrims in the wilderness by the space
of forty years.

And some whiles after they came into the Land of Promise, it was carried from
place to place: being first pitched in Gilgall, Iosu* 4. afterward in Silo,
Iosu. 18. From thence the Arc was brought into the camp of the Israelites, 1 Samuel 4. It was taken by the Philistimes, sent back to Bethshemesh; and last of
all, placed in Kiriath-iearim, not in any public seat, but in the house of
Abinadab a private man. So little was the care and respect that Saul had to
Religion, that the Ark of God was neglected, and not sought unto in his days.
1 Chronicles. 13.3.

But good David enlarged it, and with solempnitie of joy brought it to Sion his
own City. Where first he put it within a tent or Tabernacle. For albeit God
had foretold that he would not always wander too and fro, but would find out
a place of rest, where his Sanctuary should abide: that place being not yet
revealed to David, he provided curtains and a tent, whereunto it had been
wonted almost a thousand years.

But when he understood that the Lord had chosen the hill of Sion to be an
habitation for himself, that there should be his rest for ever: and that the
people with unanimity did willingly entertain the exercises of Religion in
the same place. As he was abashed to dwell in a house of Cedar, and to leave
the Ark of God under Curtains, and thereupon resolved to build an house for
God, till the charge thereof was committed over to Solomon his Son: so in
testification of his own gladness, that Religion should now grow to a settled
certainty, he conceived and writ this Psalm.

Thus much of the occasion. which gives us instruction; namely that the
supreme power and authority of settling Religion; and the oeconomie or
disposition of the ceremonies thereof belongs to the King. David performed
both most happily, without controulement: and that could not have wanted here,
more then it did in his fair purpose of building the Temple, if the bounds of
his vocation had been exceeded in this, as they were in that.

God requires double service from Kings: one is of obedience, as they be men:
the other of provision, by reason of their office, and as they are Kings:
therein they must serve God extraordinarily above all other men, by making holy
Laws, not for the civil state of their Kingdoms alone, but in matters also
concerning divine Religion, and government of the Church. If this were not an
incident of the Royal office, the holy Ghost would not have attributed the
deformities of Religion, and mis-gouernment of the Church to the want of a
King. It is an usual acclamation in the Book of Judges, and the ordinary
censure of the holy Ghost in those cases, Then there was no King in Israel. But
how should the want of a King occasion disorder in religion, if the rectifying
of such things were not within his verge and charge?

David here held it a part of his duty, so did Solomon his Son after him:
and (least any should imagine that these two were privileged for those
affairs by particular warrant,) so did Asa: so did Ichosaphat: so did
Ezechias: so did Josias, as appears in the Books of Kings and Chronicles: so
did Constantine the first Christian Emperor: so did Theodosius: so did
Gratian: so did Justinian: so did Charles the great, as the Ecclesiastical
Stories testify: so Eleutherius a Bishop of Rome advised Lucius to do, that
was King of Britain about 150. years after Christ, and gives this reason of
his advise; Quia Vicarius Dei estis in vestro regno: you (says the Bishop of
Rome unto the King) may make Laws for religion, because you are Gods
Lieutenant, Vicar, and Deputy within your own Kingdom: so the municipal
Laws of our kingdom intends: for they account not the Prince a mere Civil
or Ecclesiastical person, as they do others, but mixed: by reason of the power
that he has in both.

So Paul determines of this point for the new Testament, when he wills
prayers to be made for Kings and men in authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And what means can we have
from Kings for godliness and honesty? none verily but by their authority and
power, whereby as Guardians of both Tables of the Law of God, they make Edicts
for observation of the one and other.

Now to the Psalm, which consists of three parts: the first expresses
David's joy: the second contains the causes thereof: the third has a praise
of Jerusalem, and a prayer for the same; my purpose is to treat of the two
former.

1 Part.
David's joy teaches us that Gods children be not Stoiks: a kind of
Philosophers that desired to be without affections. And further it informs
us, that godliness stands not in solemn or sour looks. The most godly
have their affections: God planted them in man, when he stood in perfect
integrity unstained with sin. And Christ himself was not without them.

Then it is no part of holiness to shake off all affections: but to subdew and
temper the heat of them, when they are blown with the bellows of
concupiscence, that no flame be kindled against God, against our neighbors,
against our selves, against our own salvation: this is a special kind of
godliness, of piety, of holiness, of Christianity.

Take away sorrow in afflictions, and all chastisement of discipline shall
prove vain. Where will that godly sorrow be that works repentance not to be
repented of? Take away joy in prosperity, and no place will be left for
thanksgiving. Take away both, and the Apostles rule must cease, rejoice with
them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

Seeing then the affection of Joy is natural, planted in our hearts by the
Creator, of great use and necessity for performance of many good offices, the
conclusion follows, that it cannot be but lawful. Yet the corruption of our
nature does pervert many things that be good and lawful, and by our abuse we
make them evil and unlawful. So we do in this particular affection, when we
study, when we spend our thoughts and time in chearing up our own hearts,
without regard of our sins, without regard of the afflictions of Joseph,
without all feeling and fear of Gods judgments. In like sort a great number
pervert and change the nature of this affection, when they set their whole joy
and delight in circumuenting their brethren: others when they wallow in the
mire of their own filthiness and sensuality: others in heaps of their
riches with the fool in the Gospel: in their surfets, drunkenness, and
excessive riot, with the rich Glutton: in the venime and poison of their
slanderous tongues, with David's Tyrant. Psalm. 52. All these and such like, are
glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in the worst things: therefore we
will call their joy carnal. Christ pronounces a woe to them; Woe unto you
that laugh now, for you shall weep: You pass your days in ioylities, and in
a moment you shall go down into hell. Job. 20. Momentaneum est quod delectat,
aeternum vero quod cruciat. O remember that your pleasures are but transitory,
and your torments everlasting.

There is another kind of joy, called Spiritual, because it proceeds from
the holy Ghost, and is reckoned amongst the fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5. It is
promised to the faithful, Esaias 35. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and mourning shall fly away. The Apostles felt the fruit hereof, when
they departed from the Council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer rebuke for his name. The like comfort befell those Saints, that the
Apostle speaks to, ye suffered with joy* the spoiling of your goods, knowing
in your selves how that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.
Hebr. 10.

Of this sort was David's joy here, as by the causes thereof shall appear.

2 Part.
The first cause of his Joy was, the readiness, the alacrity and
cheerfulness that he observed in the people, stirring up one another, with a
sweet correspondencie or consent, and encouraging themselves with mutual
exhortations, to go into the house of the Lord. This good Prince knowing the
manifold graces of God that be dispensed in the Church, rejoices in spirit and
heart to see his people inflamed with a desire of that place where they might
enjoy them all.

By this example he does teach and admonish us to conceive double joy when God
by his holy spirit does not only frame every one of us to the obedience of his
word, but brings others also with us into the same obedience, that we may
all hold a kind of harmony and fellowship in faith. Therefore if we will be
like David, we must joy, we must take a delight and pleasure in the piety of
our brethren: and as every one is first called, so to labor and stir up
others to the like vocation. We ought to do it, first in respect of Gods
glory, which we are commanded to advance. And if God be to be glorified in all
things of us that are created for no other purpose: How careful should we be
to seek his glory in the salvation of mankind, the most precious thing in the
world, if you value it by the price? Or if the friends of the woman did rejoice
with her, when she found her groat, how much more worthily may we triumph in
an holy and spiritual kind of joy at the finding of that precious groat which
carries the stamp and Image of our heavenly King. Again, this care is
recommended unto us in that charity which we are commanded to yield unto our
brethren. That charging us with a special care of their temporal lives, their
name, and goods, does impose a more holy care for their religion, faith,
souls, salvation, and all things thereto belonging. Therefore I make that
anther note out of this place and example, that we ought to call upon our
brethren, and to exhort one another to the exercises of religion.

Despise not this example, but imagine that these words be now no more the
speech of the Israelites encouraging one another, but of the holy Ghost,
rowsing us all to the like endeavor. We will go into the house of the Lord.

The benefits that God dispenses in his house are of such consequence that
they may well breed in every man a love and liking of the Church.

Whether you look to the Tabernacle, the Temple, or the Church, God promises
his presence and propitiation to every one of them particularly. For the
Tabernacle, he says, Exodus 25. They shall make me a sanctuary, and I will
dwell in the midst of them.

Of the Temple, 1 Kings 9. I have heard thy prayer and supplication that thou
have made before me. I have hallowed this house, and my eyes, and my ears,
and heart shall be there perpetually.

Of the Church, where two or three he gathered together in my name, I am in the
midst of them.

Now where God is present and ready to help, what good thing can be, that is
not there to be found? Seeing he is the fountain of all goodness, no good
thing can be lacking where he dwells. There is peace, joy, salvation,
comfort, and happiness.

On the other side, where God is not present, no mischief is wanting: nor
anguish, nor affliction, nor heaviness, nor fear, nor the worm that dies
not, nor the fire that cannot be quenched. How miserably was Saul distressed
when God left him? 1 Samuel 18. even so are the godly, as often as they are
bereaved of of the Tabernacle, of the Temple, of the Church: because they want
Gods presence, they think themselves to be in a kind of hell. Woe is me that
I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation amongst the
tents of Kedar.

Besides Gods presence in the Church we have Christ there also our Mediator.
There he exercises the office of his headship: there he governs, guides,
quickneth, and nourishes his members, and as a true head, communicates his
own liuelihood, and happiness with them. Furthermore in the Church the holy
Ghost is inspired by the distribution and influence of his graces upon the
faithful. Last of all, in the Church and holy assemblies, the power of Gods
word and Sacraments is most effectual.

And if the Queen of Saba did account them happy which attended King Solomon,
to hear his wisdom: how much greater is their happiness, that attend the
places where they hear wisdom, not of man, but the heavenly wisdom of
Almighty God sounding effectually in his word?

If we seek our own ease, we need not to go far for it, as the Jews did to
Jerusalem: it is brought home to our doors; every man may talk of it with his
neighbor under his Vine and fig tree. If we look for profit: it is
godliness only that has promises of this life, and of the world to come.

What would you have, that is not in it? Pleasure? O taste and see how sweet
and gracious the Lord is. The testimonies of the Lord are right, and rejoice
the heart: more to be desired then Gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also
then honey and the honey comb.

If the pleasure that comes out of the Word be inestimable: such as eye has
not seen, ear has not heard, and never entered into the heart of man. If
godliness be great riches* that precious pearl which is to be purchased of wise
Merchants with the loss of all we have. If nothing be more easy for us then
to hear the word of God, and to feed our souls, at the Lords sacred Table.
If this be that one thing that our Savior Christ says is necessary: then I
beseech you by the mercifulness of God, and in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
that ye come to it henceforth with more preparation and diligence; hear it
with more heed and attention; and practice it with more zeal and obedience,
then you have done formerly. And God the father of lights, from whom every good
and perfect gift comes, bless us all with the grace of his holy spirit, that
we may so do indeed.

These Jewels and treasures, which cannot be found out of the casquet of the
Church, may kindle a burning flame of love and affection to it: but the
commandment of GOD does increase it yet further. Leu. 17.5. The children of
Israel shall bring their offerings (which they would offer abroad in the fields)
and present them at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, and he
that fails herein, that man shall be cut off from his people. The equity of
this law is great, and remains still: viz. that nothing be attempted in the
worship of God without special direction, and warrant of his word Which
equity in this particular of bringing their offerings to the door of the
Tabernacle, is grounded upon two reasons, First, that the Ministers of the
Altar might thereby have a due proportion of maintenance. Secondly, that by
these public assemblies the purity of doctrine might be kept inviolate. As
for the first, there is an honor due unto the Ministers for their
intertainment. Who goes a warfare of the own cost? Who planteth a Vineyard
and eats not so the fruit thereof? Who feeds a flock, and eats not of
his milk of the flock?

That which was commanded in the Law to be given, was the Tenth part of all
their increase: which being once sequestered from private uses, and consecrated
to the worship of God, may not, for any thing I see, be altered. For I take
Tithes to be due to the Ministers of the Word by the laws of God and Nature: a
matter that will be thought hard to prove. Yet first understand the error of
those that suppose Tithes to have drawn their original from the Leuiticall
Law: and that being abrogated, they imagine Tithes also to cease, or at least
to remain by positive law alone. Behold a double misconceit: First, Tithes
were paid amongst Gods people long before any Law was given. As we read of
Abraham, Genesis 14. he gave unto Melchisedech the tenth of all his spoils. And
Jacob vowed in Bethel, that he would give God the Tithe of all he had. Genesis 28.

Again, in case the original of Tithes had been by the Leuiticall Law: yet
Tithes need not cease, as soon as that was abrogated. I hold this for a rule,
that those Laws are perpetual, which have a perpetual cause. But the Law of
Tithes has a perpetual cause, namely, the entertainment and maintenance of
the service of God: Therefore the Law of Tithes is perpetual. Consider again
what Abraham did? he gave the tenth of all things. To whom? To Melchisedech the
Priest of the high God. When? Surely 400. years before GOD gave any Law for
Tithes. Whereupon I do infer that this Law of Tithes was graven in the heart
of man before it was written in Tables: And so consequently it was the Law of
Nature. Else how came it to pass, that Jacob did vow, and Abraham did pay
nothing but Tithes? What should we think? That Tithes were paid by Abraham,
and vowed by Jacob at all adventure? And so they stumbled by chance upon that
which God afterward established by Law? No, no: these Patriarchs (though they
were reverend and holy men) gave God no precedent to make his Law by: But God
by a secret instinct moved these holy men to do those things before Law, which
afterward he established for Law. When the Gentiles having no Law, yet by
nature do the works of the Law, are they not (says the Apostle) a Law to
themselves? And why? because they show the work of the Law written in their
hearts. After this sort he moved Judah to give sentence against whoredom,
before any Law was written to punish it. So he moved Noah to condemn Cham for
his irreverent behavior, before the commandment was given to honor father or
mother. So he moved Jacob to detest theft, and to challenge Laban for his
wrongful imputation, before the Law had said, thou shall not steal. And even
thus he moved Abraham to pay Tithes to Melchisedech the Priest of the high God,
before the Law was ordained to pay Tithes. And the Law ye know ordained Tithes
to be paid to the children of Levy: But Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedech,
whose Priesthood was of another order, then the children of Levy were: to give
us to understand, that Tithes were due to all Priests, whether they were under
the Law, before the Law, or after the Law.

Here me thinks, I hear some ask, how it happened then, that Christ, that the
Apostles of Christ, made no express mention of Tithes to be paid in the new
Testament?

The answer is easy, that whilst Christ lived, the Priesthood of the Law was
not abrogated. And after it continued some space in the Apostles time, until
the dissolution of that commonwealth: that the ceremonies ordained of God
himself, might be honorably buried. During which time, it was unseasonable for
Christ or his Apostles, to snatch Tithes unto themselves, which by Law were yet
settled in the Levites. But after that legal Priesthood was abolished, then to
whom Tithes belonged, Christ himself declares, not in words but by his fact
and deed. Upon which I build the foundation of my argument, thus:

That which Christ received in right of his Priesthood of the new Testament, is
due to all the Ministers that succeed him in the same. But Christ received
Tithes in right of his Priesthood of the new Testament: Tithes therefore are
due to all the Ministers of the same. The assumption is proved in the 7. Chap.
to the Hebr. Ver. 9. And to say as the thing is, Levy also which receives
Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham: For he was yet in the loins of his father
Abraham when Melchisedech met him. The Apostles purpose in that place is to
prove the Priesthood of Christ greater then the Priesthood of Aaron. He proves
it by two reasons. 1. The less is blessed of the greater. Christ in
Melchisedech blessed Abraham and Levy. Therefore Abraham and Levy are less
then Christ.

His second reason is drawn from the matter that I have in hand. The less
pays Tithe unto the greater. Abraham the father of Levy paid Tithes to
Christ in Melchisedech. Therefore Levy did acknowledge Christ to be greater
Priest. How? because Levy paid Tithes that were due to the Priest, into the
hand of Melchisedech the figure of Christ.

Here two things are remarkable: First, that Tithes were perpetually allotted
to the Priest, else the Apostles argument had carried no great soliditie.

Secondly, that Melchisedech neither gives the blessing, nor receives Tithes
in his own name: but in the person and right of Christ. So as that which
Melchisedech did in figure, was in deed and truth done by Christ. It was Christ
that gave the blessing unto Abraham, as we may see by the efficacy thereof.
It was Christ that received Tithes, as the Apostle does conclude; not
wrongfully. He commanded in particular terms to give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's: In general doctrine, to yield every man his own. Therefore
no man can well imagine that he would forestall, or intercept any others due,
but received his own. By what right? Sure, not in the right of his Godhead,
whereby the supreme dominion of all things rests in him. But by the title
and in the right of his Priesthood: for so the Apostle argues.

You that be hearers may make this use of my speech, that seeing Tithes were
paid by Abraham, vowed by Jacob, prescribed by the instinct of nature, before
the Law: allotted to the Priests under the Law: continued since the Law: seeing
the Church has been in just and good possession of them above 4000 years:
seeing they were dedicated to the service of God: seeing they were devoted unto
God: And the title or right, that man had before donation: does by the act, and
from any such time of donation, remain the proper possession of God, until
the worlds end, unless himself renounce, or relinquish it. Yield your Tithes
willingly, because you cannot hold them from your Ministers without impiety.
In such cases the Lord loves a cheerful giver: Et nos libenter accipimus
beneficium quod profit danti. Nobis quidem in hoc benefacitis, sed vobis
melius. Beatius est dare, quam accipere.

Besides the entertainment of Ministers, there is another reason for public
assemblies: that the purity of sincere Doctrine might be kept inviolable by
that means from the corruption of Gentilitie, the poison of Heresy, and the
rage of Schism: whilst the worship of God is not left arbitrarie, or
voluntary, but has a prescript form from whence it is unlawful to decline.
For that has been, and always will be dangerous.

It is noted for a special blemish and stain amongst the Israelites in the
book of Judges; That every one did what he thought good in his own eyes,
without regard of law, of order, of uniformity in Church or commonwealth.

And where laws either be not at all, or want due execution: that our wavering
minds be not held in a conformity: It is the easiest thing in the world, for
man vain and curious by nature, and delighted with change, to fall into
confusion and gross idolatry.

Let Jeroboam be the example hereof, who had no sooner withdrawn his followers
from those assemblies that were appointed by better authority, but
straight-waies both himself fell into Schism, and to Idolatry: and wrapped
all his adherents in the like offenses. So the Scripture marks him out every
where. Jeroboam that made Israel to sin.

Let Jeroboam carry this mark alone, and let it never be found or felt in this
Church. For if the public ministry be defaced by any, not maintained by
others, but neglected: deceivers will creep into private families, and lead
captive simple women (and men too) laden with sins, and led with diverse
lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of truth. Not
unlike to mothers which bring forth Monsters, which they hide in corners and
secret places, shaming to show them openly, and yet privily do feed and
nourish them. Be^^^rd. in Can^. ser. 65
Vbi Apostolica forma and vita quam iactatis? illi clamant, vos susurratis:
illi in publico, vos in angulo: illi vt nubes volant, vos in tenebris, at
subterraneis domibus delitescitis: Quidsimile illis in vobis ostenditis? Thus
has been hatched elsewhere, the heresies of Papists, the frensies of
Anabaptists, the schisms of rash brethren, and the profane impieties of
Atheists, of ill eggs, worse chickens.

The remedy for these inconveniences is, to cut off arbitrarie worship, to
restrain and suppress whispering or corner divinity. Therefore to the intent
we may not have, here is Christ, or there is Christ, we must all join together
in cherishing, intertaining, and frequenting one public ministry, one
prescript and settled form of prayers and Ecclesiastical rites. This is not
mine own conceit, I learned it from Mr. Calvin: Epist. ad protect. Angl. 87.
page 69.
Concerning the form of prayer (says he) and Ecclesiastical rites, I do
very well like that they should be certain in a prescript order, and that the
Pastors be not sufferd to swerue from it: as well for the help of the simple, as
also that a consent of all Churches may be held; and lastly, to prevent the
rashness of those that affect novelties.

The Ministry was ordained for this end, as the Apostle does teach us, Ephesians.
4.14. that we should no more waver like Children and be carried too and fro
with every blast of doctrine: whereby it appears that the spirit of God has
fastened us to the public ministry, the better to hold us in a constant love
of the truth. And therefore addressing our selves unto it, let us also rejoice
to go into the house of the Lord.

A matter (as some will object) easy to be said and done amongst the
Israelites, because, first, the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple, were
visible and known to be destinated to the worship of God. Now the house of God
is not so conspicuous nor commonly known: doubts and questions are still moved
which is the Church.

That these allay no part of your forwardness: hear I beseech you how they
may be cleared: and hear it not from me, but from S. Augustine: Inter nos and
Donatist as quaestio est, vbi sit Ecclesia? quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis
nostris eam quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri Jesus Christi?
Puto quod in illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui veritas est, and
optime nouit corpus suum. Nouit enim Dominus qui sunt sui. Nothing is sought
for with more endeavor then the Church, and nothing mistaken with greater error.
The cause is apparent, for that we seek it in the marks that we frame of it
to our selves, and not in the notes that Christ has given us to know it by.
Men would have the Church to be conspicuous and visible, but we cannot make
that a mark of the Church, unless we infringe an article of our Faith: I
believe the Catholic Faith. When I see a thing, there needs no faith for it:
Faith in the Apostles doctrine is of things invisible, that cannot be seen.

Succession is as much urged for knowledge of the Church: and it is plain
enough that the ancient fathers did usually allege their continued succession
of Bishops against Heretics: But the principal point of their allegation
consisted in the succession, not of place or person, but of doctrine, which the
good Bishops had kept in a long descent from the Apostles times. Tertul. de.
praescript.
Percurre Ecclesias apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum praesidentur,
sonantes vocem, and representantes faciem vniuscuiusque.

Amplitude and diffusion is made another mark of the Church: and that had
been a very deceivable cognizance, when the Arrian heresy ouerswayed all.
But may it not now be returned in prejudice of those that allege it? who sees
not the fall of great Babylon, and the waine or abatement of the Bishop of Rome
his Hierarchy.

Last of all, Antiquity is brought for a note of the Church: and if that were
a certain or perpetual evidence, then was the Church ancient as soon a^ it
began. Augustine found the uncertainty and invaliditie of these marks that
men devise, and says, De vnitat. ecclesiae cap. 3
nolo humanis documentis sed diuinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari The
marks that Christ has given to the Church will be surer: first, because he is
truth: secondly, because he knows his own body best; this is a firm
Maxim, that the Lord knows who are his. Mat. 28. when he sent his Apostles
to subdue the world by gathering him a Church, three things were given them in
charge: first, that they should preach the Gospel unto every creature:
secondly, that they should baptize them, in the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: thirdly, that they should teach those that believed and were
baptized, to observe all that he had commanded. Behold the things that the
Master of the house commanded to be in his house: are not they true marks of
the house? first, the sincere doctrine of the Gospel: secondly, the right
administration of the Sacraments: thirdly, that form of discipline (I mean
not any certain manner, for that was never yet proved) which may bring
obedience to Christ's commandments: let them that unchurch us so easily at
their pleasures, join issue with us upon these marks, and they shall see that
we have no cause through the grace of God to shun the trial.

The Church of Rome has the Word of God indeed contained in their Bibles, we
deny it not: but as Hierome says of certain Heretics, In 1. cap. Esa.
so we say of it; Heretics corrupt the truth of the Gospel with their false
constructions: and are like our worst kind of brewers, that make wine water,
whereas clean contrary, our Savior turned water into wine: so they have the
gospel, but not truly expounded, nor taught sincerely.

First, because they refer not their constructions to the glory of God,
according to the rule of our Savior, qui quaerit gloriam meam verax est: but
the church of Rome attributing salvation to their own merits, advancing
free will, extenuating original sin, etc. seek not the glory of God, but
their own gain: therefore they are not true.

There is another reason of their untrue constructions: because they interpret
not the Scripture according to the proportion of faith, as Paul wills, Romans
12 Let him that prophesies do it according to the proportion of faith. As all
gold was not holy, but that only which belonged to the temple: so every sense
that is without compass of Scripture, though it shine and glister with never
so much sharpnes of wit, yet is it not holy. By the same spirit that the
Scriptures were written, by the same they must be interpreted and understood:
this is the golden rule to know truth from error; Scripture must be interpreted
by Scripture; not always literally, not always allegorically, not always
anagogically, not always tropologically; but the darker places by those that
be more plain or easy. And as Tertul writes, oportet secundum plura
intelligi pauciora: Contra Praxeam.
and ne vnus sermo multa alia subuertat: secundu^ omnia, potius quam aduersus
omnia intelligendus erit.

Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church: if we look to the
proportion of faith, Christ undoubtedly is that precious rock, not Peter, as
they would have it: for the Church cannot be built but by faith, and that may
not rest upon Peter, or any other creature. Again, Unto thee will I give the
Keys of the kingdom of heaven: hereupon they would persuade the world, that
the power of their Keys which is Ecclesiastical, should lock up and let
loose the power of the sword, and civil Magistrate. If you will judge hereof
by the Analogy of faith, you shall see the bounds and limits of both powers.
Paul subiecteth every soul to the Civil power, and excepteth none. Etiamsi
sis Apostolus, though thou be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or
whatsoever else thou be, thou must be subject to the civil power. For this
subjection (says Chrysostom) is no hinderance to godliness. Chrisost. in
Epist. ad Romans hom. 23.
The Apostle persuades this subjection, not for humility, or by way of
courtesy, but inioynes it of necessity; We must needs be subject, idque
propter conscientiam: and that which is due of conscience, is so necessary to
be done that it cannot be omitted without heinous sin. Necessity and
Conscience, be strong obligations for civil obedience.

Give me leave on the other side to let you see the strength and sinews of
Ecclesiastical power. Then look upon the decrees of the Church, single as
they are in themselves, and severed from the Princes countenance. The decree
that the Gentiles should abstain from things offered unto Idols, is of that
nature, Act. 15. And is it not limited by the Apostle of the Gentiles? 1 Cor.
10. Whatsoever is sold in the shambl^s, eat, and ask no question for
conscience sake: But if any man say unto you, this is sacrificed unto Idols,
eat it not, because of him that showed it, and for conscience: the conscience
I say, not thine but of the other.

Compare Paul, with Paul: power, with power: bond, with bond: and Law, with
Law. Civil authority requires a necessity of obedience: Ecclesiastical,
gives a liberty to the Conscience. The civil Magistrate must be obayed
simply: The Ecclesiastical admits caution, and respect. This binds me only
in case of scandal: the other, as well out of offense, as in offense.

Though I had Gyges ring, and lived without controlement of any eye, yet am I
bound in conscience to obey the positive Laws. I am bound to obey both powers,
but with disparitie: The civil ordinances, for clearing mine own conscience
from sin: and Ecclesiastical decrees, for comeliness, for order, for saving
my brother from stumbling and offense. Judge then whether authority is
greater: the Myter, or the Scepter? Both these offices are now conjoined in
Christ: and is he not greater in his Kingdom? He stands at the right hand of
God as an advocate and Priest: he sits as a King. This puts a Scepter, the
other gives a Censer into his hand. His Priesthood reaches but to the Elect:
his Kingdom judges quick and dead. He is sweet in his Priesthood, but in his
kingdom, high, potent, and magnificall. This is enough for the falsehood of
their constructions.

Touching the Sacraments, which is the second note, the Church of Rome does no
way rightly administer them: save only that it retayneth the essential form
of Baptism. Otherwise they profane it most grossly, in applying it to dead and
senseless things. They mingle it with oil, spettle, and salt, which cannot be
done without sacrilege. is not the element of water, which Christ instituted,
sufficient to represent his precious blood for our regeneration, without these
mixtures?

The other Sacrament, namely the Supper of the Lord: the Church of Rome has
not only defiled, but quite altered, and changed it into a cursed, and an
abominable Idol of their Mass: and so have perverted utterly, and annihilated
Christ's holy institution.

1. For whereas two things be necessary in Sacraments: the sign, and the
thing signified: In this Sacrament they take away the signs for establishing
their transubstantiation.

2. That which should be distributed unto others, they keep only to
themselves, and so make it a private banquet, whereas it should be a common
feast.

3. They keep the Cup from the people, which our Savior commanded to be given
to all.

4. Lastly, in the Lords Supper, he offers himself to us: and they offer him
to GOD the Father: which cannot be done but by his eternal spirit: nor without
his death, that died but once for ever.

Where these things are done; the Essential parts of the Sacrament is not
kept: and therefore no Supper, no Sacrament, but an horrible profanation and
plain sacrilege. Hereby it may appear how unjustly they complain of us for
Apostasy and forsaking of them. Nullus pudor est ad meliora transire. And if a
man do leave and depart from a particular Church in body, and yet forsake not
the Communion and fellowship of the Apostles doctrine, nor the Sacraments
rightly administered, but holds them with all other sincere Churches: he
cannot be Apostata.

Our Rhemish Seminaries, say Luther, Calvin, etc. came out of their Church, not
they out of ours. And that is the Catholic Church which is forsaken. But the
right Apostasy is a falling away from the true Catholic and Apostolic
Church of Christ, and that by reuolting from the Apostles doctrine, and the
communion of the Catholic faith. We departed from them upon such occasion,
and in such sort, as Moses sometimes departed out of Egypt: or S. Augustine
from the Manicheis. De vestris fuimus (says Tertullian) nec mirum, fiunt enim
non nascuntur Christiani.

The Church of Rome is neither Catholic, nor Apostolic: and therefore by
leaving it we incur no Apostacy. Not Catholic because it is particular as
the Church of Alexandria, Milan, Ephesus, etc. The Catholic Church is
universal, and wheresoever the faithful be found. It is not pinned up in one
place, but dispeirced far and near.

Did the Gospel begin at Rome? was it not brought from Jerusalem, first to the
Grecians, and after to the Romans? So then that Church was not the first: and
if there were a Catholic Church before Rome had any Church, I see no cause
but there may be still a Catholic Church without it.

An Apostolic Church it is not, because it rests not upon the doctrine of
the Apostles, but is fallen from it, defending invocation of Saints, that the
Apostles taught not: forbidding marriage against the Apostles Caveat.
Anathematizing the Apostles doctrine of Justification by faith only. Denying
the faith, by advancing of traditions, above the word. And therefore seeing we
departed from that Church, where neither the word of GOD could be purely
taught, the Sacraments administered, nor God rightly worshipped: and have
forsaken that Church that now it is: not that which once it was. The Church of
Rome is rather guilty of Apostasy, then we: because it is fallen away from
them from whom it received the Gospel, Faith, Religion, and their Church. Why
has the City of Rome forsaken her seven hills, whereon that City was once
built: and is now come down to the plain? Happily they will say that their
Conduits and water courses did fail them in those hills, without which they
could not well live. Then let them yield us the like liberty for the waters of
life: that they themselves have taken for their common water. That water of
life began to fail them in the Church of Rome: They had broken all the
Conduits and Pipes: they had stopped up all. Veins, and had mingled the
fountains of water of life with mire and dirt: and so brought in a thirst and
hunger, not of bread and water, but of hearing the word of God. And was it not
then time to leave them?

Let them refuse their Synagogues, forsake their broken Cysternes that will
hold no water: return to that true and ancient faith that was renowned
through the world: and we will give them the right hands of fellowship. With
joy will we join together with them, and go into the house of the Lord.

If they will not: I call heaven and earth to record against them this day:
that they are fallen from the Gospel, from truth, from word, from Sacraments,
from Religion, from the house of God, from God himself. And all these our
Churches study with great endeavor to maintain in their perfect integrity. O
pray, pray, forget not to pray for that most excellent instrument of GOD that
has established these things amongst us by holy Laws, and good authority:
Peace be within his walls, and plentiousnesse within his Palaces. Yea the God
of peace and plenty bless him, for these blessings that he has brought upon
us, a thousand, and ten thousand fold, both here, and in the world to come.

And beloved, cease not to cry out unto God to fill our hearts with praise,
and our mouths with thanksgiving for these inestimable mercies. When Gods
benefits are received with thankfulness and due account, then he does multiply
them exceedingly. Seeing then that all the enemies we have, cannot show one
point of doctrine maintained contrary to the wholesome form set down in the
word, and proportion of faith: seeing they cannot justly reprove our
administration of the Sacraments. Let not these graces of God toward our
Churches be extenuated by scornful reproves, or slanderous Pamphlets: least
there follow questions, whether they be the houses of God, or no? least they be
forsaken by fanaticall and giddie spirits, as if they were the Synagogues of
Satan.

These be the fruits that unadvised whisperings will bring forth: and this use
the enemy of mankind has made of them. They have served him, as a pedagogie,
an A B C, or introduction of Schism, of frenzy, of Anabaptisticall confusion.

Two errors I have observed that are the grounds, and occasions of these
enormities. The first, is an immoderate desire of Christian liberty. The
second, an importunate challenge of equality in government of the Church.

As to the former, many are deceived therein, and deceive others: whilst they
set Christian liberty upon Tenter-hookes, and stretch it further then the
nature thereof will bear: seeking not only a liberty of mind and conscience
in things indifferent, but a freedom also in their actions. Christian liberty
has place in mind and conscience alone: It contenteth it self if there be no
burden of merit, of justification, of holiness, or pleasing God urged upon
the conscience: that is the seat of Jesus Christ, and if that be left free
unto him, Christian liberty is safe and sound. It respects nothing but that
which is between God and thee. And is not this a goodly liberty, when we know
that such and such things do neither justify nor condemn us before God? If
this content you not, unless you may have freedom also in your actions to do
what you will: you have left Christian liberty, which reaches not to our
actions, and respects not that which is between thee, and thy neighbor: and
thou act come to a licentious immunitie.

This difference being observed, may appease many controversies about
indifferent things. Wherein if brethren will hold but that moderation which
true Divinity teaches, and retain this freedom, our Christian liberty in
their consciences, which is not infringed; and conform their actions, that
they do not overthwart good order, to the disturbance of the Church, and
offense of the Magistrate: How joyfully might we all go up into the house of
the Lord, and sing in the tune of Angels. Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum
habitare fratres in vnum?

For as much therefore as God has warranted the Magistrates authority in
these cases, and required our obeience: let us no more think how to find out
pretenses. Studia abeunt in mores. But if there be any consolation in Christ,
any comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, any compassion and mercy,
fulfill this joy: that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord and judgment, that nothing be done through contention, or vain glory,
but that in meekness of mind every one esteem other better then himself.
That we may all with one way, and one heart, go up into the house of the Lord.

As for equality, which is the other error: when one advised Lycurgus, to
establish it amongst the Lacedaemonians, that so the least and meanest might
bear like sway with the greatest: The wise man answered: that he which called
for it should begin it first at home in his own house. And if all men be
careful to exclude paritie out of their private families: if men experienced
in policy and government, will not admit it into the commonwealth, because
that cannot be preserved with equality, but by authority and rule: Why are
not men as sensible of the house of God, as of their own houses? or why should
equality, that is found intolerable in all other societies, be obtruded only
to the Church? Because distinctions and inequality of Pastors cannot be proved
by Scripture. That is not so. There were diverse Pastors under the Law: but they
were not equal. For there was one high Priest, as it were a transcendent above
them all. But his eminency was to express the soueraignetie of Jesus Christ:
Then there were Captains of every family of the Levites: and that proves an
inequality. Last of all, there were two joined with the high Priest, which are
called rulers of the house of God, 1 Chro. 24.5.

In the new Testament there was distinction and inequality between the
Apostles themselves, or else Paul would never have called Peter and James, and
John, chief and pillars of the Apostles. There was distinction and inequality
between the twelve Apostles, and the seauentie Disciples. We read of many
Pastors at Ephesus, Act. 20. And in the Revelation John writes to the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, which euicteth necessarily, that there was one greater
then the rest Par in parem non habet imperium. But Paul gave Timothy
authority over Pastors: Therefore he ordained and intended an inequality,
and no paritie amongst the Pastors of the Church. The reasons of those that
call for equality in the Ministers, are not made to build up, and they are too
weak to pull down.

Abraham says gravely unto Lot: Let there be no contention between me and
thee; for we are brethren* that is one reason. Again, the Cananite and the
Pherizite are yet in the Land: another motive. In which case who knows not,
that the adversaries of our doctrine, will sooner be overcome with united then
distracted forces? and so we that fight the Lords battles cannot disioyne our
selves without preuarication and booty. Away then with all singularity and
admiring of our own opinions. Know ye not that it is the seminary of inward
contention? the Spirit of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets. Let us
have but one heart, and one way, that we may fill the Lords house with
garlands of victories: that we may beat our adversaries from humane merits,
and bring them to the divine mercies: from free will, and the possibilities of
Nature, to the grace of God: from traditions, to the written Word: from
elauation, adoration, circumgestation, transubstantiation of the Sacrament, to
the commemoration of Christ's death, and a sweet fruition thereof by faith. From
their Hierarchy and visible Monarchy, to the headship of our Lord Jesus
Christ. From superstition, to the true worship of GOD.

O how glorious are these holy triumphs? how instantly do they call upon us to
combine our selves together, that the conversion and offering up of the Papists
may be acceptable and sanctified. I will not dismiss you of the Laity without
some short exhortation to peace. The very name of peace is a sweet word, but
the work is sweeter. I cannot always speak of it: But that which I cannot
always speak of, that you may keep always. As for example. He that praises
God, with his tongue cannot do it ever: but he that praises God with his life
and conversation, may ever do it. Even so do I commend the words and works of
peace unto you. Or if you think me unworthy to commend such a divine
blessing: look if it be not the word of our great and worthiest King. He
commands it unto us from the Author of peace. Beati pacifici. Not pacidici,
but pacifici. Blessed are, not the praisers, but the practisers of peace. Let
the mountains bring peace, and the little hills righteousness unto thy people,
O thou Prince of peace. And so the God of peace that brought again from the
dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of
the everlasting Testament, make you perfect in all good works, workking in you
that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever and ever, Amen.

FJNJS.

