THE EXCOMMVNICATION Published by the L. Archbishop of Dublin Thomas Flemming
alias Barnwell, Friar of the Order of S. Francis, against the Inhabitants of
the Diocese of Dublin, for hearing the Masses of Peter Caddell D. of Divinity,
and Paul Harris Priests, is proved not only injust, but of no validity, and
consequently binding to no obedience.

Jn which Treatise is also discovered that impious plot and policy of the
aforesaid Archbishop and his Friars in supplanting the Pastors and Priests of
the Clergy, thereby to bring all into the hands of the Friars, of whose
disorders and foul abuses (especially in this Kingdom) something is noted.

The second Edition, enlarged.

By me PAUL HARRIS Priest.

JOHN 7. 51. Does our Law condemn a man before he be first heard, and known
what he has done? Printed MDCXXXIII.

To the judicious Reader.
EST tempus cacendi, and tempus loquendi, Eccles. 3. There is a time of
silence, and a time of speaking. Eight months of silence have now passed since
the following Censure was published, in which space as well Priests, as people
have expected a redress of so great wrongs. But since so long a time has not
wrought that effect which was daily looked for, we thought it full time to
expect no further time, but rather to break off so prejudicial a silence, and
better late, then never, to manifest unto the world, as well the insufficiency
of that sentence, as the innocence of the censured, and if it be possible to
undeceive such as are possessed of the contrary. Our delay in this affair (I
confess) has bred us this Inconvenience. That the contrary opinion being so
long sucked in, has so seasoned the Potts, as hardly now will they smell of
any other liquor. Three sorts of Readers (and so the most) I do exclude from
this discourse.

1. First, such as are careless how the matter passes among us. 2. Secondly,
such as are obstinate in the contrary opinion. 3. Thirdly, such as are not
capable of reason when they see it laid down.
Only to the fourth, anll the fewest sort of Readers is this Apology
addressed. (I say) for their only sakes, who are willing to have satisfaction,
and are capable thereof.

If any be offended, That this our Apology or Defense of our Innocence is
published, and made common to many. Let them consider, that so was the
Archbishops Censure: And that to many more, then into whose hands these writings
can come. For we are persuaded, none will take the like pains to publish them
unto hundreds, and thousands!, as the Excommunication was thorough all the
Oratoryes of Dublin, (...) well by the Parish Priests, as so many Orders of
F^iars, yea republished again, and again, from time to time, le^t happily it
might grow out of remembrance with the people.

If any do except, That this our Answer is in the English tongue, Let them
consider, that so was the Censure: They both speak one language. But you will
say, That this is made common both to Catholics, and Protestants, whereas the
Excommunication was only communicated unto Catholics. I say, in this also
they are alike. For as a matter made public among the Protestants, can not be
concealed from the Catholics; no more can any thing published among the
Catholics be kept from the Protestants. Neither can any man of understanding
conceive how it can f^ll out otherwise.

If matters herein laid down be very foul and odi^us against the
Archbishop, and his Friars, and sound very harsh in men's ears; Oh then think
how far worse it was for them to be the Authors thereof: unless we be
arrived at those times of which Cassidorus speaks, or rather prophesies:
That the days shall be, and such times come, as it shallbe a far more odious
and dangerous matter to reprove injustice, and to reprehend vice, then to
commit the same. Experience whereof we have had in our late Appeal. We the
Appellants having received of the injudicious and partial multitude, more
rebuke then they who were the Authors of all those injuries, and greivances, of
which, and of whom, we made complaint unto lawful Superiors. But as the world
commends many whom God condemns, and of the contrary: So I doubt not but many
who are justified upon the benches of the multitude, shall (...) be found in
the Magistrates la^^full Tribunalls.

The thing that we demand is justice, we call for Instice, we cry for Justice,
and with our clamours will we fill both the Heavens, and the ears of all
lawful Superiors on earth; Thoughts have voices sufficient for the Heavens,
words and writings are necessary for the earth; by which if we do not prevail
in our principal intent of attaining Justice, yet at least in opening our
innocence, and venting of our greifes, we shall give s^^e ease unto our minds.
For so says S. Gregory, Si illatas molestias lingua dicat, a conscientia dolor
emanat, vulnera enim clausa plus cruciant. Hom. 6. If the tongue do utter
sustained wrongs, grief passes from the mind. For wounds shut up do more
torment. Let then that text of the Prophet be verified of us. In omnem terram
exivit sonus eorum. etc. Psalm. 18. Their sound is gone forth thorough all the
earth, and their words to the utter most bounds thereof, yea in the name of God
say I Audiat has nostras, cleri, populique querelas,
Et Tagus and Ganges, gens etiam Antipodum.
Let the world witness our complaints, above, and under,
As far as Tagus sands, and Ganges lie asunder.


Here follows the Excommunication, published by the command of Thomas
Flemming, alias Barnwell, L. Archbishop of Dublin, and Friar of the Order of S.
Francis, thorough all the Chappells and Oratoryes of Dublin the 6. of March.
COnsidering the obstinate disobedience and continual insolency, without hope
of amendment, of Paul Harris, (notwithstanding that he has bin born^ withal
this long time past.) As also the like disobedience of Doctor Peter Caddell, to
the great scandal and dis^dification of many Catholics of this Diocese, and
to no small dishonor of the Pastoral function and authority, and to the end
that at length the current of their scandalous proceedings may have a stop, and
not always go forward without correction. After mature consideration of their
proceedings, being thereby forced to perform my duty for the good of the
souls of this my Diocese, I have thought expedient to forbid: and hereby I
do forbid all the Inhabitants of this Diocese, under pain of
Excommunication, ipso facto to be incurred, to be present, or to hear the
Masses of Paul Harris, and of Doctor Peter Cadell, and withal, from the date
of this present I do recall, and take away from them, all power and
Jurisdiction of hearing confessions, or ministering, or doing any act or acts of
the pastoral function, whatsoever, within the district of this Diocese, and
hereby likewise I do annull and make void all absolutions henceforward, by
them given in this Diocese, and do command henceforward all Catholics upon
their perils to take notice of the premises, and strictly to observe the same.

Dated 6. of March, 1631. Friar Thomas Flemming Archbishop of Dublin.

THE EXCOMMVNICATION PVBLISHED BY THE L. ARCHBISHOP OF DVBLIN Thomas Flemming
alias Barnwell, Friar of the Order of S. Francis, against the Inhabitants of
the Diocese of Dublin, for hearing the Masses of Peter Caddell Dr of Divinity,
and Paul Harris Priests, is proved not only injust, but of no validity, and
consequently binding to no obedience.
FIrst then, gentle Reader, give me leave to lay down these few Principles of
the Canon Law, as the grounds of my following Discourse.

I. The first Principle is, That the Censure of Excommunication grounded upon
an intolerable error, is both injust and invalide, and so, obligeing to no
obedience, neither in for o fori, or in foro poli, as much to say, neither in
Law, nor Conscience. Cap. Per tuas de sentent. excom. Glossa ad cap. Licet de
senten. Excom. in Sexto. S^tus in 4. sentent. distinct. 22. q. 1. art. 3.
C^varruvius ad Cap. Alma matter. part. 1.. 8. number. 7. And it is the common
Tenent of all Doctors. II. The second Principle is, That no Excommunication
just and valid can be fulminated but for a mortal sin, the same manifested,
and aforehand forbidden under pain of Excommunication, and so always
accompanied with contumacy. Sot. in 4. distinct. 22. q. 1. art. 2. conclus. 2.
and 4. Vgolinus tab. 1. cap. 17.. 7. number. 6. and 8. and cap. 27. Cap. Nemo
Epis. 11. q. 3. Council. Trident. sess. 25. de Reformatione cap. 3. And it is
the common Tenent of all Doctors. III. The third ground is, That Priests of the
Hierarchy or Clergy, are bound to no further obedience unto their Bishop or
Ordinary, then Canonical. That is, such as the Laws of holy Church prescribe,
and which they promise in their Consecration. vid. Ep. IV. The fourth is, That
in all Legal and Canonical prosequution of cause or crime, the Defendant is
to be called unto his answer, and convicted of what he is accused, before he be
sentenced. Cap. Cum Paulis 191. Vantius de Nullit^ti^us and defectn pro^essus,
number. 13. 14. 23. tom. 4. Clement. pastoralis dear judicanda. Alexauder Concilio
123. L. and si non defendantur. ff. De poenitentia. 1.. finali. ff. in lege
finali.. Illud. C. de Tempore, and in cap. 2. de litis contestatione, lib. 6.
And it has the consent of all Doctors. V. The fifth ground is, That every man
is to be taken, and to be held for a good, a legal and an upright man, till
the contrary be proved against him. Regnla Iuris 8.
These five Principles of the Canon Law, I place as so many lamps, or
lanthernes in the entry of my following Discourse, to enlighten the Reader with
more ease and facility to pass thorough the same. In which Treatise or
Discourse, I intend by Gods assistance to prove, That the aforesaid Censure of
Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell, L. Archbishop of Dublin, and Friar of the Order
of S. Francis, is of the worst rank of Excommunications, and of so defective a
nature, as besides the Injustice thereof, it labors of a mere Nullity or
Invalidity, and consequently can produce no other effect, then neglect, or
contempt.

CAP. I.
The first Argument against the Excommunication.
MY first Reason or Argument by which it is manifest, that the aforesaid
Excommunication is not only injust, but invalid, is, for that it is grounded
upon an intolerable error. But how say you is that proved? Mary as thus. A
sentence published without any cause, or reason, contains an intolerable
error. So Sayr^^ lib. 1. cap. 16, number. 32. Suarez did. 4. sect. 7. number. 31.
Ma^uale pralatorum art. 13. Conclus. 1. Alterius lib. 3. disput. ^. cap. 1.
Bonacina tom. 1. de Censuris disput. 1. q. 1. puncto 10. number, 9. Reginaldus
lib. 9 number. 106. and so commonly.

But such is the aforesaid Censure published without cause or reason, as shall
be proved.

Ergo, it contains an intolerable error.

Now for the Minor of this Syllogism; namely, That the precedent Censure was
published without cause or reason, I thus declare. The cause of the Censure
laid down, as appears by the Tenor thereof, is the insolency and obstinate
disobedience of the two aforenamed Priests, and that without hope of amendment,
to the great disedification of his flock.

To which it is answered by the aforesaid venerable Priests in this their
Apology or defense. That this cause was never proved against them, and
therefore is no cause at all, by that rule of the law, Causa non probam, non
est causa, A cause not proved, is no cause. 24. q. 3. de Illicita. and is
manifest by the light of reason. For they allege that to this day they have
never bin accused, much less convicted of any such disobedience or obstinacy.
Nay they say further, That as yet they never were cited before their Ordinary,
to answer any matter of disobedience in all their lives whatsoever. Now then
forsomuuch as the Canon it self tells us, Quod publicum judicium est
institutum, ut innocentia protegatur, and culpa puniatur 2. q. 1. That public
Judgments are therefore ordained, that Innocence may be protected, and faults
punish^d. And our wise Lawgivers observing, that this end and scope of the law
could not otherwise be attained, but by citing and calling to their answer, the
parties supposed to be delinqu^nt, and admitti^g them to their defense.
Therefore was it ordained by the Canons and laws of holy Church, that even in
summary and most compendious p^oceedings, in which all solemnity of law may be
pretermitted, yet no Bishop or Prelate should presume to sentence any of their
subjects. These or either of these two maine pillars of all legal and
juridical proceeding being neglected; namely, Citation and Conviction, as is
above proved in the fourth Principle. And that in omission of both, or either
of these two essential parts of all lawful process all sentence and
publication of sentence following, is to be held ipso fact, void, and so
Invalid in law, as no appellation from such sentence shall be necessary to any
other court or superior. For says the Canon: Quae contra legem facta ^unt,
pro infectis haberi debent. 25 q. 2. Imperiali. The things that are done
contrary to law, are to be accounted as not done at all. Now then for so much as
both these, namely Citation and Conviction, have b^n omitted by their Ordinary
Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell, L. Archb of Dublin, and Friar of the Order of
S. Francis. Tho setwo reverend Priests do allege, that the sentence of
Excommunication following and fulminated against the Inhabitants of this
Diocese, for hearing their Masses, is utterly void. For which so great a
wrong both to Priest and People, satisfaction of honor and damages, in all
law and conscience is due, they being in possession of a good name, of which
they are not to be deprived, till the contrary be proved against them:
according to that rule of the law, (which I placed in the beginning for my fifth
Principle, and is also the very law of God and Nature:) That every one is to be
held a good and a legal man, till he be convicted of the contrary, And so much
for my first Argument or Reason, manifesting the Injustice and Nullity of the
aforesaid Excommunication.

CAP. II.
The second Argument against the Ex^^mmunication.
MY second Reason manifesting the Nullity and Invalidity of the a^^ said
Excommunication, is: That all Censures of the Ecclesiastical Judge or Prelate,
are not only to be expressed in writing, 2. q. 2 Iuprimis. but also to
contain the cause of such censure. Council. Lug. ^ap. 1. ^od. in 6. which
expression of cause, is not only to be observed in denunciation of
Excomunications already incurred, but also to be incurred, in case the cause be
not otherwise notoriously known. For example, The Archbishop of Millan
excommunicates all such Officers and Wayters at the city gat^s, as als^ all
citizens, who shall admit into their houses, strangers, who bring not with them
literas sanitatis, letters of health. This Excommu^ica^ion in time of
pestilence and mortality, is just and valid, although it express no cause. For
why, the cause is apparent, the preservation of the City from infection in
time of pestilence. Yet say I, in case there were no danger of infection, for
that there is no fame or report of any ^iagues abroad, it were no valid
sentence, for want of intimation and expression of a cause. And this happens so
often, as ^uch things are pr^hibited under censures, which of themselves are
not unlawful, but by some accident, or circumstance. And in this all agree.

Now the aforementioned Priests do allege in this their Apology, That there is
no cause at all laid down in the sentence of the aforesaid Excommunication,
nor yet otherwise manifest: for which want and defect, they doubt not to avouch
it Invalid.

But it will be said unto the Minor of this Syllogism, That there is a cause
expressed and nominated, yea and very much insisted upon in the Censure, to
wi^, obstinate disobedience, continual insolency, and that without hope of
amendment, to the great scandal and disaedification of many Catholics, etc.

To which I answer, That Disobedience is an universal cause, and has many
branches, spreading it self far and wide thorough the whole life of man. For
example, there is disobedience unto God, and that in as great variety as there
be sins and offenses against the first and second Table. There is disobedience
unto the laws of holy Church. There is disobedience unto the laws and edicts
of Princes, to Prelates, to inferior Magistrates, to Parents, to Tutors, to
Masters of families, to Pedagogues, and to all lawful Superiors, and that in
an Ocean of matter and circumstances. Now then for so much as neither vice nor
virtue can be exercised but in their proper particular and individual (...) No
act of the Priests disobedience being here m^ntioned, no cause of the
Excommunication is expressed, and no cause, no censure. For it is a saying as
true as common, That qui ambulat in universalibus, intendit decipere; He that
walks in universalities and generalities, desires to deceive.

You know in your Civil and Temporal Courts, If a man be to be punished
either corporally, or by the purse, his particular fault is set before his
eyes, yea and made manifest to so many as please to take knowledge thereof. Is
Titius an offender? Is he a wicked man? This is not sufficient to doom him to
punishment: And why so? because there be many kinds of offenses, many sorts
of wickedness. Is Titius a thief, and has stolen? Neither is that sufficient
to cause his punishment: And why? because there be many sorts of stealths and
theeveries. But has Titius stolen a piece of plate of so mauy ounces; an
horse, or a cow of such a value, from such a man, such a time, and in such a
manner: O when Titius is brought unto his trial in open Court, and is
convicted of his particular act and crime, either by his own confession, or
proof of witness, then is Titius subject to the sentence, and to the
execution thereof.

Even so say I, disobedience is a vice in universali, and therefore as not
committable, so not punishable but in his particular Act. For they that know
any thing, know this: that sins cannot be committed neither in Genere, nor in
Specie, but in Individuo per Iudividuum. But here in the censure of the
Archbishop, it is neither declared against whom, or in what matter this
disobedience was, or of what nature, or colout it is. The punishment is
declared to be Excommunication, but the cause of it hangs in the clouds of
universality: and whether it will prove hayle, rain, or snow, no man knows
but by divination.

Now let any indifferent man judge, whether it be not a most illegal, and an
exorbitant course of proceeding, for a man to know his punishment, and not his
offense; to feel the one, before he be convicted of the other? And such is the
case of these R. Priests, who from time to time have demanded, urged, and
required with all duty and due respect of their Archbishop, as also of his
Council of Friars: What this their disobedience was, against whom it was
committed, in what matter it consisted of, what nature it was of? And nothing
answered, but sic volo, fit jubeo: or as sometimes it pleases him to say: That
he does these things for causes and reasons only known unto himself.

But if it were lawful for Abraham, Moses, and Job, to reason with God
Almighty: let me also with due respect ask of you my L. Archbishop, whether
this be not to open a gap, and to set wide the sluices of a full inundation to
all injustice and impiety: I say, my Lord, to punish your subjects for causes
and reasons only known unto your self. For in so doing, you seem to erect a
new tribunal, and to bring in such a form of judgment among us, as the world
has not yet taken knowledge of, contrary to all laws divine and humane, of
God and man.

For first we read in Genesis 3. when Almighty God was to cen^ure our first
Parents for their transgression, he was not contented with his own knowledge,
but he cited them in person to appear before him, saying; Adam, Vbi as? Adam,
Where art thou? charging them with their particular disobedience, in eating the
forbidden fruit, contented to hear what they could allege in their own
defense, before he descended to sentence: yea, and as a grave Author writing
upon that place, says. Had not the devil bin sentenced and damned before that
time, he happily then had bin admitted unto his defense and purgation.

The like did God in the parricide of Cain, saying, Vbi est Abel frater tuus?
Genes. 4. Where is thy brother Abel? The like he did in the destruction of the
five Cities (notwithstanding his omniscience) no doubt, to prescribe unto man a
platform of Justice and Judgment. Descendam and videbo, utram clamorem qui
venit ad me, opere compleverint, an non est ita, ut s^^am. Genes. 18. I will
go down (says Almighty God) and I will see whether they have done according
to the cry that is come unto me, or whether it be not so, that I may know.

So our Savior in the process of the adulterous woman, Mulier, Vbi sunt qui
te accusabant? John 8. Woman, where be thine accusers?

So has he foretold us, what shall be the form and process of the last
Judgment, at what time the sheep shall be separated from the goats. Math. 25.

And thus have you seen some few examples out of Scripture, of Justice
exercited in Judgment by God himself. Now as touching humane Judgments, who
can make question, but as Moses made the Tabernacle according unto that
pattern which was showed unto him by God himself in the mountain, Exodus 25.
So ought all humane Judgments to be squared according to the divine. Of many to
rehearse some few examples.

Such was the judgment of Solomon in the cause of the two Harlots, about the
quick and the dead child. III. Reg. 3.

Such was the judgment of Daniel in the case of chaste Susanna. Dan. 7.

Such was the judgment of S. Peter in the matter of Ananias and Saphira. Act. 5.

And our blessed Savior and Redeemer in that his Arraignment, where Injustice
most of all did triumph in the seat of Justice yet was admitted unto his
answer, saw his accusers, heard his forged crimes urged by his malicious
enemies, and enforced against him by two false witnesses, and last of all
received his sentence pronounced by the mouth of the unjust Judge Pontius
Pilate. Math. 27.

But these two venerable Priests ((...) I confess not in a matter which
concerns their lives) yet in a case which some will say, is more to be
esteemed then life it self, to wit, their honor and good name in the world,
were condemned, not cited to Judgment, absent, and (...), at what time it
pleased my L. Archbishop and his Friars to sit upon the Bench. And that which
in all Judgments, and by the Law of Nature ought to be the last and the
perclose of the whole process, was here the first, namely sentence. For
neither themselves, or any in the place where they live, did so much as once
su^pect any proceeding in any cause with them, or against them, till sentence
was proclaimed, and that as publickely as at the high Cross of Dublin: and
themselves condemned of Disobedience; but how? As I have said, in terms of
universality: Of a Disobedience wanting his existence or being of a particular
act, or fact: Of a disobedience without father or mother, naked of all
circumstances; as time, when; place, where; and person, against whom. A
singular judgment I confess, and, not much unlike unto that which they say in
some barbarous Countries is exercised: The man first hanged, and then his
cause examined. O Nicodemus, Nicodemu^! Thou a Jew could say, Numquid lex
nostra judicat hominem? etc. John 7. Does our law condemn a man before he
befirst heard, and know what he has done? But had Nicodemus lived in these
days among Christians, he would sometimes have seen wrong, injury and
oppression, to have sit in the seat of Judgment.

I will then conclude this point with that saying of Festus unto King Agrippa,
in the behalf of that great Apostle S. Paul, when he was to be sent prisoner
unto C^sar: Sine ratione mihi videtur mittere vinctum, and causas ejus non
significare. Act. 25. It seems unto me a thing unreasonable, to send a man
bound, and not to signify his cause. And is it not think you, a far more
unreasonable thing to thrust the people into the spiritual bonds and fetters
of Excommunication, and not to signify the cause thereof? And I wonder that
our great Masters in Israel, and you only great Couucellours of war against
the poor Clergy; my Lord, I mean our Friars who profess so great
Schollership, would not advise your Hon: (who happily by reason of your other
employments, cannot so well attend unto the study of the Canons) what
punishment that Bishop incurres, who excommunicates before the cause thereof be
proved. See then for this, the Council of Paris, with Gratian 24. q. 3. De
Illicita. And I will for the ease of my Reader set down the words. De illicita
excommunicatione lex Iustiniani Imperatoris Catholici, etc. As touching
unlawful Excommunications, the law of Justinian the Catholic Emperor (which
law the Catholic Church does approve and observe) in his 123. Constitution,
cap. 351. has decreed that no Bishop or Prelate excommunicate any person
before the cause be proved, for which the Canons of the Church command this to
be done, and for his unjust attempt he shall so long abstain from the sacred
Communion as shall seem good unto his Superior. So that Council. And it
appears by the Canon, that such Prelates incurve suspension. See Ext^^de
sentent. Excom. Sacro. So S. Gregory the great absolved the Bishop Magnus,
unjustly excommunicated by Laurence Archbishop of Millan. See S. Gregory lib.
2. Epist. 26. And the same Pope Gregory did punish John a Bishop, for
inflicting of unjust Excommunications. See for this the place above cited, de
illicita Excom. And let them consider of this who teach, that our Bishops
cannot err in their censures. That they must be obeyed in right and wrong,
etc. But I shall have occasion to speak of that point hereafter.

For So Much then as you see the Law tells us, that no Excommunication can either
be inflicted or incurred, before the cause thereof be proved. Let me humbly
intereat your Hon: my very good Lord, for I suppose that you are neither too
old to learn, nor my self too young to teach: Nor do I doubt, albeit I be
inferior to you in place and dignity in Gods Church, that it will either
misbecome my profession, as being a Priest, nor my white hairs, as now being
Paulus senex, even Paul an old man, to preach unto you. That as well for the
security of your own conscience toward God, as to avoyde the scandal and
obloquy of the world, as also punishment from the higher powers. That hereafter
you will either make the cause of your Censures as well known and approved
unto the world, as you do your punishments, or else the punishments as private
unto your self as the causes thereof. And so hoping your Hon. will take the
premises into your consideration, I will descend unto the next point; which
shall be to satisfy some doubts, and to answer to certain objections which may
be made in the behalf of the Ordinary against my two former Arguments,
enforcing the Injustice and Invalidity of the Archbishops censure.

CAP. III.
Certain Objections in behalf of the Archb. propounded, and answered.
FIrst then it may be said in defense and excuse of the Ordinary: That the
times are such, as our Prelates in this kingdom cannot observe any legal or
canonical process or course of Judgment with their subjects, and therefore
are constrained to proceed as they may. And that albeit they neither call the
Defendant unto his answer, nor admit of any proof of cause by witness
against them, they are to be borne withal: Necessitas non habet legem,
Necessity knows no law, etc.

To which first I answer, That if the Catholic Prelates either have way by
permission of the state, or take unto themselves so much boldness, as to
publish their sentences of Excommunication in their Chapels and Oratories
after Mass, as well by such Parish Priests, as are placed in the Cittyes and
suburbs, as also by the Friars of so many Orders. Than say I, How can they be
excused in the pretermission of ilegall proceeding in that former part of
Justice, going before sentence. Namely calling the parties unto their answer,
examination of their causes, admitting of proof pro and contra. For so much as
all this may be performed with much more privacy then the publication of
sentence can be. The Cano is of holy Church requiring no greater a number even
in their most public and solemn proceedings in court, then these 4. sorts of
persons: 1. The Judge 2. The Plaintiff: 3. The Defendant: and 4ly the
Witnesses: all which need not to be abo^e five or six persons at the most.
That Prelate then who can be so bold as to command his sentence of
Excommunication to be published in the hearing of so many hundreds, yea of
thousands, as my Lord Archbishop Thomas Flemming, alias Barnwell hathdone, yea
and from time to time 1. published the same sentence, lest it should grow
stale, and out of request How can he in reason pretend any fear of persecution
in granting a legal course of proceeding, in which the presence of so few (as
has been said) is necessary. And therefore to do the one, and to omit the
other, is but to slight Justice, and to oppress the Innocent. And so much for
the first answer.

My second answer is, That in case the times be such, and the persecution so
great, as that those essential parts of all legal proceeding must of
necessity be pretermitted, (I mean Convention of the parties, and Conviction
by due proof:) I say then with that common Maxim of the law, Better an
Inconvenience, then a Mischief; and in such case all sentence of punishment,
publication, and execution does likewise cease, and the guilty is rather to
pass unpunished in this world, then the very systema of all Tribunalls to be
ruinated, and Justice deposed from her Throne; for then it seems to be a case
of a common calamity and an inevitable necessity, putting silence unto all
laws, and better the Nocent be spared, then the Innocent punished.

But see, and note (gentle Reader) what use of the times, and what an excellent
advantage the Ordinary makes unto himself to compass his own ends (I say, by
fishing in these troubled waters.) For whereas in France, Spain, Italy, and
those Countries where the spiritual sword has his free stroke in all
Tribunalls (supported and maintained so often as is necessary with the aid and
assistance of the secular arm,) yet all form of due Justice is punctually
observed. Id enim possumus, quod just possumus; for that only can we do
(says the Law) which we may justly do. But here in this Diocese, all must be
presumed for the Ordinary, because we live in a mixed people, near unto the
State and Magistrate of an other profession in Religion from us, no juridicall
proceeding must be held necessary, but that our Ecclesiastical Judge may lay
about him at his pleasure, in his censures and punishments of his subjects,
without calling the parties before him to their answer, without examination of
their cause, without conviction, etc. So as what an Ordinary could not do where
the Church is established, and in his full strength and vigor against the
poorest Priest of his Diocese here, under pretense of a persecution, and
obstacle of a free course of Justice, he shall most easily effect (I say) under
the name and cloak of persecution, more freely himself to persecute, as at
this present, and for some years past, the Clergy of this Diocese has both
seen and felt, having endured a more bitter persecution from this their Bishop
and his Friars, then from the temporal Magistrate, though divided from them in
matter of Religion.

Add hereunto a second advantage also, that this Archbishop of Dublin makes of
these times by a seeming and a pleasing correspondency which he keeps (as he
imagins himself) with the State. For he being a Friar, and seeking by all
means to suppress the Clergy, and to bring all into the hands of the
Regulars, I mean the Monks and Friars, as well Franciscans, Capuchins,
Dominicans, Augustines, Carmelits, and Jesuits, (For scarce are there so many
Priests of the Clergy left in all this City, as there be Orders of Regulars
therein at this day.) And knowing that they of a contrary profession, can well
endure that Priests either in their persons, or in their maintenance and lively
hood should be straightened and suppressed. And knowing also that it will not
discontent the Protestane Magistrate to have the people forbidden to hear the
Masses of Priests. He upon these presumptions, supported by the Counce^l of his
Friars, who are of more strength in this City then men would imagine) is
animated to pursue such designs as of late he has undertaken, knowing that
the lower the balance of the Clergy descends, the higher are the Friars
advanced, and by driving of the people from the Clergy, the more of necessity
must they and wild they depend on the Friars. But this wisdom (doubtless) is
not spiritual, but carnal; not from above, but earthly; savouring not of the
Holy Ghost, but of ambition, of temporal means, and of the belly. And so being
a Council, not of God, will come to nothing, though for a time (by never so
strong a faction) supported.

A second defense of the Archbishops proceedings, is this, and which by our
Friars is much put on foot, especially among the common people: That the Bishop
is to be obeyed in all things, yea in right and wrong, as some teach: And shall
the foot judge the head? the subject the Magistrate? the sheep the Prelate? etc.

To the first part of this popular argument so much insisted upon, I answer,
that if it be spoken merrily, it may pass for a jest; but if seriously, it is
flat heresy; namely, that (...) Bishop in right and wrong is to be obeyed.

For the second part, which thorough the persuasion of the Friars, is in every
old wifes mouth; and the second word of every Artisan and Tradesman, That the
sheep are not to examine or question the sentence of their Pre^ate: the subject
of the Magistrate. I answer, that albeit indeed the Inferior can not reverse
or correct the judgment of his Superior, and much less may he punish him for
the same (because he has no jurisdiction or power over him.) Yet by the Friars
good leave, the Inferior may examine, may question and discuss the judgment
and sentence of his Superior, both in his own and other men's cases: yea and if
the Inferior, or Subject, do find either by his own learning, or by help of
such as are seen in the knowledge and profession of the Laws, that a
subordinat Prelat, such as be all Archbishops and Bishops (who are as equally
subject to the Canons, as the poorest Priest) have not proceeded according to
the laws of holy Church, the Constitutions of the Sea Apostolic, the Decrees
of general Councels, the sacred Canons received, and of force in all
Tribunals, but that such Judges, whether Archbishops or Bishops have gone
astray, contrary to the rules prescribed by the abovementioned Legislatours,
all which are their superiors in jurisdiction, and as far above them in
power and authority, as the common people are inferior unto their immediate
Prelates and Pastors. It is plain, that in such case neither Priest nor
People, is bound either in law or conscience to obey any such Archbishop, or
Bishop, or their sentence, not grounded and founded on that law, according to
which they precisely were bound to judge. For says B. Aug. Ser. 6. de Verbis
Domini. Vbi duo superiores mandant opposita, Inferiori non est obediendum;
where two Superiors command opposite things, the Inferior is not to be
obeyed. And S. Gregory Pope: Imperiali constitutione sancitum est, ut ea quae
contra l^ges fiunt, non solum inutilia, sed etiam pro insectis habenda si^t: It
is enacted by Imperial constitution, that the things which are done against
law, are not only unprofitable, but to be esteemed as not done at all. Gregor.
in Regesto, lib. 7. Epist. 7. and inserted in the Canon, 25. q. 2. Imperiali.

How idly then, or rather ignorantly, or rather maliciously do our Friars
teach the people, and that as confidently, as if it were a point of their
Catechism, that none may examine the doctrine of the Archbishop, or his
sentences, as if he were a god, who neither could err in judgment, or sin in
will, when as the law says plainly, Non debet is poenam sustinere canonicam,
in cujus damnatione non est prolata sententia canonica, 11. q. 3. He ought not
to suffer a canonical punishment, in whose condemnation a canonical sentence
is not pronounced: plainly thereby supposing that the Prelat may abuse the
Keys, and err in his censures. And the gloss upon the same cap. says, Si
ergo constet tibi, quod sententia Iudicis est iniqua, potes Iudicis violentis
resistere. If it appears unto thee, that the sentence of the Judge be unjust,
thou art not bound to obey his violence. Which is also confirmed Extra de
Appellationibus cap. Significaverunt. And the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas,
whose authority is such, as it is confessed, yea confirmed by the gravest
judgment in the Church of God, that he never taught any error in Divinity, has
this Conclusion, 2. 2. q. 104. art. 5. Subditi in ijs rantummodo superioribus
suio obedire tenentur, in quibus ipsi suis superioribus subijciuntur, and in
quibus ipsi superiores sublimioris potestatis praecepto non adversantur:
Inferiors in such things alone are bound to obey their Superiors, in which
they are subject unto their Superiors, and wherein those their Supe^iours go
not against the precept and command of a power higher then is theirs. And in
the corpse of the aforesaid Conclusion, he ^lustrateth the same doctrine out of
S. Aug. ser. 6. de verbis Domini, by example of the Captain, the Proco^^^, the
General, and God. Where neither the Captain against the command of the
proco^sull, nor the Proconsull against the Precept of the General, nor the
General against the command of God is to be obeyed by the Subje^t. Infinite
are the Authors both ancient and modern, which might in this case be produced,
if it were necessary. But how can it be necessary so to do, when Experience
teaches us, and we see daily before our eyes in all Tribunals, as well
Ecclesiast: call as Civil, sentences upon better consideration, at the
instance and motions of the parties and their learned Council sometimes
reexamined, sometimes reversed, sometimes appealed from to higher Tribunals, and
there corrected. For it fares not in Christian Commonwealth, and much less
in the Church of God, which is ruled by just and wholesome laws, as it does
among Turks and Insidels, barbarous and brutish nations, where there is no
other law but the will, or rather the appetite of the Commander. And I would
ask our Friars, grown so violent and imperious, rather through their
multitu^e then their learning; To what end does the law allow Appelles from the
^entence of Inferior Judges, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, unto
the supreme, in case it were not lawful for the parties sentenced, to examine
their sentence according unto the rules of law, whether being justly condemned,
they should so rest themselves contented; or finding it otherwise to seek their
remedy? I would also ask our Friars, in case Judges and Magistrates could not
err, to what end Almighty God so often, and so seriously should exhort all
Judges, Magistrates, and Rulers of the people, to the administration of
Justice, and not to look after rewards, but to tender the case of the Widow,
Stranger, and Orphan, menacing so many heavy threats and curses upon the heads
of such as pervert Judgment: Vae qui dicitis malum, bonum; ponentes teuebras
lucem, and lucem tenebras: Vae qui justificatis impium pro muneribus, and
justitiam justi aufertis ab eo. Esaias 5. Woe be to you who call evil, good;
placing darkness light, and light darkness. Woe be to you who justify the wicked
for rewards, and rob the just man of his Justice.

I would also demand of our Friars, To what purpose are so many books of the
Canon, Civil, Common, and Statute Law written? wherefore so many Studies, and
Colleges of the laws founded and erected, witness Paris, Orleance, Bo^ognia,
Padua, Salamanca, and our Innes of Court of London, and thorough all Christian
Common wealths, but to teach both Judge, Advocate and Client, rectum
discernere iniquo, to distinguish betwixt right and wrong: that Church or
Commonwealth ever best governed, where the fewest cases are left unto the breast
of the Judge, always preferring the silent before the speaking law, as less
subject to error and corruption.

Let then our Friars cease henceforward to teach that barbarous doctrine
ambulantem in tenebris: I say, that corner, or rather tavern doctrine, which
every Tradesman, Kitchenmaide, and three-footed old trot, have hourly in their
mouths, rammed into their heads by their false teachers: That the Bishop is to
be obeyed in right and wrong, and that no inferior unto him may examine or
call in question his Censures, Decrees, or Judgments, but rather let them
learn that better lesson of the Orator, Amor, and odium, and privatum
commodnm, sape faciunt judicem non cognoscere verum, lib. 1. Rhetoricorum.
Affection, Hatred, and private commodity, makes many times a Judge not to know
the truth. And who knows not, that in all ages, the world has much halted on
that leg, I mean of Injustice. And some will unhappily say: that this age
wherein we live, is not much better then her predecessors.

Now my last Argument in this case shall be Ad hominem: convincing my
Adversaries by their own practice. As thus.

If it be not lawful for the Subject or Inferior to question the sentence of
his Superior: the Priest of the Bishop. I then demand: How came it to pass,
that in England of late, our Friars do question the command of the Bishop of
Calcedon, that most reverend, pious, and learned Prelat, who was placed over
the English Clergy by the Sea Apostolic? Where^ore did the Monks, as also
the Ignatian Friars or Jesuits, write diverse books and treatises against
him, which books we have seen and read; surely these Monks were none of the
Lord of Calcedon his Superiors at all.

Again, What is the cause, why that libelling Friar of S. Francis Order,
(cloaking his infamous writings under the name of Edmundus Vrsulanus, in his
book called, Examen Iuridicum Censurae Parisiensis,) is so bold not only to
call in question, but absolutely to condemn the Excommunication of the most
Illustrious Archbishop of Paris, published against such as shall defend and
maintain the Eleven Propositions, commonly called the Irish Propositions;
Vrsul^^us himself being but a seditious Friar, and I trow none of the
Archbishops Judge or Superior at all.

And to come nearer home: How came it to pass? That in Droghedah some ten
years ago, certain of the Jesuits being excommunicated, and that by name by
James Plonket, then Conservator Iuris for the Franciscans: And certain of the
Franciscans on the other side, excommunicated by an other Indge, at the
procurement of the Jesuits; neither one or other yielded obedience to the
aforesaid Excommunications, but both stood stiffely in defense of their own
opinions, exclayming against, and condemning each other in public Sermons, to
the great scandal and disaedification of all good Catholics: And yet neither
was the Franciscan, or Ignatian Friars Superiors unto those Prelates, who for
their sakes fulminated those Censures.

And lastly to come home, and unto our own doors: What say you gentle Friars
unto this late example, and now in the mouth of every one, as well Protestant,
as Catholic, I say, of our Archbishop of Dublin, Thomas Flemming, alias
Barnwell, Friar of the Order of S. Francis, who stands at this day
excommunicated, yea Excommunicatus nominatim, and denunciatus, Excommunicated
by name, and denounced; and the same by a Papal Excommunication, legally, and
for most just causes published against him; and he not able to give any reason
either of the Iujustice or Invalidity thereof, remains obstinately
disobediant, unto the Sea Apostolic, to the great scandal and
disaedification of all Catholics, not only of this Diocese, and Kingdom,
but thorough the whole Christian World. So as he who most injustly, and
contrary to all course of law censured others, himself is fast bound in the
ties of an excommunication, and that from the Sea of Rome: So as it may truly
be said of him: Incidit in lequeum quem fecit, and super caput ipsius descendet
iniquitas ejus. He is fallen into the Pit which he dug for others, and upon
his head sh. Il his iniquity descend. Psalm. 7.

To conclude then this point, and summarily to lay together what has more
largely been discoursed. I say for so much as the Archbishop our Ordinary has
not trodden in the steps of the ancient Fathers, not observed such Rules as the
sacred Canons, Counsels and Decrees of the ancient have prescribed to him, and
all other Judges as their lawful Superiors, as in all other their Court
proceedings; so in awarding their sentences and censures, but that the said
Lord Archb. in the case of the aforenamed Priests, most illegally, exorbitantly
and a^omolously, has proceeded by publishing his sentence in the first place,
which ought to be in the last, having omitted not only solemnia juris, but
essentialia juris, not only the solmnities of the law, but even the very life,
p^^hand essence thereof: As first a lawful citation or calling unto their
an^wer, the examination and probation of cause against them: neither has, as
the law requires, mentioned in his sentence the particular cause of the
peoples Excommunication in hearing the Masses of these two R. Priests, but
only (as has been said) in universali, in general, and in the air, to wit,
disobedience not individuated; they therefore except against his proceedings as
most illegal, and corrupt: and confidently avouch, that the aforesaid censure
of Excommunication is nulla, irrita, and invalida; void, invalid, and of no
force, and so to be held and esteemed of all. And such Regulars, whether they
be Monks, or Mendicants, which (like unto Ephrain against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, but both against Judah) doc labor to extinguish the
Clergy, and to draw unto themselves as well the dependence and countenance of
the people, as their purses; and to that end do teach the Laity, that they
ought to make great scruple of the aforesaid Excommunication. They are false
teachers, and of the number of them, of whom the Apostle speaks unto Ti^us.
1. qui universas domos subvertunt, docentes quae non oportet, turpis lucri
gratia; who subvert whole houses, teaching such things as they ought not, for
filthy lucres sake. For the Citizens can well witness with us, that they run
from house to house, most seditiously incensing, and setting the people against
us, not regarding justice, or injustice, but what may best serve for the
erecting of their so long desired a Monarchy. And with such diligence do these
apply their business in this matter of the ceusure, abusing the ignorance and
credulity of the Laity, as if they cannot draw the good man of the house unto
their strain, then they betake themselves unto the good-wife, from her unto
the children, Apprentises and servants, not ceasing till they have put the
whole family into a combustion and broils one with another. While we in the
mean time with patience have endured all the wrongs and injuries of these
their seducements: yea till with their importunity, and many a false corner
lie, they have made us as odious unto the people, as any male factours. For
what cannot such a multitude persuade? Kinsmen to these, gossips to those,
matching these couples, bringing custom to that shop, giving here the
Scapulare, there the cord, ascribing such virtue and protection unto them, as
holy Church never taught, nay attributing such grace and merit unto one
Satursdayes Fast, after they hear and take notice of the death of a certain
Spanish Nun, called Luissa, as more can not be ascribed unto the Passion of our
Savior Christ; well worthy to be swayled with faggots in the Inquisition, for
such pernicious doctrine. But of this point, if God spare me life, these
seducers shall hear more from me ere long.

CAP. IIII.
A third Argument against the Excommunication.
NOW then having answered unto such poor shifts and silly excuses as the
Cordiliers, and the rest of the Friars make for the Ordinary. I will proceed to
a third Argument or Reason, disabling the aforesaid censure of Excommunication:
as thus.

Such a fault as could not have been forbidden unto the Priests, as
principalls under pain of Excommunication, much less could have bin inhibited
the people, as accessory and participating with them in the same fault, under
pain of Excommunication. But

Disobedience could not have been forbidden the Priests themselves under pain
of Excommunication.

Ergo, neither unto the people.

The Major of this Syllogism, is that rule of the law, Regula 42. Accessorium
sequitur nat^ram principalis; The Accessory follows the nature of the
principal. To make it familiar by an example, of which every one may be
capable. If an Vs^rer be not punishable by the law, neither then the Broaker,
or the Clarke that draws the Bonds of the usurarious contract or bargain.

As for the Minor, That Disobedience it self could not have been forbidden
the Priests under any censure, is manifest by this. First (as has bin often
said,) That Disobedience is a general vice, spreading it self into many
branches, as a river dividing his streams into many brooks, And secondly, for
that Disobedience may fall upon a matter so light and trivial, as will not
bear the burden of so great a censure. For let me ask our Scotists, Whether
the Archbishop can inhibit and forbid the Inhabitants of his Diocese, under
pain of Excommunication, never to commit any sin. The thing is so manifest,
that he can not, as till it be affirmed that he may. It will spare any further
discourse about it. It remains then, that for so much as the people could not
be excommunicated for the Priests disobedience, it must necessarily follow,
That the Excommunication falls upon them only for being present at their
Masses: which how well it sorts with my Lord Archb. profession to inflict, I
leave to consideration.

CAP. V.
A fourth Argument against the Excommunication.
MY fourth reason manifesting not only the Injustice, but the Nullity and
Invalidity of the aforesaid Excommunication awarded against the Laytie, in the
case of hearing those two R. Priests their Masses, shall be this, which for
brevities sake, I will conclude in this Syllogism.

An Excommunication inflicted for a virtuous act, contains an intolerable
error, and so by the second principle is most injust and invalid.

But to be present at the administration of Sacraments by Priests, who are free
of all canonical censures, is a virtuous action.

Therefore an Excommunication fulminated against such as be present thereat, is
not only void of force, but also wicked.

For declaration of the Minor, it is to be understood, That so long as the
Priests are uncensured, they are supposed by the Church as men allowed, to whom
all may have access in the administration of the Sacraments. For when the
Church holds it not safe for the people to communicate with their Priests, or
Pastors, whether Bishops, or Curates, or any other who have lawful
ordination, and jurisdiction, It begins (as is most reasonable) first with
the head, to cure the maladyes and diseases thereof, with the medicinable
balsamon of the Censures. (For the Censures of holy Church ought to be
medicinable, and not vindicative, used for necessity, and serviceable to true
Piety, and not to sinister ends. 2. q. 1, multi. 34. q. 3.) So as if the Pastor
or Priest be not suspended, be not excommunicated, be not interdicted, nor the
same published unto the people, together with the particular cause of such
censure, in the sentence of the Prelat expressed, and mentioned. It is to be
understood, that by the Church he is tolerated, neither can the people be
censured for participating with him, either in divine, or civil actions. I
say, so long as himself is not censured: For to illustrate this by a familiar
example. Tell me, would it not be thought a strange reckning, If the Magistrate
did forbid under some heavy fine, that none should frequent the shop, or buy
and sell, with such a Merchant in the High Street, the said Merchant neither
punished, or punishable for any delict, or fault committed. I now it would be
so held. Now (gentle Reader) if ^houperuse the Censure of the Archbishop, see
down in the beginning of this Treatise, you shall find no censure at all
inflicted upon the Priests, so as they (for any impediment unto the contrary)
may lawfully say Mass: And yet the people under pain of Excommunication may
not be present at the ^ame: This Logic I understand not, but I wot well what
S. Gregory has in his 27. Hom. Ipse ligandi atque folvendi potestate se private
qui hanc pro suis voluntatibus, and non pro subditorum juribus exercet. He
deprives himself of the power of binding and loosing, who exercises the same
at his own pleasure, and not according unto the Laws of the subject.

CAP. VI.
A ^ift Argument against the Excommunication.
MY ^ift and last reason proving the Nullity and Invalidity of the aforesaid
Censure, (which also may be gathered out of what has been before noted in the
precedent Chapters) is this:

That none can be punished with the spiritual sword of Excommunication for the
sin of another, not partaking in the same sin himself. And although this be
manifest by the light of reason, as also by faith; yet I will not spare to add
the consent of Writers the reunto, as also of the Canon. So Vgolinus de Censur.
tab. 1. cap. 17.. 8. number. 6. cap. per tuas. de sentent. Exc^^^. cap. solet, and
cap. de venerabilibus. penult. ^odem titul^ in Sexto. And it has the consent
of all Doctors, wherefore in this case I will say unto my Prelat, as David said
unto Almighty God, in the temporal punishment of his subjects by pestilence.
2. Reg. 24. Isti qui oves sunt quid fecerunt? These sheep what have they done?
Let thy hand (I pray thee) be turned against my self, etc. If the Priests have
offended, let them in the name of God be punished, but what has the innocent
people committed, that they should be censured, either for the Priests true, or
supposed offenses. Sure if that great Doctor of the Church S. Gregory may be
judge, his sentence will be for the people against our Prelat. For these are
his words: Non debet is poenam sustinere canonicam, in cujus damnationem non
est canonica prolam sententia, II q. 3. That party ought not to suffer a
canonical punishment, in whose condemnation no canonical sentence has been
pronounced.

And thus (good Reader) having (I doubt not) convinced thy conscience of the
Nullity and impiety of this Censure, I will proceed (Godwilling) one step
forward. And as hitherto I have proved, that no obedience is due thereunto: so
I will undertake (by Gods assistance) to show, and upon good grounds, that in
all conscience it ought to be disobeyed: And that whosoever yields obedience
unto the same (if he be not excused by invincible ignorance) does not only sin
mortally, but also continues in sin, so long as in obedience thereunto, he
refuses to hear the Masses of the aforesaid Priests.

CAP. VII.
Wherein it is proved, That none in Conscience may obey the aforesaid
Excommunication.
THus then I argue; Defamation or the taking away of a man's good name, is a
mortal sin. So S. Thomas 2. 2. q, 73. 1. and all Divines. Yea and so much is
that defamation or detraction greater, and more grievous, by how much it is
more material, and the partyres against whom more honorable. And it is to be
understood, That defamation or detraction is not only verbal, but also mental
and real, that is, not only in word, but in thought also, and in fact. And
because every thing is made more familiar by examples; I put the case, that my
self, as also the whole neighborhood, has understood of some scandalous sin
of one of our old friends and familiar acquaintance, whom we held, albeit a
poor, yet an honest, and a very pious man, whereupon we withdraw our good
opinions from him, our wonted conversation, our familiarity, and such benefits
as from time to time we were wonted to bestow upon him, and still would have
continued, if we had not heard such evils of him: well, it appears unto us not
long after, that the party was wronged, and free from all such vice and
wickedness, as he was charged withal, and so as in conscience we are assured
of his innocence; yet notwithstanding we bear ourselves toward him, as
formerly we did, when we believed those evils of him, to his great discomfort,
to his discountenance in the world, and in fine to his great shame, and infamy:
I say in this case we all sin mortally, and the black sin of Detraction,
if not in thought, and in word, yet (which is as bad as the rest) really and
indeed. So I say, these two R. Priests, so often mentioned, were charged by
their Ordinary with disobedience, with continual insolency, etc. All this is
manifested to be a malicious slander, notwithstanding are the people forbidden
to be present at their Masses, and the same under pain of Excommunication. One
Friar says, the Censure ought to be obeyed: Another says at least, it is the
safest way. I say, they both err, and lead into error. For the safest way is,
not to defame my brother, or to obscure his good name, nor yet to join and
concur with such as do detract and withdraw from his just honor, and that
especially in persons of so eminent a rank in the Church, as are anointed
Priests, by which means their ministry is less respected, and themselves
disinabled to walk in that vocation to which they are called.

And first the Bishop who gave so impious a sentence, and next the Friar, who
gadding from house to house, seeks to persuade the same, are guilty of most
horride sin, and as the Apostle calls it, blasphemy. And as well the one as the
other obliged to satisfaction unto the Innocent so wronged, as also unto the
Church of God. In the mean time let both Priest and people comfort themselves
in that sweet blessing, pronounced by the month of our Savior, Mat. 5. Beati
est is cum maledixerint vobis, etc. Blessed are you when men shall revile you,
and shall persecute you, and shall speak all evil of you lying for my sake:
Be glad and rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven, for so did they
persecute the Prophets who were before you. And for so much as it is the counsel
of our sweet Savior, to love our enemies, to do good to them that hate us,
and to pray for them that persecute us. It will be a work of mercy, and not (I
trust) misbecomming me, to give a parcel of good counsel and advice unto my
Prelat; and if with the Prophet Nathan, by setting his fault before his face, I
convert him into a penitent David, he to the spiritual comfort of his soul,
shall be reclaymed, and I to my great consolation, reap the fruit of my
labors.

O then, say I, if the Archbishop of Dublin, would but consider with himself,
and set before his eyes, the practice of the ancient Prelates of Gods Church,
with what leaden pases they descended unto censures, never making use thereof,
but in remediless occasions, where no admonition, no exhortation, no patience,
no longanimity would prevayle. As if they had said with the Poet.

Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnu^
Ense recidendum; ne pars sincera trahatur.
All first attempt, if naught prevayle, its best.
Cut off that part, which may infect the rest.
All courses are first to be taken with the mist icallmembers of Christ's body,
with the children of the Church. But that part (I confess) which admits no
cure, must be separated from his fellows. The ancient Bishops did never
fulminate their censures for trivial and light occasions, and much less for
causes not manifest, and well proved.

Aug. in sermon de Quadragesima. Nos a communione quenquam prohibere non
possumus nifi au^ sponte confessum, aut in aliqu^, sive saeculari, sive
Ecclesiastico judicio nominatum, atque, convictum. We can excommunicate no man,
but him who either of his own accord has confessed, or has been named, and
convicted in some saecular, or Ecclesiastical Judgment.

Conc^lium Meldense c. 56. Nemo Episcoporum quemlibet sine centa, and manifesta
peccatcausa, communione privet ecclesiastica. Let no Bishop without a certain
and a manifest cause of a sin, deprive any of Ecclesiastical communion.

Concilium Aurolianense 4. cap. 2. and Wormaciense. cap. 13. Nullus sacerdotum
quenquam rect^ fidei hominem, pro parvis and levibus causis, a Communione
suspendat, preter eas culpas pro quibus antiqui Patres arceri ab Ecclesia
jusserun^ contemnentes. Let no Priest excommunicate any, for small or light
causes, besides those faults for which the ancient Fathers have commanded the
contemners to be forbidden the Church. Again.

S. Ang. sermon. 16. de verbis Domini. C^pisti habere fratrem tuum tanquam
publicanam, ligas illum in terra, sed ut just^ alliges vide. Nam injust^
vincula disrumpit justitia. Thou have begun to account thy brother as a
publican, thou binds him on earth: But take heed thou bind him justly. For
Justice does dissolve unjust bonds.

Alas then, shall we think that this glorious St, sometime Bishop of Hippo in
Afric, S. Augustine, brought with him his censures and his sentences in his
pocket, as The. Flemming, alias Barnwell, Archbishop of Dublin uses and then
to send for a Priest against whom he desires to have a cause. And when he
finds his opportunity, draws out his sentence of suspension from his pocket,
as he did against that R. Priest, Fa. Patricke Cahil, suspending him from all
priestly function, and the same so causelessly and so inconsequently, as he
offered at the same time, to give him under his hand, a testimony of his
learning and good life, yea and has often, and to diverse averred that he was
both an honest and a learned man, which many of the. Inhabitants of this City,
and Diocese, can, and do witness.

Neither do I think S. Ambr^se Archbishop of Millan, came ever provided with
his pocket censures of suspension, as our Archbishop of Dublin, Tho. Flemming,
alias Barnwell did, when sending for Doctor, Peter Cadell, as to entreat with
him, (as he pretended) upon some occasion of business, when he saw his time,
pulled out of his breeches a written sentence of a suspension, reading the same
against him. A man of whom malice it self cannot find what to speak amiss.
And for no other cause, but that he refused to be banished out of his diocese
by him, whilst the Archbishop himself confessed that he had no cause against
him, but only that he had no use of him. And the good gentleman thinking it
most unreasonable, and inhumane, to be putfi^om his friends, his small means,
and those few Benefactors, which by his honest endeavors he had acquired. As
especially making a great scruple to obey such a majesticall and more then
Regal Commandment of Exile, (desiring as always to be found faithful to
God, so also a loyal subject unto his King) refused to obey that Banishment.

Neither yet (I trow) did ever S. John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople, menace the Censure of Suspension in such a case, as Tho.
Flemming alias Barnwell, L. Archb. of Dublin did unto Fa. Luke Rochfort of
blessed memory, for not resending a letter back again unto him. which formerly
he had sent him, witness Fa. Patrieke Brangan, and William Brown Priests, and
at this day living in Dublin, who were messengers both of the letter, and of
the threatened suspension.

Neither yet I wot well, S. Basil Bishop of Cesarea, when a Priest came to
complain of any wrong done him, did ever entreat him so irreligiously, as the
aforesaid L. Archb. of Dublin did Paul Harris Priest, the 18. day of July 1631.
in Dublin. (himself may well remember the place) after he had made such a
complaint unto him of his Friars, as he was unwilling to hear: for redress of
whose wrongs, he only had these words from his lips: I will excommunicate you
if you come any more in my presence. A very sufficient cause (no doubt) of
Excommunication, to come into a Bishops presence.

But truly as in the world, a wise and a discreet man will not upon every
occasion have his hand upon his dagger, ready to lay about him, Much less
becomes it a Prelat of the Church, for every trivial, and much less for only
framed and devised matters, to draw out the spiritual sword of his censures,
but rather let them remember, that they are placed over us, as S. Peter tells
them, 1. Pet. 5. 3. Non ut dominantes in Cleris, sed ut forma facti gregis ex
animo; Not as lording it, and domineering over the Clergy, but rather to be an
example of all good conversation unto their flock. To which purpose S. Hierom
in his Epistle ad Nepotianum. Episcopi sacerdot et sciant se esse, non dominos,
honorent clericos quafi clericos, ut ipsis Episcopis a clericis quasi Episcopis
honor deferatur. Scitum est ill^d Oratoris Domitij. Cur ergo inquit te habeam
ut principem, cum tu me non habeas ut Senatorem? Let the Bishops know
themselves to be Priests, and no Lords; Let them honor Clergymen, as
Clergymen, that they again may give honor unto Bishops as Bishops. For
elegant is that saying of the Orator Domitius; Wherefore should I regard thee
as a Prince, when thou do not use me as a Senator? Like unto which is that
of the Council of Trent, Sess. 13. cap. 1. If then our Peter has drawn out
his sword rashly, and without cause: let Peter a Gods name put up his sword
again, as our Savior advises him, saying: Converte gladium tuum in vaginam,
Put up thy sword into his scabberd: That it be not said by lawful authority
another day to such as abuse their swords, as our Savior said unto Peter: Qui
acceperit gladium, gladio peribit: He that smites with the sword, shall perish
by the sword. And so much of the Reasons or Arguments, by which is manifested
the Injustice and Invalidity of the Archbishop his Excommunication.

Yet that no diligence or means might be neglected on our parts, to reclay me
(if it were possible) our Ordinary from those violent proceedings against the
Inhabitants of his Diocese: Mr Dr Cadell in my absence (though not without my
consent) did draw this Petition following, which was exhibited unto him in a
meeting of Priests, by the hands of that R. and learned Clergyman, James
Talb^t Dr of Divinity, ait what time the aforesaid Archbish. had made a most
bitter invective Oration unto that assembly, against Dr Cadell and my self, to
the end he might make us as odious unto them, as we are displeasing unto
himself. But understand (good Reader) that all our Ordinaryes invectives, as
all his Friars detractions and obmurmurations against us, are ever in our
absence, when as we are far enough off from hearing or answering them. Such
was the Oration of Caesar the Dictator in the Senat-house; against Cneius
Pompeius, to precure him the envy and hatred of the people, the famous Pompey
being at that time many leagues from Rome: And such was the insinuation of
Haman, in the ears of the great Assuerus, against Mardoche^s and his people,
Esther 2. when there was none in place to answer for them. But now to the
Petition.

To the right Hon: Tho. Flemming alias Barnwell, L. Archbishop of Dublin.
The humble Petition of Peter Cadell Priest, and Dr of Divinity.
HVmbly shows unto your Hon: your suppliant, that whereas your Lo: the 6. of
March last past, caused a^ Excommunication lata sententiae to be published
against the Inhabitants of this Diocese of Dublin, prohibiting them to hear,
or to be present at the Masses of Paul Harris, and of Dr Peter Cadell Priests,
without any crime or cause ever proved against the aforementioned Priests, to the
great scandal of the whole Kingdom, the disaedification and ruin of many
souls, and to the utter disgrace and defamatio^ of the aforesaid Priests,
being of good esteem and reputation in this city of Dublin.

Your Suppliant therefore considering the censure of Excommunication to be the
greatest and severest punishment with which the Church does chastise
delinquents, and notorious offenders, introduced and appointed by the same
Church In medicinam, and non in ruinam animarum; and that the deliaquents
should rather be punished, then the innocents. Your Petitioner in all due and
canonical obedience submitting himself unto your Hon: as his Pastor, humbly
desires that your L. would be pleased to take the matter uuto your mature
consideration, and that you may be pleased by due course of law to cite before
you. Hon: the abovenamed Priests, Paul Harris and Peter Cadell, and that they
may be brought unto their answer, (which hitherto they never have been) of
whatsoever crimes may be laid unto their charge; and being convicted and found
guilty, that they be punished according to the quality of their faults; and in
the mean time to release the innocent People from so heavy a punishment,
undeservedly inflicted upon them, little knowing what it means. But if on the
contrary, the aforesaid Priests shallbe found to be innocent and guiltless,
that then your L. will be pleased to restore them to their good name and fame
injustly taken from them, to their great hurt and damage. And your Suppliant
shall pray. Dated April 6. 1632.

Judge (gentle Reader) whether this Petition had not bin enough to have
mollified the heart of a Pharaoh, to have freed the children of Israel from the
Egyptian servitude, and permit them to pass over the red sea, into the land
of Promise? And might not the same have prevayled (think you) with a loving,
religious and a careful Pastor, to have released his Subjects from the bonds
and captivity of so injust an Excommunication? But what answer had we of this
Petition? truly an Answer answerlesse; for to this day we never received any.

Well, for my part, I will not say of my Pastor (for the respect I owe him) as
Moses said of Pharaoh, Induratum est cor Pharaonis, Pharaoh his heart is
hardened. But surely I will say, Non vult dimittere populum ut sacrificent in
desert^: He will not let the people go to sacrifice in the wilderness with
Moses and Aaron. Yet as I doubt not but our Ordinary did foresee what errors
he was to commit even from the very first entrance into this business, (though
overruled partly by his own passion, and partly by the continual
solicitation of his Friars) he gave way thereunto. So I doubt not also, but by
this time he has a desire (especially since the success was no better) by
correcting of his mistakes, to bring matters into joint again. One great
impediment I fear will be in his way, which is the restitution of honor and
fame, which I tell you is a block that lies before many in the path that leads
unto salvation. For albeit (I confess) it goes much against the hair to make
restitution in temporal goods, in which a man has damuified his neighbor;
yet have we in the Old Testament a Tobias chap, 2. who commanded the same to
be done: and in the New a Zacheus, Luke 19: who performed it himself, But in
restitution of honor and fame, our proud corrupt natures have such an aversion
to humble our selves unto our equals, and much more to our Inferiors: I say
in acknowledging a wrong and an injury done by us, unto them, and above all
when the same requires a publicity, according to the circumstances of place and
persons in and before whom the same was committed, as it requires more then an
Heroical virtue, to overcome so great a difficultyt and I know not, whether in
all the Scriptures we have an example thereof, as we had of the former: only I
may say with S. Augustine, as well in the one case as in the other: Non
di^ittitur peccatum, nisi restitnatur ablatum. The sin is not remitted, unless
what is wrongfully taken away be restored, Aug. tom. 2. Epist. 54. And it is a
Conclusion with S. Thom. Restituere quod injuste ^blatum est, est de
necessitate salutis: It is of necessity unto salvation, to restore back what is
injustly taken away. 2. 2. q. 62. art, 2. In which place (most learnedly as
always) he shows how a man's honor, fame and good name, may injustly be
taken away two manner of ways, First in accusing our neighbor, or reporting
of him a crime which is false, and then are we bound to restitution,
acknowledging our selves to have wronged him, in speaking of him what was
untrue. Secondly, in manifesting his secret and unknown faults, not having
respect unto the due course of law and justice. In which case also restitution
is to be made, (yet without a lie) as in confessing we have defamed Titius
injustly, or have wronged him in his good name and reputation. So S. Tho. and
in these doctrines all divines agree with him.

Only good Reader, give me leave further to enlarge my self, as touching the
difficulty that all of us do ordinarily find in this kind of restitution, I
mean of fame, more then of any other. To which purpose I will relate unto you
a short History, and I believe neither unprofitable, nor unpleasant, which I
find in an old book, and indeed so old, as it was printed above one hundred
and fifty years ago. Albeit for a writer to be of that antiquity, is nothing.
And this my book so ancient as appears by the date of the impression, as well
also may witness the old Character, and the excellency of the Paper, is in a
far bigger volume, then ever I yet beheld book, and it has hitherto had so
good a fate (of which also I am right glad) that it has escaped the Indian
leaf, the greatest enemy that this day I know, to the leaves of many a good
book, I say in this our reumatique and spitting age: for it neither wants
the first nor the last pages, or any else thorough the whole volume. The name
of it is Correctorium Vitiorum, but the Author it seems, meant not to favor
us so much, as to give us his name, for in stead thereof, he is only yelepped.
Fabri lignarij filius: The Son of the Carpenter, belike his father was free
of S. Joseph's trade, but to our Story.

This Author writing upon that commandment which S. Augustine accounts to be
the 7. but S. Hierome the 6. Non furtum facies. Thou shall not steal. Tells us
of a certain Priest, who had a penitent, and this penitent he was an arrant
thief, but not of money or goods, but of honor and fame, among other of his
sins acknowledging at the feet of his ghostly father, that he had wronged a
noble Gentleman in his name, and in his reputation, and that very grievously
before many witnesses. The Priest his ghostly father tells him he is damned. He
answers that he is very sorry, and were it to do again, he would not for the
world commit the like fact. His Confessor tells him, he is damned. O says the
penitent, good father have compassion on me, you see my tears and my unfeigned
sorrow and contrition of heart for my offense. Go thy ways, says the Priest,
for thou art damned. O father of my soul, says the penitent, I come hither to
seek comfort in the Sacrament, having been always taught never to despair
of Gods mercy, for what sin or offense soever: And for my part, I am willing to
accept of what penance shall be enjoined me, though it were to go on
pilgriinage to Rome or Compostella. Well then says his ghostly father, my
child, If thou will be saved, go thy ways neither to Rome nor to Compostella,
but unto the very same party whom thou have so slandered, seek out all those
persons who at that time were present, when thou did him that shame and
affront, and there before them all upon thy knees confess thy fault, and
humbly ask him forgiveness, and having so done, return hither to me again,
and I will give thee absolution. And shall I, that am a Gentleman, a man of
note, and a commander in my country, so abase, and disgrace my self, I will
first be damned. Why, says the Priest, and did not I tell thee so much before,
and yet I could not make thee to believe me? So far my old book. And how
far this may concern my L. Archbishop, let him consider of it, when he
reads this Chapter.

CAP. VIII.
How all our Archbishops endeavors, are, to suplant the Clergy, and to plant
the Friars in their places.
NOw it is a matter worthy our pond^ration to consider upon what grounds the
Archbishop presumes to do all these things so lawlesly, and yet with such
confidence, as if no impediment could be given to these his proceedings. And
this is a point which breeds great admiration in many, not only Catholics,
but Protestants also; yea it seems to be a mystery, of which no reason can be
assigned. And so I confess it is, yet only unto those who look upon our
affairs as it were a far off, and not at hand, passing by the way, and not
of set purpose, as not desirous to trouble themselves with what does not so
nearly concern them. But we who are the Patients of these his wrongs and
injuryes, are able both to satisfy our selves and others in the premises: As
having not only observed the ends he aims at, but the means also which he
uses in the prosecution, and the compassing of his ends, which for the
satisfaction of my Reader, I will set down, and the same in fewer words then a
matter of so large extent can well be handled.

First then it is to be observed, that our Anchbishop Tho. Flemming, alias
Barnwell, was not elected at all out of the body of the Clergy; but from among
the Regulars: (By Regulars I understand Monks and Friars) having been for many
years (as he also is at this day) a Friar of the Order of S. Francis. And a^
commonly those Prelates who are chosen from among the Friars, do not so much
consider and look before them to what state and place they are called, namely
to be heads of the Clergy, as what by long custom and education, they have
been, still looking back unto their Order, their fellow Friars; whose glory
to advance, they hold it no small glory unto themselves. So then our Archbishop
The, Flemming, alias Barnwell, Friar of the Order of S. Franch, having by the
Mediation of his great friends beyond the seas: (himself being also of an
honorable Family,) obtained of his Holiness to be called unto the dignity
of the Archbishop of Dublin, that suit being strongly seconded by the potency
and sedulity of the Friars of his own Order, who by all means seek to
effect, (as they have often done) to have Bishops made out of their Convents,
accounting themselves as good as Lords of that Diocese, whose Bishop is a
Friar: neither is this proper only to the Cordiliers, but to all other Orders
of Regulars: Only the Ignatians, I confess, are not so bent to seek for
these dignityes, at least in Europe, though we hear that in the Indyes they
shoot also at that mark.

Yet this Episcopation of Friars, especially in the Sea Apostolic, is not
held so convenient, and therefore by the wisdom of the Cardinals is either
wholly taken away, or at least much discontinued. For So Much as now for these
60. years past, we have not had any Monk or Friar advanced unto that seat; I
say, since the days of Sixtus quintus, who was a conventuall Friar of the
Order of S. Francis. And the said government might very well be observed (as
the best) thorough the whole Church, and would also, no doubt, if it were not
for the Importunity of them, who find that the easiest way to climb unto that
greatness which they so much affect. And to this purpose you may call to mind
the parable of him who went at midnight to his neighbors house to borrow 3.
loaves, Luke 11. But upon what necessity? Forsooth because, says he: Amicus
meus venit de via ad me, and non habeo quod ponam ante illum: A friend of mine
is come out of his way, and I have not what to set before him. But who is this
friend who is come out his way, and wants his supper? Mary a Friar, who
hungreth after a Bishopric. For surely so often as a Friar, who has by vow
renounced all dignities, and advancements, as well spiritual, as temporal,
hungers after a Myter, and sends his friend to Rome to negotiate for him, he
is, (no doubt,) out of his right way; for it is not unknown what path the
Friar ought to keep. The path of a more then an ordinary humility, the path of
austerity and mortification, the path of continual prayer and recollection.
The path of abjection and denial, not only of preferments and dignities, and
whatsoever may be pleasing unto his senses, but even of his own self, his
will, his appetites, and desires, naked and without all interest and propriety
of things in the world^ (...) follow our Savior naked upon: the cross. So
far from begging of Bishoprics at the Popes gate, as he by his rule and
holy institution ought to beg a morsel of bread, and a mess of pottage at
the Christian man's door, for his present and daily relief. And no doubt also,
but the goodman of the house, and the head of the family would willingly be
excused of his importunity, and rid of his ambitious demands, were it not
propter improbitatem amici, by reason of the extreme importunity of his
friend, this Prince, that Nobleman, this Guardian, that Provincial, these
letters, those Ambassadors, and what not? yea and with great reason, and good
manners also, might these unseasonable suitors ^e rejected, and sent home empty
handed. For the goodman who has the loaves might say, Noli mihi molestus esse,
jam ostium elausum est: Be not troublesome unto me, for now the door is shut.
The laws and canons of holy Church: The rules of your particular institute and
orders; Your own free choice and election. Your vows of poverty and obedience
in your profession, has shut the door upon all these your ambitious
pretentions. Noli mihi molestus esse, Good Friar be contented, and get thee
home unto thy Cell: Take thy Beads, and thy discipline into thy hands, and
fetch out this temptation of a Bishopric, that is upon thee, and leave
hereafter to trouble me, thou see the door is shut. Et pueri mei mecum sunt
in cubili: and my children they are with me in the bedchamber. The Clergy my
most lawful and legitimat children, to whom these dignities of right
appertain, and do belong, mecum sunt in cubili, are with me in the chamber, of
the same Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, as the most principal members thereof, the
loaves are therefore theirs, and I may not take the childrens bread and give it
unto strangers. But what will you have of it? the Friar is constant in
knocking, and will have no denial. So as at length the good old man overcome
and wearyed out with an obstinate and a never ending solicitation, he gra^ts
him his request: And the Friar comes home with a Miter, but not always of best
ability to undergo that charge, or to manage that place. For as Aristotle
disputes it in his Politiques: Quod (...) vir (...) est (...) civis: A good
man, is not always a good Commonwealths man: So has it bin observed, not
only in other Countries, but even in this Kingdom, that such Bishops as were
made out of Monks and Friars, commonly proved not the fittest for the
pastoral charge. So as many times in (...) a Friar into a Bishop, you mar a
good Friar, and yet make up no good Bishop. For that of Aristotle is also true,
Magistrate as indicat virum: The sufficiency of a man is not so well known, as
when he comes to government. And this that great observer of the Irish
conditions, in his (...), Gira^^^ Ca^brensis, witnesses in his T^pagraphia
(...), cap. ^9. and 30. and 31. Noting how seldom out of Monasteries came good
Prelates.

Yet let no man so far mistake me, as to imagine that I intend in this
discourse, to disparage the office, or diminish the dignity of such Bishops, as
are assumed from among the Friars. Far be from me any such thought, for we
thankfully acknowledge some of them, even in this Kingdom, to be very good
heads of the Clergy, and zealous of their honor; neither yet to infirnate,
that for any personal defect, either of Judgment, learning, or discretion,
their sacred office and Ministry is less to be esteemed. For So Much as S.
Ambrose tells me in his Pastorali, Nihil in hoc saeculo excellentius
sacerdotibus: Nihil sublimim Episcopis reperiri potest: Nothing in this world
is more excellent then the Priests: Nothing more sublime then the Bishops. Yea,
give me leave to illustrate this distinction of personal infirmities, and
Episcopal dignities, by a speech proceeding from a certain Nobleman in
England, in the time of King Richard the 3. for me thinks it reseuteth a very
sound judgment. This Nobleman being solicited by others of his quality, to
join with them in deposing that King, who was held both for a Tyrant, and an
Usurper, made answer, That he in no sort would concur in any such action with
them. For (says he) let him be what he will, he has now the Crown upon his
head, and if you set the Crown upon a stake or a post, I for my part will
follow it. What that Nobleman said of the Crown, the same say I of the Miter,
let it be placed either on the head of a deserving or an or an undeserving man,
I for my part will honor and obey the same, as hitherto I have everdone. Now,
what obedience is due unto the Miter, I happily shall have occasion to speak
hereafter. In the mean time after so long a digression, let us return to what
in the beginning of this Chapter I proposed, and the Reader may help himself by
looking back a page or two.

So it happened, as our present Archbishop (his Predecessor being deceased at
Rome) landed in Ireland about the year 1623. And scarce had he twi^t looked
about him, but what before his arrival was plotted twixt him and his Friars
beyond, he here beginne^ to put in execution. But what say you is that? Mary a
Plantation upon the Clergy, and in their places to bring in the Monks and the
Friars, which about those times, as also before in great numbers, and of all
Orders hither ro^ayoed and are now grown into such a head (mainly strengthened
by the Er^^ciscan Archbishop) as by the weak and well near minated Clergy,
they are unresistable. Neither (when I speak of Monks and Friars) think that I
forget the Jesuits, for them I range under the standard and colors of the
Friars. Now the means to effect this Plantation wars, to make themselves
strong, and the Clergy weak. To make themselves strong, was to take into their
Orders by all manner of allurements and persuasions, such as may be thought
any ways fit for their purpose: and to this end they induce Gentlemen's second
sons, as also Farmers sons, and Merchants Apprentices, among which they
found (and still do) a plentiful harvest. For I have heard Merchants of
Dublin complaining, that scarce could they have an Apprentice to serve out the
half of his years, before he had a vocation to be a Friar. And among those
they refused not also to ad^it. Serving-men, Soldiers, Taylours, and
Horse-boyes, who are now become R. Fathers, though neither learned, nor civil
men. And indeed by taking in such a multitude of rude, and licentious youths,
of all sorts and conditions, many scandalls have happened among them these
years past. And no marvel, for when such a company of unbridled colts break
loose from obedience of Parents and Masters, by whom they were formerly curbed
and kept in awe, and begin to taste that pleasant liquor of liberty, which
under the Friars they suddenly enjoyed, they grew very insolent and terrible,
yea and many times insupportable. For their new Superiors, not willing to
distaste their novices (who many times in regard of the portions and means
they brought with them, were indeed their Masters.) And partly for fear of
loosing them, of whom for a long time they could not be well assured, as also
lest by offending and discontenting of them, they should not so easily draw in
others. And lastly, for that in truth such Monastical discipline (as is
requisite and commanded by the rule) could not conveniently be observed in this
Country, so many abuses on a sudden did rush^ in among them, as it moved some
zealous of the common good, (true lovers of piety, and virtue; and not only of
the specious names and glorious titles thereof) to move his Holiness for a
Reformation, which accordingly was effected, and a direction came down; That
no Novices should be received into any Order of Religion in these parts, where
Regular discipline could not be observed. But this Inhibition took as much
effect with our Friars, as if it had come from me. For the manner of our
Regulars in these parts is: That if any thing from the City be obtained in
their behalf; for example, any new privilege, or augmentation of authority,
Exemption, Faculty, Indult, Grant, Dispensation, Immunity, which falls out to
their content, and of which themselves by long fuit have been the procurers;
O^ it is received as an Oracle, it is published, it is proclaimed, it is urged,
it is insisted upon. And what but the authority of the Sea Apostolic,
Obedience, Obedience. But if on the contrary, by reason of my just complaint
made against them by the Bishops and Preats of the Clergy, any restraint or
limitation of their power be made, or diminutio^ of their greatness, which may
but eclipse the smallest glimpse of their accustomed splendour, then shall such
Apostolical letters be viewed, and reviewed, they shall be searched, weighed,
and pondered, they shall be construed, glossed, and interpreted, yea every
point and iota shall be examined and pryed into; if happily by any means they
may be avoided. But if no such flaw can be found in them, then forsooth they
were obtained by sinister and wrong information, and so subject unto obreption.
or else their Generals have not signified them, and so no reckoning to be made
of them. Example where of we have lately seen in the Bull of the Revocation
of Facultyes: And now since that again, in the Inhibition, De non admittendis
Novitijs in Hibernia, I say then, since the time that our Friars began to give
their habit, and to take in Probationers in the Kingdom (which before in much
fewer numbers were bred for them beyond seas) they are increased to such a
height, as they are become not only terrible unto the Bishops and Clergy, but
whosoever shall oppose them shall find of what power they are of. And this may
well be understood if we do but observe what Inwardnesse, or rather I may
call it, a kind of Kindred and alliance they have contracted, not only with
the common people, but with them also of best note and rank, by drawing unto
them this son, that Daughter, this brother, that sister, this uncle, that
aunt, this Nephew, that Niece, this Kinsman, that Apprentice: So as they are
become farie more dear and near unto the Inhabitants, then were ever in times
past, Fosters, or Gossips: So as by their own multitudes, and this
intaylemente of their Devotoes, they are now able in two hours to make the
worthy est man either of our Clergy or. Laity (within the City of Dublin, or
where else they reign) as odious and hateful unto the people, as any
Malefactor whatsoever.

What shall I say of that hereditary disease of lying, which reigns among our
Mendicants, by which they compass their ends, and prevayle marveilously in
their designments, yea and beyond all expectation. I call lying an hereditary
disease among Friars: For that Thomas Walsingham, sometimes a Cistertian Monk
of S. Albons, a most pious, and a learned man. and among other writers most
renowned in the Chronicle of such English Kings whose lives he writ, observed
and committed the same to posterity: That it was a good argument in his days,
in every man's mouth. Tenens tum de for^^a, quam de matonia. Hic est frater.
Ergo m^ndax, ficat and illud. Hoc est album. Ergo ^oloratum. As much to say: It
was in those times a very good reason to say, such a one is a Friar, and
therefore a Liar. Even as to say: This thing is white, and therefore has a
color. This testimony of Walfinghams shall you find in the life of Richard the
second, of which author, who lived in the reign of Henry the sixth, John Leland
in his book, De illustribus (...) scriptoribus writes of him: That he was in
perscrutandis antiquitatib^s diligens, in conscribendis historijs industrius:
in searching out of antiquities diligent, in writing of histories industrious.
And Doctor John Pits a modern writer, in his book de illustribus Anglia
script^^ibus, gives him this praise. Quod vir erat, qui ita pietatem coluit, ut
bonas literas interea non negligeret, (...) compilavit historias tanta fide, ut
verax semper habitus sit. That he was a man who so loved piety, that he
neglected not good letters, that he compiled many historyes with that
faithfulness, that he ever was held a true Writer. Well then what this true
writer has left recorded of Friars untruthes, and lea^ings, in his days, I am
sure the Friars of our times will make good, being nothing degenerate or
inferior unto their predecessors in this wind; witness this kingdom, but
especially the City of Dublin; where, by their lying, backbiting, and
detraction, they have purchased more belief, especially among the vulgar, then
he that comes with the gospel of S. John in his mouth. For whenever a Friar
is disposed by lying and back^iting to take away the good name of a Priest, or
any other man whosoever, he presently be takes himself unto his begging
vocation, which is a sufficient color to bring him to any man's house, and so
very dexterously he can stop two shards with one bush, for he can both beg
and slander at one time. For say, his principal business (and that which he
chiefly intends) is to defame, and to backbite his neighbor, yet his begging
shall be the stalking horse unto that foul business, so as the detraction
shall only seem to come by way of discourse and communication, accidentally.
And this advantage has the Friar of all men in the world, who say they were
maliciously minded, and intended never so much evil against their neighbor,
yet are they to seek of an occasion and an excuse to bring them to this and
that bodies house, whereby they might vent the poison and malice of their
hearts, of which pretext by reason of his begging, the Friar is ever provided,
and therefore in flandering, backbiting and defaming, whenever it pleases
the Friar to be so wicked, (as I said before) he has the advantage of all men
upon earth. In confideration whereof I less muvaile at the speech of a
certain Gentleman, who in a familiar discourse said, that he had rather have
the displeasure of any Nobleman in the country, then of the meanest Friar of
any order: being asked the reason thereof, he answered, he would keep that to
himself. And whence may we think all these lies and tales with which this
country (more of late then ever heretofore) is abused? I say from what
fountain by all probability do they descend, but from these Friar limitours,
who passing from parish to parish, from house to house, are lurking and
scouting in every corner. For albeit I confess the needy beggar is also
commonly a liar, yet neither has he the wit, or the boldness to vent such
lewd repo^ts, neither (if he did) is there any so light of belief, is to give
credit unto him. No, no: it is not the wanting beggar that sits at the gate
with a mess of broth, and a piece of bread in his hand, who bruiteth all these
lies and slanderous detractions of this, and that party, whom they disaffect,
but it is the wanton beggar who sits above the salt, because he has a better
coat upon his back, and authorized by his profession, which in this kingdom is
made too often a Pandor to wicked abuses. And I am the rather induced so to
think, for that in this City of Dublin, we never yet found any lie, or wicked
slander made of a Clergyman, but when we got the end of the thread, and did
wind up the same to the bottom (as sometimes we have done) the other end of it
did always hang at a Friars tongue. And this they are the more animated, and
encouraged to do (I say, to offer any abuse or disgrace to a Pastor, or a
Parish Priest, or any other of the Clergy) for that no remedy in the earth can
be had against them. But why? Because it is provided by such privileges and
indults, as they have obtained from the Sea Apostolic (which I doubt not but
was at the first granted them upon good consideration) That upon all causes
(excepting heresies, and such other enormous crimes reserved to the cognizance
of the Ecclesiastical Magistrates) they shall be convented before no other
Judges in primo instanti, then their own Superiors; as Guardians, Priors,
Rectors, Provincials, and the like. And you know it is a Proverb, that the
clout will help the shoe. So as a man (though never so highly wronged by a
Friar) had better fit him down contented then make a journey to the Friars
Superior, happily 20 or 30 miles from him, and coming to his residence or
Convent, his Guardian shall either be at home, or from home; within, or abroad;
at leisure, or not at leisure; to be spoke withal, or not to be spoke withal,
even as it pleases himself. And let the plaintiff do his best or his worst,
he shall be sure his satisfaction shall never countervaile his labor, and for
one enemy he had before, he shall be sure to purchase a score. I could be
content to make a Catalogue of some part of their lies and slanders, were it
not to avoyde prolixity, and that they are so incredible, as my self should
also incur the name of a liar in relating them: wherefore I hold it better to
say my prayers with the Prophet David: Domine liber. tanimam meam a labijs
iniquis, and a lingua dolosa: O Lord deliver my soul from lying lips, and from
a deceitful tongue.

And thus have you the first means of the oppression of the Clergy by our
Friars, which consists in making themselves strong. The second is, in making
the Clergy weak, for upon these two Poles moves the Sphere of the Friars
Monarchy. Now to weaken the Clergy there was held no better course, then upon
the vacancy of any Parish, either by death, or otherwise, to annex that cure
unto another, as we see at this day, five or six parishes within the walls,
with us reduced unto two, or else in place of the dead (who was a man of good
talents and parts) to substitute some Arcadian creature, who little can say more
then his Matins, and he shall undergo the Cure. For you know, the greater the
Ass, the greater burden is he able to bear, besides (none more pliable unto
the humor of the Friar) then he that is guilty of little worth in himself. So
twixt the one and the other, we see of ten Parishes within and without the
walls, only remaining five, while (in the mean time) the Friars, in, and about
the town, are multiplied unto five score: Besides what they have in the
Country, and not one of these, but what by his own endeavors, the strength
of his Order, the dependence of his Devoto's, the countenance of our Franciscan
Archbishop, is able to prevayle in right and wrong, against all our Clergy in
Dublin. For (God help us) at this day both Parish Priests, and all others of
the Clergy, as well in the Suburbs, as City of Dublin, scarce are we so many
persons as were in the Arc of Noah. Of which small number, some of them being
called by the Ordinary, to have the care of Parishes (and as themselves know,
and others can witness with them, neither for any desert of learning, or good
life at all.) Others being the outcast of Regulars, and without all hope of
reentrance, being thrown out as branne, (good enough in those men's eyes, to
make parish Priests) entertained into the Archbishops favor by humouring of
his Friars, (who according to that rule of state policy commended by the
Florentine divide et regna, make a faction among thy subjects and then be
absolute) he is willing to make use of them, and to serve himself of them, to
ruinate both themselves and their fellows, knowing by how much more these
silly men are obnoxious unto him, and in his danger for some causes, he is the
more assured of them, as the fittest instruments of opposition unto the rest of
the Clergy.

Charus erit Verri, qui Verrem tempore quo vult
Accusare potest. Iuvenal. Sat. 3.
Dear he is to Verres, (though not for love, but fear,)
Who Verres can accuse, earth day, each month, each year. For who are more
officious, or more violent in persecuting of the Clergy and their friends, then
these men be, to whom in a manner is committed the managing of the whole war
against the Clergy, while the Bishop and his Friars in the mean while, laugh,
and look on, to see how industrious we be in supplanting one another, by whose
division in the Interim, all the concourse of the Laity is unto the Friars,
enjoying (to their great contentment) such maintenance as was accustomed to
fall to the portion of the parish Priests. Thus like unto the wax Candles upon
their Altars, wasting themselves to give light unto others, they make way unto
the Friars Monarchy, shortly upon their ruins to be erected.

Now this Episcopal, or Friarly persecution of the poor Clergy of this City,
and Diocese; began with the coming in of our present Archbishop, and the
first tempest thereof, disburdened it self upon that worthy and most venerable
Priest, Fa. James Talbot then Vicar general. A most learned, pious, and mild
man, as all this City can witness, et ^ujus memoria fit in benedictione:
about the same time it descended also upon Fa. Patricke Cabil, Fa. Luke Roch
sort lately deceased, and a most worthy man: (For as any Clergy man was of more
eminency and sufficiency, in learning, piety, and virtue, by so much always
was he held more to stand in the Friars light, for with these ever have been
our Friars wars, and ^o^ with others.) Till lastly i^fell foul upon these
two Priests D. Peter Cadell, and Paul Harris, in whom finding nothing that he
could reprehend; The Bishop (by the Council of his Friars) falls upon the most
ingenious kind of persecution, and withal the most impious that ever in any
age was practiced, yea, I challenge all antiquity, since the Ascension of our
Savior; to give an Example of the like. For first attempting by Regal power,
rather then Episcopal, to banish them out his Diocese, and that without
alleging any cause against them, and finding this not to succeed with him, he
then commands under pain of Excommunication, that none should be present at
their Masses, knowing that nothing could be more prejudicial unto them, in
regard of their temporal maintenance, nor nothing less troublesome unto the
people. For what is it to forbear the Masses of two Priests (say they) when as
with such ease they may supply that want among the Friars? So that upon the
least scruple in the world, he wist well that would be obeyed. And so by this
one command he serves himself of two notable purposes. For first he deprives
the Priests of their accustomed maintenance: And by the same he brings what
they should have, unto his beloved Friars. For it is the custom (which he well
knew) both of the City and country in these parts, that where the good people
hear Mass, that there one time or other, they leave some small alms or
offering, according to their devotion. Here, I confess, was a great deal of
policy, but where was the Religion? Now happily if any of more understanding
and judgment then the common sort did look into this practice, and condemning
in their mind these their proceedings, so sinister and unjust: and so in
compassion of the innocent Priests, did make less account of the Ordinaryes
censure, Then had he his Regular^ br^chium, the strong assistance of his Eryars
to do him service, and to negotiat with the people, and to accommodat that
busine^. For the citizens can well witness with us, how like so many Bees our
Friars did swarm about them, applying them sometimes with the honey, sometimes
with the sting, as best might serve their turn: In Confession persuading such
as repair unto them, and never giving them absolution, till they have promised
not any more to frequent the Masses of the two Priests. Others who are slow in
coming unto the Friar, the Friar comes unto them, he visites them in their
houses, he tells them how such a good friend of theirs remembers their love
unto them: he brings them a letter or a token from such a Friar of their kindred
or acquaintance, and wishes them to be advised by him: He protests how well
he loves them; how much S. Francis or S. Dominick is beholding unto them for
their great charity and alms; and for their parts, they pray continually for
their happiness and prosperity, both in this life, and in the next. If they
prevail (as commonly they do) they have their intent. If they happen upon
others that are of a better headpiece, and have a little more steel in their
beards,, and will not so easily be drawn with their sweet words: If he be a
Merchant, they tell him plainly he will loose his custom, and neither they,
nor any of their friends will buy ought hereafter in his shop; and this they
will not stick openly to declare unto their Iourney-men and App^entices. The
like they do unto the Tradesmen, Cooks, Taylours, and Shoe-makers: Nay, they
will threaten the very Tavernes, that they shall have no sale of their Wine and
their Beer, if they will adhere unto those two Priests. (I write nothing but
what is well known through all the streets of Dublin.) Nay, and they will be as
good as their words: for all our friends who wish us well, or gives us a meals
meat, or a lodging in their house, fares this day the worse for us, and are
partakers with us of this Friarly persecution. And brother against brother, the
husband against the wife, the children against the parents, and one neighbor
against another, to the great disturbance and disquiet, not only of the Church,
but even of the Commonwealth. And what do we in the mean time? neither
persuade, nor dissuade, such as come unto us are welcome, and such as leave us,
God speed them well. As for the Friars, I confess (if any of them durst debate
the matter with us) we know what we have to say unto them. But they rather
apply themselves to work upon other subjects, who are more easy to be
deceived by them, so the great scandal of the Church, and perdition of souls.

Well, to conclude this point; All had bin well, had our Friars observed that
wholesome exhortation of the Apostle, and made an application thereof unto
themselves; A^divi^^^ enim inter vos quosdam ambulare inqxiete, etc. We have
heard some to walk among you unquietly, busy bodies, working nothing: but such
we beseech in our Lord Jesus Christ, that laboring in silence they eat their
own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. I say, all had bin in peace and quietness with us, had
the Friars and our Franciscan Archbishop observed the laws and Canons of the
Church, and according to his place had bin ready to minister Justice unto such
as wanted it, and so many times sought for it at his hands: For want of which
Justice, neither Church, nor Commonwealth can long subsist, much less
flourish. Justice the cement of all humane societies. Justice the basis and
foundation of all governments. Justice the Queen of all moral virtues. Justice
which gives to every man his own. Justice, which (as Cassiodorus says) knows
neither father nor mother, but only the truth. It accepts no person, it
imitateth God. Justice, Justice cries the Priest: Peace, hold thy tongue, says
the Friar. The one still laying on, the other still crying out: as having more
reason to cry for his beating, then the other to beat him for his crying. But
never will the Music be sweet, betwixt them, till it be set to David's Harp:
Misericordia, and veritas, obviaverunt sibi: Iustitia, and pax osculata sunt,
Psalm. 84. Mercy and truth have met one another, Justice and peace have kissed
each other. Which that it may, the God of Mercy and Truth, the God of Justice
and Peace grant unto us.

CAP. IX.
The latter part of the Censure answered.
AS the first part of the Archbishops censure consists in the excommunication
of the Laity, for hearing the Masses of the abovenamed Priests: So the second
is in taking away, from them all power and jurisdiction of hearing Confessions,
or ministering, or doing any act or acts of the Pastoral function within the
Diocese of Dablin, as also annulling and making void all Absolutions hence
forward by them to be given. So the Censure.

To which I answer out of S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 104. 5. That the Inferior cannot
limit the power of his Superior: Not the Captain, of the Proconsull; nor the
Proconsull, of the General. And it is a Rule of the Canon; Quod par in par^m
non habet imperium, and min i^s in superiorem. An equal has no command over
his equal, and much less over his superior. And it has the consent of all
Doctors. For So Much then, say the Priests, that they have received their power
and jurisdiction in the premises, not from their Ordinary, but from the Sea
Apostolic, and the fame power by the Archbishop acknowledged, and admitted
for good and authentical, and so many years practiced in his Diocese, he can
not restrain their missionary power, till by the law and authority of the
Church they be deprived thereof. And with this answer, the Archbishop may
content himself, and desist further to encroach upon his superiors
jurisdiction, to whom he has as strict an obligation of obedience, as the
Priests have: And this shall suffice to have spoken of the Archbishops Censure,
and the Nullity thereof.

These Chapters following I ^as wished to add by such of my friends as are
zealous both of the good of the Church, and of the Common wealth.
CAP. I.
Of the shameful Avarice, and scandalous Begging of our Friars Mendicant,
especially in this Kingdom of IRELAND:
SVrely, if our Archbishop had been so careful of the good of his flock, as
in his Excommunication is pretended, it had been a very methodicall charity
for him to have begun at home with his own family, of his beloved Friars, and
^o have reformed those horrible and infamous abuses among them, of which, not
only this Diocese, but the whole kingdom complains, groaning under the
insupportable burden thereof I say it had been very orderly for the Bishop to
have begun his reformation at his own house, knowing what the Apostle says.
Si quis autem suae domni praesse nescit, quomodo Ecclesiae Dei diligentiam
habebit. 1. Tim. 3. But he who knows not, how to govern his own house, how
will he have care of the Church of God.

For first: The rule of S. Francis commands, that his Friars should work, and
labor with their hands, and such among them as know no trade or occupation,
should learn the same, and when they cannot sufficiently maintain themselves
by the labor of their hands, then that it should be lawful for them to beg:
but how? not in Chapels or Oratoryes, but ostiatim from door to door. But to
the end that none shall say, that I speak this of mine own head, I will set
you down S. Francis his own words, as they iye in his Testament.. 5.

Et ego manibus meis laborabam, and volo laborare, and omnes alij fratres mei
firmiter volo quod laborent, de laboritio quod pertinet ad bonestatem: and qui
nesciunt, addiscant: non propter cupiditatem recipiendi pretium laboris, sed
propter bonum exemplum, and ad repellandam otiositatem, and quando non daretur
nobis pretium laboris, recurramus ad mensam Domini petendo elemosinam ostiatim.
In English thus. And I (says S. Francis) labored with my hands, and will
labor; and all my other brethren I firmly will, that they labor with their
hands what pertaines to honesty: and such as know not, let them learn; not for
desire of receiving a reward of their labors, but for good example, and to
avoyde sloth, and when the price of our work is not given us, let us have
recourse unto the Table of our Lord, asking alms from door to door. By which
it is manifest, that the blessed S. Francis intends not the labor of the
mind, in studying to become learned, but manual labor, and bodily work,
propounding the same unto them by his own example: Et ego manibus me is
laborabam, and I (says he) labored with my hands: neither can any say, that
this is only advised them by way of counsel, but rather absolutely commanded,
for so says the Saint, and volo, and I will that all other my brethren labor
de laboritio, by which word is ever understood bodily labor.

Now, if the Friars in their own defense, say, that it may be so expounded, as
extended unto the labor of the mind, as well as of the body: Then (say I) they
violat another precept of their rule given them by S. Francis, which is, that
they are to make no gloss, commentary, or exposition, upon his rule, but to
understand the words plainly as they lie, and this is commanded them under
obedience, in the last Paragraph saving one, of his Testament, in these words:
Et omnibus fratribus meis Clericis and Laicis, praecipio firmiter per
obedientiam, ut non mittant glossas in Regulam, nec in istis verbis, dicendo,
Ita volunt intelligi, sed sicut Dominus dedit mihi simpliciter and pure dic ere
and scribere Regulam, and ista verba, ita simpliciter and pure sine glossa
intelligatis, and cum sancta operatione observetis usque in finem. The same in
English is thus. And I firmly command under obedience, all my Friars, Clergy,
and Laity, that they make no glosses upon the Rule, nor in these words, saying:
So they will be understood; but as our Lord gave me simply and purely to speak,
and to write the Rule, and those words, so ought you to understand them,
without a gloss, and by holy operation observe them unto the end.

Now if our Friars tell us, That the Testament of S. Francis is diverse from
his Rule, and so not of that authority as to bind them to that obedience and
observation, as the Rule does. Then say I, Let S. Francis answer for himself in
his said Testament. 6. in these words: Et non dicant fratres, Haec est alia
Regula, quia haec est recordatio, admonitio and exhortatio, and meum
testamentum quod ego frater Franciscus parvulus vester and servus facio vobis
fratribus meis benedictis, propter hoc, ut regulam quam Domino promisimus,
melius catholice observemus. In English thus: And let not the Friars say, This
is another Rule, for that this is a remembrance, admonition, and exhortation;
and my will which I brother Francis, a little one, and your servant, do make
to you my blessed brethren, to this end, that we may better Catholickly observe
this Rule, which we have promised unto our Lord.

Lastly, if the Friars say: That howsoever it be, yet they are dispensed by
authority of the Sea Apostolic, from the observance of his Testament, and
consequently, from any bodily work or labor, other then it please themselves.
I answer: As the Pope cannot dispense with any commannd or Precept of
Canonical Scripture; no more can he with the Rule of S. Francis. If it be true
which S. Francis wrote in his Will and Testament, a little before his death:
(And I trust our Friars will hold it a great sin to say, S. Francis lied) in
these words, Dominus dedit mihi simpliciter and pure dicere and scribere
regulam, and ista verba: Our Lord granted unto me, simply and purely to speak
and write the Rule, and these words: Testament. 11. By which testimony of S.
Francis, it appears, that as well his Testament or Will which he made but two
years before his death, as his Rule before given unto his brethren was indicted
by the Holy Ghost, and so by divine authority given unto him. Notwithstanding
the Friars of his Order do exempt themselves from his Will and Testament, and
the observance thereof, and consequently from all bodily labor therein
commanded, and contrary unto the express command of the aforesaid Will, they
take upon them to procure glosses and expositions upon the Rule as also
dispensations and relaxations from the Sea Apostolic. And this by virtue of
the Declarations of S. Gregory 9, and Nicolaus 3. who (as they say) have
declared, that they are not bound to observe or obey that Testament or Will of
S. Francis, or the thiugs therein contained. Those Popes (it seems) were not
of opinion, That the Testament of S. Francis was of sacred authority, or
canonical Scripture, or that it was from Heaven, and the Holy Ghost inspired
into S. Francis. And so the Friars resting upon the aforesaid Declarations, are
well contented that so it should be believed. And therefore (say S. Francis
what he will, or what he can) beg they will, and labor they will not; for
that is the more easy Trade of both; and aucupium long questuofissimum, a
most ready way to attain, not only to means necessary, but to such
abundance, as we see them in all places to enjoy. For first our Mendicant
Orders have two sorts of Begging, like two ploughes ever walking. For first,
they pass thorough the Parishes, from house to house, not contented to ask
their alms at the door, as S. Franeis commands in his Will, and was practiced
in his days, and in the primitive times of his Order; for that is not
Gentlemanlike, but boldly will they rush into the Hall, and from thence into
any other part of the house, more like unto Officers, then poor Beggars: So
haunting the richest sort of people for Money, Wheat, Muttons, Malt, Salt,
Fish, Flesh, for nothing comes amiss; as they forget not the honest Farmer,
neither shall the poor Cotter escape them. And as Arma^hanus noted in his
time, so shameless, and importunate in their begging, as if there be but two
Cheeses in the house, they will carry them both away, or they will shame the
owners. And verily this which S. Richard of Dundalke writes in his Defensorium
Curatorum, of the two Cheeses, puts me in mind of what lately we saw practiced
in the County of Wexford, where a Friar coming to beg Muttons, a poor
Cotter, (having but only two,) out of his kind heart told the Friar, he should
have one of them. Alas (quoth the Friar) my honest friend, and what will thou
do with the other? It will but stray from thee; give them both to GOD
Almighty. The poor man was content: And so GOD Almighty (by the Friars help)
got both the Muttons. But far be it from me to say, That this Friar was
either a bold Beggar, or avaricious at all.

Their second kind of Begging, as it is far more compendious, so much more
commodious: for as their former Begging seemed to, be but by retayle, by
visiting the good people in their houses; so this is altogether by wholesale,
and (as it were) in gross. And it is after this manner, though used in no
other Country (that ever I could observe) but only in Ireland.

The Friar betakes himself on Sondayes, on Holy Days, or in Funerals of the
Dead, Moneth-mindes, Anniversaryes, Weddings, Patrons, and the like, to such
places as the people usually resort to Mass, and there (either before, or
after Mass) he shows himself in his habit; but (above all) he is very
careful that he may beg before Mass; for he fore-seeth that after Mass the
people will scatter, and so he shall fail of his purpose. And therefore to
prevent that inconvenience, he commands that so soon as Mass is ended, the
doors of the Oratory, or of the Gentleman's Hall be shut, so as none may pass
forth, till such time as he have uttered and ended his Mendicatory speech,
which commonly is taken out of the commonplace of Liberality, Almsdeeds,
works of mercy, and the like: for example, facite elemosynam, and omnia mund^
funt vobis. Luke 11. Give alms, and all things are clean unto you. Peccata tua
elemosy^is redime, et iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperu^. Dan. 4. Redeem
thy fins with alms-deeds; and thine iniquities with pity to the poor. Beatus
qui intelligit super egenum, et pauperem, in die mala liberabit cum Dominus.
Psalm. 40. Blessed is he who understands the case of the poor and needy, our
Lord shall deliver him in the evil day. This done, he expresses unto them a
catalogue of his wants, and there remembering, or at least practizing, that
saying of Seneca the Tragedian in Thieste. Qui timide rogat, docet negare; he
that asks faintly, teaches how to deny; without any shame or modesty, he
demands not as a Beggar, but rather as a Commander: who will give them the
Barrel of Wheat, the Malt, the Muttons, etc. If they come off to his liking,
he gives them his To giver lave, agus tuggi garo vanecht^ yen var vd. And
turning himself unto the Altar, upon his knees he says an Ave Maria: If he
find them tough and backward, then he falls a cursing them, accusing the
hardness of their hearts, and their small devotion, telling them; that it is
the very devil that possesses their hearts, and stops their tongues, and will
not suffer them to speak. So as what with his cursing, what with his blessing,
what with the vainglory that many of them take among their neighbors to be
held liberal, what with the confusion and shame that others are put unto, not
to be thought so kind hearted (a great dishonor (I tell you) among the Irish)
whosoever loses the Friar he gets. And thus has the matter been carried
these years past. But indeed of late I hear say, the case is altered, and no
marvel if with continual blood-letting the body in time grow both cold and
dry. For what thorough the multitude of Friars in this kingdom, who are
grown, sine numero, pondere, and mensura, without number, weight, and measure,
in which three all things were created, as also many other taxations from the
state, the commons are so impoverished, and oppressed, as now they are as
unwilling to see a Friar come among them to beg, as a Trooper to distraine,
and to take up their pawnes. Insomuch as in the Country the good people,
(though never so Catholic and devout,) they will rather loose Mass upon
Sundays and Holidays, then they will come within a musket shot of a Friar, so
much they fear to be pounded up in a Gentleman's Hall, or in a parish Chapel,
as their Cowes use to be, when they trespass upon their neighbors corns.
Thus are the Sacraments profaned: And that munda oblatio: that clean offering
(prophesied of by Malachy. 1.) neglected, the service and ceremonies of the
Church contemned. While in the eyes of the people, either nothing, or nothing
more is sought after, then the belly. For who is either so patient by nature,
or so irreligious for want of breeding, as he can endure a Friar limitour in a
public audience, (when he finds the people sometimes, not to answer his
expectation in giving of alms) to utter these words. Well and do you depart
the the place, and give me nothing? From the richest to the poorest those who
leave no alms with me, I will take from them the grace and benefit of that
Mass which this day they have heard. This profane and Symoniacall speech was
uttered by a Franciscan in the Diocese of Mead, and the same very lately. And
if any of his order will question the truth thereof, let him either come, or
send unto me, and I will give him such satisfaction as he shall return assured
of the truth, of what I have reported. For as old Eleazarus said, 2. Macab. 6.
Non enim aet^ti nostrae dignum est fingere: It becomes not our years to forge,
and much less my profession to slander. For let the world think or speak of
me what they please I intend the reformation of what is amiss, which were I so
happy as to effect, I would then offer up a silver pen, not to Apollo and the
Muses, but to the honor of my Savior, in this or the like verse.

Consecrat hic Paulus calamum, calamique labores,
(Ante aras) Domino lata trophaea suo.
But this may not be done, till I have told another Friar of his fault, and it
is a public fault (for I meddle with none other) who when the Priest in his
sacred vestiments is prepared to say, Introibo ad altar Dei, the Friar in a
most undece^t and ^usticall manner, will well ^ecre justle him from the Altar,
causing him to yield unto himself the first time and place of begging, on
which both Mass, Priest, and People, must attend, as if the Friar should say,
with the Satirist.

O Cives cives quarenda pecuni^ primum est,
Virtu^ post nummos. I^^n.
And so the divine and fearful mysteries being celebrated at no canonical
hour, the people are dismissed at two a clock, to go home to dinner. And if
the parish Priest seem to be displeased with the Friars behavior, or give the
least impediment unto his begging, he shall be threatened Excommunication, by
virtue of his Privileges, or else by the Bishop of the Diocese, to be
discharged of his place. As we have lately seen practiced in the Diocese of
Kildare, under their Dominican Bishop.

The consideration of these our miserable times in Ireland does often make me
to think, and to reflect of the days of Heli the Priest, 1. Reg. 12. where
the Scripture says, Porro filij Heli, filij Belial, nescientes Dominum, neque
officium Sacerdotum ad populum. etc. Moreover the Sons of Heli, were the
Sons of Belial, neither knowing our Lord, nor the duty of Priests unto the
people, etc: by whose base greediness, as you may read in the place above
cited, it is said. Quod retrahebant homines a sacrificio Domini. They did
withdraw the people from the sacrifice of our Lord, which example of Ophni and
Phinees the two Sons of Heli, in preferring the flesh pots before the
sacrifices of God, is set forth unto us a most lively type and figure of our
Friar Mendicants, who in what abundance soever they live (whose apparel,
horses, and foote-boyes, argues rather superfluity then poverty) yet beg they
will, and beg they must, and that, (as before has been noted) with such
immodesty, as all present but themselves, are much ashamed of them, making the
people either to loathe, or at least to forbear their duty to God, and in
truth to conceive that all our* Religion is but to serve our own turns. Those
who doubt of the truth of my speeches, let them but upon some Festival day,
walk unto the next Villages, as Cromlin, Casticknock, Palmerston, or Lucan,
etc. and they shall be both eye and ear witnesses of much more then I have
said. But and if they will take the pains to make a journey so far as
Connagh, then I will promise them that there they shall find our Friars rather
latrones, then mendicos, more to smell of the Thief, then of the Beggar. For
without any leave or liking of the honest Farmer, they will make bold to search
his Arkes, and hutches of Corn, Meal, Malt, and thence to take away what they
please, for who can control them? Moreover, I am credibly informed by diverse
of very good note in those parts^ That many times they will drive together all
their neighbors sheep into one fold, and knowing every man's mark, they will
choose out what Muttons they like (and I beshrew them if they take not the
fattest) and who is he that dare say, they do amiss? To such a potency they
are grown (even in a short time) in this Kingdom, that they are become not
only terrible unto the people, but not to be ruled by the laws of the Church,
and the institutes of their own Orders.

And even as in the days of King Henry 8, of late memory, the manifold abuses
not only of the Laity, but even of Church men, did cast them out of these
Kingdoms, and brought that desolation upon them, which to this day their
posterity does inherit. So let us never think to repair our ruins, with
those excesses, and disorders, which were the causes of those ruins. For
doubtless the same causes, sooner or later, will have the same effects. Now
certain it is, that as some of the Ecclesiastical order might be tainted with
much pride and ambition, by means of their great plenty and abundance, and not
free also from covetousness, yet the Mendicant orders according to the course
of man's natural corruption, are more prop^nse and inclined unto the dropsy of
Avarice, and such vices, as follow thereupon, th^n either the Clergy, or any
other estate and condition of men, who having a competency of some settled
means, may well attend their vocation with tranquillity, and contentment of
mind, (I say, their mediocrity of means under God, defending them from too
much anxiety, and care of future wants.) When as the Friar Mendicant, being
habituated in begging, and continual receiving of alms, and expectation of
uncertain gifts, dwells ever in cares house, his wants as well imaginative, as
real, like unto two fore-swarty forge-men, still beating, and hammering upon
the headpiece of his imagination, permitting him not to take any rest, yea
without a special degree of Gods grace, the beggar is ever sad, melancholy,
humorous and greedy, nor ordinarily so well provided as he ought to rely upon
that providence, which ever takes place of humane diligence. For example, give
a convent of Friars, though but of 20. persons, five hundred pounds in alms
this day (which is a fair proportion) you shall see them to morrow as
industrious in begging, as if you had given them but ten shillings. For even as
Hawks half gorged are more eager of prey, then these which are kept fasting,
so fares it with the Mendicants, who look not so much to what they have
already gotten, as what they have not yet obtained, nor what for the present
they enjoy, as what in time they may come to want. Nay the Friar though never
so well accommodated, abounding on every side, with rich kindred, friends and
Benefactours, amidst his own nation where probably he can never come to look
necessity in the face, and having also Dominus vobiscum, as a sure buckler (in
the hands of a man of good comportment) to defend him also from want: yet
compare this Friar Mendicant not now to a Clergy man (as we have already done)
but even unto the needy beggar, who has plenty of nothing, but of want, you
shall see the one well contented with a piece of bread, to satisfy his hungry
b^lly, or a pair of broken stockings, or an old shoe to his foot, when as the
other beggar will not stick to ask you an horse of eight or ten pounds price,
and if you deny him, he will show much more discontent, then the other beggar
who is denied a piece of pease bread, after which his hungry belly roares; but
if it so fall out, as your horse which you refused to bestow on the Friar
miscary, or come to any mischance, and so perish, why then the owner is rightly
served, since he denied him the Friar. Some reading these lines will better
understand them then others. A Merchant of my acquaintance, and living at this
day in this City of Dublin, refused to give a Friar a barrel of Beef, who of
my knowledge was in less necessity thereof, then the Merchant himself,
considering his charge of wife and children: soon after the Merchant (being
his own Factour) embarked himself with his Beef, and other Merchandise for
France, upon the seas he meets with a storm, and it was thought necessary for
their safety to lighten the ship, and to cast overboard some part of the
Beef, it pleased God (the temptest ceasing) they held on their voyage without
any more hurt. But what said the Friar and his fellows when news came to
town? forsooth, it was the just judgment of God that he should be forced to
throw that Beef into the sea, which he would not bestow on them. So as in
fear of these ensuing calamities incident unto our wretched mortality and
uncertain estate of life, in this vale of misery. What man of trade or
occupation, but especially what Merchant Venturer, or Seafaring man, dare deny
these Mendicant Orders what they ask? for he shall be sure the next calamity
or misfortune shall be set upon the skore of that refusal. But since many an
Agnus Dei, many a grain, and many a medall, and Relick lies buried in the
bottom of the Sea, though many besides escape. No marvel then though we see
their greatest Devo^oes, best benefactours, and friends to have their ^rosses,
both in their lives, and fortunes, and come to as many heavy markets as those
who adhere unto the poor distressed and innocent Clergy, notwithstanding what
^alendars of observations soever they make to the contrary.

And verily in this Nation more liberal (I confess) and kind hearted, then
may well stand with their means, albeit withal, more superstitious and
credulous to believe fascinati^s, ey-bitings, and old prophesies, the^ well may
stand with true piety and Religion, with which they are so overawed, that
nothing (in a manner) dare they refuse, (I speak of the simpler sort) that the
Friar casts an affection unto; for being once asked and denied, they are
persuaded that it will perist from them, and never do them good. Neither stands
it with the Friars profit to remove this and the like opinions from the peoples
minds; quaerentes magis quae sua sunt, quam quae sunt Christi Domini, rather
seeking themselves, then what is our Lord Christ's; as daily experience
teaches, and as the Apostle spoke of some in his time, Philip. 2.

Now as for their Prophesies: If any disaster or mishap befall to any man or
woman, who is not so much devoted unto their order, or not so kind unto them,
as they desire, presently the Friar divulges among the people, that either
himself, or such another Friar of his Order, did prophecy such things to
befall them: As likewise if any of their Benefactours receive any temporal
blessing, profit, or emolument more then Ordinary, it shall be imputed either
to the prayers, or prophetical predictions of some Friar, as if GOD Almighty
would keep nothing secret from them, nor dispose either of his blessings or
punishments, but by their ministry and dispensation. And among other of their
prophesies, there is none stronger among the Friar Minors, then that in this
Kingdom, the Church shall one day be ruled by their Order, which prophecy
they well weened (about six years agone) had bin fulfilled, when as (of the
four Archbishops) three of them at one time were Franciscans* namely Hugh
Cavall of Armagh, Tho. Flemming of Dublin, Florence of T^me; but two of them
being soon after called out of this life, did frustrate their expectation for
that time. As for their prophesies of the fates and destinyes of such as oppose
themselves unto their vices, (of whom among others, my self am now become a
subject) I less regard their auguries, and divinations, for that I daily see,
that themselves do not foresee their own disasters and calamityes, for so much
as diverse among them have not had so auspicious fates as they could have
wished, and yet had not the skill to foretell the same. And albeit I am daily
forewarned by my friends, to look carefully unto my self, and to be upon my
keeping, lest such as areed my destiny, be also the Procurers of my destiny;
yet the less diligence do Iuse therein: for that I have learned, Nisi Dominus
custodierit civitatem, frustra vigilant qui custodit eam. Psalm. 126. Unless
our Lord preserve the City, he watches in vain who keeps the same. And as a
great Prince in our time, (upon the murder of Henry 3. of France) being moved
by his Council, to take unto himself a guard for the greater security of his
person, answered; Bien esta guardado aquien Dios guarda: He is well guarded
whom God protects. Almighty God of his infinite mercy grant (what fate soever
befall me) that I may live and dye his servant, and the same I wish unto my
greatest adversaryes. And for so much as I am arrived (since I writ this book)
unto the years of sixty, and am persuaded (both by reason of my age, and
manifold infirmities,) that this old house of clay will (ere long) fall about
mine ears: I will dedicat this following Epitaph unto my memory, which for
want of a marble (which I trow none will be so foolish as to bestow upon my
grave) I will here with my pen ingrave upon this Paper monument: Si quaeras
quis sim? Respondeo, and Anglus, and exul,
Insuper and Cleri pars ego parva fui.
Quamque fidem docui, tenui, mea (...) ina planxi,
Omnis and in Christo, spesque, salusque mea.


Neither let any body think that I am the first, or the only man, who have
declaymed against the disorders and insolences of the Mendicants; for many
most pious and learned men in former ages, have launced their ulcers; yea and
have not pared to search them to the quick, though withas little fruit (I
confess) as I think these my writings will have. For it is not all one to
reprove, as to remove scandals and bad customs either from Church, or Laymen.
Those who with more freedom have prosecuted this argument in former times, is
Aeneas Silvius, who afterward was Pope, and called Pius 2. John Gerson,
Chancellor of Paris: S. Richard of Dundalke, and Primat, commonly called
^^machanus, for that he was Archbishop of Armagh, in his De^ensorium Curatorum:
Thomas Walfingham Monk of S. Albons, in his History of the Kings of England.
Such as in our days have not spared to note their open faults, and manifest
corruptions, some in one kind, some in another, are Card. Bellarm. in his
Gemitus Columbae; Philippus, Rovenius. Archbishop of Philippi, in his Treatise
de Missionibus: John Petrus Camus Bishop of Bellay, in his Dialogue betwixt
Nicephorus and Tristan: Camillus Caesar Censor of the books published in Rome,
in his defense of the Archb. of Philippi. Et ego Paulus Veridicus in hoc stadio
noviss^mus, sudavi.

CAP. II.
The doctrine of our Archbishop and Friars refuted, who maintain, That Civil
actions against Clergymen, are to be determined by the Bishop of the Diocese.
TRue it is that regularly speaking, the Canon and laws of the Church require,
that all causes as well Ecclesiastical, Criminal, as Civil, (...)
determinable by the Ordinary, whenever the Defendant is a man of the Clergy,
Council. Chalcedon. can. 9. Council. Agathense can. 32. Council. Carthag. 3. can.
9. Tolletan. 3. can. 13.

But to this I answer, That as many other Canons and laws were never received
in other parts of the Church, no more was this, at least for that last part of
Civil causes in England or Ireland, since the first conversion of the Natious
here by S. Patricke, there by S. Gregory. Neither let any think it strange,
that a general canon and law of the Church, in some parts of the Church be
received, in others not. For So Much as the Canon it self tells us, that a Law may
loose his strength and force of binding three manner of ways.

First, where the same was never approved or received: Because (says the Law)
Leges instituuntur, cum promulgantur; confirmantur dum approbantur. 4. did. in
istis ^. prox. Laws are then ordained, when they are published; but confirmed
when they are approved.

Secondly, if (by a later law) the former be disannulled e. 1. de Constable. in 6.
So S. Aug. posterior canon corrigit priorem: The later Canon corrects the
former.

Lastly, if by a contrary custom, which is reasonable, it be abrogated.
Locorum consuetudines ubi rationabiles sunt, juri scripto derogare possunt.
cap. Dilecti 4. de arbitris c. 2. Ext. de Cons^ot^dinibus. The customs of
places (being reasonable) may derogate from the law written.

Now then I say, That causes merely Civil, as Debts, Inheritances, Pawnes,
Morgages, Leases, Rents, Annuities, Pensions, Purchases, Sales, and the like;
so often as Priests and Clergymen were to be Defendants in all times, as well
under the government of the Saxon, as Norman Kings, were determinable by the
Common Law, and never in any Ecclesiastical Court at all. So as it seems unto
me, that law of the Church was either never received, which in these Civil
actions, draws the plea unto the Court of the Ordinary, (which I rather
believe.) Or if it were at any time in observance, by custom beyond all
memory, it was abrogated. Neither need we so much to marvel heereat, since it
is the common opinion of Divines, that the exemption of Clergymen, as well in
respect of their persons, as their goods, from saecular tribunalls, was at the
first introduced by humane, and not divine law. So S. Greg. lib. 11. epist. 54.
does no otherwise prove, that a Priest ought not to be impleaded before a
temporal Judge, but because Justinian the Emperor had so ordained ^. Read
Card. Bellar. tom. 1. Controversiarum, printed at Leons in France 1587. lib. de
Clericis cap. 28. But for the further clearing of this point: For So Much, as I
am in the Negative, and our Archb. with his Friars in the Affirmative. If they
will maintain, that the law above cited in the beginning of this Chap. was
ever in viridi observantia, in due practice within these Kingdoms of England
and Ireland: I say, it is their parts by examples of Cases pleaded, of
Judgments, and Sentences, in such and such Ecclesiastical Courts of Bishops,
or their Vicar Generals, or their Chancellours, to show out of some ancient
Records of the aforementioned Courts and Tribunals, what may make for the
confirmation of their cause, which I assure my self they shall never be able to
do; no not so much as to afford us one only president, though nothing be more
common in the Common Law, then Bishops, Abbots, Priests, etc. convented in the
temporal Courts, in Civil causes, even in the best and most Catholic times,
no less then at this day. Hence are those Writs of temporal Courts unto the
Diocaesan Bishops, venire facies Clericum, as also the Writs of Prohibition
unto Ecclesiastical Judges, as ancient as our common-lawit self, which like
unto Melchisedeck, knows neither father nor mother.

Why then does our Archbishop Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell, together with his
Friars, noise it up and down both City and Country, That A. B. Priest, is
excommunicated ^ jure for calling C. D. Priest into the Court of the Kings
Bench, for detayning and withholding certain of his Books from him most
injuriously, as was determined lately by the Lord Chief Justice? (especially
the aforesaid Priest A B. first having made his complaint unto his Ordinary,
the aforesaid Archbish. and could not be heard.) Shall we say, That our
Archbishop and Friars are either more wise, more learned and virtuous then the
Bishops, Pastors, Priests, and the whole Clergy for so many hundred years
past: so many Kings, Judges and Justices: in whose Tribunals that course has
ever been held? O no, I cannot be of that mind, but that these were as well
seen in all Laws divine and humane, and as obedient children of the Church,
and as respective of the Censures thereof, as we their posterity be. To
conclude then this point, I confidently avouch, and will maintain against
these our Innovatours, who labor to infringe the ancient Laws, and
immemorable customs hitherto from our very cradle of Christianity received,
allowed, and practiced both by the Church and Commonwealth, in these his
Majesty's Kingdoms; That they declare themselves by such their audacious
attempts, neither to be good members of the Church, nor yet good subjects unto
his Majesty.

CAP. III.
How the Archbishop Tho. Flemming, alias Barnwe^l, Frya^ of the Order of S.
Francis, usurpet is a power never before heard of in this Kingdom, to wit, at
his pleasure to banish the Kings subjects, not only out of his Diocese, but
out of his Province.
IT is said, That Exilium est mors civilis; Banishment is a civil death: And
therefore in all reason not to be inflicted but by lawful authority, and for
very grievous offenses. And first it is confessed by all Divines, that
Episcopal power in punishments, is confined to the three Censures, of
Excommunication, Suspension, and Interdict; according to that of the Apostle,
Nam arma militiae nostra non car^alia sunt, etc. 2. Cor. 10. For the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but powerful to revenge all disobedience, etc.
For which cause Excommunication the first and sharpest of all the censures, is
called Mucro Episcopi, the Bishops sword. Now if the Bishop will say with S.
Peter. Ecce d^o gladij, behold two swords, It must be known from whom he has
that other, his own being spiritual, and it is acknowledged by Divines that
he borrows it from the civil Magistrate, from Princes and Temporal
Governors, who as good children of the Church, were enduced to grant this
temporal assistance, only in some cases, unto the Pastor, for the better
government of his flock in his Spiritual regiment. And so it came to pass
that prisons were allowed unto Bishops, wherein not only to detain, but also
to chastise Heretics, Simonists, Blasphemers, prophaners of the Sacraments,
vow breakers, contemners of the fasts of the Church, and Holy Days, violators
of Ecclesiastical censures, and the like, as also for faults not of so bad a
note, to inflict pecuniary mulcts and fines at their discretion, yet we find
not that Bishops or Prelates (who besides their spiritual jurisdictio^ are not
temporal Princes, either in whole, or in part) do corporally punish, either
theft, or murders, or treasons, or rapes, or bloodshed, with infinite other
offenses, which are daily committed in all commonwealths. So never do we
find by any record or register of any Ecclesiastical court. That in these
Kingdoms either with cause, or without cause, it was permitted by the Church
unto Archbishops, or Bishops, or ever did they exercise the pain of
banishment, either out of their Provinces or Diocesses. It being a power
merely temporal, and Regal, and never committed unto them, no more then
punishments of death, loss of lim, forfeyture of house, and land, etc. Nay if
it be law which Sir Edward Cook reports in his comment upon Littleton lib. 2.
cap. Villinage sect. 200. No subject may be banished out of the Kingdom, but
by Parliament authority, for what cause or crime soever. Shall then our
Archbishop who borrowes his temporal power, and jurisdiction, from the King,
assume the like authority? But to this it will be said, That the Archbishop
only exiles out of his Diocese, or at the most out of his Province, not out
of the whole land. To which I answer, but in case the four Archbishops of
this Kingdom should agree (as within these six years, three of them at one
time were gray Friars) to banish a man each one out of his Province, is he not
then banished the whole Kingdom of Ireland? and with less difficulty might
this be done in England, where we have only two Provinces, and two
Archbishops, Canterbury, and York. And (I trow) it is no hard matter for two
to agree. But that which is most strange, and not to be believed, were it not
that it was done in the hearing of many witnesses, and in this City of Dublin
against parties living, and who at this day remain in this City, (albeit I
spare to name them.) I say, so it was, and will be justified that this present
Archbishop Friat Thomas Flemming alias Barnwell, did by sentence banish out of
his Diocese, men of the Clergy, commanding them under Censures within 15.
days to depart the same: and being demanded wherein they had offended, or what
they had committed deserving such punishment. He answered, that he knew no hurt
by them, but that he had no use of them, slbeit verily he had use enough of
them, had he bin pleased to make use of them, for they were of the most learned
men of his Diocese. And whom a virtuous Prelat would have esteemed as his own
eyes, and much less have banished. But so the times are, that learning,
virtue, and good breeding, are so far from being stayres to honor and
preferment, as nothing can sooner (with this Ordinary) work his disgrace, his
dejection and utter overthrow: well then, the Archbishop stands stiff in this
doctrine: That he can ad nutum, and ad libitum, banish any Priest out of his
district; which doctrine were it true, what man (I pray you) would take upon
him the vocation of a Clergyman, or of a Secular Priest, knowing that ever
after he must be a perpetual slave to humor his Ordinary, or else not to live
in the Church: for what one Bishop can do, another may do. And a Priest by
this means may be banished out of all Christendom; when as a Miller, or a
Baker, or a Porter, will ask never a Bishop in the land leave to dwell in his
Diocese. So much do our sacred Orders help us, as rather they help to undo
us? Say, is not this to dominari in Clerum, to tyrannize over the Clergy? Is
not this to encroach upon Regal authority? Is not this to confound all laws
both of Church and Commonwealth? Wherefore for my part I allow very well of
that Priest, my dear friend and Countrey-ma^, who being commanded above two
years ago by the aforesaid Tho. Flemming alias Barnwell, to depart his
Diocese, alleging no cause against him: He answered, My Lord, I will not
banish you the Diocese, neither shall you me; for so long as the King and the
State are pleased to permit me, I will here enjoy the four Elements, and if
any give me ^piece of bread, or a nights lodging, I will take it, and be
thankful for the same: and so saying, me thought he spoke as my self would
have done in the like case. Neither by this do I intend to deny Exile to be a
canonical punishment, but not used either by Ecclesiastical or Civil
Magistrates in these Kingdoms, nor yet any-where else, without some great and
heinous off^^ce. 16. q. 1. Probirum. 17. q. 4. Attendendum 24. q. 1. Qui contra.

And now I will conclude this point with the conclusion of that Speech which my
self lately made in a public audience, as follows.

Let me also signify unto you, That none of you presume or seek to maintain
Tho. Flemming alias Barnwell, Archb. and a Friar of the Order of S. Francis, in
his late usurped authority of Exile, or banishment, where in he takes upon him
only at his pleasure, and at his will, omni indicta causa, to banish, and throw
out of his Diocese any person whatsoever, either of the Clergy, or Laity,
which doctrine he has both publicly taught, as also of late practiced on
diverse persons, to the great disturbance both of the Church and Commonwealth:
It being a mere usurpation, contrary unto the Canons and the ancient statutes
of this Kingdom. And therefore it concerns us all (as good subjects) to
maintain our King in his Right, against all innovation whatsoever; for in so
doing we shall fulfill the command and will of our Savior, saying; Give ^to
Caesar what belongs ^^to Caesar, and unto God what is Gods. And so not doubting
but you will always remain as obedient children of the Church, so loyal
subjects unto ^is Majesty. I give you all my benediction.

CAP. IIII.
Of certain most dangerous Heresies, or rather Blasphemies, of late preached
and published by ^riars, of, and within the Diocese of Dublin, to the
perdition of many souls.
Truly if our Archbishop had bin so tender over his flock, and so careful of
their souls, as in this his Excommunication is pretended, knowing, that as it
is the part of a good Pastor, to feed the people committed unto his charge,
with wholesome doctrine, and the food of the Sacraments; so also to chase away
the Wolfes, especially those Wolfes which our Savior foretold, should come in
Sheep clothing, which are the most dangerous Wolves of all other. I say, had
these two points bin well considered of, by our Pastor, he doubtless would
have bin more diligent and frequent in his Sermons and exhortations unto the
people, as in persuading them unto good life, and observance of Gods
Commandments, (a doctrine very necessary) so in their faith confirming them
against all tempests of persecution which may arise. If happily he allege in
omission of this duty, That he leaves the charge of that office to his Parish
Priests, and to his Friars. I answer with Cardinal Bellarmine in his book
entitled Gemitus Columbae, lib. 2. cap. 4. It is not to be understood, that
the assistants should so labor, as the principal should be idle and do
nothing. Our blessed Savior had his Apostles to help him, as learned (I trow)
and as laborious, as either our Parish Priests, or Friars, and yet himself, as
the principal Pastor, refused no pains or labor to comply with his
missionary office of preaching, which he had from his Father, Luke 4. Spiritus
Domini fuper me, propter quod n^xit me, evangelizare pauperibus misit me: The
Spirit of God upon me, for which cause he anointed me, and sent me to preach
the Gospel unto the poor, according to which mission from his Heavenly
Father, he did so attend his Office of Preaching (as the Gospel reports of
him) That he travailed from City to City, from place to place, preaching the
Kingdom of God, and that not only in the Temple of God, but in the fields, in
the deserts, in the mountains, upon the sea, in private houses, sitting at the
table, walking upon the highway, at all times, and in all occasions remembering
that he was sent to preach.

So after him the Apostles, to whom Bishops succeed, they declare that this was
their Office. The Apostle 1. Cor. 9. Vae mihi si non evangelizavero, Woe unto
me, if I do not preach the Gospel. And admonishing Timothy a Bishop, he
says: Praedica verbum, insta opportune, importune, argue, obsecra, increpa, in
omni patientia, and doctrina, 1 Timothy 3. Preach the Word, be instant in season
and out of season, convince, beseech, reproove, in all patience and doctrine.
Such was the practice of S. John the Apostle; who frequented the Pulpit in his
decrepit years, as witnesses S. Hierom in the third Book of his Commentaryes
upon the Epistie unto the Galathians. And the same the 4. Council of Carthage
declared, teaching that a Bishop should attend unto Prayer, to reading, and to
the preaching of the Word of God. To which S. Gregory accords, lib. 2. Epist.
39. Episcopi est, de praedicationis ministerio ^ogitare: It is a Bishops part
to think of the ministry of preaching. And so it seems that our ancient
Bishops did very well understand the same for many ages together. For So Much as
most of the writings of S. Cyprian. S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Nazianzen, S.
C^^ysostome, S. Ambrose, S. Cyrill, S. Augustinus, S. Maximus, S. Leo, S.
Gregory, and others, were nothing else but Sermons preached unto the people.
And if the same obligation did not always remain; wherefore to this day in
putting into their hands a Bible is it said in the Consecration of Bishops?
Accipe Evangelium, vade, praedica populo tibi commisso: Take the Gospel, go
preach to the people committed unto thee. And if our Bishops in these days
were not bound to preach, wherefore does the late Council of Trent tell us,
that among all Episcopal duties the office of Preaching is the chief? Sess.
5. and 24.

But our Bishop will happily say, That his talent is not in preaching, and
making^, of Sermons. To which (I say) though he be not able to preach and make
a formal Sermon, at least, why (as occasion offers it self) does he not in
some short exhortations move the people to good life, setting before their eyes
the reward of virtue, and the deformity of vice, as also its punishments: or at
least, why teaches he not the Christian doctrine, which in truth is the
bestkinde of preaching, and most necessary in this kingdom of all other, where
such ignorance reigns among the common people, that if every hair of our
heads, were preachers or teachers of the Catechism, it were little enough? But
and if our Archbishop, be not either able, or not willing to preach, and to
feed his flock, with the spiritual food of the word, wherefore then did he
condescend to accept of a Bishopric, knowing himself so unmeet for the same?
or what account will he give up to the Prince of Sheepheards, when it shall be
required at his hands? Happily they may have enough to do, to answer for
themselves. He lays the burden upon their necks, they will say they were but
assistants unto him: Now as that learned Cardinal says, non adjuvari dicitur,
qui nihil facit. He is not said to be assisted, which does nothing himself.
Again in his treatise de gemitu Columbae, lib. 2. cap. 5. Deni^ (inquiunt)
multi sunt hoc tempore praedicatores verbi Dei, ex ordinibus religiosis; verum
est illud quidem, sed illi vocati sunt in adjutorium Episcoporum, non ut
proprium munus ipsorum impediant. To conclude (says he) they will say, that at
this time there be many preachers of Gods word among religious Orders, true it
is, but they be called to be helpers to the Bishops, not hinderers of that
which is their own proper duty to perform. But verily had Card. Bellar. lived
in these countries he would not have said that at this day there be many
Preachers of Gods word among religious Orders, but rather many beggars and
feeders of their own bellies, among religious Orders, who in begging from
house to house can publish the benefit of the cord, the Rosary, the habit, and
the Scapulare, and tell you a long story of the miracles of S. Francis, and can
frame many a tale, and many a lewd lie of the parish Priest, to bring the
people out of love with their Pastor, whereby the water may run more freely
unto their own mills. But the healthful doctrine, the blessed life, the sweet
example, the stupendous miracles of our Savior and Redeemer of the world, in
the Gospel are little taught, or insisted upon, witness those places and
parts of the country which the Friars do chiefly haunt. Examine the people,
and the penitents of those Friars, in the mystery of the Trinity, the
incarnation of our Savior, the articles of their creed, the use of the
Sacraments: you shall find them so defective, as they scarce deserve the name
of Catechumen^. Not one of ten of them knowing wherefore they were baptized,
what they adore in the Eucharist, or wherefore they go to Confession. Nay if
you demand which are the persons of the blessed Trinity, they will be more
ready to tell you our blessed Lady, S. Patricke, and S. Bride, then either
Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, more ignorant then those of whom S. Paul speaks
Act. 19. who being asked whether they had received the Holy Ghost, answered:
Sed ne^ si spiritus sanctus est audivimus. Nay we have not yet heard whether
there be a Holy Ghost, or no. And wherefore is all this? but that the doctrine
necessary unto salvation, is not so necessary for the Friars maintenance; For
whether is it more easy to say with S. Paul, Operamini salutem vestram cum
timore and tremore, Ephesians. 6. Work out you^ salvation with fear and
trembling: then with the Car^^l^ to say. Take the Scapulare, and thou shall
never be (...). Or whether is the doctrine of our Savior more easy. Qui
persever averit us^ in finem hic salvus erit. He that (...) vereth unto the end
h^ shall be saved; or to say with the Cordilier, fast but such a saturday and
thou shall never die an evil death: besides many other doctrines of like
nature, which walk in darkness: witness those Amulets, prayers, and verses
hanging about the necks of the poor deluded people, men, women and children,
in which more trust and confidence is reposed, then may stand with the purity
and integrity of our faith. But if these good people thus taught should again
feed with the like food of their bodies those their teachers, and in place of
wholesome meat, should set before themsome stinking carrion; in place of butter
and cheese, should give them a lump of Tallow, and for good bread, of Wheat,
Rye, Oats, etc. should present them with a loaf made of bran, and bean
husks, verily the Friar limitour would set his mark upon them, if not his
curse: and the fayry folk (if any such be) should sooner haunt those houses,
then either Monk or Friar. Something being here omitted accidentally makes
the cohaerence not so goo^.


I may remember since in England before the coming in of the Regulars, all
spiritual offices were performed unto the Catholics, by the Priests of the
Clergy, of which times it might be said, in respect of the great concord and
unity which they enjoyed, as well the Priests among themselves, as with the
Laity. That terra erat unius labij. The earth it was of one lip and language,
and as it is said in the 4. Act. of those primitive times of the Church:
Multitudinis credentium erat corunum, and anima una, the multitude of believers
were all of one mind, and of one will. But no sooner came the Ignatians (for
they were the first) and the Monks, and the Friars after them, and did grow to
any numbers and strength, but then came in the confusion of Babell, and their
tongues were so divided, as one spoke nothing but of Apollo, and another of
Cephas, (not I confess in diversity of doctrines) but in variety of
affections: where the Ignatian was in request, the Priest was neglected; where
the Monk ruled the roast, there the Ignatian was disrespected; where the Friar
could prevail, there neither one nor other was regarded. Till at length rather
upon a sudden shuf^ling up, then composing any stable peace, they joined all in
one with united forces to oppose the Ecclesiastical Clergy, and what tumults
and hurly-burlies have ever since bin on foot among them, and still continues
(I wis, non ad aedificationem, sed ad destructionem, not to edification, but to
destruction) the world can witness.

Now in this Kingdom of Ireland what I have not only seen, but felt, it
remains further to declare. For about some 18. years ago, you may well
remember with me, that the Monks and the Friars being then but weak, and (as
it were) in the cradle, the good Catholic people were ruled both in the
divine office of the Church, as also in direction of their consciences wholly
by the Priests of the Clergy their Pastors. Then was there such devotion and
piety in the service of God, such frequenting the Sacraments, such love among
neighbors, such fear of offense and wrong doing, as it might truly be said of
those golden days: Flumina tum lactis, t^m flumina nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant illice mella.
Then streams of milk, then streams of wine did flow, Then on green oaks
sweet honey-combes did grow.

Then the Friar made scruple to encroach in the smallest matter upon the office
of the Parish Priest, nay he was so humble, so gentle, so recollected, and so
mortified, as truly you would have taken him for a very gay creature; but this
was but in his infancy, and during the time of his noneage; for by too much
petting and cockering of him, and that chiefly by the Parish Priests themselves
in the beginning (not then foreseeing whom they did foster and harbor in their
bosoms, or what rods they were in preparing for their own ribs) the Friar
growing daily to further acquaintance with the Citizens, and gathering unto
himself continually more numbers of his fellows, he began soon to go upon his
own legs, and to perceive quod cornuta erat facies ejus, that his face had
two horns, with which he began bravely to lay about him, A Pastor when he
pleases, a Regular when he pleases, a voluntary when he list, a pressed
soldier when he list, an assistant when he thinks good, and a principal when
he will. So as now down must the Oak, and up must the Bryar, under whose
protection the sheep betaking himself for shelter and protection in every
storm, his fleece shall be well pulled, and his skin surely scratched for his
pains, as we daily see, and in part already have set down. But the Press
calls so fast upon me, as I can hardly with equal paces keep company with it,
and therefore must spare further to enlarge my self upon this argument. Only I
will conclude it with the saying of that holy and learned Prelat Peter Camus,
Bishop of Bellay in his Petronilla: That it is an admirable thing to see, that
such as govern the people, will not take charge of them, and such as have
charge of them, and are answerablo for them, can not have the government of
them. So he. Which observation of his agrees with what a principal Friar of
his Order lately said in this City, and that in the hearing of many, That for
their parts they scorned to be Parish Priests or Pastors. According to the
doctrine which Friar Thomas Strong, a Franciscan, laid down in his Manuscript
entitled an Answer unto the fraternall correction of Paulus Veridicus Harris,
in which he compares the Superiors of Regulars unto Sheep-heards, and the
Parish Priests unto Swine-heards, and consequently the Laity to Pigs and hogs.
This writing of his is this day in my custody, under his own hand, which I am
ready to impart to any who make doubt of the truth thereof. O S. Peter and S.
Paul! yea, O S. Francis! How base and contemptible is that holy office of
Parish Priests in thy Friars eyes at this day, who now bear themselves as the
only Masters in Israel, and would be accounted the sole pillars of Gods Church.
So much then for the first office of a Pastor in the dispensation of the Word
and Sacraments, together with some digressions (I confess) in which how
defective our Ordinary has been, in part is declared.

Let us now consider of the second, which is in chasing away the Wolfes which
come to kill, and to destroy; represented unto him in his pastoral staff,
given him in his consecration, with words, declaring that thereby his office is
to govern and to defend his flock from the jaws of all ravenous beasts, who
seek to prey upon the same. Now let us consider how well our Ordinary has
used this his baculum pastorale, this his sheep-heards staff, or whether to
any better purpose then he has done his Bible before given him. And for proof
hereof (good Reader) thou art to understand, that upon the 29. of April, being
the feast of S. Peter Martyr, and S. Catheri^ of Sienna, in the year of our
Lord 1631. a certain Franciscan Friar, by name Thomas Babe, did in the
Cookes-street of Dublin, in a public audience, publish this doctrine: That
for so much as a certain Spanish Nun (called Luissa) of the Order of S. Clara,
had a Revelation: That whosoever should fast upon the next Saturday after they
heard of her death, should never dye in mortal sin, or of any evil death; The
aforesaid Fr. Babe persuaded the people then present, to under-take so holy a
pe^ance: upon which, very many both in the city and country (as they did
believe his doctrine, so did they keep very carefully the same Fast; among
which our Ordinary The. Flemming alias Barnwell, to give example, did the like.
Neither was that doctrine only then, but sundry other times also taught by that
false Apostle, in diverse other places of this City and Diocese.

Another Friar also of the discalced Carmelites, by name John Plonket, as well
in public assemblies, as also in private conferences, has endeavored to
persuade the people this damnable doctrine: That whosoever shall take the
Sc^pulare of the Carmelites, and wear it upon his body, saying such prayers as
thereunto belongs, they should never dye out of the estate of grace, and the
favor of God, but at the furthest, the next Saturday after their deaths, they
should be admitted into the Joys of Heaven. These I doubt not to call hellish
doctrines broached by these false teachers in these later days to draw us from
our salvation in Christ, and from the merits of his bitter death and passion,
destroying, ^ utterly subverting our holy faith, received from the mouth of our
Savior and his Apostles, and continued in all ages from those times, till
these our days, in the Catholic Church. For remedy whereof, in zeal of Gods
honor, the preservation of our holy faith, and to prevent the danger of souls
so abused, complaint was made unto the Ordinary, as our chief Pastor of this
Diocese of Dublin, for to see correction had thereof, as may appear by a
Petition made by two Priests, and in their names presented unto the aforesaid
Tho. Flemming alias Barnwell, by two worthy Citizens, the copy whereof, is as
follows.

The Petition of D. Peter Cadell, and Paul Harris, Priests.
To the R. H^n. Tho. Flemming alias Barnwell, Archbishop of Dublin.
H^mbly complains unto your Hon. your Petitioners, of diverse most false and
damnable doctrins, lately taught and published by Friars, as by Friar Babe
Cordilier, and Friar John Pl^nket Carmelite, to the great scandal of the
Church, and destruction of many souls; beseeching your Hon. as chief Pastor of
this Diocese, to call the aforesaid Friars before you, as also us your
Petitioners, whereby you may underst^^d what in the premises may be witnessed
against them. And so your Petitioners shall pray.

March 27. 1632.
To which Petition no answer was ever yet given, neither do we expect that any
ever will be given, but rather we fear that this canker has also possessed
the head. And the rather for that we understand, that these errors do more
and more spread themselves thorough the bowels of this Kingdom: and by name
that there is another Carmelite, called Patrick Donavan, native of the County
of Cork, who persevers to teach the aforesaid errors and blasphemies among the
people, to the great scandal of all good Christians, And for so much as we can
not find that any Friars do oppose themselves either by word or writing, to
these aforesaid pernicious doctrines, but only the Priests of the Clergy,
Therefore it may well be inferred, that all the Regulars of this Kingdom are
infected with the same leprosy, and therefore in time (if it be not already
past time) to be separated from the rest of the body. The days were when
Celestius, (a man of this Country birth) brought in Pelagianisme, and ^clipsed
with that foul cloud of heresy, the glory of the Church then in this
Kingdom. After him again arose another false Prophet, and native of this
Country, called Johannes Scotus, about the year of our Lord 850. who
introduced the Sacramentary herefie, both of them Monks, whose wicked
doctrines (had the serpent been crushed in the egg) had never come to that
growth or greatness, which afterward they did. Where then (say you) was the
pastoral staff of the Prelate? Mary (say I) where now it is, far from the
back of the Wolf, but peradventure laid upon the loins of the Sheep, as at
this day we see it under this our Archbishop, in whose ten years government
(for so long has he possessed the Miter) both error in doctrine, and
dissolu^enesse of life, has more prevailed in all estates, but especially
among the Friars of his own Order, then in the days of many of his
predecessors. O what Legends might be made of the unhappy lives of his Friars
in this kingdom of Ireland, within the compass of these ten years! If either
Christianity, Charity, or Civility would allow there of. I will only in
general, which is lawful, and with Cardinal Bellarmine conclude this
Chapter: In his Gemitus Columbae, lib. 2. cap. 6. Multiplicari coepernnt
regulares sine numero, and multi non a De^ vocati, ad statum perfectionis, sed
alijs rationibus adducti, monasteria repleverunt: and impletum est illud Isaiae
non^. Multiplicasti gentem, non magnificasti laetitiam. Inde nata sunt scandala
gravia, and multiplicia omnibus nota, quae materiam uberem prebent columb^e
gemendi and plangendi relaxationem, ne dicam corruptionem Ordinum religiosorum.
Regulars have begu^ to be multiplied without number, and many of them not
called by God unto the estate of perfection, but enduced by other motives, have
replenished Monasteryes: And that of Isay. 9. is fulfilled: Thou have
multiplied the nation, but not increased their joy. Hence so many and grievous
scandals, known unto all, which yield plentiful matter unto the dove of
bewayling the looseness, I will not say the corruption of religious Orders. So
the Cardinal. In which words the Author seems unto me, not only to inveigh
against the wicked, and scandalous lives of many in Religion, but even against
the relaxation and corruption of Religious orders themselves.

CAP. V.
Of the prophecy of S. Francis, foretelling into how great sins of Avarice,
Pride, and Contention with the Cl^rgy, his Friars in time should fall.
But why should I omit that testimony which of all other, should have the
greatest force of Argument, to convict our Friar Minors, of their modern
ungraciousnesse, and impiety? and if their hearts were not too rocky to convert
them unto their ancient and primitive piety, simplicity, and humility; I mean
the prophecy of S. Francis himself, the Founder of their Order, as it is laid
down in the Chronicle of S. Francis, Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 28. in these words.

A time will come, when the religious of my Order, by the malice of the Devil,
shall leave the way of holy simplicity, indifferently receiving all sorts of
money, and all such legacies, as by testament shall be bequeathed them; and
leaving solitary, and humble places, will buiid fair and sumptuous houses in
Cities, and towns, capable to entertain Princes, and Emperors: then by
favor they will procure privileges of the Popes, thorough art, and humane
prudence; and by their earnest importunity, they will obtain requests merely
injust, though cloked with truth; by this means they will not only abandon
their rule instituted by Jesus Christ against their solemn profession, but
will also ruin, and alter the purity thereof, changing the good intention into
perverse, and being armed by means of the said privilege, against obedience,
against other Religious, and against all the Clergy, when they shall expect to
get the victory, the wretches shall find themselves fallen into the trench which
themselves shall have made, gathering no other fruit of their Seminary, but
scandals; which they shall offer to God in steed of the salvation of souls,
who seeing the same, shall be no more hence forward their Pastor, but their
ruiner, according unto their merits. And therefore he will leave them entangled
in the nets of Avarice, and their vain desires, etc. So S. Francis in his
aforesaid Chronicle, printed and published by his own Friars.

And who can make question, but those times foretold by S. Francis, are now
come, and that his prophecy in all points is fullfilled! And first for the
praevarication of his Rule, in receiving of all sorts of money, we see it daily
practiced by his own Friats, in taking of Gold and Silver, and that as freely
as any worldlings, always provided, that they touch it not with their bare
hands: but alas! what penance or mortification is that? when as they may admit
of it in a hander-kerchiefe, a glove, or lapped in a brown paper? for being
given them in that manner, the Capuchin himself (who professes most strictly
to observe the Rule of S. Francis) will most gently accept of it, and place it
in his pocket. But shall we think that S. Francis (so holy a man) had no
deeper a consideration, in prohibiting his Friars so earnestly, and with so
many words in that his short Rule, neither to ask, nor in any wise to receive
money offered them, but only (forsooth) that they should not handle the same?
But that you may the better understand this their praevarication of the Rule, I
will set you down his own words, I say, in that very same rule, which
himself avoucheth (both in his Testament above cited cap. 1. as also in these
his words above alleged out of his Chronicle) to have been instituted by him.

Quod fratres non accipiant pecuniam.

Pracipio firmiter fratribus aniversis, ut nullo modo denarios vel pecuniam
recipiant, per se, vel per interpos^t^m personam. Tamen pro necessitatibus
inf^rmor^^, et alijs fratribus indu^^dis per amicos spirituales. Ministri
tantum, and custodes sollicitam curam gerant secundum loca, and tempora, and
frigida^ regiones, sicut necessitati viderint exp^dire, eo semper salvo, ut
(sicut dictum est) denarios vel pecuni^^ non recipiant.

That the Friars shall not receive money.

I do command firmly all the brethren, that by no means they receive pence,
or money, neither by themselves nor by another person; Yet for the necessity of
the sick, and for the clothing of the Friars, by their spiritual friends,
only the Superiors, and Guardians, shall have great care of them, according
to places, and times, and cold Regions, as they shall see it to be necessary.
This always remembered, that (as it is said) they receive no pence or money.

And this is one of those 7. formal precepts, which they all confess to bind
under mortal sin, strictly commanding them as you see, neither by
themselves, nor by any other person, to receive any moneys: Which precept now
for a long time, by their common practice, is thus commodiously glossed, that
only they may not touch Moneys with their naked fingers. But may it not with
good reason be verified of these our gray Friars, that which our Savior said
of the Pharisees, and of the Scribes: B^n^ irritum facitis praeceptum Dei, ut
traditionem vestram serv^^is. Mar. 7. Well you make void the comm^nndement of
God, that you may observe your own Tradition. This precept (as S. Francis has
left written,) was commanded by Jesus Christ, and vowed by his Friars, and yet
in the sight of all men's eyes violated. Nay, that our Mendicant Friars may make
it known unto the world, that they are very philargiri, true lovers of money,
they every year sell and turn into coin, many flocks of Sheep, Hoggs,
Geese, Turkies, Hens, Cheese, Eggs; which thorough their shameless
importunity, they have rather extorted, then begged, from the honest Farmer,
charged with a great family, and a high rent, yea from many a poor man and
woman, who might hardly have spared it from their own hungry bellies. These
things are not obscure or dark, or done in a corner, but in the face of the
world, and in the eyes of this sun, and which this poor Kingdom, can
feelingly witness with me. And verily it seems the Friars mendicant were very
little better conditioned in the days of King Henry the 6. in whose time Tho.
Walsingham lived, a most pious and a learned author, whose words are as
follows, in the reign of Richard. 2.

Mihi quo^ videtur, tempora mala non tantum istis imputanda, sed generaliter
cunctorum habitatorum terrae peccatis, inclusive ordines sumendo Mendicantium
ad cumulandum causa^ malorum. Qui suae professionis immemores, obliti sunt
etiam ad quid ipsorum ordines instituti sunt, quia pauperes and omnino
expeditos a rerum temporalium possessionibus eorum legislatores viri
sanctissimi eos esse ideo voluerunt, ut pro dicenda veritate, non haberent,
quod amittere formidarent: sed jam possessionatis invidentes, procerum crimina
approbantes, commune vulgus in errore f^ventes, and utrorumque peccata
comedentes, pro possessionibus acquirendis, qui possessionibus renunciaverant
pro pecu^ijs congregandis, qui in paupertate perseverare juraverunt, dicunt
bonum malum, and malum bonum, seducentes principes adulationibus, plebem
mendacijs, and utrosqu^ secum in dev^um pertrahentes, in tant^m etenim illam
veritatis professionem suam perverse vivendo macularunt, u^ in diebus istis in
ore cujustibet bonum sit argumentum, tenens ta^de forma, quam de ma^eria. Hic
est frater, Ergo m^ndax: Sicut and illud, Hoc est album, Ergo coloratum. Sed ne
videamur livore scripsisse praesentia, fate^^ur nos omnes in culpa, and
emendemus in melius, quae scienter peccavimus, and Deum pacis and dilectionis
deprecemur attenti^s, ut f^at pax and veritas in diebus nostris. Tho.
Walsinghamus in regno Ricardi 2. fol. 266. The same in English.

It seems also unto me, the wicked times not only imputed to those, but
generally to the sins of all the Inhabitants of the earth, including the Orders
of the Begging Friars, to heap up the causes of these mischiefs, who
(unmindfull of their profession) have forgot to what end their Orders were
instituted, because their legislatours and instituters (most holy men) would
therefore have them poor, and altogether free from the possessions of
temporal things, that for speaking of the truth, they might not have any
thing, which they might fear to loose. But now while they envy such as have
possessions, approving the faults of great men, nourishing the common people in
error, and eating the sins of them both, in seeking of possessions, who have
renounced possessions, in hoarding up of money, who have sworn to persevere in
poverty, they call good evil, and evil good; seducing Princes with flattery,
the people with lies, and drawing both of them with themselves astray, they
have in such sort stained that their profession of truth, by their unhappy
living, that in these days in every ones mouth it is a good argument, holding
as well in form, as matter: This fellow is a Friar: Therefore a Liar. Even as
that: This thing is white, and therefore has a color. But that we may not be
thought to have written these thigns of malice, let all of us acknowledge our
selves to be in fault, and let us amend what willingly we have done amiss, and
beseech the God of peace and love more devoutly, that peace and truth may be in
our days, So that holy Monk Tho. Walfingham, in the reign of Richard the 2.
fol. 266. He died in the year 1440.

But because (as our Savior says:) In ore duorum, (...) trium testium, stat
omne verbum, Math. 18. in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word is
confirmed, and made good: Hark also (gentle Reader) what AEneas Silvius (who
after was Pope and called Pius 2.) left written to posterity, in commentario de
rebu^ a se gestis, of the Avarice of the Mendicants, his words are as follow.

Religiosos ^o^^unquam vidimus, quos Mendieantes appellant, and
Auricontemptores videri volunt, dum vivendi finem fecissent, magnum peculium
reliquisse, e quibus unum nouimus, qui a^r^ nummum septem and dece^ miilia
veteri muro incluserat, quae paulatim mendicando, plorandoque intervetusas
ingenio subtili corraserat. We have sometimes scene the Religious, whom they
call Begging Friars, and would seem to be contemners of Gold, at their deaths
to have left great riches, of which sort we have known one, who had hid 17.
thousand pieces of gold, shut up in an old wall, which by begging, and weeping
among old wives by his crafty with had scratched together: Of this Author Card.
Bell. ^. in his Book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, says; that he was vir
doctus, and prudens, a learned and a wise man, and dyed in the same age with
Walsingham, about the yeate of our Lord 1460.

What shall I say of Armachanus, otherwise called S. Richard of Dundalk, that
holy Bishop of Armagh and Primat of all Ireland, who in his book called
Defensorium Curatorum, did discover and lay open before Pope Innocentius 6. and
his Cardinals at A^ignion in France, their notorious vices of Ambition,
Disobedience Pride. Covetousness, Lecbery, and the like; which book of that
famous Prelat, worthy to be written in letters of gold, I wonder that to this
day it has not found an English Interpretour. Among others of their vices
declaring their covetousnes and greedines in begging, he has these words:

I am enim istis temporibus, non poterit magnus out mediocris in cl^^o and
populo vix cib^m sumere, ubi tales fuerint mena^^cantes, etc. For now in these
days, no man neither great nor little among the Clergy, can scarcely take his
meat where these beggars shall he, not asking at the door, after the manner of
poor people, ^^bly an alms, as S. Francis commanded them in his will and
Testament, and taught them to beg, but coming into the houses boldly without
shame, and there guesting themselves, (albeit not invited) they eat and drink
such as they find, and nevertheless carry with them. by extorting either
Corn, or meal, or loaves. or flesh, or cheeses, albeit in the house there be
no mo^: the^ two: neither shall any body be able to deny them, unless he
abandon all natural shame: and I wonder they stand not in awe of Pope Gregory
his sentence, who in a certain privilege published, thus writes unto the
Prelates of the Church. For that oftentimes vices do secretly enter under the
show of virtues, and the angel of Satan does oftentimes transform himself
into an angel of light, we command you by authority of these presents, That if
any confessing themselves to be of the Order of the aforesaid Friars, shall
preach in your parts, converting themselves to the lucre of money, whereby it
shall happen, the religion of those who profess poverty to be defamed, you
apprehend them as counterfeits, and condemn them. So Armachanus a native of
this country, borne in Dundalke, where also now in S. Nicholas Church his bones
rest, being translated from Avignion in France, where he dyed An. 1360 whose
singular learning, his Works this day do declare. Besides the testimony of
Trithomius, in his Book de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis in these words: Ricardus
Archiepiscopus Armachanus, and Primas Hiberniae, vir in divinis Scripturis
eruditus, and secularis philosophiae, jurisque canonici non ignarus, ing^nio
(...), sermon scholasticus, in declamandis sermonibus ad po^^lum excellentis
industriae. Richard Archbishop of Armagh, and Primat of all Ireland, a man
learned in the holy Scriptures, and not ignorant of secular Philosophy, and of
the Canon Law, of a singular wit, a schooleman in speaking, of excellent
industry in making of sermons unto the people. So much for his learning. As for
his life he both has been, and at this day is held in the Church for a Saint,
no less then S. Patrick, and S. Columbe, yea that his canonization was
proposed, and entreated of in the Popes Consistory; Friar Luke Wadding does
testify, at this day living in Rome, which canonization has hit herto not
happened unto any of the Irish, besides S. Malachias, Archbishop of the
aforesaid seat of Armagh, and S. La^^ence of Dublin. Of whose sanctity, the
common people by ancient tradition do cha^^^ this Distich.

Many a (...) have I gone, and many did I (...).
But never saw a holier man, then Richard of D^^d^^ke.
Notwithstanding because ^^is Pri^at of Armagh, commonly called S. Richard of
Dundalk (albeit his surname was Ralph) did much oppose himself unto the
disorders of Mendicants, he by Genebrard, as also Alpho^sus de Castro, is
branded with heresy, but Card. Bellarm. more learned the^^either of the^,
gives him no such note. And albeit Friar Platus the Ignatian (though by some it
is rather held to be the Work of his General, Claudius Aquaviva) in his
Treatise De bono scatu religionis, lib. 1. cap. 33. writes, that the aforesaid
Ricardus Armachanus, before Pope Innocentius 6, and his Cardinals at Auignion,
did spue out many things against the state of the begging Friars, and not long
after, dyed. Yet is it manifest by that very same Oration, which then he made,
that he spoke not at all against the institute of any religious order, but only
that he inveighed against their manifold relaxations, corruptions, and abuses;
neither did he dye soon after, for he lived three whole years after he
uttered the same, and left behind him a greater fame both of learning and
sanctity, then either Platus or Aquaviva, or any other of his adversaryes
hitherto have done. Armachanus made that Oration by Trithemius testimony de
scriptoribus ecclesiasticis 1357. upon the 8. day of November, and deceased in
the Papal Court of Avignion 1360. 17. Calend. December. So Henricus
Marlesburgensis in Chronico, to which the Irish Annals do agree. And so much of
this Author and his testimony, as touching the Avarice of the Mendicant Orders
in his time.

But alas, why should I look behind me unto the times of yore, will not these
our days, and this poor country yield us palpable examples of the
Covetousnes of Friars, not to speak of their other vices? Something I have
spoken before of their two ploughes of Begging Cap. 1. the one by retayle, the
other by gross. Now I will speak a word or two of other 2 ploughs of theirs, no
less working then the former. The first, of their Novices which they receive
into their Order. The second of their cord, habit, etc.

And first for the men Novices. It is well known that the Friar will admit of
none among them, but such as either bring them in good portions, or else such
as they guess will prove (...) out Beggars, to recompense in their industry
what they are wanting in means. So as what patrimony a father would leave his
son, either upon his preferment, or at his death, that the Friar will have, he
will not abate a smulkin. If the Father stumble at it, he shall be terryfied
with matter of conscience, as, Is not God Almighty worthy to have as much as
the world? etc. or else with the authority of the Bishop of the Diocese,
especially if that Bishop be a Friar. And do the Father what he can, he shall
both part with his Son, and his money.

As for their vowed Nuns, they bring with them 700. or 500. and at the lowest
rate 300. or 200. and 50. pounds sterling, and yet if they live in such
penance, and austerity, as the Friars persuade us, surely they cannot spend by
the powle, omnibus vijs, and modis, 10. pounds per annum. And yet
notwithstanding all these marriage goods, (for so they call them) those virgins
have their agents, who beg in the country for them, to bring them in alms,
for it is a rule with our Nuns, as well as with the Friars. Want, or want
not, beg they must, besides what gifts the friends of those so rich maids,
and so well descended, do daily present them withal. Now if a maid who is
poor and has no portion, or means at all, should offer her self unto their
Nunneryes, were she as devout as Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of whom it is
said, that she never departed from the Temple serving God, night and day in
prayer and fasting. Luke. 2. and were she as chaste as Susanna, ^^y had she the
Virginity of S. Vrsula and all her eleven thousand Virgins, yet should she be
put back from the gate of the Monastery, as one of the 5. foolish Virgins,
with nescio vos, I know you not.

Another plough of our Mendicants, I will not say the last, (for they better
know then I, how many they have) is the cord or the Scapulare, or the Girdle,
or the Breads of S. Nicolas, or the Rofary, as also the habit of their Orders,
which brings no small profit unto them. For by such indulgences, graces and
pardons, annexed unto them, there is procured unto the Mendicants, infinite
calmes and perpetual Benefactours. For the people generally, whether thorough
their ignorance, or misteaching, I know not, seem much more at this day to
stand in fear of Purgatory, then of hell it self. And they are persuaded that
these things, together with their alms unto the Friar, will save them from the
flames of Purgatory. So as who among them now is so hard hearted, as in his
life time is not girt with a Cord? or (...) their deaths is not buried in a
Friars habit? which habit if of your self you shall have no devotion to
desire, the Friar will take occasion to visit you in your sickness, and
although it be but 5. minutes before you decease, he will offer you to be
buried in his habit; If you thank him it is enough, it is taken for
acceptance, albeit you say neither yea, nor no. On goes the habit so soon as
the life has left you, and so you are exposed till burial, that all your
neighbors may behold you. The great devotion of the party unto the order whose
habit he took, is much advanced, his salvation is no whit doubted of, etc.
Now you must conceive by all means that this habit is given you gratis, that
is, of free cost, for else it were Simony, but yet I trust the friends of the
party are not so unmannerly, but by all recknings be ended, they might as
cheap have bought a piece of frize of an hundred yards. You know what Martial
says, Pauperum dona hami sunt, Cum dant, tum maxim petunt. Poor men's gifts
are hooks, when they give, then most of all they crave, and who poorer then
the Friar, though little pinched with want. For they know well to distinguish,
inter pauper tatem and indigentiam, twixt poverty and want, the first indeed
they profess, but the second is without the compass of their vows, they
leave that for the Clergy. And therefore Johannes Rusbrochius himself a Monk,
speaking of the Friar Mendicants of these times, in his book called
Tabernaculum foederis, cap. 123. has these words, Mendici, and pauperes dici
volunt, and suam semper queri inopia^, and tamen omnibus abundare rebus.
Beggars and poor they desire to be called, and always to complain of their
want; and yet to abound with all things. And me thinks a Friar when he is on
horseback, with his hatched Rapier, and his wrought Spurs, and meets a
parish Priest upon the way, in his fri^^, Stockins, and his brogges going on
foot (happily twice as far as the other is to ride,) and that to minister
unto some poor sick Creature in a Cot, he should be much ashamed of himself,
especially when he calls to mind that precept of S. Francis in the 3. cap. of
his rule. Non debeant equitare, nisi manifesta neoessitate, vel infirmitate
cogantur. The Friars are not to ride, but compelled thereunto thorough manifest
necessity, or sickness. So he, But verily in these parts it shall be much
against the Friars humor to travel two miles out of Town, not mounted upon
an easy pased horse: Nay it seems that the Friars who live among us, are of
opinion, that the world would be scandalized to see them go on foot. Well then
let us leave the Friar on horseback, and return we a little back to our
purpose of the habit, from which we have made this short digression.

Were then our Friars really so charitable, and so liberal in bestowing of
their habits. And did they so much thirst after the good of souls, yea and so
tender hearted as they could not endure that a soul should remain some short
time in Purgatory, but rather they would bestow upon the corpse the habit of S.
Francis, or S. Dominicke, for their rellefe. I then wonder (as Armachanus did
well observe,) why they do only address themselves unto the rich and to the
great ones, and not unto the poor, for surely our christian faith teaches us
that the poor have souls as well as the rich. And who can otherwise judge,
but that it is as meritorious a deed to cover a poor corpse with a habit, who
many times has scarce a rag of a course sheet to shroude them in, as to bestow
it upon the carcass of never so rich a man, for here is a soul, and so is
there: there is necessity, and the subject of an alms, and here is none. But
as Armachanus answers well for them, in his book called Defensoriorum
curatorum. Non more Thobiae ad sepelcendum rupiunt corpora pauperum
defunctorum, sed instar vulturun^ ultra m^re ad quingenta miliaria sua alimenta
odorando sentientium qu^unt. Not as Thobias did, do they seek for the bodies
of the poor deceased, to bury them: but like unto vultures, smelling out their
carions beyond seas five hundred miles do they seek food. So he.

Neither are these Mendicants comented with such profit, as they make of their
habits, and sepultures from the Larty, but they must encroach also upon the
Pastors; or parish Priest of the place, clayming not only the honor of the
funeral rites, and ceremonies, to be performed by themselves, but challenging
all duties, offerings, and alms thereunto belonging. And here I may not forget
what a late president of the Parliament of Aix in France, has left written of
the ambition of our Friars Minors in such occasions. I will give you his words.

Fratres S. Francisci qui se appellant Minores; ut nomen consonet rei, debent
esse minori loco, ideo tanquam humiliores, quia minores non debent praetendere
co^tra aliquos de aliqua praecede^tia, etc.

The Friars of S. Francis Order, who call themselves Minors, as much as to say,
the lesser; that their name may be agreeable unto the thing, they ought to be
in a lower place, as more humble, for that the lesser ought never to pretend
for precedence of place against any. Because in doing otherwise they should
seem to go against their own Order, and estate, which is to be the lesser of
all estates and Orders of the whole Universal Church; nay, which is more,
since a certain time, they would have the name of minimi, that is, the lowest
of all other, by virtue of a certain reformation. But I see that all this is
but in word, not in deed. For that they will not only contend for equality with
other Religious, but also with the Cathedral Church: As I have seen in the
Funerals of a certain Noble and potent man, Francis Rollin: who for one only
hour was depositated in their Church; and in carrying of the Corpse, they would
not only be in the last place before the Canons of the Cathedral Church; but
their Guardian said, That he ought to have the last place, yea after the Bishop
himself then in place. Which how ridiculous it was, and ought to be, let all
imagine. By which it may be seen what may be said of them, who when as they
ought in all humility to strive with the lowest, yet will they contend for
equality with the highest. Wherefore their pride can not more rightly be
compared to any thing, then to the pride of Lucifer, who would be like unto the
most High. Bartholomaeus Chassanaeus Praeses Senatus Aquaesextias in Catalogo
Gloriae mundi part 4. Consideratione 69.

Thus (gentle Reader) I have given theea touch of those dangerous doctrines
taught by our Friars, tending to the evacuation of that great benefit of our
salvation in Christ. I have showed how far our Archbishop, with all the rest
of his Friars are interessed therein. Moreover, both out of grave Authors, and
lamentable experience of these times, I have discoursed of those manifold and
manifest enormityes of the Friar Mendicants, and more particularly of this
Country: Their Avarice, Lying, Ambition, and Hypocrisy. Neither have published
the secret faults of any. God forbid I should. It is not only against Christian
charity, but humanity, so to do. If any say, It is not my part to handle these
matters, and it concerns me not? I answer, I am one of those whom the
Scripture calls barking dogs, I say 56. And whose office it is not only to
bark at the wolf when I see him a far off, but if he come nearer me, to
bite him too. Math. 7. And by Gods grace so will I do, so long as I have either
tongue or teeth in my head. And so had I ended, but

CAP. VI.
A defense of our late Appeal.
THat I was requested by a friend, to lay down the grounds and motives which
enduced M. D. Cadell and my self to publish in Print our late Appeal unto the Sea Apostolic, from the gravamina or agrievances of the Archbishop, and the
rather, for that the Friars, and those of his faction (as it is said) take
great exceptions thereunto.

1. First then in defense of the aforesaid printed Appeal; I answer, That
there is nothing therein published unto the world, which was not public
before, either de Iure, or de facto, or both, as by induction shall appear
when time serves. Now to make a thing more public, which is already public,
was always held most lawful. In confirmation whereof see these Authors
following. Cajet. opuscuio 31. Respons. 9. Lessius de justitia and Iure lib. 2.
cap. 11. dub. 13. number. 35. Clavis regia, lib, 11. cap. 11. number. 30. and 31.
Arragonius de justitia and jure q. 62. ^rt. 2. Reginaldus lib. 27. cap. 4. number.
82. and 85. ^^orius 3. part. lib. 13 cap. 7. dubio. 8. S^t. lib. 4, q. 6. ar.
3. And all other Writers. If then to make more public what already is public,
be lawful: it skils not whether that publication be written or printed,
writing or printing being but accidental to publication.

If you say; But those foul excesses laid unto the charge of the Archbishop,
ought at least to have bin concealed from the Protestants. I answer, (as in
part I have done before in my Epistle unto the Reader) That as among us a mixed
people, the manifest faults and excesses of Protestants, cannot be concealed
from the Catholics: No more is it possible, that the manifest faults and
excesses of our Catholics can any wise be hidden from the Protestants, of
which nature and quality are those 8. aggrievances, which we laid down in our
late Appeal.

Besides, who sees not, that it is the delinquents themselves, who first
manifest and make public their own disorders, and by such manifestation they
come to be known of others, who in their own just defense may make use thereof,
by way of justice, to have the same reformed or corrected: how else could it be
lawful to bring any person in question, upon crimes in courts and Tribunals?
And how comes it to pass, that we have both heard 8^ read of Prelates, not only
excommunicated, or suspended, but sometimes deposed for Heresy, Schism,
Simony, etc. I say, If their own faults might not be further published.

2. Secondly in defense of Printing our Appeal, I say, that an Appeal is a
juridicall instrument, of his own nature, admitting publicity no less then
all other court pleadings, as Bills, Answers, Orders, Sentences, Judgments,
Executions, and the like: All which processes of public courts, may be
notified through the world, either by pen, or Press.

3. Thirdly we committed that our Appeal, the rather unto the Press, for that
we suspected our Ordinary would not accept it at our hands, having often before
denied to receive any letter, or Petition, from such suitors as desired justice
of him, and so de facto, it came to pass. For first personally, and in pen
hand, we presented this self same Appeal unto our Ordinary, June 21. an.
1632. who refused to receive it of us. Wherefore that it might be sufficiently
known that we did. Appeal from his manifold tyrannies, to a higher Tribunal,
which benefit of the canon, for that he both has and does continually seek to
deprive us of, and debar us of all audience, we held it necessary (and as by
our learned council we were advised) to notify his manifold and manifest
injustice: omnibus Chri. fidelibus.

4. Fourthly, None can Appeal from the court of the Ordinary to a higher
Tribunal, but of necessity he must lay down the causes and grounds, why he
declines the judgment of his Ordinary, otherwise his Appeal is not only
void in law, but he is punishable for the same. See 2. q. 6. cap. Quicun^, and
cap. emaino, de appellationibus in 6. and ibi, glossam. Item Sayrus de eens.
lib. 12. cap. 17. number. 34. with many Doctors by him cited: So then those 8.
Gravamina laid down in our Appeal, being the causes why we declined his
jurisdiction, we could not omit the same.

5. Our fifth reason is Ad hominem, as thus: Our Ordinary Thomas Flemming, alias
Barnewell, thinking good to prohibit the people our Masses, under
Excommunication, he lays down for his ground, our disobedience and continual
insolency, without hope of amendment, etc. as may appear by the first lines of
his censure prefixed unto this work (which causes although above at large are
proved to be merely his own inventions) yet true or false, he made no scruple
to publish them in open Auditories and assemblies, when the greatest concourse
of people might be had, to our great disgrace, shame, and infamy (as much as in
him was.) If this (I say) was lawful for him to do against us in matters so
false (as we daily challenge him to the proof of them) may not we do the like
in our just defense, in his most notorious crimes, to which every day we offer
our selves to the trial and touchstone of proof, before any Tribunal which
is pleased to take knowledge thereof?

6. Lastly, our Archbishops faction daily writes, and prints against us of the
Clergy, witness that infamous Libell, called Examen juridicum censurae
Parisiensis, under the saigned name of Edmundus Vrsulanus, not only scosfing
the R. Bishops of France, with all the most learned Doctors of Sorbon, and
that famous University of Paris, in most base and contumelious language
traducing them: but also charging five R. Priests of this Irish Nation (and
that by name) with lewd aspersions, of which himself dare neither give his
name (by which he may be known) nor show his head to the justification. Nay,
not sparing to blemish the fame of the most Ill: Archbishop of Paris, being
himself (as is confessed by his own faction) a Friar Minor, (but more they
neither will, nor dare give us of him,) which libelling Pamphlet of that Friar,
is in such high estimation with our Archbishop, as it is made his only Vade
mecum: may not we then in defense of our good names, print what we are daily
provided to justify, firming it with our own proper names, by which every
hour we may be known and challenged, as we did that our aforesaid Appeal, to
so many persons as we did communicate the same unto? And as I my self the
Author of this Book Paul Harris, do subscribe my name with mine own hand,
offering my self to the justification of every word and syllable therein
contained.

The next work (gentle, judicious, and impartial Reader) which thou may
expect at my hands, is a full refutation of those most impious and blasphemous
doctrines of the Friars, abovementioned in Cap. 4. As also a compendions
Treatise of the 6. Excommunications, 2. Exiles, 2. Suspensions, published and
inflicted within the compass of a few weeks by our present Archbishop, Tho,
Flemming, alias Barnwell, with the causes, motives, and subjects of them all.
And so submitting my self and all my writings, to the censures of the Sea
Apostolic, beseeching Almighty God of his infinite goodness and mercy, to grant
us his grace, to live and dye his servants. I here end.

Qui ve^^^^s mutant ritus, legesque refigunt
Quas ^^ere Patres, and nullo compede vivunt:
Hi sunt qui patriae, clero, populoque minantur
Excidium. Tu prisca fides borum agmina vitae.
FINIS.

