TWO ELEGIES, On the late death of our Sovereign Queen Anne.

With Epitapsies. Written by Patrick Hannay* M of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks* 1619.

To the most Noble Prince Charles.
Disdain not Sir, this offering which I make,
Although the incense smoke does tower so black;
Northink my fires faint, cause they darkly shine,
Tapers burn dim, are set before a shrine.
Some better hap to have their first fruit glad,
This Common woe maskes mine in mourning shade:
Ana's strange, You (solely left for our relief)
For salve, do prove a cor'siue to our grief:
Weigh what it is to add to those oppressed,
Then by Your woe, ours shall not be increast:
I grant nor Son, nor Subject good, can smother
Grief, for so great, and good, a Queen and Mother.
Yet moderate this sorrow, as you reseene
to use in Joy, so use in grief a mean,
Ore match thy matchless self, that all may see
Her courage, worth and love, does live in Thee.
Then may this pen, which with tears draws my ^^aint,
In gold Thy glorious actions after paint.
Your Highness most humble servant, Patrick Hannay.

The first Elegy.
AS does a Mother, who before her eyes,
Her Ages hope, her only Son espies,
Butchered, and bathing still in bloody strands,
Ravished with sudden grief amazed stands*
Nor weeps, nor sighs, nor lets one tear distill,
But (with fixed eye) still gazeth on her ill:
But when with time her smothred grief forth vents,
She wastes her eyes in tears, her breath in plaints.
So we astonished could not tell our woe;
Who do grieve most, least sign of grief do show.
Yet time to those, in time, a time affords,
To weep and wail, and show their woe in wards*
Time grant us now this time, least of her praise
Our of spring hearing, and when her swift days
Had run their course, they hear none of our plaints,
Do either think some Poets pen her paints,
Or that they are of the same stones all sprung,
Which backward Pyrrha and Ducalyon flung.
So that will seem no fable, but a story,
If we do leave no witness that we are sorry,
Each senseless thing shall us vpbraide to them,
And as less sensible (then they) condemn.
Since in each object offered to the eye,
Signs of sad sorrow settled there we see,
The Heavens (though graced with her) for us are grieved,
And weep in showers for that we are bereaved
Of her: in, and for whom the World was blessed,
In whom her kinds perfection did consist.
Aquarius seems to have a solemn feast,
And that each other signs his household guest.
Not one of them now influence down powers,
But what distills in liquid weeping showers.
The Skies of Clouds now make them mourning weeds,
And general darkness all the world ore spreads:
What? has the Sun for a new Phaeton
Abandoned the Heavens, and beamy throne?
Is the cause theirs? or does it touch us nie?
(Since with their sorrow we so sympathy:)
No, its because our Cynthia left this sphere,
The world wears black, because she moves not here,
Her influence that made it freshly flourish,
Leaves it to fade, and will no more it nourish.
Leaves it? has left* How can it then subsist?
Can that be said to be, which disposest
Of soul, wants vigor? this Queen was the soul,
Whose faculties worlds frailties did control;
Corrected the ill humors, and mantain'd
In it, a wholesome concord, while she reigned:
But now ( she gone) the world seems out of frame,
Subord'nate passions now as Princes clame
Signorie ore the soul, which do torment
The whole with anguish; make the heart to faint,
Whose sad infection generall's so spread,
Griefs Character on every brow is read.
Our eyes so drop (were not God frees those fears)
The world might dread a new deludge of tears.
Dread? (thus distressed) we rather should desire
With the worlds dissolutions to expire
Our latest woes, 'twere better have no being,
Then live in woe, so as we are still dying.
Leave foolish passion, dares thou thus repine?
Against what is enacted by the powers divine,
Humbly submit, yet passion were a word,
Vsles, a nothing's name, speech should afford*
No place for it, if it should not now show
Its being by our grieuings in this woe:
Yet the wo's short, which on each soul has seaz'd,
It and the cause can never be equaliz'd.
I will not blaze her birth, descent or State,
Her Princely Progeny, her royal mate:
They Are known best, and greatest, yet these are
But accidental honors* but this star
With propper beams was so resplendent here,
Others (though bright) yet when she did appear,
Did lose their luster: she honored her place,
Her place not her: she Queen, was Queen's sole grace.
'Twas she the Antique Poets so admird,
When with prophetique fury they inspird,
Did feign the heavenly powers, they did see,
(As in a dream) that such a one should be:
And for each several grace, she should contain,
One Dietie they did for that ordain,
Not one for all, for that too much had been,
To feign her like, whose like was never seen.
Nor is their number equal to her merits,
For she a far off was showed to those spirits,
Now had they lived her virtues to have seen;
The Goddesses sure numberless had been,
But's well they did not, for then she should be
(Though giltlesse) yet cause of Idolatry,
For they who honored her shade before,
Seeing her substance needs must it adore.
The Morallists did all of her divine,
When they made every virtue foeminine;
And but they knew that such a one should be,
Doubtless with them virtue should have been HE.
Peruse all stories are compiled by Man,
Or Poets fictions since the world began:
You shall not find ( true or imaginary)
Like worth in one, whose all is in naught does vary.
Nay, take the abiects in these books reuil'd
For basest parts, so vicious and defiled,
As they seem Natures monsters, made in scorn,
As foiles, her other fair works to adorn,
( Contrar's opposed do others best set forth)
They serve not all, to parralell her worth.
They are deceived, who say the world decays,
And still grows worse and worse, as old with days:
For then this Age could never that have shown,
Which was long since to Solomon unknown,
A woman: but had he lived in our times,
He might have found one, so deuoid of crimes,
That her own merits (if merits could save)
Might justly (as of due) salvation crave.
I rather think the worlds first Infancy,
Growing more perfect with Antiquity
(As young lings do) traueld till now at height,
Big of perfection, brought this birth to light:
This second to that Maiden-Mother-Daughter,
She only was before, this only after:
For on this Grace and Nature spent such store,
As after her we need expect none more,
And those who read her praise when we are gone,
Would think we but described a worthy one,
Not that there was one such, but that she here
Left part of her, which and its seed shall bear
Successiue witness, to all doubtful ages,
Of her rare virtues, which in those dear pledges
Still live: they will say our praise came short, we dull
With speech defective, could not to the full
Set forth her worth: which she at death did give,
Others may goods not goodness of spring leave.
But she bequeth'd her goodness, for her merit,
Obtained her issue should that wealth inherit,
Which we possess in them, while they do prease
(As usurers) that stock still to increase:
Only ambitious to augment that store,
Robbing the world, which either is but poor:
Or seems so, set by them, beggars may boast,
But they alone have all that wealth ingrost:
And though that God the worlds gold has refinde,
And took the tried, He left this vain behind,
Pitying the dross the luster should obscure,
Of her bright soul, while flesh did it immure.
Yet did He not with it of all bereave us,
But with her offspring, happiness did leave us.
For her preferment, why then should we toss
Our souls with torment? or grieve that our loss
Has Heaven inricht? or 'cause we held her dear,
Wish we her punished, to be living here?
We rather should rejoice she thus did leave us,
And naught but Heaven alone of her could reaue us.
O! since that Cedar fell so right at last,
Which way it standing leaned, may well be ghest.
And since the End does crown the actions still,
How lived she, who dying, died so well!
For asked, if she did willing hence depart,
Said, (rapt with heavenly joy) WITH ALL MY HEART.
Though flesh be frail, yet hers so void of fear,
(For death did not in his own shape appear)
Did entertain so kindly its own foe,
(Who came to Court, but unawares killed her so)
As she esteemed it only one hard thrust,
At that strait gate by which to life we must:
Faith, Hope, and Love possessed her heart and mind,
Leaving no place for fearful thoughs to find:
Troops of white Angels did her bed impaile,
To tend the souls flight from the fleshy gaile,
It to conduct unto that heavenly throne,
Which Christ prepared, with glore to crown her on.
O! how my flesh-clog'd soul would scale the sky,
And leave that dear companion here to ly:
To see her entertaind, with glory crowned,
While troops of Angels her arrival sound
To that new kingdom: they all God do praise
For her translation, and their voices raise,
In sign of Joy, but yet that Joy comes short
Of what they make, for most to them resort,
For, for the greater sinner, Christ has said,
That does repent, the greater joy is made:
Yet that is made up in glore, for she so far
Does those exceed, as one another star:
What may we think unto her soul is shone,
When from her baser-part such virtue's flowne;
As a sad reverent fear their senses pierce,
Who sighing see her sorrow-suted- Hearse:
What would they do, if their vaild soul could spy
Her sitting crowned above the starrie sky:
Sure they would do (nay in their hearts they do)
Even at the thought thereof, with reverence bow.
But leave to speak, nay, not so much as think,
Least of those Joys which nere in heart could sink.
Lets not enuy' er, but inueigh against our Fate,
That we behind her, are staid here so late:
And lets not mourn for her, that she is hence,
But for our selves, that we are kept from thenee
Whither she is gone: yet let no tear ore-flow,
( Sorrow soon cease that is disburdned so)
Let them strain inward, if they le needs distill,
And with their drops thy hearts sad center fill;
And when its full, it can no more contain,
Let the caske break, and drown thee in that maine.
On the Queen.
THe world's a Sea of errors, all must pass,
Where shelues and sands the purling billow blinds:
Men's bodies are frail barks of brittle glass,
Which still are tossed with adverse tyds and winds:
Reason's the Pylot that the course directs,
Which makes the vessel (as its hieght) hold out,
Passions are partners, a still-iarring-rout:
Succumbing-thoughts are life-inuading leaks.
How built her body! such a voyage made;
How great her reason! which so rightly swayed;
How plyant passions! which so well obayd;
How dantlesse thoughts, vain doubts durst nere invade.
Her body, reason, passions, thoughts did gree,
To make her life the Art to sail this Sea.
The second Elegy.
EAch Country now contributes to the Thames,
Which a support of every current clames,
Why do thou so sweet Thames? Is not thy sorrow
Sufficient for thy self, but thou must borrow?
Or wants thy waters vvorth for such a charge?
As to conduct great Annes last body'd- barge;
Or is it cause so just and kind thou art,
Thou Wilt not incroach that, wherein each has part?
Sure that's the cause, the loss is general,
And that last office must be helped by all.
Yet wonder not they come not now so sweet,
As they do use, when they to sollace meet:
They Are not themselves, they are compounded things,
For every one, his latest offering brings
And sends it by these brooks, unto her shrine,
Whose waters with their tears are turned brine:
Each subjects cheek such falling drops distaine,
As if to dew, ^ighes had dissolved the brain:
Which from their eyes still in abundance power,
Like a moist hail, or liquid pearly shower:
Which in such haste, each one another chases,
Making swift torrents in late torrid places,
Disgorging in these brooks, making them rise,
So's sovereign Thames almost fears a surprise:
Fear not fair Queen, it is not their ambition,
But swelling sorrow, that breeds thy suspicion:
Its sorrow feeds those currents and those rils,
Which thy vast channel with an Ocean fills,
Which eye-bred-humor so has changed thy Nature,
Thy fishes think they live not in thy water:
It, or their taste is alterd, for they think,
For thy sweet streams they briny liquor drink:
How vveari'd is thy sister famous Forth,
Bringing sad Scotland's sorrows from the North,
Who comes not out of duty, as the rest
Who unto Thames their careful course adrest,
She comes, her equal, will not yield in tears,
In subjects sorrow's, nor in countries cares.
Great Nephtun's self does fear inuasiue wrong,
Seeing her strange waves throw his waters throng,
And causes Triton to sound an alarm,
To warn the Sea-Gods in all haste to arm,
who bringing billows in brave battell-ray,
Do mean Forth's fury with their force to stay:
But when they see her thus all vvrapt in woe,
And the sad cause of her just sorrow know;
They lay not their defensiiue arms aside,
But as a guard, her through their gulfes do guide,
Striving with all the pleasures of the Maine,
This grieuing-stranger- Queen to entertain,
Out throw their boures of clear transparent waves,
Christaline-wainscot, pearl the bottom paues:
Her they conduct, and to abate her woe,
Their Sea-delights and riches all they show,
Which Neptune (now in love) would gladly give her
For love, yet dares not offer least he grieve her;
Who loves and would not have his love unkind,
Must woo a pleasant humor, vacant mind:
This makes him stay his suit, and strive to please,
With all the loue-alurements of the Seas:
Yet all do not so much as move one smile,
An anxious sorrow soon discouer'th guile,
Yet he will guide and guard, her grieuing streams,
Whom at her entry in the wished Thames,
He leaves, and vows in discontent to mourn,
Till fairest Forth back to the Sea return.
Her sister her receives with kind embrace,
Their liquid arms clasping, they interlace
In love so straight, they cannot be vntwinde,
They seem both one, in body and in mind.
O happy union! labored long in vain,
Reserved by God to James his joyful reign,
And Anne's; O blessed couple so esteemed,
By all fore-knowing Jove, that He them deemed
Worthy each other, and to wear that Iemme,
Blessed Britains now united- Diadem.
He esteemed none, worthy to wear't before them,
But kept it still in store, for to decore them.
How did He suffer those two kingdoms try
All open power, and private policy;
Yet still increased discord; others force,
Made separation greater, su'd divorce.
How did one tear the other, spare no toil,
To bath in blood the neighbors fertile soil;
Wrath, discord, malice, envy, rapiny, strife,
Thefts, rapes, and murderous mischieues were so rife,
None lived secure, while each King did protect
The others fugitives, (for his respect)
Thus looking for no rest, or end of hate,
But with the ruin of the adverse State.
God, he effects it (that to him alone,
We might ascribe the honor; and being one,
We might love better: Twixt united foes,
And separated friends, love and hate grows
To greatest heights:) And for this end does raise,
( Using the means) the honor of his days;
Great James, the joy presaging Northrene star,
Whose radiant light illuminates so far.
As it does warm with its all-quickning-beames,
The frozen-loue betwixt the Tay and Thames;
With wonder and delight, drawing all hearts
And eyes, to love and see his Princely parts.
And (what is strange) who hated most before,
With admiration, most his worth adore,
Wishing they were his subjects: He is King
Already of their hearts; the poisoned sting
Of rancor is remoou'd, for love they call him,
And with their kingdoms ornaments install him,
Great confidence his vertous life must bring,
Whom such old foes, love forces make their King.
Where was ere heard, of emulating foes,
(Rooted in hate with others, overthrows
Such and so long) that did their wrath apease,
And yield (won but by love) to right, as these.
Yet do they not repent; they find report
Sometime is vvrong'd, and may indeed come short
In commendations; yet its rare (as here)
For she is a woman, and (by kind) will bear
More then she should: but his last subjects find
Themselves with Saba's Queen of self-same mind,
That fame (though saying by belief) had wronged
Two Kings, not telling half to each that longed;
For England heard not, nor could it have thought,
That Scotlands king such wonders could have wrought*
Long may he live, and die well, full of years,
And when his death shall draw us dry with tears,
On Britains Throne may his seed ever reign,
Till Christ do come (to judge the world) again.
Who would have thought from the Scot-hated- Dane,
Whom vanquished England so much did disdain,
(Oppressed with base succesion) they did turn,
(Being freed) Lord-dane to lurdane for a scorn;
Who would have thought (I say) from Dane should spring
One, who from Scots and English eyes should wring
Such hearty tears; must not her worth be much,
Since we do find its-loue-effects prove such,
How great that worth (in such, such love could breed)
O let it live for ever in her seed:
And let that love in our hearts never die,
But ever live to her Pesteritie:
And those sweet streams her mate and she conbinde
In love, O let their arms be nere vntwinde
From kind embraces, and though now their greetings
Be not so joyful as at other meetings,
Yet is their love all one, they take one part,
The one joys not, the other sad at heart:
They surfeit now in sorrow, then in pleasure,
Joy then exceeds, grief now is above measure.
To honor Charles (our hope) when they met last,
How did they rob each meadow as they past,
Of sweets, each bank a posie did bestovv,
Of fairest flowers, that on his brim did grow:
These and such like, they brought from every part,
And gratulations from each subjects heart:
They swelled with pride, rising in loftly waves,
And all the neighbor bordring banks out-braues
Their fishes frolick'd, showing joy by gesture,
The waters (vvantonizing) vvoo'd their Master;
So fast their billows 'bout his blessed barge thronged,
They hurt themselves often, often their fellows vvrong'd:
Each would be first, on others backs some ride,
Some under others slippry shoulders slide,
Though beat with oars, yet will they not turn back,
For they their humble prostrate homage make,
The Sun then guilt each glistring-glassie-coat,
Those Marin-masquers wore, dans'd bout his boat,
Who by the music measured not their paces,
Deaf'd with a confused cry from diverse places,
Of maidens, matrons, aged men, and boys,
Which from each quarter made a confused noise,
Of hearty Aue's, vvelcomming their Prince,
Echo (with answering tyrd) was mute still since,
The City with the suburbs did appear,
Like a large Theater when he came near:
Each window, wall, each turret top and steeple,
Was filled with every age, sex, sort of people:
So as some thought (who erst had never seen
Such numbers) that the buildings all had been,
Of Imagry contrived, by cunning Art:
For on the ground, the Brewer in his cart,
The Sculler, Carman, and the baser sort,
Seemed strong and rudely carved clownes, to support
The stately frame: Maids, Prentises and grooms,
Made shop-dore, window, stale, and lower rooms:
The batlements, house-couerings and the leads,
As tyles or slates, young boys and girls ore-spreads:
(The middle rooms all round about the Thames,
Which Ladies held, and choiser Citie-Dames)
Such took for spaces, which fair statues held,
Where Caruer and the Painter both excelled;
So pure complexions these seemed made by Art,
As Nature never did the like impart
To lovely youth, The large, low, open breast,
Full, white, round, swelling, azure-vain'd, increast
The error, for they thought none living would
Lay out such parts, for all eyes to behold:
So curious were the colors which were shown,
As Nature hardly could from Art be known:
So that they could adiudge them due to neither:
But participles, taking part of either,
Yet all by voice and gesture seemed glad,
Wonder it was to see a thing look sad.
Now its not so, the offerings are but tears,
The sighs, and groans, of Britains blest-reft sheres
Are now the acclamations; these two streams,
Compounded waters of mixed sorrow seems,
Yet walk, they hand in hand with equal pace,
Toward that late pleasant, but now pensive place
Where sorrow sutedin a sable weed,
Does with a mourning veil each heart ore-spread,
And Phoebus for to make the world and mind,
To wear one livery, all his beams confinde,
Dimming each eye in darkness of the night,
Either ashamed to mourn in open sight,
Or loath to alter with his brighter streams,
Our late obscured Cyntia's lesser gleames;
For her fled soul which does with glory shine,
Left with its lodging something that's divine,
Which with reflection smileth on these rays,
Which her bright soul now from the skies displeas.
And these light orbs which with such swiftnes roll
About the Heavens, acquainted with her soul,
To light her corpse, do set in every porch
Of the damantine Heaven, a starry torch,
Which darkened with the weeping Earths moist vapors,
Are her last lamps and never dying tapers,
Thames trembles, Forth does feuerise for fear,
Both roar to see their sovereign thus appear*
Their billows break their hearts against the shore,
Their fishes faint (yet cannot tell wherefore)
But when they float upon the water crop,
And see the tears from eyes and oars which drop;
They think them all to few, and add their own,
And swim in proper waters (erst unknown)
The water-Nymphes now round about her boat,
Clothed in sad sable mourning habits float,
The Hamadryads, and the Siluans all,
To bear apart in this complaint they call.
Who since her death, had practiced in their tears,
Streams deep enough: none now the water fears,
They brought with them sweet Camomile and Rue,
Mint, Spicknard, Marioram, her way they strew,
With flowers of choicest color and of sent,
Which from the slender-weeping-stalk was rent.
Her Exequies these Nymphs together sing,
Till with this consort Heaven and Earth does ring:
Heavens in uying our waters, walks, and woods,
Has reft our joy, and placed her amongst the Gods.
No more our wandering waves shall wantonize,
No more shall swelling billows brave the skies,
No more shall purling Zephyr curle our head*
No more we will foamy-powders thereon spread,
No more shall now Meandrian walks delight us,
No more despair with death shall now affright us,
Since heaven inuying our late happy floods,
Has reft our joy, and placed amongst the Gods.
We Will take no sport now to pursue the Fawn,
We Will no more tread light measures on the Lawne,
We Will deck our heads no more with Flora's flowers,
We Will vvooe no more our vvooddy Paramours,
We Will bear no part hereafter with the birds,
We Will vveep for woe, and teach them vvaile in words;
Since heaven envying our late happy woods,
Has reft our joy, and placed her amongst the Gods.
We Will hide our heads within our shores and shelues.
We Will dwell in darkest cipresse groves with elues.
No more we will sollace in great Nephtunes hals.
No more we will dance at Syluanes festiuals.
Because she is gone, whose glory graced our floods,
Because she is gone who honored walks and woods.
Thus sung they her along, but come to shore,
Where she must leave them, they nere see her more,
They sink to bottom, either in a swone,
Or else themselves (now loathing life) to drown.
The Forth and Thames losing their so loved- sight,
Vow, yearly to renew their woes, that night.
An Epitaph.
POwer to do ill, and practice only good,
Humblest in heart, highest in place and blood,
Fairest, and freest from loose-desires in thought,
Pleasures to tempt, yet not distained in ought:
With anxious care, in courage nere dejected,
Though cause of joy, with no vaine-ioy affected.
Know Reader, whensoere these lines you scan,
Such ( and none such but she) was our Queen Anne*
An Epitaph.
A Wife, a Daughter, Sister to a King,
Mother to those, whose hopes do higher spring*
Chaste, fair, wise, kind; first, Crowne-vnited w^r^
We knew her such, and held her for no more.
That she was more: Gods daughter, and heavens heir,
We know, since parted hence, He crowns her there.
FINIS.

