TWO SERMONS PREACHED BEfore the Kings most excellent Majesty in the Church of
BEAVLY in Hampshire.

The first, the last of August.

The second, the 9. of August.

BY CHRISTOPHER HAMPTON Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed for Edward White dwelling at the little North door of Paul's
at the sign of the gunne, 1609.

To the right honorable Henry, Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, Baron of TICHEFIELD,
Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter, and Governor of the Isle of
WIGHT.
BEhold (right honorable) the Sermons now published, which were pronounced by
your Lordships appointment, in a very sacred presence. The gracious allowance
which then they received from a royal divine, gives me hope that they will
not be unwelcome to the Church, entertaining all meditations with facility,
that advance Christ, her Bridegroom, Patron, and delight. What was intended in
them to this purpose, he knows best that knows all things: If any thing be
attained, that shall always be ascribed thankfully to his goodness, and
submitted willingly to her censure. With this obedience I have determined to
live, and desire to die. In the mean time, they come abroad under the pass
also of your Lordships authority, as of my honorable Magistrate. Were they
just volumes, and of any great request, your Lordship were more than worthy of
them, for that heroiacall zeal wherewith you have adorned our little Sarepta.
Now making scarce a pamphlet, they are the less worthy of a noble patron: But
I have had true experience that your Lordship accepts the poor endeavors of
our ministry above their worth. Therefore recommending them to your Lordships
good favor, and your Lordship to the riches of Gods blessing, I take my leave
with reverence, and will rest

Your Lordships most affectionately devoted, CHRISTOPHER HAMPTON.

A SERMON PREAched before the King at BEAVLIE in Hampshire.
ROMANS 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes.


IT is not unknown unto you, that the Doctrine of free justification is the
principal subject and matter of this Epistle.

The Jews, whom the Apostle spoke of in the beginning of the Chapter, were
afraid to come to this righteousness of Christ, lest they should be injurious
to the Law, and offend God, that had commanded it so seriously to the Fathers.

The Apostle answers, that this their fear proceeded from ignorance of Gods
righteousness, and their own Law: and adds a reason in these words of my
Text; For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes.

Quicquid est veteris Testamenti, Christum sonat: All the Old Testament (as
Augustine says) sounds of Christ. The Ceremonies are nothing but figures of
him: he is the kernel of the promise; they are all in him Yea and Amen; and
without him no promise has accomplishment. He is the life and soul, and
perfection and end of all the Commandments.

And therefore he that has Christ, and holds him by faith, has all that
the Law requires in precepts, offreth in promises, and shadoweth out in types
and figures.

The points in this text are considerable:

1 The prerogative that Christ has above the Law: he is the end of the Law. 2
The benefit thereof: for righteousness. 3 To whom this benefit perteines: to
every one that believes.


Excellent things are spoken of the Law. If thou will enter into everlasting
life (says Christ unto a Lawyer) keep the Commandments. So says Moses;
Denter. 6
Behold, this shall be our righteousness before the Lord our God, If we take
heed to all these Commandments, to do them.

Whereby we may perceive, that fair and large promises are annexed to the
Law. What is fairer than righteousness? What larger than everlasting life? But
they are conditional, and not absolute: Si potes dicere, Feci quod iussisti,
potes itidem dicere, Read quod promisisti: If thou can say, I have done that
which thou command, thou may well say, Give me that thou promisest.

On the other side, if the Law be not observed, and that exquisitely too, the
threats thereof are all as terrible. Cursed is every one that abides not in
all that is written in the Law, to do them.

Hard conditions, of doing, and doing all.

And if you please that we shall enter into the question, whether we can
perform the Law, or not; Paul answers, that it is a matter not of
difficulties; Romans 8,
for that might be compassed with endeavor, but of impossibility; (...); that
which was impossible for the Law to do. And he gives a reason thereof in the
former chapter: The Law is spiritual, and I am carnal. Now these two be
contraries. For the flesh evermore lusts against the spirit: Galat.
witness the same Apostle, not in words only, but in true experience also.
For he felt a Law in his members rebelling against the Law of God, and leading
him captive. When this elect Vessel, and great Apostle, after he was
regenerate (for the unregenerate feel no such strife) found this long distance
between the Law and his own affections; and such defects, that for horror
thereof he cried our, O miserable man that I am! may we attend any good
performance or complement of the Law in others?

Steven challenges the whole Nation of the Jews; Act. 7.
You have received the Law, and have not kept it. His words carry the strength
and sinews of an argument. That which is not kept, cannot justify: But you
have not kept the Law: therefore what boast soever you do make thereof, that
you received it from GOD, that it was published by Angels, and given to the
Fathers, yet does it not justify; it gives you no prerogative. They could not
answer this with reason, and therefore fell into passion and outrage: the text
says, When they heard these things, their hearts burst asunder, and they
gnashed upon him with their teeth: Manifest evidence of conviction.

Act. 15.
Peter calls the keeping of the Law, an importable yoke, and contesteth
against those which urged the performance thereof for justification, that they
laid a task upon the necks of their brethren, which neither they nor their
fathers were able to bear.

If the Law could be performed, why does Peter call it an importable yoke? If
it cannot be performed, why is righteousness sought or placed in it? For it
is not the hearing or having, but the doing of the Law, that justifies.

Sin (as John defines it) is a transgression of the Law: And do not all men
sin? It were a sin for any man to say, he has no sin: and if we confess
our sins, what do we confess, but that we are transgressors, and not
performers of the Law?

Shall we put the matter to a trial, and let all the saints in heaven and
earth pass upon the Jury?

O Lord, let them be demanded here in thy presence, if it were by their
works, or fulfilling of the Law, that they were justified. Have they not all
with one voice returned their verdict? Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give the praise, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake.

Where is James, or John, or one of the sons of thunder, to set forth the
dreadfulnesse of the Law? For I am scarce able to give you a taste thereof; but
by a little you can conceive the rest. Look then to the concussion of the
Israelites, 19. and 20. chap. of Exodus, when the Law was established, they
came with great endeavor, in fasting, sanctifying, and preparing themselves:
yet when they beheld with what majesty and terror it was published, how the
mountain smoaked, the thunders roared, the lightnings flashed, the trumpets
sounded, and the earth trembled; they cried out, We shall die, we shall die.
And this was no vain fear, but a true sensible feeling of the rigor and
severity of the Law.

Come then ye Iusticiaries, that are so foolishlie zealous of the Law: Compare
your selves, not with your selves (for that may prove to be a false measure)
but compare your selves with these Israelites; and that is no disparagement.

They were afraid of the Law, when it was published; and how dare you presume,
when it is exacted? They could not endure the proclamation of the Law; And will
you abide the execution? Upon what confidence? Are your works answerable to
the exquisite trial thereof? Alas, alas, I will not abase them with such
terms as the Scripture would afford: But make them as glorious as you can;
cover them with grace; derive them from the holy Ghost; dip them and die them
in the blood of Christ; apparel them with all the jewels, attire, and
habil^ments, that the Church of Rome has bestowed upon them: yet you shall
find them but hay, chafe, and stubble, that will be devoured in the fiery
trial of the Law: you shall find them but humane righteousness: you shall
have no more use of them in the business of justification, than David had of
Saul's armor, when he went to encounter with Goliath. It made a show to others,
but hindered David, that he could not go with it.

Such poor helps, and no better, have all they that establish their own
righteousness, and are not subject to the righteousness of God.

I can resemble the Law to nothing better, than to the man in the Gospel, that
would be brought to no other song, than to those sad and unwelcome tunes of
Solue quod debes.

Oh Lord, who can abide the harshnesse of those sharp notes! Who shall ever
be able to satisfy the rigorous exactions of such an unmerciful Creditor!
When the Law shall require the uttermost farthing most imperiously, and we not
able to answer one for a thousand tolerably: you can easily conceive, what
heavy sentence, what loathsome prison, what tragical pains, what weeping and
wailing, what gnashing of teeth, what unquenchable fire, what euer-gnawing, and
neuer-dying worm, must follow necessarily.

What then? Is the Law idle? or is God altogether rigorous, that proposes a
Law which cannot be performed? Neither of both.

God made a Law like unto himself: holy, because he is holy; pure, because he
is pure; perfect, because he is perfect; eternal, because he is eternal: and
added that condition also which a great Lawgiver requires in all Laws:
(...): He made it possible, for that integrity of nature wherein God created
us. For God made man right.

If that possibility be now taken away from the Law; if our nature be
wounded; if it be disabled; if our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and all our
teeth be set on edge; if we have lost that integrity that GOD gave unto us;
let him be free: for he is light, and in him dwells no darkness: let us not
charge him foolishly, but condemn our own preuarication justly.

For so it was, as if a man should leave a great sum of money to one whose
estate was then good, and sufficient to make restitution: if afterward, through
prodigality, riot, or unthriftiness, he misspent or wasted his estate, and
left himself no means of repaiment, can either the accusation of the
creditors cruelty, that demands nothing but his own, or the excuse of the
debtors inabilities, be just? Even so the Law was proposed to man, created
after the Image and similitude of God, with perfect righteousness, and true
holiness, and indowments, to perform the same.

If afterward we have misspent our patrimony, and wasted our fathers
substance, with the prodigal son; if we have cast our selves into the hands
of thieves and cutthroats, that have bereaved us of all means to give
satisfaction; we may deplore our own infelicitie; we cannot except against
God, or his Law, Was it not possible?

Grant this, and then you discharge God from all imputation: deny it, and then
you infringe, abate, and detract from Adams perfection, which the Scripture
celebrateth.

Thus you see, that the Law was possible: but it is now made weak by our
flesh, which is restife, wayward, refractarie, and yet the instrument wherewith
the Law does work.

As for example, The Law would have God to be loved above all things: The flesh
says she is nearest and dearest to her self.

The Law would have the flesh brought into subjection, and crucified: The flesh
is like Diotre^hes, that loves to have the pre-eminence, and will carry no
cross, but as Simon of Cyrene did, to crucify another, and not himself.

Dalila never practiced more treacherously between Sampson and the Philistines,
than every man's own flesh does against the Law of God, with the capital
enemy thereof; discovering who thirsts with covetousness, who swells in
pride, who burns with lust, who pineth away with envy: and then the serpent
that is more subtle than all the beasts that GOD created, when he ploweth with
every man's heifer, does easily dissolve their riddles.

Omnes amici, omnes inimici, omnes necessarij, omnes aduersarij, omnes
domestici, nulli pacifici: All the affections of the flesh be friends, and all
are enemies, all necessary, and all adversary, all domestical, none
peaceable. And is it possible that we should fly to the mark of
righteousness, or to the end of the Law, when our feathers are thus glude
together with birdlime?

Ah proud and wayward flesh! Why do thou spurn, and lust, and murmur
against the Law? If it humble thee for a time, is it not because it would
advance thee for ever?

Go too Agar, submit your self to your mistress Sara: suffer the law: endure
the rod and ferula of the schoolmaster; or rather, labor together with it,
that thou may also reign with it.

But the belly has no ears; and in vain do we here look for that which
is due elsewhere, and in another place: here we do fight, we do not
triumph. And I would to God we did fight manfully; for then we shall be sure
of conquest at the last. One thing is certain, that our whole battle is like
to that of Gedeons in the book of Judges. These earthen pitchers that we
carry, must be broken, before we can win the field. As long as these houses
of clay be whole, look for no perfection to hold correspondencie with the
law: look for nothing but imperfections to frustrate the law of her end.

Put off the old man, and put on the new: wash away all birdlime of
concupiscence: crucify your earthly members: tame the flesh, and bring it into
true subjection; that the law may say, go, and it goes; come, and it comes;
do this, and it does so: then you shall find no defect in the law.

O that all weakness were so taken away from this sinful flesh of mine! O
that all the sores thereof were in this sort healed! Should not I then run the
way of the Commandments?

But this the law cannot do: it rather discovers them, and aggrauateth their
sin, and makes it out of measure sinful: not unprofitable; for if the
disease were light, it would be contemned: then remedy would not be sought, and
so no cure. Lex data est, vt gratia quaereretur: gratia data est, vt lex
impleretur.

I remember the story of Elizeus in the book of the Kings. He was a Prophet,
and prophesied, as well by his deeds, as in his words. The Shunamites son was
dead; it was told the Prophet; he sent his staff by his servant; Go lay it
upon the childs face; but the dead received no life. The Prophet knew what he
did, that the staff would not be sufficient, and therefore came himself.

The law is like to Elizeus staff: though it were appointed, and Elizeus sent
it to give life, yet did it not give life. For if there had been a law that
could give life, then righteousness should have come by the law. Now we are
all like to the Shunamites child, dead in sin. Come then Elizeus, and raise
the dead: send not thy staff by any servant: but come thy self. Come, come, O
pitiful and sweet Samaritane, heal this poor hurt creature; power in wine
and oil. The Priest saw it, and passed by: the Leuite looked upon it, but no
offices of the law had compassion. Come therefore, come courteous Samaritane;
for there is mercy with thee. Bind up my sores, set me upon thine own beast:
but leave me not with any Host or In-keeper. For whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none on earth that I desire, in comparison of thee. Numquid
possunt sanare languores meos? Therefore take charge of me thy self. Say unto
me (o thou preserver of mankind) say unto my soul, I am thy salvation: but
say it so that I may hear. Open me the gates of righteousness, and I will
enter therein,

That which the law could not do, because it was made weak through our flesh,
God sent his son to do. He sent Christ to be the end of the law. He sent no
servant about it. Moses indeed was faithful in all his house, but his tongue
was heavy, and not eloquent enough to treat of such a cause. Esaies lips were
unclean; Jeremy was a child, and could not speak; all the Prophets were
tongue-tied; and the Angels themselves were unable to entertain the matter for
us. When Angels were fallen, could Angels mediate their own restitution?

Then can they never be competent for us, that were insufficient for
themselves.

To be vmpeere between God and man, to make appointment and transaction of
their differences, to sustain the wrath of the one, and the miseries of the
other (and that a mediator must do) is certainly beyond the capacity and
compass of every creature.

Verily none but God can plead with God: the son with the father: God
merciful, with God just: God pleased, with God offended.

May I crave your honorable leave and patience, to inform you of a sharp
contention? and it shall not be impertinent to this business that I treat of.
Truth and righteousness contend for the punishment of mankind with peace and
mercy, pleading for his deliverance.

Whole Adam (says Justice) must die, because whole Adam has offended. And if
regard be not had of my sister truth and my self, yet may not the word be
infringed that is gone out of the mouth of God, In what day soever thou shall
eat of this fruit, thou shall die the death.

Mercy makes answer, that if the matter should go so, and no commiseration
taken, but that whole mankind must be condemned, then why were Peace and I
brought into the world to be cut away so soon again?

Reply was made by Truth, that Mercy had zeal indeed, but not according to
knowledge. For in pity toward mankind, she is cruel to Justice and me
that are her sisters; desiring to have him spared, and us abolished. For it is
not possible for us to consist without this punishment.

The controversy is difficult, and happily some do wish for Solomon to decide
it. But a greater than Solomon was there; yet that could not hold them from
bitterness, till Peace had reproved both sides, and told them, that
contention was unbeseeming virtues and sisters. All this while the Judge was
stooping down, and writing upon the ground. The tenor of his writing was
this, as Peace did read it:

The one side says, that all mankind must die, or else Righteousness and
Truth cannot live: The other side says, that in case mankind die, Mercy and
Peace must perish with them.

This is my sentence: Fiat mors bona, and habet vtraque pars quod petebat. All
wondered at the wisdom and integrity of the decision. But the remedy was as
hard as the disease. That death should be made good, it was impossible,
unless such a one should undertake the business, that was not indebted to
death. And where should he be found? Verily none can give aid, but he that gave
counsel. And so they had recourse unto the son of God, who turning to his
father, said, Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou would not have, but have
fitted me up a body for this death. In the volume of thy book it is written
of me, that I should fulfill thy will. O my God, I am content to do it. So he
put his own decision in practice. Then Mercy and Truth met together;
Righteousness and Peace kissed each other. He was that ladder that Jacob did
see joining heaven and earth together. Where the law ended in cursing and
imprecation, because it was not observed, there Christ began, and redeemed us
from the curse of the law, and was made a curse for us.

He did herein as in the matter of Tribute, when it was demanded; although he
were free as the son of a King, yet because we will leave none offense, Go
Peter, take this piece of twenty pence, and pay for me and thee. O bone Domine
Jesus, O good Lord Jesus, will thou indeed pay for thee and me? for that which
thou saidest unto Peter, thou say unto every one of thy Church: take it, and
pay it for thee and me.

And for the^e the payment is soon made, because thou wast born, free. But my
sin is great; and is not my redemption plenteous? I have transgressed the
whole law; and have not I fulfilled it too a little? But the reward of sin is
death; and is there any gall of bitterness in that cup whereof I have not
tasted? Wherefore was all this done? Was it for my self? I will not be a
witness in mine own cause. Ask mine enemies that were chief actors in the
business. They will not be partial. Did not Pilate pronounce from his
tribunal, that he found no cause of death in me? Was not this a part of
Caiaphas censure, that it was expedient that I should die for the people?

Take him then, good Christian brother, and pay for thee and me. He is the
first fish that comes from the sea of death. Verily, the first begotten
amongst the dead. Open his life and death, and whatsoever punishment ye find
in the one, or righteousness in the other, take it all, and pay it for thee
and me.

What, both death and life? Is not the one of them sufficient? There is a rule,
that the law does bind either to obedience, or to punishment. So if the one of
the disiunctiues, or the other, be performed, the law is satisfied, and come to
her end.

This rule has place in humane laws amongst light offenses. There, if the law
cannot have obedience, it has some satisfaction by punishment: but then it
writes, Contented, and not Pleased. For the chief end whereunto all laws do
aim, is to have obedience, and thereby to make men good, which cannot be done
in humane laws, when the offense is general, and the punishment capital.

In the law of God, especially concerning the business of Justification, the
rule of disiunctiues has no place. This law has not her end, unless she be
contented and pleased too. Contented, for the sins that we have committed; and
pleased, with the obedience that is required. Christ is the end of the law:
therefore he has performed both.

Well might the law be contented with the death of Christ, because there was as
much atrocitie in that, as in the sins of the whole world. I willingly use
this reason now, to give you to understand, that I concur not with their
opinion, that think, if the son of God had shed but one drop of blood, it
had been price enough for all our sins.

I doubt whether the law would have been contented with one drop of blood.
Ought not Christ to suffer all these things, and so to enter into glory? Was
not the whole burnt offering a figure of his sufferings? And that must be all
consumed.

I look into the counsel of God, what was there set down for satisfaction of
the law. And I carry and give such reverence to the wisdom and justice
thereof, that whatsoever is wanting of that which is there set down, I verily
believe to be insufficient.

I look to the fact of Christ. Exinaniuit seipsum: He emptied himself. And I
am loath to believe, that either the father was so prodigal of his sons life,
or that the son was so careless of his own blood, that he would have powered
out all, if one drop might have served the turn. Admit this, and then Christ
died in vain.

But every thing that the son of God did, was of infinite value, for the
dignity of his person.

The dignity of his person is great, and has goodly use: but it may not be
stretched too far, lest the buffets that he received on his face be reckoned
price enough for our redemption. Hydra peccati vno icta non tollitur: Then
monster of sin will not be slain with one blow.

He made us indeed at a moment, and with great facility: for he spoke the
word, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created. But did he
redeem us so soon? No, no; it cost him three and thirty years work, and O
Lord, what labors! What sorrows! What watchings! What hunger! What thirst!
What temptations! What prayers! What strong cries! What groans! What
indignities! What scourgings! What agonies! And after all these, what a bitter
death! I dare be bold to say, that there was as much atrocitie in all these,
as in the sins of the whole world. And therefore the law might well be
contented, for matter of punishment, with the death of Christ.

Dubitas quod dabit tibi bona sua, qui non dedignatus est susciperemala tua?

Add then heereunto his perpetual obedience to the law of God, never
intermitted in the whole tenor of his life: and then Christ is the end and
perfection of the law: he has contented it, and pleased it too.

He died indeed upon the Cross, and in my nature, and for my sins of humane
infirmity But he brought withal such a troop and legion of virtues to his
Cross, as might well give righteousness to the whole world.

Time will not serve to rehearse every one: but the virtues wherewith he
adorned the four corners of his cross are so conspicuous, that I cannot omit
them.

Supereminentior est charitas: Love takes the highest place, and is set on the
top of his cross. Maiorem charitatem nemo habet: None can have greater love,
than to lay down his life for his friends: None verily but he himself, that
laid it down for his enemies.

On the right hand of the cross he set obedience, whereof he was so
respective, that he did choose to lose his life rather than his obedience. And
if obedience were better than sacrifice, when the chief worship of God was in
sacrifice, as Samuel tells Saul, and yet that obedience was commanded, and
humane obedience; how pleasing was the divine obedience of the son of God,
that was never commanded, always voluntary, always indebita?

Patience stands at the left side: As a sheep led to the slaughter, so
opened he not his mouth: he opened it not in outcries or imprecations; he
contended not with them in revenge or malice, but in piety: they refused him,
and he died for them: they contended with Pilate, when he would have delivered
him, Crucifige, crucifige, Crucify him, crucify him: and he contendeth with
his father when he had just cause to destroy them, Pater ignosce, pater
ignosce: Father forgive them, father forgive them. He regarded more that he
died for them, than that he died by them.

In the bottom of his Cross he placed humility, the foundation of all
virtues, that if we will not learn to be humble in the schools of men, we may
now practice it by the precedent and pattern of an humble God. His quatuor
v^rtutum gommis ditauit trophaeum Crucis. When he had thus enriched the four
corners of his Cross, he placed himself in the midst of all, no more now as a
stone of offense, but as a loadstone to draw all the world unto it. So he
says, Ego si exaltatus f^ero, omnia traham ad meipsum.

Draw us, O Lord, unto thee, and we shall run in the savor of thine ointments.

Cover us with the mantle of thy righteousness, which is the true wedding
garment, that when the Bridegroom comes to take view of his guests, we may not
be cast out into utter darkness, but sit with thee, eating and drinking at thy
table in thy kingdom.

Hitherto ye have heard Christ's prerogative, and the benefit thereof. The last
point remains, to whom this benefit belongs: to every one that believes.

Why then say the Jesuits, the promises of Christ are conditional, as well as
the promises of the Law? The law says, Do this, and live: Christ says,
Believe only, and all things are possible to him that believes.

Here is a condition in the one, as well as in the other.

If time would give me leave, I could show that the promises of Christ are
absolute, and without condition: but let us now admit that they are
conditional, as well as the promises of the law: yet have we many advantages
in this condition of Christ, that are not in the law.

1 Is it not much easilier to believe the promises of the one, than to do the
works of the other?

2 Again, the law is stoicall and curious, not content with our endeavors,
unless we have done all, and done it most exactly.

Christ is mild and gentle; he strives not, lifts not up his voice,
quenches not smoking flax, bruseth not a shaken reed; but enterteineth every
true faith, though it be as little as a grain of mustard seed, though it be
never so imperfect.

3 The law is solitary, teaches us what to do, but gives us no means to
do it: whereupon the Apostle calls it a dead letter.

Christ is never solitary, but accompanied with the grace and influence of his
holy spirit, which he sends into our hearts, to illuminate, to regenerate, and
to give us faith to comprehend him. And therefore when he gives us the
condition which he requires of us, his condition is most gracious, and the
condition of the Law is grievous. Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

If Christ be the end of the law to every one that believes, then did he not
fulfill the law for himself, but for those that do believe.

As he was God, he was not subject to the law, and as he was man also, he was
Lord of the law.

Duplici iure (says Bernard) filius Dei regnum possidet coelorum. Semel quia
filius; 2. quia passus: atque hoc secundo modo nihil illi fuit opus, mihi autem
dedit, and omnibus credentibus: The son of God has two titles and rights to
the kingdom of heaven: The first is by inheritance, because he is son; the
second is by acquisition, because he suffered: of this second title he had no
use or need himself, but has given it to me, and all that believe.

This will easily be yielded, that he suffered for us; but the other point is
controuerted, that he fulfilled the law for himself, and for his own
righteousness.

As God, he needed not; and as man also, he was Lord of the Sabbath. The son
of man is Lord of the Sabbath, and so consequently of the whole law. Eadem est
ratio partium and totius.

If Lord of the law, as man, then needed he not to be subject: but he made
himself. So the Apostle writes to the Galathians: but he adds the reason of
Christ his subjection; that he might redeem us that were under the law.

When the humane nature in the very moment of conception thereof, was united
inseparably to the Godhead, what felicity did it want in that union, which
might be supplied by his actual righteousness, and fulfilling of the law? What,
was not the law to be performed of every man? or was not Christ a man?

The law verily was enioined to every humane person; but Deus verbum (as
Augustine says) non suscepit personam, sed naturam hominis: and this nature
having no subsistence at any time of it self, but as soon as it began to be,
it was personated, as they say in the schools of the divinity, could not be
brought into necessary subjection of the law, without manifest injury to that
person that susteineth it.

Piscator.
Others write, that Christ must fulfill the law, to make himself a meet high
Priest: and they do not consider his native innocence that he brought with
him into the world, which being never te^erated, was sufficient to qualify him
to the office of Priesthood.

Was he not by that native integrity, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated
from sinners? And these be all the qualities that the Apostle to the Hebrews
requires in his high^Priesthood.

Seeing then he had all these by the sacred conception, which we profess, I
may conclude, that all which he did beside in fulfilling of the law, was as the
text notes, for righteousness to every one that belleeueth; and as it is in
8. Romans that the exquisite righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us.

Ioh. 17.
So he says himself; E^o procis sanctifica meipsum: It is for them, and not
for mine own behoof, that I sanctify my self.

As it is in a glass, that has not his brightness and reflections for
himself, but that others may have the use and benefit of it; so is Christ the
end of the law for righteousness, not to himself, or for his own benefit,
but for the use and commodity of every one that believes. Thus I have
delivered you Christ the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes. He is a high Priest, according to the order of Melch^sedeth. And
we read nothing of the exercise of that Priesthood, but only that he blessed
Abraham; to give us to understand, that the whole Priesthood of Jesus Christ
does consist in blessing. Hold him therefore, and let him not go, until he
have given you a blessing, which he has already graciously begun here in
this world, and will multiply it above all that you can desire in the Kingdom
of Heaven. Whereunto we do all with heart and voice say, Amen.

Even so be it, Lord Jesus, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost live and
raignest one God blessed for ever.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREAched before the Kings most excellent Majesty in the Church of
BEAVLY in Hampshire.
John 1. chap. last verse. Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter shall ye
see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the son
of man.


WOrds of great asseueration, and therefore of great importance. What can more
import us, that were exiled out of Paradise, and beequeathed to the earth, than
to have heaven open? that were sequestered and retired from the society of
Angels, than to have their sweet haunts again, and their ministry too? than to
have ingresse and egresse, and familiar intercourse with God?

Placet cunctis s^curitas, sed ei magis qui timuit, lucunda omnibus lux est,
B^r^ar. in Cantic. ser. 68.
sed euadenit de potestate tenebrarum incundior. Transisse demorte ad vitam,
vitae gratiam duplicat. Safety is pleasing to all, but more to him that was
afraid. Light is comfortable to every man, but more to him that is escaped out
of the power of darkness. To have p^s^ed from death to life, makes the grace
and benefit of life to be double.

This verily is greater than that which moo^d Natha^i^l first to believe. He
thought it a great matter for Christ to see him under the fig tree, and s^ it
was indeed miraculous, to see a man absent beyond all reach and compass of
humane eyes; yet a thing that the son of God had communicated to others, that
did the like. Elizeus sitting at home within doors, did see Gebezi his servant
taking bribes of N^man the Sirian in his journey.

But the opening of heaven, the carriage of us to God, and the whole business
of a mediator, promised in these words of my text to a true Israelite, is of
more consequence and difficulty, not communicated to Patriarch, Prophet,
Apostle, Martyr, or any Saint, but reserved only for the son of God, as a
mark of his sovereignty.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter shall you see heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man. He alludeth to
that which Jacob did see in a dream: Genes. 28
A ladder stand upon the ground: the top did reach to heaven: the Angels of God
did go up and down by it, and the Lord was at the top thereof.

A man's dream should not be registered for perpetual memory, if it did not
contain some notable mystery. Hic habent and somnia pondus: In such cases
dreams also have their weight. The ladder here represents Jacobs journey.
He was then going to his uncle Laban. The Angels are his guard, ascending to
protect him outward; descending to be his guides back again: and the Lord
was at the top of the ladder, as a gracious moderator of both Lo then a
comfortable safe conduct for a traveler.

And because our whole life is a very pilgrimage, for we have no certain place
of abode, but we travel and seek for it in Jerusalem that is above; the
son of God here under the imprese and hieroglifique of Jacobs ladder, does
promise us his means and mediation: and that is the matter that now we shall
treat of. Wherein he does not draw us along with naked hopes, but first of all
consigneth the certainty of his promise with the religion and solemnity of an
oath, Verily, verily: so the Apostle calls this sacred asseneration.

When God made the promise unto Abraham, Heb. 6.
and had no greater to swear by, he swear by himself: How? Verily I will
bless thee. And here is the same form. Therefore Christi iuramentum est
sidei nostrae fundamentum; We have Christ his oath for the foundation of our
faith. The word or God is as certain as his oath: he is not as man, that he
should lie, Number. 23.
nor as the son of man, that he should repent. Heaven and earth may pass,
but no word of God falls to the ground: all his promises are Yea and Amen. So
that for the thing it self, such religious contestations needed not: but his
oath is added (as the Apostle says) that we might have valid^m consolationem,
Hol. 6.
strong consolation. He sees the darkness of our minds, the leuitie of our
affections, the manifold sleights wherewith Satan does abuse us. Sometimes by
aggravating our sins, he drowneth us in a very hell of desperation: sometimes
bewitching us with a persuasion of righteousness, he carries us above the
clouds in pride. Cui nomina mill, mill nocendt arts. The son of God, the
wisdom of his father, that of love gave himself for us, and had experience
both ways, of the adversaries practices, and our infirmities, to help all,
and to put us out of doubt, Tertull.
interposeth an oath, Jurat Deus, capit sibi credi. O beatos quorum causa Deus
curat! Et o miserimos si nic iuranti Deo credimus! God swears, then he
desires to be believed. O happy men are we for whom God swears! And o thrice
unhappy if we believe not God when he swears! The attestation of the son of
God teaches us, that in the business of our salvation, and in the promises of
Christ, we should not be Academies. They were a kind of Philosophers (you
know) that would not be certain of any thing, but doubtful and uncertain in
all things; and that uncertainty is not suitable with our promises. Sic oportet
credere quomodo certi sumus de vis^ilibus, and adhuc amplius: Hic enim
aliquando erratur, id est, in his quae videntur; illic autem, nequaquam: We
ought to be as sure in our faith, as we are in the things that we see, and
more too: for in these things there is deceit, that is to say, in the things
that we see: but in the other none at all.

Is it possible that God should become a changeling? that his purpose should be
frustrate? his power infringed? his decree reuersed? his providence deceived?
that the merit of Christ should be euacuated? the authentical seal of the
holy Ghost cancelled? and the oath of the son of God to be of none effect?
All this assurance we have. And if none of these be possible, let the
Romanists disable them all with their Academicall doubtfulnesse; when as in the
mean time they applaud themselves, sacrifice to their own net, and burn
incense to their yarne: but let them eleuate the promises of Christ with their
uncertain hopes, and ratify their own traditions with great assurance: Joshua
and his house will firmlie believe that which the son of God has sworn
solemnly. And here is no arrogance, but devotion: to believe that which is
promised so seriously, is not presumption, but faith: we know whom we believe,
and are certain that he is true in his promises, and most mighty in his
performance. We boast not of our selves, or of any thing that we can do: but
we boast in the Lord. Securus gloriatur qui gloriatur in Domino: Bernard.
He boasts safely, that boasts in the Lord. And upon this assurance we go
on.

Hereafter ye shall see. This hereafter seems to exclude the former world
from the benefit that is here promised: as if there had been no gate of
heaven open until the death and resurrection of Christ. So the Church of Rome
has imagined; and therefore during this Interim, the Catechism published by
Pius Quintus, according to the Decree of the Tridentine Council, bestows all
the souls of the faithful that departed under the Old Testament, either in
Abraham's bosom, where they were discharged of all pains, and yet held from
the sight of God: or else in Purgatory, where they had sensible pains, and
the lack of Gods presence too.

Catechismus ad Parocheos, page 74.

Antequam ille moreretur and resurgeret, Coeli portae nulli vnquam pat^erunt:
sed piorum a^mae, ^u^ e viuis excessissent, vel in sinum Abrahae deferebantur,
vel, quod etiam nunc ijs contingit quibus aliquid dilu^dum and persoluendum
est, Purgatorij igne expiabantur.

I will not absolutely disauow Purgatory but learned antiquity has taught me,
that it must have place here in this world whilst men are alive, and not in
another place or world, alter they be dead.

Ch^ys. in Mat. hom. 75.
Neque gubernator postquam nau^ me^sa est, neque medicus postquam aegrotus
obijt, quicquam tr^dess^ potest: Neither can the governor after the ship is
suake, nor the Physician after the sick is dead, Hieron. in Psalm. 105.
avail. Hic misereri potest poenitentis, quia ibi Iudex est non miseric^rs:
Here he may have pity on them that repent: in the world to come he is a
Judge, not a pardoner. Come foolish Virgins, Matt. 25.
and persuade the Catholics by that which befell unto your selves, that all
preparation after death is idle and unprofitable.

In the mean time we will search (if you please) what allowance the Scripture
gives to fire for purging of sins. The only place that is alleged with
probability, 1. Cor. 3.
is that which the Apostle writes; The fire shall true every man's work, of
what sort it is. That shows that there is a probatorie, but proves not any
Purgatory fire.

Through this fire of probation all manner of works and workmen must pass: and
the masters of Purgatory (you know) will not allow that any of their saints or
excellent workmen should be once cinged. And therefore this fire of trial
makes nothing for their Purgatory.

The true Purgatory of Christians is the blood of Jesus Christ, which
quenches every adversary fire, and purges us from all our sins. When the
Centurion pierced his side, there came out water and blood, to show that it was
no common and ordinary blood that came from Jesus Christ, but such as had a
cleansing virtue. O Lord purge us heerewith, and we shall be clean: wash our
robes in the blood of this Lamb, and we shall be whiter than snow. Surely he
that is so washed already, needs not the mathematical fire of Purgatory, but
is clean thorowout. And he that is not washed with the blood of Christ, shall
never be cleansed, but tormented for ever in real fire. Seeing then that the
fire of Purgatory is to some men needless, and to all other helpless, I wish
better to this sacred presence, than to hold you any longer in the smoke of
that which is fruitless.

Abraham's bosom is a place of more contentment. And who would not be with the
father of the faithful? But if the Church of Rome will have it to be no more
than a place discharged of sensible pains, where they were nevertheless
suspended from Gods presence; I see no great matter that can be in it to allure
us. But none can speak better to the quality and condition of Abraham's bosom,
than Abraham himself. And he bids the rich glutton remember that he in his
life time received pleasures, Luke 16.
and Lazarus likewise pains: now therefore he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. In suspension there is anxietie, and no comfort, especially when the
suspension is from the fruition and sight of God.

Augustine writes of his friend N^bridius that was dead and in Abraham's
bosom; Con^ess. li. 9. cap. 3.
I am non ponit aurem ad os meum, sed spirituale os ad sontem tuum, and bibit
quantum potest sapientiam pro auiditate sua, sine sine foelix: If he that is in
Abraham's bosom, drinks at the well head, puts his mouth to the fountain of
life, and has happiness for evermore, as Augustine writes, then is it not a
place of retrait, of suspension, of an Interim, but of present and actual
possession.

Hierome equalleth the Fathers of the old Testament in reward with us: Contra
Iouinia^, l. 2.
Quis ignorant sub altera dispensatione Dei, omnes sanctos eiusdem juisse meriti
cuius nunc Christiani sunt? Who knows not that all the saints which were
under the Old Testament, had the same reward which Christians have now? And if
they had the same reward then that Christians have now; whence comes this
difference, that the gate of heaven is open, to us, and shut upon them? that
as soon as we fail, they receive us into everlasting Tabernacles? Luke 16.
Luke 23. Revel. 14.
Into Paradise the same day? Into blessedness instantly? and they of the Old
Testament are delaied until the resurrection of Christ? are, without any
warrant at al so discourteously sent to Abraham's bosom, and that unto Vtopia?

It cannot be for that the work of Christ's redemption was not performed at the
time of their death: For albeit, that work was fixed to the fulness of time:
Before, his hour was not come: Then, he would not admit of any
tergiuersation. Shall I not drink of the cup which my father has given me?
Yet was the power of that work, and the virtue of his redemption, extended
from the beginning of the world unto the end thereof. He entered but once to the
Sanctuary of heaven, but he found eternal redemption. And how can that which
is eternal, be limited or restrained to future times? Does it not comprehend
all times? Yes verily, and it is a transcendent above them all. Was not the
lamb slain from the beginning of the world? And is it possible that a
Sacrifice of such price, so offered, and so accepted, should not be of present
efficacy? Prius eius mors profuit quam fuit: Bernard.
It satisfied God, redeemed man, opened heaven, and put the whole kingdom of
Satan into combustion presently.

So Christ's Hereafter in this text is no limitation of time, as if heaven had
not been penetrable before his death and resurrection. But this Henceforth
implies the accession that is given to out sight by the ministry of the
Gospel. Henceforth ye shall see. That which the Fathers hoped for, that we
do see: and the passage unto heaven is made much more conspicuous by the light
of the New Testament. We have Christ borne and full grown: they had him too,
but hidden in the seed of Abraham, in the loins of David, in the womb of a
royal Virgin; Esa.
or if a child were borne unto them, yet was he wrapped up in the swa^ling
clouts of the law.

Vel^m pendebat in templo, Aug.
ne templi secreta panderentur; cruce autem Domini velum cons^iss^m est, vt
paterent. The veil did hang in the Temple, that the secrets of the temple
might not be published: but at the death of Christ this veil was rent, that
all within might be visible and manifest. Through this veil Jacob did see a
ladder, that reached up to heaven: here is yet obscurity enough; the Angels
went up and down: What is that to us that be men? What shall we do with a
ladder, when the gates of Heaven be shut against us? when there be Che^ubins,
and angry Porters, and a fiery sword to keep us out? Who shall open us the
gate? Who shall remove the Cherubins? Who shall take away the fiery sword? If
you will be pleased to look upon this Hereafter in the New Testament, Jacobs
veil is rent, that you may see all things plain, heaven open, the Angels
ascending and descending upon the son of man. If they go up and down upon
the son of man, then Christ is the ladder that reaches up to heaven: he is
the way that carries us to that high Country: The Lion of the Tribe of Judah is
our Conuoy, stronger than the armed man: our guide has the key of David,
opens, and no man shuts. I have enough, says Jacob; Joseph my son is
yet alive; I will go see him ore I die. We also have enough, and more than
Jacob had: therefore go masters, go, that we may see him too.

Chap. 2.
The spouse in the Canticles compares him to a Roe, or a young Heart: Behold, he
comes leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the hills: he is the son of
God, and thereby higher than the highest heavens: that is beyond our reach. For
God dwells in light that none can come near to. Therefore because he would
be low enough for us, he became man also, and stood upon the ground. He took
nor the Angels; he came leaping by those mountains, and skipping by those
hills: but he took the seed of Abraham, and desired to be (...) rather than
(...), a lover of men rather than a lover of Angels. He professes it in the 8.
of the Proverbs: My delight was to be amongst the sons of men. I had
thought, O Lord, that thy delight had been amongst the Host of Angels: but
seeing that of thy pitiful clemency, and admirable be ^ignitie, thou make
it thy delight to be amongst the sons of men, I will not interrupt thy
pleasure, but pray for thy prosperity: Good luck have thou with thy delight,
O thou most mighty.

Now if you ask me why he took our nature, and not the Angels that were
fallen as well as we, Multum est a me, abyssus est, profundum Crucis est: The
Well is deep, and I have not any thing to draw withal. If it were, lest
Angels might so be thought to restore themselves, because of their
excellency, we must commend the wisdom of his providence. If it were,
because man did not sin of malice, Bernard.
and without intisement, as the Angels did; but in a kind of weakness, and by
their instigation; we magnify his judgments, that are examplerie upon the
principal, and favorable to us poor seduced accessories. Paulin. Epist. 4.
Criminosius est decipere, quam decipi, and peccatum excogitare, quam facere.

I^ it were, Athanas.
because all mankind was lost through Adams preuarication, but not all the
Angels in Lucifers Apostasy; we praise his goodness, that would not quench
our spark. Let curious men discuss the causes, it is fittest for us to admire
the work: Let them dispute, and let us cry, O altitudo! O (...)! Romans 11.
O the height and depth of Gods judgments! O the love of God toward mankind!
Lord what is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man, that
thou visitest him?

Iac^bs ladder reached up to heaven, but it stood also upon the ground. Such
must the mediators condition be. Aug. Confess* lib. 10. cap. 42.
The mediator between God and man must have something like unto God, and
something like unto man; lest if he were altogether like unto men, he should
be a stranger unto God; or if he were like to God every way, he should then be
far from men, and so no mediator.

The son of God appeared to Adam after his fall: and the man ran away, and
hid himself in the trees of the garden: Here was nothing but the terror of a
Judge, no flesh taken, no placabilitie of a mediator: He appeared many times
to the fathers in humane shape, to give them a taste of his future incarnation:
here was great contentment, if it might have had continuance: but he laid
down that shape again. When the fullness of time came, he combined the
godhead and our nature so firmly together, with the glue of his person, that
man could never fly from God again, and God would never be severed from man.

Bernard.
Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo. A work that cannot
be exemplified, grace that was never merited, and love vnstinted. An admirable
conjunction, wherein God was made man, sinners righteous, and our Judge becomes
our advocate. So now I will deliver him unto you as the ladder that Jacob did
see: high enough, because he was God; low enough, because he was man; strong
enough to carry us to God, because of a Judge he is become an advocate; and
of perpetuity, because the personal union cannot be dissolved. Some doubt may
be of his breadth. I am not sent (he says) but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

That is too narrow for us that be Gentiles, But understand it of order, and
not of election, that he was sent to the Jews first, that they might have the
precedence and first fruits of his ministry: and then you shall find this
narrowness temporary. For after he had performed all things, and was risen
again, when the maturitie of time was come, he dilated his bosom to receive
us Gentiles, and made himself a passage broad enough for all the world. It is
a small thing that thou should be my servant, Esa. 4^.
to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel: I
will also give thee a light to lighten the Gentiles, that thou may be my
salvation to the ends of the world. Behold the breadth, and height, and length,
and depth; lo all the dimensions of a perfect and accomplished ladder.

Search now, and run through heaven and earth in your thoughts, and you shall
not find any other n^me, wherein all these properties do concurie and meet
together, save only in the person of Jesus Christ. The other two persons that
are in heaven, the Father and the Holy Ghost, could not be incarnate and made
low enough also for the office of a mediator, without manifest solecismes and
incongruitie. How far unbeseeming had it been the greatness of the Father,
if the Son or Holy Ghost had sent him? Therefore as the first person in
order, and fountain of all divinity, he did abide in his majesty, and sent
the Son: And Father and Son both sent the Holy Ghost, not to be incarnate,
for so there must have been two Sons; one Son of God in Heaven, and
another Son of m^n in earth, and not one Son in both: And then we should
confess and worship, not a trinity, but a quaternitie of persons: which God
keep far from the says of Christians.

Why then does Christ call the Holy Ghost an advocate? Al^um Pa^ m^da^ vobis: I
will give you another Advocate. And Paul does second that translation when he
says, Romans 8.
The Spirit does make intercession for us with sighs and groan as that cannot
be expressed. Yet there be two differences that make the mediation of the Son
of God eminent above all the groans of the Holy Ghost: the one for the time,
the other for the manner. 1. The Son of God makes intercession for us before
the wrath of God be appeased: the groans of the Holy Ghost come after. 2. The
Son of God interposeth himself as a Redeemer, with a sufficient price in his
hand. In the days of his flesh he offered up prayers, and supplications, and
himself too, with strong crying, and tears, and was heard because of his
reverence.

The Holy Ghost never offered up any thing; He comes only as a Comforter, not
as a Redeemer; as a monitor to us, not as a mediator for us. He comes to help
our dullness, to raise us up, to give heat to our affect^ons, to indite our
prayers: and that also is the benefit of the Son that s^nds him. Ye have
received the Spirit, whereby ye cry Abba Father, that when our prayers are
conceived by the spirit, and offered by the Son, they may ever be available,
and never take repulse with the Father. O quench not this spirit, grieve it
not, but cherish and entertain every motion thereof. Is it not a faithful
remembrancer sent us by the Son of God?

Come holy Spirit, and let it be thy good pleasure to remember us in this thy
favorable influence: take away stumbling blocks out of my soul, which is the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, that he may reign there alone as he should do.
Covetousness comes and challenges government; pride would be a king; lust
says she will reign; ambition, backbiting, envy, and wrath, strive in me
which of them should have the greatest sway. I, dull and heavy creature, resist
as I am able: I withstand as far as I am aided: I claim Jesus to be my Lord:
I defend my self for him, because I am his right: I hold him for my God, him
for my Lord: Come therefore holy Spirit, and scatter these Usurpers in thy
power: Draw us all after him; draw us, though we be unwilling, and make us
willing: draw us that are slothful, and make us cheerful. Shed out and power
forth the oil of thy gladness upon us, and we shall run in the savor of
thine ointments: We are soon weary, and changeable, draw us after him, lest
we begin to take our vagaries after other lovers.

After other lovers! Aug. Job. 10. con^es. cap. 42.
Quem inuenirem qui me reconci^aret ti^i? An ^undum mihi fuit ad Angelos? Qua
prece? Quibus Sacramentis? Whom should I find that should reconcile me unto
thee? Should I make any way to Angels? With what prayers? With what mysteries?
Sure, Angels are not strong enough to carry us to heaven, and men are too
weak: yet there be Giants now, as were after the flood, that having got such
mortar and brick, say, Come let us build a tower, whose top may reach up to
heaven: Videte quas scalas, imo quae praecipitia, ipsi sibi parauerint ad
ruinam: Mark what ladders, yea rather what downfals, they have gotten
themselves for their own ruin: for Angels are creatures, not able to stand of
themselves, without the support and benefit of the son of God. If their
ability had been sufficient, the devils would never have lost their places.
The rest are called elect Angels; 1. Tim. 5. Col 2.10. Col. 1.
and Christ is the ground of all election. Verily Paul calls him the head of
principalities and powers, in whom they do all consist.

Berrar. in Cantic.
Qui dedit ^a^so homini vt surgeret, dedit stanti Angelo ne caderet: He gave
man, that was fallen, power to rise, and Angels, that stood, grace, that they
should not fall: and so he was beneficial to both, raising up the one, and
confirming the other. And if I should commit my cause to such an advocate as
has need of a patron himself, it were a right tower of Babel, and no scale of
heaven. The holiest men in the world are too weak to carry us to heaven by
their intercessions. Does this appertain unto man, O Lord God? Adam was
perfect both in body and soul, yet of too too base a condition to stand in the
presence of God, without the interuention of a mediator. The tree of life,
which was given him, is a clear testimony hereof. What needed he any
Sacrament of Christ, if he could have stood of himself? And then me thinks
it is plain enough, that seeing Adam could not mediate his own cause in his
integrity, no saint, though in heaven, is able to undertake for us in this
common misery. Mary began to be a mediator for wine at the marriage in Cana:
but as soon as Christ repressed her bold^esse, she desisted soberly, and gave a
wholesome charge to the waiters, which may well hold the nature of a rule
amongst all posterity, to attend upon Christ alone. When the Saints themselves
do send us unto Christ, shall we leave him, and in our superstitious
affections hang upon Saints? If you do, look for nothing but that which
happened unto Baals Priests: They cried from the morning until the evening
sacrifice, and there was neither voice, nor one to make answer, not any that
regarded.

Tell us, Paul, what you did think when you were in such a strait, that you
knew not what to choose; whether to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which
was better for your own particular; or to abide in the flesh, which was more
profitable to the Philippians? Were you not then verily persuaded, that after
your death the Church could make no use of your prayers? What then? Is the
saints love diminished in heaven, where all their graces be increased? No sure,
love fal^eth not away: But the love of the saints in heaven is not always in
action: It is there rather in Mary's contemplation, than in Marthaes exercise.
Or if it be in action, it is like to Peter's, when he had a taste of it in the
transfiguration of Christ. The love of his brethren, was not decayed, but he
was so ravished and pleased with the sight of that which was present, that he
thought of nothing but the fruition thereof. Bonum est nobis esse hic; It is
good being here. He thought not of his brethren that were absent: he desired
but three Tabernacles for those that were present.

Can the Saints that be in heaven hear our prayers from earth? Have they any
dispensation of vbiquitie? Have they any indowment of omni^cien^i^? Can they
search our hearts? Do they see and foresee our wants? For who will commit his
body to such a Physician, that knows no more of the infirmities thereof than
he himself does tell him? Can they open the gates of heaven for us? Can they
conquer death for us? All this a mediator must do.

Ego alium noui ^eminem qui h^c potuerit, nisi Dominum meum Iesum. Qui cerse in
morte viuebat, q^ ^p^re fractus in cruce, in diuinitate stabat ^m ^a^r^, (...),
n^bis^um supplicans, in altero, cum patre propitia^s: homo manifestus, and Deus
absconditus: I know not any that can do this, but only my Lord Jesus that
lived in death; who being bruised upon the Cross in body, stood in his
divinity with the father; suppliant with us in the one, and giving a largess
to us with the Father in the other; a visible man, and a hidden God. Will you
see how he did live in death? Consider then that Satan's power was not to
continue longer (as Paulinus writes, Epist. 4.) than till he had slain an
innocent person therewith. Was not this li^ertie enough? Did he not once urge
such a point against poor Adam, for eating the fruit that was reserved,
because ^ee had liberty enough to eat of all the rest? And is not his own
cause now like to this? Ah thou ungracious and wicked servant, I will judge
thee out of th^ne ow^e mouth: Did it not suffice thee to be the minister of
Gods justice, to invade all that offended? If this only were permitted,
oughtedst not thou to have forborne this one innocent person that never sinned?
Thou have shed innocent blood, and art now not an executioner of the Law of
God, but a trespasser against it. Art thou able to reinfuse the guiltless
blood into those sacred veins again, out of which thou have presumptuously
spilt it? Is thy power nothing to edification* but al to destruction? Know then
O thou enemy, that temeritie is not always fortunate: for destruction is now
come to a perpetual end. Neque enim lex iustior vlla est, quam necis artifices
art perire sua. Thus you see the power of Satan dissolved by the death of
Christ, not with force, but in law and justice. And what do you think of the
Godhead of Christ, that hitherto was a beholder, and no actor; a Judge, and no
party in this business? Should not the Judge of all the world do right? Or
can there be any better justice, any greater right, than to restore the
innocent, and to punish the wrong-doer? Even so he did. The Godhead of Christ,
which was glued to his body with an inseparable union, which was with it in
the grave, that it did not see corruption* that same Godhead did breath the
breath of life into it again, and then he was inter mortuos liber, a free man
amongst those that were dead. When he had thus revived and restored the
innocent, then he spoiled principalities and powers, so much more magnifically,
because he pursued them into their own holds, and triumphed over them in their
own Castles, of the grave and hell. It fared with them all as it did with the
great sea-beast when he had swallowed up Jonas. They had taken such a morsel
as they could not hold, but were feign to be rid of it again. Then he took
the beast, even the great Leuiathan, that crooked serpent, and cast him alive
into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Non iam Diabolum vt Leonem timemus,
sed vt pellem concul^^mus: We do not now fear the Devil as a Lion, but we
tread him under our feet as a case. There is no cause now that you should stand
in doubt of any angry Porters, that you should be afraid of any fiery sword.
Christ see Satan falling down from heaven, as if it had been lightning. Ego
alium noui neminem qui hoc potuerit, nisi d^minum meum Iesum: I know not any
that could so have taken him away, and removed his power, but only my Lord
Jesus.

When Christ was risen again, he made not the earth a place of his residence,
but ascended to heaven as a conqueror. It is well seen how thou my King and
God go to thy sanctuary: not climing by ladders, not hoised up by cords or
pullies, but marching valiantly in the multitude of thine own strength; thou
make the Clouds thy Chariots, and walk upon the wings of the wind. And
when he came near to the walls of that heavenly City, he did not beg or
entreat an entrance by favor, but commanded it as one that had authority.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in. Securae estote caro and sanguis* coelum in
capite pos^detis: aut si vos in coelo negent, negent in coelo Christum; Fear
not flesh and blood: ye are now in your head possessed of heaven: or if any
deny you to be in heaven, they may as well deny Christ to be there. He
^scended whole; for there was not one bone of him broken: then must his body
be there too, which we are. Hominem portauit ad coelum; Aug.
Deum misit ad terras; He has both taken and given a pledge: He has taken
flesh of us, and carried it into Heaven, that Heaven now knows what it is to
bear man: and he has given us his spirit from thence, in testimony that we
shall all be gathered thither. Ego alium noui neminem qui hoc potuerit, nisi
Dominum meum Iesum. He shall be my mediator; he shall be my ladder: If he did
redeem me with the infirmity of his death, can he not make intercession for
me in the majesty and glory of his life? He lives at the right hand of God,
not in contemplation of his own greatness, but for the comfort and sustentation
of our wants He lives for ever, to make interpellation for us: and if he were
heard in the days of his flesh, because of his reverence, shall he be refused
now at the right hand of God, because of his glory? Having once opened heaven,
he makes it a through fare for our prayers to ascend, and for his benefits to
descend. Amongst other things that he gives us from thence, one is here
specially mentioned in the text. The Angels of God ascend and descend upon the
son of man: that is, by his appointment and authority, to attend, to guard,
to comfort us poor men. Heb. 10.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth for their sakes that shall
be heirs of salvation? Psalm. 34.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about the Tents of the godly, and
delivers them. They shall bear our souls into Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.
Let us use their ministry, that is glorious; leave their mediation, that is
superfluous.

There is another sort of Angels that ascend and descend upon the son of man.
When he led captivity captive, he gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Pastors and Doctors, for the gathering together of the Saints.
These are called in the Revelation, the Angels of the Churches, and here they
are said to go up and down. They had not need to sit still, lest the children
should call for bread, and there no none to break it unto them. We have the
keys of the kingdom of heaven committed unto us. Matt. 16.
Tibi ^abo claues regni coelorum. We are key-bearers to open the kingdom of
heaven to you by preaching of the Gospel. This power Peter and Paul did
exercise faithfully: They preached the Gospel, and in that, remission of
sins, and so opened the kingdom to the believers. They never practiced nor
thought of such exorbitant and infinite power, as the Church of Rome does now
usurp under the color and title of those keys, directly or indirectly to
sway and to dispose of all the world. Paul never planted any such power,
Apollos never watered it, and God of his great mercy, never give increase to it
in these kingdoms. It is clauis errans, a false and counterfeit key: the
kingdom of heaven is not opened, but shut with such keys. It is the key of
the bottomless pit.

Ber^ar. de (...) ^r^t^^e, ad Euge^m.
Non monsirabunt, credo, qui h^c ^icunt: They that plead this, will never be
able to show where any of the Apostles did it any time sit either Judge over
men, or diuiders of inheritances, or distributers of lands. I have read (says
Bernard) where the Apostles have stood to be judged: but they did sit in
judgment of such matters I never read. Christ would not meddle with the
division of inheritances. Who has made me a Judge amongst you? He disclaimeth
all authority in secular affairs, and professes that his kingdom is not of
this world: Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo. He did not speak it in a
corner, but before Pontius Pilate in the judgment place, where the Apostle
says he made a good confession. And those things that be done in judgment,
are so public, that they are intended to be done before all the world.
Therefore Augustine makes Christ call all the world to record: Aud^t^ Iudae^
and Gentes: audi praeputium: audite omnia regna terrena; Non imp^dio
dominationem vestram in h^c mundo; Hear Jews and Gentiles (says Christ)
hear you that are uncircumcised; hear all ye kingdoms of the earth; I
hinder not your government or authorities in this world.

Compare them now together, and you shall see how the Vicars of Christ agree
with their founder: Christ had no kingdom in the world, and they will have all
the kingdoms of the earth: Christ would have no authority to divide
inheritances, and they will have none to do it but themselves: Christ did not
trouble any humane government, and they will not suffer any to be quiet. Such
cannot be friends of the bridegroom: they must needs be his adversaries. (...)
^m^sp^ si sunt, sed aemuli; They are not the Vicars of Christ; they are the
servants of Antichrist. They go not up and down upon the son of man, but
upon the man of sin. Bernard describes them lively. I^a^or, and lat^rae, and
volunt^ria pa^p^rtas, Epist. 4 2.
haec sunt Mo^a^h^rum insignia; haec vitam solent nobilitare monas^am. Ves^r^
autem oculi omne sublime vident; vestri ped^s omne serum ^r^m^nt; vestrae
linguae in omnibus audiuntur concilijs; vestrae manus omne alienum diripiunt
patrimoniam. Labor, Cloister, and voluntary poverty, were wont to be the
cognisances of Monks. These were wont to commend the lives of Monks. But your
eyes do now see every great sight; your feet are walking in every place of
assemblies; your tongues are heard in every consultation; your hands reach at
every man's patrimony.

Do you then, my good friends, that are the Lords Vineyard, take heed and
beware of these false Prophets, that they steal not your hearts, sheep in
habit, but foxes in craft. We that are guardians of your Vines, shall, by the
grace of God, weaue nets for them with the threeds of the Scripture: and he
that is Christ's true Vicegerent, the Lords anointed, will in his princely
vigilancie, catch us these foxes, these little foxes, that destroy our Vines,
and make them bring small grapes.

I have delivered you Christ Jesus, to be a ladder to carry you to heaven: and
now nothing remains, but to show the use of it, which I will do in a word or
two, because I dare not abuse your patience longer. You shall therefore pass
upon him along from step to step, until you come to the throane of grace. The
first step you shall begin at his nativity, wherein, the less that he made
himself in his humanity, the greater he offered himself unto you in his
bounty: and the baser that he was for you, the dearer he should be to you. A
child was borne to us. Take then the purity that was in his birth, Esa. 9.
to cover all the impuritie that was found in yours. The next step that you
make, is to his life, and that is broad with innocence. Innocent in his
conception, because it was of the Holy Ghost; Innocent in the rest of his life,
Philip. 2.
for he was obedient to the father, etc. Innocent in his affections, because
they were tempered to the pleasure of God; Mat. 26.
Not my will, but thy will be done. Innocent in his words; Si malo locutus
fuero, de malo fe^ testimonium: If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the
evil. Innocent in his deeds, and so pronounced by the mouth of his Judge.
Innocent every way, Io. 8.
Which of you can convince me of sin? In all this innocence you may say with
the Spouse in the Canticles: Dilectus meus mihi, and ego illi; Chap. 2.
My beloved is mine, and I am his, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh;
and so we are two, not only in one flesh, but also in one spirit, which
increases our comfort. Qui agglutinatur Domino, vnus est Spiritus; 1. Cor. 6.
He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit. Hence comes that blessed
interchange of indowments, that he has taken all our sins upon himself, and
given us all this his innocence. 2. Cor. 5.
The third step is the satisfaction of his death; and the Apostle teaches you,
that if one be dead for all, then all are dead in that one. And it is certus
sermo, a clear case, 2. Tim. 2.
that if we die with him, we shall also live with him. The next step is the
power of his resurrection, wherein you may say, Meum est quod cecidit, vt meum
sit quod resurrexit; Aug.
m^m est quod iacuit intra tumulum, vt meum sit quod as^e^dit^n coelum; That
which is fallen is mine, that it may be mine which is risen again: that is mine
which did lie in the grave, that that may be mine which is ascended into
Heaven. The next step is the glory of his ascension, and from thence it is a
ready step to pas^e unto the throne of grace, where you shall see him sit at
the right hand of the Father. There I will leave you: for I know not where to
leave you better, than at the right hand of God. Walk there by faith, until
he bring you thither both in soul and body, that you may wa^e then according
to sight and kind, to enjoy the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons
and one God, to whom be all honor and glory now and evermore. Amen.

Ber. sermon. 2. in die Pentecost.
Hoc autem ideo vt conceptio mea emundet tuam, vita mea instruat tuam, mors mea
destruat tuam, resurrectio mea praecedat tuam, ascensio mea praeparet tuam:
Porro spiritus adiuuet infirmitatem tuam. (*)

FINIS.

