A SERMON PREACHED AT HITCHIN IN THE year of our Lord, 1587 the 17, day of
November, being the first day of the 29 year of the Queens Majesty's reign.

By Edward Harris, Master of Arts and Preacher of this word of God.

Printed at London by John Morris and I.B. dwelling in S. John's street. 1590.

TO THE FAITHFVLL AND BELOVED IN THE Lord his brethren known to him in
Hertford-shire, grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
THere are now three years passed since at the request of some I communicated
this sermon of mine in vvriting to those which not long after obtained for it
allowance to go abroad in print, and now at the last, it having received the
fruit of that allowance, I offer it unto as many of you as desire to profit
by the remembrance of that which ye once heard before. Use it (I beseech you)
to that end for which I first spoke it and now offer it unto you, that is, to
your further building up in the fear of our God, and honor of our Sovereign.
If you remember any more than is here set down, use that also to the same
end; and laying a part all vanities of the world, set your minds on those
things which may profit in the day of the visitation of all flesh. The grace
of our God be with you.

From my chamber at North Mimmes, this 16, of October, 1590.

E. H.

Fear God, Honor the King. I. Peter. 2.
THE sweet showers which fell in the forenoone (dearly beloved in Christ Jesus)
might, if the ground of your hearts be not brass or adamant, not only cause
the seed of the word which ye have so often received, to bring forth in you the
herb of an holy profession, and fruit of an holy life, but moreover and
besides that, might make way to the better planting of any other good and godly
instruction in your minds, I doubt not, but ye keep in remembrance the sum
of that which has been taught; namely, both who is the author of your
deliverance from all your enemies, to wit, not the arm of flesh, but God
himself, and also by what means he has brought this to pass; to wit, by the
godly and Christian government of our gracious sovereign, the anointed
messenger of the Lord in this behalf: and as I doubt not, but ye remember
these things, so I charitablie persuade my self, that ye make inquiry and
demand of your own souls, by what duties toward God the author, and by
what reverence toward the Prince the instrument of this our common safety and
welfare, ye may show your selves thankful receivers of so great a benefit.
Harken therefore what the spirit of God which is in him, and only knows the
mind and will of God, requires of you by the mouth of saint Peter. For his
own self, he seeks no more at your hands, but that ye fear him: For the
person of his anointed, he exacteth nothing else but that ye honor her. For
so says the holy Apostle, 1. Epist. Chap. 2. Fear God (says he) and Honor
the king.

For the first of these two, it is no new commandment, but an ancient and old
precept renewed, as being a matter of christian obedience required in both
Testaments. Moses the lawgiuer of Israel, Leuit. 19. 14. says to the
inheritance of the Lord the children which came out of th loins of Jacob,
Thoushalt fear (says he) the Lord thy God. Again, Leuit. 25. 17. he says,
Let every one fear his God. Likewise, Deuter. 20. he charge them, saying,
Follow the Lord your God, and fear ye him. Our Savior Christ, Luke 12.
teaches men to fear him, who after he has killed the body, can cast the
soul into hell fire, that is, God, And besides this place of saint Peter,
saint John also, Revelations the fourteenth and the seventh, having seen and
Angel flying thorough the midst of heaven, which had an everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth, even to every nation and kindred, and
tongue, and people, testifies how this Angel cried with a loud voice, saying,
Fear God, and give glory to him. Wherefore, since we are compassed with such
a cloud of most glorious and faithful witnesses, make your reckoning how ye
hear not me, but Moses, Christ, Peter, John, and the Angels of heaven crying
unto you, Fear God.

Some will say peradventure, all this needs not, there is none here (we hope)
but fear God truly. Well brethren, to the law and to the testimony, let
that be our judge, and our own consciences witnesses, whether the true fear
of God which is here commanded by the holy ghost, be in the greatest part of
men now adays.

To know then, whether we be endewed with this true and earnest fear of God or
no, there are among other, three especial ways whereby ye shall certainly know
the same.

The first way is, the birth of it: For if the fear of God that is in you,
come out of that spring, and be bred in that sort as true fear is, then have
you cause to rejoice.

The second is, by the natural and lively effects of the same fear: For
doubtless every thing, especially the motions of Gods spirit, working not
counterfaitly but according to it own nature, it must needs be a false and
bastardly fear of God, which utters not it self in convenient measure by
the proper effects of true fear.

The third way is, by such things as unseparably follow and accompany the true
fear of God, which S. Peter speaks of.

For the first way, ye must observe and know, that the earnest fear of God
springs and proceeds of a right and reverend knowledge, and meditation of
the surpassing power, bottomless wise dome, infallible providence, undefiled
justice, incomparable goodness, and other such heavenly attributes of Gods
nature, as the scripture gives unto it. For when the consideration of man's
mind is truly fixed and set upon the inward view and beholding of these
things, the glory of them is such, that it does strike and possess the heart
with an unfeigned reverence of that person, who is of such a nature, as by so
glorious names employing so great and wonderful effects, is rather pointed at
than fully defined. This that I say, is manifest by the tenth chapter of the
Prophet Jeremy. For considering how none was like to the Lord in power; how he
was great, and incomparably wiser then all the prudent men of the nations, and
how none was like to him in all the kingdoms of the world: to show what this
meditation bredde in him, and what it works in all the children of God, he
bursteth forth into these words, Who shall not fear thee O king of nations? As
if he should say, that whosoever did rightly meditate and study upon these
things, could not but hereby grow into a true fear of God, or at the least,
that the unfeigned and true fear of God springs hereupon. Provided always,
that we take this view by the word of God only, and not by the fancy or
imagination of man's brain. Here is then the first point whereby ye may know
whether ye fear God truly (as saint Peter commands.) Have ye exercised
your wits in this meditation? have ye taken a diligent view of these things
out of the most faithful assertions and examples of the word of God? and has
that fear of God which is in you, proceeded and risen hereof? then is there
hope, that the fear of God in you is not counterfeit. But now (my brethren) if
the most men be utterly ignorant of these points, and in a manner all men
remiss, negligent, and cold in taking such view of the nature of God, how may
we not justly fear, that the most men now a days are utterly destitute of
this grace and gift of the true fear of God?

2 The second means, whereby ye may know and discern whether your hearts be
possessed with a true fear of the Almighty, is by the effects, which are
diverse, the chief and principal whereof are these that follow.

First, the true fear of God is of such force and working, that it makes him
in whom it is, to hate and decline that which is evil and ungodly in the sight
of the Lord, I say not, how they which have this fear do not sin at all; but
that the faithful are by this fear, as by a most fit instrument of the holy
ghost, kept back from following the lusts of ungodliness, and have such a
watchword given them continually in their hearts, that they are not easily
drawn to any notorious breach and transgression of Gods commandments. This
effect of this true fear of God is noted by Abraham the father of the faith
full, Genesis 20. For when Abimelech the king of Gerar, who had taken away his
wife, being brought to the knowledge of his iniquity, demanded of Abraham what
he saw in the land, that he manifested not that she was his wife: Abraham
answered, saying; I thought (says he) surely the fear of God is not in this
plase, therefore they will slay me for my vvines sake: As if he had said, how
there was no hope in him that he should find any honest dealing there, where
the unfeigned and true fear of God was wanting. To this agrees a most notable
example which we find written, Exodus 1. 17. where it is showed, how that when
Pharao had commanded-the midwines to make away the men children of the
Israelites, that which restrained them from committing so horrible a fact, was
the true fear of God which they had before their eyes: for so Moses testifies
of them, saying, But the midvvines feared God, and did not according to the
commandment of the king, but saved the men children. Yea Solomon makes it a
general rule, that the fear of God causes a man not only to decline evil,
Pron. 13. but more over to hate the evil, Pron. 8. 13. And for the more
plainness, he makes mention of four points of iniquity which cannot dwell
with the fear of God: to wit, arrogancy, pride, the evil way, and a double
tongue; and shows by example in himself, how if a man have the upright fear
of God abiding and working in him, he will avoid and abhor these enormities.
The first enormity is arrogancy, which is, Alying persuasion and boasting,
that one has those graces and that ability which he has not: and this
iniquity reigns in the greatest part of men. Ye that are of the ministry,
look into them of our own calling: There are infinite in a manner, which
being unable for want of gifts to fulfill any the least part of the ministers
office and charge truly, notwithstanding presume and boost themselves to be
sufficient men for that calling when it is nothing so, and hereupon break in
and come within the listes of the holy mount of God, and thrust themselves into
the sanctuary of the most holy one. These are monstrously arrogant, and
therefore out of all question destitute of the true fear of the Lord. Of this
sort are many professors now adays, which having not as yet profited so far
as that they know the word of the beginning of Christ Jesus, or first principles
of religion, yet boast themselves to be rich in the knowledge of God and of
Christ Jesus. Of the same stamp generally are Papists, who arro gating to
themselves by nature freewil to forsake cuill and to do good, which they have
not power to merit heaven by their works which all men lack, show the true
fear of God not to be in them.

The second enormitie is Pride, which is, achalenging of glory, praise, and
dignity to ones self, in respect of those graces and gifts which are in him.
They that are carried away with this ungodliness, they are also void of the
true fear of God. Such are in the ministry those now a days, who knowing
themselves to have those good graces and gifts which their betters in
ecclesiastical place and calling do want, think much that their place is none
higher, their livings no larger, their estimation no greater, and thereupon
make it their chief study, how they may come and attain to better promotion.
Such are among the gentry those, that for the abundance of their outward
blessings cannot content themselves, unless they may have some higher title
than whereby they are yet called. Briefly, such are all those, who of a glory
that they have in their own gifts, aspire to an higher place in the commonwealth, after the manner of Abshalom, or hunt after and strive for the
pre-eminence in the church, after the manner of Diotrephes: for thus to do is
pride, which sin cannot reign in any person, and the man fear God aright
too.

The third enormitie abhorred of such as fear God truly, is the evil may,
that is to say, all course and trade of life and living, which sauoureth of
ungodliness: as living by usury, cosinage, theeuerie, extortion, leading of
ones life in filthiness, adultery, wantonness, idleness, or any other
crime, that the church of God is offended withal. This course whosoever takes
(as the world is full of such now adays) they can by no coulourable means be
showed to fear God aright, whatsoever they outwardly pretend.

The fourth enormitie which cannot stand nor dwell together with the true fear
of God, is adouble tongue: with which sin there are specially two kinds of
people infected: one is of the, who will speak as fair as Angels to a man's
face, but will straight way, or whenever occasion is ministered, slander them
most beastly behind their backs: Another sort is of them, who in the company
of such as profess the truth sincerely will make a great show of godliness,
but when they come in company of others which are leudly disposed, will say as
they say. These are double tonged, and whosoever are such in them the true
fear of God is not remaining.

2 A second effect and natural property of the true fear of God is, it
causes a man to deal not with eyeseruice, but faithfully, in all yt with
knowledge he take thin hand: it causes him to walk not deceiptfully, but with
an upright heart; not in his ordinary calling alone, but moreover in the
following and performance of any godly business otherwise lawfully committed
unto him. The reason is, because it places the Lord before him sitting in his
throne of justice, and beholding all that he does or thinks, whereby he is
brought and kept in such godly awe, that albeit men could not epsy his
falsehood, yet he knows how the Lord will both see and judge the same;
whereupon he imployeth himself with all diligence to do his work faithfully,
as in the sight of God. That the true fear of God is of this effect, it is
manifest, 2. Chron. 19.9. For there we may read, how Iehoshaphat king of Judah,
laboring the reformation of his whole king dome by due ministration of justice,
and by diligent preaching of the word, he charge the officers to deal
uprightly: and minding to show what would be auailable to make them so to do,
he attributes this glorious effect to the true fear of God, saying, Thus
shall ye do in the fear of God, and by way of exposition adds, faith fully
and with a perfect heart: as if he had said, I may charge you to deal
faithfully, but I cannot make you so to do: notwithstanding, that which my
commandment cannot work in you, that the true fear of God (if ye have the
same) will effectually bring to pass in you. Now therefore, if ye fear God
aright as ye pretend to do, then show it by the true effect of that fear, that
is to say, by faithful and upright dealing in this charge and burden that is
laid upon you. Let every one, of what degree and condition soever, examine
himself by this property, and he shall easily understand, whether the true
fear of God be resident with him or no. If such as are in authoritle, be not
faithful in ministering justice, and suppressing the adversaries of truth and
godliness, it is cuident hereby what they are. If such as are in the ministry
be not faithful in doing their office, but either dispece not the word at all,
or deal after the manner of hucksters deceitfully with it, they declare them
selves to be void of the true fear of God. If trades men have and use a false
weight, and a false measure, or seek to inriche them selves by any manner of
false dealing, there is no question but that so long as they continue such and
so minded, the unfeigned and true fear of God has no dwelling place, nor
abiding in them.

3 A third effect whereby the true fear of God is made known to be in a ma,
is, that it makes him not only to separate himself from the defilings and
corruptions of the world, when he hears them rebuked by the word of God, but
moreover speaks earnestly to his neighbors, whom he sees entangled with such
ungodliness, upon purpose and intent to draw them also away from those
iniquities. Forhe has evermore his heart meditating upon the commandemet of
the Lord, which charge him not only to have no fellowship, with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but moreouver to reprove them, as is set down
Ephesians. 5. This effect of the true fear of God ye may find in the prophecy
of Malachie, chap. 3. 16. For albeit the people of that generation were
exceeding wicked, yet some there were which at ye rebuking and admonition of
the prophet, forsook such wickedness, and laboring to draw others to gither with
them, which persons the prophet notes to have bin led to such encouragement of
their neighbors by this true fear of God, which the Lord endued the withal:
For so lie says, then (says he) they that feared the Lord, spoke ouery man to
his neighbor. This is a lesson for you, that can be content in outward show and
appearance to subject your own necks to the sweet yoke of christian
reformation: ye have heard the prophets of the Lord in the spirit and zeal
of Malachie, reprove gentlemen and others for robbing the Lord of his portion,
of his tithes, and offerings, as Malachie did: ye have heard them roproue
ministers for not keeping knowledge in their lips, that the people might ask
the law of God at their mouth, as the Prophet did: ye have heard them rebuke
many other corruptions, wherein this generation has far exceeded and gone
beyond the people of Malachies time: ye have profited so far in outward
appearance, that ye lament for these iniquities of our time to the eye, and
seem to leave and forsake them your own selves, but yet are in opinion (a
great number of you) how it is not within the compass of your several
duties, to labor in calling other aware from the fame corruptions, out of
which ye are escaped. Mark therefore this third effect of the true fear of
God, and be well assured, that it is every man's ductie which will show
himself to fear God aright, not only to leave these enormities their own
selves, but moreover to exhort euene man his neighbors, be they Gentlemen or
other, in ecclesiafticall or temporal vocation, to leave these iniquities with
them, and to become new men, otherwise the true fear of God reigns not in
them.

3 The third way and means whereby ye may take intelligence of your own
souls, whether this true fear of God commanded by S.Peter, dwell in you or
no, is by such company and fellowship as the true fear of God continually
keeps. The reprobates, yea the Atheists fear God, so do the denils also:
but it is in such a servile and slavish manner, that they hate him whom they
fear, whereas it is far otherwise with them which have the true fear of God
in them: for the true fear of God is, as one very fitly terms it, Tanquam
seta sutoria trabens, post se filum delectionis, as it were the shoomakers
hair drawing after it the thread of love, which infinite examples of Gods
faithful children, mentioned in the Scripture, do confirm and prove: For so
they feared the Lord, that they loved him also entirely, and from the bottom
of their hearts. For proofs sake, to bring one or two, it is reported of
David, 2. Sam. 6.9. that he seated the Lord exceeding lie, who not
withstanding Psalm. 116.1. avouched truly of himself, that he loved the Lord,
Yea and Moses which in the places before mentioned gave commandment to the
people of Israel to fear the Lord, does also charge them to love him with all
their heart, with all their soul, and with all their might, Deu. 6.5 which
declares how the true fear of God is accompanied with a love of him in the
same party. So the we must not fear God as the devils and reprobates fear
him, neither yet must we fear the almightle with a popish kind of fear. How
is that, will some say, the Papists have a fear of God in the, but it is such
a kind of fear, as is accompanied with a distrust in God, insomuch that they
make it a principle of their religion, how we must fear, and not be bold of
Gods favor. This detecteth their fear of God not to be the true and holy fear
commanded by Saint Peter in this place. For the true fear of God is
accompanied and joined with a trust and confidence in him, as may be proved
cuidentlie in the hundredth and fifteenth Psalm, the 1. verse. Esa 50.10.
Besides, the manifold examples of Gods scruants endued with a right fear of
him, who albeit wrestling with the multitude of their sins, seemed to shut
the door of their hearts against assured trust in the Lord for a season, yet
evermore gave it intertainment in the end. By these things then (my brethren)
ludge of your lelues, if ye fear God so that ye hate him, or cannot abide
him, and that ye will not be persuaded to have boldness and assured trust in him
to salvation, because your consciences tell you how many and how grievous your
sins are, then have ye not that fear which Saint Peter speaks of abiding
in you: but if your fear of God be joined with an hearty love of him, and ye
so fear his punishing justice, that notwithstanding ye trust in his forgiving
mercy, then is the fear of God in you an holy plant, which I beseech him for
Christ's sake to rain upon more and more with the sweet dew of the word, and
to blovv upon with the quickening breath of his spirit, that it may flourish and
bring forth fruit in you to the end,

Thus ye see (brethren) by what means ye may have understanding, whether
ye answer to this commandment of Saint Peter, that is to say, whether ye
fear God truly or no; and hereby also ye may know what it is to fear God
truly and aright, namely not to be a fearde of the fancies of our own
brain, for then fools and mad men should fear God truly; not to tremble
only at his judgementes, for then the very insensible mountains and hills
should fear God truly, because they are ready to tremble at the angry
presence of the Lord. Psalm. 18.7. not to have a mind desperately tormented and
grieved with the horror of his own sins, for then Judas and many of the
reprobate should have feared God truly: not to stand in awe so of Gods
vengeance only, that there upon we dare not follow those abominations
which otherwise our hearts are well pleased with, for then the hypocrites
should fear God truly: but upon a due and deep consideration of Gods power,
vvisdome, providence, justice, etc, to stand in such godly awe of him, that
by means thereof we are brought from the liking and following of ungodliness, to
deal faithfully in all things, to dehort other from those corruptions which
our selves have forsaken, and in all this to be so affectioned, that we
delight in the Lord and love him, at no time utterly despairing though we
fulfill not our duties so fully as we ought, but yielding to that comfort of
Gods spirit, whereby we are put in hope that God vvil accept our endeavors,
though joined with many imperfections, as the endeavors, not of slaves, but
of his faithful and obedient children.

This is now the true fear of God, whereof Saint Peter speaks, and these are
some means whereby ye may know and discern whether the same be in your
selves or other. And for as much as there is nothing more to be desired at the
hands of almighty God, then that all men may atraine to this fear, and
retain it also cuen to the end, it is needful for us to consider what those
things are which may serve as the ordinatie means to draw men unto, and
continue men in this true fear of God.

There are then two especial things which are of great force both to make men
fear God truly, and also to keep and preserve in them that grace and gift of
God: whereof the first is the excellency and peerless dignity and
worthiness of this grace. The second is the incomparable blessings of God
which foolowe the same, and art promised to as many as abide in the it.

The worthiness of this fear of God the Scripture fetteth forth, in that it
spoiling the men of this world of those gracious titles wherein they make all
true honor and commendation to stand and consist, it attributes them
notwithstanding to those that fear the Lord.

It is a thing which men most desire of all other things, to be truly wise,
insomuch that for the bare name thereof, infinite persons of all ages and
degrees, have thought neither any cost il bestowed, nor any labor ill taken,
so they might be reputed of the world for wise men; naithles the world could
never attain to this in deed: For when the judgment is brough to the throne of
God, they are all condemed of folly as Saint Paul declares 1. Corinthians. 1. where
he says, how the vvisdome of this world is foolishnes with God. In the
mean season, such as fear God truly are by the holy Ghost himself pronounced
to be rightly and truly wise. For the patient Job says, The fear of the Lord
is wisdom in deed, chap. 28 Whereunto agrees Solomon, who Proverbs 1.
avouches the fear of the Lord to be Reshith dagnath, the beginning of
knowledge, or rather as we say in our common speech, the chief point of
knowledge or head knowledge: and again in his fifteenth chapter he says, The
fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom. Whereby we may perceive how
they only are wise in deed which fear the Lord, and al other the children
of folly and madness, so excellent and surpassing a thing is the fear of
God. Besides that, the Scripture calling upon men to sanctify the Lord, that
is, to worship him with such a kind of worship, as whereby he may be declared
and known to be holy, does require this true fear of God for performance
thereof. For so the Prophet Esaie chapter 8, commands men to sanctfre the
Lord of hosts: and to show how that should be done, he adds immediately by
wale of exposition, Let him be your fear, by that means adorning the true
fear of God, with that most honorable name and title of sanctifying the Lord
of hosts. Add hereunto, that the prophet Esaias chap. 33.6, makes account how
The fear of God is a treasure to the godly, enriching them abundantly which
have it, in the sight of God; whereupon it must needs ensue, that they which
are destitute of this grace, are stark beggars before God, howsoever they flow
and swim in outward wealth and prosperity. Thus ye see of what great
dignity the true fear of God is, which ought to ravish you with a desire both
to subject your selves to this commandment of S. Peter, that the holy Ghost
mare work this true fear in your hearts; and also to take heed, that the
manifold entisementes of the world and flesh which are laid as baits to
beguile silly souls eueric where, bereave you not of it being once settled in
your hearts, considering how excellent a thing it is in the judgment of the
holy Ghost.

2 Concerning the blessings which God has promised to those that fear him,
they are so great, that greater cannot he. For what is it (brethren) that your
hearts would or can wish or desire? would ye be delivered from all such
enemies at home or abroad, as do secke by subtlety or cruelty to bereave you
of life, of liberty, of the truth, yea and of God himself? Then Fear the
Lord (says the spirit) and he will deliver you out of the hands of your
enemies. 2. Reg. 17.39. Would ye have your posterity that they shall stand up
in your place successively, to increase and prosper: Fear the Lord (says the
holy ghost) and it shall go well with you and with your children after you for
evermore, Deuteronomy. 5.29. would ye be strong against all assaults of our
spiritual enemies? Fear the Lord, and ye shall be so. For (as Solomon says)
In the fear of the Lord is assuredness of strength. Proverb. 14. and the 26.
verse. Again, would ye be out of doubt which is the right and true way,
among so great diversity of opinions as are now in the world? Fear the Lord,
and he will teach you in the way that ye shall choose, yea the secrets of
the Lord shall be among you if ye fear him, and he will show you his
covenant. Psalm. 25.11.13. To conclude, will ye be blessed, that is to say, in
a state perfited with a gathering together of all good things? Fear God, and
ye shall be so. For (as David says) Blessed are they that fear the Lord.
Psalm. 112.1.

For all this, the greatest part of the world regard not to fear the Lord, but
have their hearts filled with contempt of him: whereof to consider the causes
and remedies is very needful, that we may take heed, and give obedience to
this precept of S.Peter.

1 One cause then why men fear not the Lord, is the want of teaching and
hearing the word of God, by which as by an instrument sanctified to that
purpose, the Lord distilleth his fear into the hearts of men. This may be
gathered out of Deuteronomy. 31. where Moses giving charge to Joshua concerning the
reading of the Law in the ears of the whole congregation of Israel, shows
also wherefore it was to be done; namely, that they might learn to fear the
Lord their God. verse. 12.13. If then the publishing of the word be the means
to learn men the fear of the Lord, it must needs be, that the want of this
blessing is a reason why many are destitute of the true fear of God. For
remedy whereof none other way can be found, than for the minister diligently to
teach, and the people as diligently to hear the word of the Lord.

2 A second reason why men fear not the Lord is, because their hearts are
possessed with a strong imagination, that it is in vain to fear God. This
cause of men's not fearing the Lord, the Prophet Malachie declares, Chapt. 3.
for having spoken of certain which feared not the Lord, verse. 5. he does
afterward show their reason that persuaded them to set the Lord at naught and
to give out stoure words against him, which was, because in their corrupt
judgment, it was in vain to serve God, and it was no profit to them that
they walked humbly before the Lord of hosts, verse. 14. Against this pestilent
persuasion which leads many now adays to the contempt of God, a remedy of
sovereign effect is, the consideration of those promises before propounded to
them that fear the Lord, which will be then more effectual, when we set
before our selves in our minds as on a theater or stage, the persons of many
that feared the Lord, as of Abraham, Ieseph, Moses, David, etc. enjoying part
of these promises in this life, and now fully possessed of the rest in the
kingdom of God.

3 A third matter, where upon many take occasion to neglect and cast away the
fear of God, is a gross conceit of the nature of God, inducing them to think
that the Lord sees not what men do in the earth, and that they may do what
they will for him. After this sort the wicked in Jobs time surmised, that God
was so hidden with the dark clouds, that he could not judge thorough them,
and therefore they despised him. And so the ungodly in the days of David spoke
fiercely, and the workers of iniquity vaunted themselves against God, and all
was upon this persuasion, That the Lord did not see it, the God of Jacob did
not mark it. Psalm. 94. Against this enchantment, that it may not prevail in
men's hearts to lead them away from the fear of God, it helps much to
consider, that nothing is hid from the eyes of God. Heb. 4. that he searches
all hearts, and understands all the thoughts of the mind. 2. Chron. 28.9.
that it is a brutish folly to think that he which planted the care should
not hear, and he which formed the eye should not see, Psalm. 94. which
consideration, if it be deeply imprinted in our minds, it will make us to see
that the dark clouds are no hinderance to the Lord, but that he beholds all
things, even the very purposes of the heart, and therefore is the more to be
feared. 1. King. the eight chapter and 39.

4 A fourth reason why men regard not the fear of God, is because they see
themselves and others, who are with out al true reverence of the almighty, to
prosper well enough in the world, whilst they that fear the Lord, endure and
pass through many adversities and troubles. This reason of the wickeds
contempt of God, the prophet David saw and acknowledged, Psa. 73. For why (as
he says) because the wicked come not in trouble, neither are plauged with
other men, because there are no bands in their death, but they are lusty and
strong, therefore they glory in their pride as in a golden chain, they talk
presumptuously, and they set their mouth against heaven, That is to say, they
speak in defiance of God him self. In like manner he says of the ungodly.
Psalm. 55.19. that Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.
To expel which poisoned conceits out of men's hearts, there is not any more
convenient remedy, than to mark the way of the world, vvherin wicked men
(which say unto God, depart from us) have vvalked, and how they have been cut
down before their time, whose foundation was as ariuer that ouerflovved.
Job. 22. To consider with David, that the Lord has set such wicked ones in
slipperie places, and that the conceit which they have of their prosperous
estate, is no better then the fancy of a dreaming man, who in his sleep
imagines himself and other to be rich and in good case, but when he a
waketh he finds it nothing so. Psalm. 73. Briefly, to consider that the less
trouble they sustain here, the more torment is behind, and the more blessings
or prouocations to the fear of God they have received, the less mercy shall
they find, because they abused them to strengthen their hearts in contempt
of the Lord.

These are the chief things which cause men to reject the fear of the
almighty: these are the stones whereat they stumble, and the rocks against
which they make shipwreck, which every one must take heed of that is desirous
to walk in the obedience of this commandment, and to fear God, as S. Peter
counsels him to do.

Thus have ye heard upon occasion of Saint Peter's words, exhorting us to fear
God, both how ye may know when ye fear him aright, what may serve to inflame
you with an earnest desire to fear him truly, and what causes men not to
fear the Lord. Let us now learn other lessons ministered to us in the same
precept.

Whereas the fear of God which is not in the profession of the mouth, but in
the inward affection and feeling of the heart, is here by Saint Peter commanded
to those which before he calls apeople set at liberty, to show forth the
virtues of him which has called the out of darkness into his marvelous light,
that is to say, unto the professors of christianity: we must make our
reckoning that would gladly be taken for christians, how it is enough for us
to speak and talk of the majesty, goodness, providence, power, and other
virtuous attributes ascribed to God, but especially it is required, that we be
inwardly touched in our souls with a fear and reverence of him: yea and
verily they which can only say well of God, and are not endued with a true
fear of him, are no better christians in comparison, than that christian man
which the painter painteth upon a cloth or wall. For the painters christian is
soberly apparelled, and made to look after the saddest manner: moreover, he
has a scrowle coming out of his mouth, wherein is written some goodly
sentence of the Scripture speaking of God, and yet for all this he is no true
christian, because he lacks that which the painter can not give him, that is
to say, the true fear of God; and so these (brethren) which make an outward
fair show and speak well of God, are not true christians, if they want the
true fear of God which is grafted in the heart, and is a special thing
required in a true christian man, as by the precept of saint Peter given to
christian men appears.

Besides this lesson, there are other profitable instructions which are offered
unto us out of the order of this precept, Fear God, compared with that which
follows, honor the king.

As first of all, saint Peter, sets this precept before, Fear God, and the
other after, honor the king: where by he insinuates and gives us to
understand, how the fear and obedience of God is to be preferred to the honor
and obedience of princes; the very same rule and lesson which S. Peter and S.
John together teach us Act. 4.19. namely, That it is right in the sight of God
to obey him rather tha^ man, as common reason also makes us to know and
confess. For the souerain must be obeyed before the lieutenant, the L. of the
house before the steward of it, the master before the servant, and therefore
God before all princes, and rather than all princes and potentates in the
world, because God is the sovereign king, and they are his Lieutenants, God is
the master, and they are his servants: which admonishes us to attempt
nothing for any prince under the same, which overthrows, impaireth, or
undermines the flourishing estate of the true fear of God, either in our
selves or in any other, least we be called into judgment for serving the
creature with contempt of the creator, and preferring man before God.

An other lesson is taught us in this order of precepts, delivered by saint
Peter in this place. For by setting Fear God before honor the king, he
insinuates unto us, how that if princes will look to have true and faithful
subjects, such as will have care from the very bottom of their hearts to
yield them that due honor which is to them belonging, them must they first
provide, that they be trained up in the true fear of the almighty: for it is
hard to say, that he which fears not God aright, will or can ever honor his
prince truly.

1 For why? First of all, that which especially moves men so to honor their
prince, is the commandment and fear of God, as saint Peter says before in
this chapter, they do it for the Lords sake: whereupon it follows that if a
man have not the fear of God him self, which is the cause of his faithful
obedience to his prince, it can not well be that he should unfeignedly and
truly honor his sovereign, which is an effect of that fear of God.

2 Our sovereign Christ in the parable of the wicked judge, noting the sum of
his ungraciousness, utters it in this manner, he neither (says he) feared God
nor reverenced man, Luke. 18.2. as noting the same lesson which I have said
unto us.

3 That is most plain which we read lerem. 32. where the holy Gho^st (who is
best acquainted with our nature) does show and declare, how we are of such a
condition, that unless we be retained and kept in order and awe by the fear
of God, we will fall away even from God him self. For thus the spirt of God by
the prophet says, I will put fear in their hearts that they shall not depart
from me: as if he said, I know that men will not faithfully continue, no not in
my service which am their God and creator, unless they be endued with my true
fear: and shall we then think (brethren) that men which have not the true
fear of God planted in their hearts, can ever faithfully and truly honor their
prince?

4 It is not to be looked for (derely beloved) that he will regard the blasing
of a candle, which is not moved with the most glorious brightness of the
sun. It is not for any to persuade men, that he will ever regard the value
of a penny, which despises the full storehouse of all rich things, etc. no
more is it likely that he which fears not the God of unspeakable glory, will
give any unfeigned honor to his prince, etc. the sum is, it is hard to deem
otherwise, but that he which is destitute of the fear of God, whether by means
of ignorance or conte^ptuousnes can or will ever honor his prince truly. I deny
not, but the Lord so restrains oftentimes many godles persons with the bridle
of a certain fear that they break not forth into outrageous rebellion
against their prince, but rather stand stoutly unto him even unto the death;
which is nothing against that I say: for I show what nature being not tilled
with this true fear of God ordinarily yields, not what God against the force
of nature many times works. Again, I speak of that honoring of the prince
which is a christian virtue and a work of the spirit of sanctification, not of
that service whereunto many are brought by the spirit (as they term it)
repressing vices.

They that are gentlemen, and by reason of their calling have necessarily to
retain many in their service to wait upon them, let them consider this well
that I say. If they feed and cloth their servants well, but teach them not the
fear of God, out of question they do nothing else but harten men, and make
them strong to rebel against their Prince. Ye that are ministers also,
consider this well, and let it make you diligent to instruct your flocks in
the true fear of God. Alas (brethren) are they not too many alredie, which in
hellish madness without all fear of God, go about to bereave out gracious
sovereign of her life, the whole realm of peace, the gospel of passage? Alas
than, why should ye also sin against God and against your own souls, by
increasing the number of rebellious and disloyal persons? Ye will say
peradventure, we do it not: yes verily, if ye teach not your people diligently
the fear of the Lord. For unless men have their hearts possessed with the true
fear of God, they will not honor their Prince truly.

Honor the king.
Ye have hither to heard me patiently, concerning the fear of God: hear me
now (I beseech you) concerning our duty toward the king. Saint Peter's
commandment is, that kings and princes should be honored; which that it may
be more forcible both to teach us and also to win us, I think it needful at
this season, after my rude and disordered manner, to deliver unto you these
four especial points.

1 What it is to honor the king. 2 Which are the parts of this honor. 3 Of
whom this honor is to be rendered 4 For what causes men are to yield the same.
Honor, in this place, in the Greek called Time, is a godly acknowleging and
regarding of princes as the chiefest and chosen instruments of God, for the
maintenance as well of civil, as of ecclesiastical society. Consider what I
say. To honor the king, is first to acknowledge him for the anointed of the
Lord, and also for our anointed: neither that by words alone, but by such
other means also as we are able, accordingly as we read of the people of
Israel in their receuing of Saul. For they did not only shower altogether,
saying, God sane the king, but moreover all the godly despoled browght him
presents. 1. Sam. 10.24. 27. and they which did not so, are noted by the
spirit of God for wicked me^ and are held guilty of despising him before the
judgment seat of the almighty. Moreover, we must make suchaccounte of them,
that we set not them a footestoole here in earth, and other a throne to sit
over them: (as the Papists make the King the vassal of their pope) but we must
unfeignedly confess them with S. Peter the chiefest persons, and to them give
the sovereignty and pre-eminence here in this world, assuring our selves,
that he is Antechrist, which exalts himself above them. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. To
conclude, we must not look upon them as upon disguised Kings, browght forth
on a stage or theater, which beside their gaie garments and great words have
nothing in them above the common sort, but we must receive them as the
chiefest and highest Ambassadors of God, sent among us with largest and most
ample power and authority, yea and such power and authority, as whereof the
best, the wisest, the richest, the godliest, shall have need to maintain them
in outward societies whether civil or ecclesiastical, considering they are
thereunto sanctified and sent of the Lord, whose only blessing enableth
every man to work the good of his people.

2. The parts of his honor which here is commanded by Saint Peter to be done
unto the King, are three, to wit, Reverence, Obedience, and Paying of such
tribute, or other dewes or renenewes, as belong to a person of that calling and
dignity.

Under the name of reuerencing the prince, we understand that men ought both
to think honorably of the prince, to pray for him, as also to frame and
dispose all their outward gestures and speech in such sort, that it may carry
with it and in it a sign of their unfeigned subjection to such persons.

Of men's reverend thinking of such, we read in the book of the preacher chap.
10. where the wisdom of God in Solomon gives charge on this wife, Curse not
(says he) the king no not in thy thought. For the bridling of our tongue from
all vnreuerende words against such, Moses gives a commandment Exodus 22.28.
on this manner, Thou shall not (says he) curse the ruler of thy people.
Whereunto add that saint Peter 2.Epist. 2.2.10.11. and saint Jude also do
account them to be ungodly persons and bringers in of damnable heresy, which
speak ouil of those which are in dignity: yea, they account them as
presumptuous persons daring to speak that in contempt of princes and princely
government, which the angels durst not speak against the very devil him
self. Of man's duty praying for princes, we read 1. Tim. 2. Of the reverend
gesture which we are to use toward such persons, we have example in Nathan the
prophet, who made obeisance before king David upon his face unto the ground.
1. Reg. 1.23. These are continual and ordinary rules and examples, for the
governing and directing of our behavior toward persons of that authority.

Some will say, if it be so, then did Elisha offend in calling Ichoram the
murderers son. 2. Reg. 6.32. and our Savior him self in calling Herod a
fox. Luke 13.32. then also did the aforesaid Elisha break the commandment of
God in demeaning him self so toward the said Ichoram, that he would not once
have looked upon him had it not bin for regard that he had to the presence of
Ichosaphat 2. Re. 3. the was Michaiah to be reproved for speking in manner of
derision to Ahab. 2. Chron. 18. Hereunto I answer, how the precepts and
examples before set down, bind us, and not the Lord, who may sharply
control the princes of this world for their misdoings, and also may use the
service of whom it pleases him in that behalse, neither shall he sin, that
having the extraordinary commandment of the Lord, speaks so unto them in
Gods name, which yet is no common rule for every body, neither yet for him at
all seasons. For more cuidence herein, I use this familiar similitude: if some
great monarch having under him many provinces, and each it own king as his
lieutenant, make it a common law, that no person of what degree socuer within
his dominion, shall behave himself irreverently in word or decde against any
his lieutenants: this lets not, but that the before said monarch having
knowledge and intelligence of any his lieutenantes ungodly practices, may him
self command whom he thinks good as Ambassador from him to go unto that
lieutenant, and in his name to give him such rebuke as be deseruech, and such
terms of disgrace as are meet for him, which yet eueric one may not do,
neither yet that Ambassador without the commandment of his monarch. In like
sort, forasmuch as God is the only monarch of the whole world, and all
princes his lieutenants within their seucrall dominions: though he have set it
down as a common law for his subjects, that is, for all other men, that no
person in the world shall once dare to use the prince irreverently in word or
deed, yet this lets not but that when princes despise and break the
commandments of God whose lieutenants they are, the Lord may make who me he
lists his Ambassador to them ward, and cause the said Ambassador (without
any his offense) to rebuke them with what hard manner of speech foeuer,
according to their deserts, it shall please his divine majesty to put into the
mouth of that his messenger, which yet every one may not do, neither that
Ambassador, be he prophet or minister without such commandment. Thus we see
the Prophets and extraordinary messengers of the Lord, as Elisha, Micaiah, etc.
clear from fault, because they had the word of the Lord so to do, and yet no
man authorized by their example to speak or do his wicked pleasure against his
prince. Which every true subject is to note and observe, not only for intent
that the devil may not lead him by misconstruction of Gods word, to
vnreuerent handling of his sovereign, but moreover that we may understand for
a surety, that they are nothing else but deuillish treachers and hellish
blasphemies, where with our English traitors have opposed themselves against
our anointed of the Lord, calling her usurping competitour, and laboring by
all wicked policy to shed her blood, in consideration they had no
commandment from the Lord, neither yet fust cause so to do.

2. The second part of the kings honor is obedience, which is a performing of
all the Princes lavvfull commandments (that is to say, which iustle not
against the truth of Gods word) joined with a quiet suffering at their hands
for unlawful things refused. And for the first point, that the Prince is to
be honored with sueh fulfilling of all his lawful and godly ordinances, by the
Scripture may be plainly showed and declared unto us. For in as much as the
word of God makes reckoning how the king is the chiefest of all here in this
world, 1. Pet. 2. it were absurd to think, how the spirit of God would have
less submission rendered to such an one, then it charge servants to yield to
their common masters. Whereupon it follows, that seeing S. Paul cammandeth
servants to be obedient unto them that are their masters according unto the
flesh in all things, that is to say, in all lawful things, Collossians the
third Chapter and two and twentieth verse. Much more must men be ready to obey
the commandment of the prince in all things that are lawful and godly
considering that if they do not so obey, forasmuch as obedience is one part of
the princes honor, they do plain ly dishonor the prince in that point.

2 In this case we find a notable example in the book of Joshua, chap.
16.17.18. For whereas the people of the Lord perceived that Joshua was full of
the spirit of wisdom, and that he was anointed of the Lord to be their
gonernor now after the death of Moses, they knowing what duty they ought unto
one in that place and dignity, with great reverence submit them selves unto
him, and make promise before the Lord to obey him in all things lawful. For
thus they say unto him, All that thou have commanded us will we do, and
whether soener thou sendest us we will go, As we obeyed Mosos in all things
so will we obey thee, and whosoever shall rebel against thy commanlement,
and will not obey thy words in all that thou command him, let him be put
to death. This is the promise of the people, approved of God, received of
Joshua, sot down in the word for a president to after generations, whereby we
are put out of all dout, that the prince is to be honored with fulfilling and
performing of all his lawful and godly commandments. That which I have showed
you in doctrine, I will also make cuidet by example in our own selves. And
first I suppose, how her majesty by statute or some other princely means,
commanded in the first, or some other year past of her reign, or if not
commanded her self, yet ratified some statute of her noble an cestours,
commanding that after such time no unlearned and insufficient minister should
be admitted to preach the word or to administer the sacraments. This if it
were so, it were a most lawful commandment, because it accords and is
agreeable with the word of God, which not only allows none other person to
have cure of souls, but such a one as whose lips do keep knowledge, and
from whose mouth the people may ask and have the law of the Lord, Malach. 2.
1. Tim. 3: but also teaches how if the salt, that is the minister, have lost
his saltness, that is, the abillitie to teach the people of God, he is thence
forth (not to be employed to meaner parts of that calling, but) good for
nothing in that office, but to be cast out and trodden under foot. Considering
than how this commandment were most lawful, whosoever should after the time
aforesaid wittingly and wilfully make by such unlearned minister, disobey; the
lawful commandment of the Prince, and consequently so far forth dishonoreth
his Prince. The reason is apparent; namely, because obedience or fulfilling of
the Princes lawful commandments and laws, is one part of the Princes honor,
which cannot be denied him but so much of his princely honor must be denied him
also. In like manner I say of such law of our Sovereign, as commands cuerie
subject of this realm to come and resort to church at time sanctified and set
a part for ye same purpose by the Lord; it is a most lawful and godly
commandment: For it is every way agreeable to the word of God, commanding all
men to keep his Sabbathes and to reverence his sanctuary, Leuit. 19.30.
wherefore when our English Papists refuse this, they do (for the reason
aforesaid) so far forth dishonor the Prince which commands it. The like may
be said of many things commanded in our laws, which being compared with the
word of God, appear to be most lawful and godly.

But here, some flauering courtier will say, you avouch that obedience (that is
a fulfilling of the princes lawful commandementes) is a part of the princes
honor: tell me this I pray you, do not they disobey the king and consequently
dishonor him, which do not whatsoever he commands.

No truly: for true and christian obedience whereby the prince is honored, is
a performing of lawful comma^dements. If any thing therefore that is
commanded be unlawful, and against the words of God, the persourmance thereof
can not truly be called by the name of true obedience (whereof we speak) And
as the doing of such unlawful matters can not shrwde it self under the name
of obedience: so if we look narrowely and neerelye unto it, it is nothing else
but an ungodly provoking of the Lord to shorten the life of princes, yea and
on our parts which commit or admit such unlawful things, so many furderances
and thrustinges forward of the prince unto death as may easily be discerned by
that of Solomon Prove. 28.2. where he says, For the transgression of a land
there are manis princes thereof, meaning that sin, which is a transgression of
the law of God, is a cause wherefore the princes lives are shortened through the
just vengeance of God, either against the prince chiefly as one unworthy to
rule Gods people any longer, if the people have sinned at his commandment, or
against the people as unworthy to have a good prince any longer, if they have
sinned contrary to the princes will and pleasure.

2. For the second point of true obedience to the king, some will further ask
and say, But what if a prince will enfer men to do otherwise then God has
commanded, and to commit such things as God has forbidden upon pain of
punishment or death may not here one withstand their prince by open war,
rather then to suffer such punishment unjustly at his hand?

I answer, woe unto such thoughts as traiterous and accursed, refolled by the
martirdomes of so many thousands, as both in the Scripture and other
ecclesiastical histories are read, when unlawful things were commanded them,
or lawful things forbidden them upon pain of such punishment to ensue and
follow, to suffer quietely (which is the second point of true obedience to
the prince) and not furiously to rise or rebel against them: and therefore
traiterous above measure were and are the practices of such as being commanded
nothing but that which was godly, have endeavored to bereave our Sovereign of
life by open rebellion, rather than they would be obedient to just laws and
commandments in the fear of the Lord, as became godly and christian
subjects to do without grudging.

3 The third part of the princes honor is, paying of tribute and other such
money or commodities of the world, as by kingly right and authority belongs
unto him. This our Savior him self teaches both by doctrine, and also by
example. His doctrine is to be found written, Mark. 12.17. where he says, Give
unto Caesar that which is Cesars, speaking there of tribute, as it is manifest.
For he was demanded whether it were lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar or no:
whereupon he requesting the demanders to show him a penny, and asking whose
image and superscription the penny had on it, when they answered, Cesars, than
he replied, saying, Give therefore unto Caesar that which is Cesars, and unto
God that which is Gods. His example is to be found Matthew. 17.27. where he
himself, albeit the heir of all things, yet being now in the form of a
servant and under worldly jurisdiction, pays polemony to the officers which
came unto him for it. In like manner S. Paul Romans 13. having proved by sundry
very forcible arguments, how all men are to be subject unto the higher powers,
when he comes to declare by what practice we are to show the same subjection,
he infers on this wise, Give therefore (says he) tribute to whom tribute
appertains: as declaring thereby how one cannot deny the king his tribute,
but he therewithal dishonors the same king, and denies him that subjection
which the Lord allows him in his word.

Concerning the third point of our former division, which was touching the
persons who are to yield this honor to the king, they are people of al degrees
and callings whatsocuer, of whom the Prince demands the same and imposes it
as from the Lord, for this the plain words of the scripture do exact and
straightly command, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject (says saint Paul) to
the higher powers, and S. Peter has a notable reason hereof comprehended in
one word, when he calls the king the chief among all other. For he that is
chiefest of all, is to be honored of all, of what estate or calling so ever
they be. The king or Prince is the chief of all, and therefore all other
parties, whether they serve the Lord in civil or ecclesiastical vocations,
are to honor the Prince in manner aforesaid.

2 This has plentiful and sufficient proof out of those manifold examples of
the word, wherein (as it were a table) are set before us, and described all
degrees of people honoring the king or prince as be comes them, so that none
can plead any right of immunitie in this behalf. If one were a Patriarch, he
has an example to reverence re^ce and honor the king ministered and given him
in Abraham, who bowed him self before Ephron, and before his people, Ge. 2.3.
If a minister of the church, he is taught to reverence and honor the king by
the example of Aaron, who submits himself to Moses, Nu. 12.11. of the priest
that obeyed Saul, 1. Sa. 14.18.19. of Zadok the priest, who readily performed
the commandment and will of David, 1. Re. 1.33.38. of Hilkian the priestwhich
does as Josiah co^a^ded him. 2. Reg. 22. 12.14. of the Leuits and priests which
did as Iehoshaphat charged them, 2. Chro. 19. If one were a prophet, he has an
example in Nathan, who does humble obeisance in the presence of David, as we
showed before in Jeremiah which speaks most humbly and reuere^tly to
Zedekiah, calling him his Lord ye king etc. though he had put him in prison
wrongfully, Ier. 37.20. in Daniel, who honored Nebuchadnezzar, ca. 4. and
Darius ca. 6.21. If one were of royal pare^tage, he has example to honor ye
king in Mephibosheth, who fell on his face, and did reverence before David. 2.
Sam. 9.6. If a man of very great substance, he has an example in Barzillai
the Gileadite, whose reverend behavior and dealing toward the same David is
set forth and commended. 2. Sam. 17. and 19. If a most politic counselor, he
has example of his dutifulness toward the prince in Hushai the Archite the
friend of David. 2. Sam. 15. If a most valiant captain, he has example given
him in Abner. 2. Sam. 3.21. in Ioab 1. Chron. 21.3. in the three mighty men,
2. Sam. 23.16.17. The like examples we may find in the word for all other
estates and degrees whatsoever.

This doctrine is clear, yet there are which gainsay it: as the Anabaptists on
the one side, the Papists on the other side. The Anabaptists deny all
magistracy and princely government among Christians, imagining it to be a
matter that cannot stand with the nature of true christianity, for one to
receive honor as a Prince, and another to give and yield such honor as a
subject: who are easily refelled. For to whom is this commandment here of
honoring the Prince given by S. Peter? it is no given to christian men? yes
verily, eue^ to those whom before he calls living stones, an holy nation, a
royal priesthood, etc. which are the titles of all true christians. Would S.
Peter have commanded that, which was not agreeable to christianity? No
verelie, we see then, how christianity will not bolster out any man to
dishonor the king, no more than it will grant a man to cast of and reject the
fear of God. For as a duty of christianity the one is required of men;
namely, to fear God, and honor the king or prince: and thus the mist of
Anabaptistical doctrine vanishes at the shining forth of that light, which
utters it self in this precept of S. Peter. The papists, they convey their
poison another way: for they do not simply deny honor to princes, but to
those princes whom their Romish antichrist disalloweth and is displeased
withal: to such they think themselves, that is to say, all papists to owe no
duty, but to be lawfully quit and discharged from their oath of alleagance
and al duetifulnes toward them by their Pope: neither that alone, but moreover
account it lawful for them which are borne subjects to such princes, to
blaspheme, hurt, and murder them, if by any means possible they may, as has
appeared by the satanical attemps of late English traitors against our
sovereign. This is as easily confuted by S. Peter in this place as the former
opinion was, if we consider what manner kings and princes had then the
government when saint Peter gave this precept. Were kings at that time
favorers of religion? did they further the preaching of the word, whereof peter
was a minister? Did they esteem Peter or any other the Apostles or faithful
children of God? No such thing; but contrariwise they were enemies of the
gospel, they labored by all means to hinder the passage and course of the
truth, they persecuted Peter and all the rest of the godly; For all this, S.
Peter, who was taught and spoke by the holy ghost, durst not will any man to
dishonor them or to slay them, but (as this place declares) he charged true
christians and all that feared God to Honor the king, which as many as feared
God and were true christians indeed accounted it their duty inuiolably to
perform and do. Did Peter commandeuen the ungodly kings and enemies of the
truth to be honored of all yt were true christians? and may the blafphemous
Pope by that fulness of iniquity and deceitfulnes, wherwithal the devil
possesses him, persuade me^ now adays, that they may at his commandment and
for wrecke of his anger, blaspheme with mouth, and assalt with sword the
majesty of their souerain prince, who laboreth by all means to bring me^ to the
knowledge of true godliness and right practice of the same, and yet be right
catholics, true christians, and such as do no more the^ in duty they are bound
to do? O monstrous co^trariety, declaring their Pope to be Antichrist, in that
he takes upon him to change this law of God, Dan. 7.25. concerning the
honoring of kings set down by saint Peter, and his accomplices not to be true
christians or such as fear God, but the very members of Antichrist and sons of
perdition.

4 We are now come to the last point propounded in our former division: which
is, for what causes the king is to be honored in manner aforesaid.

1 And first of all, a special matter which puts men in mind and exacteth
of the^ to honor the king, is, because this vocation is the ordinance of God,
against which to spurn, or to work or speak any thing which carries matter
of dishonor therewithal, were so far forth to spurn, work, or speak against
God himself. That the kings office and vocation is the ordinance of the
Almighty, the scripture most plainly affirms. The Queen of Saba speaking to
Solomon, says on this manner, Blessed (says she) be the Lord thy God which
loved thee to set thee on his throne as king in steed of the Lord thy God, and
has made thee king over Israel, etc. 1. Reg. 10. She says that the Lord did
set him on the throne of the kingdom, and that the Lord his God made him king
over Israel. Neither was this a thing peculiar and proper to Solomon only and
his kingly authority alone, but the same is true of other also. For saint Paul
Romans 13. generally avouches how all power is of God: and that in this respect
the prince is to be honored, saint Paul in the same place proves, using this
very argument and reason, Because it is the ordinance of God, and whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Hereunto adioine the
prophet David, who Psalm. 2. exhorting his enemies quietly to yield him the
honor of his princely power and authority, and not to rebel and rise still
against him, uses this amongst other as a reason to persuade them withal,
because he was Christus Domini, the anointed of the Lord, and because The Lord
had appointed him his king upon his holy mount of Sion. In consideration
whereof, he says not how they bended themselves against him the anointed of the
Lordalone, but affirms how they stood up against the Lord and against his
anointed, as reckning the Lords case and the kings in this point to be al one.
Mark (derly beloved) what amo^strous sin this is, which whosoever wittingly
co^miteth, walks presumptuously and with a stiff neck not against the
stream of man's power and strength, but against the invincible majesty of God
himself. O my brethren, I beseech you in the name of Christ Jesus do not so
wickedly, be no counselors nor partakers with any rebellious persons; what
shall ye that are but dry stubble, yet by suffering your selves to be carried
headlong with the whirlwind of popish doctrine against our God, which is a
co^suming and devouring fire.

2 A second matter which calls upon men to render this duty of honor to ye
king, is, the mark whereat he aims in all that he goes about: which is, the
wealth and good of the subjects. For there unto he laboreth both by power and by
council, yt the inheritance of ye Lord committed to his charge, may flourish,
grow and increse outwardly in abu^da^ce of worldly blessings, inwardly in ye
manifold graces of Gods spirit, yt the wicked may be suppressed and feared from
breking forth unto those ungodly actions, whereby loosnes may be brought in
amongst men: that also outward enemies round about the^ may have peace with
those that he rules, and not annoy any warlike or hostil force or inuasio^s.
This the Scripture and word of God avouches. S. Paul Romans 13. affirms
concerning the well disposed, how the king or higher power is the minister of
God to such an one for his good. King Solomon Pro. 20.26. as touching the
wicked and hurtful persons, shows what a sovereign remedy is to be found in
roial power and authority against the^, A wise king (says Solomon) scatters
the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them. Neither can these things
be performed and brought to pass without great care, travel, costs,
counsel, and danger on the princes behalf, by reason of the rebellious
affections of man's nature where withal he is continually to strive both by
rewards and and punishments. In consideration whereof, for so great pains and
benefits to requite the prince again, not with honor and dutifulnes, but
with bloodshed, rebellion, or conspiracy, can not but be a sin immeasurable
sinful.

3 Not to stand much on this point, I will adioine but this one reason. S. Paul
Romans 13. aforenamed verse. 2. says, how They which resist and rebel against
the higher powers, get unto them selves judgment. And what judgment
(brethren) means he? Verily the judgment of Gods heavy plagues and of most
shameful death to carry them out of this world, and of unappeasable
vengaunce to rest and knawe upon them in that euerburning lake in the world
to come. These are not bugges words to fraye you alone, but the very and
plain truth which the word will furthermore teach you. As touching the state
of such persons in the world to come what it shall be, ye may take great aim
hereby, considering how it is hardly to be read in the whole scripture, where
the patterns of Gods mercy toward sinners falling into evil are propounded,
that ever God suffered any of his elect ones after their effectual calling, to
be carried of the devil into this sin of rebellion against the prince. Add
hereunto, that saint Paul reckons this enormity among those which whosoever
commits, Shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Tit. 1.16. Concerning
their most fearful punishments in this world, mark the most certain
examples of the holy word of God. Korah, Dathan and Abiram rebelled against
Moses, therefore They died not the common death of all men, but the Lord
wrought a new thing, so that the earth opened her mouth and svvallovved them up
with all that they had, and they went down quick into the pit. All which
was done, to make us understand, that such rebels provoke not man but God him
self. Number. 16.29.30. Absalom the goodly though ungodly son of righteous
David, rebelled against his father the king, and therefore as he rod upon his
princely mule under a great oak, the very boughs of the tree would not
suffer so wicked a wretch to escape unpunished, but caght hold on his head, And
he was taken up betvveene the heaven and the earth, there hanging till Ioab
his great friend came and thrust him through with three darts, beside the
vvounds which ten other men the servants of Ioab gave him. Yea, so little was
the face of the kings son reverenced because of his treason, that he had none
other sepuchre but a dung hill pit in the wood, none other tomb or hearse but a
ruinous heap of great stones cast upon him, 2. Sam. 17. Sheba the son of
Bichri a man of Iemini rebelled against the same David: therefore the Lord
destroyed him by the hands of them which were his friends. For the men of Abel
to whom he fled for help, at the counsel of a woman cut off his head, and
did cast it over the wall to Ioab, 2. Sam. 19. Add hereunto the examples of
late traitors in this our own Country, as Sommeruile, Throgmorton, Babington,
and their accomplices, which like dunghill cocks entending to perch upon the
head of this realm to the destruction thereof, were justly constrained to
crow their last upon the gallows. The like (O Lord) we beseech thee bring
upon all the enemies of Elizabeth thine anointed, but let peace be upon the
Israel of God, and upon all that unfeignedly seek her true honor in the right
fear of the Almighty.

Laus solt Deo.


