THE ENGLISH CONCORD, IN ANSWER TO BECANE'S ENGLISH JARRE: Together with a
Reply to Becan's Examen of the English Concord. By Richard Harris, Dr. in
Divinity.

2. Tim. 2.16. Stay profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto
more ungodliness.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Mat. Lownes; and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head. 1614.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty; James, by the Grace of of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, Catholic,
and Apostolic faith: and Supreme Governor in all Causes, and over all persons
Ecclesiacticall within his Dominions. So ordained to be by the Divine Masestie.
Most Gracious Soueragine;
THat busy pack-horse Jesuit Becan, maintaining, what in his small power
lies, diametrall opposition to your Majesty's rightful and supereminet power
Ecclesiastical: To make the same seem ludibrious in the eyes of his adherents,
(as King David dancing before the Arc, seemed to be in the eyes of profane
Michal); in his printed empty pamphlet, styled, Dissidium Anglicanu, brought,
as it were, upon the worlds Theater, five English Protestant Writers, in
defense of your Majesty's said Supremacy; namely, the most learned, and
Reverend Bishop of Ely, with his two Chaplains, Master Thomson, and Master
Burhill, also Master Doctor Tooker, and my Self; as iarring among our selves,
in many and material points of the said Supremacy: and thereupon he
concluded, that your Majesty has no iuct cause, to urge the taking of the
Oath of Regal Supremacy upon your subjects; since the defenders thereof in
writing cannot agree in the main, real, and essential parts of it. Which
pernicious project of the Adversary, caused me, in my most humble duty, and
loyal service to your Majesty, eftsoons to write my book of English
Concord; therein showing, and proving the sweet harmony, whereby all the fore
said five Writers utter the rightful Supremacy of your sacred Majesty.

Now, because some of your Majesty's Popish and English subjects, have turned
the said pamphlet of Becan, out of Latin, into English, thereby to cause that
poisonfull canker to spread further, and that Roman leprosy to ouerrun the
outward faces, and inward hearts of English Papists, on this side, and beyond
the Seas: To countermine that serpentine plot, viz. to suppesse, or at the
least, to stay the further progress of that running Canker; it seemed good
unto your Majesty, to command the translating of my said book into English:
which was done accordingly. But before it could be printed, Becan had written,
and sent to the last Frank-fort Mart, his EXAMEN of my book of English
Concord: which forced me to annex my REPLY, and Refutation of his Examen, in
the Interim, in English also, because the other are in English; intending with
all convenient speed, to send the same Reply augmented, beyond the Seas in
Latin, that this importune Adversary, may see his reed Examen shaken down, and
shinered all to pieces; and also may behold the English Concord, fully
maintained, and justified, in every part and parcel of Regal Supremacy.

I humbly confess unto your excellent Majesty, that it grieved me at my very
heart, to spend so many good hours, in refuting the Almanack-pamphlets, of this
shallow, and in very truth, unlearned Jesuit; wherein is not to be found any
learning, reading, or indicious discourse, fitting a Father-Iesuit: but only
boy-like wranglings, about either seeming Iarres, in words or syllables; or
escapes of the Transcriber, Printer, or Corrector, in some abcedary letters, in
numerall figures, in quoting the middle paragraph-word, for the first word of
the self same Canon: whereas the very express words, or the very
substantial matter, according to the meaning of the Author, and the purpose in
hand, was faithfully set down.

These trifles, which (with his shameless calumniations, untruths, and
scurrilities, make up the very bulk of his triobulare book) though they might
well have been let pass, as things of naught; or buried in silence: yet
because wise Solomon advises, Sometimes to answer a fool in his foolishnes;
least my silence heerin, should cause this Jesuit to grow more insolent; or
the Popish sort in their vngrations and rebellious denial of this Oath, more
confident; I have made this Reply, to give him more matter to work upon: It
being my settled resolution, through Gods assistance whiles I breath, to
justify in vvriting against this Jesuit, both the rightfulnesse of your
Majesty's Supremacy, and also the uniform agreement of the said Writers
therein. The rather, because, though this Jesuit by his silly scribblings,
brings shame and disgrace to the Pope, whose cause he undertakes to defend;
yet is thought not the vnmeetest Emissary of his Unholiness; for that this
Popeparasite, with his hard forhead, dare set forth in print, any thing for his
Lord God the Pope, and against your sacred Mai^stie: be it, for the matter,
never so impiously gross; and for the manner, never soimpudently sourrilous.
Wherefore, having tasted of your Highness most Gracious patronage in my former
labors, I am emboldned to present these also unto your royal view: being
more desirous of your May: sole judgment, to approve the lines defending
regal jurisdiction; then of a whole College or council of our Adversaries.
Because such is the desert of your royal mind, and pen, as was by
Sabellicus attributed to Cicero: Pulchrius illi multo fuit Latinum sermonem,
quam Romanum Imperium auxisse. So is it more honor to your excellent Majesty,
(if such a Prince be capable of access of Honor) that you have by writing
propagated the religion of Christ, then if by battle you had enlarged your
Dominions, and Great Britains Monarchy: The one being the price of the death
of Jesus: the other, your most lawful patrimony, by the death of your royal
forefathers. Which the Lord grant you may so long enjoy, as your own royal
heart desires, and all your loving subjects do say, Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble, and loyal subject, RICHARD HARRIS.

A PREFACE TO all English Papists who approve not the Gunpowder Treason:
aunswering the Preface of BECANE.
For as much as Becane has discoursed of an English Jar about the
Supremacy, I am willing to use a few words unto you; but in no case to be
troublesome with any tedious Oration. About two years since, Becane wrote two
Libel-pamphlets touching the Kings Supremacy: the one against the Apology and
monitorie Preface of our most mighty and gracious Sovereign, JAMES, King of
great Britanne: The Other, against a book called Tortura Torti; or rather
against the author thereof, the most reverend Bishop of Ely. The smoaky fumes
of which Pamphlet (for they contained no solid matter in them) were dispelled
by Dr. Tucker, Mr. R. Tomson, Mr. Rob. Burhill, and by Hainricus
Salo-brigiensis. Notwithstanding, Martin Becane abides conceitedly obstinate,
although there be many things, which might have cooled his heat, and taken
from him all lust of further brawling. And principally these: First, the
iniquity of his Cause. Then, your indifferent equity. Lastly, the manifold
intestine Iarres and differences of Roman Writers, about the Popes Supremacy;
and our full agreement in the Kings Supremacy. What shall I need to speak of
the iniquity of his Cause? For it fights against the Church of Christ, in the
behalf of the honor and Soueraignetie of Antichrist; after the manner and
biasse of Icsuits. And in this case, what one of the forenamed has he not just
cause to fear? Again, your indifferent equity, wherein (with the Venetians
and the Parisian Sorbonists) you detest the Jesuits, who seek to justify
their Cause by the imprisonments, bonds, and deaths of Traitors, suffered for
their rebellions against their native Kings; whose hands (unless they were the
hands of this Becane) would it not shake, and cause to let fall the pen?
whose spirits, though never so lofty, would it not depresse, infringe, and
dissipate, save only of Becane? But, very impiously and impudently does he
apply, to the Gunpowder Traitors, that which Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 4. wrote of
the persecuted Saints: viz. You are made a gazing stock to God, to Angels, and
to Men. Let them be so, since the Jesuit will have it so; 1. Agazing stock to
God: who, beholding their treacherous and covert conspiracies against their most
gracious Sovereign, his Anointed (as the Jesuit here confesses) laugheth
them to scorn; enfeebling their forces, for our victory; and preparing hell
fire, for their eternal punishment. 2. A spectacle to Angels: who [wondring
there be any (so much as styled with the name of Christians) that tremble not
to call the royal Supremacies of Kings in the Church (ordained by God
himself, grounded upon Scriptures, practiced with commendation, by the best,
both Kings of Israel, and Emperors Christian) Potentissimos Inferorum
Principatus; The most potent principalities of hell:] rejoice to behold such
infamous and execrable Traitors committed to the safe custody and torture of
spiritual wickednesses. Lastly, A spectacle to men: who (being dispersed
through the whole world, and but hearing of these most inhumane and bloody
Jesuitical conspiracies, more savage then cruelty it self) are inflamed for
the Lords Anointed to undergo perpetual combats with all these pestilent
Emissaries of Antichrist. Moreover, if you know not with what great variety,
inconstancy, and vanity of opinions the popish Writers travel; and with what
uniform consent of all our Writers the Kings Supremacy is maintained; listen
and read-ouer (but cursorily) this little Book which here I present to you:
and in it you shall find particularly expressed before your eyes, wherein and
in what heads they differ among themselves, about the Popes Supremacy; and how
we accord in the Supremacy of our King. And here it much concerns your
desire of peace and tranquillity, to obscrue how gallantly this Becane
presents himself to you, with his counterfaite and childish wiles to
entrappe you: wherein he plays his prizes so skilfully and subtly to
circumuent you, that by his only cunning hops to gain no small praises. But
seeing he is ready for the combat, I will so provide that he shall not find me
unprepared; not only to meet with his blows, but also to repel them, and to
turn them back again upon his own head. Of which our conflict I desire you
to be Spectators. In the mean time I beseech the most merciful heavenly
Father to grant you zeal according to knowledge, etc.

The most desirous of your salvation, Richard Harris.

Becan: Exam.
By the way of a lie and calumny, you write, that I did use that of the
Apostle: You are made a gazing stock, to God, Angels, and Men; of Traitors: I
did not use it of Traitors; but of those Catholics, who are with you,
imprisoned, banished, spoiled of their goods and fortunes, or also put to
death. You know who they are.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
I Know the Jesuit herein belyeth this State most impudently: by which, none
but traitorous, or at least, seditious obstinate Cacolikes (and not any one
merely for faith or religion) have been or are imprisoned, exiled, dispoyled,
or executed.

2. The Jesuit here confesses, that those said traitors were Catholics; and
themselves (even the Gun-powder-traitors) confessed that their treason was
undertaken for their faith and religion. So traitorous and dangerous to
Christian States is the Iesuited Popery.

3. This Becane in his conscience thinks that these words, You are made
gazing stocks, were and are most fitly and truly to be applied to Garnett,
that cunning, but arch-traitour; viz. when he was dismembered, and his head and
quarters fixed on high, to be gazed on.

4. The present Iesuited Romish faith, is impious heresy, and Idolatrous
blasphemy: the religion is gross superstition, and open rebellion against God
and the King; or rather an open profession of the lawful killing of Kings
(Gods Anointed) by the meanest vassals of the said Kings, authorized by the
Pope to kill them. As it is plainly set down by Suarez, in his late book
against our King, Lib. 6. chap. 4. imprinted by public authority with
privilege. Therefore by all laws divine and humane, why may not all such
Iesuited Cacolikes be most justly imprisoned, dispoyled, exiled, or executed as
guilty of high treason, for this their traitorous and rebellious faith and
religion so stiffely maintained by them? especially, when as by their own
popish doctrine, Heretical obstinate Schismatikes (such as indeed all those
Cacolikes are) may be imprisoned, and dispoyled of goods, lands, and life it
self: and when as so many thousand dear Saints of the Lord, merely for their
orthodoxall faith and pure religion, have been in their bloody Inquisition,
and other popish persecutions, most sauagely tortured, even to death. Therefore
with great impudency does he charge us with shedding the blood of Martyrs for
faith and religion; from which we are as free, as they therein are guilty.

5. No small number of popish Martyrs, so canonized and enrowled amongst them,
were in truth heinous and diabolical Traitors against the King, Queen, and
State here; and accordingly were here executed: therefore, indeed these
words, You are made agazing stock etc. the Jesuit applied to Traitors, to wit,
such popish Martyrs.

6. Lastly, the exceeding clemency of our King toward the now imprisoned
seditious and treacherous Cacolikes is such, that they fare more deliciously
and live more sportfully (I might well have said, riotouslie) then millions of
his Majesty's good subjects do, who enjoy their liberty. This is too too well
known. And this, forsooth is that hard-hard usage, and hot persecution, which
has bred this Jesuitical exclamation.

BECANVS Jar.
THE Kings Supremacy in the Church of England is a new thing. It began under
King Henry the 8. continued under King Edward the 6, and Queen Elizabeth: and
now under King James, the same is rent and torn in pieces, with so many
domestical iarres and divisions, that long it cannot stand. So as Christ in
the Gospel said full well, Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur: Every
Kingdom, divided in it self, shall be destroyed. But what, and how great
these discords be, I will show in these few Questions following: I. Whether the
King of England have any Primacy in the Church, or no? II. Whether the Primacy
of the King, be Ecclesiastical and spiritual? III. Whether the King by this
Primacy, may be called the Primate of the Church? IIII. Whether by virtue of
the same Primacy the King may be called Supreme Head of the Church? V. Whether
this Primacy consist in any Power, or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical? VI. Whether
the King, by reason of his Primacy, can assemble or call together Councels, and
sit as President therein? VII. Whether he can make Ecclesiastical Laws? VIII.
Whether he can dispose of Ecclesiastical livings, or Benefices? IX Whether he
can create, and depose Bishops? X. Whether he can excommunicate the obstinate?
XI. Whether he can be Judge, and determine of Controversies? XII. From whence
has the King this his Primacy? XIII. Whether he can force his Subjects to take
the Oath of Supremacy?


In these Questions do our Adversaries extremely differ and disagree; but
especially these: M. Doctor Andrews, in his Tortura Torti; M. William Tooker
Deane of Lichefield, in his Combat, or single Fight with Martin Bucane; M.
Richard Tomson, in his Reproof of the Refutation of Tortura Torti; M. Robert
Burhill, in his Defense of Tortura Torti; and M. Henry Salclebridge, in his
Refutation of Becane his Examen. Besides these (as opposite unto them) I will
also cite Doctor Sanders, in his book of the Schism of England; Genebard in
his Chronology; Polydor Virgil in his History of England; Iacobus Thuanus of
Aust, in the History of his time; John Calvin in his Commentary upon the
Prophet Amos, and others.

English Concord.
THe Regal Primacy, in the Church of England, is much more ancient then the
Popish Primacy in the Roman Church. The Regal Primacy had his beginning from
the Daniel chap. 7. v. 6
Ancient of Days, under the most ancient Patriarchs: It flourished
magnifically under the Orthodoxall Kings, Israeliticall and Evangelical: and
now in England it flourishes most of all under King James; soundly sounded
upon the rock, and built upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets,
permanent for ever; so that, by the fall of raines the coming of floods, and
the wine-blasts of any Jesuits whatsoever, it cannot be so much as moved; much
less removed; and least of all rent and torn in pieces: But, of the Popish
Primacy, rightly said Christ in the Gospel; Every Kingdom divided in it
self shall be desolate. Now what and how great their Iarres and discords are,
I am to show, in handling these few Questions following.

English Concord.
BEcane, in his book of English discord, and in his first Question, demanded,

Whether the King of England have any Primacy or Supremacy in the Church? And I
in my book of English Concord, demanded,

Whether the Pope have any Primacy in the Church? considering that Saint
Cyprian asserteth that Peter did never challenge or assume any such thing,
Epist. ad Quintum. 71. sect. 3
as to say that he held the Primacy; and that Chrysostom dogmatically writes
thus:

Whosoever desires (or affects) the Primacy in earth (as all Popes do)
shall find confusion in heaven. Homil. 35 in Matthew.


Whereunto the Jesuit in his late book, entitled Examen Concordiae
Anglicanae, The examination of the English Concord, answers or obiecteth thus:

BECAN, Exam.
THat they are not the words of Chrysostom, Page 92
but of some other author joined with him. 2. That these words are against our
King, desiring Supremacy in earth. 3. That the Author speaks promiscuously
of both the Primaces, Secular and Ecclesiastical; 4. but distinguishes
between the desiring and obtaining of the Primacy; referring the one to
vanity, and the other to the judgment of God.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
1 I Do commiserate the seely ignorance of this Jesuit Becane, who knows
not, that these very words aforesaid, are not only canonized, but also
expressly fathered upon Chrysostom, in the Popes Canon law; which the Jesuit
dare not affront. Did. 40. ca. Multi.
The words of the Canon are these; Also John Chrysostom: Not every one is a
true Priest, which is named a Priest. Many Priests, and few Priests: Many in
name, but few in work: Take heed therefore brethren, how you sit upon the
Chair; because the Chair does not make the Priest, but the Priest the Chair,
etc. The same Chrysostom: Whosoever shall desire Primacy in earth, shall find
confusion in heaven: neither shall he be numbered among the servants of Christ,
Qui de Primatu tractauerit, Who handles, or ambitiously speaks of, or
challenges Primacy. De Scriptor. Ecclesiasticis.
And according to that Canon, the most profound and famously renowned Canonist
(even by Bellarmine in his late book) to wit, Henry Cardinal Hostiensis
(upon the 15. Chapter of Penitency and Remission, Cap. Cui Papa) ascribes
these words unto Chrysostom, as to the Author of them, thus: And so in the
Penitential Court, the Pope is made less, and his Confessor greater: and this
Chrysostom insinuates, Did. 40. Multi.

Wherefore the Jesuit may take from me, thus cleared, this falsity unto
himself: or else he must return it over; To the Authority of their
Apostaticall Church; To their authentike and ordinary glosses and explanations
of the Gospel; To the decrees of the Roman Bishops; To their chiefest
Canonists and Divines: for in the writings of all those, he may find sentences
written in that Work, called the Imperfect Work, alleged as out of
Chrysostom.

2. By the express words of the foresaid Canon, it is manifest, that the words
of Chrysosto^, are by their Canon law referred unto Priests and Priests only,
who sit upon the Chair, in express terms often repeated. Whereby it
appears, what a seely and unmannerly Sophister this Jesuit is, who thence
frames his Argument against our King, drawn thus into form syllogisticall; as
indeed from thence it can be drawn no otherwise.

What Priest soever desires Primacy in earth, shall find confusion in Heaven.

The King of England is a Priest desiring Primacie in earth.

Therefore he shall find confusion in heaven.

Were this Jesuit in our University Schools, he would be hist out, as an
absurd Dunse, for arguing. Our gracious King is no Priest, but detesteth their
Priests and Priesthood, as Antichristian. He is by the grace of God the high
and potent Monarch of Great Britanne, France and Ireland; and under Christ made
of God (without any ambitious desire of his) Primate or Supreme Governor over
all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiasticallor Temporal, within his
Dominions; maugre the beard of the Pope, and all his Shauelings.

But if the Jesuit will rightly assume out of the Mayor proposition, set down
in the said Canon law; he must take the triple crown of Primacy from the Popes
head, and wrap it up in the dust of Confusion, thus:

What Priest soever (though it were Peter himself) does challenge, or
ambitiously desire Primacy in earth, shall find confusion in heaven.

But the Popes of Rome have, and (now most of all) do challenge (as their
right) Primacy in earth; [Not only over the whole Clergy (contrary to that
Inhibition of S. Peter. 1. Pet. 5. v. 3. Not as Lords over Gods Heritage) but
also over Kings: and that not only in Spiritualls, but also in their
Temporalls: viz. in their Goods, Reuenews, Crowns, Kingdoms, liberties and
lines; As their chiefest Jesuit Writers, Bellarmine and Suarius, and this
mean Jesuit Becane, have not been ashamed to dogmatize in their late public
writings: some whereof have been even by State-Papists, in their Parliaments
censured and condemned, as seditious and pernicious against Kings prerogatives
royal, crowns and dignities. And some of them by us, here lately have been
purged by fire.] and also most ambitiously have and do desire and practice to
get the Popedom; and being opposed therein, do by all, even bloody means,
endeavor to retain the same; Onuphr, in Chronie. Romans Pont.
as the thirty Schisms in the Church of Rome about the Popedom (whereof the
last and worst lasted by the space of fifty years together, raised and
continued by the ambitious desire thereof in the Popes themselves; even to the
shedding of the lives blood, of two hundred thousand christians, caused by two
Antipopes at once) does more then demonstrate. To instance this ambitious
desire in one, but their principal one and chiefetaine, Hildebrand the first,
who with brazen face did openly undertake to depose the Emperor from his
Empire: The Cardinal Beno, who lived with Hildebrand and knew him too well,
writes thus of him; Hildebrand poisoned six Popes, to make his way to the
Popedoma. Nauclere reports that the clergy said, Pope Hildebrand was
excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy, as having defiled the Apostolic Sea
with Simonie, etc. And Abbat Vrspergensis writes, Anno. Dom. 1080.
that the Council of Brixia censured Pope Hildebrand as an usurper of the Sea
of Rome; not appointed by God, but intruding by fraud and money. And to speak
in general, as Mantuan says, of Rome and Romanists;

-- Venalia nobis.
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria Sacra, Coronae:
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est venale, Deusque.
Where Church, Priest, Altar, Mass, Crown, for money told:
Also Fire, Incense, Prayer, Heaven, and God are sold.
Where all things come for money, there is no probability, that the Popedom
(there more worth then all things else) should come freely without money, etc.
Rome is no changeling: of which the Jesuits may read in the Canon law, thus:
Roma fundata fuit a praedonibus, adhuc de Primor dijsretinet; dicta Roma,
quasirodens manus.

Roma manus rodit: quos rodere non valet, odit.

Rome was first founded by thieues, and sauoreth still of her beginnings.

By the hand Rome byteth States: and whom she cannot bite, she hates.

If Rome bite all not giving; sans gifts, she popes none living.

Now since the Assumption is so plainly proved, we may thus conclude,

Therefore the Popes of Rome shall find confusion in Heaven.

Hence the Popish Antichrist is by the Apostle termed fitly, Filius
perditionis, The son of perdition or confusion.

Moreover, from the words of Cyprian, is this Syllogism (as canon-shot)
directed against the very heart of the Popes Primacy, thus: If Peter did not,
ne could challenge to himself Primacy; then the Pope having no Primacy, but as
Peter's successor, cannot challenge Primacy to himself: But Peter could not
challenge Primacy to himself (as Cyprian here says, De Simple Praelator
and else where proves thus: Hoc erant vtique, etc. The rest of the Apostles
were the same that Peter was, endewed with like fellowship of Honor and
Power.)

Therefore the Pope cannot challenge the Primacy.

This of Cyprian the Iefuit passes over, dry-foot: and not without cause;
seeing he could get no baulme from Gilead to cure this deadly wound given to
the Pope, by Saint Cyprians foresaid Canonshot.

3. The Jesuit does here shamefully belly Chrysostom, affirming that he
speaks promiscuously of both Primacies, Secular and Ecclesiastical; whereas
most distinctly he writes thus of them: Dominus introduxit, etc. The Lord
brings in a diffeference between worldly, or temporal Princes, and
Ecclesiasticalls: because the Princes of the world are therefore made, that
they might rule over their subjects, and serve themselves of them, 1. Sam. 9
ver. 11. etc.
and spoil them to their own profit and glory (according to the saying of God
to Samuel; This shall be the manner of your King: he will take your sons for
his Chariotdriuers, Captains, and Husbandmen; and your Daughters for
Apothecaries, Cooks, and Bakers: he will take your fields and vineyardes, and
give them to his servants, etc.)

But the Princes Ecclesiastical are therefore made, that they may serve their
underlings, and minister unto them all things which they have received from
Christ: That they should neglect their own profit, and procure the profit of
others: and if need be, that they should not refuse to die, for the safety or
salvation (pro salute) of their inferiors. Therefore if these things be so,
there is cause and profit to desire the Secular Primacy; but to desire the
Ecclesiacticall, there is neither reason nor cause. For what wise man would
hasten willingly to submit himself to servitude, labor, grief, and such a
danger, as to render an account for all the Church, before the inst Judge?
unless peradventure, he think there is no judgment of God, or fears it not:
as one, abusing his Ecclesiastical Primacy secularly, changes the
Ecclesiastical into the Secular.

Than which words, what could be written more distinctly and plainly, against
this lying Jesuit, and his Popes Primacy; to stop the mouth of the one, and to
pluck up the other by the roots? I mean the Primacy Papal, which is now
become the highest temporal Primacy in the earth: of which, the Emperors, as
vassals, hold their Imperial crowns, yea their lives; and yet neither of
these, but during the Popes pleasure. And this is with them become an article
of the Romish faith. Hence it is, that his Majesty's subjects are forbidden by
the Pope, in their oath of Allegiance, to swear, that, what in them lies,
they will preserve the life of their Sovereign, against the Papal, and all
other foreign power; because (as the Pope has definitiuely set it down) they
should therein deny the faith. Is not this his Ecclesiastical Primacy become
Temporal, or rather Diabolical? Therefore every good Christian, from
Chrysostom here is to learn, That the Pope either thinks there is no God,
or Judgment of God to come; or that the fear of God, and of his Judgment, is
not before his eyes. Surely, if the popish Primacy be that Ecclesiastical,
here described by Chrysostom; the Pope will no longer contend for it; he will
soon hate it worse than dog or snake.

4. The Jesuit here either very ignorantly, or very impudently abuses his
Reader; whom he would make believe that Chrysostom in that Homily, so
distinguishes the Primacy of Honor, to wit Ecclesiastical, from the
obtaining of that Primacy; as though he misliked the one for vanity, and
approved the other as a good thing given by God: whereas the express words of
Chrysostom are clean contrary; thus: Nune scimus, etc. Now we know that a
good work is one thing, and the Primacy of honor is another thing; And that
it is good to desire a good thing: but to covet the Primacie of honor, is
vanity.

To shut up this point; The Christian Reader may here understand, that the Pope
even by the virtue of this testimony of Chrysostom, set down in, and
authorized by, the Canon law, is incapable of Ecclesiastical Primacy. For if
he be no Priest indeed, he can be no Ecclesiastical Primate indeed. But by
this Canon indeed he is no Priest, because he is no Priest Opere, in Priestly
work, that is, as S. Paul expounds it, to preach the word in season, 2. Tim.
4.2 1. Pet. 5.2 Heb. 5.14
out of season, etc. or as Saint Peter explaines it, To feed Christ's flock
with the sincere milk, or strong meat of the word: or as Chrysostom here
describes it, To serve his inferiors, by ministering unto them all that he
has received from Christ: ready not only to neglect his own profit, to
procure theirs; but also, if need were, to lay down his life for them. The
Pope therefore being less in nothing then in this work, is, by the express
words of this Canon, nothing less then a Priest indeed; and by necessary
inevitable consequence, nothing less then Ecclesiastical Primate indeed.
Here is now high time for this Jesuit to lay-vnder his shoulders for support
of the tottering Primacy of his Pope, very sore shaken by this Canon law-shot,
and ready to fall down into the dust. Wherein, pitiful is the Popes case, who
in this conflict, for his defendour, bath so seely a weakeling, and so
ignorant a Jesuit, as this Becane is, and hereafter will more and more appear
to be.

English Concord.
BEcane, in his book of Jar, and in his second Question, demanded, Whether
that Primacy of the King be Ecclesiastical and Spiritual?

And I in my book of Concord, Page 4.
and in my second Question, demanded, Whether that Primacy of the Pope be
Secular and Temporal?

Because on the one side, the Pope, Lucifer-like, asserteth, All power to be
given unto him, as well in heaven, as in earth. Which power Pope Boniface the
eightth went about to put in practice, when he endeavored to strike a Terror
into Kings, Princes, Nations, and people on the earth; rather then to plans
Religion in them. And on the other side, Chrysostom says: They who believe
not the Judgment of God, nor fear it, abusing their Primacy secularly, turn
it into the Secular. And Christ says, first unto Peter; I will give thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven (not of earth) and then of himself; My kingdom
(that is, my Primacie, which to the Pope is in stead of his kingdom) is not of
this world. Ioh 18.36
If it were of this world, my servants would surely fight, that I should not
be delivered to the Jews. And this said diametrall opposition betwixt the
Primacy of Christ, and the Primacy of the Pope-Antichrist, caused Pasquill to
write in verse no less truly, then eloquently, thus: Christus regna fugit:
sed vi Papa subingat vrbes.
Spinosam Christus; Triplicem gerit ille coronam.
Abluit ille pedes: Reges his of cula praebent.
Pauit oues Christus: Petit hic Regna omnia mundi.
Pace venit Christus: venit hic radiantibus armis.
Christ, worldly kingdoms offered, did eschew:
The Pope by force, seeks kingdoms to subdue.
A Crown of Thorn our Savior Christ did bear:
The Pope a triple Crown of gold does wear.
Christ vvasht the feet of his disciples all:
But all must kiss the Popes feet, great and small.
Christ fed his sheep and lambs most carefully:
The Pope to worldly kingdoms casts his eye.
Christ to his own, both mild and meek did come:
The Pope with Arms, the world does ouerun.


Here is a matter very dangerous to the Popes Primacy: which this shallow
Jesuit not daring to deny, and yet not able to answer unto it; leaving it as
it were the body, flies only upon the shadow, that is, the Citation, as it
follows.

BECAN. Exam.
OVs of Gratian, Page 92.
Did. 9. cap. Innocen: you (...) the Pope, asserting All power to be given to
him as well in heaven, as in earth: but, falsely. For in Did. 9. there is no
such Canon to be found, Yea, run over all the Distinctions that are in
Gratian, yet you shall not find it. Indeed there is such a Canon in the second
part of the Decree 22. Question 4. which begins thus; Innocens: but there it no
mention of those words, which are cited by you.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IS this beseeming the gravity of Jesuitical Fatherhood, so childishly to
snatch after flies, that is, Escapes in Citations, either of the transcriber,
or composer, or correctour, and sometimes, peradventure, of the Author
himself; seeing those escapes are so frequent in most books printed? The
Gloss of the Canon law, is so accurately and iudiciously written, that the
most learned Canonists circ it often for good Canon law, as they do the very
text of the Canon law: and yet the said accurate Gloss fails often in the
Citations, which it uses; whereof these two Escapes may serve for a taste:
viz. Did. 81. ca. Si qui verb. Emendent: The Gloss cites Did. 22. ca.
Nullus: and yet in that Distinction, there is no such chapter to be found.
Again, in Did. 96. ca. Si Imperator. verb. Definimus; the Gloss cites,
Cause 20. Quest. 3. ca. Quasitum: and yet there is no such chapter or Canon to
be found in that third Question, nor in that twentieth Cause.

If this Jesuit had written against the Authors of that learned Gloss, he
would have strewed upon them, (as he has done upon me, in like case) these his
rhetorical flowers, or rather boyish scurrilities; viz: You cite the Canon
falsely. You have not read the Canon. You understand nothing. How ost shall I
warn you to cite truly? It irketh me to warn you so often. I see I do but
lose my my labor in desiring you to cite truly, since I can obtain nothing,
etc.

In Page 8. of my English Concord I cited Jewel his Apology, part. 4. cap.
21. Dinis. 7. collecting certain reasons to prove that which I there alleged.
Jewel, for proof of his collections, cited First: 9. q. 3. Neque ab Augusto.
Secondly, Did. 40. Si Papa. Thirdly, Did. 19. Si Romanorum.

For my part, the authority, and most profound learning of that reverend
Father, bred such a reverence in me toward him, that I would not so much as
examine the said Citations, but set them down, as I found them written in his
book. Now the Jesuit, in his Examination of the said Citations, finding some
small slips in some of them, bestowed upon the Bishop (through, or by, my
sides) these scurrile and disgraceful flowers following: You profit nothing. I
will teach you once again. It casilie appears that you never saw, either
the Glosses, or Canons. Such Glossators, out of England, are of no estimation.
Who would not admire the insolency of this Jesuitical Bragadochio, obiecting
ignorance to the incomparably learned Bishop Jewel? unto whom, in the
indifferent judgment of any equal and indicious Readers of the writings of
them both, Becane is not worthy to hold the candle, or to carry his books
after him.

This I thought meet (gentle Reader) to signify unto thee in general,
because this trifling disputer in his whole discourse following about
Citations, does nothing else, but misspende the time in such empty sopperies.
As for this Citation in particular, viz. Did. 9. ca. Innocent; The very truth
is, it was only the fault of the Transcriber: for those very words, D. 9. ca.
Innocent. written, I expuncted with mine own hand, before any Jesuitical
censure passed over them. The matter comprised in the words which I cited (
viz. That all power is given to the Pope, as well in heaven as in earth) was a
thing so well known to all papists of any reading, and also acknowledged as an
article of popish faith; that for proof thereof, I set down no Citation in
the Margin of my book. But now, least this unlearned Jesuit, having read so
little (as by all his writings may appear) in the Canon law, or popish
Counsels, or Canonists, should imagine that no proofs of the said matter are
to be found in them; I will direct him, for his schooling sake, first to the
Canon law, Did. 22. ca. Omnes. Where Pope Nicholas speaks thus: Christ
himself alone founded the Roman Church, and erected it upon the rock of
faith, when he gave to Peter, clauiger of eternal life, the rights of the
Empire earthly, and also heavenly. What is this else, but more plainly,
translated into English, thus: He gave to Peter (and consequently to the Pope)
all power in heaven and earth. But it may be, the Jesuit would feign see the
place, where the very words are written. Therefore,

Secondly, I do direct him to the popish Council of Lateran under Pope Leo
the tenth; in which Council Stephanus the Bishop of Petracha, spoke thus
openly, with great applause: In the Pope is all power, above all powers, as
well in heaven, as in earth.

Thirdly, I direct him to the most famous Canonist, Abbot Panormitan; who,
super prima primi de Electione, cap. Venerabilem. verb. Transtulit, writes
thus: The Pope may, upon very great cause, transfer the Empire from one
nation to another, because he can do whatsoever God can do; otherwise Christ
had not been so diligent a father of his family, if he had not lest one on
earth in his place, who can do all things that Christ himself can do.

By this it is plain, that as All power in heaven and earth was given to
Christ: So all power in heaven and earth, is given to the Pope. And
consequently, it is as plain, that as Christ is God: so the Pope is God. For
better understanding of which consequent; I send the Jesuit to that learned
and judicious, yet popish, Writer, Marsilius Patauinus, who relates out of
Bernard thus: All things were given to Christ, because he was the eternal
Son of God. And Christ does challenge to himself all things, by the right of
creation, and merit of redemption. And whosoever takes these unto himself,
makes himself indeed God. 2. These. 2.4
That is (as Saint Paul describes him) the popish Antichrist, sitting in the
temple of God as God, showing himself that he is God; or rather, exalting
himself above all that is called God, or worshipped. Which may better appear
by Becanes solution of these two Questions following: First, whether, as to
Christ and Pope, All power is given in heaven and earth; so both Christ and
Pope, have one and the same name given to them, viz. The name above every name;
that at the name of the Pope, Phil. 1.9.
as at the name of lesus, every knee should bow of things in heaven, in earth,
and under the earth? Unto this former question, I suppose Becane would say,
Respondetur quod sic, that is, affirmatively: because in his Examen, page 133.
he says, The Pope Peter was received into the fellowship of the name and
dignity of the individual unity, or Godhead.

Then the second question goes further, thus: whether at the name, yea at the
feet, of the Pope, all should not do more, than bow the knee; since the
greatest Emperors must fall down flat with their faces on the ground, to
kiss his feet; and with their necks stretched out, must receive and
entertain his feet trampling upon them; and lastly (as it is challenged at
this time) must offer readily their throats to be cut at the Popes pleasure.

Before I leave this Strain, I must set down that which the Gloss, out of
the foresaid Canon Omnes. D. 22. infers, viz. thus: Argumentum quod Papa
habet vlrumque gladium, et spiritual^m, et temporalem. This argues that the
Pope has both the swords, Spiritual and Temporal. Even as the Canonists also
thence gather the Popes supreme power temporal even over the Empire, to
confer it to whom he will, and to transfer it whence, and whither he will.
And so the Pope falls into the just condemnation of God, and Confusion in
heaven: whereof we heard before out of Chrysostom.

Here two great mischiefs are necessarily inferred, pat upon the Popes head:
the former; That he is that Antichrist, and his Primacy Antichristian.

The later; That the Pope, by reason of that his Primacy, lies deeply plunged
into hellish confusion.

And yet here the Jesuit Becane is as mute as a fish: so miserable a desendour
of the Pope is he; even that Becane, who in the Preface to his Examen wished,
that he might be the kings valiant Champion to desend his Cause. Now surely his
Majesty should be maincly well holden up, through his great store of ignorance;
more gross then ever I perceived in any Jesuit Writer whatsoever.

English Concord.
BEcame, in his Jar, Question, 3. demanded, Whether the King, by reason of
his Primacy, may be called Primate of the Church?

And I in my Concord demand, Whether the Pope, by reason of his Primacy, Anton.
de Rosellis.
may be called (as popish Writers call him) King of Kings and Lord of Lords?

For example, Boniface 8. who in time of solemn supplications went
apparelled right as the Emperor himself, Crowned with a golden Crown Caesar
like, glistering in an embroidered gown, and a naked sword carried before him
at his commandment. Can ye, Vide vit, Dond, in Sexco.
o Academicks, (for the Jesuit often speaks to you) beholding this spectacle,
forbear laughing?

Unto this the Jesuit says no more but as follows.

BECAN. Exam.
YOu cite out of the life of Boniface 8. which is in the sixth book of the
Decretals, these words: Boniface 8. In time of solemn ^pplication, etc; but,
falsery. There is no such thing there, neither yet in Platina, who is well
known to have written the life of Boniface accurately. Peradventure you found
some such thing in the English fables; but they, out of that Island, carry no
credit.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
YEs: I find it in the Paralipom. Vrspergensis, page 365. thus: Papa
Bonifacius 8. ipso apparatu in Iubilaeo, qui tunc Romae agebatur, se solenniter
ostentauit: Primo quidem solenni die, in Pontificalibus apparens populo,
Apostolicam ill is benedictionem impartitur: postero die, Imperiali habitu,
infula Caesarea insignis, gladium ante se nudatum iussit deferri, et sedens
alta voce testatur; Ecce duo gladij hic. Boniface 8. in time of Iubile, showed
himself the first day in his Pontifical robes: the second day in his Robes
Imperial: to wit, the imperial Crown on his head; etc. and a naked sword
borne before him, with proclamation thus: Behold here two swords. And there I
read also this exclamation: Vides O Petre successorem tuum: Et tu Salutifer
Christ, cerne tuum vicarium: vide quo ascendit superbia Serui Seruorum tuorum.
Oh Peter thou see what manner of successor thou have. And oh Saniour Christ
behold thy vicar, and see, vvhither the pride of the Servant of thy sernants
has ascended. Further, in Auentine, vt ex concilio Vangionum, I find this
written, viz. The Pope usurps both the Empire, and high Priesthood, as
Decius, and other worshippers of false Gods, were wont to do.

The Jesuit mistook my purpose in that marginall note, Vita Bonif. 8. in
Serto: which was not to show where it is written, viz. that Boniface went in
processio^ Emperor-like apparelled: but that the Christian Reader might be
directed to a writing authentical, where he might see Pope Boniface 8.
pictured out in far worse and more odious colors; namely, at the end of the
sixth book of the Decretals, thus: In the year 1294, Boniface got the Popedom,
but not without the crime of ambition, and of other ill feats. He pretermitted
nothing which either fraudor ambition could compass. He was so proud, that
he contemned all men. There are some who write, that he suborned, and
privily sent certain men, who in the night by a voice sent down as it were
from heaven, entering the Chamber of Pope Caelestine (a simple man) should
persuade him to relinquish his Popedom, if he would be saved. This is
notorious, that when Prochetes the Archbishop of Geneua, was before him on
his knees upon Ashwednesday, whereas, according to the manner, the Pope should
throw ashes upon his head and say: Remember man thou art but ashes, and to
ashes thou shall return; Boniface cast ashes into Prochetes eyes, and said:
Remember man thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibellines, to ashes thou
shall return. The same Boniface sent his letter to Philip King of France,
first to exhort him, and if that would not serve, to threaten him to undertake
the Hiernsalem expedition. Philip commits that Legate to prison; vvhereupon the
Pope sends the Archdeacon of Marbon, to command the King in the Popes name to
dismiss his Legate; and if he refused, to tell him in the hearing of all men,
That because of his contumacy and violating the law of nations, The kingdom of
France was deuolued to the Church of Rome. But Sarra, sent by King Philip,
took the Pope prisoner, and so brought him to Rome, where within 35. days
after for very griese of mind, he perished. In this sort dyed Boniface, who
indeauoured to cast terror into the hearts of Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Nations, and People, rather then to sow religion among them: who also
endeanoured to give kingdoms, and to take them away, to put in, and to put
out, whom he would. Learn, all Princes both Secular, and Ecclesiastical,
learn by his example, to rule the Cleary and people, not proudly and
contumcliously as he did.

Behold here, gentle Reader, First, how great the ignorance of this Jesuit is,
who knew not that the Treatise of the life of Boniface set down in the sixth of
the Decretals, was made by Platina. Secondly, how unluckily the ignorance of
this Jesuit here is; which has ministered unto me so just an occasion to
publish afresh unto the world, what a most shameless, and odious Tyrant Pope,
their most renowned Pope Boniface the eight was.

English Concord.
Becane, in his Jar and fourth Question, demanded, Whether by reason of his
Supremacy, the King may be called the Supreme head of the Church?

And I, in my Concord, and 4. Question, demanded, Whether the Popeby reason of
his Primacy, may be called the supreme head of the Church?

considering that Gregory the great writes thus: What vvilt thou answer to
Christ the head of the universal Church, Lib. 4. Epist. 38
at the trial of the last judgment, who endeuorest by the name of Universal
Bishop ( much more by the name of the Supreme head of the vninersall Church) to
bring into subjection all his members unto thee?

Unto this, though it touch the Pope necre, the Jesuit, in his Examen,
answers not one word.

English Concord.
BEcane in his fifth Question demanded, Whether the kings Primacy consist in any
power, or jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical?

And I im my fifth Question demanded, Whether the Primacy of the Pope consist in
any power or jurisdiction Temporal? That is, in a dominion temporal and
coactiue; considering that Christ said thus: The Kings of the nations bear
rule over them, but ye shall not be so: and that Bernard writes thus,
peremptorily: Luke 22.25 Consider. ad Eug^n. lib. 2.
It is plain that dominion is forbidden the Apostles. Therefore presume thou
to vsurp to thy self, either as a Soneraigne. the Apostleshippe; or as an
Apostle, the Sovereignty. Thou art plainly forbidden one of them. If thou
vvilt have both together, thou stalt lose both. Otherwise. think not thy self
to be excepted out of the number of those, of whom the Lord complains,
saying; They ruled, but not by me.

And yet, Martin. Polon.
Boniface the 8, gives the King of France to understand, that he is chief
Lord in matters Spiritual and Temporal through the whole world: and
commands the said King to acknowledge that he holds the Kingdom of France of
him: because it is heretical to think and hold the con^rarie. In like manner
said Pope Adrian: The Emperor reigns by us; Auentin. 1.6
whence has he the Empire but from us? Behold: it is in our power to give
it to whom we will. And according to their Canon law: Kings and Emperors,
by the command and will of Christ, receive their power from the Pope, as
Extran. Joan. 22 Cum inter nonnullos. in Gloss.
from their Lord God.

Hereunto the Jesuit makes answer as follows.

BECAN. Exam. Page 94.

In the 7. Page you cite, ex cap. Cum inter nonnullos, Extrau. Page 22. these
words: Kings and Emperors, etc. I know not whether more falsely or
ridiculouslie. Indeed falsely, because in that Chapter, there is no such
matter. Ridiculously, because, when as in the sixth of the Decretalls, are
found these words: Extrauag. Cum inter de verborum significatione; you out of
mere ignorance and sluggishnesse, set down these words: Extrauag. Cum
inter. Page 22. What, is John and Page all one with you? Truly, children
cannot be more foolish in citing, then thus. Unless you profit better, the
Doctors of the Canon law will never admit you to the degree of a Batchelour.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
EXcuse me (Christian Reader) uttering the truth of this scornful Jesuit,
in more tart manner, here and there, than otherwise is usual with me, or fits
my disposition.

If ever there were, or be, an ignorant slug, trifling lie frivolous, boyish
lie scurrilous, and a lying, forsooth, Father Jesuit* this Becane is one, and
among such may bear the bell: as I will make it appear before I dismiss him.

His boyish scurrilities are two: In the former, he asks whether John and
Page, be all one with me? A question fitter to be made by a Petite schoolboy
to his fellow, then by a Father, Jesuit, to an ancient Divine. In the second,
he would cut off all my hope to attain the degree of Batchelour. The Jesuit
may know that I am a Doctor in Divinity, of 19. years standing; it may be,
as ancient Doctor as himself. Howsoever that; I dare boldly auerre this; that
Becane, in comparison of Doctor Harris, is (in manner) but an Abecedary
scholar in the variety of all good literature divine and humane; in all the
liberal sciences; and in all the learned tongues: as he shall find, to his
shame, if therein he dare grapple with me. I must confess, and say with
Saint Paul, I was a fool to boast my self. But the scurrilous disgracings of
this seely Jesuit have enforced me.

As his scurrilities, so his lies are also two: The former, That I cited out of
the Chapter Cuminter nonnullos, Page 22. whereas in my paper book, it was cited
thus in short: Extrauag. 22. ca. Cum inter nonnullos. But the transcriber,
corrector, or compositor put-in, Page. And is not this a boyish feather for the
boyish father-Iesuite to play withal? As though such ouersights in printing,
are not usual? This Jesuit himself, Exam. page 98. will have, an escape of
far greater moment to pass in the printed books of Tertullian against
Praxeas.

His second untruth is; That I cited it so falsely, not of oversight, but of
mere ignorance, and dullness. Alas for this feely ignorant, and (here)
impudently lying Jesuit! unto whom, upon pawn of all my books, I will
undertake and perform it, to read Lectures out of the Canon law; in the study
whereof I have spent more weeks, yea months, then this Jesuit has bestowed
hours.

His extreme ignorance in the Canon law, is made Here apparent in these 3
points following. First, in that he confounds the 6. book of the Decretals,
with the Extrauagants; whereas they are distinct parts of the Canon law: which
law is divided into these 6. general parts; 1. The Decrees, gathered by
Gratian. 2. The Decretals, compiled by Gregory 9. 3. The Sixth of the Decretals,
made by Boniface 8. 4. The Clementines, by Pope Clement the fist. 5. The
Extrauagants of John 22. 6. The Extrauagants common, made by diverse Roman
Bishops, after the Sixth of the Decretals.


The second point of his ignorance is in confounding. cap. Cum inter. with cap.
Cum inter nonnullos: viz. as like as an apple is to an oyster.

The third point, who in his ignorance is apparent is in citing thus: Extrauag.
Cum inter Joan. 22. Deverborum significatione. When as the Canon or chapt. Cum
inter. is to be found, neither in that Title Deverborum significatione, nor in
all the Extrauagants of Joan. 22.

Now therefore the Jesuit is to answer me, to those fine questions, touching
the three points of his very grosle ignorance in the Canon law here
manifested.

1 Whether the Decretalls and Extrauagants be all one with him? 2 Whether
Boniface and John be all one with him? 3 Whether 8. and 22. be all one? 4
Whether cap. Inter. and cap. Inter nonnullos be all one? 5 Whether a chapter of
a Title, extant; and a chapter of the same Title, not extant; be all one with
him?
And then let the indifferent Readr judge, whether any child could be more
foolish in citing, than he; and how undeservedly he obtained his degree of
Doctorship.

The truth is, that place, viz. Extrauag. Joan. 22. cap. Inter nonnullos in
gloss. was cited by me, to show, that Kings receive their power, non simply,
of the Pope; but more then so, viz. of the Romish Bishop, as of Their Lord God
the Pope.

The Jesuit, Eudaemon Ioannes, writing in defense of the Iesuit-traytor-
Garnet, says, he could not find in any printed book of Extra. Joan. 22. those
words: Our Lord God the Pope. Yet afterward finding those very words, he
ingenuously confessed the same.

I know not, neither do I much care, whether Becane have like ingenuitie in
him: but sure I am, these very words are in that Gloss: Printed in folio at
Paris. Auno 1513.
Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, conditorem dicti decreti, non potuisse
statuere proat statuit, hareticum censeretur. To believe that our Lord God the
Popo, etc. Is not this pretty heathenish blaspnemie? The heathen called their
Emperor, Our Lord God Domitian. The Papists call their Primar, Our Lord God
the Pope.

English Concord.
BEcane in his Jar, and sixth Question, demanded, Whether the King by his
Primacie, may call Cou^cells, and presede in them?

And I, in my sixth Question, demand, Whether the Pope by his Primacie, may
call Counsels, and prese de in them?

I instanced in two general Counsels; the one of Constance, wherein three
Popes, John 24. Gregory 12. and Benedict 13. were deposed. The other of Basil,
in which, Pope Eugen. 4. was deprived of his Popedom; and another chosen in his
room. But this the Jesuit silently passes over, though it may happily rend
the Popes hart-strings in-sunder.

English Concord.
Becane in his Jar, and 7 Question, demanded, Whether the King can make
Ecclesiastical laws? And I, in my Concord, and 7 Question, demand. Whether
the Pope can make laws Ecclesiastical, and disannull laws Temporal?

Herein I produced 4 Ecclesiastical laws against the Pope and his Primacy.
The first, Did. 99. ca. Primae.
That the Bishop of the first Sea or Seat, be not called Prince of Priests, or
high Priest, or any such like; but only, The Bishop of the first Sea:
neither let the Bishop of Rome himself, be called Universe all Bishop.

The second; Cyprian in Conc^lio Carthagi. Council. Co^stantin. 6. cap. 36.
Council. Afric. ca ^2.
That no Bishop should make himself Bishop of Bishops, or Papa, that is, Pater
Patrum.

The third; That the Bishop of Constantinople, should have equal authority,
with the Bishop of Rome.

The fourth; That they should not be received to the Communion of any within
Africa, who held Appeals lawful to any Judgments beyond the Sea. Especially
to Rome: for this Canon was made purposely, against Appeals to the Bishop of
Rome.

Concerning the Popes power over laws Secular, I produced a current general
Axiom of theirs, viz. The fullness of the Popes power surpasses all positive
laws: And it suffices, that, in the Pope, his will stand for reason. And
therein I did instance by this sentence of Panormitane, De Constitut. ca.
Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae, nu. 9. (which also agrees wholly with the Rubrike of
that chapter). Thus, The law of the Prince, prejudicial to the Church:or the
law of any Inferiors behoueful to the Church: does not extend unto the Church,
unless it be expressly approved by the Pope.

Then I added thus: The reasons hereof collected out of the Canon law, by
Jewel, in his Defense of the Apology, are these; Part. 4. c. 21. Di. 7.
Though the whole world should sentence against the Pope, yet the Pop^s
sentence should prevail; because he seems to have all laws, 9. q. 3. Neque
ab Augusto.
or rights, in the closet of his breast.

And again: Therefore that which the Pope allows, or disallowes, Did. 19.
cap. S^ Roman, in Glossa.
we ought to allow, or disallow. Whosoever then does not obey the statutes of
the Roman Church, is to be accounted an heretic.

Further, Did. 40. Si Papa in Gloss.
That it is a kind of Sacrilege, to dispute of that which the Pope does.

Morcouer, That the Pope has a celestial arbitriment: whence it follows,
Extr^ de tr^ps^. Epi. ca. Quinto. in Glossa.
that in those things which be wills, His will to him for Reason is: Neither
is there any who should say to him, Sir or Lord, why do you so?

Lastly, That as the Pope by his own will only, can create a law: Felin de
Relc^pt.
so by his own will only, he can disper^^ with the law.

The Jesuit, in his Examen, answers nothing unto the laws Ecclesiastical,
either of the universal Bishop, or of the Equality bet ween the Bishop of
Canstantinople, and the Bishop of Rome: and yet those said two laws, expel
the Pope with his Primacy, out of the Church, and shut up the Church doors
against him (as they of Eden were against Adam) to prevent his future
re-entrie. But because the Jesuit does make particular answers unto most of
the remainder; I will set them down severally, and my Reply unto them; as
follows.

BECAN. Exam.
YOu cite out of the Council of African, Page 94.
cap. 92. these words: Ad Transmatina indicia etc. Where upon you gather, that
it is not lawful to appeal to the Bishop of Rome. But I, unto this day, never
saw any Council of Aftick, cap. 92. which has any such words. And it is
manifest by the best Authors, that Appcales to the Sea Apesrolicait, were
alwates la^ full and usual. See the Council of Sardica, cap. 3. 4. and 7. and
Henorius Emperor, in his Epistle to Arcadius, which is set down in the first
Tome of the Council, among the Episties of Innocent the first.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
WHereas he says, he cannot find that 92. chap. or the words here specified;
we have the Jesuit confessing himself guiltic of his most palpable ignorance
in the Canon law and Counsels. Their own Binnius, whose Edition (as they will
have it) is the last, largest, and best Edition of the Counsels; in his first
Tome, page 643. cites the 92. ca. Council. African. sub Coelestino et Bonifac.
in these very words: Ite placuit, vt Presbyteri, Diaconi etc. in causis quas
habuerint, si de iudicijs Episcoporum suorum questi fuerint, vicini Episcopi
cos audiant, et inter eos, quicquid est, finiant adhibiti ab eis ex consensu
Episcoporum suoru^. Quod siab eis prouocandum putaucrint, non prouocent nisi ad
Africana Concilia, vel ad Primates prouinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem,
quiputauerit appellandum, a nullo infra Africam in Communionem suscipiatur. If
Priests, Deacons, etc. complain of the judgment of their Bishops, let the
next Bishops hear their causes, etc. If they shall think meet to appeal
from them, let them not appeal but only to the Counsels of Africa, or to the
Primats of their own Provinces. But let not him be received of any within
Africa to the Communion, who thinks he should appeal to judgment beyond the
Sea.

These words the Jesuit might have found in the Epitome of Counsels, written
by their Carranza. Yea in their own Canon law, 2. q. 6. cap. Placuit vt
Presbyteri, and 11. q. 3. ca. Presbyteri. Therefore the Jesuit, here, makes
himself, together with his ignorance, very ludibrious.

Touching the Decretall Epistles, and others mustred among them, they have
been long since upon just demerit, branded as bastards. As for the Council of
Sardica, Cardinal Cusanus, De Concord. lib. 2. ca. 25. says; That S.
Augustine held not the Council of Sardica for a Catholic Council, but rather
for a Council of Arrian heretics. And further, That the Fathers in the
Council of Africa (in which Council Saint Augustine was present) in their
letters to Pope Coelestin, wrote, that they never found this Constitution
decreed in the Counsels of any Bishops. Wherefore, it may well be doubted,
whether this be a Constitution of the Council of Sardica, or not.

This answer may suffice the empty citing of an Epistle, and Canons of a
Council. Wherout when the Jesuit expresses other matter, he shall receive a
further answer.

BECAN. Exam.
YOu cite these words of Cyprian, Nemo nostrum, etc. out of the Council of
Constantinople, Page 95.
2. cap. 36. But neither are those words found there, neither was Cyprian
present at any Council of Constantinople. Enery where you are rude, and a
stranger. You have no knowledge of times or places; and yet suddenly you would
be a Master.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
INdeed, if I were so rude, and such a stranger in the Fathers and Counsels,
as he shows himself here to be, I might rightly be termed rude and
ignorant. The very misplacing, and the twice setting down of the same Canon,
and of the same Council for words so diverse, might easily have informed the
Jesuit, that it was the Compositors, or Transcribers, and not the Authors
oversight. There is none that knows Becane and my self, but presume that I
know as well as he, the times and places of all the Counsels put forth in
print; and that I could not be ignorant of this, viz. that S. Cyprian was dead,
a glorious Martyr, more then 50 years before any of the four general
Counsels (much more before this sixth of Constantinople) was celebrated or
called.

But, silly Jesuit, can not he find these words of Cyprian uttered by him, in
any Council where he was present? Can he cite any Council but that of
Carthage, where Cyprian was present? Or is he ignorant, that Cyprian was
present at the Council of Carthage, and there uttered these words, Nemo
nostrum Episcopum. etc. If he be so ignorant, let him hear Cyprian in these
his own words. Superest vt de hacipsa re, singuli, quid sentiamus, proseramus,
neminem iudicantes, aut a iure Communion is, aliquem, si diuersum senserit,
amouentes. Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum
constituit, aut tyrannico timore ad obsequendi necessitatem, colleg as suos
adigit: quando habet omnis Episcopus, pro licentia libertatis et potestatis
suae arbitriu^; proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio non possit, qui nec ipse
potest alierum iudicare.

Let every of us utter what we think of this matter, judging no man, nor
excommunicating any, who shall think otherwise then we do. For there is none
of us, that makes himself a Bishop of Bishops; or by tyrannical fear forces
his colleagues to obey: since every Bishop may speak freely what he thinks,
judged of none, as he can judge none.

Does not the Jesuit know even by the name Papa, that the Pope ambitiously
makes himself Bishop of Bishops, in their popish Canons? and tyrannically
by oath, enforces all Bishops to the necessity of obeying him, to say as he
says, in their canonical obedience? If he know not, let Aeneas Syluius,
afterward Pope Pius 2. school him in these words: Bishops contradicting the
Pope, though they speak the truth, yet they sin against their oath made to the
Pope.

If this Jesuit were not ignorant that Cyprian spoke those words in the
Council of Carthage; what a frivolous Doctor is he, misspending the precious
time about trifling escapes of the Printer, or Transcriber etc. viz. of the
word, Constantinople, for the word Carthage? as though such escapes were not
frequent in the Popes Canon law.

BECAN. Exam.
YOu cite these words; Page 95.
Plenitudo potestatis Papae, etc. with this citation; Extra de Constitut.
Ecclesi. Sanct. Mariae, numero nono. Again, falsely and ridiculously. For
neither are those words there, neither have you cited the place well. Thus you
should have cited it, Extra de Co^stitutionibus. cap. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae.
Yet now at the last liarne somewhat, that you be not always a child, and
blockish in citing.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe Jesuit here undertaking to be my Schoolemaister, proves himself to be a
very blockish, and a ludibrious Teacher. To prove, not as he imagines, The
fullness of the Popes power to surpass all Positive laws: but that The
temporal laws, with, or against the Church, extend not to the Church without
the Popes express allowance; I cited the place rightly, thus: De Constitut.
cap. Eccles. Sanctae Mariae. nu. 9. But the Jesuit, after the depth of his
shallow capacity, cites it thus: De Constitut. Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae,
leaving out these words, numero nono. When as those very words, if he had but
any smattering skill, in the Commentaries upon the Canon law, might easily have
informed him, that these words and syllables, viz. Lex praeiudicialis
Ecclesijs, etc. were the words of Panormitan, vvriting upon that chapter, as
indeed they are, thus; Paner de Const^r ca. E. cl. Sa^^e marae. nu. 9.
Lex Principis, praeiudicialis Ecclesiis, non extenditur ad Ecclesias, nisi
express approbetur per Papam. Si vero est Constitutio laicorum inferiorum
fauorabilis Ecclesiis, non extenditur aliquo modo ad clericos, nisi sit
approbata per Papam. The laws of Princes, prerudiciall to the Church, extend
not to the Clergy, except the Pope expressly allow them.

Though these words, Lex praeiudicalis etc. be not in the Canon, but in the
Rubric of the same (and even that is enough to make this Jesuit blush) yet the
matter is fully set down in that Canon, De constitut. ca. Eccles. S. Mariae.
And the case was between John de Archea (who appealed) and the Church of St.
Mary, touching certain possessions then in contiouersie, before the judge of
appeal: who, by reason of a certain statate of Rome, spoiled the Monastery of
the said possersions, and transserred them to the Church of Saint Marie; giving
corporal possession thereof.

This cause being brought to the Pope, he sets down this decree: We,
considering that layites having no power over the Church, or Churchmen, if
they make a law which may restect the good of the Church is of no validity,
unless it be established by the Popes authority; do make void that which is
done in prejudice of the Monastery and diffinitiuely do sentence, the
possession to be restored unto it.

These things being thus made plain to the Jesuit, it is meet now he should
answer how those laws, indeed anciently made, but lately revived, and reen
forced by the Venetians, so exceeding prejudicial to the Church and Churchmen
(as the Pope in his late excommunicating Bull expressly and his two Cardinals,
Bellarminus and Baronius particularly, have set down) stand still in force,
even to the expulsion, and extirpation thence of all Icsuits, without any hope
of their return. Whether, because this said Canon has lost his force; or for
that the roating Bull has lost his horns, and is now become no more feared,
then a braying Ass?

BECAN. Exam. Page 96.

OVt of Gratian 9. q. 3. Neque ab Augusto, you cite these words: Sirotus
Mundus sententiaret, etc. Richard you presit nothing. Once again I wili teach
you: thus you ought to have cited; cap. Nemo ludicabit, 9. q. 3. For the
beginning of the chapter does not begin with these lord; Neque ab Augusto,
as you dream, but with these, Nemo iudicabir. And yet the words cited by you,
are not found there.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IT is not I, who (to prove, that if all the world would sentence against the
Pope, yet the Popes sentence should stand) cite 9. q. 3. Neque ab Augusto; but
the incomparably learned Bishop Jewel, as I expressly wrote in my Concord,
page 8. Therefore the Jesuit fondly says, that he will teach me to cite
better heerin, thus: cap. Nemo iudicabit. 9. q. 3. because the chap. begins
with these words, Nemo iudicabit, and not with these; Neque ab Augusto. Wherein
the Jesuit bewrays his incredible rudenels and ignorance, who never read
citations made in the Canon law, by words after the beginning, the midst, or
later end of the Canon, but only in the beginning thereof. Therefore here I
must take him to schooling, and read three lectures out of the Canon law (viz.
out of the Decrees, the Decretalls, and the Extrauagants) unto him, thus:

In the Decrees, Did. 12. ca. No decet. verb. Discretione. and Did. 11. ca.
Non nos. verb. quis entm: the Glosle cites 17. q. 4.. Qui autem. But those
words are not the beginning of any chapter in 17. q. 4.

In the Decretalls, De Electione, and Electi potestate, cap. Venerabilem. verb.
Transtulit, The Gloss cireth 24. q. 1.. Sedillud, and immediately after, 11. q.
1.. Sedsi quis: but neither of those chapters begin with those words, Sedillud,
or Sedsi quis.

In the Extrauagants of Joan. 22. De verborum significatione, cap. Quia
quorundam. the Gloss cites thus: 56. Did.. his omnibus. And thus, 14. q. 1..
Quia ergo. Whereas the first word of the Canon, is, Episcopus.

By these lectures, as I suppose, I have schooled this Becane herein
suficiently: but now falls the Jesuit into a desperate case; for he having
found out the Canon, he cannot find out these words, Sitotus mundus, etc. I see
I must take him to schooling once again, and teach him where he shall find
those very words and syllables: viz. in the Gloss, verb. or. Neque ab omni
clero. The words of the Gloss are these: Argumentum quod concilium non potest
Papam iudicare, vt extra. de Elect. significasti. vnde sitotus mundus
sententiaret in aliquo negotio contra Papam, videtur quod sententiae Papae
standumesset. vt 24. q. 1. Hac est fides. This argues that the Council cannot
judge the Pope. Therefore, if the whole world should give sentence in any
matter against the Pope, the Popes sentence must stand.

Now may the Jesuit run and cry (...), I have found it; and withal, thank the
learned Bishop Jewel, for his citing of the Canon, viz. not by the first words
of the Canon, but by the words following: whereby he pointed, as with his
finger, the Jesuit to the Gloss, where those words are written.

BECAN. Exam. Page 96.

YOu cite out of the Gloss, Did. 19 cap. Si Romanorum, these words: That
which the Pope allows, etc. Therefore, whosoever will not obey the stetutes
of the Roman Church, is to be accounted an heretic. But the Gloss has not
these later words: they are added by you, the new Glossator. I know not of
what account these new Glossators are in England: I am sure out of England they
are of none.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here again, this unlucky Jesuit shows naked his great ignorance, when he
says that those later words (or the substance of them) are not in the Canon
law or Gloss, but are of my Gloss: he would have said Bishop Jewels Gloss.

Had not the Jesuit been a very unlearned man indeed, the learned Bishop,
directing him to the Gloss, verb. Reprobantur, might have taught him presently
to have found those later words, or the very matter, viz. That it is heresy,
wilfully to disobey, or oppose the statutes of the Roman Church. For in that
very place, the Gloss cites 24. q. 1. cap. Haec est fides, where S. Hierom is
produced, asserting, That if any shall blame that, quod Papae iudicio
comprobatur; which the Pope allows; se non atholicum, sed haereticum
comprobabit, he shall prove himself no Catholic, but an haeretick. The
reason whereof the Jesuit may read Did. 22. cap. Omnes, in these words; Fidem
violat, qui aduersus Romanam Ecclesiam agit quae est matter fidei: For he
violates the faith, who does against the Roman Church, the mother of says.

It may be, the simple Jesuit knows not, that by their Canon law, the Pope
may make new Articles of faith, through his statutes. Let him therefore read,
Extra. Joan. 22. De verborum significatione. cap. Cum inter nonnullos, in Gloss
and these words there: Papa princeps Ecclesiae, Christique Vicarius, potest
articulum fidei facere: The Pope, Prince of the world, and Christ's Vicar, can
make new Articles of faith: and there shall the Jesuit find this case put; The
Pope did newly in that Canon, statuere, ser it down, That Christ and his
Apostles had somewhat proper, or in special. After which it is there thus
resolved: That to assert obstinatly, that Christ, and his Apostles had nothing
(in special) in propriety, haereticu^ fore censendum, was to be accounted
heretical, cum Decretalis exi^t, after the Decretall had gone forth, and not
before. I will put a few more cases to the Jesuit, to make him understand it
better.

Admit the Pope (as Nabuchodonoser did by his Image set up) at the lifting up
of his Idol, the wafer cake, (which has no more eyes to see, nor ears to hear,
nor heart to understand, then Nabuchodonosers Image had, but will sooner putrefie
then his) should command all Nations, kindreds, and people, to fall down, and
worship it; and three were found, as those three children, who would not fall
down, and worship it, should they not all three be reputed heretics?

Admit that the Pope should statuere, establish, that Doctrine of Devils, 1.
Timo. 4. verse 2. that is, should forbid eating of flesh in the Lent, as
unholy; and one should, as one did, eat wilfully a pigge in Lent, should not
that one be, as indeed he was, burnt for an heretic?

Admit, where Christ commanded even the lay people to read, and search the
Scriptures, the Pope, Job. 5.39.
contrary to Christ, that is, in one word, Antichrist, should forbid all laytie
to read and search the Scripture; and one layick should be found, either
reading the Scripture, or carrying, about him, the Bible translated into his
mother tongue: should not such a one, be estloones carried into the house of
slaughter, I mean the house of Inquisition, whence commonly such never return
alive?

Admit that the Pope (contrary to the laws of God and man, the laws of
nature, of Nations) should statuere, set it down in his Briefes, that what
subject soever, should take the Oath of Allegiance (but even so far, as to
swear to maintain, and defend to his power, the life of his Sovereign against
all foreign power) should swear against the Catholic faith; and any one
vvilfullie opposing that stature made by the Pope, should take the Oath, as law
full: should not he go for an heretic, unless the Pope dispensed with him
to take it?

By these palpable instructions, the Jesuit may learn, that those later words
aforesaid were not my Gloss (as he says) of no value; but the capital
Popish doctrine, most pernicious to Kings and States, Antichristian, disloyal,
diabolical. By force whereof, if the Pope (as I said before) should statuere,
set it down, that Becanus the Jesuit, should go into England, to raise there
sedition and rebellion, to contriue, and act a new GVNNE-POWDERTREASON, wherein
to fold up in one sudden destruction, the King, Queen, Prince, Nobility,
Co^munalty, Bishops, Judges, etc. as a thing meritorious, and the Ieluite
should wilfully refuse to do it, as a thing unlawful; he would be reputed
and punished as an heretic; although he should have lost his life on earth,
and hanged his soul in hell, by doing it. So far extends their blind
obedience Jesuitical, to the Statutes and authority Papal.

BECAN. Exam. Page 97.

OVt of another Gloss, Did. 40. cap. Si Papa, you cite these words: It is a
kind of sacrilege to dispute of the Popes fact. But, as unfaith fully as
before. For the Gloss has no such word, or rather the contrary; for thus it
speaks expressly: If the Popes crime be notorious, and he beincorrigible, I
believe that he may be thereof accused. It easily appears, that you never saw
the Canons, or Glosses. You are better seen in fables.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
BY this it is manifest, that this Jesuit never saw, or ran over cursorily
the Canons and Glosses, but is better seen in scurrilities. Otherwise, having
the 40. Did. ca. Si Papa before him, in the very next page of the next leaf
to the Canon Si Papa, and there in the Gloss, cap. Non nos. verb. quis enim;
with the same view, he might have read these words: Semper praesumitur pro
Papa, vt 93. Did. cap. 1. Vnde sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de facto
suo. Vel die quod facta Papae excusantur, vt homicidia Samsonis, furta
Haebraeorum, et adulterium Jacob. Vt extra de diuortijs. Gaudemus.

The Pope is presumed always to be good, Therefore it were a kind of
sacrilege to dispute of his fact; whose fact, viz. murder, is excused, as
those of Samson; and his thefts, as the thefts of the Hebrews: and his
adulteries, as the adultery of Jacob.

This stuff is plain enough: but it is too too filthy. Therefore with what
face, or show of any little skillin the Canons or Glosses, could the Jesuit
deny the Gloss to have any such words, since the very words are there in the
Gloss to be found? Again, considering it was the Bishop Jewel, and not I,
(as my printed book of Concord, page 8. showed) who cited Did. 40 cap. Si
Papa. he shows himself to be of proiected impudency, who durst so basely
think and write of that most learned Bishop, viz. That he never saw the
Canons, or Glosses.

If the Gloss write contrary, it writes contrary to it self, and to the
express words of the Canon it self, Si papa; which are these: Papae culp as
redarguere, praesumit mortalium nullus, quod cunetos ipse iudicaturus, a nemine
est iudicandus; nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius. No mortal man presumes to
reprehend the Popes faults, because he is to judge all, and to be judged of
none; unless he be found Apostat from the faith.

The Gloss, in 22. q. 2. ca. Non liceat, says plainly (and not, as here,
Credo, I believe or think) Nullus mortalium papam possit iudicare. Extra de
Elect. ca. Innotuit. Did. 40. Si Papa. No man living may judge the Pope.
Heresy (as the Gloss, Did. 40. Si Papa: says well) makes the Pope no Head of
the Church. But other Crimes cannot make him no head: and so long as he is
Head of the Church, by the Canon law, he is the Church, and above general
Councels, Emperors, and all mortal men living.

Therefore says Innocent the Pope, Did. 96. ca. Satis euidenter: It is showed
evidently enough, that the Secular power can neither bind, nor loose the Pope,
plainly called God, by the godly Emperor Constantine: now it is manifest,
that God can not be judged of men.

And in 9. q. 3. Aliorum, he concludes thus: God would have the causes of
other men, to be determined by men: but he has questionless reserved the
Bishop of this Sea to his own judgment. He would have the successors of
blessed Peter to owe their innocence to heaven only, and to keep a conscience
inuiolate to the trial of the most subtle Discussor. It is manifest, that the
faithful every where, are subject to the Pope, when as he is designed Head of
the whole Body.

This being the maine, and clear doctrine of the Romish Catholic faith; it is
much to be feared, least that the Pope reading what Becane has here written
(viz. That the Pope may be judged, and if he be incorrigible, deposed; not for
Heresy alone, but also for other notorious crimes) will not only be much
ashamed of him, as of an unlearned Jesuit, and casheer him, as a miserable
defendour of him; but also, excommunicate him as an Heretic, and an Impugner
of his Maiesticall Primacy: whose honor will soon be buried in the
dunghill, If he may be judged for his crimes notorious.

English Concord.
BEcane in his eightth Question, demanded, Whether the King may confer
Ecclesiastical Benefices?

And I, in my eightth Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may confer
Ecclesiastical Benefices?

Here I did instance in the Collations of Ecclesiastical Benefices in France,
made by the King of France, and not by the Pope: for proof whereof I produced
the Epistle of King Philip the fair, to Pope Boniface the eightth, thus:
Philip by the Grace of GOD the french King, to Boniface bearing himself for
highest Bishop, etc. Let your greatest fooleshippe know that the collation
or bestowing of the Church-liuings do pertain to us by our right Regal; and
that the fruits of them, during the vacancie, are ours. That the Collations
made already by us, or hereafter to be made; are of force and validity: and
we repute them fools, and mad men, who think otherwise.

Unto this, the Jesuit, in his Examen, answers not one word.

English Concord.
BEcane in his Jar, and ninth Question, demanded, Whether the King can create
and depose Bishops?

And I in my Concord, and ninth Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may
create and depose Bishops?

Herein I showed how blasphemously (against Christ, the sole head of the
Church) these Popes parasites write of Papal Primacy, touching this point.

Durand: De Minist. et ordin. li. 2
All Bishops descend from the Pope, as members from the head, and of his
fulness, they all receive.

Petrus de Palude: The Church has not any power of Jurisdiction but from
Peter. From Peter after Christ, all spiritual power is derived.

Bellarmine: The Pope alone is, Iure diuino, by Gods word, or right divine; but
Bishops, by the Popes law, or by Papal ordinance.

Hereunto the Jesuit, in his Examen, makes no answer; as though such
blasphemies were current among them for good Popish-catholike doctrines.

English Concord.
BEcane, in his tenth Question, demanded, Whether the King may excommunicate
stubborn, and disobedient persons?

And I, in my tenth Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may excommunicate, and
depose, stubborn Emperors, who will not obey the Popes will, as it were De
Translat. Epist.ca. Quanto. in Glosla.
reason it self?

And here I mentioned the Treatise of Bellarmine, against William Barclay,
published Anno 16 11, with this inscription: Of the power of the Pope in
matters Temporal. Which said Treatise, by public edict in France, was first
adjudged to be burnt; and so it had been; but for the restless importunity
of the Jesuits: yet afterward by public edict, was it, under a great penalty,
forbidden to be bought, sold, or read; as a Trentise erroneous, seditious,
schismatic, and pestilent.

This also the Jesuit, in his Examen, is content to pass by; for that belike,
he would not stir up again that ill savor of Bellarmines exceeding great
disgrace therein.

English Concord.
BEcane in his Jar, and eleventh Question, demanded, Whether the King may be
Judge of Controversies?

And I, in my Concord and 11. Question, demanded, Whether the Pope may be Judge
of Controversies? For example, these Popes following;

Pope Zepherinus (or as some write, Eleutherius) Judge of Montanisme, of whom
Beatus Rhenanus out of Tertullian against Praxeas, notes thus: Episcopus
Romanus Montanizat. The Bishop of Rome is a Montanist: or holds with the
Heretic Montanus.

Pope Liberius and Pope Leo, both Arian heretics judges of Arianisme: as
appears by Alphonsus de Castro, in his book of Heresies, and by the Legend of
Hillary.

Pope Anastasius judge of Nestorianisme, who as the said Alphonsus there
writes, fauouredthe Nestorian Heretics.

Pope Honorius judge of the doctrines of Sergius the Heretic, of whom the
Bishops in the sixth Council of Constantinople, action 13. write thus: We have
anathematized or cursed, or excommunicated Honorius, who was Bishop of old
Rome, because be followed the opinion of Sergius in all things, and confirmed
his impious doctrines.

BECAN. Exam. Page 97

OVt of Beatus Rhenanus, who wrote Annotations upon the book of Tertullian
against Praxeas, you cite these words: Episcopus Romanus Montanizat, that is,
the Bishop of Rome follows the heresy of Montanus. I have often warned you
of your deceitful Citations; but all in vain. Beatus Rhenanus, in his
Annotations, has not those words, but these. Rectissime egit, etc. The Bishop
of Rome did very well, who condemned that fained Prophecy of Montanus. Which
words are clean contrary to those former, unless in your Grammar, to receive,
and to reject Montanus, signify the same thing. But I know the cause of your
error. The Printer, or some other, (besides the Annotations of Rhenanus) had
set down in the margin of Tertullians book, certain short notes, which show
the matters there handled. Therefore in a cortaine place, he put these two words
Episcopus Romanus, The Bishop of Rome: because the Bishop of Rome was there
mentioned: and a little after he put apart this word, Montanizat, is a
Montanist; because Tertullian defended the heresy of Montanus, which the Pope
had condemned. You, haning no regard of truth or faith, conioyne those words
thus: Episcopus Romanus Montartizat. I am asbamed of this Imposture or deceit.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IF there were but one dram of truth, faith, or modesty in this Jesuit, he
would not have written so falsely, deceitfully, and impudently, as here he
does: which I will make most apparent in this Strain, before I leave him.

Tertullian, following Montanus, wrote his book against Praxeas: and in the
beginning thereof, he writes thus: Nam idem (Praxeas) tunc Episcopum Romanum
agnoscentemiam prophetias Montani, Priscae, Maximillae, et ea agnitione pacem
Ecclesiis Asiae et Phrygiae inferentem; falsa de ipsis prophetijs adseuerando,
et praecessoru^ eius auctoritates defendendo: Coegit, et literas pacis reuocare
iam emissas, et a proposito recipiendorum charismatum concessare. Praxeas
compelled the Bishop of Rome ( who at that time acknowledged, or approved the
prophesies of Montanus, and in so doing brought peace to the Churches of Asia,
and Phrygia: partly by affirming false things of those Churches, and partly by
defending the auctority of the Bishops predecessors) to revoke his letters of
peace, which he had sent, and to cease from his further communicating with
Montanus.

By which words of Tertullian, it is cuident that the Bishop of Rome did then
approve, and by his letters maintain the Heretical Prophesies of Montanus.

Beatus Rhenanus in his edition of Tertullian, besides his Annotations upon
him, set footh his Marginall notes, over against the text, briefly expressing
all-along the matters contained in the text; and over against these words of
the text ( The Bishop of Rome acknowledging the Prophesies of Montanus, and so
bringing peace to the Churches) he put these two Marginall notes: viz. the
former; Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. Because Tertullian said, The Bishop of
Rome approved Montanus.

The second; Autoritas Romanorum Pontificum. The authority of the Komane
Bishops. Because Tertullian said, that the Bishop of Rome, when he did
Montanize, by his letters sent, brought peace to the Churches of Asia and
Phrygia.

And heereto agrees Rhenanus his Annotation upon these words of Tertullian,
Episcopum Romanum. Attend summam Romani Pontificis autoritatem, etiam illis
temporibus, dum aliquid recipit aut damnat. Observe here the great authority
of the Bishop of Rome, even in those times, when hec did either receive, or
reject any thing. To wit, because once he received Montanus, but afterward
rejected him. So that it is most clear, that those words, The Bishop of
Rome does Montanize, is the very Marginall note of Beatus Rhenanus,
conioyning all those three words, Episcopus Romanus Montanizat; without any
separation of them, by comma, full point, or any the like, at the word Romanus:
as is to be seen in the Margin, in all the editions of Tertullian, (even by
Papists, as namely, in the Edition of Renatus Laurentius de labar, printed at
Paris, cum priuilegio, An. 1580.) where those marginall notes are set down.

Their ownc Pamelius, in his late Edition of Tertullian, An 1608. leaves out
those three marginal words; Episcopus Romanus Montanizat. And, in his 7.
annotation upon those words, Episcopum romanum, shows himself griened at,
and much disliketh, that those said three marginall words, are extant in all
former printed editions: for thus he writes; Quare eo magis improbanda
aduocatio marginalis quae hactenus extat in excusis exemplaribus omnibus;
Episcopus Romanus Montanizat.

But if those margimall words, Episcopus Romanus, stood alone in the margin so
full pointed, because the Bb. of Rome is there mentioned; and then the word
Montanizat, set down in the margin, separate from the other two foresaid words,
because Tertullian does there Montanize, as this Jesuit would have it; Pamelius
in common sense, had no reason either to leave our, or dislike those three
marginall words.

Judge now, gentle Reader, how either pitifully ignorant, if he never read
those said three marginall words in beatus Rhenanus his edition of Tertullian:
or if he did, how shamefully impudent this Becane here shows himself to be,
casting this aspersion upon me, that I deceitfully alleged those said
marginall words, conioyning them which in printed books stand separated: and
so applying that to the Bishop of Rome, which the marginall note assigns to
Tertullian. A more palpable untruth could not be vuered.

Whereas he endeavors to iustific the same, by citing these words out of
Rhenanus his annotations ( Rectissime ergo egit Romanus Pontifex, qui illam
confictam Montani prophetiam damnauit. The Bishop of Rome did well, in
condemning that fained prophecy of Montanus) and asking me, whether it be all
one to condemn and approve Montanus, he does manifest to the world, how
exceeding shallow he is, not knowing whether he writ with, or against himself.

Tertullian, writing very distinctly of two several times, says; that the
Bishop of Rome at the first approved Montanus; and accordingly sent letters to
the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, signifying his communion with Montanus, and
so procuring great peace to those Churches. Whereupon, Rhenanus marginall note
was, The Bishop of Rome does Montanize. But Tertullian says again, that he
afterward, by the means of Praxeas, revoked his said letters, and rejected
Montanus, Whereupon, even on the text word, reuocare, Beatus Rhenanus his
annotation is this: Rectissime ergo To: Pontifex egit etc. Therefore right well
did the Bishop of Rome to condemn Montanus. Does not this show apparently,
that the Bishop of Rome was once a Montanist; but after, recanted? And does not
the Jesuit feel this his own weapon retorted into his own heart?

BECAN. Exam. Page

OVt of the Council of Constantinople you cite these words: Anathematizari
curauimus Honorium etc. You follow the fraud of the Grecians, who, upon enny,
inserted the name of Honorius, when as it is plain, or certain, (constat)
that Honorius was not there condemned, as Bellarmin de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap.
11. proves out of the Library ^^eper, Athanasius, and others.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IN asserting Honorius to be a Monothelit heretic, I do follow three general
Counsels, viz. the 6. act. 13. the 7. act. the last. and the eight act. 7. And
two Popes, Agatho, in his Epistle to Constantine the Emperor, to be seen in
the Synod 6. act. 4. and Pope Lco 2. in his Epistle at the end of the 6. Synod.
And further, I follow then own Pontifical of the Popes lives in Leo 2.
besides many, as learned Writers as Bellarmine, by whom it appearech
manifestly, that Honorius was an Heretic. Our English man Harding, in his
book against Bishop Jewel, page 131. of Pope Honorius, writes thus: Now at
length Ma. Jewel, you say that which has some face of truth; for Honorius
indeed fell into the heresy of the Monothelits. And this is the only Pope, who
may iastly be burdened with heresy.

Pope Leo 2. in his Epistle to the Emperor, at the end of that 6. general
Council, has these words: We accurse Honorius, who has not lightened this
Apostolic Church, with Apostolic doctrine; but, by wicked treachery has
labored to subvert the undefiled faith.

In this my citation, I sollow not (as this fulse Jesuit says) the Greek
fraud; but the edition of Counsels, by their own Binnius, Tom. 3. thus:
Concilium Constantinopolitanum tertium, sextum universal, in quo ducenti,
octoginta, et nouem Episcopi, sub Agarhone Papa, and Constantino Pogouato
Imperatore An. 680. et 631. Page Binnij 67.
act. 13. Impia execramur dogmata Sergij, Cyri, Pyrrhi et Theodori, quos Agatho
Papa abijcit, vtpote contraria rectae fidei sentientes, quos Anathemati
submitti definiuimus. Cum his vero simul proijci a sancta Dei Catholica
Ecclesia, simulque anathematizari praeuidimus Honorium, qui fuerat Papa
antiquae Romae, eo quod inuenimus per scripta quae ab eo facta sunt ad Sergium,
quia in omnibus eius mentem secutus est, et impia dogmata confirmauit.

We detest the impious doctrines of Sergius, Cyrus, etc. whom we have accursed;
with these, we have also cast out of Gods holy Catholic Church, and accursed,
Honorius, who was Pope of old Rome; because we found by those things which he
wrote to Sergius, that he was wholy of Sergius opinion, and confirmed his
impious doctrines.

Here, if I would hunt after Butterflies, as this tryfling Jesuit does, I
could tax him for his ouer-sight, or ignorance, in putting down Athanasius for
Anastasius. But leaving this unlearned Jesuit to correct his errors; unto
Bellarmine, hcere objected against me, I say, that Anastasius writing of the
Popes lives, in the life of Pope Leo 2, sets down Honorius among the
heretics who were condemned by the sixth general Council. And for further
answer, I refer Bellarmine unto Mr. Dr Whitaker, Controuers. 4. cap. 6. and
to Mr. Dr. Reynolds his Conference against Heart, ca. 7. Diuis. 2. who both,
very largely and learnedly, have refuted all which Bellarmine has written
material for the clearing of Honorius.

By these Pope- Heretics, the Christian Reader may learn, what a dangerous
thing it is to make the Pope Judge of all Controversies. And further, he may
here obscrue, with what deep silence the Jesuit lets pass The Pepes,
Liberius, and Leo, for Arrian heretics: and Pope Anastasius for a Nestorian
heretic. So worthy a champion defender is Becane of the Popes Primacy.

English Concord.
BEcane, in his Jar and 12. Question, demanded, Whence the King has his
Primacy?

And I, in my Concord, Quest. 12. demanded, Whence the Pope has his Primacy?

Whether of Christ, who said, Ioh. 18. v. 36.1. Pet. 5. v. 3. To. 13. v. 1.
My kingdom is not of this world: or of Peter, Who forbade his fellow
Presbyters to dominere over the Clergy; much more, over Kings. Or rather of
the Devil, Mat. 4. v. 9. Luke 4. v. 6
who said, I will give unto thee, all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them: for that is given to me, and I give it to whom I will. And even so
said the Devils heir, Pope Adrian: Whence has the Emperor his Empire but
from us? Behold, it is in our power, to give it to whom we will.

By these sayings it is demonstrated, that the Pope has his Primacie, not from
Christ, but from the Devil. Yet here the Jesuit has not one word to answer
for his Popes Primacy.

English Concord.
BEcane, in his Jar, and 13. Quest. demanded, Whether the King may compel
his subjects to the oath of Primacy?

And I, in my Concord, and 13. Quest. demanded, Whether the Pope may compel
his subjects (that is, all Christians) to the oath of Primacy?

Because, according to their Canon law, Did. 81. ca. Siquis.
What Christian soever will not obey the Popes precept (even to kill his
Sovereign, and native King) runs into the sin of Idolatry and Heathenisme.
Especially the Bishops: who (...) etyed to the Pope by oath, Aenae Sylnaus ad
Mogunt.
That if they gainsay the Pope, though they speak the truth, yet they sin
against their oath made to the Pope.

Lastly, De Romans Pont. l. 4. cap. 5.
because Bellarmine says: If the Pope should command vice, or forbid virtue,
the Church were bound to believe virtue to be evil, and vice to be good.

BECAN. Exam. Page 99

YOu cite, out of Gratian, Did. 81. cap. Si quis, these words of the Pope: If
any will not obey our precept, etc. You have not read this chapter: neither is
the beginning of it, Si quis, but, Si qui. Neither does the Pope there decree,
that he incurres the sin of Idolatry, who will not obey him in killing his
nature King, as you calumniate; but the Priests and Deacons, who after
admonition, will not abstain from fornication: and also they, who will
presume to hear those Priests and Deacons in their public Ministry, being
interdicted to enter the Church. Consult with the Canon, and you shall find it.

Dr HARRIS Reply.
IHaue read that Canon over diligently, more often then Becan has fingers on
both his hands; wherein I find, that if unrepentant fornicators, Priests or
Deacons, forbidden entrance into the Church, will yet presume to use their
Ministry in the Church, the people are inhibited to hear them.

And, whosoever will not obey that precept, incurres the sin of Idolatry,
according to that of Samuel; It is the sin of vvitcherast not to obey, and
the wickedness of Idolatry not to listen, or assent.

So far reaches that rule particular. Then follows in that Canon, the
general rule, in these words: Peccatumigitur Paganitat is incurrit, etc.
Therefore, whosoever says he is a Christian, and contemns to obey the Sea
Apostolical, incurreth the sin of Paganism.

So that by this Canon, what Christian soever disobeyeth the Sea of Rome,
commanding any thing (good or evil, as Bellarmine has it) incurres the sin
of Paganity; he must be reputed an heathen. If the Jesuit knew not, that the
Canon rises ab Hypothesi ad thesin, from the particular to the general, he
showed himself to be a very unlearned man: if he knew it, in writing thus, he
shows himself to be a brasen-fac't abuser of his Reader.

That the Reader may see the truth of this generality (a matter so nearly
concerning the crowns and lives of Princes) I will produce, for proof thereof,
two other places of the Canon law, wherein that foresaid general rule is thus
set down. The former, Clementis de haereticis. ca. Adnostrum. in Glossa.
Peccatu^; paganitatis incurrit, quicum Christianu^;se asserat, sedi Apostolicae
obedire contemnit. What Christian soever disobeyeth the Sea Apostolic,
incurres the sin of Paganism.

Where that Gloss, to prove that general, cites Did. 10. ca. Nulli fas.
Nulli fas est, velle, velposse, transgredi Apostolicae sedis praecepta. It is
not lawful for any to be, either willing, or able, to transgress the precepts
of the Aposlolick Sea.

The second place is, Extrauag. Joan. 22. de verborum significa. cap. Cuminter
nonnullos, in Gloss. Haereticus est ille, qui animo superbienti, dispositionem
sedis Apostolicae, Articulos fidei non infringentis, seruare, et ei obedire
contemnit: cum peccatum ariolandi sit non obedire, and scelus Idololatriae non
acquiescere, et vitium Paganitatis contemnere obedire. 81. Did. Si qui sunt.
8. q. 1. Sciendum.

He is an Heretic, who with a proud mind, contemns to keep, and obey, the
disposition or order of the Apostolic Sea, not infringing the Articles of
faith: since it is the sin of witchcraft not to obey; and the wickedness of
Idolatry, not to harken; and the voice of Paganism, to contemn to obey.

Thus, by the express words of the Canon, the generality of this is apparent,
viz. To disobey the Sea of Rome, commanding any thing which is not heretical,
(for in matter of manners, says Bellarmine, the Pope can not err.) is
withchraft, Idolatry, Heresy. Therefore, if the Pope should command a Jesuit,
or the vilest slave in a kingdom, to kill the King, who retains his crown
after the Pope has excommunicated him, and deprived him of his crown: it is
vvitchcraft, idolatry, and heresy, in that jesuit or slave, who vvilfully
refuses to kill that King.

The Mystery of Antichristian iniquity, as it is now revealed, proceeds yet
further, eue^ to the lawful killing of Kings, by the vilest vassal, without
any command of the Pope, or of any Superior, not only after such a King be
solemnly deprived of his dominions by the Pope, but without that, after
sentence declaratorie only pronounced; to weet, of heresy, or any other crime
of that King, containing the penalty of deprivation. For that is now an
orthodoxall position of the Cacolike Romish faith, Printed Cum priuilegio, and
expressly maintained by Suarius in his book, with this Title, The defense of
the Catholic faith, against the errors of the English sect, with the answer
to the Apology of the oath of Fidelity, and the Preface monitory to the king,
etc. The words of Suarius containing that Antichristian iniquity, Impiety,
Impudency; are these: It is most true, Lib. 6. cap. 4.
that the Pope may inflict the penalty of Deposition, and pronounce the
sentence of Deprivation of the Kingdom of any King supreme in his temporals:
after which just sentence so pronounced, whereby, ipso facto, he is deposed
of his kingdom; If a private man shall kill the king, he does it not by
private authority, but in the virtue of the sentence, and consequently, as an
instrument of authority public. When a king is deposed, then he is no king,
nor lawful Prince. Yea, if such a king, after, Lawful deposition of him,
persisting obstinate, does vvithholde his kingdom by force, in this he begins
to be a tyrant, because he is no lawful king, neither by any just title does
possess his kingdom. This more plainly appears in a king that is an
Heretic: for by his heresy, forsooth, ipso facto, he is deprived in some
sort, of his Dominion, and the propriety of his kingdom: because it either
remains confiscate, or even by the very law is deuolued to his Successor, if
he be a Catholic. And yet nevertheless, he may not presently be deprived of
his kingdom, but does possess, and administer the same justly, until by
sentence, at least declaratory, he be justly condemned of his crime. But after
that sentence given he is altogether deprived of his kingdom, so that he can
not with just title possess the same. Therefore from that time, he may be
handled altogether as a tyrant, and consequently may be slain by any private
man whatsoever. Now in the last point proposed, this is to be said. That
after the sentence condemnatory of the king (for the privation of his kingdom)
given by the Pope, or, which is all one, after the sentence declaratory of a
crime, having such a penalty by the law imposed on that crime; certainly he
which gave sentence, or to whom he committed it, may deprive the king of his
kingdom, even by killing him; either if he can not otherwise deprive him, or
if the just sentence extend to the depriving of him.

Mark well, o ye Christian Princes, especially o ye Princes Protestant
orthodoxall: do you behold (for it more nearly concerns every one of you)
into what, even the highest, pitch of traitorous impudency and impiety, this
Coccatrice brood, and Generation of vipers, to wit, the Jesuits, are
mounted? when as in their treasonfull dogmaticall positions, published in print
to all the world, and most stiffely by them auerred as doctrines of Catholic
faith, they teach it to be lawful for any, the basest villain of a king to
kill the king, being excommunicated, deposed, or otherwise declared to be so
and so criminous. Moreover, they teach, that the said base vassal or
villain, is, in such case, a more public person lawfully to kill the king,
then the king or his Judges are, to sentence that villain Traitor-Regicide.

The time was, when Emperors were the sovereign Lords of the Bishop of Rome.
Gregory the great, called Mauritius the Emperor, his Lord, and himself the
Emperors Servant: but afterward the case was altered clean contrariwise; and
the Pope became the sovereign Lord of the Emperor, and the Emperor the Popes
vassal. In the year 1133, when Pope Innocent the second, had set the Crown
upon the Emperor Lotharius head, he caused the solemn manner thereof to be
painted on a wall in his Lateran-Palace; and under the picture, these verses
following, to be written: Rex venit adfores, iurans per vrbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dance, coronain.
The king, at Palace of the Pope, swears fealty; and than,
The king, receiving Crown of Pope, made is the Popes sworn man.


True it is, that by the Popes Canon law, Did. 63 c. Tibi Domino. et 22. q. 5.
de forma in Glossa, the Emperors, as the Popes vassals, must swear homage to
the Pope, as holding their Crowns, and Empires of him: but it was never heard
of, before these Jesuitical traitors had so heretically dogmatized, that the
Kings and Emperors hold their lives also of the Pope, as the basest villains
that ever were, to wit, at the Popes pleasure. Now judge, Christian Reader,
what noble schoolemaisters these Jesuits are, teaching all Christian subjects
the Art of killing their Kings.

Saint John in his Revelation, Chap. 17. verse. 16. prophesied, That the King
should hate the whore, the scarlet whore (died first in the blood of Martyrs;
but now, in the blood of Kings) and make her desolate, and naked, and should
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

If ever there were just cause presented to kings to do it, surely now it is
given them to the full. Prou. 8.15.
The King of heaven, by whom they rule, and decree justice, stir up betimes
their royal hearts, with united forces to constrain the Pope to renounce this
his Antichristian bloody claim, or else to pull his triple Crown from his
head, and to lay his Romish Popedom in the dust; choosing another Patriarch
(if a Patriarch must needs be had) and bounding that new one, within the
Ecclesiastical tedder only. That learned Gerson, in his book, De
Aufeberilitate Papae, of taking the Pope of Rome, clean away, gave a good Item
for this long since.

BECAN. Exam. Page 100

YOu cite out of Bellarmine these words (If the Pope should command vice, and
forbid virtue, the Church were bound to believe virtue to be evil, and vice
good.) but most deceitfully. For Bellarmine does not absolutely affirm that
which you feign, but upon condition: that, grant one absurdity, another will
follow. Bellarmines words are these: It can not be, that the Pope should err,
in commanding any vice, or forbidding virtue, because then he should err about
faith. For the Catholic faith teaches, that all virtue is good, and all vice
is evil. But if the Pope should err, in commanding vices, and prohibiting
virtues; the Church were bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues evil,
unless it would sin against conscience.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THis Jesuit makes Bellarmine write far worse, than as I produced him. For in
my Citation, he spoke thus: If the Pope should command vice, or forbid virtue;
the Church should believe vice to be good, and virtue to be evil: but Becane
brings him in writing more impudently, and blasphemously, thus: If the Pope
should err in commanding vices, or forbidding virtues, the Church were bound
to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil, unless the Church would
sin against her conscience. Which is plain blasphemy, and for which
Bellarmine incurreth S. Paul's curse directly, For he can not deny, but that
the blessed Angels of heaven, and Apostles, were as free from error, in their
Angelical and Apostolical doctrines of faith, and manners, as the Pope is: yet
says S. Paul, Gal. 1. verse. 8: If we, or an Angel from heaven, should preach
unto you otherwise, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. But
Bellarmine thus: If the Pope should preach otherwise, viz. virtue to be evil,
and vice good (according to that of Esaias, Chap. 5. verse. 20. Woe be to them,
that speak good of evil, and evil of good) the Church ought to hold the Pope
so blessed, as that she should sin, if she did not believe him so erring,
and erroneously preaching; What is this else, but to give the holy Spirit of
God, the Lie in his face?

(...) is here most absurd, in writing thus: Dato (...) do, sequitur aliud. If
we grant one absur^^^, (...) follows another. For grant that one absurdity,
that a blessed Angel of heaven should preach error: should this ^^^urditie
follow, That the Church were bound to believe him? No says Paul; the Church
were bound to hold him accursed.

Further, it is apparently untrue (wherewith Becane does here charge me) viz.
that I said, Bellarmine did absolutely affirm the Pope to command vice and
forbid virtue: or that the Church should believe vice to be good, and virtue
evil: for I cited it in a hypotheticall or conditional proposition, thus: If
the Pope should command vice, etc. and not by a categoricall, or singlie
affirmative proposition, thus: The Pope does command vice, and forbid virtue,
etc. It may be, Becanes learning extends not so far, as to know when a
thing is uttered categorically, and when hypothetically; and so of ignorant
simplicity, he falsely burdened me with it. If it were so, I will the rather
forgive him; but then I would have him to go to school again, to learn the
principles of Logike: if he knew it, and yet would write thus, he abuses his
Reader not a little.

But I will leave this unlearned Jesuit a while; and indeed I begin to grow
very weary of him: with Bellarmine here would I gladly change a few words; and
learn of him, whether the Church be bound in any case, to believe error in
faith, or in the necessary precepts of manners? If he affirm it, he shows
himself to be an Heretic (...), condemned in his own conscience: if he deny
it, then suppose the Pope should err in faith or manners, yet the Church
should not believe him therein. By the rules of the Cano^ law, If the Pope err
in faith, that is, if he be an Heretic, he should be deposed: but by
Bellarmines parallel, If the Pope err in faith, he must be believed. If this
be not doctrine heretical, what can be heretical? Therefore to the
everlasting shame of Jesuits, let this heretical position of Cardinal
Bellarmine, (which Becane seeks here to defend, but the very heathen would
blush to assert of any) be engraven with a pen of iron in lead or stone for
ever; viz. If the Pope should err in commanding vices, and forbidding virtues,
the Church is bound in conscience, to believe vices to be good, and virtues to
be evil.

Go to now o Pope, and say, Soul thou have enough: for now, do but command
the bloody and traitorous crime of Regicide, that is, killing of kings, as a
virtue, it is presently good; and the Church is bound in conscience, to believe
it to be good. The like is to be said of Adultery, Incest, Idolatry,
Blasphemy. What needs now the Pope to dispense with these sins, seeing that
by his commanding of them to be done, he makes them even virtues?

That which Bellarmine affirms here to be an absurdity and impossibility;
their great learned VVriters, Schoolmen, and Canonists (as, Ockam, Cusan,
Antonin. Sanders, Turrecremata, Zabarella, Canus, Alphonsus, Hostiensis, and
Panormitan) their Popish Councels (as, the 5. Roman under Symachus, and Council
of Basil) yea, the very Canon law, Si Papa. Did. 40. grant, and dogmatize, to
weet, That the Pope may err, not only in precepts of manners; but more then
so, in doctrines of faith, and also be an heretic. Among the synodicall
Epistles in the Councels of Basil, thus we read: Many Popes are said to have
fallen into errors and heresies. It is certain, that the Pope may err. The
Council has often times condemned the Pope, in respect, as well of his
heresy in faith, as of his lewdness in life. And touching the Canon law in
this point, Panormitan de Electio. et Elect. potest. ca. Significasti, writes
thus: The Council may condemn the Pope of Heresy, as in Did. 40. Si Papa:
where it is said, that the Pope may be an heretic, and may be judged, and
condemned of Heresy.

Who then could have thought, that Bellarmine would have been so shameless a
flatterer of the Pope, as to write that the Pope can not err? according to
that of Alphonsus against Heresies, Lib. 1. ca. 4. Non credo aliquem esse adeo
impudentem Papae assentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare, nec in
interpretatione literarum sacraru^, hallucinari possit. I do not think, that
there is any one so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to say, he can not
err, or be deceived in interpretation of the Scripture.

To conclude; I would learn of Bellarmine, what answer he will make to this
question of Erasmus, writing upon 1. Cor. chap. 7. thus: If it be true which
some assert, That the Pope can never err iudiciously; what use is there of
general Counsels, or of learned Divines, or Lawyers in those Counsels;
wherefore lies an appeal to the Council, or to the Pope himself better
taught; wherefore should there be any Universities; or any in them, to busy,
or disquiet themselves in the questions of faith; when as all men may learn
the certain truth of one man only? how comes it to pass, that the decrees
of one Pope, are contrary to the decrees of another Pope? And further I will
demand, why the Pope suffers so many controversies to be undecided? for
example, these three: 1. Whether the Virgin Marie were conceived without
sin, or not? 2. Whether the Popebe above a general Council, or a general
Council above the Pope? 3. Whether the Pope have supreme power in the
Temporalls of all Princes, Kings, and Emperors, Directly, or Indirectly?
especially, considering that the most learned Popish VVriters, bitterly and
irreconcileably dissent in these points.


This Jesuit Becane, Page 101.
in the winding up of his most ignorantly-grosse, and unjust censures of my
false citations, as he falsely speaks;

First tells me, with a lying mouth, and a brazen face, that I never read the
Authors which I have cited. But, the Jesuit shall find and feel by this Reply,
that I have read, and diligently perused them.

BECAN. Exam.
SEcondly, That I may know, if I have read the history, how that more then 400
false citations were by Bishop Eureux, noted to be in Plessaeus his book of
the Eucharist: and that Plessaeus was publicly co^nicted of that crime,
before Henry 4, King of France.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
I Read that story over in French, from the beginning to the end, partially
written against Plessaeus: wherein I find but 9 citations, whereof Plessaeus
and the Bishop disputed before the King. Howsoever Plessaeus at that time
(daunted, as may seem, by the Maiesticall presence of the King, who had then
forsaken the Orthodoxall faith, which once he for a long time professed, and
to his uttermost maintained; and whom then, notwithstanding outward shows of
indifferency, Plessaeus found indeed, adverse to him, and wholly addicted to
his Adversary) did not so well justify those citations of his, as either
himself desired, or his friends expected: yet afterward in his Book printed,
he has in particular, maintained his said citations: unto the which book I
re^erre the Jesuit.

BECAN, Exam. Page 102.

THirdly, Becane gives me his fatherhoods counsel, to be warned by Plessaeus
harms: yet after his Jesuitical lying manner, he tells me withal, That had my
book been as large as that of Plessaeus, where there were 400. false
citations in his book; according to the proportion, there would have been in
my book, a thousand.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe learned Bishop did not tax Plessaeus his citations, as this frivolous
Jesuit does mine, for the ouersights of the Composer, or Transcriber, mistaking
one syllable for another, one word for another, one name for another, or one
Canon for another; so that the substance of the matter, according to the
meaning of the Author, or truth it self, were truly cited. Which grave and
learned course, if Becane had kept with me, he should have found none, no not
any one false citation of that kind; as this Reply does demonstrate: wherein is
justified the very substance of all, yea the very words and syllables almost of
all the citations, set down in my book of English Concord. Therefore, with
strange impudency, does this Jesuit say, that my false citations, in
proportion, would have grown to a thousand: as though none to none had any
proportion.

Neuerth^lesse; hereafter, because this trifling Jesuit fowleth for feathers,
that is, escapes in printing, through the composer, or Corrector; I will be
Corrector my self, as my weighty business will permit. In the mean time,
gentle Reader, vouchsafe to observe, what a wary course this Jesuit in his
writings takes, duly proportioned to his very small learning and reading, viz.
to use in a manner, none, or very few, citations of any kind; but only to set
down, with his pen, whatsoever his empty brains conceive. After which
course, it were no hard thing, to write a book, as large and as material, as
commonly his are, every week throughout the year, one.

Now the Jesuitical Syrts are past: hereafter we shall ride in the calm of
apparent uniform Concord touching the Kings Supremacy; how soever this
turbulent Jesuit (like those restless wicked ones, spoken of by Esaias, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt) endeavor to trouble the waters, with the mire and
dirt of his Jesuitical discord: which, by this Reply following, is returned
home, and impacted upon his own face.

English Concord.
IN these Questions, the Adversaries dissent extremely: On the one side,
Augustinus Triumphus, Aluarus Pelagius, Hostiensis, Panormitanus, Syluester,
Henricus Gaudauensis, Rodericus Sancius, Alexander Alensis, Celsus Mancinus,
Thomas Bozius, Franciscus Bozius, Isidorus Moscouius, Laelius Zecchus,
Cardinal Baronius, and lastly, Alexander Carerius; who in his book publicly
printed, was not afraid to call Bellarmine, and all who took part with him,
against the other forenamed; Impious Politics, and Heretics of our time. I
say, in these points of the Popes Primacy, and at this present time, the
Jesuits extremely dissent from the Sorbonists; and the Venetian and French,
from the Roman Papists.

On the other side, all Protestant-English Writers, with one uniform consent
agree in the Kings Supremacy; as they, who willingly have taken the Oath of the
Kings Supremacy, which is set down in these express words following, viz. I,
A. B. do utterly testify, and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiasticll
things or causes, as Temporal. And that no foreign Prince, person, Prelat,
State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual, within
this Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities: And do promise that from
henceforth, I shall bear faith and true alleagiance to the Kings Highness,
his heirs, and lawful Successors: And to my power shall assist, and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, and authorities, granted, or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his heirs and Successors, and united or
annexed to the Imperial crown of this Realm. So help me GOD, etc.

But, by the laws of England, in these very words and syllables; Supreme
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, or Power Spiritual, is for ever united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this kingdom. These things then being so
certainly and manifestly true; let Becan himself judge, if he will judge
sincerely and ingenuously, according to this oath of Supremacy (taken willingly
by all Protestant English Writers, without refusal of any one)

1 Whether the King of England has not Supremacy, or Primacy in this Church? 2
Whether that Primacy or Supremacy, be not Ecclesiastical and Spiritual? viz.
which is in all things and causes, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual. 3 Whether
the King by his Primacy, or Supremacy, may be called Primat of the Church? to
weet, as one is called a King, of his kingdom: a Bishop, of his bishopric: or
a Bailife, of his Bailiwick? 4 Whether by the same Supremacy or Primacy, he
may not be called Head of this Church? that is to say, the only supreme
Governor in all things and causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, and over all
persons Ecclesiastical. 5 Whether that Primacy or Supremacy do not consist in
Power or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical? to weet, which consists in all things
Ecclesiastical, and over all persons Ecclesiastical; and which is termed by
the express words of the laws of England, Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or
power Spiritual; seeing that the Oath of Supremacy, respects the Kings
authority Ecclesiastical: and the Oath of Fidelity, his authority Civil. As
our King JAMES in his Book, most accuratly distinguishes them. 6 Whether the
King, by his Primacy or Supremacy, may not call Counsels, and presede in them?
viz. as the only supreme Governor of this Kingdom, in all things and causes:
and over all persons, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual. For do not all Cou^cells
consist of persons Ecclesiastical? and are not things Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical handled in Councels? 7 Whether the King may not make
Ecclesiastical laws? to weet, as the only supreme Governor in all things,
and over all persons Ecclesiastical; according to that of Saint Augustine:
Contra Crescon. lib. 3. c. 51.
Herein Kings, (as it is from heaven prescribed unto them) serve God, as
Kings; if in their kingdom, they command those good things, and forbid those
evils, which pertain not only to humane society, but also to Divine
Religion. 8 Whether the King may not co^ferre Ecclesiastical Benefices? As the
only Supreme Governor in all causes. and over all persons Ecclesiastical. 9
Whether the King may not make and depose Bishops? As the only Supreme
Governor in all causes. and over all persons Ecclesiastical. 10 Whether the
King may not compel his subjects to the oath of Supremacy? As the only
Supreme Governor in all causes. and over all persons Ecclesiastical. 11
Whether the King, has not his Supremacy by the right of his Crown? As the
only Supreme Governor in all causes. and over all persons Ecclesiastical.
As for Excommunication, if the Jesuit mean by it Retaining of sins, that
respects the Jurisdiction internal: and all, both Protestant, and Popish
Writers acknowledge, that our King challenges no such power. But if he
understand, the inhibiting from the Communion and other holy exercises
performed by the Minister, and faithful people in the Church, then in England,
where every, not only Archbishop, but Archdeacon, and his Official do
excommunicat, we shall have (according to Becane his dispure here) so many
Primats of the Church of England, as there be in it Archdeacons, or their
Officialls. But here the controversy is of one only Supreme Primat, or
Supreme Governor. Therefore this Question of Becane, touching the Kings power
to excommunicat, is very idle and ^riuolous.

As touching the Judge of Controversies, all Protestant Writers hold no mortal
man to be Judge of the^. Notwithstanding, Hainrik Salobrig, and (long before
him) Jewel, in his Defense of the English Apology, Par. 6. c. 13. D^uil. 2.
out of the Ecclesiastical Writers, especially out of Socrates, and Cardinal
Cusanus, write, That Christian Princes, with good commendation, have heard, and
determined some Controversies of faith. According also to these words of
Charles the Great, produced by the reverend Bishop of Ely, viz. We do decree,
and by Gods assistance have decreed, Tort Tort. Page 165.
what is to be firmly holden in that cause, or Controversy. It was a cause of
Faith, against Eliphandus, who asserted Christ to be the adopted Son of GOD.

Lastly, who would here regard the naked names of Sanders, Genebrard, Pol.
Virgil, and Thuanus, which Becane does here muster? Are these also Adversaries
to Becane? or do these, as Adversaries, extremely dissent touching these
Questions.

As for Calvin, Tortura Torti a good while since has answered thus: As Calvin
did not allow the Pope to be King, or the King to be Pope: Page 379.
so we approve not that in the King which we detest in the Pope. But Calvin
with us, and we with him, think, that those things belong to the King, in
the Church Christian, which belonged to Josias, in the Church Judicial. And
we desire no more.

Now, having passed these Rocks, the remainder of our way is easy; and all
Becans Iarres, hereafter objected against us, may, as it were with the blast
of some few words, be eftsoons scattered, and brought to naught. For by this
which is already demonstrated, it is most manifest, that all our English
Protestant Writers, do fully and uniformly agree in the whole substance or
matter of the Kings Primacy or Supremacy; and that Becane, throughout his
Jar, strives only about words or syllables. Against which kind of
contention, St. Paul writes thus unto Timothy: 2. Tim. 2. ver. 14.
Protest before the Lord, that they strive not about words, which is to no
profit, but to the perverting of the hearers.

Unto all this, in my Concord, from page 12. unto page 19, Becane in his
Examine. answers not one word.

Becans Jar.
The I. Question. Whether the King of England have any Primacie in the Church.
1. THE first Jar or contention then is, concerning the name of Primacy. Many
of our Adversaries admit this Name: but M. Richard Tompson had rather have it
called Supremacy, then Primacie. His reason is, because Primacy does signify a
power of the same Order. Now, the King has not power in the Church of England
of the same Order with Bishops and Ministers, but a power of higher and
different Order from them. Ergo, he has not the Primacy, but the Supremacy.
The words of M. Tompson page 33. of his book are these: Nos in Anglico nostro
idiomate belliores long sumus, quam per inopiam Latini sermonis, nobis Latin
esselicuit. No^ enim dicimus, The Kings Primacy, Regis Primatum, sed The Kings
Supremacy, Regis Suprematum: Quo vocabulo nos quoque deinceps vtemur. Multum
enim differunt Primatus and Suprematus. Illud enim Potestatem eiusdem Ordinis
videtur significare, hoc non item. We in our English tongue, do speak much
more properly, then we can do in the Latin speech, through the penury
thereof. For we do not say, The Kings Primacy, but The Kings Supremacy:
which word (...) For that Primacy and Supremacy do greatly differ: Primacie
seeming to signify a power of the same Order, but Supremacy not so.

2. Out of which words, we gather two things. The one, that all Englishmen,
who use the Name of Primacie, do either err or speak improperly, if we
believe M. Tompson. For if they speak property; seeing that the word Primacy
does properly siguifie a Power of the same Order; they do plainly understand
that the King has Power of the same order with the Bishops and Ministers of
his Church. But this now according to M. Tompsons opinion, is an error:
wherefore either they do err, or speak improperly.

3. The other is, that a Conjecture may be made of the thing signified, from
the word signifying. The word Supremacy is a new and lately invented word,
unknown to the Ancient Fathers, not used in Scriptures, unheard of in the
Christian world.

Moreover, what does it signify? The Supreme power (forsooth) of the King in
the Church? Wherefore this is new also. Surely, if the ancient Fathers, either
Latin or Greek, had known this power, they would have found out at least some
word, whereby to have expressed the same properly. But this it seems none of
them did.

English Concord. Page 20

IS Becane the Jesuit become a captious cauiller at syllables, Pri. and Sapre?
Our Soueraigue Lord K. James, translated the english word Supremacy, Apol. ^ur.
fid. page 54
into the Latin word Primatum; and Mr. Thomson translated the same English
Supremacy, into his Latin word Suprematum. Here is full agreement in the thing
it self; and will the Jesuit strive about words, or diu^rs names of the self
same thing? Certainly, a Christian king, is neither Presbiter Priest: nor
August. Q ex viroq, Testa. mixed. Q. 101
chief of Presbiters, that is, Bishop: nor chief among the Bishops, that is,
Archbishop: nor chief of Archbishops, that is, Patriarch: nor chief of
Patriarchs, to weet, Pope; and in that sense he is no Primate, or has Primacy;
but he is the only Supreme governor of all Presbiters, Bishops, Archbishops,
Patriarchs, and Popes; within his dominions; whose supreme government, we call
in English Supremacy, or (after the Latin word, which our king v^ed) Primacy;
and acknowledge the same, by our oath, thereof taken. But now let us attend
these two goodly consequences which the Jesuit makes.

1. R. Thomson has devised a new Latin name, to express the self same thing,
and the self same English name of the same thing: Therefore the thing it self
is new.

The Fathers of the Nicene Council devised a new name, (...), to express the
Deity of Christ, or Christ in respect of his Deity. Therefore is Christ his
Deity new? or Christ in respect of his Deity, new? Take heed Becane of such
a consequent.

Thus rather perhaps the sequel would run more roundly: The name (Jesuits)
is new; Therefore deservedly may the Jesuits be called, as blasphemous, so new,
sectaries. Indeed, if the ancient Fathers had acknowledged the power of
Universal Bishop, they would have found, at least, one word, whereby to have
expressed the same properly: especially considering that (if we will believe
Gregory the great). Gregor. li. 4. Ep it. 76.78.80. et lib. 7 Epist. 79
To assume that arrogant, profane, sacrilegious, and Antichristian name, of
Universal Bishop; is all one, and the same, as to be the king of pride:
Lucifer, who set himself before his brethren: to be an Apostate from the
faith, and the forerunner of Antichrist.

In the Canon law, we read thus: Did. 99 Primx.
Let not the Bishop of the first Sea, be called the Prince of Priests, or high
Priest, or any the like: but only the Bishop of the first Sea; but let not the
very Bishop of Rome, be called Universal Bishop.

Let Becane tell me which of the ancient Fathers, either acknowledged the Popes
supreme power over the whole Church; or in propriety of speech, and, as proper
unto him, called the same Primacy: touching which, Chrysostom, as he is cited
in the Canon law, Did. 40 Multi.
writes thus: Whosoever shall desire Primacy in earth shall find confusion in
heaven: neither shall he be numbered among the serwants of Christ, who does
handle, or contend for Primacy.

His second consequence is this: Mr. Thomson devised a new word or name,
whereby to express in Latin more fully and properly (as be took it) the
English word Supremacy: Therefore whosoever do not call Supremacy, in Latin,
Suprematum, speak improperly. Fie! how hang these together? Forsooth, please it
the Jesuits, as scattered broomeshaggs.

To conclude. Becane himself, Quest. 12. page 43. brings in Mr. Thomson
speaking thus: Primacy is a royal good thing, or the Prerogative royal,
which can not be taken away by Ecclesiastical censure: neither is it absurd,
that an heathen king should be Primate of the Church. Therefore, according to
Becane his dispute here, They, who ascribe Primacy to the king, and call him
Primate of the Church, err not, but speak properly.

BECAN. Exam. Page 106

YOu say this strife is about the name. It is so. I urge nothing else. But of
they strine, as you say; where is the concord which you promise? In the very
beginning you despair of concord. And of you cannot dissolve the strife about
the name, what shall become of the thing it self?

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
I Did not say, our Writers did strive about the namer but I asked the Jesuit,
why he would brawl about the name, when the thing it self was fully agreed
upon. Here then in the beginning of this Jesuits examination, we have him
taken in a gross untruth. For in my English Concord, chap. 1. I proved an
uniform consent of all, not only in the matter, that is, the kings Supreme
Government, over all persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical, or civil
within his dominions; but also in the very English name thereof, to weet,
Supremacy: unto which self same thing, and self same name of the same thing,
all our Protestant English Writers have sworn; and in our public prayers in
pulpit, we solemnlie profess our allowance thereof, and our concord therein,
as being our Kings most just title.

As for the Latin name Primatus, into the which the English word Supremacy is
translated, we all agree therein also. For Becane, Question 12. page 43, brings
in Mr. Thomson, calling the kings Supremacy, in Latin Primatum, and the king
in respect thereof, Primatem.

How hard then is this Jesuits forehead, affirming that I granted discord in
the name to be among us? Indeed Mr. Thomson in regard of the Papists [who
understanding no Primacy but Sacerdotall, that is, Episcopal (for by their
Canon law, all Patriarks are Primates, and all Primates Patriarks, and so all
Primates Sacerdotall) clamor that we, ascribing Primatum Primacy to our King,
yield him Jurisdiction Sacerdotall, that is, Episcopal:] to reform their
misconceit therein, wishes there were made some Latin word, as Suprematus, or
the like, to express fully our English word Supremacy; thereby to cut off all
Popish and childish cauills, and to let them understand, that we by Primacie
(after the Latin word, as it is now translated, or Supreme Government of the
Church, called in our English tongue Supremacy) mean not Ecclesiastical
Supreme government Sacerdotall or Episcopal; but only Regal.

In England our two Archbishoppes are called Primates, as being superior
governors Sacerdotall over all the Bishops, and other inferior clergy men,
within their Archbishopriks, in causes Ecclesiastical: but because our king is
supreme governor, even over those archbishops, and all other persons
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, and in all causes Temporal and Ecclesiastical
within his dominions, we call in English, that his supreme government, not
Primacy, but Supremacy; as if it were, Supre-Primacy, or above Primacie.
Therefore I had just cause, to ask the Jesuit, why his frivolous fatherhood
would contend about names, when there was, and is, so full agreement in the
very thing it self? In regard whereof, S. Paul depainteth this Becane (as he
shows himself here to be) in his orient color thus: 1. Tim. 6.4
He is puffed up, and knows nothing; but doteth about questions, and strife of
words: whereof comes envy, strife, railing, and evil surmising; every word
falling so pat upon the Jesuits head, as it S. Paul had pointed him out with
the finger. Indeed Becane in asking me, how I will concord them in the
matter, when I see, and grant variety of the names, proves those words of
S. Paul, to fit him well, viz. That he is puffed up, and knows nothing. For here
he knows not (which country swaynes do know) that there may be, and is,
identity of matter, or person, when there is variety of names of that matter,
or person. But because I do commiserate his fatherhoods ignorance herein, I
will vouchsafe to teach him this one lesson; taken out of their own Canon law,
which ( in Did. 80. ca. Loca. in the Gloss) schooleth him thus: Idem est
Primas et Patriarcha, sicut et dicit lex, differentia tantum nominis est, inter
pignus et Hypothecam. A Primate and a Patriarch, is one and the same, as the
law faith, the difference is only in the name of Pignus and Hypotheca, in
Latin: in English, of pledge, and pledge: and so of these two words in Latin;
Primatus, and Suprematus; in English, (as we in England understand it)
Supremacy and Supremacy.

And the said Canon law, Did. 99. ca. de Primatibus, in the very text it
self, schooleth him more fully thus: De Primatibus quaeritur, quem gradum in
Ecclesia obtineant; an in aliquo a Patriarchis differant? Primates et
Patriarchae diuer sorum sunt nominum, sed eiusdem officy. Primates and
Patriarks have diverse names, but one office: so the kings Supremacy may, in
Latin, have diverse names; but it is one and the self same Regal office.

BECAN. Exam. Page 106

But if Thomson be heard, They who say the king has Prima^^^, Primacy of the
Church, signify that he has power of the same order with Bishops and
Pastors. But this is a great error, not only in the word, but in the thing
it self. Therefore they err not only in the word, but in the very thing, who
speak so. What answer you to this? you plainly dissemble.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
I Answer plainly and truly, first, that Mr. Thomson said that the word
Primatus did signify power of the same order with Bishops, only in the
Papists sense and understanding; but nothing less then so, in the Pro^estants
sense, who mean by Primatus, Primacie, power Regal only and not Episcopal:
In whose sense, Mr. Thomson himself calls that Regal power, Primatum; as was
showed by Becane himself, producing Mr. Thomsons own words, Q. 12. Pa. 43.
Therefore they who speak so, err, neither in word, nor in the thing it self.

Secondly. I answer plainly without dissimulation, that the Jesuits mouth
here runs over with a palpable untruth; since it is most certainly true,
that not any one Protestant English Writer, calling the kings Supremacy, in
Latin, Primatum, signifies, or would have signified thereby, that the king
has power Sacerdotall with Bishops and Pastors. Indeed, the Papists did, and
do seek thereby openly to scandalize us, as though we ascribed to our King
and Queen, power Sacerdotall or Episcopal in the Church: which moved Queen
Elizabeth, of blessed and famous memory, in the later end of her Injunctions,
to command this explanation following, to be published in Print, with this
Title: AN ADMONITION TO SIMple men deceived by the malicious.

Her Majesty forbids all her subjects to give ear or credit to such
perverse, and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and maliciously labor
to notify to her loving subjects how by the words of the oath of Supremacy,
it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm, possessioners of
the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministry of Divine offices in
the Church: wherein her said subjects be much abused, by such evil disposed
persons. For certainly her Majesty neither does, ne ever will challenge any
other authority, then that which was of ancient time due to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. That is to say, under God to have the Soueraignety and
rule over all manner persons, borne within these her Majesty's Dominions and
Countries, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be;
so as no foreign power shall, or ought to have, any superiority over the. And
if any person, that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said
Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense, or meaning;
her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such, in that behalf, as her good
and obedient subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner penalties contained
in the said Act, against such as shall peremptorily or obstinatly refuse to take
the same Oath.

What could be written more plainly and fully against this Jesuit, not only to
stop his mouth heerin, but also to take up, at once, his whole Jar following;
even by the very roots?

BECAN. Exam. Page 107

THose words of mine ( Thomson devised a new name of this thing Supremacy,
Suprematus: therefore the thing is now) I did not call a consequent, but a
conjecture. Again, you are contrary to your self, reasoning thus: The name
of Jesuit is new: therefore the thing is new. If the consequent hold in this,
why not in the other, etc. And further, it is ridiculous to compare one
Thomson, with so many Fathers of the Nicen Council, and to affirm that lawful
for him, which was lawful for them.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
HEre have we the Jesuit lying in his byrdlime: Wherein, the more he struggleth,
the worse he is enwrapped; and whence he seeks to go out, by going out of his
wits, saying it was his conjecture from no consequent of reason. As though
every conjecture reasonable, does not lean upon some reason probable. If
therefore his conjecture was grounded upon no reason, it follows, that he
with his conjecture, was unreasonable. But with what face (unless he be
extremely ignorant in the very petite rules of Logic) can he deny it to be
a consequent, standing upon two Propositions, reduced by himself into form
Enthymematicall. The later (the Conclusion) inferred upon the former,
containing the Medium in it, viz. a new name imposed, with the particle-note of
inference or consequence, viz. Igitur (therefore) and having his
forerunner-watch-word colligimus (we gather) giving warning of a consequent to
follow.

Now then, draw out this reason into his full syllogisticall form; it will
run, and can run no otherwise, than thus:

What thing soever has a new name imposed upon it, that thing is new. Hence
the Jesuit assumed thus:

But the Kings Supreme power in the Church, has a new name, Suprematus,
imposed upon it. Ergo, the Kings Supremacy is new.

And I thence assumed thus:

But Christ, in respect of his Deity, had in the Nicen Council a new name,
(...), imposed upon him.

Ergo, Christ, in respect of his Deity, or Christ's Deity, was then new.

The Jesuit, being invery great streights, and not able to bear the stroke
of this argument, (for, the former, or Mayor proposition, is his own. The later
proposition, called the Minor, or Assumption, he durst not deny. The form is
rightly syllogisticall. To deny the Counclusion, is against all rules
dialecticall. To grant it, is heretical.) creeps into a bench-hole, and then
laugheth, and says: It is ridiculous to compare one Thomson, a private man,
with so many Fathers in the Nicen Council, representing the Church; that it
should be as lawful for Thomson, as for them, to impose a new name.

Could any man imagine, that Martin Becan, a father Jesuit, and a public
Reader of Divinity, should be so unlearned a slugge, as he palpably here
shows himself to be? Truly, if a Cambridge Sophister had answered so, he
should have been either corrected in the Schools, or hissed out of the
Schools. For, let the like arguments be framed thus:

Every man is a living creature.
The king is a man.
Therefore the King is a living creature.
And thus:

Every man is a living creature.
The Kings scullian is a man.
Ergo, the Kings scullian is a living creature.
If any silly fellow using Becanes words should with Becan answer thus; It is
ridiculous to compare the Kings scullian, with the King: should he not, as a
ridiculous ass, be ludibriously exploded?

These, as the other, syllogismes, respect not Quis; who is a man, or who gave
the new name: but Quid; whether he be a man; whether it be a new name imposed.
Nay, rather thence the argument runs upon the Jesuit, with greater force,
thus: If the imposition of a new name upon a thing, by a private man, shall
infer the thing to be new; much more shall the imposition of a new name upon
a thing by public authority, conclude that thing to be new.

Now it is time that I answer his Question here proposed, viz. Why I use that
consequent against the Jesuits (thus: The name of the Jesuitical Sect is new.
Therefore that Sect is new.) which my self misliked? I answer, If he had well
observed those my words before going, viz. ^llud fortasse rectius: he should
easily have perceived, that I misliked that consequence, as it is indeed most
childish and ridiculous: yet by the way of Sarcasmus, ironically I used it, to
thump Jesuits there-withall; because their Sect, and the name of their Sect, is
new indeed.

BECAN. Exam. Page 108.

THe name of Jesuits, is as ancient as the name of Christians. By both those
names, one and the same thing is signified. But the name of Caluinists,
Hugonots, etc. is new. Herein peradventure the comparison is fit, That as
those Fathers denised a new word, or name, (...), to abolish the name (...),
which the Arians used: so Thomson devised a new name, Suprematus, to abolish
the name Primatus; which the King, Burhill, and other Academiks use. And again,
as the Nicen Fathers reputed all for hereiticks, who used the word (...); so
Thomson should account those to be heretics, that use the word Primatus. But
what Concord is this? Rather a huge Jar.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe uniform concord, in the thing it self, and name of the thing, has bin
heertofore in this book demonstrated sufficiently. The Jesuits eyes therefore
seeming to see here an huge discord, are, as Samsons foxes; tied together by
the tails, within his head: but separatly set in his face, looking asquint;
which appears the rather to be true, because he seems here to behold
things, and like, which are eucry way unlike.

As first, those Fathers did not devise a new word, for the word (...) was long
before: only they ascribed it as a new attribute to Christ, in respect of his
Godhead: but Mr. Thomsons word, Suprematus, is spanne new.

Secondly, the Fathers did not give both those name, (...) and (...), unto
Christ: but Master Thomson calls the Kings Supreme Government of this Church,
both Suprematum, and Primatum.

Thirdly, the Fathers held them for heretics, who did use the word (...), as
Becane here says: but Mr. Thomson holds our King, the Bishop of Ely, and
others, to be orthodoxall professors, who use the word Primatus. So that here
at enothing but dissimilitudes, unless it be in this; that as the Fathers
devised a new name, (...) to abolish that as (...), which the Arian heretics
ascribed unto Christ: so Mr. Thomson devised a new word, Suprematus, to abolish
the other word, Primatus, as the Popish heretics do now ascribe it, to the
Pope.

But what more do I espy in this Jesuit here? Truly, if he be not a very
unskillful linguist in the Greek and Syriack tongues, I behold in him Heresy
and Blasphemy. Heresy in that he holds them heretics, that say, Christ is
(...), consubstantialis, of the same substance with the Father. For (...), is
vnitas substantiae, the unity of substance. viz. (...): and (...), is
consubstantialitas, or substantiae vnitas, consubstantialitie, or unity of
substance. (...). The very identity of substance, without any difference,
variance, or distinction.

His Blasohemy, in challenging, to themselves, I mean the sect of Ieluits, the
name of Jesuits, that is to say, Saviors from sins: which is the most proper
name of the Lord Christ; according to that saying of the Angel: Mat. i. v. 21.
Thou shall call his name JESUS (in Syriack, Ieshua) for he shall save his
people from their sins.

And according to that of St. Peter: Neither is there Salvation in any other.
A^. 4. v. 12.
For among men, there is given none other Name under heaven, whereby we must
be saved.

Therefore, what horrible and detestable blasphemous caytifs are these Jesuits,
to appropriat this name, the name of Saviors, unto themselves! Our Lord Jesus,
is called Christ, passiuely, because he was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows. So then, in that ointment, he had fellows, or
partakers.

The Oil was first poured upon the Sacrificers head: but afterward, it ran
down to the skirts of his clothing. Therefore says St. 1. Ioh. 2. ver. 20.
John, Ye have an ointment from that holy One.

Then, as our Lord Jesus, our Head, because he was anointed, was called
Christ, that is to say, Anointed: so his members the Saints, because they also
are anointed with the same oil, though not in the same degree; are called
Christians, that is to say, Anointed.

But our Lord Christ, was called Jesus, or Ieshua, actiuely, because he should
save his people from their sins. And only he called Jesus, or Ieshua,
because There is no Salvation in any other. For that among men, there is given
none other Name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Therefore, there is but
only one Jesus or Ieshua in name, or in deed, by whom Gods people are saved
from their sins; so all the members of Christ, are called people Saved, and
not one of the^, Saviors from their sins. But the word Jesuits, ^
according to the Syriack language, signifies in English, Saviors: as though
they were Saviors of their people from their sins, as Christ is the Savior of
his people from their sins.

By plain narration of which certain truth, grounded out of the express
words of the Scripture, every Idiot may perceive, how blasphemous this Sect of
Jesuits is, in assuming unto all men of their Sect, and to none but of that
Sect, the name of Jesuits, that is, Saviors of the world. Unless it be by way
of contrariety, as Mountains, because they move not, are called, Montes, a
non mouendo: so they are called Jesuits, Saviors of the world; being in very
truth, the most notorious, and infamous Destroyers of the world, of Kings and
kingdoms, fighting manfully under the banner of their Lord God, Antichrist the
Pope: who, by St, John, Reave 9. ver. 11.
is rightly called (...).

But now, it is high time to see, how this Jesuit, in the profundity of his
ignorances, and absurdities, against all common sense, reason and divinity,
would have these following Parallells to meet together.

1 The name of Jesuits, but of 79. years standing. The name of Christians,
being of standing almost 1600. years. Are of the same Antiquity.
Explication.
Ignatius Loyala, the first Author of the Sect of the Jesuits, and the first
imposer of the name of Jesuits upon that Sect (as Becane in his Examen, Page 14.
confesleth,) did not associat his fellows, whom he afterward called Jesuits,
till the year 1534. that is, 79 years past; but the Professors of the
Gospel, Act. 11. ver. 26.
were about the year of Christ, 40. first called Christians, viz. 1573. years
past.

2 To be anointed, as all Christians are: To be Saviors, as only Christ is.
Is one, and the same thing. 3 To be called by a name common to all Christians
in the world: To be called by holy a name common to no Christian in the
world, but to them only who are of the Sect of Jesuits. Is all one. 4 To be
called by a holy name, imposed by the Apostles, warranted by Scriptures, given
according to the profession of the public Christian faith: To be called by a
name of blasphemy, imposed by that monster Ignatius Loyola, according to their
destroying profession, directly against the Scripture, which condemns all
Sects, and Sectaries, with their Sect names. 1. Cor. 3. v. 3.4. etc. Is even
the self same. 5. Sectaries, to take voluntarily, unto themselves, names and
titles of Schism or Sect; as Dominicans, Franciscans, Jesuits, etc.
Orthodoxall professors, by their hateful and heretical adversaries, to be
termed malignantly in scorn, by Sect-names which they detest: as Caluinists,
Hugonots; etc. Is all one self same thing.
Who ever wrote so unlearnedly, and so absurdlic, as this Jesuit Became here
does? I much marvel, that his Superiors suffer him to blurre papers, and to
publish them abroad, in this so learned Age. But before I part here with the
Jesuit thus, he mustacknowledge, that [whereas in my book of Concord, I
proved out of Pope Gregory the great, the name, and title of their Popish
Primate to weet, Universal Bishop, to be an arrogant, profane, sacrilegious,
Antichristian, Luciferian, and Apostaticall name, given to him, and taken by
him, against their own Canon law; And whereas also, out of, and by virtue, of
their Canon law, I wrapped-vp their Primate in the dust of hellish confusion,
because he desires, and ambitiously challenges a Primacie in earth, above all
Princes, Kings and Emperors upon earth, cuen in their Temporalls, their
Crowns, and Kingdoms, and, as the case is now, their very lines] he has not
here one word to say, for his Lord Godthe Pope, in this his desperate case; and
in the Iesnits accurate Examination (for so he would make us belicue) of my
Concord book.

Gentle Reader, I have been the more prolyx here, in my Reply against the
Jesuits Examen, in this first chapter, because it giucth such light to the
remainder, as dispelleth the foggy mists, which this Jesuit endeavors to
raise, whereby to make our uniform agreement, in truth, touching the kings
Supremacy, to be a seeming discord. So that a short Reply to all the rest, will
be sufficient; with reference unto this, yea even to this one distinction of
Regal, and Sacerdotall, rightly understood.

Becans Jar.
II. Question. Whether that this Primacy, which the King has in the Church, be
Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual?
1. THis is now another Jar. Under King Henry the 8. and King Edward, this
Primacy was always called Ecclesiastical and Spiritual; as it appears out
of Doctor Sanders, whose words are these: Caluinus Henrici Primatum
Ecclesiasticum oppugnauit. Calvin did oppugn King Henry's Ecclesiastical
Primacy. Again: Episcopus Roffensis, quod Heurici Primatum Ecclesiasticum
nollet confiteri, ad mortem producitut. The Bishop of Rochester, because he
denied King Henry's Ecclesiastical Primacy, was brought forth to die, etc.
Andagaine: Multi in custodijs propter negatum Ecclesiasticum Regis Primatum
detenti. Many were kept in prison, for denying the Kings Ecclesiastical
Primacy. In like manner: Henricus mandauit vt filius in fide Catholica
educaretur, excepto Primatus Ecclesiastici titulo, quem ei reliquit, King Henry
commanded that his Son (Edward) should be brought up in the Catholic faith,
excepting the title of Ecclesiastical Primacy, which he left unto him. And yet
more: Stephanus Wintoniensis, Edmundus Londinensis, Cuthbertus Dunelmensis,
Nicolaus Wigorniensis, and Datus Cicestrensis Episcopi, timide restirerunt
pueri Regis Primatui spirituali, imo simpliciter subscripserunt. The Bishops of
Winchester, London, Dutham, Worcester, and Chichester, did fearfully with
stand the Spiritual Primacy of the Child King, nay they absolutely subscribed
thereunto.

2. Under Queen Mary that succeeded to her Brother King Edward in the Crown,
this Title of Primacy was taken away in a Parliament held at London, as
witnesses Iacobus Thuanus in the 9. book of the History of his time, in these
words: Antiquatus ijsdem Comiths Primatus Ecclesiastici titulus. The title of
Ecclesiastical Primacy was abolished in that Parliament. The same was again
restored under Queen Elizabeth, as testifies the same Author in his 15. book
etc.

3. But now in these our days under King James this matter is called into
question; Some not daring to call it Primacy Ecclesiastical and spiritual,
but only Primacy belonging to Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters: amongst
whom is M. Doctor Andrews, or the Kings Chaplain, in his Torture of Tortus
page 90. where he writes thus: Neque vero quoad spiritalia, alium nos Regi
Primatum tribuimus, neque quoad temporalia alium Pontifici detrahimns, quam
debemus. Prior ille Regibus omni iure, postertor hic Pontifici nullo iure
debetur. Neither do we attribute one Primacy, concerning spiritual matters
unto the King, nor do we take from the Pope any other Primacy, concerning
temporal matters, then we ought to do. The first is due unto Kings by all
right, the later no way pertains to the Pope etc. I, when I first read these
words in the Chaplains book, did think that he had taken these two, towit,
Primacy spiritual and belonging to spiritual; as also these other, Primacy
temporal, and belonging to temporal, for one and the same thing. But now it
seems that the Defenders and Interpreters of the Chaplain, to wit, M.
Tompson, and M. Burhill, do take it otherwise. For so writes M. Burhill, page
55. of his Book, concerning this point: Non dicit, Primatum spirituatem, sed
Primatum quoad spiritualia deberi Regibus omni ture. He (the Chaplame) does not
say, that Spiritual Primacy, but Primacu belonging to Spiritual, is due unto
Kings by all right etc. And theeag une, page 133. in fine: Etsi enim Regi
tribuimus Primuth in Ecclesia, non tamen Primatum spiritualent aut
E^^^siassicum ei tribuimus; sed potius Primatum quoad les and personas
spirituales and Ecclesiasticas. For although we give unto the King Pri^acy over
the Church; yet do we not gine unto him Primacy spiritual or
Ecclesiastical; but rathor Primacy belonging to things and persons spiritual
and Ecclesiastical etc. And M. Tompson, page 31. of his Book, also says: Non
dixit, Primatum Ecclesiasticum, aut Spiritualem, quasi formaliterintelligat;
sed quoad Spiritualia, idest, obiectiue and materialiter. The Chaplain said
not, the Primacy Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as though he under stood it
form ally; but for so much as it belong eth to Spiritual, that is to say,
obiectiuely and materially etc. In which sense the same Author page 95. says.
Dicimus Regem gubernare quidem Ecclesiastica, sed non Ecclesiastice We say
indeed, that the King governs Ecclesiastical things, but not
Ecclesiastically.

4. So as if you ask in England, whether the King has Primacy Ecclesiastical
or no? It will be answered thus: King Henry, K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth had
Ecclesiastical Primacy: K. James has not Primacy Ecclesiastical, but only
so far forth, as it belongs to Ecclesiastical things. Has then his Majesty
that now is less then they had? So it seems. Is then the Kings Primacy in
England so nipped and pared in so short a space? So they say. Is it then almost
decayed, and at anend? I doubt not but it is. What is the cause? Hearben to the
common saying: What Is quickly got, is quickly lost: as also to that of the holy
Scritture: Si est ex hominibus consilium hoc, aut opus, dissoluetur. Act. 5.
38. If this devise, or work be of men, it will be dissolved.

English Concord.
THE Primacy, or Supremacy Regal, Page 14
under K. Henry 8. K. Edward 6. Q. Elizabeth, and K. James, has been, is, and
will be one, and the same: That is to say, Supreme Power Regalin the church,
Jewel. Defons. par. 6 ca. 9. Duasi. 1. et 2.
whereby Kings may, not Burn incense, as Ozias did nor rush upon Episcopal
function, nor preach the Gospel, nor administer the Sacraments to the people,
nor bind, nor loose (The which with some of our Writers, spoke of by Becane in
this Question, is, to govern Ecclesiastical things, Ecclesiastically:) but
execute those things only, which belong unto them, as kings, to perform that
kingly function therein, which, David, Solomon, Ezechias, Tortura Tort. pa. 381
Josias, and other of the most noble, and most religious kings, have done, and
which was ever lawful fora king to do: or particularly, if you had rather,
thus; The right and power by Regal authority, to make Church laws: as, that
GOD should not be blasphemed Dan. 3. 29
That God should be pacified in a fast Iona. 3.7
; and honored in a festival day Ester 9.26
; and all such, as we read to have been made, in the Code, Authentiks, and
Capitulars, by Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, and Carolus Magnus.

Moreover, to delegate such as should judge of the laws so made. 2. Chr. 19.8


Further to bind his subjects by oath to keep those laws 2. Chro. 15 14. et
34. 32
, yeain Deu. 13 10 Leurt. 24.23
matter of religion; and by Regal authority, to punish the transgressors of
them.

To call Counsels of Synods by his authority 1. C^ton. 13.3
; for reducing of the people to Gods worship 2. Chr. 19.4
, and purifying of the Templepolluted.

Touching persons; To administer justice unto all, of all sorts 2. Chr. 29.5.
; who should be (To speak as the Scripture does) The head of the Tribe of
Levy 1. Sa. 15.17
, no less then of the other Tribes: The king, no less of Clerks, then of
Laikes.

To deprive the high Priest (if he do deserve) of his high Priesthood 1. Reg.
2.27
.

In matters of Religion; To break down the high places: To abolish strange
worship Exo. 32.10
: to break in pieces the brazen Serpent, which Moses erected 2. Reg. 18.4


In matters of Order; To ordain such things, as pertain to the comeliness 2.
Chro. 24 12 Socrat. lib. 2 ca. 17
of GODs house; and to suppressefriuolous, and unprofitable questions. These,
by Dinine right, are the rights of Regal Primacie. To weet, whereby the king
may;

1. Be called Tort. Tort. p. 339
(...), The Supreme head of the Church. 2. Call Counsels, and presede in them.
3. Make Laws Ecclesiastical. 4. Constitute, and depose the High Priests. 5.
Bind his subjects by oath, to keep the laws by him made.
To conclude, hereby may the Adversaries see that Regal Primacy is founded in
the Scriptures, and propagated from the first religious kings, under the old,
to the first religious Emperors and kings, and so to our Sovereign Lord King
James, under the new Testament; and in that long distance of time, nothing
impaired, or diminished.

What then, never to decay? I doubt it not. What Is the reason? Hear it out of
Gods book (not out of triuials Jesuitical)q If it be of God, Acts 5.39
you can not dissolve it. Go now Icsuite, and play with your sooleries, and
very childish questions. In the mean time, let me ask and answer in your
own words: The Primacy Jesuitical, has it less power in France (for in
Venice it has none at all) than it has had there, or else where? So it
appears. Is it then, in so short a time, abated and diminished in France? So
men say. Is it therefore near his end? I do not doubt it. What Is the reason?
Hear it from the Jesuits triuiall. That which suddenly came (for we know well
the swaddling clouts of Loyola, the Jesuits Sire) is soon gone.

BECAN. Exam. Page 112

THE Primacie or Supremacy under King Henry, King Edward, and Qucene
Elizabeth: was Spiritual and Ecclesiastical; but under King James, it is not
so (and what it will be is uncertain.) Here is a Jar.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IN my Concord book I showed, in general and in particular, the Regal
Primacy under K. James to be the self same, which was under K. Henry, K.
Edward, and Q. Elizabeth; adding that it so would continue, as certainly it
will, during this orthodoxall Religion among us: which I hope shall continue so
long as the sun and moon endure; though the Jesuitical, and all other
Papisticall bowels burst thereat.

I shewod it in general; for that, the Supremacy then was, and now, no less,
is, The kings Supreme power, in, and over, all causes, and all persons (within
his kingdom) Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; and therefore in the self same
laws of this kingdom, then, and now in force, called The kings supreme Power
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical.

In particular, I demonstrated the same, by setting down the most material
points, out of the express words of Scirpture, wherein the kings said Supreme
power Spiritual or Ecclesiastical consists: in which said, both general,
and particular points, as there they are set down, all English Protestant
Writers with full consent agree, without any Jar, or difference whatsoever.

If this shallow Jesuit had had any sound matter in him, in this his Exame^,
he would have answered to the matter, especially to those material points
founded upon the Scriptures; and have proved, that either those particular
points belong not to the office of Regal Supremacy: or else that we
Protestant Writers, jar in some one or more of those said material points
gathered by the R. Bishop of Ely, and there set down; as not warranted by holy
writ to belong to kings; but this Jesuit passes them over, with Noli
metangere, and only sets before the Reader his twice sodden Ioathsome
Colewoorts viz. That Mr. Burhill writes thus: We do not give unto the king
Primacy Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, but rather Primacy in, and over, causes,
and persons Spiritual or Ecclesiastical: whereas Mr. Burhil in his Appendix
to the confutation of Eudaemon, Page 283. cuts this Jar all in sunder,
writing thus: In the 21. chapter of my book against Becane, I purposely and
plainly taught, how the said Regal Primacy may be called both ways, to weet,
Primacy Spiritual and Ecclesiastical: or, Primacy in matters, and over
persons spiritual or Ecclesiastical; and that they who call it spiritual
Primacy, mean nothing else then we; who, in regard of the cauillations and
calumnies of the Adversary (by Spiritual power, under standing nothing else,
but power Sacerdotall, or Episcopal) call it Primacy in, and over causes and
persons spiritual or Ecclesiastical: And that in the very thing, there is no
dissent at all among us.

What could be spoken more fully and plainly, to put to silence the lying and
iarring lips of this Jesuit?

BECAN. Exam. Page 114.

IT is your private fansy: none but you will say, that the King has, or that
himself challenges power, to appoint, or depose summos Pontifices, the
highest or chiefest Bishops, who should rule over all the Christian world,
and who dwell out of his kingdom: as he has in his Preface monitorie,
protested.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
BElike the Jesuit has not read this Question in Saint Augustine, and the
answer unto it: Quid est Episcopus, nisi primus Presbyter, hocest, Summus
Sacerdos? What is a Bishop, but the chief Priest?

And accordingly, Lactantius (lib. 4. ca. 30.) calls every Bishopric,
Supremum Sacerdotium, the highest Priesthood.

If the Jesuit could understand Greek, I would produce Ignatius ad Trallianos,
putting the question, and making answer unto it, as Augustine did, thus:
(...). What other thing is a Bishop, but one having principality and power
over all men?

Belike the Jesuit will be bold with Ruffin, and tax him for calling Athanasius
(who was no Pope) Pontificem maximum, the highest Bishop. But then comes in
Hierom speaking of every Bishop, and dogmatizing thus: Ecclesiae salus in
summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet. The safety of the Church, depends upon the
dignity of the highest Priest.

With us in England, are not only Bishops, but Archbishops also, even Primats,
that is, Patriarks, over who^ the King in his Supremacy, is Supreme Governor:
whom, as he may nominat and appoint; so, upon their deserts, he may depose, as
Solomon did Abiathar. In the mean time, 1. Reg. 2. ver. 27.
the King allows not that any Bishop, especially the Bishop of Rome, should
rule over all the Christian world.

This Jesuit, bringing in our King here denying that he will meddle with the
matters of other men, not his subjects; as on the one side, he deservedly
commends our gracious King therein: so on the other side, he justly
condemns that busie-body the Pope, intermeddling in matters of the King and
his subjects, endeuc^ring impiously and impudently, to auert his subjects from
swearing allegiance unto their Sovereign; against the law of Nature, and
Nations, against the law of God and man: therein showing himself indeed to be
that wicked man, that son of perdition, that very Antichrist, described by
St. Paul, 2. These. 2; especially, considering, that neither our King, nor the
meanest vassal or villain of our King, is the Popes subject. For, by the
right and ancient division of Provinces, this Realm of England, was not under
the Bishop of Rome.

Pope Innocent, 400. yeeresafter Christ, confesses, that he had not sufficient
authority to call one poor Britan out of this Realm. The case was this: The
Bishops of Africa, prayed Innocentius, cither to send for Pelagius the Britan,
or to deal with him by letters, to show the meaning of his lewd speeches,
tending to the derogation of Gods grace: To whom the Bishop of Rome answered
thus: Quando, etc. When will he commit himself to our judgment, write I what
letters I will, See B. Bil. Page 320.
whereas he knows he shall be condemned? And if he were to be sent for,
they may better do it, that are nearer to him, and not so far distant as I
am.

BECAN. Exam. Page 115

IF these propositions be equivalent, viz. The King has not Primacy
Ecclesiastical: The King cannot execure offices Sacerdotall or Episcopal:
then it follows, that they who deny the King canexeci^te officas Sacerdot
all, deny the King to have Primacy Ecclesiastical or Spiritual. And they who
hold, that the King has Primacy Spiritual, affirm, that he may execute
offices Episcopal. This is rather to increase, then to take away the Jar.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here the Jesuit plays the wrangling Sophifter: and his Elench is (as the
School terms it) A dictosecundum quid, addictu^ simpliciter.

For, these words, Primaeus Ecclesiasticus, do not simply (but, secundum
interpretationem vel sensum, according as some Writers mean thereby) signisie
Primacy Episcopal, and not Regal. In which sense, all Protestant Writers deny
the King to have Primacy Ecclesiastical.

Others, by those words, Primatus Ecclesiasticus, mean Primacy Regal, or not
Episcopal. In which sense, all English Protestant Writers, ascribe unto the
King, Primacy Ecclesiastical: and, as Master Burhill vvriteth, may well call
it Primatum Spiritualem, Spiritual Primacy.

So here the Jar is taken clean away; and the Jesuit is sully answered in
all objected by him in due place. The rest, which against his own, and all
good method, he iumbleth here together, hotch-potchwise, as, The King to be
no Head, nor to call Counsels, etc. shall hereafter, in their due place,
receive also their full answer.

Becans Jar.
III. Question. Whether the King, by virtue of this Primacy, may be called
Primate of the Church.
Master Henry Salclebridge does absolutely affirm it. For thus be writes
page 140. Dico, Regem Angliae Ecclesiae Anglicanae Primatem esse. I say, that
the King of England is Primat of the Church of England. Nay, he will have this
point to be so certain, and out, of al doubt, that he thinks, whosoeur
should deny it to offend against the public profession of England. For so he
says page 177. Angliae Rege^ Anglicanae Ecclesiae Primate^ esse, in
professione publica Anglicana Veritasis, sacris liter is nixae, ponitur. That
the King of England, is Primate of the Church of England, is founded in the
public English Profession of Truth, grounded upon the sacred Letter.

2. M. Tooker. and M. Burhill do absolutely deny it. For thus writes M.
Tooker page 3. Olere autem malitiam, ac clamitare audaciam tuam illud videtur,
cum Rege^ Caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque consingas. It may seem to savor of
malice, and cry out upon your sauciness, when as you feign the King Head, and
Primate of the Church, etc. And Ma. Burhill, page 133, Nec primatem quidem
omnino Regem nostrum dicimus; multo veto minus Primatem Ecclesiasticism,
Neither do we at all, call our King Primate; and much less Ecctesiasticall
Frimate, etc.

3. Heer-hence do I frame a twofold Argument. One out of M. Tookera words in
this manner: He that affirms the King to be Primate of the Church, is a
sausy and malicious fellow. But M. Salclebridge affirms the King to be
Primate of the Church. Ergo, he is a sausy and malicious fellow. The other
argument I frame out of M. Salclebridges words thus: He that denies the King
to be Primate of the Church, does offend against the public Profession of
the Truth received in England. But M. Tooker denies the King to be Primate of
the Church of England. Ergo, he offends against the public profession of
the Truth received in England. So (I wis) one Mule claweth another.

4. But now it may be demanded, whether of them does judge more rightly in
this case, M. Salclebridge, who affirms the King to be Primate of the Church,
or M. Tooker, that denies it? This controversy depends upon another
question, to weet, whether these two Names, Primate, and Primacy, are
necessarily connexed, or, as they say, Coniugata? M. Salclebridge thinks that
they are. Therefore, because he has once affirmed the King to have the Primacy
of the Church, he consequently anerreik, that the King is Primat of the
Church. For that with him this Argument has force a Coniugatis: The King has
Primacy, Ergo, the King is Primate. As also this: The Chaplain has a
Bishopric, Ergo, he is a Bishop.

5. Now M. Tooker, he thinks the contrary. For page 6. of his book he
expresty says: That the King has the Primacy of the Church; but yet he is
not the Primate of the Church. And contrariwise, The Archbishop of Canterbury
has not the Primacy of the Church; and yet is he Primate of the Church. So as
he denies these two consequences a Coniugatis, to weet. I. The King has the
Primacy, Ergo, he is Primate. 2. The Archbishop is Primate, Ergo, he has
the Primacy. And perhaps he will deny these in like manner. I. The Chaplain
has a Bishopric Ergo, he is a Bishop. 2. M. Tooker is a Deane, Ergo, he
has a Deanery.

English Concord. Page 29

WHy should I school an Ass? with whom, gently to claw, and curstlie to kick,
Mule-like, is all one? Or why should I rub your memory, to recognize these
your own words: James, the most renowned and potent King of England, Refut.
Apol. and Praef. monit. Regis, page 17.
in his Apology, and monitory Preface to the Emperor, etc. endeavors to
prove, that himself in England, and every King in his kingdom, is Head, or
Primat of the Church.

There, you confound Head and Primat, as one thing: here, by a twofold
question, you sepatate them, as diverse things. So the Mule scratcheth himself.

The King does make no express mention of the word Primat: yet, (as you say)
he endeavors to prove, and proves demonstratiuely, that he is Primat of the
Church. Therefore, as the King, we, and your lelfe, understand it; it is all
one, to have the Primacy of the Church, and to be Primat of the Church. Since
then, weeagree in the thing, why do you wrafig be about the name, here, of
Primat, as before of Primacy?

Doctor Tooker, and Master Burhill, lume openly professed, subscribed, and
sworn, that the King is the only Supreme Governor in, and over, all causes,
and persons, Eoclesiasticall within his Realine: that is, ^h^ Hainrick, and
Thomson, and your self understand it, in one word, Primat. But Tooker, and
Burhill, deny the King to be Primat of the Church. They do so, and that
rightly: to weet, in your popish sense, of Supreme Primat of the Church Sacer
do tall or Episcopal. By which distinction well understood and used, it
appears, that among us, there is no Jar at all, touching the Supremacy, or
Primat.

BECAN. Exam. Page 120

YOu call me an Ass, because I said the English Protestant Writers Jar in
this point. If I be an Ass, by contend you with me? Have you learned to strine
only with Asses? Belike you thought you had to do, with English Predicants.
I am not of that Tribe. Neither am I contrary to my self for I do not
distinguish Primat and Head of the Church; but I show the English Writers to
dissent in both. And that is very true; because some afsirme, and others deny,
the King to be either Primat, or Head of the Church.

Dr. Harris Reply.
TO his quest. I answer thus: By Gods grace, I have learned to dispute, and to
grapple with the most learned Jesuit in the bunch. And I am sorry that it was my
ill hap, to meet with such a slug as this Icsuit is. But sich it fulleth out
so, I must take up this burden, and proceedin answeting (as Solomon says) a
fool in his folly, lest he be proud. I know by their books, many Jesuits to
be very learned: and I know many English Preachers, in learning, to be nothing
inseriour to their chiefest Jesuits. Therefore this Jesuit Becane, without all
truth, and good manners, sets the Asses ears upon so many learned English
Preachers: but they will nothing less then fit them, he must resume the ears
to himself, and carry them about with him, as his own.

Touching his assertion, I did not say that he distinguished the Head, and
Primat of the Church, as two things diverse, but that he confounded them as
one. Hcere, as one that is at daggers drawing against himself, he confesses,
he did not, nor does, distinguish them: and yet here, with two disjunctive
particles, he separateth them.

Indeed, with the Papists, what is the Papal Primat of the Church, but the
Supreme Head of the Church? Therefore justly I found fault with the Jesuit,
for making two questions of one. viz. I. Whether the King be Primat of the
Church? 2. Whether the King be Supreme Head of the Church? and not thus rather,
according to his words and meaning: Whether the king be Head or Primate of the
Church; or Head, that is, Primate, etc. But in this his Examen, the Jesuit
does increase (and not lessen) the Jar with himself.

BECAN. Exam. Page 121

I Do not inquire what Tooker, and Burhill have professed or sworn of the
kings Supreme Government: but what they have written of the Primate of the
Church. Both of them deny that the king may be called Primate of the Church;
Hainric says be may be so called. There is the Jar.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
TRue it is, in our English tongue, as we do not call the kings Supreme
government of this Church, Primacy, but Supremacy: so do we not cell the king,
Primate Ecclesiastical, or Primate at all. But in respect that the English
word Supremacy, is translated into the Latin word Primatus; as we in Latin
ascribe unto the king, Primatum Ecclesiasticum, or Primatum, in omnibus causis,
et supra omnes personas Ecclesiasticas, Primacy Ecclesiastical, or Primacy, in
and over, all Causes, and persons Ecclestasticall: so we in Latin call the
king Primatem Ecclesiasticum, Primate Ecclesiastical, to weet, of his foresaid
(Regal, not Episcopal) Primacy or Supremacy Ecclesiastical, that is, in and
over all Ecclesiasticalls: which Mr. Burhill is so far off to deny, that he
has expressly allowed them, who assert it. So that here is nothing but empty
striving about words, which the Apostle condemns. I will therefore leave this
Jesuit, snatching at syllables, and catching of flics; I say, I will leave him
so striving, and with are him thus reasoning.

BECAN. Exam. Page 121 (...)

Doctor Tooker, and M. Burhill disputing against me, who denied the King to be
Primate of the Church; do deny it in that sense, wherein I said the King
usurped the Primacy of the Church.

But I did not mean that the King usurped the Primacy of the Church
Sacerdorall: for I elsewhere confess that the King disclaimeth it,

Therefore they, denying the King to have Primacy Ecclesiastical, do not
mean that he has not Primacie Sacerdotall.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
WHo taught this unlearned Jesuit to dispute from all particulars? Concerning
the general, do all disputers, at all times, reason according to the meaning of
the Adversary, which often times they understand not?

Touching the Minor, or later proposition, or Assumption of Becane; who would
not think his meaning to be, that the king by his confession disclaimeth all
Primacy sacerdotall, that is, Episcopal, Archiepiscopall, or Patriarchall? for
all Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs are Priests, and therefore their
Primacy Episcopal, etc. is Sacerdotall: but this Jesuit means nothing
less. For by Primacy Sacerdotall, he means here only the power of inferior
Priests or Presbyters, in Court internal only; who have no jurisdiction in
Court external, as though all our dispute were not of Primates,-and Primacy?
As though any inferior Priests, who were not Bishops, have at any time, bin
called Primates? feeling that by the Canon law, Primates and Patriarks, are all
one: as though Primacy with the Papists, does not respect the external Court
only. These are as plain, as the nose on Becanes face. Therefore his face is
hard, who abuses his Reader so grossly.

But I Will return this his argument upon his own head thus: If Dr. Tooker, and
Mr. Burbill deny the King to be Primate, or to have Primacy in that dense than
Becane says The King usurps Primacy; and Becane says The King usurps
Primacy Sacerdotall, that is to say, Episcopal: Then it follows that they
deny the King to be Primate, or to have Primacy Episcopal.

But the first is true, according to Becane; viz. That the deny, as Becane
means; and Becane means that the King usurps Primacy Episcopal.

Therefore the later is true also, viz That Dr. Tooker and Mr. Burhill, denying
the King to be Primate, or to have the Primacy; deny him to be Primate, or to
have Primacy Episcopal, as all Protestants do.

So that here is among us all, a full and settled Concord; and the Jesuits
Jar, as empty chafe, is blown clean away.

Becans Jar.
IIII. Question. Whether the King, by reason of his Primacy, may be called Head
of the Church?
THis Title first began to be usurped of King Henry the 8. as all Authors,
as well our own as our adversaries do testify. For thus writes Iacobus
Thuanus in his first book of the Histories of his times: Henricus post
diuonium, se Caput Ecclesiae constituit. K. Henry after his divorce (from Q.
Katherine) made himself Head of the Church etc. And Polydor Virgil lib. 27. of
his History of England, says: Interea habetur Concilium Londini, in quo
Ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis, nullis ante temporibusvisam, induit.
Henricus enim Rex Caputipsius Ecclesiae constituitur. In the mean while (to
wit after his foresaid divorce) a Council was held at London, wherein the
Church of England took to it self a form of power, never heard of before.
For that King Henry was appointed Head of the same Church etc. Genebrard also
in the fourth books of his Chronologic has these words: Henrieusanno 1534. in
publicis Comitijs se caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae appellauit. King Henry in the
year of our Lord 1534. in public Parliament, called himself Head of the
Church of England etc. Also Doctor Sanders in his book of the Schism of
England, says: Exqu^ licendiformula, primam occasionem sumptamatunt, vt Rex
Supremum Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae diceretur. By which manner of speech, it is
said, the first occasion was taken, of calling the King supreme Head of the
Church of England etc. And again, in the same book: Proponebantur eis noua
Comitiorum Decreta, and iubebantur iureiurando affirmare, Regem Supremum
Ecclesiae esse Caput. The new Laws or Statutes of the Parliament were
propounded unto them (to wit, to the Kings subjects) and they were commanded to
swear, that the King was head of the Church etc. John Calvin in like manner
upon the 7. Chapter of the Prophet Amos writes thus: Qui tantopere extulerunt
Henricum Regem Angliae, certe fuerunt homines inconsiderati. Dederunt enim illi
summam rerum omnium potestatem; and hoc me grauiter semper vulnerauit. Erant
enim blasphemi, cum vocarent eum summum Caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Those who
so greatly did extol K. Henry of England, were men void of consideration. For
they gane unto him the chief power of all things: and this point did ever gall
me grievously. For that they were blasphemers, when they called him the chief
Head of the Church under Christ etc.

2. The same Title did K. Edward Son to King Henry, and his Successor,
usurp, as it may be seen by his Letters to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, which begin thus: Edouardus Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and
Hyberniae Rex, supremum in terris Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hybernicae, ta^m
causis spiritalibus quam te^poralibus Caput; Reuerendo Thomae Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, salute^. Edward by the Grace of God K. of England, France and
Ireland, supreme Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, as well in
Causes Ecclesiastical as temporal: to the Reverend, Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, greeting etc. The same Title also did Bishop Cranmer give unto the
said King, as appears by his letters written to other Bishops subject unto
him, thus: Thomas permissione diuina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, per
Illustrisimum in Christo Principem Edouardum Regem sextum, supremum in terris
Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hybernicae, sufficienter and legitime
authorizatus; Tibi Edmundo Londinensi Episcopo, and omnibus fratribus
Coepiscopis, vice and nomine Regiae Maiestatis, quibus in hac part sungimur,
mandamus, vt Imagines ex. Ecclesijs cuiusque dioecesis tollantur etc. We Thomas
by Gods permission Archbishop of Canterbury, being sufficiently and lawfully
authorized by our most grat^ous Prince in Christ, King Edward the (...),
supreme Head on earth of the Church of England and Ireland, do in his Majesty's
Name and place, which berein we supply, command von Edmund Bishop of London,
and all the rest of our Brethren Bishops; that Imaves be taken out of the
Churches of every Diccesset etc. And Doctor Sanders also in his book of the
Schism of England says thus: Quamprimum visum est Henrici octaui mortem
diuulgare; statim Edonardus Henrich filius, nonum aetatis annum agens, Rex
Angliae proclamatur, and sumurn Ecclesiae Anglicanae in terris Caput, proxime
secundum Christum constitutel it etc. As score as it was thought good to
diuulge King Henry's death, by and by Edward his son, being of the age of
nine years, was proclaimed King of England, and ordained supreme Head of the
Church of England on earth, next under Christ etc.

3. Queen Elizabeth, although she were a woman, yet she thought her self no
way inferior to her Father or Brother, She therefore would be also called
supreme Head of the Church of England. For so writes Iacobus Thuanus in his
15. book of the Histories of his time. Elizabetha, recep to a Patre and fratre
titulo, Ecclesiae Caputper Angliam coepitappellati. Queen Elizabeth having
received the (former) Title from her Father and Brether, began to be called
Head of the Church throughout England etc.

4. But now aduyes, under K. James, this title is put in Repardie. The
Chaplain (to wit M. Doctor Andrews) does admit the same in his Tortura Torti:
but M. Tooker, and M. Burhill do reject it. M. Tookers words, which a little
before I recited are these: Olere autem malitiam, and clamitare audaciam tuam
videturillud, cum Regem Caput Ecclesiae, Primatemque confingas. It may seems to
savor of malice, and try out upon your sausines, when as you feign the King
to be Head and Primate of the Church etc. And in like manner does M. Burhill
page 133. reprehend a certain person of over much, want onnes and boldness, for
calling the King, Head, Pastor and Primate of Bishops.

5. In his debate and Jar then, what shall the King do? If he admit the Title
of Supreme Head of the Church of England, M. Tooker, and M. Burhill will no
doubt murmr streadly. If he rerect it, what then will the Chaplain say?
Perhaps this contention may be mollified, if the King, as he gave to the
Chaplain the Bishopric of Ely: so he would give to M. Tooker, and M. Burhill
two other Bishoprics. For then, least they might seem ungrateful, they would
easily grant this Title to the King, and far greater too.

English Concord. Page 32.

THe Head, Regal Primate, and th'alone Supreme governor in all things, and
over all persons Ecclesiastical, in the Church of England; signify one, and
the self same thing: wherein, all our English Protestant Writers do
uniformly accord; and so do openly and publicly profess the Kings royal
Title of Supreme Head under Christin England.

Here therefore the Jesuit contends for nifles. And this he might have
learned of the R. Bishop of Ely; Tott. Tort. page 338. et 339
who does not only admit that Title, but also foundlie proves the same by
Scriptures, and Fathers, in these words: Now to bring this name of Head unto
the King, from Gregory, or any other, needs no wondrous Art. The Holy Ghost in
this word was our guide. The Prophet Samuel speaks thus to his King: 1. Sa.
19.17
When thou wast little in thy own eyes, wast thou not made the Head of the
Tribes of Israel: of with tribes, the Tribe of Leny was one. Theriore the K. is
head of the leuitical tribe; in the which Tribe was the high Priest Abimelech
under the king his head. Wondrous ignorance it is to deny this; not wondrous
Art to prove this. Moreover: Chrysostom, a Bishop of the. Catholic Church (no
less godly, and learned then Gregory) called Theodosius, not only the Head,
but also the Top, or Crown of the head, even of all men upon the earth. I
think there was then a man upon earth, who was called the Bishop of Rome.

Agreeable hereunto writes Dr. Tooker, Duel. page 4
thus: The Bishop of Ely does with us, and with Chrysostom, so acknowledge the
king to be Head, and top of the Head; that he under stands him to be
governor of the Church, under the Primary head Christ.

See you not hereby (Jesuit) how impudently you lied, when you wrote thus: But
now this Title of Head, is endangered under King James etc. Dr. Tooker, and Mr.
Burhill will not have the King to be called such a Head of the Church, as you
Papists dream the Pope to be: viz. Unto whose motion, (as say the Clementines)
all are subject. From whom, as from an Head, taken up into the fellowship of
the individual unity, God does pour out his gifts in the whole body De Elect.
et Elect. potest. ca. Fundamenta.
From whom all Bishops descend, as members from the Head: De Minist. et
ordin. li. 2
who can do all things, that Christ can do: Hoftiens. de Transl. Epi. ca.
Quinto.
who has the same Tribunal and Consistory that Christ has. Abbat de Elect.c.
Venerabilem.


But is the Jesuit amongst the Prophets? It may be, among the false Prophets.
What, does he measure our Writers (who had rather lose their heads, then, in
the Papists sense, to ascribe unto their King, the Title of Supreme Head) with
the met-wand of Papal parasites?

In that Jar of Cardinals, about the Popes Primacy, to vveet, whether it
consist in the Temporalties of Kings, Directly, or Indirectly: what will Pope
Paul 5. do? If he admit that Primacy Direct; Bellarmine will murnur: if he
refuse it, what will Baromus, and the Canonists say?

If the Cardinals would bestow the Popedom upon Bellarmine, he would grant
unto the Pope, this, and a far greater Title Directly. But have the Papists
any greater Title then this papal, to weet, of the Head bf the Church? It
seems so: because according to his Parasits, these following are Catholic
Axioms.

First, The Pope can dispense above right, or law, and can make justice of
injustice: and can make no sentence a sentence, and can create somewhat of
nothing. De Trans, Epi. Quanto in glosla.


Secondly, The Pope is the true (Sovereign) Lord of Temporalties: so that he
can take away from one that which is his own: and that act of his holds for
good, though he sin. Princes are not Lords, but Tutors, Procurators, and
Stewards. Ioh. de patis. de porest. Pap. et Reg.


Thirdly, It is heretical to beliene, that Our Lord God the Pope, the maker of
this and that decree; can not decree as he has done. Extrau. loan. 22. ca.
Cum inter nonnullos in Gloss.
Is there any thing more? Yes, above God, and power divine. They have persuaded
the Popes, that.

Fourthly, The Popes may do all things, even what they list, even things
unlawful; and that they are More than God. Francis Zibarell.
Which made In Polycratico.
Camotensis long since write thus: The Popes command the Angels: They have
power over the dead: They offer violence to the Scriptures, thereby to gain
fullness of Power. The Pope is become intolerable: no Tyrant did ever equal
him in pride and pomp.

Behold here the Roman Head, how glorious, pompous, and (if he had rather
have it so) how tyrannous it is.

BECAN. Exam. Page 128.

IF the name, Head of the Church, and Primat of the Church, signisit the same
thing; then Tooker and Burhill, who deny the King to be Primat, not only
Ecclesiastical and Sacerdotall, but also in any other sense what soever: deny
also in the same sort the King to be Head.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
DOctor Tooker (as in my Concord, and in this 4. Question, out of his express
words was showed) did, together with the R; Bishop of Ely, acknowledge, the
King to be Supreme Head of this Church. Page 284.
M. Burhill, in his Appendix, writes thus: If any of us call the King Head of
the Church in his kingdom, that manner of speech, has good reason, and sense
orthodoxall. I did not reprehend any man as audacious, because, according to
our meaning, he calls the King, Caput, Pastorem, et Primatem, Head, Pastor,
and Primat.

The Jesuit told us before, Exam. page 321.
that he regarded not what they have sworn, and professed publicly, but
what they have written: let him therefore read this which they have written, to
make him ashamed of his shamelcsse untruths.

BECAN. Exam. Page 128

WHat will you say to the Bishop of Ely, who in his Tortur: Toni, page 331.
saud: It is a monstrous body, that has more Heads then one. And page 389. The
Church is one body, and there is but one Head of one body. That one Head is
Christ, and not the Pope. Whence it follows, that your English Church is more
monstrous then ours. For you have two Heads of diverse kinds,.i. Sacerdotall,
and Regal. We, but of one kind, that is, Sacerdotall. You make as many Heads,
as there be Christian Kings over their Dominions; but we, two oncly in all
Dominions Coristian. viz. Christ, and the Pope.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe unlearned Jesuit, presumptuously here enters the combat with the most
learned Bishop; a Pigmey with a Giant: but it seems he under stands neither
the R: Bishop, nor himself. The R: Bishop is so far off from denying our
King to be Head of this Church; that he has not only asserted it, but also
proved it our of the Scriptures, and Fathers, as has appeared: but hevtterly
denies, that either the King, or Pope, or any other, but the Lord JESUS only,
is Head of the Church, in the Popish sense; viz. such a Head, by whom all the
body boing coupled and knit together, by every joint for the furniture thereof,
Ephesians. 4. v. 16.
according to the effectual power which is in the measure of every part,
receives increase of the body, to the edifying of it self in love. For suchan
Head, Pope leo made Peter, and so him self, Epist. 89.
and every Pope; writing of Peter, as taken vpinto the fellowship of the
Individual unity: writing, I say, not only of God inspiring, but De
inspirante Petro, of Peter inspiring. So that no good thing passes from God,
the fountain of all good things, but by participation with Peter. Asthough he
were Emmanuell.

Such a Head, as is also the Head of faith; and therefore the author of faith:
because the head is the author and original of all sense and motion; which are
derived thence into the rest of the members. Such a Head, whose body is the
whole Church. Such a Head, as is the rock and foundation of the Church. Such
a Head of his Church, as he is the Bridegroom of his Church. If the Church
have but two such Heads, it cannot choose but be a monstrous body; as the
reverend Bishop ineuitably has concluded against the Church of Rome.

Where the Jesuit says, that Christ, and the Pope, are both of one kind; and
Christ, and the King, are of diverse kinds: I answer him, that the King does
resemble Christ as Head, much more then the Pope does. For both the Scriptures,
and ancient Fathers, call Kings, Heads of the Church, and Viears of GOD, within
their Dominions: but no Scripture, or ancient Father for the space of five
hundred years at least, after Christ, called the Pope of Rome, as by his
proper Title, either the Vicar of GOD, or Head of the vniners all Church.

Here is matter for Becane to work upon; or rather a bone for Becane to gnaw
upon. Yet our Kings, Gods Vicars, and Heads of the Church, do not take upon
them to be Heads-Bridegroomes: Heads-Rocks: Heads-Foundations: Heads-Authors
of faith: Heads-Originalls of all life, sense, and motion of the Church.

They rather detest, from their souls, the Luciferian, and Antichristian pride
of the Romish Bishop, challenging to be such an Head of the Church.

But what will the Jesuit say, to three Popes at onces Had the Church of Rome
then but two Heads? It were hard to iustle out Christ, as no Head: and it is no
easy matter, to shape one Head of three Popes (and those Antipopes) shoueled
together. Or were there so many Pope-Heads then, quot sunt in Mitra Pontificia
coronae, as there be crowns in the Popes Mitre?

BECAN. Exam. Page 131

YOu cite Clement, asserting all to be subject to the motion of the Papisticall
head of the Church. Why do you not add the place where Clement says so? I
think you never saw Clement. You make too much have. And you perceive not that
you cite these words in prejudice of your King. Because the words, All are
subject to the motion of the Head, signify nothing but this, that all are
subject to the command of their Superiors. Dot you exempt any from the
government and motion of your Head in England? Peradventure your self, and
such like Predicants.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
I Did not imagine the ignorance of this Jesuit to have been such, that, when
I had set down the express words of the Canon law, so triuiall, as being
notoriously known by the meanest students of that law; he could not have
readily found the place where those words are written. But since I see the case
of his ignorance to be so pitiful, I will supply his want of skill. Let him
therefore turn to the Clementines of Pope Clement the 5. Title 3. De
Haereticis. cap. Ad vestrum, and there, upon the Text-word, Ecclesiae, in the
Gloss, (which is cited by the learned Canonists for good Canon law) he shall
find written these very words and sullables: Omnes igitur sunt subiecti motioni
illius (Papae): et sunt in illo, quasi membra de membro. de Elect.
Significasti. All are subject to the motion of the Pope, and are in him, as
members of the member the Head. Becane dare not deny this to be catholic and
Canonical popish-doctrine: not withstanding, it may be, he further desires to
hear a Text-Canon of another Author of Canons, touching this motion Papal, and
the strange subjection thereunto. For this, let him turn to Did. 40. cap. Si
Papa. There shall he hear Boniface the Martyr uttering these Text Canonical
words; If the Pope, negligent of the salvation of his own sonle, and of others,
should draw with him, by heaps, innumerable people, to be tortured with him by
many plagues, or hellish torments eternally, they all must be so subject to
that his drawing motion, that he may not be rebuked of any of them for that
motion.

Or admit the Popes motion were, to forbid virtue, and to command vice: then
(as says Bellarmine) the whole Church, must be so subject to that motion, as
to believe, that vice is good, and virtue evil, unless they will sin against
conscience. Is not this lowly good infernal subjection? Far be it from any
of us to acknowledge any subjection to any such motions of our Kings or Queens.

But why does the Jesuit presume, to tell the meaning of that Author, whom, as
he here confesleth, he knows not? Let him learn more modesty hereafter;
and in the mean time know, that for members to be subject to the motion of
their Head (for example, the Church of Rome to their Pope-Head) is, not only
to obey the command of their head (as if the legs should move, when the head
would have them move) but to receine the virtue of motion from the head,
without which, they cannot move at all.

Hence it is, that in great distemperatures of the head, as Apoplexies, or the
like, the members are void of all motion. And so it fares with the Church of
Rome, and their Pope-Head: from whom, as from their Head (so says their Canon)
even their Head of faith, GOD powers out his gifts (the gifts of motion) into
all the members. Yet in such sort, as that without partaking of the Pope-Head,
GOD (says Leo) powers no gift or grace into any member.

God for bid we should acknowledge the King to be such an Head of motion, or
we be subject to any such motion. His Majesty detesteth any such claim: and
we derest all such subjection. So little is the King preiudicated by this
quotation.

Touching the scornfully objected exemption of our Predicants from the Kings
command: were your popish shauelings borne in England, the Seminary Priests,
and Jesuits, as loyal and obedient to the King, as our English Preachers are;
the crown would stand upon the Kings head with more safety, and his subjects
should eat the labors of their hands, and drink the water of their own wells
with more security. Were your Priests and Jesuits or confounded, none would
hurt or destroy in all the mountain of Gods holiness. None would hatch the
Cockatrise eggs, or weaue the Spyders web, of Gunpowder treasons, and milhons
of other traiterous complots, and bloody conspiracies.

You, you are they who in very deed trouble Israel, and bring the whole
Christian world into combustion. It is a statute enacted in the heavens, that
every soul, (...), Romans 13. ver. 1.
(as says Chrysos^tome writing upon those words) (...); be he an Apostle, or
Evangelist, or Prophet, or any other, Peter, Pope, or whosoever: should be
subject to the higher Powers for conscience sake. But by the Popes statute or
Canon, the vilest shaueling Priests aforesaid, are so exempted from subjection
to the highest Powers, Kings, and Emperors, that they are not bound to obey
them or their laws, for Conscience, but only for Order sake.

Therefore they are not bound to give, neither will they give, to Caesar, that
which is Caesar's, viz. Tribute; for, Tribute belongs to him: nor Custom; yet
Custom is due to him. They will not, as Saint Paul did, stand at Caesar's
judgment seat, to be tried there: much less will they, as Christ did, present
themselves to that tribunal which has power given to it from above, to be
condemned there. Some kind of reason they may have for it; as this: They hold
with Antichrist, why then should they follow Christ?

Touching the popish Layicks, If (as the Jesuit here says) all the Kings
subjects within his Realms, are bound to obey the King; why do they disobey
him, even in the face (being open and professed wilful Recusants) to come to
Church, there to hear Gods word truly preached, and his Sacraments duly
administered? to pray to God, and to praise God in the congregations of his
Saints? Why do they (against the law of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of
their King) refuse to testify by oath their Allegiance to their Sovereign?
Why? unless it be for that they want motion; as having no virtue of motion
thereunto, derived unto them, from their Pope-Head: or else, because they take
them selves to be the subjects of the Pope, and not of the King. And this is
indeed Prejudicial to the King, in the highest degree.

BECAN. Exam. Page 132

YOu cite out of the Canon law, some maimed words, which you read not there,
nor under stand: That you may understand them, I will cite them whole as they
are: The Sacrament of this office etc. They are Pope Nicolas words, and
contain these three things. 1. That Christ placed the Sacrament of Preaching
the gospel, principally in Peter, when he saw the vessel let down from
heaven, and when it was said unto him, Rise Peter, kill and cate. 2. That God
would have the virtue, and effect of the gospel, to be powered upon the
Gentiles from Peter, as from a Head. 3. That God took Peter into the
Jellowship of individual unity, by communicating his name, and dignity to
him, for he would have Peter called the rock, and foundation of that Church,
whereof he is the rock and foundation. What gather you hence against the Pope?
nothing as all. Only you bewray your dullness, and ignorance berein.

Dr. HARR IS Reply.
I Gather hence, that the Pope is very Antichrist, showing himself as God. The
Scripture says, that, by preaching the gospel, 1. Cor. 3.7.
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but this God only gives the increase;
that is the virtue and effect of preaching. But here Peter, to weet, the Pope,
is said to give the virtue and effect of preaching.

The Scripture, 1. Cor. 3.11
yea the Canon law, says, that there is no foundation, or rock of the Church,
but only Christ Jesus. But here the Pope challenges, not only the name, but
the very Dignity of Christ, viz. to be, as Christ is, The foundation and rock
of the Church.

God says, Esaias 48.11.
He will not give his Glory, or Dignity, to any other: but here it is said,
that Peter, to weet, the Pope, is assumpted into the Dignity of the indiuidual
unity. The individual unity, is our Lord God; but here the Pope is assumpted
into the fellowship of the name: and hence it is, that the Papists or
Papi-coliks, call that Romish Anrichrist, their Lord God the Pope.

Thus have I gathered, out of the blasphemous assertio^s of this Jesuit here,
and out of their Canon law, enough for this one time, and to much for Becane to
answer all his life time, against their Pope-Head.

But how does the Jesuit gather, that the Sacrament of preaching was
principally constituted in Peter, when, after the vessel let down, it was
said unto him, Rise Peter, kill and eat? seeing that Christ before his
passion, did constitute the Sacrament of preaching, equally and with the self
same words, in all his Apostles, saying, Gopreach the gospel to all the world.
By virtue whereof, the rest, as well as Peter, did preach the Gospel: but this
vision, and this speech to Peter, was after Christ's ascension: not to
constitute the Sacrament of preaching the Gospel principally in him; but to
reform the error that was principally in him, viz. that he ought not to
preach the gospel to the Gentiles. Therefore by that speech and vision, he was
emboldned to preach the Gospel to Cornelius a Gentile; but not to kill
Cornelius, as Cardinal Baronius expounded those words against the Venetians.

If the Jesuit had cited the whole words of the Canon, as he promised to do,
he might have learned by those words of the Canon, Dexteras Societatis: the
right hands of Fellowship; that the Sacrament of preaching the Gospel, was as
principally constituted in Paul toward the Gentiles, as it was in Peter
toward the Jews.

As touching me, I had read that Canon often: but I purposely cited, out of it,
those words only which show, what a blasphemous Head the Church of Rome has,
who challenges to be assumpted into the fellowship of the individual unity,
in such sort, that all gifts and graces of God, are powered upon the Church from
him, and through him, as the Head of that his body, the Church.

And those words which I cited, were not maimed, but full enough to euince the
Pope to be such a blasphemous Head indcede. Notwithstanding, I must give the
Jesuit leave to hold on his course, viz. to wound his Pope, when he seeks to
heal him; to disgrace me without cause, and to belly me, without blushing.

BECAN. Exam. Page 133

YOu cite out of Durand truly, that all Bishops descend from the Pope, as
members from the head. Which is nothing else but this: that they all receive
from the Pope Iurisduction of the external Court. Which, as English Academicks
say, is in li^e sort given by the king, to the Bishops in England. Therefore
here is the Jar between you, and the Academicks.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IN England, the King does but nominate some to be Bishops; They are chosen by
the Deane and Chapter. The King approves and ratifieth the Electio: but they
are consecrated Bishops, only by Bishops. And thereupon, without any grant
thereof from the King, they have, ipso facto, Episcopal function and
Jurisdiction in external Court. Whereby it is apparent, even by this
Iesuitesinterpretation of the words, that our Bishops do not descend from our
King, as the Romish Bishops descend from the Bishop of Rome; who receive the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the virtue and effect of their preaching from the
Pope; and so descend from him, as members from the Head: which Pope (says
Bellarmine) is the only Bishop iure diuino, by the word of GOD: and all the
rest of the Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, are but his Curates, iure
human^, by the wordor inspiration of the Pope. Inspirante Petro (as Leo says)
The Pope breathing on them the Holy Ghost.

All English Academicks would detest such descending of our Bishops from the
King; who gives unto our Bishops chosen and consecrated, their Baronries, and
Jurisdiction coactiue by corporal or temporal mulcts (which is Dr. Tookers
meaning herein) but not Jurisdiction merely sacerdotall or Episcopal; viz. to
excommunicate, to give Orders, to confirm etc. And so here is still the
Concord maintained.

BECAN. Exam. Page 134.

THE rest which you cite out of Hostiensis, and the Abbat, you neither cite
well, nor understand. It irketh me to warn you so often, and to obtain
nothing.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Truly I understand, that Martin Becane is a very unlearned, and slugge
Jesuit, as shall in this place, manifestly appear. In the mean time, I pray
you Christian Reader to observe how the case is now altered, touching the
Popish Headship, from that it was heretofore: for even as Antichrist grows on
to his height of impudency, and impiety; so the Headship increases.

Heretofore the Pope was said to be, not simply, the Head of the Church, as
Christ is; but the inferiour-ministeriall Head: now he is grown to be the
Supreme Head, equal with Christ, as having the same Tribunal and Consistory,
that Christ has, and being able to do all that Christ can do. To prove this,
I cited the words of the two most famous, and iudiciously learned Canonists,
that ever were; Cardinal Hostiensis, and Abbat Panormitane: and in the margin
of my book, I quoted rightly the places where those words were written. The
matter you see, to be of the greatest moment, and most fitting to the dispute
of the Head of the Church, here in hand: yet the Jesuit has no other thing to
answer but this; you do not cite those words well, nor understand them.
Whereof (Christian Reader) be you judge, after that I have produced at large
their own words; which are as follows: Panormitan. Super prima primi de
Electione, cap. vener abilem. verb. Transtulit: Papa transtulit imperium in
Germanos Papa autem hoc potuit facere ex magna causa concurrente: cum possit
facere quicquid Deus potest. Alias Christus non fuisset diligens Paterfamilias
si non dimisisset in terris aliquem loco sui, qui expedientibus causis possit
omnia facere, quae ipse Christus, Hanc regulam firmauit Hostiensis in cap.
Quanto, De Translatione praelatorum; vbi dicitur quod cum Dei et Papae idem sit
consistorium, omnia potest facere, quae ipse Christus, excepto peccato. Sed
improprie excipit peccatum, quod Peccatum non cadit sub potentia, imo sub
impotentia. The Pope translated the Empire to the Germans. The Pope might do
it, upon great cause, because be can do whatsoever God can do. Otherwise,
Christ had not been a diligent father of his family, if he had not left one,
in his own stead on earth, who, as causes require, can do all, that Christ
himself can do. This rule has Hostiensis confirmed in cap. Quanto. de
translat: Praelat. where it is said, that seeing there is but one, and the
self same Consistory of God and the Pope, The Pope can do all things that
Christ himself can do, except sin. But Hostiensis improperly excepted
sin, because sin falls not under power, but rather under impotency or
weakness.

By these their words thus at large set down, it appears, that I cited the
words well, and knew what I cited; even enough to demonstrate, that the Popish
Primate, is a blasphemous Head; and that our King is no such Head. Both which
are appatant to any man of reading: but this slugge Jesuit is so unlearned
that he understands nothing, which has any sound learning, or judicious
reading in it.

Becans Jar.
V. Question. Whether the Kings Primacy do consist in any Power, or
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical?
HERE now, is there a great Iaure and debate amongst our English Adversaries:
nor can the same be easily understood, unless it be first well distinguished.
Ecclesiastical Power is threefold as the Divines do teach. One of Order;
another of interior Jurisdiction; the third of exterior Inrisdiction. To the
first belongs to effect or consecrate, and to administer Sacraments: to the
second to govern the Church in the interior Court, or Court of Conscience;
and to the third, belongs to govern the Church in the exterior Court. Now
certain it is, that the King has not the Power of Order, by reason of his
Primacy. For this does M. Tooker confess page 14. where he says: Reges non
habent potellatem administrandi Sacramenta. Kings have not power to administer
Sacraments. It is also certain that be has not Jurisdiction of the interior
Court, or Court of Conscience. For this in like manner does M. Tooker confess
page 63. Omnis jurisdictio (says be) in foro interiori Sacerdotum est, nulla
Regum. All Jurisdiction in the interior Court (or Court of Conscience)
belongs to Priests, not ance way to Kings, etc.

2. All the question then is, whether the King has Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in the exterior Court or no? About this point are the
Englishmen at a great jar and variance amongst themselves: some affirming it,
some denying it, others distingnishing. M. Tooker affirms it page 305. in
these words: Qui habet plenissimam and amplissiman iurisdiction^min foro
exteriore, potest candem dare and auferre. Rex eam habet. Ergo potest eandem
dare and auferre. Totum hoc liquet ex V. and N. Testamento. He that bath most
full and ample Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, can give and take away the
same (at his pleasure.) But the King has this Jurisdiction. Ergo, he can give
and take away the same. All this is manifest out of the old and new Testament
etc. With him agrees also M. Salclebridge page 140. Regesoleo sacro vncti,
capaces sunt Iurisdictionis spiritualis. Kings (says be) anointed with holy
oil, are made capable of spiritual Jurisdiction etc. And then again in the
same place out of the Laws of Eng. Rex (says be) est persona mixta, vtpote
qui Ecclesiastica^ and temporale^ iurisdictione^ habet, and quide^ Suprema. The
king is a person mixed, to wit, that has both Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, and that in the highest degree etc. And yet more p. 144. Perleges
Ecclesiasticas in hoc Regno approbatas, vnus Sacerdos duo beneficia habere non
potest, nec Bastardus Sactis initiari. Verum Rex, Ecclesiastica potestate and
jurisdiction, quam habet, in vtroque, dispensate potest. By the
Ecclesiastical Laws approned in this Kingdom (of England) one Priest may not
have two Benefices, nor a Bastard be made a Priest. But the King, by the
Jurisdiction And Power Ecclesiastical, which he has, can dispense in both
etc.

3. M. Tompson, and M. Burhill do absolutely deny it: M. Thomson, page 80. of
his book writing thus: Primatus Ecclesiae non est definiendus per
iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, sed per gubernationem supremam. The Primacie of
the Church, is not to be defined by Jurisdiction Ecclesisstical, but by supreme
Government, etc. And again, page 95. Diximus, Regem gubernare quidem
Ecclesiastica, sed non Ecclesiastice. We have said before, that the King
indeed does govern Ecclesiastical things, but not Ecclesiastically. And why I
pray you? Because, for sooth, be has not Jurisdiction Ecclesiatically, but
onoly Temporal. And heerounto agreath Must. Buchill, page 234. granting this
negatine proposition. Rex (says he) nullam habet Iurisdictionem
Ecclesiasticam, nec in foro interiori, nec inexteriori. The King has no
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, neither in the interior, nor exterior Court,
etc.

4. Now my Lord of Ely, he distinguishes in this case, as may be seen in M.
Tookers Book, page 305. in these words: Habet Rex omnem iurisdictionem
spiritualem, in foro exterioti, exceptis quibusdam Censuris. The King has all
inrisaction spiritual in the extoriour Court, except is certain Consures, etc.
So as now to this question (to weet whether the King, as he is Primate and
Head of the Church, have any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical or spiritual in the
exterior Court,) we must an^were thus: First with M. Tooker, and M.
Salclebridge, That he has most ample, most full, and supreme Jurisdiction.
Secondly, with my Lord of Ely, That he has indeed some, but notall. And
lastly, with M. Burhill, and M. Thomson, That he has none, no not any one
jot at all.

English Concord. Page 38

THese are the very express words of the law of England, which is now in
force. Star. 1. Elzab.
That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which was exercised heretofore, or
lawfully might be exercised, by any spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, to
visit the Ecclesiastical state and order, also to reform, and to bring into
order, and to correct Ecclesiastical persons, all errors, heresies, schisms,
etc. is for ever united, and annexed to the imperial Crown of this kingdom:
whereby the King of England, through his full power, by his Letters Patents,
may assign and authorize such persons being natural borne subjects, as he
shall think meet, to exercise and execute under his Highness, all manner of
Jurisdictions, privileges, and preheminences, in any wise touching or
concerning any spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within his Highness
Dominions.

Now all Protestant English Writers, in the Oath of Supremacy which they have
taken, Lorament. Primat. in Apol. Reg. page 56.
have openly testified, and in their conscience declared, that they will with
all their power, aid and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
prehemi^e^ces united and annexed to the Crown of this kingdom. Wherefore, all
plainly agree in the thing it self. But that, which the Jaws of Engl. call
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and define to be the supreme Government in all
Ecclesiastical things, and over all Ecclesiastical persons, M. Thomson would
rather call, Supreme Government.

The R: Tortur. Tort. p. 151
Bishop touching this matter writes thus: This I urge, that the Jurisdiction
which Abbesses have with you, is ordinary spiritual Jurisdiction. For the
Abbat has ordinary: and in her administration, the Abbess is equalled with the
Abbat. And what should let it? Because they cannot exercise censures,
excommunicate? But excommunication does not directly belong to the key of
order. In 4. Sente^. Did. 18. q. 2. art. 2.
Aquinas asserteth this; Excommunication is no act of the key directly, but
rather of the external court. And it is a common opinion with you, that he
that has not the key of order, may excommunicate. Those things which are of
order, and the inner court, are denied to women: but things belonging to the
outward court, are communicated to Layiks: and of those things there is no
reason but that women may be capable; As Stepha. d'Aluin does stiffly argue for
his Abbesses, and therein takes our part: the Sorbon approving his opinion
therein (Although we ascribe not to our King power of Censure) and therein you
give much more to your Abbesses, then we to our Prince. Ma. Burhill demes the
King to have any Jurisdiction in the outward court, to weet, Sacerdotall.

So the King of England has all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that is, Supreme
and Regal (whereof only our controversy is): but no Sacerdotall, no, none at
all; and yet without any Jar whatsoever.

But oh Becane, can you without blushing (if there be but a grain of pudency
in you) obstinatly detract from most religious Kings all supreme Jurisdiction,
properly Regal, when women (of whom St. Paul, 1. Tim. 2. v. 12. I permit not a
woman to use authority over the man) with you, are capable, Fran. Steph. D'
Aluin de Potestat. Episc. Abbatu Abbatiss. ca. 2.3. 4.11. etc.
and partakers of Spiritual Jurisdiction, Sacerdotall, or Episcopal? viz. Of
power to excommunicate Clerks, to absolve, to visit, to institute, to present
to Benefices, Prelatures, and dignities Ecclesiastical: yea of having all
administration as well spiritual as temporal, but only of those things of
order, whereof a woman is incapable.

Lastly, al those things which Salobrigiensis does here recite, touching Kings
anointed with sacred oil, etc. Mixed persons, etc. which may dispense against
laws Ecclesiastical, are transcribed out of the express words of the common
laws of England: which, in this kind of argument, might have satisfied to the
full.

BECAN. Exam. Page 139

THomson says expressly, that The Primacy of the Church, is not to be defined
by Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: but the law of England does so define it.
Thomson says, that The King does govern Ecclesiastical things, but not
Ecclesiastically: therefore his Jurisdiction is not Ecclesiastical. Burhill
detracteth from the King all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the outward Court,
that is, as you say. Sacerdotall: but Tooker faith, that All jurisdiction of
Priests, is in the inward Court. The Bishop of Ely says, The King has no
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the outward Court, but only power of Censure.
And says again: The King has not power of censure. But Hainric, and Tooker
say, The King has all supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The English law
says, The King has all manner Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The Bishop of Ely
says, He has some Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but not all.

So the King has Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; with Tooker, Supreme: with the
law, all manner: with the Bishop, some, but not all: with Burhill, and
Thomson, none, none at all. Is this your English Concord?

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe fool will always be playing with his babble; some fools with variety:
but this claywitted Jesuit, plays with his down right repetitions of the same
things in the same words; whereas heretofore, he has received in my English
Concord, a full, clear, and solid answer, to all, and every one of these
particular seeming Iarres; but in truth no iarres at all. Wherein is manifested
our good Concord, even in all those seeming Iarres. In short, thus: Master
Thomson denies the Kings Supreme Church government to be called Primacy, or
the King Primat; as Papists understand it, to weet, Episcopal: but he himself
calls the Kings supreme Church government, Primacy, and the King in respect
thereof Primat; as the Protestants mean, to weet, Regal.

So Dr. Tooker, denied the King to be called Head of this Church; that is,
Episcopal, or Papal: but Doctor Tooker acknowledged expressly, that the King
is not only the Head, but also the top of the Head of this Church; to weet,
Regal. And in that sense, says Ma. Burhill, they say well, who call the King,
Caput, Appendix page 284.
Pastore^, et Primatem, the Head, Pastor, and Primat of this Church.

Doctor Harris says Ma. Burhill denies the King to have Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the outward Court, viz. Sacerdotall; that is, in Dr. Harris
meaning, not Presbyteriall, but Episcopal (according to that of Lactantius,
who called Sacerdotium, summum Episcopatum. Sacerdotall, that is, Episcopal,
Archiepiscopall, or Patriarchall.) And Dr. Tooker says, that all Jurisdiction
of Priests, that is, of Presbyters, or lowest Priests, or all Jurisdiction
Presbyteriall, is in the inner Court. Is here any Jar?

The Bishop of Ely says, The King has power of Censure, to weet, Regal, and
Ecclesiastical (as plainly appeared, when Solomon deposed Abiathar the high
Priest. And again, he says, The King has not power of Censure; that is,
Episcopal, as Excommunication. Or in short thus: The King has some
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, viz. Regal. And the King has not all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, viz. Episcopal.

Dr. Tooker, and Hainric say, the King has all supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.i. Regal. And our English law says, The King has, not (as this
Jesuit writes) all manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical (for that would
include both Episcopal, and Presbyteriall, or in Becane his sense,
Sacerdotall) but all manner of supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that is,
Regal. Ma. Thomson says, The King has no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or
Primacy (for Primacy and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are all one with Ma.
Thomson) Episcopal: but Ma. Thomson says: The King has Primacy, or Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Regal. So the King has all, and all manner
Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Regal: and, The King has not all, The
King has none, none at all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Sacerdotall, or
Episcopal. The King does not govern Ecclesiastical things, ecclesiastice,
that is, Episcopally, or Sacerdotally: The King does govern Ecclesiastical
things, Regally. Is not here a plain Concord, and uniform agreement? The
Christian harmony whereof, this Jesuit cannot dissolve, though all his iarring
hart-strings would burst in-sunder.

But whereas this Jesuit says, that M. Burhill affirms the King to have no
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, none at all, in Court either inward or outward;
he shows himself to be past shame, in his gross untruths: for M. Burhills
express words in his Page 285.
Appendix are these: Quomodo nullam, nullam penitus huiusmodi Iurisdictionem
Regiesse aio his verbis; vbi propositionem qua hoc asseratur, falsam esse
pronuntio? How do I say, that the King has none Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
none at all, in Court inward, or outward, when I pronounce that proposition to
be false, wherein this is asserted. So the Jesuit brings in Ma. Burhill
affirming that, which he expressly denith.

The particular manner, and material points, of this Supreme Government Regal
and Ecclesiastical, are set down by our gracious King James: by Queen
Elizabeth: by three of our most learned Bishops, viz. of Salisbury, Winchester,
and Ely (as is transcribed in this Reply, and English Concord: but especially,
in Hainric Salo-Brigian his Becano-Baculus) with uniform consent.

BECAN. Exam. Page 141.

IF supreme Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, that is, Primacy of the Church, was
exercised under Queen Mary, and might lawfully be executed by the Pope: then
it follows, that it was lawfully separated from the Regal Crown. For, if
it were by Divine right united unto it, it could not be separated from it,
and lawfully exercised.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IF the heavens fall, we shall have stoare of Larksheads. We will as soon
grant that the heavens may fall, as that the Pope might lawfully exercise
supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this kingdom.

If Queen Mary would wilfully and superstitiously renounce that Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which was due unto her, as Queen of England, by
the law of God, and the law of this kingdom; yet it follows not, that the said
supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, was not by divine and humane right,
united to the Crown. The public worship and scruice of GOD, was under the
law, united to the persons Leuiticall, and to the place where the Temple was:
yet Jeroboam, who made all Israel to sin (as Quecne Mary, more bloody then
he, made all England to sin) changed both persons, and place, by whom, and
wherein, Gods divine public worship was then to be performed. Here then is
naught else, but Becanicall folly, or foppery Jesuitical.

BECAN. Exam. Page 145

THat which you cite from the Bishop of Ely, and assert here your self, viz.
That we give more to an Abbess, (namely power to exco^municat) then you to the
Queen, is not true. You ascribe all to the Queen, which you do to the King, as
to have Primacy, to be head of the English Church, etc. Abbesses with us, have
not power to excommunicate, as Elizabeth with you, had. Hear what our Canons
think of this matter: It is plain, 33. q 5. ca. Mulierem
that the woman is subject to the dominion of the man (or her husband) and has
no authority. For she cannot teach, nor be a witness, nor judge, how much less
may she command, or reign? De sentent. Excommunicationis cap. De monialibus.
And again: If Nuns or Monialls, lay violent hands upon themselves, their
Conuerts, or Clerks: they ought to be absolned by the Bishop of that
Diocese, wherein their Monasteries are.

Hence the canonists gather, that Abbesses cannot absolve (and therefore cannot
excommunicate) their Monialls. And this is observed in our practice. See
Suarez. Tom. 5. d. 2. Sect. 2. et 3.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THE reverend Bishop of Ely, asserted, the Abbesses with Papists to have or
dinary Jurisdiction spiritual, and therein to be equal with Abbats: and that
nothing hindered, but that they might excommunicate, because according to Tho.
Aquinas, Excommunication is not an act of Order, or inward Court, but of the
outward: And I, in my English Concord, set down the particulars of that
ordinary spitituall Jurisdiction of Abbesses, viz. ( To excommunicate, absolve,
visit, institute, confer benefices, present to Benefices, Prelatures, and
Dignities Ecclesiastical: and to have all Administration of the Monesteriall
Monialls, or Nuns; as well Spiritual, as Temporal; but only those things
of order, whereof a woman is incapeable.) ex Tractatu doctissimo, out of the
most learned Treatise, of Father Stephen Dr. Aluin, entitled thus: A Treatise
of the Power of the Abbats and Abbesses: printed at Parise 1607. authorized
solemnly to be printed; and in very singular manner allowed with high
commendation, by the Divines of Parise, deputed for examination of all books
to be printed there.

In my margin notes I directed the Jesuit to the particular chapters of that
Treatise, where the said Stephen does not only assert those particulars; but
also solidly and indiciously prove the same, by the Canon law, and best
Canonists writing comment, upon that law. Notwithstanding, this Jesuit, as
though his nose bled, turns aside from all these (so many words, so many
pressures of him) and says but this: It is false, Abbesses with us have no
power to excommunicate.

Did ever any Jesuit so unlearned as this Becane is, and here shows himself
to be, write with pen? Stephen D'Aluin, does not only say it, but from sound
premises conclude it. The Jesuit, leaving the premises unanswered, or
untouched, denies the conclusion; and sinking under the burden of the
respondent, will rather play the opponents part, and so obiecteth these two
empty Canons nothing to the purpose. 23. q 5. cap Multerem.
The former is of private women, that they should be subject to their husbands:
and not usurp authority over other men, as, to teach them publicly, to judge
them, to rule, or reign over them, to weet, as the Gloss expounds it, in
temporalls.

If this Canon should be understood generally of all women (for Abbesses are
not there once mentioned) then Mathilda Countess, of whom the Gloss in L. vlt.
cod. de Arbit. makes such honorable mention, could not command or judge them,
who were her subjects as Countess: nor Q. Mary (so much commended by all
Papists) might reign, as Queen, over her English subjects. By what right or
law then, did she shed innocent blood of so many Martyrs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, and Laiks of all sorts, Sexes and Ages, exceeding much, till
she replenished England, from corner to corner; as Manasses did Jerusalem?
Angel: in rep. qua^. cod. de fidei com. et in L. Foeminae F. de reg. iur is. et
in L. cum praetor F. de iudic: says that He saw a certain Queen, named Joan,
sitting in the Regal seat, and giving sentence of death, against them of
Balso.

The latter Canon says, that Monialls, or Nuns, De senten, Excoman.ca. De
Monialibus.
laying violent hands upon Clerks, should or might be absolved by the Bishop;
which is true, when either the Abbess is not exempted, from Jurisdiction
Episcopal, as many of them are not: or, when the Pope does not give, or derive
from himself as Head, ordinary Spiritual Jurisdiction to the said Abbesses,
as to many of them he does; for then it is a ruled case, especially amongst
the Canonists, (though peradventure this seely Jesuit be ignorant thereof) that
they may, by virtue of that ordinary Spiritual Jurisdiction, excommunicate,
absolve, institute, visit, etc. those Ecclesiastical things only excepted,
which pertain to the key of order.

Indeed the Schoolmen, as Thomas Aquinas. in 4. did. 19. q. 1. art. 1. et 2.
and q. 3. ad. 4. also did. 25. q. 2. art. 2. and q. 1. ad. 2. And Paladanus
Durand. in 4. did. 19. q. 1. art. 1. Syluester verb. Abbatissa. and Dominicus
Soto in 4. Did. 20. q. 1. art. 4. deny to Abbesses Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction or dinary: yet they acknowledge the same, as delegated unto them
from the Pope. But the Canonists proceed further: for they hold, that the very
dignity of the Prelature, and excellency of the offices of Abbesses, does
give unto those Ecclesiastical women, to weet Abbesses, Spiritual
Jurisdiction, not only delegated, but even ordinary, over their Monialls or
Nuns: and this they gather out of the Canon law. De Mayor. et Obed. cap.
Dilecta. where Pope Honorius 3. commands obedience to the Abbess of Brubigen:
who had suspended Clericos suae Iurisdictioni subiectos, ab officio, et
beneficio; The Clerks under her, from their office, and benefice.

This is a more plentiful and sound answer unto these two Canons, so fondly
objected, then the Jesuit deserves, and so we may leave him here. But because
this point now in hand does so nearly touch the Kings Supremacy, or his
Supreme Jurisdiction Spiritual and Ecclesiastical; to stifle this Jesuit
herein, once for all, and ever hereafter, I will proceed to the further
declaration, and demonstration hereof; wherein I will observe this course
following: viz. to prove out of the Canon law, or Canonists ancient and
modern, or both,

First in general, that all Laics, Males, or Females, are capeable of
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, in the outward Court; even to
Excommunicate.

Did. 32. ca. Praeter hoc. verb. Ducibus. in Glossa: Laicus de mandato
superior is, potest suspendere clericos, et excomunicare, quia Excommunicatio
est potius Iurisdictionis quam or dinis. Ext. de Elect. Transmissam. Did. 63.
c. Adrianus. etc. In Synodo. D. 96. c. Been quidem. et c. Nos ad sidem. et
causis matrimonialibus 35. q. 5. Ad sedem. 2. q. 5. c. Mennam. Io. Hoc tamen
videtur alienum a laico, cum de rebus spiritualibus se non intromittat. vt
Extra. de. Indi. Decernimus, imo, vt ibt dicitur, prohibetur praelatis, vt
talia Laicis non committant: tamen Dominus Papa, qui habet plenitudinem
Potestatis, posset committere vt Excommunicarent. Bar. A laick, (to weet, male,
or female, for some of the Canons here cited by the Gloss concern the males;
but others, especially the last, concern the females directly, as that, 2. q.
5. Mennam) may suspend, and excommunicate clerks, by command, or commission
from the superior, especially of the Pope. viz. by Spiritual power delegated:
because excommunication is not of Order, but of Jurisdiction in the outward
Court.

Did. 96. c. been quidem, in the Gloss.. Praeter. Romanum. Papa quamlibet
causam Ecclesiasticam, committere potest laico. The Pope may delegate to a
Laick spiritual Jurisdiction of External Court, whereby to hear and
determine any cause Ecclesiastical.

More distinctly thus: 1. Of Laik males. Did. 96. Been quidem. in gloss. verb.
Laico. Non licuit Laico homini, sacer doti anathema dicere, vel excommunicare,
iure suo; sed ex delegatione Papae, been. A Laik man, could not lawfully, by
his own right or power, excommunicate a Priest; but by, power delegated from
the Pope, he might well do it. 2. Of Laik Females. Cause. 2. q. 5. ca. Mennam.
in gloss. verb. Arbitrio. Delegatur hic laico, spirituale negotium. The case
was this; Menna a Bishop, was accused before the Pope of certain crimes, whom
(after that by his oath he had purged himself) the Pope dismissed, and
absolved: notwithstanding, afterward, the Pope committed to Brunichilda, Queen
of France, full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, to convent before her the said
Bishop, for the said crimes, to purge himself with two other
compurgator-bishops joined with him, by their oaths; so far forth as she
thought good; provided, that she did not exceed the extent of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; viz. to urge him to his said purgation, or the exact manner
thereof, by applying unto him, hot burning iron, or the like: for such
corporal tortures, and only such, the Pope in this Canon inhibited. All which
is expressly set down at large in the very text of the said Canon.


Secondly, in more particular manner, that both Laik male Abbats, and also Laik
femall Abbesses, are capeable of, and may, and do, execute ordinary
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, viz. to excommunicate, absolve,
institute, suspend, visit, etc. All which belong, ad Spirituale forum
contentiosum. To the Spiritual Jurisdiction of outward or contentious court: as
appears by Extrauag. commun. De Praebendis. ca. Execrabilis. verb. visitare.
in glossa.

And first for Abbats.
Decretal. de Praescriptionibus. Tit. 26. c. Auditis. Ta^to tempore probantur
per testes ab Abbatibus de Heuenscham, pleno iure possess: vt videantur in
eis, Episcopale ius legitime praescripsisse. Quod si constiterit, absoluatis
Abbatem ab impetitione Episcopi, super Ecclesijs memoratis, adiudicantes ill as
Abbati, pleno iure subiectas, et Episcopo super ill is, silentium imponatis.
Circa cognitione^ quoque causaru^ matrimonialium, et Capellani suspensione^ in
praedicta villa, et inter dictum capellaru^, vos super his, ius Episcopale
adiudicetis eidem Abbati. The Abbats of Heuenscham seem lawfully to prescribe
Episcopal Jurisdiction in certain Churches: if that be so, let the Abbat and
not the Bishop, govern those Churches Pleno iure, that is, by right of
Jurisdiction, Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, Episcopal, euenin causes
matrimonial, suspensions, and interdictions. The gloss of which Canon,. Ius
Episcopale; writes thus: Hic manifest patet quodiura Episcopalia
praescribuntur, cognitio causaru^ matrimonialiu^, tantu^ de iure communi
spectat ad Iurisdictione^ Episcopi, quam praescribit Abbas. Hence it is
manifest that Abbats may prescribe Episcopal Jurisdiction, etc.

Clementin. de reb. Eccle. non alienand. or. Monasterioru^. verb. Proprij. in.
gloss: Abbates exempti habent Episcopalem Iurisdictionem. Abbats exempt have
Episcopal Jurisdiction. et cap. De statu Monachoru^. ca. Attendentes. verb.
Alia. in gloss. Illa ergo non corriget ordinarius loci, sed Abbas, vel Prior,
cui subsunt. In exempt Monasteries, let not the Ordinary of the place, but the
Abbat, or Prior, correct faults done there.

To be brief: Abbats, by the Canon law,
May Absolve an Excommunicate Monk: (and therefore excommunicate him) Did.
90. c. Si quis. verb. Prioris. in gloss. Abbas potest absoluere monachum suum,
inijcientem manus in monachum suum, vel alterius.

May Dispense concerning Orders. 20. q. 4. Monachu^. verb. Remittatur. in
gloss. Abbas dispensare potest circa ordines.

May Give or confer the less orders. Did. 69. Quoniam. verb. lect or is in
gloss. Abbas minores or dines hodie confer possit.

May Visit his subjects mediat and immediate. extra. commun. de cencibus c.
vas. verb. Abbates in glossa.

May Bless and consecrate Ecclesiastical things and persons. Sexti. de
Priuilegijs. Tit. 7. ca. Abbates. Addition. I. in glossa. Et faciunt haec pro
Abbatibus qui benedicunt calices, patinas, vestes sacerdotales, cruces et
similia. Nam si benedicant personas, fortius et res.

According to the Canonists, not only Abbats, but also Priors claustrall, in
their absence, have ordinary Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as
these modern, Victorinus, Mansus, Auersanus, and Monachus Cassinensis, the
Abbat of Saint Sepherine at Naples, cap. 2. de. modo procedendi in Causis.
Regula. N. 4. have largely written and proved. When the Abbat is away, the
Prior has authority in Court both secret, and contentious, to hear
confessions, to visit etc. Specula. in Tit. de offic. ordin. si. constable. per
text. in cap. Duo extra. eod. tit. Abbas. in tract. de forma procedendi. in
cap. Irrefragabili eod. tit. et in cap. Cum contingat. De foro competen: And is
ordinary Judge there; as Petrus Follerius in the last part of his practik
criminal, has clearly proved and fortified.

Now touching Abbesses. I. Out of the Canon law.
Decretal. de mayor. et obed. Tit. 33. ca. Dilecta. verb. Iurisdictioni. in
gloss. Abbatissa potest suspendere ab officio et beneficio, Monach as su as, et
clericos suae Iurisdictioni subiectos, secundum quod hic satis innuitur, si
inobedientes fuerint. Habet enim administrationem temporalium et spiritualium.
Item ratione suae administrationis, post suam confirmationem potest confer
Ecclesias, et beneficia, et constituere clericos in Ecclesijs sui Monasterij,
sicut Abbates. Abbesses may suspend their Nuns, and also clearks which are
under them, from office and benefice, if they be disobedient; for she has
administration of things spiritual and temporal therein: and by virtue of her
administration, she may collate Churches and benefices, and institute clerks in
the Churches of their Monastarie, as Abbats may do. Out of the text of this
Canon. Dilecta. Panormitan notes, that an Abbess is capable of spiritual
Jurisdiction, and may exercise that Jurisdiction over her Nuns.

Decretal. De statu Monachoru^. Tit. 35. cap. 8. Ea quae. Haec autem omnia
etiam in Monasterijs quae non habent Abbates proprios, sed Priores: nec non in
Monasierijs monialium^ oad articulos Abbatissis, et monialibus co^gruentes
praecipimus obseruari. We will have all these things observed in the
Monasteries of Monks and Nuns.

In which Constitution, because it speaks expressly of administration, as well
spiritual as temporal; as well of Abbots, as of Abbesses: by that very
extension the Abbess is equalled with the Abbot, in the administration of his
Monastery, as well spiritual, as temporal. Whereupon Panormitan noreth, Quod
Dispositum in Monachis, et Abbatibus, extenditur ad Abbatissas et Moniales.
That which belongs to Abbats in their Monasteries, appertains to Abbesses
in theirs.

The same Panormitan, in Decretal. Tit. 10. De his quae fiunt a praelat. sine
consens. capital. ca. Continebatur. n. 4. writes expressly, That an Abbess
has as free administration of her Monastery, as an Abbat has. But an Abbat
has ordinary spiritual Jurisdiction in his Monastery, as all Canonists agree.

Flaminius Parisius, De Resig. Benef. 1.3. q. 12. n. 3.5. 8. et 14. proves at
large, That an Abbess may have a Praelature, and dignity, with administration,
and a right to visit, even without the Monastery; which right she may also
commit to others. And the Bishop Bitontine, very lately holds and proves the
same in his works dedicated to Pope Clement 8. See the very Text. Sext. de
Elect. ca. Indemnitatibus, proving the same.

Barthol. in l. 1. cod. de dign. lib. 12. n. 4. says that Abbesses have
dignity, with administration, not only over their Nuns, but also without,
for that they have Castles, etc. as Abbats have dignity, with administration.
Sext. de Priuilegijs. ca. Apostolicae. And therefore, by a ruled case among the
Doctors, grounded upon ca. Attendentes in Cleme^tin.de stat. Monachor. they
ought to visit, or to commit the visitation to others. Extra: con.ca. Vas
electionis.

Out of these, and the like, Steph. d' Aluin, ca. 2. sect. 12. of the power of
Abbesses, concludes; that Abbesses and Prioresses claustrall, by a certain
right, constitutions, and rule of S. Benedict, from whence all the rest, in a
manner, are drawn, as also by custom, have authority and power ordinary,
spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, over those that are under them. And cap. 3.
sect. 8. That Abbesses, and Prioresses, ex cardin. council. 17. call. 4. bj. cap.
Dilecta, and the Gloss.adjoined, have all administration, as well spiritual,
as temperall, of those monasteriall Nuns; save only of those things whereof a
woman is vneapable, to weet, of Order.

Now, touching the power which Abbesses have to excommunicate.

Because Tho. Aqui. in 4. sent. did. 18. q. 2. art. 2. in corpore, writes
thus; Exco^municatio non est actus clanis direct, sed magis exterior is
iudicij: Excommunication is not an act of the key directly, but rather of
external court. Navarre, lib. quinto, consil. 1. de sentent. Excom. concludes;
that a woman by privilege, may also excommunicate.

Tabiena and Arnilla, verbo Abbatissae. nu. 3. besides Panormitan, Astensis,
and others, That an Abbess may command the Priests, her subjects, to
excommunicate their rebellious and obstinat Nuns, or to absolve them.

Whereupon, Steph. d'Aluin, cap. 3. sect. 12. concludes those: Proinde omnis
habens Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, et si non habeat clauem ordinis, potest
excommunicare ex D. Thoma. Therefore all having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
may excommunicate, according to Tho. Aquin.

Now, that they have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, witness Panormitun, in ca. De
stat. Monachor. Jason, consil. l 40. lib. 2. Flaminius, deresig. lib. 3. q. 12.
n. 12. saying: Dispositum iur is in Abbate, habere locum in Abbatissis. What
right Abbats have, Abbesses have the same.

And again, Panormitan, Arnilla, and Flaminius write, That Abbesses exempt,
have right or jurisdiction to visit the places, and persons subject to them;
and that they have Clerks subject unto them, Pleno iure, that is, under their
government, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal.

Now say Card. Parisius, and Flaminius: Out of the right to visit, or from
visiting by her self, or her deputy, follows her Jurisdiction, to deprive,
depose, correct, punish, and chastise. And to have them subject to her, Pleno
iure, by full right, does plainly import Jurisdiction, Deprivation,
Visitation, and Correction.

To conclude this point: If private men and women be capable of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; If Abbesses have and execute the same, in collating Benefices,
instituting, suspending, depriving, visiting, judging crimes, and imposing and
receiving purgations of Bishops; lastly, excommunicating, and absoluing;
according to Popish Canons, Canonists, Custom, and practice among them: with
what face does this Jesuit, or any other Papist, scandalize our Kings, or
Queens, for taking, or us for ascribing unto them, Supreme Ecclesi.
Jurisdiction: yet not that, whereby our Kings or Queens may institute Clerks,
excommunicate, or absolve them: oras King James, and late Queen Elizabeth have
in their writings published to the whole world. Therefore, most impudently
false is the Jesuit here, asserting that Queen Elizabeth had power to
excommunicate.

Touching Suarez, let this Jesuit know, that Steph. D' Aluin, has refuted in
this point, a far greater, and better learned man then Suarez is, to weet,
Franciscus a Victoria, in his Relect. 2. de potest. Ecclesiae; and showed the
practice of the Church to be, as here has been declared.

Christian Reader, I have been much here in this point, because it is of that
moment, and so remarkable: for recompense, in replying to the remainder of
Becanes Examivation, I promise to be short; the rather, because in truth, it
is but froth, not deserving any other answer at all, but that which is already
set down in my English Concord.

Becans Jar.
VI. Question. Whether the King of his own Authority can assemble, or call
together Counsels?
1. Now follow the Iarres and debates of our Adversaries, concerning the
Offices and Functions of the Kings Primacy, and they are six in number, which
may be disputed of. The first is, of assembling, or calling together of Synods.
The second, of enacting of Ecclesiastical laws. The third, of conferring or
bestowing of Benefices. The fourth, of creating and deposing of Bishops. The
fifth, is about Excommunication. The sixth and last, is about the decision and
determining of Controversies. The question then is, whether these offices
belong to the Kings Primacy? I will speak a word of each in order.

2. First, it may be demanded, whether the King by virtue of his Primacy,
may of his own authority, call or assemble together Synods, and therein sit as
chief and head? This was certainly persuaded that it might be done, in the
time of King Henry, K. Edward, and Queen Elizabeth: but now under King James,
the matter is called into question. M. Salclebridge page 121. affirms, that
be can dot it, in these words: Christiani Principes in Regnis suis cum laud,
propria auctoritate Synodos conuocarunt, Constitutiones condiderunt, causas
audierunt and cognouerunt. Christian Princes have with great praise assembled
Synods by their own authority, in their Kingdoms, have made Constitutions,
heard and examined causes etc. And again, page 146. Rex Angliae potest Synodos
indicere omnium Ordinum Oecumenicas, et in ijsdem praesidere. The King of
England, says he, may assemble General Counsels of all Orders or degrees,
and therein sit as President or Chief, etc. And page 155. he says in like
manner, Reges Angliae suprema sua authoritate, deiure, Synodos conuocarunt. The
Kings of England, have by their own supreme authority, and by right, assembled
Synods, etc.

3. Now Ma, Tooker in this point is very variable: one while contradicting
himself, another while others. And this is manifest out of the diverse
testimonies he produces. The first is page 37. where he has these words: A
quibus magis aequum est indici Concilia, quamabillis, penes quos semper fuit
authoritas ea congregandi? Cum autem communiter triplex ponisoleat Concilium,
Generale, Prouinclale and Dioecesanu^; Concilium Generale solius Papae iussu
celebrari vultis, sed nequeillud nisi ab Imperatoribus and Regibus simul
consentientibus hodie indici debet. Prouinciale a Metropolitano cum suis
Suffraganein. Dioecesanum ab Episcopo cum Curatis, Rectoribus, and Clericia
Dioeceseos, etc. By who^ is it more fit that Counsels should be assembled,
then by those in whose power has always authority been to call them
together? For whereas commonly there be three sorts of Counsels, General,
Provincial, and of a particular Diocese: the General Council, you will
have to be celebrated only by commandment of the Pope; but yet not so neither
now adays, unless Emperors and Kings do agree thereunto also. A Provincial
Council is to be assembled by the Metropolitan and his Suffragans: that of
the Diocese by the Bishop thereof, together with the Curats, Rectors, and
Clerks of the same Bishopric, etc. Out of which testimony was may gather,
that the King of England cannot assemble a Council of kis own authority.
Not a General, because that belongs to the common consent of Kings and
Emperors. Not a Provincial, because that pertains to the Metropolitan. Not
of the Diccesse, because that belongs to the Bishopot thereof. What then, I
pray you, is left unto the King?

4. Another testimony hereof is out of the same Ma. Tooker, page 41. in these
words: Abunde liquetex Concilijs ipsis, and historia Ecclesiastica,
Prouincialia Concilia and Nationalia ab Imperatoribus ac Regibus fuisse
congregata. It is abundantly manifest out of the Counsels themselves, and the
Ecclesiastical Histories, that Provincial and National Counsels have been
assembled by Emperors and Kings, etc. This now is plainly repugnant to his
former testimony. For there he affirms, that Provincial Counsels are tobe
assembled by the Metropolitans thereof: here be says, that they must be
assembled by Kings and Emperors. There, is distinguished only a threefold
Council, to weet, General, Provincial, and that of the, Diocese: here now,
is added a fourth, to weet, National.

5. His third testimony is set downs page 42. where he proposes this
question: Quoigitur iure tantam sibi porestatem arrogat Pontifex solus? Number
diuino? By what nighe then, I pray you, does the Popechallenge unto himself
alone so great power? Does he do it by divine right? etc. And a little after
he adds: Erat Apostolorum omnium, non vnius tantummodo, and indicere
Concilium, and statuere cum verborum solennitate; Visumest Spiritui sancto and
Nobis, etc. It belonged to all the Apostles, not to one alone, to assemble a
Council, and with solemnity of words to ordain; It seems good unto the
Holy Ghost, and us, etc. As if he would say; That as by divine right, not S.
Peter alone, but all the Apostles together with equal power did assemble the
first Council at Jerusalem, and therein decreed that law, about eating of
blood and strangled meats: so in like manner, by divine right, not the Pope
alone, but all Bishops, with equal power, must assemble Counsels, and decree
Ecclesiastical laws. Surely, if it be so, then without doubt it follows,
that the power to call or assemble Counsels, does not belong by the law of
God, to secular Kings and Princes, but to the Apostles, and their successors,
etc.

6. His fourth testimony is page 63. where he says: Mixtum autem ius, and
resultans ex vtroque, and iure Regio and Episcopali, est Legum sanctio and
Synodorum indictio, and praesidendi in ijs praerogatiua, and controuersiatum
decisio, aliorumque actuum, qui his finitimi sunt exercitium: quae fere ab
origin Primatus Regij descendunt, and communicantur Sacerdotibus, etc. The
decreeing or enacting of laws, the assembling of Synodes, and Prerogative of
sitting therein as chief or head, as also the exercise of all other offices in
this kind, is a certain mixed Right, proceeding from both Kingly and Episcopal
power: which things do in a manner come down, or descend from the origin of
the Kings Primacy, and are communicated or imparted unto Priests, etc.

This now again, as you see, is contrary to that which he said next before.
For there be will needs have the assembly of Synodes or Cou^cells to belong
by divine right to the Apostles: beer, for sooth, he will have the same
chiefly to belong to Kings, and from them to be derived unto Bishops. These
things do not agree one with another.

English Concord.
HItherto, the contention has been Grammatical about words and names: 1.
Whether that supreme government of the King in the Church of England, which all
our Writers do profess, ought to be called Primatus, or Suprematus; Primacy,
or Supremacy? 2. Whether he that holds that supreme government in the Church,
of that his Primacy may be called Primate of the Church, or Head of the Church,
or the only Supreme Governor of the Church? 3. Whether that Supreme
government, or Jurisdiction, which is in all Ecclesiastical matters, and above
all Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be called the Supreme government of the
Church, or the Supreme Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical?

These foolish and unlearned questions, 2. Tim. 2.23.
Saint Paul forbids, unworthy of Divines: but, as it should seem, not of a
Jesuit. Let Becane tell me ingenuously, whether these six offices only
appertain to the Papal Primacy? Or whether there be not sixty times six
which may be called into question? Let him tell me, whether these offices do
properly pertain to the Primacy of Peter, and so to the Bishop of Rome?

Let him show me, where it is written; or that Peter had any Primacy at all:
or that this his Primacy is contained or defined within the bounds and limits
of these duties? or that ever Peter did exercise such offices as Primats of the
Church: That is to say, let him manifest out of the Scriptures, what Council
Peter summoned as Primate of the Church; what Ecclesiastical laws he made;
what benefices he collated; what Bishops he created, or deposed; of what
controversies he was supreme judge. These things if the Jesuit cannot show,
he is a pratler and no disputer: for all, yea the meanest of Bishops in the
kingdom do excommunicate; are therefore all those Bishops, Primates and
Supreme governors in the universal Church throughout the whole kingdom? our
question is of one only Supreme governor of the whole Church in the kingdom.
Make exception but of Excommunication alone, and Hainricus by many express
authentike writings, has demonstrated, that Christian Princes have with
singular commendation, 1. Called Counsels. 2. Made Ecclesiastical laws. 3.
Conferred benefices, although this seems too gross and greasy, whereof to
make a part of Primacy. 4. Created, and deposed Bishops. 5. Taken up and ended
controversies. But so granted, that no mortal man can be judge of all
controversies, especially of faith. That Christian Princes of their own
authority, and with commendation have summoned Counsels; both Hainric and Dr.
Tooker do expressly write in plain words. Neither is Dr. Tooker in this point
either against him self, or against Hainric. When that first council was
assembled at Jerusalem, whether did reign Christian, or Pagan Princes? how
idle is this? when the question is only about Christian Princes. what; is there
no difference here betwixt a Jesuit and a Sophister? But if Peter was then the
sole Primate of the Church, why did he not alone call that Synod? and why did
James sit President in that Council? what mean these words? Visumest nobis,
it seemed good unto us: and not rather it seemed good to Peter; or alone, or
with the addition of Primate; or after this manner, it seemed good to our holy
father Pope Peter, and after him to the residue of the Apostles and Elders. If
Peter, or the Pope, be Supreme judge of all controversies, what mean these
words? Visum est spiritui Sancto, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost: and not
rather it seemed good to Pope Peter, the Supreme judge of all controversies.
This is a great mystery: as if no mortal man but only the Holy Ghost, could
be Supreme judge of all controversies in the Church. And why may not
provincial Counsels becalled by the Metrapolitan, Nouel. constit. 123. leg.
13. et 133 Franc.
and Dioecesan, by the Bishops by virtue of Ecclesiastical laws made by
Christian Princes? especially seeing (as Dr. Tooker rightly affirms) their
indiction primarily appertains to the King, and from him may be derived to
the Bishops. These things do excellently agree together.

BECAN. Exam. Page 152

YOu say our English Writers touching the Kings Supremacy, differ only in words
or names. An ingenuous confession: whence I conclude, his Supremacy to be
verbal, and titular only, and not real. Yet the Bishop of Rochester died for
not acknowledging it. And others for the same causes, are imprisoned; which
makes you labor so much, to bring asleep, or to extinguish, this Nominall
Jar.

Dr. HARRIS. Reply.
I Say, as I have abundantly proved in this Reply, and in my English Concord,
that all our English-Protestant-Writers do with full and uniform consent,
agree in the real, solid, and substantial Supreme Government of the King in
all Causes, and over all persons, Ecclesiastical, or Civil within his
Dominions, next under Christ.

Further, that all the said Writers sully agree in the very name of that
Supreme Government, to weet, the English name, Supremacy. Moreover, that all
the said Writers, in the sense of this real thing, and of the name of this
real thing, call the same Supreme Gonernment, in Latin, Primatum, Primacy:
and Iurisdictonem Spiritualem vel Ecelesiasticam; Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

Again, that all the said Writers, call, and acknowledge the King to be
reallie, Supreme Governor, in all Causes, and over all Persons,
Ecclesiastical or Civil within his Dominions, next under Christ. And in this
sense, all the said VVriters call the King, Supreme Primate and Head of this
Church, as has been showed expreslie out of their own writings.

Whereby appea^eth, that in very truth, here is no English Jar among our
Protestant Writers, Real, or Nominall. And so, these fig leaves, wherewith
Becane endeavors to cover the shameful nakedness of the Popish sort, denying
to acknowledge the Kings Supremacy aforesaid, are removed and taken clean away.

But alas for for this seely Jesuit, who is confined now, in his English Jar,
to Jar Nominall only, and not Real: and has no other twigge to hang by, but
this scattered consequent, viz.

The Protestant English Writers express the self same substantial thing, to
weet, the Kings Supremacy, with variety of names, and phrases.

Therefore the thing it self is not real, but nominall.

Our Academian school-boyes, would, and deservedly might, hiss this Jesuit
with his consequent out of the University Schools, as exceeding foolish and
childish. Thus rather would the argument proceed; The Iarres of some Writers,
about a thing or matter, are Nominal only, and not Real.

Therefore their consent is real, and the thing it self Real.

Touching Rochester-Bishop, inculcated by this Jesuit; our King in his
Apology, page 121. according to the public Records, writes thus: Roffensis in
carcerem coniect us est, priusquam in iudicium capitis de Primatu Pontificis
vocaretur: idque, partim quod tardior esset ad successionem Regiae prolis
confirmandam, cui iam antea Regni Ordines subscripserant: partim quod
implicatus eo negotio tenebatur, quod de sancta Virgin Cantiana ill is
temporibus forte inciderat, adeo vt propter ^elatas Pseudoprophetiae illius
frauds, reus iudicatus sit Maiestatis, ob non detectam coniurationem. The
Bishop of Rochester was imprisoned, and condemned, not only for acknowledging
the Popes Supremacy: but also, for gain saying the lawful succession of the
Kings progeny; and for concealing high treason against the King.

And why might not the Bishop of Rochester then, or why may not the Popish ones
here now, in like case, be imprisoned or put to death, for treason against
their Soueraign? Who can deny that it is treason, for any subjects, to deny
their Sovereign to be their lawful Prince? But, since every lawful Christian
Prince, is Supreme governor of his own subjects in things Spiritual and
Temporal, or, which is all one, is Custos vtriusque Tabulae, Keeper of both
Tables: to deny that of their Sovereign, is to deny him to be their lawful
Prince. Assuredly, to acknowledge the Popes Supremacy here, as now it is
defined, and converted from Spiritual to Secular; is to acknowledge the King
to hold his kingdom of the Pope in Chief, and that also at his will and
pleasure, as it is plain by their Canon law, and Canonists: yea, to hold their
lives also, as Tenants of Life, at the Popes will, by Jesuitical doctrine, as
before in this Reply, and in Becano-Baculus was expressly showed, and proved
demonstratiuelie.

And what is this else, but apparently to deny the King, and to assert the
Pope to be their Sovereign Lord and King indeed? And is not this high treason
in the highest degree? why then may not such lawfully be imprisoned, condemned,
and executed, as Archtraitors? At least, why may not our King require an oath
(and this said oath) of his subjects against the Pope usurping his right: 2.
King. ca. 11. v. 4
as well as Iehoiada the high Priest did of the men of Judah, for Ioas their
King, against Athalia that usurped his state? Queen Elizabeth, in her
Explanation of the Supremacy, caused these words to be printed, and published
to all her subjects, viz.

That if any her subjects, would accept the oath of Supremacy, with this
interpretation, sense, and meaning; viz. That the K. or Q. Majesty of England
under God, is to have soueraignetie and rule, over all manner of persons, borne
within her Majesty's Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate,
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be, so as no foreign Power shall, or
ought to have, any superiority over them: her Majesty is well pleased, to
accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient subjects; and shall
acquit them of all manner penalties, contained in the said Act against such,
as shall peremptorily, or obstinately refuse to take the same oath.

The like interpretation of the oath of Supremacy, holds now under our K.
James, and was of force under King Edward 6. and King Henry 8: whereby it
appears, that to imprison, or execute any here, for not taking the oath of
Supremacy; is all one, as to imprison and execute Traitors for not
acknowledging their Kings Sovereignty; and for acknowledging the Popes
Soueraignetie over their King, in his prerogatives Royal, Crowns, Kingdoms,
and life it self.

BECAN. Exam. Page 154

YOu ask whether those 6. offices, viz. to call Councels; make Ecclesiastical
laws, confer Benefices, create and depose Bishops, excommunicate the
stubborn, and judge controversies Ecclesiastical; did properly belong to
Peter's Primacy? or which of whose offices hoe exercised as Primate? But this is
not to the matter. The Question is here, whether your Writers agree that your
king, as supreme Governor, may do those offices? I say they Jar therein. Do
you help them? Touching the power total Councels, D. Tooker iarres with
himself and with Hainric. For Tooker says that the calling of Councels does
primarily belong to Kings, and from them is derived to Bishops. And yet he
says: That the Apostles called Councels by Divine right. Therefore not from
Kings right. Therefore by Divine right, the Apostles successors, that is,
Bishops, and not Kings, have power to call Councels. And this is against
Hainric and Tooker himself.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
OUR gracious King James in his book of Apology etc. vindicated and proved his
rightful Supreme Power, or Government in all Causes, and over all Persons
Ecclesiastical within his Dominions. Upon that, this Jesuit Becane inferred,
That then our King had power to call Counsels: To make Ecclesiastical laws:
To create and depose Bishops: To confer benefices: To judge Ecclesiastical
controversies; otherwise, that he neither was, nor could be Primate or Head of
the Church, because all those were offices properly belonging to the primacy.
Hainric, in his Becano-Baculus, denied that his consequent, as Dr. Harris in
his English Concord here does: because their chief Primate, and Head Pope-
Peter, did never (as Primate) challenge to himself, or execute any of those
offices; and for that neither in Scripture, nor any Ancient Father, is found
any of those offices properly to belong to Peter, as Primate, or Head of the
Church. The Jesuits forces being too weak to grapple with Hainric therein;
Hainric took up Becane his own description. And thence irrefragably
concluded, our King to be Primate and Head, that is, Supreme Governor of this
Church. Which is all one, as if he had taken from Becane his own cudgel, and
beaten him soundly black and blew therewith, as became Becano-Baculus to do.

Yet Christian Reader, consider what just cause Hainric had, and I have here,
to urge the Jesuit, to show, especially in this particular, what general
Council cell Peter did call, as Primate; or what Scripture or Ancient Father
did attribute to Peter, as Primate, any power to call general Counsels. All
the Jesuits in the world, with all the learning and reading they have, can not
show it. Whence necessarily, by Popish rule, it will follow, that Peter was not
Supreme Primate of the whole Church; and consequently, that the Pope is not
Supreme Primate of the said Church.

On the other side, our Writers have, out of the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical
Histories demonstrated, that the most religious; both, Kings under the Law, and
Emperors under the Gospel, have called general Councels, for which they are,
generally, greatly, and worthily commended. The Jesuit knowing this to be most
true, and not able to answer it, runs into his starting hole, and says,
that it is not to the matter; when inceed it sticks in the very bowels of the
matter, and hangs so fixedly in the Popes liver, as no Jesuitical Dictamne can
draw it forth.

In this one point of Regal Supremacy, the Jesuit can not produce any two of
our Writers, who do not fully agree. As for Hainric and Dr. Tooker, they both
write uniformly, that it belongs to orthodoxall Kings and Emperors, when
any such are, to call Counsels. Here therefore the Jesuit, being at a
nonplus, and brought to his shifts, faineth a Jar between Dr. Tooker and
himself. Well, then belike when Bellarmine in his writings differs from
himself, that is, at least an hundred times, those discords must be styled,
Popish Iarres: but how does Becane prove that Dr. Tooker is in this point
against himself? Forsooth because he faith, that the Apostles (viz. when there
was no Christian Emperor) by divine right, called a Council. Then the
argument runs thus: All the Apostles jointly in time of Persecution,
lawfully called one Council only, of some few persons within one City.
Therefore, in time of Peace, not Christian Emperors, but only, and all,
Bishops in the Christian world, jointly must call all general Counsels,
throughout the whole Christian world.

What cable, strong enough, and long enough, can the Jesuit get, from all the
Jesuitical crew, so to tie these together, that the consequence may hold for
good? For here is a manifold Non sequitur; 1. From one particular act of
Apostles, to a general rule of all Bishops. 2. From times of Persecution, to
times of Peace. 3. From times when there were no Christian Emperors to call
Counsels, unto times when there were some to call, and indeed did call, all
and every one of the most renowned general and orthodoxal Counsels, to weet,
the first six of them.

Becane dare not say, that the 4. first general Counsels (which Pope Gregory
the great esteemed as the 4. Evangelists) were unlawfully, or against divine
right, indicted or called; yet were they all called by Emperors, and not by
Popes. viz. The first Nicen Council, by Constantine the great: The first
Council of Constantinople, by Theodosius the first: The first Counsel of
Ephesus, by the Emperor Theodosius the second: The first Council of Chalcedon,
by the Emperor Martian. Unto which Counsels, the Emperors by their Letters,
called as well the Popes of Rome, as other Patriarchs.

If Pope Leo the first, had known any such divine right, of calling general
Counsels to be in him, and not in the Emperor, he would neeuer have stooped
so basely, as suppliant upon his knees, to entreat the Emperor, and the
Empress, by himself, and by others, to call a general Counsel: for what
else had this been, but treacherously to request the Emperor to bereave him
of his Divine right (as Becane here calls it) and by usurped power, to be
practiced by the call of general Counsels, to extinguish that Divine right,
and Popish Primacy. That is, to extinguish their Catholic faith. For now the
Papal Supremacy, is the very capital and maine point, of their Catholic
faith.

To shut up this chapter, and question: Becane sitting upon his Cathedral
Tripos, should here determine these two Questions following.

First, whether Bishops only, or Archbishops only, or only Patriarchs (for
these may not be confounded as one and the same) be the Apostles successors?
Or whether Patriarchs be successors of some of the Apostles; and Archbishops of
other-some: and Bishops successors of the lowest, or third rank? And whether
one kind only of these successors, or all three kinds, may call general
Counsels?

Secondly, whether all the Bishops in the Christian world, as the Apostles
successors, must jointly, as all the Apostles did, call general Counsels? or
(because that would now prove too-too troublesome) how many of them may serve
that turn?

Becans Jar.
VII. Question. Whether the King can enact Ecclesiastical laws, or no?
1. It is clear, that K. Henry the 8. did, as well by himself, as by his
Vicar General (Cromwell) enact Ecclesiastical Laws. For so says Doctor
Sanders, in his book of the Schism of England: His diebus vigilantissimus hic
Ecclesiae Pastor Henricus quo in posterum sciretur, quae cui rite nupta e^^et,
legem ediderat perpetuam de Nupt.js, Comitiorum etiam auctoritate confirmatam,
qua statuebatur, vt si quae personae in Leuitico non prohibitae, solo consensu
perverba de praesenti, matrimonium, nulla carnis copula subsecuta,
contraxerint: eae vero ambae postea, vel earum altera nuptijs cum altera
persona in Leuitico non prohibita contractis, carnali copula easdom
consummauerint, hae posteriores quas firmasset copula, non priores illae, quas
solus consensus statuisset, ratae atque legitimae haberentur: adco, vt cum olim
iuris Gentium fuisset Regula,Nuptias non concubitw, sed consensus facit; iam
deinceps Henrici regula effe coeperit, Nupttas non consensus, sed concubitus
facit. Ettamen ipse Legis-lator contra suam ipsius regulam vxorem Annam
Cliuensem, cuius nuptias, non solo consensu, sed septem etiam mensium concubitu
firmauerat, eo solum praetextu reiecit, ipsaque viuente aliam superinduxit,
quod alteri, nescio cui, consensum antea praebuisse fingeretur. Huius ergo
legis tantopere postea puduit ipsos Potestantes, vt mortuo Henrico, eam ipsi
reuocaucrint, atque irritam fecerint, etc. In these days, the most vigilant
Pastor of the Church, K. Henry, that it might be known to posterity, what
woman were lawfully married to another, enacted aperpetuall law concerning
Marriage, authorizing the same by public Decree of Parliament: vvherin it was
ordained, that if any persons, not prohibited in the Leuiticall law, should
contract martage by only consent, and by words de praesenti, no carnaell
copulation following the same; and that the said persons, or either of them
should after ward contract with another person not prohibited in the
Leuiticall law, and consummate the same by carnal copulation; that then these
later contracts, which were consummated by carnal copulation, not the
former, that were agreed upon by only consent, should be accounted for good
and lawful. In so much, that whereas the rule of the law of Nations in old
time was, That consent, not carnal copulation did make the marriage lawful;
now here after by the law of K. Henry, it began to be arule, That carnal
copulation, not consent did make marriage lawful. And yet for all this, the
lawmakers himsolfe K. Henry, did, against his own proper rule and law, reject
Anne of Cleeue his wife, whose marriage was not only contracted by consent
adone, but consummated also by seven months carnal copulation, upon this
only pretense, that she had gives her consent to another before. I know not
whom; and upon this fiction he married another, she yet remaining alive. And
of this law afterward the Protestants themselves were so much ashamed, that
after K. Henry's death, they recalled, and disannulled the same.

2. Concerning his Vicar general (Cromwell) thus writcth also the said Doctor
Sanders in the same book. Septembri me^se, authoritatesua Vicaria, Canones
quosdam Ecclesiasticos quos Iniunctiones vocabat, sigillo Vicariatus sui
munitos Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus and reliquo Clero praescripsit; in
quibus praeter caetera, iubebantur Parochi sub grauissimis poenis, vt Oratione^
Dominica^ cum salutatione Angelica, Symbolum item fidei, and december Decalogi
praecepta, aliaque huiusmodi, Anglice in posterum in Ecclesijs docerent. In the
month of September. K. Henry's Vicar General, by the authority of his Office,
prescribedcertain: Ecclesiastical Canons, which he called Injunctions, signed
with the seal of his Office of Vicar General, to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and the rest of the Clergy: vvher in among other things, the Pastors
of Churches were commaund^d, under most setere punishment hereafter to readin
their Churches, the Lords prayer, the Aue Mary, the Creed, and ten
Commandments in English, etc.

3. Now, our English Adversaries, that vvite in these dates of the Kings
Supremacy, doc not agree in this point. For that some of them say, that the
enacting or decreeing of Ecclesiastical laws, does by divine Right belong
unto Bishops; others say, that it belongs to Kings and Emperors. The first
apinion holds Marster Tooker. page 42. of his book, where be says, that the
Apostles, in the first Council at Jerusalem did enact this Ecclesiastical
law: Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris
nisi haec necessaria: vt abstineatis vos ab immolatis simulachroru^, and
sanguine, and sussocato. It has seemed good unto the holy Ghost, and to us, to
lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things: that you abstain
from the things immolated to Idols, and from blood, and that which is
strangled, etc. And this, says he, the Apopostles did by diuineright. The
other opinion holds Ma^ster Thomson, page 80. where he affirms, that
Bishops, and Counsels cannot enact or decree any Ecclesiastical law, which
has the force of law, unless Kings and Emperors consent thereunto. His
words are these: Decreta Conciliorum and Patrum, Ecclesiasticis Censuris, and
(...) tantum stetliIent, nisi legum vim Caesarea auraipsis afflasser. The
Decrees of the Counsels and of the Fathers, had been held but only for
ecclesiastical censures, and penalties, unless the Emperors favor had
imparted the force of laws unto the said Decrees, etc.

4. Here now the Jar is evident. For without doubt, that ecclesiastical
law, which the Apostles decreed, had the force of a law: for that so mush is
gathered out of these words; Visum est, nihil vltra imponere vobis oneris,
nisi haec necessaria. It has seemed good, to lay no further burden upon you,
then these necessary things, etc. But this Ecclesiastical law had not it force
from any favor of the Emperor, seeing that neither Tyberius, nor Pilate, nor
Herod, nor any other secular Prince, which the^ lived did by his favor,
authorize the force of the law; but that it came from the Apostles themselves.
For that they, by their Apostolical authority and power, which they had
reciued from Christ, did decree, and promulgate that law. And the same power
and authority have Bishops now adays, not Kings, nor Emperors.

English Concord. Page 48.

DIstinguish but the times (as St. Augustine teaches you) namely, the times of
the Churches peace, wherein reigned Christian Princes; and the times of
persecution, wherein Pagan Kings had the Sovereignty) and you shall rightly
understand the Scriptures. Of the peaceable times of the Church so writes Dr.
Tooker, page 42. It belonged to King David, Solomon, Iehoshophat, and Josias,
to give laws to the Levites, and to the whole congregation of Israel.

And in the same place he writes again of the times of persecution: Erat
Apostolorum omnium, etc. It was not one, but all the Apostles, which both
called the Council, and decreed with like solemnity of these words Visumest
Spiritui sancto, et nobis. It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us.

Ma. Thomson (speaking of this matter) does not deny that the lame
Apostolical law had any force, without the favor of Caesar, as though there
had never been law in the Church, without the aforsaid approbation of the
Emperor; but only, that without it, they had no force under pain of
corporal punishment: as is most plain by the tenor of his words.

So that here is no Jar or dissension among the English Writers, as he
affirms; but only a dreaming dorage of the Jesuit, who childishly sporteth
himself, with a fallacy of Equinocation; especially, when he endeavors to
match in equal rank, the laws and Canons of Bishops, with the lacred decrees
and Constitutions of the Apostles.

Well wrote Saint Augustine: D^N^ur. et Grana. c. 61.
I am bound to consent to the holy Scriptures (of the which sort are the
decrees of the Apostles) without all refusal.

And in another place; Iread other Writers, Epist. 19. ad Hiero. Did. 9.
Ego^oht.
how much soever they excel in holiness or learning; so, as I do not
therefore think it truth, because they thought so; but because they persuade
me by other canonical Authors, or by probable reasons, not differing from
truth.

And against Faustus: Lib. 11. ca. 5.
We must read this kind of learning (such as are the writings of the holy
Fathers, and Doctors) non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum liberate
iudicandi, not as bound to believe them, but as free to judge them.

And unto this purpose he writes in another place: Neither will I object the
Council of Nice unto thee, Cont Maxinn. l. 5. c. 14.
neither must thou object the Council of Ariminum unto me: let matter with
matter, and reason dispute with reason, out of the authorities of holy
Scriptures.

The Jesuit, I hope, will not deny, that all the Apostolical Sanctions were
given by Divine Inspitation: and dares he affirm so much of all
Ecclesiastical Canons of Bishops, yea though the Popes Holiness have
breathed upon them? yea, of the Council of Trent?

Against which, the Ambassadors of the French King, Anno 1562
who was there present, protested in this manner: Minus legitima, minusque
libera, etc. All those Counsels were ever accounted less free, and therefore
not so lavvfull, when they, who were assembled (not led by the holy Ghost)
spoke after the pleasure of some other, to vveet, the Pope.

And the University of Paris, Anno 1517. in their appeal against Pope Leo the
tenth, and his Council assembled at Rome, wrote in this sort: Leo Papa dicimus
in quodam coetu, etc. Leo the tenth, in a certain Assembly, in the City of
Rome, we know not how gathered together, yet we are sure not in the holy
Ghost.

And is Becane the Jesuit ignorant, in what pleasant manner Cardinal Cusan
brake this jest upon Eugenius the Pope? saying: De cocord. lib. 2. ca. 20.
How can Pope Eugenius affirm this thing to be true, because he will have
it so, and for no other cause? Ac si inspiratio ipsius Sancti spiritus, etc. As
if the mind of the holy Ghost, were in the power of the Bishop of Rome; and
must then inspire, when the Pope will have him inspire.

To conclude this Question, I desire the Jesuit Becane, in the behalf of Ma.
Thomson, to yield a sound reason, wherefore the Bishops, in the first Council
of Constantinople, did in this humble manner entreat Theodosius the Emperor:
Rogamus clementiam, etc. We beseech your clemency, that by the letters Patents
of your Piety, you would confirm, and cause to be ratified, the decree of
this Council.

BECAN. Exam. Page 162

THe Apostles by divine right might make laws. Which right cannot be proved to
have bin transtated from them to Kings or Emperors, but to Bishops,
successors of the Apostles, with whom, as with the Apostles, the Spirit of
truth remains for ever. Therefore the Bishops and their Laws or Canons
(even in England) are no less divinely inspired, then the Apostles, or their
Laws or Canons Apostolical. Which if you deny, the Archbishop of Cauterbury,
or certainly the Bishop of Ely, will cause you to be punished therefore. You
are abasht to speak any thing of King Henry 8. his law, touching the lawful
marriages in degrees not prohthited, which carnal knowledge followed.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
What modest Hearer will not be abashed, and what Christian heart will not
tremble, to hear these blasphemies uttered by the Jesuit? The Apostles were
Gods chosen penmen to write the Scripture, as they were immediately moved by
the Spirit of God, 2. Pet. 2.19 21
without possibility of error. They were Gods immediate instruments, either
jointly in Council, or singularly alone, to set down Laws and Canons,
Essential parts of that Scripture, whereof we read thus: (...). 2. Tim. 3.16 1.
cor. 15.15
The whole Scripture is gluen by inspiration of God. The Apostles were such
chosen witnesses to testify Gods truth, Gal. 3.8
that if an Angel from heaven should testify otherwise than they did, he must
be accursed.

Are all Bishops, or any one, two, three etc. Gods immediate penman to write
portions of holy Canonical Scripture? Are all the Laws and Canons made by
Bishops in all Counsels, essential parts of Canonical Scripture, given by
inspiration of God? Are all Bishops God immediate chosen witnesses to testify
the truth, so without all possibility of falsehood, that the Churches faith
should depend thereon so sure, that if an Angel of heaven testify other wise,
then they have preached or written, he should be accursed? Then must writings,
testimonies, and laws heretical, go for Scripture Canonical; and so Divine
Scripture must be heretical.

Is not this blasphemy? And this necessarily follows from the Jesuit his
premises here, to weet, That all Bishops, and the laws and Canons in
Counsels, and other writings made by Bishops, are and were inspired by the
spirit of truth without error, as the Apostles, and their Canons and writings
were.

Ten seucrall provincial Synods gave consent with the Arian Heretics. And
whereas in the first and most famous general Council of Nice which maintained
or thodoxally Christ his Godhead, there were but three hundred and eighteen
Bishops; In the heretical Council of Ariminum, which stood for Arius against
the Godhead of Christ, there were eight hundred Bishops. Which made Augustine,
contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14. write thus: Noc ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec
tu mihi Ariminensem, etc. Neither may I, by way of prejudice, object the
Council of Nice to thee; nor you to me, the Council of Ariminum: out of the
authorities of Scripture, let matter with matter, cause with cause, and reason
encounter with reason. The spirit of truth had so forsaken, and the lying
spirit of heresic had so possessed in a manner all the Bishops in the
Christian world; that, as Hierom against the Luciferans says, Ingemuit totus
orbis, et Arianum se esse miratus est. The whole Christian world groaned, and
maruailed that it was become Arian, or holding with that Archheretike Arian.
If any Counsels; surely the former, and general with their Canons, were of
Divine inspiration. But says Augustine against the Donatists, lib. 2. ca. 3.
Ipsa plenaria Concilia saepe priora a posterioribus emendantur. The former, and
general Counsels, are often times corrected by later and provincial. If the
Acts and laws of Popes be of Divine inspiration: why do later Popes dissannul
the former Popes Decrees? For so writes Platina de Stephano, et Romano; Acta
priorum Pontificum, sequentes Pontifices aut infringunt, aut omnino tollunt.
The later Popes vtterlierepeale their predecessors Decrees.

For further answer to the Jesuit here, first I say that the aforesaid
immediate Divine inspiration, was personal and proper to the Apostles, and not
transitiue or deriuatiue, from the Apostles to Bishops; as in my English
Concord by four several testimonies, out of Augustine the most learned Bishop
that ever wrote, I proved directly and expressly: whereunto this empty
prattling Jesuit answers not one word. To stop his mouth ever hereafter
touching this point, I will add this fifth out of his hundred and eleventh
Epistle ad Fortunatianum:: Nequequorumnuis disputationes quantumu is
Catholicorum et landatorum hominum, velut Scriptur as Canonicas habere debemus,
etc. We ought not to receive the disputations of any, be they never so
Catholic, or praiseworthy, as we do the Canonical scriptures, so that it
should not be lawful for us, saving the reverence to them due, to reprove, or
reject somewhat in their writings, if we sinde it dissonant from truth.

Secondly I say, that those words of our Saniour, Ioh. 14. v. 16. The Spirit of
truth shall remain with you for ever; are meant as well of Pastors and
Teachers, as of Bishops: for Christ when he ascended gave not only Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists and Bishops; but also Pastors and Doctors for the work
of the ministry, Ephesians. 4. v. 11. c1 14
and the edifisation of his body: that his Church should not be carried about,
with enery wind of doctrine and deceits of men.

So that Presbyter preaching Pastors and Doctors, as well as preaching
Bishops, stand in need of the Spirit to guide them into the heavenly truth.
That in Math. 28.20. I am with you to the end of the world: is meant of the
Church, and every member of the Church. For so elsewhere says our Savior:
Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst among them.
And so says the Lord by Esaie, Chap. 59 v. 21
My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, from henceforth even for ever. 2. Epist. 2. v.
27.
And so says John: That anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true,
and is not lying, and as it taught you, ye shall abide in him. Which made
Panormitan (De Elect. et Elect. potest: ca. Significasti) write boldly thus:
Plus credendum vni priuato fideli, quam toti Concilio et Papae, si meliorem
habeat authoritatem vel rationem. There is more credit to be given to one
Private lay man, then to the whole Council and to the Pope, if he bring better
authority, and more reason.

Concerning that law of King Henry 8. about validity of marriages not forbidden
in the Leuiticall law, the Jesuit may be abashed to misspend the time with such
fooleries; considering that Becane partly has it but by relation of Sanders, a
lying Writer, and malicious adversary to this State: but especially because he
confesses the said law to be abrogated.

Belike, Iesuitical dispute is transcendent, Entium, et non entium, Of things
which are, and are not. But has not the Pope greater cause to be ashamed, by
whose Decree, as by a law of Medes and Persians which changes not, it was
lawful for King Henry the 8. to marry his own Brother Arthurs wife, Queen
Mary's mother, and that after Arthur was solemnly married unto her, and had
known her carnally? contrary to the Leuit. 18 v. 16. et 20 v. 21
Law and the Gospel Matthew. 14 v. 4
, and contrary to the judgment of all the famous Universities in Christendom,
who condemned the same as an incestuous marriage. Did King Henry the 8. ever
decree, that marriages incestuous should hold as lawful? Further, before this
Jesuit be hence dismissed, he should answer directly, breuiter et rotunde,
whether he and his Pope be not ashamed of that Canon 2. q. 7. Nos si incompet.
where the Pope, with his breeches let down to his heels, stands ready to
receive that correction, which, according to his demerites, the Emperor should
be pleased to impose upon him.

Lastly; I am in great fear, least the Pope [vnderstanding that Becane
matcheth enery Bishop with his holiness, as being alike inspired with the spirit
of Truth, so that they can err no more then the Pope can, and consequently,
should make Canonical laws and be Supreme Judges of all controversies, as the
Pope is] will utterly renounce Becane, and abandon him, as being one, of a
bastard and degenerate brood.

BECAN. Exam. Page 167

You say it is fond to think that the laws of Bishops have as great force and
authority, as the Apostles laws bad. Because the Apostles laws are set down
in holy writ. So was the Ordinance of Assuerus. Hear me speak as the thing
is: Humane laws (such as the Apostles were) receive not greater force to bind
because they are written in this or that book: but because the law maker uses
greater power, and will have it bind more. According to these two rules; one
of Vipian: Eth. lib. 10 cap. 9
Quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem. That which pleases the Prince,
has vigor of law. The other of Aristotle: It mattereth not whether laws be
written, or not written.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
MY reason to prove the Apostles laws and Canons to be of greater force and
authority to bind the conscience, was not simply because they are found
written in the Scripture, as the Ordinance of Assuerus is: but because they are
set down there, not only as Canons or Doctrines allowed, but also as
Essential parts of holy writ and Canonical Scripture: so neither Assuerus
Ordinance was, not any Law or Canon of Bishop, was, is, or ever shall be.
According to that of Saint Hierom upon the 89. Psalm: Quamuis sanctus sit
aliquis post Apostolos, quamuis disertus sit, non habet authoritatem. No man be
he never so holy or eloquent, after the Apostles, has any authority. The
Canons and Doctrines of the Apostles, are the foundations whereupon the Church
of Christ is built, Ephesians. 2.20
and contain that absolute certainety of Divine truth, that If an Angel from
heaven should teach otherwise he should be accursed. Agreeable to that of Saint
Augustine, Contra liter. Petilian. lib. 3. ca. 6. De quacunque re quae pertinet
ad sidem vitamque nostram, non dicam, si nos, sed si Angelus de coelo nobis
annunciauerit, praeterqua^; quod in Scripturis legalibus et euangelicis
accepist is Anathema sit. Be it of any thing that pertaines to faith or
manners, I do not say, if we, but if an Angel from heaven, preach otherwise,
then is set down in the scriptures Legal and Evangelical, let him be accursed.
But of all other Laws, Canons, and Writings, Origin in his first Homily upon
Hieremy writes thus: Sensus nostri, et enarrationes sine his testibus non
habent fidem. Our judgments or decrees, and our Explanations, without these
witnesses have no credit. And these witnesses says Augustine De Pec. mer. et
Remiss. lib. I. cap. 22. nec falli possunt, nec fallere, Can neither deceive,
nor be deceived. Therefore when Constantine the great had gathered those 318.
Bishops to the famous Council of Nice; by way of instruction, he gave unto
them the Apostles Canons and Doctrines, set down in the Scripture, as their
Directorie rule, whereby to make and square their Ecclesiastical Canons.
Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 7. reports the words thus: Euangelicae et Apostolicae
literae etc. The writings of the Evangelists, Apostles, and Prophets do
plainly instruct us, in the will and mind of God. Therefore laying aside
contention, let us seek out of those oracles divinely inspired, the vnsolding
of things propounded.

Therefore what horrible blasphemy is this in the Jesuit, to assert first, that
the Bishops and their laws and writings, are of like inspiration, and
authority to bind the Conscience, as the Canons and Doctrines of the Apostles
contained in the Scriptures? Secondly, that it mattered not, whether those
Canons and Doctrines were written in Gods book or no. Because Aristotle faid
of all laws: Scriptaene sint leges, an non scriptae, interessenibil videtur.
Whereas Tertullian says against that Heretic Hermogenes; Scriptum esse doceat
Hermogenis officina. Sinonest scriptum, timeat vae illud adijcientibus aut
detrahentibus destinatum. Let Hermogenes show it written, or else let him fear
that curse which is appointed for those who add to, or take from, the
Scripture. And touching Philosophers, the same Tertullian in the said book,
writes thus in capital letters: Haereticorum Patriarchae Philosophi.
Philosophers are Arch-fathers of Heretics.

Secondly, That the Apostles Canons and Doctrines set down in Scripture, are
but humane Canons and Doctrines. Which, then says Augustine, de vnitat. Eccl.
contr. Petilian, cap. 3. were to be taken away. His words be these: Auferantur
de medio, quae aduersus nos inuicem, non ex diuinis Canonicis libris, sed
aliunde recitamus. Quaeret fortasse aliquis, cur vis ista auferri de medio?
Quia nolo humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis, Ecclesiam sanctam
demonstrari. Away with all those authorities that either of us allege against
the other, but those that are taken out of Canonical Scripture: If any ask,
why I would have all other authorities put away? I answer, because I would
have the Church demonstrated by Divine Oracles, not humane documents. Plus
aliquid dicam, says Chrysostom in his second Homily, upon Paul's second
Epistle to Timothy: Ne Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium,
si quid Humanum. I will say more: Paul him self is not to be believed, If he
speak any thing of his own, if he speak only as a man. Therefore Saint Paul
of his Canons and Writings says thus: If any man think himself to be a
Prophet or Spiritual, 1. Cor. 14.37.
let him acknowledge that the things which I write to you, are the
Commandments of the Lord.

How great is this Jesuitical impiety and how abominable, too call Diume
Oracles, and Gods commandments, Humane documents? But this is not all; The
Jesuit adds out of Vlpian, for a general rule: That thesole will of the
Prince, is sussicient to make a law to be of force, to bind Christians to obey
for conscience sake (for of such laws only we here dispute). Whence this
impiety should necessarily follow, that, because Nabuchodonosor the Lawmakers
used all his Monarchical power and authority to make a decree, That every
subject of his should fall down and worship the golden Image which he had set
up, Sidrach, Mishak, and Abednego, were bound in conscience to fall down and
worship it.

Heretofore we have found the Jesuit to be very unlearned: but in this passage
he declares himself to be impious also, and blasphemous.

BECAN. Exam. Page 169

WHere read you that the fifth Council of Constantinople was celebrated under
Theodosius? You always err. Indecde the words you cite, are in the first
Council of Constanunople. viz: We pray your Clemency to confirm the Counsels
decree The reason of which words, you said was this: That alt though those
Fathers made a decree, which had force of an Ecclesiastical law, and force to
compel by Ecclesiastical censure; yet they prased the Emperor to confirm
the decree, by adding a constraining force through temporal punishments. If
this your reason whereby you defended Thomson, be good, why do you ask me
another? If if be not good, why did you not answer for him better? If Thomson
mean, that Prelates may by their own authority, make laws Ecclesiastical,
to bind their subjects to the keeping thereof by ^^^sures Ecclesiastical, but
cannot urge them, by punishments Corporal; and that Kings should only
subseruire serve under the Prelates as their outward executors, (hangmen, or
the like): he consents with us. Otherwise there is no Concord. Choose which
you will.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
COncord? What concord has Christ with Belial? The believing Protestant, with
the Idolatrous Papist? The servants of Christ, with the sworn slaves of
Antichrist? Wicked Nahash the Ammonite, would not covenant with the Gileadites
for peace, unless he might thrust out all their right eyes, and bring shame
upon all Israel: The Jesuit here (more wicked than Nahash) protests, that he
will have no concord with us, unless he may, not only bring shame upon Israel,
but quench the light and glory of Israel: to weet, that our Kings casting their
Crowns at the Popes, nay at inferior Bishops, feet; should stand ready to be
hangmen, or the like executioners of all their impious and unrighteous decrees
and commands: viz to hang, and burn, whom, when, and where they will.

Choose which we will? We will choose millions of Combats with garments
tumbled in blood, rather than to yield to the least iotte of this shame and
disgrace of our royal Monarchs, the Sovereign Lords of all Prelates within
their Kingdoms; Patriarchs, or Popes themselves.

Although no lines of concord can be drawn between us and the Papists: yet
here among our s^lues is full consent. Dr. Tooker says, in times of Churches
persecution, the Apostles did, and well might, make laws Ecclesiastical. Mr.
Thomson grants as much, and adds, that because the authority of Emperors
(then heathen) did not breath upon them, or with them, they wanted the
enforcements by corporal punishments, as imprisonments, loss of goods,
members, life etc.

Dr. Tooker says, in times of Church peace, the authority of calling Councels,
and of ratifying the Canons and Decrees made in Councels, belongs to
Christian Kings and Emperors. Mr. Thomson with full agreement, says, in those
times of peace, the Bishops and Councels could not make any Ecclesiastical
law, which had force of law, without the authority of the King or Emperor.

To back this assertion of Mr. Thomson, I moved the Jesuit to yield a sound
reason, why [especially if that be true which Pope Boniface 8. in that last
Canon, Extrau^g. Commun. de M^^or. et Obedien.
Vnam Sanctam, viz. Vterque gladius spiritualis et materialis est in potestate
Ecclesiae: sed ille, Sacerdotis; is, manu Regum et militum, sed ad Nutum
sacerdotis, exercendus. Both spiritual and material sword, are in the
Churches power: but the one is to be used by the hand of the Priest; the other,
by the hand of the King or Soldier, but at the Priests beck or command.] so
many, to wee^, 150. Bishops assembled in the first Council of Constantinople,
should be such suppliants, as it were upon their knees, unto the Emperor,
beseeching, and so earnestly entreating him, to confirm the Counsels decree,
if that decree had had force of Ecclesiastical decree, without confirmation of
the Emperor.

But this empty Jesuit not being able to give another solid reason, and not
daring to yield that: runs away from the matter; and leaves naught else behind
him, but the crackling sound of a windy tubbe; answering unto me nothing but
this: If your reason brought to defend Thomson were good, why did you ask me
another? If not, why did you not give me a better? which his answer made in
form of the two horned Dilemma, is thus returned upon him, with both horns
directly bent against him. If my reason were good to accord them; why does the
Jesuit here hold on his prattle of discord? if it were not good, why did not
the Jesuit produce a better, and a more solid reason of those Fathers entreaty
for Imperial confirmation, to ratify their decree? considering that the
Question, as it was moved and darted by me, struck the Jesuits Cause through
the very heart. As some cannot fish but in troubled waters; so it seems this
Jesuit can hold no argument, but in mists of confusion. For here he confounds
the Council and laws of the Apostles, with Councels and Canons of
after-Bishops. Sic canibus catulos, sic paruis componere magna: It is belike
the fashion Iesuitical, to compare molehils with mountains. The Apostles in
extraordinary manner Divinely inspired, might, and did make Ecclesiastical
laws to bind the conscience of all Christians, though not to punish their
bodies: But the after-Bishops, in times of Christian Emperors, neither did, nor
could meet, specially in general Counsels, to make laws Ecclesiastical, for
the space of 600. years, at least, after Christ, without Imperial command.
And when they were met in Council, not only the Emperor, but also his
officers, the lay Senate and Judges, sat as Presidents there, giuing-rule and
order for making of those Canons, not suffering any to pass for law, without
their consent, and confirmation of the Emperor, as Hainric the Salo-Brigian in
his Becano-Baculus, has with great variety of solid proofs, fully
demonstrated; and further has there produced very many Ecclesiastical laws,
touching in a manner all Ecclesiastical matters, and Ecclesiastical persons,
commendably made by orthodoxall Kings and Emperors, without Counsels of
Bishops.

Lastly, whereas the Jesuit here slyeth, upon me, (indeed not upon me, but
upon the Compositer) for mistaking the Arithmeticall figure of 5. for 1. and as
though I had written five at large, the Jesuit sets down ( quintu^); he shows
himself to be, in the one a truthlesse wrangler, and in the other, a seely
fly-catcher. My Compositer, or Transcriber, must be whipped in print, mistaking
one letter for another: but he must go scot-free, mistaking one name for
another; one man for another, to weet, Tooker for Richard. Exam. page 120.
For which I would not tax him in due place, (and here, constrained I do it)
because I would not misspend the Readers precious time, with such empty and
childish trifles.

Becans Jar.
VIII. Question. Whether the King by his own proper authority, may confer,
collate, or bestow Ecclesiastical benefices?
1. THat the King may confer Ecclesiasticell livings, M. Henry Salclebridge
affirms page 121. in these words: Christiani Principes in suis Regnis, cum
laud, propria authoritate, beneficia con^ulerunt. Christian Princes in their
own Kingdoms, by their own proper authority, have given or bestowed
benefices, and that to their praise, etc. And then again page 150. Audin
Iesuita, non modo collationes beneficiorum ad Angliae Reges spectare, fed ad
eosdem illos spectare, vti Ecclesiae Anglicanae Primates vel supremos
Ordinarios etc. Do you hear Jesuit, the collation of benefices, does not
only belong to the Kings of England, but also it does belong unto them, as
they are Primates or supreme Ordinaries of the Church of England etc. And yet
more: Rex ratione supremae suae Ecclesiasticae iurisdictionis praesentabit ad
liberas Capellas. The King by virtue of his supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall be able to present unto free Chappells etc.

2. Now M. Tooker to the contrary denies it, page 36. where talking of the
Kings of England, he says thus: Beneficia autem curata, vel non curata, non
conferunt omnino in que^piam, maiora minoraue: multo minus dignitates
Ecclesiasticas, sine Episcopatus, sieve Archiepiscopatus per vniuersum ambitum
Regnisui. Eorum certe collatio vel institutio est, quorum est destitutio, id
est, Episcoporum Comprouincialium, qui potestatem habent personas
ipsassacrandi. Hoc habetiuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor and ^ubordinata
poteslas habet, ius inquam nominandi and p^aesentandi apud nos etc. Kings do
not at all collate or bestow upon any man benefices that have care of souls,
or not care, greater or lesser; and much less Ecclesiastical dignities,
whether Bishop^ickes or Archbishoprickes throughout the whole circuits of
their Kingdoms. For this truly belongs unto those, whose office it is to
dispose there of, to wit, to the Compreninciall Bishops, who have power to
consecrate the said persons on whom they bestow them, Indeed the Kings
Majesty notwithstanding has this right with us in England, which an inferior
and subordinate power also has, to wit, right so nominate and present unto
benefices etc.

3. Behotde here a triple Jar or discord between these two Authors, and this
in a daily and vulges watter. The first is, that M. Henry Salclebridge says,
that the collasion of benefices belongs to the Kings of England, in that they
he the Primates of the Church of England. M. Tooker says to the contrary, that
it belongs not to Kings at all, but to Bishops. The second Jar is, that M.
Salclebridge says, that Kings by their own authority, have conferred
benefices. M. Tooker says, that they never do, nor have done. The third is,
that M. Salclebridge says, that Kings by virtue of their supreme
Ecclesiastical I^risdiction may present (...) benefices. M. Tooker ^^^rr^th,
that in this point, Kings hauene more right, then their subjects, and other
inferior persons: for so he says: Hoc habet iuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor
and subordinata potestas habet. The Kings Majesty has (in this point of
conferring beneficer) the same right that an inferior and subordinate power
bath etc. Whether of these two then should King James believe, if he had a fat
benefice, or an Archbishopricke now to bestow?

English Concord.
Here is also a Jesuitical trifling altercation about words. Hainric by
collation of Benefices understands Presentation, Nominations to Benefices,
the very Donation of Benefices: Doctor Tooker thereby concclueth the
Institution of Presbyters, and the consecration of Bishops. Dr: Tooker
acknowledges the Kings Presentation, Nomination, Donation: Hainric, by no
means, attributes to the king either Institution or Consecration as both of
them being proper go the Bishops. The Kings presenthig of his Clearks to the
Bishop, for institution of them into such Benefices with Cure, as respect the
Kings hereditary right of Patronage, is nor much different from the
presentations made by his subjects, who have the like right of Patronage:
unless it be herein, viz that the King by his writ, may and does compel the
Bishop (especially after recoucry by Quare Impedie) opposing himself
therein, to institute fit Clarks, presented by his Majesty, or by other
Patrons to the said Bishop.

But the presentation of certain Benefices with Cure, after they have
continued void of any Incumbent, for the space of 18: Months appertains unto
the King by way of lapse, as unto the Supreme Ordinary, in his Dominions, or
the only Supreme Governor of the Church therein; and that by the common laws
of England: as is expressly showed, in Becano-Baculus, Page 142. 150.

Moreover, there are certain Benefices with Cure, called Donatiues, which
admit no Institution at all: of these the King by his own Donation only,
without any either Episcopal Institution, or Archidiaconall Induction, makes
the Clearks rightful possessours.

Doctor Tooker knows well these triuial and vulgar matters (as Becane here
calls them), and bears in mind our most learned Sovereign his words in his
Monitory Preface, touching the Collation of Benefices, Page 33.

How often have the Kings of France withstood the Pope, in such sort, that they
would not yield unto him the very Collation of Benefices?

And those other words concerning Bishoprics received from Kings and
Emperors, Page 29.

Even the Pope also, with all obedience and submission, did acknowledge himself
to hold his Popedom of the Emperor. And Page 31. He that peaceably is desirous
to know, in what sort the Bishops of Spain, Scotland, England, Hungary, by
ancient Institution, even until modern innovation, came in, and were invested
by Kings, with quiet possession of their temporals purely, and entirely; he
shall find the same, by searching the lives of the Fathers, and by reading
Histories. Walthram Naumburg. lib. de Inuestit. Episc.

Behold then, how a threefold Concord arises out of that threefold Jar which
the Jesuit faineth.

The first Concord: Hainric says, that the conferring of certain Benefices
belongs to the Kings of England by way of lapse, as they are the chief
Governors of the Church of England: Doctor Tooker affirms, that the
Collation of Benefices, lying void of any Incumbents above 18. Months,
appertains to the King only by way of lapse: and not to the Bishops or
Archbishops; or to any other subject.

The second: Hainric says, that Kings by their own authority, have oftentimes
given Benefices: to weet, Donatiues. Tooker auerreth that the King may give 40.
50. or more, within the compass of one year, if so many fall void.

The third: Hainric says, that by the laws of England, Kings, because of
their Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, present to free Chapels; and that
none of their subjects, to weet, Bishops or Archbishops, have authority to
visit the said Chapels: Dr. Tooker, instructed by the same laws, avouches
that Kings only have that authority, and no subjects, but by the Kings grant.

Finally, if the hungry Jesuit, (who minds only his meat, that is, far
Benefices, or Archbishoprickes) can produce but one little, either word of
Scripture, or sentence in Ancient Father, whereby it may appear that the
Collation of Benefices belonged to the Primate of the Christian Church as
Primate; let him have the victory: But if he cannot, unless he be more then
impudent, let him seal up his lips, and recognize those words of the Parisian
Advocate, Arg. 11. Page 25. That of Luke 9. The Son of man has not where to
rest his head; is Equivalent, with this: The Church by Divine right has no
Territory.

BECAN. Exam. Page; 173

SMall Benefices without Cure, may be conferred upon Clearks, which are neither
Priests nor Bishops. Therefore Tooker by Collation, does not mean Institution,
or Sacration. Again he says, that the King of England has no other right
then to name or present; but to give or confer, is more then to name and
present: you feign Tooker by Collation to under stand Instuntion or
Consecration. Therefore you dissent from Tooker. Hainric says, the Collation
of Benefices belongs to the King of England, as Primate of the Church of
England: but this you deny: for you bid me show out of Scripture or Ancient
Father, that the Collation of Benefices belongs to the Primate of the Church.
Not I, but Hainric who affirmed it, must show that. It is my part only to show
that English Writers dissent in this point. This I have done, let me therefore
have the victory.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here, the Jesuit is as a chased timorous Heart, which having his deadly wound
given him, flies out a while, straggling from his fellows: but feeling decay
of his vital spirits, and life's blood, runs into the brakes to hide his head,
and there to perish. Becane in his verbal (but in no sort real) confutation
of his Majesty's Apology and Preface Monitory, sets down the Conferring of
Benefices, as one of the proper offices of the Supreme Primate Ecclesiastical;
as he understood it, Sacerdotall or Episcopal. Hainric in his Becano-Baculus,
told the Jesuit, that, although by none, either Scripture, or Ancient Father,
it can be showed that Collation of Benefices belonged, as proper, to the said
Primate Ecclesiastical; yet he would encounter him therein, and beat him with
his own weapon: as he did soundly, proving that good Emperors, have given
Popedoms, and that according to the Canon Law: That Catholic Kings by their
prerogative Regal, have given, as to this day they give, Archbishopricks,
Bishoprics, and other Benefices.

Because Becane the Jesuit, never as yet answered, nor ever will be able to
answer, Hainric therein: I urged the Jesuit by Scripture, or Ancient Father to
show, the Collation of Benefices, to belong to their Ecclesiastical, to weet,
Episcopal Primate; promising upon that condition, that we would yield the
victory unto him. But this seely Jesuit (not being able for his life produce
the least, either word of Scripture, or sentence of Ancient Father for it)
runs away into the brakes of his clouded ignorance, crying out thus: Let me
have the victory, for I have proved an English Jar.

How ridiculous is this Jesuit here? Hainrie, as has appeared, denied the
Collation of Benefices to belong to the Supreme Primate Episcopal; yet
supposed that it did appertain to a Supreme Primate, to weet, Regal; that
thereby he might cudgel the Jesuit with his own weapon, and according to
Becane his dispute, prove the King to be Primate, to weet, Regal, because the
Collatio of Benefices belongs unto him. Therefore not Hainric, but only Becane
was to show it out of Scripture or Ancient Fathers: which, because he neither
has, nor can do, his mouth is to be stopped up herein, ever hereafter.

Touching the Benefices he speaks of, the Jesuit cannot name any small
Benefices without Cure, conferred upon Clearkes that are neither Priests, nor
Bishops, which may not by the laws of this Kingdom, be given as well by the
King, as by the Bishops, or Archbishops. But what a trifling Sophister is this,
going about to prove, that Doctor Tooker by Collation, did not mean Institution
and sacration? when as these his express words show that he meant thereby
nothing else; Duel. Page 36. Reges Angliae Beneficia Curata, vel non Curata,
non conferunt omnino in quempiam Maiora Minoraue, multo minus Episcopatus per
vniuersum ambitum regni sui, illorum certe Collatio vel Institutio est quorum
est destitutio, id est Episcoporum comproumcialium, qui potestatem habent
personas ipsas facrandi. In short, and in English, thus: The Collation of
Benefices, or Bishoprics, belongs not to the Kings, but to Bishops, whose
office is to Institute and Consecrate.

Certainly, in the Jesuits sense, the inferior Bishops do not confer,
that is, do not give Archbishopricks: But in Doctor Tookers sense, they do
confer Archbishopricks, that is they do consecrate Archbishops, being
nominated, not by Bishops, but by the King, being chosen not by Bishops, but by
the Deane and Chapter. Whereby it is most manifest, that Doctor Tooker by
Collation meant Consecration.

Collation, as say the Canonists, in the large signification thereof,
contains Presentation, Nomination, Donation, and Institution, or
Consecration. Hainric, by Collation understands Presentation, Nomination, and
Donation; all which he proves to belong to the King, as Dr. Tooker also
acknowlegeth. Dr. Tooker by Collation understands Institution and
Consecration; which he, and also Hainric, assert to belong to Bishops, and not
to Kings. So that Hainric and Dr. Tooker agree fully in this point, being
understood according to their express words.

My self and Hainric also conspire wholly heerin: for Hainric in his
Becano-Baculus; and I, in my English Concord, assert expressly, that the
Collation or Presentation of Benefices by way of lapse after 18. Months,
belongs to the King, as Supreme Primate Regal: Therefore, with very great,
either ignorance, or impudency does the Jesuit object any Jar between me
and Hainric in this point.

Both Hainric, and my self, auerre that Collation of Benefices cannot be
showed in Scripture, or Ancient Father, to belong to the Episcopal Supreme
Primate: But Hainric has proved it sufficiently, that Collation of Benefices
and Bishoprics, did of old belong to the Supreme Primates Regal.

Therefore this imputation of a Jar, between Hainric and Harris: or Hainric
and Tooker: or Tooker and Harris; deserves a whip, or a cudgel for Becane,
rather then a garland of victory.

BECAN. Exam Page 176

IF, by Collation of Benefices, Hainric and Tooker mean diverse things, then
there is a Jar: If they mean the same thing, then Tooker did not mean
Institution and Sacration. Therefore you dissent from your self.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe two horns of this Dilemma, as of the former, are thus bent directly into
the Jesuits face. If by Collation of Benefices, Hainric and Tooker mean
things diverse: then Hainric may alcribe Collation to the King; and Tooker may
deny Collation to belong to the King, without Jar: If they mean the same
thing, then, according to Becane his dispute here, there is no Jar between
Hainric and Tooker. For if their meaning of things diverse, does arguea Jar:
their meaning of the self same thing, must argue Concord.

BECAN. Exam. Page 177

IF, by Collation, Tooker meant only Institution and Sacration, and yet
acknowledge the King to confer 40. or 60. Benefices in the year: then b^
grants, that the King does Institute 40. or 60. into Benefices in the year.
Every where you entangle your self. Tooker says nothing of Presentation by
way of lapse, nor to free Chappells exempt from Episcopal Visitation; but
rather the contrary in these words: Hoc habetiuris Regia Maiestas, quod minor
et subordinata potestas habet, ius inquam Nominandi et Praesen andi apud nos.
The King and his Subjects have like right to nominate and present their Clearks.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
What a clay-witted Sophister is this Martin Father Jesuit, forsooth Divinity
reader in Mentz? reasoning thus. Tooker (understanding, by Collation of
Benefices, Presentation, Nomination, Donation, as Hainric does) acknowledges
the Kings right to confer 60. Benefices, or more in a year, and 10. or 12.
Bishoprics in a year, as they may fall void: Therefore Tooker taking
Collation for Institution and Sacration, grants right and power to the King,
to Institute, and Consecrate, so many Priests and Bishops yearly. So boyishly
daunceth this Jesuit under the net of Equivocation, easily perceived, by all,
who running, do but cast their eyes upon him.

The Kings different, and supereminent right and power above all his subjects,
in bestowing of Benefices, has in the English Concord been unfolded
distinctlie, and more sufficiently then Becane deserves, thus: 1. The King
only by his Breue Episcopo, Writ to the Bishop; after presentation in his
Majesty's Court, recovered, compels the Bishops to institute the Presentee.
2. The King only presents his Clearks by lapse of time, to weet, after 18.
Months Vacancy. 3. The King only (or they only unto whom that is granted by
the King) presents his Clearkes to his free Chappells, exempted by him from
Episcopal Visitation; by his Regal Donation only, without any Institution or
Induction of Bishop or Archdeacon, giving his Clearks real and lawful
possession of such Donatiues.


All these three particulars are vulgarly known, and ingenuously confessed by
Dr. Tooker: which (if he would vouchsafe this Jesuit an answer) would
expreslie appear in his after-writings, as the like has been done in Mr.
Burhill his after-writings.

But all these three instances of Regal Supremacy above all his Subjects,
Clergy, or Lay, this unlearned Jesuit silently passes over: Only as the
dog turns to his vomit, so he in his Examen returns to his loathsome
froath and scumme of idle repetition of the self same things, matter,
sentences, words and syllables, which in his Jar he had ser forth in print;
and which said froath, by the very blast of my English Concord, was utterly
dissolved and scattered, long before this his Examen peeped out.

Becans Jar.
IX. Question. Whether the King can create, and depose Bishops, or no?
1. Master Salclebridge says, that be can. For thus he writes page 121.
Christiani Principes in suis Regnis, cum laud, propria authoritate, Episcopos
crearunt and deposuerunt. Christian Princes, have in their Kingdoms, by their
own proper authority created and deposed Bishops, and that with praise etc.
And then again page 144. Rex Angliae Archidiacono Richmundiae Episcopalem
concessit Iurisdictionem. The King of England granted Episcopal Jurisdiction
to the Archdeacon of Richmond etc. And yet further page 155. Reges Angliae
suprema sua authoritate, deiure, atquecum laud omnium Ordinum Episcopos
elegerunt, ac proinde deponere potuerunt. The Kings of England of their own
supreme authority, by right, and with praise of all manner Estates, have
elected Bishops, and therefore they might depose them also etc. And then
lastly: Constat, Christianos Principes cum laud Episcopos elegisse, and
deposuisse, etiam Romanos. It is manifest, that Christian Princes, have
elected, and deposed Bishops, yea Popes also, and that with their praise etc.

2. Now M. Tooker, he denies in the place before cited that the King can
create or depose Bishops. For there he assi^ning (...) things necessary for
the ordaining or creating of a Bishop, to wit, Consecration of the person, and
a Bishopric, adds, that the King can perform neither of these two. For
neithere (...) be confer any benefice, and much less a Bishopric or
Archbishopricke; neither has he any power to consecrate persons. In so much,
that in another place he confesses, that it is so far off from King James to
have power to create or depose Bishops, that he would rather acknowledge
himself for one of their scholars and Disciples. For thus he writes page
311. Serenissimus ac pientissimus Rex noster Iacobus non habet quicquam
antiquius and honorificentius, quam vt cum Valentiniano filium se Ecclesiae
profiteatur, and cum Theodorico Italiae Rege, se alumnum Ecclesiae, and
ciscipulum Archiepiscoporum fuorum, and Episcoporum libenter recognoscat. Our
most Gracious and most pious King James does esteem or account nothing more
noble and more honorable, then with Valentinian (the Emperor) to profess
himself a son of the Church; and with Theo^^oricus King of Italy, most
willingly to acknowledge himself a foster-childe of the Church, and a disciple
of his Archbishops and Bishops etc.

3. This Jar now, as you see, is of great moment. For if the King cannot
create or ordain Bishops, as M. Tooker says he cannot; then it follows
evidently that Thomas Cranmer who was made Archbishop of Canterbury by the King
(Henry the 8.) was no true, but a false Bishop; no pastor, but a robber; one
that entered not into the sheep fold by the door; but climbed up some other
way. Whereof again ensue three other markeable points. First, that all other
Bishops, who were afterward either created by Cranmer, or by the King, were
lake unto Cranmer himself. Secondly, whatsoever was done of them, by
Episcopal authority or Iuresdiction, was of no validity or force, Thirdly,
that they, so ordaixed, are bound to restitution of all reave news and prosies
which they have reaped by their Bishoprics. What counsel now is there to be
taken in this point? Let your Academicks, I pray you, consider.

English Concord. Concord Page 58

THat Christian Princes have with commendation created and deposed Bishops, yea
Bishops of Rome; not only Hainric, but also our most drad Sovereign Lord
James, the most learned King upon the face of the earth, has manifested, in
his monitory Preface, out of the Ecclesiastical Histories, in these very
words, Page 28. Inperatores arque Reges etc. All these Emperors and Kings
which lived religiously and Christianly, were so far from thinking the Pope
to have any power over them, that they themselves have created Popes, and when
they grew irregular, reformed them; and sometimes also deposed them. And Page
291. Sed et per aetates complurimas etc. But for many Ages together, the most
assured and inviolable right of creating the Roman Bishops, remained with the
Emperors. Wherein, my principal witness shall be the Bishop of Rome; who
decreed in a Council Sigeb. An. 734 Wathr. de Epis. Inuessat. Mart, Polon. An.
780.
of 153. Bishop and Abbats, that right and power of choosing the Pope, and
ordaining the Sea Apostolic, should remain to the Emperor Charles the great;
and moreover, definitiuely ordained that all Archbishops, and Bishops
throughout all Provinces should take their inuestiture from him: Niem, de
Pnuil, et Jur. Did. 63 ca. Adrian.
and that no Bishop should be consecrated, unless he were first commended and
invested by the King. And whosoever shall offend against this decree, hew
rapped him up in the bands of Anathema. Mat Paris. in H. Act. 1100. sdem An.
1112 et An. 1119
Page. 34. King Henry the first of that name, after the conquest, gave the
Bishopric of Winchester unto William Gifford, and presently invested him,
into all the possessions appertaining to that Sea, against the decrees of the
late Council. The same King Henry gave the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, to
Raphe Bishop of London, and invested him by a Ring and a Staff. Plat. vit.
Pela. 2. et Gregory.
Besides, not only Plaina, but other Popish Writers, do witness, that the
Emperors consent, for many Ages, was to be obtained for the choice of the
Bishop of Rome: which thing Bellarmine which all his skill, Declericis.
could not handsomely avoid.

Moreover, also the Roman Bishops were enjoined to pay unto the Emperors
Exchequer, a certain sum of current money, for the obtaining of their
confirmation; which custom endured for the space of seven hundred years, An.
680. in vita Agatho. Anastas. An. 678 Did. 63. 1. Agatho.
after Christ, as is witnessed by Sigebert Luitprand and other Historians of
the Roman faction. But every where we shall meet with examples of Emperors,
which cut the wings of the Roman Bishops usurped authority. All these things
so substantially manifested, and pithily disputed by our Sovereign King, in
his Apology for the oath of Allegiance Page 127.128. will Dr. Tooker most
willingly subscribe unto; especially seeing he demonstrateth the same by
sacred text, saying, Sub veteri Testa: 2. Chro. 19 v. 4
reges haud dubie, gubernatores erant Ecclesiae intra fines suos: exauctor
auerunt enim summum Pontificem, aliumque in eius locu^ subrogauerunt: 1. Reg.
2. v. 17
Under the old Testament, there was no question but that Kings were governors
of the Church, within their dominions: for they deposed the high Priest, and
placed another in his room.

Truly Dr. Tooker affirms Regem non Sacrare Episcopos. That the King does
not consecrate Bishops: and as truly that the King is a son of the Church,
as Valentinian, or with Theodosius a pupil or a foster child of the Church:
yea, a disciple, not only of Archbishops and Bishops; but also of inferior
Priests and Ministers, (whose Sermons he more often hears) but only, Quoad
officia Ministerialia, respecting the proper office of Ministerial. duties,
and not in the Supreme government of the Church. And unto this purpose writes
Dr. Tooker Page 311. of King Edward the sixth; Titulumet stolam Pontificiam
aspernabatur etc. Although he refused the title and robe of a high Priest: yet
notwithstanding he retained the Christia Supremacy to himself, as the mean
whereby he might more safely advise the Church, and provide for it against the
time to come. Again, he verifieth as much of our King James and other
Christian Princes, Page 312. Sunt quidem reges Christiani etc. Even now are
Christian Kings and other Princes, the highest and Supreme governors of all
persons whatsoeucr within their Empire and Dominion, and have ever so been,
from the ancient time, of the purer and Primitive Church. And Page 312. Non
tantum sunt praesules in ordine etc. Yet notwithstanding they are not Prelates
in any Priestly order, although they enjoy a Supremacy in the Christian
regiment: for with great Constantine, they ought to be common Bishops of
exterior matters; and with Charles the great, Ludouicus Pius and Lotharius,
make laws, Ecelesiasticall Canons (if need require) or with King David,
Solomon, Ezechia and Ichoshaphat, keep visitation in the Temple, and give
order to Ecclesiastical affairs. And why not then, with Solomon, to depose
and disrobe a high Priest, and put another in his place? for which opinion Dr.
Tooker writes, Page 152. Totumhoc quantumcunque est etc. All this how great
soever, which is as great as may be, is but an or dinary document of piety,
religion and royal jurisdiction. Wherefore this stands a fir me foundation
of our side, that King Solomon out of his ordinary power, might depose the high
Priest, and bring him into order. And therefore, vain is the Challenge of the
Roman Bishops, boasting an immunity, as though no secular Prince could remove
them. For it is plain, that this is practiced in sacred Scriptures. Therefore
with what face though of brass, could the Jesuit Becane utter to the world
this low de lie! And from whence does he in another place confess, that it is
so far from King James, to create and depose Bishops, that he rather
acknowledges himself their foster child and disciple? As though King Solomon
acknowledged not himself a foster child of the Church, and Disciple of the
Priests, when he deposed Abiathar, and subrogated Zadoc in his stead: the
Jesuit, Sophister like, is always wallowing in a fallacy called Ignoratio
Elenchi.

Moreover, Doctor Tooker, Page. 37. writes, Rex concedit suam regiam
licentiam eligendi. As often as it happens to any Cathedral Church to be
destitute of a Bishop, then the King by a vvritte, gives license to the
Deane and Chapter, to elect another person Canonically.

But I will btiefely declare unto thee (gentle Reader) the whole process and
carriage of this election: for it is common and vulgar every day. Thus
therefore it proceeds: When any Cathedral Church wants his Pastor, the
King sends forth his royal Writ Conge Destire, directed to the Deane and
Chapter; commanding them with all speed, to assemble and to choose an
Archbishop, or Bishop, for their Sea: but with this prouiso; that they choose
no other, than that person which shall be named by the King, under the penalty
of a Praemunire, (which is the greatest punishment among us in England, except
death.) And the same Archbishop, or Bishop so named by the King, and elected
as aforesaid, must be consecrated by the Archbishop, or Bishops, under the
same penalty.

Now consider learned Reader (for I will make thee my judge) what other thing
is this, then to create Archbishoppes and Bishops? excepting one, lie
ceremonial formalities. But let us suffer that most blessed Martyr, Archbishop
Cranmer, to rest in glory with Christ in heanen. This Jar and difference is
of great momenn, (I mean betwixt the Papists and us) for if it appear as
clear as the light, both by the Popes Canon laws, and also by open Tables of
Ecclesiastical Histories, as our most drad Sovereign has most exactly
demonstrated, that the Roman Emperor created and elected Popes, and set in
order the Sea Apostolic: And if all Archbishoppes and Bishops, throughout all
Provinces, received their Inuestitures from them: (according to the popish
VVriters, especially the Jesuits) all those Roman Bishops which have been so
created and elected for many hundred years (to omit all inseriour Archbishops
and Bishops) Non extiterunt Pastores intrantes per ostium in ouile, sed
Praedones aliunde ascendentes, have not been Pastors entering into the
sheepefolde by the door, but thieues and robbers ascending another way, that
is, false Bishops, Archbishops and Pastors. Out of which I infer three things.

First, that all the Bishops so created by Emperors and Kings (according to
the words of Genebrarde) were disorderly and Apostaticall, rather then
Apostolical.

Secondly, whatsoever was done of them by Episcopallauthoritie, or
Jurisdiction, is of no moment, force or validity.

Thirdly, that the Bishops so ordained, are bound to restitution of all reuene
was and and profits, which they have reaped by their Bishoprics.

See thou not (Jesuit) how thou art beaten with thine own rod? Quid hic
consilij capiendum? What devise is now to be taken? Let your Academicks, who,
now only (having swallowed up the Sorbonists) will rule the roast, to weet, the
Jesuitical Fathers (if it so may please their God Layola) see unto it.

BECAN. Exam. Page 181

YOu use three arguments to prone that Doctor. Tooker agrees with Hainric
herein, viz. that Kings may make and depose Bishops. i. Tooker embraces as
orthodoxall, all things proved by the King. But that Kings may create and
depose Bishops, was soundly proned by the King. Therefore Tooker embraces it
as orthodoxall. Here first the minor is false: for Tooker denies that the
King can create and depose Bisoops; for he says that the institution and
destitntion of inseriour Priests, belongs to Bishops, and not to, Kings:
therefore the King has not solidly proved it. Secondly, it may thus be
returned: All Academichs willingly approur all things soundly proved by the
King. But the King has soundly proved the Pope to be Antichrist. Therefore
the English Academicks willingly er^braec it as orthodoxall. The consequen^^ is
faise. For Powell verily belioueth that the Pope is Antichrist. and the King is
nor cortaine of it. The Syllogisticall form is goods. therefore one of the
premises is false.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here have we the picture of a very unlearned Jesuit, whose lineaments are
drawn with his own pensill; and which is depainted with his own lively
colors.

First, ignorantly he confounds as one, a single narration with a double
ratiocination; and the institution and destitution of inferior Priests, with
the creation and deposition of Bishops.

Secondly, he answers two Syllogismes, and those produced from his own forge
only, with denying the conclusions of both.

Thirdly, he reasons from one individual, Doctor Tooker, to all our
University Academicks. Lastly, he brings in Master Powell disallowing that,
which he chiefly approves.

The single natration set down in the English Concord, was thus: Doctor
Tooker, reading, and well approving his Majesty's solidarguments, especially
that from exemplary act of Solomon, commended in Scriptures, viz. in deposing
Abiathar, and placing Zadock, chief Priests; was so far from denying the
power of Kings to depose Bishops, that he, grounding himself upon the said act
of Solomon, concluded with the King and Hainric; That Emperors may lawfully
depose Popes, and so made up the harmony of all good concord herein. The
Jesuit transformeth this single narration into a double Syllogism: the former
thus;

All which the King has soundly proved, Tooker does not deny, but embrace, as
orthodoxall. But that Kings may depose Bishops, the King has soundly proved.
Therefore Doctor Tooker does not deny that Kings may depose Bishops. To this
he answers thus: Doctor Tooker denies that Kings may depose Bishops,
therefore the King has not solidly proved it. Then briefly and plainly his
answer here unto is thus: The conclusion of this syllogism is false.
Therefore the minor is false. Which answer proceeds from extreme ignorance
in the very principle of Logic.

But how proves he (for he dare not be Respondent here) the conclusion to be
false? Because Doctor Tooker denies the institution and destitution of
inferior Priests to belong to Kings, as being proper to Bishops. As though
inferior Priests and Bishops were all one. As though institution and
destitution of Priests, were all one with election and deposition of Bishops,
or Popes. One Bishop may institute and destitute an hundred Priests: but one
hundred Bishops cannot choose or depose one Bishop, especially an
Archbishop, or Pope.

Here are some lineaments and lively colors of this Jesuits gross ignorance:
more are to be seen in the second Syllogism, following thus; All things
soundly proved by the King, all English Academicks approve. That the Pope is
Antichrist, was soundly proved by the King: therefore all English Academicks
allow, as orthodoxall, the Pope to be Antichrist.

To this he answers thus: The conclusion is false, and the form good:
therefore the mayor or minor is false. It skilleth not whether, so that one of
them be false.

What is this else, but to his utter shame, to display his intolerable
ignorance to the world, and to expose it as ludibrious to the meanest Academick
Sophisters: who should be well lashr, or justly exploded if they would answer
right formed syllogismes, by denying the conclusions.

But how does this Jesuit prove this later conclusion to be false? Because
Gabriell Powell belieueth this doctrine, viz. that the Pope is Antichrist,
which the King has soundly proved, to be orthodoxall. Wherein, behold the
strange blockishnes of this Jesuit, who should have instauced in one Academick,
denying that which the King had soundly proved, viz. the Pope to be Antichrist:
but he brings in Master Powell allowing with all his (...) what the King
therein had soundly proved.

Moreover, if the King did not prove soundly the Pope to be Antichrist; then
the Jesuit takes away the suppositum, and so she weth himself to be a
frivolous Disputer. If the King did solidly prove the Pope to be Antichrist,
why should not Master Powell believe it as orthodoxall?

The Jesuit says The King does not hold it as certain: Reply first that is
nor ad idem; it is no answer to the Syllogism, many part thereof. Secondly,
though his Majesty does not hold those arguments so certain, which (...) from
that mystical book of the Revelation, (...) his Majesty solidly evinceth the
same, from other places of holy Writ, the meaning whereof is more certain,
clear, and evident.

Thirdly, Saint Paul teaches the Jesuit, that the spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophers; That the Lord reuealeth some things to one, which he
does not to another.

To conclude this strain, the Jesuits mayor proposition of this later
syllogism, does manifest the great store of ignorance in him, arguing a
general of all English Academicks, from the individual Dr. Tooker.

BECAN. Exam. Page 184

THe second argument. Tooker asserteth the King of England to have the primacie
of the Church. Therefore he confesses that he may depose Bishops. The
consequence is not good with you; for some of you asserting the Primacy, dony
the power of deposing Bishops. Yo^ take that ai granted, which should be
prooned. What is this, but to beg that which is questioned?

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here also the ignorance of this Jesuit sillily mistaketh the meaning of the
English Concord in this point. Becan, out of Doctor Tooker, asserting the King
to be a foster-child, and disciple of the Bishops, does conclude, that
therefore Doctor Tooker denied the Kings power to rule or depose Bishops.

The English Concord, to prove the weakness of that consequence, showed out of
Doctor Tooker, that though Kings were not Bishops, but subject unto them, in
regand of their Episcopal duties, as in hearing the word preached by them, in
receiving of the Sacraments administered by them; yet in respect of supreme
Ecclesiastical government, they were rulers over Bishope, and might depose
them. As King Edward the sine did, who though he disclaimed Episcopal
function, yet he claimed and used the primacy. But let the argument run from
the primacie of Kings, to conclude their power to depose Bishops. I say it
holds good; considering that all Papists make the power of deposing Bishops,
a part of the primacie. And that not one English Protestant Writer, ascribing
the primacie to the King, denies him the power to depose Bishops.

Here is then no begging of that in question, but a solid putting that out of
question which is contrauersed; and soundly concluding the power of Kings to
depose Bishops.

BECAN. Exam. Page 185

YOur third argument is, Tooker writes that Solomon deposed high Priests:
therefore the King of England may do the same. This also is no consequence:
for most grave Authors teach, that These, and such like consequences are not
good, etc. The Kings in the old Testament had that power: therefore Kings in
the new Testament have the same.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THis brew-bate Jesuit, would feign have made a Jar between Hainric,
asserting the Kings power to depose Bishops; and Doctor Tooker. The English
Concord shows, that Doctor Tooker did not only assert, but also prove the
same by the exemplarie act of Solomon, deposing the high Priests.

Against this clear concord, the Icsuit opposes nothing but this, That most
grave Authors deny the argument. Which is nothing to the purpose. For here the
question is not, whether other Popish Writers dissent from Hainric, or Tooker:
but whether Hainric and Docter Tooker dissent herein. Neither in this case,
mattereth it, whether this Argument from Salomons act, be good, or not. It
suffices that Doctor Tooker took it to be good.

BECAN. Exam. Page 1^2

THese your arguments help not your cause. For either they are sound, or not
sound: If sound, they prone Tooker to dissent from himself; and so there is a
Jar. If not sound, why do they occupy any paper?

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THis Jesuit is very unlucky in his Dilemmaes. For, as the former have been: so
this, is thus retorted upon him. These arguments help my cause well; for, if
they be unsound, by Becans dispute, they prove not Doctor Tooker to dissent
from himself; and so no Jar: if sound, what cause has the Jesuit to dislike
either them, or the printing of them?

Thus is his whole Examen in this ninth Chapter utterly dissolved, and brought
to naught.

Becans Jar.
X. Question. Whether the King can excommunicate his obstinate subjects, or no?
1. Here now do our Adversaries rank their King amongst ordinary men; and
what they granted unto him before, here now they seem to revoke. For they
say, that the King cannot excommunicate any of his subjects, and yet himself
may be excommunicated by them, and expelled out of the Church of England,
whereof himself is supreme Head. The former part here of does Master Tooker
affirm, page 15. in these words: Rex non habet potestatem distringendi
gladium spiritualem, vel quempiam excommunicandi. The King has no power to
vnsheath the spiritual sword, nor to excommunicate any man, etc. And the
Chaplain, my Lord of Ely, page 151. says: Nos Principi censurae potestatem
non facimus. We do not give authority to our Prince to use Censures. etc.
And again, Master Thomson, page 83. Excommunicare nullo modo ad Suprematu
Ecclesiae pertinet. To excommunicate does no way belong to the Supremacy of
the Church. And again, page 84. Omnes fatemur Regem excommunicandi potestarem
nullam habere. We do all confess, that the King has no power to
excommunicate, etc.

2. The later part of the former point affirms Ma. Burhill, page 137. when he
says: Quod Ambrosio licuit in Theodosium, idem and alijs in Regem simili de
causa liceat, etc. As it was lawful for Ambrose to proceed against Theodosius;
so is it lawful also for others to proceed against the King, in the like
cause, etc. To wit (he would say) as it was lawful for S. Ambrose being a
Bishop, to excommunicate Theodosius the Emperor; so in like manner it is
lawful for our Bishops (of England) to excommunicate King James, if he offend
in like manner. And then again, page 242. Supremus Ecclesiae Gubernator,
potest eijci ex Ecclesia. The supreme Governor of the Church, (to wit, the
King) may be cast forth of the Church, etc. And page 267. Rex etsi iustusime
excommunicatus, non amittit Primatum. The King, although he should be most
instly excommunicated, yet he does not loose his Primacie, etc.

3. Now I do not sec, how these things can possibly hang together, or agree
with those which hitherto before have been attributed to the King. For unto
him is attributed, That he is primate, and the supreme head of the Church of
England: That be is above all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as temporal in
his Kingdom: That he bath supreme, most ample, and full jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, no less then political and temporal. And notwithstanding
all this, being so great a person, yet can he not excommunicate any one of
his subjects, either Laicke, or Churchman, although never so rebellious and
obstinate. Nay, although he be so great as he is, he may nevertheless be
excommunicated by his subjects, and cast out of the Church of England, whereof
he is supreme Head. I cannot understand this mystery.

4. Hereunto will I add three arguments more, which will increase the
difficulty. The first is: He that has supreme, most ample, and most full
Iurisdection Ecclesiastical in any Kingdom, may exercise all the actions, and
offices that belong unto Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of that Kingdom. But now
the King has supreme, most ample, and most full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
in the Kingdom of England, as Master Tooker, and Master Salclebridge do
confess: Ergo, he may exercise all offices belonging to Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in the Kingdom of England: Ergo, be may also excommunicate: for
that excommunication which is denounced by sentence, is an act of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Or else contrariwise, if you will thus: He that
cannot exercise all acts of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in any Kingdom, has
not supreme, most ample, and most full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in that
Kingdom. But the King of England cannot exercise all acts of Ecclesiastical
Iurisdection in his Kingdom, because he cannot excommunicate any man. Ergo,
he has not supreme, most ample, and most full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in
his Kingdom.

5. The second argument is this. He that gives to another, power to
excommunicate, without doubt has power himself to excommunicate, because no
man can give to another that which he has not himself. But the King of
England gives power to his Bishops to excommunicate. Ergo, he has power to
excommunicate. The Minor is proved out of Master Tooker, page 304. where he
affirms, That the Bishops (of England) do receive all their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the exterior Court, from the King. But now, power to
excommunicate belongs to Jurisdiction of the exterior Court, as the
Chaplain page 41. and Master Tooker, page 305. expressly teach us, saying: Rex
habet omnem iurisdictionem spiritualem in foro exteriori, exceptis quibusdam
censuris. The King has all Jurisdiction spiritual in the exterior Court,
excepting certain Censures. But now he excepteth Excommunication, wherein you
see is to be noted again a contradiction in Ma. Tooker; for that he refers
Censures (amongst which excommunication is one) to the Jurisdiction of the
exterior Court. True indeed. But yet he adioyneth two other things, that are
contradictorie. The first, that the King can give unto Bishops all Jurisdiction
of the exterior Court: and the second, that the King has not all Jurisdiction
of the exterior Court.

6. The third A^gument is: That whosoever is subject to another in
Ecclesiastical inrisdiction of the exterior Court, has not supreme, most
ample, and full lurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the exterior Court. But the
King is subject to some other body in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
exterior Court, to wit, to the Bishop, because he may by him be
excommunicated, by sentence, and cast out of the Church, as Master Burhill
does confess: Ergo, he has not supreme, most ample, and most full
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the exterior Court etc. Or, if your will,
contrariwise thus: He that is subject to no other in Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, cannot by any man be excommunicated by sentence. But the King
now, if he have supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is subject to no other in
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: Ergo, he cannot by any other be excommunicated
etc. I doube not, but you mark well, that these things do not agree.

English Concord. Page 68

IN good sooth, by this precedent chapter, I observe my Aduerlary a bad
Disputer; by the good leave of his fellow Jesuits. For manifesting hereof let
us first handle the question. You enquire whether the King may excommunicate
his subjects.

The worthy Bishop of Ely, page 151. Doctor Tooker, page 15. Master Thomson,
page 83. and 84. affirm of all our Writers in these words, Omnes fatemur regem
excommunicandipotestatem nullam habere: We all confess, that the King cannot
excommunicate.

I pray, tell me, in so full a concord, is here any difference? Surely, no
English Jar, except a fained Becanicall Jar: for the Jesuit follows not
the question, Whether the King can excommunicate; but, whether the King may be
excommunicated, and so proceeds (as you see) to discourse of the offices of
supremacy: that is to say, Whether this be not numbered among the residue, That
a Primate may be excommunicated of his subjects.

But here, like an idle Sophister, he fights without the lists: and first, it
is worth our labor, to mark his admirable skill in Logic, whereby he goes
about, out of our most uniform consent, to wrest an English discord. This is
therefore his first reason; The King cannot execute all the inferior actions
of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that is to say, He cannot excommunicate:
therefore he has no supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

I am ashamed of such childish Jesuitical fancies. Is the Jesuit become
ignorant, or forgetful of the question? Is not our controversy about one
supreme Governor of the Church in all matters Ecclesiastical, and above all
Ecclesiastical persons? Yes, we reason about the office of that one only
supreme Governor, as supreme Governor; according to Saint Augustine ad
Bonifac: Epist. 50. Inhoc ergo seruiunt domino reges in quantum sunt reges, cum
eafaciunt ad seruiendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi reges. In this Kings
serve the Lord, respecting only their kingly office: that is, when they do
those things to serve him, which they cannot do except they were Kings.

Now sir, if excommunication belong only to the primate or supreme Governor
(for in our question they are both one) then it should follow, that all
Bishops, and every mean Archdeacon (for both these have power to
excommunicate) are also supreme Governors of the Church: and so there must
needs be, by this Jesuits Logic, as many only supreme Governors, as there
be Bishops, and Archdeacons. Is any thing more absurd? See you not in what a
brake the Jesuit is caught? But for the power of excommunication, understand
thus much; The King of himself can excommunicate no man: yet notwithstanding,
by the consent of all the estates assembled in the Parliament, he can make
Ecclesiastical laws, by force and virtue whereof, this or that obstinate
subject ought to be excommunicated.

And besides, it is in the Kings absolute power, to command any Bishop
within his dominion, to absolve any man, whom by appeal he shall find to be
unjustly excommunicated.

Secondly, the Jesuit reasons thus: The King gives to other, power to
excommunicate; therefore he he himself may excommunicate. The Jesuit might
have learned out of Bernard (who they take for a brother of their own) the
vanity and weakness of this argument: who, though his doctrine herein be
not orthodoxall, yet to infringe this consequent, does very accuratly
distinguish thus, writing to Eugenius; Conuerie gladium tuum in vaginam: Tuus
ergo, et ipse two forsitan nuiu, etsi non tua manu, cuaginandus, etc. Put up
thy sword into thy sheath (says Christ to Peter). Then says Bernard to the
Pope, Yea, that sword is thine, yet not to be drawn by thy hand, but at thy
direction. Both swords are the Churches, that is to say, the spiritual sword,
and the material sword: but the material sword is drawn for the Church; the
spiritual sword by the Church: one of them by the hand of a Priest; the other,
by the hand of a Soldier: but yet, at the pleasure of a Priest, and the
command of the Emperor.

Thirdly, he argues on this manner; The King is subject to the Bishop
excommunicating the King, as was Theodosius to Ambrose: therefore, he is not
the only supreme Governor in his dominion, over all persons and causes
Ecclesiastical.

I answer, that if this be a strong argument, then shall not the Pope be
Primate of the Church: for the Pope is subject to a Priest in his act of
Confession. So writes Panormitan; Papatenetur confiteri: Extra. de poenit.
etremiss.
et in illo actu Sacerdos est mayor illo: Sacerdos potest illum ligare et
absoluere. The Pope himself is bound to confess to a Priest: and in that
action, the Priest is greater then the Pope: for he has power tobinde and
loose him.

It also appears by a Councellat Constance, See the Councels of Coustance and
Basil
and another at Basil, that many Popes have been subject to Bishops, and by
them conuented, judged, excommunicated, and deposed from their Papacy:
according to that of your Canon law; Cum again de fide, Did. 19. Anastasius in
glossa.
tum Synodus mayor est quam Papa: When a controversy is concerning faith, then
a Council is above the Pope. Therefore the Jesuit deceives by Elench a dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.

We teach, that our Kings are not Primats, but private men, in respect of
Sacerdotall functions; and by that means, not only are ^^feriour to Bishops,
but also to every other Minister: According to that worthy saying of
Valentinian the Emperor; Egosemin sonil Plebis. Eten^ collocato in Pontisicale
solio, cui nos quoque maderatores imperij nostracapita submittamus^^ also an
Emperor, Sozome. lib. 6.^^.7. The do^e^. lib. 4. cap. 5.
am like one of the common people. Place such a man in the Bishops throne, to
whom we that are managers of the Empire, may submitour necks.

The Popes excommunications, of any the meanest subjects of our Kings, much
less of the King himself, many years before King Henry the eight was borne,
were of no force by the common laws of England; as is manifested by Hainric,
in Becano Baculus. Where also he has taught you out of the same laws, that
the King of England, is the supreme Ordinary of his Kingdom; On, as it is in
the oath of Supremacy, The only supreme Governor of the Church of England:
And yet we doubt not, but he may besuspended from the Eucharist by a Bishop,
to whom he himself has committed Ecclesiastical jurisdiction (as Theodosius
was by Ambrose) that is, by resnsall to give him the holy Communion; but not in
any judicial, or co^sistorian form, of citation, appearance, and sentence to
be cast out of the Church.

The Jesuit is deeply deceived, if he imagine that the action of Ambrose was
solemn and canonical; or that it was excommunication in a strict and proper
sense: which thing I will (when need requires) convince by many solid
arguments. And in the mean season, let him show me, whether Theodosius was
canonically cited unto the consistory of Ambrose? or whether the Emperor did
answer for himself, either in person, or by his Proctor? Or whether the
sentence of excommunication was pronounced upon the Tribunal of the Bishop? Or
whether it were canonically denounced in the open Church, before he was
forbidden to enter into the Temple? And again, by whose commandment, and by
what example, did Saint Ambrose alone, without his fellow Elders, or the
counsel of other Bishops, excommunicate the Emperor of so many kingdoms,
espceially seeing Ambrose was neither Pope nor Patriatch? And let the Jesuit
give some good cause, why Ambrose should ^am ^^e upon so humble and godly an
emperor, by his excommunicating him, who erred only in one fact; and not once
blame or touch Constantius, a most proud, godless, and heretical Arian?

Lastly, whether it were the custom at Millan, to excommunicate all
murderers, (or else Theodosius had wrong): for Iassure you, murderers are not
excommunicated in England; and I think, very few are so censured at Mentz,
where Becane lives.

BECAN. Exam. Page 191

YOu answer, that here is no Jar; because all your Writers uniformly agree
in this: That the King cannot excommunicate. But here is the greatest Jar;
Because all English Writers who confess it do manifestly differ from
themseluss, as these three Arguments prove.

First, Whosoever has all mannet supreme, most ample and full Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in any Kingdom, he may exercise all acts which pertain to
Iurisdio^tion Ecclesiastical in that kingdom. And so be may excommunicate, to
wit, by a power vndependant of any man; such as the Pope has (the rest having
it from him, who may give it to them, and take it away). Enen as the King, who
having supreme, most ample Jurisdiction civil in his kingdom, may exercise
allciuill acts of that Jurisdiction in his kingdom.

But the Writer's assert the Kings, all manner supreme, most ample, and full
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. Therefore they assert the Kings power to
excommunicate.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here is but an idlerepetition of the self same Argument; which the English
Concord had answered before, by denying his mayor Proposition. Which denial
was grounded upon the testimony of Saint Augustine, whereunto this Jesuit
answers not one word. The substance whereof was this: That attacts of
Ecclesiastical government (and only all those acts) which the King alone may
do as King, belong unto him: but Excommunication belongs to every Archdeacon;
therefore that belongs not to the King.

The Jesuit being put unto his shifts, has fansied this new starting hole:
viz. That power vndependant of any other, to excommunicate, is proper only,
and to every supreme Governor Ecclesiastical. Therefore if the King be supreme
Governor Ecclesiastical, he has that vndependant power to excommunicate.

Whereunto Ireply, first, that no Scripture, no, nor ancient Father, for the
space of 600. years after Christ, does assert this vndependant power of
excommunicating, to belong to the supreme government Ecclesiastical.

Secondly, that the ancient Fathers deny this vndependant excommunicating power
to belong to Peter; (much less to the Pope.) but with one uniform consent,
dogmatize according to the Scriptures, that all the Apostles received from
Christ immediately (not from Peter) power to excommunicate, equal with Peter.

Thirdly, that the very principal Schoolmen, as Peter Lombard, the Master of
the Sentences, Thomas Aquine, the Doctor Angelical, Alexander Ales, the
Doctorirrefragable, and John Scot, the subrle Doctor, deny the same. First,
they all four define the keys, by the power to open and shut, to bind and
loose. See Lombard, Sent. l. 4. did. 18. et 19. Alexander Su^ma Theolog. part.
4. q. 20. memb. 2. et 5. Aquin as in Sent. l. 4. did. 13 q. 1. art. 1. Scot.
in Sent. l. 4. did. 19. art. 5. Secondly, Alexander in Summa p. 4. q. 20.
memb. 5. et 6. Tho: in 4. Sent. did. 24. q. 3. art. 2. and Scot. in Sent. l.
4. did. 19. art. 1. affirm, that the keys promised to Peter, in the 16.
chap. of Matthew, were given to the Apostles in the 20. chap. of John.

Fourthly, Bellarmine himself denies this vndependant power of
excommunicating to be proper to Peter: and proves by four sound arguments,
the said power to be common to all the Apostles, thus: de To. Pontif. l. 4.
cap. 23. That the Apostles received immediately from Christ their Jurisdiction;
First, by these words of our Lord, John 20. As my Father sent me, so send I
you. Which place, the Fathers, Chrysostom, and Theophylact, so expound, that
they say plainly, The Apostles, by those words, were made the Vicars of Christ:
yea, and received the very office and authority of Christ.

Cyrill, upon this place adds, that The Apostles by these words, were
properly created Apostles, and Teachers of the whole world. And that we
should understand, stand, that all power Ecclesiastical, is contained in
authority Apostolical, therefore Christ adds; As my Father sent me: seeing
that the Father sent his Son, endued with chiefest, or highest power.

Cyprian, in his book of the unity of the Church, says; The Lord speaks to
Peter, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and after his
resurrection, said to him, Feed my Sheep. And although after his resurrection,
he gave to all the Apostles equal power, and said: As my Father sent me, so I
send you; yet, to manifest unity, he constituted one chair. Where you see,
the same to be given to the Apostles, by those words, I send you; which was
promised to Peter by that, I will give thee the keys: and after, exhibited by
that, Feed my sheep. Now it is manifest, that by those words, I will give thee
the keys, and by that, Feed my sheep, is understood the most full even
exterior Jurisdiction.

Secondly, the election of Matthias unto the Apostleship shows the same. For,
we read Acts. I. that Matthias was not chosen by the Apostles, nor any
authority given unto him; but that his election being craved and obtained from
above, he was presently numbered among the Apostles. Surely, if all the Apostles
had Jurisdiction from Peter, that ought to have been showed most of all in
Matthias.

Thirdly, it is proved out of Saint Paul, who purposely teaches that he had
his authority and Jurisdiction from Christ; and thereupon, proves himself to
be a true Apostle. For, Gal. I. he says, Paul an Apostle, not of men neither
by man, but by Jesus Christ, and G O D the Father. And, there to show that he
received not authority from Peter, or other the Apostles, he says; But when
it pleased him, which had separated me from my mothers womb, and called me
by his grace to reveal his Scnne in me, that I should preach him among the
Gentiles, immediately I communicated not with flesh and blood, neither came I
again to Jerusalem to the which were Apostles before me: but I went into
Arabia, and turned again into Damascus. Then after 3. years, I came again to
Jerusalem to see Peter, etc. and chap. 2. For they that seemed to be somewhat,
added nothing to me above that I had.

Fourthly, it is proved by cuident reason: for the Apostles were made only by
Christ, as it appears Luke 6. He called his Disciples, and chose twelve of
them, whom he also called Apostles. And John 6. Have not I chosen you twelve.
Now that the Apostles had Iutisdiction, it is manifest, partly by the acts of
Saint Paul, who 1. Cor. 5. did excommunicate, and 1. Cor. 6.7. 11.14. etc. made
Canons. Partly also, because the Apostolical dignity, is the first, and
supreme dignity in the Church: as it appears, 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. See B.
Thomas, in 1. Cor. 12. Hitherto Bellarmine.

Unto these, I will add the testimony of two other Fathers, to weet, Origin,
and Beda. Origin, Tract 1. in Matthew. says: Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo claues regni
coelorum, caeteris quoque common est: Et quae sequuntur, velut ad Petrum
dicta. sunt omnium communia. This saying, I will give thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, is common to the rest of the Apostles: and the words that
follow, as spoken to Peter, are common unto all.

Beda Homil. in Euangel. Quem me dicunt, says; Potestas ligandi et soluendi
quamuis soli Petro a Domino data videatur, tamen absque vlla dubietate
noscendu^ est, quode^ caeteris Apostolis, data est: The power of binding and
loosing, though it seem to be given by the Lord only to Peter, yet without
all doubt, it was given also to the rest of the Apostles.

By which, it is soundly proved, that all the Apostles had the full power of
the keys, and most full Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical (and in one word)
vndependant of any other, to bind, to loose, to open, to shut, to
excommunicate and absolve, given by Christ, equally and immediately unto them,
and their successors, as well as to Peter and his successors. But all Bishops
are successors to the Apostles: therefore all Bishops have most full
vndependant Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical to excommunicate. And therefore, by
this Jesuits argument here, all Bishops are supreme Governors of the whole
Church. What then shall become of his Lord God the Pope, and the Popes
Primacie? Whose fullness of power, must by this orthodoxall position, be
distributed equally amongst all Bishops; not as from Peter or Pope, but as
successors of the Apostles.

For so Cyrill in John, lib. 3. ca. 20. Apostolis et eorum in Ecclesijs
successoribus, plenam concessit potestate^. Christ (not Peter, much less the
Pope) gave to the Apostles, and their successors, fullness of power.

Where-to accords Saint Cyprian, de simpl. Praelat. saying: Christus candem
dedit Apostolis omnibus potestatem: Christ gave unto all his Apostles the self
same power.

Bellarmine, to prove the Ecclesiastical authority of Matthias to be
vndependant, and not dependant of Petex, brings in Matthias chosen an Apostle,
not by the Apostles, but by God. And so of S. Paul, chosen an Apostle, not by
men, nor of men, but of God. How then can the Pope challenge vndependant
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, when he is chosen and made Pope, and also vnpoped
by men, much inferior to the Apostles? If the Pope alone have vndependant
Church government, to give and take Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to, and from
whom he please; how was the Patriarch of Alexandria made equal unto him in the
first Nicen Council, Can. 6? And why was the Archbishop of Constantinople,
equalled with him in authority, and in all things, except in Seniority; in the
first Council of Constantinople, cap. 3. and in the Council of Chalcedon,
Can. 28?

Certainly, this vndependant supreme government, was not acknowledged to be in
Anicetus Bishop of Rome, by Polycarpus, who gain-saied Anicetus in the
celebration of Easter. See Eusebius. l. 5. ca. 26. Nor in Victor, who usurping
authority over the Bishops of Asia, was countermaunded, withstood, and sharply
rebuked by Irenaeus, Polycrates, and others, Bishops in France, Asia, etc. See
Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 25.

Touching the Jesuits argument, drawn from the Kings supreme gouermment
civil, to conclude thereby his power to exercise all acts pertaining to civil
Jurisdiction. I reply and say, that true it is, the fountain of all civil
Justice under God in this Kingdom, is in his Maiestic: That he alone has
power to constitute civil Judges, and accordingly does so. But our most
learned Lawyers, and reverent Judges, will teach the Jesuit, that when the
Judges be so constituted; by the laws and customs of this kingdom, it
pertains to those Judges, and not to his Majesty, to judge and sentence, in
matters personal, real, or of blood, as Felonies, and Treasons, equally
between the subjects, and also between the King and his lubiects: which cuts
in sunder the very hart-strings of this his main argument. For, if it pertain
not to the King, to exercise all acts of inferior civil government, though
he be the supreme civil Governor in his Kingdom; a fortiori it follows,
that it pertains not to his Majesty, to exercise all inferior acts of
Ecclesia sticall government, though he be supreme Ecclesiastical Governor.

The Lord of a Manor, to which belongs a Court Baron, may constitute a
Steward to have Jurisdiction over his Tenants in that Court, in setting fynes,
in amercing, etc. yet the Lord of the Manor cannot execute that Jurisdiction:
for if he set fynes, or amerce, it is void; though that Court be, and is also
called, that Lords Court.

BECAN. Exam. Page 194

YOu say, that although the King cannot excommunicate, yet with consent of the
Orders, or State of the Kingdom in Parliament, he may wake Ecclesiastical
laws, by force whereof, such and such ought to be excommunicated. What now
Richard? Hainric said, the King by his own an^ hority might make
Ecclesiastical laws; and you, ^ilifying that authority, restrain it to the
consent of the Orders in Parliament. Ton detract too much from the Primate and
Head of the Church of England. And here you make also a new Jar.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
WHata malicious and scoffing Sycophant is this? who being persuaded in his
conscience, that I, even in this strain, ascribe too much to our Primate the
King, says, I detract too much from the King herein. First, this rude and
ignorant Jesuit must be taught, that according to the laws and customs of this
kingdom, though the King be here immediately next under Christ the supreme,
Governor Ecclesiastical and Civil: yet it pertains not to his Majesty
alone, without consent of the Orders of the kingdom in Parliament, to make any
law even civil, thereby absolutely to bind all the subjects of his Kingdom;
which all Statutes made by the uniform consent of the said Orders in the
Parliament, with the approbation of the Kings Majesty, do manifest.

Touching the supposed Jar between Hainric and me: Hainric, writing
generally of the power of all Christian Kings and Emperors, to make
Ecclesiastical laws, asserted that the said Kings and Emperors, laudably by
their own power, made such laws: which I also auerre. And I, here writing of
the power of his Majesty therein, as it is used and limited by the laws and
customs of this Land, assert that his Majesty, by consent of the Orders or
States of the Kingdom in Parliament, may make Ecclesiastical laws, by force
whereof, such and such should be excommunicated: which Hainric will aver to
be very true. So this seeming Iarte, in the view of the goggle eyed Jesuit, is
in very deed a sound concord.

Further I reply, that Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, by her own
authority, set forth Injunctions, as Ecclesiastical laws. And our gracious
King James, by his own authority, confirmed the last Ecclesiastical
law-Canons, made in the Convocation house.

Lastly, I say, That by the laws of this kingdom, his Majesty, by his own
authority and letters Patents, may authorize any persons, being natural
borne subjects to his Highness, whom he shall think meet, to exercise, use,
occupy, and execute under him, all manner of Jurisdictions, privileges, and
preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning any spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions within his Reasmes, to visit, reform, redress,
order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses,
offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner sprituall,
or Ecclesiastical power, authority, or Jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, to the
pleasure of Almighty GOD, for increase of virtue, etc. Will the vile Jesuit
call this, vilifying of our Ecclesiastical Governor? Questionless, it
grindeth his heart, that our Church (the true visible Church of Christ Jesus)
ascribes so much unto his Majesty.

BECAN. Exam. Page

THat which you add, is a new Paradox, viz. That Ecclesiastic all laws, made
by the King, have force to excommunicate, and yet, that the King cannot
excommunicate. It is the most certain rule of Lawyers, that vvhoseuer has
power to make apenall law, has also power to punish. This common rule holds in
matters Civil, and Ecclesiastical: why exempt you your King from the common
rule, and confine him into such straights?

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
TO an unlearned Jesuit, plain vulgar things seem Paradoxes. Date the Jesuit
deny, that Clergy men have power to make laws for putting to death of
Heretics, and against such and such erroncous obstinate persons as heretics?
and dare he affirm, that Clergy men may give the sentence of death, or shed
the blood of any heretic; since by their triuiall, and vulgarly known popish
Canon, they may not sit upon the bench when the sentence of death is pronounced
by the civil Judges? That most certain rule of his Lawyers, is most plainly
false. viz. That whosoever has power to make a penal law, has power to
punish: unless the meaning be of power to punish, by commanding such Officers
to punish, unto whom the inflicting of such punishment appertains. In which
sense, our King also may be said to excommunicate, or absolve: that is, to
command Bishops to excommunicate, or absolve men, according to the laws
provided in that behalf. Yea, further, the Kings writ of prohibition,
absolueth that subject of his, which is wrongfully excommunicated by
Ecclesiastical censure. And this is not to straighten, but to enlarge (much
more then the Jesuit would have it) his Majesty's supreme power herein.

Who knows not, that Christian Kings and Empeperours have made Ecclesiastical
laws, by virtue whereof, such and such Priests, should be suspended, deprived,
degraded; and others chosen, and instituted into their Benefices? and yet it
pertained not to those Emperors to suspend, deprive, degrade, choose or
institute the same, in their own persons. And that this rule holds not in
civil matters, was showed before.

BECAN. Exam. Page 196

MY second Argument was this. The King gives unto another power to
excommunicate; therefore himself has power to excommunicate: or if he have
not that power, he cannot give it to another. You deny the Argument, alleging
Bernard to show the invalidity thereof. But Bernard rather hinders, then
helps your cause: for he reas^noth as I do, thus: Peter had no temporal
possessions; therefore he could not give them to another. He had care of the
whole Church; therefore he gave it to his successor. Bernard says nothing of
this consequent, but of a double power of the Pope; the one, temporal
indirectly; all offices of which power, Bernard denies that the Pope by
himself way execute: the other, his power spiritual directly, which he
grants may be executed by the Pope himself. This Position, viz. No man can
give to another, that which he has not himself, Bernard and I assert: to
which you answer nothing.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe Jesuit is here ensnarled by the testimony of Bernard, as one fallen into
a quagmire; who the more he struggleth to get out, plungeth himself deeper
into it. Bernard asserteth the right and power of both swords, equally to be in
the Pope, (for that, of Directly, and Indirectly, is not Bernards distinction,
but the Jesuits vain and new found fiction) and therefore be may give power to
others, ad nutum ipsius, to execute the Material sword: yet by himself cannot
use, or draw out the same. What is this else, but that one may give power to
another, to do that which he cannot do himself?

The Jesuit is intolerably ignorant, if he know not, that by their Canon law,
the Pope is made Lord of the whole world in temporalibus: by whom Kings
reign, and of whom they hold their Scepters. In popish books printed and
allowed, They who hold the material sword to be in the Pope, not directly,
but indirectlie, are censured for Politilian Heretics, these times-seruers.

But what if I should use the same distinction here, and say, that supreme
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, were it the King indirectly, to weet, in or dine
ad custodiam vtriusque tabulae; to pronide and procure, that all Ecclesiastics
perform their duties, according to the prescript of Gods law: Were not this
Jesuits Argument, according to his own dispute here, dashed in pieces? For, as
the Pope may have the material sword indirectly, and yet have no power by
himself to use the same: so may a King have supreme Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical indirectlie; and yet not have power by himself to execute the
functions of Jurisdiction Ecelesiasticall; and so not to excommunicate. True it
is, No man can give that unto another, which himself has not to give: yet the
King may give authority to another, to do that, which pertaines not to
himself to do, as formerly was showed.

This is a decided case amongst the Canonists, Decis. 2. Tit. de Praebend. Quia
licet Abbatissae aut Monialibus cur a committi non possit, quoad exercitium
actuale, tamenius potest ipsis competere, vtexercitium faciant per virum illius
potestatis capacem. Vide notatum per Innocent de Praeb.c.Lateran.et per
gloss.in ca. Cum et plantare. Though women be incapable of the cure of souls,
as touching the actual exercising thereof themselves: yet Abbasses, and
Monials, may have right and power, to exercise the same by a man capable of
that power.

But it is not amiss to observe some conclusions from the Jesuits Positions
here.

First, that the Popes supreme power Ecclesiastical, is dependant upon
another, that is, upon Peter. For he asserteth out of Bernard, That (not
Christ, but) Peter gave unto the Pope, the cure of the whole Church.

Secondly, that the Pope, as Peter's successor, neither has, nor can give, any
temporal possessions. For so he makes Bernard concluding thus: Peter had no
temporal possessions himself: therefore he could give no temporal
possessions to his successor the Pope.

Thirdly, That a man may give that to another, which he has not himself. For
the Pope, as Peter's successor, gives temporal Kingdoms and Empires: and yet
the Pope, as Peter's successor, has no temporal posselsions, much less
Kingdoms, and least of all, Empires.

Out of these conclusions, grow these two Quaeres following; 1. Whether the
Pope in giving Kingdoms, distributing the vastest parts of the earth, the
Indians East and West, viz. among the Kings of Spain and Portugal; and in
translating Empires from one Nation to another, (because herein he succeeds
not Peter) succeed not the God of this world? who said unto our Savior Christ,
Math. 4. All these Kingdoms, with the glory thereof, I will give unto thee. 2
How the Popes Kingdom in Italy, is Peter's Patrimony, if no temporal
possessions belong to Peter?


BECAN. Exam. Page 198.

MY third Argument was this: He that is subject to another in Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical of exterior Court, has not supreme Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical of exterior Court.

But the King is subject to another, that is, the Bishop, who by Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical of exterior Court, may excommunicate him, and throw him out
of the Church. Therefore he has not supreme power Ecclesiastical of exterior
Court.

Your answer was, That so the Pope is not Primat of the Church; for he is
subject to the Priest, to whom be confesses, and who may bind and loose his
sins. The Primacy does not consist in Jurisdiction of the interior, but
exterior Court. The power of absoluing from sins, or the inward
Jurisdiction, is given by Christ immediately, to all Priests equally, by force
of Order: which Jurisdiction is not greater in the Pope, then in any other
Priest. The Pope may be subject to the Priest in Jurisdiction interior.
Richard, you err greatly, not distinguishing between these Jurisdictions, of
the internal, and external Court.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IT seems the wits of this Jesuit are much wasted; for he knows not the way
wherein, or the place whereto, he intends to go.

Amongst us Writers, who all deny the King has power to excommunicate, he
said there was a great Jar; because we also held the King to be supreme
Ecclesiastical Governor in his dominions. By which Medium, viz. The Kings
supremacy, supposed to be true; the Jesuit endeavored to infer necessarily,
that therefore the King might excommunicate.

But in this his third Syllogism, the Jesuit goes about to overthrow the
supposed truth of the said Medium: namely, to prove, that the King is not
supreme Governor Ecclesiastical. And what is this to the matter in hand? viz.
to prove a Jar? Which answer is more sufficient, then his fondness
deserves. Yet, because, he imagines this Syllogism to be invincible, I will
answer directly unto it, and shiuer it all to naught.

I deny both the Mayor and Minor Proposition thereof. I say, The Mayor is
false, and show it thus; The Pope is subject to other Bishops, who, in
exterior Court, that is, in Counsels, have not only excommunicated, (whereof
see Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 11. Nicephor. lib. 17. cap. 26. Council. Constantinopol.
6. Act. 13.) but also anathematized him. Yet says this Jesuit, The Pope in
Court exterior, is supreme Governor over all Bishops, to whom he gives,
and from whom he takes away at his pleasure, power to excommunicate.

Again, The Pope is subject to a Priest, his Confessor, who has power to
exercise the keys against the Pope, viz. to open unto him heaven gates, and to
shut them against him. To bind his sins, and to loose them. To throw him
out of that communion of Saints, whereof we read in the Creed. To deliver him
to Satan: and therefore to excommunicate him.

The Jesuits starting hole here is, That the Priest may bind the Popes sins
in the internal Court, but not in the external.

As though the Court of Conscience, were not the highest Court under Heaven. As
though that Communion which stands only of Saints indeed, and all those Gods
Elect, were not above that Communion, which consists of holy ones, and
unholy: of the Elected and Reprobated. For, as by popish Canons, The
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is above the Temporal: so the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction internal, is above the external.

If therefore the Priest Confessor be above the Pope, whose sins he
binds; whom he delivers to Satan; whom he excommunicateth from that
inward Communion of Saints Elect, by virtue of his inward Jurisdiction; why
may he not much more excommunicate him from the Communion of the righteous and
unrighteous, the Elect and Reprobate, by external Jurisdiction, which is
far inferior to the other?

But because the Jesuit here taxes me, for not distinguishing between
Jurisdiction internal, and external; between the binding of sins in Court
exterior and interior, I answer him, as Tertullian did to another Heretic:
Ostendat Hermogenes scriptum, aut vae illi. Let Becan show where this
distinction is written, or vvoebe unto him.

If he cannot, then let him hear, what the Church of England in her Apology,
the second part, chap. 7. Diuis. 5. has orthodoxally, and iudiciously
determined herein: viz. Seeing one manner of word is given to all, and one
only key belongs unto all, we say there is but one only power of all
Ministers, as concerning opening and shutting.

So that if the Priest by this one key shut out the Pope, that is, bind his
sins, then he excommunicateth the Pope: or if with that selfsame key, he
open to the Pope, that is, remit his sin; then heab solueth the Pope. For
wherefore is one excommunicated, but because his sins are bound? wherefore is
one absolved, but because his sins are remitted? If it be not in respect
thereof, the King may be said to have power to excommunicate; that is to say,
to keep men from the Communion, viz. when he commits some to close prison:
where, neither any can speak to them, nor they to any.

Now therefore, if the Priest may be the cause of the cause, that is, if he
can bind the Popes sins; why may he not be the cause of the effect: that
is, why may he not excommunicate the Pope; or, (which with S. Paul is all one)
deliver him to Satan? According to that of Saint Hierome to Heliodore, of the
Eremiticall life: God for bid that I should speak any evil of those, who
succeeding the Apostolic degree, make the body of Christ with their sacred
mouth: who having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, in sort judge before
the day of Judgment. It is not lawful for me to sit before a Priest: he
may, if I sin, deliver me to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the Spirit may be saved.

And so Saint Rasil of the solitary life, cha. 23. Peter, inquit, Amas me,
etc. Christ said unto Peter, Love thou me? Feed my sheep. And in like sort
unto all Pastors and Doctors he gave the same power. A token whereof is this,
that all bind and loose equally, as well as Peter.

If every Pastor and Doctor bind and loose equally, as well as Peter; why not
in Court exterior as well as Peter, since the sheep are committed unto them, as
well as unto Peter?

The Minor Proposition I also deny here, as I did in the English Concord. That
is, I deny that any Bishop has power to throw the King out of the Church,
or to excommunicate him, according to canonical excommunication, so properly
called and defined.

And further I denied, that the supposed excommunication of Theodosius, by
Ambrose, was canonical excommunication: yielding there some reasons thereof.
Whereunto (though very material) this silly Jesuit answers not one word; and
yet with Jesuitical, that is, with brazen face, is bold to set before thee
(Christian Reader) his loathsome Coleworts, twice, yea, thrice sodden.

Becans Jar.
XI. Question. Whether the King may be Judge of all Controversies in the Church?
1. Controversies that arise in the Church are of two sorts: some are about
faith and Religion: others are concerning Ecclesiastical affairs. The former
of these questions then, is: Whether the King by virtue of his Primacy, be
supreme Judge of all Controversies, which pertain unto faith and Religion?
Master Salclebridge says be is, page 163. in these words: Sic luce clarius
est, Christianos Principes cum laud, Controuersias fidei dijudicasse and
diremisse, etiam in vniuersalibus octo Concilijs, etc. So as it is more clear
then the Sun, that Christian Princes, with praise, have judged of, and
decided controversies of faith, and that in eight General Counsels etc. Which
is as much to say, in the first of Nice, the first of Constantinople, that of
Ephesus, Chalcedon, the second, third, and fourth of Constantinople, and the
second of Nice, wherein diverse controversies concerning matters of faith
were judged of, and decided; especially cuncerning the diuinitis of Christ,
against the Heretic Arius; of the divinity of the holy Ghost, against
Macedonius; of one person of Christ, against Nestorius; of two Natures in
Christ, against Eutiches and Dioscorus, and so of others. All these
Controversies, says Master Saclebridge, were judged of, and decided by Kings
and Emperors.

2. Master Tooker now, he affirms the quite contrary, who by no means
will have Kings or Emperors to be Judges of Controversies of faith. For thus
he vvriteth, page 3. of his books: Olere autem malitiam, ac clamitare audaciam
tuam illud videtur, cum Regem caput Ecelesiae, Primatemque confingas, omniumque
causarum and controuersiarum, quae ad sidem and Religionem pertinent iudicem
tribuas. It may seem to savor of malice, and cry out upon your sausinesse,
when as you feign the King to be head of the Church, and Judge of all causes
and controversies which pertain unto faith and Religion, etc. And again page
50. Rexin suo Regno, omnibus superior sit, nullisubditus. Fidei iudex no
appelletur quidem. Although the King in his own Kingdom be above all, and
subject to none: yet he may not be called, in any case, the Iadge of our
Faith, etc. And page 313. Reges Christiani non sunt fidei ac Religionis
Iudices. Christian Kings are not Judges of faith and Religion.

3. So as, if now in England there should chance to arise a dissension or
debate concerning any point of Faith or Religion, as for Example, concerning
the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist; what should your Academicks
here do? To whom should your Citizens, and the rest of the subjects have
recourse? Should they go unto the King as Judge in this point, and ask his
sentence and determination? Master Tooker, you see, would not go to the
King. What? should they go to some other Judge then? But Master Salclebridge
he will admit no other. What then were best to be done in this case? Truly
even that, which hitherto has been done in the debate of the Kings supremacy:
to wit, always to braule, and jar thereabout, and never end the
controversy. And what is the cause? In very deed no other, but for that some
think one thing, some another; and they cannot, or rather will not find out
the certain and true Judge, who can decide the matter. And this is the
property of heretics.

4. The other Question is, Whether the King be Judge of all Controversies, that
concern other Ecclesiastical affairs? Master Salclebridge says, that he
is, page 165. in these words: Audin', Controuersias Episcopales ab Imperatore
diremptas? Do you not hear Sir, that Episcopal Controversies have been
decided by Emperors? etc. is hat Ma. Tooker thinks of this point, is not
well known. For sometimes he affirms it, as for example, pg. 24 thus:
Nemini dubiu^ est, quin in Primitiua Ecclesia, de rebus and personis
Ecclesiasticis ^us dicerent Imperatores. No man can doub: but that in the
Primitive Church, Emperors judged of matters, and persons Ecclesiastical etc.
And yet page 23. he seems to deny it: Non est Princeps supra res, sed supra
personas. The Prince (says he) is not above the matters, but abone the persons
etc. And then again page 49. Rex in suo Regno supremus est, non supra res, sed
supra homines. The King in his own Kingdom is the chief or principal, but
yet not chief over things, but over men. And thus you see every where nothing
but iarring and disagreement.

English Concord.
BOth Doctor Tooker and Hainric, deny the King to be supreme Judge in
controversies of faith: but in other controversies, both of them agree, that
Christian Emperors have given judgment upon Ecclesiastical persons, in
Ecclesiastical matters.

Here then you see is no Jar, but a full and perfect concord. Wherein the
Jesuit is taken guilty of a double falsehood. First, when he blusheth not to
write, that Hainric affirms, the King, by virtue of his supremacy, is
supreme Judge of all controversies; when on the contrary, he deemeth no mortal
man, nor King, nor Angel, can be that supreme Judge: nor Saint Peter; according
to that, It seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us: and least of all, the
Pope of Rome.

Lastly, he constantly denies, that any one of the Fathers ever numbered this
dignity, of being supreme Judge of controversies, among the other duties of
Primate of the Church, or Ecclesiastical supremacy.

Secondly, though Becan says, Hic vhique dissidium, nothing but iarring: yet
in good sooth, [that Christian Princes have with commendation judged and taken
up controversies of faith; out of these words of Socrates, Lib. 5. cap. 10.
Theodosius called together a Council of all Sects: and when the Emperor
understood their manifold dissensions, he commanded them, that every of their
Sects should put in vvriting the particular articles of their several faith.
They put their opinions in vvriting accordingly. Then, when they were sent for
to the Court, the Bishops of each Sect appeared and met together: the
Emperor takes at their hands the written scroules of their faith. Afterward,
he shuts up himself in his Closet alone, and most earnestly makes prayer
to GOD, that his Majesty would help him to find out the truth. Lastly, he
reads every confession severally, and having read them, be condemns and
teareth them all, except the faith of the Consubstantiall: that he praised and
approoued] not only Hainric, but before him, Ma. Doctor Bilson the most grave
and learned Bishop of Winchester, in his book of Christian obedience, printed
at London, Anno 1586. and before him, that most excellently learned Iuell, Bb.
of Salisbury, Part. 6. cap. 13. Diuis. 2. Page 524.
in the defense of his Latin Apology, gathered the same doctrine, and
concluded the same opinion: the words are these, page 172. in the Apology;
Theodosius Imperator, vt ait Socrates, etc. The Emperor Theodosius (as
Socrates vvriteth) did not only sit among the Bishops, but was also chief at
the decision of the controversy, and did rend in pieces the vvritings of the
Haereticks, approouing the faith of the true professing Catholics.

That which Hainric writes here of the controversies of faith, remembered by
the Jesuit in the four first general Counsels (as for the second Council of
Nice, it was rather a godless and trifling conspiracy then a Council) wherein
Emperors sat Presidents, and together with the consent of the Synod, gave
judgments, and concluded those differences; that did also Bishop Iuell, write
long before him, Part. b. cap. 13. b. 1. Page 522. out of Cardinal Cusanus, in
his third book De Concordia, cap. 16. whom we will sooner believe, then ten
thousand Becans: the words are these; Sciendum est quod in vniuersalibus octo
concilys semper invenio Imperatores, etc. This you must know, that in the
first eight general Counsels, I always find, that the Emperors, and their
substitutes, with the Senate, had the supremacy and office of Presidentship:
and with the consent of the Synod, gave the judgments and decisions.

Now Sir, I pray you, what other thing is this, then to judge and take up
controversies of faith? and yet the Jesuit turns Iester in this so serious a
matter; as if the gods of his society had given him some great advantage:
saying upon his former weak inferences; So as if in England there should
chance to arise a debate, etc. And I will follow his steps, and turn his
own terms upon him in this manner:

So as if in Rome there should chance to arise a dissension, or debate about
any point of faith; as for example, about the Popes supremacy, or (which is
all one) his being universal Bishop, what would the Academicall Fathers of
the society of JESUS do? who have suppressed the Sorbonists. What would the
people of Rome do, or other the Popes subjects? Should they go to Pope Paul
the fifth, as their onelle Judge and desire his sentence and determination? why
then Pope Gregory the great (a far wiser man) will stand against it. Should
they go and desire any other Judge to take up the matter? Surely, Bellarmine
will not endure that.

What were then best to be done in this case? Even that which hither to has
been done in the debate of the Popes supremacy. For the Papists have ever
been at odds, and iarred, and could never end this controversy. And what is
the cause? In very deed no other, but for that some think one thing, and some
another: and they cannot, or rather will not, find out the certain and true
Judge, who can decide the matter. And this is the property of heretics.

Again, I will touch Becane in one instance, more nearly. If there chance to
arise a controversy about this point, or article of the Popes religion; An
sides haereticis seruanda, Whether promise must be kept with heretics, what
will the Academicall Fathers of the society do? Will they go to Pope Paul
the fifth? Becane will not like of that. Will they go to any other Judge?
Barronius will not endure it; no, nor Ignatius Loyola, the Sire of all the
Jesuits (who first invented the Art of Equivocation, and so the breach of
faith) if he were alive.

Here I might boinfinite: but I will confine my self in one or two examples.
If it chance a dissension or debate to arise about the body of Christ in the
Eucharist; as whether it may be broken, or chewed with the teeth of them that
care it; according to the Decree Part. 3. did. 2. cap. 42. What would the
Roman Catholics do in this case?

Would they repair to Pope Paul the fist, as Judge of this controversy?
Berengarius in his Recantation has given warning to the contrary. Would they
go to Pope Nicholas? Bellarmine will not allow of him; who in his third book
and tenth chapter of this Sacrament of the Eucharist, vvriteth; Christus vere
in Sacramento existit, sed non teritur, non roditur: Christ is truly in the
Sacrament, but he is neither bitten nor chewed.

To conclude, if there arise a dissension at Rome, about the Real presence; as
for example, Whether Christ's body be really present, but without bigness, as
Durand holds, in 4. Did 10. q. 2. or with greatness, but without
distinction of parts, as Decam in 4. q. 4. and thirdly, with bigness, and all
distinct parts, as Bellarmine, Lib. 3. cap. 5. De Euchar. what were then best
to be done in this case? For the Papists are always at odds and jar about
the corporal presence of Christ in the Eucharist: and the strife can never be
taken up. What Is the cause? In very deed no other, but for that some think
one thing, and some another: and they cannot, or rather will not, find out the
certain and true Judge, who can decide the matter. And this is the property of
Heretics.

But here observe with me in the last place, the guilefull disposition of
Becan; Doctor Tooker, page 23. affirms, that Princes are above the persons,
and not the sacred things, as the word, Sacraments, and spiritual graces of
the Church: adding in the same page, Sole ipso, etc I will make it as clear
as the Sun, that the chief care of the Prince, must be had for things and
causes Ecclesiastical: and that their supremacy especially consists in the
execution of that function.

From hence the Jesuit makes this collection; The King (by confession of
Doctor Tocker) is not above some Ecclesiastical things, as the word, and
Sacraments: therefore above no Ecclesiastical things, as are the controversies
of Bishops; Against Doctor Tooker his express meaning in the same leaf.

BECAN. Exam. Page 204.

YOu say Haintic and Tooker do not dissent herein. Richard, I admire your
impudency. Hainric says: Christian Princes commendably have determined
controversies of faith. Tooker says: Christian Kings are not Judges of faith.
These are utterly repugnant: there in none so blind, who may not here see a
Jar. For if they be no Judges, how can they judge? And if co^mendably they
judge matters of faith, they must needs be Judges of faith. It is certain,
Hainric is of opinion, that the King is supreme Judge of faith amongst men in
this life: or (which is all one) the supreme President of Councels. GOD only
is absolutely the supreme Judge, or President of Councels. We say, The Pope,
amongst men, is supreme Judge. You say, The King, or Emperor.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
Here is naught else, but the empty froath of the selfsame things
reiterated. Doctor Tooker says, The King is not supreme Judge in controversies
of faith amongst men. Hainric averreth the same. Hainric says, Christian Kings
laudably have judged and determined matters of faith: Doctor Tooker knows and
acknowledges the same: Impudency it self would hardly say, there were any
jar heerin. But the Jesuit cannot conceive, how one may commendably determine
a controversy in any matter, unless he were the only supreme Judge every
where, touching that matter.

As though James did not determine that controversy of faith in the Counsel
of Jerusalem. Act. 15. v. 19. And yet the Jesuit will not permit James to be
supreme Judge in controversies of faith.

As though Daniel did not commendably judge and determine the controversy
touching the chastity of Susanna: and yet Daniel was no supreme Judge of
women's continencies, or incontinencies.

When in the first Nicen Council, the controversy amongst the Bishops was,
Whether Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, should sleep with their
wives, which they had married before they were in orders: And when the rest of
those Fathers would have made a Canon prohibiting the use of their wives;
Paphnutius, grounding himself upon that in Scripture: Marriage is honor able
among all men, and the bed undefiled: determined: (...). The company of man
and wife, to be cleanenesse, and chastity.

And thereupon says Sozomen. Lib. 1. cap. 22. Paphnuij sententiam approbauit
Concilium, et de hac re, nullam legemtulit, sed eam in cuiusque arbitrio, non
in necessitate, poni voluit. The Council approeued his sentence, and would not
make any such Canon, but left it free to the choice of every one of them. And
yet Paphnutius was no supreme Judge of all such matters.

The Jesuit would disdain, to call Hosius, Bishop of Corduba, supreme Judge in
controversies of faith: yet Athanasius, in his second Apology, writes thus of
him: In qua Synodo dux ille et Antesignanus non fuit? Qua Ecclesia istius
Praesidentiae non pulcherrima monumenta retinet? In what Council has not
Hosius bee^e chief, and President? what Church is without some notable
monuments of his Presidentship?

But why does not the Jesuit answer unto Socrates? who writes the very same
that Hainric affirms herein; and much more in the Proem to fifth book, where
he has these words: Passim in historia Imperatorum mentionem propterea
fecimus, quod exillo tempore quo Christiani esse coeperunt, Ecclesiaenegotia
exillorum nutu pendere visa sunt, atque adeo maxima Concilia de eorum
sententia, et conuocata fuerunt, et adhuc conuocantur. Therefore in this
history have we mentioned the Emperors, because, since they first became
Christian, the Churches affairs depended upon them, and the greatest Councels,
were and are assembled by their command.

Surely, if to be Presidents in those greatest Councels, be all one, as to be
supreme Judges of faith; (so the Jesuit here would have i^) how can it be
avoided, but that Emperors were supreme Judges in those controversies handled
in the said Councels? and so, in controversies of faith, (for such
controversies were handled in them); seeing that, as that great learned man,
and Cardinal, Cusanus in his book of Concord, Lib. 3. chap. 16. writes, (and
he writes as he sound it;) That Emperors, or other Senators, were always
Presidents, and had the Primacie in those said greatest Councels.

The Iesnit cannot deny, but that Cusanus so writes: wherefore then does he
not shape Cusanus his answer? Wherefore? Because a man may as soon expect
water out of a Flint-stone, as any indicious learning or reading, from this so
unlearned and shallow Jesuit.

If the Pope should be that universal Bishop or supreme Judge of cotrouersies
in faith: then, as said Pope Gregory the great; If he err in the faith, all
the members of Christ's Church then living, must err in the faith. Then
Heretics, Apostates from the faith, and the principal Authors of that
Apostasy, that is, Antichrists, viz. Popes, may be supreme Judges of
controversies in faith. Which is impious, and absurd: For, as Lyra in Math.
cap. 16. says; Constat etc. It is certain that many Popes have been
Apostates from the faith. Therefore we hold no man to be supreme Judge in
controversies of faith; because All men are liars. Therefore we say, The Lord
alone is supreme Judge: because, as Augustine (against Cresconius the
Grammarian, lib. 21. chap. 2.) says; Dominus semper veraciter iudicat:
Ecclesiastici autemiudices, sicut homines, plerumque falluntur. God judges
always truly: others, even Ecclesiastical Judges, are most commonly deceived.

BECAN. Exam. Page 206

TOOker herein follows your King, who in controversies of faith, sends
every man to his own private conscience: for so he vvriteth in his Praeface
Monitotory: Opto vt velitis: I wish you would diligently read over the
Scripture, to take from thence the rule of faith: and to place the foundation
of your faith, in your own certain knowledge, and not in the uncertain
opinion of others. Which is all one, as if he had said; There is no certain
judge in the matter of faith, but every one is to rest in his own proper
judgment. Therefore Tooker holds with the King, but dissenteth from
Hainric. You hault on both sides.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
HAinric, in his Becane Baculus, defending this found doctrine, and
orthodoxall, which Becan here brings in, set down by his Majesty in his
Praeface Monitorie; cudgelled soundly this Jesuit, for his impious scoffing at
that holy and good doctrine, as is there to be seen in many pages: yet this
shameless Jesuit, dare here affirm, that Hainric dissenteth from his
Majesty herein.

If this be Becans English Jar, the is his English Jar, in truth, the most
uniform Concord. For I dare avow, that not only Hainric, but all other
Protestant English Writers do embrace, as true, ancient, catholic, and
Apostolic doctrine, that which the Jesuit transcribeth here from his
Majesty's Praeface Monitorie.

Moreover, we may here behold the footsteps of that old Serpent, wherein this
serpentine brond, viz. this Jesuit treads. His Majesty, following his
Master Christ, advised Princes, To take from the Scripture (diligently read
over by them, and so, well understood by them) the rule of their faith:
whereby they might place the foundation of their faith, in their own certain
knowledge, to weet, solidly grounded upon the Scriptures; and not in the
uncertain opinion of others.

This pure doctrine, the Jesuit with the aspersion of his leaven, adulterateth
thus: This is all one, as if the King had said, There is no certain Judge in
the matter of faith, but every one is to rest in his own proper judgment:
whereas his Majesty clean contrary asserteth, that GOD has provided to every
one of his Saints on earth, a certain Judge in matter of their faith, to weet,
the holy Ghost, and holy Scripture; the certain knowledge whereof, as touching
matter of faith, the holy Ghost, working together with the sacred means of
hearing, reading, meditaring, conferring, praying, etc. gives and seals up
in their souls: So that they shall not place the foundation of their faith, in
the uncertainty either of their own proper judgments, or of the opinions of
others; but in the certain testimony of the foresaid Judge.

Of which Judge, Saint John, 1. Ioh. 2. v. 27. vvriteth thus: And the
annoynting which ye have received of him, dwells in you: and ye need not
that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things;
and it is true, and not lying: and as it taught you, ye shall abide in it.

So that every Christian is to rest, not in his own proper judgment, for that
is uncertain; but in the certain judgment of the forsaid anointing: working
in the Saints that certain knowledge, wherein to place the foundation of
their faith; whereof his Majesty speaks.

Constantine the great, and first Christian Emperor, found in himself, by
gracious effect, the certainty of this said doctrine, here averred by our
King; for thus he writes in his Epistle to Sapor, King of Persia, registered
by Theodoret, Lib. 1. cap. 24. Marking the divine faith, I obtain the light of
truth: and following the light of truth, I acknowledge the divine faith.

The certain truth of this doctrine, is so apparent, that is bath express
testimony and acknowledgement thereof, from the very Popish VVriters
themselves, as is to be seen by diverse of them, in Beoano-Baculus.

Therefore, I will here instance in one only, and that no mean one, viz.
Stapleton, who in his second admonition to Master Dr. Whitakers, set before
his Triplication, writes thus: In libro meo 3. Principior u fidei, Spiritus
sancti internam persuasionem, ad quodlibet fidei obiectum credendum, ita
necessariam, ita efficacem esse docui, vt nec absque illa, quicquam a quoquam
creds possit, etsi milliei Ecclesia attestetur: et per illam solam quodlibet
credendum credi queat, tacente prorsus, et non audita Ecclesia. In my 8. book
of the Principles of faith, I have taught, that the inward persuasion of the
holy Ghost is so necessary, and so effectual for the believing of every
object of faith, that without it, neither can any thing be believed by any
man, though the Church testified with it a thousand times; and by it alone any
thing that is to be believed, may be believed, though the Church kept silence,
and never were heard.

Is not the force of this truth great, and must needs prevail, since the
Adversaries themselves, write so fully and directly for it?

To shut up this point, and to shut the Pope clean out, from this supreme
Iudgeship, Panormitan the Abbat, in De Elect. et Elect potest. ca.
Signisicasti; very iudiciously writes thus: Plus credendum est vni priuato
fideli, quam toti Concitio et Papa, si meliorem habeat authoritatem,
velrationem. We ought to give more credit to one private lay man, then to the
whole Council, and the Pope, if he bring better authority, and more reason.

And to the same effect, writes Picus Mirandula, in the question, Whether the
Pope be above the Council; thus: Simplici potius rustico, et Infanti, et
Anicula magis, quam Poncifici maxima, et mill Episcopis credendum est, si^sti
contra Euangelium, illi pro Euangelio faciunt. More credit is to be given to a
simple plain Rusticke, to an Infant, or to an old woman, then to the Pope, or
a thousand Bishops, if the Pope and the Bishops speak against the Gospel, and
the others speak with the Gospel.

What a silly supreme judge, and absolute in all controversies of faith, is the
Pope, unto whom, (as oftentimes it may, and has fallen out) less credit is to
be given, then to a private man, then to a woman, then to an Intant?

BECAN. Exam. Page 107.

I Repeat that which I had written before: If a dissension should arise in
England, touching some point of faith, as of the Real prefence of Christ in
the Eucharist; what should the subjects do? Should they go to the King as
supreme Judge? Hainrick would have it so; but Tooker would not suffer it: The
King himself sonds every man to his own conscience, and you would hault on
both sides. Touching that which you bring out of o^r discords, touching it.
The Pope, as universal Bishop. 2. Faith to be kept with Heretics. 3. The body
of Christ broken, and chewed or grinded in the Eucharist. 4. The Real presence
of his body without quantity: It is false, we dissent not herein; and though
we did, does it therefore follow, that you dissent not in the point of your
Churches Primate? That is most foolish.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
INdeed the Jesuit is here become very foolish, and childish; and come to
this, Repetamus omnia breuiter, yet sets him down in his chair of pestilence;
that is, scornfulnes; with Jesuitical, viz. the greatest impudency, scoffing
very impiously and ridiculously, our Kings sacred Maiestic, as those cursed
miscreants did our Savior Christ. They cried, All hail King of the jews: and
this Jesuit, in effect cries, All hail King of England, supreme Judge there,
in controversies of faith.

Touching the Real presence, there is no discord amongst us: but therein are
discords endless amongst the Papists; as in the other points here mentioned,
though this Jesuit with brazen face deny the same. If any man, having an honest
and good heart, doubt in any matter of faith, our King has here put that man
in the King of heaven his high way, to put him our of doubt, viz. by sending
him, to the Law, Esaias 8.
and to the Gospel. Thirther fly we, and not to our King, in controversies
of faith. But miserable Papists, who leave the law and Gospel, as dead Ink:
whither should they fly in their controversies of faith? To the Pope? belike
as the Thomists and Scotists did.

The case was this: There fell out between those two Sects, this odious
quarrel, Whether the Virgin Mary were conceived in sin, or no. The one
side, said yea: The other faction, cried nay. Their factions increased, the
Schools were enflamed, and the world troubled: No Doctor, no Coucell, was able
to accord them. The Scotists alleged for themselves the Council of Basil. The
Thomists said, that Council was disorderly summoned, and therefore unlawful.

In the midds of these broils, Pope Sixtus took upon him, as supreme Judge,
to determine that controversy in faith between them. When all the world
expected his resolution, desirous to be satisfied in that question; The Pope
commanded both the Thomists, and the Scotists, to depart home, and to dispute
no more of that matter: and so left them as doubtful as he found them.

Could not a Supreme Judge made of clowts, have done the office of a supreme
Judge therein, as well as Pope Sixtus; that is to say, have done just nothing?

Lastly, whereas this trifling Sophister, framing his childish argument [Papist
Writers jar in many points: Therefore English Writers jar not in the point
of their Kings Primacy] upon the anvile of his own fantasy only; and so
framed, would father it upon me: let his fatherhood learn by this reply, that
my only scope therein was, in urging him to the quick, by those objected
iarres, as it were, by so many incisions of his Basilica vain, to give a vent
unto that falt, fiery, scoffing humor of his, at our seeming iarrs, which in
his plethorick body, was so redundant, and put^ ifying in him: As also to give
him to understand, how pat those words of our Savior Christ fall upon his
head; Math. 7. v-5.
viz. Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

Their Popish Iarres, are Beame-Iarres: our English seeming Iarres, are less
then Mote-Iarres. In truth, they are no Iarres, at all, but true Concords. And
thus is his froath once again scattered to nothing.

Becans Jar.
XII. Question. Whence, and by what Title, has the King his Primacie in the
Church?
1. THe sense hereof is, Whether the King precisely in that he is a Christian
King, has the Primacy of the Church? The former part of this point, Ma.
Thomson seems to approve, page 78. where he says: Omnes Principes, etiam
Pagani, obiectiue habent supreman potestatem in omnes omnino personas suoru^
subditorum, and generatim in res ipsas, sieve ciuiles sint, sieve sacrae, vt in
cultu diuino and Religione procuranda, saltem quoad modum and exercitium. All
Princes, yea even those that be Pagans, have for the object of their supreme
power, all manner of persons that be their subjects, and generally all things,
whether civil or sacred, as in advauncing Gods honor and Religion, at
leastwise, so far forth, as belongs to the manner and exercise thereof,
etc. And then again, page 94. Primatus est Regium bonum, quod Censura tolli
non potest. Nec est absurdum, Regem velut Ethnicum, esse Primatem Ecolesiae.
Primacy is a certain Kingly right, that cannot be taken away by censures. Nor
is it absurd, that a King, as he is an Ethnicke, be Primate of the Church etc.
And yet further in the same place: Rex Ethnicus, cum Christo initiatur, non
acquirit Primatu de nouo. An Ethnicke King (says he) when as he is
instructed in Christ, or the Christian faith, does not purchase any new
primacie, etc. To whom consents Ma. Burhill. page 251. thus: Rex titulo
Registemporalis potest sibi vindicare, and assumere Primatum Ecclesiae. A King,
by the title of a temporal King, may claim unto himself, and take upon him
the Primacie of the Church, etc. And page 267. Rex etsi iustissime
excommunicatus, non amittit Primatum in rebus Ecclesiasticis. A King, although
he be most justly excommunicated, yet does he not loose his Primacy in
Ecclesiastical matters, etc.

2. My L. of Ely now, he teaches us a quite contrary lesson, in his Tortura
Torti, pa. 39. where he averreth, that the Primacie of the Church does belong
to the King, not because he is a King, but because he is a Christian King;
and therefore Ethnic Kings have no Primacy in the Church, so long as they
remain Ethnicks; but do then receive the said Primacy, when they are made
Christians: and loose the same again also, when they be excommunicated. His
words are these: An non Regi Ethnico praestare fidem fas? Imo nefas non
praestare. In Ethnico enim est vera potestas temporalis, idque sine ordine ad
potestarem Ecclesiasticam. Is it not lawful then, to yield Allegiance to an
Ethnicke King? Nay rather, not to yield it, is a wickedness. For, in an
Ethnicke there is true temporal power, and that without respect to
Ecclesiastical power, etc. And a little after. Rex quiuiscum de Ethnico
Christianus fit, non perdit terrenum ius, sed acquitit ius nouum. Itidem cum de
Christiano sit sicut Ethnicus, vigoresententiae amitut nouum ius quod
acquisierat: sed retinet terrenum ius in temporalibus: quod suerat illi
proprium, priusquam Christianus fieret, etc. Every King, when as of an
Ethnicke, he becomes a Christian, does not loose his earthly right, but
gets a new right. And so in like manner, when as of a Christian, he
becomes as an Ethnicke, (to wit, by excommunication) then by vigor of the
sentence, he loses that new right which he had gotten, but yet
notwithstanding he still retains his earthly right intemporall things, which
was proper unto him, before he became a Christian, etc.

3. So as according to the opinion of Ma. Thomson, and Ma. Buthill, it
follows, that all Kings, whether Christians or Ethnicks, or of whatsoever
other Sect or Religion they be, are Primates of the Church in their own
Kingdoms. Therefore all Englishmen and Scots, who live at Constantinople, are
(by their sentence) subject to the Turk in Ecclesiastical matters: as also
they that live in Spain, are subject to King Philip; and they at Rome, to the
Pope, and so to others, in other places. What now shall these men do, if the
Turk should command them to follow the Alcoran? The King of Spain force them
to hear Mass? The Pope to pray for the dead? and some heathen King perhaps
compel them to Idolatry? Shall they then obey these Princes command? But then
should they do against their consciences. Shall they refuse to obey? Then
farewell Primacie of the Church. Perhaps they will answer, that they will
obey, when they think good. Shall therefore subjects be Judges of their King?
May then the Catholics in England, say after this manner, If it please your
Majesty, in this point we think good to obey your Majesty's command, but in
that not?

English Concord.
IN this place, either the Jesuit is beside himself, or else he has much
forgot himself. For every where in his other Questions, he affir meth that no
King; either Pagan or Christian, has any Primacy in the Church: and yet here,
he enquireth from whence, and by what title, he has his Primacie in the
Church. Therefore, by his own learning, he beats his brains to find the
original of nothing.

If he take away this supposition, that the King has a Primacie in the Church,
either precisely as he is a King, or else, because he is a Christian King;
he is a foolish Sophister. [For his dispute runs not thus; The King if he
have Primacy of the Church, he has it, either as he is a King, or as a
Christian King: but he has it in neither of the said two respects: therefore
he has it not at all.]

If he let that supposition stand; then, because it is manifest, that our most
gracious King James, is by birth, a King: and by religion a Christian King; he
is a brainsick wrangler. For, since by his supposall here, The King has the
Primacie of the Church: what matter is it, whether he have it, as he is a
King, or as he is a Christian King, if so be he have it at all?

Wherefore, there is no cause that we should much stand upon this idle and
beggarly question, wherein is only a shadow of a question.

Furhermore, I would have the Jesuit understand, that this Primacie of the
Church he stands upon, is not derived from the title of a King, but from God
himself. For Moses was adorned with this dignity in the Church of Israel. And
yet we never read, that he was styled with the title of a King.

But certainly, that you may know here is no jar or odds among us,
respecting the maine: the worthy Bishop of Ely, in his Tortura, page 377. has
soundly, and according to the very truth manifested, That the Primacie of the
Church, belongs not to Ethnicke Kings, as Ethnic: but unto Kings, as they
are Christian Kings, or Defenders of the Divine truth. His words are these; Et
sunt ista quidem ex Testamento veteri satis solida fundamenta, non quod ad
reges infideles Primatum pertinere probent, etc. And those things before
related out of the old Testament, are so solid and substantial grounds, as
Tortus shall never be able to shake. Not that they prove this Primacie of the
Church to belong to Pagan Kings: no surely, we in the new Testament give no
more unto such Princes, then was given in the old unto Ahasucrus, and
Nabuchodonosor. Wherefore, in this point, Tortus is beside himself: but yet, if
Caesar become a Christian, as in Constantine, then presently he has the same
right over the Church of the new Testament, which Josias had in the old.
Reditus statim fit ad iura regum Israel; there is a present possession of the
ancient rights of the Kings of Israel, as soon as ever they are made Kings of
the Israel of God, and given up their names to Christ. Wherefore, this is not
our purpose, that the Persecuters of the Church, such as were Cains and
Tiberius, should be the Governors of the Church, (who would not receive that
title although a man would give it them: because they employ their whole
strength to ruin and root up the Church): but let them then take superiority
in the Church, when they are unfeignedly converted to the faith thereof. There
are due to Caesar, the things of Caesar: and there belong to the Christian
Caesar, whatsoever duties under the old Law were either paid or payable by the
people of God to their Kings: unto whom were then due and yielded, all manner
of subjection and obedience, not only in the affairs of the couill state, but
also of the Church.

These things so expressed, are very true and fitting our purpose: for in them
we have learned, that Pagan Kings, as they are Pagans, have no Primacie in the
Church.

But what if almighty God so guide and govern the hearts of Pagan Kings, as
that they would stand for the worship of God against error, and make laws for
the same; let the Jesuit tell me in that case, whether God does not hind our
conscience to obey pagan Princes? And let him take heed how he deny it, least
Bellarmine fall on his Jack for it, because he has resolved the matter, in the
very same words, De pont. Romans lib. 5. cap. 2. But yet if he doubt, lot him
resort to Saint Augustine, in his 166. Epistle to the Donatists; who writes on
this manner: Quando Imperatores veritatem tenent, etc. When Emperors stand for
the truth, and give out a commandment for the same against error; whosoever
shall despise the same, increases his own damnation. For even among men he
suffers punishment: but before God he shall not dare to appear, which
refuses to do that, which truth it self commands by the heart of the King.

And according to this opinion, our reverend B. in his Tortura Torti, page 381.
most truly writes, Quodcunque in rebus religionis, etc. Whatsoever the Kings
of Israel did in matters of religion, neither did they anything without
commendation, wherein they had power and authority to enact Laws, as that GOD
should not be blasphemed: which you will not deny the King of Babel also did,
Dan. 3.29. And the King of Nineuch, Jonas. 3.7. that with a public
proclaimed fast, God almighty might be satisfied.

Andaccording to this sentence, wrote Saint Augustine many years before him,
in his 50. Epist. to Bonifacius the Soldier. Sed illud propheticum iam
impletur, Psalm. 2. Et nunc reges seruite domino in timore, etc. But now is the
prophetical Oracle fulfilled, which speaks in the 2. Psalm, Now, o ice
Kings, serve the Lord in fear. And how shall Kings scrue the Lord in fear,
unless they prohibit and punish those enormities with religious severity and
justice, which are daily committed against the Lords will and commandment?
And because he is a King, he serves (as a servant) by making Laws, with
force and vigor to command things that are righteous, and to forbid the
contrary. Even as Ezekias served by destroying the Temples of Idols, and
cutting down the groves. Even as King losias served, by doing the like. Even
as the King of Niniuch served, by compelling the whole City to pacify the
Lord. Even as King Darius served, by breaking the Idol in pecces. Even as King
Nabuchodonosor served, by making a godly and laudable law, that whosoever
blasphemed the God of Sydrach, he should be destroyed, and his house razed. In
this therefore Kings serve the Lord, in that they are Kings; when they do
those things for his service, which they cannot do but as they are Kings.

If therefore the Jesuit, had seriously known how to distinguish these things,
he might have acknowledged, that Master Burhill, and Master Thomson, agreed
with the reverend Bishop in this point. Especially, when Master Thomson, in
page 78. writes thus expressly and distinctly; Omnes principes etiam pagani,
etc. All Kings, yea, very Pagan Kings (objectiuely) have supreme power over all
the persons of their subjects, both in sacred and civil things: especially, to
attemper their measure, and permit their exercise: which thing is witnessed by
the Chronicles of all Nations. Although the Pagans used that their power
against the Lord: yet was it a fault of the men, abusing their power given
them of God to a good end, and not any fault of the power at all. But yet, by a
far more special regard did this power in Ecclesiastical matters, of old
belong to the good Kings of Israel: and now also to Christian Princes. For
they, as bceing of the lewish Synagogue, and these, as being of the Church,
have a greater and more special right in all causes of the Church, then if
they were merely and only Kings. Wherefore, in one respect it was said to
Cyrus; Pastor incusestu: Thou art my Shepherd: and in another respect to
David: Tu pasces populum meum Israel; Thou shall feed my people Israel. Which
thing Iremember our reverend Bishop has admonished in another place.

And speaking to Becan himself, page 94. he concludes with these words; Haec
facilia sunt intellectu: and miror te tantum Theologum hic haesisse. These
things (says he) are easy to be understood: and I cannot but vvonder, that
Becane, who is magnified by the Papists for so great a Divine, should fail in
a point of such facility.

Here you may perceive (Readers) that there is a constant English concord, and
no Jar among us at all: wherein these two things offer themselves to be
considered. First, the Logic: and secondly, the plainness, or rather
ignorance of this Jesuit: or, at the least, a Jesuitical jar, or the Primacy
of Kings, established by the Jesuits themselves. 1. Thus he reasons out of
Master Thomsons, and Master Burhills opinion. All Kings, yea popish and
pagan, have a primacy in their Kingdoms: Ergo, says the Jesuit, it must needs
follow, that all persons living in those Kingdoms, are bound to do all things
(though never so wicked) which are by them commanded. Is this the Divinity
of the Jesuits?

Math. 23. 2. Our Savior speaks thus to his Disciples; The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses chair: all things therefore which they command you to
do, that observe and do. Acts 4.18. There the same Pharisees out of the same
chair, forbid the Apostles, that they speak and preach any more in the Name
of Jesus. Therefore may not the Jesuit as Logically conclude, that the Apostles
are bound to obey them? and then no more teaching in the Name of Jesus. But
Peter and John answered them other wise; Whether it be more just, we obey
GOD, or man: judge ye. And after this manner writes Isidore in the Canon law,
Si is qui praeest, 11. q. 3. out of Basil; St is qui praeest prohibet vobis
quod a Domino est proeceptum, etc. If he that sits chief, forbid you that
which is commanded of the Lord; or on the contrary, command that which is
forbidden of the Lord: let him be accursed of all them that love God. and
reckoned a false witness, and sacrilegious person.

The Roman Catholics of Venice, of Sorbona, and many other Noble-menan
France, acknowledge the Popes supremacy in the church: but if the Pope should
command them to become his subjects in temporal things, etiam in ordine ad
spiritualia, in behalf of spiritual causes: or, if he should authorize the
Alcoran, and command them to follow it; would they, think you, obey his
will? Then must they do against their conscience. If they do not obey him;
then what shall become of the Popes Primacie?

I will beat you with the scourge of your own tongue; Perhaps they will
answer, They will obey when they think good. Shall therefore the
papislicall Catholics in France, and in Venice, take up this saying; Here, O
Pope, we think good to obey your Holiness command in this point, and not in
that: and then farewell the Popes supremacy. Thus much of the Logic of Becane.

Now, for his plainness, or plain ignorance; these are the words of the
Bishop of Ely, in Tortura Torti, page 39. Dominia non fundantur in fide, sic
infidelitate non euertuntur. Quin rex quinis cum de Ethnice Christianus fit,
non perdit ius terrenum, sed acquirit nouum. Governments and principalities are
not founded upon believing, and therefore are not overthrown by infidelity.
But when any King is made a Christian, of a Pagan, he loses not the earthly
right he had before, but acquireth a new right.

Thus far our worthy Bishop. Now (says the Iefait) in these words, The
Chaplain teaches, that Pagan Kings have no Primacie in the Church; but they
receive it by their conversion to Christianity. But I say, that these are not
the words of the Bishop of Ely only, but (before him) of Cardinal Bellarmine,
De Roman: Pont: Lib 5. cap. 2. et 3. Dominium non fundatur in gratia aut fide:
Christus non abstulit regna ijs quorum erant, etc. Lordshippe and
principality, is not grounded on grace, or believing: Christ took not away
Kingdoms, frons them to whom they belonged, for he came not to destroy things
well established, but to perfect them.

Therefore, when a King is made a Christian, which was a Pagan, he loses
not his earthly Kingdom, which he had obtained by right, but acquireth nouum
ius, a new right. Which new right, if Becane may be believed, as an
Interpreter, or Concluder, or Judge; is the Primacie in the Church.

And so we have him crying guilty, confessing the question: let us sound the
victory. For if there be no jar here betwixt the Jesuits about this
Primacie, then have we plainly confirmed, and euicted them, that Christian
Princes have a Primacie in the Church. For so Bellarmine, expressly and
dogmatically, affirms, That Ethnic Kings becoming Christians, acquire a
new right. Which new right, by confession of Becane, is the Primacy in the
Church.

Therefore Christian Kings have a Primacie in the Church. But what is the
Primacie of Pagan Kings, as Pagans, I leave it to the Papists themselves to
consider.

BECAN. Exam. Page 212

I Do not take away the Supposition, out of mine own opinion; for I deny the
King to have Primacie: but out of yours, who affirm he has it. Therefore,
out of your opinion, I might well dispute thus: Whence has he Primacie?
Whether as a King? or as a Christian King? to show the discord. For by
Thomson, and Burhill, all heathen Kings, as well as Christian; By the
Chaplain, only Christian Kings, are Primates of the Church. This is a great
Jar, compound it, if you can.

And where you add, that it mattereth not how he have it, so he has it:
This is a new Jar. For it mattereth greatly, according to Thomson and the
Chaplain. For, if he have the Primacie because he is King; he cannot lose it
so long as he is King: if because he is a Christian King, he may lose it. If
he may lose the Primacie, he is not secure: if he cannot lose it, he may
take his quiet rest.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
HIs first words of the 12. Question, show that he makes the Suppositum of
himself, and not out of our Writers opinion; especially Ma. Thomson, and Ma.
Burhill, here named by him. For, having set down the Question thus, Whence,
and by what title, has the King Primacie in the Church? he says; The
meaning of this Question is, Whether the King have Primacie as a King, or as a
Christian King.

But as Becane has produced Ma. Thomson, and Ma. Burhill, in his 1. and 2.
Questions, They both deny the King to have Primacie in the Church. Therefore
the Jesuit here sets down the Suppositum as of himself, and not as out of
their opinions. But what meant the Jesuit to say, he disputed here, when he
only asked the Question? Do boys use to dispute with their Masters, when
they only ask questions of their Masters? Indeed, if the Jesuit had
disputed, he should have disputed as in my English Concord is set down; and
so by his dispute, he had not taken away his own Suppositum, (as here he
does) but had disputed out of the opinion of some others, who aver the Kings
Primacy.

As touching the Jar; the English Concord, even out of the express words of
Ma. Thomson, manifested the agreement between the reverend Bishop, and Ma.
Thomson, in this point, so plainly and directly; that Ma. Thomson himself
wondered that Becane could stumble at it, as at any Iarie. And now lately comes
forth Ma. Burhill, in his Appendix page 289. asserting, That an Ethnic King,
vvhiles he is an Ethnicke King, can no more be supreme Governor of the Church,
then an Ethnic man. while he is an Ethnic man, may be a Priest, of, or in
the Church. And so, touching this point, and this Question, here is made up, a
full and uniform Concord: and the Jesuitical mist of this supposed great
Jar, utterly dispelled.

But, is this Jesuit well in his wits, affirming, That if the King, precisely
as King, have Ecclesiastical Primacie; then he is secure, because as long as
he is King, he can not lose it; but if he have it as a Christian King, he
may lose it? when as death, or, (by their Antichristan popish new doctrine)
the Pope (by one breath of his mouth, at his pleasure, excommunicating, and
thereby proscribing any Christian King) may take away his kingdom, and so his
primacie: but neither Pope, death, nor devil, can take away his Christianity.
Romans 3. ver. 35.

Note also here (good Christian Reader) the horrible impudency of this
Jesuit; who ironically afferteth, That Kings are sure, and may be secure to
enjoy their kingdoms; when as Suarius, in his spanne-new Book, has made it
known to all the world, that by Jesuitical doctrine (most stiffely defended
as orthodoxall, and now in force) Kings are not sure to enjoy, for the space of
one month, week, or day, their kingdoms, liberties, or lives, if the Pope be
disposed to bereave any of them thereof. That is, to excommunicate them; and
that is very easily done, even by the breath of his mouth, wheasoeuer he is
pleased to pretendany cause thereof. For then, by their Canon law, because he
is supreme Judge, whose will stands for reason, and law is summa ratio, reason:
no man must say unto him, Domine, cur Itafacis? Sir Judge Supreme, why do you
so?

Thus in plain truth, by these poysonfull miscreant Jesuits, are the lives and
kingdoms of all Kings Christian, brought at this day into far more imminent
danger, then are the liucs and livings of the meanest vassals of the said
Kings: and yet (says this Jesuit) Kings, in respect of their kingdoms, may
sleep soundly on both sides. Which indeed is nothing else, but to lull them
asleep in the bed of careless security; thereby, with more speed and less
danger, to cut their throats.

BECAN. Exam. Page 214

YOu object that I should reason thus: According to Thomson and Burhill,
Ethnic Kings, as well as Kings Christian, have Primacie of the Church:
Therefore, all living in those Kingdoms, are bound to do whatsoever those
Ethnic Kings impiously shall comaund. That was not my inference, but this;
Therefore all Scots and Englishmen, living in those Kingdoms, are subject in
Ecclesia sticall matters, to those Ethnicks as Primates of the Church. Upon it,
I do not so much dispute, as demand thus: What the English or Scottish would
do, if those Kings should command them any thing touching the Church, or
religion? If they should always in all things obey, they should do against
conscience? if never obey, they should not acknowledge their Primacy. If then
only they should obey, vvken they thought good: they should make them selves
Judges of their Primats. To these three they should have answered; or answer
you, if they deny to answer.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
IAunswere: first, that whereas the Jesuit in diverse places of his Examen,
has professed, that he will dispute nothing but about the English Iarres; he
has here forgotten himself, and endeavors the refutation of Ma. Thomson,
and Ma. Burhill, touching the Ecclesiastical Primacy of Pagan Kings, requiring
an aunswete thereof, either from me, or them.

Secondly, that the Jesuits ignorance in Logic is such, that he does not
understand when he reasons, and when he reasons not.

In his English Jar, chap. 12. Sect. 3. his words are these; According to the
opinion of Thomson, and Burhill, all Pagan Kings are Primats of the Church:
Therefore, all Englishmen living in Constantinople, or Rome, are subject to the
Turk, or Pope, in matters Ecclesiastical. Therefore, what shall they do, if
the Turk command them to follovv the Alcoran? or the Pope, to pray for the
dead? Shall they obey the command? Then they shall do against conscience.
Shall they not obey? Then they deny their Primacy. Shall they obey when they
think good? Then subjects shall make themselves Judges of their Kings.

Here are five several inferences, all tending to evince the absurdities,
which necessarily sollow upon the supposed opinion of Master Thomson, and Ma.
Burhil. herein: and yet the Jesuit says, he does not dispute. Moreover, in
express words he concludes thus; That if the English be subject to the
Tufkish Emperor, as Primate: and the Turk command them to follovv the
Alcotan; they must obey his command: or otherwise, they utterly overthrow
his Primacy.

What is this else, but to conclude thus; If Pagan Kings be Primats of the
Church, then all men living in their dominions, are bound to do what they
shall impiously command: unless the Jesuit will deny, that the Turks
command is impious, viz. to follovv the Alcoran?

And is not this goodly, hellish, Jesuitical doctrine, practiced by the
Jesuits, according to their oath, Caecae obedientiae, of blind obedience; to
pervert the faith, and fidelity of subjects, to God, and their King; to destroy
Kings and kingdoms: to disturb the peace of Christendom, by their combustions
tumbling of garments in blond, if their supreme ludge and Primate sh^l command
them so to do?

Thirdly, that the English Concord, gave this fondling more sufficient answer
then he deserved, to all these his questions, by retorting them upon himself,
thus: The Catholic (so called) Venetians, and Sorbonists, acknovvledge the
Pope to be their Ecclesiastical Primate. Then they are subject to him as
Primate. Then, if he as Primate, command them to obey him in temporalls, in
order to spiritual things, what shall they do? Shall they obey him? Then
they shall do against conscience. Shall they not obey him? Then they shall
deny his Primacy. Shall they obey him when they think good? Then the subjects
shall make themselves Judges of their supreme Judge.

This pinched the Jesuit to the quick, answering fully his questions, if he
had answered these: but alas, his silliness could shape no solid answer
thereunto.

Fourthly, I answer, That supposing the Turkish Emperor to be Primat
Ecclesiastical in his dominions; The English living therein, are bound, ever
to obey him in all things lawful and honest: and never to obey him, in things
unlawful, and dishonest.

Lastly, I answer, That Master Thomson, and Ma. Burhill hold the clean
contrary unto that which the Jesuit fathereth upon them here. For they reach,
that Pagan Kings, as Pagan, have not properly and truly, Primacy
Ecclesiastical; as has appeared out of their writings: therefore the Jesuit
very ridiculously fights here with his own shadow only.

BECAN. Exam. Page 215

YOu say, that I confess the Primacy Ecclesiastical of Kings Christian,
because where Bellarmine vvriteth thus: ( Quando Rex, etc. When a King of a
Pagan becomes a Christian, he does not lose the earthlis kingdom, which of
right he had before, but he gets novumius, a new right.) I interpret those
words of Bellarmine, a new right, to be Ecclesiastical Primacie. I did not
interpret the words of Bellarmine, but of the Chaplain, though they seem to
be the same. For, Bellarmine adds thus: Acquiritius novum ad vitam aeternam:
He gets a new right to life aeternall: which new right, not only Ethnic
Kings, but also their subjects, obtain, when of Pagans they become
Christians. But the Chaplain means, by new right, Primacie Ecclesiastical:
for he says, that the Christian King, by force of excommunication, loses
that new right. Truly, he cannot lose the rightto eternal life by
excommunication, but by his own fault only. Richard, go now and triumph.

Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe English Concord, charged this Jesuit with acknowledgement of the
Ecclesiastical Primacie of Christian Kings: because [vvhereas the reverend
Bishop of Ely cited the words of Bellarmine, as out of Bellarmine himself; and
as fully to Bellarmines meaning, as Bellarmine himself does, De Rom Pont. lib.
5. cap. 2. et 3.] the Jesuit interpreted those said words cited by the Bishop,
of Primacy Ecclesiastical, which Christian Kings obtain, when of Pagan, they
become Christian Kings. Unto which, this silly disputant has nothing else to
answer but this; That he did not interpret those words, novum ius, a new
right, as the words of Bellarmine, but as the words of the Bishop. Which
answer is very idle, seeing that the Bishop produced them, as the words of
Bellarmine, and not as his own.

The Jesuit, to back his answer, says; That Bellarmine adds for
explication of those words, a new right, ad vitam aeternam; to life eternal:
which the Bishop leaves out. And further, that the Bishop says, The new
right may be lost by Excommunication; but the right to eternal life, cannot be
lost by force of excommunication, but only by the own fault of him that
loses it. Lastly, That not only Kings, but all their private subjects, may
gain, by their conversion, that new right to eternal life.

Unto which, I reply: First, that the words cited by the Bishop, explicat those
words, new right, to be meant, of a right to eternal life, as fully as
Bellarmines words do. The very express words of Bellarmine, De To. Pon. lib.
5. c. 3. colum. 1077. are these; Quando Rexfit Christianus, non perdit regnum
terrenum, quod iure obtinebat, sed acquirit nouum ius ad regnum aeternum. When
a Pagan King becomes a Christian King, he loses not his earthly kingdom,
which by right he obtained; but he gets a new right to the kingdom
eternal.

The Bishops express words in Tort. Tort. page 40. 1.1. are these; Rex quinis,
cum de Ethnico Christianus fit, non per dit terrenumius, sed acquiritius nouum;
puta, in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus. Every King, when of a Pagan, he
becomes a Christian King, does not lose his earthly right, to wit, in the
spiritual good things of the Church.

By which words it is most apparent, that the Bishop, no less then Bellarmine,
explaneth that new right, to ben right to eternal life: unto which the
Christian Kings are brought by those said spiritual good things of the Church;
being the means which God has ordained, and sanctified to that purpose.

Secondly, I reply, that as Excommunication grounded upon no fault of the
Christian King, cannot take away his right to eternal life, so it cannot take
away his Primacy Ecclesiastical.

Again, that Excommunication grounded upon a grievous sin of the
excommunicated, joined with impenitencie and obstinacy; may as well, may
rather, cause him to lose his right to life eternal; as it may force him to
lose his Primacy Ecclesiastical. Does not the perpetual binding of any man's
sins, viz. being obstinate and impenitent, exclude him directly from his
right to eternal life; but that binding, if at all, excludes him from the
Primacy, indirectly, and by consequent only

Lastly, I reply, That although it be true, that private subjects, as well as
their Kings, becoming Christians, or Pagans, get a new right to everlasting
life: yet that is nothing to the purpose, which intends Kings only, (not
private persons) what they acquire or lose, in becoming Christian Kings.

Now, the new right to the Kingdom eternal, is, as their new service of GOD
is, to the King eternal. But according to Saint Augustine: Herein Christian
Kings, as Christian Kings, serve the Lord; when they do those things to serve
him, which they could not do, but as they are, or in that they are Christian
Kings.

It is not enough for a Christian King, toward the obtaining of eternal life,
or, as Bellarmine speaks, of Gods eternal kingdom, to serve the Lord, as a
Christian King, that is, by executing his Primacy Ecclesiastical, as he that
is Custos vtriusque Tabulae, The graund or Cause-keeper of both the Tables; and
so holding his new right to life eternal. According to that of Saint Paul,
unto the same sense, though in another case: 1. Tim. chap. 2. ver. 15. Women,
through bearing of children shall be saved, if they continue in faith, and
love, and holiness with modesty: so Christian Kings shall be saved, by well
using their Primacy Ecclesiastical, if they continue in faith, love, and
holiness.

Thus are all these several examinations Jesuitical, as Potters sheards,
shiuered to nothing: thus have we this Jesuit acknowledging the Ecclesiastical
Primacie of Christian Kings. Why then, unless the Jesuit have somewhat to say
in arrest of judgment, should not we, as we have obtained, so openly proclaim
the victory?

Becans Jar.
XIII. Question. Whether the King may constrain his Subjects to take the Oath
of Primacy, or no?
1. HItherto have we treated of the Iarring and disagreement of our
Adversaries, about the nature, offices, and origin of the Kings Primacy. Now
there remains a certain practical question, which touches the Conscience
to the quick; to wit, Whether the King may constrain or force his subjects to
swear, that they acknowledge his kingly Primacy, whereof we have spoken
before? Or whether they will acknowledge the King as Primate and supreme Head
of the Church of England, unto whom, as unto their Primate and supreme Head,
they will promise fidelity, no less in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
matters, then in Politic and temporal? This question has two points. The
first, whether the King of England does defacto exact, or has at any time
exacted such an Oath of his subjects? The other is, Whether his subjects are
bound in conscience to take such an Oath, if the King should exact the same? Of
both these points severally, I mean to speak a word or two.

The first Point.
2. The first point then is, Whether the King of England does exact, or at any
time has exacted such an Oath of his subjects? It is manifest that King Henry
the 8. did. For so writes Doctor Sanders, In his book of the Schism of
England: Laurentius Cocchus Prior Coenobij Dancastrensis, vna cum tribus
Monachis and duobuslaicis, Aegidio Horno, and Clemente Philpotto, quod nollent
Ecclesiasticum terrent Regis Primatum iurato confiteri, exclu^i eterris, ad
caelestem aeterni Regis gloriam transmissi sunt. Laurence Coch, Prior of the
Monastery of Dancaster, together with three Monks, and two Laymen, Giles
Horn, and Clement Philpot, for that they would not swear to the
Ecclesiastical Primacie of a tempor all King, being excluded from ^arth,
were translated to a celestial glory of the eternal King, etc. And then
again: Proponebantur cisnona Comitiorum Decreta, and iubebantur inreinrando
affirmare, Regem Ecclesiae supremum esse Caput. The new decrees of the
Parliament were propounded unto them, and they were commanded to swear, the
King to beesupreme Head of the Church, etc.

3. Now that Queen Elizabeth the daughter, followed herein her Father K.
Henry, it is manifest by the former Oath that she exacted of her subjects,
which is this: Ego A. B. prorsus testificor, and declaro in conscientia mea,
Reginam esse solam supremam Gubernatricem, et istius Regui Angliae and aliorum
omnium suae Ma^estaus dominiorum and regionum non ninus in omnibus
spiritualibus atque Ecclesiasticis rebusvel causis, quam temporalibus: Et quod
nemo externus Princeps, Persona, Praelatus, Status, vel Potentatus, aut facto,
aut iure, habet aliquam iurisdictionem, potestatem, superioritatem,
praeeminentiam, vel authoritatem Ecclesiasticam aut spiritualem in hoc Regno.
Ideoque plane renuntio and repudio omnes forinsecas iurisdictiones, po^es^ates,
superioritates atque authoritates, etc. ^ A. B. doc verily testify and
declare in my conscience, that the Queen is the only supreme Gonernesse, as
well of this kingdom of England, as of all other her Majesty's dominions and
Countries, as well in all spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters and causes, as
in temparall: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate
has, either by fact, or right, any Iurisaiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical or spiritual in this kingdom. And
therefore I do utterly renounce, and abandone all foreign Jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities and authorities, etc.

4. The very same also does now King ^ames, who binds his subjects not with
one Oath alone, but with two; to wit, of Supremacy and Allegiance. The former
Oath of Supremacy begins thus: Ego A. B. palam ^estor, and ex conscientia
mea declaro, quod Maiestas Regia, vnicus est supremus Gubernator hu^^s Regni,
omniumque aliorum suae Maieslatis dominiorum and territoriorum, tam in omnibus
spiritualibus sine Ecclesiasticis rebus and causis, quam in temporalibus: Et
quod nullus extraneus Princeps, Persona, Praelatus, Status, aut Potentatus
habet, aut habere debet, vllam iunsdictio^e^, poteslatem, superioritatem,
praeeminentiam, vel authoritatem Ecclesiasticam, sieve spiritualem intra hoc
Regnum, etc. I A. B. do publicly testify, and in my conscience declare,
that the Kings Majesty is the only suprewe Governor of this kingdom, and of
all other his Majesty's dominions and territories, as well in all matters and
causes spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as in temporal: And that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any
turisdiction, power, superiority, preheminenci, or authority Ecclesiastical or
spiritual within this Kingdom, etc. The later Oath called of Allegiance,
begins thus: Ego A. B. vere^t sincere agnosco, profiteor, testificor. and
declaro in consctentia mea coram Deo and Mundo, quod supremus Dominus noster
Rex Iacobus, etc. I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, and
testify in my conscience, before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord
King James, etc.

5. Both these Oaths are set down at large in his Majesty's Apology: and in
both of them, his subjects are required publicly and openly toprofesse and
acknowledge, that King James is the supreme Gonernour, and Lord of all England,
not only in politic and temporal matters, but in spiritual and
Ecclesiastical also: And that neither the Pope, nor any other forrainer, has
any power or Inrisdiction in, or oner the Church of England. Again, the former
of these Oaths was brought in by K. Henry the 8. as his Majesty confesses in
his Apology, in these words: Sub Henrico octauo primum introductum est
Iuramentum Primatus, sub eoque Thomas Morus and Roffensis supplicio affecti;
idque partim ob eam causam, quod Iuramentum illud recusarent. Ab eo deinceps
omnes mei Praedecessores, quot quot sunt hanc Religionem amplexi, idem sibi,
aut non multo secus asseruerunt, etc. The Oath of Primacy was first brought
in, under K. Henry the 8. under whom Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop of
Rochester were beheaded; and that partly because they refused that Oath. From
him all my Predecessors dow neward, as many as have embraced this Religion, did
retain the same Oath, or not much different, unto themselnes, etc. Now the
later Oath was invented by King James himself.

The second point.
6. The Question then is, Whether all the Kings subjects in England, are bound
in conscience to tabe both these Oaths, as often as the King shall exact the
same? Or whether they should suff^rimprisonments, torments, and death it
self, rather then swear? Concerning the former point, the Catholics doubt
nothing, for that they have certainly and firmly determined rather to lose
their lines, together with the glorious Martyrs Sir Thomas More, and the Bishop
of Rochester, then to admit the Kings Primacy, and abjure the Popes. Now,
coucerning the later Oath, there has been some doubt made these years past.
For that some Catholics, who percei^ed not the force and scope of that Oath,
did a little stagger at the beginning, whether they might with a safe
conscience s^ear^ thereto, or no. Which doubt of theirs notwithstanding did not
last long, but was soon taken away by Pope Paul the fist, and Cardinal
Bellarmine. For the Pope forthwith directed two Apostolical Breues to the
Catholics of England, and the said Card, vvrote a letter to Ma. Blackwell
then Archpriest of this affair. Both Pope and Cardinal dec deny, that the
said Oath may be taken with a safe conscience, and their reason is this:
Because no: man with a safe conscience, can deny the Catholic faith. But he
now, who should take this Oath proposed by the King, should deny the Catholic
faith, though not generally, yet in part, so far forth as belongs to some
one article there of: Ergo, no man with a safe conscience can take this Oath.

7. This reason, being very sound, all good Catholics admit: but our
Adversaries do not. I, in favor and consolation of the Catholics, have
determined to adioyne here unto two other reasons, especially against the Oath
of Supremacy, which by the Adversaries cannot be rejected. The first is this:
No man is bound in conscience to swear that which is either apparantlie false,
or at leastwise doubt full: But, that the King is Primate, and supreme head of
the Church, and for such to be obeyed, not only in temporal, but also in
Ecclesiastical matters, is either apparently false, or at leastwise doubt
full: Ergo, no man is bound in Conscience to swear the same. The Mayor is
cuident of it self, for that it is not lawful to affirm any thing which is
either false er doubtful, and much less to swear the same. The Minor is
prooned thus: For that, it is judged apparently false, as well amongst the
Caluinists, as amongst the Catholics, that the King is Primate and supreme
head of the Church. But now amongst the Caluinists of England, who adhere unto
the King, the same is called into doubt. For that some of the^ affirm, others
deny these points following: 1. That the King is Primate of the Church. 2. That
he is supreme head of the Church. 3. That he has Ecclesiastical Primasy oner
the Church. 4. That he has power and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. 5. That
the King by his own proper Autheritie may assemble Councelis or Synods, and
sit as chief Head or President therein. 6. That he can confer benefices, or
Ecclesiastical livings. 7. That he can creats and depose Bishops. 8. That he
is ludge in Controucrsies of faith, etc. So as truly, if these and the like
points be doubtful and uncertain, amongst those who adhere unto, and fanour
the King. seeing that some deny them, some assirme them: it follows
necessarily, that the Kings whole Primacy is an uncertain thing. What rashness
then, and impudency is it, to go about to bind Catholics in their
Consciences to swear that, which they themselves do affirm some of them to
be false, some others to be doubt full?

8. I will explicate more distinctly that which I have said. The Oath of the
Kings Primacy, does contain so many parts as there be, or are thought to be
Offices and functions of the Kings Primacy. The Offices then either are, or are
thought to be dinerse, as we have seen before, towit, to assemble Synods, to
exact and decree Ecclesiastical laws, to confer benefices, to create Bishops,
to determine controuer sies of faith, and the like. Therefore, diverse are the
parts of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy. Of these parts then, let us take one
of them by it self, to wit, this: I A. B. do swear in my conscience, that I
will be faithful and obedientvnto the King as often, or whenever he shall by
his own proper authority, create Bishops, whom he will. and again depose from
these office or dignity, whom he will. etc. If this part only of the Kings
Offices, should be exacted of all his Majesty's subjects in England, what, do
you think, would be done? Would all, trow you, yea they who most adhere now
unto the King, swear this? Let them swear that would; M. Tooker I am sure, if
he be a constant man would not. For that he denies the creation and
deposition of Bishops to belong any way unto the King. And if so be, that he^,
who otherwise acknowledges the Kings Primacie (at least in words) would not
swear there unto; how then should Catholics be compelled to do the same, who
do in no wise acknow ledge it? And what I have said concerning this point, the
same may be also said of therest.

9. My other reason is this. King James does often protest, that he claims no
more right or: Inrisdiction oner the Church, then did the Kings in the ola
Tistament in ancient times: and therefore that this his Primacy must be
coutained within the same lymits, and terms, that theirs was in the old
Testament. But the Kings in the old Testament could not compel their subjects
to swear such an Oath as this: I A. B. do openly testify, and in my
conscience declare, that Jeroboam is the only supreme Gonernour of this
Kingdom of Israel, as well in spiritual as temporal matters: And that no
forrayner has any jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
in this Kingdom, etc. Ergo, neither King James can enforce his subjects to take
such a like Oath. The Mayor is manifest out of his Majesty's own words in his
Apology. The Minor I thus explicate. After the death of King Solomon, his
kingdom (God so disposing) was divided into two parts: whereof one contained
ten Tribes: the other two. So as by this means, they became two distinct
kingdoms afterward, and therein reigned two distinct Kings, one whereof had no
depe^dance of the other in temporal gonernment. One was called King of Israel,
the other, King of Judah: and both of them had successors in their kingdoms. The
first Kings that ruled, after the dinision of the kingdom made, were Jeroboam,
King of Israel, and Roboam King of Judah. In either Kingdom were Priests and
Leuits. But the high or Chief Priest, could not resid-in both kingdoms, but
only in one, and that ordinarily in Judah: yet not withstanding, he was Head
of all the Prusts and Levites that remained in both Kindoms. Neither could
Jeroboam lawfully say unto his Priests and Levites: You shall not obey the High
Priest, that resideth in the Kingdom of Judah: but you shall obey me only: for
you are exempted from his jurisdiction and power, etc. And though he should have
so said; yet no doubt but he had offended. If now King Jeroboam could not
exempt the Priests and Levites of his ovvn^ Kingdom, from the Jurisdiction and
Power of a sorraine High Priest: by what right then does now King James of
England do the same? especially, seeing he anerroth, that he claims no
more right or inrisdiction unto himself oner the Church, then the Kings of the
old Testament did?

The Conclusion.
1. ALL then that has been hither to said, may be reduced into three heads.
The first is, that the Kings Primacie in the Church is a new thing, and first
brought in by King Henty the eight, nor hitherto has been beard of, or
usurped in any other place then only in the Kingdom of England. The second
is: that there be so many Iarres and disagrements of the English Ministry
among them selves, concerning this Primacy, that it is not manifest nor
certain what the said Primacy is, nor what sorce and authority the same has.
The third: that the Oath of this Primacy can neither be exacted by the King;
nor may the subtects take the same.

2. Heerehence three other questions which might be made concerning the
Subjects, will easily be solued. There be 3. sorts of Subjects in England. The
sirst, as some call them, are Henricians, who both acknowledge and swear unto
this Kingly Supremacy. The second sort are Puritans, orpure Calumists, who
indeed do not acknowledge the said Supremacy, but yet do swear thereunto. The
third are Catholics, which neither acknowledge it, nor will swear it.

3. The first question then is, What may be said of these Henricians, which
both acknowledge and swear to the Kings Supremacy? I answer: that they do
unwisely, and inconsideratly. The reason is. Because it is folly and rash^es,
as before I have said, to swear a thing that is doubt full and uncertain. But
the Primacy of the King, is a thing altogether doubtful and uncertain amongst
the Henricians, as is manifest by their iarres and dissentions, which hither to
we have shexed. Ergo, to swear to such a Supremacy, is both folly and rashness.

4. The second question is, What may be said of the Puritans, or pure
Caluinists, who do not indeed acknowledge the Kings Primacy, and yet if they
be commanded, do swear thereto? I answer: that they are perjured persons and
Politicians. The reason is. Because they belie^c one thing, and swear another.
They beliene with Calvin, that neither Kings nor secular Princes, have any
Primacy in spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, but only in temporal; yet
nevertheless, they swear Allegiance unto the King (together with the foresaid
Henricians) as to the Primate and supreme Head of the Church: and this they
do, to make an external and political peace, which is more esteemed by
them, then their faith and Religion; and therefore they are rather to be called
Politics then Christians. Of whom his Majesty gave a most worthy testimony,
in his Preface Monitory; to wit, That he had found more truth and hones^ie in
the high-land and bordering theenes, then in that sort of people.

5. The third question is, what may be said of Catholics, who neither
acknowledge the Kings Primacy, nor swcar thereto. I answer: that they be inst
and upright men, who walk before God in truth and verity. They be sincere,
who profess with their month, that which they think in their bart. They are
wise indeed, who with good Eleazarus, had rather die, then consent to any unlaw
full thing, no not so much as in outward show. They be like unto the Apostles,
who endeavor to obey God, rather then men. They be like unto the Martyrs of
the Primitine Church, who freely profess themselves before the persecutors,
to be such as indeed they are.

6. But you will say, they be miserable. For if they refuse the Oath, they are
forced to undergo impresonments, torments, punishments. Truly they are not
therefore miserable, but most happy. For so d^d our Savior teach us in the
Gospel, Math. 5. 10. Blessed are they, who suffer persecution for justice, for
theirs is the kingdom of heanen. But then you will say: It is a hard thing to
suffer. How is that hard which is done with ^oy and delight? Hear what is said
of the Apostles, Act. 5. 41. And they went from the sight of the Council
rejoicing, because they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the Name
of Jesus. Hear what the Apostle says of himself, 2. Cor. 4. Superabundo
gaudio in om^i tribulatione nostra. I exceedingly rejoice in all our
tribulations.

7. And from whence comes this joy? Truly from a twofold gift of the holy
Ghost; to wit, Hope, and Charity. Hope of future glory, that makes us io^ full
and full of comfort in all adnersities. Romans 8. 18. The sufferings of these
times, are not condign to the foture glory, that shall be renealed in us. And
again; Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in hope: and patient in tribulation. And, Heb.
10. 34. The spoil of your own goods you took with joy, knowing that you have
a better, and a permanent substance. Do not there fore leese your confidence,
which has a great reward. For patience is necessary for you, that doing the
will of God, you may receive the promise, etc.

8. Nor is the force of Charity less: Romans 8. 35. Who then shall separate us
from the Charity of Christ? Tribulation? or distress? or famine? or nakedness?
or danger? or persecution? or the sword? etc. But in all these things we
onercome, because of him that has lo^ed us. For I am sure, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present,
nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the Charity of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, etc.

9. Heereto belong the examples of Christ, and of other Saints, which have
great force and efficacy, to stir up and streng then the hearts of Catholics,
to suffer patiently in this life, prisons, fetters, torments, yea death it
self. 1. Pet. 2. 20. If doing well, you sustain patiently, this is thank
before God. For unto this are you called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaning you an example, that you may follow his steps, who did not sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth: who when he was re^^led, did not re^^le;
when he suffered, he threatened not; but delivered himself to him that judged
him unjustly, etc.

10. And, Heb. 11. 36. Others had trial of reproaches, and stripes: moreover
also of bands and prisons: they were stoned, they were hewed, they were
tempted, they died in the slaughter of the sword: they went about in
sheepskins, in goate-skinnes, needy, in distress, afflicted: of whom the
world was not worthy: wandering to deserts, in mountains, and dens, and in
caves of the earth, etc.

11. And again in the 12. Chapter, and 1. verse. And therefore by patience let
us run to the Combat proposed unto us, looking on the Author of Faith, and
the consummator Jesus, who, joy being proposed unto him, sustained the Cross,
contemning confusion; and sits on the right hand of the seat of God. For
think diligently upon him, who sustained of sinners such contradiction against
himself, that you be not wearied, fainting in your minds. For you have not
y^trelisted unto blood, etc.

12. And yet more, a. Cor. 11.23. In very many labors, in prisons more
abou^dantly, in stripes abone measure in death^ often. Of the Jews five times
did I receine forty (stripes) saving one. Thrice was I beaten with rodds, once
I was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, night and day have I been in the
depth of the Sea, in ionrnying often, in perils of waters, perils of thieues,
perils of my Nation, perils of Gentiles, perils in the City, perils in the
Wilderness, perils in the sea, perils among false brethren; in labor and
misery, in much watching, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness, etc.

13. And yet more in the 12. Chapter and 9. verse, Gladly will I glory in my
own infirmity, that the power of Christ may dwell in me. For which cause I
please my self in infirmities, in contumelies, in nece^sities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ. For when I am weak, then am I mighty,
etc.

14. With these, and the like testimonies of holy Scriptures, were armed Sir
Thomas More, and the Bishop of Rochester, when they rather chose to die, then
to take an impions and wicked Oath. With these places were others also
animated, who followed them in their glorious fight. And lastly, with these are
they encouraged, who now in England are kept in prisons, bound in fetters,
spoiled of their goods and linings, and purpled in their own blood.

S. Cyprian Epist. 9.
Pretiosa mors haec est, quae emit immortalitatem pretio sanguinis sui:
Pretions is that death, which buyeth immortality with the price of it blood.

And in the end of the same Epistle.

O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam temporibus nostris gloriosus Martyrum sanguis
illustrat! Erat antea in operibus fratrum candida: nunc facta est in Martyru^
cruore purpurea. O happy is our Church, which the glorious blood of Martyrs
does in these our days illustrate! It was made white before in the works of
our brethren: but now is it made purple in the blood of Martyrs.

And yet more in Epist. 24.
Quid gloriosius aut felicius vlli hominum poterit ex diuina dignatione
contingere, quam inter ipsos carnifices interritum confiteri Dominum Deum? quam
inter saeuientia saecularis potestatis tormenta, etiam extorto and excruciato,
and excarnificato corpore, Christum De^ filium, ersi recedente, sed ^amen
libero spiritu confiteri? quam relicto mundo caelum petisse? quam desertis
hominibus, inter Angelos stare? quam collegam passioniscum Christo, in Christi
nomine factum esse? What can happen unto any man, through Gods diu^ne
bountifulness, more glorious, or more prosperous, then without all fear to
confess our Lord God? then amidst the cruel torments of secular power, to
confess Christ the Son of God, with a free spirit, though now departing from
the body, yea from the body tortured, tormented, and all to bemangled? then by
leaning the world, to go to heanen? then by for saking the company of men, to
be conversant with Angels? and be made partaker of the Passion of Christ, in
Christ his Name?

English Concord.
IT is very true, that both the oath of Supremacy, and the oath of Allegiance,
are contained in the Kings Apology: but this is a very false, and plainly a
Jesuitical lie, that in both those oaths, viz. the oath of Allegiance, The
subjects are required, publicly and openly to profess and acknowledge, that
King James is the supreme Governor, and Lord of all England, not only in
politic and temporal matters, but in spiritual and Ecclesiastical also:
and that neither the Pope, nor any other forrainer, has any power, or
inrisdiction, in, or oner the Church of England.

Here I begin with the I^suit, taking him napping in a gross falsification of
the oath of Allegiance: for there is no such thing contained therein. Which is
also testified by his excellent Majesty, in his Preface Monitory, page 11. Vt
certioribus iudicijs per ditam horum co^uitiatoru^ malitiam deprehendere pos
sit is, etc. That with more certain and assured tokens, you may espy the
desperate malice of these raylers (as the Pope Paul 5, Cardinal Bellarmine,
and Becane) who impudently affirm, that this Oath was devised to entrap, and
beguile, the consciences of improuident Papists, in matters of faith; I will
declare the whole passage of the matter in few words. As soon as this for me
of the Oath of Allegiance was conceined, the lower house of Parliament,
thought good to insert that clause, whereby all power should be taken from
the Pope to excommunicate the King. But I presently caused the same to be razed
out; to the end, that it might appear, that this Oath had no other force or
respect, then that the Popes excommunication, should be no just or lawful
cause unto my subjects, by secret or open practices, to attempt any thing
against my person, or my kingdom; because I thought that this sentence of
excommunication, of a spiritual censure, was by unjust usurpation of Popes,
made a secular pretense, and so exorbitant beyond all bounds. With so great
care and study I did avoid, that nothing should be contained in this Oath,
but that profession sion of civil allegiance, and temp or all obedience,
which nature it self prescribes to all them, which are borne under any
kingdom, adding only a firm promise, whereby I demand of my subjects, aid,
and assistance against the breach of due allegiance, and fidelity. Wherefore,
I faw it appertained to the cause, that I should make an Apology for this
Oath: wherein I have taken upon me to prove, that nothing is contained
herein, but that which concerns mere civil and temporal obedience, such
as is due to all sovereign Princes.

And again, in the 53. page of the Apology, Iuramentum primatus excogitatum
est ad discrimen faciendum, etc. The Oath of supremacy was devised, to discern
and put a difference betwixt the Papists, and those of our religion: but the
Oath of Allegiance was invented to distingutsh betwixt the Papists, who hold
obedience and fidelity to the King in things civil, from those that were
indiutdually affected to the Gunpowder treason.

Concerning your glorious Martyrs (as you style Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas
More) you might have learned out of Tortura Torti, page 360. how the worthy
Bishop of Ely, stops Tortus his mouth, saying: Dixerat Apologiae author,
etc. The Author of the Apology said, that it was not any spiritual Primacy,
but a carnal matrimony, that brought the supposed Martyr dome to Sir Thomas
More, and the Bishop of Rochester: and this he spoke not amiss. But then
replied Tortus: Then it was a carnal matrimany, that caused holy S. John
Baptist to suffer martyrdom, when he freely reproved King Herod's marriage. With
this example Tortus wounds himself. For tell me, O Tortus, what was that
marriage? was it not with his brothers wife? was not this the word that: cost
the Baptist his life? It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. But
what was the cause of the death of More, and Fisher? was it not clean
contrary? It is lawful for thee, to have thy brothers wife; it is not lawful
for thee to put her away. So that if Saint John, Christ's forerunner, died
unjustly, they died most justly: and if he were a Martyr, (as he was) then
were they some other thing: which I will not tell you. For he dyed, that the
King should not keep his brothers wife: but these dyed, that the King should
not put away his brothers wife. He told King Herod, it was not lawful: they
told King Henry, it was lawful, and he must not do otherwise. Could Tortus
any ways mar their martyr dome more deeply? So far the Bishop of Ely.

And give me leave to add something more. O glorious Martyrs! who had rather
consent together to die, then to confess the royal supremacy of Kings,
established in the Scriptures, used and practiced by all the most commended
Christian Kings; and withal; to establish the Papal Primacy, which Christ
himself expressly forbad: which the Fathers of the Council of Ephesus called
the smoke of worldly power; and they of Carthage, with all care, and
diligence, admonished the Church to beware of, as Typhum saeculi, the
arrogancy of this present world.

Concerning that notorious fact of Pope Paul the fifth, and Bellarmine, (which
here the Jesuit remembers) full of inhumanitie, impiety, and audaciousnesse;
that excellently learned man, Ma. Causabon, in his Epistle to Front Ducaeus,
has taught him, page 167. thus: De fidelitatis iuramento, cui occasionem
praebuit pulueraria coniuratio, etc. Concerning that Oath of Allegiance, first
occasioned by the Gunpowder treason, I marvel why the English Papists so
much complain. They have much more cause to complain of Cardinal Bellarmine,
and some fevv others, who hardened the heart of Pope Paul the fifth to yield
unto them, (who at the first with stood them: for I speak not rashly, but
have good Authors for my assurance) that all the Catholics in England should
here perish, rather then a matter so just and equal should be permitted. For,
what can be more equal, then that subjects should promise fidelity to their
Sovereign? especially after a treason so barbarous, and notable, for cruelty?
The King in the Commonwealth, is the same that a householder is in his private
house: and do you think that such a man were well advised, to keep in his
family any servant, of whose fidelity he was not persuaded? or rather, whose
disposution he greatly suspecteth? I think no body, that is not mad, would
grant such a thing. Wherefore, either King James has less power in his
Kingdom, then a householder in his house, or else these complaints about the
subjects Oath of Allegiance, are all unjust, and frivolous. For in good sooth,
I have met with many Papists, both in France and England, and I have also read
the writings of many, who deem this Oath not only most just, but also most
holy. Wherefore, many of your side, and some of them Priests, yea, the
Archpriest Black well, have taken the same without all scruple of conscience,
not against their wills: and by their public writings, learnedly and truly
(though sharply against the Pope and the Jesuits) have persuaded others to do
the like; (such are Master Sheldon, and Master Warmington.) But yet there are
some, with whom the Popes Bulls, and Bellarmines Letters, prevail more then
the law of God, the law of nature, and of all Nations, or the examples of wise
men. And if the Law run upon these, what place is there left for complaint?
And you your selves, which call this a persecution of Catholics, cannot tell,
for what cause, and by what example of antiquity, you so term it. It was
never done, nor heard of, that Christian people said they suffered persecution,
if they were commanded to swear Allegiance to their Sovereign. But we read
the contrary in the Counsels; where they are accursed that break faith to
their Kings, which they had voxed to them, for the preservation of the slate
of their Country, and of their King. And you know, the fourth Council of
Toledo, declares all such exco^municat from the Church.

Here is work for the Jesuit, let him satisfy these things: and in the mean
time let him understand, that that Catholic faith is accursed with all
maledictions, as inhumane, impious, sacrilegious, Antichristian, and
diabolical: whereof this is one Article: That Christian people ought not to
swear allegiance to their lawful Sovereign: to weet, that, which, as has
been declared, the law of God, the law of nature, and the Canons of Counsels
have ordained, as most equal, and most holy. Orelse thus, (to speak after
Becans manner) That, for Christian people to swear allegiance to their
lavvfull Prince, is to deny the Catholic faith. And this reason, being very
sound, all good Catholics admit, says Becane: but in truth, this reason, as
very rotten, is only admitted by Antichristian Catholics: but we Protestants,
the only true, and proper orthodoxall, or right believing Catholics, will
never admit it.

And I (says the Jesuit) will adioyne two other reasons, on the behalf of
Catholics, against the Oath of Supremacy, which by the Adversary cannot be
rejected. He should rather have said thus; And I, for the destruction of my
friends, the Romish Catholics, will adioyne two other reasons, which may be
most justly refused, and exploded by all our Adversaries, the Protestants.

But has Martin the Jesuit here forgotten himself? were not the reasons of
Pope Paul, and Bellarmine, lately alleged, expressly brought against the oath
of Allegiance, which only was in controversy; and will he now dispute against
the oath of Supremacy, which is distinct and several from the Oath in
question? Martin therefore should rather say thus; I have determined for the
ruin of Catholics in England, to adioyne two reasons more, nothing differing
from the former. Well then, let us hear these two pretty reasons: his first
reason is this;

1. It is manifestly false, or at least doubtful, that the King is Primate, or
supreme Head of the Church, who must be obeyed both in all temporal and
Ecclesiastical matters, as he that has 1. an Ecclesiastical Primacy. 2. an
Ecclesiastical Iuris diction: first, to call Counsels by his own
authority: and secondly to create, and depose Bishops, (for every mean person
may confer a benefice, and no mortal man may be supreme Judge in
controversies of faith: therefore these two last rehearsed, are no branches of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy). Therefore (concludes the Jesuit) this Oath must
not be taken.

I answer: The Antecedent of this reason is most false: For all Protestants in
England, acknowledge it to be certainly true, and none doubts thereof:
namely, that the King of England, is the only supreme Gonernor, or (as the
Papists expound it) Primate and supreme Head of the Church of England: whom
we must obey in all causes, both Ecclesiastical and civil; as him, that has
the government over all Ecclesiastical persons, and in all spiritual causes:
or (as they expound it) which has the Ecclesiastical Primacy, or Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical; and therefore has power to call Counsels, and to create and
depose Bishops. All our men, with one consent, think, speak, and swear this.
And so the Jesuits first reason, with small ado, and no labor, is put to
flight.

But yet the Jesuit urges the matter more articulately, saying; That the oath
of the Kings supremacy, has so many parts in it, as are thought to be
distinct offices of the Kings supremacy: and thereupon, culleth out one of
them, which he deemeth most absurd, writing thus: I A. B. do swear in my
conscience, that I will be faithful and obedient unto the King, as often, or
whensoever he shall by his own proper authority, create Bishops, whom he
will, and again depose from their of fice, whom he will, etc.

Whom he will? Nay, that is the proper speech of popish Antichrists, Stat
proratione voluntas: Extrauag. de trans. Episc. quanto.
My will stands for a law. But Christian Princes say thus; Idpossumus
quodiure possumus: We can do nothing but that which we can do by law and
right.

Therefore, any Christian subject, and by name Dr. Tooker, may swear in this
manner: I A. B. do swear in my conscience, that I will be faithful and
obedient to the King, as often, or whenever he shall by his own proper
authority, depose Bishops for just causes, as Solomon did Abiathar.

But let Martin Becane put on the thoughts of an honest and sober man awhile,
and tell me, Whether the oath of Supremacy contain so many parts, as are
supposed to be the offices or functions of the Primacie? He says, putantur, as
are thought, or supposed; what of any triobular or mean Writer of the
English, or Roman party? Fie, fie, who can abide this? Nay rather, the oath
of the Kings Supremacy, comprehends no more, then those offices of the royal
Supremacy, which is manifest that the Kings of Israel in holy Scripture
executed with commendation: and so does the Kings Majesty write, in the same
express terms. All which offices are articularly, and exactly set down by
him in his Apology, page 127. 128. And by the Bishop of Ely, in his Tortura
Tort. pa. 377. 378. collected out of, and confirmed by the word of God.

But here I would desire the Jesuit to tell me, whether the oath of the Popes
Supremacy contain as many parts, as are the offices and functions of the said
Supremacy, thought to be, by the Jesuits, Canonists, Popes Parasits, and Popes
themselves? Then the Pope of Rome, must be Universal Primate and Bishop, in
Council. Constantic^s. paral. Vspergen.
Denecessitate salutis; of the necessity of salvation. Extra de Appel. vt
debitus glossa.
The Ordinary of all men. Harding in Jewel, Def. par. 5. cap. 6. diuis. 4.
Whose diocese is the whole world. Lib. 1. Ceremon.
Who, being invested Pope, rules the City, and the world. Francis. Zabarella.
Who possesses all the rights of all inferior Churches. Durand. de Ordin, et
ministris.
Of whose fullness all Bishops receine. Hard. Jew. part. 5. ca. 6. D. 7.
Who may not be judged, either by Kings, or the whole Clergy, or the whole
world. Pet. de Palu. de potest. Pap. art. 4.
Who in no case, for any crime whatsoever, may be deposed, either by the
whole Church, or by a Council, or by the whole world. Ioh. de. Parisijs de
potest. Regia and Pap. 9. q. 3. Nemo.
All whose actions (though as evil in themselves, as theft and adultery) we
must so interpret, as done by divine inspiration. So that, Di. 40. ^o^ nos.
glossa.
it were a kind of sacrilege to call the Popes fact into question, who is
free from all humane laws. Whose deeds, although evil in themselves, are to
be excused; as the murders of Samson; the thefts of the Jews in Egypt; and
the adultery of Jacob. Council. Tom. 1. in purga. Sixti. 9. q. 3. cu^ta.
Whom to accuse, is to sin against the holy Ghost, which shall never be
forgiven, in this world, nor in the world to come: as freed from the law of
man. Then is the Pope of Rome, not as a mere De Elect. et. elect. fundamenta
in glossa. Et Cle^. ^n prooemio in glossa.
man, but Christ. Hard. Jew. page 2. cap. 3. Di. 2.
The Bridegroom of the whole Church. So as (by Panormitan, De Elect. cap.
licet) the Pope and Christ make but one Consistory. Herue. de. pot. Pap. ca. 23.
He is alone the whole Church. Felin. de constable. statut. canon.
A vice-God. Ext. Ioh. 22. cumint. nonnullos. gloss.
Our Lord God the Pope. Did. 96. satis culdenter.
A God. Fran. Zaba. Hard. Jew. p. 5. c. 6. D. 6.
More then GOD. t Having divine power, to whom all power is given in heaven and
in earth. Extra de transl. Epis. ca. Quanto Hostiensis.
Who, (sin only excepted) can do all that God can do. Paschalis Papa De
Elect. et elect. potest. ca. Significasti.
He shall be above general Counsels. Angel. Paris. Hard. Jew. p. 5. c. 6.
Diuis. 14.
Purgat^ry. Pet. de Palud. de po^est. Pap. art. 4.
The whole Church. Nic. Cu^an
The Scripture. Extra de constable. stat Canon Felinus
Angels. Co^c^tl. Lat. sub Leone sessio.
All power. De Mayor. vnam Sanctam.
All things. 15. Q 6. Authori^^te in glossa.
So as he can dispute against the law of nature. 16. Q 1. Quicunque in glossa.
Against the law of God. Panor. de diuortij
Against the new Testament. Summa Angel. dict. Papa.
And all the commandments of the old and new Testament. De transl^t. Epis.
Quanto Hostiensis.
So as he can do as much as God can do. And I will yet deal more
articulately and plainly. Ioh. de Paris. de Pot. Reg. and Pap. Auentinus l. 6.
He shall be Lord in temporal things thorough the whole world, directly, and
indirectly. De Mayor. Solitae Anto. de Ros^l.
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Did. 98. Si Imper. in gloss. Extra de
fo^o co^petent. ca. Licet.
Being above all Emperors, as his vassalls. De Mayor. vnam sanctam.
Having of his own both swords. Auent. in Adriano 4. Anno 1154.
Being set over Nations, and Kingdoms, to destroy, to pluck up, build and
plant. Hard. Jew. p. 5. c. 6. D. 8.
From whom alone, all Emperors hold their Empires. Auent. in Adrian 4.
In whose power it is to give them, or take them from whom he will. Carrion
de Alexand. 3.
Who treads the necks of Kings under his feet. Caelestinus Papa. Vide Rogetu^
Cestr^nsem; et Houenden.
And to conclude, who crowns Kings with his feet: and with his feet again
spurneth the Crown to the ground. De Mayor. Solitae. gl
Being seventy times seven, greater then the greatest Kings. I will yet
expresle the matter more articulately. Lyra in D^ut. c. 17.
He shall be so absolute a Judge of all Controversies, that if he shall say
the right hand is the left, or the left hand the right: his saying is to be
believed. And this is the opinion of Bellarmine, De Pont. Po. li. 4. c. 5.
If the Pope should command vice, and forbid virtue: the Church were bound to
believe, that virtue were evil, and vice were good. And they give this reason
thereof; Panor. de Constit. c. 1.
The fullness of the Popes power, excels all Positive laws. De transl.
Epis. Quanto glossa. Hostiensis ibidem.
and it suffices that the Popes will go for a law; whereby he can make
righteousness of unrighteousness.

And hereupon Philelphus, Decad. 6. Hecast. 9. beautifully describes the Pope
as Antichrist, saying; Non Scytha, non Turcus, non quiterrore Damascum,
Aegyptumue tenet, sed maximus ille Sacerdos,
E medio templi nostrum emersurus in axem,
Antichristus erit, quise canit ore colendum,
Pro christo, cuius refer at nomenque, vicemque.


Which I English thus; No Tartar grim, or Turk, or feared Saladine,
Shall be that Antichrist; but that high Priest,
That midst the Temple sits: adored with dread dinine,
Who bears the name, and Vicar is of Christ.


I might be infinite in numbering the several offices, which are thought to be
the offices of the Roman Primacie: out of which I will frame this, after Becans
manner. I A. B. do publicly testify, and swear in my conscience, that I
will be faithful and obedient to the Bishop of Rome, as often or whenever
he shall by his own proper authority, directly in temporal causes, create
Emperors whom he will, or by the same power, depose whom he will.

If this part only of the Popes Supremacy, should be exacted of all the
Jesuits, what, do you think, would be done? Would all, think you, yea they
which adhere unto the Pope, swear this? Let them swear that would, as
Baronius, Triumphus, Carerius, and almost all the Canonists, and many other
famous Popish Writers. Yet, I amsure, that Bellarmine, and Becane, if they be
constant men, will never swear. For thus writes Bellarmine, Papa not habet
vllam mere temporalem iurisdictionem direct iure diuino, lib. de Pont. Romans 5.
cap. 4. The Pope has no mere temporal jurisdiction directly by the law of
God. And Becane in his Refuration, page 18. Acprimum non disceptamus de primatu
in temporalibus, illum quisque Rex insuo regno legitime habeat: We dispute not
of the Primacy in temporal causes, let every King in his kingdom, lawfully
possess the same.

What then? Is this so sure a ground with Bellarmine and Becane, that they
firmly determine to lose their lives, like many glorious Martyrs in this
kingdom, rather then to admit the Popes supremacy, and abjure the Kings? For
this is thought to be one of the prime offices of the Popes supremacy, That the
Pope is Lord of the whole world, directly in all temporal causes. But, this is
utterly false in the conscience of Becane and Bellarmine. Or whether, partly,
for preservation of external peace and government, which these menesteeme more
then their faith and religion: or, partly, that one of them may be made Pope,
the other a Cardinal, which good fortune may befall them hereafter; will they
swear against their own conscience unto the Popes supremacy, with all
functions which are thought to be parts thereof, and thereof shall be branded
as Carerius has marked them, to be impious Politicians of our time, deserving
rather the name of Hareticks, then of Catholics? Of whom may Pope Paul the
fist truly affirm, That he has found more truth in savage and wilderobbers,
then in these kind of men, (viz. the Jesuits) which teach and practice the Art
of Equivocation, even in their solemn swearing. And thus much for the first
reason: which I am sure is enough, (if not too much) for Bellarmine, and Becane
also.

His second reason is this: King James does often protest, that he claims no
more right or jurisdiction over the Church, then did the Kings in the old
Testament long ago. But the Kings in the old Testament, could not compel
their subjects to swear such an oath as this is; I A. B. do openly testify,
and in my conscience declare, that Jeroboam is the only supreme Governor of
this kingdom of Israel, as well in spiritual, as temporal matters: And that
no forrainer has, or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority, or
authority in this kingdom. Ergo, King James, etc.

And, a little after, he explicateth his Minor proposition thus: After King
Solomon, there were two distinct kingdoms, Judah and Israel, and there were
two Kings, whereof both had their successors. There were Priests and Levites
in both, who were chiefly ruled by the high Priest, who lived in Jerusalem.
And yet Jeroboam could not lawfully say to his Priests and Levites, you shall
not obey that High Priest resident in Judah: you are exempt from his
jurisdiction, etc. So Becane.

I answer: Can any man endure, either in a Divine so great ignorance, or such
malice in a Jesuit? As though the Kings Majesty did ever believe, write, or so
much as dream, either, that all those things which the wicked Kings of Israel,
(of whom Jeroboam was ringleader) did practice impiously in Ecclesiastical
matters: or that, all that jurisdiction which those ungodly kings did challenge
over the Church, does belong to the King supremacy.

Of Jeroboam thus speaks holy writ, 1. Kings, 12.28. The King made two golden
Calves, and said unto the Israelites, It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem: Behold the Gods that brought you up out of the Land of Egypt. And
he put one of them in Bethel, and the other in Dan. Also, he made a house of
the high places, and made bim Priests of the lowest of the people, who were
not of the sons of Leui. And Jeroboam made a feast, in the fifteenth day of
the eight Month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and sacrificed on the
Altar. So did he in Bethel, and offered unto the Calves that he had made. And
he constituted in Bethel, the Priests of the high places which he had made.

And you may read in the 13. chapter, That being rebuked by a Prophet for this
matter, yet he departed not from his evil way, but turned himself, and made
him Priests of the high places, de saece populi, of the dregs of the people;
and whosoever pleased him, he consecrated him, and made him a Priest of the
high places.

And again, 2. Chron. II. chap. 13. verse, And the Priests and the Levites
that were in all Israel, resorted to him out of all their coasts, (meaning
Roboam, the son of Solomon.) For the Levites left their suburbs, and their
possessions; and came to Judah, and to Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons
had cast them out from ministering in the Priests office before the Lord.

But thus writes the King, and his learned Interpretour, the Bishop of Ely,
in Tort. Tort. page 381. Quodcunque in rebus religionis reges Israel fecerunt,
nec sine laud fecerunt, id vt et Regi Iacobo, faciendi ius sit atque potestas.
Whatsoever the Kings of Israel did with commendation, in the matters of
Religion; the same power and jurisdiction now has King James.

Let this therefore be the Proposition, or first part of the second reason,
which Becane himself acknowledges in his Refuration, cap. 8. page 124: and
then I will assume the Minor.

But the Kings of Israel, not without commendation, by their royal authority,
in matters of Religion, 1. Have enacted laws. 2. Delegated of their subjects
to judge of such laws. 3. Have bound all their subjects, both Clergy men, and
Laymen, by oath of Allegiance. 4. Have pumshed the transgressors of such
laws. 5. Have called assemblies or Counsels. 6. Have ruled all estates; as
the Heads of the Tribe of Leui, as well as of the other Tribes: and were as
much Kings of the Clergy, as of the Laity. 7. If any Abiathar, or High
Priest, vvexed proud, they bridled him by their censure; and, if there were
cause, deposed Abiathar from the High Priesthood. 8. They abolished all strange
worship: as, when they razed the high places, brake in pieces the golden
Calves, and the brazen Serpent, etc. To conclude, they gave order for things
indifferent, which appertained to the outward splendor, and comeliness of the
house of G O D: And by their authority cut off idle and curious questions in
religion, which were wont to be the mother and breeder of schisms: as the
Scriptures expressly witness; whereof you may read in Tort. Torti, page 381.382.

Therefore I will conclude, that King James has the same power, and
jurisdiction; and therefore may bind his subjects by an oath: I A. B. do
openly testify and declare in my conscience, that King James is the oneli^
supreme Governor of this Realm, and of this Church of England, etc. (as was
David, and Solomon, of the Church of Israel, and Asa, Ezekias, and Josias, of
the Church of Judah); and that no forrainer has, or ought to have, any
jurisdiction, power, etc. within this Kingdom, (as they had none in Judah) and
so may lawfully say to the Priests subjects, Obey not the high Priest, which
dwells in any foreign kingdom: but obey me alone, as the only supreme
Governor of this Church. You are all exempt from his power and jurisdiction.
For so David, Solomon, Asa, Ezekias, and Josias, might lawfully command their
Priests and Leuits: and therefore so may King James command his Clergy.

These things (thou may perceive learned Reader) are collected out of the
pure fountains of sacred Scriptures, and so conclude our cause solidly, and
beyond all exception. But Becane his Sillogisme is a monstor in Logic, running
upon some feet, and yet halteth. For King James speaks of godly and religious
Kings, (and not schismatic) either of all Israel, or only of Judah: and of
their Ecclesiastical government, the very pattern and exemplary primacy,
commended unto Christian Kings in the Scriptures. But Martin the Sophister,
that is, the Jesuit, assumeth impious and schismatic Kings of Israel, rent
from Judah; among who^, never any one is remembered in scripture to have handled
Ecclesiastical matters with commendation.

And here I entreat the ingenuous Reader, to observe the Jesuitical and
serpentine subtilty of Becane; who, to decciue his Catholics, passes by all
the godly Kings of Judah, and only brings Jeroboam on the st^ge, a
schismatic King, the first head of that iniquitic, and the ringleader of
all them that are branded with notes of infamy in the holy book, as 1. King.
15.29. And Baasa struck all the house of Icroboam, he left no soul alive:
because of the sins wherewith Icroboam sinned, and made Israel to sin.

And 2. Chron. 13.5. Ought you not to know, that the Lord God of israel, has
given the Kingdom over Israel, to David for ever, even to him, and to his
sons, by a Covenant of Salt? And Icroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of
Solomon, the son of David, is risen up, and bath rebelled against his Lord,
etc. Lo, this is that most impious, rebellious, and schismatic Jeroboam;
which must comfort, and confirm the Romish Catholics.

But seeing our Jesuit is conversant among schisms and schismatiques, let him
assume, and make his instance, those three Antipopes, who troubled the world
about the time of the Council of Constance. Or let him take any one of them,
and tell me, 1. Who was then the Primate of the Church? 2. Who was then the
supreme head of the Church? 3. Who had then the Ecclesiastical Primacy? 4. Who
did then exercise the supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction? 5. Who could then,
by his own authority, call a general Council, and sit therein President? 6.
Who had power to conserre that fat benefice of the Papacy it self? 7. Who
could then create Popes, and depose the Antipopes? 8. Who was then the supreme
Judge of all Controversies; especially of papal, or popish questions?

But I will yet press the Jesuit more necrely. What if the French (so called)
Catholic Church, should create to it self a Patriarch, and leave the Sea of
Rome; seeing the Pope Paul the fist, claims temporal jurisdiction over the
King of France? What if other Kings, both Protestants, and all those which
call themselves Catholics, seeing the Pope claims jurisdiction over all, in
a common cause that so much concerns their Crowns and royal dignities,
should join hands and hearts, and establish a Patriarch in their several
Kingdoms, who should (...), take and exercise the same jurisdiction that the
old Roman Patriarch had, and did practice in his Province? which thing (making
so much for establishing and confirming the outward peace, and Ecclesiastical
polity of the Christian world) is much desired, Cod. de sacra. sa: Eccl. l.
omni Inno.
and hoped for at the next general Council: as we read in old time, that the
Emperor of Constantinople, by his law, did in all things equal the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Constantinople, with the power of the Bishop of
Rome. Quam legem euertere nunquam potuit Papa omnia conatus, Imperator is
patrocinio tutam: Which law maintained by the patronage of the Emperor, the
Pope could never repeal, although he assaied all means for the same. Liberat.
cap. 13.

And may not then (I pray you sir) those Kings lawfully say to their Priests;
Do not obey the Bishop of Rome: but obey this Patriarch alone? You are exempt
from all Romish power and jurisdiction?

If the Jesuit doubt hereof, let him repair to Gerson (De Auferebilitate
Papae) that stiff Patron of the Roman Religion, and he will teach him thus
much. Johannes de Parisys also, in his Treatise De Pot. Reg. and Papal. cap.
13. writes thus: Bonifacius obtinuit a Phoca, etc. Pope Boniface obtained of
Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be called the Head of all Churches.
Whereby we may gather such another argument, That it appertains to the
Emperor, to transfer the Primacy of the Church, and to order Ecclesiasticad
affairs.

According also with the decrce of the Council of Chalcedon, cap. 28: or, as
it is related by Carranza, Sess. 16. Sedi veter is Romae patres merito dederunt
Primatum, quodilla ciuitas caeter is imperaret. And cap. 12. Quascunque
civitates per literas regis Metropolitico honor arunt nomine. The old Fathers
did worthily give the Primacy to the Sea of old Rome, because it then ruled
over all the residue, and all Cities were honored with the title of
Metropolitan by the Kings Letters Pattents.

But now at length, I will particularly answer to the objections of Becane. 1.
There were not Priests and Levites in both the Kingdoms of Judah; and Israel, as
has appeared out of the express words of the Scripture. 2. Jeroboam might
lawfully say unto his Priests, which were not Levites, but of the lowest of the
people, and by him made and consecrated; You are exempt from the jurisdiction
of the High Priest, which is at Jerusalem. 3. If King James so often protest,
That his Primacy is defined within those bounds and limits, wherein the godly
Kings v^der the old Testament contained theirs; Then it follows, that the
Primacie of Kings is both godly and certain, founded on holy Scriptures, and
not doubtful, or false, (as this falsary Martin affirms) nor contains so
many parts, as are thought to be the offices thereof, by Hainric, Thomson,
Burhil, Dr. Tooker, or any other Protestant. Secondly, that King James may
lawfully, and by right, compel his subjects to the Oath of Supremacy.
Thirdly, that Pope Paul the fist, Bellarmine; and Becane, resisted King James
impiously, and against all humanity, by seeking to avert his subjects from
their allegiance, and from taking both the one, and the other, so just and
godly an oath; After the same manner, as Elymas did resist the Apostles,
seeking to turn away the Proconsul from the faith. Act. 13.8.

Having thus satisfied the questions of Becane to the full, and more then was
needful, dispelling their clowdie mists, and breaking the snares of these
Spyders webs; and so made up into a perfect Concord and harmony, all the
supposed English Iarres about the Kings supremacy; There now remains nothing
but the Jesuits Epilogue, or Conclusion: which by changing only the persons,
and terms, I may most aptly and justly return upon the Papists in this
manner.

The Conclusion.
ALl then that has been hitherto said, may be reduced unto three heads; The
first is, that the Kings Supremacy in the Church, is an ancient right, and no
new thing, but first ordained by Christ, the ancient of days, and was
practiced in the old time by the most approved and pious Kings in the old
Testament: But the Popes Supremacy was never used, by any sound and godly
Bishop of Rome, before that infamous Emperor Phocas: and thefore a new thing,
never rightly claimed.

The other, that there be so many iarres, and disagreements among the Romish
Clergy about this Primacie of the Pope; that it is not manifest, or certain,
what the said Primacy is, nor what force, or authority the same has.

The third, that the oath of this Primacy, can neither be exacted by the Pope,
nor may any Papist take the same: but the oath of the Kings supremacy, may be
exacted by the King, and observed of all his good subjects.

Heerehence, three other questions, which might be made concerning the
subjects, will easily be answered. There are three sorts of subjects which live
in those regions where the Papacy bears sway: 1. The first, are Baronians;
who, in truth acknowledge and swear to the Popes supremacy; that is, to his
direct supremacy: for his indirect supremacy is directly ridiculous.

2. The second, Bellarminians, or Pope-puritans, who do not acknowledge this
supremacy, and yet swear unto it. 3. The third, are true believing
Protestants, who neither acknowledge it, nor will swear it.

The first question then is, What may be said of these Baronians? I answer,
that they do unwisely, and inconsideratly; The reason is, because it is folly
and rashness to swear a thing that is doubtful and uncertain: as for
example, The Popes supremacy; as is manifest by their iarres and dissensions
which heretofore we have showed.

The second question is, What may be said of the Bellarminians, or
Pope-puritans? I answer, They are perjured persons, and politicians. The
reason is, because they believe one thing, and swear another. For they agree
and consent therein, with the right and orthodoxall Protestant; and yet with
the Baronians, they swear allegiance to the Pope, as to the Lord Paramount of
the whole world in temporal things, (for Pope Paul the fifth does challenge the
same). And this they do, to keep an external and political peace, which is
more esteemed by them, then their faith and religion; and therefore are branded
by Carerius, in his public writings, and authorized to be impious
Politicians, and haeretiques of this time, and not to be called Christians: And
of whom Pope Paul the fifth may truly assirme, That he had found more truth and
honesty in the high-land and bordering thieues, then in this sort of
aequinocating people.

The third question is, What shall we say of the Protestants, who are the right
and true Catholics? I answer, They be iustand upright men, who walk before
God in truth and verity. They be sincere, who profess with their mouth, that
which they believe in their heart. They are truly courageous, who with good
Eleazarus, had rather die, then consent to any unlawful thing, no not so much
as in outward show. They be like unto the Apostles, who endeavor to obey God,
rather then men. They be like to the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, who
freely profess themselves, before their Persecutors, to be such as indeed they
are: That is to say, much unlike the Jesuits, who range up and down,
sometimes like poor Laymen, and sometimes in the habit of Gentlemen,
thrusting themselves into solemn assemblies at banquets and feasting; and
sometimes into the Universities: for some of this stamp lie close in the
Universities, to pervert inconstant heads, greedy of novelties.

But you will say, They are miserable: for, if they refuse the oath, which
Apoc. 13.17. is the mark of the Beast; they are forced to undergo not only
imprisonments, torments, and punishments, but also death itself. Truly they
are not therefore miserable, but most happy; for so has our Savior taught us
in the Gospel, Mat. 5.10. Blessed are they who suffer persecution for
righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

But then you will say, It is a hard thing to suffer: how is that hard which is
done with joy and delight? Hear what is said of the Apostles, Acts 5.41. And
they went away rejoicing from the Council, because they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for the Name of Jesus. Hear also what the Apostle says of
himself, 2. Cor. 7.4. I am filled with comfort, and am exceeding joyous in
all our tribulation.

From whence comes this joy? but of the double gift of the holy Ghost, Hope
and Charity. Hope of future glory, that makes us joyful, and full of comfort
in all adversity, Romans 8.18. The afflictions of this present time are not
worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto us. But the Papists say
thus; The sufferings of this life, are worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed. Unto the Martyrs (as they say) their sufferings are meritorius, and
unto other supererogatorie: according to the old verses of prayer made unto
Thomas Becket, Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem prote impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
Make us o Christ up to ascend
by virtue of S. Thomas blood,
Which for thy sake he once did spend,
to heavens race among the good.


And unto the Heb. cap. 10.34. You suffered with joy the spoiling of your
goods, knowing that you shall have a better, and more enduring substance. But
of the Jesuits, it may be said clean contrary; You have received plenty of
other men's goods, to their unrecoverable harm, (witness the Venetians)
knowing, that here you receive your reward in this world, and therefore cannot
look for any better, or more enduring substance, in the world to come.

And no less is the force and power of Charity, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation? or anguish? or famine, etc. But
in all these things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us. I
am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. nor any creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ our Lord.
But the Jesuits call this pious and godly assurance, impious presumption. And
from this forge came that flagitious discourse of Bellarmine, De incertitudine
iustitiae; Of the uncertainty of righteousness or justification.

Heereto belong the examples of Christ, and of other the Saints, which have
great force and efficacy to stir up and strengthen the hearts of Catholics,
to suffer patiently in this life, prisons, fetters, torments, yea, death it
self. 1. Pet. 2.20. If you suffer patiently for well doing, this is
thanke-worthy with God. Heereunto are ye called, because that Christ has
suffered for you, leaning you an example, that you should follow his
footsteppes, who did not sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: who,
when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not;
but committed it to him, that judges righteously. But of the Jesuits it may be
said clean contrarily, and most truly: They doing evil continually suffer
impatiently; whose glory is their shame (witness the Venetian.) For hereunto
are they called: to make of faithful subjects, rebels and Traitors to their
Kings: to sley or poison Kings (thereby treading in the manifold, and deeply
imprinted, steps of of Antichrist): to commit all most heinous and bloody acts,
to their uttermost endeavor. In whose mouth is ever found the guile of
aequiuocating, so hateful and pestiferous to mankind: who revile, when they
are not reviled, Jude, v. 8.
and blaspheme even such as are in highest authority: who threaten, when they
suffer not: endeavoring to betray their King and his royal issue; the Nobles,
and states of their own Nation, assembled in Parliament; to the merciless and
swist devouring Gunpowder flames: and so committing their cause to that
unjustly judging Claudius Aquauiua, their provost general, miraculously set
o^ser them. Who taught the Jesuits to commit themselves ^^^im, judging iusily;
when he boasted, he could send mo souldrers, Gretzer. ddu. Jesuit.
and sooner into the field, to weet, his Jesuits; then any Christian King in
the world could do: and when he promised the Pope, (viz. in time of the
Venetians interdiction, and the Popes imminent danger) to send unto him for his
succor, 40000. men; but upon condition, that as many of them, as were slain
in the battle, should be canonized Martyrs.

And Heb. 12. v. 1. Therefore, Let us run with patience, the race that is set
before us: looking unto Jesus, the author, and finisher of our faith. But the
Jesuits say thus: Therefore let us, by unbridled audaciousnes, joined with all
manner wickedness, run the race that is set before us, striving against
Priests, Academicks, and Kings, looking to Ignatius Loyola, the author and
finisher of our Jesuitical faith. For says Euerhard; The Jesuits are pressed
and always ready, to undertake with cheerfulness and alacrity, and what in
them lies, to perpetrate any flagitious wickedness enjoined them; because
they believe, that if they die in executing the commands of their Superiors,
they shall obtain I know not what crown, greater, and more excellent, then
that of Martyrs.

With these, and other the like restimonies of holle writ, as Heb. 11. v. 36.2.
Cor. 11. v. 23. et 12. v. 9. etc. that most reverend Archbishop Cranmer, and
the reverend Bishops, Latimer and Ridley, being armed and encouraged, chose
rather to suffer death, then to oblige themselves, with that impious Papal
Oath. Whom followed very many in that glorious combat, burned in the flames,
wherein they shined more, then those said burning and shining flames. Unto
these may be added, the true catholic Protestants, who in Rome and Spain,
under those hellish Furies, the most savage Inquisitors (more bloudily cruel,
then that infamous Tyrant Busiris) are imprisoned, fettered, proscribed, and
died purple red with their own blood. In, and of, whom, these following are
verified, Psalm. 116. ver. 15. Precious in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of
his Saints.

S. Cyprian, Epist. 9. O blessed Church of ours, which, in our days, the
glorious blood of Martyrs has made illustrious. Before, it was as white as
snow, by the good works of the brethren: but now it is as red as Crimson by
the blood of Martyrs.

And the same Saint Cyprian, Epist. 24. What more happy and glorious thing,
from Divine favor, can befall any man; then in the mids of their tormentors,
undaunted, to acknowledge their Lord God? Then in the mids of most cruel
tortures, inflicted by secular Power; with a body racked, mangled, quartered,
and hewed in pieces, at their last gasp, freely to confess Christ the son
of God? Then abandoning the world, to long after heaven? Then leaving men, to
stand among Angels? Then to be made Christ's companion, in suffering with
Christ, for Christ his sake?

BECAN. Exam. NIL.
Dr. HARRIS Reply.
THe Jesuit is utterly exhausted, and come to a Non plus. For unto all this
last, and longest 13. chap. of the English Concord, hanging as an intoxicated
Dart, in the liver of this Jesuit, and of his Lord God the Pope, and other
Popelings, he answers not one word.

The Epilogue.
THus (Christian Reader) you have in this Reply, on the one side, the
instification of the English Concord, in all the particulars thereof, of any
moment: and on the other side, the utter overthrow, and dissipation, of the
whole, and every whit, of this trifling Examen of Becan, consisting of naught
else, but of the frothy repetitions, (ad nauseam vsque) of the self same
things, formerly set down in his English Jar; adding only, some idle
taxations of small escapes in printing, or transcribing, together with his
virulent calumniations, and his false and unjust, yet very slanderous, and
scandalous imputations, not only against me alone, or the other four Writers,
whose sound, full uniform, and indissoluble agreament, this infernal torrent
Becan, calls the Concord of English Foxes: but also against all other
English, most grave, godly, learned, sincere, and painful Preachers of divine
truth; in that respect, being more, and more illustrious, within his Ma.
Dominions, then in all the Christian world besides. These righteous servants,
and great Ambassadors of the high God, zealous opposites to all vice, and
promoters of all righteousness, and holiness: these planters of Gods Vineyard,
these builders of his own Temple: these holy Sowers, who by their laborious
sowing of Gods immortal seed, to weet, his word preached, in the hearts-ground
of his chosen; and by Gods rich blessing upon their sacred labors, beget many
thousands sons and daughters of the heavenly Father, heirs of Gods
kingdom, and toynt heirs with his only begotten son: The black mouth of
this railing Rabshekeh-Iesuit, blasphemously reuileth, as lying, calumniating
and parasite-ouerthrowers of all faith, religion, and ancient modesty: and
the chief promoters of all contrary vices, in England: resembling them to
Crows here, who pull up the tender blade, and devour the ripe Corn. Whereas
their popish, enorme, and impious acts this way, do manifest to all the world,
that they are indeed those Harpyes, carrion Crows, and hellish brids of the
devil, Mat. 13.7.19
which catch away that which was sown in the hearts, by those said godly
Sowers. And moreover, those pestiferous and envious Enemies of God, and his
Saints, who in that field of the Lord, Mat. 13. v. 25
sow their cursed rares, in which, the divine Malessie, by his said sacred
Ministers, had formerly sown his good seed.

To conclude; These said holy messengers, and Ministers of the Lord, being of
conuer sation pure, godly, righteous, and sober: eating those meats which God
has created to be received by them with thanksgiving: 1. Tim. 4. v. 3
living with their vviues in the holy estate of Matrimome, Heb. 13. v. 4
honorable among all men, (therefore among them): and lying chastely with their
wines, in the marriage bed undefiled, Mal. 2. v. 15
thereby keeping themselves in their spirit, seeking and producing a godlyseed;
This unclean Jesuit, venting the doctrine of devils, 1. Tim. 4 v. 1.3. to wit,
the catholich Romish doctrine, calls therefore, Mancipia ventris, ac
libidinis: Slaves to lust, and belly cheer. Whereas the Popish fasting, is
feasting with delicacies: and the cleanenesse of their Popes especially, also
of their Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Jesuits, and other Popelings, is
the most filthy and abominable uncleanness, in their most unnatural
Sodonietries: most brutish incests, with mother, daughter, sister, niece: and
most dishonest whoredoms, and fornications, with masds, and married women, who
confessing to the^ their wanton pronenesse to lust, their libidinous thoughts,
desires, words, and deeds with other men; are thereby made a pray to their
unlawful lusts, (either for hope of absolution, or fear of punishment, and ire
of husbands or parents) to have their bodies abused by them, at their pleasure;
making them, quae semelverec u^diae limits transilierint, gnauiter in
pudentes. Lastly, with Nuns, the most beautiful virgins that can be gotten
from all parts of Christendom, but by those full fed and neighing horses, made
most detestable proiected whores. Witnesses so many thousand Infants, the
fruits of their wombes, st^fled, and buried, in waters, vault-earths, and other
privy places, to hide their impurities: The Cage-cloysters of which unclean
byrds, were purposely devised, and erected to that filthy end. For when as
these libidinous bond-slaues, perceived, that no one woman, the lawful wife,
could satiate the unbridled lust of any of them: the Mystery of iniquity took
a course to fulfill the same, (though it would be in a manner, infinite) with
all manner of variety, viz. of Stews of males and females: of open
vvhore-Courtizans: of secret whore-Nunnes: of confessed whores, maids, and
married women. And least the soul of any one of them (as Lots righteous soul
was) vexed with these monstrous, vagrant, and most silthy libidinous
incontinencies, should confine himself and his desires to one woman, his wife
in holy wedlock, they with incredible, both impudency and impiety, took this
sorpentine-wise order for estoppell thereof, viz. by Canon unchangeable,
solemnly, absolutely, and peremptorily, without all hope of any dispensation
unto any therein, whomsoever, to prohibit any Clergy-mens marriages, as
unlawful, and unclean adulteries. Take a view of the present estate this way,
of the whole world, not only of Christians, but also of Jews, Turks, and all
other insidels: and read over the histories of former times, and places; and
you shall not find so many, and so lewdly, yet politikely contrived villainies,
for satiating all manner filthy lusts of their Priests, no not in Sodom it
self, as are found in places, where the Popish Mystery of iniquity bears
sway. And yet this impure, and impudent Jesuit, dare call the chaste married
Preachers in England, Slaves to lust. Assuredly, there are a thousand popish
Priests, for one Protestant Preacher, lust-slaues. Neither are here to be
found (as they be in Rome, and Romish territories) open whore Courtizans, or
cloystered whore Nuns, publicly authorized. Such sometimes, that is, in
times of popish darkness, were here, and here infected many: but since the
light of the Gospel came in, those fylths are abandoned, expelled, and
utterly vanished hence. God the author and sanctifier of marriage, has
pronounced the marriages of our Preachers, to be honorable: Heb. 13. v. 4
but God, the consuming fire, has threatened to judge popish Priests,
adulterours, and whoremongers: upon whom he will rain, snares, stormy
tempests, and brimstone of hell fire. Psalm. 11. v. 6
This shall be the portion of their cup. Even the sower sauce, for their sweet
lust-sinnes; (without their deep repentance). And herein, because I cannot
err with Becan, I crave no pardon with Becan.

FINIS.

