A NEW DISCOVRSE OF A STALE SVBIECT, CALLED THE Metamorphosis of AJAX:

Written by MISACMOS, to his friend and cousin PHILOSTILPNOS.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1596.

A LETTER VVRITTFN BY A GENTLEMAN OF GOOD WORTH, TO the Author of this book.
SIr, I have heard much of your house, of your picturs, of your walks, of your
po^ds, and of your two boats, that came one by land, and the other by sea, from
London bridge, and met both at Bath bridge: all which God willing (if I live
another summer) I will come of purpose to see; as also a swimming place, where
if one may believe your brother Fraunces, Diana did bath her, and Acteon see
her without horns. But to deal plainly with you, there be three special
things that I have heard much boasted of, and therefore would willingliest see.
The one a fountain standing on pillars, 43. Can.
like that in Ariosto, under which you may dine and suppe; the second a
shooting close with a xij score mark to every point of the card, in which I
hear you have hit a mark that many shoot at, viz: to make a barren stony
la^d fruitful with a little cost; the third is a thing that I cannot name well
without saue-reuerence, and yet it sounds not unlike the shooting place, but it
is in plain English a shiting place. Though, if it be so sweet and so
cleanely as I hear, it is a wrong to it to use save reverence, for one told
me, it is as sweet as my parlor, and I would think discourtesie, one should
say, save reverence my parlor. But if I might entreat you (as you partly
promised me at your last being here) to set down the manner of it in writing, so
plain as our gross wits here may understand it, or to cause your man M.
Comb (who I understand can paint prettily) make a draught, or plot thereof to
be well conceived, you should make many of your friends much beholding to you,
and perhaps you might cause reformation in many houses that you wish well unto,
that ^^ill think no scorn to follow your good example. Nay to tell you my
opinion seriously, if you have so easy, so cheap, and so infallible a way
for avoiding such annoiances in great houses: you may not only pleasure many
great persons, but do her Majesty good service in her palace of Greenwitch
and other stately houses, that are often annoyed with such savors, as where many
mouths be fed can hardly be avoided. Also you might be a great benefactor to
the City of London, and all other populous towns, who stand in great need of
such conuayances. But all my fear is, that your pen having been inured to so
high a discourse,

Of Dames, of Knights, of arms, of loves delight,

will now disdain to take so base a subject,

Of vaults, of sinkes, priuies and draughts to write.

But herein let a public benefit expel a private bashfulnesse, and if you
must now and then break the rules de slouilitate morum, with some of these
homely words, you see I have broken the ise to you, and you know the old
saying, pens may blot, but they cannot blush. And as old Tarlton was wont to
say, this same excellent word saue-reuerence, makes it all manerlie. Once this
I dare assure you, if you can but tell a homely tale of this in prose as
cleanly, as you have told in verse a baudy tale or two in Orlando mannerly, it
may pass among the sowrest censurers very currantly. And thus expecting your
answer hereto, at your convenient leisure, I commit you to God this of 1596.

Your loving cousin. PHILOSILPNOS.
THE ANSWER TO THE LETTER.
MY good Cousin, if you have heard so well of my poor house with the
apurtenaunces, it were to be wished for preservation of your better conceit
thereof; that you would not see them at all, they will seem to you so far
short of the report: for I do compare my buildings and my writings together, in
which though the common sort think there is some worth and wit, yet the
grauer Censurers do find many faults and follies; And no marvel for he that
builds and has gathered little, and writes and has read little, must needs be
a bad builder, and a worse writer. But where as you are disposed either in the
way of praise, or of play, to extol so much the basest room of my house, as
though you preferred it before the best; your commendation is not much unlike
his courtesy, that being invited by a crabbed-fauourd host to a neat house, did
spit in his hosts face, because it was the fowlest part of the house. But such
as I have you shall be welcome to, and if I may know when you will begin your
progress, I will pray my brother to be your guide, who will direct your iestes
in such sort, as first you shall come by a fine house that lackes a mistress,
then to a fair house that mournes for a master, from whence, by a straight
way called the force way, you shall come to a town that is more then a town,
where be the waters that be more then waters. But from thence you shall pass
down a stream that seems to be no stream by corn fields that seem no
fields, down a street no street, in at a gate no gate over a bridge no bridge,
into a court no court, where if I be not at home, you sall find perhaps a
fool no fool.

But where as you praise my husbandry, you make me remember an old school
fellow of mine in Cambridge, that having lost five shillings abroad at Cards,
would boast he had saved two candels at home by being out of his chamber, for
such be most of my sauings. Yet this one point of husbandry, though it may
well be called beggarly: yet it is not for all that contemptible, and thus it
was. Finding a fair and flat field, though very stony, as all this country
is: I made some vagrant beggars (of which by neighborhood of the Bathes, here
comes great store) to gather all the stones that might break our arrows, and
finding an easy mean to water the ground with a fat water, I have bettered my
ground (as you say) and quite rid me of my wandering guests, who will rather
walk seven mile about, the^ come where they shall be forced to work one half
hour.

Now Sir, to come to the chief point of your desire, which requires a more
ample answer, but for a preamble you must be content with this. You tell me,
belike to encourage me, that my invention may be beneficial, not only to my
private friends, but to towns and Cities, yea even to her Majesty's service
for some of her houses: trust me I do believe you write seriously as you
term it herein, and for my part I am so wholly addicted to her highness
service, as I would be glad, yea even proud, if the highest strain of my wit,
could but reach, to any note of true harmony in the full consort of her
Majesty's service, though it were in the basest key that it could be tuned to.
And if I should fortune to effect so good a reformation, in the Palace of
Richmond, or Greenewich (to which Palace, many of us owe service for the
tenure of our land) I doubt not but some pleasant witted courtier of either
sex^ would grace me so much at least; as to say, that I were worthy for my rare
inue^tion, to be made one of the Privy (and after a good long parenthesis) come
out with chamber, or if they be learned and have read Castalios Courtier, they
will say, I am a proper scholar, and well seen in latrina lingua. But let them
mock that list, qui moccat moccabitur.

Who strike with sword, the scabbeted them may strike:
And sure love eraueth love, like asks like.
If men of judgment think it may breed a public benefit, the conceit
thereof shall expel all private bashfulnesse; and I will herein follow the
example of that noble Lady, that to save the liberties of Couentry, rode naked
at noone through the streets thereof, Camden in his Brita^nia.
and is now thought to be greatly honored, and nothing shamed thereby.

Further whereas you embolden my pen, not to be abasht at the baseness of the
subject and as it were leading me on the way, you tell me you have broken the
y^e for me, to enter me into such broad phrases, as you think must be frequent
herein: I will follow your steps and your counsel, neither will I disdain
to use the poor help of save reverence if need be, much like as a good
friend of yours and mine, that beginning to dispraise as honest a man as him
self, to a great Noble man, said, he is the veryest knave, saving your
Lordship: But the noble man (ere the words were fully out of his mouth,) said,
save thy self knave or be hanged, save not me. Even so I must write in this
discourse, sometime indeed as homely (saving your worship) as you shall
lightly see, and yet I will endeavor to keep me within the bounds of
modesty, and use no words, but such as grave presidents in Divinity, Law,
Physic, or good Civility, will sufficiently warrant me.

Sure I am that many other country^men, both Dutch, French, and Italians, with
great praise of wit, though small of modesty, have written of worse matters.
One writes in praise of folly. 2. an other in honor of the Pox. 3. a third
defendes usury. 4. a fourth commends Nero. 5. a fifth extols and instructs
bawdery. 6. the sixth displaies and describes Puttana Errante, which I here will
come forth shortly in English. 7. a seventh (whom I would guess by his
writing, This matter is discoursed by Rables, in his 13. chap. of his fifth
book.
to be groom of the stool to some Prince of the blood in France) writes a
beastly treatise, only to examine what is the fittest thing to wipe withal,
alleging that white paper is too smooth, brown paper too rough, woollen cloth
too stiff, linen cloth too hollow, satin too slippery, taffeta too thin,
velvet too thick, or perhaps too costly: but he concludes, that a goose neck
to be drawn between the legs against the feathers, V^ moye^ de me torcher le
culle plus Seigneurial, le plus excellent, le plus expedient que iamais fut veu.
is the most delicate and cleanely thing that may be. Now it is possible that I
may be reckned after these seven, as sapientum octauus, because I will write of
A Iakes yet I will challenge of right (if the Heralds should appoint us our
places) to go before this filthy fellow, for as according to Aristotle, a ryder
is an Architectonicall science to a sadler, and a sadler to a stirop maker etc.
so my discourse must needs be Architectonicall to his, since I treat of the
house it self, and he but of part of that is to be done in the house, and that
no essential part of the business: for they say there be three things that if
one neglect to do them, This may be omitted in reading.
they will do themselves; one is for a man to make even his recknings, for who
so neglects it will be left even just nothing; as other is to mary his
daughters, for if the parents bestow them not, they will bestow them selves;
the third is that, which the foresaid French man writes of: which they that
omit, their lawndresses shall find it done in their linen. Which mishap a
fair Lady once having, a serving man of the disposition of Mydas Barber, that
could not keep counsel had spyed it, and wrate in the grossest terms it could
be expressed, upon a wall, what he had seen, but a certain pleasant conceited
Gentleman, corrected the barbarism, adding rhyme to the reason in this sort.

My Lady has polluted her lineall vesture,
With the superfluity, of her corporal disgesture.
But soft, I fear I give you too great a taste of my slouenly eloquence, in
this sluttish argument. Wherefore to conclude, I dare undertake, that though
my discourse will not be so wise as the first of those seven I spoke of, that
praises folly: yet it shall be ciuiller then the second, truer then the third,
honester then the fourth: chaster the^ the sift, modester then the sixth, and
clenlier then the seventh. And that you and other of my good friends may take
the less offense at it, I will cloth it (like an Ape in purple,) that it may
be admitted into the better company: and if all the art I have cannot make it
mannerly enough, the worst punishment it can have, is but to employ it in the
house it shall treat of, only craving but that favor, that a noble man was
wont to request of your good father in law, to tear out my name before it be
so employed; and to him that would deny me that kindness, I would the paper
were nettles, and the letters needles for his better ease: or that it were like
to the Friars book, dedicated as I take it to Pius quintus; of which one
writes merrily, that his holiness finding it was good for nothing else,
employed it (in steed of the goose neck) to a homely occupation, and forsooth
the phrase was so rude, the style so rugged, and the Latin so barbarous, that
therewith as he writes, scortigauit sedem Apostolicam. He galled the seat
Apostolic: and so I commend me to you, till I send you the whole discourse.

Your loving cousin and true friend. MISAKMOS.
THE PROLOGVE TO THE READER OF the Metamorpho-sis of AJAX.
GReat Captain AJAX, as is well known to the learned, and shall here be
published for the unlearned, was a warrier of Graecia; strong, headdy, rash,
boisterous, and a terrible fighting fellow, but neither wise, learned, staide,
nor Polliticke. Wherefore falling to bate with Ulysses, and receiving so foul
a disgrace of him, Ovid. Meta. lib. 12.
to be called fool before company, and being bound to the peace, that he might
not fight with so great a Counselor; he could endure it no longer, but became
a perfect mal-content, viz. his hat without a band, his hose without garters,
his wast without a girdle, his boots without spurs, his purse without coin,
his head without wit, and thus swearing he would kill and slay; first he killed
all the horned beasts he met, which made Agamemnon and Menelaus now, more
afraid then Ulysses, whereupon he was banished the towns presently, and then
he went to the woods and pastures, and imagining all the fat sheep he met, to
be of kin to the coward Ulysses, because they ran away from him, he massacred
a whole flock of good not Ewes. Last of all having no body else to kill,
poor man killed him self; what became of his body is unknown, some say that
wolves and bears did eat it, and that makes them yet such enemies to sheep
and cattle. Lib. supra dicto.
But his blood as testifies Pouidius the excellent Historiographer, was turned
into a Hiacint, which is a very notable kind of grass or flower.

Now there are many miracles to be marked in this Metamorphosis, to confirm
the credit of the same: for in the grass it self remains such pride of this
noble blood, that as the grasiers have assured me of their credits, (and some
of them may be trusted for 100000 pounds) the ruther beasts that eat too
greedily hereof will swell til they burst, the poor sheep still for an old
grudge, would eat him without salt (as they say) but if they do, Salt
recouers baned sheep.
they will soon after rot with it.

Further I read that now of late years, Rabbles lib. 1. cap. 13.
a French Gentleman son to one Monsieur Gargasier, Come Gargasier cognoit
l'esprit excellent de Gargantua a l'inue^tio^d, vntorche cul.
and a young Gentleman of an excellent spirit and towardness, as the reverent
Rabbles ( quem honoris causa nomino, that is, whom I should not name without
sauereuere^ce) writes in his first book 13. Cha. but the story you shall find
more at large in the xiiij. book of his tenth Decad. Lib. Fictitius
This young gentleman having taken some three or four score pills to purge
melancholy, every one as big as a Pome Citterne, commanded his man to mow an
half acre of grass, to use at the privy, and notwithstanding that the owners
(to save their hay perhaps) swear to him it was of that ancient house of AJAX,
and therefore reserved of purpose only for horses of the race of Bucephalus,
or Rabycano, yet he would not be persuaded: but in further contempt of his
name, used a phrase that he had learned at his being in the low Countries, and
bad Skite upon AJAX. But suddenly (whether it were the curse of the people, or
the nature of the grass I know not (he was strike^ in his posterioru^s with S.
Anthonies fire; and dispairing of other help, he went on Pilgrimage in hope of
remedy hereof to Iapana, near Chyna: where he met a French Surgeo^, in the
university of Miaco that cured him both of that and the Verol, that he had
before in his prioru^s; with the Momio, of a Grecia^ we^ch, that Ulysses buried
in his travel, upon the coast of the further Aethiopia; and so he came back
again by Restinga des ladrones, through S. Lazaro, and crossing both the
Tropicks, Cancer and Capricorn, he came by Magellanes, swearing he found no
straights there; but came from thence straight home. And so in 24. hours
sail, and two or three od years beside, he accomplished his voyage, not
forgetting to take fresh wine and water at Capon de bona speranza. Yet ere he
could recover his healthfully, he was feign to make diverse vows (for now he
was growe^ very religious with his long travel.) Among which one was, that in
remembrance of China, of all meats, he would honor the Chine of beef most: an
other was, that of all offices of the house, he should do honor to that house
of office, where he had committed that scorn to AJAX: and that there, he
should never use any more such fine grass, but rather, tear a leaf out of
Holinsheds Chronicles, or some of the books that lie in the hall; then to
commit such a sin against AJAX. Wherefore immediately on his coming home, he
built a sumptuous privy, and in the most conspicuous place thereof, namely just
over the door; he erected a statue of AJAX, with so grim a countenance, that
the aspect of it being full of terror, was half as good as a suppositor: and
further to honor him, he changed the name of the house, and called it after
the name of this noble Captain of the greasy ones (the Grecians I should say)
AJAX: though since, by ill pronunciation, and by a figure called Cacophonia,
the accent is changed, and it is called a Iakes.

Further when the funeral oration was ended, Hic desunt non paucae de sermon
aeth clerum.
to do him all other complements, that appertained to his honor; they searched
for his petigrew, and an excellent Antiquary, and a Harold, by great fortune,
found it out in an old Church book in the Austen Friars at Genoua: and it was
proclaimed on this fashion. Thus far Ovid.


AJAX son of Telamon. Thus much lib. 6. S. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. Ster^utius the
God of doung.
son of Aeacus. son of Iuppiter. Iuppiter, alias dictus Picus. son of old
Saturn. Alias dictus Stercutius. Which when it was made known unto the whole
fraternity of the brethren, there was nothing but rejoicing and singing, unto
their god Sarcotheos a devout Shaame in honor of this Stercutius the great
great grandfather of AJAX. Which Sonet has a marvelous grace in their
country, by means they do greatly affect the same similiter desinentia, every
Friar singing a verse, and a brother aunswering him in the tune following,
amounting just to four and twenty, which is the mystical number of their
order.

But by the way, if any severe Catoes take exceptions, and any chaste Lucrecias
take offense at the matter or music here following, let them pardon me, that
sought but to keep decorum, in speaking of a slouenly matter, and of slouenly
men somewhat slouenly.

Vos vero viri eruditi si quae hic scurriliter nimis dicta videbuntur,
ignoscite: aequissimum ^^im est, vt quam voluptatem scelerati male saciendo
capiant* ^^ndem (quoad fieri potest) male audiendo amittant* Videt^^ autem
cuiusmodi farinae homines taxare instituimus: ^^n plos, doctos, sanctos,
continentes, sed lu^urios^s, hereticos, barburos, impios. Quibus ego me per
^mne^ vitam ace^^imum hostem, vt and verum (...) semper pro^i^ebor. Nostis
prouerbium, Cretisandum cum Cretensibus, and cert^ hoc dignum est pa^ella
operculum. Such lipp^s such let^uce.
Nam similes habere debent labr^ lactucas.

^ O Tu qui dans, O tu qui dans, o ra cu la, o-ra-cu-la, ^ scindis cotem no
va-cu-la, cu-la, da nostra vt ^ ta-ber-na-cu-la, lingua canant vernacula,
cu-la, lingua ^ canant vernacula cula.

^ O Tu qui dans, O tu qui dans, oracula, oracu-la, ^ scindis cotem no vacula
cula, da nostra vt tabernacu-la, ^ cula, vt taberna-cula, lingua canant
vernacula, ^ cula, cula, lingua canant verna-cula.

1. O tu qui dans oraculae 2. Scindis cotem nouacula 3. Da nostra vt
tabernacula 4. Lingua canant vernacula 5. Opima post gentacula 6. Huiusmodi
miracula^ 7. Sit semper plaenum poculum. 8. Habentes plaenum loculum 9. Tu
serua nos vt specula^ 10. Per longa and laeta secula^ 11. Vt clerus and
plebecula 12. Nec nocte nec diecula 13. Curent de vlla recula, 14. Sed
intuentes specula 15. Dura vitemus spicula 16. Iacentes cum amicula 17.
Quaegarrit vt cornicula^ 18. Seutristis ^euridicula 19. Tum porrigamus oscula
20. Tum colligamus floscula 21. Ornemus vt caenaculum 22. Et totum habitaculum
23. Tum culi post spiraculum. 24. Spectemus ho^ spectaculu^.
Then suitable to this himne, they had ^ dirge for AJAX, with a prayer to all
their chief Saints whose names begin with A. Ora pro A IAX.
Sauntus Ablabius Sauntus Acachius Some of these denied the godhead of Christ
with Arrius, some the authority of Bishops as Aerius which you may see in
Prateolo de vita^^ret^corum.
Sauntus Arrius Sauntus Aerius Sauntus Aetius Sauntus Almaricus Saunti
Adiophoristae Almarieus denied the resurrection of the body, which is an
heresy that mars all, as S. Paul says 1. Cor. 15. 14. That then our faith
were vain.
Saunti 11000 Anabaptistae Et tu Sauntiss. Atheos
And so ended the black Sauntus.

By all which you may see, that it is but lack of learning, that makes some
fellows seek out stale English Etymologies of this renowned name of AJAX. One
imagined, it was called so of black iacks; because they look so slouenly,
that a mad French man wrote, we did carry our drink in our boots: but that is
but a bald Etymology, and I will never agree, that Jack, though he were never
so black, should be thus slaundered. But if you stand so much upon your
English, and will not admit our Greek, and our Roman tongue, you shall see
I will cast about, to have one in English for you. First then, you have heard
the old proverb (age breeds aches) now you must imagine, that an old man,
almost pound with an ugly Mopsa, said, not without a greatsigh; Oh, what a
match were this, were the woman away? But the devise that shall be hereafter
discovered, will so confound this Gentleman with the strong breath, that save
we carry about us some traitors, that are ready to take his part, he should
never be able so much as to blow upon you. Yet I would have the favorable
readers (of what sort soever) thus far satisfied, that I took not this
quarrel upon me voluntarily, but rather in mine own defense; and standing
upon the puntilio of honor, having been challenged, as you may partly see in
the letter precedent, by one, as it seems, of the Captains own contrymen:
for his name is Philostilpnos, which I thought at first, was a word to conjure
a spirit, till at last, a fellow of mine of Cambridge, told me the Philo was
Greek, and that he would say in English, that he loves cleanliness. Now I
being bound by the Duello, having accepted the challenge, to seek no
advantage, but even to deal with him at his own weapon, entered the lists with
him, and fighting after the old English manner without the stockados, (for to
voine or strike below the girdle, we counted it base and too cowardly) after
half a score downright blows, we grew to be friends, and I was content to
subscribe, Yours etc. And to the end I may answer him in the same language, I
am called Misacmos, which is cousin and ally to his name, and it signifies a
hater of filthiness, and to all such as are of kin to either of our names or
conditions, we commend this discourse ensuing.

Ad Zoilum and Momum.
Cease masters any more,
To grudge, chafe, pine, and freat,
Lo stuff for you good store
To gnaw, chew, bite and eat.
A short aduertisment of the author to the Reader.
The discourse ensewing is divided into three parts or sectio^s (as it were
breathing places) least it may seem confused, or too tedious to be read all at
once.
1 The first iustifies the use of the homelyest words. 2 The second proves
the matter not to be contemptible. 3 The third shows the form, and how it may
be reformed.
1. The first begins gravely, and ends lightly. 2 The second begins pleasantly,
and ends soberly. 3 The third is mixed both seriously and merrily.
1 I would pray you to weigh the grave authorities reverently, for they are
true and autenticall. 2 I would wish you to regard the pleasant histories
respectively, for they be honest and commendable. 3 I would advise you to use
the merry matters modestly, for so they may be faultlesse and harmless.
1 If you mean not to read it, then disprayse it not, for that would be
counted folly. 2 Till you have fully read it, censure it not, for that may be
deemed rashness. 3 When you have read it, say both of us have lost more time
then this in our days, and that perhaps would be judged the right.
THE METAMORPHOSIS OF AJAX.
THere was a very tall and serviceable Gentleman, sometime Lieutenant of the
ordinance, called M. Jacques VVingfield; who coming one day, either of
business, or of kindness to visit a great Lady in the Court; the Lady bad her
Gentlewoman ask, which of the VVingfields is was; he told her Jacques
Wingfield: the modest Gentlewoman, that was not so well seen in the French, to
know that Jacques was but James in English, was so bashfoole, that to mend the
matter (as she thought) she brought her Lady word, not without blushing, that
it was M. Privy VVingfield; at which, I suppose the Lady then, I am sure the
Ge^tleman after, as long as he lived, was wont to make great sport.

I fear the homely title prefixed to this Treatise (how warlicke a sound so
ever it has) may breed a worse offense, in some of the finer sort of readers;
who may upon much more just occasion condemn it, as a noisome and unsavory
discourse: because, without any error of equivocation, I mean indeed, to
write of the same that the word signifies. But if it might please them a little
better to consider, how the place we treat of (how homely soever) is visited
by themselves, once at least in four and twenty hours, if their digestion be
good, and their constitution sound; then I hope they will do me that favor, and
them selves that right, not to reject a matter teaching their own ease, and
cleanliness, for the homeliness of the name; and consequently, they will
excuse all broad phrases of speech, incident to such a matter, with the old
English proverb that ends thus; For Lords and Ladies do the same. I know
that the wiser sort of men will consider, and I wish that the ignorant sort
would learn; how it is not the baseness, or homeliness, either of words, or
matters, that make them foul and obscenous, but their base minds, filthy
conceits, or lewd intents that handle them. He that would scorn a Physician,
because for our infirmities sake, he refuses not sometime the noisome view of
our lothsomest excrements, were worthy to have no help by Physic, and should
break his divine precept, that says; Honor the Physician, for necessities
sake God has ordained him. And he that would honor the makers of
Aposticchios, or rebatoes, because creatures much honored use to wear the^,
might be thought, perhaps full of courtesy, but void of wit.

Surely, if we would enter into a sober and sad consideration of our estates,
even of the happiest sort of us, as men of the world esteem us; whether we be
noble, or rich, or learned, or beautiful, or healthy, or all these (which
seldom happens) joined together we shall observe, that the joys we enjoy in
this world, consist rather in indolentia (as they call it) which is an avoiding
of grieuances and inconveniences, then in possessing any passing great
pleasures; so durable are the harms, that our first parents fall has laid on
us, and so poor the helps that we have in our selves: finally so short, and
momentany the contentments that we fish for, in this Ocean of miseries, which
either we miss, (fishing before the net, as the proverb is) or if we catch
them they prove but like Eeles, slight and slipperie. The chiefest of all our
sensual pleasures, I mean that which some call the sweet sin of letcherie,
though God knows, it has much sour sauce to it; for which notwithstanding,
many hazard both their fame, their fortune, their friends, yea their souls;
which makes them so often break the sixth Commandment, that when they hear it
read at Church, they leave the words of the Communion book, and say, Lord
have mercy upon us, it grieves our hearts to keep this Law. And when the
Commination is read on Ashwednesday, wherein is read, Cursed be he that lies
with his neighbors wife, and let all the people say, Amen; these people either
say nothing, or as a neighbor of mine said, Some say amend, and so done, were
very well said.
he hem; I say this surpassing pleasure, that is so much in request, and
counted such a principal solace, I have heard confessed before a most
honorable person, by a man of middle age, strong constitution, and well
practiced in this occupation, to have bred no more delectation to him (after
the first heat of his youth was past) then to go to a good easy close stool,
when he had a lust thereto (for that was his very phrase.) Which being
confessed by him, and confirmed by many; makes me take this advantage thereof
in the beginning of this discourse, Aiak's house preferred before a ba^^die
house.
to prefer this house I mind to speak of, before those which they so much
frequent; neither let any disdain the comparison. For I remember, how not long
since, a grave and godly Lady, and grandmother to all my wives children, did
in their hearings, and for their better instruction, tell them a story; which
though I will not swear it was true, yet I did wish the auditory would believe
it; namely, how an Hermit being carried in an evening, by the conduct of an
Angel, through a great city, to contemplate the great wickedness daily and
hourly wrought therein; met in the street a gongfarmer with his cart full
laden, no man envying his full measure. The poor Hermit, as other men did,
stopped his nosthrils, and betook him to the other side of the street, hastening
from the sower carriage all he could; but the Angel kept on his way, seeming
no whit offended with the savor. At which while the Hermit marvelled, there
came not long after by the^, a woman gorgeously attyred, well perfumed, well
attended with coaches, and torches, to convey her perhaps to some noble man's
chamber. The good Hermit somewhat revived with the fair sight, and sweet
savor, began to stand at the gaze. On the other side, the good Angel now
stopped his nose, and both hastened himself away, and beckened his companion
from the place. At which the Hermit more maruelling then before, he was told by
the Angel, that this fine courtesan laden with sin, was a more stinking
savor before God and his holy Angels, then that beastly cart, laden with
excrements. I will not spend time to allegorize this story, only I will wish
all the readers may find as sure a way to cleanse, and keep sweet the noblest
part of them selves, that is, their souls; as I shall show them a plain and
easy way, to keep sweet the basest part of their houses, that is, their
sinkes. But to the intent I may bind my self to some certain method, I will
first awhile continue as I have partly begun, to defend by most autenticall
authorities and examples, the use of these homely words in so necessary
matters. Secondly, concerning the matter it self, I will show how great, and
extraordinary care has been had in all ages, for the good ordering of the
same. Lastly, for the form, I will set down the cheapest, perfectest, and
most infallible, for avoiding all the inconveniences the matter is subject to;
that hitherto (if I and many more be not much deceived) was ever found out.

When I was a truantly scholar in the noble University of Cambridge (though I
hope I had as good a conscience as other of my pew-fellowes, to take but a
little learning for my money) yet I can remember, how a very learned and
reverent Divine help this question in the schools. Scripturae stylus no^ est
barbarus. The style, or phrase of the Scripture is not barbarous. Against whom
one replied with this argument. That which is obscenous, may be called
barbarous:
But the Scripture is in many places obscenous:
Therefore the Scripture may be called barbarous.
To which syllogism was truly answered (as I now remember denying the minor)
that though such phrases to us seem obscenous, and are so when they are used
to ribauldrie, or lasciuiousnes, yet in the Scripture they are not only void
of inciuilitie, but full of sanctity; that the Prophets do in no place more
effectually, more earnestly, nor more properly beat down our pride and
vanity, and open to our eyes the filthiness, and horror of our sins, then
by such kind of phrases, of which they recited that, where it is said, that the
sins of the people were, ^sa. 64.
quasi pannus menstruatae vniuersae iustitiae nostrae, that a common or strange
woman (for so the Scripture covertly terms a harlot) has her quiver open for
every arrow; that an old lecherous man, is like a horse that neigheth after
every mare, etc. To which I could add many more, if I affected copiousnesse in
this kind; some in broad speeches, some in covert terms, expressing men's
shame, men's sins, men's necessities. Quinque aureos anos facietis pro quinque
satrapis, which our English of Geneua tra^slates very modestly. Ye shall make
^iue golden Emeralds for five Noblemen or Princes. Which word I am sure, many
of the simple hearers, and readers, take for a precious stone of the Indians,
set in gold; and so they shall still take it for me, for that ignorance, may
perhaps do them less hurt in this matter, then further knowledge; but yet what
a special Scripture that is to Gods glory and their shame, appears by David's
prophecy in the 77. Psalm, where he says; Percussit inimicos suos in
posteriora, opprobrium sempiternum dedit illis. He smote his enemies in the
hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame; in remembrance whereof, in
some solemn lyturgies, until this day the same Chap. of Aureos anos is read.

What should I speak of the great league between God and man, made in
Circumcision? impressing a painful stigma, or caracter in Gods peculiar
people, though now, most happily taken away in the holy Sacrament of Baptism.
What the word signified, I have known reverent and learned men have been
ignorant; and we call it very well Circumcision, and uncircumcision, though the
Remists (of purpose be like to vary from Geneua) will needs bring in Prepuse;
which word was after admitted into the Theater with great applause, by the
mouth of Master Tarlton the excellent Comedian; when many of the beholders
that were never circumcised, had as great cause as Tarlton, to complain of
their Prepuse. But to come soberly, and more nearely to our present purpose; In
the old Testament, the phrase is much used of covering the feet, and in the new
Testament, he that heals and helps all our infirmities, used the word
draught; that that goes into the man, is digested in the stomach, and cast
out into the draught. Lastly, the blessed Apostle S. Paul, being rapt in
co^templation of divine blissfulness, co^pares all the chief felicities of the
earth, esteeming them (to use his own word) as stercora, most filthy doung, in
regard of the joys he hoped for. In imitation of which zealous vehemency,
some other writers have affected to use such phrase of speech, but with as il
success, as the ass that leapt on his master at his coming home, because he
saw a little spaniel, that had so don, much made of: for in deed, these be
counted but foul mouthd beasts for their labors.

But to conclude these holy authorities, worthy to be alleged in most reverent
and serious manner; and yet here also I hope without offense: let us come now
to the ridiculous, rather then religious customs of the Pagans, and see, if
this contemptible matter I treat of, were despised among them; nay rather
observe, if it were not respected with a reverence, with an honor, with a
religion, with a duty, yea with a deity, and no marvel. For they that had
Gods and Goddesses, for all the necessaries of our life, from our cradles to
our graves, viz. 1. for sucking, 2. for swathing, 3. for eating, 4. for
drinking, 5. for sleeping, 6. for husbandry, 7. for venerie, 8. for fighting,
9. for physic, 10. for marriage, 11. for childbed, 12. for fire, 13. for
water, 14. for the thresholds, 15. for the chimneys; the names of which I do
set down by themselves, to satisfy those that are curious. 1. Lacturtia, 2.
Cunina, 3. Edulicae, 4. Potina, 5. Morpheus, 6. Pan, 7. Priapus, 8. Bellona, 9.
Aesculapius, 10 Hymen, 11. Lucina, and Vagitanus, 12. Ether, 13. Salacia, 14.
Lares, 15. Penates. I say, you must not think, they would commit such an
oversight, to omit such a necessary, as almost in all languages, has the name
of necessity, or ease: wherefore they had both a God and a Goddess, that had
the charge of the whole business; the God was called Stercutius, as they
write, because he found so good an employment for all manner of doung, as to
lay it upon the land: or perhaps it was he, that first found the excellent
mystery of the kind setting of a Parsnippe (which I will not here discover,
because I heard of a truth, that a great Lady that loved Parsnips very well,
after she had heard how they grew, could never abide them) and I would be
loath, to cause any to fall out of love with so good a dish. Nevertheless
(except they will have better bread then is made of wheat) they must (how fine
so ever they be) give M. Stercutius leave, to make the la^d able to bear
wheat. But the Goddess was much more especially, and properly assigned for
this business, whose name was Dea Cloacina, her statue was erected by Titus
Tacius, he that reigned with Romulus, in a goodly large house of office (a fit
shrine for such a Saint) which Lodouicus Vi^es cites out of Lactantius. But he
that will more particularly inform himself of the original of all these
petty Gods and Goddesses; as also of the greater, which they distinguished by
the name of Dij consentes, which are according to old Ennius verse, divided
into two ranks of Lords and Ladies. Iun^, These Gods were of the privy council
to Iuppiter, 23. Chap. 4. book.
Vesta, Minerua, Ceresque Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Neptunus, louis, Vulcanus, Apollo.
Of all which S. Augustine writes most divinely, to overthrow their divinity;
and therefore I refer the learned and studious reader, to his fourth and sixth
book de Ciuitate Dei, where the original, and vanity of all these Gods and
Goddesses, is more largely discoursed: with a pretty quip to Seneca the great
Philosopher, who being in heart half a Christian, as was thought; yet because he
was a Senator of Rome, S. Augustine 6. book 10. chap. L.
was feign (as S. Augustine says) to follow that he found fault with, to do
that he disliked, to adore that he detested. But come we to my stately Dame
Cloacina, and her Lord Stercutius, though these were not of the higher house,
called Consentes; yet I hope for their antiquity, they may make great
comparison: for he is said to have been old Saturn, father to Pycus that was
called Iuppiter; and Cloacina was long before Priapus, and so long before
Felicity, that S. Augustine writes merrily, that he thinks verily, Felicity
forsook the Romans, for disdain that Cloacina and Priapus were deified so
long before her; adding Imperium Romanorum propterea grandius, quam felicius
fuit. The Roman Empire therefore was rather great, then happy. But how so
ever Lady Felicity disdaines her, no question but Madame Cloacina was always
a very good fellow: for it is a token of special kindness, to this day among
the best men in France, to reduce a Syllogism in Bocardo together. Insomuch as
I have heard it seriously told, that a great Magnifico of Venice, being
Ambassador in France, and hearing a Noble person was come to speak with him,
made him stay till he had untied his points; and when he was new set on his
stool, sent for the Noble man to come to him at that time; as a very special
favor. And for other good fellowships I doubt not, but from the beginning it
has often happened, that some of the Nymphs of this gentle goddess, have met
so luckily with some of her devout chaplens, in her chapels of ease, and paid
their privy tithes so duly, and done their service together with such
devotion; that for reward, she has preferred them within forty weeks after to
Juno Lucina, and so to Vagitana, Lacturtia, and Cunina: for even to this day,
such places continue very fortunate. And whereas I named devotion, I would not
have you think, how homely soever the place is, that all devotion is excluded
from it. For I happening to demand of a dear friend of mine, concerning a
great companion of his, whether he were religious or no, and namely if he used
to pray; he told me, that to his remembrance he never heard him ask any thing
of God, nor thank God for any thing; except it were at a Iakes, he heard him
say, he thanked God, he had had a good stool. Thus you see, a good stool
might move as great devotion in some man, as a bad sermon; and sure it suits
very well, that Quoru^ Deus est venture, eoru^ templu^ sit cloaca. he that maks
his belly his god, I would have him make a Iakes his chapel. But he that would
in deed call to mind, how Arrius, that notable and famous, or rather infamous
heretic, came to his miserable end upon a Iakes; might take just occasion
even at that homely business, to have godly thoughts; rather then as some
have, wanton, or most have, idle. To which purpose I remember in my riming
days, I wrote a short Elegy upon a homely Emblem; which both verse and
Emblem, they have set up in Cloacinas chapel, at my house very solemnly.
And I am the willinger to impart it to my friends, because I protest to you
truly, a sober Gentleman protested to me seriously; that the conceit of the
picture and the verse, was an occasion to put honest and good thoughts into his
mind. And Plutarke defends with many reasons, in his book called Symposeons,
Lib. 5. qu^st. 1.
that where the matters them selves often are unpleasant to behold, their
counterfeits are seen not without delectation.

Sprint^ non spint^. More feared then hurt.



A godly father sitting on a draught,
To do as need, and nature has us taught;
Mumbled (as was his manner) certain prayers,
And unto him the Devil straight repayr's:
And boldly to revile him he begins,
Alleging that such prayr's are deadly sins;
And that it showed, he was deuoyd of grace,
To speak to God, from so unmeet a place.
The reverent man, though at the first dismayed,
Yet strong in faith, to Satan thus he said;
Thou damned spirit, wicked, false and lying,
Dispa^ring thin^ own good, and ours en^ying:
Each take his due, and me thou can not hurt,
To God my prayer I meant, to thee the dirt.
Pure prayr ascends to him that high does sit,
Down falls the filth, for fiends of hell more fit.
Wherefore, though I grant many places and times are much fitter for true
devotion, yet I dare take it upon me; that if we would give the Devil no
kinder entertainment in his other suggestions, then this father gave him in his
causeless reproof (for he gave it him in his teeth, take it how he would,) I
say we should not so easily be overthrown with his assaults, as daily we are,
For want of the good take heed.
for lack of due resistance. But come we now to more particular and not so
serious matter; have not many men of right good conceit, served themselves with
diverse pretty emblems, of this excrementall matter. As that in Alciat, to show
that base fellows oft-times swim in the stream of good fortune, as well as
the worthiest. Nos quoque poma not amus. Or as the old proverb, Pom^,
signifies horsedong as well as apple^.
as well as emblem, that does admonish men not to contend with base and
ignominious persons. Hoc scio pro certo, quod si cum sterc^re cert^
Vinco ceu vincor, semper ego maculor.
I know if I contend with dirtie foes,
I must be foyld, whether I win or lose.
Which Emblem had almost hindered me the writing of this present discourse,
save that a good friend of mine told me, that this is a fancy and not a fight,
and that if it should grow to a fight; he assured me I had found so excellent a
ward against his chief dart, which is his strong breath, that I were like to
quit my hands in the fray, as well as any man. But to proceed in these rare
Emblemes; who has not read or heard, of the Picture made in Germany, at the
first rising of Luther? where to show as it were by an Emblem, with what
dross, and draffe, the Pope and his partners fed the people; they caused him
to be purtraied in his Pontificalibus riding on a great sow, and holding before
her taster, a dirty pudding: which dirtie devise, Sleidan the Historian very
justly and gravely, both reports and reproues; yet it served a turn for the
time, and made great sport to the people. But when this May Game was done, an
hundred thousand of them came home by weeping cross; so as the poor sow was
not only sold by the ears, but sold by a drum, or slain by the sword. Yet
the Flaunders cow, had more wit then the Germane sow: for she was made after an
other sort, viz. the Mirror of Princes feeding her, the Terror of Princes
spurring her, the Prince of Orange milking her, or after some such fashion, for
I may fail in the particulars; but the conclusion was, that Monsieur d'
Allanson (who indeed with most noble endeavor, though not with so happy
success, attempted them) would have pulled her back by the tail, and she
filed his fingers. And thus much for Emblemes. Now for poesy (though Emblemes
also are a kind of poesy) I rather doubt, that the often usage of such words,
will make the Poets be condemned; then that the Poets authorities, will make the
words be allowed: but if their example can give any countenance to them, they
shall want none. It is certain, that of all poems, the Epigram is the
wittiest, and of all that writes Epigrams, Martial is counted the pleasantest.
He in his 38. ep. of his first book, has a distichon, that is very pliable to
my purpose; of one that was so stately, that her close stool was of gold, but
her drinking cup of glass. Ventris onus puro, 1. 38.
nec te pudet excipis auro:
Sed b^bis in vitro, charius ergo cacas.
And in the same book, to the ge^tlewoma^ that had a pleasure, to have her
dog lick her lips, as many do now a days.

Os, and labra, 1. 74.
tibi lingit Mane^a Catellus:
Non miror merdas, si libet esse can^.
Thy dog still lickes thy lips, but it is no hurt:
I ma^uell not, to see a dog eat dirt.
Further in his third book, he mocks one of his fellow Poets, that drove away
all good company with his verses, every man thought it such a penance to hear
them.

Na^ tantos rogo quis ferat labores, 3. 44.

Et stanti legis, and legis sedenti,
Currenti legis, and legis cacanti,
In Thermas fugio sonas ad aurem, etc.
Alas my head with thy long readings aches,
Standing or sitting, thou readst every wheare,
If I would walk, if I would go to AJAX,
If to the Bath, thou still art in mine ear.
Whereby the way, you may note that the French courtesy I spoke of before, came
from the Romans; since in Martials time, they shunned not one the others
company, at Monsieur AJAX. But now it may be some man will say, that these
wanton and ribald phrases, were pleasing to those times of licentiousness, and
paganism that knew not Christ; but now they are abhorred and detested, and
quite out of request. I would to God with all my heart, he lied not that so
said; and that indeed Religion could root out as it should do, all such
wanton and vain toys (if they be all wanton and vain) yet I am sure, that
even in this age, and in this realm, men of worth, and wit, have used the
words and phrases, in as homely sort as Martial, some in light, some in
serious matter. Among Sir Thomas Mores Epigrams, that fly over all Europe for
their wit and conceit, the very last (to make a sweet conclusion) is this,
Sectile ne tetros porrum tibi spiret odores;
Protinus ^ porro fac mihi cepe vores,
Den^o foet^rem si vis depellere cepe:
Hoc facile efficient allia mansa tibi;
Spiritus at si post etiam grauis, allia res^ at;
Aut nihil, aut tantum, tollere ^^erda potest.


Which for their sakes that love garlic, I have taken some pains with,
though it went against my stomach once or twice.

If leekes you leeke, but do their smell disleeke,
Eat onions, and you shall not smell the leeke:
If you of onions would the sent expel,
Eat garlic, that shall drown the onions smell,
But against garlikes savor, at one word,
I know but one receipt, what is that? go look.
Now fie, will you name it, and read it to Ladies, thus you make them blame me
that meant no less. But to come again to pleasant Sir Thomas, he has another
Epigram, that though this was but a sour one, I durst as live be his half at
this as at that, and it is about a medicine for the collicke. Te crepitus
perdit ni^^ium, si ventre ret entus,
Te pr^pere emissus seruat item crepitus:
Si crepitus seruare potest, and perdere nunquid,
Terrificis crepitus, regibus aequa potest.
Thus il-fauoredly in English, Non'est bonum luderecum sanctu.
for I will tell you true, my Muse was afraid to translate this Epigram: It is
good to play with your fellows.
and she brought me out three or four sayings against it, both in Latin and
English: An ^escis lon^as regibus esse manus.
and two or three shrewd examples, both of this last Poet, who died not of the
collicke, He was beheaded.
and of one Collingborne, that was hanged for a distichon of a Cat, a rat, and
a dog. Yet I opposed Murus aheneus esto nil conscire sibi, and so with much a
do, she came out with it. To break a little wind,
Sometime ones life does save.
For want of vent behind,
Some folk their ruin have:
A power it has therefore,
Of life, and death express:
A king can cause no more,
A crack does do no less.
And when she had made it in this sorry fashion, she bad me wish my friends,
that no man should follow Sir Th. Mores humor, to write such Epigra^s as he
wrate, except he had the spirit, Two Apothegmes of Sir Thomas More.
to speak two such Apothegmes as he spoke, of which the last seems to fall
fit into our text. The first was, when the King sent to him to know if he had
changed his mind; he answered, yea: the King sent straight a counselor to
him, to take his subscription to the fix Articles. Oh said he, I have not
changed my mind in that matter, but only in this; I thought to have sent for
a Barber, to have been shaven ere I had died, but now if it please the King, he
shall cut off head; and beard, and all together. But the other was milder, and
pretier; for after this, one coming to him as of good will, to tell him he
must prepare him to dye, for he could not live: he called for his vrinall, and
having made water in it, he cast it, and viewed it (as Physicia^s do) a pretty
while; at last he swear soberly, that he saw nothing in that man's water, but
that he might live, if it pleased the King; a pre^i^ saying, both to note his
own innocence, and move the Prince to mercy: and it is like, if this tale had
been as friendly told the King, as the other perhaps was unfriendly enforced
against him, sure the King had pardoned him. But alas what cared he, (to say
truth) what need he care, that cared not for death? But to step back to my
teshe (though every place I step to, yeeldes me sweeter discourse) what think
you by Haywood, that escaped hanging with his mirth, the King being graciously
and (as I think) truly persuaded, that a man that wrate so pleasant and
harmless verses, could not have any harmefull conceit against his
proceedings, and so by the honest motion of a Gentleman of his chamber, saved
him from the ierke of the six stringd whip. This Haywood for his Proverbs and
Epigrams, is not yet put down by any of our country, though one does indeed
come near him, that graces him the more, in saying he puts him down. But both
of them have made sport with as homely words as ours be* M. Dauies.
one of a Gentlewomans glove, save that without his consent it is no good
manners to publish it but old Haywoods says: Except wind stand, as never wind
sto^d,
It is an ill vvind blows no man good.


And another not unpleasant, one that I cannot omit. By word without writing
one let out a farm,
The lessee most lewdly the rent did retain,
Whereby the lesser vvanting vvriting had harm:
Wherefore he vowed, while life did remain,
Without vvriting never to let thing again*
Husband quoth the wife, that oath again reuart,
Else without vvriting you cannot let a crack
God thank the sweet wife, quoth he, from my heart:
And so on the lips did her lovingly smacke.
Such a thing it was, but not having the book here, and my memory being no
better then I would have it, I have stumbled on it as well as I can. But now to
strike this matter dead with a sound authority indeed, and in so serious a
matter as under heaven is no weightier, to such a person, as in the world is no
worthier, from such a scholar, as in Oxford was no learneder, mark what a
verse here is, an Eucharisticall and Pareneticall verse. He says: It Italici
Augaei stabulum foedumque cloacam,
Ate purgars Romanaque (...) tolli.


If he had said Stercora, I could guess well enough what it had meant, but
that the Greek has in some ears a better emphasis. Thus writes their great
Ca^piano (...), that confoundes all the Puritano Pa pist as. M. Raynolds much
more seemly uses the metaphor, li. 1 c. 8. p. 290.
And yet to say truly, I make no great boast of his authority to my text. If I
had alleged him in Divinity, I would have stood ^ustily to it, Iesuitae ^imum
in ipsius capt^^ re^orquere.
and said (...), but for verses in praise of his Mistress, there be twenty of
us may set him to school: for be it spoken without disgrace or disprayse to
his Poetry, such a metaphor had been fitter for a plain Dame, abhorring all
Princely pomp, and not refusing to wear russet coats, then for the
magnificent Majesty of a Maiden Monarke. Believe me, I would feign have made
him speak good rhyme in English, but (as I am a true (...)) I beat my brains
about it, the space that one may go with the tide from London bridge, down
where the Priest fell in upon the maid, and from thence almost to Wapping, and
yet I could not couch it into a cleanely distichon. But yet because I know
Mistress Philostilpnos will have a great mind to know what it means, I will
tell her by some handsome circumlocution. His meaning is, that a Lady of
Ladies, did for zeal to the Lord of Lords, take the like pains to purge some
Popish abuses, as the great giantly Hercules did for Augeus. Now what manner of
work that was, in the process of this discourse one way or other, you shall
see me bring it in, though yet I know not where will be the fittest place for
it: here yet you see by the way I have told the ma^s meaning reasonable
mannerly, yet still me think I can say of his metaphor, That still (me think)
he used a phrase as pliant,
That said, his Mistres was for wit a giant.


But I pray you let me go back again to merry Martial: for I should have one
more of his, if I have not lost it, Ad Phoebum. Oh here I have it. Vtere
lactucis and mollibus vtere maluis, 3. 68.

Nam faciem durum Phoebe cacantis, habes.
He aduises him to take somewhat to make him soluble, for his face looked as if
he were asking, who should be M. Mayor the next year. But I think this jest
was borrowed of Vespasianus fool, or else the fool borrowed it of him: but
the jest is worthy to be received into this discourse. This fool had iested
somewhat at all the board, save Vespasian him self; and belike he thought, it
was ill playing with edge tools, and Emperors; but Vespasian commanded him,
and promised him frank pardon, to break a good jest upon him. Well Sir (then
said the fool) I will but tarry till you have done your business; whereby he
quipped the Emperors ill feature of face, that even when he was meriest,
looked as if he had been wringing hard on a close stool. But let us seek some
better authorities then Epigrams and Iesters: sure I am I shall find in
history, which is called nuncia vetustatis, vita memoriae, the reporter of
antiquities, the life of memory, many phrases, expressing the same action, and
not thinking their style any whit abased thereby. He that writes the first
book of Samuel tells, that David did cut off the lap of Saules coat, 1. Sam.
24. Spelu^ca quam i^gressus est Saul, vt purgaret ventrem.
and leaves not to tell, what Saul was then doing. The writer of Bassianus
life tells, how he was not only privily murdered, but murdered at the privy.
Heliogabulus body was thrown into a Iakes, S^etonius.
as writ^th Suetonius. Lastly the best, and best written part of all our
Chronicles, in all men's opinions, is that of Richard the third, written as I
have heard by Moorton* but as most suppose, by that worthy, and vncorrupt
Magistrate, Sir Thomas More, sometime Lord Chancellor of England, where it is
written, how the king was devising with Teril, how to have his nephews privily
murdered, and it is added, he was the^ sitting on a draught (a fit carpet for
such a counsel.) But to leave these tragical matters, and come to comicall,
look into your sports of hauking and hunting, of which noble recreations, the
noble Sir Philip Sidney was wont to say, that next hunting, he liked hauking
worst, but the faulconers and hunters would be even with him, and say, that
these bookish fellows, such as he, could judge of no sports, but within the
verge of the fair fields of Helicon, Pindus, and Pernasus. Now I would ask
you Sir, lest you should think I never read Sir Tristram. Do you not sometime
(beside the fine phrase, or rather Metaphor, of inewing a woodcock) talk, both
of putting a heron to the mount, and then of his s^cing? ^ell of springing a
pheasant and a partridge, and find them out by their dropping? Do you not
further, to judge of your haulkes health; look on her casting? if it be black
at one end, and the rest yellow, you fear she has the phillanders, if it be
all black, you shall see and smell, she is not sound. Lastly, you have a
special regard to observe, if she make a clean mute. Moreover for hu^ting,
when you have harbourd a stag, or lodged a buck, does not the keeper, before he
comes to rouse him from his lodging, (not without some ceremony) show you his
femishing, that thereby you may judge if he be a seasonable dear? And soon
after, follows the melodious cry of the hounds, which the good Lady could not
hear, because the dogs kept such a barking. And when all this is done, and you
are rehearsing at dinner what great sport you have had: in the midst of your
sweet meats, in comes Melampus, or Ringwood, that sang the base that morning,
and in the return home, lighted upon some powderd vermin, and lays a chase
under the table, that makes all as sweet as any suger-carrion; and all this you
willingly bear with, because it is your pastime. Thus you must needs
confess, it is more then manifest, that without reproof of ribaldry, or
scurrility, writings both holy, and profane, Emblemes, Epigrams, Histories,
and ordinary and familiar communication; admits the use of the words, with all
their apurtenaunces; in citing examples whereof, I have been the more copious,
because of this captious time, so ready to backebite every man's work, and I
would forewarne men not to bite here, lest they bite an unsavory morsel. But
here me think it were good to make a pause, and (as it were at a long dinner)
to take away the first course; which commonly is of the coursest meat, as
powdered bie^e and mustard, or rather (to compare it fitter) fresh biefe and
garlic; for that has three properties, more suting to this discourse: viz.
to make a man wink, drink, and stink. Now for your second course, I could
wish I had some larkes, and quails, but you must have such as the market I
come from will afford, always remembered, that our retiring place, or place of
rende vous (as is expedient when men have filled their bellies) must be
Monsieur AJAX, for I must still keep me to my tesh: wherefore as I say, here I
will make the first stop, and if you mislike not the fare thus far, I will
make the second course make you some amends.

THE SECOND SECTION, proving the matter not to be contemptible.
IT has been in the former part hereof sufficiently proved, that there is no
obscenity, or barbarism in words concerning our necessaries: but now for the
place, where these necessaries are to be done, perhaps some will object, that
it was never of that importance, but that it was left to each man's own care to
provide, for that which concerned his own peculiar necessity. It is not so,
for I can bring very aut^nticall proofs out of ancient records, and histories;
that the greatest magistrates that ever were, have employed their wits, their
care, and their cost, about these places; as also have made diverse good laws,
proclamations, and decrees about the same: and all thereto belonging; as by
this that ensues shall more plainly appear. In the handling whereof. I will
use a contrary method to the former: for I will begin now with profane stories,
and end with divine. First therefore most certain it is, that mischiefs make
us seek remedies, diseases make us find medicines, and evil manners make good
laws. And as in all other things, so by all likelihood in this we now treat
of, when companies of men began first to increase, and make of families towns,
and of towns cities, they quickly found not only offense, but infection, to
grow out of great concourse of people, if special care were not had to avoid
it. And because they could not remove houses, as they do tents, from place to
place, they were driven to find the best means that their wits did then serve
them, to cover, rather then to avoid these annoiances: either by digging pits
in the earth, or placing the common houses over rivers: but as Tully says of
Metaphors, that they were like our apparel: first devised to hide nakedness,
then applied for comeliness, and lastly abused for pride: so I may say of
these homely places, that first they were provided for b^^e necessity, for
indeed till Romulus time I find little mention of them; then they came to be
matters of some more cost, as shall appear in examples following; and I think
I might also lay pride to their charge: for I have seen them in cases of
fugerd satin, and velvet (which is flat against the statute of apparel) but
for sweetness or cleanlines, 33. Henry 8. For it is no reason M. AJAX should
have a better gown then his Mistress.
I never knew yet any of them guilty of it; but that if they had but waited on
a Lady in her chamber a day, or a night, they would have made a man (at his
next entrance into the chamber) have said, fo, good speedye. Now, as scholars
do daily seek out new phrases, and metaphors; and Tailors do often invent new
vardingales, and breeches: so I see no reason, but Magistrates may as well now
as heretofore, devise new orders for cleanliness, and wholsomnesse. But now to
the stories, I alleged before, as it were at the second hand, out of
Lactantius; how Titus Tacius that was king with Romulus, erected the Statue of
the Goddess Cloacina, in a great Privy, made for that purpose. I find after
this in the story of Liuy, how Tarquinius Pryscus, a man of excellent good
spirit, but husband to awife of a more excellent spirit; a man that wan a
kingdom with making a learned oration, and lost it with hearing a rude one; a
king, that was first crowned by an Eagle, counseled by an Augure, and killed
by a traitor; whose reign and his ruin, were both most stra^gely foretold.
This worthy Prince is reported by that excellent historian, to have made two
provisions for his city, one for war, the other for peace, both very
commendable: for war a stone wall about the town, to defend them from
outward invasions; and for peace, a goodly Iakes within the town, with a vault
to convey all the filth into Tiber, to preserve them from inward infection.

Not long after him reigned Tarquinius, surnamed the Proud, a tyra^t I
confess, and an usurper, and husband to a dragon rather then a woman: but
himself surely, a man valiant in war, provident in peace, and in that young
world, a notable politician: of whom Liuy takes this special note, that
coming to the crown without law, and fearing others might follow his example,
to do that to him, he had done to another^ he was the first that appointed a a
guard for his person, the first that drew public matters to private hearings,
the first that made private wars, private peace, private confederacies; the
first that lessened the number of the Senators; the first, that when any of
them died, kept their rooms void, with many excellent Machiauillen lessons;
which, who so would be better instructed of, let him read but his accusing of
Turnus, his stratagem against the Gabians, etc. But the matter I would praise
him for, is none of all these, but only, because he built a stately temple, and
a costly Iakes, the words be, Cloacamque maximam receptaculum omnium
purgamentorum vrbis, a mighty great vault to receive all the filth of the city.
Of which two works, joining them both together, Liuy says thus, Quibus duobus
operibus, vix noua haec magnificentia quicquam adequauit. Which two great
works, the new magnificence of this our age, can hardly match. Now though
Brutus, after in a popular and seditious oration, to incite the multitude to
rebellion, debased this worthy work of his, saying he wasted the treasure of
the realm, and tired and toyled out the people, in exhaurie^dis cloacis, in
emptying of Iaxes (for that was his word) yet it appears by the history, that
if his son had not defloured the chaste Lucrece (the mirror of her sex) Brutus
with his fained folly, true value, and great eloquence, could never have
displaced him. For even with all his faults you see, that Brutus his own sons
would have had him again; who laying their heads together, with many young
gallants, that thought them selves much wiser then their fathers; concluded
among themselves, that a king was better then a Consul, a Court better then a
Senate; that to live only by laws, was too strict and rigorous a life, and
better for pesantly then princely dispositions: that Kings could favor, as
well as frown, reward, as well as revenge, pardon, as well as punish, whereas
the law was merciless, mute, and immutable, finally, they concluded it was ill
living for them, where nothing but innocence could protect a man. Lo Brutus,
how eloquently thy sons can plead against their father; but thou have a Jury of
sure freeholders, that gave a verdite against them, and thy self wast both
judge and shiriffe, and hastenedst execution.

O brave minded Brutus! I will not call thee primus Romanorum, because one was
shent for calling one of thy posterity, vltimus Romanorum, but this I must
truly say, they were two Brutish parts both of him, and you; one to kill his
sons for treason, the other to kill his father in treason; Caesar called Brutus
son, and said to him when he stabd at him, (...).
and yet you would both make us believe you had reason, and why so? forsooth
because Victrix causa placet superis, sed victa Catoni. That is to say in
English, You had great fortune, and your cousin had great friends, yet neither
died in bed, but both in battle, only his death was his enemies advancement,
and thy death was thy enemies destruction. But to omit these trifles, and to
return to my tesh; whereas thou railest against so great a Prince, for making
of so sumptuous a Iakes, this I cannot endure at thy hands: and if thou had
played me such a saucy part here in my country, first of mine own authority,
It seems the writer hereof would fain be thought a Justice of peace.
I would have granted the good behavior against you: secondly, Tarquinius him
self might have Scandalum magnatum against you: and thirdly, a bill should
have been framed against you in the Star chamber, upon the statute of unlawful
assemblies: and then you would have wished you had kept your eloquence to your
self, and not when a man has done but two good works in all his life, you to
stand railing at one of them. For suppose that Tarquin had given me but a fee,
thus would I plead for him. Master Brutus you have made us believe all this
while, you were but a fool; but I see now, if one had begged you, he should
have found you a Bygamus. And whereas you seem to disgrace my honorable
client, for making of A IAX, I dare undertake to prove it, that your own
laws, your religions, your customs, yea your conscience, is against you, and
shows, it is but a mere calumniation. For to omit Dame Cloacina, so lately
deified, did not the noble Hercules, whom you Brutus honor as a God, far
ancienter then Quirinus, and Romulus, among those many labors that eternized
his memory, make clean Augeus du^ghils. Quis non Euristea durum
Aut illaudati nescit Busiridis aras.
If the work have a baseness, Tarquinius but with his purse, Hercules with
his person effected it, leaving a pattern to posterity both of labor and wit,
for by turning a stream of water on the mickesons, he scowred away that in a
week, that an hundred could scant have done in a year. Then would I end with
some exclamation, and say, O tempora, o mores! Oh times, oh manners! If a man
be not popular, you will straight say, he is proud; if he keep good
hospitality, you will say he does but fill many Iaxes; if he build goodly vauts
for sewers, you will say, he spends his treasure in exhauriendis cloacis Or
rather I would say, O Hercules come and bend thy bow against Brutus, that
shootes arrows through thy sides to slay Tarquinius. Martial. 505
Ca^p^r^^^usidi (...) fertur meacarmina qui^^ N^scio si sciero ve ti^i causidice.
But now let me leave playing the lawyer, and lawyerlike be friends immediately
with him whom eue^ now I talked against so earnestly, I mean with Brutus;
because indeed saving in this one case, I never mean to be of counsel with
Tarquin: for such proud clients will speak us passing fair while we serve
their turns, and after pick a quarrel against us when we sue for a reward.
Now therefore to go forward with the story.

When this valiant Brutus had thus discharged the Kings and Queens out of the
pack, and showed himself indeed a sworn and vowed enemy to all the coat
cards, there crept in many new forms of government, and every one worse then
other, namely, Consuls, Dictators, Decemuiri, Tribunes, Triumuiri, till at last
after often enterchanges, it came to the government of Emperors. In all which
times, there were not only laws, and special caueats given to the great
officers in time of war and danger, Ne quid respab detrimenticaperet, to look
to the safety of the maine chance (the common wealth) but also there were
officers of good account, as Aediles, Praetores vrbis* that made inquiries de
stillicijis, de aquae ductibus, of reparatio^ of houses, of watercourses, or
common sewers, of which I could recite out of the 43. book of the Digest. tit.
23. de cloacis. where you shall find: It was lawful for any man purgare and
reficere cloacam: What officers were to license him that would priuatam cloacam
facere, quae habeat exitum in publicum: What special care was to be had of
Tubus and Fistula. Lastly, that nouam cloacam facere is concedit, cui
publicar^^ viarum cura sit. That is, that no man might make a new Iakes, but he
that had license of the wardens of high ways. With much more which I would
cite, if it were not to avoid prolixity. And from them no doubt was derived our
commission of sewers, of which, the best of us all I hope, will take no scorn:
which commission, though in our country it is chiefly intended to keep open
the channels of rivers in the deep country, that the water may have free
passage. Yet the very name imports, that therein is comprised the subject of my
present Discourse, which in populous towns had as much need to be looked to,
as the other, infection being fit to be avoided as well as innundation. But now
I hasten to imperial examples: for though I have showed already some
authorities for my text, out of the practice of the laws, the provident care
of Magistrates, the magnificent cost of kings, the religion (though false) of
pagans. Yet until I have added to all these, the majesty of Emperors, and the
verity of Scriptures, I suppose some carping mouths will not be stopped.

The first example I meet with among the Emperors, Some of our rude
countrymen English this obtorto collo, ha^ging an arse.
was a matter rather of courtesy then cost: and if any man will say, that I
draw this into my Treatise, as it were obtorto collo, I answer, that in my
understanding, the tale falls so fit and proper unto this discourse, as
indeed to have brought it into any discourse saving of AJAX, I would say it
were improper and uncivil. The argument holds a min^re ad maius. Now hearken
to my tale. Claudius Emperor of Rome, and husband to that filthy Masselyna,
Agrippa says of her, that she lay with 22. several me^ in 24. hours, at the
common stews. and ta^dem lassata viris non satiata redijt.
( Vilissima quae fuerunt vel sunt,) she that was worthy, for the commonnesse
of her body (be it spoken with saving the reverence of all women that are or
were, save her self) to have bin metamorphized into AJAX, rather then poor
Hecuba, for barking at him that killed her son, into a bitch. This Claudius I
say, though not for cost (as Tarquin) yet for his courtesy was greatly to be
commended: for a Gentleman one day being talking with him, and falling suddenly
into a grievous fit of the cholicke, the poor Gentleman would not for good
manners sake break wind, which might presently have eased him, and after the
disease increased so sore on him that he died. The Emperor informed of his
death, was much grieved thereat, specially hearing of the cause, and immediately
thereupon made it be solemnly proclaimed, that if any man hereafter should be
troubled with the cholick, it should not be taken for ill manners to break wind,
though it were in the Emperors own company. Now it may be, some man in
disgrace of this proclamation, will say, that this Claudius was but a cuckold
and a fool. I answer, that for the cuckold, that was none of his fault, and if
it were a fault, God forbid all our faults should be seen on our foreheads*
And for the fool, the old proverb may serve us, Stultoru^ plena sunt omnia,
the world is full of fools. But take heed how you beg him for a fool, for I
have heard of one that was begged in the Court of wards for a fool, and when
it came to trial, he proved a wiser man by much, then he that begged him. And
though I have small skill in the law, specially in these prerogative cases,
(for I must confess I studied Littleton but to the title of disco^tinuance)
yet me think I should find a quirke, to make the^ that should beg him have a
cold suit in the court of wards. For I take it to be a ruled case, that though
a man h^ld wholly in Capite, put the case by a whole Knights service, or half
a nights service, yet if he be covert Baron, as Claudius was (for I am sure his
wife ware the breeches) and being at his fool age of 31. the Custodia must of
course be granted to the wife, although the man be plus digne de sang. And
thus much we say, saving to our selves all advantage of exception to the
insufficiency of the bill, Two par^s why Cl^udius was esteemed a fool. Look
Sueton.
etc. And without that the said Claudius did fondly to cause a man's hand to be
cut off upon the motion of a stranger, and without that he had almost marred
all the pastime he and his friends should have had at a Naumachia or sea-game,
with resaluting the slaves that should have fought, in good Latin. And lastly,
without that the said Claudius at his being in England Claudius was in England.
(though he was counted one of the best freeholders in Middlesex) could
forfeit any land that he held by the right of his sword, either in fee-simple,
or fee-taile, either by the socke, or the smock, to any other Lady, but the
Lady his wife. But alas Claudius, thy friends may say, that I am a bad Lawyer,
for all this while I have done little better then confess the action, but I
care not seeing thou art dead, Mortui non mordent, and it were fitter now to
preach for thee, then to plead for thee: well then for thy gentle
proclamatio^s sake, lo what in sadness (if I were to make thy funeral
Sermon) I would say for thee, that howsoever some writers have wro^ged thee
with the name of a fool, He is called fool to his face.
in one of thy judgments I may liken thy wisdom to Solomon, But hereby hangs
a tale. Claudius his judgment like that of Solomon.
and in one of thy jests, I can compare thy wit with Diogenes. Ass for
example, a woman on a time disclaiming her son, and pretending that for
conscience sake she must needs confess a truth, viz. how her own child died,
and this was a Supposititius, a substitute in his place, for avoiding of her
husbands displeasure, no evidence appearing to the contrary, and the next heir
following the matter very hard, by co^plot with the mother, who remained
obstinate in the tale, Claudius then sitting in judgment, seems to believe
it, and seeing the man a comely young man, and she no old woman, and often
protesting she maliced him not: he commanded her immediately in his presence to
marry him. The malicious mother driven to that unlooked for pinch, openly
confessed her unnatural malice, to avoid so unnatural a marriage; and thus
much for his justice; now let us here what his jest is. A certain Gentleman
that had his fingers made of lime twigges, stole a piece of plate from Claudius
one day at a banquet; the conueyaunce was not so cleanly, but one had spied it,
and told the Emperor, and offered to accuse him of it, whereby his goods might
have been all confiscate: but this good Prince would neither head him nor hang
him, no nor so much as once suffer him to be troubled; only the next time he
came, he caused him to be served in an earthen dish. The Gentleman being
abashed at it, for the dish gave him his dinner. Claudius was so far from
laying his crime in his dish, that he said, be of good cheer man, and fall to
thy meat, and when thou have dined put up that dish too: for I will spare thee
that with a better will then the last, for perhaps thou have a mind to poke up
thy dish when thou likest thy meat well. And so farewell good Claudius, and
when any of my friends are troubled with the collicke. I hope I shall make them
remember thee.

The next Emperor that is fit to bring into this discourse, is Vespasian,
though his predecessor Vitellius, who is noted to have bin a passing greater
eater, would (I think) have taken it in good part, to have bin offered a
cleanly and easy place for egestion after his good digestion. But to the
purpose. Vespasian before he was Emperor had borne some other offices, among
the which, one was Aedilis and it is written of him, that he incurred great
displeasure with Otho the^ Emperor, because he had not seen better to the
keeping sweet of the streets, and caused the filth of them (according to his
office) to be carried to the places appointed for the same. But afterward
himself coming to be Emperor (though the City of Rome was before his time
sufficiently furnished of Iaxes) yet it seemed there wa^ted other places of
near affinity to the^ (which he found belike when he was Aedile by
experience) I mean certain pissing conduites: and therefore he caused diverse
to be erected in the most populous and frequented places of the City, and
saved all the urine in cesternes, and sold it for a good sum of money to the
Dyers. But though I tell you the tale thus plainly, you must imagine the
matter was much more formally and sinely handled, and namely, that there was an
Edict set out in this sort.

By the Emperor C. Flauius Vespasianus, pater patriae, semper Augustus, etc.
FOrasmuch as his Majesty has been informed by sundry credible men, that
great abuse is committed by the irreuerent demeanure of diverse persons, ill
brought up, who without all due respect of civility and reverence, in most
unseemly manner, shed their urine, not only against the walls of his royal
palace, but also against the temples of the Gods and Goddesses. Whereby not
only ugly and loathsome sights, but filthy and pestiferous savors are daily
engendered, his Majesty therefore as well of a fatherly care of his citizens, as
of a filial reverence to the Gods, has to his great charges, and of his
princely bou^ty and magnifice^ce, erected diverse and sundry places of fair
polished marble, for this special purpose, requiring, and no less straightly
charging all persons, as well Citizens as strangers, to refrain from all other
places, saving these especially appointed, as they tender his favor, etc.

Thus could I have penned the Edict, if I had been secretary. For it had not
been worth a fig, if they had not artificially covered the true intent (which
was the profit) and gloriously set forth the goodly and godly pretense (that
was least thought on) viz. the health of the people, and clean keeping of the
temples. But I doubt, notwithstanding this goodly Edict, it will be objected,
that it was condemned for a base part, by a judge whose sentence is above all
appeal: I mean that noble Titus, deliciae humani generis, he that thought the
day lost in which he had done no man good: to answer which, I would but say as
was said to him, when the pissing money was put into the perfumed purse, suauis
odor lucri, the smell of gain is sweet. And I dare undertake, this answer will
satisfy my Lord Mayor of London, and many of the worshipful of the City,
that make sweet gains of stinking wares, Oils, oad, tar, etc.
and will laugh and be fat, and say: So we get the chinkes,
We will bear with the stinkes.
But I must find out a better answer for courtly wits, and therefore I say to
them, that according to the discipline and custom of the Romans (in my
opinion, under reformation of their better judgments) this was so honorable a
part of Vespasian, that he was therefore worthy to have been deified. For if
Saturnus were allowed as a God, by the name of Stercutius, as is before
alleged, for finding a profitable use of all manner soil, I see a good reason
(apaeribus) that Vespasian should as well be deified, for finding a means to
make money of urine, and accordingly to be named Vrinatius, of Vrina, as the
other is, of Stercus, Stercutius. Further Vespasian was famous for two true
miracles done by him, greater then all their gods beside ever did. Now if any
take exceptions to his face, because the fool told him, he looked as if it
went hard with him: trust me it shall go hard with me too, but I will find
somewhat to say, for him; and first I will get some of the painting that comes
from the river of Orenoque, which will wonderfully mend his complexion.
Secondly, I will say this, how bad soever his face was, he had something so
good, that a handsome woman gave him a thousand crowns, for putting his seal
with his labell to her pattent, and yet she exhibited the petition (as I take
it) in forma paper, for she was stark naked. Once this I am sure Suetonius
writes, that when his steward asked him, how he should set down that 1000.
crowns on his book, he b^d him write it among his other perquisites, in some
such sort. It. for respit of h^^age from a loving tenant to her lovely Lord for
a whole knights f^e, recepi -- 1000, crown^^.

Now for his wit, though I could tell you two excellent tales, how he deceived
a groom of his chamber, of his brother, and how he would needs be half with
his horse-keeper, for setting on a shoe on a horse that lacked none: yet I omit
them both, because many will be too apt to follow the president, and I will
keep me very strictly to my tesh, and specially because I hasten to a most
royal example. I mean of Traian. There is no man (I think) that has either
traveled far countries, or read foreign stories, but has either heard of
the famous exploits and victories that he had, or seen some of the stately and
sumptuous momuments that he made. This Traian was Emperor of Rome, and then
Emperor when Rome stood at her highest pitch of greatness, a man whose conquests
were most glorious, whose buildings were most gorgeous, whose justice was most
gracious, he that stayed his whole army, to right the cause of one widow, he
that created a Magistrate, and delivering him the sword for justice, said to
him, use this for me as long as I govern justly, but against me when I govern
otherwise, he in whose time no learned man was seen want, no poor man was
seen beg, he that would boast of Nerua his predecessor, of Plotina his
wife, of Plutarke his counceller: finally, this Traian was so well accomplished
a Prince in all princely virtues, as no story, no time, no memory, in all
points can match him. This most renow^ed Emperor, hearing there was a town in
Bithinia, far off from Rome, and in a place where he was like never to be
troubled with the evil savor, that was much annoyed for lack of a good
conueyance of the common priuies, thought himself bound (as a father to all
his subjects) to provide a remedy for such an inconvenience, and of his own
purse he took order for making a vault of great cost and charge in the city.
And for full satisfaction of the reader herein, I will set down the two
Epistles, as I find them in the tenth book of the Epistles of Plinius Secundus
to Traian Epist. 99.

Argumentum quaerit an. C. Plinius Secundus Traiano Imp. S. Amestrianorum ciuit
as, domine, and eligans and ornata habet, inter praecipua opera pulcherrimam,
eandemque longissimam plateam, cuius a latere per spacium omne porrigitur,
nomine quidem flumen re vera cloaca fedissima. Quae sicut turpis and
immundissima aspectu it a pestilens est odore teterrimo. Quibus ex causis no^
minus salubritatis quam decoris interest eam contegi, quod fiet si permiseris
curantibus n^bis ne desit pecunia operi tam magno quam necessario. Which is
thus in English.

Caius Plinius to Traian the Emperor greeting: The co^tents is, whether he
shall cover the water that runs by the town of Amestris.
The City of the Amestrians (my Lord) being both commodious and beautiful,
has among her principal goodly buildings, a very fair and long street, on
the side whereof runs thorough the whole length of it, a brook, in name
(for it is called so) but indeed a most filthy Iakes; which as it is foul and
most uncleanly to behold, so is it infectious with the horrible vile savor,
wherefore it were expedient, no less for wholsomenesse then for handsomnesse,
to have it vaulted, which shall be done if it please you to allow it, and I
will take care that there shall be no want of money for such a work, no less
chargeable then necessary. Thus writes Plinius Secundus, a Roman Senator, and
as it were a deputy Lieutenant in the Province of Bithinia, to the great
Traian, and I do half marvel he durst write so, for had it been in the time
of Domitian, Commodus or Nero, either Martial should have iested at him with
an Epigram, or some secretary that had envied his honest reputation, should
have been willed to have answered the letter in some scornful sort, and
would have written thus.

Master Pliny, my Lord God the Emperor, Che scrisse taccia ^t piu (...).
not vouchsafing to answer your letter him self, has commanded me to write
thus much to you, that he maruels you will presume to trouble his divine
Majesty with matters of so base regard, that your father being held a wise
man, and a learned, might have taught you better manners, that his Majesty
has matters of greater import, concerning the state of Empire, both for war
and peace, to employ his treasure in. Thus much I was commanded to write. Now
for mine own part, let me say thus much to you, that I heard my Lord God the
Emperor say, that if the ill savor annoy you, you may send to your Mistress
for a perfumed handkerchife to stop your nose, and that some Physicians say,
the smell of a Iakes is good against the plague. Some such answer as this, had
been like to have come from some of those beastly Emperors, and their filthy
followers. But how did Traian answer it? I will set you down his own letter,
out of the same book, in the same language.

Argumentum.
Permittit confornicari cloacam. Tr. Plinio S.
Rationis est, mi secunde Charissime, contegi aquam istam quae per ciuitatem
Amestrtanorum fluit, si detecta salubritati obest, Pecunia ne huic operi desit,
curaturum te secundum diligentiam tuam certum habeo.


Thus in English. It is good reason, my dearest Secundus, that the water be
covered that runs by the city of the Amestrians, if the want of covering may
breed infection. And for money for the work, I make no question, but you
according to your accustomed diligence, will make provision. Short and sweet,
yea most sweet indeed, because it was of an unsavory matter. But I had almost
forgot to English the argument, and then folks might laugh indeed at me, and
think I were Magister incipiens with ans, and say I could not English these
three words, permittit confornicari cloaca^; what the good year, what is the
same confornicari? trust me there is a word I never read in Homer nor
Aristotle, marry indeed they wrote but ill Latin, no nor in Tully, in Liuie,
in Tacitus, nor in all the Poets: what a strange word is this? Ho sir bring
hither the Dictionarie. Which of them, Cooper? No no, Thomas Coperus omisit
plurima verba. Which then, that with the French before the Latin, or Thomas
Thomas? Yea, bring me them two. What have thou brought the two dictionaries? I
meant but the two Thomases. Come old friend Tom, A great officer among the
boys at Eaton, Master of the rods.
Tom, Qui fuer as quo^dam clarae praepositor aulae, you have made rods to ierke
me withal ere now, I think I shall give you a ierke, if you do not help me to
some English for this word. Look it sir there in the dictionarie. Con, con.
Tush what do thou look in the French? thou will make a sweet piece of
looking, to look for confornicar in the French: look in the Latin for
fornicor. F, fa, fe, fi, fo, for, for, foramen, forfex, forica, forma,
fornicator, (now I think I am near it) fornix, fornicor, Eliots dictionarie
and Coopers placed these 2. words, too near together.
aris, are. There, what is that? A vault, to vault or arch any thing with a
compass. Well said, carry away the books again, now I have it: then thus it
is, He allows the vaulting or arching over of the Iakes. Mary Gods blessing
on his heart for his labor, and I love him the better for it. Wherefore (most
noble Traian) thou may well be called the pattern of all princely qualities,
comely, bountiful, martial, merciful, a lover of learning, moderate in private
expenses, magnificent in public, most goodly of stature, amiable, not only in
thy virtues, but even in thy vices. For to say the worst was ever said of thee,
these were all thy faults, ambition, or desiry of glory in wars, love of
women, and persecuting of religion. For so they join thee, Nero, Domitianus,
Traianus, Antoninus, Pontifices Romanos laniarunt. To which thus I answer
without a fee, but with all my heart: that thy ambition was so honorable, and
thy warlicke humor so well tempered, that thou did truly witness of thy
self, that thou did never envy any man's honor, for the confidence thou
had of thine own worth: and all the world can witness, that thou never
did make unjust war, nor refuse any just or indifferent peace. For that
same sweet sin of lechery, I would say as the Friar said, a young man and a
young woman in a green arber in a May morning; if God do not forgive it, I
would. For as sir Thomas More says of Edward the fourth^ he was subject to a
sin, from which, health of body in great prosperity of fortune, without a
special grace, hardly refrayneth. And to speak uprightly of him, his lusts
were not furious, but friendly, able with his goodly person, his sweet
behavior, and his bountiful gifts, to have won Lucretia. Besides, no doubt
his (...) was the less, in that he ever loved his wife most dearly, and used
her most respectively: for I have ever maintained this paradox, it is better to
love two too many, then one too few. Lastly, for the persecution of thy time,
though I dare not defend it, yet there is a maxim, inuincibilis ignorantia
recusat, and sure thou did not know the truth, and thy persecution was very
gentle, and half against thy will, as appears by the 98. Epistle of the
tenth book of Plin. Epistles, where thou do utterly reject all secret
promoeters, and do pronounce against the strict inquisition, Conquirendi non
sunt, etc. Wherefore I doubt not to pronounce, that I hope thy soul is in
heaven, both because those thou did persecute prayed for thee, wishing to
thee, as Tertul. says; Vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam,
exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietu^. A long life,
a happy reign, a safe dwelling, strong armies, a faithful Senate, honest
people, and a quiet world. Further, it is written by authors of some credit,
that thy soul was delivered out of hell, at the prayer of great S. Gregory,
which though I am not bound to believe, S. Damas^en S. Brigid write this of
Traian, believe them who list, for though it seem Popish, yet it ministers an
argument against some Popish opinions.
yet as in love, I had rather love too many the^ too few, so in charity, I had
rather believe too much then too little. As for that Scripture, ex inferno nulla
redemptio, I have heard it often alleged by great clerks, but I think it is in
the Epistle of S. Paul to the Laodiceans, or in Nicodemus Gospel: for I never
yet could find it in the Bible. Wherefore this I will frankely say for Traian,
that whersoeuer I find a Prince or a Peer with so great virtues, and so few
vices, I will honor him, love him, extol him, admire him, and pronounce this
of him; that the army is happy that has such a General, the Prince happy
that has such a councellor, the Mistress happy that has such a servant, and
thus I end my profane authorities, and now I come to the divine, wherein I
think I shall serve you in the ba^ket I have promised you as my self have been
served many times at our co^mencement feasts, and such like in Cambridge, that
when we have been in the midst of some pleasant argument, suddenly the Bibler
has come, and with a loud and audible voice begun with Incipit libri
Deuteronomium, caput vicesimum ter-cium. And then suddenly we have been all s't
tacete, and hearkened to the Scripture, for even so must I now after all our
pleasant stories, bring in as I promised, some divine authorities, to the which
I pray you let us with all due reverence be attentive.

In the aforesaid 23. Authorities of Sripture.
Chapter of Deuteronomie, in the 12. verse, I find this text:

12 Habebis locum extra castra ad quem egrediaris ad requisita naturae.

13 Gerens paxillum in balt^o, cumque sederis fodies per circuitum, and egesta
humo operies quo releuatus es.

14 Dominus enim Deus tuus ambulat in medio castroru^, vt eruat te and tradat
tibi inimicos tuos, and sint castra tua sa^cta, and nihil in eis appareat
foeditatis, ne derelinquat te. That is.

12 Thou shall have a place without thy tents, to which thou shall go to do the
necessities of nature.

13 Carrying a spade staff in thy hand, Or a trowell.
and when thou will ease thee, thou shall cut a round turfe, and thou shall
cover thy excrements therewith, in the place where thou did ease thy self.

14 For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy tents to deliver thee, and
to give thy enemies into the hands, that thy tents may be holy, and that there
appear no filthiness in them, lest he forsake thee.

But me think some may say upon hearing of this text, What is it possible
there should he such a Scripture, that handles so homely matters? I can hardly
believe it; I have always had a bible in my parlour these many years, and often
time when the weather has been foul, and that I have had no other book to
read on, and have wanted company to play at cards or tables with me, I have
read in those books of the old Testament, at least half an hour by the
clock, and yet I remember not any such matter. Nay further, I have heard a
Preacher, that has kept an exercise a ye are together upon the books of
Moses, and has told us of Genesis, and genealogies, of the arc and the
propitiatory, of pollutions, of washings, of leprosies, but I never heard him
talk of such a homely matter as this. I answer, It may be so very well. And
therefore now I pray you, since the text is so strange to you, give me leave to
put you in mind of two virtuous and honest observations out of this (how homly
so ever) yet wholly Scripture. One, to be thankful to our Savior for his
mercies; the other to be faithful to our Sovereign for her merits. We may
thank God that al these servile ceremonies, which S. Paul calls the works
of the Law, as Circumcision, New moons, Sabbaths, washings, cleansings, with
touch not, handle not, eat not, etc. are now taken away and quite abolished by
the Gospel, which has now made Omnia munda mundis. And as S. Augustine says,
in steed of ceremonies, combersome, infinite, intolerable, impossible, has
given Sacraments, easy, few, sweet, and gracious, and has taught us in steed
of hearing Fac ho^ and vi^es, to say now to him, DaDomine quod iubes. Secondly,
whereas it seems you never heard this text preached on, you may bless in your
soul, and pray for her Majesty's so peaceable and prosperous reign, this text
being not fit for peace and a pulpit, but only for war and a camp. And
therefore though I hope we shall never have cause to hear such a Scripture
preached of in England, yet those that serve in other countries, both have and
shall hear it thus applied (and that often not without need) viz. that though
now to the clean all things are clean, yet still we must have a special care
of cleanlines, and wholsomenesse, even for the things here spoken of, and if
for such things, how much more for rapes, the^ts, murders, blasphemies, things
(as God knows) too common in all our camps. Ne Dominus Deus noster, qui
ambulat in medio castrorum derelinquat nos. Least the Lord our God, that
walks in the midst of our te^ts, should forsake us. And even in the time of
the sweetest peace, me thinks I could also say, here at home, that it is an
vnreuerent thing, for Churches ordained for prayer, and church-yardes appointed
for burial, to be polluted and filed as if they were kennels and dunghils.

And I have thought sometime with my self, that if I were but half so great
an officer under our most gracious Emperesse, who is in deed worthy, and only
worthy to be Traians Mistress, as Plinius Secundus was under that Traian; I
would write for the mending of such a loathsome fault in my neighbor town of
Bath (where many noble persons are often annoyed with it) as Pliny did for
Amestris. Yet why may I not by Poetica lice^tia, and by an honest and
necessary figure (in this age) called Reprehensio, imagine my self for half
an hour to be Secundus, and suppose some other, that perhaps at this hour is
not far from Traians country, to be that worthiest Traian? For though in the
English Grammar, the feminine gender is more worthy then the masculine, the
which rule I wish long may hold. Yet lest old Priscian should say I brake his
head when I never came near him, There is a Comedy called Priscianus vapula^s,
where if one should say igne^hanc, Priscian would cry, his head were broken.
I will keep me in this my pleasant imitation, within such an honest
limitation, as shall be free from all just reprehension, and write, in steed of
C. Pl. Secundus Traiano Imp. Salutem.

Haec tibi Traiano, terraque marique remoto,
Scribit Misacmos, nulli pietate Secundus.
The City of Bath (my Lord) being both poor enough and proud enough, has
since her highness being there, woonderfully beautified it self in fine
houses for victualing and lodging, but decaies as fast in their ancient and
honest trades of merchandise and clothing: the fair Church her Highness gave
order should be reedified, stands at a stay, and their common sewer, which
before stood in an ill place, stands now in no place, for they have not any at
all. Which for a town so plentifully served of water, in a country so well
provided of stone, in a place resorted unto so greatly (being at two times of
the year, as it were the pilgrimage of health to al saints) me think seems
an unworthy and dishonorable thing, wherefore if your Lordship would
authorize me, or some wiser then me, to take a strict account of the money, by
her Majesty's gracious grant gathered and to be gathered, which in the opinion
of many, cannot be less then ten thousand pounds (though not to wrong them, I
think they have bestowed upon the point of 10000. pounds abating but one
cipher) I would not doubt, of a ^^inate church to make a reverent church, and
of an unsavory town a most sweet town.

This I do the rather write, because your Lordship, and the rest of her
Majesty's most honorable counsel, thought me once worthy to be Steward of that
town, but that the wiser counsel of the town thought it not meet, out of a
deeper reach, lest being already their poor neighbor, this increase might have
made my estate too great among them. For indeed the ^ee belonging to it, and
some other commodities annexed, might have been worth to me de claro vi^^ and
modis, per ann^m. CCCClxxx.d.

Moreover I am to certify your Lordship, that the spring taken out of the hot
bath into the private, does not annoy or prejudice the virtue of the hot bath
as her Majesty has bin lately informed. And it is not unnecessary, for some
honorable persons that come thither, sometimes to have such a private bath. But
now I pray you let us hearken to the Scripture, for the Bibler is not yet come
to Tu autem.

I find also in the second and third chapters of Nehemias, which some call the
second book of Esdras, where he tells how no body but he and his ass went to
survey the city. Et ingressus sum ad portam vallis nocte, and ante fontem
draconis, and ad portam stercoris, and consider abam murum Jerusalem dissipatum
and portas eius consumptas igni. And in the third chapter showing who repaired
all the ruins, Et portam vallis aedificauit Hanum and habitatores Zanoe, ipsi
aedificauerunt eam, and statuerunt valuas eius, and seras, and vectes, and
mill cubitos in muro vsque ad portam sterquilinii. Et portam sterquilinii
aedificauit Melchias filius Rhechab princeps etc. And the gate of the valley
built Hanum and the inhabitants of Zanoe, they built it, and they made the
leaves of the gate, and the locks, and the hinges, and a thousand cubits in
the wall, even to the doung gate, and Melchias son of Rhecab being Prince of
Bethacharan built the doung gate. There is a noble and learned Lady, dowager to
the Lord John Russell, that will not name love without save reverence.
I would have said, saue-reuerence the doung gate, but that Nehemias who was a
Gentleman well brought up, and a courtier, and had been a sewer and cupbearer
to Artaxerxes, writes it as I have recited it.

But now to the purpose, perhaps you will say, that this makes nothing to the
present argument, that the gate is called Doungate, for we have a gate in
London called Dougate, that with a little dash with a pen will seem to be the
same gate, and yet has no great affinity with the matter, and on the other
side, there is a place has a glorious title of Queen Hiue, and yet it was
ordained for my lady Cloacina. I grant it might be so, for so there is a parish
by London called Hornsey, which is an ungracious crooked name, and yet I
verily persuade me, that the most glorious or gracious street in London has
more horns in it sometime either visible or invisible then all the other
parish. But concerning the gate in Ieruselagim called Porta Stercoris, I find
it was so called because it lay on the East side of the City, toward the
brook Cedron, whither all the rain water of the City, and all other
conueiances ran, as they do out of the City of London into the Thames: and
that being so, and the city so populous, the gate might well be called Porta
Stercoris. Now without the city I find mentioned another place ordained for
the like purpose, to carry out all such filth as the rain could not wash away,
and had no common passage, and that was the valley of Hinnon, which seems by
the map to lie Southeast and by South to the Temple, and thither, I say, the
Scauengers carried their loding, The Brickils.
as they do at London beyond Golding lane. And therefore in the new Testament it
is called gehenna, and taken for hell, and if you have a mind to know how I
come by this divinity, trust me if you will, I come by it as true men come by
their goods. For so it is, that not long since there dwelt in Bath a
schoolmasters, a man whom I favored much, for his sake that sent him thither.
But he had not been there long, but a controversy arose betwixt him and some
preachers therabout, among whom we have too many that study nothing but the
controversies, and it came after many disputes on both sides, at last to
writing and publishing of Books. And the schoolmasters (though being no
Preacher) wrote a book with this title, that Christ descended not into hell:
the very sight of which title, being flat co^tradictorie to an article of the
Creed, I remember I said of the man as Heywood says in his proverbs, that
hereafter He might be of my Pater noster indeed,
But sure he should never come in my Creed.
And therefore I might repute him as a good humanist, but I should ever doubt
him for a good divine. Now as I say, hearing in these disputes and sermons,
diverse names of hell thoroughly sifted. As Ades, Tartaros, Infernum, Stagnum
ardens, and last of all Gehenna, which last I was most used to, as having an
old verse when I was at Eaton, of a Peacocke. Angelus in penna, pede latro,
voce gehenna.
A bird that has an Angels plume,
A theeuish pace, a hellish tune.
Consequently, I observed, that our honest and learned Preacher of Bath M. R.
M. first proved hell to be a local place (if not circumscriptiue, yet at least
definitive. The^ he showed the etymology of the word gehenna to be derived in
Greek of (...), that is, the earth or valley of Hinnon, the^ he told, that
this place was as it were the common dunghill or mickson of the whole town,
that the Jews had used in this valley, to make their children pass through
the fire, as a sacrifice to the Devil, according to the Psalm of David, they
offered their sons and daughters unto devils. Finally, that our savior to
make a more fearful impression in their hearts, of the pains of hell indeed,
which they know not, used the name of this hellish place, which they knew that
had in it these hateful hellish properties, smoke, stink, horrible cries, and
torment. But least you should think I speak as a parrot, nothing but what I
have heard an other say, let me add somewhat of mine own poor reading, and
that shall be this, that this valley of Hinnon was once for the sweet air,
fine groves, fair walks, and green and pleasant fields, comparable with any
place about Jerusalem, but when the abominable Idol of Moloch was erected in
it, whose purtraiture was like a king having the head of a calfe, al of bras,
and hollow within: unto which (most inhumanely) they sacrificed humane flesh,
yea their own children, and to the end that the wicked parents might not feel
remorse of the woeful cries of the wretched children, they daunced a strange
medley about the fire, having music suitable to such mirth, of drums and Jews
harpes (for I think hornepipes and bag-pipes were not then found out) I say
these abominations being there committed, the good Josias, driven to use an
extreme medicine to so extreme a malady, first burned and brake all too pieces
the horrible Idol, and then in detestation of the abuses there committed, cut
down the fine groves, tare up the sweet pastures, defaced the pleasant walks;
and to the end that all passengers should fly from it, that were wont to
frequent it, he caused all filthy carrion, dead dogs and horses, all the filth
of the streets, and whatsoever hateful and ugly things could be imagined, to
be carried thither. And this o Josias was thy zealous reformation: but alas how
little do some that pretend thy name, participate thy nature. They pull down
Moloch, but set up Baal Peor and Beelsebub, their lean devotion thinks the
hill of the Lord is too fat, their envious eye serves them like Aretinoes
spectacles, to make all seem bigger, then it should be, they learn the
Babylonians song in the Psalms. Down, down with it at any hand,
Make all thing plain, let nothing stand.
They care neither for good letters nor good lives, but only out of the
spoils to get good livings, our good Lord Bishops must be made poor
superintendents, that they might superintend the goodly Lordships of rich
Bishoprics, and then we that be simple fellows must believe, that they offer
us Josias reformation, whereas indeed it sauors not of that in any thing but the
ill savor: for as Josias defaced a fair field, and made it spurcitiarum
latrinam, so they would ruinate our cathedral churches, and make them Spelunca
latronum, as my good friend Hary-Osto, or mine Host Hary says of the Pagan
Rodomont, after his host had ended his knauish tale. He makes the Church (oh
horrible abuse)
Serve him for his profane ungodly use.
Wherefore let them call themselves what they list, but if they learn no better
lessons of Josias, but to turn sweet fields to stinking dunghils, they shall
make no new Iaxes in England by my consent, and I hope my devise shall serve
to mende many that be now amiss, with an honester and easier reformation, and
I doubt not but the Magistrate that has charge to see ne quid respub.
detrimanti capiat, will provide, least our receipts prove deceipts, our
auditors frauditors, and our reformation deformation, and so all run headlong
to gehenna, where the sport will be torment, the music clamors, the prospect
smoke, and the perfume stink. Which two last, I mean smoke and stink, I have
verily persuaded me, are two of those pains of hell, which they call poena
sensus: Esa. cap. 3. Eterit pro sua^^ adore foe^or.
which pain S. Augustine affirms may also torment aerie or spiritual bodies,
as partly appeers in the story of Tobias, where a wicked spirit was driven
away with the smoke of a broyled liver; and therefore I have endeavored in my
poor buildings to avoid those two inconveniences as much as I may. As for the
two other annoiances, that the old proverb ioineth to one of these, saying,
there are three things that make a man weary of his house, a smoking chimney, a
dropping eues, and a brauling woman. I would no less willingly avoid the^, but
when storms come, I must as my neighbors do, bear that with patience, which I
can not reform with choler, and learn of the good Socrates, who when Xantippe
had crowned him with a chamber pot, he bare it off single with his head and
shoulders, and said to such as laughed at him for it.

It never yet was deemd a wonder,
To see that rain should follow thunder.
And to the intent you may see, that I am not only groundedly studied in the
reformation of AJAX, which I have chosen for the project of this discourse, but
that I am also superficially seen in these three other matters of shrewd
importance to all good housekeepers, I will not be dangerous of my cunning,
but I will venture my pen and my pains, if you will lend but your eyes or your
ears, though I perhaps shall have more fists about my ears then mine own for
it. First therefore for the house, I will teach you a verse for it, that I
think M. Tusser taught me, or else now I may teach it his son. To keep your
house dry, you must always in summer.
Give money to the mason, the tiler and plummer.
For the shrewd wife, read the book of taming a shrew, which has made a
number of us so perfect, that now every one can rule a shrew in our country,
save he that has her. But indeed there are but two good rules. One is, let
them never have their wills; the other differs but a letter, let them ever have
their wills, the first is the wise, but the second is more in request, and
therefore I make choice of it.

Lastly for smoking chimneys, many remedies have been studied, One taught an
excellent rule to keep a chimney from smoking, and a privy from stinking,
viz. to make your fire in your privy, and to set the close stool in the
chimney.
but one excellent and infallible way is found out among some of the great
Architectes of this age, namely to make no fire in them, and by the same rule
they may have very sweet Iaxes too. But the best way I have found, is out of
Cardan partly, but as I think mended by practice of some of my neighbors of
Bath: who make things like half a cloak about the tops of the chimneys, with
a fane to turn round with the wind, which because they make of wood is
dangerous for fire, but being made thin of copper plates or of old kettels
will be as light and without danger, but this is supererogation, and more then
I promised you. But now to come home again, though home be never so homely,
the fourth annoiance though it be left out of the proverb, may compare with
two of the other three, which is a stinking privy, which makes a man wish
sometime, save for an ornament of the face (as Heywood says) to have no nose.
Most of our savors be more sour then sweet,
A nose then or no nose* which is most meet?
And for reformation of this, many I doubt not, have ere this beaten their
brains and strained very hard, to have found out some remedy; but yet still I
find all my good friends houses greatly annoyed with it.

But yet ere I come to discover this exact and exquisite form that I have
promised, let me add a word or two out of the good and wholesome rules of
physic, both for authorizing the homely words so often used, as for proving that
the matter in their faculty is specially regarded; for diverse, that are
otherwise very dainty and curious, yet for their healths sake, will endure
both to hear homely language, to see sluttish sights, to taste dirtie drugs,
and to show secret sores; according to the Italian proverb, All confessore
medico and aduocato,
Non deue tener cosa celato.
From your confessor, lawyer, and physician,
Hide not your case on no condition.
No man therefore is either so ignorant, or so impudent, as either not to know
or not to confess, that the honorable science of physic, embaseth it self
ofttimes about the care of this business. For whereto serves I pray you, fiant
clysteria, fiant pillulae, fiant potiones, fiant pessi. But fie on it, it makes
me almost sick to talk of them, sure I am the house I treat of, is as it were
the center to which they must all fall first or last, and many times I think
first were wholsomer of the two. But to enforce my proofs, though shortly yet
soundly, I will not bring any peculiar prescripts out of Galen and Hipocrates,
least you should oppose against them Asclepiades or Paracelsus, nor stand long
to dilate of the Empiricall physic, or the dogmaticall and the methodicall. Of
all which if I should say all I could, I fear me not so much, that physicians
would take me for a fool, as that fools will take me for a Physician. I will
therefore set down as it were certain autenticall rules, out of a general
Council of Physicians, and that sent by common consent to a great K. of
England, against which if any Doctor should except, he must ipso facto be
counted an heretic. This therefore I find of my text in that book that
begins Anglorum regi scribit schola tota Salerni. For when he has been
advised to make choice of three Physicians, Haec tria men's laeta, requies,
moderata diet. Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet, and Doctor Meryman. Then they
admonish him of many particulars, for his health, for his food, for his house,
etc. Which if they might with good manners write to a king, then I may without
inciuilitie recite to a kinseman. Si vis incolumem, si vis te viuere sanum,
Curas toll graves irasci creed profanum,
Parce mero caenato parum nec sit tibi vanum,
Surgere post epulas somnum fuge meridianum.
Nec mictum retine, nec co^prime fortiter anu^. and
The Salerne schole does by these lines impart
Health to the British king, and does advise,
From cares thy head to free, from wrath thy heart,
Drink not much wine, sup light, and soon arise,
After thy meat, twixt meals keep wake thine eyes.
And when to natures needs prouokt thou art,
Do not forbear the same in any wise:
So shall thou live long time with little smart.
Lo what a special lesson for health they teach, to take your opportunity so
often as it is offered of going to those businesses. The^ soon after to let you
know how wholesome it is to break wind, they tell four diseases that come by
forbearing it. Quatuor ex vento veniunt inventre retento,
Spasmus, hydrops colica, vertigo, quatuor ista.
But most especially making for my purpose, both for word and matter. Aer sit
mundus, habitabilis ac luminosus,
Infectus neque sit, nec olens foetore cloacae.
Which as a principal lesson, to be learned by builders, I will set down in
verse. A builder that will follow wise direction,
Must first foresee before his house he makes,
That the air be clear, and free from all infection,
And not annoyd with stinch of any Iakes.
For indeed let your house be never so well apparaled, never so well plaistered
and painted, if she have a stinking breath I shall never like of my lodging.
Lastly, there be two other verses, with which I will end these school
authorities. Multiplicant mictum, ventrem dant aescula strictum,
Post pyra dapotum, post pomum vade cacatum.
And thus I take it, I end this part of my discourse, with a well chosen verse
to the purpose: yet ere you go, take this with you in prose, that many
Physicians do hold, that the plague, the measeals, the hemorhoids, the small
pox, and perhaps the great ones too, with the fistula in ano, and many of
those inward diseases, are no way sooner gotten, then by the savor of others
excrements, upon unwholesome priuies. Wherefore I will now draw to the
conclusion of this same tedious discourse: for it is high time now to take away
the board, and I see you are almost full of our homely fare, and perhaps you
have been used to your dainties of Potatoes, of Caueare Eringus, plums of
Genowa, all which may well increase your appetite to several euacuations, we
will therefore now (according to the physic we learned even now) rise and
stretch our legs a little, and anon I will put on my boots, and go a piece of the
way with you, and discourse of the rest: in the mean time my self will go
perhaps to the house we talk off, though manners would, I offered you the
French courtesy, to go with me to the place, where a man might very kindly
finish this discourse.

THE THIRD SECTION, showing the form, and how it may be reformed.
NOw therefore to come where we left last, for I know you would feign have your
instructions ere you go home, as soon as I have given my horse some breath up
this hill, I will ride along with you, so you will ride a sober pace: for I
love not to ride with these goose chasing youths, that post still to their
iourneies end, and when they come thither, they cannot remember what business
they have there, but that they had even as much in the place they came from.

These inconveniences being so great, and the greater because so general, if
there be a way with little cost, with much cleanelinesse, with great facility,
and some pleasure to avoid them, were it not rather a sin to conceal it,
then a shame to utter it? Wherefore shame to them that shame think, for I will
confess frankely to you, both how much I was troubled with the annoyance, and
what I have found for the remedy. For when I found not only in mine own poor
confused cottage, but even in the goodliest and stateliest palaces of this
realm, notwithstanding all our prouisio^s of vaults, of sluices, of grates, of
pains of poor folks in sweeping and scouring, yet still this same whoreson
saucy stink, though he were commanded on pain of death not to come within the
gates, yet would spite of our noses, even when we would gladliest have spared
his company, prease to the fair ladies chambers. I began to conceive such a
malice against all the race of him, that I vowed to be at deadly fewd with them,
till I had brought some of the chiefest of them to utter confusion. And
conferring some principles of Philosophy I had read and some conueyances of
architecture I had seen, with some devises of others I had heard, and some
practices of mine own I had paid for: I found out at last this way that is
after described, The principles are these, A^r non penetrat aquam. Natura non
^atitur va^u^^.
and a marvelous easy and cheap way it is, and I dare speak it upon my
credit, not without good experience, that though it be neither far fetched, nor
dear bought, yet it is good for Ladies, and there be few houses that may not
have the benefit of it. For there be few great and well contrived houses, but
have vaults and secret passages made under ground, to convey away both the
ordure and other noisome things, as also the rain water that falls into the
courts, which being cleanly in respect of the eye, yet because they must of
force have many vents, they are often noisome in regard of the smell. Specially
in houses of office, that stand high from the ground, the tuns of them drawing
up the air as a chimney does smoke. By which it comes to pass many times
(specially if the wind stand at the mouth of the vaults) that what with
fish-water coming from the kitchins, blood and garbage of foul, washing of
dishes and the excrements of the other houses joined together, and all these in
moist weather stirred a little with some small stream of rain water. For as
the proverb is, It Is noted as the nature of a sink,
Ever the more it is stird, the more to stink.
I say these thus meeting together, make such a quintessence of a stink, that
if Paracelsus were alive, his art could not devise to extract a stronger. Now
because the most unavoidable of all these things that keep such a stinking
stir, or such a stink when they be stirred, is urine and ordure, that which we
all carry about us (a good speculation to make us remember what we are, and
whither we must) therefore as I said before, many have devised remedies for this
in times past, some not many years since, and I this last year, of all which
I will make choice only of two beside mine own to speak off, because men of
good judgment have allowed them for good, but yet (as the ape does his young
ones) I think mine the properest of them all.

The first and the ancientest, is to make a close vault in the ground, widest
in the bottom, and narrower upward, and to floor the same with hot lime and
tarris, or some such dry pauing as may keep out al water and air also: for if
it be so close as no air can come in, it does as it were smother the savor,
like to the snuffes or extinguishers wherewith we put out a candle, and this
stands with good reason, that seeing it is his nature to make the worse savor
the more he is stirred, and nothing makes him keep a more stinking stir, then
a little wind and water, surely there can be little or no annoia^ce of him in
this kind of house, where he shall lie so quietly. But against this is to be
objected, that if there be a little cranny in the wall as big as a straw, or if
the ground stand upon winter springs or be subject as most places under ground
are, to give with moist weather, the^ at such times it must needs offend.

Besides in a Princes house where so many mouths be fed, a close vault will fill
quickly; and that objection did my Lord of Leicester make to Sir John Young, at
his last being at Bristow, who commended to my Lord that fashion, and showed
him his own of a worse fashion, and told him that at a friends house of his at
Peter hill in London, there was a very sweet privy of that making.

Another way, is either upon close or open vaults, so to place the sieges or
seats as behind them may rise tons of chimneys, to draw all the ill aires
upwards: of which kind I may be bold to say, that our house of Lincolnes Inn,
puts down all that have been made before it, and is indeed both in reason
and experience, a means to avoid much of the annoyance that is wont to come of
them, and keeps the place all about much the sweeter. But yet to speak
truly, this is not sat from all infection or annoiance while one is there, as
my sense has told me, for Sensus non fallitur in proprio obiecto. Or perhaps
by the strict words of the statute it ought to be so, and that but two parts
may be devised away, and a third must remain to the heir, for I dare
undertake, go thither when you will, your next heir at the common house,
whatsoever charge he is at in the suit, I am sure he may be made a savor, at
the least for the ^ertiam partem above al reprises, if the fault be not his
own. And further, when the weather is not calm, the wind is so unruly, that
it will force the ill aires down the chimneys, and not draw them up, as we see
it does in chimneys where fire is made, force down the smoke, notwithstanding
that the very nature of fire helps to enforce it upward, whereas these moist
vapors are apt (even of their own nature) to spread abroad, and hang like a
deaw about every thing. Wherefore though I am but a punie of Lincolnes Inn^,
and the builder heerof was a bencher, ye^ I will under reformation, prefer my
devise before his, either because it is better, or else out of the common fault
of young men in this age, that we think our devises wiser then our elders. Yet
with this respective modesty, that because my devise as with water, where that
cannot be had, or where houses stand on an exceeding flat, there I will leave
the work to his oversight, but where any convenient current is, and no want of
water, there I would be surueyer, and so to divide the regiment, that if for
the dry land service he be general, for the water service I will be Admiral.
A true praise of Li^colnes Inn.
Yet by the way, I hope all the Innes of court will gratulate the present
flourishing estate of our Lincolnes Inn: not so much for furnishing the realm
with most honorable, upright and well learned magistrates, great sergea^ts,
grave counselors, towardly barresters, young gallants of worth and spirit sans
nombre, but also (that I may now deal with mine equals, and not with my
ancients) with two such rare enginers, M. Plat set forth a book of engines.
me for this one devise, and Master Plat for very many. Or if envy will not
suffer them to give us due honor, let us two M. Plat, at least grace one
another: and I am the willinger to offer this kindness to you, because I was
advised by some to have recommended this devise to your illustrations, which I
was very like to have done, save that we are of no great acquaintance, and
beside I have a little ambitions humor of mine own to be counted a deviser,
though to clear me of pride, you see my first practice is upon so base a
subject, as I hope no body will envy me, or seek to take it from me: as the
sweet Zerbino said to Marfysa, of the ugly Gabrina. You have so sweet a piece
to carry by you, Ariost. Cant. 20.

As you are sure that no man will envy you.
And after he had played a word or two with them, he concluded, Ben siate
accopiati Io iurerei,
Se come essa e bella tu gagliardo sci.
No doubt you are a fitly matched pair,
If you as lusty be, as she is fair.
But when they had done breaking off jests one on another, and that it came to
breaking of staves, the peerless Prince (for his oaths sake) was feign to
take that most hateful hagge into his protection. And so I suppose, that some
may play in like sort upon me and my writing, and say; The writer and the
matter well may meet,
Were he as eloquent as it is sweet.
But if they do, let them take heed, that in one place or other of this
pamphlet, they do not pull themselves by the nose, as the proverb is But that
you may see M. Plat, I have studied your book with some observation: if you
would teach me your secret of making artificial cole, Some coniect^re, that
stale and cowdoung must effect both these multiplications.
and multiplying barley (though I feareme both the means will smell a little
of kin to M. AJAX) I assure you I would take it very kindly: and we two might
have a suit together for a monapolie, you of your cole, as you mention in your
book, and I of M. reformed AJAX: and if you will trust me to draw the
petitions, you shall see I will get some of the presidents of the starch and
the vinegar, and make it carry as good a show of reason, and good to the
common wealth as theirs does. As first for yours I would frame these reasons: I
would show the excellent commodity of iron-milles (for if you speak against
them your suit will be dashed straight.) I would prove how they reduce wild and
savage woods, to civil and fruitful pastures. I would allege, they are good
for maintenance of navigations, in respect that every ship, what with his cast
pieces, ankers, bolts and nails, has half as many ^un of iron as timber to
it. I would say, it is a commodity to the subject, considering they sell it for
twelve or fourteen pound the tun, and when it came out of Spain or Holland,
it was sold but for eight pound. The like also I would say for glass: and so
concluding, that the woods must needs be spent upon these two (as doubtless
they will in a short time) then your devise for artificial cole, of how homely
stuff soever you make it, will be both regarded and rewarded. And thus perhaps
making some great man your half, you may have an imposition of a tenth or a
fifth of every chaldron of your fuel. And though it should poison all the town
with the ill savor (as the brew house by White hall does her Highness own
house, and all Channon row) yet what for necessity, and what for favor, it
should be suffered. And never fear that the price of your cole will fall by
cherishing of woods, for now Sir Walter Mildmay is dead, you shall have few men
will busy themselves about any of these public inconveniences, The Author
could have said honorable of both, but he takes honesty in this place for the
high^^ title.
or if his honest successor would attempt it, he should I fear me, have small
hope to prevail, in that which so honest a predecessor could not.

Now for my Monapole, I would ask but this trifling suit, and I would make
these goodly pretenses. First, because I have proved by good authors, that M.
AJAX is lineally descended of the ancient house of Stercutius, and to have
lived long under protection of Dea Cloacina, and to have been prayed for by so
many holy Saints, I would procure (if the traffic were as open with Rome as
it has been) that as his progenitor Stercutius was allowed for a God, by one
of the first Roman Pontifices Maximi, so M. AJAX might be allowed for a Saunt
by Pope Sisefinke, Sextus quintus (I would have said) or one of his successors,
Boce^^lo writes that S. Ciapiellet^ was canonized.
(which if it be so easy a matter, as Boccacio, and other Italian authors
write, will not be very chargeable) and then with some of the money that you
gain with the perfumed cole, (if you will lend it me, and I will mo^gage my
Bull to you when I have it, for payment) I will erect in London and elsewhere,
diverse shrines to this new Saint, and all the fat offerings shall be
distributed to such poor hungry fellows as sue for Monapolies, which being
joined to the ashes of your cole, will be perhaps not vncommodious for land,
and you and I will beg nothing for our reward, but you as I said before, If
I had such a grant, he that were my here is ex ass, would be the richest squire
in England.
a fifth part of every chaldron, and I but the sixth part of an assise a month,
of all that will not be recusants, to do their daily service, at these holy
shrines. Now if any do object it is too great a suit (for I think it would
be the richest office in England) and say that it would amount to more then
Peter pence, and Poll pence to, I would first to stop their mouths quickly,
promise them a good share in it, then I would amplify the service, that in
this devise I do in some respects to the state of Christianity, in a matter
that Saint Peter nor Paul neither never thought of. For it is a common
obloquie, that the Turks (who still keep the order of Deuteronomie for their
ordure do object to Christians, that they are poisoned with their own dung,
which objection cannot be answered (be it spoken with due reverence to the two
most excellent apostles) with any sentence in both their Epistles, so fully to
satisfy the miscreant wretches, as the plain demonstration and practice of my
device must needs answer them. What think you M. Plat, is not here a good plat
laid, that you and I may be made by for ever? only I fear one let, and that
is this: I protest Misac mos and al^^^ friends love (...) the better (...) If
you call this flattery, I woul^^ you would all deserve to be so flattered.
I hear by report there is a worthy Gentleman, sometime of our house, that
has now the keeping of the great seal, and these suits cannot pass but by
his priuitie, and they say (see our ill hap) he has ever been a great enemy
to all these paltry co^cealments and monapolies, and further they say of him,
that to beguile him with goodly shows is very difficult, but to corrupt him
with gifts is impossible; well, if it be so, all our fat is in the fire, and let
the lean go after. You may make a great fire of your gains, and be never the
warmer: and I may throw all mine into AJAX, and be never the poorer. Let us
then make a virtue of necessity, and since we cannot get these monapolies, let
us sai^ we care not for them, and a vengeance on them that beg them, and so we
may have millions say Amen to us, and we shall be thought the honester men, and
seeing I have had so il luck in this, I would no body might ever have any more
of them, till I make such another suit. And if M. Plat will follow my advise,
he shall impart his rare devises gratis, as I do this, and so we may one day be
put into the Chronicles, as good members of our country, more worthily then
the great Bear that carried eight dogs on him when Monseur was here. A
worthy matter to be put into a Chron^cle and fit for such worthy
historiographers.
But to leave Master Plats cole, which kindled this fantasy in me, and to
turn to my tesh, though I called my self by metaphor an admiral for the water
works, yet I assure you, this devise of mine, requires not a sea of water, but
a cesterne; nor a whole Tems full, but half a tun full, to keep all sweet
and sauorie: for I will undertake, from the pesants cottage, to the Princes
palace, twice so much quantity of water as is spent in drink in the house,
will serve the turn: which if it were at Shaftsburie, where water is dearest of
any town I know, that is no great proportion. And the devise is so little
combersome, as it is rather a pleasure then a pain, a matter so slight, that
it will seem at the first incredible, so sure, that you shall find it at all
times infallible. For it does avoid at once all the annoya^ces that can be
imagined, the sight, the savor, the cold: which last, to weak bodies, is often
more hurtful then both the other, where the houses stand over brooks, or
vaults daily cleansed with water. And not to hold you in too long suspe^ce, the
devise is this; You shall make a false bottom to that privy that you are
annoyed with, either of lead or stone, the which bottom shall have a sluice
osbrasse to let out all the filth, which if it be close plaistered all about
it, and renced with water as often as occasion serves, but specially at noone and
at night, will keep your privy as sweet as your parlour, and perhaps sweeter
too, if Quail and Quando be not kept out. But my servant Thomas (whose pensil
can perform more in this matter then my pen) will set down the form of this
by it self in the end hereof, that you may impart it to such friends of yours,
as you shall think worthy of it, though you put them not to so great penance
as to read this whole discourse.

And that I may now also end your penance that have taken all this pains to
read this, that for your pleasure you would needs persuade me to write; I will
not end adruptly here, but as friends that are upon parting in a journey, choose
a cleanly place in the high way to take their leaves one of another, and not in
the dirt and mire: so I^ ere we part, will first for the ennobling of this rare
invention, tell you somewhat of the place, of the company, of the means, and
of the circumstances, that first put so necessary a conceit in my head. For I
remember I have read that Archymedes the excellent enginer, (a man in his time
fully as famous in Syracusa, as out M. Plat is here in England,) was said to
have disgraced him self by an intemperate or rather vntempestiue joy that he
took of a very worthy and memorable invention of his. The story is thus.
Archimedes having long beaten his brains to find some way by art how to
discover, what quantity of counterfaite mixture was put into a crown of massy
gold, not dissoluing the metals, and finding no means in long study, at last
washing him self naked in a bathing tubbe, he observed still that the deeper
he sunk the higher the water rose, and forthwith he conceived (which after he
performed indeed) that by such a means the true quantity of each metal
might be found, and the fraud discovered: with joy whereof he was so ravished,
that stark naked as he was, he ran out into the streets crying, (...) I have
found it, I have found it. At which for the time all the people were amazed,
and thought him mad, till his inue^tion after proved him, not only sober, but
also subtle. What if some pleasant conceited fellow should give out by way of
suppositio^, that possibly the deviser of this rare conueyance, was at the time
of devising thereof, sitting on some such place, as the godly father sat on at
his devout prayers, or the godless king sat on at his deuilish practice? as
put the case on the stately stinking privy in the Inner Temple (where many
grave apprentices of the law put their long debated cases to homely uses) and
that with joy of so excellent inuencion he ran out with his hose about his
heels, and cried, (...): so might I be likened to Archimedes, and there be some
perhaps would be so very fools to believe it. But lest any idle headed fellow
should devise, or any shalow braind people believe such a tale, I do before
hand give the word of disgrace to any that shall so say, and will make it good
on their persons with all weapons from the pin to the pike, that whether it
were by my good guiding, or my good fortune, in the inue^tion hereof, nor in
the execution I never received such a disgrace as that of Archimedes. For I
assure you the devise was first both thought of and discoursed of, with as
broad terms as any belongs to it, in presence of six persons, who were (all
save one) enterlocutors in the Dialogue, of which I was so much the meanest,
that the other five, for beauty, for birth, for vallue, for wit, and for
wealth, are not in many places of the Realm to be matched. Neither was the
place inferior to the persons, being a Castle, that I call, the wonder of the
West, so seated without, as England in few places, affoords more pleasures: so
furnished within, as China nor the West Indies scant allows more plenty.
Briefly, at the very coming in, you would think you were come to the Eldorado
in Guiana. And by this I hope both the inue^tion and execution hereof may be
sufficiently freed from baseness.

Yet there remains one easy objection against the merit of my good service
herein, I mean easy to make, but it will not seem so easy to answer, and
that is, that some may say, this may fortune to do well in many places, but yet
there is no depth in the inue^tion: for it is nothing but to keep down the
air with a stopple, and let out the filth with a scrue, which some will
mislike, and will not endure to have such a business every time they come to
that house. To which I answer, that for depth in the inue^tio^, I affect it not
(for I would not have it in all above two foot deep.) And though the proverb
is, the deeper the sweeter, that is to be intended in some sweeter matters, for
the deeper you wade in this, you shall find it the sowrer. And if it seem too
busy, he that has so great have of his business, may take it as he finds it,
which cannot be very ill at any time. But the old saying was, Look ere you
leap, and the old custom was, that if a man had no light to look, yet he
would feel, to seek that he would not find, for fear least they should
find that they did not seek. Further the pains being so little as it is, I
should think him a slouen that would not by him self or his man leave it as
cleanly as he found it: specially considering that in Deuteronomie you are
told, God mislikes sluttishnesse, and every cat gives us an example (as
houswiues tell us) to cover all our filthiness, and if you will not disdain
to use that which comes from the Musk Cat, to make your self, your gloves,
and your clothes the more sweet, refuse not to follow the example of the Cat of
the house, to make your entries, your stairs, your chambers, and your whole
house, the less sour. Indeed for the devise I grant it is as plain as
Dunstable high way, and perhaps it will be as common to, b^t neither of the^
shall be any disgrace to it. For I heard an Italian tell, that in Venice, after
they had had the great loss by fire in Maximilians time, when their Arsenall
was burnt with gunpowder, they had long consultatio^, how to keep their store
powder from danger of fire, for fear of like mischances; at last a plain
fellow (like my self) came and told, that he had devised a way, and prayed to
have audience. Then he told them a long tale, but all to this short purpose,
that gunpowder was made of iij. simples, viz. saltpeeter, brimstone, and coal,
that each of these several, would be easily kept from fire, and be quenched if
they were kindled, but being compou^d, it blew up all in a moment, if the least
spark did but meet with it; the^ he showed that the causes could not be so
sudden of using powder, but that the simples being ready, it might soon be
made; lastly that saltpeeter did grow rather the^ wast with lying, whereas
being made into powder, it does consume, etc. All which though every man there
knew before, yet because they had not offered to put it in practice, they gave
him a reward for his devise, and followed therein his advise, placing these
simples in several houses, which are so dangerous when they are compounded,
and since that time they have been more annoyd with water then with fire.
Wherefore I assure me the Magnificoes of Venice would allow of the devise, and
if I had some idle money, I might hap be so idly disposed, to put out more then
I will speak of, upon this return, when one of the sons and daughters of S.
The Mag. of Venice are called Figliuoli de S. Mar^^*
Mark had put my devise in execution, specially if that Molto
Magnificentissimo were yet alive, that when his wife was sick, and the
Physician was to see her water, he knew not how to bid her make water, in
words seemly for his high state and her fine ears, that had never heard so
foul a word as that in her life, till his man took on him the matter, and
found a phrase, by circumlocution to signify pissing, and never once to name
it, in this sort; Chara signora viprego fate quello che fate dinanzi al cacare.
But see see, I would feign have bid you farewell, and now we are again in our
dirtie common place; well I Will go with you yet a coits cast farther, and then
upon the next green we will bid farewell, and turn tail, as they say:
wherefore now I will make you only a brief repetition of that I have said.
You see first how I have justified the homely words and phrases with
authorities above all exception. I have proved the care ever had of the matter
with examples above all comparison. Lastly, I have expressed to you a clean
form of it above all expectation. Neither do I praise it as Merchants do
their wares, to rid their hands of them, for I promise you, how high so ever I
praise it, I mean not to part with it: for were I to praise it upon mine oath,
as we do household stuff in an inuentary, I would praise it in my house, to be
worth 100 pounds, in yours 300 pounds, in Wollerton 500 pounds: in Tibals,
Burley, and Holmbie 1000 pounds, in Greenwitch, Richmond and Hampton Court
10000. And by my good sooth, so I would think my self well paid for it. Not
that I am so base minded to think, that wit and art can be rated at any price,
but that I would accept it as a gratuity fit for such houses and their owners.

For I tell you, though I will not take it upon me, that I am in dialecticorum
dumetis doctus, or in rhetorum pompa potens, or coeteris scientijs saginatus,
as does our Pedantius of Cambridge, yet I take it, that in this invention I
shall show a great practice upon the grammar, and upon this point I will
challenge all the grammarians, viz. I say, and I will make it good, that by my
rare devise I shall make Stercutius a nowne adjective. Now I know you will set
your son William to answer me, and he shall say no no, and come upon me with
his grammar rule vt sunt divorum Mars Bacchus Apollo, virorum, etc. and hereby
conclude, that he is both a substantive, and that a substantial one too, and a
Masculine.

But all this will not serve, for I have learned the grammar too, and therefore
Come grammar rules, come now, your power show, as says the noble Astrophill.
First therefore I say, his no no is an affirmative.

For in one speech two negatiues affirm. Secondly tell me pretty Will, what is
a nown substantive? That that may be seen, felt, heard, or understood. Very
well, now I will join issue with you on this point, where shall we try it? Not
in Cambridge you will say, for I think they will be partial on my side. Well
then in Oxford be it, and no better Judge then M. Poeta, who was chief
Captain of all the nownes in that excellent comedy of Bellum grammaticale.
This Comedy was played at her Majesty's last being at Oxford.
For without all peradventure, when he shall here that one of his band, and so
near about him, is brought to that state, that he is neither to be seen,
smelt, heard, nor understood, he will swear gogs nowns he will thrust him out
of his selected band of the most substantial substantives, and sort him with
the rascal rablement of the most abject adjectives. But now Sir that I have
brought you to so fair a town as Oxford, and so sweet a companion as your son
William, I will leave you to him that made you.

Now (gentle Reader) you have taken much pain, The Epilogue or conclusion.
and perhaps some pleasure, in reading our Metamorpo-sis of AJAX: and you
supposed by this time to have done with me: but now with your favor I have not
done with you. For I found by your countenance, in the reading and hearing
hereof, that your conceit oft-times had censured me hardly, and that somewhat
diversely, and namely in these three kinds. Three reproofs of this pamphlet.
First you thought me fantastical; secondly, you blamed my scurrility; and
thirdly, you found me satyricall. To which three reproves, being neither
causlesse nor unjust, do me but the justice to hear my three answers.

I must needs acknowledge it fantastical for me, Answer to the first
objection, of fantasticalnesse.
whom I suppose you deem (by many circumstances) not to be of the basest,
either birth or breeding, to have chosen, or of another man's choice, to have
taken so strange a subject. But though I confess thus much, yet I would not
have you lay it to my charge, for if you so do, I shall straight retort all the
blame, or the greatest part of it, upon your self: and namely, I would but
ask you this question, and even truly between God and your conscience, do
but answer it. If I had entitled the book, A Sermon showing a sovereign
salve for the sores of the soul. Or, A wholesome haven of health to harbor
the heart in. Or, Amaruellous medicine for the maladies of the mind. Would you
ever have asked after such a book? would these grave and sober titles have
won you to the view of three or four tittles? much less three or four score
periodes. But when you heard, there was one had written of A IAX, straight you
had a great mind to see what strange discourse it would prove, you made enquiry
who wrote it, where it might be had, when it would come forth. You prayed your
friend to buy it, beg it, borrow it, that you might see what good stuff was in
it. And why had you such a mind to it? I can tell you; you hoped for some
meriments, some toys, some scurrility, or to speak plain English, some
knavery. And if you did so, I hope now your expectation is not altogether
frustrate. Yet give me leave briefly to show you what pretty pills you have
swallowed in your pleasant quadlings, and what wholesome wormwood was enclosed
in these raisins of the sun.

Against malcontents, A brief sum of the true intent of the book.
Epicures, Atheists, heretics, and careless and dissolute Christians, and
especially against pride and sensuality, the Prologue and the first part are
chiefly intended. The second gives a due praise without flattery, to one that
is worthy of it, and a just check without gall to some that deserve it. The
third part as it teaches indeed a reformation of the matter in question, so
it touches in sport, a reprehension of some practices too much in custom. All
which the reader that is honorable, wise, virtuous, and a true lover of his
country, must needs take in good part. Now gentle reader, if you will still
say this is fantastical, then I will say again, you would not have read it
except it had been fantastical, and if you will confess the one, sure I will
never deny the other.

The second fault you object, Answer to the second objection of scurrility.
is scurrility, to which I answer, that I confess the objection, but I deny
the fault, and if I might know whether he were Papist or Protestant that makes
this objection, I would soon answer them: namely thus; I would cite a
principal writer of either side, and I would prove, that either of them has
used more obscenous, foul, and scurrill phrases, This cannot be denied.
(not in defense of their matter, but in defacing of their adversary) in one
leaf of their books, then is in all this. Yet they profess to write of the
highest, the holiest, the waightiest matters that can be imagined, and I write
of the basest, the barrennest, and most witless subject that may be described.
Quod decuit tantos cur mihi turp^ putem? I forbear to show examples of it,
least I should be thought to disgrace men of holy and worthy memory.

For such as shall find fault that it is too Satyricall, Answer to the third
objection, that it is too Satirical or sharp against the faults of the time.
surely I suppose their judgment shall sooner be condemned by the wiser sort,
then my writings. For when all the learned writers, godly preachers, and honest
livers over all England (yea over all Europe) renew that old complaint. Regnare
nequitiam and in deterius res humanas labi. Seneca.
When we hear them say daily; that there was never under so gracious ahead so
graceless members, after so sincere teaching, so sinful living: in so shining
light, such works of darkness. When they cry out upon us, yea cry indeed,
for I have seen the^ speak it with tears, that lust and hatred were never so
hot, love and charity were never so cold: that there was never less
devotion, never more division: that all impiety has all impunity: finally,
that the places that were wont to be the samples of all virtue and honor, are
now become the sinkes of all sin and shame. These phrases (I say) being
written and recorded, sounded and resounded in so many books and Sermons, in
Cambridge, in Oxford, in the Court, in the country, at Paul's cross in Paul's
churchyard: may not I as a sorry writer among the rest, in a merry matter, and
in a harmless manner, professing purposely, Of vaultes, and priuies, sinkes
and draughts to write, prove according to my poor strength, to draw the
readers by some pretty draught, Allusion to the former words.
to sink into a deep and necessary consideration, how to amend some of their
privy faults? Believe it (worthy readers, for I write not to the unworthy) A
IAX when he is at his worst, yeeldes not a more offensive savor, to the finest
nostrils, then some of the faults I have noted, do to God and the world. Be
not offended with me for saying it, more then I am with some of you for seeing
it. But this I say, if we would amend our privy faults first, we should
afterward much the better reform the open offenses, according to the old
proverb. Every man mend one, and all would be amended. Trust me, they do
wrong me that count me Satyricall. Alas I do but (as the phrase is) pull a
hair from their beards whose heads perhaps by the old laws and canons should
be shorn. If you will say there is salt in it, I will acknowledge it, but if
you will suspect there is gall in it, I renounce it. I name not many, and in
those I do name, I swerve not far from the rule, Play with me, A fit rule to
be kep^, and breeds all misrule when it is broken, specially by honorable
persons.
and hurt me not:
Jest with me, and shame me not.


For some that may seem secretly touched, and be not openly named, if they
will say nothing, I will say nothing. But as my good friend M. Dauies said of
his Epigrams, that they were made like dublets in Birchen lane, for every one
whom they will serve: so if any man find in these my lines any raiment that
suits him so fit, as if it were made for him, let him wear it and spare not,
and for my part I would he could wear it out. But if he will be angry at it,
then (as the old saying is) I beshrew his angry heart: and I would warn him
thus much (as his poor friend) that the workman that could with a glaunce
only and a light view of his person, make a garment so fit for him, if the
same workman come and take a precise measure of him, may make him another
garment of the same stuff (for there need go but a pair of sheeres between
them) that in what sheere soever he dwells, he may be known by such a coat
as long as he lives. Well, to conclude, let both the writer and the readers
endeavor to mend our selves, and so we shall the easier amend others, and then
I shall think my labor well bestowed in writing, and you shall think yours
not altogether lost in reading. And with this honest exhortation I would make
an end, imitating herein the wisest Lawyers, who when they have before the
simplest Iurers, long disputed their cases to little purpose, are ever most
earnest and eager at the parting, to beat into the Iuries head some special
point or other, for the behoof of their client. For so would I, howsoever you
do with the rest of the matter: I would I say, feign beat still into your
memory this necessary admonition (which my new taken name admonishes me of)
to cleause, amend, ^^os.
and wipe away all filthiness. To the which purpose, I could me think
allegorise this homely subject that I have so dilated, and make almost as good
a Sermon, as the Friar did before the Pope, saying nothing but Matto San Pietro
three times, That is to say, What a fool was S. Peter?
and so came down from the pulpit again: and being afterward examined, what
he meant to make a Sermon of three words, but three times repeated before the
triple crowned Prelat, and so many Cardinals. He told them, they might find a
good Sermon in Matto San Pietro; as namely, if heaven might be gotten
notwithstanding all the pride, pleasures, and pomp of the world, with ^ase,
sensuality and Epicurisme, then what a fool was S. Peter to live so strict,
so poor, so painful (...) With which it is possible his auditorie was more
edified, or at least more terrified, then they would have been at a longer
Sermon. But I will neither end with Sermon nor prayer, lest some wags liken me
to my L.() players, who when they have ended a baudie Comedy, as though that
were a preparatiue to devotion, kneel down solemnly, and pray all the
company to pray with them for their good Lord and master. Yet I will end with
this good counsel, not vnsuting to the text I have thus long talked of.

To keep your houses sweet, cleanse privy vaults,
To keep your souls as sweet, mend privy faults.
FINIS.

