The ensamples of Virtue and vice, gathered out of holy scripture. By Nicolas
Hanape patriarch of Jerusalem. Uery necessary for all christen men and women
to look upon.

And Englyshed by Thomas Paynell.

Anno. 1561.

To the most noble, most excellent, and most virtuous Lady Elizabeth. Queen
of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith. etc. Thomas Paynel
wishes all felicity.
ALthough your gracious life to all men's judgments, is so clean and pure
that it neade no manner of incitatyon or ensample of virtue to virtuous and
charitable living: yet when I bethought me how corrupt, how caduke, how
bryttle, and how sliding from virtue to vice, man's nature is even from the
beginning, and with how diverse and manifold instigations the concupiscences and
lusts of this deceitful world does embrace and entangle man with all, and
that our adversary the devil is most vigilante and diligente daily to devour
the soul of man, and to alure him to his ways and tradityons: ^. Peter. 5.
I esteemed it irreprehensible, if I your daily orator should at any time, I say
not quicken your grace, for tha^ were but lost labor, but exhort your grace to
the continuance of your godly and virtuous living, and judged my sel^
unblameable, if I in this tempes^ious and blustryng time should send your grace,
as it were an anchor, or a staff to stay you by, and fermely to stablyshe your
grace, least that your grace should (that God forbid) waver or slide from the
Catholic and true faith of God, from his true and liuelye word, or from the
trace of your charitable and virtuous living. For who is sure to stand fast,
and not to fall? Paul says. Let him that stands take heed he fall not. Or
who can say, I am without syn, or my heart is clean? What is more surer then
to avoid this fall, than to lean to thinfallible and mighty word of God, than
to ensue the life of Christ our savior and and redeamer, and the ensamples and
undoubted hystories, gathered out of holy scripture, and by me your highness
most hable and obedient subject translated for the vtilitye and consolation of
the unlearned into english: this is doubtless a very profitable colection,
and the anchor and staff that I spoke of, containing most compendiously the
wonderful miracles, the noble historyes, the worthy acts, the wise sayings,
the politic stratagemes the wicked co^spiracies, the due obedience, faith and
fidelitye of a christian, with other innumerable and marvelous things, and ye
parables of all scripture. Read it therefore most gracious Lady, and take good
hold at the godly ensamples and doctrines there of, for in so doing, your
grace shall not neade to slide from the faith of Christ, nor yet from the
trace of your godly and virtuous life, but shall stand as Christ's soldier
against satan, the world, and the flesh to your eternal felicity and comfort
most victoriously. For where there is no pain nor battle, there can be no
victory nor no triumph. For Sayncte Paul says, Act. 14.
that we through much tribulation and pain, must enter into the kingdom of
God. And again he says, 2. Cor. 4
that this our tribulation and adversity which is momentanye and light,
prepares an exceadynge and an eternal weight of glory unto us: yea and that a
crown of righteousness is laid up for all those that suffer tribulation and
adversity, 1. Timo. 4.
and have fought a good fight, and have kept their faith, the which our Lord
that is a righteous judge shall give unto all them that love his coming. And
for as much as this our slidinge life, is as it were but a warfare and a
continual battle against our ghostly enemi the devil, fight ye must yea and
that earnestly and continually even to the latter end, for so your grace shall
ouerturne satan your enemy most victoriouslye, and be crowned with the
crown of eternal joy and felicity.

An exhortation to the study of holy scripture.
THou shall show thy son in that day, saying. Deute. 12.
This is that which our Lord did unto me, when I came out of Egypt. And it
shall be as a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a remembrance before
thine eyes, that our Lords law may be always in thy mouth. For in a strong
hand our lord brought thee out of Egypt.

Ye shall not do that, that seems good in your own eyes, Deute. 13.
but that I command you, that do you only unto our lord, nor thou shall put
naught thereto, nor take ought there from.

Thou shall read thys^ law before al Israel in their ears. Deute. 31
Gather the people together, men, women, and children, and the stranger that is
within thy gates, that they may hear and learn, and fear our Lord your God.
And keep and observe all the words of this law.

Let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but record therein day
and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is written
therein, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then shalt thou do
wiselye. Iosu. 1.
Thou shall not decline from the words of this law neither to the right hand,
nor to the left, that thou may do al thing wiselye that thou take in hand.

All the words of God are pure and clean, for he is a shield unto all them,
Prouer. 30.
that put their trust in him. Put thou nothing unto his words, least he
reprove thee, and thou be found a lier.

Cry now as loud as thou canste, leave not of, lift up thy voice like a
trompet, and show my people their offenses, Esaias. 58
and the house of Jacob their sins.

Woe be unto those folish prophets that follow their own spirit, Ezech. 13
and speak where they se nothing.

Search the scriptures, John. 5.
for they are they, which testifye of me.

What so ever things are written, 1. Mat. 15.
they are written for our learning, that we through pacyente and comfort of
the scriptures, might have hope.

2. Timo. 4.
Al scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve,
to amend, and to instruct in rightwisenes that the man of God may be perfect
and prepared unto al good works.



A Table of the Chapiters.
i. OF miracles showed by ye divine power of God. ii. Of Gods providence, and
secreate judgments. iii. Of the benignitye of God, toward his servants.
iiii. Of divine consolation. v. Of the benediction and blessing that God gives
unto manne. vi. Of the malediction and curse, wherwyth God curses man. vii. Of
the blessing wherwyth man blesses God. viii. Of the benediction and blessing
wherewith man does bless man ix. Of the malediction and curse, wherewith man
does curse man x. Of the severity of God against the wicked. xi. Of the anger
and fury of God. xii. That God does more regard the intent of the doer, then
the work it self. xiiii. That God at times does tempt and prove man. xiiii.
That man should not te^pt god. xv. Of vows. xvi. Of prayer. xvii. Of weeping
and wayling. xviii. Of swearing. xix. Of the observation and keeping of the
saboth day, xx. Of the reverence that ought to be done and exhibyted to Gods
temple. xxi. Of the adoration and worshippyng of God. xxii. Of Idolatry. xxiii.
Of blasphemy against God. xxiiii. Of Gods precepts and commandments, and
of the observation and keeping of the^. xxv. Of obedience and disobedyence.
xxvi. Of holy scripture. xxvii. Of good exhortation, and predication of the
word of God. xxviii. Of euel counsels and perswasio^s xxix. Of hearing the word
of God. xxx. Of apparicions and vysyons, showed in the old time. xxxi. Of good
angels. xxxii. Of evil sprites. xxxiii. Of the immortality of the reasonable
soul. xxxiiii. Of the faith that man should have unto God. xxxv. Of the
fidelity that ought to be kept to man. xxxvi. Of quietness and illustration
of the mind. xxxvii. Of longanimity. xxxviii. Of the fear of God. xxxix. Of
fear where with the euel fear those that be good. xl. Of the love of God. xli
Of the love that man ought to have to his neighbor. xlii. Of envy. xliii. Of
brotherly reprehention. xliiii. Of the compassyon that man should have to his
neighbor. xlv. Of hospitality. xlvi. Of amity and love. xlvii. Of enmity and
hatred. xlviii Of peace and concord. xlix. Of unity and common consent. l. Of
discord, strife, and debate. li. Of good zeal against sinners. lii. Of
vndyscreate zeal. liii Of prudency and dyscretion. liiii Of deceyt and
subtelty. lv Of the erudytyon of children. lvi That it is a pearillous thing,
not to agree to good counsel. lvii Of suspicion, and falscredulity lviii That
holy and good men suffer certain things to be done but not gladly. lix. Of
justice and equity. lx. Of the good and evil judgments of men. lxi Of
penaun^e. lxii Of the honor of parents. lxiii Of thanks giving for the
benefits of God. lxiiii Of gratitude for the benefits of man accepted. lxv Of
ingratitude. lxvi That truth engenders hatred lxvii Of lies and leasyuges.
lxviii Of treason. lxix Of adulatyon and flatery. lxx. Of derysyon and
contumelyous reprofe. lxxi. Of detractors and evil speakers lxxii Of
liberaliti, merci, (...) lxxiii Of couetusnes. lxxiiii Of pouertye. lxxv Of
hypocrisy and dissimulatio^ lxxvi. Of the receate of gifts a^^ rewards.
lxxvii Of fortitude and. lxxviii. Of confidence and magnanimity. lxxix. Of
patience and mekenes in Iniuris and torments. lxxx. Of constancy and
continuance in purposes. lxxxi. Of bodily war, and victory most commenly
obtained. lxxxii. Of impacience and murmuring lxxxiii. Of pusillanimitye.
lxxxiiii Of fortitude and strength to do evil. lxxxv. Of murder. lxxxvi. Of
diverse slaughters o men. lxxxvii. Of abstinens and sobrietye. lxxxviii Of
gluttonye and drunkenness. lxxxix. Of matrimony. lxxxx. Of chastity. xci. Of
luxuriusnes and inco^tinency xcii. Of unwise looks. xciii. Of silence and
clatterynge. xciiii. Of carnal affection. cxv. Of the ire and anger of man,
through zele and love. xcvi. Of the anger of man through vice. xcvii. Of
humilitye. xcviii. Of pride. xcix. Of vain hosting and crakinge. C Of
elections. Ci. Of good princes and prelates. Cii. Of evil princes and
prelates. Ciii. Of ambitious persons. Ciiii. Of the deuels temptation. Cv. Of
sin in general, and of diverse pains which follow sin Cvi. Of confession of
sins. Cvii. Of the hardness, and obstinacye of the wicked. Cviii. Of ye
peruersity of certain me^. Cix. Of the wyckednes of tirantes Cx. Of the
oppression of the good by the evil. Cxi. Of tribulation, and vtility. etc
Cxii. Of the multitude of evil men Cxiii Of good men which lurked, and were as
unknown among ye evil Cxiiii. Of the nobility and inconstancy of the people.
Cxv. Of good operations and works Cxvi. Of man's intention, in doing of his
works. Cxvii. Of slothfulnes and negligence. Cxviii Of the good towardness of
children. Cxix. Of the societye and fellowship of good men. Cxx. Of the societye
and fellowship of evil men. Cxxi. Of good prosperity. Cxxii. Of worldly
curyosyty. Cxxiii Of the great faith of women. Cxxiiii Of the wisdom of
women. Cxxv. Of the pietye and compassion of of women. Cxxvi. Of the fortitude
and strength of women. Cxxvii Of the auidity and gredynesse of women. cxxviii
Of the deceytfulnes of women Cxxix. Of the folyshe and vndiscreate
communication of women. Cxxx. Of the superfluous ornaments and raiment of
women. Cxxxi. Of death in general. Cxxxii. Of sepultures and buryals. cxxxiii.
Of the horrible death and etc cxxxiiii Of the precious death of. etc.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Tisoale, dwelling in Knight Riders streat. Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



Of Miracles showed by the divine power of God. The first Chapter.
THe creatyon of things was so marvelous, that the knowledge thereof could
not come to man, but by revelation. For after the mind of S. Gregory, Greg.
super zac. homeli. 1.
Moses prophesied of those things that were past, saying. In the beginning God
created heaven and earth. Genesis. 1.
Nor that, because he forspoke the things that were to come, but because he
disclosed those things that were seacreat.

At the time of Noyes floude, Gene. 6.7.
our Lord saved Noah, his wife, his three sons with their wives: and in the
Arc he saved the male and the female of all other beasts.

Our Lord repressed the presumpteousnesse of men, Gene. 11.
that would build a tower unto heaven: confoundinge their language.

Genesis. 22
Isaac was wonderfully born, and wonderfully delivered, when that he (the ram
being caught by the horns in a thicket) should have been offered up for a
sacrifice.

Exodus 7.8.9. and.10.
It is euidente and plain inoughe how many miracles our Lord showed by Moses,
when he brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt.

Exodus. 13.
It was a great miracle, that the Pyllare of the cloud departed not from the
Children of Israel going out of Egipte toward the land of promise,
neither by day, nor yet by night.

Exodus. 14
It was a terrible, and a Miracle worthy to be spoken of, that the red sea was
divided, and so dried up, that the children of Israel went over dry footed,
and the Egyptyans overwhelmed in the myddest of the sluds.

Exodus. 15
By the wood or tree showed unto Moses, the waters were made sweet.

Numer. 11.
Our Lord sent quails to the murmuring people, Nume. 20.
and afterward it rained Manna for them to eat, and out of the rock, he sent
them water plenteously to drink.

Our Lord sent flesh to the children of Israel, Numer. 20
the which in the wilderness murmured and desired to eat flesh even
aboundauntly.

Through thoccasion of Chore and his fellows sedition, Nu. 16.17.
many miracles chanced and was showed.

The people were smitten or stinged with fiery serpents, Numer. 21.
and loking upon the serpente of brass, they were cured and healed.

Our Lord led the children of Israel in the wilderness fortye year, Deute.
26.
and their clothes waxed not old, nor their shoes were not consumed upon their
fete.

There was a certain man at Listra the which was a crepel from his mothers
womb, Acts. 14.
and never had walked unto whom Paul loking upon him, said with a loud
voice. Stand upright on thy fete, and he start up and walcked.

Nume. xxii
Balaam coming to curse gods people, was reproved of the ass, that he rode
upon.

Iosu. iii.
After that the children of Israel were entered into the flood of Jordan, the
waters that came down from above, did swell and rise up upon an heap like a
mountain, and the waters that were beneath departed into the dead or salt Sea.

Iosue, vi.
After that the children of Israel had compassed the city of Jericho vii.
times, the wall fell down.

Iosu. x.
Our Lord obeyed to Io^ues vow, saying. Sun stand thou still upon Gabeon.

Iosu, vii.
Our Lord sent the sweard into all the hosts of the Medianites, and they slew
one a another: so that by a few, many were ouercommed and discomfited.

iii. Reg. v.
By our Lord's Ark, the which the Philistines took, were many miracles showed.

i. Reg. xiiii
Ionathas and his Harness bearer destroyed so many of the Philistines, that it
was taken for a miracle, and all the hosts were troubled.

This likewise was no small thing that David, 1. regum. 17
being but young, inexpert and unarmed, prevailed against that strong and
armed Philistiane Goliath.

It is red, 3. regum. 17
that Helias did miracles, as when he asked of God such a drought, that it
rained not upon thearth, for the space of three years and a half.

Likewise the ravens brought him bread and flesh twice every day. 3. regum. 17


Consequentlye he revived the woman's child. 3. regum. 17


Afterward through prayers, 3. regum. ^8
he obtained of God fire, that wonderfully consumed the burnt sacrifice, and
after his Prayer there was a great rain.

After this the angel of our Lord showed him bread and water. 4. regum. 1.
And through his prayers, the fire burnte up ii. captains over fiftye with
their fiftyes.

At length he divided the waters of Jordan with his mantel, 4. regum. 2
and was taken up in a charet of fire into heaven.

4. regu. 4.
Many like things are written of Helizeus, for the increased the poor widows
oil, that was indetted.

4 regu. 4.
The self obtained a child for the sunamite. And after it was departed he
revived it again.

4. regu. 4.
He cast meal into the pottage that was first bitter, and made it sweet. And
multiplied the loves for the prophets children.

4. regum. 5.
He healed Naaman the Sirian of his leprosy.

4. regum. 6
He makes iron to swim upon the water.

4. regum. 6
He knew many things being absent, as though he had been present. And caused
his servant to see the fiery charets of Angels. And he smote the hoastes of
the Assiryans with blindness.

4. reg. 7.8
Uery often he prognosticated things that were to come.

4. regu. 13.
The carkase of a certain dead man touching the body of Elizeus revived.

4. regu. 19.
When king Sennacherib besieged the city of La^his, three were slain of his men
in one night, an hundred, four score and five thousand, in the days and time
of king Ezechiell.

The children of Ammon, 2. Para. 20.
of Moab, and of the mount of Seir, gathered the^ selves together against king
Iosaphat, and what time the Levites began to laud and praise GOD in the host
of Iosaphat, their adversaries tourninge their weapons against them selves,
and murdered one an other.

This thing was very maruailous, 4. reg. 20
that the Sun at the peticyon of Ezechia went ten lines or degrees
backewarde in the Dyall of Achaz.

Tobias was four years blind, Tob. 11.
but afterward by the angels counsel, he anointed his eyes with the gall of
the Fish, and received his sight.

The miracle of Daniels three fellows, Daniel. 3.
and how magnificentlye they were delivered from the furnace of burning fire,
is worthy to be remembered.

Daniell. 6.
Likewise how that Daniel remained vii. days with the Lions vnhurted.

Jonas. 1.2.
By Jonas occasion, the Sea was sore troubled, but after they had cast him into
the Sea, a fish swallowed him up, and he lived there three dais, and
afterward escaped and came out safe and sound.

2. Macha. 3
Heliodorus proved the might and power of God, when he would have spoiled the
temple. For he was beaten and scourged of two young men very grievously.

2. Macha. 8
There pearished against the Galathians in Babylon.6000. men through the aid
of 12000. men sent unto them from heaven.

Luke. 1.
The Angel of our Lord appeared unto Zachary, declaringe unto him from God,
that Helizabeth his baren and old wife should bear him a son, the which
geuinge no credence to the Angels words, was made domme until the child was
circumcised: and then his speech was restored him again.

And this was very marvelous that Ihon, Luke. 1.
being yet in his mothers wo^b reioysed and sprange at the salutation of
blessed Mary, the which had newly conceived our savior. And when blessed
Elizabeth knew it, she reioysed, saying. Blessed art thou among women.

And also that there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, Mathe. 2.
a star leading and going before them.

Our Lord Jesus being called to the marriage, Ihon. 2.
at the beginnynge of his miracles, turned water into wine.

Nor this was no small miracle of our Lord, Luke. 4.
that he when they of Nazareth filled with wrath led him even to the edge of
the hill, that they might cast him down headlonge, went his way even through
the midst of them.

And Jesus went about, Math. 4.
and they brought unto him all sick people, and he healed them.

As for the miracles which our savior vouchsaued to do being conuersaunt
among the people, are gathered out of the Evangelical historye. For he
revived three dead men, that is the Daughter of Ia^rus the Archsinagoge, Math.
9.
and the widows son that was carried out of the City. Luke. 7.
The third was Lazarus. Ihon. 11.
After that he healed a leven leapers. Of the one Math. viii. Luke. v. Of the
other ten. Luke. xvii.

Afterward he gave six blind men their sight. Of two Math. ix. of other
two. Math. xx. Of one other. Mark. viii. Of him that was borne blind. Ihon. ix.

He deliuerd vii. specially that were possessed of Devils. Of two of them.
Matthew. viii. Of the one of them, the which was most famous, whose name as
he said was called Legio, is touched. Luke. viii. Of one other, the which was
blind and dumme. Math. xii. Of a certain Lunatyke, the which could not be
delivered but by Prayer and Fasting. Math. xvii. Mark. ix. And of an other
unclean spirit that was cast out of a man in the Jews Synnagoge. Mark.
i. Luke. iiii. and of the woman of Cananes daughter, that was healed at the
instaunce and prayer of her mother. Math. xv.

Furthermore it is showed after the sense of the letter. Luke viii. that he
cast out seven devils out of Marye. Mark. xvii.

When that Simo^s mother in law was taken and vexed with a great Fever, Luke.
4.
he rebuked the Fever, and immediatlye she arose and ministered unto them. Math.
viii. Mar. i.

He healed a man (which was let down through the tilinge) of the Palsy.
Lu. 5.


Also as he was eating in the Pharisees house on the Sabbath day, Luke 14
he healed him that had the dropsy.

And he erected and made straighte the woman that bowed together, Lu. 13
and could in no wise look vpwardes, nor lift up her head.

He caused the man that had a wythered hand, mar. 3.
to stretche forth his hand.

Math. 8.
He healed also the Captains servant, that lay sick of the palsy.

Mar. 7.
Item he made the dumme to speak and the deaf to hear.

Ihon. 4.
He heals the rulers son of Capernaum that was even at the point of death.

Mar. 15.
He caused by the only touching of the hemme of his garmente, the issue of
blood to cease and to be stopped in the woman.

Mar. 4.
Our Lord being a sleep, there arose a great tempest or storm in the s^a, he
rebuked the winds, and eftsoon the wind and the Sea obeyed him.

math. 14.
He walked on the sea, his disciples wondering there at, and he made Peter to
walcke on the water, and stretching forth his hand, he saved Peter that began
to sink.

Mar. 9.
He showed a fair miracle to those three Discyples in his Transfyguration.

mar. 6.
He satisfied with v. loves and two fishes, five thousand men, and they took up
xii. baskets.

At another time and season he refreshed with seven loves and a few little
fishes ^oure thousand men, Math. 15
and they took up vii. baskets full.

He cursed the Fig tree having leaves only without fruit, Math. 21
and inco^tinently it withered away.

Gently he restored the princes servant his ear that Peter smote of, Math.
26.
and checked Peter for the same.

When that our savior was hanging upon the Cross, from the syxte hour to
the ninthe hour, Luke. 23.
there was darkness over all the earth, the none being on the contrary part of
ye sky, so that the Sun could in no wise suffer any Eclipse by that moan.
math. 27.
And the veil of the temple did rent, and the graves did open.

At the resurrection and vprising of our Lord, math. 28.
there was a great earthquake, for the angel of our Lord descended from
heaven, and came and rouled back the stone. etc. and for fear the kepers were
astonished.

After this he appeared to his disciples, Ihon. 20.
the doors being shut.

Ihon. 21.
Afterward did Jesus show him self again at the Sea of Tiberias, where at his
Commandment they cast out their net, and it was fylde with great
Fyshes, a hundred and liii. yet was not the net broken.

And xl. days after his resurrection, appearinge unto his Disciples, and
rebukinge and instructynge them, Acts. 1.
while they beheld and maruailed, he was taken up an hie, and a cloud received
him up out of their sight.

These forsaide miracles are spoken of in special. Many other were done (as
we read) in general. As it appears in diverse places of Mathewe. Ihon. 21.
Mark and Luke. And Ihon says: That there are many other things, which
Jesus did, the which if they should be written, I suppose ye world could not
contain the books that should be written.

Act^s. 2.
It was no small miracle of the effusion of the holy sprite, upon the disciples
at Pentecost, where with the disciples were fortified, made steadfast, and
illuminated.

Peter beholdynge a lame man at the gate of the Temple, Acts. 3
which was called beautiful, said: In the name of Jesus rise up, and walk,
and taking him by the right hand, he lift him up, and his fete and ancle
bones recovered strength.

The chief priest, Acts. 5
and al they that were with him, laid hands on the Apostles, and put them
in the common Prysonne. But the Angel of our Lord by night opened the
prison doors, and brought them forth.

They brought the sick into the streates, Acts. 5
and laid them on Beds and cowches, that at the least way, the shadow of
Peter, when he came by, might shaddowe some of them. There came also a
multitude out of the cities round about, and they were all healed.

When Phillip preached at Samaria, Act. 8.
unclean sprites, crying with loud voices came out of many, and many taken with
Palsies, and many that halted, were healed.

Acts. 9.
Peter healed one Eneas which had kept his bed of the palsy viii. years. He
said unto him, Eneas? our Lord Jesus shall make thee whole.

Acts. 9.
Peter put all other forth, and kneling down, he prayed, and turninge him to
the body, he said: Tabitha, arise, and she opened her eyes, and when she saw
Peter, she sat up.

Acts. 9.
This was a marvelous deed, that as Saul was going to Damasco, to take Christ's
disciples, there shyned round about him a light from heaven, and he fell to
the earth. Inwardly he was illuminated, and outwardly he was blineded.

Acts. 12.
Peter being in prison, bound with two chains, and kept most diligently with
iiii. quaternions of Soldiers, was losed and brought forth by the Angel of
God, and the iron gate opened to the^ by the own accord.

Acts. 13.
Paul did deprive Elimas the sorcerer and false prophet of his syghte, because
he sought to turn Paul the Proconsul and ruler from the faith: and resysted
against the Apostels,

A certain damsel possessed with a spirit that prophesied, brought her
master and mistres much vauntage with prophesying. The same followed Paul and
Luke, Acts. 16.
and cried, saying: These men are the servants of the most hie God. But Paul
said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus, that thou come out of
her, and he came out the same hour.

Paul and Silas were in prison, and prayed, Acts. 16.
and lauded God. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the
foundation of the prysone was shaken, and immediately all the doors opened, and
every man's bands were losed.

God wrought no small miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his body
were brought unto the sick, Acts. 19.
napkins and partlettes, and the diseases departed from them, and the euel
sprites went out of them.

Certain Jews took upon them to ^al over them, Acts. 19.
which had euel sprites ^he name of our Lord Jesus, saying: we adjure you by
Jesus whom Paul preaches. And the evil sprite answered and said. Jesus I
know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? and the man in whom the evil sprite
was ran on them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled away naked
and wounded.

And upon one of the sabbath days Paul preached, and continued the preachinge
unto midnight. Acts. 20.
And there satte in a window a certain young manne, being fallen into a dead
sleep. And overcome with sleep, he fell down from the third lofte, and was
taken up dead. But when Paul went down, he fell on him, and embrased him. And
they brought the young man a live, and were not a little comforted.

And in the Winter when Paul and his fellows were escaped out of the broken
ship, Acts. 28.
and were warminge them at the fire. There came a viper out of the heat, and
caught him by the hand, he shoke the viper into the ^ire, and felt no harm.
How be it the men of that country looked and believed that he should have
fallen down dead suddenly.

Paul by prayer and by laying his hands on the father of Publius, Acts. 28.
delivered him of a fever, and of a bloudye ^lixe. So when this was done, other
also which had diseases in the i will came and were healed.

Of Gods providence and secreat judgments. The second Chapter.
OUr Lord knew that man would sin, Genes. 1.
and yet he made him inclining there unto, when that he might have made him
without any such inclinatyon or promptness to sin at all. But he knew how
great profit and goodness should ensue, and begotten by the occasion of his
fall.

Jacobs sons did decre and purpose to extinguishe Joseph their brother,
Genesis. 27
but yet God disposinge the thing otherwise, they exaulted him far above
them selves.

Jacob when he blessed Joseph's children (Joseph wandering and being ignorant
of the cause) laid his right hand on Ephraims head, Genesis. 48
and his left hand upon Manasses.

Exodus ^.3
After that Moises had smitten and slain the Egiptian, and by the way of
rebultinge of a Jew, had offended him, he fled from the face of Phara^e and as
a banished man, dwelt many years in the country of Madian, so that it was
thought that he durst appear no more in the land of Egipte, and yet by keeping
there his father in laws sheep, he had a more greater occasion to serve God,
and saw that great vision, and was sent by God to the children of Israel,
and to Pharao.

Exodus 5.6
Our Lord knew full well, that Pharao would not obey his commandments, and yet
he caused him to be required and spoken to by Moses.

Exodus ^.
Our Lord or ever he would bring the children of Israel out of Egipte,
permitted and suffered them a long time and often to be afflicted and punished.

Pharaos wise men, and his enchaunters did through Gods sufferaunce, Exodus 7
as great signs, as touching certain of them in Egypt, as Moses did.

Our Lord does permit and suffer the reproved to be indurate, Exodus 9
and his elected to be afflicted, thereby to do yt is wonderful, and to be
the better known and praised.

Our Lord did oftentimes promise the children of Israel, Nume. xii^^
a country that flows with milk and honye, and yet but two of them, Saleph
and Iosue of twenty years of age, came thither: the reast came not thither, but
their children only.

Moses the which did so often times reconcyle the synnefull people unto our
Lord, did once sin at the water of strife, Nume. 20
nor he obtained not for him self, to enter the land of promission.

In that, that the children of Israel for their iniquity remained more the^
xl. years in the desert.

Our Lord was thereby greatly magnified, Deute. 29.
the which did feed them there so long, and kept their raime^t from wearing,
and at the last did wonderfully bring them into the land of promise.

Of the people that did inhabit the land of promise, Iosu. xi
this was our Lords commandment and sentence, that their hearts should be
hardened and that they should come against Israel in battle, and utterly
to be destroyed, and that no mercy should be showed them, but that they should
pearish, and be brought to naught.

After that Gedeon had obtained and won so marvelous a vyctorye of his
enemies, Iudi. 8.
and had refused to reign over the people, he made an Ephod, the which deed
was the decay and ruin of him self and his household.

Our Lord was grieved with the children of Israel for their iniquitye and
wickedness, Iudi. 10.
and said unto them, I will healpe you no more, go and cry unto the Gods
which ye have chosen.

And they said unto our Lord: We have sinned. Then there follows that our
Lord had pi^ye on their misery.

Sampson, Iudi. 16
the angel bringing the message, was conceived of his mother the which was
barren. And afterward he was often times deceived by women, and at the last,
he was destroyed by the ruin and fall of a house.

The children of Israel by the counsel and will of our Lord, Iudi. 20
fought twice with the children of Benjamin, and were overcome, but
afterward they utterly in a manner destroid them

Our Lord suffered the Arc to be taken of the uncircumcised, 1. regum. 6.
where he showed many miracles. And when it was reduced and brought home
again the me^ of Bethsames received it joyfully, and yet our Lord sieve 70. of
the Princes, and 5000. of the common people.

Among all the people there was none better then Saul, 1. regum. 15
when our Lord chose him, and yet afterward he sinned, and our Lord refused
him.

David was the least among al his brethren, 1. regum. 16
and as it were of no reputatyon among the^. So yt when I sais children were
called for, this David was neglected, and contempned, and yet our Lord governed
all the people by him, and for his cause extolled all his progeny and kindred.

1. regum. 28
This is much to be maruailed at, that Samuel the prophet was called up by a
sorcerer. Saint Augustyne says, in his book de doctrina christiana, that it
was the similitude and Image of Samuel, but not the Prophet him self, nor yet
his spirit, for he appeared by the sacrilegious art and craft of the devil.

It is to be noted how expressly our Lord spoke unto Nathan of the goodness of
David and Solomon his sone, ^. regum. 7.
the which should build the temple, and yet both they fell into iniquitye and
sin, most shamefully.

When David should die, he made a marvelous ordinance, 3. regum. 2.
but for as much as the scripture does so commend him, it is to be supposed,
notwithstanding he was partlye cruel, that yet he did it not, without a just
and a reasonable cause.

Our Lord gave Solomon so great prosperity and peace, 3. regum. 11.
that satan was not against him, and he gave him wisdom above all other
kings, and yet at length our Lord suffered him to be in satuated, depraved,
and many adversaries to be stirred up against him.

Jeroboam by our Lords commandemente spoken and declared by the Prophet Esaias,
3. regum. 1^.
was ordained and made chief ruler of ten tribes, the which afterward yet
induced the people maliciously to Idolatry.

ALyon slew the manne of God, 3. regum. 13.
the which foretold Hieroboam the destruction of the aultare, nor he did not
eat, nor yet touch the carkase of the dead.

Notwithstanding that Achab was a man most wicked, iii. Reg. xxi
and had hard say that he should be afflicted and punished for his trespasses,
yet he began outwardlye to repent, and our Lord deferd his pain and
punishment.

4. regum. 1.
This was very terrible and fearful, that Helias caused the ii. captains and
their l. men to be consumed and devoured up with the Fire that came down from
heaven.

4. regu. 10.
Iehu king of Israel with most fervent zele did so persecute the worshippers of
Baall, that our Lord did commend his doings: and yet he departed not from
Ieroboams Idolatry.

King Manasses did many terrible and evil deeds in Jerusalem, 2. Para. 33
afterward he was bound with chains, and carried to Babylon, and doing
penance, he called upon our Lord, and was heard.

After that king Josias had led a most holy life, 1. Par. 35
he went forth to fight against Necho the king of Egypt, saying unto him,
leave of to meddle against god which is with me, least he destroy thee, but he
harkned not unto the words of Necho out of the mouth of god, and his chance was
but evil, for he being pierced, and shot through with darts and arrows,
pearished and died.

Our Lord suffered the holy, elect, and specially beloved city, and his
peculiare people, the which he brought wonderfully by the desert out of Egipte,
into the land of promise, Tob. 13.
to be over ^^nd and taken by the Chaldeans and Assirians. And it seemed that he
little esteemed the^, for it is written. O give thanks unto our Lord, ye
children of Israel. For among the heathen which know him not has he
scattered you, to thintente that ye should show forth his marvelous works,
and cause them to know that there is none other God but he.

Tobias after such holy and mercyful works in which he was very careful
and diligente, Tob. 2
waxed blind, and his kinsfolks and friends offended therewith, and not
perceiving the cause thereof, derided, and laughed him to scorn.

It might be reputed and thought very marvelous, Iudi, i.ii.
why ye our Lord suffered that wicked Holofernes to subdue so many realms and
kingdoms.

Also of Aman, the which of all other was most proudest and most
crueltest, Esth. 3.
and yet next unto the king he was exalted above all other princes.

Job. 1.^.
Iobes friends wondered, and were even ashamed, that they saw him so grievously
afflicted and punished.

The divine justice does punish euel me^ at sometimes by those that are worse
then they them selves, Esaias. 10
as he punished the chidlren of Israel and Judah by Nabuchodonozor, and the
Cauldes. As the prophet Osay writes, woe be unto Assure, which is a rod of my
wrath.

Romayn. 13.
Our Lord does not set princes and prelates upon those only that are
faithful and good, but upon all people. For there is no power but of God.

Jonas. ^^^
Our Lord commanded Jonas to preach. There are yet xl. days, and then shall
Nin^ue be overthrown. And yet our Lord knew that the Ninevites would do
penance, and that they should not be so punished.

Our Lord suffered that Antiochus should make that venerable and reverent temple
profane: 1. macha. 1.
burn the holy city, and make great slaughter of Innocents.

In the days and time of Antiochus Epiphanius, 1. Macha. 6
the which destroyed the Temple, and made it Profane, did cruelly handle many
of ye Jews, and slew them. It might apeare and seem to many, that the whole
world was in a confusion, and evil ordained and ruled. But for all that our
Lord out of those evils, could bring the punishmente of the wicked, and the
corruption of certain other. And again the virtue and merits of many of
those that were slain, were diversely increased.

I pray those that hear this, to consider, how that Judas Machabeus,
Ionathas, 1. Macha. 9. 1. Match. 10
and Simon his brethren were men toward God and men most valiant and most
faithful: and yet they died but miserably. For Judas was slain in battle
against Bacchides. Triphon slew Jonathan and his two sons. 1 Macha. 16
Ptolomeus ye son of one Sabolde slew proditoriously Simon and his two sons
which were dronken.

It is to be wondered at, 2. Mac. 6.7
that GOD, when Eleazarus being so old a man, and the vii. brethren, suffered
such cruel torments for the law of God, did show no vengaunce there, against
the tyrauntes.

Math. 2.
Our Lord, being yet but a child, would be conveyed from the presence and face
of Herod, and suffered the Innocents to be slain in his place. But in that,
he provided well for the infantes, for they should never have had so much
profit, if herod had indeuerd him self to have honored the^ as they had by
that, that he commanded them to be slain.

Our Lord when he hard the faith of the Centurion, he maruailed, and said to
them that followed him. math. 8.
Many shall come from the East and west and shall reast with Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, but the Children of this kingdom shall be
cast out into utter darcknesse.

A certain Scribe offered him self to follow our Lord, math. 8.
and was not admitted. Luke. 9.
He invited an another to follow him, the which seemed not to be willing. For
he said. Suffer me first to go and burye my father.

Our Lord did miracles in Chorasin and Bethsaida, Math. 11
where they profited but little. But he did none in Tire or Sidon, where if he
had done them, they should have been profitable and have done much good.

God suffered Ihon Baptist thexample of all holiness to be beheaded of Herod
the most vilest aduouterer. mar. 6.
But it increases the astonishmente of man, for as much as it was done at the
instance of an harlot, nor we read not in the gospel, that there insued any
variaunce, neither against the da^sel, nor against the aduoutrer, nor yet
against Herod the Tetrarche.

In our Lords passion, God, as concerning the redemption of mankind,
fulfilled his most benign will by the most celerate and wicked iniquity of
men. Acts. 3
For scripture says God which before had showed, by the mouth of all his
Prophettes how that Christ should suffer, has thus wise fulfilled.

Ihon. 18.
Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and head of the Church, denied his master
thryse, Christ sufferinge the same.

Ihon. 11.
Thomas, the which said so confedently. Let us go, that we may dye with him,
doubted of our Lords resurrection, whereof it came that Peter was the more
meke and gentle to sinners, and that the faithful, and they that stackard in
the faith, were the better stablished there in. And of this it is gathered,
that no man should presume upon his stedfastnes. And that no man, whether he
be fallen from his faith, or doubts therein should despair of the mercy, or
of the forgiveness of God. And by this that Judas the Apostle and dispensator
of God did slide into such an eanorme crime, nor rose not again, al
presu^pteous security is deminished and broken: by the which no man for the
state and condition that he is in, nor for the deeds that he has done ought
to be hie mineded, but in fear. For why the Apostles were the faithful leaders
of the people, and yet they were kept in prysonne wythal diligence.

It might seem to such as be weak, that God should not have suffered such
things to have been done in the beginning of the faith. Acts. 4^
But yet ye faithful thereby were maruelously comforted, and the adversaries of
our faith confuted. Acts. 12.
The like thing chanced in Peter alone when he was taken by Herod, put in
prison, and brought forth and miraculouslye delivered by the Angel.

It was great iniquity to stone Steven to death, Acts. 7.
and yet many good things through the providence of God, came thereof. For
Steven was gloriously crowned in heaven, and aboundauntly honored in earth,
his oration and prayer that he made there, brought Paul unto us, and left unto
al our posterity an example of a marvelous pa^ience and charity.

Acts. 8
Steven being thus stoned, there followed a great persecution in the Church
and congregation that was at Jerusalem.

For they were all sparkled abroad through out all the regions of Iewry and
Samaria, except the Apostles, so that ^t seemed to be a great detriment or
hindera^ce to ye honor of the christian religion. But the Discyples that were
scattered abroad did so preach and set forth the word of God, that the
Church there by was a great deal the more enlarged.

Acts. 13.
For as much as the Jews, when Paul and Barnabas preached the word of God
unto them, refused it, and put it from them, they took an occasyon to preach
unto the Gentyles.

There was a dissentyon between Paul and Barnabas for Iho^ whose surname was
Mark, whom Paul would not receive, because he went from the^, but Barnabas
took Mark with him, Acts. 15.
and so they departed a sunder one from the other. Where by should have
followed, as it was thought, some great rebuke and shame. But God disposing
the matter, there ensued great fruit and profit. For the word of God was
opened and preached to many.

They committed a very heinous deed and fault, that put that excellent
doctoure Paul in prison, co^pellynge him to cease from Preachinge, the which
thing might seem to many, a great inconvenience, and that God should not have
suffered it.

And yet it is to be greatly noted, that the divine providence by such
impedimentes and losses, has showed and caused great fruit and profit.

For as the merits of Paul did thereby increase, so likewise he left the mo
examples of virtue, and taught much better by his works, then before time
by his words. For being in prison, he wrote to those that were absent and in
far countries, nether was he so profitable unto the church by his preachinge,
as he was by sending of his Epistles. And therefore if he in any one city or
province had been honored of all men, and gladly hardt he should not yet have
had such occasions to have gone and visited so diverse and many nations as he
visited. Therefore when that the Jews, or any other did persecute him from
town to town, he preached the word of God to many. And when he was in
hold, he wrote his Epistles, and when the Jews resisted him, Acts. 13.
he turned him self to the gentiles.

And again, because that in Syria, he found Festus and Felix unrightful
Judges, Acts. 25.
he was enforced to appeal to Caesar, and so he came to Rome, and through
his predication and doctrine was greatly illustred, and luckelye by his passion
made most famous.

Of the benignity of God to his servants. The third Chapter.
ABraham coming and speaking with our Lord, Genesis^ 28
desired him to spare the Sodomites, used such a marvelous boldness, that men
might have judged him very importune. But yet our Lord answered him all ways
gentlye, and granted him his request.

Our Lord most gentlye appeared unto Jacob flying and eschuynge his brothers
anger, Gene. 31.
and delivered him from his father in laws insecution, returning again to his
brother.

Jacob used a great audacitye and bouldnes in his prayer to our Lord, Gene.
38.
saying. I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

And our Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, Exodus. 32.
and behold, it is a stiff necked people: suffer me, that my wrath may wax hot
against them. As though he would say: thou hold me, nor I cannot consume
these wicked sinners, except thou let me go.

And our Lord spoke unto Moses, as a man speaks to his friend, Exodus. 33.
and did defend him from his enemies and detractours.

Our Lord obeyed unto Iosuas voice, Iosue. 10.
saying. Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon.

Balack called Balaam for to curse the children of Israel, Iosu. 24.
but our Lord clean contrary blessed them by Balaam. Nume. 22


Gedeon demanded twice of our Lord a sign in the fiece, Iudi. 6.
whether he should obtain the victory of his enemies.

This was to be maruailed at, that our LORD, when he him self was abiected
and refused, 2. regum. 7.
disdayned not there at, but in the contempt of the servants of GOD, he
esteemed him self to be contemned. As it is manifest and plain in Samuel. 1.
regum. 8.


They did not reiecte thee but me, says our LORD. Note also, how
courteouslye our LORD spoke unto Nathan, 2. regum. 7
of David, and of his house in time to come.

Notwithstanding that the posteritye of David did sin greuouslye and many
manner of wise, 4. regu. 19.
yet his good deeds are oftentimes remembered, and because of them, our Lord
does very often spare and forgive the sins of the people.

At the Commandment of God the ravens brought bread and flesh to Helias:
3. reg. 17.19
And afterward the angel of God showed him bread and water.

Ezechia the king of Iewry said. Our LORD will be merciful 2. Para. 30
unto all those that seek him withal their hearts, nor shall not impute unto
them, that they are not sufficiently enough sanctified.

Our LORD sent his Angel, the which led for the young Tobias, and
brought him again, he drove the devil from his wife, he made his parents
glad and joyful, To. 5.8.11.
he cured the old Toby of his blindness, and replenished his house with all
goodness.

Our Lord seemed as it were to be afraid to offend Ieremye, when that he did
utterly purpose to destroy the people for their sins, Iere. 7.
for he said, I shall thrust you out of my syghte. Therefore thou shall not
pray for this people, thou shall nether give thanks nor prayer for them, nor
thou shall not let me, nor make no intercessyon to me for them. For in no wise
will I hear thee.

This thing is plain and manifest, that GOD is with his servants in their
tribulation. Daniell. 3.
For Nabuchodonosor saw one in the burning furnace with Azaria and his
fellows like the son of God.

When Daniell was in the Lions den at Babylon. Daniel. 5. Daniel. 14.
Our Lord sent him his dinner from a far of (that is) from Iewry by the
prophet Abacucke.

Daniell. 13.
Our Lord hard the voice of Susanna, because she was unjustly condemned by thold
and unchaste elders: likewise by the just judgment of a continent and a chaste
child, she was delivered.

Our Lord prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonas, Jonas. 2.
the which seemed yet for his disobedience justly to have deserved pain and
punishment.

Machabeus and they that were with him fightinge against Timothe, 2. Match. 10
had manifestlye healpe from heaven, for there appeared five men upon
horsebackes with bridels of gold, etc.

And afterward in a another place, 2. macha. 11
they going to battle against Lystas, there appeared before them upon
horseback a man in white clothing with harness of gold, shaking his spear.

There was a great benignitye in our Savior. Math. 4.
For he went about healynge all manner of Sickness, and all manner of
dyseases. For if he had not so don, many sick persons could not have come unto
him.

Our Lord answered the Leaper, that said unto him, LORD, if thou will,
Math. 8.
thou may and canste make me clean, very meekelye and gently, for Jesus
puttinge forth his hands, touched him, saying. I will, be thou clean. But
the Priests abhord all such men.

Our Lord incontinent after Mathewes vocation dynde in his house with him.
Math. 9.


After that our LORD was departed and gone into the desarte, math. 14.
he saw much people, and was moved with mercy toward them, and he healed of
them those that were sick. And when the even drew on, his disciples said unto
him, let the people depart. Jesus as one most liberal, said unto them. Give
ye them to eat.

When Peter began to sincke, he cried saying, Math. 14.
Lord save me. And immediatlye Jesus stretchynge forth his hand, caughte him.

Our LORD did gentlye defend Marye Magdalen against the pharisy that
thought evil by her: Luke. 7.
and against her own Sister, complaininge of her, Mar. 14.
yea and against his Disciples that for the effusyon of the ointment, Luke. 10.
fumed against her.

The unspeakable goodness of god, is much declared in the example of the
prodigal son, where it is written.

But when he was yet a great way of, Luke. 15.
his father saw him, and moved with compassion, ran, and fell on his neck
and kissed him. He desired to be one of his hired servants, but yet his
father interruptinge his communication, received him as his son.

This was a marvelous benignity and gentelnesse of Christ, Luke. 19.
when that he invited and badde him self to the Publicans house, the which was
desirous to see him, and also he blessed the same.

When our LORD had indistinctlye spoken these words. Ihon. 13.
One of you shall betray me.

It follows, when Ihon leaned on Jesus breaste, he said, LORD who is it? Lo
what a benignitye and familiarity was this?

Acts. 2
Our savior promised his Disciples being heavy that he should depart from
them, that his father should send them a another comfortoure, the which thing
was well fulfilled at Whitsontide, when that the holy spirit did so mightily
strengthen, comfort, illuminate and teach them.

Ihon. 18.
The bishops ministers coming to take our Lord, he said unto them, if ye seek
me, let these go their way. For he knew full well, that they were not ready to
suffer martyrdom. And therefore mekely condesce^ding to their infirmity, he
would that they should spare them.

Ihon. 23.
The thief desired our Lord to remember him when he came to his kingdom: But
our LORD did grant him more then he demanded, saying: To day shall thou be
with me in paradise.

Luke. 22
This was the great meekness and gentleness of Christ, the which refused nor
Peter, that denied him thrice but beningly beheld him, nor he left not Thomas
in his doutfulnesse, Ihon. 20
but did exhibit him self manifestly to be touched.

And he made Paul blind, Acts. 9
following the act of his persecution. He cast him to the earth, called him, and
converted him.

Steven when they stoned him, Acts. 7
saw our Lord standinge in heaven, as though he had been ready, strongly to
have defended him.

Our Lord showed great gentleness to blessed S. Ihon, Apoca. 1.
being banyshed in to the isle of Pathmos, when he appeared and sent his angel
unto him, the which with diverse reuelatio^s did comfort him.

Of divine consolation. The fourth chapter.
AFter that Abraham at the commandment of God, Genesis 12.15.
went out of his country. Our Lord did comfort him with apparitions and
revelations.

Genesis. 18
Jacob flyinge from the face of his brother, and sleaping upon a stone, our
Lord appeared, and repleanished him with great consolation.

Exodus 3.
Our Lord appeared to Moses being exiled, and kepinge sheep, the which
thing, for the time that he was in Pharos house, chanced not unto him.

Exodus. 16
It rained Manna from heaven in desert to the children of Israel, yea and often
he gave the^ miraculously flesh and water.

Exodus. 34
Moses being in the mount. For the space of fortye days and fortye nyghtes,
did nether eat nor drink, but was refreshed with the deuyne word of God.

Iosu. 1.
Our Lord said unto Joshua, be of good cheer and strong, for I will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee.

3. regum. 17
Our Lord commanded the ra^ens twice a day to bear Elias bread and flesh.

Afterward our Lord appeared to Elias flying from Iezabell, iii. Reg. xix
whose Prophettes he had caused to be slain.

Our Lord did comfort king Hezechias effectuously, 4. regum 19
both by his prophet and by his angel, the which smote and slew in the host
of the Assiri ans an 185000.

Even at the self same time Saras and Tobias prayers were hard, To. 3.8.11.
and the angel of our Lord was sent to cure and deliver them both, that is
Sara from the Devil that had slain her husbands, and the elder Tobias from
poverty and blindness.

Our Lord vouchsafed wonderfullye to comfort his people of Israel by the
hand of one woman, Iudi. 14.
the which were in anguishe and fear of Holofernes host.

Our Lord turned the Jews sorrow into joy and gladness, Esth. 9
when that they by Hesters procuremente slew their enemies that were prepared
to oppress and to Murder them.

This thing is notable, that when the people of Israel in the time of the
captivity of Babylon were in great affliction that they had even than mo
Prophets, than in Salomons time, when he was in his most prosperity. For Jeremy
was in Iewry, Ezechiel and Daniel in Chaldea.

Dani. 3.
The Angel of our Lord came down with Azaria and his fellows, into the
Oven, and smote the flame of fire out of the Oven, and made in the midst of
the oven, as it had been a cold wind blowing, so that the fire neither touched
them, grieved them, nor did them hurt. Whereby it appears that the divine
pity is in every place, and ready at all times to comfort man.

Dani. 6.
Our Lord has twice comforted Daniell that was put into the den of Lions.
First by sending of his angel, which shut up the Lions mouths. Secondarily by
the prophet Abacuck Dani. 14.
the which was transported and conveyed with meat out of Iewrye into Calde by
Gods angel.

Our Lord by his servant Daniell did suddenly deliver Susanna which was
calumniously and falsely condemned. Daniell. 13.


Judas Machabeus and they that were with him perceiuinge that aid was sent
them from God, 2. macha. 1^
blessed the merciful Lord, and took their hearts again unto them.

Our Lord did well fulfill his promise made unto his Apostles, Acts. 2.
saying unto them, that he would send them a comforter, when he sent them the
holy spirit, that instructed them, comforted them, and fortified them so
aboundauntly.

Paul was happy and fortunate in this life, 2. Corin. 1.
which said without any fear, as the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in
us, even so is our consolation plenteous by Christ.

The church had reast and peace, Acts. 9
and was edified walking in the fear of our Lord and was repleanished with
the comfort of the holy ghost.

Our Lord sent his angel to Peter that was bound in Herodes prisone. Acts. 12.
which delivered him out of Herodes and the Jews hands.

As Paul and Silas were praying and lauding God in prison, Acts. 16.
suddenly there was a great earthquake. And the doors opened, and every man's
bands were losed.

Our Lord spoke thus to Paul in the night by a vision, Acts. 18.
preaching at Corinth. Be not afraid but speak, for I am with thee.

Paul being in Claudius the Tribunus hold. Acts. 23.
Our Lord stood by him in the night and said, be constante Paul for as thou
haste testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.

Paul having in will to comfort those that were with him in the ship: Acts.
27.
said: There stood by me this night the angel of God, saying: fear not
Paul: Thou must be brought before Caesar. And lo, God has given the all that
sail with the.

Ihon the Apostle being relegated and exiled into the Isle of Pathmos, Apoca.
1.
was many and diverse times comforted with divine and Godly consolation.

Of the benediction and blessing that God gives unto man. The.v. chapter.
GOd created man in his own Image and likeness, Genes. 1.
male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and said: Grow and
increase, and repleanish the earth.

And God blessed Noe, Genesis. 9.
and his sons and said unto them: bring you forth fruit. etc. The fear of
you, and the dread shall be upon every beast of the earth. etc.

Our Lord said unto Abram, Genesis. 12.
get ye out of thy country, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great,
that thou may be even a blessing.

And as concerning Ismaell, Gene. 17
I have heard thee, says our LORD unto Abraham. Lo I will bless him, and
make him to increase, and will multiply him excedingly.

Gene. 26
Our Lord blessed Isaac, and the man increased in richesse and went forth and
grew.

Jacob speaking unto our Lord and his uncle, Gene. 30
said: It was but little that thou had before I came to the, and thou art
enriched, and our Lord has blessed thee for my sake.

Jacob wrestling with the angel in his oration said: Genesis. 32
I will not let thee go except thou bless me. And it follows, and he blessed
him in the self same place.

Our Lord blessed the Egiptyans house for Iosephes sake, Genesis. 39
and the blessing of God was upon all that he had, in the house, and in the
field.

2. regum. 6
The Arc of our Lord continued in the house of Obethedom the Ecthite three
months, and our Lord blessed Obethedom and all his household.

Thou have blessed the works of his hands, Job. 1.
and his possession is increased in the land.

Job. 4.
Our Lord blessed and encresed Job more at the latter end, then at the beginning.

Christ ascendinge up to heaven, led his disciples to Bethany, Luke. 24
and lifting up his hands, he blessed them.

That blessing is to be desired, that our Lord shall give to his elected in
the latter day when he shall say, Math. 2^.
come ye blessed of my father.

Of the maledictyon and curse, wherewith god does curse man. The.vi. Chapter.
WE read that the serpente was first cursed of God. Gene. 3
Thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the earth: upon
thy belly shall thou go. etc.

And to the trauall and pain of man it is said. Genes. 3.
Cursed is the ground in thy work, or for thy sake.

And Ieremias lameniynge the destruction of Jerusalem, said. Our Lord has
forsaken his own altar, and cursed and abhorred his own sanctuary.

Daniel in his oration said: the curse is poured upon us. Dani. 9.
And note, that cursinges are said to be poured upon the sinful, and
blessing to redound upon the just. His blessing sees the wise manne, Eccle.
19.
shall run over as the stream.

Our Lord speaking by Malachy the prophet to euel priests, Mala. 2.
saithr I will curse your blessings.

And the fig tree having no fruit but leaves only, mat. 21.
was cursed of our Lord, and incontinent it wythered.

Math. 25.
The curse that in the day of judgment shall be pronounced against the wicked
shall be very terrible and fearful. Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire.

Of the blessing wherewith man blesses God. The.vii. Chapter.
MElchisedech king of Salem meting with Abraham Genesis. 14
returninge from ye slaughter, said: Blessed be the high GOD, by whose aid and
defense thou haste thine enemies in thy hands.

When Sisera was overthrown, Delbora and Barak sange, Iudi. 5
saying: Ye that so willinglye put your lives in pearel and ieopardy for
Israel, bless and praise ye the Lord.

It is said that David, after the victory that God gave him against Goliath
the Philistian, 1. regum. 17
made this psalm. Blessed be the Lord my God, Psalm. 144
which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight.

When Hyram had hard the words of Saloman, 3. regum. 5.
he reioysed greatly and said: Blessed be God which has given unto David a
wise son over this people.

The Temple being finished, Solomon in the presence of all the people, 3.
regum. 8.
said: Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, which spoke with his mouth unto
David my father.

David did appoint chefely Asaph and his brethren to thank our Lord. 1. Par. 26
It follows then: blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever: and let
all the people say. Amen.

King David was very pleasant and joyful, 1. Para. 16
and blessed our Lord before the universal multitude.

Esdras perceiuinge Arthaxerses to be well minded toward the Jews said: 1.
Esdras. 7
Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers which so has inspired the kings
heart, to garnishe the house of our Lord that is at Jerusalem.

When Esdras had opened the book of the law, Es. 2. ca. 7.
all the people stood up, and Esdras blessed our Lord god with a loud voice,
and all the people answered. Amen.

2. Esdras 9
After that the wall of the city of Jerusalem was finyshed under Esdras and
Nehemia, the Levites said. Stand up, and bless the Lord forever and ever.

When Sara the daughter of Raguel had made an end of her prayer, To. 3.
she said: Blessed is thy name o God of our fathers.

Tobias instructinge and teaching his son. Tob. 4.
Among all other things he said unto him: Bless thou, and be always thanckful
unto God, and beseech him, that he will order and direct thy ways.

Raguell and his wife perceiving that Satan had not hurt nor touched young
Toby, Tob. 8.
said: Blessed be thou o Lord God of Israel, for it is not happened unto us,
as we thought.

Raphaell did diligently monyshe Tobye and his son, Tob. 12
that they should bless and be thanckefull unto God, and tell out al his
wondrous works.

After that Tobye had recovered his sight, Tob. 13
and had hard Raphaels communication, he opened his mouth, and praised our
Lord and said. Great art thou O Lord for evermore.

Osias the chief ruler of the people of Israel, Iudi. 13.
seeing Judith with the head of Holofernes, said. Blessed be our Lord the
maker of heaven and earth.

A mystery was reveled in the night to Danyell by a vision, and he praised our
Lord of heaven saying. The name of God be blessed for ever and ever, Dani. ^.
for wisdom and strength ar his own, and he changes the times and ages.

Ananias and his fellows being cast into the burning oven, did walk in the
myddest of the fire, Dani. 3.
praysyng and blessing our Lord: And king Nabuchodonoser afterward
perseuynge and saying so great a miracle, said, blessed be the God of Sidrach,
Misach and Abednago.

After they had obtained of their enemies the victory, 1. Match. 4.
and had builded an altar, the children of Israel worshypped and gave thanks
to God, that he had prosperd them, and given them the victory.

Forasmuch as Heliodorus that would have spoiled the temple of our Lord, 2.
macha. 3.
was through the virtue of God most terribly scourged, they praised our Lord
that had magnified his place and temple.

When Machabeus and such as were with him perceived that God had sent them
aid, 2. Match. 11.
they blessed and praised our Lord altogether, which had showed them mercy,
and were comforted in their minds.

When John the baptist was borne, zacharis mouth was opened. Luke. 1.


And he prophesied saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel.

When Mary and Joseph had brought the child Jesus into the temple, Symeon took
him up in his arms, Lu. 2.
and blessed our Lord God saying, Now let thou thy servant depart in
peace.

And after Christ's ascension, Lu. 24.
there were in the temple, that praised and lauded God.

And Paul suffering tribulacions, 2. Corin. 1.
said, blessed be God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1.


And likewise. Peter. To bless god, is as it were a heavenly work and office.

Apoca. 5.
And I heard them all say, blessinge, honor, glory, and power be unto him
that sits upon the seat, and unto the lamb for evermore.

Of the benediction and blessing wherewith man does bless man. The viii.
chapter.
MElchisedech king of Sale^ met Abraham and blessed him, Genesis 14
saying. Blessed be Abraham unto the high God.

Genesis. 27
Isaac blessed Jacob saying. God give the of the dew of heaven, and of the
fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine.

When that Esau cried out above measure. Genesis. 17
Isaac said unto him. Thy blessinge shall be the fatness of the earth, and of
the dew of heaven from above.

And with thy sword shall thou live, and shall be thy brothers servant.

And Joseph brought in Jacob his father to Pharao. Genes. 47.
And Jacob blessed him. And Pharo asked him how old he was.

Jacob blessed his son Joseph and said. Genes. 48.
God before whom my fathers did walk bless these laddes. He spoke of Manasses
and Effraim, whom Iosephe desired that his father should bless. Gene. 49
For after this, Jacob blessed every one of his children with proper and
several benedictions.

Our Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. On this wise ye shall bless the children
of Israel. Numer. 6.
Our Lord bless thee, and keep thee. Our Lord make his face shine upon thee.

And Aaron lyftynge up his hand over the people, Leui. 9.
blessed them.

Balaam the son of Be^r said unto Balach. Numer. 23.
I am brought and conueyde hither to bless, and it is not in me to alter it.

The poor man's pledge shall not remain with thee all the night, but thou
shall deliver him the pledge again, or ever the sun go down, Deuter. 24
that sleping in his own raiment, he may bless thee.

Moses the manne of God blessed the children of Israel before his death,
Deuter. 33.
and said, our Lord came from Sinai, and showed his beams from Seir unto them.

Joshua called the Rubenites, and the Gaddites and the half tribe of Manasses,
Iosue. 22.
and said unto them. Have ye kept all that Moses commanded you? so he blessed
them, and sent them away.

In the song and thanks geuynge for the victory against Sisara we read.
Iudi. 5.
Blessed be thou Iahel the wife of Haber the Kenite among all women, and
blessed shall she be in her te^t and tabernacle.

Noemi perceiuinge Ruth his daughter in law to be honored of Boom, ruth. 2.
said: blessed be he of our Lord, for the like favor and grace that he showed
to the living, he reserueth for the dead.

Boom did commend Ruth, that fled to the GOD of Israel, ruth. 3.
and said. Blessed art thou in our Lord, for thou have showed more
goodness and mercy in the latter end, than at the beginning.

Hely blessed Elkana and his wife, and said unto him. 1. regum. 2.
Our Lord give the seed of this woman, for that she has lent our Lord, or
for the peticion that she has made unto the Lord.

The Ziphites sent word unto Saul, 1. regum. 23
that David lurked in their country. And Saul said: Blessed are ye in our
Lord, for ye have compassyon on me.

It was told David that they of Iabes had buried Saul, 2. regum. 2.
and he said unto them. Blessed are ye unto our Lord, that ye have showed
such kindness unto your Lord Saul, and have buried him.

King Solomon turns his face, 3. regum. 8.
and blessed all the congregation of Israel, and all the Congregation of Israel
stood still.

When David had made an end of the burnt offeringes, 1. Para. 16^
and peace offeringes, he blessed the people in the name of our Lord.

And he dealte to all Israel both man and woman a craknell of bread, and a
good piece of flesh and a flacket of wine.

Raguel taking the right hand of his daughter, Tob. 7.
gave her into the right hand of Tobias, saying. The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob be with you. Join you together, and fulfill his
blessing in you. He kyssed Tobye, and weeping took him about the neck and
said, Tob. 9.
Gods blessinge have thou my son, for thou art the son of a good virtuous
man.

Gabelus going into ye house, found Tobi, he wept and said, the god of Israel
bless the, for thou art the son of a right virtuous and just man, and of
one that fears god.

Osias the chief ruler of the people of Israel, said unto Judith, blessed art
thou of Our lord the hye god, Iudi. 13.
above all women upon earth. And afterward all the elders began to praise her
with one voice, Iudit. 15
saying. Thou worship of Jerusalem, thou joy of Israel. etc.

And it fortuned that when Elizabeth heard the salutacion of Mary, Luke 1.
she cried with a loud voice, and said. Blessed art thou among women. etc.

Of the malediction and curse wherewith man does curse man. ca. ix.
IT is red that Noah among all other men was the first that cursed Chanaan
his nephew, Genesis 9.
because that Cham his father disclosed the nakedness of Noah to the rest of
his brethren, when that he should rather have kept it close.

Among the words of benediction that Isaac gave to Jacob his son. Genesis 27.
He said. Cursed be he yt curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee.

Jacob said unto Simon and Leuis father, Genesis 49.
cursed be their wrath. For it was shameless, and their indignation and
fearcenesse, for it was hard and cruel.

Balac sent messengers unto Balaam, Nume. 22.
that he should come and curse the people of Israel, Nume. 22.
for he had heard, him to be acursed, upon whom maledictio^ or curse fell or
chanced.

Who so curses his father or his mother, Leui. 20
let him dye.

Moses writes and sets for the Deu. 27.
many maledictions and curses against those that transgress gods
commandments delivered unto them.

The City of Hiericho being destroyde, Joshua swear, Iosu. 6.
saying, cursed be the man before our lord, that rises up, and builds this
cite Hiericho.

The Sickemites when they were eating and drinckinge and merry, Iudi. 49.
did curse Abimelech.

Goliath the philistine cursed David in the name of his gods. 1. reg. 17.


Saul purposinge to ensue and follow the philistines, 1. regu. 14,
charged the people with an oath, saying. Cursed be the man that eats any
food till night, until I be avenged of mine enemies.

Semei came out cursing, and he cast stones at David, 2. reg. 16.
and said, come forth you bloudsheder, and thou man of Belial.

Eliseus cursed the children that mocked him, 4. reg. 2.
saying, go up thou balde head, go up thou bald head. And there were torn in
pieces with.ii. bears.xlii. children.

When Machabeus laid sege to a certain hold named Gazer, 2. match. 10.
they that were within, curste and band excedingly. And made great craking
with wicked words.

The Pharisees berated and cursed him that was borne blind whom our Lord Jesus
did illuminate. John. 9.
And they said. Be thou his disciple.

The Jews reproved Paul saying. Reuilest and cursest thou gods hye Priest?
Acts. 23.
But Paul excused him self, and said. I wyste not brethren that he was the
hie priest and gouernoure.

Of the seuerite of god against the wicked. ca. x.
GOd punished the sin of our first parents grievously, Genesis 23.
the which, as they believed, was venial, and that it should not have been
punished so extremely.

God spared not the original world, but welnye destroyed it wholye with water.
Genesis 7.


The.v. cities were consumed with stinkinge fire be the angels sent from god,
Genesis 19.
for bogery.

The Egiptians perceived that the children of Israel were drowned and sanke as
lead, Exo. 14.15.
god co^maundinge the same, in the mighty waters.

Because Amalech people did let the children of Israel goinge to the land of
promise. Exo. 17.
Our lord said to Moses I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalech
from under heaven.

For the calfe sake that the people worshipped, Exo. 32.
there fell in one day about 3000. men.

There went a fire out from our lord and consumed Nadab and Abihu, Leui. 10.
the sons of Aaron, because they took either of them his censor, and put
strange fire therein, and cens thereupon. And offered it before our Lord.

Our Lord commanded the cursed Leui. 24.
speaker to be brought without the host, and let all the multitude stone him.

And while the flesh, that our lord sent, Nume. 11.
the children of Israel beholding and seeing the same, was yet between their
tethe. Our Lord smote the people with an exceading great plague.

Our Lord plaged Marye with the Leper, Nume. 12.
because she spoke against Moses. Of 600. thousand men, the which were
nombred, shall none come into the land of promise, and that for their sinful
dealinge, Nume. 14
save Caleb and Iosue, as our Lord did threaten them.

He that was found gatherynge of sticks upon the Sabbath day, Nume. 15.
was stoned to death by Gods commandment.

Our Lord consumed Chorath, Dathan, and Abiram, Nume. 16
with a terryble death.

Our Lord punished Moses greuouslye at the water of strife, Nume. 20.
because he doubted, and yet until then, he had born him self very holily and
faithfully as well unto God, as to man.

Our Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, Nume. 21.
because they were fainte and weary of their iourny and labor. And they said,
wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt.

Acham the son of Charmi pearished with all that ever he had, Iosu. 7.
because he took of the excommunycate things of Jericho.

For the crime committed against the Levites wife, Iudi. 20.
the whole trybe of Benjamin except six hundredth men pearished by Gods
Commandment.

Hely corrected his Children that had trespassed but meanelye, 1. regum. 2.
and therefore he was punyshed for them and with them. What shall we then say
of those, that do not correct their children, but entice them to evil both by
word and deed?

(...)
For as much as Saul did offer burnt at sacrifice contrary unto Samuels
commandment, he was reproved. And likewise because he reserved king Agag,
(...)
Amalech, and his sheep and oxen.

For Saules offenses they of his own house and familye were punyshed even
after his death, 2. regu. 21.
and because of them, there fell a great hunger in the land.

As David was bringing our Lord's Ark upon a carte. 2. regum. 6.
Oza put his hand to the Arc and held it, 1. para. 13.
for the Oxen being a little wild, stombled, and our Lord smote him for his
fault, and there he died.

For the elation and pride of David causynge his people to be nombred, 2. regu.
24.
there dyed two and seventy thousand men.

The manne of GOD that came out of Iewrye, 3. reg. 13.
and declared unto Ieroboas the success of the office of his priests, was
slain with a Lion, because that he, contrary to Gods commandment, did eat
bread in the house of a certain prophet.

There were two and forty children devoured of two bears, 4. reg. 2.
because they mocked Elizeus, saying. Go up thou bald head.

If Echezis sin be so greuouslye punished, 4. reg. 45.
because he took gifts and rewards of Naaman given him with good will, what
shall be said of those, that eract many things fradulently or extort them
violentlye?

Ozia king of Iewry took the censar, and would have burnt insence like as the
priests were wont to do, ^. para. 20.
and by and by the leprosy sprange in his forehead.

For as much as Ezechias showed the messengers of the king of Babylon al his
treasures, 4. reg. 20.
he lost them, and yet they came out of far countries, and as it seemed, they
should have been much made of, and ioyfullye received.

Our Lord delivered his peculiare and well beloved people into Nabu^hodonosors
hands, 4. reg. ^0.
the which did capti^ate ye people most cruelli burnt the holy city, and
destroyed the Temple.

Because the daughters of Sion are become proud. etc. In stead of good smell,
there shall be stink among the^, and thy goodly and mighty men, (...)
shall hearith with the sw^^^de in battle.

The kings of Babylon cruelly entreated the children of Israel, and
afterward they them selves also with their noble city were destroyed, Esa. 14.
even as our Lord threatened. Io. 30.51.


Heliodorus was greuouslye scourged, because he was willinge to convey away the
stuff and goods of widows and peoples committed to the priests custody. 2.
Match. 3.


King Antiochus was smitte^ with so grievous a plage, that the worms scrauld
out of his wicked body: and his hoa^t was grieved with the smell 2. Match. 9.
and stink of him.

Our Lord being wroth delivered ye ungracious servant, Mat. 18.
the which would not forgive his fellow the.C. pence, to the sailors, until he
had paid all ye was due unto him.

Our Lord commanded the unprofitable Mat. 25.
servant, that would not study to multiplye the Talent delivered unto him, to
be deprived of that he had, and to be cast into utter darkness.

That fraud and guile that Ananias committed, act. 5.
his wife Saphira knowing of the same, was sore punished.

Herod arrayed with royal apparel set him in his seat, and made an oration
unto the people, Acts. 12.
the which lifting up their voices, said: It is the voice of a God, and not of
a man. And immediately the angel of our Lord smote him, because he gave not
God the honor, and he was eaten with worms, and gave up the ghost.

Of the anger and fury of God.
NOte and take heed, that ye anger of God, De ciuitate dei. Lib. 15 Capitu. 25.
after ye mind of S. Augustine, is not the perturbation or motyon of his mind,
but his judgment, by the which, pain is appointed to sin, his cogytatyon
and recogytation of things mutable, is his immutable reason and judgment.
Nor GOD does not so repent him of his deed as the yrefull manne does, whose
sentence of all things is as fixed and steadfast, as his prescience and
foreknowledge is certain. But if Scripture use no such words, yet it does not
insinuate it self familiarly to all kind of men, unto whom, he would it
should be known, and that to fear the proud, stir up the negligente,
exercise those that inquire and seek, and nourishe those that understand, the
which thing he would not do, if his will were not first to bow and incline
him self, and as it were to descend and come down to those which are weak and
feeble.

Our Lord was angry with Moses Exo. 4.
that so oftentimes he refused to take upon him the governance and leading of
the people, God commanding the same.

Our Lord was angry with the Egiptians that kept, Exo. 15.
and afflicted his people, and would have persecuted them going their ways.
Then it follows. Thou haste sent thy anger.

Moses prayed unto our Lord, saying: Exo. 32.
why does thy wrath O lord wax hot against thy people: For the calfe made of
molten metal, to the which they offered burnt offeringes.

By the occasion of Corah, sedition and his companions, Nume. 16.
Moses and Aaron said unto our Lord. O most mighty God of the sprites, if one
man has sinned, will thou be wroth and angri with all the multitude.

The people both sittinge and wepinge were much desirous of flesh. Nume. 11.
Then it follows. The fury of our Lord was provoked unto wrath exceadinglye.

All the multitude of the children of Israel murmured against our Lord, Nume.
16.
Moses, and Aaron, saying: ye have killed the people of our Lord. Then there
follows. There is wrath gone out from our Lord, and the plage waxes fearce
and cruel.

The people began to commytte whoredom with the Daughters of Moab. Nume. 25.
It follows. And our Lord being angry, said unto Moses. Take all the heads
of the people, and hang them.

Because of Moses unbelief and doutfulnesse at the water of strife. Nume. 20.
Our Lord was wroth with him, as it is written. Our Lord was angry with me
Moses for your sakes, and said unto me. Deu. 1.
Thou shall not go in thither, yt is, into the land of promise.

Beware said Moses that your heart be not deceived, Deu. 11.
and that ye turn not aside from God, and serve strange Gods, and worship
them. And then our Lord being wroth, shut up the heaven.

The children of Israel have transgressed the couenaunte, Iosu^ 7.
and have usurped the excommunicate things. There follows. And the wrath of
our Lord waxed hot against the children of Israel for the sin of Achan.

Our Lord was grieved and angrye with Osa, and smote him, 1. para. 13.
because he touched the arc.

Our Lord was wroth with Solomon, because his mind was turned from our Lord.
3. reg. 11.


The fury of our Lord was against Israel, 4. reg. 13.
and he delivered them into the hands of Hazael king of Syria, because of
their Idolatry, for they worshipped the calves yt Ieroboas made.

Our Lord was wroth against Israel, and he moved David against them, 2. reg.
24
in that he said to Ioab, go and nombre Israel and Judah.

After Idolatry, witchcraft, encha^tmentes, and other diverse sins and
wickedness, 4. reg. 17
the Children of Israel provoked our Lord. And our Lord was exceading wroth
and angri with Israel, and put them out of his syghte.

The Prophet Iehu said unto Iosaphat the king of Judah, 2. Para. 19
that came to battle with Achab the king of Israel. Thou helpest the
ungodly, and do love those that hate our Lord. Therefore ire and wrath come
upon thee from our Lord. Nevertheless there are some good acts found in
thee.

Ioas the king of Judah and his rulers served groves and Idols, 2. para. 24.
and then came the wrath of God upon Judah for this their trespasses sake.

Amasias king of Judah overcame in battle through the healpe of GOD, 2.
para. 25
the Edomites, and brought their goods away, and bowed him self before
them, wherefore our LORD was angrye and wroth with him.

Hezechias did not again unto God according to the benefits that he had showed
him: 2. para. 32
for his heart arose, and there came wrath upon him, and upon Jerusalem.

Josias king of Judah, when he had hard that was written in the book of the
law, 2. para. 34.
said: great is the fury and anger of our LORD that is fallen upon us,
because your fathers have not kept the words of our Lord.

They did eat, Esd. 2.9
and were filled, and became fat, and lived in wealth through thy great
goodness: and they provoked the to anger.

And Artaxerzes, the gentle commanded that all things should be done to the
most highest, 1. Esdras. 7
after the law of God. Least his anger arise against the realm, and against
the king, and his children.

Our Lord said to Eliphas the Themanite. I am angrye and displeased with thee,
Job. 42.
and thy two friends, for ye have not spoken before me the thing that is right.

Thus it is written of Babilone, be Iere. 50.
hold she shall be the least set by among the nations: void, wasted, and dried
up, no man shall be able to dwell there, for the fear and anger of our Lord, but
she shall be whole desolate.

When Machabeus had gathered a multitude together, 2. Match. 8.
he was to mighty for the heathen: for the wrath of our Lord was turned into
mercy.

And it is written in the parable of the ungracious servant that would not
have compassion on his fellow, Mat. 18.
his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the ^aylers.

Also it is written against those that excused them selves that they could not
come to supper. Luc. 14.
Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said unto his servant. etc.

He that believes on the son has everlasting life: John. 3.
he that believes not the son, shall not se life, but the wrath and anger of
God abides on him.

The ire and anger that shall be showed at the day of judgment is greatly to be
feared. Apoca. 6.
Of the which it is written in the revelation of Saint Ihon. Kings of
thearth, and the great men. etc shall say to the hills and rocks, fall on us,
and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the seat, and from the
wrath of the lamb.

That God does more regard the intent of the doer, then the work it self.
The.xii. Chapter.
CAine brought of the fruit of the ground an oblatyon unto our Lord. Genesis 4.
Abel also brought of the firstlinges of his sheep. Then folow^th. Our Lord
had respect unto Abel, and to his oblation, but unto Caine and to his offering,
he had no respect.

After that promys was made to Abraham that he should have a child by Sara,
Genesis 8.
he laughed, and so did Sara, Whose laughing our Lord reproved, but not
Abraham's.

We read that when Moses and Aaron showed wonders before Pharao, Exo. 6.
that Pharaos wise men and enchaunters did in like manner with their sorrerye.

Chore and his company had even such censers as Aaron had, Nume. 16.
and perchance of as good metal or rather better: and yet god did not equally
accept their censing.

The Bethsames lifted up their eyes, and spyed the Arc and reioysed, 1. regu.
6.
and offered a burnt offering unto our Lord. And although they seemed to do a
good work, yet our Lord plaged them with a great plague, because they had
seen the Arc, the which they should not have seen.

1. regu. 19.
When Saul was among the prophets, he strypte of his clothes, and began to
prophecye, but it auayled him but little.

Oza put forth his hand to houlde the Arc that it should not faull, 1.
para. 13.
and our Lord smote him incontynently, and there he dyed.

Notwythstandynge it is a very good thing to offer incence unto our Lord, 2.
para. 16.
yet it pertayneth notte to every man to do the same. For Ozias the king of
Judah was smytten with ye leper, because he would burn insence upon the altar
of insence.

Our LORD does reprove by his Prophet Esaias the oblations Esa. 1.
that he him self did institute to be offerde, and that, because of the
wickedness of those that offerde. Why offer ye so many sacryfyces unto me,
says our Lord? Then there follows. Your hands are full of blood.

Our Lord preferred the offering of the widdowe which cast two mites in to the
treasury, Luke. 21.
above the offeringes of the rich men.

Herod desired very greatly to see Jesus. And when he saw him he was
exceading glad, but yet he gate no profit thereby, LuKe. 23.
thoccasion and cause where of was another pitye nor charity, but curiosity and
vanity.

That God at times does tempt and prove man. The.xiii. chapter.
GOD did prove Abraham, and said unto him. Genesis 22.
Take thy son. etc.

Our Lord said unto Moses: behold, Exo. 16.
I will rain bread from heaven to you, and the people shall go out and gather.
There follows, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law or no.

And when our LORD spoke with Moses, Exo. 20.
all the people hard their voices, and the sound of the trompe, and saw the
Lamps, the Lyghteninge and the mountain smokinge. And being afraid they said
unto Moses. Talk thou with us. etc. Moses said fear not for GOD is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be in you that ye sin not.

Our LORD did not put all the people clean away from the land of promission,
Iudi. 2.
that through them, Israel might prove whether they would keep his
commandments.

Our Lord left Ezechias to be proved, that all such things as was in his
heart and mind, 4. reg. 20.
at the coming of the king of Babilons messengers, might be known.

It is written, that God, after that Toby was made blind, Tobi. 2.
suffered that temptation to happen unto him, that they which came after
might have an example of his patience,

Judith speakinge of the children of Israel, Iudi. 8.
the which Holofernes thought to destroy, said, that they should call to
remembrance, how their fathers in times paste were tempted, that they in like
manner might be proved, whether they worshypped their God a right or no.

Job for the great tribulations that he suffered, Job. 23.
said of him self. He has proved and tried me, as the gold in the fire.

David desired of our Lord, saying: Examen me O Lord, psalm. 25. psalm. 138.
and prove me. O Lord thou have proved me. etc.

Our Lord Jesus walking on the sea, commanded Peter to come unto him. Mat 14.
But when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid.

Our Lord said unto Phillippe, whence shall we by bread, John. 6.
that these may eat. This he said to prove him.

Peter said: maruail not that ye are proved as gold by fire, 1. pet. 4.
which thing is to try you.

That man should not tempt God. The.xiiii. Chapter.
ABraham going toward Egypt did wiselye that he confessed not that Sara was
his wife, Genesis 12^ 20.
for if if he had so said, he might have brought both him self, and her into
danger.

And Isaac did in like manner: For if he had done so, Genesis 26.
he in a manner, as says s. Augustine, had tempted our Lord.

The children of Israel tempted our Lord very often in wilderness. Nume. 14.


When the children of Israel were overthrown in battle by the Philistines,
1. regu. 4.
they brought the Arc of our Lord with them into the battle, and it was
taken, and they were smitten with a great plage.

David knew that he was anointed king, 1. reg. 22.23
and that he should reign after Saul, as Samuel had promised and yet he would
not put him self in any ieopardy, but did to keep him self that he might
possible.

When yt an horrible great fish invaded Toby, Tob. 6.
he tarried not that thangel should deliver him, yt which thing he might easily
and quickly have done: but he took the fish by the gil, and drue him to the
dry land.

Ozias had promised and appointed with the people, Iudi. 8.
that he, if there came no healpe after five days were paste, would give up
them selves and the city to Holofernes. Judith said unto the elders of the
city, what are ye, that ye do tempt our Lord? This device or words optaineth
no mercy.

Our Lord was tempted by the devil, that he should cast him self down headlyng
from the pinnacle of the temple. Mat. 4.
But he said to him: Luke. 4.
Thou shall not tempt the LORD thy God. For he might have descended other
ways.

The Pharisees willing to tangle Jesus in his words, Mat. 22.
caused to be demanded of him, whether it were lawful to give Caesar tribute or
no. Jesus perceiuinge their wickedness, said? why tempt ye me, ye hipocrites.

When he had cast out the Deuel, the dombe spoke, certain there were that
tempted him, Luke. 11.
and required of him a sign from heaven.

Peter rebuking Saphira Ananias wife very sharplye, Act. 5.
said, wherefore have ye conspired together, to lie and to tempt the holy
ghost.

Paul in that thing, that by human industrye he could do him self, Act. 9.
looked for no miracle or healpe. And therefore when the Jews laid watch for him
at Damasco, he caused him self to be let down through the wall in a basket.

And when they had him bound with thonges, Act. 22.
and that the Tribune would have punished Paul, he said that he was a Citezen
of Rome. Act. 23.
And again he said that he was a Pharisey, and that to make dissension among
the Jews. Act. 25.
And when he had an unrighteous judge, he appealed unto Caesar.

Of vows. Ca. xv.
Jacob goinge unto his uncle Labans house, Genesis 18.
after the vision that was showed him, vowed a vow, saying. If God will be with
me. etc.

King Arad the Cananite fought against Israel, Nume. 21.
and having the upper hand and victory over them. He took some of them
prisonners. But Israel vowed a vow unto our Lord, and afterward overcame them.

Iepte fought against the children of Ammon, Iudi. 11.
vowed a vow unto our Lord, saying. If thou will deliver the children of
Amon into my hands. etc.

Anna praide unto our lord, and sore weping vowed a vow, 1. regu. 1.
and said O lord of hosts. if thou will give me a man child, I will give
him unto our lord.

Absalon willing to rebel against his father king David, 2. regu. 15
said unto him I will go now to Hebron, and pay my vow which I have vowed
unto our lord. For thy servant vowed a vow, when he was in Gesur, in the
land of Siria, saying: If our lord shall bring me again to Jerusalem, I will
do sacrifice unto our lord.

Asa the king of Judah offered up 2. Para. 15.
those things in the house of our lord that his father had vowed and dedycated
unto our Lord, even silver, gold and diverse other vessel.

And the people reioysed when they were so willinge to make their vows, 1
para. 19.
for with all their hearts they offered their goods unto our Lord. And David
the king reioysed with great gladness.

And the children of Israel and Judah brought in and offered their tithes, 2.
para. 31.
which they had vowed and consecrated unto our Lord.

King Artarerzes commanded Esd^as and the people, 1. Esd. 7.
that they should bring gifts unto our Lord God of Israel, the which they
had vowed and promised our Lord.

All the people after the victory, came to Jerusalem to praise and give
thanks unto our Lord, Iudi. 16.
and they all offered burnt offeringes, their vows and promises.

The men that were in the ship where Jonas the Prophet was, Jonas. 1.
feared exceadingly, doing sacrifices, and making vows unto our Lord.

2. Match. 3.
Heliodorus purposing to spoil the tresuary, and violently to take away such
things as were laid there to be kept, was be the divine power grievously
scourged, and afterward made whole through the prayer of Onyas, he offered
unto god, made great vows, and so returned to the king again.

After that our Lord had, smytten Antiochus with a grievous plague which no man
could heal, 2. Match. 9.
he promised the Jews to garnysh the temple, with great gifts.

Luke. 1.
It seems that the blessed virgin made a vow of her virginite, forasmuch as
she said. How shall this be, seeing I know not a man.

Those Jews made a cruel and a wicked vow, Act. 23.
that coming to the hie rulers said: we with deuocio^ have made a vow, that
we will nether eat nor drink, nor taste any thing till we have killed Paul.

Of Prayer. Ca. xvi.
ABraham most humbly, discretelye, Genesis 18.
constantly and mekely did pray our Lord, to spare the Sodomites.

At some time we must pray our Lord for such things, Genesis 25.
as he has purposed to do. As Isaac made intercession unto our Lord for his
wife, because she was barren. And yet our Lord purposed that she should
conceive and bring forth children.

It is greatly to be thought upon. How thankeful, Genesis 32.
how lowly, and how importune that Iacobbe was in his prayer, saying, Lord I am
not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. And afterward how he sequestrated
him self from his wives and all his familye, and remained there alone in the
night.

Moses prayde our Lord oftentimes, Exo. 7.8.9.10.
that he would remove the plagues from Egypt, and was heard, notwithstanding
that the people were evil.

Moses in the war that the children of Israel made against Amelech, Exo. 17.
did more by prayer, than Joshua by fighting.

The only prayer of the mind does cry and ascend unto God, as it well
appears when our LORD said unto Moses that spoke nothing unto him, Exo. 14.
wherefore cryest thou unto me.

After the adoration made unto the caulfe. Exo. 32.
Our Lord as it appeared, would have utterly destroyed the people, but Moses
by reason of instante prayer abtained their pardone. But yet note, the manner
of his praying, either (quoth he) forgive them their sin: or wipe me out of
thy book.

After Moses intercession and prayer, Nume. 11.
the fire that had devoured the hosts of the murmurers, and those that were
heavy and sorry of their labor, quenched.

Our Lord being even yr^full against the people that demanded flesh in
wilderness, Nume. 11.
granted them their peticion, whereby it appears, that the extudicion and
hearing of man's prayer, is not alwais a sign of divine and godly dilection.

Mary by the intercession and prayer Nume. 12
of Moses was healed of her leprosy

The people being sore afflycted with fiery serpents, said unto Moses^ Nume. 21
pray for us, and he made intercession for the people.

Anna being troubled in her mind prayed unto our Lord, 1. regum. 1.
and wept sore, and vowed a vow, she spoke in her heart, and her voice was not
hard at all.

When the children of Israel should fight against the Philistines, 1. regum.
7.
they said to Samuel. It is necessary that thou pray and cry to our Lord for
us, that he may save us out of the hand of the Philistines.

It pleased not God that the children of Israel should require a king to
reign over them. 1. regum. 8.
And yet our Lord said unto Samuel, hear the voice of the people, in all
that they say unto thee.

Samuel said unto the people, GOD forbid, 1. regu. 12^
that I should sin against our Lord, and cease prayinge for you.

David said, 2. reg. 7.
that he had found in his heart, to pray to our Lord.

David prayed and besoughte God for the child, 2. regu. 12.
and fasted, and went in and lay upon the earth. This was a very good manner of
praying, but David was not then worthy to be hard.

Helias praying for rain, said to his servant, 3. reg. 13.
look toward the seat, for from thence he trusted that some rainy cloud would
arise, but until the seventh time nothing appeared, whereby the instancye and
continuance of prayer is commended.

King Iosaphat smitten with fear, gave him self wholly to pray unto our Lord.
2. para. 20.
For he heard say, that a great multitude of people was coming against him.

Hezechias after he had hard ye king of Assiryans messengers used very good
counsel, 4. reg. 19
when that he sent unto Esaias the Prophet, saying: make thy prayer for the
remnaunt yt are found and left. And the king turned him to pray unto our
Lord. And note there, how faithfully and how prudently he made his prayer.

Hezechias that he might pray the more attentively turned his face to the
wall, iiii. reg. xx.
and prayde our lord, saying, I beseech thee now O Lord remember how I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfyt heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight and Hezechias wept sore.

Manasse the king of Judas prayer was very humble, ii. Pa^ xxxi^i
devout, and effectuus, as men may se in the later end of the book.

Who fasted and praide our Lord to have a sure and a right way, i. esd. 8.
and it chaunsed prosperously. And when he gave the king drink, he made his
prayers to God of heaven, Nehe. 1.
and when he should answer to those things that were asked him, he prayde
most humbly.

When Tobi had heard his wives evil and naughtye communication, Tob. 2.3
he took it heuely, and with tears began to make his prayer.

When Sara the daughter of Raguell had heard the great reproach and rebuke of
her maiden, tobi. 3.
she went into an hie chamber of her house, and continuinge iii. days in
prayer, she besought God with tears, yt she might be delivered from that
rebuke.

Tob. vi.
Raphael the aungel, that the devil might have no power upon Toby the younger,
warnd him, that when he had taken Sara to his wife, and was come into the
chamber, that he should with hold him self from her three days, and give his
diligence unto nothing but unto prayer with her.

Iudi. 4.
When the children of Israel heard of the power of Holofernes, they cried unto
our Lord. But Eliachim the hie priest put them in remembrance, how that Moses
overthrew Amalech that trusted in his might and power, not with weapons, but
with holy prayers.

Iudit. 8.
Judith did trust greatly in other men's prayers, and therefore she purposing
to go to Holofernes, said unto thelders, pray ye unto god, that he will
stablishe, and bring my counsel to good end. And after follows: Do ye
nothing else but pray unto our Lord for me.

Judith. 13
In like manner^ when she should smite of Holofernes head, she made her prayer
with tears standing before the bed.

And when Esther should speak unto king Ahasuerus, Esth. 4
she said to Mardocheus. Gather all the Jews together that may be found,
and fast ye and pray for me: but how deuoutlye and how humbly they praid,
and how Mardocheus prayed for him self and the people. It is written in
the.xiiii. Chapter of Esther.

The prayer of Jeremy was of great reputation with God, Ihere. 11.
when our Lord said unto hi^, pray not for this people.

Azarias standing in the mydst of the furnace, Dani. 3.
praid thus. Blessed art thou o Lord God of our fathers.

Daniel for all king Darius act and decre, Dani. 6.
left not of kneling down upon his knyes to pray unto the Lord like as his
manner was to do before time, three times a day. See now how precious and how
profitable a thing he esteemed it to pray unto our Lord.

Daniel perceiving the time of the Captiuitye to be complete, and at an end,
prayde the more instantly for the people that were in captivity. And note how
mekely and how fervently he makes his intercession and prayer. Dani. 9.


When Susanna perceived that she lacked all human aid and counsel, Dani. 13.
she made her recourse to the help of prayer, and her prayer was heard.

Jonas prayed unto our Lord, out of the fyshes bellye, Jonas. 2.
and said, in my trouble I called unto our Lord, and he heard me.

The congregation were ready gathered to fight, 1. Match. 3.
to pray, and to make supplication unto God for mercy and grace.

When that Judas Machabeus should give battle with Gorgias he made his prayer
and said, i. Mac. iiii.
blessed be thou O savior of Israel. i. match. Vi.
In other.ii. principal battaylles we read not that he prayed, The one was
against king Antiochus, and then he wanne not but departed his ways. i. Mac.
ix.
The other was against Bacchides and Alchimus, and then he was slain in the
battaille.

i. match. xi.
Ionathes perceiving that al his company, except a few, left him fightinge
against strangers, he rent his clothes, and praid, and afterward obtained
the victory.

The Jews being in tribulatyon, prayed unto our Lord. The priests having on
them their priestly stoles and vestimentes fell down before the aultare and
called upon God, ii. mac. iii.
which had made a law concerning stuff given to keep that it might be safely
preserved for such as deliuerd it to be kept. And all the women held up their
hands toward heaven and praid.

Onias the hie priest praid for Heliodorus that was grievously scourged by God
for spoiling of the temple, ii. mac. iii.
and our Lord restored him to life again.

Judas Machabeus and they that were with him, iii. Mac. viii
praid and besought our Lord to deliver the^ from wicked Nicanor: and though
he would not do it for their sakes, yet for the couenaunte yt he made with their
fathers, and because they called upon his holy and glorious name.

The wicked Antiochus praid unto our Lord, of whom he should have obtained no
mercy. 2. Match. 9.


Nicanor and they that were with him, 2. Match. 15.
drue nie with shaumes and songs: but Judas and his company with prayer and
calling upon God. They buckled together, with their hands they smote, but with
their hearts they prayed unto our Lord, and slew no less the^ 35. thousand
men: for through the present help of God, they were gloriously comforted.

Mat. 8.
The Leper had a short, a profitable, and an humble manner of praying, Luke. 5.
the which knelinge before our Lord did worship him and said, Mark. 1.
master, if thou will thou can make me clean.

The Centurion used as it were by a certain insinuation, Mat. 8.
the like manner of prayer, Luke. 7.
when he said: Master, my servant lies sick of the palsy.

Ihon. 11.
And also Martha and Mary for Lazarus that was dead and buried.

Our Lord at times will be prayed for that, Luke. 10.
that he purposes to do, pray ye the Lord of the harvest to send forth
laborers into his harvest. Mat. 9.
Then there follows immediatelye. Calling together. etc.

And when the people were sent away, he went up into a mountain to pray
alone. Mat. 14.
Whereby we are taught, that when we inte^d to pray, we should fie the company
of man, lest we should be troubled.

Our Lord and savior in his holy Gospels, Mat. 6.
has taught us to pray by word of mouth, saying: Thus shall ye pray. Our
father. etc.

Men ought always to pray, Luke. 18.
and not be weary.

Also our Lord has animated us to pray by his promise. Luke. 11.
Ihon. 14.
Ask (says he) and ye shall have. Item, what soever ye ask in my name, that
will I do.

He has likewise informed and taught us to pray by his example. Mat. 14.
For he that might command, would pray.

And specially he did the same. Mat. 26.
for ye persecution of this Passion being at hand, he prayed, and warned other
to pray, saying: watch and pray.

When Mary Magdalen obtaind forgeuenes of her sins of our Lord saying: Luke.
7.
Thy sins are forgeuen the, we read not that she used any loud prayer, but
that she wept only, where by the efficacye of the inward desire appears
without any vocal or loud prayer.

Our Lord does induce us to instant and continual prayer by thexample of one yt
went to his friend at midnight. Luke. 11.


Luke. 18.
And by thexample of a widow, the which desired with great importunity of the
wicked judge to avenge her.

And to instruct us to pray with hu^mility and without pride, Luke. 18.
or any aua^cement of our selves. Our Lord induc^th thexample of the proud
pharisy, and the lowly and humble Publicane.

Act. 1.
After our lords assention into heaven, the Disciples returned unto Jerusalem,
and they al continued^ with one accord in prayer and supplication with the
women and Mary.

Thapostles being minded and willinge to choose one of the disciples in Judas
place, Act. 1.
appointed two, Joseph, and Mathias, and when they prayed, they said: Thou Lord
which know the hearts of al men, show whether of these two thou have chosen.

In the primitive church, al faithful people continued in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, Act. 2.
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

Peter and Ihon went up together into the temple at the ninth hour of prayer.
Act. 3.


And as soon as the disciples had prayed, the place moved, Act. 4.
where they were assembled together, and they were all filled with the holy
ghost, and they spoke the word of God boldly.

The Jews stoned Steven, calling on, Act. 7.
and saying: lord Jesus receive my spirit. And he kneled down, and cried with
a loud voice, saying: Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

Peter and Ihon prayed for them of Samaria, Act. 8.
yt they might receive ye holy Ghost: then laid they their hands on them, and
they received the holy Ghost.

Saul being prostrate upon the thearth, and profitably execated and made blind,
Act. 9.
stood up again, and coming into Damasco, and began to pray, and was three
days without meat or drink.

Cornelius the Centurio was a devout man, and one that feared GOD wtal his
household, which gave much almose: Act. 10.
and prayed God always: whereby he disposed him self to aproche and come to the
faith. And therefore it follows. Thy prayers and thy almoses are come up into
remembrance before God.

Peter was kept in Herodes prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the
congregation unto god for him. Act. 12.


When the holy ghost had said: separate me Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13.14
for the work whereunto I have called them. It follows. And when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they let them go. Again
there follows. That they did marvelous much good.

Peter went up unto the hiest part of the house to pray, Act. 10.
about the vi. hour, that he being far from those that were beneathe might
pray the more devoutly.

When Paul went to pray, he met a damsel possessed with a spryte that
Prophesied, whom Paul deliuered^ commaundinge the spirit in the name of Jesus
Christ to come out of her. Act. 16.


Paul departing from Achaia and his brethren, Act. 20.
after a little communication, and a few godly words, he kneled down, and praid
with them al, and they al wept very sore.

When Paul had praid in the temple, he was in a trance, Act. 22.
and saw our Lord Jesus, saying unto him. Make haste and get the quickly
out of Jerusalem.

After that Paul had prayed, and had laid his hands on Publius father being
sick of a fever, Act. 28.
and of a bloody flixe, he healed him.

Paul the Apostle, monished, These. 5.
that we should pray continually the which thing he him self did most
diligently. Romans 1.
For to the Romans he says, with out ceasing I make mention of you in my
prayers.

To pray is to diffycyle and so heard a thing, Romans 8.
that Paul says, that he is not fufficiente nor hable to do it.

We know not that we pray as we should pray, 2. these. 3.
and therefore Paul does often and most humbly desire other men to pray for
him. Brethren (says he) pray ye for us.

Paul caused prayers to be made, to avoid that was evil, and also to obtain
those things that are good: of ye first he says thus, romans 15.
I beseech you brethren that ye help me with your prayers, that I may be
delivered from the unfaithful. And yt he believed that he was helped by other
men's prayers, he says.

Our Lord has delivered us from so great dangers and pearels. Of the second,
that he desired to obtain goodness by other men's prayers, 2. cor. 1.
he says. Praying for us, that God may open unto us ye door of vtteraunce,
that we may speak the mystery of Christ. And in a another place he says.
Coloss. 4.
Brethren pray ye for us, that the word of God may have passage, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
and be glorified.

Paul prayed for other men, and that he might be fruteful unto them. romans 1.
With out ceasinge I make mention of you, praying always in my prayers, that
by some mean a prosperous journey by the will of God, might fortune me to come
unto you.

And to Timothe, without any ceasing or intermission, 2. timo. 1.
I make mention of thee in my prayers night and day, desiring to se thee.

And also he prays for the Thessalonians, that God would call them to the way
of health, 2. these. 1.
saying: we pray always for you, that our God will make you worthy of this
calling.

And for the Philippians, that they may profit and encrese from that that is
good to better, Philip. 1.
saying: And this I pray: that your love and charity may increase more and
more.

And also that the Collossians might have ye fullness of divine knowledge, col.
1.
saying: we cease not to pray for you, and to desire, that ye might be
fulfilled with the knowledge of his will.

The Apostle S. James, says, that the prayer which is made for corporal and
bodily health, Iaco. 5.
avails. The prayer of faith shall save the sick. And also for eternal
salvation, the which is the very true health. Pray one for an other, that ye
may be saved, for the prayer of a ryghteous man avails much.

Of weping and wayling. ca. 17.
AGar going a great way of from Ismaell wept, Genesis 21.
nor she would not se the death of the child.

Genesis 27.
Esau cried out greatly and bitterly, That Jacob had his fathers blessing.

Genesis 23.
And Abraham came to mourn Sara his wife, and to weep for her.

Genesis 29.
After that Jacob knew Rachel his kynswoman, he lyfted up his voice and wept.

Genesis 33.
Esau took his brother Jacob about the neck, kyssed him, and wept.

Genesis 37.
Jacob rent his clothes, and putting on a shyrte of hear, sorowed for his son
a long season.

Genesis 43.
Iosephes heart did melte upon his brother Benjamin, and the reares brust out of
his eyes, and he entered into his chamber, and wept.

Genesis 45.49.50.
Joseph lifted up his voice and wept, saying unto his brethren I am Joseph. And
he wept upon his deed father. And again he wept, when his brethren prayed him
to forgive and forget the trespace that they have don against him.

The rascal people that was come out of Egypt, Nume. 11.
fell a lusting of flesh, and sitting down wept, and said. Who shall give us
flesh to eat?

The whole multitude cried out, murmured and said. Nume. 14.
Would god that we had died in the land of Egypt.

When all the multitude saw that Aaron was dead, Nume. 20.
they mourned and wept for him.xxx. days.

The children of Israel wept for Moses xxx. days. Deu. 34.


The aungel of our Lord came unto the place of those that wept, Iudi. 1.
and cast all such benefits as our lord had don unto ye children of Israel in
their teth, and likewise the trespasses yt they had co^mited, the^ the people
cried out and wept

When the children of Israel should fight against the Beniamytes, Iudi. xx.
they wept before our Lord.

And after that they had obtaind the victory, Iudi. 21.
they wept and bewailed the destruction of their brethren.

When Nohemi and his daughter in law Ruth. i.
should depart, they began to weep.

Anna prayed unto our Lord, and wept very sore. 1. regum. 1.


After that the people hard yt Iabes should be beseged, 1. regu. 11.
they wept even very sore.

Samuel mourned Saul, and wept, because our Lord repented him, 1. regu. 15.
that he had made Saul king.

Ionathas and David kissed either other and wept together. 1. reg. 20.


Saul hering David's voice that had spard him, 1. reg. 24.
lifted up his voice, and wept.

When David saw that Sicelag was burnt, 1. reg. 30.
and that the men were taken prisonners, and carried away. He and the people that
were with him wept, until they could weep no more.

David mourned and wept for Saul and Ionathas, 2. reg. 1.
and for the other that were slain.

David and all the people did mourn and weep for Abner, 2. reg. 3
whom Ioab murdered.

David would not weep for his little son that was dead, 2. reg. 12.
and yet he wept for him when he was sick.

Notwithstanding Absolo^ showed him self very naughtes and wicked toward his
father, 2. regu. 18.
yet his father king David bewailed his death most pyttefully.

Elizeus seeing Azael before him, began to weep, 4. regu. 8.
for ye evil yt he, being king of Siria, should do to the children of Israel.

Hezechias wept very sore, praying our lord for the death the which he
verily esteemed to be at hand. 4. reg. 20.


When Josias the king of Judah herd the thretnyngs for sin written in the book
of the law of god, 4. regu. 22.
he rent his clothes, and wept, and greatli pleased our lord

When the temple was reedified be those that came from Babilone, 1. Esd. 3.
a man could not know or discern the joyful voice or sound of those yt were
merry and glad from the noise of weping among the people.

When that Esdras prayed and wept for the co^mixtion of the Jews and the
gentiles, 1. Esd. 9.
a great number of men and women being gathered together resorted unto him,
and wept very sore.

When Nehemia heard of the miserable estate and condition of the city 2. Esd.
1.
of Jerusalem, he wept and mourned certain days and fasted, and prayed before
the face of god of heaven.

Toby did eat his meat with mourning and fear: Tobi. 2.
for he had the dead coar^ of his neighbor in his house, the which he would
bury in the night.

And when Toby had heard the inturius words of his wife, Tobi. 3.
he sighed and with tears began to make his prayer.

After that Sara Raguels daughter had heard her maids contemelius and grievous
words, Tobi. 3.
she prayed and besought god with tears, that he would deliver her from that
rebuke.

When young Tobi was departed and gone from his parents: Tob. 5.
his mother began to weep, and said: The staff of our age, haste thou taken
and sent away from us.

When Gabelus came into Raguels house, Tobi. 9.
and saw young Toby sitting at the table. He wept, and blessed him.

Blind Toby arose, and ran to mete his son returning homewards. Tobi. 11.
He received him, and he and his wife kissed him, and they began to weep for
joy.

And when Achior had plainly declared all ye Holofernes had said, Iudi. 6.
all the people with a common lame^tacio^ pourd out their prayers together unto
our Lord. And afterward the whole congregation with great murning and weping
made their prayers together all the night long, saying we have sinde with our
fathers.

Judith stood before Holofernes bed, making her prayers with tears, Iudi. 13.
that god would vouchesafe to make perfect the thing that in her thought she
had devised.

When Mardocheus had herd of the wicked and unjust sentence that was given
against the Jews, Esth. 4.
he rent his clothes, and besprincled his head with ashes, and put on sak^loth,
and with loud and lamentable cryinge declared the bitterness, and sorowfulnes of
his mind. And in all lands and countries, as far as the kings cruel word
and commandment extended, there was great lamentation among the Jews,
fasting weping and mourning.

After that Haman saw that Mardocheus Esth. 6.
was so magnified and honored he gat him home in all the haste mourning and
bareheaded.

Holy Job wept and lamented his own miseries, Job. 30.
saying: my harp is turned to sorrow, and my pipe to wepinge, whose vehement
weping and sorrow does appear by his words before spoken. Job. 16.
My face is swollen which weping, and my eyes ar ye shadow of death: he also
lamented and wept for other men's sorrows, and trouble. I wept (says Job) with
him that was in trouble, Job. 30.
and my soul had compassion upon the poor.

psalm. 6.
King David the prophet, had a bathe even of his own tears. I will wash my
bed every night, and water my couche with my tears.

His tears were unto David as meat and drink. psalm. 41. psalm. 69. psalm. 101.
My tears have be^ my meat, day and night. Thou shall give us plenteousnes of
tears to drink. And in a another place. He says, I myngled my drink with
weping.

And David remembering his own life did weep. psalm. 55.
O God I have opened my life unto the, and thou have set my tears in thy sight.

And having heaven in remembrance he said. psalm. 136.
By the waters of Babylon, we sat down and wept.

And in his prayer to our Lord: psalm. 38.
he says. Hear my prayer O^ Lord, and with thine ears receive my tears.
psalm. 94.
And in a another place: let us weep be fore the Lord our maker.

Esaias per^eiuing the d^structyon of his people, Esa. 22.
said. Get ye hence from me, for I will weep and make bitter lamentation. Nor
go not about to comfort me upon the destructyon of the daughter of my people.

Jeremy said. Be obedient, give ear take not disdain at it. Iere. 13.
For it is the Lord him self that speaks. Then there follows. But if ye
will not hear me that give you secreat warnyng, I will mourn from my whole
heart for your pride and stubbernes. Piteously will I weep, and the tears shall
gushe out of mine eyes, for the lords flock shall be carried away captive

The copyous complain^e and bewailing that is in Jeremy, Iere. 9.
are signs and arguments of many tears: who will give my head water inoughe,
and a well of tears for mine eyes, Iere. 6.
that I may weep night and day for ye slaughter of my people.

And the manifold lamentatio^s, therefore I do weep, Three. 1.
and mine eyes gushe out of water. Then follows, for my sorrow is very great,
and my heart is heavy.

And the clamerous and loud sobbinges. Mine eyes run and can not cease.
Three. 3.
Mine eyes break mine heart, turn not thy face from my syghing and cryinge.

And for the failing and loss of eyes Mine eyes, Three. 2.
says Jeremy begin to fail me, through wepinge: and my body and bowels are
disquieted.

I Daniel mourned for the space of iii. wekes, Dani. 9.
so that I had no lust to eat bread, as for ^lesh and wine, there came none
within my mouth.

When that Susannes friends saw that the prestes should bear witness against
her, Dani. 13.
they wept^ and she loking up toward heaven wept, for her heart had a sure trust
in the Lord.

After that Antiochus had caused a great murder of men in Jerusalem, 1. Match.
1.
there arose a great heaviness in all the land of Israel. The married men
mourned, and the Bride and Brydegrome lamented.

Israel made great lamentation for the death of Mathathias. 1. Match. 2.


All the people of Israel made great lamentation for the death of Judas
Machabeus: 1. Match. 9.
and mourned long, saying. Alas how was this worthy slain which delivered the
people of Israel.

After that Ionathas, his ii. sons, and a 1000. other men, 1. Match. 12.
the which he had of Triphon, were slain, Israel bewailed Ionathas, and
them that were with him, right sore.

Antiochus was sorry in his mind for thuniust death of Onias, 2 Match. 4.
and moved with pity wept, remembering his sobernes and manerly behavior, and
modesty.

After that Herod had caused at the children yt were ii. year old to be slain,
Mat. 2.
then was fulfilled that, which was spoken by ye prophet Iere. In Rama was
there a voice hard, lamentatyon, weping and great mourning. Iere. 31.


The father of the child that was lunatike cried with tears, saying: Lord I
believe, Mar. 9.
healpe thou mine unbelief.

We read that Mary Magdale^ wept three diverse times. Luke. 7.
First, at our Lords fete for her sins. Secondarilye, for the death of her
brother. And thirdly for the Lords passion. Ihon. 20.11


We find that our Savior wept thrice. First upon Lazarus, whom he revived
again. Ihon. 11.
Secondarily, upon Jerusalem, the which he knew should be destroyed for sin.
Luke. 19.
And thirdly up on the cross, when he offered him self as a sacryfyce for the
sins of the world. Heb. 5.
As Paul says. Offering up prayers with strong crying and tears.

After that Peter had denied his master thrice, Luke. 22.
he went out and wept bitterly. But note that Lucas premytted, saying. Our
Lord looked upon Peter.

A great company of people, and women followed him unto the cross, which
bewailed and lamented him Luke. 23.


Paul the Apostle did serve ye lord with tears, Act. 20.
for when he ^ad his brethren fare well, he said. Ye know after what manner I
have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humilitye and
with many tears.

Also he monished his neighbors with tears, Act. 20.
and provoked them to weep, saying. By the space of three years I ceased
not to warn every one of you night and day with many tears. Then follows.
They wept very sore.

Also Paul wrote his Epistles with tears. 2. Cor. 2.
Out of great affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many
tears. And many walcke, of whom I have told you often, Philip. 3.
and now tell you wepinge.

And to the Romans he says: the spri^e makes intercession for us with
groninges which cannot be expressed. Romans 8.
Such groninges are not wont to be without weping.

When Peter was come to Ioppa, all the widows stood round about him weping,
Act. 9.
and showing the co^tes and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them.

Of swearing. ca. xviii.
ABimelech spoke unto Abraham, saying. Genesis 21.
God is with thee in all that thou doste. And therefore swear unto me. And
Abraham said. I will swear.

Genesis 31.
Jacob and Laban made a covenant and Jacob swear by the fear of his father
Isaac.

Moses was content and swear that he would dwell with Ietro, Exo. 2.
and take his daughter Zephora to his wife.

1. regu. 20.
Ionathas made a covenant with David in the Lord, and they swear both.

David hearing of the hardness of Nabal, ^. regu. 25.
said: So GOD do unto the enemies of David: If I live of all that pertains
to him, by the dawning of the dai, any thing that pisseth against the wall.

2. regu. 19.
David mourning for the death of his son Solomon, Ioab said unto him: Arise
and come out, and speak kindelye unto thy Servants, for I swear by the
Lord. Except thou com out, there will not tarry one man with thee this night.

David swear unto Bethsabe Salomons mother, 3 regu. 1.
that Solomon should reign after him.

After that king Solomon had hard his mothers peticyon for Adonia, 3. regu. 2.
he swear by the lord, saying, God do so and so to me, if Adonia has not
spoken this word against his own life.

Helias the Thesbite said unto Achab the king of Israel. 3. reg. 17.
As truly as the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall be
neither dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

Benadab king of Siria disdaining at Achabs answer, 3. reg. 20.
said: Thus and thus do the Gods to me, if the duste of Samaria be enough for all the people that follow me.

Wicked Iesabel that slew Helias the Prophet, 3. reg. 19.
made the like oath. Helias said unto Helizeus, tarry here for our Lord has sent
me to Bethel. He said. 4. regu. 2.
As surely as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee.

Nabuchodonozor swore by his throne, Iudi. 1.
that he would be avenged.

King Antiochus the son of Antiochus, sent unto the Jews to make peace. 1.
Match. 6.
And made an oath unto them, and afterward brake it again immediately.

Herod the Tetrarch swear unto Herodias daughter, Mar. 6.
whatso ever thou will ask, I will give it thee, even unto the one half of my
kingdom.

Peter to those that said unto him, Mat. 26.
And surely thou art even one of them for thy speech bewrays the, began to
curse and to swear, that he knew not the man.

We read that Paul in his Epystles did oftentimes swear: Philip. 1.
Thus he says. Rom 1.
GOD the father of our LORD Jesus Christ does know that I lie not. 2. Cor. 1.
And again: Behold before God I lie not. God is my witness, whom I serve. I
call God for a record unto my soul.

Of the observation and keeping of the Sabbath day. Capit. xix.
THe observation of the Saboth had his original beginning of that, Genesis 2.
that is said and written in Genesis. God blesses the seventh day, and
sanctified it, because that in it, he reasted from al his work.

And the children of Israel gathered in the wilderness on the.vi. day a
double quantitye of Manna. Exo. 16.
Because that on the Sabbath they should reast from all work.

And among all the ten commandments, Exo. 20.
there is only a reason given of thobseruay^on of the Saboth, because that
among carnal men, it seemed to have little reason. And this precept is very
often times found in the law, to the intent that man should diligently observe
and keep it, and labor to get and obtain the true reast.

And on the Sabbath day there were offered two lambs, Nume. 28.
and upon other days but one except in solemn feasts and kalendes. And
that, to declare, yt in festiual days men should honor god more reverently and
aboundauntlye then other days.

The man that was taken gathering of sticks upon the Saboth day, Nume. 15.
was by Gods commandment stoned with stones of all the people.

Nehemias saw some treading wine presses, 2. Esd. 13.
and bringing of burdens to be sold upon the Saboth day, and he rebuked them
as breakers of the Sabothe.

The gentiles which held with Antiochus appointed to fight upon the Sabbath
days against certain Jews that were fled out of Iewry, 1. match. 2.
but they casted not one stone at the^, nor made fast their preuy places: but
said, we will die all in our innocencye. But yet it is to be observed and
noted, that notwythstandynge that in this thing they showed a Deuotyon toward
Gods commandment, yet inas much as they perceived afterward that thereby
Gods people might be scattered and lost, they took better counsel: saying.
What soever he be that comes to make battle with us upon the saboth day, we
will fight against him, for why to fight for the defense of man's life, or for
the law of God, is no servile work or labor.

Judas Machaheus and his company fought against Nicanor and his host, 1.
match. 7.
and slew 5000. men, and put the rest to flit^. But yet they followed not the
chase, because it was ye day before ye saboth.

Nicanor thought withal his power to strike a field upon a Sabbath day.
Nevertheless the Jews that were compelled to go with him, 2. match. 15.
said: O do not so cruelly and vnkindlye, but halow the Saboth day.

The Pharisees said unto the Disciples that did pluck and eat ye ears mat.
12.
of corn, 1. regu. 21.
ye do that which is not law full to do upon the Sabbath day. But the Lord
said unto them, have ye not read what David did. etc. Then follows. The
son of man is also LORD even of the Sabbothe day.

We do read that our savior did many miracles upon the Sabbothe day, Mat.
12.
as it is manifest through out all the Gospel, and for that, there may be
assigned three causes. First, to show him self to be the Lord. Mat. 12.
The second, to open the true understanding of the precept and commandment,
for me^ ought not to cease from all works upon the Saboth. Luke. 6.
Whether is it lawful on the Sabbath days to do good, or to do euel, Luke. 12.
to save ones life, or to destroy it. The third that he might edifye and
profet all that saw him and hard him.

When Christ had healed the woman which was bowed together, the ruler of the
Sinagoge disdayned, Luc. 13.
because that he had healed on the Sabbothe day, and said. There are six
days, in which men ought to work, in them come that ye may be healed and not
on the Sabbath day. But the Lord answered him, and said. Thou hipocrite, does
not each one of you on the Sabbath day lose his Ox or his Alfe from the stal,
and lead him to the water? And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan
has bound, lo 18. years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day? And
when he thus said, all his adversaries were ashamed, and all the people
reioysed on all the excellent deeds that were done by him.

The holy women which had prepared sweet odours, Luke. 23.
to anoint our lords body, kept the sabbath day so strictly, that on that they
would not anoynte so precious and holy a body. So they rested the Sabbath
day, according to the commandment.

Our Lord lay in the Sepulcher on the Sabbath day. Ihon. 1^.


The Sabbath day was most apt and convenient to hear the word and law of
God, Act. 13.
and the prophets. The which are read every Sabooth day.

Of the reverence that ought to be done and exhibited to Gods Temple. ca. xx.
OUR Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Exo. 30.
Thou shall make a lauer of brass to wash withal, and put water therein.
Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands, and their feet therein even when
they go into the tabernacle of witness.

Nume. 4.
It was lawful but for a few to enter into the tabernacle, or to touch the
vessel.

3. regu. 6.7
Solomon was much more dylygente and feruente in the edification and building
of Gods Temple, then in buildynge of his own house. For he accomplyshed
Gods house in seven years, and his own in thyrtene. Yea he began sooner to
build the Temple, than his own house.

3. regu. 8.
Solomon made great solemnite in the buyldyng of the Temple.

4. regu. 11.
Ioiada the bishop, commanded that Athalia should be brought out, and not
to be slain in our Lords Temple.

Our Lord seemed to have great cure and care for the Temple when that he
commanded Sirus the king of Percia, Esd. 1. ca. 1.
Esd. 45.
to build him an house at Jerusalem. And it is understood of a materyall
Temple. As the text does declare. And Esaye declared the same two hundredth
years before.

After that the Jews were returned from the captyuite of Babilone, they
began to build the Temple, 1. Esd. 3.
or ever they edified or made the walls of the City, notwythstandynge that
they had many enemies, whom they feared both day and night.

Tobias is much coo^mended, which went to Jerusalem unto the Temple of our
Lord, Tobi. 1.
and there worshypped and prayed unto the Lord.

After that they had optayned the vyctorye of their enemies the which had
defiled the Temple, 1. Match. 4.
Judas and his brethren, or ever they made any mention of their own houses
said, behold our enemies are dyscomfyted: Let us now go up, to cleanse, and
to repair the Sanctuary.

King Demetrius ordained, that who soever fled unto the Temple at Jerusalem,
or within the liberties or cost thereof, 1. Match. 10
should, as though they were fallen into the kings danger for any manner of
business, be pardoned.

The Jews going to make battle against Nicanors host, 2. Match. 15.
had pryncipally more solycitude care and fear for the holy Temple, then
for their wives, children, brethren and kynsfolkes.

At the forty days end, Our lord would be brought and offered in the
Temple. Luke. 2.


And when he was twelve years old, Luke. 2.
he was found disputing in the Temple.

Afterward he drove oftentimes the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Ihon.
2.


Luke. 19.
And many times he taught, and did miracles in the Temple.

Our Lord does reprove the Pharisees, which said that the gold of the Temple
was more holy, Mat. 23.
than the Temple.

After that the Apostles had received the holy ghost. Peter and John went up
into the Temple, Act. 3.
at the nine hour of prayer. And even then was the first miracle of health
showed, that was done after the assention of our Lord.

The angel of our Lord which by night opened the prison doors, Act. 5.
and brought the Apostles forth, said, go and stand and preach in the Temple
to the people all the words of this life.

The Enuke, Queen Candace of the Ethiopians chamberlayn, Act. 8.
is commended, that he came out of Ethiopia to Jerusalem to worship. And
note that he sittynge in his Charet^ Read Esaye the Prophette. The which
thing makes very sore against many going to sanctyfyed and holy places,
the which nether read nor yet declare any holy documents or lessons, but
multiply vain and trifling words only.

Thought the Iowes persecuted Paul with much hatred, Act. 21.
yet they would not murder him in the temple, but drue him out of the temple,
ye they might kill him without the region of the temple being untouched and
undefiled.

Of the adoration and worshipping of God. Ca.xxi.
IT came to pass, Genesis 4.
ye Caine brought and offered of the fruit of the ground an Oblation unto the
Lord. Abel also offered of the first ^inges of his sheep, and of the fat there
of: and our Lord had respect unto his oblation.

Enoch the son of Seth, began to call upon the name of God. Genesis 4.


Noe builded an aultare unto our Lord, Genesis 8.
and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul, and offered
sacrifices, and our Lord smelled a sweet savor.

Our Lord appeared unto Abraham in the land of Canaan, Genesis 12.
and said unto him. Unto thy seed will I give this land. And there builded
he an aultare unto our Lord, that appeared unto him.

When Abraham had lyfted up his eyes, there appeared iii. men standing by him.
Genesis 18.
And when he saw them, he fell to the ground and worshipped them saying. Lord
if I have found grace and favor in thy sight, go not from thy servant.

Abraham being prepared and ready to offer up in sacrifice unto GOD his only
son Isaac, Genesis 22.
our Lord otherwise providing therefore, he offered a Ram.

Our lord appeared unto Isaac in Bersabe, Genesis 26.
and said, fear not, for I am with thee. And he builded an aultare there unto
our Lord.

And God said unto Jacob, arise, and get the up to Bethell, Genesis 35.
and dwell there. And make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto the,
when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

When the children of Israel hard that our Lord had visited them, Exo. 4.
and had looked upon their trybulatyon, they bowed their head, and worshypped.

And after that our Lord had spoken unto Moses of the religion of Phase, and of
the destruction of the first born in the land of Egypt. Exo. 12
Then there follows. The people bowed them selves, and worshypped.

Ietro said to Moses, be thou unto the people to godwarde, Exo. 18
that thou may bring their causes to God. And thou shalt teach them the
ceremonies and ordinances, and the way to worship god.

And our Lord said unto Moses, come up unto the Lord, Exo. 24
thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the 70. elders of Israel, and ye shall
worship far of. And after a few words there does follow. They offered peace
offrynges, that is xii. calves, unto the Lord.

And our Lord commanded to make him a tabernacle, Exo. 25
with diverse vtensiles, and ministers to be ordained to minister to his honor
and worship, as it is manifest in diverse Chapiters of Exodus.

The first of the ten Commandments, is. Exo. 20
Thou shall have no strange gods. Thou shall make the no graue^ Idol. Thou
shall not worship them, neither serve them. Deuteronomy. 6.
And in a another place. Mat. 4.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

The angel of God said unto Manne Samsons father, Iudi. 13.
if thou will offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord.

Elcana Samuels father, went up out of his city at certain appointed or
feastful days, 1. regu. 1.
to pray, and to offer unto the lord of hosts in Silo.

The sin of Helis children was very great before our lord, 1. regu. 2.
for they wythdrue me^ from the sacrifice of the lord.

And as Samuel offered the burnt offering, the Philistines came to fight against
Israel. 1. regu. 7.
But our lord thu^dred a great thundre ye same day among the Philistines, and
put them in such a fear, that they fell, and were slain before Israel.

Solomon went to offer unto our lord at Gabaon, 3. regu. 3.
and he offered a thousand burnt offringes, and the lord apeared unto him in a
dreme by night.

Solomon after the temple was edified, stood before thaltare of our Lord, 3.
regu. 8.
in the sight of all the congregation of Israel, and stretching out his hands,
toward heaven, kneled upon both his knees, and praid.

King David gave much diligence to amplify and increse the worship and honor
of our lord, 1. Para. 15. unto. 25
in the number of singing men and prestes.

After that the children of Israel were returned from the captivity of
Babylon, 2. Esd. 9.
they red in the book of the law of our lord iiii. times on the day, and iiii.
times on the night, and worshipped the lord their God.

When all the Children of Israel went to the golden Calves, Tobi. 1.
Thoby fled al their companies, and got him to Jerusalem unto the temple of
god, and there worshipped our Lord god of Israel.

When Job had hard the words of ye messengers declarynge unto him the loss of
his substance, Job. 1.
he stood up, and fallinge down upon the ground, worshypped and said. Naked
came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I turn thither again.

Notwithstanding it was prohibyted that no man should desire any peticyon,
Dani. 6.
either of any God or man within thirtye days, but only of king Darius, yet
Danyell kneeled down upon his knees three times a day in his house, and made
his peticion and prayer, and praised his Lord God.

The wise men went into the house, and found the Child with Marye his mother,
Mat. 2.
and fell down flat, and worshypped him. Behold the deuotyon of a marvelous
humility? what should we christianes then do to ye lord our god, that now does
raygne, if the gentyles did such reverence to a child that wept.

When Jesus was come down from the mou^tain, Mat 8.
there came a leper and worshipped him, saying: Lord, if you will thou can
make me clean.

The manne that was borne blind falling on his knees worshypped him. John. 9.


The disciples after the Lords resurrection worshipped him. Mat. 28.


The priest, and the people of Listra, lokynge upon Paul and Barnabas, Act.
14.
believing them to be Gods, would have done sacrifice unto them. But they
forbode them.

Ihon fell before the angels feet to worship him, Apo. 19
and he said unto him. Se thou do not, for I am thy fellow servant, worship
God.

Of Idolatry. Ca. xxii.
ANd when the people saw that it was long or Moses came down from the
mountain, Exo. 32.
they gathered them selves together against Aaron and said. Make us Gods to go
before us.

The people of Israel committed Whoredom with the daughters of Moab, Nume. 23.
which called them unto the sacrifice of their gods. And the people did eat,
and worshipped their gods.

When Joshua the son of Nun was dead, Iudi. 2.
the children of Israel did wyckedly in the sight of our Lord, and served
Baalim and Astraroth, and forsake the Lord God of their fathers.

All Israel went a whoringe in Ephod that Gedeon made, Iudi. 8.
which thing became a ruin unto Gedeon, and to all his house.

Solomon was old, and women depraned and turned his heart to follow after other
Gods, 3. regu. 11.
and his heart was not perfect.

After that Jeroboam had taken counsel, 3. regu. 12.
be made two calves of gold, and said: Behold. Israel, these are thy Gods,
which brought you out of Egypt.

It suffised not Achab king of Israel to walcke in the sins of Jeroboam, 3.
regu. 16.
but furthermore he served Baal and worshipped him.

Judah made them altares, Idolles, and groves on every hie hill, 3. reg. 14
and under every thick tree.

Achaz king of Judah, walked in the way of the kings of Israel, 1. regu. 16.
and Judah, yea, and consecrated his son, and made him to go through the fire
after the abominations of the heathen. when the children of Israel were
translated and carried among the Assirians, diverse natyons and strong people
were brought, and put into the cities of Samaria: 4. r^gu. 17.
And every natyon made them gods of their own. And when they should serve our
lord, they served their gods also, after the custom of the people.

Sennacherib being confounded and put to rebuke and shame, 4. regu. 19.
returned from the impugnatyon of Esechia king of Judah, to Niniue. And as he
was praying and worshippynge his Nefrach in the temple, Adramelech and Sarasar,
his ii. sons smote him with the sweard, and escaped.

Manasses king of Judah rered up altares for Baall, 4. regu. 21.
and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.

Iudi. 6.
Holofernesse taking great indignation against Achior that setforth and much
commended the power of the god of the Hebrews. Said, that he would show him,
that there was none other God but Nabuchodonozor.

Dani. 3.
Nabuchodonozor made a golden Image, and commanded that al people, kinreds, and
tounges should fall down and worship it.

Darius king of Pers made and put forth a commandment, Daui. 6.
that no man within 30. days, should require any peticion of God, or man, but
only of king Darius.

There was at Babylon an Idol called Bell, Dani. 14.
him the king did worship and honor dailye. But after that Daniel had
destroyed him, they of Babylon worshipped a dragon.

Antiochus commanded idols to be worshipped, 1. Match. 1.
and that they should edifye and set up altares and temples, and offer up
swines flesh, and that me^ should leave their children uncircumcised.

When Paul was abiding at Athe^s his sprite, Act. 17.
when he saw the city given to worshippinge of Idols, was moved in him.

Of blasphemy against God. Ca. 23.
THe Israelitish woman's son was stoned to death by Gods commandment,
Leui. 24.
because he blasphemed the name of our Lord.

Hely said unto his sons. 1. regu. 2.
If one man sin against an another, our Lord may be pacified and pleased: but
if a man sin against the Lord, who shall pray for him?

Nathan the Prophet did agrauate the sin of David, 2. regu. 12.
saying: because thou have given the ennemies of the lord a cause to rail, and
to blaspheme his name.

The manne of God said unto Ahab king of Israel. 3. reg. 20.
Because the Sirians have said. Our Lord of hills is but their Lord, and he
is not god of valleis, therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into
thy hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

3. reg. 21.
It seems that wicked Iezabel could not excogitate nor invent a more grievous or
a greater sin to cause Naboth shortly to be stoned to death, the^ blasphemye,
where with she falsely accused him.

4. regu. 19.
The blasphemies that Sennacherib king of the Assirians servants, spoke and
used, did greatly displease God. And therefore the anger of our Lord smote in
the host of the Assiryans an C.lxxx. and.v. M.

It is not expedient for simple men to dispute against the blasphemies, 4.
regu. 18.
of infidels. And for that cause king Hezechias forbad, that the unlearned
people should not answer the blasphemies of Rabsa^is the Assiriane.

Holofernes disdayning that Achor had commended the power of the god of heaven,
Iudi. 6.
said unto him, for so much as thou haste prophesied, that the people of
Israel shall be defended of their god, I will show the that their is no god,
but Nabuchodosor, ye when we slay them all as one man.

When Hieremy rebuked the people, because they did sacryfyce unto strange
gods, Iere. 44.
they answered, we will in no wise hear the word of God, but we will do
sacryfyce unto the queen of heaven, like as we and our forefathers have done.
For then were we in prosperity, nor no misfortune came upon us.

Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon said unto Daniell and his companions that
would not worship the golden Image, Dani. 3.
what god is there that may deliver you out of my hands:

In the days and time of Antiochus certain wicked people of Israel gave
counsel saying. Let us go and make a couenaunte with the Heathen, 1. Match. 1.
for sense we departed from them, we have had much sorrow.

Judas Machabeus laying siege to a certain strong hold. 2. Mac. 20.
A company of the Hethen that were within it, craked and spoke many
blasphemous and cursed words. But within few days after, they were burnt and
consumed with fire.

The Jews saying unto Nicanor. There is a mighty Lord in heaven, 2. Mac. 15.
that commands the seventh day to be kept. The wicked Nicanor said: And I
am mighty upon earth, to command them for to arm them selves, and to
perform ye kings business.

After that our Lord had healed and cast the devil out of the blind and the
dumme man. Mat. 12.
LuKe. 11.
The people were a mased, but the Pharisees blasphemed, saying. This fellow
drives the deuyls no otherwise out, but by the help of Beelzebub the chief of
the deuyls.

Our Lord hanging upon the cross, Mat. 27.
they that passed and went by reuyled and blasphemed him waggyng their heads.
etc.

The Jews spoke against those things that Paul spoke, Act. 13.18.
blaspheming and railing against it.

Of Gods precepts and commandments and of the observation and kepinge of
them. ca. xxiiii.
OUr Lord gave unto our first parent Adam a lyte and a easy commandment to
be fulfilled. Genesis 2.
Saying. Thou shall eat of every tree of the garden, but as touching the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it. But he kept this
commandment but evil, and therefore he fell into a great and grievous pain and
punyshement.

Notwithstanding the commandments seem at some times to be of lyte and
slender matters, Genesis 2.
yet they ought and with no small diligence to be observed in as much as the
transgressors are grievously punished. For our Lord said unto Adam: In what
day or hour soever thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and euel, thou
shall dye the death.

Noe did every thing, even as the Lord commanded him. Genesis 7.


When the people of Israel should receive the Commandments of God, Exo. 19.
they were commanded to be sanctyfyed. Go unto the people and sanctyfy them
to day and to morrow. And therefore he commanded ye children of Israel, to
make them gardes of yellow sylke in ye quarters of their garments, Nume. 15.
to have a contynual remembrance of the celestyal co^mandeme^ts.

Our Lord when he made Iosue ruler over his people, Iosu. 1.
gave him a special monytyon, of the medytatyon and obseruatyon of his law
and commandments.

Balaam the sorcerer said unto Balach the king: Nume. 23.
Told not I thee, saying. Al yt the Lord commands, that must I do? Behold
now, what reverence this evil man had to gods commandment?

Joshua omytted nor mynyshed no word of all that our lord commanded. Iosu. 11.


Saul the which was specyallye chosen, 1. regu. 15.
was utterly rejected and cast away for the trangressyon and breakyng of Gods
commandment.

David instructynge and teaching Solomon his son, 1. Para. 22.
the which should raygne after him, said: Then thou shall prosper, when thou
fulfillest the statutes and laws, which our Lord gave to Moses.

After the ordinance of Ioiada the bishop, 2. Para. 23.
they brought out the kings son, and put upon him ye crown and gave him in
his hand, the law that was to be kept, and made him king.

Syrus king of Persia, and Monarch of all the world, 1. Esd. 1.
was not ashamed to say. Our Lord God of heaven and earth has commanded
me to build him a house at Jerusalem.

Our Lord eue^ complaining does say. The commandments of Ionadab the son of
Recchab, the which he commanded his children to keep, and that they should
drink no wine prevailed and were better kept then mine. Iere. 35.
For they obeyed their fathers commandment, I have spoken unto you, and yet
have ye not been obedyent unto me.

Susanna putting her life and good name in pearell and danger, Dani. ^3.
judged it better to fall into the hands of man, then to forsake and leave the
laws of God.

There were two women accused to have circumcysed their sons, 2. Match. 6.
who^e when they had led round about the city (the babes hanging at their
breasts) they cast them down headlinges over the walls.

Eleazar an aged man sustained grievous pains of the body, 2. Match. 6.
and at length he was put to death, because that he against ye law of god would
another eat swines flesh, nor yet fain or dissemble that he had eaten it.

For the law of god the vii. brethren with their mother suffered grievous and
intolerable pains under Antiochus. 2. Match. 7.


Other creatures that obey the lord do induce us to observe his commandementes,
2. regu. 24.
of good angels there is no doubt, the which are his mynysters, doing his will
and his word. Of evil angels. 1. Para. 21.
He commanded the evil sprite to go out of the man. Luke. 8.
He commanded the Ravens to feed Helias, and they did so. 3. regu. 17.
And the Psalm does say generallye. He has given them a law, which shall not
be broken. Fire and hail, Psalm. 148.
snow and Ise, wind and storm fulfill his word. Job. 9.
He commands the Sun, and it ryseth not.

The parents of Ihon the Baptist walcked so in all the law, Luke. 1.
ordinances and iustyfications of our Lord, that no man could find faut
with them.

Our Lord answered the young man that axst him, Mat. 19.
what good he should do to have everlasting life, saying. If thou will enter
into life, keep the commandments.

Of obedience and disobedience. Ca. xxv.
GOD willing that man being in the state of innocence should live under
obedience, Genesis 2.3.
bound him with precepts and laws, and punished him right sore and
grievously, living disobedyently.

Noe spedely obeyed our Lord in althinges that he, Genesis 7.
at the instant time of the flood, commanded him.

Notwithstanding that Gods commandment of the circumcision was a grievous and
an unwont thing, Genesis 17.
yet Abraham made no procrastinatyon, nor no delay to fulfill and accomplish
the same? For even in ye self same day that god commanded it, he fulfilled it.

Abraham without any stop or delay offered up his only son in a sacrifice.
Genesis 22.
Behold and consider his marvelous and wonderful obedyence.

Joseph did spedely obey his father yt sent him to his brethren, Genesis 37.
although he had accused them, where upon he (and not without a cause) might a
feared to have gone unto them.

Moses obeyed our Lord that made Exo. 3.4.
him the captain and guide of his people. But mark yet with what difficultye.
For he excused him self five times.

The children of Israel promised great obedience, Exo. 24.
saying. All the words which our LORD has said, will we do. But yet
afterward they did the contrary in their deeds.

The children of Israel walkyng in the wlldernes at Gods commandment pitched
their tents, Nume. 9.
and at his commandment they took the^ down.

Also the children of Israel were afraid to ascend and to go up into the land
of promise, Nume. 14.
when God commanded them, but when God forbad them, they strove to go up, but
it was to their pain.

Many of the children of Israel that went to war against the commandment
of God and Moses, Nume. 14. Nume. 31.
were ouerthrown of a few: but when they fought by obedience and commandment
a few overthrew a multitude and wan the victory.

In as much as Achan transgrest ye commandment of Joshua, the people were
overcome in battle, Iosu. 7.
and all Israel stoned him with stones.

1. regu. 13.
Saul offeringe burnte sacrifyce against the commandment of Samuel, was
reproved. And likewise because he spared Agag the king of the Amalakites, and
their sheep, and other precious and chefest of their goods, which should have
been destroyed, 1. regu. 15.
and then Samuel said unto him. Better is obedience then sacrifice.

Although David was anointed king by Samuel, 1. regu. 17.
yet he obeyed his father sending him with vitayles unto his brethren,
notwithstanding he was elected and chosen above al his brethren.

Our lord foretold Solomon, 3. regu. 9.
that if he would do and fulfill al things that he had commanded him to do,
that the^ he would stablish ye throne of his kingdom in Jerusalem for ever. But
if he turned away, 2. Para. 7.
and would not keep his precepts and commandments, that than he would wede
Israel out of ye la^d for ever

3. regu. 20.
Obedience at some times is also commended in such things as seem to be
commanded without any reason, and therefore a Lion slew him, that being
commanded, would not smite one of the Prophets children.

The man of god that foretold Ieroboas the destruction of his altar, 3. regu.
13.
was killed and slain by a Lion, because ye contrary to Gods commandment he
did eat bread and drink water in an other prophets house.

When that Naaman disdaining ye prophet Elizeus commandment, 4. regu. 5.
departed from him with displesure, his servants said unto him, father, if the
prophet had bidden the do some great thing, surely thou shuldst have don it

Toby the younger, after he had hard his fathers exhortations, Tobi. 5.
answered and said, father, all that thou have commanded me will I do, and
diligently.

Whatsoever Mardocheus commanded, that did Esther observe and keep, Esth. 2.
and did all things so, even as she was wont to do, when she was young and
under his governance.

The Recabites are much commended of our Lord, because yt they would drink no
wine, Iere. 35.
obeying and following their fathers commandment, saying, ye shall drink no
wine.

Jonas. 1.2.3.
Jonas did refuse un wiselye to obey our Lord, commaundinge him to go, and
preach at Niniue, but coming back again. He came to the place yt God sent
him.

1. Match. 2.
Mathathias said unto Antiochus messenger. Though all nations obey the king,
yet I and my sons will obey the laws of our fathers.

2. Match. 7.
One of the seven brethren said: we are ready rather to suffer death, then to
offend the laws of God and the fathers.

And the child Jesus went down with Mary and Joseph, LuKe. 2.
and came to Nazareth, and was subject and obedient unto them.

Mat. 4.
Those Apostles did spedelye and perfectly obey, the which being called of our
lord, straight way left the nets, and followed him. Luke. 5.
Likewise Matthew left all and followed him.

Mat. 21.
Of those that obey in word and not in deed, or in deed more than in word. Our
lord puts an example of two sons, of the which two, the one said yt he
would go into his fathers vyneyarde and work, and went not. The other said
I will not, and went.

Our Lord does command us to obey eue^ those prelates that bear rule. Mat. 23.
They shall sit in Moses seat, what so ever they bid you observe, that observe
and do.

Our savior and lord of the law, Luke. 2.
would obey the law in circumcisyon, Mat. 26.
and oblatyons made in the Temple, and also in eating of the Paschall Lamb.

The Apostle does put us an ensample of obedyence in our savior, Philip. 2.
saying, he became obedyente unto death, whom he also declares the fruit
of obedyence. Then there follows. Wherefore God has exaulted him. etc.

The chefest of the priests threatened and commanded Peter and Act. 4.
Ihon that they should speak nor teach no more in the name of Jesus. They
answered and said, whether it be right to harken unto you more then to God,
Act. 4.
judge you. For we can not but speak that which we have seen and hard. And
afterward when the Apostles were reproved again of the hye prestes, because
they had not observed their Commandment, Peter and the other Apostles
answered, Act. 5.
we ought more to obey God, then men.

Saul lyinge prostrate upon the earth, Act. 9.
and hearing Jesus of Nazareths words, said even promptlye, Lord what will thou have me to do?

Cornelius said unto Peter. Now are we al here in thy presence, Act. 10.
ready to here al things that are commanded unto the of God.

Paul chose Silas to be his fellow, and went through Siria and Cilicia, Act.
15.
stablyshynge the congregatyon, and Commaundynge to keep the Precepts of the
Apostles and Elders.

Of holy scripture. Ca. xxvi.
WE ought to have great reverence unto holy scripture, Exo. 31.
the which God him self did write, deliver and teach.

Moses returned from the Mount bearing two tables written with the finger of
God. Exo. 31.


Our Lord Jesus does say, that he was sent to Euangelice and preach, mat. 10.
and he sent forth his disciples to do the same.

If it may be said then, that the old law was given Moses by god, by the
means of angels, as says the Apostle, and S. Steven does testify the same.
Act. 7.
Ye have (says he) the law of God, by the ministration of angels. The reast
of the old Testament was given by the inspiratyon of the holy Ghost, as says
S. Peter. The scripture came never by the will of man. 2. Pet. 1.
But holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost. The new
Testament does contain the words and deeds of the Lord Jesus Christ in the
Gospelles, the words of the Apostels in the Epystels and in the Apocalipses,
the deades of the Apostles in the acts. Christ very God and man, spoke part
of the Gospel by him self, and the holy ghost, and by him other words, the
which the Apostles and the Evangelists by him instructed did speak. They were
all filled with the holy ghost, Act. 2.
and began to speak with diverse and other tongues.

A wise man seeks out the wisdom of them of the old time, and exercyseth him
self in the prophets. Eccle. 39.
As though he would say. A wise man must exquire and seek the wisdom of wise
men, but specially he must give his diligence to the scriptures of ye prophets.

Notwithstanding that Ionathas the hie priest and the elders of the Jews were
occupied in matters of war, 1. Match. 2.
yet they were unto the Spartianes, under this manner: But as for us, we read
no such matter, for why we have the holy book of scripture in our hands to our
comfort.

And our Lord answering by scripture, defended his disciples against the
Pharisees. Have ye not read (quoth he) what David did when he was an ho^gred?
Mat. 12.


Our savior being tempted of the devil, Mat. 4.
answered by scriptures, and by the auctoryte of scripture confounded him: And
he said that the scripture was fulfilled at his coming. This day is this
scripture fulfilled in your ears. LuKe. 4.


Our Lord gave great auctoryte to the old Testament, when he said Till
heaven and earth pass, Mat. 5.
one jot or one title of the law shall not escape till all be fulfilled. And
the scripture cannot be losed or broken. And the new Testamente is of no less
aucthoryte, Joan. 10.
but rather of more then the old: Of the which our Lord sayth^ Mat. 14.
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.

Our Lord oftentimes overcame the hie priests, mat. 21.
Scribes and Pharisees even by Scriptures, the which reproved him.

Our Lord reproved the Saduces of ignorance, mat. 22.
saying. Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures:

Peter in his first sermon after the holy sprite was sent, Act. 2.
converted unto Christ by the declaration of the prophet Iohels auctorite.3000.
men.

The Enuche or chamberlain, the which coming out of Ethiopia to Jerusalem,
Act. 8.
red the prophet Esaias sitting in his charette, is much commended and praised.
And Philip by the commandment of God, took an occasion to preach the gospel
of Christ unto him, and that by the auctoryte of Scripture that he found him
reding, whom being fast in his belefe, he christened.

Act. 17.
Paul coming unto Berrheham, entered into the Jews Sinagoge Certain of them
received the word very gredely. Daily searching the Scriptures whether it were
so or not. And many honest and good women of Greece believed, and of the chief
men, not a few.

Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, Act. 18.
helped them much which had believed through grace. For he overcame the Jews
myghtely, and openly, showing by the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

Our Lord sent the lawyer, that inquired of him what he should do to obtain
life everlasting, LuKe. 10.
to the scripture, saying what is written in the law? how read thou?

Of good exhortation, and predication of the word of god. Cap. xxvii.
CAine being admonyshed by the exterior voice of God, Genesis 4.
left not of his pretenced iniquitye. And by this it is patent and manifest,
that the exterior exhortation without the interior, is of very little and small
efficacy

The just man Lot did mekelye admonyshe and exhort the Sodomites, saying. Nay
for gods sake my brethren do not so wickedly. Genesis 19.
Do not this evil unto who^ they answered, very contumaciously get the hense.
Thus it appears, that peruers people are hardly cured and corrected.

It happened and chanced well with Jacob, Genesis 27.
for as much as he agreed unto his mothers exhortation and counsels.

Ruben hearing the wicked words of his brethren against Joseph, Genesis 37.
said: Let us not kill him, nor shed his blood, and Judas gave counsel
not to slaye, but to sell him, that so the less hurt might ensue and follow.

Moses sister persuaded Pharaos daughter even well, Exo. 2.
that an Hebrews woman might be called to nurse ye child.

Iethro for the vtility of the people, and to alleuiate and lyghten Moses
burden gave him good counsel, Exo. 18.
that he should appoint and orden mean judges for the people.

David by the good exhortatyon of Abigaile, 1. regu. 25.
was turned, and drawn from his intent and purpose, that is, from shedding of
Nabals blud.

Abner gave good counsel to Asaeli that followed after him, 2. regu. 2.
saying, follow me not, least I be compelled to smite thee to the ground.
But because he would not hear him, he slew him.

The old men gave Roboam Salomons son good Counsel, 3. regu. 12.
but he, to his great hurt and damage, ensued the counsel of the yo^ger
sorts of men.

When Naaman the Syrian, because of Eliseus answer, 4. regu. 5.
was departing with displesure, his servants counseled and persuaded him, to
accomplish and fulfill the prophets commandment, and he did so.

As long as Ioiada the bishop lived, which instructed and exhorted Ioas the
king of Judah: 4. regu. 12.
so long he was good but after that he was departed, he waxed very evil.

The posts went with letters by the commandment of Ezechiell the king, 2.
Para. 30.
and of his Lords and princes thorowout all Israel and Judah. And said. Ye
children of Israel turn again unto our Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, and let every one return to the remnaunte that are escaped, out of
the hands of the Assirians.

When the Jews were buyldyng the temple, 1. Esd. 5.
they that were returned from Babylone were exhorted, and Aggeus and zacharias
did healpe them.

Nehemia desyring to build a wall in Jerusalem, said to the noble men and
rulers. 2. Esd. 2.
Let us get up, and build and they strengthened their hands to good.

At Nehemias exhortation, they that took usury of the people consented both to
restore it again, 2. Esd. 5.
and also from thence forth to take no more.

Tobias being in captiuitye, went unto all them that were in prysone, Tobi.
1.4.14.
and gave them wholesome exhortations. Also he preached very well unto to his
son.

It chanced well with Toby that he obeyed the counsels of Raphaell, Tobi. 6.
whom he esteemed and took for a man and specially in drawing out of the
fyshe, in demanding and askyng a wife, and whether he should marrye her, or
no.

The parents of Sara young Tobies Tobi. 10.
wife did monysh and exhort her to honor her father and her mother in law, to
love her husband, to rule well her household, to keep her house in good order,
and to show her self fautlesse.

Judith made a good exhortation unto the people, Iudi. 8.
reprouinge that that was indiscreetly ordained, and teaching them what ought
to be done.

Mardocheus efficacelye persuaded Esther, Esth. 4.
to go into the king with danger and pearel of her life, to pray for the
wealth of her people.

After that Esaias had seen the wonderful vision, Esa. 6.
he him self said, woe is me, because I hold my peace, but after that he
perceived that his lyps were cleansed with the stone or hot coal that was
taken from the altar he said unto our Lord that inquyred whom he should send
unto the people here am I, send me.

Our Lord said unto Esaye. Cry as loud as thou cansie, leave not of. Esa.
58.
Lift up thy voice like a trompette, and show my people their offenses, and
the house of Jacob their sins.

Jeremy first execused him self from preachinge, Iere. 1.
and after he granted, and followed the will of God.

Abimelech the Mortan said unto king Sedechias. Iere. 38.
My Lord the king. All thy servants that have cast Ieremye the Prophet into
the dongyon or lake, have done euel. And the king commanded that he should be
drawn out of the lake before he died.

Our Lord spoke unto Jonas, saying: Arise, Jonas. 1.2.
and get the to Niniue, and preach there unto them, the predication that I
shall speak and declare unto thee.

Daniell gave Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon good Counsel. Dani. 4.
Saying, be content with my counsel, and redeame thy sins with alms.

When that Mathathias should die he exhorted his sons to do manfully for the
law of God. 1. Match. 2.


When Judas Machabeus should fight, 1. Match. 3.
he exhorted, and encouraged his people with goodlye words. And in a another
place he weaponed them, 2. Match. 15
not with the armor of shield and spear, but with wholesome words and
exhortations.

When the first of the seven brethren was tosted and tormented, 2. Match. 7.
the rest of his brethren with his mother exhorted him to die manfully and
strongly, saying. Our Lord God shall regard the truth, and comfort us. But
specially their mother did wonderfully and efficacely exhort her children.

Ihon the Baptist exhorting many things, Mar. 1.
preached unto the people, of the which, Luke. 3.
certain are touched in the first of Luke, whose exhortatyon was of such
efficacy, that not only many confessing their sins were baptized, Mar. 6.
but also when Herod him self heard him, he did many things, and heard him
gladly.

Our Lord sent forth his discyples saying. Mat. 10
Go and preach, saying. The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Mar. 16.


Peter the Apostle preached upon Whytsonday so effectuouslye, that in one day
there were baptized. Act. 2.
3000. souls. And at a another time through his preaching there were christened
five thousand.

And when the Prophets and doctors that were at Antioche had fasted and praid,
Act. 13.
the holy ghost said. Separate me Bernabas and Saul. Then follows. They
were sent forth of the holy Ghost, and preached the word of God in the
sinagoges of the Jews.

As Peter was preaching in Cornelius house, Act. 10.
the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word of God. And he
commanded them to be baptized.

Paul and Barnabas returned again to Listra, Act. 14.
and to Iconium, and to Antioche, and strengthed the discyples souls again,
and exhorted them to continue in the faith.

And it fortuned in Iconium that Paul and Barnabas went into the synagoge of
the Jews, Act. 14.
and so spoke, yt a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks
believed.

When Paul being in bonds should speak and answer for him self before king
Agrippa and the judge Festus. Act. 26.
Agrippa said unto him. Somewhat thou perswadest, and bring me in mind
for to become christen.

A vision appeared unto Paul in yt night. There stood a man of Macedonia and
prayed him, saying: come into Macedonia and healpe us. Act. 16.
Then there follows. After he had seen the vysyon. Immediatelye we
prepared to go into Macedonia, being certefyed that our LORD had called us
to preach the Gospel unto them.

And many of the Corinthyans when they gave audience to Paul's preaching
believed, Act. 18.
and were baptized. Then spoke our lord to Paul in the night by a vision. Be
not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace: for I am with thee, and no man
shall invade the, that shall hurt the.

And a Jew named Apollos born at Alexandria, Act. 18.
was learned in the way of our lord, and spoke feruentlye in the spryte, and
taught diligently the things of our Lord Jesus.

Paul entering into the Jews sinagoge at Ephesus, behaved him self and spoke
boldly, Act. 19.
disputing, and geuynge them exhortations of the kingdom of God.

And upon one certain day, Paul being ready to depart on the morrow, continued
his preachinge unto mydnight. A certain young man oppressed with dead sleep,
Act. 20.
fell down from the window, and was taken up dead. When Paul was come down
unto him and had revived him^ he went up again, and talked with them even til
the morning, and so departed.

Paul departing from Asia said unto the elders. Act. 20.
By the space of three years, I ceased not to warn and monyshe every one of
you night and day with tears.

Of evil counsels and persuasions. Ca. xxviii.
EUa gave unto Adam her husband of the forbidden tree, Genesis 3.
and he did eat of it. It is to be thought and esteemed, that she persuaded him.

Genesis 39.
Iosephes mystres whom he served, did wickedlye persuade and sollycite him to
evil.

Moses tarying somewhat long with God in the mountain, Exo. 32.
the people said unto Aaron: make us strange Gods to go before us. Unto whose
suggestions, Aaron did folyshlye condescende and obey.

Baalam taught Balaac, how that by women he might draw the children of Israel
to iniquity and sin, Nume. 31.
and so to provoke our Lord against him self.

The children of Amon persuaded their king very evil, 2. regu. 10.
that he should dishonest David's messengers.

Ionadab David's Nephew gave very evil counsel to Amon, 2. regu. 13.
when he counseled him to defloure his sister. Of the which thing chanced
great inconuenyence and harm afterward.

Achitophels counsel that he gave to Absolon was detestable and filthy. And
yet the counsel that he gave in those days, was as a man had asked counsel
of God.

Women turned Salomons heart, and through the^ it was so depraved, that he
followed other Gods, 3. regu. 11.
and worshypped them.

Ochozias the king of Judah, walked in the ways of the house of Achab the
which was most wycked^ 2. para. 22.
for his mother Athalia by her counsel, entysed, yea and compeld him to do
wickedly.

As the Jews, after their return and coming again from Babylon were
building their temple, 1. Esd. 4.
their ennemies wrote unto king Artaxerses, and persuaded by them, did forbid
them to work any more.

Amans friends hearing him complaining of Mardocheus, Esth. 5.
that would not knele unto him: said. Command a high pair of galowes to be
made, and to morrow speak thou to the king, that Mardocheus may be hanged
thereon.

Jobs wife gave him very folyshe counsel, Job. 2.
but he, as a prudent and a holy man, would not follow it.

Pharaos wise counselors, gave him unwise and folish counsel. Esa. 19.


Because that Jeremy did Prophecye that the city of Jerusalem should be taken
of the Chaldees. Iere. 38.
The princes and rulers of the people said unto king Zedechias. Sir, we
beseech you let this manne be put to death. And he unwisely agreing unto them
said: Lo, he is in your hands: for it is not mete that the king should deny
you any thing.

Darius the king of Percia through the evil suggestion of this Princes and
noble men, Da^i. ^.
made a statute, that whosoever desired any peticion, either of God or man, except
of the king only. Should be cast into the Lions Den.

In the days and time of Antiochus, wicked men went out of Israel, 1, Match.
1.
and persuaded many, saying. Let us go and make a couenaunte with the
Heathen.

Menelaus did so persuade Andronicus, that he slew Onias the priest, 2. Match.
4.
without any regard of righteousness.

When the court was kept against Menelaus before Antiochus Ptolome being
corrupted with money by Menelaus persuaded the king, 2. Match. 4.
and brought him to the sentence, the which discharged Menelaus, and
conde^pned to death his just accusers.

Herodias gave her daughter wicked counsel, Mat. 14.
saying. Thou shall ask nothing else, but the head of John Baptiste.

Paul the proconsulle desired to hear the word of God, Act. 13.
that Paul and Barnabas did preach. But Elimas the sorcerer withstode them,
and sought to turn the ruler away from the faith.

When Paul and Barnabas were in such honor at Listra, that men would have
done sacrifice unto them as unto Gods: Act. 14.
Thither came certain Jews, which, when they had persuaded the people, and
had stoned Paul, drew him out of the cyty, supposing he had been dead.

By the occasion of a certain damsel, whom Paul delivered of an evil

By the occasion of a certain damsel whom Paul delivered of an evil spirit,
Act. 16.
her master fearing and sorowing the loss of his advantage, declared so many
things to the magestrates and rulers, that he caused Paul and Silas to be
beaten with rods, and to be cast into prison.

Of hearing the word of God. Ca. xxix.
AAron told all the words which our Lord had spoken unto Moses, Exo. 4.
and the people believed. And when they heard that our Lord had visited the
children of Israel, they lay down prostrate and worshypped. And Moses said
before the Lord. Lo: the children of Israel hear me not, and how shall
Pharo hear me.

All the people said unto Moses with one voice. Exo. 24^
All the words which our Lord has said, will we do. And a little after. And
Moses took the book of the appointment, and red it in the audience of the
people. And they said, all that our Lord has said, we will do, and be
obedient.

Eglon the king of Moab sat in his somer parler, Iudi. 3.
and Aliud said unto him, I have a message unto thee from God, he arose
immediately out of his seat, asthough he would have done reverence unto the
word of God.

Hely taught Samuel right well, that he should say unto our Lord that
spoke unto him: 1. regu. 3.
Speak on lord, for thy servant hears.

Achab the King of Israel would not hear Micheas our Lords Prophet, 3.
regu. 22.
because he prophesied no good unto him but evil. Yet when Micheas was calde.
He said unto him. Hear the word of God.

Esdras brought forth the book of the law, 2. Esd. 8.
and read in it openly from the morning until the noone day, and the ears
of the people were erected unto the book. Then follows. All the people wept,
when they heard the words of the law.

Iobbe making answer unto our LORD said: Job. 42.
I have given dylygente ear unto thee, and now I see thee with mine eyes.
Wherefore I give mine own self to blame, and take repentance in the dust and
ashes.

OUR Lord spoke unto Ieremye. Iere. 26.
Keep not one word of the Lord back, if peradventure they will hearken,
and turn every man from his wicked way. That I may also repent of the
evil, that I have determined to do unto them, because of their wicked
inventions.

OUR Lord said unto Ezechiell. Eze. 3.
Get thee unto the house of Israel, and thou shalt show them my words
and mind. Then there follows. The house of Israel would notte hear nor
follow the, for they would not hear nor follow me.

The words of Jonas came unto the king of Niniue, Iona. 3.
which rose out of his seat, and did his apparel of, and put on sackcloth,
and sat him down in ashes.

Herod the Tetrache feared Ihon the Baptist, Mar. 6.
and kept him, and when he heard him he did many things, and hard him gladly.

Mary the sister of Martha sat at Jesus fete, LuKe. 10.
and hard his word. And at the last, she hard our Lord say, Marye has
chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

Luke. 6.
Our lord in the later end of his sermon in the mount, said: whosoever
hears my sayings, and doothe the same, shall be likened to a wise man, that
has builte his house upon a rock of stone.

Luke. 5.
When the people preased Jesus, to hear the word of God, he sat down and
taught the people out of the ship. Peter and his fellows brought the ships
to land, and they forsook all and followed him.

To the woman that lyfted up her voice and said: Luke. 11^
Blessed is the womb that bare thee. Our Lord answered: yea, blessed or
happy are they that hear the word of GOD, and keep it.

We do read that our Lord about the time of his passion, Luke. 19
taught dailye in the temple. And after a few words we read that all yt people
stood by him and were astonyed when they heard him.

As two of the Lords disciples were goinge to a town or castle called Emaus,
Lu. 24.
and talked together of al those things that had happened and chanced at the
time of our Lords passion, they deserved to have his company, of whom they
spoke, and had their communication.

The sermon that was made to the people in the feast of Pentecost, Act. 2.
being ended, and after the coming of the holy ghost, thus it is said and
written. When they hard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto
Peter, and unto the other Apostles. Ye me^ and brethren what shall we do? And
there were baptized about a 3000. men.

After that the lame man was healed, and Peter's sermon ended, Act. 3.4.
many that hard his predication believed, and the nombre of the men was
about five thousand.

The twelve Apostles called the multitude of the Disciples together, Act. 6.
and said. It is not mete that we should leave the word of God, and serve
Tables. And note, that those tables were the tables of pore wydowes. Where by we
may understand, that the predication and setting forth of the word of God, is
preferred above the corporal works of mercy.

The Jews could not resist the wisdom and the spirit which spoke by holy
Steven. Act. 6.


Philip went into a city of Samaria and preached christ unto them: Act. 8.
And the people gave head unto those things which Phyllyp spoke with one
accord.

Phillip opened his mouth, Act. 8.
and preched Jesus unto the chamberlain and coming to a certain water, the
chamberlain said that he believed that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and he
baptized him.

Our lord said thus unto Ananias of Paul, Act. 9.
whom he blineded corporally, and illumined spiritually: Go thy way, for he
is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the gentiles, and kings,
and the Children of Israel.

Our lord would not instruct Cornelius by his aungel, Act. 10.
but sent him word that he should call Simon, whose syrname is Peter, and he
should tell and teach him, what he ought to do.

While Peter spoke, Act. 10.
the holy ghost fell on all them, which hard his preaching.

The gentiles heard that the Jews put from them the word of God, Act. 13.
and that Paul and Barnabas would turn to them, and they were glad, and
glorified the word of our lord, and believed, even as many as were ordained
unto eternal life.

And it fortuned in Iconium, that Paul and Barnabas went into the sinagoge,
Act. 14.
and so spoke, that a great multitude of the Jews, and also of the Greeks
believed.

A certain woman named Lidia, a seller of Purple, Act. 16.
gave audyence unto Paul's words, whose heart our Lord opened, and was
baptized with all her household.

When the Atheniens hard Paul speak of the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked, Act. 17.
and other said, we will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed
from them. Howbeit certain men claue unto him and believed, among the which was
Dionisius an Ariopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and other with them.

Paul remained at Ephesus by the space df ii. years, Act. 19.
and disputed dailye in the schole of one called Tirannus, so that al they that
dwelt in Asia, hard the word of our Lord.

After that king Agrippa had heard Paul, Act. 26.
he said unto him. Somewhat thou perswadest me to become Christen.

When Paul was come to Berrea he entered into the Synagoge of the Jews: Act.
17.
some of them received ye word wythal diligence and gredines of mind, and
searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were even so, and many of
them believed.

Of the apparitions and visions showed in the old time. Capitu. xxx.
BEfore iniquity and sin, our Lord spoke unto Adam, Genesis 1.2.3.
but after that sin was committed and done, he spoke to Adam, Eve, and to the
serpent. Ye he monished Caine or ever he slew his brother, and afterward
reproved him.

Our Lord commanded Noe to make an arc, Genesis 6.7.8.9.
and to go into it, and after the exercitation or destruction of the earth he
had him come forth of the arc: then he blessed Noe and his children, and said
unto them, bring ye forth fruit, and multiply and repleanysh the earth.

Our lord said unto Abraham: Get thee out of thy country, Genesis 12.
and out of thy nation. And again our lord apeared to Abraham, and said unto
him, unto thy sede will I give this land.

After that Abraham and Lot were departed one from the other. Genesis 13.15.17.
Then follows. The word of our Lord came unto Abraham in a vision. And
after that our Lord appeared unto him, and gave him the commandment of the
circumcision.

And there appeared unto Abraham three men. Genesis 18.
etc. And even then he hard what time his son should be borne.

And there came ii. angels Lot sitting at the gate of Sodom: Genesis 19.
And Lot seeing them, rose up to mete them, and worshypped them.

God came to Abimelech in a dreme and said unto him: Genesis 20.
See thou shalt die for the woman's sake which thou haste taken away, for she
is a man's wife.

Genesis 21.
When that Abraham had taken Saras words greuouslye complainyng of her maid
Agar and her Son, our Lord said unto him, let it not be sharp and grievous
in thy syghte, because^ of the ladde, and of thy bondmaide.

An angel appeared in the wilderness to Agar the maid, Genesis 26.
and to her son.

God proved Abraham, Genesis 22.
and said unto him, take thy son. etc. And when he held forth the sweard.
Behold the angel of our Lord. etc.

Our Lord appeared unto Isaac in Bersabe, Genesis 26.
saying, I am the God of Abraham thy father. etc.

God appeared very often to Jacob going to Laban, Genesis 28.31.
and coming again from thence. And our Lord said unto Laban in a dream: Take
heed that thou speak not to Jacob ought save good. And after this our Lord
spoke many times to Jacob.

It were to long to rehearse how oftentimes our Lord spoke unto Moses. Look
in the book of Exodus the third Chapter with other more that follow.

We read also that our Lord spoke unto Balaam by night, and when he rode upon
his Ass, the which saw the Angel, Nume. 22.
whom Balaam saw not.

Iosu. 1.4.5, 7.13.
Our Lord in like manner spoke very often to Joshua.

After the death of Joshua the children of Israel counseled with the Lord and
asked saying: Iudi. 1.
who shall go up before us? And our Lord said, Judah shall go up.

The angel of our Lord ascended unto the place of those that did weep, Iudi. 2.
and said, I brought you out of Egypt.

The angel of our Lord appeared unto Gedeon, Iudi. 6.
and said. The Lord is with thee.

The angel of our Lord appeared unto Man's wife. Iudi. 13.
And at a another season he appeared both to Manne and his wife.

The children of Israel being gathered to fight against the Beniamites, Iudi.
20.
counseled with our Lord. Unto whom he said, that Judas should be captain
of the host, and begin. And notwithstanding that they were twice overthrown,
yet our Lord commanded them to fight.

Our Lord called upon Samuel four times, 1. regu. 3.
and at the last he said, speak on Lord, for thy servant he areth, and that
by Helis counsel. And than there follows, that our Lord appeared again in
Silo.

When David should give battle, 2. regu. 2.
he did oftentimes consulte with our Lord. And we read that he always
answered him, as it appears in many places, but specially in the second
book of the kings the second Chapter.

Our Lord appeared to Solomon, 3. regu. 3.
and said. Ask what thou will.

When Solomon had finyshed the building of the house of our Lord, 3. regu. 9.
and the kings palace. Our Lord appeared unto him, and said, I have heard
thy prayer.

And he spoke again unto Solomon 3. regu. 11.
rebuking and checking of him very sharply, for his fautes committed.

The angel of our Lord appeared 3. regu. 19.
unto Helias flyinge from the face of Iesabel, the which showed him bread and
water. And also in a small still voice, or air.

When Elizeus was compassed about with the Assirians host, 4. regu. 6.
manys angels that defended him appeared, the which his servant saw in the
similitude and likeness of fiery horses and charets.

The appearinge of the angel Raphael continued leng, Tobi. 9.
whom our lord sent to cure and heal Sara.

Diverse of the Prophets saw many marvelous visions, Esa. 6.
as of the wakyng rod, Iere. 1.24.
and a sethinge pot, and of two maundes of figs. But specially Ezechiel,
Daniel, Amos, and zacharias arful of imaginarious visions, the which to
express would require a long time.

There apeared unto Heliodorus the which would have spoyld the temple, 2. Match. 3.
and have conueid away such things as were deposed and laid there to be kept, an
horse with a terrible and a fearful man sitting upon him.

When there should have been a vehemente bataile between Tymothe and Judas
Machabeus, 2. Match. 1^
there appeared v. men upon horsbacks garnished with brydles of gold, leadynge
the Jews, and two of them having Machabeus betwixt them that kept him safe on
every side with their weapons.

The Jews going to battle against 2. Match. 1^^
the great and mighty host of Lisias, Machabeus being their captain, there
appeared before them upon horsbacke a man in white clothing with harness of
gold, shaking his spear.

We do read that the angel of God appeared thrice unto Joseph: Mat. 1.2.
first, our lord being in his mothers womb. Secondarely, when he was come
forth of his mothers womb. And thyrdlye when he was in Egypt.

When Jesus was baptized the spirit of god was seen upon him in a bodily shape
like a dove, Mat. 3.
Luke. 4.
and the fathers voice was hard saying: This is my well be loved son.

Also in our lords transfyguratyon there apeared Moses and Helias speaking Mat.
17.
with our Lord. And there came a voice from heaven. Luke. 9.


When our Lord Jesus arose from death to life, Mat. 27.
many bodies of saints which slept, arose, and coming out of the graves
came into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

When Jesus was risen earlye the first day after the saboth, Mar. 16.
he appeared first to Mary Magdalen.

After this he appeared to two dysciples going by the way, Luke. 24.
and last of all, he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, Mar. 16.
and cast in their teethe their unbelief, and hardness of heart.

Our Lord Jesus showed him self alive after his passion, Act. 1.
and that by many arguments and tokens, appearing unto them xl. days, and
speakinge of the kingdom of God. Then there follows. And while they looked
steadfastly up toward heaven, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel.

When the fiftye days were come to an end. Act. 2.
they were al with one accord together in one place: And there apeared unto them
cloven tongues, like as they had been of fire.

Stephen being full of the holy ghost, Act. 7.
looked up into heaven he saw the glory of God, and said. Behold, I se the
heavens open, and the son of man standing on the right hand of God.

And the Angel of God was there present, and a light shyned in the
habitacion of the prysonne. Acts. 12.
And he smote Peter which was bound with chains, on the side, and stered him
up, saying, arise up quickly.

And when Paul was come nigh to Damasco to take those that were christened,
Act. 10.
suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven, And he heard
our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, saying unto him, Saull, why persecutest thou me?
And afterward he appeared to Ananias.

Cornelius the captain, a devout man, Act. 9.
and one that feared God, saw euydentelye, about the nynth hour of the day,
an angel of God saying unto him, Corneli, send men to Ioppa, and call for one
Simon whose syrname is Peter, he shall tell thee, what thou ought to do.

Peter being in his prayers, and a hungerd, fell into a trance, and saw.
Heaven opened, Act. 10.
and a certain vessel came down to him as it had been a great shete knytte
at the four corners and was let down to the earth, wherein were all manner of
fourefoted beasts of the earth, and vermen and worms, and fowls of the air.

When Paul and Barnabas had gone through Misia, they came to Troada. Act. 16.
And a vision appeared too Paul in the night. There stood a man of Macedonia
and prayed him, saying. Act. 17.
Come into Macedonia and help us, our Lord said unto Paul by a vision in the
night, fear not, speak, and hold not thy peace.

On a certain night god standing by Paul, said unto him be constant and of
good chere Paul, Act. 23.
for as thou haste testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome.

Paul purposing to comfort and cheer his fellows in the time of the
tempest, Act. 27.
persuaded them to be of good cheer, saying. There stood by me this night
thangel of God, and said, fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Ceaser
and lo, God has given the al them that sail with the.

Blessed Johan the Apostle and Evangelist exiled into the I Will of Pathmos,
Apoca. 1.
saw Christ in the mids of seven golden candelstyckes. Ye all the book is
full of such visions.

Of good angels. Capi. xxxi.
Angels appeared unto Abraham, and were very familier with him. Genesis 18.
Angels were loged with Loath, and following in a manner his gentle violence,
delivered him from all perel and danger. Genesis 19.


The angel of god called unto Abraham, and forbode him to sacrifice or to offer
up his son, Genesis 22.
and promised him great things for his obedience.

Jacob fleyng from his brother Esau, Genesis 28.
saw the Angels ascendynge and descending upon the ladder.

Jacob returned from Labans service to Isaac his father. Genesis 31.
The angels came to mete him, and to defend him.

And the angel of God which went before the hooste of Israel when the people
came out of Egypt, Exo. 14.
stood betwyxte the hooste of the Egypcians, and the hooste of Israel. For it
is written, Exo. 23.
behold I send my angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee into the place which I have prepared.

Nume. 22.
The angel of god stood in the way against Balaam riding upon his Ass.

The angel of our Lord rebuked the children of Israel, Iudi. 2.
because they had sworn and made a peace with the Cananites, putting them
in remembrance of Gods benefits done and shewde unto them.

The angel of our Lord appearing unto Gedeon did comfort him, Iudi. 6.
and holded him to deliver the people.

The Angel appeared to Manues wife that was barren, Iudi. 13.
declarynge unto her, that she should conceive, and that she should keep
abstinence.

After that the people at Daudis commandment were nombred, our lord sent a
pestilence into Israel. 2. regu. 24.
And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, David
seeing the angel that smote the people, said. Lo, it is I that have done
wyckedly.

Our Lords angel did comfort Helias ^^eynge the tyranny of Iezabel and
refreshed him with sober meat. 3. regu. 19.


And the angel opened unto Helias, 4. regu. 1.
what he should answer unto Ochozias messengers.

There were mo good angels with Elizeus to defend him, 4. regu. 6.
then there were evil men with his adversaries to hurt him.

The angel of our Lord came, 4. regu. 19.
and smote in one night of the Assiryans an hundred four score and five
thousand.

The angel Raphaell that was Tobias guide, Tobi. 5.6.
delivered him from the danger of the fysh, and his wise from the devil, he
restored old Toby to his sight, and through him, as well his parents, as his
companions and fellows were repleanished with diverse consolations.

As truly as our Lord lives, says Judith, Iudi. 13.
his angel has kept me going thither, remaining there, and coming hither
again from thence.

One of the Seraphins flewe unto Esaias, Esa. 6.
and cleansed him with a stone, which he took from the altar with the tongues.

The angel of God descended with Azaria and his fellows into the oven or
furnace of fire. Dani. 3.


Daniel being within the den of Lions, Dani. 6.
said unto king Darius coming unto him. My God has sent his angel which
has shut the Lions mouths, so that they might not hurt me.

Afterward the angel of our lord brought the prophet Habacucke out of Iewry
into Chalde, Dani. 14.
to bear Daniel his dinner.

There were diverse and great mysteries showed unto Danyell by the ministry of
angels. Dani. 9.10.11.


Machabeus and they that were with him praid our Lord, 2. Match. 11.
that he would send a good aungel to deliver Israel. Then there follows.
There appeared before them an angel in white clothyng.

The angel Gabriel to auaunce and upon the conception of John ye Baptist, Luke.
1.
appeared unto zachary.

And to denounce the conception of our savior, Luke. 1.
the self angel Gabryell was sent of God unto a city of Galile, named David or
Nazareth.

And again, when our Lord was borne the angel of our Lord slode hard by
the Shepheardes, Luke. 2.
and there was with the angel a multitude of heavenly souldyors praising God.
etc

We read also, that thangell of our Lord appeared, and spoke unto Joseph, Mat.
1.
first before his nativity, saying, fear not to take unto the Mary thy wife.
Secondly, after the adoration and worshipping of the wise men. Mat. 2. Mat. 2.
Arise and take the child and his mother, and go into Egypt. Thyrdly, after
Herodes death. Take the child and his mother and go into the land of Israel.

After the departure of the devil that tempted him, Mat. 4.
the angels came and ministered unto him.

And after his supper, and in his prayer made in the garden, Luke. 22.
there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, comforting him.

Mat. 28.
At the time of his resurrection, the angel of our Lord came down from heaven.
John. 20.
Mar. xvi. Lu. xxiiii.

At our Lords assencion, behold two men stood by them in white apparel. Act. 1.


The chief prestes rose up, and all they that were with him, laid hands on the
Apostles, Act. 5.
and put them in common prison. But the angel of our lord by night opened
the prison doors, and brought them forth, and fayde, go, and preach in the
Temple to the people.

The angel of our Lord spoke unto Philip, Act. 8.
saying: Arise and go toward the South. etc.

Cornelius saw evidently, about the ninth hour of the day, Act. 10.
an angel of god coming into him, and saying. Cornelius. etc.

And Peter being a sleep in Herodes prison, Act. 12.
the aungel of our Lord was then present. etc.

King Herod arrayed him in royal apparel, Act. 12.
and set him in his seat, and made an oration unto them, and the people gave a
shoute, saying: It is the voice of a God, and not of a man. And immedyatelye
the aungel of the lord smote him because he gave not the honor to God, and
he was consumed and eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

There stood an angel of God by Paul in the ship, Act. 27.
counsellyng him to be of good cheer, saying, fear not Paul.

Our Lord signified things which must shortly come to pass. Apoca. 1.
And after that he spoke by his angel unto his servant Ihon, which bare
record of the word of GOD. etc. And that book is full of angelycall
reuelatyons.

Of evil Spirits. Ca. xxxii.
Evil spirits are said to be our Lords, 1. regu. 16.
because they are in gods power, and what so ever they do, they do it by God.
The evil spirit of God vexed Saul.

The devil killed Saras Raguels daughter vii. husbands, Tobi. 3.8.
but yet by the coming of Raphael the good angel was eiected.

Satan had even so much power upon Jobs cattle his house wherein his
children did eat, Job. 1.2.
and upon his body, how much the divine prouydence did suffer him to have.

The evil sprite made the man fearce and cruel. Mat. 8.
And also he makes a man unclean, for those ii. demoniakes, or possessed with
devils were out of measure fearce, Luke. 8.
and dwelt and lay in graves. And the devils desired to go into the swine,
not into Lambs. One of those ii. was more famous then the other, he ware no
clothes: he abode in no house but in graves, he was bound with chains, and
kept with fetters, and he brake the bands, and was carried of the fend into
wilderness.

This euel sprite makes a man both deaf and domme, Mar. 7.
and when the spirit takes him, he knocks and teareth him and he fometh and
gnasheth with his tethe and pineth away, LuKe. 9.
Mar. 9.
and often times he casts him into fire and water, to destroy and lose him.

Our Lord refused the laud and praise of malign spirits. LuKe. 8.
Hold thy peace (quod he) and come out of the man. Mar. 1.


Our Lord did forbid his discyples to rejoice that the evil spirits were
under them, Luke. 10.
and subdued unto them, as though they should not esteem that thing very greatly.

A certain damsel possessed with a sprite ye prophesied, Act. 19.
cried out many a day after Paul and his fellows. But Paul being heavy
therefore, turned about and said to the sprite, I command the in the name and
virtue of Jesus christ yt thou come out of her, and he came out the same hour.
And note yt Paul would not that the doctrine of truth should be confirmed by
the spirit of deceitfulness and falshode.

Certain of the Jews took upon the^ to call over the^, which had evil sprites
the name of our Lord Jesus, saying, Act. 19.
we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. And the evil spryte answered and
said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know: but who are ye? and the man in whom the
evil spryte was, ran on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them,
so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded

Of the immortality of the reasonable soul. Ca. xxxiii.
FOr as much as it is said of Abraham, that he was put to his people, Genesis 25.
it is supposed that he had people in a another world, that is, men, which lived
well as he did.

We have the like saying of Isaac. He was put unto his people. Genesis 35.49.
And of Jacob.

And when Jacob believed that his son Joseph was dead, Genesis 37.
he said, I will go down into hell unto my son mourninge. So then, he believed
that he was there in spryte.

Iosephes brethren having in will and mind to say, that one of their brethren
was dead, said. We are xii. brethren, Genesis 42.
the sons of one man, the youngest is with our father, and one no man wotteth
where he is.

Our lord appearing unto Moses in a bush, Exo. 3.
said, I am the God of Abraham Isaac, and Jacob. etc. by this our savior
proves the ressurection of the dead. Mat. 22.
He is not a God of the dead says he, but of the living.

It is said of Chore and his company, that they went down alive into hell,
Nume. 16.
and the earth closed upon them, and they pearyshed from among the
congregation. By this it appears that the evil, as touching their souls do
live in hell.

If Saul had surely believed that Samuel had been extincte and dead as
touching his soul, 1. regu. 28.
he would not have desired him to have been reuyued and called again.

When that David's servants, maruailed why he wept not for his young son
that was dead, he said, I shall go to him rather the^ he shall come again to me.

When that David's servant, meruailed why he wept not for his young son that
was dead, 2. regu. 12.
he said, I shall go to him, rather then he shall come again to me.

When Absolon was hanged, and thrust through with iii. spears, 2. regu. 18
David be wailed and lamented him mournfully. And s. Augustine in his book de
doc. chri. says. That David bewaild not the lack and death of his son. But
because he knew to what pains that adoulterous and Paracide soul should be
drawn unto. But for his other son that died an Innocente, and for whose
sickness he was sore afflicted, 2. regu. 12.
he reioysed.

3. regu. 17.
Helias praid for the reuiuification of his hosts child, saying. O Lord my
God, let this childs soul come into him again.

Oftentimes we read in the books of the kings, 3. regu. 14.
he was laid a sleep with his fathers. The which thing by no means may be
understood or spoken of brute beasts: 4. regu. 13.
and therefore there by it is proved that they live after their death, and that
here after they shall arise again, as it appears in those that sleep.

It is manifest and open by Thobias words which he spoke rebuking the
folishnesse of his kinsfolks, that the soul lives after that it is separated
from the body. Tobi. 2.
We are, says Toby, the children of holy men, and look for the life, which
God shall give unto them that never turn their be lefe from him. And
afterward in his oration and prayer he says. Tobi. 3.
O Lord, deal not with me according to thy will, and command my sprite to be
received in peace.

Our Lord gave Job double of al ye ever was his. Tobi. 42.
And at length he gave him vii. sons, and iii. daughters.

The preacher (after the mind of s. Eccle. 11.
Gregory in the last of his Morales) spoke expressly and plainly, saying. Let
the dust be turned again unto earth, from whence it came, and the spryte
shall return unto God, which gave it.

By those words that the dampened do say in hell, they declare and show,
Sapi. 5.
that the good as well as the evil do live in a another world.

Thus it is written even literallye of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon Now that
thou art laid down to sleep that is in death, Esai. 14.
there come no mo up to hew us down. Hell also beneathe trembles to meet
thee at thy coming. And after there follows. Thy pride is brought down into
the deep of hell. And many mo things ar written there, by the which it is
euidente that he pearished not utterly, but that his soul went down into hell.

When that they counseld Eleazarus to feign and dyssemble him self to have
eaten of the flesh of the sacrifice: 2. Match. 6.
he said. Though I were now delivered from the torments of men, yet should
not I escape the hand of almighty God, nether alive nor dead.

One of those seven brethren, said. 2. Match. 7.
Those things I possess and have from heaven, but now for the law of God, I
despise them, for my trust is that I shall receive them. Of him again.
Likewise it is clear and manifest by the mothers words and other, that they,
as touching the soul believed not that they should pearish.

Razias taking his own bowels, threw them upon the people, 2. Match. 14
calling upon our Lord and ruler of the earth, and spirit to reward and restore
him this again, and so he dyed.

Our savior warninge his Dysciples, the which he sent abroad, Mat. 10.
said unto them. Fear ye not them which kyl the body, but are not able to
kill the soul. But rather fear him, which is hable to destroy both soul and
body into hell.

That thing which our Lord does show of the rych man and Lazarus seems to be
no parable or symilitude, Luke. 16.
but a manifest hystorye. And so it appears that the souls both of the good
and evil be immortal, and receive after the separatyon from the body, even
as they deserved being in the body.

Our Lord by the ensample of the unjust steward that made him friends with his
masters goods, Luc. 16.
does conclude: saying: make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when
ye shall have neade, they may receive you into everlasting habitatio^s. The
which saying was of none effect, if the soul after the separation from the
body, or after the death of ye body, had no receptacle or place to be received
unto.

Blessed saint Steven had a devout and a right opinion and faith of the soul,
Act. 7.
the which when they stoned him, said, Lord Jesus, receive my spryte.

It appears manifestlye by the words of that excellent doctor Paul tha^ the
soul does live after it be separated from the body. 2. Cor. 5.
We know (says he) that if our earthy mancyon of this dwelling were
destroyed, we have a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but
eternal in heaven.

Philip. 1.
And he says, I desire to be losed, and to be with Christ.

And the self same man says. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body subdued unto death? roma. 7.
Truly he would not say such things, but that he was sure of a another life.

Of the faith that man should have unto God. Cap. xxxiiii.
ABraham believed our lord, Genesis 15.
and that counted he to him for righteousness: and note that he believed God,
which promised him a thing most difficult and hard.

After that the children were past over the red sea: Exo. 14.
and Pharaos host overthrown and drowned, the people feared our Lord, and
believed the Lord and his servant Moses.

Moses until he came to the waters of strife, Nume. 20.
faithfully believed all the sayings and words of our Lord, but somewhat he
stackard there.

Ionatha^ said unto his harness bearer. It is no hardness with our Lord,
1. regu. 14.
to save either in many, or in few.

This was a word of a great and a mighty faith. 1. regu. 17.
That David said when he should fight against Goliath the geyaunt. Thou come
to me with a sword, a spear, and a shylde: But I come too thee in the name of
our Lord.

Iosaphat said unto his host gethered together to fight. 2. Para. 20.
Put your trust in the Lord your God, and ye shall be sure and in sauegarde.
Give credence to his Prophets, and so shall ye prospere.

Aza spoke a word of a great faith, saying. 2. Para. 14.
Lord it is no distance or matter to the, whether thou help in few, or in
many.

Esdras coming to Jerusalem, 1. Esdra. 8.
required not of the kings gydes to conducte him on his way because it was a
perylouse and a ieoperdous way, but turnde him self to prayer, and to fast.

When Nehemias perceived and saw so many dangers and labors hang over them,
2. Esdra. 4
he said. God shall fight for us, and we will be laboring in the work.

Daniels fellows spoke a word of a great and a fervent faith to king
Nabuchodonosor. Dani. 3.
Our God whom we serve is able to keep us from the hoote burning Oven, and
can right well deliver us out of thy hands.

Judas Machabrus said unto his fellows that were afraid. 1. Match. 3.
It is a small matter for many to be overcome with a few. Ye, there is no
difference to the God of heaven, to deliver by a great multitude, or by a
small company. For the victory of the battle stands not in the multitude of
the host. But the strength comes from heaven.

Eleazar said unto those which would that be, 2. Match. 6.
fayninge him self to have eaten of the flesh of the sacrifice, should have
escaped death, I cannot escape the hands of God almightye nether alive nor dead.

The words of those seven brethren and their mother proceaded and came of
the abundant faith of the mind. 2. Match. 7.


Luc. 1.
Thangel said unto zachary Ihon the Baptiste father. Behold it shall come to
pass, that thou shall be dom and not be able to speak, until the day that
these things be performed, because thou beleuedst not my words.

And Elizabeth filled with the holy ghost, Luc. 1.
did specially laud Marye the virgin, saying: blessed art thou that have
believed. etc.

It is proved that there was a marvelous faith in those three wisemen: Mat. 2.
the which coming out of the East to Bethelem, and fineding the child with
his pore mother, most humblye did worship him, and offered mistical gifts unto
him.

Our Lord even meritoriously commended the faith of the Centuryon, Mat. 8.
the which said. Sir I am not worthy. etc. Then there follows, I have not
found so great faith in Israel.

Every man's proper faith may be very profitable unto him, Mat. 9.
if the faith of other men was so commodious and profitable unto the sick of
the palsy. And when Jesus saw the faith of them, Luc. 5.
he said. Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgeuen the, and out of hand
he wholye healed him.

A woman which was diseased with an issue of blood, Mat. 9.
said within her self: if I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be
safe. Then there follows, daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made the
safe.

Our Lord did not many miracles in his own country, Mat. 13.
because of their unbelief.

When Peter walkinge on the water began to sink, mat. 14.
our Lord reproved him for lack of faith, saying: O thou or little faith,
wherefore did thou doubt?

The woman of Canane is greatly praised of our Lord, mat. 15.
to whom he said. O woman, great is thy ^ai^he, be it unto the, even as thou will.

Peter spoke a faithful word unto our LORD that asked him, mat. 17.
what men said that he was. Thou art, said Peter, the son of the living God.

The faith of Magdalen was marvelous, and therefore she justly deserved to hear
of our LORD. Luc. 7.
Thy faith has made thee safe, or saved thee.

Now when the father of the child that was lunatike believed. He most humbly
required that his faith might be increased, mar. 9^
and wepinge he said. Lord I believe, healpe thou mine unbelief.

Our Lord said unto Thomas. Bring thy finger hither. John. 20.
etc. and be not faithless, but believing. Because thou have se^e me, thou
have believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

Upon Whitson sunday after Peter's first predication, and the receiving of the
holy ghost, Act. 2.
there believed about three thousand men.

When the halting man was made whole, Act. 3.4.
he spoke unto the people that wondered, and were sore astonyed. And many of
them which heard the words, believed. And the number of them was about v.
thousand.

The Apostles chose Steven a man full of faith, Act. 6.
and full of the holy ghost.

The Enuche said unto Philippe, See, here is water, what doothe let me to be
baptized. Act. 8.
Philip said unto him, if thou believe with all thine heart thou may. And
the Enuche answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God.
And then Philip baptized him.

Saul and Cornelius were diuersty brought unto the faith of Christ, Act.
10.9.
but yet they were brought edificatyuely and fruitfully.

Some of Sipers and Ciren which when they were come to Antioche, Act. 11.
spoke unto the Greeks, and preached our Lord Jesus. And a great nombre
beleaued and turned unto our Lord.

Paulus the Proconsull and ruler Act 13.
seeing how that Elimas the sorcerer that resisted Paul the Apostle, was made
blind by the word of God, believed, and wondered at the doctrine of our Lord.

Paul and Barnabas said unto the Jews. Act. 13.
It was meet that the word of God should first have been preached to you.
But saying ye put i^ from you, lo, we turn to the Gentyles. When they heard
this, they were glad and gloryfied the name of God, and believed, even as many
as were ordained unto eternal life.

A certain man at Listra, a crepell which never had walked^ Heard Paul
preach, Act. 14.
which beholdinge him, and perceiving that he had faith to be whole, said
unto him, stand upright on thy feet, and he went forth and walked.

It fortuned in Iconium that Paul and Barnabas went into the sinagoge of the
Jews, Act. 14.
and so spoke, that a great multitude both of Jews and also of the Greeks
believed.

As Paul and Barnabas went through diverse towns and cities, Act. 16.
the congregations were stablished in the faith, and increased in nombre daily.

When the keeper of the prysone, in the which Paul and Silas were detained,
Act. 16.
saw the earthquake, and the prison open, being sore troubled and afraid, fell
down at their fete, saying: what must I do to be saved? and they said, believe
in our Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

When Paul had disputed at Athe^s against Idolatry, Act. 17.
certain men cleaving unto him, believed, among the which was Dionisius. etc.

Of the fidelitye that ought to be kept to man. Capi. xxxv.
ELiezer Abraham's servant did the message committed unto him, Genesis 24.
by his master very faithfullye, when he went for Rebecca to Bathnals house.

Jacob served his uncle Laban faithfully, when that he keeping his sheep by day
was consumed with heat, Genesis 29.31.
and by night with frost.

Joseph showed him self faithful unto his master, Genesis 39.
in that he would not touch his wife. And in his counsel that he gave unto
Pharao: Genesis 41.
and in such service as he exhibited and did for him.

Rachab the harlot did faithfullye with the spies which Iosue sent: Iosu. 2.6.
and likewise Iosue afterward used her faithfully again.

Although the Gabaonites had deceived Iosue and the children of Israel, Iosu.
9.10.
yet they kept their oath and promise with them, and after that faithfully
defended them against their enemies.

Ionathas did faithfully disclose his fathers ire and wrath unto David, 1.
regu. 20.
and as much as lay in him, excused him, and afterward comforted him.

Abiathars father being slain by the occasion of David, 1. regu. 22.
I am, says David, the cause of the death of all the souls of thy fathers
house. Abide with me, and fear not. For if any seek my soul, he shall seek
thine also, with me thou shall be in sauegarde.

David would not smite, nor lay his hands upon Saul his Lord and king. 1.
regu. 24.
Notwithstanding he was euel, and did persecu^e him, and yet if he had would,
he might twyse have slain him.

The harness bearer of Saul was a great sign and token of fidelitye, 1.
regu. 31.
and yet he did but indiscreetly, when that he, seeing his master was dead,
would live no longer, but fell upon his sweard, and died with him: what ought
we then to do for our Lord that was crucified for us?

The men and inhabitours of Iabes in Galaad, 1. regu. 31.
showed them selves faithful to Saul their Lord, notwythstandinge he was
evil and wicked, when they reverently buried him.

Urias the Hethite would not live in delight and pleasure, 2. regu. 11.
as long as his Lord Ioab labourd and was in warfare.

When the city of Rabbath was in ieopardy to be lost and taken, 2. regu. 12.
Ioab as long as he beseged it, sent for David to come thither to take the
city, that the honor of the victory might be given to his master, and not to
him self.

When Dauyd fled from Absolon, Ethai said unto him. As truly as God lives,
2. regu. 15.
in what place my Lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there
also will thy servant be.

David's men would not that he should go forth with them to battle. 2.
regu. 18.
Saying. Thou art compted to be worth ten thousand of us. Whereby it appears
that faithfully they loved him. And in another place. Thou shalt notte goo
out with us to battle, 2. regu. 21.
that thou quench not the light of Israel.

All Israel separated them selves from David, 2. regu. 20.
and followed Selon the son of Bochri. But the Jews cleaued unto their king
both faithfully and constantly.

Three robust and strong men, most faithfully defended David fightygne
against the Philistians, 1. Para. 11.
and brought him water out of the well of Bethelem, the which he greatly
desired.

Ioiada the hye priest, did exceeding faithfully with Ioas the son of Ioram
king of Judah. 4. regu. 11.
Notwithstanding that he afterward regarded it but slenderly.

Onias the bishop, and other priests did faithfully travel and labor, 2.
Match. 3.
to keep such things as widows and pepylles had deposed and given them to
keep.

Our Lord does commend the Mat. 25.
fidelite of those servants that increased the things delivered unto them.

Paul with great faithfulness procured 2. Cor. 9.
the gatherynge of men's alms to be done for the necessite of the poor in
Iewry.

Paul sent faithful and effectuous letters to Philemon for his fugitive
servant Onesimus. Philip. 1.


Certain of the chief of Asia, gave Paul discrete and faithful Counsel,
Act. 19.
desirynge him, that he would not prease nor come into the common hall.

Of quietness and illustration of the mind. Cap. xxvi.
AFter that Abraham went from Hur of the Chaldees. Genesis 12.13.15.18.
Our lord ap^eared sondrye times unto him, and visyted him with diverse
revelations.

Genesis 18.
Our Lord appeared unto Abraham in the plain of Mambre, as he sat in his tent
door in the heat of the day. The which may he expounded of a contemplative
man.

Genesis 24.
Isaac dwelt in the south country, and was gone out in his meditations or to
pray in the field.

Genesis 25.
Esau became a cunning hunter, and a tiller of the earth, but Jacob was a quiet
and a simple man, and dwelled in the tents.

Genesis 28.
Jacob departed from Bersabe to come to Haram, and purposynge to reast there in
a certain place, because the son was down, he took of the stones that were
in that place, and put them under his head, and laid him down and slept in
that same place, and he saw in a dream a ladder standinge upon the earth. etc

Moses kept the sheep of Ietro his father in law, Exo. 3.
and he drove the flock to the back side of the desert, and came to the
mountain of god, Horeb. And Our lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire.

Iethro Moses father in law saying him occupied from morninge unto even in
geuinge of judgment to the people he said unto him, Exo. 18.
Thou consumest and weriest thy self, and those that are with the with vain
and indiscreet labor. Be thou unto the people in those things that pertayne
unto god.

Our lord came down to the mount Sinay, Exo. 19.
and called Moses up to the top of the mountain, and there he reveled unto him
the judgments, the commandments, and the ceremonies the which he should
teach the people.

Our lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend.
And Moses was with our lord.40. days, and forty nights, and did neither
eat bread, nor drink water.

Our Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, get the up into this mountain, Deu. 32.
and from thence behold the land, which I give unto the children of Israel.

Samuel did sleep in the temple, and our Lord calde Samuel. 1. regu. 3.


When king David satte in his house, after that our Lord had given him rest
round abou^e from all his enemies, 2. regu. 7.
he said unto Nathan the Prophet. Thou seyste, that I dwell now in an house
of Cedarre trees, but the Ark of God, dwells within the curtain.

It was showed unto Helias that fled from the face of Iezabel, 3. regu. 19.
that our lord was not in a great spirit, nor in no co^motion, nor wind,
nor earthquake, but in a small still voice.

The mind of man must take his judgment by the sumilitude and likeness of
corporal things, or else it must be lifted up to god, in who^, what soever is
seen or thought delectable in any creature, is inseparable sound much
better. 4. regu. 3.
So that when the mynstrell played before Eliseus, the hand of Our lord came
upon him.

When Eliseus would pray deligentely for the Sunamites child that was
departed, 4. regu. 4.
he did it not openly before al men, but shut the door to the lad and him,
and prayed unto Our lord.

Sara Raguels daughter being rebuked and slaundred of on of her maidens, Tob.
3.
went into the innermost chamber of her house, and three days and three nights
she nether eat nor drank, but continued in prayer, and besought god with tears
that he would deliver her from that rebuke.

Judith perceiving her people to be streyted and in danger went into her
closet, Iudi. 9.
put on an heary smock, strawed ashes upon her head, and falling down before
our Lord cried unto him.

Queen Esther fearing the danger that was at hand, Esth. 14.
fled unto our lord. And when she had laid a way her glorius apparel, she
put on garments that served for syghinge and mourninge, and prayed thus unto
our Lord, help me desolate woman.

After the tribulations and perturbations which David sustained and suffered,
Psalm 54.
he said. Who shall give me wings like a dove? For then would I fly away, and
be at rest. Then he shows the manner how to come to these wings, and rest
saying. Lo, then would I get me away far of, and remain in the wilderness.

When Ezechiell was among, or in the mids of the prisoners, Eze. 1.
the hand of our Lord came upon him, and he saw a stormy wind come out of
the north.

When Daniell heard of the cruel sentence that was pronounced against the
wise men of Babylon, Dani. 2.
he went home, and the mysterye was showed unto him by a vision by night.

Dani. 9.
The Angel Gabriell said unto Daniell that prayde fervently. I am now come to
teach thee, and to make thee understand, that thou art a man greatly beloved.

I will stand upon my watch says habacuc, Haba. 2.
and shall fasten my joy upon my bulworke, to look and se, what shall be said
unto me, and what answer I should make him that reproved me.

And when the people were sent away, he went up into a mountain to pray
alone. Math. 14.
And when night was come, he was there him self alone. By the which thing he
gives the people an ensample to flee, and to seek for solitariousnes.

And zacharias went into the temple of our Lord, LuKe. 1.
and the whole multitude of the people were with out in prayer, while the
incense was a burning. And then there appeared unto him an Angel of our
Lord.

Martha was troubled and combred about much seruinge, Luke. 10.
but Mary syttyng at Gods feet, heard the word of God. And it is greatly to
be noted. that quyetnes, and the hearing of gods word should be preferde above
al religyons and devout ministry and service

John. 11.
When Jesus saw mary weep, and the Jews also wepinge which came with her, he
groned in the spirit, and wept, the which thing he did not, when Martha
spoke unto him.

Our lords disciples were wonderfullye illuminated and taught at the coming
of the holy ghost. Act. 2.


After the light from heaven shyned round a boute Saul, Act. 9.
he fell to the earth, and was made blind, the fasted and prayed by the space
of three days, and had many exellente revelations from Christ.

When Peter was lodged in Simo^s the Tanners house, Act. 10.
at a certain time he went into the highest place of the house to pray, to the
intent, that he, being far from the troublous people that were beneathe,
might give him self the more quyetlye to his prayers. Our Lord, Peter
being in a trance, showed unto him, that the heathen ought not to be
repelled from the predication of the gospel.

Paul was taken up into the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.
and hard secreate words, which no man can utter. romans 1.9.10.11.
His exceading great wisdom appears in his Epistles, Ephe. 1.2.
and principallye to the Romans. Col. 1.2.
To the Ephesyans. To the Collossyans. And also to the Hebrews, Heb. 1.


Our Lord disclosed unto blessed Saint Ihon, being sequestered from the
tumulte and consolatyon of the world, and banyshed into the I Will of Pathmos,
the celestial and heavenly works and deeds, as it appears in his revelations.

Of longanimity. Capit. xxxvii.
ABraham tarried many years, or ever he had any child by Sara, Genesis 21.
for he was an hundred year old, when his son Isaac was borne unto him.

From the first promise made unto Abraham, until he had sede were years 440.

Our Lord suffered Israel to be scourged and afflicted in Egypt a long time
and season. And afterward to be tempted and proved in wilderness the space of
40. years, or ever they came to the land of promise, as it appears through
out all the book of Exodus and Numery.

Iudi. 20
The children of Israel fightyng against the tribe of Benjamin, many against a
few, were twice ouerthrown and yet at the last they prevailed.

Job. 13.
Job being punyshed in body, deprived of al his children, laughed to scorn of
his friends, and spoiled of all his goods, did say. Lo, though he slaye me,
yet will I put my trust in him.

Tobyas elders and kinsfolks laughed him to scorn, which said unto him,
Tob. 2.
where is thy hope, for the which thou haste done alms, and buried the
dead?

But Tobias rebuked them, and spoke. Say not so, for we are the children of
holy men, and look for the life which God shall give unto them that never
turn their belefe from him.

When Susanna was condemned by the false testimony and witness of two judges,
Dani. 13.
it is thus written of her, That her heart had a sure trust in the Lord.

When one of those seven brethren was required of the tyrande, 2 Match. 7.
quyckely he put out his tongue, and constantly held forth his hands, and
spoke with a steadfaste fayeth. These have I of heaven.

Judas Machabeus sent unto Jerusalem two thousand dragmas of silver to be
offered there for the offenses and sins of the dead, 2. Match. 12.
iustelye thinking and relygyouslye of the resurrection.

There was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, Luke. 2.
And the same manne was just and godly, and looked for the consolation of
Israel.

Our Lord going and ascending up into heaven commanded his disciples that
they should not depart from Jerusalem, Act. 1.
but to wait for the promise of the father.

When Paul perceived that the one part were Saduces, Act. 23.
and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the counsel: Men and brethren, I am
a Pharisy, the son of a Pharisye: Of the hope and resurrection from death, I
am judged.

The Apostle does monishe Timothe, to charge them which are rich, 1. Timo. 6.
that they be not use minded, nor trust in uncertain richesse, but in the
living God.

Of the fear of God. Capi. xxxviii.
Genesis 3.
Until the time that our beatitude and salvation be confirmed and stablished,
there can be no security nor sauegarde: for the angels in heaven, and our first
parents in paradise did trespass.

Lot even among those that were most wicked, Genesis 19.
was good: and yet departing from Sodom with his two daughters, upon the
mountaigne he sinned.

The want and lack of the fear of God, Genesis 20.
is the cause of sin, and therefore Abraham said unto Abimelech, I thought
with my self, saying. Parauenture the fear of God is not in this place, and
they shall slaye me.

The midwiues feared God, and he made them houses. Exo. 1.


Our Lords will was to make the children of Israel sore afraid, and therefore
he gave them his law with thunder, Exo. 20.
fire, lightnyng, noise of the trumpe, smoking mountain, and other signs most
terrible.

A man ought not to trust in the honesty of his parents, 1. regu. 8.
for Abraham had many evil children, and but one good. Samuel had two,
and both naughts, David had many that were evil. Solomon had one evil son and
folish, and there are found many examples of other.

After the children of Israel were gone over the red sea, Exo. 14
and that Pharaos host was drowned, the people feared the Lord, and believed
our lord and his servant Moses.

Abdias which was the governor of Achabs house, 3. regu. 8
feared greatly the God of Israel. For when Iezabel destroyed the prophets of
our Lord, he took an hundred prophets, and hyd them, fifty men in one cave,
and fifty in an other, and provided bread and water for them.

The men which the king of Babylon sent to inhabit Samaria feared not God, 4.
reg. 17
and therefore our Lord sent Lions among them, the which destroyed and slew
them.

Iosaphat set judges thorowout all the cities of Judah, 2. Para. 19
commanding the^ above al other things, that the fear of God should be with
them, and to do al thing with diligence. For there is no unrighteousness with the
Lord our God.

Tob. 1.2.
The elder Tobias taught his son from his youth up, to fear God, and to
refrain from all sin, and caused those that feared God to be caulde to dine
and to be meary with him. And he fearing God more then the king, took the
bodies of the slain, and buried them.

And Sara Raguels daughter, in her oration and prayer to our Lord, Tob. 3.
confessed, saying. An husband have I consented to take, not for my pleasure,
but in thy fear,

The younger Tobias and his friends with the fear of our Lord, Tob. 9.
held the feast of the marriage.

Judith was a widow of a very good report with every one, Judith. 8.
for she feared our Lord greatly, and there was no body that spoke an evil
word of her.

Among al other things that Job is commended for, Job. 1.2.
the fear of God is most specially touched. And therefore he said, I have ever
feared God, as the swelling waves and floudes.

This is specially spoken of a strong woman, Job. 31.
a woman that fears our lord, is worthy to be praised.

When Eleazarus was tormented and pressed with plages, 2. Match. 6.
and sore martyrdom, he said: Thou o Lord know that whereas I might be
delivered from death, I suffer these sore pains of my body: but in my mind I
am well content to suffer them because I fear thee.

A great tempest being moved in the sea, Jonas. 1.
the shypmen, in whose company was Jonas, cast him into the sea, and the sea
left ragyng, and the men feared our Lord exceadynglye, doing sacrifices and
making vows unto our lord,

If any lord ought to be feared, because he may give unto man much good, a
great deal more should God be feared because he can give the hiest and
greatest goodness of all. For Thobias says. Tobi. 4.
My son, he not afraid: we shall have great good, if we fear God. And
because that god can give that, Mat. 10.
that is euyil also, Christ does say, fear him, which is able to destroy
both soul and body into hell.

If the servant unto whom a talent was committed, Luke. 19.
was greuouslye punished because he did not multipli and increase the same, but
kept it and brought it again bound in a napkin: what shall become of him, that
does wast and spend all that ever he has luxuriously, and as much as lies in
him, does contrary and against our Lord?

They shallbe greuouslye punyshed that have done wickedly: And so it apeareth
that they shallbe confounded that have not done the works of mercy. Mat. 25.
For it shall be thus said unto them depart from hence ye cursed, into
everlasting fire.

Simeon was a just man and a fearful, and looked for the redemption and
consolation of Israel. Luke. 2.


And the fearful and devout men dressed Steven that was stoned to death by
the Jews, Act. 8.
and made great lamentacion over him.

It is written that the church or congregations after Paul's conuersyon, was
edyfied, and walked in the fear of our Lord, and was repleanished by the
comfort of the holy ghost.

By the occasion of Cornelius that feared God, Act. 10.
Peter said. In all people, he that fears god, and works rightousnesse, is
accepted with him.

Of the fear, where with the evil fear those that be good. Capi. xxxix.
ABimelech said unto Abraham. God is with the in all that thou do. Genesis 21
And therefore swear unto me even here by God, that thou will uot hurt me.

The Egiptians that followed the children of Israel passing by the midst of
the sea, Exo. 14
said. Let us fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord fyghteth for them
against the Egyptyans.

Saul considering that our Lord was with David, 1. reg. 18
began to fear him.

The captain over fifty that came the third time to Hely, 4. reg. 1.
spoke reuerentlye unto him, and because the other two did not so, they were
consumed with fire that came down from heaven.

It happened that when the wall of Jerusalem was finyshed, 2. Esd. 6.
that all the hethen which were there about were afraid.

All the heathen on every side were afraid of Judas and his brethren: 1. Match.
3.
so that the rumoure of his name came unto the king.

Their adversaries heard that Ionathas was ready with his men to the
battle, 1. Match. 10.
they feared, and were afraid in their hearts.

After that Lisias was ouerthrone be Judas Machabeus, 2. Match. 11.
he was wyllinge to make peace with him, and promised, that he would consent
to all things which were reasonable, even as Judas would.

Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just manne, Mar. 6.
and an holy: and he kept him.

After the terrible death of Ananias and Saphira, the disciples were all
together in Salamons porche. And no man durst ioyn him self to them, Act. 5.
but yet the people magnified them.

When Paul and Silas were both in prisone together, Act. 16.
and their feet made fast in the stocks: suddenly there was a great
earthquake. The keeper of the prison being afraid, fell down at the fete of
Paul and Silas, and said Sirs what must I do to be saved?

Of the love of god. Capi. xl.
WHen God should give the law unto Moses, he said unto him, Exo. 20.
I am thy lord god, showing mercy unto those that love me, and keep my
commandments.

The chefest of all the commandments is the love of god. Deu. 6.
For Moses said after he had repeated the commandments unto the people. Thou
shall love the lord thy god, with all thine heart. etc.

Moses willinge specially to printe in the peoples mind the fear and love of
god: Deu. 10.
said, and now Israel, what does the lord thy god require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy god, and to walk in all his ways, to love him, and to
serve the lord thy god, with all thine heart. etc.

Joshua being old, and stryken in years, calde all the people of Jerusalem
unto him, Joshua. 13.13
and wareninge them of many things, among all other he said. Take heed most
deligentlye of this that ye love your lord god.

It is written of David, that with his whole heart he did praise our lord, and
loved god that made him: Eccle. 47.
ye and be him self said, a lord that art my fortitude and strength, I
will love the.

The Apostle Paul has given this sentence. Psalm. 17.
If any manne love not our lord Jesus Christ, the same be cursed. For our
lord that shall revenge things shall come.

In as much as love is a virtue that moves a man to christ wards. 1. Cor. 16,
Paul ^adde great Love, the which was crucified unto Christ. And it may be
noted, that Christ was his wisdom. Nether showed I my self that I knew any
thing among you, 1. Cor. 2.
save Jesus Christ, even the same that was crucified.

And his substance. I have counted (says Paul) all things loss, Philip. 3.
and do judge them but vile, that I may win Christ.

And his justice. He is made unto us our wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
our Justice, our sanctification, and our redemption.

It may be said that Christ spoke in Paul. 2. Cor. 13.
Seek ye experience of Christ which speaks in me?

Also Christ did work by Paul, I dare not speak of any of those things, Romans
15.
which christ has not wrought by me.

Again Christ did live in Paul. I live, yet now not I, but Christ lives in
me. Gala. 2.
And again he says, Christ is to me life. Philip. 1.


Item Christ does triumph in him. Thanks be to god, which always gives us
the victory in Christ 2. Cor. 2.


He may also be called Christ's servant. Paul the servant of Jesus Christ.

And the Apostle of Christ. rom^. 1.
Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ.

And the legate or messenger of god Now then are we messengers in the room of
Christ, 2. Cor. 1.
2. Cor. 5.
even as though God did exhort you through us, so pray we you in Christ's
stead, that ye be reconciled unto God.

And he was Gods helper. We are gods helpers or laborers.

And Gods champio^. 1. Cor. 3.
I have fought a good fight. And again. So fight I, not as one that beats
the air. 2 timothy 4.
And again. 1. Cor. 9.
If I have foughten with beasts after the manner of men. 1. Cor. 15.


Item a runner. I so run, not as at an uncertain thing. 1. Cor. 9.


And a special follower. Be ye folowers of me, 1 Cor. 1^.
as I am the follower of Christ.

Saint. John says. Let us therefore love god, for he loved us first. 1. John 4.


Of the love that man ought to have to his neighbor. Cap. xli.
CAyne was grievously reprehended of our Lord, Genesis 4.
and punished because he did wickedly against his brother, and said that he
was not his brothers keeper.

Note how diligently and carefully Abraham prayde our lord, Genesis 18.
that he would spare the Sodomites, the which thing was a great sign and
token of love.

Moses had so great dilection and love to his neighbors, exodi. 32.
which were his subjects, that in his prayer to God, he said, either forgive
them their sin, or wype me out of thy book.

Moses did wyshe in his prayer, that our Lords people could prophecy, Nume.
11.
notwithstanding that his honor should seem to be deminished thereby.

Moses would have no greater dominion then he had, Nume. 14.
and yet our lord promised him it. Such was his love toward his neighbors
whom he ruled.

Iudi. 21.
The children of Israel, after the occision and death of the children of
Benjamin, wept very sore, and said. O lord wherefore is this evil chaunsed in
Israel?

The soul of Ionathas was knyt with the soul of David, 1. regu. 18.
and Ionathas loved him, as his own soul.

David showed that he loved his enemy, 2. reg. 1.3.
when he mourned for Saul, and his friend, when he wept for Ionathas and Abner.

David likewise bewailed the death of Absolon his son, 2. regu. 18
although he was evil, and his adversary.

Nehemias does show his great love toward the children of transmigratio^,
esdra. 2. per totum.
as it appears by the things that he did for them.

Because Tobias had showed the works of charity to many, Tobi. 1.
many did love him, and therefore when he was commanded by the king to be
slain, he was hiden and not found.

Our LORD would that we should have such love to our neighbors, Mat. 18.
that he said unto Peter, that he should not forgive his brother that sins
against him, till seven times but seventy times seven times.

The Samaritane is much extolde and lauded for the great love and charity that
he had to his neighbor. Lu. 10.
For coming unto him being half dead, he was moved with pytye and
compassion, he bound up his wou^des and poured in oil, and wine.

It is declared that S. Steven had a marvelous great love to his neighbors,
the which praid more devoutly for those that stoned him to death, Act. 7.
than for him self. For them he kneled down, and cried with a loud voice.
But for him self he spoke thus simplye, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

Paul did love his neighbors inestimablye, for he was to them as a mother
that is in travel. Gala. 4.
For he said unto the Galathians. My little children, of whom I travel in
birth again.

Item Paul is to his neighbor as a father that corrects. 1. Cor. 4.
In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel And a little after. Shall
I com unto you with a rod?

And to the Thessalonians. Ye are witnesses how that we have prayed 1. These. 2
you and comforted you as a father does unto his children. And as a nourse ye
chearysheth, and flattereth her children. And in a another place. Even as to
babes in Christ, 1. Corin. 3
I gave you milk to drink.

And as a master and a Doctor instructing. I am appointed a preacher, 2. Timo. 1
and Apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles in faith and veri^y.

And as a laboring and a helpyng brother. Phil. 4.1.
My brethren dearly beloved and longed for, I beseech German my yoke fellow.
And in a another place I have you the companyons of my joy, in the defendinge
and stablyshyng of the Gospel. And again, we be not Lords over your faith, 2.
Corin. 1.
but are helpers of your joy.

And as it were a Legate to those yt be reconciled. 2. Cor^n. 5.
Now are we messe^gers in the room of Christ.

And Apostle bringing good tidinges, ye know that I would keep back nothing yt
was profitable unto you, Act. 20.
but to show you and teach you openly, and throughout every house. And in a
another place, Act. 17.
whom ye ignorauntlye worship, him show I unto you.

1. Corin. 3
And as a builder building. As a wise builder have I laid the foundatyon.

And yet nevertheless it may be said that Paul by other ways and means
showed him self to be a most fervent lover of his neighbors. Because he did
many things for them. For he either sustained them, or e^sse he gave them, and
procured for the power that he had not to give them, of those that had it, and
Paul him self does testify that he counseled and did for the vtility and
profit of his neyghbors, saying. Act. 20.
These hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with
me. For it is more blessed to give, then to receive: and al though it was a
work of supererogation, considring he might have received somewhat of them, yet
he did it to spare those he preached unto. I am ready says he, 2. Corin. 12
to come unto you, and yet will I not be chargeable unto you for I seek not
yours, but you. Secondarely he took nothing, that he might cut of from the
Pseudapostles the occasion of gloryfying. In all things I kept my self so that
I should not be chargeable to any man, 2. Cor. 11.
and so will I keep my self. What I do, that will I do, to cut away occasyon
from them, which desire occasion, that they might be found like unto us, in
that wherein they rejoice. And again he procured that thereby he should have
the greater reward. We have not used this power to receive any reward of you.
1. Cor. 9.
What is my reward then. Uerely that when I preach the Gospel, I make the
Gospel of Christ fre. Paul procured also of the congregatyon of Achaia, to
dystrybute and give to the pore that were in Iewry, and therefore he caused
collectyons, 1. Cor. 16. 2. Cor. 9.
to be gathered, and induced the faithful effectuously to the same. Item he
that sows lytle^ shall reap little.

And he distributed unto his neighbors the word of God, wherewith he
plentifullye abounded. Ye and gave him self to be profitable unto his, we
would have dealte unto you not the gospel only, but also our own souls
because ye were dear unto us. ii. These. ii
And again he says, ii. Cor. xii.
I will very gladlye bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls.

Furthermore Paul even with his own body did marvelous things to convert his
neighbors to the faith and to spiritual health by preaching, disputing, and
iournyinge from Damasco to Arabia and Jerusalem, and to Antioche. And then by
the commandment of the holy ghost, with Barnabas he went from Antioche to
Cipers, and from thence they sailed by Cicill, and came to Persida. Iconium,
Lycaoniam, and ordained prestes and elders in every congregation. And after
that they had done much good, they returned to Antioche. Afterward Paul
purposing to visit his brethren unto whom he had preached the word of god, he
took Sila with him, and went to Siria and Cilicia, and from thence to Phrygia
and Galatia, and came to Mysia, and after that being called, he sailed into
Macedonia. And when he had done much good at Thessalonia, and in many other
cities of that regyon, he went to Athens, and there he disputed with certain
curious Philosophers. And from thence he went to Corinthum, and there he
converted much people to our Lord. And then he took his iourny to Ephesus, and
entered in to the sinagoge and dysputed with the Jews. And from thence he went
to Cesaria, Act. xvii.
and from Cesaria he came to Antioche, and after he had tarried there a certain
time, he took his iourny toward the country of Galatia and Phrigia, and
confirmed and stablished all the disciples. And when he had wandered over all the
hye parts of the country, he came again to Ephesus, and tarried there two
year, disputing of the kingdom of God, and did so much, that all they that
dwelte in Asia both heathen and Jews did hear the word of God. From thence
he returned by Macedonia, Troyade and Miletum, and passing by many other
cities and Isles, he came to Tire and from Tire he took his journey by
Ptolomaidem, and Cesaria, and came from thence to Jerusalem. And there the
Jews took him, drew him, bet him, and falsely accused him, before diverse
judges, and manifestlye grieved, was constraind to appele unto Caesar He was
delivered unto the captain, and after the ship was broken, and many other
pearyls, he being bound with chains, came to Rome, and there being given to
preaching and teaching, purposed to go into Spain. Behold now how he loved
those, for whose sakes he suffered such and so many pains and pearils. And
Paul says, we do all things dearly beloved for your edifying. ii. Cor. xii.


Also the signs of love appear, when a man will sustain and suffer that is
grievous for his friends sake. For it is written. Thou shall not be ashamed to
salute or defend thy fre^d: and if any evil or hurt chance unto the through
him, Eccle. 12
sustain and bear it.

Out of these forsaide words, it is open, that Paul suffered wonderful
things for his neighbors profits. 2. Timo. 2.
I suffer (says Paul) all things for the electes sakes, that they might
also obtain saluatyon. Of this look in the title of tribulation, for there
thou shall find many things as touching this matter.

It appears by S. Ihons words, that he had great love to his neighbors.
For his mouth spoke, of the haboundance of his heart, when that he so often
repeated charity, as it apeareth in his first Epistle. Capit. iii.iiii.

Of Envy. Capitu. xlii.
Through envy of the devil, Sapi. 2.
came death into the world, for when he saw that man was in a happy and good
estate, and that he might ascend to that he fell from, he tempted man, and
overcame him.

Cain moved with envy, slew his brother Abell, Genesis 4.
because he saw that God accepted his brothers gifts, and not his.

It is written of Isaac, that GOD blessed him, Genesis 26
and that he waxed rych. And therefore the Palestines enuyed him. And so it
appears, that prosperity occasyonally does cause the evil to hate and to envy
many.

Rachel that was baren, envied her sister which was full of children. Genesis 30.
Behold how that envy spares not even those that are nigh of kin.

Iosephes brethren did most cruelly hate him, Genesis 37.
because they saw that their father loved him more then all his brethren, and
because of his dremes that he rehearsed unto them, and note what mischefe came
of it.

When that two men prophesied in the host, Nume. 11.
Iosue as though he enuyed the thing, said: master Moses forbid them. And he
said, enuyest thou for my sake? would God that all our Lords people could
prophecye, Nume. 11.
and that our Lord would put his spirit upon them.

Mary Moses sister, and Aaron spoke against Moses, Nume. 12^
saying, our Lord has not only spoken by Moses. Has he not spoken also
by us? whereby it appears that the envious spares another friend, nor kinsman.
For Moses was their brother, and through him they had received great honor.

After that the Philistian was slain the women sange. Saul has slain his
thousand, 1. regu. 18.
and David his ten thousand. And Saul was exceading wroth, and the saying
dyspleased him.

And when Achitophell saw that they did not after his counsel, but after the
counsel of Chusai, 2. regu. 17.
he went home to his own house, and hanged him self.

As the children of Judah after their return from Babylon, 1. Esd. 4.
were building of our Lords temple, the people that dwelt about them were very
sorry therefore, and diverse and many ways did let them.

Samasbalath and Tobias heard say, 2. esd. 2
that there was come a man which sought the wealth of the children of
Israel, and it grieved them very sore.

Daniel did excel all the princes and great estates of the realm. Dani. 6.
And therefore they sought an occasion to draw him out of the kings favor
and presence.

Alchinus perceiving the love that was betwixt Judas and Nicanor: 2. Match. 14
came to Demetrius, and told him that Nicanor had taken strange matters in
hand, and had ordained Judas the kings enemy, to be the kings successor.

When the chief priests and Scribes saw the wonders that our Lord did, Mat.
21.
and the children cryinge hosanna to the son of David, they dysdained.

The brother of the prodigal son, Luke. 15.
hearing of the feast that his father made for his youngest brother that was
returned home, disdained, and would not go in.

Envy was very far from John the Baptist. John. 3.
For when his disciples came unto him saying, that Christ did baptize, and all
men come to him. He answered. The friend of the bridegroom. Which stands and
hears him, reioyseth greatly because of the brydegromes voice. This my joy
therefore is fulfilled. He must increase But I must decrease.

Some of the Jews that had seen our Lord revive Lazarus, John. 11.
went their ways to the Pharisees, and said. What do ye? whereupon the hie
preastes and the pharisees gathered a counsel.

The hye preastes and pharisees even through envy committed so cruel a deed,
Mat. 27.
as to crucify our lord, for Pilate said that he knew that for envy the hie
priests had delivered him, that is the son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ.

As Peter and Ihon spoke unto the people, Act. 4.
the priests and the rulers, and the Saduces came upon them, taking it
greuouslye that they taught the people.

Then the chief priest rose up, and all they that were with him, Act. 5.
saying the signs that Peter did, they were full of indignation and envy, and
laid hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.

When the Jews heard Steven speak, Act. 6.7.
their hearts claue a sunder, and they gnashed with their tethe, being right
heavy and sad, that they could not resist the wisdom, and the sprite which
spoke in him.

The whole city almost came together, to hear the word of God, Act. 13.
that Paul and Barnabas preached. But when the Jews saw the people, they were
full of indignation and envy. Many of the Thessalonians, Jews, and Greeks,
and not a few of the noble and worshipful women believed but the disdainful
and envious Jews, Act. 17.
^^oued and stirred up the city against them.

Of brotherly reprehention. Capi. xliii.
TO reprehe^d or rebuke a neighbor, is a work of mercy. Genesis 11.
And therefore Abraham after he had sworn to Abimelech that he would be
merciful unto him, by and by there follows, that he rebuked Abymelech,

Abraham did charitably and gentlye quench and a pese the strife that was
betwixt his herdmen, Genesis 13.
and the herdmen of his nephew Lot.

Lot did swetelye and gentlelye reprehend the Sodomites, Genesis 19.
notwithstanding they listened not unto him.

Ruben and Judah did so temper the fury of their brethren, Genesis 37.
that they slew not Joseph.

Moses rebuked him that did wrong to the Hebrew very charitably, Exo. 2.
but he took it il, and spoke iniuriouslye^ saying. Will thou kill me, as thou
kildst the Egiptian?

Iethro perceiving that the people tarried to be judged by Moses, said. It is
not well that thou doste, Exodus 18.
thou shall vainly and folishly consume thy self. And note, how so notable a
man did harken, ye and follow the admonition of a Heathen.

Phinehes the son of Eleazar, and the other messengers, Iosu. 32.
did discretely reprove their brethren that builded an aultare to the shame and
rebuke of the children of Israel, and they were very glad to do satisfaction.

The children of Israel sent messengers through out all the tribe of
Benjamin, Iudi. 20.
saying. What wickedness is this that is happened among you? Now therefore
deliver us those men that has done that wicked deed.

Ionathas reprehended his father Saul because that he wrongfullye persecuted
David, 1. regu. 19.
and at the beginning he somewhat did temper and debate his malice.

Abigaill purposing to reprove her husband for his churlyshnesse that he showed
unto Dauiddes messengers, ^. regu. 25.
would not by and by after dynner tell him, but tarried the aportunite of time
until the morrow day, and then in the morning when he had digested the wine
that was within him, she told him.

Abner took Asahel up right well, because he persecuted him so near. 2. regu.
2.
But he distained to hear him, and therefore he was slain.

Note how discretly Nathan the prophet rebuked david after he had committed
aduoutrye and murder. 2. regu. 11.
He said not angerlie thou haste done wickedlye, but with an apt and a mete
similitude, he intraped him by the words of his own mouth.

Helias rebuked the people most louyngly, saying. 3. regu. 18.
How long halt ye between two opinions? if our lord be god, follow him.

There was a certain man of the children of the prophets, 3. regu. 20.
that went about to reprehende Achab the king of Israel, and put a parable
unto him, by the which he knew his fawte.

4. regu. 3.
Elizeus said freely to Ioram king of I^rael, being environed with his host, if
it were not, that I regard the presence of Iosaphat, I would not look toward
the, nor yet se the.

The priests withstode Ozias the king of Judah that would have burnt incense,
2. Para. 26.
and said. It is not thy office to burn incense unto our Lord, but to the
priests the children of Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense.

Esdras with a loud voice rebuked the children of transmigratyon, 1. Esd. 9.10
that contrary to the law married strangers.

Nehemias hearing the clamoures of the people that were ouercharged by the
rich, 2. Esdra. 5.
rebuked the counselors and rulers, and said unto them. Every one of you is
to chargeable unto his brother. He does the like because that many of them
bearing of burde^s did profane and break the Saboth day.

Tobi. 2.
Tobias elders and kinsfolks laughed him to scorn, but he rebuked the^,
saying. Say not so, for we are the children of holy men, and look for the
life, which God shall give unto them that never turn their belefe from him.

When Judith heard the mind and purpose of her citizens, Iudi. 8.
that they after the fifte day would give up the city unto the Assirians: she
reprehended and reproved them with faithful and discreate Communicatyon and
words.

Daniel did very discretely reprove king Balthazar by the example of his
father. Dani. 5.
And note how patiently the king hard him, notwithstanding, He spoke against
him, and how that he afterward did magnify and honor him.

And Ihon the Baptist spoke with a marvelous feruentnes, Mat. 3.
to the Pharisees and Saduces. O^ generation of vipers, who has taught you to
flee from the vengaunce to come.

Ihon said to Herod that committed aduoutrye with Herodiada his brothers Mat.
14.
wife. It is not lawefull for the to have her.

Peter indiscreetly, although^ yet louyngelye, Mat. 16.
did rebuke ^ure lord, saying, that he should suffer many things of the
elders, and hye preastes, but our lord answered him hardely again, saying.
Go after me Satan.

Our lord gave Peter a true and a certain rule of brotherely reprehention.
Mat. 18.
If thy brother trespase against thee, go and tell him his fault between him
and thee alone,

One of the thieves which were hanged rayled and blasphemed our lord Jesus.
Luke. 23.
But the other answered, and rebuked him saying. Feareste thou not god, etc.
we receive according to our deeds.

The man that was borne blind, and illuminated of god, John. 9.
did reprove and overcome the pharisees Even very well, saying. This is a
maruelus thing, that ye wotte not from whence he is, and yet he has opened
mine eyes. Sense the woorlde began was it not heard, that any man opened the
eyes of on that was borne blind. If this man were not of god, he could have
done nothing.

Peter perceiving certain Jews to marvel, Act. 2.
and to laughe the Dysciples to scorn, did boldly and discretelye rebuke them,
and instruct them, and converted them to the faith. The like did chance,
after that Peter had healed the haulte. Act. 3.
For he showed the^ their fautes, and somewhat he excused them, and spoke many
sweet words unto them, so that 5000. men were converted.

Peter rebuked Ananias and Saphira his wife very sore, Act. 5.
because they defrauded and kept away part of the price of a field or
possession that they had sold, and brought a certain part, and laid it
at the Apostles feet.

Steven being with the Jews in counsel, Act. 7.
did boldly reprehend them, saying among other things.

O ye stiff necked, and of vncyrcumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted:

Paul setting his ^ies on Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 13.
that sought to turn the ruler away from the faith, said unto him. O full of
all subtelty and disceitfulnesse the child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to peruerte the straight ways of the Lord?

Peter terriblye reprehended and rebuked Simon Magus that offered money for ye
gift of God, Act. 8.
saying. Thy money pearish with thee.

Paul does reprove with a marvelous discretion the Romans which were
converted of the Gentiles and Jews, and with a proud commotion would have
preferde them selves above other. He declares that they have both sinned,
and that they have n^ade of the glorious mercy of GOD. For the Gentyles were
transgressors of the law of nature, and the Jews of Moses law. Roma. 2.
For we have already proved says he, how that both Jews and Gentiles are
under sin.

Paul does rebuke the Corinthians specially of this, because they seemed to
be divided among them selves for one says, 1. Cor. 3.5.6.11.15.
I am of Appollo, and another of Cepha. And again, because they diss^mbled, and
winked at the fornicator that being among them kept his mother in law. And
because they went to law for seculer busynesses before the Hethen. And he
reproves them, as touching the receite of the holy Communion. And rebukes
them as concerning their error of the resurrection of the deed. And chefely
he reproves them because they sustained and suffered many grievous things of
the false prophets, nor had not him in such reverence as they should have had,
2. Cor. 11.
ye suffer, says he, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you,
if a man take, if a man exalte him self, if a man smite you on the face. And
again he says, I ought to have been commended of you. 2. Cor. 12.
For in nothing was I inferior to the chief Apostles.

Paul rebuked the Galathia^s sharply and feruentlye, Gala. 3.
because that they, after they had received the truth and verity of the gospel,
would return to circumcision, and to the observations of the law. O ye folishe
Galathyans, says he, who has bewitched you, yt ye should not believe the truth?

Paul hard say that certain of the Thessalonians walked vnquietlye and
inordinatly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
workinge not at all, but being curious, and busybodyes. And therefore he
commanded them to be rebuked.

Of the compassion that man should have to his neighbor. Ca. xliiii.
WHen Abraham heard that Lot his brothers son was taken, Genesis 14.
he spedely and manly succourd and recovered him.

Ruben and Judas wythstode their brethren that would have slain Joseph. And
although they brought him not to his father: Genesis 37.
yet by that menes he was the more gentlelye handled.

Gedeon having pity and compassion upon those that followed him, ^udi. 8.
asked and prepared bread for them.

Although the children of Benjamin Iudi. 21.
had most grievously offended the children of Israel, yet because they were
destroyed, they liftinge up their voices, wept very sore.

Samuri mourned for Saul, notwithstanding he knew that God had rejected and
forsakened him. 1. regu. 15.


David having compassyo^ on those that were weary to follow and fight, 1. regu.
30.
appointed, that as his part is that goes down and fyghteth, so should his
part be that tarieth by the stuff that it might be parted a like.

David was heavy for the death of Absolon, 2. regu. 18.
although he had greatly offended him. But David knew that in soul he was
damned.

Helias took the woman's sharp words very gentely, 3. regu. 17.
and having compassion for the the sorrow she took for the death of her
son, he prayede effectuously.

When Iezabell had slain and destroyed the Prophets of our Lord. 3. regu.
18.
Abdias hyd a hundred of them, and fed them for a long season.

Eliseus had compassion and pity on the wydow that was bedetted, 4. regu. 4.
and increased the little oil that she had.

We should not alonely have compassion on our neighbors for the euylles that
are present, 4. regu. 8.
but also for those that are to come. And therefore Eliseus lookynge upon Azael,
that should do evil things to the children of Israel, did weep.

After that the children of Israel had taken of the people of Judah two
thousand women and children, 2. Para. ^8.
they spared them, and sent them home again well clothed and refresshed.

Nehemias hearing of the miserable estate of the city of Jerusalem, 2. Esd.
1.2.
wep^e many a day, and at the last he found both counsel, and good help.

When Sennacherib reigned, which hated the children of Israel. Tob. 1.
Tobias went dailye throweoute all his kindred, and comforted them, he fed
the hungry, clothed the naked, and buried the dead and that deligently.

Job had great compassion upon his neighbors. Job. 19.
The which said. The Ear that hears me shall bless me, for I delivered the
poor when he cried, and so did I the fatherles, and him that had none to
healpe him, the blessinge of the pupyl came upon me, and I comforted the
wydowes heart.

When queen Esther heard of the cruel sentence that was given against her
people, Esth. 7.
she took the matter no other wise, but although she had been one of them,
notwithstanding that she, being the kings most well-beloved spowse, was in
securite and safeguard for all that sentence.

When Jobs three friends heard of all the trouble that happened unto him, Job.
2.
they came to comfort him, but in as much as they could not understand the
cause of his affliction, they were afterward a burden unto him.

Esd. 21.
We should not only have compassion on the just being in affliction and
trouble, but also upon the synful and unjust. And therefore Esaias says, My
loins for the destruction of Babylon are filled with sorrow:. Heaviness has
taken hold upon me, as the panges of a woman that is trauaylinge.

Esaye saying in sprite the calamite that should come or chance unto his
people, Esd. 22.
said. Get ye hence. I will weep and make bitter lamentation. Labur not, for
ye shall not be hable to comfort me because of the destrucction of the
daughter of my people.

A bemelech the morian being sorry that Ieremye the prophet was cast into the
lake or dongyonne where their was no water butte mire, Iere. 38.
procured the matter so with the king, that he was drawene out.

After that Baruche had written the thretning words at the mouth of Jeremy,
Iere. 45.43
he said, woe is me for our lord has given me sorrow upon sorrow. And yet
the people said, that Baruch had provoked Ieremye against them, that they
might be delivered into the hands of the Caldees.

When our lord had disclosed unto Ezechiel the sins that the people had
committed, Eze. 3.9.
and the pains that they should suffer. He was heavy, and full of sorrow.

King Darius knowinge that Daniel was cast into the lake of Lions, Dani. 6.
even for very heaviness went to bed supperlesse, neither was there any meat
brought before him. And furtheremoore his sleep faylded him.

Onias the preaste was in great, heaviness when he saw that the temple should
be spoiled by Heliodorus, 2. Match. 3.
and that such things as was laid there be widows and pupilles should be be
taken and carried away.

The noble king Antiochus, though he was even specially evil, 2. match. 4.
yet when he heard that Onias the hye priest was wrongfully put to death,
being moved with mercy, it pitied him, and he wept, remembering his sobernes,
and manerly behaueour.

Our Lords disciples came unto him, Mat. 15.
and besought him for the woman of Chanane, saying. Lord send her away, for
she cries after us.

Our Lord, against those that will not have pyttie of their neighbor, mat.
18.
and forgive him from the heart, does induce the parable of the ungracious
servant, to whom he forgave a thousand talentes, and yet would not forgive
his fellow an hundred pence. And that no man does gladly bear with his
neighbor, nor has mercy or compassyon on them, is well proved, mat. 25.
because that at the latter judgment, there shall be a special disputacion of
the works of mercy.

And when our Lord saw that the wydowe wept, whose son was carried out
dead. He had compassyon on her, Lu. 7.
and said unto her, weep not, and he revived her son that was dead.

Our Lord was moved with mercy toward the indigent and nedye people. mat. 14
For they followed him on foot in the deserte.

The Samaritane was moved and had compassion on the wounded. Lu. 10
He bound up his wounds, and poured in oil and wine, and made provision for
him, and caused him to have meat.

Our Lord beholding the city of Jerusalem, Lu. 19.
and considering the euyls that should afterward chance unto it wept on it,
saying. If thou had known. etc.

When Jesus saw Marye weep, and the Jews also weeping which came with her,
Iho. 11.
he groned in the spirit, and was troubled in him self, and wept.

Our Savior even hangyng upon the cross, was careful for his mother, whom
he knew to be crucified and tormented in soul. Woman said he, behold thy
son, poynting unto John.

When Peter was come to Ioppa, and saw the wydowes weeping for the death of
Tabitha, Act. 9.
whichie made them cootes and garments, he kneled down and prayde, and when
he had called her, he showed her alive to the saynctes and wydowes.

When Paul was at Athens, his sprete was moved in him, Act. 17.
when he saw the city given to worshipping of Idolles.

The barbarous and strange people showed Paul and his fellows no little
kyndnes: Act. 27.
for they kyndled a fire, and refreshed them every one, because of the present
rain and cold And they that in the time of winter escaped out of the broken
ship had good need of it for some did swymme to land, and some were carried
on boordes, and on broken pieces, of the ship.

Paul sorowed his brethren and kynsmen that perished with so great anxiete of
sprite, Roma. 9.
that he said, I have great heuines, and contynuall sorrow in my heart: for I
have wyshed my self to be cursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen as
pertaining to the flesh.

And to the Galathians. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again.
Gala. 4.


Of hospitalyte. Capi. xlv.
NOte. How spedely, and how Ioyfullye Abraham received Angels into his
house. Genesis 18.
And how he caused all things necessary to be prepared for pylgrimes.

Mark also: how Lot honored the Angels that past by. Genesis 19.
Which he took to be men. He praide them instantly, and offering them most
gently all necessary things, defended his house, as he could, against those
that violently would have entered into it.

Rebecca seemed to be pressed and redye to hospytalyte, Genesis 24.
the which said unto Abraham's servant. We have litter, hay and prouinder
enough, and also fair room to lodge in. And anon after Laban said unto him, I
have dressed the house, and made roum for thy camels.

Iethro without any great prayer received Moses being a stranger into his
lodging. Exo. 2.
Afterward he honored his daughter and his Nephews magnificently.

Moses says. Our Lord god loves the stranger, Deuteronomy. 10.
and gives him fode and raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger, for ye were
strangers your selves in the land of Egypt.

Rachab the harlot lodged the spies sent by Joshua most liberally, Iosu. 2.
and she was helped and delivered most faithfully.

The Leuite found no man in all Gabaa Benjamin, Iudi. 19.
that would take him to lodging, but one old man that came from his work.

Helias revived the woman's son that sustained and lodged him. 3. regu. 17.


The Sunamite received Elizeus going by, 4. reug. 4.
into her house, and lodged him the which obtained her a child, and revived
the same.

Job a good receiver of gestes and strangers, Job. 31.
said. The stranger tarried not without, and my doors were open unto him, that
went by the way.

When our savior sent his dysciples to preach, Mat. 10.
he said that he was received and hard in them. He that receives you,
receives me, he that hears you, Luke. 10.
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me.

Jesus walking here in the world, had not where to lay his head, Luke. 9. Luke
10.
and yet we read that Martha was his special hosts.

zacheus received our Lord joyfully into his house. Luke. 19.
And our Lord made him more joyful, when he said. This day is health
happened unto this house.

By the example of those two discyples that constrained our Lord being LuKe. 24.
in the likeness of a pilgrim to tarry with them, it appears, that
strangers should not only be called in unto us, but also compelled to tarry with
us.

The Apostles most commonly were lodged in the houses of artificers, Act. 10.
and and of mean men. As we do read of Peter, who was lodged with one Simon a
tanner, whose house was by the sea side.

And Paul lodged with Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.
because they were of ye same craft, and occupation.

Lida a seller of Purple, besoughte Paul and his company to tarry with her in
her house, Ac. 16.
and she constrained them.

When Paul and his fellows were escaped out of the broken ship, Act. 28.
Publius the chief of the I Will, received and lodged them three days curteouslye.
And Paul by prayer, and by laying his hands upon his father, which lay
sick of a fever and of a bloudye flixe, healed him.

Paul writing unto Philemon, used an vrbane and a civil hope and confidence,
Ad. phi. 1
when he said, prepare me lodging, for I trust that through the help of your
prayers, I shall be given unto you.

Among all other things, unto the which Paul does specially induce the
hebrews, Heb. 13.
is hospitality. Be not forgetful to lodge strangers, for thereby have diverse
men lodged Angels unawares.

Saint. John in his third Epistle does commend Gaynus, Capi. 1.
saying. Beloved thou dooest faithfully, what so ever thou dooest to the
brethren, and to strangers, which bear witness of thy love before the
congregation.

Of amity and love. Capi. 46
LAban called to gether a great company to the feast, Genesis 29.
and marryage. And gave his daughter Rachel to Jacob his nephewe.

Our lord spoke unto Moses face to face, Exo. 33.
as a man speaks unto his friend.

Ruth abode still by Naomy her mother in law. Ruth. 1.
And said unto her whether soever thou go. I will go also. And wheresoever
thou shalt dwell, there will I dwell.

The soul of Ionathas was knytte with the soul of David, 1. regu. 18.
and Ionathas loved him, as his own soul. And Ionathas put of his own cote
that was upon him, and gave it to David, and thereto his cloak, his sweard, his
bow, and his girdle.

It was a token of faithful amity, although it was indiscreet, 1. regu. 31.
that Saul's harnesbearer, seeing that his Lord and master was dead, would
dye with him.

Abner sent his messengers to David, saying. 2. regu. 3.
Make a bond of amitye with me, and my hand shall be with the to bring al Israel
unto the.

Chusai the Arachite David's friend, came to Absalon, 2. regu. 17.
and destroyed Achitophels counsel.

The prophet Iehu said unto Iosaphat king of Judah, the which had made peace,
2. para. 19.
and was come to help and to fight with Achab the king of Israel. Will thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate our Lord? therefore thou haste
deserved the wrath and anger of our Lord.

Proud Aman called his friends unto him, Esth. 5.
and told them of the glory of his richesse, and of the multitude of his
children, and with what glory, ye king had exalted him above all other his
princes and servants.

When Jobs three friends hard of all the trouble, Job. 2.6.
that had happened unto him, they came every one from his own place, to viset,
and to comfort him. Yet afterward he said of these, ye go about to subvert
your friend.

The wicked traitor Alchimus stirred up king Demetrius against Judas Machabeus,
1. Match. 7.
of whom he said unto the king. Judas and his brethren have slain thy friends.

King Alexander sent a letter to Ionathas, with these words, 1. Match. 10
we have hard of thee, that thou art a mighty and a valiant man, and meet to
be our friend.

Ionathas took gold and silver and diverse presents, and gave it to the king,
1. Match. 11.
and found him gracious, and he made him the head and prince of all his friends.

Ionathas seeing that the time was mete for him, ^. Match. 12.
chose certain men and sent them unto Rome, for to stablisse and renew amite
and frendeship with them.

After that Alexander had slain Demetrius, 1. Match. 10.
he sent Ambasadors to Ptolome the king of Egypt, that they might have amite
and friendship to gether, and he would give him his daughter to wife.

For the old amite that certain men which stood by had to Eleazarus, they
brought such flesh as might be lawefully eaten, 2. Match. 6.
and willed him to make a countenance as though he had eaten of the flesh of
the sacrifice, for so he might have been delivered from death.

Lisias perceuinge that the Jews being defended by the healpe of Almighty
god, 2. Match. 11.
were invincible, sent them word, and promised that he would make the king
their friend.

Our lord commended the unjust steward, Luke. 16.
because he had done wisely in gettinge of friends with his masters monye,
concludinge thereby, that we should make those men our friends, that may at ye
time and hour of death, receive us into the everlasting habitations.

Our Lord puts an example by him, that goes to his friend at midnight,
Luke. 11.
to ask somewhat of him.

At the time of our Lords passion, Luke. 23.
Herod and Pilate were made friends.

The city of Ephesus being moved and troubled, Act. 19.
certain of the chief of Asia which were Paul's friends, sent unto him,
desiring him, that he would not prease into the commen hall.

Of enmite and hatred. Capi. xlvii.
AFter the trespass and sin of our first parents, Genesis 3.
by and by god put enmite between the serpent and the woman, and between both
their seeds.

The heard men Gerare did strive with Isaacs heardmen for a well, Genesis 26.
that they dug. And therefore Isaac calde it the well of enemies.

And Esau hated Jacob continually, because of the blessing that his father
blessed him withal. Genesis 27
And he said in his heart. The days of my fathers sorrow are at hand, and I
will slay my brother Jacob.

Jacob said to Simeon and Leui, ye have troubled me, Genesis 34.
and have made me odious to the Cananite, and the Pheresite, thinhabitors of
the land.

When Iosephes brethren saw, that their father loved him more tha^ al his
brethren, Genesis 27.
they hated him, nor could not speak peaceablye unto him.

The Egiptians hated the children of Israel, Exo. 1.
and did so mock them, and punished them, that their life was bitter unto them.

And our Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Number. 25.
Let the Medianites feel that ye be their enemies, and smite them, for they
have done against you like enemies, and have deceitfulli begiled you by the
Idol Pheor.

Adonizedech king of Jerusalem, and other iiii. kings, Iosu. 10.
besieged Gabaon, because that the Gabanites fled and were gone to Joshua and to
the children of Israel, and had made peace with them.

The Elders of Gaba went to fet Iephthe, Iudi. 11.
and said unto him, come and be our captain, to whom he answered, did not ye
hate me and expel me out of my fathers house? How happens it then, that you
come unto me now in time of necessity and tribulation?

Dalida wept before Sampson, and complained saying, Iudi. 14.
thou hate me, and love me not, and therefore thou wylt not declare and tell
me the ryddle.

Saul perceiving that the people set much by David, 1. regu. 18.
and that he showed him self wise and bold in all things became always
Dauyds enemy.

The two thieves that slew Isboseth said unto David, 2. regu. 4.
lo, here is the head of Saul's son thy enemy. But yet they were but evil
rewarded for their labor.

When Thoi king of Hemath hard that David had smitten and ouerethrowen
Adadezer his enemy, 2. regu. 8.
he sent Ioram his son to thank him, and to entreat him for peace.

After that Ammon David's son had forced Thamar Absolons sister, 2. regu. 13.
he hated her exceadingly, so that the hate wherewyth he hated her, was greater
then the love wherewyth he before loved her.

After that Solomon was gone from god through sin, 3. regu. 11.
our lord styrred up three adversaries unto Solomon, that is had ad the
Edomite, Rason the son of Heliada, and Jeroboam his servant.

3. reg. 18.18
Wicked Iezabel persecuted Helias the prophet for the death of Baals prophets
the which he caused to be slain.

When that Helias reproved Achab for the unjust death of Naboth: 3. regu. 21.
Achab said unto Helias, have thou found me thine enemy? He answered. I have
found the.

Achab said unto Iosaphat king of Judah. There is yet one man of our lords
prophets Micheas the son of Ierala, 3. regu. 22
by who^ we may ask counsel of ye lord, but I hate hi^ for he does not
prophecy good unto me but evil.

The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin hard that the children of captivity
builded the temple unto our^ lord god of Israel. 1. Esd. 4.
And they would not build with them.

Then Raguel and Anna his wife praised our lord, Tobi. 8.
because he had delte mercifully with them and had put away from them the
enemy that persecuted them.

After that Holofernes headde was smitten of, Iudi. 13.
and that every man now held his peace. Judith said. O praise ye the lord our
god, for he has not despised nor forsaken them, that put their trust in him,
and in my hand he has slain the enemy of his people, and with that she took
forth the head of Holofernes, and showed it them.

Esther complayninge of proud Aman, said unto Ahasnerus. Esth. 7.
Our enemy and adversary is this wicked Aman.

It is thus written of Judas machabeus. His enemies fled for fear, 1. Match. 3.
and all the workers of ungodliness were put to trouble, such luck and
prosperity was in his hand.

Ptolomy the king of Aegipt would have obtained Alexa^ders kingdom be fraud
and gyle: 1. Match. 11.
but his enmite and malice was openly known.

Simon knew that Triphon dissembled in his words, 1. Match. 13.
when he demanded Ionathas two sons, and a hundred talentes of silver, yet
commanded he the money and the children to be sent unto him, leeste he
should be the greater enemy against the people of Israel, and say, because
he sent him not the money and the children, therefore is Ionathas dead.

Of peace and concord. Cap. xlviii.
Genesis 1.
IN the beginning god made all other beasts double, that is male and female.
But he created man sole, and of him are all other procreated and made, and that
to commend the unite of peace and concord in man.

Riches and abundaunce of temporal things, Genesis 13.26.
are oftentimes the matter and occasion of strife and debate, as it appears in
Abraham's and Lots herdsmen, and Isaac and the shepherdes of Gerare.

Men do gladly make peace and frendshyppe with such as be of great might
and power. Genesis 16.
And therefore Abimelech came to Isaac, because he saw him prosper.

Sumtimes a man must give place, and avoid the fury or hastines of his better.
Genesis 17.18.
As Jacob did departing from his brother Esau, until his fearsnes and wrath
was swaged.

The Gabaonites hearing what Joshua had done at Ierico and Hai, Iosu. 9.
came unto him, and made a good peace and agreement with them.

When Phinees and the other legates that were sent unto the children of Iosu. 22.
Ruben, had heard their excuse, they were appeased, and gladly received their
answer.

Although Absolon had done to 2. regu. 18.
wickedly against his father yet David more desired peace then the death of his
son, for he said. Is the young man Absolon safe.

Notwithstanding that David was holy, 2. regu. 7.
and such a one as pleased god, yet our lord would not that he should build
him a house, but that Solomon his peasible son should enjoy and be honored,
and have that privilege.

Our lord is much to be lawded and praised, when he gives his people a
peasable and a quiet estate, 3. regu. 5
as was in Salomons time, the which said. The lord my god has given me
rest on every side, so that there is neither aduersarye, nor any evil plage.
Then there follows, blessed be our lord.

Good and blessed men have love and amite one to a another. 3. regu. 14.
But, the evil fight against the good, and other that are evil. As there was
war contynually between. Roboam and Jeroboam.

It was declared and shewde unto Helias that our lord was not in the mighti
strong wind, 3. regu. 19.
nor in the earth quake nor in the fire. But in a small still voice, that is in
tranquilite and peace.

And the people blessed and thanked all those, 2. Esd. 11.
that were wyllinge to dwell at Jerusalem.

Ionathas sent ambasidoures unto Bachides for to make peace with him, 1. Match.
9.
and yet the self Bachides was capytane of the hooste, in the which Judas
Machabeus Ionathas brother was slain.

King Demetrius sent letters unto Ionathas with loving words and praised him
greatly: for he said we will first make peace with him, 1. Match. 10.
before he bind him self with Alexander against us: else he shall remember
the evil that we have done against him, his brother and his people.

The cause of the peace that was in Onias time, 2. Match. 3.
was his wisdom and goodness, and the goodness of his subjects.

After that Judas Machabeus had overthrown Lisias, 2. Match. 11.
he wyllinglye and gladlye made peace with him. For he perceived that the
Hebrews being defended by the healpe of almighty God, could not be overcome.
Wherefore he sent them word, and promised that he would consent to all
things, which were just and reasonable, and to make the king their friend.

Our Lord would us to have so much peace and concord with our neighbors,
Mat. 18.
that he said unto Peter, that we should not forgive our brother, if he sin
against us, till seven times, but seuentye times seven times.

The Angels in our Lords nativity brought tidinges of peace and commanded
them to have peace among them selves, Luke. 2. Luke. 10.
John. 14.
and that they should show it forth. Luke. 24.
Forther more he leaft them peace, and after his resurrection he offered them
peace.

He that desires to keep peace, and to have the quietness of mind, must
abstain from discursions and troubles of the mind, John. 11.
and at sometimes cease from that, that is honest and laufull. For when Martha
heard that Jesus was come, she went and met him. Mary sat still at home, nor
moved not thence until she was called of our Lord by her sister, although
that Mary parauenture was not ignorant of our Lords coming when that
Martha knew it before.

How great that the goodness of peace is, it may be pondred by Paul that
discrete judge: the which most diligently in all his Epistles does wyshe it
to all those that he writes unto: except in his Epistle to the Hebrews, in
the which for certain causes he nether sets to his name, nor premytteth
any salutation. Note yet, that when he says peace be unto you, he premytteth
grace. Saying. Grace be with you and peace. Roma. 1.
Where by it is manifestely understood, that true peace cannot be had,
without the grace of god. Esa. 48.
And therefore Esaye says.

As for the ungodly they have no peace.

Of unite and common consent. Capi. xlix
De. Ci li. 12. Capi. 22.
GOD made mankind of one man, to commend and declare unto men, how pleasant a
thing the unite of many is unto him. Whereupon Saint Augustine does say. Man
was made one, but not left alone. There was never thing that humayne nature
spoke of, so commodius for mankind so full of discord through vice, so given
to feloshippe, so natural, against the vice of discord, other to be taken
head of, if it be not, or to be helped and healed if it apeare, as the
remembrance of our first parent, whom god would creat alone that of him
many other should spring, and that by this admonition, a concordiall unity
might be observed and kept in many.

The people of Israel was of one consent and mind in the desarte, Exo. 19.
and willing to receive the law. For after they had hard of Moses the words of
the law, they answered all with one voice, all that our Lord has said, we will
do.

The people, to make and perform the work of the tabernacle of our Lord,
Exo. 35.
and the holy uestmentes of the ministers, did bring in and offer with most
readiest and devout minds all that was necessary to perform the same.

All the children of Israel were gathered and knit together as it had been
but one manne, Iudi. 20.
so revenge and punish the flagitious dede^ committed against the Levites wife
in Gaba Benjamin.

The universal tribes of Israel came to David unto Hebron, 2. regu. 5.
and anointed him king over them.

The fear of our LORD fell on the people, and they came out as it 1. regu. 11.
had been but one man to aid their brethren which were besieged in Iabes Galaad.

All Israel came to king Solomon, and then the Arcke, 3. regu. 8.
and all the holy vessels were borne into the temple, and the temple was
solemly blessed and dedicated.

All the people were gathered and 1. Esd. 3.
came together even as one man unto Jerusalem to edify and to build the temple,
the which was destroyed by the king of Babylon.

And all the people gathred them selves to gether, 2. Esd. 8.
as one manne in the streat, and they said unto Esdras, that he should bring
the book of the law of God.

When Achior had disclosed all things that Holofernes had said, Iudi. 7.
all the people with a common lamentation and weping, and with one consent,
prayed unto God.

After the death of Judas Machabeus, al his friends came together, 1. Match. 9.
and said unto Ionathas his brother: for so much as thy brother Judas is dead
etc. We chose the this day for him, to be our prince and captain to order, and
to fight our battle.

After that the people had heard Simons words, 1. Match. 13.
the hearts of the people weer kindled together, so that they cried with a
loud voice. Thou art our captain in stead of Judas and Ionathas thy brethren,
order thou our battle, and whatsoever thou co^mandest us, we shall do it.

After the assention of our Lord, Act. 1.
all the disciples continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with
the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. And so the holy
ghost found them.

All that believed kept them selves together after they had received the holy
sprite, Act. 2.
and had all things commen, and continued dailye with one accord in the
temple, and brake bread from house to house.

When the disciples had heard that the creple was healed, and of Peter's and
Ihons answer to ye magestrates, they lift up their voices to God with one
accord, Act. 4.
and said, Lord which have made heaven and earth. etc.

After that Ananias and Saphyra his wife were terriblye punyshed at Peter's
word, Act. 5.
great fear was through out all the country. And they were al together with one
consent in Salomons porch.

And the multitude that believed were of one heart, Act. 4.
and of one soul. Nether said any of them, that ought of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things common.

Of discord, strife and debate. Ca. l.
Envy moved the first discord among men, Genesis 4.
as betwixt Cain and Abell, because that Caines works were malign and evil,
and his brothers good and just.

The substance of Abraham and Lot was great, Genesis 13.
and they could not dwell together, and so there fell a strife between ye
herdme^ of Abraham and Lot.

The five kings of the Sodomites served and were subject unto Chodoriamor xii.
year, Genesis 14.
and in the xiii. year they rebelled, and departed from him. And so there was
war between four kings against five. In the which war Lot was taken, and
recovered by Abraham.

The inhabitours and men of Sodom did compass the house about, Genesis 19.
in the which, two angels in the likeness of me^ war lodged, for they would
have known them, and they preased sore upon Lot because that faithfully he
defended his gestes.

There was strife and debate between the heardmen of Gerar and Isaacs, Genesis 26.
for the possession of sheape, of Oxen, and a mighty household.

Jacob fletinge away was wroth, Genesis 31.
and said to Laban. for what trespace or offense art thou thus angrye with me
and have searched all my stuff.

By the occasion of Dina Jacobs daughter whom Sichem Emors son Iere. 34.
did rauyshe, and forced, a great dyscorde arose between Jacobs sons, and
the inhabitoures of that Country.

Moses upon a certain day, saw two Hebrews that strove together. Exo. 2.
And he said unto him that did the wrong? Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?

After that the Children of Israel were gone out of Egipte, Exo. 17.
and were paste the red sea. Amalech came and fought with them in Raphidim.

Oftentimes the children of Israel did strive against Moses in the
wilderness. Genesis 16.17.
First for lack of drink. And again when they had one kind of meat, Nume.
21.
they desired a another. And when they lothed Manna, they calde for flesh. Also
they came together against Moses and Aaron at the waters of contradiction and
strife, Nume. 20.
where they did chide and murmur against our Lord and Moses.

Between Abimelech Gedeons son, and the men of Sichem, the which had made
him king wrongfully, Iudi. 9.
was great dyscorde, so that they began to detest him, and to rebel against
him, and he ouercomde them.

There arose astrife between those of Ephraim and Iephthe, Iudi. 12.
for as much as Iephthe going to fight aginste the children of Ammon would
not, as they said call them.

There was so vehement a discord and battayl in Gabaa Benjamin and iudi. 20.
the Tribes of Israel for the Levites wife that they of the Tribe of Benjamin
were utterly all slain, except. 5. hundred.

After that David had slain the Philistine. 1. regu. 18.
Saul was wroth and angry with, David, because he was most commonly praised.
Wherefore Saul looked a side on David from that day forewarde. Nor no man
could from that time mollify his heart, but needs he must persecute him.

There was long debate and strife between the house of Saul, 2. regu. 3.
and the house of David. But David. Waxed stronger and stronger, and Saul
continually weaker and weaker.

There was to great and to dishonest a dissension and discord between Absolon
couetinge the kingdom and David his father. 2. regu. 18.
At the last yet Absolon that moved the same, was hanged.

When David returned to Jerusalem, the children of Israel were troubled and
vexed because that the Jews, 2. regu. 19.
they being not calde there unto, brought him again.

Two women did strive be ^ore king Solomon for a child, 2. regu. 3.
the which they both would have had.

After the death of Solomon, the people desired his son Roboa^ to use and to
handle them more courteously. 3. regu. 12.
But because he answered the^ churlishly and hardly, ten of the Tribes left^
him and made Ieroboa^ their king by ye occasion whereof, there was sore wars
between the kings of Israel and Judah.

There was a strife among the disciples, which of them should seem to be
the greatest, Luke. 22.
but it appears by that, that follows that such contention and strife
pleased not our lord.

John. 6.
The Jews strove among the^ selves saying, how can this fellow give us that
flesh of his to eat.

And much murmuring was there of our lord Jesus among the people, John. 7.
for some said, he is good, other said nay, but he deceives the people. There
follows. There was dissension among the people.

After that Cornelius was christened with all his house, Ac 1.11.
the Apostles and brethren that were in Iewry hard that the heathen had also
received the word of god. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that
were of the circumcision contended against him saying wherefore wentest thou
into men uncircumcised.

When Paul and Barnabas preached, and did many miracles in the city of
Iconium, Act. 14.
the multitude of the city was divided, and part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles.

Certain men which came down from Iewry, Act. 15.
taught the brethren, saying, except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved. So when there was risen discencio^ not a little unto
Paul and Barnabas against them, they determined that Paul and barnabas, and
certain other of them should goo up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders
about this question.

Act. 15.
By the occasion of John, whose sir name was Mark, whom Paul would not take
to the work of the gospel, there arose a dissension between Paul and
Barnabas, so that they departed asonder one from the other yet al was for the
fortheraunce of the gospel.

Paul preaching and doing many miracles at Ephesus, Act. 19.
there arose no little a do about the way of our lord for a certain man named
Demetrius a silver Smyth which made Silver shrines for Diana, was not a little
beneficial unto crafts men. etc. And all the city was in a rore, and in great
confusion.

When certain of the Jews saw Paul in the temple, Act. 21.
they moved all the people, and laid hands on him, criynge. Men of Israel
help. And all the city was moved, and the people swarmed to gether.

When Paul had cried out in the counsel. Act. 23.
Men and brethren, I am a pharasei, the son of a pharasei. Of the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am judged. And when he had so said, there arose a
debate and a dissension between the Phariseis and the Saduces, and the
multitude was divided.

Of good zele against sinners. Capi. li.
THe children of Jacob were very cruel for the deflouringe of Dina their
sister oppressed and forced by Sichem. Genesis 34.


Moses hearing the voices of those that song, Exo. 32.
and seeing the calfe and the daunsinge, his wrath waxed hot, and castinge the
tables out of his hands, he brake them. And note, how grievously he punished
the people. For whom he so faithfully and instantly prayed unto our lord.

The zele of Phinches the son of Eleazar, Nume. 25.
when he thrust the man and the medianityshe woman through, although they were
mighty and noble, pleased our lord very well.

Iosue commanded Acham to be stoned with stones, Iosu. 7.
and all his stuff to be burned, because he took of the excommunicate things
of Ierico.

When the children of Israel hard say that the children of Ruben and Gad,
Iosu. 22.
had builded them an aultor, they came together, and would have foughten
against them.

Iudi. 19.12.
All the children of Israel gathered to gether as it had been but one man, to
revenge the horrible and grievous crime, that the men of Gabaa Benjamin had
committed against the Levites wife.

Helias did bouldelye reprove the people that did err, 3. regu. 18.
and caused the preastes of Baal to be slain.

Achab was rebuked because he let king Benadab, 3, regu. 19.
a man woorthye of death, to skape away a live.

Although Iehu the king of Israel was specially evil, yet he is greatly
commended because he destroyed the sede of the house of Achab, 4. regu. 10.
and caused Baals prophets to be slain, and his house to be broken.

The spirit of God came upon zacharia the son of Ioade the priest, which
stood in the syghte of the people that honored and served Idols. 2. Para. 24.
And said unto them, why transgress ye the commandments of our lord, that ye
cannot prosper? for because ye have forsaken our Lord, he also has forsaken
you.

When Esdras the priest hard say that the Jews were married with the gentiles,
1. Esd. 9.
he was exceading sorry, and by great syghing and sorowynge, he showed tokens of
heaviness.

Nehemias perceiving that the Jews married outlandysh women, did reprove them,
2. Esd. 13.
and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and made them bare.

Mathathias stood up and said. Woe is me. Alas that ever I was: borne, to see
this myserye of my people. After follows, 1. Match. 2.
of his most seruent zele, and marvelous honesty, when he slew the Jew
besides the altar, which openly in the sight of all, did sacrifice unto Idols.

Onias the hie priest did manfullye resist Simon, 2. Match. 3.
the which went about to do a certain wicked thing in ye city.

Mat. 3.14.
Ihon the Baptist was in a wonderful fervent zeal, when he said, O generation
of vipers, who has taught you to flee from the venga^ce to come? And likewise
when he reproved Herod.

Mat. 23.
Our Lord did sharplye rebuke the Pharisees, Scribes and Hipocrites, but
specially in the three and twentye of Mathewe, where that seven times he said
unto them. Woe be unto you.

Our LORD perceiving that the Phariseis did maliciously watch for him, Mar.
3.
loking angerly about him, was heavy that they were so blind in heart, John. 8.
and said, you are of your father the devil.

Our Lord did oftentimes cast the^ out of the temple, Luke. 19.
that bought and sold, and at sometimes with very sharp words, John. 2.
saying. My house is ye house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

Peter was kindled with a fervent zeal, Act. 5.
against Ananias and Saphyra his wife, when he saw that they kept away part of
the price of the land.

And the words that Steven spoke to the Jews, Act. 7.
came of a burning zele, saying. O ye stiffenecked and of uncircumcised hearts
and ears, ye have always resisted the holy ghost.

Paul and Barnabas, wythstandinge Berieser the false Prophette, Act. 13.
Paul said. O full of all subtlety and disceitfulnesse, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease ^o peruerte the straight ways of our Lord?

When Paul preached at Athens, Act, 17.
his sprite was moved in him, when he saw the city given to Idolatry.

The feruente zeal of Paul, did most specially appear, when he reproved,
rebuked and prayed the Galathians, Gala. 5.
and likewise the Romans, Roma. 9.
the Corinthians and the Hebrews. 2. Cor. 11.
Heb. 1.


Of indiscreet zele. Capit. lii.
WHen Iosue Moses servant saw two men in the hooste, that Prophesyed, Nume.
11.
he said, master Moses forbid them. And Moses said unto him? what, enuyest
thou for my sake?

Abisai the son of Seruia was willing to have cut of Semeis head, 2. regu. 19.
because he cursed David, that suffered Absolons persecution, but David would not
suffer that he should have any harm, or damage.

The children of the Prophets constrained Elizeus to send men to seek his
master, 4. regu. 2
least happily the spirit of our Lord had taken him up, and cast him upon some
mountain, or into some valey.

Jonas fled from the face and sight of God, when he commanded him to preach
to the Ninevites. And afterward he was sorye and discontent, Jonas. 1.4.
that the city pearyshed not, as he had preached.

When our LORD had showed his Disciples how that he should suffer many
things of the hye priests and elders of the Jews, Mat. 16.
and be killed. Peter began to rebuke him, saying. Master favor thy self,
this shall not happen unto the.

The Pharisees did greatly contend for the observation of the Sabbothe, Mar. 2.
when they saw our Lord heal the sick, LuKe. 6.
and his disciples pluck ye cares of the corn, and rub them in their hands,
on that day.

The Pharisees contended more for the traditions of man, Mat. 15.
than for the commandments of God.

And the people conte^ded more for the gould of the Temple, Mat. 23.
then for the temple, and for the gifts of the aultare, then for the aultare.

They brought children to our Lord, that he should lay his hands upon them,
Mar. 10.
and pray. And his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But Jesus said:
suffer the children to come unto me, for bid them not: for of such is the
kingdom of God.

When Mary had poured the precious ointment upon the Lords head, some of the
disciples disdained, Mar. 14.
and were not content with her for the wast and loss of the ointment.

Ihon forbade a certain man yt casted out devils in our Lord Jesus name, Luke.
9.
because he followed not them with other Disciples. And Jesus said unto him,
forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is with us.

LuKe. 9.
When James and Ihon hard that the Samaritans would not receive the messengers of
our Lord, they said. Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven, and consume them? Jesus turned about, and rebuked them, saying: ye
wotte not what manner sprite ye are of.

Luke. 22.
Our Lord reproved Peter, because he had stricken of the ear of the high prestes
servant. For it was not christ's time then to show his power, but his patience.

It appears that Ihon the Baptist Disciples bare no great good zeal toward
our Lord, John. 3.
when they said unto Ihon their master, Rabby, he yt was with thee beyond
Jordan, the same baptiseth, and all men come to him, Ihon answered them
rightwel, and said, a man can receive nothing, except it be given him from
heaven.

When that many sick folks were brought out of the city, Act. 5.
and were healed of Peter, the chief priest rose up, and all they that were with
him, were full of indignation.

Paul was a great follower of his fathers traditions, against many of his
own fellows, when he made havoc of the congregation, Act. 8.9.
entering into every house, and drawing out both men and women, and thrustyng
them into prison. Likewise he obtained letters of the hie Priest, to the
sinagog^ that was at Damasco, that he, if he found any there that called upon the
name of Christ, might bring the^ bound unto Jerusalem.

Act. 13.
The Jews perceiving that almost the whole city came together to hear the word
of GOD that Paul and Barnabas did preach, they were full of zeal and
indignation, and spoke railing words against those things which were spoken of
Paul.

When Paul was come to Jerusalem, the brethren said unto him, Act. 21.
how many thousands of Jews be there that believe, and are earnest folowers
of the law? And of such speaks Paul, Roma. 10.
saying: I bare them record, that they have a zeal and a fervent mind to
Godwarde, but not according to knowledge.

Of prudency and discretion. Capitulo.liii.
ABraham coming into Egypt, did wisely and warely, Genesis 12.20.
as touching his wife, for he cloked the truth, and yet affirmed no falshode,
saying. She is my sister. He did the like, when he came to Abimelech.

And Abraham did prudently separate him self from Lot, Genesis 13.
because their herd men should not strive together.

Abraham discretelye while he yet lived, Genesis 25.
did divide and give every child his portion, least that they, after his death
should strive and he at debate.

Rebecca did wiselye enstructe her son Jacob, Genesis 27.
how he should obtain and come by his fathers blessing, and prudently she
caused him to depart from those parties, until his brothers fearsnesse were
swaged.

Jacob by craft did even very well begyle Labans craftiness, Genesis 30.
when Laban denied to give him competente wages for his service.

Jacob did prudently, that he, when he should meet with his brother, Genesis 32.
sent him Presents, and when he divided his Substance, least that he,
even at one brounte should lose al, and put such things as he loved best in
danger.

Genesis 41.
Joseph spoke prude^tly before Pharao expounding the dream unto him and giving
him counsel against the famine that was to come.

Genesis 44.
Joseph did warely and wiselye deprehend and accuse his brethren, and put them
in fear.

Iethro gave Moses good counsel, saying: Exo. 18.
provide thy self men of power, and such as fear God, true men, and such as
hate covetousness.

Or ever Moses invaded the land of promise, Nume. 13.
he sent spies thither to consider the state and condition thereof.

The spies that Iosue sent, lurked and wisely kept them selves close, Iosu. 1.
until they that sought for them were returned to their own again.

Iosue used great policye and wisdom, when he laid awaite unto the town of
Hai, Iosu. 8.
and afterward made as though he had fled his way.

The Gabaonites thinking by craft and subtlety to beguile Iosue, by his
discretion were brought into seruytude and bondage. Iosu. 9.


Phinees and other messengers that were sent to the children of Ruben, Iosu. 22.
spoke discreately unto them, and with wise communication appeased them.

Ahud bringinge a present unto Eglon king of Moab, Iudi. 3.
craftily deceived him.

Gedeon did smite and destroy the host of his enemies, Iudi. 8.
the which being without care, did cast no peryls.

Iephthe like a wise man did signifye Iudi. 11.
by messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, that he did wrong to
war against him, but yet afterward he made an vndyscreate vow.

Iepthe did wyttely perceive who were Ephraites, Iudi. 12.
and who were Galaadytes, by the pronou^syng of this word Schibbolech, that is
an ear of Corn, when they said Schybbolech. For they could not so pronounce
it.

The children of Israel fighting against the Beniamites by policy and craft
feigned them selves to fly, Iudi. 20.
and by that means drew them out of the City, and utterly destroyed them.

Saul when certain men despised him, 1. regu. 10.
and said, how can this manne healpe us, dissembled the matter, and made as
though he had not heard them.

It was a point of great wisdom when Dauyd being armed with Saules armor,
1. regu. 17.
proved whether he could so go against Goliath, or no.

David went out to all things, whythersoeuer Saul sent him, 1. regu. 18.
and behaved him self wisely.

David in the presence of Achis fained him self mad, 1. regu 21.
and as though he had been in a furye, so to escape from him.

Abigail did wiselye pacify Dauyd being angery with Nabal her husband. 1.
regu. 25.


2. regu. 12.
Nathan goinge about to reprove the Prophet Dauyd of his excess and fautes
done to Urias and his wife, took and used wisely the manifest parable of the
rich manne, that took a sheep from a poor man.

Ioab used a wise cautel, 2. regu. 17
when that by a wise woman he caused Absolon to be revoked.

A wise woman of Abel, 2. regu. 20.
returned Ioab from the obsidion and seige of the city.

Bersaba, hearing that Abdonias would raygne for his father, 3. regu. 1.
spoke wisely unto David for her self, and her son Solomon.

Salomom desired of^ god discreation and wisdom, 3. regu. 3^
the which thing pleased god exceadyngly, and with wisdom, he granted him
many other things.

Solomon judged wisely between two w^men that conte^ded and strove for one
child. 3. regu. 3.


King Roboam answered his people very hardely, 3. regu. 12.
and forsakinge the good and discreate counsel that his sad and old
Senators gave him, he spoke after the counsel of young me^ and did unwisely.

When Achab king of Israel should be rebuked, 3. regu. 20.
a certain man of the children of the prophets discretely proponed a parable
of a man that was commended, and evil kept, and saved. By the which the king
might easily perceive his sin and wickedness.

Iehu did studiuslye and prudentlye when he feigned that he would do reverence
and honor unto the prophets and preastes of Baall. 4. regu. 10.
And yet afterward he slew them, and destroyed Baals altar.

Ezechias king of Judah, 4. regu. 18.
did studiously and discreately forbid that his people should make no answer
unto blasphemus messengers of the king of the Assirians. For it is not
expedient for faithful people to have unfaithful disputations with and
against litigious persons.

Ioiada the hye preast purposing to make Ioas the son of Ioram king of
Jerusalem, 2. Para. 23.
used him self both warely and wisely.

Ezechias understanding that the king of the Assirians would come against
Jerusalem, 2. Para. 32.
did s^oppe all the well headdes without the city, and reparde the walls of
the city, and couraged his men with confortable words, and at length turned
him self to praise our lord.

Nehemias with great discreation, dyligence, 2. Esd 2.3.4.
solicitude and care, did build a wall about Jerusalem.

The word that zorobabel spoke, was a word of great wisdom, 3. Esd. 3.
and woorthelye approved, that is, women have yet more strength. But above all
things the truth bears a way the victory.

Tobias beleuinge that he should dye shortelye, Tob. 4.
he gave his son, documentes and Preaceptes of great wisdom. And among
all other he said. Ask ever counsel of the wise.

Judith showed great wisdom in her words. Judith. 11
And all Holofernes servant marueled at her wisdom and said one to
another. There is not such a woman upon earth, in bewtye contenaunce, and
discreation of words.

Mardocheus required Esther with great wisdom to help the Jews. Esth. 4.
Saying, if thou hold thy peace at this time, the Jews shall be otherwise
delivered, and thou and thy fathers house destroyed. And who knows whether
thou art come to the kyngedome for this causes sake.

God gave unto Daniel and his fellows connyng and learning in all scripture and
wisdom: Dani. 1.
but to Daniell specially he gave the understanding of visions and dreams.

Daniell did expound Nabuchodonosors dreams most wisely. Dani. 2.4.13.
And afterward we do read, although it chanced before, of two old preastes
the which had given, as he most wyselye perceived, false testimonye and
wytnes against the Innocent Susanna.

It was told Judas, that Nicanor came unto him but under deceyt, 1. Match. 7
and that he would take him, wherefore he gate him wisely away from him, and
would se his face no more.

Simon knew that Tryphon disse^bled in his words, 1. Match. 13
yet commanded he a hundred talentes of silver, and Ionathas two sons to be
delivered unto him, least he should be the greater enemy against the people of
Israel, and say, because he sent him not ye monye and the children, therefore
is Ionathas dead.

The vii. brethren with their good mother, 2. Mac. 7
by their words, which they had one to another, and to the tirant: declared
that they had great wisdom.

There was a certain day appointed when Judas should speak secreatlye alone
with Nicanor. 2. Match. 14
Nevertheless Judas commanded certain men of arms to be set, and to wait
in convenient places, least there should suddenly arise any evil through the
enemies.

It appears by the communication that the blessed vyrgin had with the aungel,
that she had great discresyon and wisdom. Luke. 1.
For she casting in her mind, what manner of salutatio^ that should be, said,
how shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

And when the child Jesus of xii. year old tarried at Jerusalem, and was
found in the temple sit^ynge in the midst of the doctors, LuKe. 2.
hearing them and posing them, all that heard him were astonished at his wisdom,
understanding, and answers.

Our Lord commended the unjust steward, Luke. 16.
because he had done wisely.

Our Lord very well deluded the curious interrogacion of the priests and
elders askinge him, Luke. 20.
by what authority he did those miracles, he said. I also will ask you one
thing. From whence is the baptime of John?

When Paul and Sylas were put in prison, the Magestrates sent the next day
after, Act. 16.
and commanded that they should be losed, Paul said wisely. They have beaten
us openly vncondempned. Notwithstanding that we are Romans, and have cast
us into prison, and now would they send us away privily?

When the city of Ephesus was sore moved and in a confusion, Act. 19.
Paul did wisely and humblye agree to the counsel of his friends, that he
should not prease into the common hal. Where also appears the wisdom of the
Scribe that pacified the people being so moved, and how he sent every man to
his own house.

And when the Tribune had commanded that Paul should be bea^en and scourged,
Act. 22.
Paul said unto the Centurion that stood by him. Is it lawful for you to
scourge a Romain and vncondempned? Then they which should have punished and
examyned him, departed from him.

When Paul purposed to sail out of Greece into Syria, Act. 20.
and heard say that the Jews laid wait for hym^ he wisely returned through
Macedonia, nor refused not the company of his brethren which were of diverse
cities.

Paul understanding that the one part was Pharisees. He cried out, I am a
Pharisey. And certain of the Phariseis stood up, and fought for him. Act. 23.
And after when he hard say that some of the Jews had made a vow, not to
taste nor eat nothing until they had slain him, he caused ye to be showed to
the Tribune, yt which sent him with armed men to Felix ye ruler of Syria.

When Festus the president would have sent Paul, at the instaunce of the
Jews, to Jerusalem. He wiselye perceiving their malice, Act. 25.
appealed to Caesar.

Of deceit and subtlety. Capi. liiii.
Genesis 3.
IT is manifest that the deuel in the form of a Serpent was the first master of
al craftines, lies, and deceitfulness, the which being more subtle, then all
other beasts, deceived the first woman, he would not board the first man,
because he knew that he had more discreatyon then the woman.

Laban Jacobs father in law, went very oftentimes about to deceive him, Genesis
29.30
now in his wife, now in his wages. But our Lord in the fraud and guyle of
those that would have circumue^ted him, was with him and aided him.

When Laban searched Jacobs household stuff, Genesis 31.
and came to search Rachels tent, she craftily deluded his careful searching.

Jacobs sons being as it were in a madness and fury for the inforcemente and
rape of their sister Dina, Genesis 34.
counsaild Sychem, the people, and inhabytors of the City to be circumcised,
where by they suddenly rushed in upon them, and easily slew them.

Jacobs Children would have deceived their father, Genesis 37.
when they dipped Iosephes coat in the blud of a Got, and sent that should
say unto him, we have found this, see whether it be thy sons coat or no.

Pharo the king of Egipte bethought him of diverse crafts and subtleties, Exo.
1.5.
utterly to extirpate ye children of Israel, and destroy them in Egypt, and by
no means suffer them to depart the country.

Pharaos wise men and enchaunters did by their sorcery, Exo. 7.
as touching the first two signs, even as Moses did.

Chore and his fellows spoke maliciously when they stood against Moses and
Aaron, Nume. 16.
saying. Ye make much to do: It is sufficient for us, that all the multitude
are holy, every one of them, and our Lord is among the^. Why heave ye your
selves up above the congregation of our Lord?

Balaach king of the Moabites perceiuinge that he could not overcome the
children of Israel by fortitude and strength, Nume. 23.
would have ouerthrown the^ with Balaams curse.

The Gabaonites hearing what Joshua had done at Jericho and Hai, Iosu. 9.
thought craftily, how they might do, that they should not be utterly
destroyed.

The Philistines took good head, yt there should no smith be found through out all
the land of Israel least happily the Hebrews should make the^ swerdes or Spears.
1. regu. 13.


Saul disdaining the prosperity of David, 1. regu. 18.
spoke of his daughter Michol whom David desired to have. I will give her unto
him, that it may be to his rebuke and shame, and that the hand of the
Philistines may be upon him. Wherefore Saul said unto David, thou shall this
day be my son in law in two things.

David by great subtletye would have cloked his iniquyty, 2. regn. 11.
when he sent for Urias, to the intent he should go, and sleep with Bersabe his
wife.

Ionadab Semnas son taught Ammon the son of David a wicked deceytfulnesse
or subteltye, 2. regu. 13
when he said unto him, lay thee down on thy bed, and make thy self sick.
For so thou maiste have Thamar Absolons sister alone, the which tempted him.

When Absolon was purposed to revenge the iniurye done to his sister Thamar, 2.
regu. 13.
whom Ammon her brother had forced, he made a great banquet, and invited his
brother, and even when he was meary with wine, and banketing, he caused him to
be slain.

Absolon ambitiously couetinge his fathers kingdom, 2. regu. 15.
began maliciously to flatter, and dispraising his fathers factes and deeds,
bosted and said that he would do good justice.

Jeroboam thought in his heart, 3. regu. 12.
now shall the kingdom return to the house of David, if this people go up
and do sacrifice in the house of our Lord at Jerusalem, where upon the king
took counsel, and made two calves of gold.

3. Re. 20.
Achab the king of Israel, said certain general words to the messengers of
Benadab the king of Siria, offeringe unto him most lyberallye both his men
and his goods. By the which he descending to more special things would have
burdened him very sore.

Sedechias the son of Chanaam Baals prophet made him self horns of Iron, as
though he had been a true Prophet, saying unto king Achab. Thus says our
Lord, 3. re. 22.
with these horns shall thou push the Syrians. At length he deceived him, and
caused him to go to battle.

Gehezi runnynge after Naaman did color his peticion very craftelye and
subtellye, 4. re. 5.
saying, my master has sent me, and says. Se. there be come to me two
young men, give them one Talent of silver, and two change of garments.

Iezabel that mischeuous woman used a very cruel deceitfulnes and gile to
obtain Nabothes bineyarde for her husband. 3. re. 21.


Athalia the mother of Echozia king of Judah saw that her son was dead she
destroyed all the kings seed, 4. re. 11.
and reigned vi. year.

Rapsaces Sennacherib king of Assirians messenger spoke with a loud voice, 4.
re. 18.
that the people which were upon the wall might here and fear.

Whilst Abia the king of Judah did comfort his hooste, and rebuked his
adversaries, Jeroboam the king of Israel went about to lay deceites, and to
convey men priuelye behind him. 2. Para. 13.
And when his enemies stood even before him, he compased ye Jews not taking
head thereof, both behind and before with his host.

The children of Isreal's neighbors, the which were returned from the
captivity of Babylon, 1. Esd. 3.4.
invented many guiles and deceites, 2. Esd. 4.5.
to let them from the edification and building of the temple and wall of
Jerusalem.

Esth. 3.
When proud Aman saw that Mardocheus, would not worship him, he through that
occasion counseled the king by false surmising and lies, to destroy all the
Jews.

Job. 1.
Because that Satan could by no means deny before our Lord Iobes virtues, he
imagyned deceytfullye to deprave his intentyon, saying. Does Job fear God for
naught? Note likewise, how that upon one day, the devil depryued him of all
that ever he had, and caused messengers to come unto him, that through
manifold sorrows he might weaken and break him be impac^ence.

The great estates of the realm of Per^ia, procured that Darius should put out
such a decre or commandment the which they esteemed and thought that Daniell
would not observe nor keep, Dani. 6.
that be such subteltie and craft, they might wind him out of the kings
favor.

Two old preastes invented a detestable deceyte, Dani. 13.
to deceive Susan, and afterward cruelly to be revenged of her.

Alcimus being full of malignite, 1. match. 7
came to Demetrius and accused Judas Machabeus of many things. And after that
he presented him with a crown of gold and with other gifts, and as that day
he held his tongue, 2. Match. 14.
but afterward, he did and spoke so much that the king gave him the hie
preesthode.

Jason sent Menelaus with money unto king Antiochus, 2. Match. 4.
but Menelaus being commended and praised of the king, turned the preesthode
unto him self, laying up.300. talentes of silver for Jason.

When Herod, privily called the wise men, and enquired diligently and learned
of them what time the star appeared, Math. 2.
and sending the^ to Bethleem, said, Go your way thither, and search
diligently for the child. But for what intent he did so, it appeared by the
murdering of the children.

The Pharisees wyllyng to tangle our Lord in his words sent out unto him
their discyples, Mat. 22.
with Herodes servants, saying. Master, we know that thou art true. Is it
lawful that tribute be given unto Caesar, or not?

The hye priests and chefest of the Jews gave large money unto the keepers
of the Sepulcher, Mat. 28.
that they should say, how that Jesus was stolen away by night.

The Pharyses sought many cyrcutes and ways to cause the blind man that had
received his syghte to confess and say, John. 9.
that he received not his sight of Christ.

Ananias, his wife Saphira having knowledge thereof, defrauded, and kept away
part of the price of the land. Act. 5.


The Samaritanes regarded much Simon Magus, because that of long time he with
his sorceryes had bewitched them. Act. 8.


The Jews, perceiuinge that the word of God was sown and published through
all the countreye bye Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.
steered up and moved the devout and honest women, and the chefest of the
city of Antioche, and raised persecution against them, and expelled them out
of their coostes.

When Paul and Barnabas were at Listra, Act. 14.
and in so great favor, that men would have done sacrifyce unto them as
unto Gods. There came certain Jews the which persuaded the people so, that
Paul was stoned and drawn out of the city, supposing he had been dead.

Certain crafts men, with a damsel possessed with a spirit that prophesied,
which were minded and willing to complain of Paul, said not, that through
him they lost their gains, Act. 16
but lyingly they said. These men trouble our city, and preach ordinances,
which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, seeing that we
are Romans.

The Jews malitiouslye did purpose to desire the Tribune that Paul might be
brought forth, Act. 23.
as though they would have known something more perfectly of him: but many
laid wait to kill him, and had bound them selves with a vow, that they would
eat nothing, till they had slain him.

Of the erudition of Children. Cap. lv.
Jacob seeing and marking Joseph's dreams, Genesis 37.
rebuked him, least he should stere up the indignation and envy of his
brethren against him.

Jacob hearing that there was corn and sustinaunce to be sold in Egypt, Genesis
42.
reproved the negligence of his children.

The blasphemer and cursed speaker was stoned to death in the wilderness, his
father was a man of Egipie, Leui. 24.
and his mother an Israelitishe woman. Such children are oftentimes evil
instructed.

Our lord commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should teach Deu. 4.
their children such things as they had seen.

A contumacius and a stubburne child that will not obey the commandment of
his parents, Deu. 21.
but contemn them, is commanded by Moses to be stoned to death.

Holy the preaste corrected his children but slenderlye, 1. re. 4.
and therefore as well he as they, were punished of our lord.

A^onias was but meanelye corrected of his father David. 3. Re. 1.2.
And therefore he being pufte up in pride exalted him self, saying. I will
raygne and be king. But at length king Solomon his brother, caused him to be
slain.

David approchinge and drawinge nigh unto his death, did diligentely instruct
Solomon his son, the which should raygne after him. 1. Para. 28


Tobias the elder taught his son from his infancye and tender age, to fear
our lord, Tobi. 4.13
to abstain from all sin, and when he believed that he should dye, he
holsomely instructed him. And likewise when he should depart and dye.

The parents of Sara young Tobias wife, did suffer their daughter to depart
and to goo with her husband. Tobi. 10.
Exhortinge her to honor her father and mother in law, to love her husband,
to rule well her household, to govern and keep her house in good order, and to
show her self fawtlesse.

Job had great solicitude and care for his children, for when they had eaten
and banketed to gether, Job. 1.
dailye he offered for every one a burnt offering lest peradventure they
had done some offense.

The parents of Susanna being just and godly people taught their Dani. 13.
daughter according to the law of Moses.

When the time drew fast on that Matha^hias should die, 1. Match. 2.
he healthsomly instructed his sons, and animated and encouraged them against
the wicked.

That mother more the^ marvelous the which saw her 7. sons suffer and dye in
one day, 2. Match. 7.
exhorted every one of them with godly words, and said. I can not tell how
ye came into my womb. etc.

That it is a pearillous thing not to agree to good counsel. Ca. lvi.
THe angels that appeared unto Lot, gave him this good counsel, that he
should depart from Sodom, and take his sons in law with him, and that they
should not look behind them, but save the^ selves in the hill.

The which Lot said unto his sons in law that they should be going, but
he seemed to them as though he had mocked. Genesis 19.
And therefore Lotte sons in law, that would not depart from that wicked
people, did pearyshe with them. And his wife that looked behind her, was
turned into a pyllare of Salt. And Lot him self that would not, after the
Angels counsel by and by ascend up to the mount, did trespass and sin
with his own daughters.

Ruben counsayled his brethren to restore Joseph to his father again. Genesis
37.42
But in as much as they would not, it happened afterward that they were put to
trouble.

When the children of Israel would ascend or ever it was time, unto the place,
that our LORD had spoken of. Nume. 14.
Moses said. Our LORD is not among you. The Amalechites and the Cananytes are
there before you. And ye shall fall upon their sweardes, because ye are
turned away from our LORD, and will not hear him.

After that horrible deed committed against the Levites wife, the Children of
Israel gathered together, Iudi. 20.
and sent messengers to the children of Beniamyn, the which should say thus
unto them, what wickedness is this that is happened among you? Deliver us those
that have committed that heinous deed. But they would not here them, and
afterward therefore they were in a manner all slain, a few excepted.

Abner said to Asael, leave of to follow me, 2. regu. 2.
but he despised his words And Abner smote him through with the hinder end of
his spear.

Roboam Salomons son, would not hear the old men's Counsel, 3. regn. 12.
but harkened to the counsel of young men, wherefore he lost a great part of his
people.

Achior gave Holofernes good and faithful Counsel, the which he proudlye
and dysdaynfullye despised and within a while after was slain, and his host put
to flighte with loss and confusion. Iudi. 6.


Godolia, whom the king of Babilo^ had made gouernoure of the land of Judah,
Iere. 40.41.
sent Iohanan the son of Careah faithful word, that Ismaell the son of
Nathania would kill him. And he answered him: Thou speak falsely of Ismael,
but in the seventh month Ismael came, and after he had eaten with Godolia, he
slew him.

Daniel said unto Nabuchodonozor, o king, Dani. 4.
accept my counsel, and redeame thy sins with alms, but he would not agree
there unto, and so was turned into a beast.

Judas Machabeus taking his journey toward Galaad, 1. Match. 5.
left Josephus and Azarias to be captains over the people, and commanded
them, saying. Se that ye make no war against the heathen, until the time we
come again. But they couetyng to get the^ a name and fame, lost both the thing
they went about, and their name also.

Judas Machabeus had but viii. C. men, 1. Match. 9.
his adversaries were two and twenty thousand, his companyons warned him not
to fight without an host of men, but he would not follow their counsel, he
him self was killed in that battle, and the remnaunt fled.

Pilates wife gave her husband good counsel, Mat. 27.
but he refused to follow it. Fearing more to offend Caesar, then to conde^pne
the just and innocent blud.

Of suspicion and false credulity. Ca. lvii.
ABraham suspected yt the fear of God was not in Geraris, Genesis 20.26
and that the men of ye country would kyl him for his wives sake. The like
chanced to Isaac.

Laban suspected that Jacob had stolen his goods, Genesis 31.
and for that cause he searched all his household stuff.

Jacob perceyuyng Iosephes coat to be bloody, Genesis 37.
suspected that he had been dead, and of some wicked beast devoured.

Joseph commanded his steward to bring his brethren into his house to dine
with him, Genesis 43.
but they being sore afraid, suspected and believed that he would have brought
them into servitude and bondage.

The Rubenites and the Gaadites going to their possessions, Iosu. 22.
did build and set up an altar beyond Jordan. The children of Israel hearing
there of, were sore troubled, not knowing for what purpose they had done it,
and believed that they would go from their law.

When Sampson was gone to his fathers house, Iudi. 15.
his father in law thought, and believed that he had hated, and refused his
wife, and therefore he married her to a another.

Hely saying Annes lips move, and that she spoke never a word, 1. regu. 1.
believed she had been dronken.

Because Saul did persecute David, he laid to David's charge that he persecuted
him. 1. regu. 22.
And said yt his son Ionathas had stirred up his servant to lie await
against him, the which thing was most untrue and false.

When David was with Achis the king of Geth as the keeper of his life. 1. regu.
26
The Lords spoke unto Achis to let David go, least he should fly and return
again unto Saul.

David sent messengers to king Amnon, to comfort him over the death of his
father. ^. regu. 10.
But his Lords suspected that they came rather to spy out the city, then to
comfort him.

After that king Ahasuerus was moved against Aman, and that he was laid down
upon Esthers bed, Esth. 7.
to entreat her for his life: The king laid unto him, that he in his presence
would have oppressed and forced the Queen.

When Jeremy was going toward the land of Benjamin, Iere. 37.
the porter of the gate took him, and laid falslye to his charge, that his
mind was to run to the Caldees.

Ieremye the Prophet declared the will of our Lord to the people yt was left and
remained after the destruction of Jerusalem, Iere. 42.43.
they said unto him: Thou lie. Our Lord has not sent the, but Baruch the
son of Neria has provoked the against us, that he might bring us into the
captiuitye of the Chaldees.

The tormentors yt led Eleazar to his torment and pain, 2. Match. 6.
took displeasure and were angry with him, because of the words yt he said, for
they coniectured and suspected, that he had spoken them of an arrogance, and
hie mind.

When the disciples saw our Lord walking on the sea, Mat. 14.
they suspected yt it had been some sprite, and cried out for fear.

When Simon the Pharisy saw a woman which was a sinner weeping at our Lords
fete, LuKe. 7.
he spoke wtin him self saying. If this man were a prophet, he would surely
know, who, and what manner of woman this is that touches him, for she is a
sinner.

For a man another to set much by him self, Luke. 18.
nor yet to judge evil of a another, the example yt the Lord our savior does
bring in of the Pharisy that bosted him self, and of the meek and humble
Publicane, is much profitable.

When the Jews, after the effusyon of the holy spirit, saw that our Lords
disciples spoke with diverse tongs and languages, Act. 2.
Some of them said. These men are full of new wine.

All the christian disciples were afraid of Paul after his conversion, Act. 9.
and believed not that he was a Disciple, until that Barnabas brought him to
the Apostles, and declared to them, how yt he had seen our Lord in the way,
and how he had done boldlye at Damasco in the name of Jesus.

When Lysias the Tribune saw yt the Jews entreated Paul so cruellye, he asked
of him. Act. 21.
Art not thou that Egiptian, which before those days made an uproar, and
leddest out into the wilderness 4000. men that were murderers?

When the barbarous people and strangers saw the Uyper hang on Paul's hand,
Act. 28.
they said: No doubt this man is a murderer, and thought that he should
have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly.

That holy and good men suffer certain things to be done, but not gladlye.
Capi. lviii.
Jacob at the instance of his children, Genesis 43.
did permit and suffer his well be loved son Benjamin to be led away and kept
against his will for the necessitye and lack of vitaile.

Moses suffered the Jews that were odious and spiteful to their wives, Deu. 24.
to give them a bill of deuorcement, because he feared the murtherynge of their
wives.

David considering his people, set captains over them. 2. re. 18.
And said unto ye people, I will go with you also. And the people aunsweared.
Thou shall not go forth: for thou shall be counted worth ten thousand of us.
Wherefore it is better that thou succor us with in the City. And he said unto
them, what seems you best, that I will do.

Simon knew that Tryphon dyssembled and used gile and deceyte in his words,
desiring Ionathas two sons, and a hundred talentes of silver: yet commanded
he the money and the children to be delivered, i. match. xi.
least parauenture he should provoke the enmite and evil will of the people
against him self.

Of Justice and equity. Capitu. lix.
ABraham being minded and well wyllyng to be separated and divided from Lot his
brothers son, Genesis 13.
gave him the option, to choose and to take what part he would. And thus may a
perticion be well made, the elder to divide, and the younger to choose.

Jacob said unto Laban, my justice and my righteousness shall answer for me
to morrow. Genesis 30


Elizeus suffered the children of the prophets to seek Helias, 4. re. 2.
leest happily the spirit of our Lord had cast him some where is, And yet he
knew that they should labor in vain.

Salphaads daughters peticion was just even by gods testimony and witness, Number.
27
the which desired of Moses, that they might in herite their fathers
inheritance and lands.

King Adonibeseth was taken by the children of Israel, Iudi. 1.
the which cut of his thombs and his great toes. Then said the king, Three
score and ten kings having their thombes and their great toes cut of,
gathered the fragmentes under my table. As I have done, so god has done to me
again.

After yt Agag the king of the Amalakites was brought before Samuel, 1. reg. 15
Samuel said unto him. Thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy
mother be childlesse above other women.

David said unto Saul that unjustly persecuted him. 1. re. 26
Our lord reward every man according to his righteousness and faith.

David ordened, and in a manner it was taken for a law, 1. re. 30.
that as his part is that goes down and fights, so shall his part be that
tarieth at the stuff.

David would not accept the thressinge flower of Arama for naughtes, the which
he might have had so, 2. reg. 24
but he bought it at a just price.

When Tobias hard the kyd cry. Tob. 2
He said. Look that it be not stolen, restore it again to the owners, for it
is not lawful for us to eat or to touch any thing of theft.

Proud and unjust Aman by the commandment of king Abasuerus, Esth. 7.9
was hanged on the self same galous, that he had made for Mardocheus. And on
the same day, the Jews enemies were slain by the Jews, the which they had
thought to have slain.

Jeremy prophesiynge against Babylon says. Iere. 50
Recompense her as she has deserved, and according as she has done so deal
with her again.

King Darius commanded those men which had accused Daniell to be cast
into the Lions den, Dani. 6
and the Lions or ever they came at the ground took them, and brake al their
bones a sonder.

The people did to those oulde Preastes which accused Susanna, Dani. 13
as they had done against their neighbors, for they put them to death
and slew them.

Antiochus caused Andronichus to be striped out of his purple clothing, 2. Mac.
4
and to be slain in the same place. Where he unjustly put Onias the hye
preaste to death.

The cruel and wicked Jason that had cast many one out unburied, 2. Match. 5
was thrown out him self, no man mourning for him, so that he neither enjoyed
the burial of a stranger, nether was partaker of his fathers sepulcher.

Antiochus the homicide and blasphemer, was sore plaged even as he had
entreated and plaged other, 2. Match. 9
so he died a miserable death in a strange country upon a mountain.

Our lord did merytoriouslye revoke the whole debte, Math. 18
that he liberally forgave the wicked and vngratiue servant, because he would
not forgive his fellow an hundred pence that he ought him.

Of the good and evil judgments of men. Capi. lx.
A Judge ought most diligentely to search out the cause that he is ignorante
in, Genesis 11.18
for it is said, that god from whom nothing can be hid, came down to se ye
city which the children of Adam builded, and likewise he says. I will go
down and see whethere they have done in deed according to that cry which is
come unto me, or not.

Judas unjustly commanded Thamar his daughter in law to be burned. Genesis 38.


Joseph's master geuinge to much credit to the words of his wife, Genesis 39.
put him in prison.

Causes of small importau^ce, as Iethro counseled Moses ought to be determined
by the lower judges, Exo. 18
and causes of great importance by the hier magistrates and rulers.

Moses gave none of the.xii. oxen and.vi. charettes to the children of Caath,
Number. 7.
although they were nie akinne unto him. But he gave al to the other Leuits,
because that they, being burdened with heuier things had more need of them,
the^ the other.

Moses counseled with our lord for the daughters of Salphaad. Nume. 27.
And our lord made him this answer, if a man dye and have no son, his
enheritaunce shall turn to his daughter.

It was Moses mind and will, Nume. 32
that the children of Ruben and other that desired to inhabit the land that
was now required and gotten, should go armed to battle before the children
of Israel, until the other countres were subdued and gotten.

Of Samuels children it is written, that they turned a side after Lucre, 1.
reg. 8.
and took rewards, and perverted the right.

David at the word and report of Siba, that gave him gifts, gave an unjust
sentence against Mephiboseth being absent. 2. re. 16.19.
But yet after he knew the truth of the matter, he was willing to revoke the
untrue sentence again.

Solomon gave just judgment of the two women, 3. re. 3
the which contended to be the mother of one child.

Iosaphat the king of Judah set judges in the land, and commanded them saying.
2. Para. 19.
Take heed what ye do. For ye execute not the judgments of man, but of God.
For all that ye shall judge, shall redounde unto you again. Let the fear of
our Lord be upon you, and do all things with diligence.

At Amans suggestion king Ahasuerus spoke unjustly of the people, Esther. 3.
saying unto Aman, do with that people as it pleases thee.

Esaias said thus by the judges of Israel. Thy princes are wicked and companions
of thieves. Esa. 1
They love gistes altogether, and gape for rewards. They help not the
fatherless to his right, nether will they let ye widows causes come before
them.

In as much as Jeremy prophesied from our LORD that Babylon, Iere. 38
should be taken of the Chald^es. The princes and rulers of the people, said
unto King Sedechias. Sir we beseech you, let this manne be put to death.
He answered then, saying. Lo, he is in your hands, for the king may deny you
nothing.

Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon commanded that all the wise men of Babylon
should be destroyed, Dani. 2.
because they could not declare the dream he had seen.

Although Darius the king of Persia knew right well that Daniel was an
innocente, Dani. 14
yet at the instaunce of his lords and princes, he caused him to be cast into
the lake and den of Lions.

Daniel did discreatly examine those two old judges, Dani. 13
that bare false witness against Susanna.

When Menclaus was accused in the judgment hall before Antiochus for money, 2.
match. 4.
which he promised was discharged, and his accusers wrongfully put to death.

The Jews made their complaint before king Antiochus of the unjust death of
Onias, 2. Match. 4.
the which Antiochus, although he was wicked, was sorry therefore, and
commanded that Andronicus should be stripped out of his purple clothing, and
slain, where he slew Onias.

Herodes judgment was to unjust when he sent forth men of war, math. ii.
and slew all the children that were in Beth leem.

At the peticion of a damsel that dau^sed, Herod the Tetrarch caused Iho^ the
Baptist to be beheaded in prison, mar. vi.
and yet he knew that he was a just man and a holy.

Nicodemus said unto the pharisees. Does your law judge any man: Ihon. vii
before it, hear him, and know what he has done?

This judgment was most unjust, when Pilate losed Barrabas the homicide, math.
xxvii
thief, and seditious person, and delivered unto the will of the Jews, our
Lord Jesus.

The Apostles answered the prestes and magestrates of the temple, Act. 4.
commaundinge Peter and Ihon not to teach any thing in the name of Jesus.
saying, whether is it right in ye sight of God, to harken unto you, more the^
to God judge ye.

When Paul had cast ye deuel out of the maid which had a sprite that
prophesyed, Act. 16
her masters unto whom by Prophesying she brought much luker and vauntage,
accused him, the magestrates caused Paul and Silas to be beaten with rods, and
to be cast into prison.

When the Jews accused Paul. Gallie the proconsul and ruler of the country
said. Act. 18
If it were a matter of wrong or an evil deed. O ye Jews, reason would that I
should hear you. But if it be a question of words, or of names, or of your
law, look ye to it your selves, for I will be no judge of such matters.

The hie priest commanded them that stood by, Act. 23
to smite Paul on the mouth. Then said Paul unto him. God shall smite the thou
painted wall, syttest thou and iudgest me after the law: and co^maundest me to
be smitte^ contrary to the law?

Act. 24.
Although Paul had reasonablye well excused him self before Felix the ruler,
yet Felix having in mind to please the Jews, left Paul to Festus his
successor, bound in prison.

Festus the president said. It is not the manner of the Romans to conde^pne
any man, Act. 25.
before that he which is accused, have the accusers before him, and have
license and place to answer for him self, concerning the crime laid against
him.

Festus not agreinge to the Jews which desired that Paul might be sent to
Jerusalem, said unto Paul, wylt thou go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these matters?

Then said Paul, I stand at Cesars judgment seat, Act. 25
where I ought to be judged, I appeal unto Caesar. Then spoke Festus with
deliberatyon, and answered: Thou have apealed unto Caesar, unto Caesar shall
thou go.

When they had heard Paul's reasons, king Agrippa and Festus spoke together,
Act. 26.
saying: This man has don nothing worthy of death: Then said Agrippa unto
Festus. This manne might have been let lose, if he had not appealed to Caesar.

Of penance. Ca. lxi.
SO long as Marie tarried with out the host, Number. xii.
the children of Israel removed not. For it is nether good nor profitable to
go, or to pason by the deseart and wilderness of this life, without the
bitterness of penance.

Nu. xiiii
The people of Israel, hearing that our Lord was angrye for their murmuring,
took great sorrow. And in the morning, they would have don more then our Lord
had commanded them.

Iudi. ii
At the voice of the aungel layinge the benefits of God unto the sinful
people, they cried out, and wept.

The children of Israel said unto our Lord. Iudi. 10.
We have sinned: do unto us whatsoever please thee. And they put away the
strange. Gods from them. Then there does follow, he had pity on the misery of
Israel.

David did sone repent, when Nathan did reprehend and rebuke him of his faut.
2. regu. 12.


Achab the most wicked king of Israel, rent his clothes, put on a cilice about
his flesh, 3. regu. 21.
and fasted, and lay in sackclothe, went barefote, and held down his head,
and the pain and punishment that he for his offenses had worthily deserved,
was delaied.

Manasses the king. of Judah, being bound with chains, ii. Pa. xxxii
was carried to Babylon he did great penance, and humbled him self exceadingly
before God, and he brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.

It was said unto Esdras lame^ting the sins of the people. i. Esd. x
If there be penance in Israel for this thing, I will make a couenaunte with
our God.

The people hearing of the fearful and terrible power of Holofernesse, cried
earnestlye, Judith. iiii
and humbled their souls with fastinges and Prayers, they and their wives, the
Priests put on heary clothes, and withal their hearts cried unto our Lord,
that he would viset his people.

And in the praise of Iudyth it is written, that she ware a smock of here and
fasted all the days of her life, except the Sabothes, Judith. 8.
and new mones, and the solemn days of the house of Israel.

Notwithstanding that Job was a simple, Job. 1.42
a true, and a just man, and such one as feared God, and eschued evil, yet he
says, I do penance in duste and ashes.

The captivity of Jerusalem being at hand, Esaias said. Esa. 22
Our Lord God called men in that day to weeping and mourning, to bauldnesse and
gyrding about with sackcloth.

The Ninevites at Jonas preching believed GOD, Jonas. 3
and Proclaimed fasting, and arayd them selves in sack cloth, as well the
great as the small of them.

Timotheus host drawing near, Machabeus and they that were with him, 2. match.
10.
prayed unto our Lord, sprinkled ashes upon their heds, being gyrded with
heary cloth about their loins, fell down before the aultare, and besought our
Lord that he would be merciful to them, and an enemy to their enemies.

Ihon the Baptist was sanctified or ever he came out of his mothers wo^b math.
11.
and nourished with his holy parents and fled into the desert, wh^re he led so
austere and so hard a life, that as it is said, he another did eat nor drink:
ye and add this to, that he was not clothed, for Camels here is no mete
garment for man.

How gladly our Lord received the sinful to penance, math. 4.
it appears by this, Lu. 5. Lu. 7
that he began his preaching with penance. Also he says that he came for that.
math. 9. math. 26
And declared ye same by his works, and by the example of Mary And of zacheus.
Lu. 15
Luke xix. And by the example of Peter. And by diverse symylytudes, the which
he wrote of the Sheape that was lost in the desarte. And of the groate that
the woman lost in her house. And of the Prodygall child, whom the Father
thought was dead, and after reuyued.

Mary Magdalen the example and patron of penance, came unto our lord
uncommanded, Lu. vii
nor was not ashamed of those that were at table with him, she stood at his
fete behind him weping. And to bring men to penance, he put an example of
certain, upon whom fell the tour in Siloe, and slew them. Lu. xiii.
And then he says, Except ye repent ye shall al likewise perysh. And as
touching the example of the sheape that pearyshed, and the grote that the
woman lost, and afterward was found. Our Lord does say, Lu. xv
that there is in heaven more joy over one sinner that repents and does
penance, then over ninety and nine just persons, which neade no penance.

Our lord gave unto the woman that was taken in aduoutry, Ihon. viii
a little and a short penance, saying: Go and sin no more.

Judas seeing that our lord was condemned, Math. xxvii
repented him self, and brought again the xxx. plates of silver. saying: I
have sinned, betraying the innocent blood. Truly he said the truth, but
inasmuch as he dispeared, he deserved no forgiveness.

Peter denying his master in the hie preastes court did sin, Math. 26.
but when he was willing to weep and to do penance, Luke. 22.
he went out. And note, that. Luke does ad to this, that our lord turned
back, and looked upon Peter.

Certain Jews, which were compuncte and prycked in their hearts, Act. 2.
said, ye men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter said unto them. Do
penance, and be baptized every one of you.

When they heard Peter's reasons wherefore he came to Cornelius, Act. 11.
and that he had baptized him, the brethren held their peace, and gloryfied
god saying. Then has God also to the gentyles granted repentance and
penance to life

Of the honor due unto our parents. Capitu. lxii.
Sem and Iaphet deserved their fathers blessinge, Genesis 9.
in as much as they did their duty unto him being bare. But his son Cain
was cursed because he deryded the nakedness of his father.

The fathers blessinge was a thing of great estimation among our elders.
Genesis 27.
As it appears in Jacob and Esau, for they carefully sought for the same.

Although Esau was a wicked man reproved of god, and hatinge his brother Jacob,
Genesis 27.
yet he would not kill him, duringe the life of his father Isaac. For he
said. The days of my fathers sorrow will come. In that, he honored his
father, being a frayde to offend him.

Judas bound him self to a great pain. Genesis 42.43
When he said to his father. If I bring not Benjamin again, and deliver him
unto the. Then let me bear the blame for ever. And yt is to be noted, that
when Ruben said, slaye my two sons if I bring him not to ye again, yt he
agreed not unto him. But yet he agreed unto Judas, saying the other forsayde
words.

The self same Judas desiring Joseph to send Benjamin again to his father,
among other things he repeted the forsaide words by the which he bound him
self to his father. Genesis 44.
And said more over. I cannot go up to my father if the child be absent,
onelesse I would se and be a witness of the calamite and wretchedness that shall
come on, and oppress my father.

Jacob blessinge his children, spoke thus against Ruben. Genesis 4^
Thou art cast out and unstable as water. Thou shall not grow and be
cheafeste, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed, and dydest defile it.

Our lord commanded by Moses, yt if a man have a son that is stubburn and
disobedient, Deuteronomy. 21.
that the people of the city should stone him to death.

Our lord recompenst the evil that Abimilech did unto his father in sleynge
his.lxx. brethren. Iudi. 9.


The children of Hely would not hear their father rebukinge and corr^tynge
them, 1. Reg. 2.4.
and therefore they felt the Uegeaunce and punishment of god

Because that Ionathas tasted a little honye against his fathers inhibition, 1.
Regu. 14
his father judged him to death, but yet the people delivered him, that he dyed
not.

David fl^ing from the presence and face of Saul, being in great necessite,
remembered his parents, 1 Regu. 22.
and diligently commended them to king Moab.

Absolon labored to expel his father David out of his kingdom, 2. regu. 15
but yet his chance was not good.

Solomon rose to mete his mother coming unto him, and bowed him self unto
her. 3. regum. 2.
And there was a seat set for the kings mother.

Two of Sennacheribs sons slew him, 4. regu. 19.
and yet nether of them reigned after him.

Old Tobias instructing his son, among other things he said. Tobi. 4.
When God takes away my soul, burye thou my body, and hold thy mother in
honor all the days of her life.

Our Lord castyng those out of the temple with a scourge that sold and
bought Oxen, John. 2.
sheep, and doves, and the chaungers of money, said, make not my fathers
house, an house of marchaundise, seeking very often times in this and other
things his fathers honor.

It is written of the child Jesus, that he went down with them, Luke. 2.
that is, with Mary and Joseph, and came to Nazareth, and was subject and
obedient unto them.

Also in a another place he says. John. 8.
I honor my father.

And hanging upon the cross, he commended his mother to his well-beloved
disciple. John. 19.
Whereby it appears, what carfulness he had for his mother, that forgot
her not at the point or last Article of death.

Of thanks giving for the benefits of God. Capi. lxiii.
Jacob gave thanks unto god most diligently, Genesis 31.
saying. Lord I am not worthy of ye least of all the mercies and truth, which
thou have showed unto thy servant.

Exo. 13.
Our lord would that the children of Israel should never forget their
deliverance out of Aegipte. And it shall be. Says he, a sign unto thee upon
thine hand, and for a remembrance between thine eyes, that the lords law
may be in thy mouth.

Moses and the children of Israel sange this song unto our lord, Exo. 15.
and said. Let us singe unto our lord, This was after they had so wonderfully
passed over the red see.

After they had obtained and gotten a wonderful great victory of their
enemies, Nume. 31.
the princes of the host of Israel came to Moses, saying that there was not
one of the children of Israel slain in the battle. And yet they had taken
of men and cattayle a great number. And for that cause they offerde up great
gifts unto our Lord.

Our Lord commanded that after the myraculus going over Jordan, they should
pitche, Iosu. 3.
and set up twelve stones, in and for a perpetual monument and memory of the
same.

After the victory obtained by Barath and Tebora of Sysara they sa^ge and gave
^hankes to our Lord. Iudi. 5.


Anna praid and praised our Lord for her son Samuel the which our Lord had
given her. 1. reg. 2.


Although the children of Israel in such battles as they wanne did fight
stoutlye and stronglye. Iudi. 20.
Yet they said that it was our Lord that smote their enemies, that the laud
and praise might be given unto our Lord.

When David heard of the revelation that God made by the Prophet Nathan, 2.
reg. 7
of the continuance of his kingdom, he gave God thanks most humbly and
devoutly.

Our Lord is much to be lauded and praised that gives his people a good
prince and prelate. 3. regu. 5.
Blessed be our Lord, says scripture, which has given unto David a wise son
over this mighty people.

1. Esd. 1.
Cyrus the king of Persia proclaimed through out all his Empire. Our LORD
God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and has commanded
me to build him a house at Jerusalem. Whosoever now among you is of his
people, our Lord his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, and
build the house of our lord God of Israel.

Tobi. 11.
When Tobias had recovered his sight, he and his wife, and all that knew him
before that he was blind, praised and glorified God.

Iudi. 16.
After the victory of Holofernes host was obtained, all the people resorted and
came to Jerusalem to praise and pray unto our Lord.

Dani. 2.
After that the vision of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon was reveled and opened
unto Daniel. He blessed our Lord God of heaven and said. The name of our Lord
be blessed, for wisdom and strength are his.

The iii. children being delivered from the burning fire and flame of the
furnace, Dani. 3.
praised our lord well and devoutly. And not they only gave thanks unto god
for yt thing, but Nabuchodonozor did also cause the wonderful things of our
lord to be proclaimed through out al his kingdom.

After that the temple under Judas Machabeus was erected and purifyed, 1. Match.
4.
they worshypped and gave thanks to the GOD of heaven, that had prospered
and given them the victory.

Judas Machabeus, and the people of Jerusalem wrote unto Aristobolus, 2. Match. 1
saying, we being delivered by god from great dangers and pearils,
magnifyce^tly do give thanks unto him.

When the blessed virgin had herd the laud and praise that Elizabeth gave her,
LuKe. 1.
saying. Blessed art thou among women, she praised and lauded God for the
benefytes given to her and to all the world, with these words. My soul
magnyfyeth ye lord.

We read in the gospel, that when our Lord purposed to do some great miracle,
John. 6.11.
that oftentimes he looked up to heaven and gave thanks, Mat. 26.
as it manifestly appears in the multiplicatio^ of the loves. In the
resuscitation of Lazarus, and in the institucion of the blessed and holy
sacrament.

After Ihon the Baptist was born, LuKe. 1.
and that zacharias had recovered his speech, he prophesying praised our Lord,
saying: Blessed be our Lord God of Israel.

Simeon took the child Jesus up in his arms, Luke. 2.
and blessed our Lord.

When the people saw yt our Lord had healed the man of the palsy, Mat. 9.
they meruailed and glorified god, which had given such power to men.

And likewise when ye widows son was revived, Luke. 7.
there came a fear on the^ al, and they magnified god, and gave unto him the
glory, saying. A great prophet is risen up among us.

One of those x. lepers yt which were cleansed at Gods commandment, turned
back again, Luke. 17.
and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him thanks.

After that our Lord had supt with his disciyles, Mat. 26.
and had said grace, they went out unto mount Oliver.

The halt that was healed by Peter, Act. 3.4.
entered with the Apostles into the temple, walkinge and leapinge, and praisyng
God. Then there follows. All men praised God because of that which was done,
for the man was above xl. year old, on whom the miracle of healing was showed.

Paul gave thanks for ye benefits to him and other exhibited. 1. Timo. 1.
To him self in his conuersyon. I thancke my Lord god that comforted me in
Christ, whereas before I was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and contumelious, but
yet I obtained merrye, because I did it ignorauntly through unbelief.

And in his conversation, thanks be unto god, 2. Cor. 2.
which alwais gives us ye triumph and victory in Christ Jesus.

And devoutly he gives thanks for the benefits exhibited to his brethren.
First verily I give God thanks for you all, Roma. 1.
that your Faith is spoken of in all the world.

1. These. 2.
And to the Thessalonians. What thanckes can we recompense to God again for you
over all the joy that we joy for your sakes before God.

1. These. 5.
And he exhorts them to give thanks for all things. Rejoice ever, pray
continuallye. In all things give thanks.

Of gratitude for the benefits of man accepted. ca. lxiiii.
AFter that Abraham had smitten and overcome the four kings, Genesis 14.
and had brought again and recovered all such substance and goods as they
had stolen and gotten. The king of Sodom came forth to mete him, and offered
him al those goods and substance, the only beasts excepted. Where is to be
noted, that notwythding Abraham refused that was proferd him yet it was his
mind that his company should have part of ye pray that was taken, not being
ingrate or vnmyndefull of their aid and pains taken.

Laban seeing the Jewels, that is, the earinges, and the bracelets that Abraham's
servant had given his sister Rebecca, Genesis 24.
went out unto him and said: come in thou blessed of our Lord, and so he
receued him into his house with great humanity and gentleness.

After that Jacob had served his uncle Laban many years, Genesis 29.
Laban said unto him. Though thou be my brother, shuldst you serve me for
naught?

Pharao ye king of Egypt was very kind and thankful unto Joseph for ye
exposition of his dream, Genesis 41.
and magnificently he did exalt him.

Iethro the Priest of Madian was thankful and kind unto Moses, Exo. 2.
because that he, when his Daughters came to water their sheep, defended them:
he caused him to be called into dinner, and gave him his daughter in marriage.

Iosue was very careful that Rahab the harlot, Iosu. 6.
which hid and saved his messengers, should not pearish in Ierico that was
destroyed.

When Gedeon had delivered Israel from their ennemies, Iudi. 8.
they said unto him. Reign thou over us, both thou, thy son and thy sons
son, for thou have delivered us out of the hand of Madian.

Ruth. 2.
And Naomy said, commending Boom yt looked most beningly upon Ruth: blessed be
he of our Lord, for that favor and grace that he showed to the living, he has
reserved for the dead.

Because Cineus was good and favorable unto the children of Israel, 1. regu.
15.
Saul when he destroyed Amalech, did spare him.

David said to Abiather, whose father loved David. Abide thou with me, 1.
regu. 22.
and fear not, for if any man seek thy soul, he shall seek mine also.

David sent to the men of Iabes in Galaad, 2 regu. ^.
that buried Saul and his children, and gave them thanks.

For the love that David had to Ionathas Saul's son, 1. ^egu. 9.
he made an inquisition whether there were any man left of the house or kindred
of Saul. And ordained that Mephiboseth the son of Ionathas should be a
continual gest at his own table.

The Queen of Saba brought king Solomon many gifts. 3. regu. 10.
And he gave her according to all her desire, what soever she asked, besides
that he gave her of a free will with his own hand.

Helias had compassyon upon the widow that sustained him, 3. regu. 17.
and so effectuously prayed for her son that was departed, that he reuyued
him again.

Abdias alleged the pleasures and benefits that he had done for our Lords
prophets, 3. regu. 18.
the which he hid when they were sought for to be put to death. And al was
for this intent, that he should not send him with no ieoperdous message.

When Helias should ascend into heaven, 4. regu. 2.
he well and munificently rewarded his disciple Elizeus.

Elizeus offered most gently the Sunamite his hostess, 4. regu. 4.
to speak to the king for her, if she had any business with him. Again he
obtaind and gat her a child, and afterward being dead revived the same.

Naaman the Syrian being cleansed of his leprosy at Elizeus word and peticion,
4. regu. 5.
did offer him gifts, saying I pray the take a blessyng of thy servant.

The Jews accusers sent an Epistle to king Arthaxers^s among all other
things containing this. 1. Esd. 4.
We remember the salt that we did eat in the palace. And in as much as we
thought it against all right to see thy loss and hurtes, we have sent. etc.

Young Tobias rehearsed unto his father with great gratitude and thanks the
benefits and good tournes that he had received of Raphael the aungel. Tobi. 12.


Queen Esther was not unkind to Mardocheus her nourisher. Esth. 4.


Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon hearing the interpretatyon of his dream,
Dani. 4.5.
extold Daniel, and gave him great gifts. Likewise Balthazar honored him for
the declaration of the scripture that was written in the wall.

When Judas Machabeus heard that the Scithopolites were favorable unto the
Jews in the time of their tribulation, 2. match. 12.
he thanked them.

The elders of the Jews said unto our lord Jesus, Lu. 7
of the Centurion that prayed him for his servant. He is worthy that thou
should do this for him, for he loves our nation, and has built us a
sinagoge.

Paul did fully recognize the benefits that were done unto him. Gala. 4
For he says to the Galathians, ye received me as an Aungel of god, and would
have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.

I was even filled after that I receued of Epaphroditus the things which were
sent from you with an odure of a sweet smell, Phil. 4
a sacrifice accepted and pleasant to god.

Our lord give mercy unto the household of Onesiforus, 2. Timo. 8
for he often re^reshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain.

And also for Onesimus philemons servant, the which did minister unto him in
prison, he writes to Philemo^ affectuous letters.

Of ingratitude. Capitu. lxv.
Gene. 40
THe chief butler in the time of his prosperity had clean forgotten Joseph his
interpreter.

Gene. 31
Jacob did serve his uncle Laban profytablye and faithfully, and he would often
have deceived him.

When the people saw, that it was long or Moses came down out of the
mountain, Gene. 32
they said unto Aaron, up make us gods to go before us. Behold now how
soon they had forgotten the benefits received of the true and living god.

The children of Israel lothed in the desert that good meat given them, Nume.
11
from heaven without their pain or labor, they wept, saying, who shall
give us flesh to eat.

The Aungel of god did impropriate and cast in the children of Isreal's teethe
the benefits of god exhibited unto the^, Iudi. 2.
because they had broken the couenante and appointment, and had transgressed
the commandments of god.

Saul received many benefits and good turns of David: 1. re. 17.
and yet he did his best to kill him.

David saved the inhabitours of the land, 1. re. 23
and yet they would have betrayed and delivered him into Saul's hands that
persecuted him.

The children of Ammon recompensed honor, 2. re. 10
and good deeds with injury, when they vituperated and put David's messe^gers to
rebuke and shame, which he sent to comfort the king over the death of his
father.

David and Ioab were ingrate and unkind to faithful vrias, 2. regu. 18
of the which two, the first sent letters. And the other did Cruellye
execute them.

After that David had revoked Absolon his son, 2. reg. 15
and had forgeuen him the murder committed against his brother Ammon, he
made insurrectio^ against his father.

2. re. 16
Dauyd in disheretinge so sone Miphiboseth Ionathas son remembered not the
amite and love that was between his father and him.

3. reg. 12
Our lord exalted and set Ieroboas over ten tribes. And by and by elated with
pride and a will to rule, he perverted the people from the true honouringe and
worshipping of god.

Eliseus had done much good for the king of Israel. 4. re. 6.
And all his people. And yet for the dearth that was in the country, he
commanded his head to be smitten of. But god disposed it other wise.

2. Para. 24.
Ioas the king of Judah remembered not the mercy and kyndnesse that Ioiada the
hye preast had done unto him but slew zacharia his son reproving and
rebukinge him, that he had le^^e our lord, and transgressed his
commandments.

Amasias trusting to the succoure and healpe of god, overcame the Edomites,
and the children of Seir. 2. Para. 25
And yet brynginge their gooddes a way, he bowed him self and worshipped
before them. And the prophet that was sent unto him, said, why haste thou
sought and honored the gods of the people, which were not able to deliver
their own people out of thy hand.

Ezechias did not unto god according to it that he had showed him, 2. para.
32
for his heart arose.

Many have abused and turned the goodness and honor of princes showed unto
them, Esth. 1
into pride. Nor they are not content to give thanks for benefits, and to
violate the law of humanite in the^ selves, but also they hope and th^nk to
escape the sentence and iudgeme^te of god, that sees all.

Our lord complaining of the people of Iewry, says. I have norished and
brought up children, but they despised me. Esa. 1
And he proves that they are least thankeful then beasts. There follows.
The ox has known his owner, and the ass his masters crib. But Israel has
received no knowledge, my people has no understanding.

Our LORD would have done and showed many and great benefytes to Achab the
king of Judah, Esa. 7
as he sent him word by Esaye, but he despised too receive them.

Ionathas sent strong armed men, 2. match. 10
the which delivered Demetrius from the hands of the Antiochians.

And yet afterward D^metrius did alienate him self clean from Ionathas, nor
rewarded him not according to the benefytes that he had showed him, but
troubled him very sore.

Of the ten Leapers that our Savior cleansed, Lu. 17
there came but one again to magnify God, and to give him thanckes.

The damsels masters or Parents, out of whom Paul did cast the spirit of
Prophesye, Act. 16
were very ingrate and unkind unto Paul. For why they sorowed more the loss
of their gayn and vauntage, then they reioysed in the expulsyon of the devil.

That truth engenders hatred. Ca. lxvi.
BAlaac the king of Moab was very dolourous and sorry, when that Balaam spoke
any good of the children of Israel. Notwythstandynge it was true that he
spoke. Nor he did not honor him, as he would have honored, Nume. 24.
if he had spoken pleasauntlye and after his mind. I thought says
Balaac, to promote thee unto honor, but our Lord has kept the back from
worship.

Ionathas Gedeons son, that told the truth of Abimelech and his, Iudi. 9
which had vnryghtfully made him king was fain to fly from the face and
presence of Abimelech.

Saul was angry with his son Ionathas, 1. reg. 20
because he excused David, the which was an innocent and blameless toward
Saul.

Achab did hate Micheas the Prophet for tellyng him the truth, 3. reg. 22
I hate him, says he, for he does not prophecy good unto me but euel

When Ananias the Prophet had reproved Aza the king of Judah, 2. para. 16
because he put his trust in Bennadab the King of Syria, Aza was wroth, and
sent the seer into prison.

zacharias the son of Ioiade at ye commandment of king Ioas was stoned, 2.
Para. 24
because he rebuked the king and his Lords, that they had left and forsaken
our Lord.

When Achior had rehearsed the great and noble things that our Lord had
done for the children of Israel, Judith. 5.6
and that his power was great, Holofernes princes and Lords were angry, and
thought to slay him, and Holofernes him self disdained the thing vehemently.

Sedechias the king of Judah, laid Jeremy the Prophet in prison, Iere. 31
saying, why doste thou prophecye thus? Thus says the Lord etc.

When Baruch had red the words Iere. 36
that he had written out of ye mouth of Jeremy, before Ioachim the king of
Judah, he caused the book to be cast into the fire, because it declared the
truth of the captivity of Jerusalem, and the king commanded Baruch and Jeremy
to be taken, but they were not found then as god would.

When that Jeremy prophesied the captivity of the city, he was cast into a
lake, Iere. 38
where there was no water, but mire, and so he descended and stacke fast in the
mire.

Because Daniel proved Bell, and the dragon to be no Gods, Dani. 14
they of Babylon gathered them selves together to come unto the king, and
procured that Daniel should be cast into the Lions den.

Because of Eliazarus good and true words, they that drue him to torment, and
that a little before were mild and gentle, 2. match. 6
waxed wroth and angry.

Because Ihon the Baptist said unto Herod. math. 14
It is not lawful for the to have thy brothers wife, mar. 6
he imprisond him, and afterward behedded him.

When our lord had reproved the hipocrites and pharisees of many things they
began grievously to wax busy about him, Lu. xi
to stop his mouth, laiyng wait for him, and seking to catch some thing
out of his mouth, whereby they might accuse him.

The pharisees cursed him that was borne blind, John. 9
and healed of our lord, and cast him out of the Sinagoge, because he
confessed the truth most constantlye.

The hye preastes hearing the words of the Apostles as concerning Christ's
doctrine, Act. 5
claue a sonder, and sought means to slay them, and being beaten warned them,
that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, And they departed from the
counsel, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy, to suffer rebuke for his
name.

When the Jews heard Saint Steuens words, Act. 7
their hearts claue a sunder, and they gnashed on him with their tethe, and
cast him out of the city, and stoned him.

Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth. Gala. 4


Of lies and lesinges. Capitu. lxvii.
THe first lie was spoken by the serpent, Gene. 3
which said to the woman, ye shall not die.

Gene. 18
Sara being afraid, with a lie excused her self that she laughed not.

Gene. 38
And fornicators disdain to make lies, as Judas, which said: She cannot accuse
us of any lesinge, that is Thamar, to who^e he promised a kid.

Exo. 1
The lesinge or lie that ye mid wives made to Pharao, unwilling to slay ye
children of the Hebrews, was temporally rewarded, but not eternally, although
it was a lie full of pitye and compassyon.

Exo. 9.10
Pharao would often have deceived Moses through lies but yet it auaild him
nothing.

The people w^ping and sitting in the wilderness, Nume. 11
said, we remember the fyshe we did eat in Egypt for naught.

The Gabaonites being crafty and deceitful of thought, Iosu. 9
would lyinglye have deceived Joshua. But he used good and wise counsel, and
bringing them into servitude and bondage, did not break the covenant and
leage made between them.

It is never lawful to lie, to tell the truth is always lawful. 1. re. 16.
And it is expedient at some times for a man to hold his peace, as Samuel
did, saying, I came to offer and to do sacryfice unto our Lord, and yet he
came principally to do a another thing: Not withstanding he said that he came to
do that.

Saul said that his servant had conspired against him, because they took
not David. 1. re. 22
And he said that David his servant laid wait for him, when that he laid wait
for David.

One of David's sons being slain tidinges came to David, 2. regu. 13
that Absolo^ had killed all the kings sons. So do men oftentimes that bring
tales and rumors.

Chusai officiously did lie unto Absolon, saying. As I have obeyed thy father,
so will I obey thee.

The man of God foretold Ieroboas the destruction of this aultare, ^. reg. 13
the which through the lie of a false Prophet was deceived, and brake Gods
commandment.

The two false witnesses that were brought forth against Naboth, 3. reg. 21
was the cause that he was stoned.

The false Spirit being in the mouth of the Prophets, 3. re. 22.
deceived Achab, persuading him to go unto the battle. For there he was
wounded to death.

Judith by the words that she spoke to Holofernes, Judith. 10
deceived him: although she be excused, because of her godly intent and
purpose.

Aman invented a mischeuous lie, to destroy Mardocheus, because he would not
bow his knee, Esth. 3
nor worship him.

The princes and commen people that were left after the destructyon of
Jerusalem, Iere 42
came to Ieremye, and said that they would do, what so ever he would command
them whether it were good or badde, but yet they kept their large promise but
slenderly.

The two old priests made a very detestable and a pernitius lie against
Susanna, Dani. 13
whom they should have commended for her most constante chastity.

Antiochus sent his chief treasurers into the cities of Judah, which came to
Jerusalem, 1. match. 1.
speaking peaceable words unto them, but all was dysceate, for when they had
given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the city, and smote it sore, and
destroyed much people.

When Antiochus Eupator besieged Jerusalem he sent unto those that were within
it, i. Match. 6.
to make peace, and they received it, and the king and Princes made an oath unto
them, but he brake his oath, and commanded the wall to be destroyed.

Alchimus that desired to be the hye priest said unto king Demetri^: Judas and
his brethren have lost ^ slain thy friends. And afterward he came into the
land of Judah, and sent 1. match. 7
messengers to Judas and his brethren and spoke unto them with peaceable words,
but under craft and disceyt. And at length it was proved, that there was
neither judgment, nor truth in them.

Demetrius promised Ionathas to restore the castle unto him, but when the
Jews, 1. match. 11
which Ionathas sent, had won it, Demetrius lied and dissembled all that ever
he spoke, and wythdrew him self from Ionathas.

Simon sent unto Triphon a hundred talents of silver, i. match. 13
and Ionathas two sons, to discharge him. For Triphon promised to send
Ionathas if they would do so. But he did but fable and lie. For he kept the
monye, and slew both Ionathas and his children.

The Jews, and pryncipallye the Scribes and Pharisees, math. 11.22
the which envied him, made lies against our lord Jesus, saying: that he was a
drynker of wine, a liar, a glutton, and one that forbad men to pay tribute
unto Caesar, a subuerter of the people, and one that seduced them, a blasphemer,
and possessed with the devil.

The Jews invented a very false and a wicked lie, Mat. 28.
when they corrupted the kepers of our Lords sepulcher, saying, say ye that
his disciples came by night, and stole his body away while ye slepte.

Ananias and Saphyra his wife, made a lie unto Peter concerning the price of
the land, Act. 5.
the which lie was afterward by Peter most grievously revenged.

The Jews ordained two false witnesses against Steven, Act. 6.
saying. This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against the law
and this holy place.

There were many lesinges and lies invented and found against Paul. Act. 16.
For the master of Phitonissa dwelling among the Philippians, out of whom
Paul had cast the spirit of prophecy, said unto the magestrates and rulers
of the city: These men trouble our city, being Jews, and preach
ordinances, which are not lawefull for us to receive.

And some there were at Athens that said, what will this babbler say? Other
said: Act. 17.
He seems to be a tydinges bringer of new deuels.

Again. There were certain Jews at Jerusalem that laid hand on Paul, cryinge.
Act. 21.
Men of Israel healpe. This is the manne that teaches all men every where
against the people, and the law, and this place, furthermore he has brought
Gentyles into the temple, and has polluted this holy place.

And afterward Tertulius the Jews Orator said before Felir the ruler. Act.
24.
This Paul is a pestilent fellow and a mouer of debate unto all the Jews in the
whole world.

And furthermore when the barbarus Act. 28.
and strange people saw in the Isle of Mitelene the viper hang on Paul's
hand, they said among them selves: No doubt this manne is a murderer,
whom, though he have escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live.

Paul bears witness of him self Some men affirm that we say, Roma. 3.
as men spoke falsely of us. Let us do euel, that good may come thereof.

And to the Corinthians. Some say that our epistles are grievous, but our
bodily presence weak, and our spech and communication rude.

Of Treason. Capitu. lxviii.
Saul being vered with the deuel, David sung and played before him, 2. Cor.
10.
and Saul went about to nail him to the wall with the iauelynge that he
held in his hand.

Saul promised to give David his daughter in marriage, 1. Re. 18.19
that through occasion the Philistians might kill him.

David saved and defended the inhabitours of Seely from the philistines 1.
regu. 18.
hooste that besieged them, And yet they would have betrayed and delivered him
unto Saul his enemy, 1. regu. 23.
that even to death did persecute him.

After that Saul had lamented the persecution of David, 1. regu. 24.
and that David was sworn unto him: he persecuted and followed David as
wrongfully and as sharply as ever he did before.

Urias carried from David to Ioab, letters of his own death. Amnon David's
son, caulde unto him his sister Thamar as though he would have eaten meat
at her hand, 2. regu. 11. 2. regu. 13.
and afterward defiled her.

Absolon called his brother Amnon to a banquet, 2. regu. 13.
and slew him.

When Ioab had saluted Amasam, and had taken him by the chyn as though he
would have kyst him, 2. regu. 20.
he smote him in the side, and he shed out his bowels to the ground.

zambry the captain of half the horsemen, 3. Re. 16.
slew Hela his Lord and master, and did reign after him seven days only.
He was besieged, and he burnt him self, and the kings palace.

Selum Iabes son, conspired against zacharias the king of Israel his lord
and master, 4. regu. 15.
and slew him, and after him he reigned in his slede one month only.

As Sennacherib was praiyng and woorshippinge his god in the temple 4. regu. 19.
his two sons smote him with the sweard But yet neither of his sons reigned
after him.

Certain of Nehemias enemies would maliciusly have made a confederation wih
him, 2. Esd. 6.
and thought to have done him a displeasure, and gave money that he might be
brought to sin.

Two of king Ahaswerus porters or chamberlaines, that sat at the coming in of
the Palace, Esth. 2.
would have laid hands on the king, and have slain him.

Ismael the son of Nathania came and many more with him to dine with Godolia,
4. regu. 2^.
whom the king had made captain over the men of Babylon which were in
Iewry, And after diner they rose and slew him, that would not have thought nor
believed no such euel in them.

King Antiochus sent his chief treasurer into the cities of Judah, 1. Match. 1
which came to Jerusalem, and spoke peaceably but yet deceitful words unto
those that were within. For when they had given him credence, he fell suddenly
upon the city, and smote it sore, and destroyed much people of Israel.

When king Antiochus Eupator besieged Jerusalem, and could not take it. 1.
Match. 6.
He sent unto those that were within to be at peace with them, and they
received it. He swear unto the^, and sone after brake his oath that he had made.

Ptolomeus the king of Egypt went about through disceit to obtain Alexanders
his Nephews kingdom. 1. Match. 11.
And entering into the cities of Alexandria with a great host of men, and
received by the kings commandment in to them very honorably, he left me^ of
war to keep them.

When Triphon saw yt Ionathas came with so great an host, he commanded him to
keep but a few with him, 1. Match. 12.
and to send away the reast, and when he had done so, he was taken, and a
thousand that were with him, and the other returned home again.

As Triphon went forth to walk with the young king Antiochus his Lord and
master, 1. Match. 13.
he slew him traitorously, and reigned in his stead,

Ptolomy the son of Abobus, the hie priests son in law, 1. Match. 16
made a banquet for Simon and his ii. sons. And when they had dronken well, he
slew them.

When Apollinus was come to Jerusalem, fainingly he kept him self quiet and
still until the Saboth day. 2. Match. 5.
And then when the Jews kept holy day, he slew a great multitude of the^.

Judas Machabeus hearing yt they, which besieged the towers, where in their
ennemies the Gentiles were, 2. Match. 10
had taken money, and let part of their ennemies go, he slew them as
traytoures and sellers of their brethren. And went in hand and took the tours

The treason that the most wicked Judas used against his Lord, Mat. 26.
passed al other treasons in iniquity and peruersity, LuKe. 22.
the which sold his Lord and master for a little money, John. 18.
and delivered him with a kiss into the hands of his ennemies.

Certain of the Jews came to the chefest of the priests and elders, Act. 13.
desiring them to do so much, as to cause Lysias the Tribune, that had Paul
in hold, to bring him forth among the^, as though they would have known^
something more perfectly of him. And they were even ready by and by to kill him.

Of adulation anf flatery. Cap. lxix.
WHen Chore and his companio^s s^ode up against Moses and Aaron, they said,
Number. 16
it is sufficient enough for us, that all the multitude are holy, and that
our LORD is among them. In the which words if appears that they
flattered and sought for the benevolence and favor of the people.

The young man yt brought David tidinges of Saul's death and his sons was slain
by David's commandment yet he thought that he had brought prosperous and
good tidinges. 2. regu^ 1.


The two thieves that slew Isboseth Saul's son, 2. regu. 4.
and brought his head unto David, thought to please him. But he declared well
unto them, that it displeased him, for he commanded them to be slain, and
their hands and fete to be cut of, and hanged over the poole in Hebron.

Absolon said unto the man that had matters before king David, 2. regu. 15.
thy words and communication seem to me good and just. But there is no man
deputed to hear thee.

The evil and false Prophets told Achab the king of Israel that he should
prosper in his wars: 3. regu. 22.
for they knew that he would be glad to hear such tidinges.

After the death of Ioiada ye priest, the lords of Judah came and made
obeisaunce to the king, 2. Para. 24.
the which being pleased with their adulation, harkned unto them. And so they
left the house of our Lord, and served groves and Idols.

The Jews ennemies that edifyed the temple after their return out of
captivity, 1. Esd. 4
wrote thus unto the king. We remembering the salt yt we have eaten in thy
palace, thought that it was against reason to se thy damage and losses. etc.

Judith. 2
Nabuchodonozor said unto the elders, and captains of his wars, that this was
his thought and purpose, to bring the hole earth under his dominion. Now when
that thing pleased them all. etc.

King Ahasuerus being wroth with Queen Uasthi, questioned with his wise
counselors, Esth. 1.
what sentence or law should be executed upon the Queen. The which counselors
did not cool the kings furye, nor excuse her that was absent, but one
answered with indignation, saying. The kings indignation is just.

Amans friends, Esth. 5
and his wife, not perceiuyng the cankerd and euel mind that he had toward
Mardocheus, did not reprove nor rebuke him, but said. Command thou a hye pair
of galowes to be framed and made.

The princes and hie estates of Darius the king of Perse, Dani. 6
having a desire yt the king should make an unjust decree, did purpose a thing,
that seemed to pertain to his honor.

Alchinus that wicked traitor, willing to be made the hie priest, i. match. 7
said unto king Demetrius: Judas and his brethren have destroyed thy friends,
after there follows, ye the king made Alchinus the hie priest, and commanded
him to be revenged, and to punyshe the children of Israel.

After that Ihons disciples were departed and gone, Mat. xi
our Lord began wonderfully to praise him, the which thing makes against
those, that do openly praise men, and seacreatly detract and backbite them.

The Pharisees going about to take Christ in his words, Mat. 22
began to praise and to flatter him, saying. Master we know that art you true,
and teach the way of God truly.

Herod Agrippa that great king perceiving that he pleased the Jews because
he had taken certain of the congregation, Act. 12.
and had killed James the brother of Ihon, proceaded further to have taken
Peter.

Act. 12
The people gave a shout to Herod that wicked king, the which had slain James,
and incarcerated Peter, saying. It is the voice of a God, and not of a man.

Act. 24.
Tertullius the orator which was brought in against Paul by the president
Felix, did at the beginnynge of his oration flatter Felix.

Of derision, and contumelious reprofe. Ca. lxx.
THe men of Sadoch and Phanuel derided Gedeon persecuting Zebee and Salmana,
Iudi. 8.
but of that followed mischaunces. For afterward he entreated them very
rigorously and euel.

Nabal contemned contumeliously the words of David's messengers, saying, 1.
regu. 25.
what is David? And what is the son of Isai? There is plentye of servants
now a days, that break away from their masters.

Michol seeing king David dansinge before the Ark of the Lord, 2. regu. 6.
despised him, because she saw him bare. And afterward deriding and mocking
him she said. O how glorious was ye king this day?

Wicked Iezabell spoke scornful and mocking words unto Achab. 3. regu. 21.
Thou art a man of great authority, and do govern thy kingdom well.

For as much as the children deryded and mocked Elizeus the prophet, 4. regu.
2.
saying. Go up thou bald head. Two bears tare and devoured xlii. of the^.

King Hezechias posts went swiftly from city to city, 2. Para. 30.
warnyng ye children of Israel to return unto our Lord. But they laughed
the^ to scorn, and mocked them.

2. Para. 36
Our Lord sent his prophets daily unto them, and warned them to spare his
people, and his dwellinge place. But they mocked the messengers of god, and
little regarded his words, and misused his prophets.

When Sanabalat and Tobias hard say that the walls of Jerusalem were a
buildinge, 2. Esd. 4
they mocked the buylders.

When Tobias was blind, his friends and kinsfolk laughed his living to scorn,
Tob. 2.
saying: where is now thy hope, for the which thou have done alms, and
buried the dead?

Nicanor seeing the burnt sacrifices that were offered, for the king laughed them
to scorn with comtempt, 1. match. 7
and spoke proudly and disdainfullye, ye and swore in his wrath.

Antiochus that cruel tiraunte, being kindled in anger by the words of the
seventh brother, 2. Match. 7.
was more cruel upon him, then upon all the other, and took indignation that he
was so lightly regarded.

Our lord was diverse manner of ways derided, as it shall afterward apeare in
the chapter of patience.

Certain Jews, Act. 2.
when they saw that our lords disciples after the infusion of the holy ghost,
spoke diverse languages and tongues, said mockingly These men are full of new
wine.

When the Athenienses had heard Act. 17
of the resurrection of the dead that Paul preached. Some mocked. And other
said, let us hear the again of this matter.

Of Detractors and euel speakers. Capi. lxxi.
Joseph's lady and mestres spoke wickedly to her husband of him being Innocent
and chaste. Genesis 39


Pharo said, who doubts, but that ye have some mischefe in hand Exo. 10
whereby it appears that evil men do affirm, and at sometimes do lay to
good men's charges with unjust boldenes the thing which is unjust and false.

Mary and Aaron upon a light occasion spoke against Moses, Nume. 12.
but quickly after there followed a pain and punishment that revenged the matter.

Nume. 14.
The children of Israel dispraysed the land of promise to their great pain
and punishment.

Nume. 16.
By the occasion of Chores and his fellows sedition, many were most fearfully
slain. And yet after that, the multitude murmured against Moses and Aaron,
saying: ye have killed the people of our Lord.

Although Balaam was evil, yet he said, Number. 23.
that he in no wise would curse the people which our Lord had blessed And as
touching that, there are many worse found then be, the which do gladly and
more oftentimes curse and backbite the good, then the perverse and euel.

Saul at the beginning was exceading goo^: 1. regu. 10.
but yet the children of Beliall said: how can he save us?

By the occasion of Doeg the Idumite declaring unto Saul that Abimelech ^he
priest had comforted and refreshed David, 1. re. 22.
he slew.lxxxv. men that did wear a linen Ephod. And many mo women and
children.

The lords of the Philistines caused Achis the king of Seth, 1. reg. 19
to remove David (the which by his judgment was good) from his honest office
and place, that he had preferred him unto.

David commanded the young man that showed of king Saul and his sons
death, 2. reg. 1
to be slain. And yet he thought that he had brought him prosperus and glad
tydinges.

The chefest of the children of Ammon said unto their lord. 2. re. 10
T^inkest thou that David for the honor of thy father has sent comfortours to
the? And so they perverted the simple and pure intention of David.

Absolon ambitiusly desyringe the kingdom, 2. regu. 15
said unto one that had busynesses before him: There is no man deputed of
the king to hear the.

Siba Mephiboseth servant did wickedly bacbyte his lord unto David: 2. re. 16
and his evil words were sone believed.

As the children of Israel, which were returned from Babylon were buyldinge
of the temple: i. Esd 4
their enemies sent a wicked and an untrue epistle to king Artaxarses, to
cause him to let and to hinder the buyldinge.

When that Sara Raguels daughter reproved one of her maidens for her fault:
Tob. 3
she answered her saying. God let us never se son nor daughter of the more
upon earth, then kyller of thy husbands.

By the only occasion of Mardocheus that would not worship nor bow to proud
Aman, he informed ye king Ahasuerus, that the Jews condemned his
commandment, Esth. 2
and that they sowed discord and debate throwoute all his kingdom. And upon
report ye were condemned all to dye, but yet the divine mercy provided for
their deliverance.

Because that Jeremy preached that the Caldes should take the city of
Jerusalem. Iere. 38.
The princes and rulers of the people said unto king Sedechias, This man
labors nor seeks not for peace of ye people, but for mischefe

The Caldes came and accused the Dani. 3
Jews saying unto Nabuchodonosor ye king, that Daniels fellows did not worship
his gods and that they were transgressors and breakers of the kings decrees and
laws.

The princes and lords of Darius the king of Persia, Dani. 6
enuyinge and beringe hatred to Daniel, accused him to the king, that he prayed
and worshipped another god the^ king Darius

These two old prestes went about filthely to defame Susan, Dani. 13
but yet god by an abstinent and a chaste child did wonderfully deliver her.

Alchimus, which would have been the hie preast, and certain other, said unto
king Demetrius, i. match. 7
Judas and his brethren have destroyed thy friends and have scatered us out of
our country.

There came together against Ionathas certain pestilent and wicked men of
Israel, i. match. 10
to provoke king Alexander against him. But the king regarded them not.

Simon of the tribe of Benjamin, a ruler of ye temple, 2. match. 3
came to Appolonius, and told him that the treasury was full of innumerable
money.

This Simon of whom we spoke before, 2. match. 4
reported and spoke the worste of Onias the prouisor of ye city. And was bold
and nothing ashamed to call him an enemy of the realm, whi^he was so faithful
a defender of his people, and so fervent in the law of god.

2. Match. 24
Alchimus coming to king Demetrius, among al other things said As long as
Judas lives, it is not posible for men to be in quiet.

mat. 9.
When the pharisees saw that our lord sat at meat in Mathews house, ye said
unto his disciples, why eats your master with Pubblica^s and sinners.

Lu. 19
The like chanced be zacheus. For they murmurd, that he was gone in to tarry
with a man that is a sinner.

math. 11.
And of John the baptist that was a great faster, they said. He has the
deuell. And of our lord Jesus that did eat with sinners, they said. Behold a
glutton, and an unmeasurable drincker of wine, and a friend unto Pubblicans and
sinners.

After that the pharisees had seen the miracle of him that was borne blind,
John. 9
and how that he was restored to his sight by our lord Jesus, they bacbited
our lord, saiynge, we know that this man is a sinner, and they curssed the
man, and said. Be thou his disciple.

The Scribes and pharisees bacbited our lord, calling him a Samaritane, a
demoniach. A blasphemer, a sinner, a glutton, a drunckard, a liar, and one that
forbad to pay tribute to Caesar a subuerter of the people. A seductor, the
which all may be had and found in diverse places of the gospel.

The Jews beinge-vnable to resist the wisdom of Steven, Act. 6
and the spirit that spoke by him, brought into the counsel two false
witnesses saying. This man cease not to speak blasphemus words against this
holy place and laws.

Certain men being in sorrow that they had lost their gain, Act. 16
because that Paul had cast out of a maid of theyrs a sprete that
prophesyed, said unto the magistrates. These me^ trouble our city, and through
their euel words, the people ran against them and their clothes being rent,
they were commanded to be beaten with rods, and to be cast into prison.

When Gallio the proconsull was ruler of the country of Acaia, ye Jews made an
insurrectio^ with one accord against Paul, Act. 18
and brought him to the judgment seat, saying. This fellow does counsel men
to worship god contrary to the law.

At Ephesus when diverse waxed hard hearted, Act. 19
and believed not, but spoke euel of the way of our Lord, and that before the
multitude, Paul departing from thence, separated ye disciples.

When certain Jews which were of Asia, Act. 21
saw Paul in the temple, they cried, o ye men of Israel help. This is the man
yt teaches all men every where against the people and the law. Furthermore he
has brought the gentiles into the temple, and has polluted this holy place.

Act. 24
The orator Tertullius propunded for the Jews before Felix the deb^ty against
Paul, saiynge. We have found this pestilent fellow mouinge sedition and debate
unto all the Jews in the whole world, and a maintayner of sedition of the
sect of the Nazarites, which has also enforced to pollute the temple.

Paul disputinge at Athens, Act. 17
certayue philosophers of the Epicures and of the Stoyckes said, what will
this babbler say? Other said, he seems to be a tydinges bringer of new deuels.

When the strangers saw the viper hang on Paul's hand, Act. 28
they said no doubt this man is a murderer. Whom thought he have escayed
the sea. etc. But shortly after the changed their opinion.

Of Liberalite mercy and largenes. Capi. lxxii.
REbecca Batuels daughter did most liberally answer Abraham's servant, Genesis 24
saying. Drinck my lord.

Exo. 2.
Moses did very liberallye when he defended Iethroes daughters from the
shepheardes, that would not suffer them to water their sheep.

When Moses hard that Iethro his father in law was coming to him, Exo. 18
he went out to mete him, and did diversely honor him.

The children of Israel with most prompe and devout minds, did give to the
work of the tabernacle, Exo. 36
and the holy vestments, al thing yt was necessary. And ye artificers were
enforced to say unto Moses. The people bring to much, and more then enough.

Moses desired of king Edom, saying we pray thee yt it may be lawful for us
to go through thy land, Nume. 21
we will not turn in to the fields, nor vineyardes, neither drink of the
waters of the wels. etc.

Gedeo^ desired bread of the lords of Sochot and Phanuel for his companions an
men yt were weary, Iudi. 8.
but they would give him none, the which thing was afterward to their pain.

Nabal used hi^ self vnliberally toward David yt desired him to give him
somewhat. 1. re. 15.


After that David had obtained the victory of the Amelechites, 1. reg. 30
he sent gifts and part of the pray unto the elders of Judah, and to his
friends and neighbors, saying: see here is a blessyng for you.

David commanded that Mephibo seth should eat bread always upon his table. 2.
re. 9.
And he gave him all that pertained to Saul.

Soby, Machir, and Berzillai did profer unto David flyinge from the face and
presence of Absolon, 2. re. 17
many necessary things for his hoaste, as wheat, barley, and flour.

This Berzillai, did aid David when he fled from his son Absolon. 2. re. 19
And after that David had obtained and won the victory, he retained Chymeam
his son as one of his family.

The Queen of Saba gave Salomo^ many things. 3. re. 10
And Solomon gave her according to her desire what so ever she asked, besides
yt he gave her of a fre will with his own hand.

Certain good men of Israel clothed the naked prisonners, 2. Para. 28
and set all that were feeble upon horses, and brought them to their brethren.

King Cyrus brought forth the vessel of the temple of our Lord, 1. Esd. 1.
which Nabuchodonozor had taken, and sent them again to Jerusalem, all the
vessels of gold and silver were 5000. and 400.

The children of Judah returning from Babylon, 1. Esd. 2
offered willingly to the building of the house of God, and gave gold after
their hability.

King Darius commanded, that ye house of God should be builded in Jerusalem,
1. Esd^ 6
and that the charges should be taken out of the kings cofers. Although there
were some envious persons that by their letters labored to let and hinder the
work.

1. Esd. 7
King Artaxerzes gave a glorious and a liberal epistle to Esdras the priest yt
came to Jerusalem to comfort ye Jews

2. esd. 2.
King Artaxerzes used him self liberallye to Nehemias coming into Iewry, and
gave him even such letters as he required.

Nehemias was a very liberal Legate, the which did not grieve the people with
vital and exactions, 2. esd. 5.
and he did much good to those yt he was sent unto

Tobias did study how to divide all that ever he had among his brethren that
were prisoners, Tob. i.
and of his kin, he fed the hungry, and clothed ye naked.

Raguel delivered to young Tobias with his daughter the half of all his
substance. Tob. 10


Tobias the younger, was very kind unto Raphael, Tob. 12
whom he took to be a man, and well acknowledged the benifites that he had done
unto him, where upon both he and his father did offer him most liberally the
moity of al their goods.

King Ahaswerus commanded a great feast to be made for Esthers marriage,
Est. 2.
and caused the lands to be in quietness, and gave gifts, as it became the
royalty of a king.

When king Ahasuerus saw Queen Esther, Esth. 5
he safd unto her, what wilt you Esther, what is thy pe^icion? if it be even
the half of my kingdom, thou shall have it.

Esth. 6
King Ahasuerus enquired, what honor or reward Mardocheus had gotten for the
fidelity yt he had showed unto him. And when he understood yt he was unrewarded,
he caused him magnificently to be honored.

Jobs sons made bankets, and each of them on the day that he made his feast,
Job. 2
sent for their sisters to eat and to drink with them.

Blessed Job does declare yt he was merciful to the poor, Job. 29.31
saying, I comforted the widows heart, and I was a father unto ye pore. Again
he says If I have eaten my meat alone. For mercy has grown with me even
from my childhode.

The chief captain of Babylon gave Jeremy meat, Iere 40
and rewards, and let him go whether so ever he would, promising him great
humanity and kindness, if he would go with him to Babylon, and yet he gave him
free leave and license to carry.

Seleucus the king of Asia in the time of Onias the hie priest, ^. match. 2
paid all the charges pertaininge to the minysterye of the Sacrifices, of his
own rentes and heritage.

The wise men opening their treasures, not their little purses with half pence,
Math. 2
offered unto a pore Lord, gold, frankensence and mirrhe.

Our Lord is a liberal and a large rewarder, math. 19
the which, to those yt leave these temporal goods for his cause, does give
an hunderfolde in this world, and life everlasting in the world that is to
come.

It came of a benign and a gentle liberality that our Lord defended the
disciples, math. 12
which upon the Saboth day did pluck the ears of corn, Lu. 6
and chafed them with their hands to eat, against those wicked Pharisees.

And also of the Publicanes and sinners that came to hear him. Lu. 15.19
And of zacheus. math. 26
And there is an ensample of Mary, Mar. 14
that kissed our Lords feet. And of Judas, for the which sign of
gentleness, the unhappy and wicked manne, ought to have the sooner repented.

The people followed our Lord on foot into the desert, and left the cities and
when the even drue on, Mat. 14
his disciples said unto him Let the people depart, that they may go and bye
them vitailes. But he as a liberal Lord and master answered, give ye the^ to
eat.

Zacheus in distrybuty^ge of his goods, Lu. 19
and making of restitucyon was very large and liberal. Thus he said unto
our Lord: Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I
have done any man wrong, I restore him four fold.

The gift of the pore wydow which cast two mi^es into the treasurye, Lu. 21
is preferred of our Lord, above the gifts of the rich.

Our Lord was very bountiful and liberal to the thief yt hanged and asked,
saying: Lu. 23
Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus saite unto
him, verelye I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in paradise.

Our lord vouchsaued to show his benignitye and liberalitye, John. 2
when that he, being called to ye pore marriage went thither, and there turned
water into wine, to chere the poor that were there at dinner.

The great liberality of God apeareth in the parable of the ungracious servant,
math. 18.
unto whom our lord said: I forgave the all the debt, because thou desyredst
me.

Ioses, whose sir name was Barnabas had land and sold it, Act. 4
and brought the price, and laid it down at the Apostles fete.

When the disciples yt were at Antioch hard say, yt there should be great dearth
throughout al ye world, Act. 11
they purposed to send socour unto the brethren which were in Iewry. The which
thing they also did, and sent it to the elders by ye hands of Barnabas and Saul.

A certain woman named Lidia, a seller of purple, Act. xvi
being baptized by Paul's predication, prayed Paul very devoutly and
liberallye, and compeld him and his fellows to remain and abide in her house.

When Paul and his companions were escaped in the winter out of the broken ship,
the barbarous and strange people showed them no little kindness for they kindled
a fire, Act. 28
and refreshed every one of them, because of the present rain, and cold.

Publius the prince of the Islande called Mytilene, Act. 28
unto ye which Paul and his fellows after the tempest arrived, received us, and
lodged us three days courteously, whose father Paul did heal of a fever, and
of a bloudye flixe.

It appears that Paul was very liberal to the pore, whose busynesses he so
diligently procured, 1. Corin. 16
as it is manifest in the gathering for the poor, 2. Corin. 9,
the which he caused to be done most carefully. And he says, if it be mete
that I go also, they shall go with me. And he which sows little, shall repe
little. And he that sows largely and freely, shall reap plenteously.

There was in Paul an ensample of a wonderful liberality and gratitude, the
which wrote so affectuous letters for one Onesimus a fugitive servant of
Philemons, as it is evident in his epistle to philemo^. If thou count me a
fellow, says Paul, receive him as my self. Capi. 1.
If he have done the any hurt or owes the o^ghte, that lay to my charge.

Of Couetiousnes. Capitu. lxxiii.
IN that, that Cain slew his brother, Genesis 4.
because he saw his brothers goods increase, may be noted great avarice, and
a great desire of money.

We read that Cain was the first that builte any city, Genesis 4.
and not Abel. For good holy men have hear no contynuynge city, Heb. 13.
but they seek one to come.

Because of the great substance that Abraham and Lot had, they could not
inhabit and dwell together: Genesis 13^
And their herdsmen began to strive one with a another.

The abundaunce of temporal goods, Genesis 13.
is oftentimes the occasion of great sin, as it is enident by the Sodomites
which were of all other sinners the wurst.

After that Isaac grew to be rich, his shepeherdes and his neghboures began to
braule and chyde. Genesis 26.


Judges and prelates ought to hate auaryce more then any other vice. Exo. 18.
And therefore Iethro spoke notablye of Judges. Thou shall seek out those that
hate covetousness.

There are few preastes in these days that forbid or let the superfluite of
oblations, Exo. 36.
as they did that were rulers over the works of the tabernacle.

Balaacs messengers went unto Balaam having money and rewards in their
hands, Nume. 22.
and so he was corrupted with covetousness.

The tribe of Ruben and Ead. And half the tribe of Menasses, Nume. 32.
because they had great substance of cattail, would not goo over Iordane.
But were content for their portion to inhabit and dwell in the countrei apt
and meat to f^de and bring up their cattayle.

Achior seduced by covetousness, took of the excomunicate things of I^richo.
But for that lucre and gain, Iosu. 7.
he had and sufferd great loss and damage.

Dalida for money that was promised her of the philistians, Iudi. 16.
delivered Samson her husband unto them.

It is written of Samuels sons, that they turned a side after lucre, 1.
regu. 8.
and took rewards, and perverted the right.

Covetousness seems to be the chefest cause or occasion that Saul was reproved
for, 1. regu. 15.
I mean the cupidite that he had to Amalechs pray. For Samuel said unto him,
wherefore haste thou not harkened unto the voice of our lord, but have turned
to the pray, and haste done that is wicked, In the sight of our lord.

Nabel was to strayte laced against David demanding somewhat of him Whereupon,
1. regu. 25.
but for Abigail his wifes sake, he had welnye lost both his substance, and him
self to.

Semei against the kings prohibition and commandment went out of Jerusalem
to seek his servants that were run their ways. 3^ regu. 2.
And for that Solomon caused him to be slain.

Nabothes vyneyarde, the which Achab desired, 3, regu 21.
was the occasion that two false witnesses were brought forth against him,
and that he was commanded to be stoned.

Forasmuch as Gihezi took that thing of Naaman that Eliseus refused, 4. regu.
5.
he was stricken with Leprosy.

In Nehemias time there were certain of the noble men and rulers so oppressed
with v^ury, 2. Esd. 5.
that the were wyllyng to sell their sons and daughters unto bondage, but
Nehemias did much rebuke them.

After that Nabuchodonozor had gotten the victory of Arpharat the king of
Medes, Iudi. 1.
by and by he occupied and subdued, all other kingdoms.

Judas Machabeus said unto his people and companions, 1. Match. 4.
be not gredy of the spoils, we have yet a battle to fight for Gorgias and
his host is hear by us in the mountains.

Ptolomi the king of Aegipt slaundren Alexander his son in law, 1. Match. 11.
because he would have had his realm. And yet Alexander had honorably received
him.

Simon of the tribe of Benjamin styrde Appolonius and king Antiochus against
Onias and the holy city, 2. Match. 3.
saying, that the treasury was full of innumerable money.

Menelaus through the money that he promised Antiochus obtained the hie
prichode. 2. Match. 4.
And at length by menes of the golden vessel that he stale out of the Temple,
the which he gave Andronicus, he caused Onias to be slain. And being
acoused to Ptolomi, he corrupted him with money, and caused him to give
sentence of death against his accusers. And the self Menelaus through the
covetousness of them that were in power, remained still in authority,
increasynge in malice, to the great hurt of the cytezins.

When that certain Jews at Machabeus ^. Match. 10.
commandment had besieged two towers in the which their enemies were, 2.
Match. 10
certain strangers entreated for money let some of them escape, the which,
Machabeus caused to be slain as traitors, and sellers of their brethren.

After that the war against Gorgias was ended, Judas Machabeus and his
company came, 2. Match. 12
to burye the bodies of them that were slain. Under the cotes of certain
Jews that were slain, they found money and Jewels of ydols, which thing
was forbidden the Jews by the law. And therefore men believed it to be the
cause that they were slain.

The young manne that inquired of our lord how he might have eternal life,
Mar. 19.
had great and rich possessions, and therefore when he hard the counsel
of perfection, he went a way so^ye.

The preastes wyllinge and desiring that the people should oftentimes offer,
mat. 21.23.
did suffer that such things as might be offered, should be sold in the
temple. And for this cause the goulde of the Temple was calde more holy then
the temple, and the gift that was upon the aultare, to be of more reverence
then the altar it self.

The covetousness and cupiditye of gain seems to be the Pryncipall motion,
mat. 26.
why that Judas betrayed our Lord. For he says what will ye give me, and I
will deliver him unto you.

By money the kepers of our lords sepulcher were corrupted, mat. 28.
and said falsely, that our Lord by night was stolen away by his disciples.

Our Lord Jesus the true lawyer, Luc. 12.
would not meddle with the diuisyon of the worldly heritage, notwythsta^ding
that he was required, but said, who made me a judge or a deuider over you?

Our Lord against those that heap up temporal goods, Luc. 12.
and thyncke that they shall many years delight and have pleasure in them,
does propounde the Symylytude of the rich man, whose ground brought forth
plentiful fruits.

Luke. 16.
Our Lord against these rich glottons, that use these precious and delicate
garments, which are straighte and neady to releaue and healpe the pouertye of
their neighbor, does put forth the parable of the rich glotton. And note,
that it seems not to be a parable, but an history. Again note that if he be
so punished that gave not his own proper goods, what shall become of them,
that steal other men's?

Luke. 14.
The biers of Oxen and Farms, that is the biers of things moveable and
immovable excused the^ selves, that they could not come to ye great supper
unto the which they were invited and called. For by such things men are
oftentimes withdrawn from the celestial glory.

The covetous Pharisees, hearing our Lords monitions, Luke. 16.
and that they should make them friends of the unrighteous Mammon, laughed him
to scorn.

The avarice of Ananias and Saphira, the which kept away parse of the price of
the land, Act. 5.
was most terribly punished.

Certain crafts men, which had a damsel possessed with a spirit that
prophesyed, Act. 16.
whom Paul delivered of the Deuell, perceiuinge that they had lost their gain
and lucre, caught Paul and Silas his fellow, and brought them to the rulers
and officers, saying, and accusyng them, that they troubled the city, and
preached unlawful obseruaunces and customs. The magestrates rentinge their
clothes, commanded them to be beaten and to be cast into prison, and to be
kept with all diligence.

Paul being at Ephesus, and doing there many miracles, Act. 19.
a certain manne named Demetrius, a Silver smith which made silver shrines
for Dyana, was not a little beneficial unto the crafts men, whom he called
together, and said, that Paul had persuaded and turned away much people,
saying, that they be no Gods which are made with hands but deuels, and has
so trouled the City, that it is al in a rore and full of confusion. And they
rushed into the common hall, with one assente, and caught Gaius and Aristarcus
Paul's companions.

When Paul was with Felix the president, Act. 24.
being bound and of the Jews accused as a seditious and a pestiferous person,
Felix hoped money should have been given him of Paul. Wherefore he called him the
oftener and commoned with him. But in as much as it came not so to pas, he did
not quite him, but left him bound to Fest us his successor.

Of Poverty. Ca. lxxiiii.
Genesis 32.
WE read not that Jacob had either beast or man when he departed from his
parents, and went to his brother Laban, but that he went over Jordan with his
staff. And at a certain time being disposed after the Sun was down to
reast him self, 28
he took a stone and put it under his head, and laid him down in the same
place to sleep.

Moses k^pt the sheep of Iethro his father in law, Exo. 3.
priest of Madian, where by it appears that he had no sheep of his own, that
kept other men's.

Ruth the Moabite had no great store of richesse, Ruth. 2.
when she went a glening the ears that the reapers left behind them, the
which pertayned unto the pore.

Saul being content with one ladde, 1. regu. 9.
went for to se^ke his fathers asses. And Saul not long after said unto
Samuel, that his kindred was the least of all the kynreds of the tribe of
Benjamin.

David was the least of all his brethren, so that when Samuel came to annoint
one of Isais children David was in the pastors, 1. regu. 16.17.
nor he was not called at ye beginning, as though he had been of no reputation,
and afterward his brethren being in the host, his father sent him laden
with vitayles unto them.

Helias suffered great penury when he prayed the widow of Sarept to give him a
morsel of bread, 3. regu. 17.
and a little water.

The children of the Prophets did live under Elizeus in great poverty, 4. regu.
4.
the which had but a little bread, and unsavory pottage.

Anna Tobias wi^e went dailye to the weauing work, Tobi. 2.4.
whereby it appears that they were but pore, which could not have their loum
i^ their own house. And Tobias said unto his son, my son be not afraid,
truth it is, we lead hear a pore life, but great good shall we have, if we
fear God, and depart from all syn, and do well.

The children of the Rechabytes build no houses, Iere. 35.
sow no seed, plant no vine, have no vineyardes, drink no wine, but did
dwell in tents.

Nabuharadan left the rascal people, and those that had nothing to dwell
s^il in the land of Judah. Iere. 39.
He spared the pore, but he slew the mighty and rich, or else he led them as
prisonners and captives unto Babylon.

We have an ensample of poverty in the Lord our savior, Luke. ^.
the which was born of a pore mother, and nourished of a poor carpenter,
semelye fed, wrapped in cloutes and not in furs, laid in a maunger, and
afterward when his glorious mother was churched, his parents offered in the
temple, the offringe of the poor. And anon after Joseph fled with the child
and his mother into Egypt. Mat. 2.
And when the child was xii. year old, he abode still in Jerusalem unknowing to
his father and mother: Luc. 2.
And so it appears that they had no great family to associate and serve the
child.

Jesus going about from town to town, Mat. 8.
had not where upon to lay his hed^ and therefore he says. The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have neastes, but the son of man has not where to
reast his head. John. 19.
And for this it maketh^ that he hunge bare upon the cross.

The disciples, for the most part, were chosen out of the porest sort, Mat. 4.
Iho^ and James did mend their nets, Mar. 1.
and did wash them. Luc. 5.


In our lords sermon that he made in the mount, the commendatio^ of poverty,
as though it were the foundation of the spiritual building, Luc. 6.
Mat. 5.
is first placed and spoken of.

Among al other Christ's miracles, this is written that the pore receive the
glad t^dinges of the Gospel. Mat. 11.
For before the coming of Christ, it was not wont to be so.

Our Lord said unto the young man that asked him how he might come to
everlasting life. mat. 19
If thou wylt be be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give to the
pore. And our lord does promise a marvelous remuneration and reward to those
that leave and forsake any thing for his names sake.

Of that famous and notable Lazarus, which was carried by the aungelles into
Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16.
the Scripture alleges no other work of righteousness or cause of his glory,
but because he received pain in this mortal life, and therefore God in another
life would comfort him.

The poor and feeble were brought into the great supper of our Lord, Luc. 14.
yea, and certain, as it is r^d there, were compelled to come from the hie
ways and hedges.

In the primative church all that believed were together, Act. ^.
and had all things commen, they sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all men, as every man had need.

Peter said unto the crepell that asked his alms, Act. 3.
silver and gold have I none. etc.

Paul taking his leave of the faithful of Achaia, Act. 20.
said among other things, I have desired no man's gold, silver, or vesture,
as ye know your selves: for these hands have ministered, 1. Cor. 4.
unto my necessities, and to them that were with me, we honger and thyrste, and
are naked. etc.

Of hipocrisy and dissimulation. Ca. lxxv.
AMon David's son dissembled and fained him self sick and dis^ased, to deceive
Thamar who^e he luxuriously loved. 2. reg^. 13.


Ieroboams wife did change her habit and disguising of her self came to
Abdias the prophet, 1. regu 14.
unto whom he said, why doste thou dissemble and fain thy self to be an other?

4. regu. 5.
Gehezi Elizeus ^eruaunt feigned yt his master had nead of two change of
garments for two young men of the children of the Prophets.

When Apollonius was come to Jerusalem sent from Antyoche, Act. 5.
he fained peace, and kept him still until the Saboth day. And then he
commanded his men to take the^ to their weapons, for the Jews kept holy
day, and so he slew all those that were gone forth to the open play.

rouer. 8.
Although the divine sapience does generally detest the wicked, yet most
specially he threateneth hipocrites, Mat. 23
saying very often in the gospel. Woe be to you ye pharisees, ye ypocrites.

The pharisees going about to tangle Jesus in his word he answered rebukinge
them, math. 22
why tempte ye me ye ypocrites?

Some there be that commit great fautes, and exchue those sins that are
less, Math. 23
straynynge out a gnat, and swaloynge a Camel. As the hie preastes did, that
feared more to enter into the judgment hall of Pilate, John. 18.
then to commit or procure that haynus crime of murder.

The ruler of the sinagoge disdaynynge that our lord should heal the sick
on the Sabbath day, Luc. 13
said unto the people, There are.vi. days, in which men ought to work, in
the^ come that ye may be healed, and not on the Sabbote day. But our lord
reproved him, calling him ypocrite.

Ananias and Saphira his wife committed great hypocrisy, Act. 5.
when they dyssembled that they had brought the hole price of the land, and
had laid yt before the Apostles fete.

Notwihstanding that Simom Magus gave credence to Philippes preachinge. Act.
Yet Peter said unto him, Thou have no part in this sermon, for thy heart is
not right in ye sight of god. Do penance therefore. etc. Then answered Simon
and said. Pray ye to our lord for me.

Paul did greuouslye note Elimas the sorcerer of falshode and ypocrisy.
Saying. Act. 13
O full of all subtlety and disceptfulnes, thou child of the deuell, thou
enemy of all righteousness, wylt thou not cease to peruerte the straight ways
of our lord?

Of the receayte of gifts and rewards. Capitu. lxxvi.
ABraham would not receive the gifts that the king of the Sodomites proferd
him, Genesis 14.
when he returned from the slaughter of the four kings, although he had
well deserved them.

Jacob sent presents to his brother Esau, Genesis 32
to aswage and mitigate his anger.

The people offered and gave gifts in so great a quantite to the work of our
lords tabernacle: Exo. 36
that Moses caused it to be proclaimed, that they should offer no more.

Balaam loved the reward of iniquite, and went with balacs messengers, Nu. 22.
that had the reward of ye south sainge in their hands.

Ahiud offered gifts unto Eglon the king of Moab, Iudi. 3
and afterward speaking in secret with him, he grievously smote him, and slew
him.

Sampsons enemies promised Dalida money and induced her to begile and deceive
him. Iudi. 16


It is said by Samuels children, that they turned a side after lucre, 1.
regu. 8.
took rewards, and perverted the right.

It was not laid to Samuels charge, that he, 1. regu 17.
which had judged the people twentye years, at any time had taken of any
man any gift or reward.

The gifts that Siba Mephiboseth servant presented unto David flyinge from
the face of Absolon, 2. reg. 16
seem so to have inclined David's mind, that he gave an vnryghte judgment
against him that was absent.

The queen of Saba gave king Solomon.120. talentes of gold: 3. regu. 10.
and of sweet odours exceeding much, and precious stones. And king Solomon gave
her according to all her desire what so ever she asked, besides that he gave
her of a free will with his own hands.

Aranna would have given David the threshyng floor and all things necessary
to do sacrifice with all, 2. reg. 24
but he would not take it but at a price, nor offer up no sacrifice of other
men's goods.

Benedad ye king of Siria had peace with Basaa the king of Israel: but yet the
gifts that Aza the king of Judah sent him, 3. reg. 15
caused him to break his consideration with Basaa, and greauously to entreat
him.

Naaman the Sirian was freely healed of Eliseus, 4. reg. 5
and yet Cihezi because he took gifts of Naaman, was grievously plaged.

The king of Babylon sent letters and presents unto king Hezechias. 4. re. 20
Then follows, Hezechias was glad of the^ and of their coming. But note there,
how greatly he displeased our Lord.

After that Achaz king of Judah had spoiled our lords house, 2. Para. ^8.
the kings and the princes houses, he gave gifts unto the king of the
Assirians, And yet it helped him not.

The Jews in a remembrance of their gladness, Hest. 9
which they conceived and had by the death of Aman their enemy, did order,
that gifts should be distributed and given unto the poor.

Our Lord speaks by the Prophet Esaias complayningly, Esaias. 1.
saying. Thy princes are wicked, and companions of thieves, they love gifts
altogether, and gape for rewards.

The master of the king of Babilons hooste, Iere. 40
gave Hieremy vytayles, and rewards, and let him go.

After that Daniell had expounded the vision unto Nabuchodonosor the king,
Dani. 2
he made him a great man, and gave him many and great gifts.

Balthazar the king of Babylon did promise Daniell great gifts, Dani. 5
But he answered, saying, keep thy gifts thy self, and give thy rich gifts
to another.

Ionathas went to Ptolomeis and gave Ptolomi and Alexander great presents of
gold and silver, 1. match. 10
and found favor in their sight.

When Triphon saw that Ionathas came unto him with so great anhoost, 1. macha.
12
he was afraid, and received him honorablye, and gave him rewards. And by
this occasion he deceived him, for after he had sent away his host, Triphon
kept him there with a few, and kylde him.

For the gifts which the ambitius Jason did give and promise to king
Antiochus, 2. match. 4
he obtained the hye Priesthode and when he had sent the money to the king
by Menelaus, he beguiled him, and got the dominion For Iaso^ had paid three
hundred talentes of silver.

Menelaus Lysimachus brother did obtain with the money that he promised
Antiochus, 2. match. 4
the hye priesthode. And afterward he gave to Andronicus certain vessel of
gold, that he had secreatly stolen out of the temple and caused Onias to be
slain. After all this, when that he was accused before king Ptolome, he
procured with monye that he promised to give him, that his accusers were
condemned to death.

The wicked traitor and detractor Alchimus desiring to obtain the hie
Priesthode, 2. match. 14
offered Demetrius a crown of gold, and certain other things.

The wise men offered unto the poor Lord, Mat. 2.
gold, Frankensence, and mirrhe.

When the soldiers that should have kept the sepulcher of our Lord, math. 28
had received good store of monye, they said that his Disciples, Mat. 28
they being a sleep, had stolen him away.

LuKe. 21
The gift of the pore widow, which cast into the treasurye two mytes, is preferred
of our Lord far above the rich men's gifts.

When Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands the holy ghost
was given. Act. 8.
He offered the^ money saying. Give me also this power.

The presidente Felix that kept Paul bound falslye accused by the Jews:
Act. 24
did hope that Paul would give some money, wherefore he called him the oftener
and communed with him. And because that he, as it is very like, came not to his
intent, he left Paul in prison bound.

Of Fortitude. Cap. lxxvii.
WHen Abraham saw that Lot his brothers son was taken, Genesis 14.
he took his servants born in his own house with other, and set upon the
four kings by night, that had taken him. And after he had pursued, and
smitten them, he brought Lot again withal his substance, and all the people
of Sodom.

The pureness of the conscience makes a man both sure and bold, Genesis 31.
and therefore Jacob being wroth, chode with Laban, saying. For what cause or
for what offense followest thou so after me, and haste searched all my stuff?

The angel said unto Jacob, if thou have been strong against God, Genesis 32
how much more shall thou prevail against man?

Moses stood boldly and constantly against Pharao, Exo. 5.
reproving him, because he would not let our Lords people go.

The children of Israel came harnessed out of the land of Egypt. Exo. 13


Caleph and Iosue did manfullye comfort the people, Nu. 13.14
saying. Let us go up, and possess the land, for we be able to overcome it.
And again. Fear not the people of the land, for they are but bread for us.

Phinees with xii. M. fighting men overthrew the Madianites of yt which,
besides men and women that were slain, Nume. 31
there were xxxii. thousand virgins taken. And of cattle an infynite multitude,
and yet there perished not one of the children of Israel.

Deute. 31
Moses said unto Iosue that should succeed him. Be strong and bold, for thou
must go and lead this people into the land.

When Iosue went against thinhabitors Iosu. 8
of Hai he was in the front of the hoaste compassed with the aid and strength
of strong and valyant men.

After that the v. kings were taken, Iosue said unto the chief of the men of
war that were with him, Iosu. ^0
go on and put your feet upon the necks of these kings, be not afraid, nor
faint hearted.

Caleph said unto Iosue, I am this day 85. year old, Iosu. 14
and yet I am as valiant and as strong at this time, as I was when I sent to
search and spy the country, even the same fortitude and strength does continue
in me still.

Ahud the judge and chief captain of the host of Israel going in the front of
the battle, Iudi. 3
said unto the people. Follow me, for the Lord has delivered your enemies
into your hands.

The aungel said unto Gedeon, our Lord is with thee, Iudi. 6
thou mighty man of war. Go hence in this, thy might thou shall deliver
Israel out of the hands of the Madianites. And when he most humbly excused
him self, he heard. I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Madianites,
as they were but one man.

Gedeon by the commandment of our LORD, Iudi. 7
said unto his host, if any man dread or be afraid. Let him return, and
with three. C. men, and a proper stratageme or subtle point of war, he
overthrew the Madionites.

Samson tare a Lion in pieces with his unarmed hands, Iudi. 14.15 and.16.
as he would have rent a Kid, and after did many strong feats.

1. regu. 11.
Saul hearing that the men and inhabiters of Iabes Galaad were besieged, he
boldly, efficacely, and quicklye did succor and help them.

1. regu 17.
David in his childehode did strongly overcome a Lion, a Bear, and Goliath the
Philistine.

David with one souldiare came to Saules host, 1. regu. 26
and entringe into his tent, took away his spear, his shield, and the cruse of
water.

2. regu. 2.
Twelve of Isboseths servants, and xii. of David's caughte each other by the
head, and thrust their swords in each other sides, and they fell down
together.

2. regu. 23.
David longed and said, oh that I had of the water that is in the cestern by
the gate of Bethelem for to drink. And three mighty men brake through the host of
the Philistines, and brought him of that water.

4. regu. 9.10
Iehu did manfullye when he slew two kings, and Ochozias brethren, the children
of Achab, and when he kylde a great multitude of Baals Prophets.

Ioiada with great strennuitye and force plucked the kingdom of Judah out of the
hands of Athalia, 4. regu. 11.
and crowned the kings little son of the kynred of David.

Ioab the son of Seruia was the prince and head captain of the host, 1.
Para. 11
because that he before all other smote the Iebusites that dwelt in the city
of Jerusalem, and so did David appoint it.

Nehemias said unto the noble men and judges. Let us arise and buyld, and their
hands were strengthed to good. 2. Esd. 2.


The children of transmigratio^ did build the wall of Jerusalem round about, 2.
Esd. 4
and with one hand did every one work, and with the other held his weapon.

The ennemies of the children of transmigration did diverse manner of ways put
them in fear, 2. Esd. 6
thinckynge that there by they would cease from their work. But Nehemias
said: That therefore he strengthed his hands the more.

When the children of Israel heard of Holofernes might and power, Judith. 4
they prepared most diligently to resist him: for they took in and occupied
all the tops of the mountains and walde their Towns, and prepared Corn for
them against the battle.

Judith. 13
Judith had in her self a marvelous strenuity and courage, when she went to
Holofernes, and slew him in his tent.

Daniels companions said to Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon, Dani. 3
our God is able to keep us from the hot burninge oven. And if he will not,
yet shall thou know (O king) that we will not serve nor worship thy Gods.

Dani. 6
Daniel left not of for all the kings decre, to pray unto his God.

1. match. 2
Mathathias and his children had a wonderful fortitude and strength that so
withstode king Antiochus, and so often prevailed against him.

Judas Machabeus with good hope and very manfully and boldly passed over the
river to his enemies, 1. macha. 5
the which had pitched their tents beyond the water.

Eleazar the son of Saura, ran boldly and with a courage to an Elephant, 1.
match. 6
and gat under him, and slew him, then fell the Elephant down upon him, and
there he died.

Eleazarus said unto the tormentors. If I die manfully, and as it becomes
mine age, 1. match. ^
I may parauenture leave an example of stedfastnes, for such as be young, if I
with a ready mind, and manfullye die an honest death, for the most worthy
and holy lawes^

Machabeus and they that were with him went promptly and willingly to battle
against Lysias having an helping from heaven, 2. match. 11.
and our Lord was merciful unto them. They fell mightily upon their enemies
like Lions, they brought down xi. M. foteme^ xvi. C. horsemen, and put all other
to flight, many of them being wounded and some got away naked.

And with great power gave the Act. 4.
Apostles witness of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, and great
grace was in them all.

Steven full of grace and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people. Act. 6
His fortitude did most appear in that, that most constantly he resisted
the Jews, and took his most cruel death most patiently.

Fortitude (as Cicero does say) is a preconsiderate susception and taking upon
of pearils and dangers. And a sufferaunce or bearinge of labors. And in that
it is very euydent that Paul was Christ's most strongest Apostle and
souldioure, the which for Christ's sake sustained so great pearils and
dangers, Capi. 11
as it appears in the Acts of the Apostles, Capi. 11
and he does recite and number them in the second to the Corinthians.

Of Confydence and magnanimity. Ca. lxxviii.
Exo. 5
MOses stood often before Pharao, and constantly reproved him.

Nathan the Prophet constantlye, and yet reuerentely did reprove David after he
had committed aduoutrye and murder. 2. regu. 11.


Helias said to Achab. It is not I that have troubled the house of Israel, 3.
regu. 18.
but thou, and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments
of our lord. And after that he caused.CCCC. prophets to be slain.

Item he said to Ochozias the king of Israel. 4. regu. 1.
Thou shall not come down of the bed, on which thou art gone up but shall dye
the death.

Achab the king of Israel said unto Helias, 3. regu. 21.
have thou found me thine enemy? he answered: I have found the, for thou art
even sold to work wickedness in the sight of our lord.

Eliseus spoke maruelus freely and boldlye to Ioam the king of Israel his host
standinge about him. 4. regu. 3.
What have I to do with the? Gat the to thy fathers prophets, and to thy
mothers.

Our lord was with Iosaphat, 2. Para. 7.
because he walked in the ways of his father David. Then follows. When his
heart had taken bold^es by the ways of our lord. etc.

The spirit of our lord came upon zacharia the son of Ioiada the preast, 2.
para. 24.
which stood in the syghte of the people, saying why transgress ye the
commandments of our lord, the which thing shall not be for your profit.

Hezechias comforted his men of war saying. 2. Para. 32.
Pluck up your hearts and be strong. Be not afraied nor discouraged for the
king of the Assirians, nor for all the multitude that he has with him, for
there be mo with us then with him. with him is an arm of flesh. But with us is
the lord our god, for to help us, and to fight our battayls.

Sanabalat and other enemies, being sorry that the walls of Jerusalem were a
buylding, 2. Esdras. 4
endeuerd them selves to resist and diverse ways to fear Nehemias, but they
could not.

Iudit. 10.13
Judith was a woman of a maruelus great magnanimity, the which unarmed went to
Holofernes tent, and slew him.

Mardocheus did boldly refuse to worship proud Aman, although he knew that
the king had commanded it. And also he spoke unto the Queen severely and
frelye, Esther. 3.4
saying. Think not to save thine own life, while thou a^te in the kings
house, for if thou hold thy peace at this time, then shall the Jews have
help and delyueraunce out of an other place: and thou and thy fathers house
shall be destroyed.

Ananias and his fellows said stoutly to king Nabuchodonosor, Daniell. 3.
our God whom we serve and worship, is able to deliver us out of thy hands.

Daniell little regarding king Da^ius decree, Daniell. 6.
or commandment, did worship and pray unto his lord God, ^s he was wont and
accustomed to do.

Matathias and his sons did strongye and boldly rebel and resist king
Antiochus. 1. Macha. 2


Eleazar Saures son ran boldlye 1. macha. 6
^o the Elephant where he coniectured that the king was, and gat him under him
and slew him.

Timothe gave his host a great sign and token of magnanimite, 1. Match. 5.
if they would pass over the water. And so did Judas, and obtained a great
and a noble victory.

When Judas men said unto him, that they might save their lives, for our
enemies are many, 1. Match. 9.
and we are but few Judas answered, God forbid that we should flee from
them. Wherefore if our time be come, let us dye manfully, and let us not stain
our honor.

When Judas Machabeus men saw the hooste coming, they said. How are we
able, being so few, to fight against so great a multitude, and so strong?
And Judas said, it is a small matter for many to be overcome with few, 1.
Match. 3.
yea, there is no difference to the God of heaven, to deliver by a great
multitude or by a small company, for the victory of the battle stands not
in the multitude of the hooste, but the strength comes from heaven.

Ionathas did encourage his company to the battle, 1. Match. 9.
because their enemies were in their way, and the water of Jordan on both
sides, with banckes, fennes, and woods, so yt there is no place for us to
depart unto.

When that Ionathas was in battle against the Heathen, 1. Match. 11.
all his men left him except.ii. or iii: But when they yt fled saw yt their
capten fought man fully, they turned again unto him, and helped him, and there
were slain of the Heathen three thousand men.

That excellent Captain Judas Machabeus, 2. Match. 10
went and turned him self to fight when most neade was.

Machabeus and they that were in his company, 2. Match. 10
perceauyng that they had help from heaven: were comforted in their minds,
not only to fight with men, but with the most strongest and cruel beasts,
yea, and to run through the walls of iron.

After our Lord was crucified, Mat. 27.
Joseph of Arimathia went boldly into Pylate, and begged the body of Jesus.

John. 9.
The man that was borne blind, and that was restored to his sight by our Lord,
did freely conf^sse and speak the truth by Christ our Lord.

Thomas said unto the disciples, let us also goo, John. 11.
that we may dye with him.

Peter the which at the only voice of a maid, Act. 2.3.4.5.
was made afearde, denied Christ, but after he had received the holy spirit,
was so endued with virtue and strength, that he in the presence of the
Pharisees and Magestrates, did preach Christ most constantly.

Steven being full of grace and strength, Act. 7.
did freely preach Christ our Lord, and rebukynge the Jews did confound them
seeing among other things: ye stiff necked and uncircumcised hearts and
ears, ye have always resisted the holy ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye.

The Magestrates and Ministers rebuked and commanded the Apostles saying,
Act. 5.
We command you, that ye teach notte in this name. And behold you fill and
repleanyshe Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood
upon you. Peter and the other Apostles answered and said: we ought more to obey
God, then men.

Paul the Apostle, Acts. 13.
Paul the proconsul being present, rebuked Elymas the sorcerer most sharplye,
and for a season made him blind.

When the magestrates had commanded that Paul and Sylas should be delivered
out of prison, Acts. 16.
Paul said unto them. They have beaten us openly vncondempned, for all that we
are Romans, and have cast us into prison, and now they would send us away
priuelye. And he spoke so, that they being afraid, came and desired them to
depart out of the city.

The city of Ephesus being moved and in a rore, Acts. 19.
the citizens rushed into the common hall with one assen^e, and took violently
with them two of Paul's companions. Paul would have entered in unto the hall,
but his disciples would not suffer him.

Paul taking his leave of his brethren that were in Asia said. Act. 20.
The holy ghost witnesses in every city, that ^andes and trouble abide me in
Jerusalem. But none of these things move nor fear me, neither is my life
dear unto my self. etc.

Paul showed great magnanimity before his judges that is before Ananias the hie
priest, Act. 24.25
before Felix and Festus from whom, because he did him manifest wrong, he
appealed to Caesar.

Paul, being in all these pearyls and dangers, Act. 27.
was continually with out fear, and that did principally appear in the
tempest and shypwracke that he suffered.

Saint Augustine says thus of Paul. Aug. libro. de. ci^i. dei. 14. Ca. 9.
That behoueable says he, and strong man, that labored more the^ all the
other disciples, that did glory and rejoice in his infirmities, that blessed
man Paul (I say) Christ's Champion, whom he taught, for whom he was in
bonds, with who^ he was crucified, in whom he was glorious in the sight of
this world, to whose honor he was a spectakle, both to Angels and manne
that gladlye beheld him striuynge in great agonye with the eye of faith, and
to rejoice with those that rejoiced, weep with those that weep, outwardly
having strife, and fear inwardly, desiringe to be dissolved and to be with
Christ.

Of patience and meekness in injuries and torments. Capi. lxxix.
ISaac took it mekely, when his father would have offered him up for a
sacrifice. Genesis 21.


Joseph took that mischeuous deed that his brethren did against him patiently,
Genesis 37.4
and forgave them beninglye.

Joseph gave his brethren a special commandment, Genesis 45.
saying: Se that ye fall not out by the way.

Moses did estsones pray for Mary, that spoke so wyckedly against him and
through his prayer she was healed. Nume. 12.
The people murmurd against Moses and Aaron, saying ye have killed ye people
of our lord. And when our lord waxed wroth, and would have punyshed the
people. Nume. 16.
Moses said unto Aaron. Go thou spedely to the people and pray for them, and
the plage ceased.

The children of Ephraim that ^hode myghtelye with Gedeon were pacified by his
meke answer, Iudi. 8.
saying what deed could I have done like unto yours?

1. regu. 11.
Saul would not suffer those men to be slain, that backbyted him.

1. regu. 34.
Dauyd might often have slain Saul, that sharply persecuted him, and would
not, as when he cut of the lap of his garmente, and when he found him a sleep.

2. regu. 15.16.
David flying from the face and presence of Absolon, said patiently to
Sadocke. If I shall find favor in the eyes of our LORD, he will ^rynge me
again. And with like patience he answered Semeus that cursed him.

Mephiboseth took the unjust sentence given against him very patyently. 2.
regu. 19.


The elders giving Roboam counsel, said. 2. Para. 10.
If thou will please this people, and speak mekely unto the^, they will be thy
servants for ever.

Elizeus did not suffer those ye came to take him, 4. regu. 6.
to haue^ any hurt, but caused meat to be set before them, and when they
had eaten, he sent the^ away.

Tobias being blind, showed wonderful great patience, Tobi. 23.
as well against the divine scourge and plage of blindenes, as against the
derisions of his wife and his friends.

Job when he lost his goods, his children, Job. 1.2.
and almost him self ^o was pacient. And it is to be noted, yt at once he
lost his goods and his children, and the Temptation was the more vehement. But
yet such friends as were left, were rather a desolation then a comfort unto
him as it is euidente in those his friends, the which were ouerous and heavy
comforters unto him.

Daniels companions that were cast into the burning furnace, did exhibit a
mearye and a joyful patience, Dani. 3.
and our Lord was more praised by their patience, then by the sapience or
wisdom of Daniel.

Sara Raguels daughter, took patiently the grievous rebuke and slander of one of
her fathers handmaide^s not answering her again, Tobi. 3.
but incontinently turning her self to prayer.

When Eleazarus was sore plaged and punished, 2. Match. 6
he said O Lord thou know that where as I might be delivered from death, I
suffer these sore pains of my body: but in my mind I am well content to
suffer them because I fear thee.

The seven brethren and their mother did joyfully suffer sore torments and
punishments. 2. match. 7.


When Peter had demanded of our Lord, how often shall I forgive my brother if
he sin against me, till seven times? Mat. 28.
He hard our Lord say. I say not until seven times, but seue^tye times, seven
times. And that we should remit and forgive our brethren even from the heart,
our Lord brought forth the Parable of the ungracious servant, whom he
most liberallye forgave a thousand Talentes.

When James and Ihon had hard that the Samaritanes had not received our Lords
messengers, they said, wylt thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven, Luc. 9.
and consume them, even as Helias did? And our Lord rebuked them, saying, ye
wot not what manner sprite ye are of.

The woman that was taken in aduoutry, and accused before our Lord, answered
nothing to her accusers, John. 8.
but our Lord took the matter in hand, and mercifully absolved her.

Now and than a man must give place and avoid the fury of those that
persecute him. Luke. 4.
For our Lord that came to suffer and to die, did, not as fearful, but as
wise, and lokynge for a competent hour of his passion, avoid and eschew
oftentimes the fierce rage of the Jews. John. 8.
Jesus hid him self, LuKe. 4.
and went out of the Temple. And he departed, and went his way even through
the mids of them.

Mat. 11.
Our LORD says of him self, learn of me, for I am meke and lowly of heart.

Our Lord took patiently the injuries that were done unto him by word and deed.
By backbitigne words, contradictorius, tauntinge and contumelious words.
They slaundred him both priuelye and openly, pryuelye within them selves, and
judging him temerariously and falsely, if this manne were a Prophet, he would
know what manner of woman this is. Again: This manne blasphemeth. Luc. ^.
Openly, when the Pharisees said to his Disciples, L^c. 5.
why does your master eat and drynk with Publicans and sinners. Mar. 2.


Also when they depraved his miracles, saying. Mat. 12.
He dryueth out deuels by the help of Beelzebub the chief of the deuels. John.
9.
We know that this man is a sinner. And again they said that he was possessed
with the devil.

He suffered contradictorius words, John. 8.
as when they said. Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true.
And again. Thou art not yet l. year old, Mat. 9.
and have thou seen Abraham: and scornful words he suffered, when he said. The
maid is not dead, but slepeth. And contumelious words. As Say we not well,
that thou art a Samaritane, and haste the deuell? John. 8.
And, who is this yt speaks blasphemies? Luc. 5.
But specially he heard these words in the time of his passion, or ever he
came to the cross in Annas and Caiphas house, and before Pilate and Herod.
And at the last even ha^gyng upon the cross. he hard such words spoken
against him.

Likewise in deeds he has suffered grievous injuries, for as he was preching,
all they in the Sinagoge were filled with wrath, and thrusting him out of the
city, Luke. 4.
they would have cast him down headling from the top of the mountain.
Ihon. 8
And again they took stones to stone him.

And when he went out of Jerusalem, minedynge to go by Samaria, LuKe. 9.
but the Samaritans would not receive his messengers, the which he sent
before him.

And when he preached, and rebuked the Jews of their malice and sin they
gathered up stones to have stoned him. Ihon. 8.
But all this was in a manner nothing in respect of those things which he
sustained in his passion, where upon thou maiste note that he, even as he
foretold it, was mocked, scourged, and crucified, mocked, in Caiphas house.
For it is written yt the men that held him, Mar. 15.
did scorn him saying. All hail king of the Jews. And likewise in Pilates
judgments house, mat. 27.
they mocked him, bowynge their kne. And in Herodes house. Herod with his men
of war despised him, Lu. 23
and mocked him. Item our lord Jesus was illuded hanging upon the cross,
Luc. 23.
and mocked of the souldiars, preastes, and commenly of those that passed by,
and of the thieves. Of the soldiers it is written. Luc. 13.
The soldiers did mock him, and proferd him vinegar. Mat. 27.
And of the preastes. Also the hie preastes mocking him with the Scribes and
the elders, said, he saved other, Mar. 15.
him self can he not save. They that passed by blasphemed him shaking their
heddes. Luc. 23.
And the thieves which were crucified with him, rayled on him. Furthermore
note, that he was scorned with be^kys and signs, when they wagged their
headdes, and bowed their knees. And with words. As when they that did salute
him said. ma. 15.
All hayle king of Jews. And with deed, when they crownde him with thorn,
and in place of a cepter put a read in his hand and defiled with spittle, and
now clothed with a purple vesture, now with a white.

Our savior showed mekenes in his passion to Judas the traytoure, Mat. 26.
whom he called friend, and to Malcas the sergeant, whose ear he restored and
healed. John. 18.19
And to Annas, Caiphas and Pilate before whom he was accused, he answered very
gentely and mekely. And to those that crucified him, for the which he prayed,
and to the thief, Luc. 23.
unto whom he answered so courteously.

We must think and ^ounder the diverse s^ourginges of our lord. Mar. 15.
For first he was scourged upon the head, he was smitten upon the head with a
read. John. 18.
And upon the face. One of the ministers which slode by the bishop, smote him
on the face. Mat. 27.
And they did smy^e him in the neck and over all his body. And Pilate delyuerd
Jesus that was scourged, to be crucified. And in this thing it is to be noted,
that all such as do learn are wont to be scourged and bea^e^ upon the head
servants upon the neck, the which men thrust out of the house, gilty persons
upon the face, and scelera^e persons thorowout all the body.

Also a faithful soul must consider, that he was scourged with the tongues
of blasphemers, dispisers, and of those that cried out and said, Mat. 26.
crucify him, and that smote him with their hands, as it is written. They
smote him on his face with ye palm of their hands. And with a read, and
scourges. As Matthew and Mark do testify.

And to the heap of all iniuryes, it makes, that the lord of all lords and
rulers, the which does lose that be fetered, and does illuminate the blind,
was taken and bound like a thief. John. 18.
The Jews ministers, says John, took Jesus, and bound him.

Also he was less esteemed the^ a thief for the Jews demanded yt Barrabas
Luc. 23.
should be loosed and our lord to be crucified, Mat. 27.
and yet Barrabas was a thief and in sedition had committed murder. So that
Barrabas was a murderer a sedi^ius person, a famous thief, and in malice sore
diffamed forther more he was hanged and set between two thieves, as though he
had been their master, and worste of all other. For John says, John. 19.
And Jesus in the mids.

Forthermore we must way and ponder, that he was afflicted and punyshed in all
the members and senses of his body. His eyes beheld and saw those cruel
tormentors. And also his most mekest mother the which in soul was
crucified, and his derely beloved disciple, and the devout women that in mind
suffered with him. His ears did hear blasphemouse, mocking, injurious, and
dispising words. Likewise his nose, by reason of the place in the which he
was crucified, where the misdoers were beheaded, might with filthy slenche be
offended. His taste was noied because they gave him wine mingled with myrre, or
vinegar with gall to quench his thurst withal, whereby we may well understand,
that the drink which they gave him was very bitter. His sense of feeling or
touching sprede thorowout all his body, felt pain in his members which were
scourged, and in his hands and feet. Which were board through with nails.

It may be likewise considered, John. 19.
that he sustained loss in things longing and pertaining to his body. For he
was spoiled of his raiment: and his friends went from him. Mar. 14.
For his disciples for soke him, and ran away. Thus he was afflicted, as it is
said in all parts of his body, by his most bitter passion:

Also in heart and mind he suffered, for he was sorye for his friends that
stood by: and for his enemies that ignorauntly did crucify him.

And again in a manner he sufferd and was hurt in his good name and fame. Mat.
27.
For they called him a seductor of the people. Sir said the chief of ye
priests to Pilate, we remember yt this deceiuer said while he was yet a live.
etc.

And yet we must mark as touching the helthfull passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that it was most fylthy and most ignominius and shameful, be reason of
ye place, because it was done in Jerusalem. Where he was known and honored, and
where he had done many miracles. Item because of the time and day, for it was
done in the solemn feast of Ester, when a great multitude came together unto
the feast, and he was led unto his cross and passion at nine of the clock, to
then^ent he might be seen and known of all men. And again it was most
fylthy considering the kind of death. For it was the death of the cross, a
death dew unto ill spoken men, ill doers, and unjust men. And the manner
of going to his death. Jesus went forth bearing his cross the which
thing is not red of other two wicked persons which were led with him. John. 19.
And again by reason of his companions. For he was crucyfied betwixt ii.
thieves, asthough he had been one of the^, or the greatest or master of them.

Forthermore the bitterness of his blessed passyo^ was increased by ye natural
complexion of our lords body. For manifest it is yt his holy bodi was of ye
best and most purest co^plectio^: made and fashioned by the work of the holy
ghost, without any fault or error of nature, and so his holy flesh had no
rebellion or fight against the spirit: And therefore the spirit did love, and
not without a good cause, his body, more then any other man's spirit or soul
should love his body. Item the bitterness of his passion was agrauate by ye
continuance of the same. For many mar^irs that were burnt, or drowned, or
beheaded, did accomplish and end their martyrdom very shortly. But our
Lords passion endured even in a manner from thinstance of his conception,
until the hour of his death. For he foreknewe most certenlye, what his
humanity should suffer: but specially it continued from the time of his last
supper, until the nynthe hour of the syxte day following, And also it was
aggrauate by the quality of the members, in the which he suffered, that is, in
his fete and hands, ye which are members full of neaues and sinews, and most
ready to receive dolor and pain. And that our lords passyo^ was most bitter,
and very grievous, it may be most chefely gathered by this yt Luke shows, for
in his oration and prayer had after supper, his sweat through the vehement
imaginacion of the anguishe and pains that were to come, Luc. 22.
were like drops of blood, trickeling down to the ground.

But that our Lord went freely and willingli unto his passion, that made it most
gracious: Mat. 26.
R^^e, says he, let us be going. Behold, he is at hand that shall betray me.
And Ihon says, he went forth to mete the ministers that sought Jesus of
Nazareth, John. 18.
and when they hard our Lord say, I am he, they went backewardes, and fell to
the ground.

And when he was taken, bound, ignominious^y led away, falsely accused,
buffeted, be spued, scourged, mockingly crowned with thorn, yet he never
showed any word or sign of impacience or trouble: but showed them manifold
benefits that so did handle him. For he healed the servant ear that was
cut of, he spoke many devout and profitable words unto the^, and praid meekely
for those that crucified him, calliuge most swetely upon his father,
beninglye excusinge them, Luc. 23.
saying father. Forgive them, for they wotte not what they do.

And all this he suffered not for him self, but for us. For he prayed that the
sins might be taken away, which he never committed. And so he dyed for our
necessity and vtilitye, and not for his own, but for all his friends. For why,
to deliver us, he would be taken, to redeem us, he would be sold, that we might
be honored, he would be confounded and crucified. He was bound, that we might
be losed, scourged, that we should not be scourged, he died, that we should
not die eternally. And Paul says, I live by the faith of the son of God,
which loved me, and gave him self for me. And in a another place. Christ died
for our sins. Gala. 2.
And Peter says, Christ suffered for us, 1. Cor. 15.
leaninge us an ensample that we should follow his steps. 1. Pet. 2.
And Esaias, Esai. 33.
he was wounded for our offenses, and was smitten for our wickedness, and
with his stripes, we are healed. And it is written, I give my life for my sheep.

And it is written of the Apostles which were beaten. Act. 5.
They departed from the counsel rejoicing, that they were counted worthy, to
suffer rebuke for his name.

Steven was so pacient and benign to those that stoned him, that he made more
diligent intercession for them, Act. 7.
then for him self, for he kneled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay
not this sin to their charge, when he prayed for him self, we read not, that
he kneled, or cried.

Paul and Silas being in a hard prison, Act. 16.
prayed at mydnight, and lauded God.

Of constancy and continuance in purposes. Cap. lxxx.
AFter that we be once departed from the society and fellowship of those that
be evil, Genesis 19.
we should not look behind us, as Lots wife did, the which was turned into a
piler of salt.

Iosephes mistress was daily moles^ius and grievous unto him, Genesis 39.
but yet continually he resisted that nepharius and wicked deed.

Moses could by no means be chased or ouercomd, other to remain and to
sacrifice to our Lord in Egypt: Exo. 8.9.10.
or to leave unto Pharao ye peoples children or cattle.

David was sore reproved of his eldest brother, and also dissuaded by Saul, 1.
regu. 17.
and yet he left not of his purpose, but fought manfully, and overcame Golyath.

Ioa^ continued in the siege of Rabbath until the city was taken: and in the
battle against Absolon, 2. regu. 11.18.20.
and in the siege of the city, Abela against Seba the son of Bochius.

Although Nehemias in buyldinge of the wall of Jerusalem, 2. Esd. 4.6
suffered many lettes and impedyments: yet he never left of, nor ceased not
from his work, until the wall was wholly ended.

In so much as Tobias ^uer feared God from his youth up, Tobi. 2.
he grudged not against God, that the plague of blindness chanced unto him,
but remained steadfast in the fear of God, and thanked God all the days of his
life.

Eliachim the hie priest spoke unto al Israel, saying, be ye sure that our
Lord will hear your prayers and peticions, Iudi. 4.
if ye continue steadfast in Fastinges and prayers in the syghte of our Lord.

King Ahaswerus servants desired to know, whether Mardocheus continued in
his purpose that he would not honor and worship Aman, Esth. 3.
the which Mardocheus did so continue in his purpose, that he would not only
worship him, nor yet arise or when he came by, bow his kne unto him.

Daniels fellows said constantlye unto the king of Babylon, know thou O king,
Dani. 3.
that we will not serve thy Gods, nor do reverence or pray unto thy Image.

Daniell left not of for all Darius wicked and cruel de^re, Dani. 6.
to pray in the day time unto our Lord, as his manner was to do.

Susanna did constantly resist those two old priests, Dani. 13.
that tempted her so vehemently.

There were many of the people of Israel which determined with them selves, 1.
math. 1.
that they would not eat unclean things, but chose rather to suffer death,
then to be defiled with unclean meats.

Eleazarus had a wonderful constancy and perseverance in his pains and
torments, 2. match. 6.
for he chose rather to die with a most grievous death, then against the law to
eat swines flesh, or to dissemble to have eaten it.

Those same seven brethren, with their good and devout mother, 2. Match. 7.
did well continue unto the latter end: nor they could not be induced to the
preuarication and breche of the law, another by fair means, nor yet by foul.

The blessed virgin Marye had a most ferme and steadfast purpose to keep her
virginity: Luc. 1.
the which would not consent to the conception of her child, until she
understood, that it should not be done by man, but by the virtue of the holy
ghost.

Our Lord does put an ensample of him that begins to build a tour, Luc. 14.
and was not able to make an end.

The man that was borne blind, and restored to his sight by our Lord, John. 9.
did constantly continue against the Pharisees, confessing and defending the
truth.

Act. 1.
And al our Lords disciples continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus.

When the Princes of the Jews, saw the constancye of Peter and Ihon, Act. 4.
and understood that they were unlearned and idiots or lay men, they
meruailed.

Barnabas perceiving that many of the Antiochens were turned unto the faith,
Act. 11.
exhorted them al, that with purpose of heart they would continually cleave unto
our Lord.

Paul and Barnabas exhorted the brethren, to continue in the grace of god. Act.
13.


The holy ghost witnesses in every city unto Paul, Act. 20.
that bands and trouble abide him in Jerusalem, but I fear (says he) none of
these things, neither do I make my life dearer unto me, then my self.

Of bodily war and victory most commenly obtained. Capi. lxxxi.
ABraham with a few of his fellows overthrew four kings, Genesis 14.
the which were so mighty, that they wasted and destroyed great countries, and
at length they overcame ye kings of the v. cities, and spoiled the men of
Sodom and Gomor. But Abraham recovered the spoil, and delivered Lot his
nephew.

And it is to be noted, that in just war a man is not bound to Proclaim
war unto his enemies, Ca. 8.10.
or to foretell them, yea it is lawful to deceive them, as it appears by
Abraham, Iosue and Gedeon.

Moses sent Iosue to fight against Amalech that went about to let and hinder
the children of Israel. Exodi. 17.
Moses went not in his own parson, but continued in Prayer, and did more by
prayer, then he with his hands fighting.

The children of Israel being moved, went courageously to fight. Nume. 14.
Moses forbiddinge them, against the Amalechites and the Cananites, which
smote them, and hewed them, eue^ unto Horma.

King Arad fought against the children of Israel, and took some of them
prisoners. Nume. 21.
But Israel vowed a vow unto our Lord, and overcame them, and destroyed the
cities of their enemies.

The children of Israel fighting by Moses commandment against the Madianites,
Nume. 21.
had and obtained so great a victory, yt they took for a pray 3200. virgins,
and yet of the Israelites there was but 1200. fighting men of the which there
was not one man slain.

When the people shouted, and blewe with trompets, Iosu. 6.
as Iosue commanded them, the walls of Jericho fell down and so was the city
taken.

By the accasion of Achams preuarication, the children of Isrell were driven
from the city of Hai. Iosu. 7.8.
But after the sin was pourged at gods commandment, the city was taken,
and ouerthroen.

When Iosue fought against the.v kings, which came to destroi the Gabaonites:
Iosu. 10
Our lord cast down from heaven great stones upon them. And there were mo
dead with the hayle stones, then they were, whom the children of Israel slew
with the swerd, Then the sun and the moon stood still at Iosues word and
commandment for the space of a day, that he might utterly destroy his
enemies. And it is to be noted, that notwythstandinge it be written, that Iosue
in the conquering of ye land of promise, did smite and destroy all the land
with the kings thereof: and ye fightinge he took the^ all, except Gabaon. Yet
it is red there. Iosu. 10
That our lord fought for Israel. Notwithstanding therefore that the children
of Israel did fight strongly with their hands, yet the victory was ascriued
to god.

Iudi. 1.
We read not that the children of Israel after the death of Joshua went to
fight, except that they first counseled with our lord. And our lord
deluered the Cananites and the pharesites into their hands.

Iudi. 3.
Our lord left many nations among the children of Israel to instruct Israel.
And all that knew not ye wars of the Cananites, and that their children might
learn to fight with their enemies, and have ye custom of fighti^g.

Iudi. 3.
Our lord styrde up a savior unto Israel named Ahud the which slew Eglon
the king of Moab. And the children of Israel went down with him going
before them. The which said unto them, follow me, for our lord has
delivered your enemies into our hands. And they slew of the Moabites upon a
ten.M. men.

Delbora said unto Barach, up, for this is the day, Iudi. 4.
in which our lord has delivered Sisara into thy hands: our lord feared
and destroyed Sysara, all his charettes, and all his host with the edge of the
sweard.

With.300. men that with their hands did cast water into their mouths,
Iudi. 7.
our lord delivered Israel from the hand of Madian and Amalech, the which in
Gedeons time were many in number.

Abimelech Gedeons son through his concubine, slew.70. of his brethren upon
one stone, Iudi. 9.
to thentent he might raygne alone. After that a certain woman, whilste he
beseiged the tours of Sichem, cast a piece of a mylstone upon his head and all
to break his brain pan.

I^phethe went to fight against the children of Amnon, Iudi. 12.
whom our lord delivered into his hands. And he destroyed with a very great
plage.xx. of the children of Amons cities.

Samson through the great strength that our Lord gave him, Iudi. 15.
obtained against the Philistia^s many victoryes, the which did oppress and
keep the children of Israel in great seruitute and bondage.

600. men of the tribe of Dan, came to Lais, Iudi. 18
even to a people that were at rest, and without mistrust, and smote them with
the edge of the swearde, and burnt the city with fire. And there was no man to
healpe, because Lais was far from Sidon. And they had no medlynge with any
other manne.

Although the children of Israel were justly moved against the children of
Benjamin, Iudic. 20.
and were.vii. times as many mo as they were: yet they trusting to their
fortitude and number, were of them ouercomed. Afterward they wept and fasted
before our lorde^ and our lord said unto them. To morrow I will deliver
them into your hands. And then they had a full vyctory over them.

In the time of Eli the preaste, the philistians overcame the children of
Israel, 1. regu. 4.
the which afterward as thouge they would tempte GOD, brought the Arc of
our lord with them, presumptuously trustinge that by it, they should obtain
the victory. But the philistines comfortinge one an other, overcame them
again. And took the Ark of god in the battle.

Samuel did cry unto our lord for the children of Israel, 1. regu. 7.
and offered up sacrifice for them: And our lord thundered a great thunder
among the philistines, and they were put to flyte and slain.

When the towns of Iabes Galaad were besieged by Nahaz the king of ye
Ammonites Saul did sone succur the^, 1. regum. 11.
for he with a great multitude of men of war came in upon the host in the
morning watch, and scattred their enemies so, that two of the^ were not left
together.

Ionathas Saul's son seeing the station and watch of the philistines, said
unto his harnes bearer, 1. regum. 14
it is no hardness with our lord, to save either in many or in few. And there
chaunsed as it were a miracle of god, for the multitude was slain by them, 1.
regu. 14.
and fleing hither and thither were scattered in every place.

At Samuels commandment Saul slew Amalech, 1. regu. 15.
and took Agag the king of the Amalekytes alive. And utterly destroyed all the
people.

There was a marvelous fight between David and Goliath of Grath the gyante. 1.
regu. 17.
David was a child unmeet and unapt for such a purpose, without armure, and
yet he trustinge in our Lord, prevailed against the armed gyante, that was
strong and expert in s^ynge and stone.

When David heard say that the Amalechites had burnt Sicelag, 1. regu. 30.
and had led their wives away captives, he took counsel with our lord,
whether he should follow those thieves or no. Our lord said unto him, follow,
and with four hundred men he vanquished them, and brought the whole pray
again.

After many wrong and unjust persecutions moved by Saul against David, ye
Philistines fought against him, 1. regu. 31.
and the wait of the battle was turned against Saul Then took he his sweard,
and through desperation fell upon it. And so Saul dyed, and his three sons,
and al his men.

There was cruel war between David's xii. servant, 2. regu. 2.
and Isboseths xii. servants, when they slew each other.

When the Philistines hard yt they had anointed David king over Israel, 2.
regu. 5.8.
they came al up to seek David, and David asked counsel of our Lord, and
smote the^. Afterward he smote the Philistines again, and took the bridle of
bondage out of their hands. Hesmote Moab, the which was tributary unto him.
Also he smote king Soba, and xii. M. of the Sirians. And our Lord kept David
what so ever he took in hand.

When Ioab saw that the front of the batta^l was against him, before and
after, he said unto his brother Abisai. If the Sirians prevail against me,
thou shall healpe me, if the children of Amnon prevail against thee, 2. reg.
10
I will come and succoure thee. Therefore quite the like a man, and let us
fight for our people, and for the city of our God, and our lord shall do
that, which is good in his own eyes. And when the battle was begun, all his
adversaries fled from him.

Absolon made dishonest war against his father David, 2. regu. 18.
and therefore he and his people that held with him sped there after, to the
intent you may know and learn, that they which unjustly consent to an evil
Prince, can never prosper?

Benadab the king of Syria with xxxii. kings besieged Samaria, and at our
Lords commandment he was overthrown, and put to flight, the only
servants of the governors of the shyres, 3. regum 20
which were in number even CC.xxx. and two fighting against them. The next
year after Bennadab came again with a great host, and there were slain of
the Sirians an hundred thousand foteme^ in one day, because they said. The
Lord is but God of the hills, and not God of the valleis.

When the king of Judah, the king of Israel, 4. regum. 3.
and the king of Edom were gathered to fight against Moab: and had great
scarsity of water: the Prophet Elizeus said. This broke shall be filled with
water. And furthermore our Lord shall deliver Moab into your hands.

Samaria was so long besieged by the king of Syria, 4. reg. 6.7
that an Asses head was sold for lxxx. silver pence: And the fourth part of
a Cab of Doves donge, for v. sicles. And at the word of Elizeus the Syrians
were put to flight, and by that they had great abundance of all things.

After ye Amasias king of Judah had obtaynd the victory against Edo^, he sent
unto the king of Israel, provoking him to battle, 4. regu. 14.
but yet he put him to the worse. And through Amasias elation and pride, a
great part of ye wall of Jerusalem was destroyed.

Although Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel and his people were
evil, 4. regu. 14.
yet he healped them, and did them much good, by the hand of Jeroboam.

Our Lord fought well and meruelously for Hezechias the king of Judah 4. regu.
19.
against Sennacherib the king of Assyria When that the angel of our Lord slew
in one night of Sennacheribs hoaste.185000. And he him self was slain
afterward of his own children.

When Abia the king of Judah and his host saw yt the battle was before and
behind. He cried unto our Lord: and the priests blew the trompets, 2. Para. 13.
and our lord made Jeroboam and al Israel afraid^ and there fell down wounded of
Israel 50000. strong men, and so the children of Israel were brought under, and
the children of Judah comforted, because they trusted unto our Lord.

Zara the Moryan came out against Asa the king of Judah, with an host often
hundred thousand, Asa cried unto our Lord, saying. Lord it is no 2. Para. 14.
difference with thee whether thou healpe in many or in few. Then follows.
Our^ Lord made the black Mores afraid, and they fell down dead. For they
were consumed of our Lord.

The children of Moab and Ammo^ were gathered together to fight against
Iosaphat, 2. Para. 20.
but he wholye gave him self to pray unto our Lord. And what time as the
singing men began to laud and praise our lord, he turned the deceites of their
adversaries among them selves, for every one with mutual wounds destroyed an
other.

Phacee Romelius son king of Israel, slew in one day in Judah, 2. Para. 17.
an hundred and twenty thousand fyghtinge men, and that because they had
forsaken our Lord.

The victory which our Lord gave unto the children of Israel, Iudi. 16.
by the hands of Judith is famous and notorius, wherefore she said after ye
death of Holofernes, our lord almighty hindered him, and delivered him into the
hands of a woman.

Judas Machabeus perceiving ye Serons 1. Match. 3.
host was great, his fellows being fearful, 1. Macha. 3
said: It is a small matter for many to be overcome with a few: yea, there is no
difference in the sight of God of heaven, to deliver by a great multitude, or
by a small company, and Seron and his host was destroyed. And the self
Machab^us with three thousand men, 1. macha. 4.
which had neither harness, nor sweardes to their minds, ouerthrewe Gorgias
and his great ^ost.

Bachides came with a great power to fight against Ionathas, and Ionathas said
unto his men. 1. macha. 9
Let us fight and cry now unto heaven, that we may be delivered from the hands
and power of our ennemies, and so they were.

It is worthy to be noted of Judas Machabeus, that he which fought so often
times, and did so many honest and worthy acts, did so often win, as often as
he, when he should fight, did pray and call to God for healpe. 1. match. 6.9
But yet we read not that he prayed in two of his most notable battles. The One
was against Antiochus Eupator. The second against Bacchides and Alchimus, and
then he was slain in the battle.

Of Impacience and murmuring. Cap. lxxxii.
AGar Saras maid that could not suffer the correction of her mistress, the
which fared ^oule with her, Genesis 16
because of her pride, fled her ways: but at the angels commandment she
returned again unto her.

The officers of the children of Israel said unto Aaron, Exo. 5.
and Moses our Lord look upon you, and judge you, which has made the sauoure
of us, stincke before Pharao.

The children of Israel beholding the Egiptians, said unto Moses, perauenture
because there be no graves in Egypt, Exo. 14
haste thou therefore brought us away, for to dye in the wilderness?

The first murmuring of the children of Israel in the desarte was for lack
of drink. Exo. 15.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, what shall we drink?

After that, the hole multitude of ye congregation of Israel did murmur for
meat, saying. Why have ye brought us into his wilderness, to kill this hole
multitude with honger? Exo. 16.
Again they murmured for lack of drink after that our lord had sent the^
quails and Manna. And when they suffered ho^ger in the desert, with murmur and
impacience, they remembered the flesh which they did eat in Egypt, but of the
hard bondage and seruitute wherewith they were oppressed, they made no mention.

And when the people ^awe, that it was long or Moses came down out of the
mountain, Exo. 32.
they gathered them selves together against Aaron, and said unto him. Up, and
make us Gods to go before us.

The people, as though they had been heavy and wearied with much labor, Nume.
11.
began to murmur against our Lord, and the fire of our Lord burnt among them,
and deuourd the vttermoste part of the host. And note the peruersity of them
that said. We remember the fish we did eat in Egypt for naught. And yet they
boughte it full dearly.

After the terrible death of Chore and his fellows, Nume. 16.
the multitude murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, ye have killed the
people of our Lord.

Again they murmured and chode with Moses at the waters of strife, Nume. 20.
for faut of drink and fruit.

Achitophell perceiuinge that they did not after his Counsel, 2. regu. 27.
was so moved and so impacyent, that he departed from Absolon, and went home
and hanged him self.

Because that the Children spoke roughlye with those of the ten tribes, 2.
regu. 20.
Israel went from Dauyd, and followed Seba the son of Bichri.

When Tobias spoke of the kydde, which he heard cry, Tobi. 2.
saying: Look that it be not stolen, his wife did answer him impaciently.

When Sara Raguels daughter, rebuked one of her maidens for her faut: Tobi. 3.
she answered her again to injuriously, saying. God let us never see son or
daughter of thee more upon earth, thou kyller of thy husbands.

When word came to Holofernes that the children of Israel prepared them
selves to make resistaunce, Judith. 5
he was exceading wroth.

Judith. 6
When Achtor had left of speaking Holofernes took sore indignation.

Because Mardocheus would not worship Aman, Esther. 3.
he took such indignation, and was so impaciente, that he seemed to procure
not his death only, but the death of all the Jews.

Elihu the son o^ Barachel, perceiving that Jobs friends, Job. 32.
the which disputed with him, could not overcome him, showed by his words
many tokens of impaciency.

Daniell. 3.
Nabuchodonozor hearing that Daniels fellows would not worship the golden Image
which he made^ In anger and furiousnes, caused the^ to be brought before him.

When Herod heard, that there was borne a king of Jews, Mat. 2.
he was troubled, and all the city of Jerusalem with him.

Our lord syttinge at meat in Mathews house, Luc. 5.15.
the scribes and pharisees murmured saying unto his disciples Why do ye eat
with publicanes and sinners?

And at zacheus they murmurd, saying. He is gone in to tarry with a man that is
a sinner. Luc. 19.


And the elder brother of the prodigal son, Luc. 15.
hearing of the feast that his father made for his youngest brothers cominge
home, disdained at it, and would not go in.

When the chief preastes and Scribes saw the wonderful miracles yt he did,
Mat. 21.
and the children cryinge in the temple. Hosanna to the son of David: they
disdayned.

When ye pharisees saw that they were with effectuous words confuted by John. 9.
him that was borne blind, and restored by our lord to his sight again,
they cursed him, and said. Be thou his discyple: Thou art all together borne
in sin, and do thou teach us?

There arose a murmur and a grudge among the Greeks and the Hebrews, Act. 6.
because their wydowes were despised in the daily ministration.

Of Pusillanimity. Capitu. lxxxiii.
WHen ye Angels had said unto Lot. Genesis 19.
Save thy self in the mountain, he answered. I cannot be saved in ye
mou^tain, lest some misfortune fall upon me, and yet a worse chance chanced
even then unto him.

When the children of Israel saw the Egiptians behind the^, Exo. 14.
they were sore afraid, although they had seen so many miracles done for them
by the divine power of god.

As Moses was speaking with our lord in the mount, Exo. 20.
the people heard the thunder, and the noise of the trumpe, and saw the
lyghtninge, and the mountain smokinge. And being very fearful, they stood a
far of, and said unto Moses. Talk thou with us, and we will hear, but let not
god talk with us, least we dye.

After that the conditions and estate of the land of promise was reveled and
opened, Nu. 13.14.
the which had mighty and strong inhabitours, whose cities were walled and
exceading great. Deu. 1.
The whole congregation said: would God that we had dyed in the land of
Egypt. And they said again. The messengers have feared and discouraged us.

Balaac seeing all that ye children of Israel had done unto ye Amorites, Nume.
22.
and that his people were sore a frayde, he trustinge more in words then in
arms, sent unto Balaam to come and curse the children of Israel.

Rachab said unto the spies yt came from Iosue. Iosu. 2.
I know yt our lord has given you ye land, for ye fear of you is fallen upon
us: and the inhabitoures of ye land faint at ye presence of you.

After that Achior had taken of the excommunicate things of Ierico: the men
of Hay put the children of Israel to flight, Iosu. 7.
and slew.36. men. The hearts of the people were a fraid, and melted a way
like water. And Iosue rent his clothes.

When the Gabaonites heard what Iosue had done unto Ierico, Iosu. 9.
and Hai, they feared, and coming to Iosue, they even as he would, made a
grement with him.

Gedeon having.3200. men in his host, Iudi. 7.
made a proclamation, that if any did dread, or were afraid, he should
return. And there departed and returned of the people.2200. men.

When Saul and all Israel heard the words of Goliath the philistine askinge
a man to fight with him, 1. regu. 17.
they were even a stoned, and discouraged.

Saul gathered all Israel together, and came to Gelboe. 1. regu. 28.
And when Saul saw the host of the philistines, he was a frayed, and his heart
was sore astonyed.

2. Para. 3.
Roboam being rude and fearful of heart, could not resyste the hooste that
Ieroboas had gathered against him.

When all the host of the Assirians heard that Holofernes was headed, Iudi. 15
their mind and counsel fell from them, and being moved and styrde with
fear, defended the^ selves, with their feet.

It was declared unto the house of David, that the king of Israel, and the
king of Siria were co^federated to fight against Jerusalem. Esa. 7.
David and his people hearts were moved, as ye trees of ye wode before ye face
of the wind.

And Esaias descriuinge the burden of Tire, said, fearfulness, the pit, and the
snare upon the. Esa. 24.
O thou that dwell on the earth.

When that Jeremy by gods commandment did prophecy that Jerusalem should
be taken. Iere. 38.
The princes and rulers of the people said unto the king: Sir we beseache you
let this man be put to death. The king yt was weke hearted and fearful,
answered the^. Lo, he is in your hands. For the king may deny you nothing.

Darius the king of Persia ordained by the counsel of his great estates, a
certain cruel decre and law, Dani. 6.
the which Daniell observed not, and therefore he was put into the Lions den,
and it dyspleased the king, yet he durst not manfully resyste his estates and
lords.

When Judas Machabeus saw that his host failed him, and that he must needs
fight, 1. Match. 9.
it brake his heart, and he was slain in ye battle. And yet we read not yt
Judas was either in war, or any other where a frayde before.

Nicanor made peace and amity with Judas Machabeus, the which thing displeased
king Antiochus. 2. match. 24
And he sent unto Nicanor, to se^d him Judas. And although he did it much
against his will, yet he could nor durst not withstand the kings will and
commandment so that if he had could, he had fulfilled the kings evil
intent and mind.

Peter walkinge upon the sea, came unto our lord. mat. 14.
But when he saw a mighty wind, he was a frayde.

Nicodemus seemed to be a weak sprited man, John. 3.
yt he came to Jesus by night as though that by day he durst not come unto
him.

When the disciples saw that our Lord was taken and bound, they forsook him
and fled. mat. 26.
But Peter followed him a far of, because he durst not approach near.

Our Lord reproved the weakness of mind of his disciples, because they feared
the commotio^ of the sea, mat. 8.
he being present, saying unto the^, why are ye fearful. O ye of little faith?

Peter was to feeble sprited, when yt he after so bold words, mat. 26.
at the only voice of a wenche, denied his Lord and master.

Likewise that young man clothed with linen, mar. 14.
when the ministers caughte him, he chose rather to leave his lynnen garment,
and fly away naked, then to tarry there any longer.

The parents of him that was born blind, John. 9.
and again res^ored to his sight by our Lord, did fearfully answer the
Phariseis, because they feared to be excommunicate out of ye sinagoge.

Of Fortitude and strength to do euel. Ca. lxxxiiii.
CAine was stronger then Abell, when he rose up against him, and slew him. Genesis
4.


The four kings did travel and labor very sore, which after so great a
slaughter of men ouercam the king of Sodom with many other, Genesis 14.
and led a way Lot Abraham's nephewe as a prisoner.

Abimelech Gedeons son sustained great fatigation and labor, when he slew
lxx. of his brethren, Iudi. 9.
and afterward by strong hand took Sychem, the which even sone after was
slain most miserably.

Saul put him self to many great pearels and trauail, 1. reg. 18.19.
to persecute David, and could never obtain his purpose.

2. regu. 15.
Absolon being mineded to expel and drive his father out of his kingdom, took a
great business upon him: but yet his chance was but evil.

Jeroboam both by thought and deed, 3. regu. 12.
travailed very sore to auert and turn the people of Israel from the house of
David, and once turned, so to retain and keep them.

Holofernes paste over and wasted many countries to bring them under the yoke
of his dominion. Iudi. 1.16.
But yet at the last one woman or ever he could accomplish his purpose,
behedded him.

Antiochus Epiphanes took and sustained great labors, to destroy the
worship and honor of god in Iewry, 2. Match. 9.
and yet at length brought to poverty and confusion, he died a most miserable
and wretched death in a strange and a foren country.

The children of this world in their generation are oftentimes not only more
prudent and wise then the children of light, Luc. 16.
but also of greater power: for when the disciples took their reast and slept,
Judas procuring his prodition and treason, watched most diligently.

The chief priests did weary them selves with great ^are and labor to
extinguish and bring to naught the name of Christ, Mat. 28.
for they corrupted the kepers of the Lords sepulcher with great sums of
money, to say, that his disciples took him away. Again, they did cast and bind
his disciples in prison, Act. 3.4.
and now and then they monished them with words, now with stripes, and did
them great iniuryes, to the intent they should not speak, nor teach in the
name of our Lord Jesus.

When Lysias the Tribune had Paul in bonds, there were above forty Jews
which had made a vow that they would eat nor taste nothing, Act. 23.
till they had killed Paul. And therefore they desired that he might be
brought forth, that suddenly they might invade him and kill him.

Of Murder. Capi. lxxxv.
OUr Lord did grievously punyshe the murder that Cain committed, Genesis 4.
and yet there was no law written that did forbid it. Exo. 1.
1. regu. 17.
Caine slew his brother Abell. 2. regu. 20.
Moses the Egiptian. David Goliath. 3. regu. 2.
Ioab Abner and Amasam. Solomon Abdomam, Man. 6.
Ioab, and Semet. Act. 5.
Herod Ihon the Baptist. Peter Ananias and Saphira, Genesis 9.
but in these consider the variety of intentio^s and causes, God would that
man should vehemently and much abhor murder, and therefore he said, flesh in ye
life thereof, and in the blud thereof shall ye not eat.

A murderer should be reputed and esteemed as dead. And therefore Rebecca said,
Genesis 27.
why should I be deprived or desolate of both my sons in one day. For if Esau
had slain Jacob, she judged that she had lost both.

If zebee and Salmana had not slain Gedeons brethren, Iudi. 8.
Gedeon had not afterward slain them.

Abimelech the son of Jeroboam slew three score and ten of his brethren, to
the intent he might reign alone, Iudi. 9.
and yet he ruled not long there, but sustained great misfortune, and made an
evil end.

For because ye Abimelech the priest comforted David flying from Saul, 1.
regu. 22.
Saul the persecutor of David slew him with many other priests, weme^ and
children.

David caused the young man which confessed that he murdered Saul, 2. regu. 1.
to be slain. 2. Re. 11.
And procured Urias death by the hand of Ioab.

Absolon slew his brother Amnon, whom he invited to the banquet, 2. R^. 13.
eue^ as he was eatinge and mearye with wine.

The effusion and shedding of man's blood is so horrible, 3. Re. 7.
that although David was other ways a very good manne, yet our Lord would not
that he, but that Solomon his Son, should build him his temple.

Notwithstanding that Ioab was a worthy man of arms, and very faithful to the
Lord his master: 3. Re. 2.
yet in as much as he deceitfully slew two men, all that ever he had done
before, was coumpted as nothing. And so Solomon caused him to be slain.
Notwithstanding he held the corner of the aultare.

Naboth by the procurement of wicked Iezabell was cruellye stoned to death. 3.
Re. 21.


Ioas the king of Judah commanded zacharias the son of Ioiade the priest to
be stoned to death, 2. Para. 24.
and yet his father restored him the kingdom, and slew Athalia.

The ii. old priests, Dani. 13.
which thought to put Susanna most wrongfully to death, convicted by Danyell,
were slain by the people.

Tryphon slew Ionathas and his two sons, 1. Match. 13.
and yet he had received of Simon for Ionathas ransom, and deliverance a C.
talentes of silver, and his two sons for ostages and pledges.

Ptolomy the son of Abobus made the hie priest and his two sons a banquet:
1. Match. 16.
and when they were merry, and had dronken well, traitorously he slew them.

Of diverse slaughters of men. Capi. lxxxvi.
THere was a marvelous great slaughter of men and other beasts when that all
men, Genesis 7.
except viii. perished in the flud, called Noes flud.

The four kings, which over thrue five kings, made coming thither and
fyghting against them a great murder of men, Genesis 14.
although the number of them be not written.

It cannot be well known by scripture, how many me^ by diverse plages did pearysh
in Egypt, or how many were drowned in the red sea, but yet it is to be
thought, that the nombre was very great.

Of vi. hundred and 3000. fyghting men which were nombred from twentye
years upwards, Nume. 1.26
there came not one into the land of promise, except Caleph, and Iosue, but
pearyshed and dyed by diverse calamytyes in the desert.

The children of Israel by Moses commandment slew a great nombre of the
Medianits, the which thing may be proved by the pray that they took. Nume. 31.
For of virgins there was found 320000. Al their women were corrupted, and their
men slain.

In Iosues time, at the entering and going into the land of promise, Iudi. 7.8.
there was found as well in the Cities as in the fields a great nombre of
dead persons.

In the time of Debora, Gedeon, and Iephtha judges of Israel, were many men
slain, although they cannot be certainly numbered.

By thoccasion of the Levites wife. which was slain, Iudi. 20.
there was killed 7000. fighting men, besides women and children, the which all
were of the tribe of Benjamin.

In the days of Heli when the arc of our lord was taken, 1. regu. 4.
there was slain of the Israelites iii. M. fotemen.

Saul which destroyed Amalech, slew many of them. 1. Re. 14.17
And afterward when Goliath the Phylystyan was slain, there were many of
the Philistians destroyed.

When Saul and his children were slain, 1. Re. 31.
there fell many, and a great number of the Israelites were destroyed.

David slew many of his own, and of Amnons children, 2. regum. per totum.
and many of the Philistians, as it appears in diverse places.

For David's elation and pride in ye nombringe of his people, 2. Re. 24.
there dyed 70000. of his men.

When the xxxii. kings with an exceading nombre of men were gathered together,
3. Re. 24.
Benadab the king of Siria were twice put to flight by Achab the king of
Israel, and at their next metinge, there was slain of the Assirians a hundred
thousand footmen in one day.

Abia the king of Judah, and his host, 2. Para. 13.
slew 50000. of Ieroboams strong and mighty men.

Asa the king of Judah had in his host five hundred, and lxxx. thousand men.
2. Para. 14.
The black Mores were ten hundred thousand, the which were utterly
destroyed, for our LORD fought against them.

Phacee the king of Israel Ramelias son, 2. Para. 28
slew in Judah an hundred and twentye thousand in one day, which were all
fyghtinge men, and that because they had forsaken our lord.

When Salmanassar, took Samaria, and brought the children of Israel among
the Assirians. Jeremy. 39.
And when Nabuchodonozor took Jerusalem and the king of Judah, it is very like
that there dyed many a man, although the number be not certain.

By the occasion of proud and cruel Aman, the which for Mardocheus sake only
would have destroyed all the Jews. Esther. 9.
The Jews slew in Ahasuerus kingdom.75000. men, yt which they esteemed to be
their ennemies.

Ionathas sent Demetrius to Antioche.3000. me^ to aid him against the citizens,
1. Match. 11.
the which would have slain Demetrius. And there was killed upon one day, a
hundred thousand men.

There was so great a slaughter of men in Jerusalem, 2. Macha. 5
that when Antiochus Epiphanes took the city, in three days there were
slain.8000.4000. put in prison, and no less sold.

Against the Galathia^s.6000. only slew a.C. and.xx. M. through ye help that
was given them from heaven. 2. Match. 8.


Besides the battles that Judas Machabeus made against Apolonius and Seron ye
chief captain of ye Assiria^s host, of ye which it is written in ye. 3. Ca.
of the first book of the Machabees, we read that he specially had
other.xii. battles, as it appears from the.viii. Ca. of the.ii. book, unto
the end. In ye which were slain.9000. men, of those that were with Nicanor.
And.20000. with Timothe and Bacchides.25000. of the Idumites, and again.24000.
of ye same people ye which were in two towers. Furthermore.2000. yt were with
Timothe, and.2000. with Lisia. And also.10000. in a certain ground or field of
Timothese. And again.30000. of his me^, and afterward.250000. in ye strong
city of Carmon. And in ye city calde Ephro^^ 25000. And in Antoichus Cupators
host he slew.14000 me^, at ye last Nicanor was slain with 25000. fightinge men.
The sum of al is two hundred and 56000 men: besides those that were slain of
Judas host: and those that perished in fortresses and battles, of ye which
there is no certain number. Nor they are not co^pted here, ye fell in Judas
last battle against Bacchides and Alchimus, where they fought from mourninge
till evening in the which Judas perished, and the other fled their ways.

Of abstinence and sobriety. Capi. lxxxvii.
OUr lord commanded Adam saying. Genesis 2.
Eat thou of all the trees of paradyse, but as touching the tree of knowledge
of good and evil you shall not eat of it. In the which prohibition abstinence
is commended, in yt he would not ye man in paradise should eat of all manner of
meat.

Moses was in ye mount with our lord.40. days and 40 nights, Exo. 24.
and he nether did eat nor drink. Abstinence is a right good dysposition to
receive divine revelations: And manne refreshed with divine revelations, is
wont to abhor bodily delight and pleasure. Yea, Leuiti. 15
and our Lord commanded the children of Israel to abstain from diverse meats.

When either man or woman did vow a vow to be sanctified, Nume. 6.
or did consecrate or appoint the^ selves unto our lord, they abstained from
all such kinds of drink, as might cast them into dronckennesse.

The Aungel appearinge unto ma^nas wife which should conceive him, Iudi. 13.
that should deliver the people, commanded her to abstain.

This makes much to the commendation of sobriety, ye which does stand in the
use of fish, and in ye abstinence from flesh: that our lord in his gospel does
even often times multiply fish, Luke. 5.
and not flesh. And at our lords commandment the disciples in closed a
great multitude of fishes, Mark. 6.
furthermore we read yt he twyse multiplied bread and fishes. Luke. 9.
And of.v. loves, Ihon. 6.
and ii. fishes in Marcke. Math. 15.
Luke, and John And of.7. loves and a few fishes ye which our lord multiplied,
Mark. 8.
mention is made i^ Mat and Mark.

Peter purposinge to show that the disciples, Acts. ^.
which were replenished with the holy ghost, were not drunken, said that it was
not yet the third hour of the day. Geuynge us to wit, that it was not
convenient to drink before the third hour.

The people of Israel were a hungerd, and there was honey in the fyeld, 1.
regu. 14.
but no man eat thereof, but Ionathas the son of Saul.

When David desired water of the well or cesterne of Bethelem, it was brought
him, 2. regu. 23.
but yet he would not drink thereof, because he longed to greadely after it.

A small and a slender sustenaunce contented Elias, 3. regu. 17.
the which asked only of the wyddow Sereptane a little water, and a morsel of
bread.

Ieroboa^s wife going to Helias the prophet, 3. regu. 14.
took with her.10. loves, and a cruse of honey. There is no mention made of any
flesh. For he supposed that the prophet did eat no such meat.

And it is notable, that the ravens fed Helias with flesh twyse in one day.
3. regu. 17. 3. regu. 19.
And how that the Angel of our Lord, showed him bread, and a vessel of
water only.

Achab hearing, after he had put Naboth to death, 3. regu. 21.
our Lords co^minatio^ and threatening declared unto him by Helias ye prophet:
put a shyrt of here upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and
went barefote, and held down his head. And therefore our Lord did temper the
pain and punyshmente, the which he threatened.

Esdras proclaimed a fast, and caused all men to afflicte and humble the^
selves, 1. Esd. 8.
for they desired of our Lord that he would give them a right way. Then
there follows. So we fasted, and besought our lord for this, and he heard us.

The children of Hely, of Amnon, with certain of the Amonites gathered them
selves together, 2. Para. 20.
to fight against Iosaphat ye king of Judah. And when he heard it, he set him
self to seek and to pray our LORD and proclaimed a fasting throughout all
Judah. And there follows that he obtained the victory.

When Paul and Barnabas had ordained elders and priests in diverse cities,
Act. 14.
and in every congregation, and had prayed and fasted, they commended the^ to
our Lord, on whom they believed.

When Nehemias should pray Arthaxarses for the holy city, 2. Esd. 1.
and yt the walls thereof might be repaired: He says of him self. I fasted
and prayed before the God of heaven.

It is said of young Tobias and of his father in law, ToBi. 8.12.
and other his friends, that with the fear of God they held the feast of the
marriage. And the Aungel said afterward to both the Tobias, prayer is good
with fasting and alms.

When the children of Jerusalem heard of the terryble and fearful power of
Holofernes, Judith. 4.
they humbled their souls with fasting and prayers.

Also it is said of Iudyth, that she ware a smock of here, and fasted all
the days of her life, Judith. 8.
except the Sabothes, and new mones, and the solemn days of the house of
Israel.

When Esther should speak unto king Ahaswerus, she said to Mardocheus. Go
and gether all the Jews together that are found at Susan, Esther. 4.
and pray ye for me. Look ye eat not nor drinck not in three days, neither day
nor night. I and my maids will fast likewise.

Our Lord commends the abstynence of the Rachabites, Jeremy. 35.
because they would drink no wine, as their father had commanded them.

Our Lord caused Ezechiel the prophet to keep an hard diet, Ezechiel. 4
saying. Take unto the wheat, barley, beans, gromel sede, Millium and fitches.

Daniel was at a point with him self, that he would not be defiled through the
kings meat. Daniell. 1.
There follows. God gave those springaldes conninge and learning in all
scripture and wisdom.

Daniell for the space of iii. wekes eat no bread, as for flesh and wine
there came none within his mouth. Daniel. 10.
And our Lord showed him a marvelous vision. Saint Gregorye in his Homely of
Pentecost says, that the holy ghost did fill the abstinent child, and made
the Prophet judge of the old men.

Our Lord sent to Daniell by the prophet Abacucke, Daniell. 14.
bread and potage being in the den of Lions, but he sent him no flesh, nor
no other delycate meats.

Eleazar an aged man, had rather die a cruel death, 2. Match. 6.
the^ contrary to the law, to eat, or to feign to eat any swines flesh.

It chanced the vii. brethren with their mother to be compelled by the king
against the law, 2. Match. 7.
to eat swines flesh: but they chose rather to sustain and suffer most cruel
torment.

It is written of Ihon the Baptist, that his meat was Locustes and wild honey,
Math. 2.11.
and lived so, as though he neither eat nor drank.

Anna the prophetisse, the daughter of Phanuell, is among other things
commended, Luc. 2.
that she departed not from the temple, but served GOD with Fastings and
prayers night and day.

Our savior after he was baptized, by and by was led into the wilderness,
and there he fasted till he ho^gred, Luc. 4.
which thing makes against those that fast with a filthye conscience, nor
will not for the time of fasting, suffer nor sustain no honger.

The children of Israel which were of the xii. Tribes, Iudi. 20.
were twyse ouerthrown by the children of Benjamin afterward they wept before
our lord and fasted the same day, and so overcame them, and prevailed against
them.

In the time and days of Hely, the Philistines^ 1. regu. 4.7
prevailed against the children of Israel once or twice, and the Arc of our
Lord was taken: Thirdly the Philistines gathered together in Samuels days,
but ye children of Israel fasted the same day, and said, we have sinned
against our Lord. And it follows, that the children of Israel destroyed
them.

After our Lords resurrection, he manyfestlye showed him self to the.vii.
disciples that were a fyshinge and could take nothing, John. 21.
saying. Luc. 6.
Cast out the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. Then
follows, that they drew out the net full of great fyshes. And our Lord
gave his dysciples of those fyshes. But unto the Jews as carnal men and
carynge for carnal things, He gave flesh to eat, to their evil mischaunce
and hinderaunce.

Abstinence does easily cause a man to watch and pray. Mar. 26.
For our Lord after his last supper, rebuked his disciples, saying. What,
could ye not watch with me one hour?

We read not that our Savior, whose actions are our instruction, John. 21.
did at any time eat flesh, but when he eat the pascall lamb. But of the
fyshe which was brought unto him he did eat.

When our Lord sent his disciples to preach, Luke. 10.
he said. Into what so ever city or house ye enter, eat such things as they
have, or such as is set before you. That is, that they should be content with
such as they had, not curyously seking for other.

Peter being a hongred in Simon tanners house, fell into a trance, and saw
heaven opened. Acts. 10.
etc. In the which vision were offered and presented unto him such beasts as
were prohibited by the law. But he refused to eat of them, although, as it is
said, he hongred.

There were in the congregation yt was at Antioche prophets and Doctors. etc.
Acts. 13.
As they ministered to our lord and fasted, the holy ghost said, separate me
Barnabas and Paul.

The children of Israel came together with fasting, 2. Esdras. 9
sackclothes, and earth upon them. etc. And they stood and knowledged their
sins, and red in the book of the law.

When there was a good dinner or feast in Tobias house, Toby. 2.
he heard that one of the children of Israel lay slain upon the streat.
Immediately he lepte from the table, and leaving the feast, and fasting, went to
the dead coarse, and buried it.

Daniell speaking of him self does say. Daniell. 9.
I turned me unto my God our Lord, praying and making intercession with
fasting, sackclothe, and ashes, and then he perceived a special revelation of
the incarnation, passion, and death of Christ.

Baruch did read the words of the book, Baruch. 1.
in the audience of Iechonia Ioachim the king of Judah son, and in the
presence and audyence of all the people, which when they heard it wept,
fasted, and prayed before our Lord.

Of glotony and drunkenness. Cap. lxxxviii.
THe first faut and sin of man was finished and ended by the vice of
gluttony. Genesis. 3.


Noe by drinking of wine, Genesis. 9.
was dro^ken, and uncovered within his tent.

Lot being dronken committed incest with his own daughters. Genesis 19.25.
And Esau sold his birthright for a mess of pottage. Exo. 32.
And the people sat them down to eat and drink, and began to play.

Our Lord said unto Aaron. Thou shall not drink wine nor strong drink that
may cause thee to be dronken, Leui. 10.
thou nor thy sons that are with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of
witness least ye dye.

Whosoever makes a vow in the law, Nume. 6.
and will consecrate and appoint him self unto God, must abstain from wine, and
from all that thing that may make him dronken.

Nume. 11.
The people lusted after flesh, and sat down and wept, saying. Who shall give
us flesh to eat.

The first temptation and grudginge of the children of Israel was for drink,
Nu. 15.16.
the second for bread: and after yt upon like occasion they sinned oftentimes.

With these iii. C. men that lapped water with their hands, and did drink
moderately, Iudi. 7.
our Lord delivered Israel from the hand of Madian.

Men being at meat, wax more bolder and fuller of words being at meat and
drink, Iudi. 9.
they cursed Abimelech.

The Philistines being at meat and meary, Iudi. 16.
the house fell upon them.

The children of Israel would receive no sodden flesh of those that offered
but raw, 1. regu. 2.
to thentent they might prepare it the more delicately.

Ionathas did eat against his fathers commandment a little honey, 1. regu.
14.
and his father therefore would have put him to death, but that ye people helped
him, and entreated for him.

Amnon David's son being merry with wine and dronken, 2. regu. 13.
was slain in Absolons house at a banquet.

Benadab the king of Syria was dronken and had in his pauilion a great
multitude of fighting men, 3. regu. 20.
and yet he was overthrown, and put to flight by the servants of ye governors
of the provinces and shires.

They did eat, and were filled, and became fat, 2. Esd. 9.
and lived in wealth through thy great goodness. And yet they provoked thee to
anger.

Wine overcomes all those that drink it: 3. Esdras. 3
it seduceth and deceaueth the mind, and brings both the poor man, and the
king to dotage and vanity.

Holofernes drank more wine, the^ ever he did in one day before in all his life.
Iudit. 12.13
And Judith was alone in the chamber: as for Holofernes lay upon the bed al
dronken, and of very dronkennes fell a sleep, and so Judith had good opportunity
to kill him.

Aman came joyfully and merilye, from the Queen's feast and bancket. Esther. 5.7
But the next day after both he and his ten sons were confounded and heavy.
for he was hangde upon the Galowes.

Job knew that many things went amiss in feasts and bankets: Job. 1.
and therefore after that his children had banketted and feasted one an other,
he gat up early, and offered for every one a burnt offering.

At the time that Jerusalem should be destroyed, it is written that our Lord
called men unto weping and mourning. And behold, they have joy and gladness,
Esa. 22.
slaying oxen, and killynge sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine. Let ^^eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

The priest and the prophet kn^we nothing through drunkenness, Esa. 28.
they are dronken with wine, they go amiss through strong drink: for their
tables are so full of vomit and filthiness, that no place is clean.

Ptolomy Abobus son made a banquet for Simon the hie priest and his two
sons. 1. Match. 16.
And when they were merry, and had dronken well, he slew the^.

In our lords temptation after the mind of Matthew and Luke we read. Mat. 4.
If thou be the son of God, Luc. 4.
command that these stones be made bread.

Herod made his birth day supper, and the Daughter of Herodias daunsed there,
Mat. 14.
Mar. 6.
and pleased Herod and those that sat with him, and by this occasion, at the
peticyon of the damsel that daunsed, Ihon the Baptist was beheaded.

Unclean spyrites love unclean places. Luc. 8.
So that the Demoniake that had a legion of Deuels in his body, dwelt and abode
in graves. And the deuels desired and prayed our Lord Jesus, yt they going out
of ye man, might enter into ye swine. Not into ye oxen and lambs, the which
are clean beasts.

The ensample of the rych glutton, the which complayneth that he is specially
tormented in his tongue, Luc. 16.
makes very sore against these great eaters and haunters of feasts and
bankettes.

Of matrimony. Capitu. lxxxix.
IT is evident that a wife ought to be in many things unto her husband a
fellow and equale, Genesis 2.
but not a mistress nor a maid, because that our lord made her of Adams ryb,
and not of his head, nor of his foot. Again it is manifest, that manne is
the head of the woman, for as much as he is in a manner the beginning of her
being: and the woman was made of the man, not the man of the woman. And
therefore the man must be the master and the instructor: And the co^mmaundement
was given unto Adam by God, and by Adam to Eve.

Because ye one man ought to have but one wife, Genesis 2.
therefore our lord says: They shall become one flesh.

It is red, Genesis 4.
that only Lamech before the flud had two wives.

Our Lord commanded that in Noah's Ark should be reserved so many males as
females: Genesis 7.
that there might be one for one.

The Egiptians in Abraham's time seemed more to abhor aduoutery than murder.
Genesis 12.
And therefore Abraham feared least they would first slaye him, and then
present his wife unto Pharao. Asthoughe he would not have known her, so long
as he believed that she had an husband.

Sara Abraha^s wife was obedient unto her husband, Genesis 21.
and calde him Lord. And Abraham in like manner condescended unto her will and
mind in some things.

Our Lord punyshed Abimelech with greauous plages for Sara Abraham's wife.
Genesis 20.


The consent of the party is required in marriage. Genesis ^4.
We will call the damsel, and know her will and mind.

The blasphemer that was stoned to death in the desert, was the son of an
Israelytishe woman, Leui. 24.
and gotten of a man of Egypt. Where out a man may gether, that it is not
expedient to make marriages of diverse and contrary tribes, for the children
begotten of such persons, are evil brought up and nurtred.

That secreat, the which Sampson would not show nor declare unto his
parents, Iudi. 14.
his wife, to his great loss, wryngde it out of him.

Helcana said unto Anne his wife. Am not I better to the the^ ten sons? 1.
regu. 1.


Nabal was hard, evil, and folysh. He had Abigail to his wife, 1. regu. 25.
the which was very wise and beutifull.

All be it Dauyd had ma^y wives, yet he committed aduoutry with Bersabe. 2.
regu. 11.


Ioram the king of Judah did evil in ye sight of our Lord and walked in the
ways of Achab, 4. regu. 8.
ye cause is this, for ye daughter of Achab was his wife.

The children of transmigration and captivity that had taken strange wives, 1.
Esd. 10.
refused and put them a way at Esdras commandment.

Nehemias perceiving that the Jews did mary strange wives, 2. Esd. 13.
did chyde and curse them, and did chasten and beat part of them.

Sara Raguels daughter said in her prayer. Tobi. 3.
O lord I have consented to take an husband, not for my pleasure, but in thy
fear.

The Angel said unto Tobias. They that receive marriage of such a fashion,
Tobi. 6.
that they shut god out from them, and from their heart, and give the^ selves
to their own lust, even as it were horse and mule which have no
understanding: upon such has the devil power.

The first night when Tobias was brought into Sara his wife, he exhorted the
virgyn, saying unto her. Up Sara, let us make our prayer unto God to day, Tobi.
8.
to morrow, and ouermorow: For these three nights will we join and reconcile
our selves with God, and when the third night is paste, we shall join
together in the dewty of marriage.

The Angel declared unto Tobias an honest cause and fashion of taking a wife.
Tobi. 6.
Thou shall take the maiden in the fear of God says he, and more for the
desire of children, then for any fleshly lust.

Saras elders did monyshe her, to honor her father and mother in law, Tobi.
x.
to love her husband, to rule well her household, to keep her house in good
order, and to show her self fautlesse.

The women that were carried out of Iewrye into Egypt, Iere. 44.
the which did sacryfice unto the queen of heaven, excused them selves by their
husbands, the which did the like thing.

Susan to keep the faith and promise of matrimony was content, Dani. 13.
and offered her self to infamy and death, but that the just Lord by Danyell,
made other provision for her.

Our Lord disdained not to be present at the marriage and at the feast in Cana a
city of Galile. John. 2.


Ihon the Baptist was beheaded, because he reproved Herod of aduoutry. Mat.
14.


When the Phariseys asked whether it were lawful for a man to make a
deuorcement with his wife for any manner of cause. Mat. 19.
Our lord answered, let no man put a sonder that, which God has coupled
together.

They that were calde to the great supper went not, and he that had taken and
married a wife, Iu^. 14.
desired not to be excused: for ye state of marriage does vehementlye provoke,
and draw a man back from that that is godly.

As touching the act of matrimony, the apostle judges the man and the wife
alike. 1. Cor. 7
The wife has not power of her own body, but the husband. And likewise the
husband has not power of his own body, but ye wife.

Ananias, his wife Saphira having knowledge thereof, deceitfully kept away part
of the price of the land that was sold, Act 5.
but they were both grievously punished.

Of Chastity. Cap. lxxxx.
AS long as our first parents were in Paradise, so long they were virgins, Genesis
4.
but after that they were cast out, it is written. That Adam knew Eve his wife.

When Sichem had defiled Dina Jacobs daughter, her brethren were very angry,
because he had wrought folly in Israel, Genesis 34.
in that he had lain with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done.
At length they slew him that had defiled her, and his father, and all the
people. And note, that that thing was done under the law of nature, and
before the law written. How much more then ought virginitye to be honored
under the law of grace, and fornicatyon punished?

Although Joseph was a servant that was bought, Genesis 39.
and a beutifull young man, without a wife, and provoked by his mistres, yet he
refused aduoutery, and had rather to offend her, and to be cast into prison,
then to lose his chastity.

Judas being unchaste, Genesis 38.
detested and abhorde the fornication of Thamar.

After the overthrow of the Medianites by Phinees and other warriers, Nume. 3^
Moses commanded the corrupt and defiled womenne to be slain, and the vyrgyns
to be reserved and saved.

They ought to be pure and clean and specially from women, 1. regu. 21.
that eat hallowed bread.

When the Sunamite Helyzeus hostess would speak with him, 4. regu. 4.
Eliseus sent his servant unto her, as wyllinge to avoid the speech of
women.

Sara in her prayer said. Thou know Lord, Tobi. 3.
that I never had desire unto man, and that I have kept my soul clean from
all uncleanly lust.

Judith after the death of her husband knew no another, and continually she
loved chastitye, Iudi. 8.
but yet mark what she did, she dwelt closelye with her maidens, and wearing a
smock of here fasted all the days of her life, except the sabothes and new
mones, and the solemn days that the people of Israel kept.

Dani. 13.
Susan was grievously afflycted by those ii. old judges, but she supposed
nothing to be preferred above chastity, and her good name and fame.

Furthermore let no man trust to chastity only, mat. 25.
for of the Evangelical virgins, there were as many folyshe as wise.

The blessed virgin being most reverently saluted by the angel, Luc. i.
forgot not her purpose and vow of chastity, although the angel did promise
her, that she should bear the son of the most hiest.

By that, yt our savior said, in that world they nether mary nor are married,
mat. 22.
is signified, that virgins aproch most niest the eternal life.

There was an argument of chastity in Steven. Act. 6.
In as much as he was deputed by the Apostles to the ministry and custody of
women.

Of luxuriousness, and incontinency. Capit. xci.
THe sin of the flesh seems to be the chief cause, Genesis 6.
why our Lord drowned the hole world. For it is written, that all flesh had
corrupt his way upon ^arth.

Note how many and how great mischefe and evil that chanced by the ardent and
burning love of Sychem, Genesis 34.
Emors son, that violently oppressed and forced Dina.

When so ever luxurious persons do use lechery, in other, yet they detest it.
Genesis 38.
As it appears by Judah, the which said by Thamar, bring her forth, that
she may be brent.

By the occasion of ye Levites wife, there were slain of the men of Belial in
Gabaa Benjamin, ^udi. 20.
an increadible libidinous furye, vexing them above vi. M. persons.

Isboseth Saul's son rebuked Abnor, the which went into his fathers concubine:
2. Re. 3.4.
But Abner being angrye there with, procured the matter so, that he took his
land from him: And sone after they both lost their lives and their lands.

David being in amors with Bersaba Urias wife: 2. regu. 11.
abused her, and proditoriously commutted murder.

Judith. 12.
Judith stood before Holofernes, and his heart was whole moved, so that he brent
in the desire toward her.

The angel said unto young Tobias against those, Tobi. 6.
that receive marriage of such a fashion, that they shut God out from them, and
from their heart, and give the^ selves to their own lust, even as it were an
horse and mule, upon such has the devil power. What shall become the^ of
fornicators and luxurious persons, that mind no other thing, but to fulfill
their filthy and stinking pleasure.

The two old priests, were so deceived and set in the love of Susanna, Dani. 13.
yt they, when she refused to accomplish and fulfill their will, went about to
procure her death.

By the occasion of Herodian, who^ Herod had married contrary and against the
law. Mat. 14.
Ihon the Baptyst at the peticion and instance of a sinful woman was beheaded.

Unclean Spirits love unclean places, Mat. 8.
and therefore they desired our Lord Jesus that he would suffer them to enter
into the swine, not into the Oxen and lambs, the which are clean beasts.

Among those that were called to the great supper, Luc. 14.
and went not, he that was married, desired not to be excused. Where by it
appears, how far of the luxurious and unclean livers be from our lords
supper, if to marry a wife does so inuolue and entangle a man, that in a
manner it suffers him to think upon no other thing.

It appears by the ensample of ye prodigal child that had wasted his goods
with luxurious and ryotous living, that the sin of lechery does impouerish
man, and therefore it is written, that he began to lack. Luc. 15.
Item it makes that nature of man vile. For there follows, yt he kept swine.
And again it extinguishith not the burninge flame and fire of lecheary and
lust, but does kindle it. For it is written there he would feign have filled
his ^ealye with the coddes that the Swyne did eat.

Of unwise lokes. Capit. xcii.
THe first woman loking upon, Genesis 3.
and beholding the fair and lustye fruit of the tree that was forbidden them,
took of the fruit there of, and did eat.

The beautifulnes of women seen, was ye occasion of much harm. Genesis 6.
The sons of God beholding the daughters of men that they were fair. etc.

Because that Cham saw the naked priuities of his father Noah, Gene. 9.
and told his two brethren that he was naked, his father did curse him.

Abraham said unto Sara his wife. I know that thou art a fair woman to look
upon, and therefore when the Egiptians shall se thee, Genesis xii.
they will kill me, and save thee alive.

Dina having a mind to see the women of the la^d, Genesis 34.
was seen and defiled.

Judas seeing Thamar in the common way, Gene. 38
lay and sinned with her.

Iosephes masters wife, whom he served, cast her eyes upon him and said, Genesis
39.
come lie with me.

Our lord said unto Moses. Charge the people, Exo. 19.
least perauenture they would pass over the marks, to see our Lord.

David from the rofe of his palace, saw a woman washing her self over against
him, 2. regu. 11.
he took her, and afterward caused her husband deceytfully to be slain.

When Judith came in before Holofernesse, immediately he was taken with her
beautye. Iudi. 10.16
And after it is written, her slippers ravished his eyes, her beauty captiuated
his mind.

The ii. old men saw Susan dailye going forth and walking, Dau. 13.
and they burned for lust to her.

Because that Herodias daughter daunsing before Herod pleased him, Mar. 6.
he promised her folishly, that cruelly he fulfilled.

Of silence and clattering. Capi. xciii.
GOd gave the commandment to Adam, Genesis 2.
and not to Eve, because ye the woman should have the less occasion to speak,
but an occasion rather to ask things, and to learn of man.

We read yt Eve spoke first with the serpent, Genesis 2.
or ever she had any talk with man, the which thing was both hurtful to her,
and to her posterity: And note there, how evil she repeted our lords
commandment given unto man.

Cham Noes son had seen his fathers priuities, Genesis 9.
he showed his brethren and so he incurde his fathers curse and malediction.

After that our Lord had spoken to Moses, Exodi. 4.
he was slow mouthed and slow tunged. Whereby he declares, that spiritual
and devout men, the which do often common and speak with God, should be tardius
and slow to speak.

Ara Calebs daughter syttinge upon her ass did fight, but when her husband
had persuaded her, Iosu. 15.
he moved her father to ask what she ailed, and afterward she obtained of
her father sprynges of water both above and beneath.

Sampson dysclosed that secreat to his wife, Iudi. 14.
the which he would not open and dysclose to his parents. And she eftsoon
publyshed the same, to his great loss and damage.

And the self same Sampson declared unto Dalida, Iudi. 16.
how he might lose his fortitude and strength. And she without any stop or
let, disclosed it unto his enemies.

Anna Samuels mother coming to the tabernacle of our Lord, 1. regu. 1.
spoke in her heart, and her lips did move only, but her voice was not heard.

Samuel being a sleep in the tabernacle, did not open the vision unto Ely, 1.
regu. 3.
that was showed him, until he asked and adjured him to dysclose it.

When the men of Belial said thus of Saul their new king. 1. regu. 10.
Can this man save us? He dissimbled to hear them whereby we understand, that
he held his tongue wisely.

David being sore troubled against Nabal, was afterward through the wise
communication and words of Abigail pacified again. 1. regu. 25.
Nor she told Nabal another less nor more, until ye morrow day, that he had
well dysgested the wine that he had dronken.

When Saras maid had spoken to her mastres shamefully and curssedly, Sara with
silence gave place to ye strife, Tobi. 3.
and going up into a chamber of her house, began to pray deuoutely.

Esther kept long silence, nor would not judge her people nor her country as
Mardocheus commanded her, Esth. 2.3.
and that least the king should hate her.

Iobes wife; he being punished of God, Job. 1.
spoke folyshlye unto him.

Job seems to reprehende and rebuke him self more for speakinge, Job. 40.
then for any other thing. For he says, I that have lytely spoken unto the,
cannot answer, one thing have I spoken, ye which I would I had not spoken.
Job. 42.
And again. I have spoken unwisely, and those things that pass my
understanding.

When Rasin king of Siria, Esa. 7.
and Phacee ye king of Israel had purposed to fight against Judah: ye prophet
Esaye said to Acham ye king of Judah. Take heed to thy self, and be still, but
fear not, neither be faynte hearted.

Hezechias ye king of Judah sent word, Esa. 36.
that the people should not answer Rabsaketh. And they held their tongues, and
answered not one word.

Jeremy which was sanctified in his mothers wo^b, Iere. 1.
and ordained to be a prophet, excused him self saying. Oh, oh Lord God. Lo. I
cannot speak, for I am yet but young.

When Susan was brought, Dani. 13.
she, least those two wicked old priests should bear false witness against
her, wept and looked up toward heaven, and cried to God, for her heart had a sure
trust in our lord: but yet it is not red, yt she did directly answer to her
accusers.

The Jews gave them selves to husbandry, 2. Match. 12.
but Nicanor, and certain other would not let them live in silence, rest and
peace.

We read in the gospel, that the blessed virgyn Marie spoke to the Angel,
Luc. 12.
and to her son. Why have thou thus dealte with us? And they have no wine.
John. 2.
And when she instructed the mynisters of the marriage. What so ever he says
to you, do it. And although Helizabeth did magnificentely commend her, Luc.
1.
yet she made no answer but turnde her self to laud and praise God.

And Mary which was a sinner coming to the fete of our Lord in Simons house
spoke nothing, Luc. 7.
as men say: but began to wash his fete with tears, and did wype them with
the here is of her head, and kyssed his fete, and anointed the^ with ye ointment.
Nor she answered not her sister Martha complayninge of her, Luc. 10.
nor yet the dysciples that dysdayned and were not content within them selves
for the effusion and waste of the oyntmente. Mar. 14..
And inasmuche as she kept silence. Our Lord did answer, and every where
defended her.

The woman that was taken in aduoutry, and accused before our Lord, John. 8.
spoke but few words: but our lord answered for her, and at length did
mercyfully absolve her.

When Paul should speak in the synagoge, Act. 13.
he stood up, and beckened with ye hand for silence. For he knew that there was
no speakinge, where there is no audience, the which thing is oftentimes proved
in scripture.

The children of Israel flyinge out of Egypt saw Pharoos hooste, Exo. 14.
and were greatly a frayed, unto whom Moses said, our Lord shall fight
for us, and ye shall hold your peace.

Of carnal effection. Capitu. xciiii.
MOses gave unto the Levites.xii. oxen, Nume. 7.
and vi. charettes, the which the Lords of the tribes and children of Israel
did offer: But unto ye children of Caat he gave none although they were nyer of
kynne unto him.

Nor it is not red, that Moses gave to any of his children any great office,
although the people had him in great reverence.

When Moses should dye, he diligently besought our Lord, Nume. 27.
to provide for the people a mete and a good captain. And yet he would name
none of his own generation

When Iosue distributed the land among the children of Israel, he gave so
small a portion unto his own tribe, Iosu. 17.
that they made a special complainte there of. But mark what an answer he
made them.

Eli heringe of ye death and fall of his two sons in battle, seemed not
greatly to care therefore: 1. regu. 4.
but when ye messenger told him ye the ark of God was taken, he fell from of
his stole and dyed.

When Ioab saw yt David be wayled but to much ye death of his son Absolon,
2. regu. 19.
he laid to David's charge, that he would have been nothing sorye, if he had
lost all his host.

That wonderful mother, and worthy to be remembered of al good men, 2. match. 7.
seeing al her vii. children pearishe upon one day, took their death willingly
and gladly.

The Jews care goinge to battle against Nicanor, 2. Match, 15.
was but mean for their wives, and children, or for their brethren or
kinsfolk: but their great and first care and fear was for the holy temple.

Our Lord speaking unto the people, one said unto him, Mat. 12.
behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, seking thee. But he
answered, who is my mother? or who are my brethren? whosoever does the will of
my father which is in heaven, ye same is my brother, sister, and mother.

Our Lord did answer his aunt after the flesh, Mat. 20.
desyringe that her two sons might sytte by him in his kingdom so
rigorouslye and hardlye, as though she had been a stranger: And so he is
as ready to sell heaven as good cheap to thee, as to them.

Although blessed Saint Ihon, and the two James were men of great holiness
and imperfection^ Yet he Ihon. 21.
committed not the general cure of the Church to any of them but did ordain
Peter, the which was nothing kin unto him, to be the head, the Prince, and
the pastoure of his Church.

Our savior approuynge and alowing Peter's confession which he made of him,
when he said. Thou art Christ the son of the living God, Math. 16
did consequently say, flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee.
Meaning there by, that flesh is wont to make but evil reuelatyons.

The Apostle Paul commendinge his Gospel does say. It pleased him which
separated me from my mothers womb, Galat. 1.
and called me here unto by his grace. etc. I by and by communed not of the
matter with flesh and blood.

Of the Ire and anger of man through zeal and love. Capi. xcv.
WHen Moses spoke unto Pharao, Exo. 11.
and that Pharao would not hear him, he went out from Pharao very angry.

Moses commanded the children of Israel, Exo. 16.
that no man should leave ought remain of Manna till the morning, that
notwithstanding, they harkened not unto Moses, but some of them left of until
the morning, and it waxed and craulde full of Worms, and stanke, and Moses
was angrye with them.

Moses returning, and coming nigh unto the ^oste, Exo. 32.
saw the calfe and the daunsing, and being angrye, he cast the tables out of
his hands, and brake them beneath the hill.

When Moses sought for the Goat that was offered for sin, Leui. 10.
he found yt it was burnt, and being angrye with Eleazar and Ithamar the
sons of Aaron he said. Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering. etc.

Nume. 16.
Moses beholdinge the rebellyon of Chore and his company, and being very angry,
said unto our lord. Turn not thou unto their offering.

1. Re. 20.
Ionathas Saul's son considring ye iniquity of his father against David, arose
from the table in great anger, and did eat no meat that day.

2. regu. 13.
When David had hard ye parable of Nathan the Prophet, he was dysdainful and
exceeding wroth with the man, and said: As surely as our Lord lives, the man
that has done this thing, is the child of death.

Elizeus was angry with Ioas the king of Israel, 4. regu. 13.
because he had not smitten the ground with the arrowe v. or vi. times, that
he might have destroyed all Siria.

Nehemias hearing the peoples clamor and complaint for the usury yt the rulers
and nobles exacted, 2. Esd. 5.
was sore dyspleased and angry.

Esth. 7.
After that king Ahaswerus had hard Queen Esthers complaint against Aman, the
which sought the death of all the Jews, he arose from the common seat in
displeasure, and anger.

Our Lord looked round about him on the Jews with anger, mar. 3.
and mourned on the blindness of their hearts.

Of the anger of man through vice. Ca. xcvi.
OUr Lord had respect unto Abell and to his oblation. Genesis 4.
And Cain was exceading wroth, and his countenance abated.

Balaac being angry and wroth with Balaam, Nume. 24.
smote his hands together and said, I sent for the to curse mine enemies, and
thou have blessed them.

Saul hearing that David after the victory was commended, 1. regu. 18.
was exceading wroth, and the saying dyspleased him. etc.

When Ionathas had excused David unto his father: 1. regu. 20.
Saul being angry with Ionathas, said. Thou rebel, do not I know, that thou
do love the son of Isai unto thine own rebuke and confusyon?

Achab the king of Israel came home to his house heavy and evil apaid, because
of the word which Naboth the Israelite had spoken unto him. 3. regu. 21.


After Elizeus easy and holsom counsel, Naaman was wroth, 4. regu. 5.
and went away, and said, I thought with my self, he would surely come out to
me, and call on the name of his God.

Hanai the prophet came to Asa, and reproved him, 2. Para. 16.
that he had put his trust in Benadab the king of Siria. And Asa was wroth
with the seer, and commanded him to be tied, and put into a prison.

Amazias severed the host, which came out of Ephraim to aid and help him. 2.
Para. 25.
But they were exceading wroth with Judah, and returned home into their country
in great anger.

The priests reproved Ozias the king of Judah, 2. Para, 26.
which went about to burn insence, and being angrye, he held the censare,
and threatened them.

When Sanallat hard that the wall of Jerusalem was a building, 2. Esd. 4.
he was very wroth, and being sore moved, mocked the Jews.

When Sennacherib returned again, and fled out of Iewry, Tobi. 1.
because of the plage and punishmente of God for his blasphemy in his wrath
and anger he slew many Jews.

When Tobias spoke of the kid that cried, Tobi. 2.
look that it be not stolen. etc. His wife was angry and said. Now is thy hope
become vain openly.

It was showed Holofernes, that ye children of Israel prepared them selves to
make resistance against him, Judith. 5.
then was he exceading wroth.

When Achior had showed them yt the power of the God of Israel was great and
mighty, Judith. 5.
the great men of Holofernes were wroth, and thought to slay him.

When Aman hard say, and had proved by experience, that Mardocheus would not bow
his kne unto him, Esth. 3.
nor worship him, he was exceadinge angrye.

Elihu the bussite disdained, and was angrye at Job, Job. 32.
because he called him self just before God.

The princes of Judah thinckinge yt Ier. 37.
Jeremy would have rund to the Caldees, were angry with him, bet him, and cast
him in prison.

Nabuchodonozor in his great fury and anger, Daui. 2.3.
commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon, because they could not
declare and open his dream unto him, and in his anger he commanded the three
men to be brought before him.

Jonas. 4.
Our Lord reproved Jonas, because he was angry for the wild vine.

1. Mac. 3
When king Antiochus hard of Judas battles and victories, he was angry in his
mind, and gathered an hoaste.

2. Match. 6.
The tormentors of Eleazar hearing his constant words, were now in dyspleasure
and anger, although that a little before, they were mylde and gentle.

After the oration and words of the seventh brother, 2. Match. 7.
king Antiochus being kindled in anger, was more cruel upon him, then upon all
the other.

2. match. 9.
Antiochus perceiving now that it lay not in his power to spoil the city of
Persepolis, he auauncynge him self in his wrath, thought he was able to
aduenge the injury yt was done to those that fled upon the Jews.

It happened that when the heathen hard, 1. match. 5.
how that the altar was set up in the sanctuary in the old estate, they were
very angry.

When Herod saw that he was mocked of the wise men, he was exceading wroth,
mat. 2.
and sendynge forth men of war, he slew all the children that were in
Bethleem.

When they of Nazareth had heard our Lord say: Luc. 4.
No prophet is accepted in his own country. All they in the sinagoge, were
filled with anger and wrath.

A certain man named Demetrius a silver smith, Act. 19.
which made silver shry^es for Diana: called together ye workmen of like
occupation, and said, that Paul had turned away much people, saying that they
be no Gods which are made with hands. When they hard these sayings, they were
full of wrath.

Of Humility. Capi. xcvii.
THe angel said unto Agar, turn again to thy mastresse, Genesis 16.
and submit and humble thy self under her hands.

Abraham spoke most humbly unto our lord, Genesis 18.
saying, I will speak unto my Lord, which am but dust and ashes.

Jacob did humiliate and humble him self very much before Esau, Genesis 33.
and so he abated his anger.

Moses excused him self vii. times, or ever he would take upon him the leading
and governance of the people, Genesis 3.4.
the which our Lord put and appointed unto him, nor would not agree unto it,
until he understood that our Lord was angry. For in the text it is written.
And our Lord was angrye with Moses.

Moses despised not the profitable counsel of a heathen, Exo. 18.
but most humbly granted and agreed unto it.

Moses perceived and saw that he had of our Lord the special gouerna^ce and
leadinge of the people: and yet he dysdained not to desire and pray O^ab the
son of Raguell to go with him, Nume. 10.
and that he should be the guide and leader of the people.

Gedeon answered the Aungel saying thus unto him, Go hence, in this thy might
thou shall deliver Israel. Iudi. 5.
And he answered. Be^olde my kyndred is poor in Mana^ses, and I am little in my
fathers house.

The men of Ephraim chode a good and proudly with Gedeon, Iudi. 8.
yet through his meke and lowly answer they were quieted.

The men of Isael said unto Gedeon. Reign thou over us, Iudi. 8.
both thou and thy son: And Gedeon said unto the^. I will not reign over
you, neither shall my child raygne over you, but our Lord shall raygne over
you.

Saul or ever he was anointed king, 1^ regu. 9.15
when he sought his fathers asses, and excused him self to Samuel, pretended
humility in deed and in word. And afterward it was said unto him. When thou
wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of
Israel?

Although Samuel had anointed David king, 1. regu. 17.
yet at his fathers commandment he bare vitayles unto his brethren before
whom he was preelected, and chosen.

Dauyd did humble him before Saul, 1. regu. 18.
when he should marye his daughter. And again before Semei the servant. When
he heard that he cursed him. Forthermore he humiliated him self unto God, 2.
regu. 16.
when he daunste before the arc. And when Nathan came unto him, 2. Re. 6.7
showing him the will of our Lord as touching the perpetuitye and continuance
of his kingedome.

Meph^boseth being falsely accused of his servant, 2. regu. 19.
and unjustly put from his enheritaunce, made a meke and a gentle answer.

Achab that most wicked king of Israel, 3. regu. 21.
hearing how he should be punished for his trespaces: humbled him self
before our Lord, and therefore he diminished sumwhat his pain and punishment.

The fire touched nor consumed not the captain that spoke mekely unto Helias,
4. regu. 1.
as it touched the other other two with their fyftyes, which came before him.

Helizeus coming to Iordayne, smote first the waters saying nothing, and
they departed not a sonder. 4. regu. 2.
But afterward he calde upon the name of his master, then they departed this
way and that way.

Semeas the prophet said to Roboam and his Lords. 2. Para. 12.
Thus says our Lord, ye have left me, and therefore have I left you. Then
they being astoned, said, our Lord is ryghteous, and when our Lord saw yt
they submitted the^ selves. The word of our Lord came to Semeas, saying. They
submit and humble them selves, therefore I will not destroy them.

Hezechias submitted him self, after that his heart was risen up at the
coming of the messengers of Babylon: 2. Para. 22.
and therefore the wrath of our Lord came not upon them in his days.

When the children of Israel hard of the mighty and terrible power of
Holofernes: Judith. 4.
they cried earnestly unto God, and humbled their souls with fastinges and
prayers.

Queen Ester fled unto our Lord, and humbled her body with fastings. Esth. 14.
And praying, among other things she said. Thou know lord, yt I abhor ye
sign of pride and prehemine^ce. etc

When our Lord said yt Jeremy was a prophet, Iere. 1.
he very humbly excused him self, and said. Oh, Oh Lord God. I can not
speak. etc.

Nabuchodonozor walkinge in the palace of Babylon, spoke arrogantly and
proudlye, Dani. 4.
but after that he was cast out of men's company, and had recovered his
understanding, he knew that al they that dwell upon the earth in comparison of
God. Were to be reputed as nothing.

When our Lord had smitten Antiochus with an incurable plage and disease, 2.
Match. 9.
so that he might not abide his own stinche. He said. It is reason to be
obedyente unto God, and that manne desire not to be like unto him.

Joseph humbly thinking him self unworthy to be joined with the blessed Mary,
Mat. 1.
whom he saw was conceived. Beleuinge that thing to be wrought by God, and
not by the work of man, was minded, privily to depart from her.

In those days, great humility appeared in the wise men that they, Mat. 2.
when they found the child with Mary his mother, fell down flat, and
worshipped him.

When John the baptist was of so Mat. 3.
great reputation that the people believed that he was Christ: he said. There
shall come a myghtyer after me, whose shoes I am not worthy to vnlachet.

Our Lord Christ the virtue and wisdom of God, mat. 3.4.
was not ashamed to begin his predication with the same self theme, that
John the baptyste began with all. Do pennaunce. For the kyngedome of heaven
is at hand.

The blessed virgin Mary, which was so reuerentlye saluted of the Angel, and
calde the mother of the highest, Luc. 2.
waxed not proud there with, nor she called not her self ye mother of God, but
the hand maid of God. Nor she sent not for Elizabeth her kinswoma^, but
mekely went unto her. And when ye Elisabeth replenyshed with the holy ghost,
knew what was done, the^ Mary commended the dyuine mercy and power, saying. My
soul magnyf^eth the Lord, Luc. 1.
for he has looked on the humility of his hand maiden.

The Ce^turion answered mekely and faithfully, saying unto our Lord being
minded to go and heal his servant. mat. 8.
Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

When Peter saw, that he at our lords commandment had enclosed a great
multitude of fyshes, Luc. 5.
he fell down at his knees, saying, lord go from me, for I am a sinful man.

Our Savior did forbid them to publishe his miracles, Mat. 8.
to learn us to fly and a void the vice of pride and vanity and to grue us
an ensample of humilitye. As it appears in the leaper, which was cleansed.
And in the two blind me^, that were restored unto their sight. And again in the
deft and dum which were healed. And in his transfiguration he said, Math. 17.
show the vision to no man.

When our Lord had said to the woman of Canane: It is not mete, to take the
childre^s bread, mat. 15.
and to cast it to dogs. She answered. Truth Lord, for the dogs eat of the
crummes, which fall from their masters table.

The disciples askinge Christ who is the greatest in heaven, Mat. 18.
he answered whosoever humbles him self as this child, the same is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Our Lord induced an ensample, or a parable of humble and meke ciuility, Luc.
14.
saying. When thou art bydden to a wedding, sit not down in the hiest room.

Then sample which our Lord brings in of the proude^ Pharisey, Luc. 18.
and the humble Publican, is very good to avoid pride, and to follow and ensue
humility.

The humility of Ihon the Baptist does diversely apear. John. 2.
For he did judge but meanly of him self, when that ye people perchance
esteemed him to be Christ. I am not Christ. Also he spoke lowly. John. 1.
I am a voice crying in the desarte. He denied him self to be Christ or a
prophet. And he was but meanly araide with Camels heere^ And he chose but a
simple and a mean habitation. John. 1.
He was in the desert.

We read that Mary Magdalen did sit most humbly and very oftentimes at Jesus
fete, Luc. 7.10.
and hard the word of God.

Peter answered our Lord most humbly, John. 21.
askinge him whether he loved him more then the other dyscyples, and said, ye
Lord, thou know that I love thee.

We may, and ought to take ye most notable examples of humility of our savior.
John. 7.
For he would be conceived in a despised country, that is in Galile. Of the
which it is written. Search and look, for out of Galile aryseth no prophet.
And Nathanaell wondering said. Can there come any good thing out of Nazareth?
John. 1.
Item he was borne, of an humble and a meke mother, the which said, Luc. 1.
Luc. 2.
he beheld the humility of his hand maiden. And in a small cotage, and a low
place, for she laid him in a maunger. And for the space of xxx. year, he was
in the world in a manner as unknown, so that there is nothing red of his
doings, but that he, when he was xii. year of age, Luc. 2.
remained at Jerusalem, and was found in the temple hearing, and questionyng,
and determinyng. The which thing makes against those presumptuous persons,
Luc. ii.
that take upon them to hastily the office of a teacher. And then he went down
with Mary and Joseph, and was obediente and subject unto them. Then being about
a xxx. year of age, he came to Ihon Baptist, to be baptized of him. But he sent
not for him. The which thing makes sore against those, mat. 3.
that disdain to go to their inferiors. Likewise he chose him lowly and pore
disciples, and wtal humility was conuersa^t among them, and taught them to be
meek humble, mat. 11.
saying: learn of me, for I am and mecke and lowly. And he called him self more
often the son of man, than ye son of god, although they were both two after the
two natures which were in him. Yet most commenly he would name him self after
thinferiour and lowest nature. He was conversant with men, Ihon. 2.
and would be present at pore marriages where they lacked wine. He went to no
costly and rich mariges, in the which there is most commonly enorme and
great excess. And when he knew, that they would come and take him up to make
him a king, John. 6.
he fled up into a mountain: Mat. 17.
and he paid as a servant or as an aliene the tribute monye. Luc. 9.
Nor he had not whereon to lay his head. And going about to castles and
villages, he went continually a foot, so that he being weary of his iourny,
John. 4.
set on the well, and desired the woman of Canane to give him drink. And when
he came to Jerusalem, he had no horse to ride upon, but an ass. And departing
from this world unto his father, mat. 21.
he left a special example of humilitye, when he washed his disciples fete,
and wyped them with the towel, Ihon. 13.
wherwyth he was girded. But in his passion, he most chefely humbled him self,
even to death, Philip. 2.
and not to all kinds of death, but to the death of the Cross, the which
kind of death was most shamefulst, as it appears in all the Gospelles. Of
this it may be noted, that proud men, and such as love the world, are wont to
be occupied about vii. things, and to desire the same, or specially to glory
in things obtained: the which things Christ hanginge on the cross lacked,
and had the contrary. They may be called these earthly abundance. Worldly
wisdom. Carnal pleasure. The fame and praise of the people. A rought of
servants. The fall of their enemies. A number of friends. But our Lord
Christ Jesus upon the Cross was most poorest, Ihon. 19.
for he was spoiled of his garments.

He was taken for a fool and unwise. For the preachinge of the cross, is to
them that pearish folishnesse. 1. Cor. 1.
Item he was di^famed, and called a deceauer of the people. For the hye
Pryestes said by him, we remember, that this deceiuer said, etc. And being upon
the cross he was well nie ouercummed, and inclinynge of his head gave up the
ghost. And there he had no friends. I have trodden the press my self alone, Esa.
63.
and of al people there is not one with me. My lovers and friends have thou put
away fro me. Psalm. 87.
And on the cross, he lacked servants, his Dyscyples left him, Psalm. 87.
and went from him. And I am made as a man without help.

Act. 10.
When Peter came into Cesaria, Cornelius met him, and fell down, and worshypped
him. But Peter taking him up, said I my self also am a man.

Paul and Barnabas hearing that they of the city of Listra said that they were
Gods, Act. 14.
and would have done sacrifyce unto them: rent their clothes, and ran among the
people, saying: Syrs why do ye this? we are mortal men like unto you etc. And
yet scarce refrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifyce unto
them.

Paul the Apostle labourde with his own hands to get that was necessary for
him self and his fellows: Act. 18.
and therefore he drue to Aquila and Priscilla, the which were tent makers, as
he him self was.

And in an another place he says. These hands have mynystred unto my
necessityes, Act. 20.
and to them that were with me.

And Paul did judge and think of him self, 2 Cor. 1.
but meanly and lowly, the which trusted to the prayers of his brethren,
saying by the help of your prayer for us.

He desired very diligently the prayers of other men, Roma. 15.
saying: I beseech you brethren for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the love of the holy sprite, that ye healpe me with your prayers.

And Paul does inwardlye with his own words declare true humilitye, when he
says, I am the least of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 14
which am not worthy to be called an Apostle. These. 3.
And again he says: 1. Cor. 15.
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1. Timo. 1.
of whom I am chief. Yea, he exhorts men most diligently to humilitye,
saying. Be not hye mineded: Roma. 12.
but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort. And again, in meekness
of mind, Philip. 2.
let every man esteem another better then him self.

Of Pride. Cap. xcviii.
Eve for the appetite and desire yt she had to excel, Genesis 3.
after she had hard, ye shall be even as Gods, did eat of the tree, which she
was forbidden to eat of.

It was given and granted to man, to eat fish, Genesis i.
foul, and other beasts, ye shall have rule of the fish of the sea, and foul
of the air, and cattle. etc. And the fear and dread of you shall be upon all the
beasts of the earth. Gene. 9.


Their pride which would build a tower unto heaven, Genesis 11.
was condemned by the confusion of languages.

When Agar saw that she had conceived, Genesis 16.
she despised her mastresse.

Against those that glorifye them selves that they are first born, Genesis 4.15.
is, that Cain was borne before Abell. Esau before Jacob. Genesis 29.
And Judas was yt forth among the children of Israel. And Manasses Iosephes
son was borne before Ephraim, Genesis 48.
and yet he obtained the benediction and blessing of the right hand. 1. Re. 16.
And David was the least and youngest of all his brethren. 2. Re. 3.
And Adonias was born before Solomon. And so forth of many other.

Pharao answered to proudly, Exodi. 5.
when he said, I know not the Lord, nether will I let Israel go.

The rebellion that Chore and other made against Moses came of pride, Nume. 16.
for Moses said unto the^, ye are very haut and make much to do, ye children of
Leui.

Abimel^ch being smytten of a woman, called unto his harness bearer and said
unto him. Iudi. 9.
Slaye me, that men say not of me, a woman slew him.

Saul desired Samuel to honor him before the elders of the people, 1. regu.
15
and before Israel.

The sin of elatio^ and pride was greuouslye punyshed, 2. regu. 24.
when Dauyd caused his subjects and people to be numbered.

The pleasure and lust that king Jeroboam had to bear a rule, 3. regu. 12.
fearing that the people would reuert and turn to the house of Dauyd, caused
him to inuente golden calves, and to make the people to worship them, for he
desired that they should rather depart and go from their God, then from their
Lord.

After that the victory was obtained against Arphaxat the king of Jews,
Judith. 1.
then was the kingdom of Nabuchodonozor the king of the Assirians exalted,
and his heart was lift up.

Nabuchodonozor commanded Holofernesse that he should rote out all the Gods
of the land: Judith. 3.
to the intent that he only might be called and taken for the God of the
nations, which Holofernes with his power brought under him.

When proud Aman saw yt Mardocheus would not worship him, Esther. 3.
he counsayled the king to destroy all the Jews.

That most proudest Aman would that men should bow their knees unto him, Esth.
3.
and of men he would be worshipped. But it is to be noted, that ye self same
pride was the cause of so much evil in it self: yt he being angry and
disdaynful, esteemed al other things which he possessed as nothing.

Our Lord by the prophet Esaye does detest the signs and tokens of pride,
Esa. 3.
saying. Because the daughters of Sion are become so proud, and have waulked
with stretched out necks, and with vain wanton eyes. etc.

That saying of Esaias, Esa. 14.
I will clime up into heaven. etc. and will be like ye highest of all. Is
understood literaly of Nabuchodonozor.

Of Moab it is thus written. We have hard of the pride of Moab, Esa. 16.
he is very proud, his pride, his arrogance, and his indignation, is much
more then is his strength.

Because Nabuchodonozor king of Babilo^s heart was proud and his sprite or
stomach set so fast to wilfulnes, Dani. 5.
he was desposed from his trone, and his glory and majesty was taken from him.

Balthazar Nabuchodonozor ye king of Babilons son, Dani. 5.
did not submit his heart, but was elevated against our Lord of heaven. And
therefore he was slain: and Darius the Mede succeeded him in his kingdom.

Antiochus came up to Jerusalem with a mighty people, 1. match. 1.
and enterd proudely into the Sanctuarye, and took away the golden altar,
the candelsticke, and all the ornaments thereof. etc.

They that Judas Machabeus sent to keep and defend the land said when they
should go to fight. i. Match. v.
Let us get us a name, and go fight against ye heathen that are round about
us.

Alchimus that would have been made the hye priest, 1. Mac. 7
and certain other wicked men went to king Demetrius and accused Judas and the
people of Israel.

When Nicanor hard of the burnte sacrifices that were offered of the Jews for
the king: i. macha vii
he laughinge them to scorn, mocked them, and spoke proudly and disdainfully.

Antiochus esteemed and thought in his pride, 2. Match, 5.
that he might make men sail upon the dry land, and to go upon the sea,
such an hye mind had he.

Nicanor coming to fight against Judas and his fellows thought him so sure
of the victory, 2. Match. 8.
that he sold the Jews or ever he saw the^ in ye field.

Antiochus being put to flyghte most shamefully and with dishonor by Por^is
spoke proudly saying, 2. match. 9.
that he would come to Jerusalem, and make it a grave for the Jews. But our
Lord smote him with an incurable disease and plage.

When the Jews said. There is a mighty Lord in heaven, yt which has
commanded ye seventh day to be kept: The^ said Nicanor. And I am migh^y upon
earth, to command them for to arm them selves, 2. Match, 15.
and to perform the kings business. And elevated with great pride, he devised
to overcome Judas, and to bring a way the victory.

Luc. 10,
When the disciples had said, Lord, even the very deuels are subdued to us
through thy name. Our lord refrained the^ saying. I saw Satan as it had been
lightning, falling down from heaven, nevertheless in this rejoice not.

Luc. 18.
The pride of ye Pharisey, the which bosted him self, and condemned his
neighbor, is dysalowed.

Herod upon a day appointed, araied him in royal apparel, and set him in his
seat, and made an oration unto the people. Act. 12.
And the people gave a shoute, saying. It is the voice o^ a god, and not of man. And immedyately the Angel of our Lord smote him, because he gave
not God the honor. And he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

Of vain bostinge. and crakinge. Ca. xcix.
GAall Odebs son said unto his fellows: what is Abimelech? and what is
Sichem that we should serve him? Iudi. 9.
Would God this people were under my hand, that I might take Abimelech out
of the way.

Sampson with his bare hands tare a Lion, Iud. 14.
neither told his father nor his mother what he had done.

Goliath the Philistine defied the hooste of the Israelytes, 1. regu. 17.
and demanded that one should come to fight with him hand to hand.

Adonias the son of Hagith exalted him self, saying, I will be king. 3.
reg. 1.
But his kyngedome dured not long.

Benadab the king of Siria sent messengers unto the king of Israel, 3. regu.
20.
and said. Thus and thus do the gods to me. If the duste of Samaria be
ynnoughe for all the people that follow me. To take every man an handful. But
he was well answered, that he which puts on his harness should not boast him
self, as he does that puts it of.

4. regu. 18
Rapsaces spoke hye and proud words in ye king of Assirians name, saying,
have they delivered them out of ye land of the king of Assirians. etc.

Iudi. 6.
Holofernes said to Achior, when we slaye them all as one man, then shalt thou
also peryshe with them, through ye swearde of the Assirians, and al Israel
shall be destroyed with the.

Aman being immitted and calde to Esthers banquet, sent for his friends and his
wife, Esther. 5.
and told them of the glory of his richesse, and of the multitude of his
children, and that he and the king only should dine with ye Queen. And yet
note, yt he the next day after, was hangde upon ye galous, yt which he had
prepared for Mardocheus.

Esaias has dysclosed the words of the king of ye Assirians: Esa. 10.
Thus have I done through ye power of mine own hand, and through my wisdom I
understood it. And there was no man yt durst move a feather, or open his
mouth, or once whysper.

This saying of the prophet, Esa. 14.
I will clyme up into heaven, and set my seat above the stars of God, and will
be like the highest of al, is literally understood and meant by Nabucho. etc.

Jeremy says of Moab. I know her stoutnesse, Iere. 48.
her boasting, her arrogance, and the pride of her stomach, and that virtue is
not by her.

Nabuchodonozor said unto Danyels three fellows, Dani. 3.
that would not worship his golden Image. What God is there, that may deliver
you out of my hands?

Nabuchodonozor walkyng in his haule, Dani. 4.
said: Is not this the great city of Babylon, which I my self have made a
kings court, with my power and strength for the honor of my majesty? while
these words were yet in his mouth, there fell a voice from heaven. etc.

When Sereon hard say, yt Judas had gathered unto him ye congregation of the
faithful, he said. I will get me a name, 1. Mac. 3
and overcome Judas, the which contrariwise, did overcome him sone after.

Demetrius the son of Demetrius sent unto Ionathas, saying: come down to us
into the plain field, ^. Match. x.
and there let us prove our strength together, thou shall find that I have
valiant men of war with me, ask and know whom I am. And yet his chance was
but evil.

Nicanor purposing to fight against the Jews, 2. Match. 8.
called merchant men unto him, promising that he would give them lxx. Jews for
one talent.

The multitude of armed men coming together, 2. match. 9.
Antiochus was put to flighte from Persepolis a city of Persia with shame and
dyshonoure. And yet he spoke proudly, saying, yt he would come to Jerusalem, and
make it a grave for the Jews.

Nicanor did ask of the Jews, whether there were a mighty one in heaven, 2.
match. 15
that commanded the Sabothe day to be kept. And when they said, the mighty
Lord in heaven commanded the seventh day to be kept, he said. And I am mighty
upon earth.

Peter said very boldlye unto our Lord. mat. 26.
Though all men be offended because of thee, yet will not I be offended. And
yet afterward it chanced far otherwise.

They that boast and crake most of them selves, Mat. 4.
do chance to lie, they follow specially the devil, the which when he had
showed our Lord all the kingdoms of the world, said: al these things are
delivered unto me, Luc. 4
and I give them to whom I will.

Our Lord against those that be bosters and arrogante, Luc. xviii
does bring in the example of that Pharisey, saying. I am not as other men
are, or as this Publicane.

The Phariseis spoke words of great arrogancye to him that was borne blind,
John. 9
and restored again to his sight by our Lord, and he with good reason
confounded them. Thou art all together borne in sin, and do thou teach us?

Pilate but to arrogantly said unto our Lord: John. 19
know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to lose
thee?

Of elections. Capitu. C.
MOses using Ietros the priest of Madians counsel, Exo. 18.
did elect and choose under judges or prelates men of actiuity and power, and
such as feared God, true men, and hatyng covetousness.

Our Lord commanded Moses to take xii. rods after the number of the tribes of
Israel, Nume. 17.
and the name of Aaron was in the tribe of Leui. And when he had put the^ in
the tabernacle, on ye morrow he found Aarons rod budded.

Moses purposing to revenge Israel of the Madianites, Nume. 31.
said. Let there be chosen a M. out of every tribe of Israel, to the wars.

When Moses which had disobeied the will of God, Nume. 27.
should die, he praid our Lord devoutly, saying. Let the Lord of the sprites of
all flesh, set a man over the congregation, and our Lord ordained that Iosue
the son of Nun should be his successor, and guide of the people in his stead.

After the death of Iosue, the children of Israel asked counsel of our Lord,
saying: Judith. 1.
who shall go up before us, and be the captain of the war? And our Lord said,
Judas shall go up.

When the men of Israel saw that Gedeon had fought strongly and ma^fully for
them: Iudi. 8.
they said al unto him, reign thou over us.

The elders of Galaad went unto Iepthe, Iud. 11.
and said unto him, come and be our prince and captain, and fight against the
children of Amnon.

There was a man of Benjamin named Eis, 1. regu. 9.10
the same had a son called Saul; a chosen and a good man, nor there was not
a better in all Israel. Our Lord disclosed unto Samuel that he should be
chosen, and anointed upon the people of Israel.

Samuel at the special commandment of our Lord went to Bethleem, 1. regu. 16.
and anointed David the son of Isai king upon Jerusalem and Israel.

Saul being dead, the men of the tribe of Judah came and anointed David king
over the house of Judah: 2. regu. 2.
after that, 2. regu. 5.
all the tribes of Israel came unto him, and anointed him king over all the
people of Israel. And therefore he says in his Psalms, he has chosen his
servant David. And in a another place. 1. Para. 28.
It has pleased our Lord, to choose me king over all the people of Israel.

And David drawing toward his death, 1. Para. 28.
said unto the elders of Israel. Of all my sons, our Lord has chosen
Solomon my son to sit upon the seat of the kingdom of our Lord in Israel.

Jeroboam by the terrible judgment of God was chosen and taken to be king over
ten tribes of Israel. 3. regu. 12.
And yet he was the occasion that the people departed and went from god.

Iehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria unto the rulers and best of the city.
4. regu. 10.
Of all our masters sons choose the best, and him that shall please you, and
set him on his fathers seat, and fight for your Lords house.

All Judas friends came together, and said unto Ionathas, 1. match. 9.
for so much as thy brother Judas is dead, there is none like him to go forth
against our enemies. Wherefore we this day chose thee for him, to be our
Prince and captain to order and to fight our battle.

Our Lord called his disciples, and of them he chose twelve, Luc. 6.
whom he called apostles.

After the assention of our Lord, the disciples appointed two, Joseph and
Mathias: Act. 1.
and when they prayed, they said. Thou Lord which know the hearts of all
men, show whether of those two thou have chosen to take the ministration of
this apostleshyp upon him.

The sayings of the apostles pleased the whole multitude. Act. 6.
And they chose Steven a man full of faith, and full of the holy ghost, and
Philippe etc.

As the Discyples minystred to our Lord and fasted, the holy ghost said.
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13.
for the work where unto I have called them.

Of good Princes and Prelates. Ca. Ci.
MOses the good prelate went in oftentimes to Pharao, to deliver the people
from the Egipeiacal servitude and bondage. Ex. 67.8.9


Moses did comfort the people that were afraid, saying. Fear ye not, stand still,
Exo. 14.
our Lord shall fight for us, and ye shall hold your peace. He spoke with his
mouth, but praid our Lord with his heart, as it appears there.

Exo. 15
Moses cried for the people unto our lord, when they murmured against him.

A good prelate must refer all things to our Lord. Exo. 16
And so Moses said, your murmuringes is not against us, but against our lord.

Moses when Israel fought against Amelech, went not to the battle, but sent
his servant Iosue only, and yet as touching his part, the war was just. Exo.
17.
But he standinge in the top of the hill, applied and turned him to prai unto
our lord.

When Moses should depart from the people, Exo. 23
and ascend up to the mountain, he left them two good vicares and gouernoures,
that is Aaron and Hur.

Our lord seemed to be willing to confound and destroy the sinful people,
Exo. 32
and promised unto Moses great dignity and honor. And yet Moses did pray
instantly for the people, And note, with what seueritye he punyshed the people,
for whom he prayed our Lord so instantly.

Moses gave unto the Levites xii. oxen, and vii. charettes, Numer. 7.
the which the lords of the tribes of Israel had offered. But he gave nothing
to the children of Caath, although they were nearer of kin unto him, because
their office was to hear all things upon their shoulders.

Moses wished and desired that all the Lords people could Prophecye.
Notwithstanding that his honor, as it seemed, Nume. 11.
should thereby have been deminished.

After that the spies were returned, our Lord said to Moses, Nume. 14
how long do this people provoke me, and how long will it be or they believe
me? I will smite them therefore with the pestylence, and will make of the a
prince of a greater nation, and mightyer then this is. But Moses would be
preserde no hier.

The people pearishing for the tumult and murmuringe that they made against
Moses and Aaron, Nume. 16.
Moses said to Aaron. Take a censare, and put fire therein out of the aultare,
and pour on cense. and go quicklye unto the congregation, that thou may
pray and obtain the forgeneuesse for them.

When Moses should dye, Nume. 27.
he prayed our Lord most diligently that he would provide the people of a
meet and a good captain. But yet in special he would name none.

Israel served our Lord all the days of Iosue. etc. Iosu. 24.
For why a good prelate is very mete to direct the people in the way of our
Lord.

Samuel judged al Israel and went about Bethel. Calgala, 1. regu. 7.
and Masphat, that they which had need of him, might the easlyer come unto
him.

Samuel said unto the people. God keep me from this sin, 1. regu. 12.
yt I should cease to pray for you, and I will teach you a right way and a
good.

When David saw the Angel yt smote the people, 2. regu. 24.
he offered him self to be beat for them, let thine hand (I pray the) turn
against me.

Al they of Israel hard of the judgment, which the king had judged between
the two women, 3. regu. 3.
and they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to
do justice.

It is a sign and a token that our Lord does love the people when he gives
them a good prelate. 3. regu. 9.
For the Queen of Saba said, our Lord loved Israel, and therefore he made ye
king over it, to do equity and righteousness.

3. regu. 20.
Our Lord being purposed and wyllinge to deliver the king of Siria into the
king of Isreal's hands, sent him word by his prophet, that the king should
begin to fight and give battle.

As long as Ioiada the bishop lived, 4. regu. 12.
Ioas the king of Judah was good, and did that which was good in the sight of
our Lord. But the bishop being dead, he did much harm.

Iosaphat the king of Judah, set judges in the land over the people, and did
faithfullye, 2. Para. 19.
and wisely instruct them. Take heed, says he, what ye do, for ye execute not
the judgment of man, but of God, which is with you in the judgment.
Wherefore now, let the fear of God be upon you, and take heed, and be doing
the thing that pleases him, for there is no unrighteousness with the Lord
our GOD, that he should have any respect of persons, or take rewards.

Hezechias king of Judah caused the brazen serpent to be broken in pieces: 4.
regu. 18.
because it was unto the people an occasion of committinge ydolatry.

The posts went with letters thorowoute all Israel and Judah at the kings
commandment and his Lords, 2. Para. 30.
saying. Turn again unto our Lord. etc.

As Esdras was prayinge and weeping for the transgression of the people, 1. Esd.
9.
there resorted unto him a great company of men and women, and the people
folowinge his ensample wept and lamented very sore.

Eliachim the hye preast hearing of the power of Holofernes, Judith. 4.
went round about all Israel: and spoke unto them saying. Be ye sure, that
our Lord will hear your petitions, if ye continue steadfast in fasstinges
and prayers in the syghte of our LORD. And thus he comforted the people with
good exhortations.

A good prelate must be as a good father unto ye people committed unto him For
it is written by Esai of Eliachim, whom our lord set and did constitute in
Sobnas the rulers place: Esa. 22.
he shall be as a father of such as dwell in Jerusalem.

After that Judas Machabeus was dead, 1. match. 9.
there spronge up wicked persons throughout all costs of Israel, and exhorted
all such as did evil, to wickedness. And in those days there was great
hunger. etc.

When men thought that Ionathas was slain by Tryphon. 1. Match. 12.
Then all the heathen that were round about them, sought to destroy them.
For they said, now have they no captain, nor any man to help them. Therefore
now let us overcome them, and rote out their name from among men.

It is well said, that the prudencye and pitye of Onias the hye preaste, 1.
Match. 3.
and the goodness of other godly subjects, was the cause of peace, and good
estate of the holy city.

Onias did well resyste Heliodorus, going about to spoil the temple, 2. mac.
3.
and to take away such things as was laid up for wyddowes and fatherless
children.

Our savior and lord Jesus, where he calls him self a good shepherde, John.
10.
by and by he submits the cause, saying, a good shepharde gives his life
for the sheep. And again I give my life for the sheep. Whereby he does us to
understand, what thing is required, that a man may be called a good
shephearde.

When our Savior, after his resurrection, was minded to commit the
congregation of the church to Peter: first he proved him, John. 22.
saying, Simo^, love thou me more then these? And note, that he examined him
of dilection, and not of knowledge, not of practice, or contemplation, but of
the deed, not of the law. Nor he asked him not once, but thryee. If thou love
me, feed my sheep, clyppe them not, nor slaye them. For why a good prelate
must feed his sheep, with word, example, and bodily food.

Peter perceyuinge that the Jews marueled, and judged evil of the discyples,
lifted up his voice, and said unto them. Act. 1.
Ye men of Iewrye. etc. where he defends his flock most constantly, and
most holsomlye overcomes his adversaries.

We may consider here by Paul, the prelate of all excellent goodness, that
dilection does most specyallye pertain to a good prelate. John. 10.
For the prince and chefest of all pastoures did so love his sheape, that he
gave his life for his sheape. The which loved them even to the latter end.
And Paul was marvelous feruente in that kind of dilectyon and love. And
therefore he said. I will very gladlye bestow, and will be bestowed for your
souls, 2. Cor. 12.
though the more I love you, the less I am loved again.

Item there ought to be in a prelate the science and knowledge of scripture.
Choose and love the light of wisdom, Sapi. 6.
the which does profyt the people. Or elsse how can he dyscerne Leprosy, 1.
Cor. ^.3.
from no Leprosye, or judge the people committed unto him. Paul had an
excellent knowledge both in divine and humain matters, he gave unto babes in
Christ milk to drink, and spoke wisdom among those that are perfect. And he
was taken up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.
and hard secreat words which no man can utter.

The love of subjects, and knowledge of scriptures, causes a presydent or a
prelate to be dilygent. Roma. 12.
Let him, says Paul that rules, do it with diligence. The which
solicitude and diligence Paul used most fervently toward his neighbors.
And therefore he says, beside the things which outwardlye happen unto me, I
am combred dailye, and do care for all Congregatyons. 2. Cor. 11.
And in a another place. I would ye knew how great solicitude and care that I
have for you. Collo. 2.
Of and by these three foresaid things thinstruction of the learned does
follow, and therefore our Lord does promise by Jeremy: saying, I will give
you herdmen after mine own mind, which shall ^eade you with learning and
wisdom.

As Artaxerzes said to Esdras, and to the judges of the people. 1. Esd. 7.
Teach the unlearned frelye, the which thing Paul the doctor of the heathen
has done evidently, teaching the universal world other by word or writing a
teacher of the gentiles with faith and verity and opens the savor of his
knowledge by us in every place. i. Timo. 2.
2 Cor. 2.


Also a good prelate ought to dispose and orden his offices among his
subjects, Exo. 18.
as Moses did, the which by the counsel of Iethro made among the people
rulers over hundreds, over fifty, and over ten. Paul did the like in ye church.
i. Cor. 11
Other things will I set in order when I come. And for yt thing he said unto
Tite. For this cause left I thee in Creta, that thou should reform the
things that are imperfect, Tite. i.
and should ordain elders and priests in every city, as I had appointed
thee.

Item a good Prelate must animate and comfort the weaklings and fearful, exo.
14.
as Moses did, when he said unto the fearful people, fear not, our lord shall
fight for you. And Paul did that thing very well, saying. Be strong and of
good comfort in our Lord, Ephe. 6.
and through the virtue and power of his might, put on all the armor of god.
etc. And again. Consider how that he endured such speaking against him of
sinners, Heb. 12.
least ye should be wearyed and faint in your minds.

A good Prelate should defend the oppressed: as Onias the hie priest did, the
which did constantly resist Heliodorus going about to spoil the temple, 2.
match. 3
and how valiantly Paul wythstode the false Prophets, 2. Cor. 11.
it is manifest in the Acts. And he says, where in so ever any man dare be
hold, I dare be bold also. And therefore he said yt he fought. So fight I. not
as one that beats the air. And I have fought a good fight. 2. Timo. 4.
I have fulfilled my course.

A good Prelate should be a comforter of thafflicted, as Eliachim did, when
Holofernes besieged Bethelia. And Paul was equal with him in this part, and
says. Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the
father of mercy, and the God of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.
which comfort us in all our tribulation, in so much that we are able to
comfort them, which are in any manner of trouble. And again. I beseech you
brethren, suffer the word of consolation or exhortation. Heb. 13.
And such words of consolation he used specially to the Philippians and
Thessalonia^s, as it is manifest to those that will search and look for it.

It good prelate must stir up those that be flouthful and cold. Genesis 42
As Jacob the Patriarch did, the which hearing that there was vitailes and
corn to be sold in Egypt, said to his children. Why do you neglecte it? And
that thing could that noble Paul do full well. It is now time (says Paul)
that we should awake out of sleep. And he says: Awake thou that sleapest,
and stand up from death, Roma. 13.
and Christ shall give thee light. And again. Ephe. 5.
I warn thee that thou stir up the gift of GOD which is in thee, by the
putting on of my hands.

A good prelate in as much as he may, 2. Timo. 1.
must help the neady to have that that is necessary for them. We have an
ensample of that in Elizeus, the which did distribute to the children of the
prophets twentye loves. 4. regu. 4
The which thing Paul did fulfill most diligently, having in remembrance
these words. It is more blessed to give, Act. 20.
then to receive, as he says. And when he had not what to give, he procured
it of other me^, as it does well apeare to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 16.
Concerning the gathering. etc. and again. He which sows little, 2. Cor. 9.
shall reap little.

It pertains to a good prelate to bring those low that are proud. And
Moses purposing to do the same said rebukyngly. Nume. 16.
Ye make much to do, ye children of Leuy. And Samuel said unto Saul.
Wherefore have thou not harkened unto the voice of our Lord.

And Paul was very well learned in this art, saying. Some swel as though I
would come no more to you, i. regu. 15.
but I will come to you shortly, if God will, and will know not the words of them
which swell, 1. Cor. 4.
but the power. And in another place. Charge them which are rich in this
world, that they be not proud and hie mineded. 1. Timo. 6.


Again a good Prelate ought personally to viset those which are far of, i.
regum. 7
and are not able to come unto him the which thing Samuel did fulfill. For he
went about Bethel, Calgala, and Masphat, and judged the people. And who at any
time exercysed that thing as Paul did? the which from Jerusalem to the latter
sea, Roma. 15.
filled all places with the Gospel of Christ, and so, that he named his life a
certain course. i. Cor. 9.
I therefore so run, not as at an uncertain thing. 2. Timo. 4.
And I have fulfilled my course.

Also a good Prelate ought to punish transgressors, exo. 31.
as Moses did, when they worshipped and prayed unto the molten calfe. Nor Paul
was not neglygente in this part, but said. The weapons of our warfare are
not carnal things, 2. Cor. 10.
but things mighty in God. Then there follows. And are ready to take
vengaunce on all dysobedyence. And also. i. Cor. 4.
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or elsse in love, and in the spryte of
softness?

A good Prelate ought to extirpe and wede out the stubburne and pestyferous
from among the people: as Moses did with Chore and his, which claue unto him.
Nume. 16.
Separate says he, and stand thou and all the congregation alofe. And then
unto the other he said. Depart from the tents of these wicked men. And Paul
says of him that kept his mother in law. I have determined to deliver him
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh. 1. Cor. 5.
And afterward. Pourge ye the old leven. And he delivered unto Satan
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1. Timo. 1.
to learn not to blaspheme.

And to make an end, this good prelate must pray for all men, Exodi. 32.
as Moses did, the which prayed unto our lord. And as Samuel did. God forbid
that I should sin against our Lord, 1. regu. 12.
and cease praying for you. And Paul did fulfill this thing most diligently,
Roma. 1.
without ceasing I make mention of you in my prayers. And again. We pray
always for you that our God will make you worthy of his calling, 2. These. 1.
etc. And he exhorted that it might be done. I pray you that above all
things, prayers may be had for all men, i. Timo. 2.
and kings.

Of evil princes and prelates. Capi. Cii.
OUr Lord commanded Moses saying: Nume. 15
Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against
the son:

Moses said unto Aaron, what did this people unto thee, Exodi. 32.
that thou haste brought so great a sin upon them? as though he would say, ye
prelate should sin greatly against his subjects, that would incline to their
evil will and purposes.

Elye corrected his sons but slenderlye, the which thing dyspleased our
Lord very sore, 1. regu. 2.
and yet with words he corrected and reprehended them, but he did it but
softely. and not profitably nor sharply, what shall we then say of those that
favor men in mischefe, or of those that give men an occasion of evil?

The whole wayt of the battle turned upon Saul, and so he fell and was
slain. i. regu. 31.


For David's sin that he committed when he nu^bred his people, 2. reg. 24.
there dyed of the people seventy thousand men.

Because Roboam would ouerpresse and charge his people, 3. regu. 12.
he lost ye greatest part of them.

Jeroboam gave an occasion to the people to depart and leave God, 3. regum. 12.
when he made calves of gold, and commanded ye people to adore and worship
them.

Subjects by the occasion of evil prelates and rulers are at some times
temporallye punished. 3. regu. 18.
Whereupon Helias said to Achab. Thou troublest al Israel, and thy fathers
house.

The king of Siria commanded the captains of his Charettes, 3. reg. 22.
thus. Fight neither with small nor great, save only against the king of
Israel. And that was only against that most wicked Achab.

Manasses made Judah and the inhabiters of Jerusalem to err, 2. Para. 33.
and to do worse then the Heathen, whom our Lord destroyed before the children
of Israel.

Esaias has expressed the sins and fautes of the euel rulers and prelates that
dwelt in Jerusalem, esa. i.
saying: Thy princes are wicked and companyons of thieves. They love gifts all
together, and gape for rewards.

And of Nabuchodonozor a very euel prince and governor, esa. 14.
it is said. Thou have wasted thy land, and destroyed thy people.

Sobna the ruler of the temple believed that he should live long in Jerusalem,
and when he should dye, to be honorably buried. But our Lord said thus
unto him. What have you to do here, and whom have thou here? And a non after
there follows. I will drive the from thy station and dwelling place. Esa. 22.
And he seems to be of those, the which said a little before. Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

Sedechias said unto his estates that desired the death of Jeremy. Iere. 38.
Lo, he is in your hands, for the king may deny you nothing.

Our Lord by his prophet Ezechiel speaks against evil prophets and
prelates. Ezechi. 13.
Ye ascended not against them, neither made you a wall for the house of
Israel, that ye may abide ye better in the day of our Lord.

Our lord most terribly does threaten evil and naughty prelates by his prophet
Ezechiell, saying, Woe be unto you shepheardes of Israel that feed your
selves, should not the shepheardes feed the flocks? By and by he discryueth
the deeds of ill pastors, Ye have eaten up the milk, Ezech. 34.
ye have clothed you with the woll, the best fed have ye slain. The sick have
ye not healed, the broken have ye not bound (...)

When the head preaste saw that the Apostles did many signs and wonders, Act.
5.
he rose up, and al they that were with him, and laid hands on the Apostles
and put them into the common prison. But the Aungel of our lord by night,
brought them forth. Then went the Magistrates with ministers and brought
them again. And after many and long counsels they calde the Apostles unto
them, beat them, and commanded that they should not speak in the name of
Jesus.

The Jews caughte Steven, and brought him to the counsel, and when the chief
preastes had objected and laid many things unto him, Act. 6.7.
then said they, is it even so? When he had truly and faithfully defended
him self, and sharply reproved them, they stoned him to death.

Certain men having a damsel, whom Paul delivered of a spryte which
Prophesied, Act. 16.
accused him in such wise and Silas his companion, that they troubled all the
city. The Magistrates and Judges with out any probation there of, commanded
the^ to be beaten, and to be thruste into the hard and inner prison.

When Paul was brought into the counsel he began to speak resonablye, but
even at the first word that Paul spoke, Act. 23.
the hye preaste commanded him to be smytten. Then said Paul. God shall smite
the thou painted wall. Syttest thou and iudgest me after the law, and
commaundest me to be smitten contrary to the law?

Paul had evil and wicked Judges, Felyx and Festus, Act. 25.
the which would please and gratify the Jews, and therefore Paul was
constrained to appeal.

Of ambitious persons. Capitu. Ciii.
MAry and Aaron spoke against Moses, Nume. 12.
and said, has not our Lord spoken also by us? But these words seemed
ambitiously to desire the leadinge of the people.

Chore and his company desyringe to come to ye governance of the people,
condemned Moses and Aaron, and accused them saying. It is sufficient for us,
Nume. 16.
seeing all the multitude is holy, and that our lord is among them. Why heue
ye your selves up above the congregation and people of our Lord.

Abimelech Gedeons son did craftily procure by his mothers friends that he
was chosen king, Iudi. 9.
but yet afterward it chanced very vnluckely unto them both.

The parable that Ionathas propounded, how that ye olyue, vine, and fig tree
would not take ye superiority and kingdom upon them, Iudi. 9.
and that the fyrre bushe a small and a vile tree presumed to usurp the rule
there of, may be aptlye ascryued unto those which are ambitious.

Gad ye son of Obed, said, would God this people were under my hand, Iudi. 9.
ye I might take Abimelech out of ye way.

Absolon when me^ came to the king for judgment, 2. regu. 15
flatteringlye, backbytingly, and ambitiouslye said. Thy words and matter
seem to me to be good and just: but there is no man deputed of the king to hear
the. Oh yt I were made judge in ye land. 2. re. 17.18.
But note what chanced unto him afterward.

Adonias the son of Hagith, exalted him self, 3. regum. 1.
saying. I will raygne, I will be king.

Achias the Selonite said unto Jeroboam. Reign according to all that thy soul
desires. 3. regu. 11.
But after yt he had obtained the kingdom upon x. tribes, he used him self most
wyckedly.

Zambry perceiuinge that Hela the king of Israel his Lord was dronken, 3. reg.
16.
smote him, and killed him. And he reign vii. days only after him.

Athalia the mother of king Ochozias saw that her son was dead: she had such
an ambitious and burning ^ust to rule, 4. reg. 11.
that she destroyed all the kings seed, Ioas excepted, the whi^he by Ochozias
sister was taken away by stealth.

Sellum the son of Iabes conspired against Zacharias the king of Israel his
master, 4. regu. 15
and slew him, and he reigned a month in Samaria.

Nabuchodonozor the king of the Assirians, Judith. 3.
called unto him his Captains and men of war, and told them his thought, and
that his purpose was, to bring the hole earth under his dominion.

Ambitious and proud men, are more troubled with a few that excel them,
Esther. 5.
or that will not obey them: then they rejoice of many that follow the^ and
obey them. For proud Aman the which was next unto the king, and had many
children and great richesse, esteemed him self to have nothing, as long as he
saw Mardocheus before the kings gate.

When Seron hard say that Judas had gathered the congregatyon and church of the
faithful, 1. macha. 3.
he said, I will get me a name and a praise through out all the realm: And I
will fight and overcome Judas. And yet Judas sone overcame him.

Alchinus that would have been hye priest, 1. Mac. 7
and other wicked and ungodly men of Israel came to king Demetrius, saying unto
him. Judas and his brethren have slain and destroyed thy friends, and has
driven us out of our own land.

Ptolomeus the king of Egypt went about through disceit to obtain and destroy
Alexanders kingdom. 1. macha. 11
And at length Alexander being overthrown, and chased into Araby, he obtaind
it. And zabdiel the Arabian smote of Alexanders head. And sent it unto Ptolomy,
the which had but little joy there of: For the third day after, dyed king Ptolomy
him self.

Ptolomy the son of Abobus had abundance of silver and gold, 1. Match. 16.
and waxed proud and stately in his mind, and thought to conquer the land.
And by that occasyon, traitorously he slew Simon the hie Priest, and his two
sons.

Jason above all other coueted most ambitiouslye to be the hie priest. And for
that he came to king Antiochus the noble, and promised him 360. talentes of
Silver. And many other things, 2. macha. 4
which when the king had granted him, he had the use thereof, but for a small
time. For Menelaus whom he sent to Antiochus gat the priesthode, and was sone
discharged thereof, and his brother Lysimachus came and was placed in his stead.

When Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, Act. 8.
the holy ghost was given, he offered them money, saying. Give me also this
power, that on whom so ever I put my hands, he may receive that holy ghost. But
Peter said unto him. Thy money pearish with thee.

Of the deuels temptation. Ca. Ciiii.
THe serpent being crafty to te^pt ye the deuel in the serpent, approached the
feblest part of ma^kinde, and the most prompest to sin for he tempted not
Adam first, Gene. 3.
but Eve. And began searchynge a far of, for he counseld them not even suddenly
to eat of the forbidden fruit. And he denied that there should follow any
pain for the transgressyon of the commandment. Yea he affyrmde that great
goodness should follow that only eating of the apple.

The lying spirit does oftentimes lie in his temptation, Gene. 3.
for he said unto Eve, ye shall not dye the death. And he said unto our
Savior, when he showed him all the kingdoms of the world. Luc. 4.
They are delivered unto me, and to whom I will, I give the^. And furthermore
he alleges holy scripture peruersly and falsely: saying unto the LORD of
aungelles. He has given his angels charge over thee. Math. 4.


And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to nombre Israel. 1.
Para. 21.


Satan required of our Lord, that Job might be touched in his goods, Job. 1.2.
children, and body. Wherein may be noted, the subtelty, malignity, and
infirmity of our ennemy.

It is not expedient to dysclose our temptations to any such man, whom we
believe to have been tempted with like sin. But rather to some dyscreat and
holy man, that would comfort us in goodness. Wherefore when the two old men,
did reuele and open their concupiscence one to a another, Dani. 23.
they were provoked to that, that was worse.

The Lords temptation does teach us to overcome al kinds of temptation. Luc.
4.
He was tempted in three things, unto the which, all other temptations may be
reduced. And note, that he overcame not temptation by power, but by scripture.

Our Lord, his passion being even at hand, Luc. 22.
said to Simon Peter. Satan has desired to sifte you, as it were wheat: But
I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. And when thou art converted,
strength thy brethren.

Luc. 13.
The devil put into ye heart of Judas to betray our Lord Jesus Christ.

Peter said to Ananias, Act. 5.
how is it, ye Satan has filled thine heart that thou should lie unto
the holy ghost and keep away part of the price of the land.

Of sin in general, and of diverse pains which follow sin. Ca. Cv.
THat sin does cause shamfastnesse in man, it is evident, for when our first
parents in the state of innocencye were bare, Gene. 3.
they were not ashamed: but after they had trespassed, by and by they made them
selves aprons.

Sin does defame a sinner. And therefore Adam after that he had trespassed,
Gene. 3.
thought to have hid him self from the presence of our Lord. Sin likewise
makes a man fearful, for after ye Adam had sinned, Gene. 3.
he said, I was afraid, because I was naked, and hid my self.

The enormity of sin does cry to the ears of our Lord for ve^gance, Gene.
4.
As the voice of thy brothers blood. And in a another place. The cry of the
Sodomites. At some times our Lord does punyshe sin with temporal pain and
punyshmente. As it is euydent in Adam and Eve. Ge. 3.4.19
In Cain. In the Sodomytes. And often in the children of Israel. And Christ
said. Sin no more, Ihon. 5.
least a worse thing happen unto thee.

Pharao knowledged and confessed yt he was scourged and punished of our Lord for
sin, Exo. 10.
saying. I have sinned against our Lord and against you.

The children of Israel did evil in the sight of our Lord. And our Lord was
angry, Judith. 2.
and delivered them into the hands of raueners, that took and spoiled them,
and sold them into the hands of their enemies.

Sin does not suffer the sinner to be in quiet. 2. reg. 24.
For David's heart smote him, after that he had nombred the people.

Eccle. 47.
Sin did infatuate Solomon the wise, and stained his honor and worship.

After that Ioram the king of Judah began to walk in the wicked wais and steps
of the kings of Israel, 4. reg. 8.
Edom went from him, and would not pay him the accustomed tribute.

The children of Israel left the commandments of God, 4. reg. 17.
and made the^ Gods of metal, and served Baal. There follows. Israel was
translated and carried away out of their own land.

The word of God was against Judah, to put him out of his sight, 4. reg. 24.
for the sins of Manasses^ the which he had committed, and for the innocent
blud that he shed.

Jerusalem and all the cities of Judah are desolate, Iere. 44.
and no man dwelling in the^, because of their great malice and sin, which
they committed, to provoke me to anger. No, yt they had any cause to do so, but
upon a custom.

The burden and grefe of sin is so great, that Jeremy does say. That our
Lord might no longer suffer, Iere. 44.
because of the malitiousnesse and inue^tions of your studyes.

Man through sin is febleshed: Jerusalem sinned, and therefore it was made
unstable, 3. regu. 11.
yea and Salomous servant was so bold as to rise against his Lord, after he
had trespassed.

After that our Lord had healed the manne that lay sick in his bed, Ihon. 5.
he found him in the temple, and said unto him. Behold, thou art made
whole. Sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee.

Our lord said unto the woman that was apprehended in aduoutrye, John. 8.
and accused of the Jews before him: Go and sin no more.

Of confession of sins Capi. Cvi.
OUr lord monished Adam after he had sinned, to knowledge and to confess his
faut: but he in a manner rejected and laid his faut to God and to the woman,
Gene. 3.
and the woman to the serpent. And said: The woman whom thou gave to be my
fellow. etc. And the woman said, yonder serpent begiled me, and I did eat.

Cain did knowledge his fault, Genesis 4
saying. My iniquitye is more, then that it may be forgeuen.

Pharao said I have sinned against God and you. Exodi. 9.
And again. I have now sinned, our Lord is righteous, and I and my people are
ungodly.

Saul said, 1. regu. 26.
I have sinned, I have playde the fool, and have erred excedynglye.

And Judas said, Mat. 27.
I have sinned, betrayinge the innocent blood.

And yet none of all these obtained forgiveness, because they spoke it not
with a true heart.

David spoke the like words with an humble and lowlye heart, 2. regu. 12.
and deserved to hear, our Lord has put away thy sin.

The people being afflycted and stonge with fyerye serpents, Nume. 21.
came to Moses, and said, we have sinned, for we have spoken against our lord,
and against the.

The children of Israel were vehemently and sore oppressed by ye Philistines,
and the children of Amnon, And they said unto our Lord: we have sinned,
Iudi. 10.
do you unto us what soever please thee, deliver us only this day.

David being reprehended of Nathan the prophet for his excess and sin
committed against Urias and his wife: 2. regu. 12.
did humblye recognize and confess his fault.

David when he had nombred his people, 2. reg. 24.
did so humblye and mekely recognize his fault, that he offered him self to be
punished instead and place of the innocent people.

2. Esd. 1.
Nehemias said, I knowledge and confess for the sins of ye children of
Israel, which we have sinned against the: And I and my fathers house have
sinned, and have been vaynly seduced.

Tobi. 3.
Although Tobias feared God even from his infancye, and observed his precepts
and commandments, yet he most humbly confessinge, said: we have not done
according to thy commandments, neither have we walked innocently before thee.

Daniels three fellows which lived so holyly among the Chaldes, Dani. 3.
and for whose sake our Lord showed so great a miracle in the furnace, never
murmurd against our Lord, asthoughe they had sufferd such things justly. But
Azarias said, we have sinned, we have offended and done wickedlye.

And Daniel in his prayer to God, confessed his sins, Dani. 9.
and the peoples, saying. We have sinned, we have offended, we have done
wyckedly.

The syxte of those seven brethren, which began to dye, 2. Match. 7.
said. We suffer these things for our own sakes, for we have sinned against
our Lord God.

There came to John Baptyst all Iewrye, Mat. 5.
and all the regyon round about Iordane, confessing their sins.

As Paul was preachinge in Asia, Act. 19.
many that believed came and confessed and showed their works.

Of the hardness and obstinacye of the wicked. Capitu. Cvii.
CAin after that our Lord had reproved him was worsse, Genesis 4.
and slew his brother.

The heart of Pharao neither by fair words, Exo. 5.6.7 8.9.
which Moses spoke from our lord, nor yet by dure and sharp punishemente
could be mollified.

Our Lord does call the children of Israel, Exo. 32.
a styfnecked people as it appears in diverse places in Leuitici.

1. regu. 2.
Hely corrected his children with words, but it profyted them but a little.

Samuel foretoulde the people the sore and grievous conditions of their king,
i. regu. 8.
and that it dyspleased our Lord. And yet they would not leave of their
purpose.

Saul neither by Ionathas words, nor yet by the benefytes which he received
of David, 1. regu. 18.
could be provoked or induced to love David.

1. regu. 25.
It is said of Nabal, that he was hard, very evil and malicious.

^saell persecuted Abner but to obstinatlye. 2. reg. 2.


Our Lord sent prophets to the men of Judah, 2. Para. 24.
that they should return unto him. But they would not hear of it. Ye, they
kilde, zacharia the son of Ioiada most cruelly, because he rebuked them.

Hezechias the king of Judah sent messengers through out all Israel, 2. Para.
30.
saying. But ye not styfnecked, like as were your fathers, the^ follows, yt
they laughed the^ to scorn, and mocked them.

Their hearts were very hard that came to take our lord, Luc. 22.
yt which when yt he with a word had smitten them prostrate to ye earth, John.
18.
and had healed the servants ear yt was smitte^ and cut of, were not moved to
mercy, neither by ye manifestatio^ of ye miracle, nor yet by ye meekness or
gentleness of ye benefit.

Saint Steven rebuking the Jews vehementlye and sharply, Act. 7.
said. O ye styfnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted ye holy ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye.

Of the peruersity of certain men. Capitu. Cviii.
THe first woman perverted the order of nature, Genesis 3.
when she gave her husband of the fruit that was forbiden, and he eat it:
when yt the man ought rather to have taught ye woman, what she should have
eaten, or what she should have a voyded.

The lord enrychd the Hebrews with the spoils of the Egyptians: although
there be many now as usurers and such like, Exo. 12.
the which enryche the Egiptians with the spoil of the Hebrews.

The children of Israel sufferynge penurye and scarsnes in the deseart, Exo.
16.
said, that in Egypt they sat by the flesh pottes, but they made no mention
of the greauous and cruel bondage that they were troubled and vexed with all.

The people in the deseart said, we remember the fyshe which we did eat in
Egypt for naught? And yet they were ouerprest with grievous servitude and
bondage. And now being at liberty and in fredome they were norished with angels
fode, Nume. 11.
that is, with most sauery meats given the^ from heaven without any labor.

When the spies and searchers did declare and open the condityons and goodness
of the land of promise, Nu. 13.14.
the people contrary to Gods will would have returned into Egipte, and by no
means go no further. And even shortly after, against the will of our Lord,
they would have made but to great have.

When Moses had called Dathan and Abiron, Nume. 16.
they said, we will not come up. Is it a small thing that thou have brought us
out of a land yt flows with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness, and to
reign over us also?

Moses desired of king Edom, saying. We pray thee that we may go now through
thy country, Nume. 20.
we will not go by the Fields nor Uyneyardes, neither will we drink of the
water of the Fountains, we will go by the kings hie way. Edom answered him.
Thou shall not go by me, least I come out against thee with the sweard.

The like thing chanced of Seon the king of the Amorytes. But in as much as he
would not grant that was little, Nume. 21.
he lost that was much.

Balaam would not curse the people, whom he believed to have Gods benediction.
But there are many which speak more evil of the good, then of the naughtye:
Nume. 24.
And marvel it was, that he which would not curse them, would harm them.
For notwythstandynge that our Lord had showed him, that the people of Israel
were blessed, yet finally he gave evil counsel, by the which women deceived
him.

The children of Israel hearing our Lords commandments, Iudi. 2.
did all things clean contrary.

Iephthe desired the men of Ephraim to go to battle with him. And they would
not. But after that he had won the victory, Iudi. 12.
and was come again, they, as though he had not called upon them, began to
quarrel, and to chide with him.

David plaide before Saul being vexed with the deuel, 1. reg. 18.19
and served him profytably, and yet Saul would have naild David to the wall with
a iauelyng, the which he held in his hand.

Saul would have slain his son Ionathas, 1. regu. 10.
because he excused Dauyd the innocent.

Saul said, that his servants had conspired against him, 1. regu. 22.
and that David lay await for him. Whose death he sought for, but he could
neither find him, nor take him.

The king of the children of Amno^ perceiving that he had done iniurye unto
David, 2. reg. 10.
would fight with him, when that he should rather have gone about to have
pleased him.

Amnon David's son, caused Thamar his sister, 2. regu. 13.
whom he had forced, to be expeld and put from him.

Absolon David's son moved him self malitiouslye against his father, and went
in unto his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel. 2. reg. 15.16
And would have depryued his father both of his life, and of his kingdom.

When our Lord had exalted Jeroboam upon ten tribes of Israel, by and by he
converted and turned the people from worshipping of God, 3. reg. 12.13
and monished by the Prophet, he commanded him to be taken.

Achab king of Judah took away our Lords aultare, and caused a another to be
made like unto that, which he had seen in Damasco, and commanded burnt
offerynges to be offered up upon it.

The Idolatry, sorcery, murder, and other diverse crimes committed by Manasses,
are sufficientlye declared.iiii. Reg. xxi. 2. Para. 33.


After that Amasias had ouercomde and slain the Edomites, and the men of Seir,
2. Para. 25.
and had brought away their Gods, he worshypped them, and burned incense unto
them. Wherefore our Lord was wroth and rebuked him by his prophet, saying unto
him: why have thou worshipped those Gods, which were not able to deliver
their own people out of thy hand?

Achaz king of Judah offered sacrifices unto the Gods of them of Damasco, which
bet him, and said. The Gods of the kings of Siria helpte them, 2. Para. 28.
therefore will I appease them with Sacrifices, for then will they healpe me
also. But contrariously they were his destruction, and the destruction of al
Israel.

Because that Mardocheus only did not worship proud Aman, Esth. 3.
he procured with the king of the Assirians, that all the Jews should be put
to death.

When Jeremy rebuked the people because they did sacrifice unto strange Gods,
Iere. 44.
they answered, sense we left of to do sacrifyce unto the Queen of heaven, we
have had scarceness of al things, and pearysh with sweard and hunger.

The lords and great estates of Darius the king of Persia did accuse Daniel,
Dani. 6.
because that three times a day, he made his prayers unto his God.

The two old priests, that saw Susan to be of a constant chastity should have
loved her, Dani. 13.
and greatly have praised her. But contrarilye they slaundred her, and went
about to condemn her to death: but our Lord did most wonderfully deliver her,
by an abstinent, and a chaste child.

The wicked Alchinus, which ought to have loved Judas and his brethren, 1.
Match. 7.
with other ungodly men, went to king Demetrius: saying. Judas and his
brethren have slain thy friends, and driven us out of our own land.

^. Match. 9.
When Antiochus was mineded to rob the city of Pentapolis, he when the people
ran together to their weapons, was feign to fly, the which injury he
thought to aduenge upon the Jews.

They of Ioppa committed a very cruel and a shameful deed: 2. Match. 12.
for they prayed CC. Jews to enter and go in to the ships with them, but
when they were gone forth into the deape, they drowned them.

Nether the austere and sharp life of Ihon: Mat. 11.
nor yet the temperate and comely eating of our savior could please the Jews.

When the Pharisees saw that our Lord cast out deuels, Mat. 12.
and that the people were amassed, they blasphemed saying. This fellow dryueth
the deuels no otherwise out, but by the healpe of Beelzebub the chief of the
devils.

There was to much peruersitye in Judas, Mat. 26.
that sold his master for xxx. silver pence.

Of the wickedness of tirauntes. Ca. Cix.
PHarao invented diverse wyckednesses to extinguyshe, Exo. 1.
or to reduce the children of Israel to a smaller number. First of all, he
commanded to punysh them with hard labor. Secondarelye he commanded the
male children to be killed, but afterward he commanded that they should be
cast into the river and that the women children should be saved. First Pharao
said even simply, I know not the Lord, nether will I let Israel go. Exo. 5.
And again he granted it unto them saying, go ye, and do sacrifyce unto the
Lord in this land. And yet afterward he would let the^ go to do sacrifice
unto our Lord in the wilderness, so that they went not far of. Exo. 10.
And after that he was content that the men should go, so that they left
their shepe^ their cattle behind the^.

Exo. 5.
After that Pharao understood that the children of Israel would do sacrifice
unto our Lord: he afflicted and used them more hardly.

Iudi. 1.
Three score and ten kings having their thombes and great toes cut of, gathered
the fragmentes under Adonibezechs table.

Abimelech Gedeo^s son, usurping the superiority and dominion, Iudi. 9.
over the people, slew seventy men his brethren upon one stone.

Saul, after that he had received many benefits by David, 1. regu. 22.
sought his death, and slew 85. men that did wear a lynnen Ephod.

Jeroboam commanded the man of God to be taken, 3. regu. 13.
the which rebuked him for the sacrilegious altar that he set up. and builded.

Iesabell sought Helias death, in as much as he had caused Baals Prophets to
be slain. 3. regu. 19.


Naboth the Israelite by ye procurement of Iezabel, 3. regu. 21.
was stoned to death: for she caused false witness to be brought out against him.

Achab king of Israel caused Micheas the prophet to be cast into prison: 3.
reg. 22.
and to be sustaynd and fed with bread of affliction, and with water of trouble.

When the word of our Lord came against Baasa yt king of Israel, 3. regu. 16.
and his house by the hand of Iehu the prophet, he slew the foresaid prophet.

Manasses the king of Judah, 4. regu. 21.
shed innocent blood, and replenyshed Jerusalem with the blood of innocents.

When Sennacherib came again, and fled out of Iewry what time as God punyshed
him for his blasphemy. Tobi. 1.
In his wrath he slew many of the children of Israel.

Nabuchodonozor said unto Holofernes. Thou shall spare no realm. Judith. 2.


Afterward we read of Holofernes, that there came such a fear upon the
countries, Judith. 3.
that the indwellers of all the cities, went forth to mete him as he came, and
received him with garlandes, and torches, with dances, tabrets and pipes.
Nevertheless, though they did this, yet could they not swage his rigorous
stomach.

Because that Mardocheus would not bow his knee to proud Aman, Esth. 3.
he chose rather to procure the death of all the Jews, then to forgive him
alone.

Sedechias king of Judah, commanded at the peticion of the rulers of the
people, Iere. 38.
that Ieremye the prophette should be cast into the lake or dongion, where
there was neither water nor light.

The king of Babylon slew Sedechias the king of Judah children before his face
at Reblatha, Iere. 19.
and made his eyes to be put out, and bound him with fetters, and sent him
to Babylon.

Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon in a furye commanded to destroy all the wise
men at Babylon, Dani. 2.
because they could not interpretate ye dreame^ which he dreamed and saw.

It was an exeadinge and a marvelous great cruelnes of Nabuchodonozor the
king of Babylon, Dani. 3.
when he caused Daniels fellows to be cast into the burninge furnace.

Antiochus went up to Jerusalem, and made a great slaughter of men, 1.
macha. ^.
and shed innocente blood on every side of the Sanctuarye at Jerusalem.

Demetrius took Antiochus the son of Antiochus and Lisias, 1. Mac. 7
and brought them to Demetrius, the which would not see them, so the host put
them to death.

Tryphon took Ionathas traytorousllye. And when he had him, he asked for his
deliverance.200. talents of silver, 1. Match. 13.
and his two sons for ostagees. And when he had them, he most wickedlye slew
ye father and his sons.

Andronicus being desired of Menelaus, and by him through gifts corrupted,
2. macha. 4
slew Onias the hye priest.

King Antiochus absolved that sacrilegious manne Menelaus accused of many
crimes, 2. Match. 4.
and condempnde his accusers to death.

The tirauntes sent by Antioche did exercise and use to much cruelnes
against Eleazarus, 2. mac. 6.7
and likewise against those.vii. brethren and their mother.

When Herod saw that he was mocked of the wise men, he was exceadinge wroth,
Math. 2.
and sent forth men of war, and slew all the children that were in
Bethelem, and in all the coasts, as many as were two year old and under.

Herod the Tetrarche knew that John the Baptist was a just and a holy manne:
Math. 14.
mar. 6.
and yet at the peticion of an harlot he caused him to be beheaded in prson.

Pilate knew that the Jews for envy had delivered our Lord, and could
find no cause why, and yet at their clamoures, Math. 27
and fearing least he should lose the favor of Caesar: he delyuerd him
scourged to their will and pleasure.

There came unto our Lord certain Pharisees, Luc. 13.
and said unto him. Get thee out of the way and depart hence, for Herod
will kill thee.

Herod the Tetrarch was desirous to see Jesus of a long season: and when he
saw him he was exceadinge glad. Luc. 23.
And yet he with his men of war des:+pised him, and when he had mocked him, he
arrayed him in white clothing, and sent him again to Pilate.

Herod the king, sent a company to vex certain of the congregation: Act. 12.
And he killed James the brother of John. and because he saw that it pleased
the Jews, he went about to take Peter also.

Paul was of certain men falsely accused, Act. 16.
because that he had cast out of a certain maid a spirit that prophesied.
The magestrates sent him and Sylas his fellow to be beaten with rods, and to
be cast in prison, and to make their feet fast in the stocks.

Felyx the president hoped that money should have been given him of Paul, Ac.
24.25
whom he held bound in prison: Wherefore he called him the oftener, and
co^moned with him. Festus succeeded him. And Felix wyllinge to show the Jews a
pleasure, and to hurt Paul, left him in prison bound, and Paul appealed to
Caesar.

Of the oppression of the good, by the evil. Capi. Cx.
THe wicked and envious Cain, preuaylde against Abell the just, Gene. 4.
and slew him.

The Sodomites did diuersllye and manifold manner of ways afflict and torment
the life and soul of Lot. Gene. 19.


Esau hated Jacob continuallye, and said in his heart. Genesis 27.28
The days of my fathers sorrow are at hand, and I will slay my brother Jacob.
So yt he was co^pelde to fly to his uncle Laba^.

The Egiptians hated the children of Israel, Exo. 1.
and deludinge them did so afflicte them, that their life was bitter unto them.

Abimelech ambitiouslye couetinge ye kingdom, Iudi. 9.
slew.70. of his brethren.

David served Saul both faithfully and profitablye, 1. reg. 17.
and yet he sought long after his death.

Absolon did so move the people a against David, 2. regu. 15
that he was enforced to avoid Jerusalem, although he was eftsoon revoked
and calde again.

Wicked Iezabel did so threaten and go about to slaye Helyas, 3. reg. 19.
that he, being in fear of his life, fled whether so ever his mind did
lead him.

When that wicked king of Israel Ioram heard say that there was great
famyne and hunger in the city, 4. reg. 6.
he sent one of his men, to smite of Helizeus head.

Azarias Ioas son, 2. Para. 14
at Ioas the king of Judah commandment was stoned to death, because he
reproved the king and his people that served and honored ydoles.

Nabuchodonozor commanded Holofernes that he should roo^e out all the gods
of the land, Judith. 2.3.
to the intent that he only might be called and taken for God. And therefore he
destroyed many regions, and ye people of God, which was returned from ye
captiuitye of Babylon, he afflicted and punyshed very sore.

The proud, cruel, and wicked Aman, was so mighty, Esth 34.
that he little esteemed it to procure the death of all the Jews, but yet the
divine providence withstode his attemptinges. Iere. 20.


Phashur the priest smote Ieremye the prophet, and put him in the stocks.

Iere. 29.
Ananias did prophesye clean contrary to that, that Jeremy said, and took the
chain of wodde from Ieremyce neck and brake it. And Jeremy went whom to his
house, as a man confused of the liyng and false prophet.

Da. 3, 13.14
Nabuchodonozor the king of Babylon, commanded Azarias and his companions to be
cast into the furnace, because they would not worship the golden ydol, ye
which that wicked Idolater had erected. And Daniell was twice cast into the
lake of Lions, by the labor and procurement of wicked men.

Antiochus ascended proudly to Jerusalem with a great multitude, 1. macha. 1.
and made there a terrible slaughter of me^.

Bacchides and Alchimus the traytoure, sent by king Demetrius, 1. macha. 9.
brought forth so great an host against Judas Machabeus, yt Judas was slain in
battle, and the reast of his men fled.

Triphon that traitor and full of all guyle, Act. 13.
which by deceit slew king Antiochus his Lord and master, slew also Ionathas
and his two sons.

Herod that most vile aduouterer beheadded at the peticion of one harlot John
the Baptist, math. 14.
the patron and ensample of all holiness.

Our Lord Jesus savior of the world was smytten, math. 28.
and deluded of Anna, Caipha, John. 19.
and of Herod ye Tetrarch, and at ye last judged and crucified by Pilate the
president, yea, and of ye thieves bla^phemed.

The chief priest, and all they that were with him, Act 5.
laid hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison: and afterward
they were beaten, and commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus.

Certain Jews moved the people and the elders, Act. 6.7.
and the scribes, and they caught Steven, and brought forth ii. false witnesses
against him, and so stoned him.

Herod Agrippa sent forth a company to afflict and vex certain of the
congregation: Act. 12.
And he killed James, Ihons brother with the sweard. And furthermore he
imprisoned Peter.

The Jews moved the devout women, and chief men of the city, Act. 13.
and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of
their coasts.

When that Paul and Barnabas were so honored at Listris that they would have
done sacrifyce unto them as unto Gods, Act. 14.
there came certain Jews which, when they had persuaded the people, and had
stoned Paul, drue him out of the city, supposing he had been dead.

Certain men leading about a woman possessed with a spirit that prophesied,
Act. 16.
did so stir up the rulers and Magistrates of the city of Philippes: that
Paul and Silas his companyon were commanded to be beaten, cast in prison,
and set fast in the stocks.

Of tribulation, and the vtilitye there of. Capi. Cxi.
Joseph being exiled, increased more in the land and country of his poverty:
Genesis 41.
then he should have increased with his brethren, in the country of his nativity.

Iosephes brethren said one to an other. We have well deserved this: for we have
sinned against our brother, Genesis 42.
and therefore is this trouble come upon us.

Exo. 1.
The children of Israel through Pharaos oppressio^s and tribulation increased:
for the more he vexed them the more they multiplied, and grew.

The children of Israel being aff^ycted and stinged with the fyerye
Serpents: Nume. 21.
said unto Moses, we have sinned, for we have spoken agayns^e our Lord, and
agayns^e thee. But or ever our Lord sent the serpents, they nether knew their
faut, nor yet calde to God for healpe.

We read not that the children of Israel, Iudi. 2.
as long as Iosue ruled, and that they were occupied in warfare and battle,
did ever depart, or left GOD: But after that they were at quiet, and in wealth
they sone forsook him.

The children of Israel hard that the Philistynes were gathered to com up
against them. 1. Reg. 7.
And being afraid they said unto Samuel. Cease not to cry unto the LORD
our GOD for us, that he may save us out of the hand of the Phylistines.

When David fled from the face and presence of Absalon: 2. re. 15.16 18.24.
and when S^mei his servant cursed him, he was very pacient. But after he
had obtained the victory, he waxed proud and commanded his people to be
nombred.

David perceiving our Lord to be wroth and angry because of his elation and
pride: 2. Reg. 24.
did most humblye knowledge his faut: and desired that he might be punished,
and the people spared.

The angel of our LORD did comfort Helias flying from Iezabell the Queen
that persecuted him, 3. regum. 10
and he showed him both bread and water.

Micheas the prophet was commanded to be fed, 4. reg. 22.
in pryso^ with the bread of affliction, and water of trouble, because he
would not answer Achab after his own will and pleasure.

It was our Lords will, that the Jews should be afflycted and punyshed by
the king of Egypt: and so to learn and know, 2. para. 12.
what difference there is between the service of God, and the service of the
kingdoms of the world.

After that Manasses was in tribulation, and bound with chains in Babylon: he
humbled him self excedingly before our Lord, 2. Para. 33.
and God hard his prayer.

In the time of trouble, they cried unto thee: and thou hardest them from
heaven. 2. Esdra. 9.
And through thy great mercy thou gave them saviors which healped them out
of the hand of their enemies.

Tobias after many good deeds, god suffering the same, Tob. 2.
waxed blind, and afterward was laughed to scorn of those that should have
comforted him. But our Lord after that did diverse manner a ways recreate and
comfort him again.

Judith speaking of her own people, said. Iudi. 8.
Ye ought to remember, that when your father Abraham was tempted, and tried
through many tribulations that he was made, and found a lover and a friend of
God.

Job sustained tribulatyon by his wife: and by the reproaches and contumelious
words of his friends: the which thing ought to have provoked him to heaviness.
Job. 1.2.30
And in body he was diseased with a marvelous sore infirmity, even from the
sole of his foot, to the crown of his head. And in the loss of his
substance and children. In the taking away of his solace and comfort, for his
wife abhord him and could not abide his breath. Other yo^g and vile persons
derided him, and staind his face with spittle.

Jeremy which was sa^ctifyed in his mothers womb, Iere. 15.
and full of the spirit of prophecye, said thus of him self, that he was a
brauler, a man of dyscord and dissension, and a rebuker of the whole land, and
that all men cursed and spoke evil upon him.

Jeremy for preaching the truth unto the people, Iere. 16.18
was now and then punyshed, and often imprysonned, and at length the people
stoaned him to death.

Ezechiel being in Caldea as a banyshed man, Ezech. 1.5.
saw in the mids of the Captives the wonderful visions of God. Whereby it
appears, that god does oftentimes comfort those which are in tribulation.

It appears well by Daniels companions that our Lord is with him that is in
tribulation: Dani. 3.
for Nabuchodonozor saw with them a fourth like the son of God.

Nabuchodonozor in his prosperity was arrogant and proud, Dani. 4.
and therefore he was cast out of men's company, and changed into a beast. But
after that he recovered his understanding, the which he, being in dignity and
honor, lost by elation and pride, he praised the highest, whom before he
blasphemed.

Our Lord was as highlye, or more praised through the patience of the iii.
children, Dani. 2.
the which they took in ye tribulation of the furnace: as he was with the
sapience and wisdom of Daniel, the which he had in the exposition and
interpretation of dreams.

Susanna being condemned to death, Dani. 13.
having no recourse to any humayne aid or healpe, weping looked up unto heaven,
as does the bird which co^pased on earth with men and dogs has no refuge,
except it eleuate it self into the air.

After the death of Judas Machabeus, wicked men came up, and there was a great
dearth in the land. 1. match. 9.
And wicked Bachides took away the Lords and rulers of the country. And there
be came great trouble in Israel.

There went forth a very unjust decre and commandment against the Jews, 2.
match. 6.
that who so would not do sacrifice, after the laws of the gentiles, should be
put to death. And there was great tribulation in Israel.

Antiochus being in good health, was a cruel and a proud homicide, 2. match.
9.
but afterward smytten by god with a grievous and incurable plague: he changed
both his words, and his purposes.

After that our Lord was borne, he sone after felt and suffered ye pressures and
torments of the world: so that Joseph took him and his mother, math. ii.
and fled into Egypt. Of diverse and many afflictions and injuries which our
lord has suffered, read in the titles of mercy, and patience.

The Apostles being scourged by ye precepte and commandment of the
Magestrates: Act. 5.
departed from the counsel, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy, to suffer
rebuke for the name of Jesus.

And although Paul was not even the^ with the Apostles, ii. Corin. xii
yet he said afterward of him self: we rejoice in our tribulations. And
again. Uery gladly will I rejoice of my weakness, that the strength of Christ
may dwell in me.

Act. 8.
After that Steven was stoned too death: there was a great persecutyon against
the Congregatyon which was at Jerusalem: and they were all scattred abroad
through out the regyons of Iewry and Samaria, except the Apostles. But yet
note. That it was much profitable for the dinulgation of the gospel.

It may be well known by the acts of the Apostles, that Paul after his
conversion suffered tribulations and persecutions. Act. 9.
For ye Jews took counsel together, 2. Corin. 11.
to kill him by night. And when they went about their deceitfulness, he was
let down through the wall in a basket.

When Paul and Barnabas were in Antioche Pisidia, Act. 13.
they sowed and preached the word of God, thorowout all the country. But the
Jews raised persecusion against them, and were expelled out of their coasts.
But they shoke of the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium.

In the city of Li^tris they were had in such honor, Act. 14.
because of ye creapel, whom Paul healed, that they would have done sacrifice
unto the^. But thither came certain Jews, which when they had obtained ye
peoples consent, and had stoned Paul, they drew him out of ye city, supposing
he had been dead.

And in Macedonia, by the occasion of a damsel, out of whom Paul cast forth
a sprite that prophesied, her master being heavy for the gain that they lost
thereby: Act. 16.
they apprehended and took Paul, and his fellow Silas, and said yt they were
disturber^ of ye city. The rulers commanded the^ ^o be chastened with rods,
and to be cast in prison, and to set their feet in ye stocks.

Afterward at Thessalonica, when many of them believed, the disdainful Jews,
by certain evil men, slyrde up, Act. 17.
and set all the city in a roar. But the brethren immediately sent away Paul
and Silas unto Berrea. But when the Jews perceived that they had received also
the word of God at Berrea: they came and moved and troubled the people there.
And the^ immediately the brethren sent away Paul, and by sea brought him to
Athens.

Paul in like manner preached at Corinthe, and testified to the Jews that
Jesus was very Christ. And when they said contrary and blasphemed, Act. 18.
he shoke his raymente, and said unto them: your blood be upon your own
headdes.

When Callio was a ruler of the country of Acaia, the Jews made insurrection
with one accord against Paul, Act. 18.
and brought him to the judgment seat, saying. This fellow counceleth men to
worship God contrary to the law.

Paul departinge from Ephesus, and preachinge boldly the word of God, and
doing there many miracles: Act. 19.
A certain manne named Demetrius a silver smyth, which made silver shrynes for
Diana, called together the workmen of like occupation, and styrde up a great
number of people against Paul, whom he said did turn much people from the
worshippinge of the gods. When they heard these sayings, they were full of
wrath, and cried out saying: Great is Dyana of the Ephesians.

As Paul was saylynge out of Greece into Siria, the Jews laid wait for him:
Act. 20.
and he was counseled to return through Macedonia. And there accompanied him
many brethren of diverse and sondrye places.

When certain Jews of Assyria had seen Paul in the Temple, they moved all
the people, and laid hands on him, cryinge. Men of Israel, help. And they
took Paul and drew him out of the temple. Act. 21.
And as they went about to kill him, tydinges came unto the hye captain, that
all Jerusalem was moved: the which took soudiers, and ran unto them. When
they saw him and the soudyers, they left smiting of Paul. Then the captain
took Paul, and commanded him to be bound with two chains.

As the Jews cried against Paul, and cast of their clothes and threw duste
into the air: Act. 22.
the captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bad that he
should be scourged, and examyned, that they might know wherefore they cried
so on him.

When the hye captain had Paul in hold: mo then fortye Jews said unto the
hye priest. We have made a vow that we will taste nor eat nothing, until we
have slain Paul. Cause him therefore to be brought forth. For we are
ready or ever he come near, Act. 23.
to kill him. But the Captain being monyshed of this by Paul's systers
son, caused him with strong hand and warelye to be conveyed unto Felyx the
hye debitye.

Paul standinge before Felyx the Debity, the Jews accused him that he was a
pestilente fellow and a seditious, Ac. 24.25
and when he had oftentimes hard him and the Jews, and that the time was sore
spente, and that Festus should succeed him in Cesaria: Act. 27.28
he willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound, the which
perceyuinge that Festus did him wrong, appealed unto Caesar.

After this appeal, he suffered shipwreck, and at Rome was bound with chains,
and sufferd great anguyshe and tribulation.

Act. 14.
Paul and Barnabas exhorted them to continue in the faith, affirminge that we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.

2. Corin. 1.
The Apostle wrytinge of him self says, Brethren I would not have you
ignorant of our trouble, which happened unto us in Asia. Where with we were
grieved out of mesure, passinge strength, so greatly that it yrked us to live.

When we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, 2. Corin. 7.
but we were troubled on every side, outward was fightinge, inward was fear.

And the Apostle commendinge the Thessalonia^s, said. Ye became folowers of us,
1. These. 1.
and of our Lord, receauinge the word with much affliction with joy of the
holy ghost.

There was about a fytye years from the time of the coming of the holy
ghost unto the disciples, Apo. 1.5. Per totum.
and the time that Domitian exyled John the Apostle. And yet we read not, that
he had in all that time so many dyuine consolations, as he had in the
little time of his tribulation. As it is evident in the first of the
Apocalipse.

Of the multitude of evil men. Capi. Cxii.
WHen the floude was, there were saved only but.viii. persons. For all flesh
had corrupt his way upon earth. Gene. 6.


The children of Israel were mo, then the children of Isaac: Gene. 25.
and Abraham had mo children by Agar, then by Sara.

In the.v. cytyes of Sodom, were not found.x. just persons, Genesis 18.19.
so there was a multitude of evil men, and few good.

Among al Joseph's brethren there were but two, Gene. 37.
Ruben and Judas, that labourd to save him: but yet the evil preuailde.

Moses sent spies to consider and search the land of promise, Nume. 13.
but there were but two of them good, Caleph and Iosue.

Six hundred thousand fighting men were nombred, Nume. 1.
of the which two only, Caleph and Iosue did enter into the land of promise.

There were mo with Absolon going about to usurp his fathers kingdom, 2.
regu. 15
then with David that reigned well and justly.

The greater part of the children of Israel was in the kingdom of Samaria, 3.
reg. 12.
for there were ten tribes, and the worst sort of people: and the least part in
the kingdom of Jerusalem, for there were but two tribes.

3. regu. 20.
The number of the king of Siria^s fighting men, that fought against Israel, was
so great, that the king said. The dust of Samaria is not enough for all the
people that follow me, to take every man an handful.

There was so great a number of fighting me^ in Holofernes host: Iudi. 2.
that they covered the ground of the land like the grasshoppers.

All the inhabitours of Egipte, and the women, the which stood in a great
multitude, Iere. 44.
did sacrifice to strange Gods.

There abode no more with Judas Machabeus then 800. men, 1. Match. 9.
but in Bachides and Alchinus the traitors host were 10000. men, and two
thousand horsemen.

There was at Jerusalem, when our Lord suffered, a great multitude of people:
John. 19.
yet was there not a man found, that would manifestly wythstand our Lords
death so falslye and wickedly procured. But every man cried, deliver not
Jesus, but Barrabas.

Certain Jews the which Paul found at Rome at his first coming thither,
Act. 28.
said unto him. As concerning this sect of Christians, we know that every
where it is spoken against.

Of good men which lurked, and were as unknown among the evil. Cap. Cxiii.
Although it be written that all flesh had corrupt his way upon earth: Gene.
6.7.
yet our lord said unto Noe, the have I seen righteous before me in this
generation.

The just man Lot, did inhabyte among the Sodomites. Gene. 13.


Joseph did lead a chaste and a faithful life in Egypt. Gene. 39.


Our Lord appeared unto Moses in the land of Madian, Exodus 3.
when he kept Ietros his father in laws sheep in the desert.

Samuel even among the wicked children of Hely, 1. regu. 2.
was holy and innocent.

Helias judged all that were under Achab and Iezabell, to be Idolaters, him
self excepted: 3. regu. 19.
but our Lord said unto him, I shall leave me 7000. of which never man bowed
his knees unto Baall. Roma. 11.


Tobias was of the tribe of Neptalim, and under the kingdom of Samaria, Tob. 1.
in the which al were esteemed to be Idolaters, and with diverse vices infected.
And yet being in captivity, he forsook not the way of truth.

Whereas al in a manner worshipped proud Aman, Esther. 3.
only Mardocheus bowed not his kne unto him.

Holy Job was a gentile, and as it is said, he descended of Esau, and yet it
is certain, Job. 30.
that he was marvelous noble both in faith and manners. The which said of him
self, I was the brother of dragons, and the fellow of Estriches.

Jeremy was with the people whithe remained in Judea after the destruction of
Jerusalem, Ier. 43.
and he prayed for them, and declared the will of our LORD unto them. But
they said unto him. Thou lie, our LORD has not sent thee. But Baruche
provoke the against us, that he might bring us into the hands and
captiuitye of the Caldees.

Eze. 2.
Our Lord said unto Ezechiel: thou son of man, fear them not, for the
unfaithful, and prouokers are with the, and thou do dwell among Scorpyons.

Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, dwelt among the Caldees Idolaters, Dani.
3.6.14.
the which labourd to induce and bring them to Idolatry, and to draw them from
the worshipping of the very true God.

Dani. 13.
Susanna lived in Babylon most chastely, whereas the two old priests were
unchaste, and untrue judges.

It seemed that in Antiochus Epiphanis time, that the Jews were translated and
brought to the rites and customs of the gentiles. 2. Mac. 6.9.
But yet there was found Mathathias and his sons Eleazarus, and many more,
which were stable and strong in the law of God.

Our Lord commending the faith and devotion of the Centurion, Math. 8.
said, I have not found so great faith in Israel.

Nicodemus a ruler of the Jews, came to Jesus by night and co^fest plainly
Rabbi, John. 3.19.
we know that thou art a teacher come from God. And after that our Lord was
crucified, he came to bury him, and brought a C. pound of precious ointment.

Joseph of the city of Aramathia, Mar. 15.
a noble counselloure was also the dysciple of Jesus, but yet a secreat disciple
for fear of the Jews. But laying al fear a side, he went in boldlye unto
Pilate, and made a devout peticyon, askyng of an undevout tyraunte, the body
of Jesus.

Gamaliell an honorable doctor of the law, Act. 5.
was a Pharisey, and gave good and excellent counsel to the chief priests
for the Apostles.

There was a certain man in Cesaria called Cornelius, Act. 10.
a devout man, and one that feared God with all his household, which gave much
alms to the people, and prayed God always.

Of the mobility, and inconstancy of the people. Ca. Cxiiii.
MOses returning out of the la^d of Madian into Egypt, told all the words of
our Lord, for the which he had sent him: Then follows. And the people
believed. And when they hard that our Lord had sanctified the children of
Israel, they bowed their head, and worshypped. But afterward when they were
afflicted by Pharaos task masters, Exo. 4.5
they said to Moses and Aaron. Our Lord look upon you and judge, which has
made the savor of us stink in the eyes of Pharao, and in the eyes of his
servants: and have put a swearde in their hand to slay us.

When that the children of Israel, after mani plages of Egypt, came out of
Egypt enriched and armed, our lord going before them, and showing them the
way by a cloud and fire, Exo. 14.15.
they saw the Egiptians following after them, and were sore afraid.

And said unto Moses: because there were no graves in Egypt, haste thou
therefore brought us away for to dye in the wilderness? After that they were
comforted by Moses, when our Lord divided the sea, that they passed over dry
foted, and that Pharaos host was drowned, then the people feared our Lord,
and believed him, and his servant Moses, saying: we will sing unto the Lord.

And sone after coming to Marath, the people murmured because the waters were
bitter: and when they were made sweet by castinge in of a little wodde, Exo.
15.16.
they murmured again for lack of meat, and said unto Moses and Aaron, would
to God we had dyed in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and
our Lord at the even tide sent them quayles, and in the morning he sent
them Manna.

After this when he should give the^ the law: Exo. 19.
they said. All that our Lord has said, we will do.

And when Moses had showed them ye words and precepts, the which he had
received of our Lord, Exo. 24.
they said. All the words which our Lord has said, will we do.

But when Moses staid long in the mount with our Lord about the description of
the tabernacle, Exo. 32.
the people gathered them selves together unto Aaron, and said. Make us Gods to
go before us.

After that the Tabernacle was reared up, Nume. 11.
and that the chief men, after that the fighting men and Levites were
nombred, had made their oblations, and that all things were ordained how they
should go on their journey: the people a non after began to murmur, Nume. 21.
as greaued by much labor.

After that the people had hard the spies relation, they murmured and wept.
Nume. 14.
And said one to another: Let us make a captain, and retourn unto Egypt again.

They hearing, that their murmuring dyspleased our LORD ascended up into
the Mountain, and against Moses will and pleasure did fight and were ouercomde
by their enemies. Nume. 14.


Again in the sedition of Chore, there rose many against Moses and Aaron,
Nume. 16.
and when they were most terriblye punished, the multitude of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, ye have killed the people of
our Lord.

And when our Lord had by the miracle of Aarons rod caused them to cease
from their grudginge, Nume. 17.
they said. Behold we are wasted away and consumed, we all come to naught,
who so ever comes nigh the dwelling of our Lord, dies.

Forthermore they proceeded and came to the waters of strife, Nume. 20.
where they chode in such manner with Moses and Aaron, that they likewise
mystrusted the divine power. And therefore our Lord punished them.

After that the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab,
Nume. 25.
which called the people unto the sacryfice of their gods, Israel coupled
him self unto Baall Peor. And our Lord commanded the heads of the people to
be hanged up against the son.

When Gedeon had delyuerd the children of Israel from the hand of Madian,
and had slain zebee and Salmana, the men of Israel said unto him, Iudi. 8.
raygne thou over us, both thou thy son, and thy sons son. But after that
he was dead having.70. sons, they went not about to take any of them to be
their Lord and ruler.

Samuel the prophet delivered the people of Israel from the hand of the
Philistines, 1. reg. 7.8.
and recovered the cities which they had taken from Israel. Afterward they
gathered the^ selves together, and demanded a king, both against our Lords
will and Samuels.

Although that David ruled and governed ye people well, 2. regu. 15.
and had won many victories, yet they sone conspired against him. And ye
people departing from him, increased with Absolon.

It is to be noted, that when David should return unto Jerusalem, the people
would have brought him thither with great honor. 2. re. 19.20
But inasmuch as the men of Judah had co^moned and spoken with them of the ten
tribes, all Israel went from David, and followed Siba the son of Bochry.

In king Salomons time, the children of Israel had abundance of all
temporal things, 3. reg. 10.12
and floryshed in great honor, and yet by the occasion of a rughe word, all
they for the most part, did sone leave and depart from his son Roboam.

When the children of Israel heard of the terrible power of Holofernes, they
occupied all the tops of the mountains, Judith. 4.7.
and made fast the towns with walls, and prepared corn for them against the
battle. Afterward when they felt them selves streyted of the host, they came
al to Osias and said. God be judge betwixt us and thee, for thou haste dealt
evil with us, because thou speak not peaceablye with the king of Assirians.

When Jeremy had ended all the words that our Lord had commanded him to
speak unto the people: then the preastes and all the people took hold upon
him, I^re. 26.
and said. Thou shall dye. And afterward, the Rulers and people said unto
ye preastes. This man may not be condemned unto death.

All the people from the least unto the most, came to Jeremy the prophet and
said, we will do all that our Lord commands us, Iere. 4^.43
whether it be good or evil. But they ten days after that Jeremy had
declared the will and pleasure of our Lord unto them, said unto him. Thou
lie our Lord has not sent thee: But Baruch the son of Neria provoke
against us. Nor they would not hear the voice of our Lord.

The multitude did sone believe the two preastes: Dani. 13.
and condemned Susanna to death. And a non after there follows. The people
returned with have, and came upon the two preastes, and dealte with them, even
as they would have done with their neighbor.

Simon knew that Triphon dissembled in his words, when he asked Ionathas two
sons, and a.C. talentes of silver, yet he commanded that it should be
delivered: 1. Match. 13.
least he should be the greater enemy against the people of Israel: and say:
because he sent not the money and the children, therefore is Ionathas dead.

On a certain day when that our Lord was in the city of Nazareth, the Jews
gently desired him, to do such miracles there, Luc. 4.
as he had done at Capernaum: But after he had a little rebuked and checked
them, they were filled with wrath, and thrust him out of the city, and would
have cast him down hedlyng from the edge of ye hill.

When our lord had satisfied.5000. men with.v. loves and two fishes they would
have caught him to make him king. John. 6.
But sone after the unfaithful began to dispute and ask questions: saying.
What sign show thou, that we may believe thee.

When the Jews saw that Lazarus was revived, and that our Lord had done many
other miracles: they came and met him with great honor: John. 12.
And yet at even tide, when he had well beheld them, he found not one that
invited, or that calde him whom to his house.

The people.v. days before Ester received Jesus with great mirth and and
honor, John. 18.19
and all that weke the people were much desirous to hear his words, and in
the mourning they came to him into the temple to hear him. But on the.vi.
day^ following, all they did cry, crucifye him.

After that the spirit sat upon each of the disciples, Act. 2.
the mutitude came together, and were astonyed. Other mocked, saying, these men
are full of new wine. But Peter stood slyffe in this matter and excusing the
dyscyples, spoke many things unto them, alleging the words of Iohel the
prophet. When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, askinge what
they should do. And the same day there were Baptized about.3000. souls.

Upon a certain Sabothe day, the whole city came almost together to hear the
word of God, Act. 13.
the which Paul and Barnabas preached. The Jews spoke against it blaspheming
At length Paul and Barnabas turned them selves to preach unto the gentiles.
When the gentiles heard this, they were glad. A while after the Jews moved the
devout women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against
Paul and Barnabas and expelled them out of their coasts. But they shoke of
the dust of their fete against them, and came to Iconium.

When Paul and Barnabas were at Listris a city of Lycaonia, and that Paul
had cured there a certain creapell: Act. 14.
the people said that they were Gods, and would have done sacrifice unto them.
But they declaring yt they were but mortal me^, pacified ye people yt they did
them no sacrifice. Thither came certain Jews, which when they had persuaded ye
people, stoned Paul, and drue him out of the city, supposing he had been dead.

Certain men which had a maid ye prophesied, the which Paul delivered of ye
devil, did so move and stir ye magestrates and rulers of the city, that the
people ran so against Paul and Silas his fellow, Act. 16.
yt they re^t their clothes, and, bet them with rods, cast them into prison,
and made their fete fast in the stocks. And the next after they praid them to
depart.

Paul being at Ephesus, and doing there many miracles, a certain manne name
Demetrius, a Silver smith, which made silver shrynes for Diana, called together
workmen of like occupa^ion, and moved so great trouble in the city, Act. 19.
that it was all in a rore and confusyon, and they rushed into the commen hal
with one assent, and the most part knew not wherefore they were come together.
Then were Paul and his fellows in great danger of body, but the town clarke
speaking fair, and discreatlye to the people, ceased them, and let the
congregation depart every man to his own house.

On a certain day there was in Jerusalem such a co^course of people against
Paul, that they bet him, and drew him so out of the temple, that scarcely the
hie captain, the which came thither with his Souldioures could come by him.
Afterward when he had declared what things had chanced unto him, al they of
Damasco lift up their voices, and said. Away with him, Act. 21.22.23.
for it is no reason that he should live. The next day following, Paul cried
out in the counsel, men and brethren, I am a Pharisey, the son of a Pharisey,
then there arose a debate between the Phariseis and the Saduces, and the
multitude was divided. And certain Phariseis rose up and fought, saying. We
find no evil in this man. Though a spryte or an angel has appeared and
spoken to him let us not strive against God.

When that Paul, after the shypwracke that happened in the winter, was
warminge him self at the fire: there came a viper out of the heat, and caughte
him by the hand, when the strangers saw that, they said among them selves:
Act. 28.
No doubt this man is a murderer: whom though he have escaped the sea, yet
vengaunce suffers not to live. Paul shoke of the viper into the fire, and
felt no harm. But when they saw no harm come to him, they changed their
mynds, and said that he was a God.

Of good operations and works. Capitu. Cxv.
OUr Lord put man in the garden of pleasure, to dress and keep it. Genesis 2.3.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. And after that, our Lord
put him out of the garden of pleasure, to labor ye ground, of the which he was
taken and made. And so note thou, that our LORD would manne to labor both
in the state of innocencye, and also after his fall.

David when other kings were wont to go forth to battle, 1. regu. 11.
tarryed at home, and in that idleness, committed both aduoutry and treason.

Solomon did build our lords house and his own. 3. regu. 6.7
But yet note: that he builded our Lords house first. And although the work
was much greater, yet he accomplyshed all in a less time.

The workmen wrought industriously, 2. Para. 24.
and set up the house of our Lord in as good estate and condytyon as it
was before, and strengthened it.

Hezechias the King of Judah, wrought it that was good, 2. Para. 31.
right, and true before our Lord, and sought his God, and that did he withal
his heart, and prospered.

In the second year that the children of Judah were returned from Babylon, 1.
Esd. 3.
they began to lay the foundation of ye temple, Iosue the son of Iosedech,
and his brethren over looked the work men that labored.

1. Esd. 6.
King Darius commanded that our Lords house should be builded in Jerusalem,
and that the expenses should be given out of the kings cofers, for hindering of
the work.

1. Esd. 4.
Note that the works, the which the children of transmigration made as
concerning the foundation of the temple, and the walls of the city, had many
hinderers.

Iona. 3.
God beheld the works of the Ninevites, and had mercy on them.

Mat. 20.
Idle workmen if they be called to wages, are reproved.

Our Lord commends the servant which received five talentes, and using them,
Mat. 25.
gaind other five. And him likewise that received two, and gained other two.
But he reproved him which received one talent, and increased it not, but kept
and reserved it vnprofitablye.

The two disciples which constrained our Lord to abide with the^, Luc. 24.
knew him not by his words as long as they were with him. But by his work of
hospitality and breaking of bread they knew him.

Our Lord approved the work of Mary Magdalen when she anointed him even as he
sat at meat, Mar. 14.
notwithding that his disciples grudged with in them selves there at.

Christ does declare, that children should ensue and follow the laudable
works of their fathers, John. 8.
saying. If ye be the children of Abraham, do the deeds of Abraham.

Paul the Apostle does compare good works to sede, 2. Cor. 9.
of the which a man sows little enough, and yet reapeth plenteously, for he
which sows little, shall reap little.

Paul reprehended the Thessalonians for their idleness very sharplye, 2.
These 3.
although in a another place he commends them. And says, that if any
would not work, the same should not eat.

Tabitha was Christ's dysciple: the same was full of good works and and alms
deeds, Act. 9.
which she did. And therefore when she was dead, many were moved to pray Peter
for her, and he revived her again.

In all people, he that fears our Lord, Act. 10.
and works righteousness, is accepted with him.

Paul being at Corinthe, abode with Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.
because he was of the same craft, and wrought. Their craft was to make tents.

Of man's true intention in doing of his works. Cap. Cxvi.
CAin killed his brother Abel. David Goliath. Ioab Abner, and Amasia, Herod
Antipas, Ihon the Baptist. Agrippa James. Peter with a word slew Ananias and
Saphira, but consider their diverse intentions and causes.

Abraham when our Lord promised him a child, laughed, and Sara laughed within
her self. Genesis 17.18.
But Abraham's laughing was commended, and Saras reprehended,

Pharao said, I have sinned. Ex. 9. David said, I have trespassed.ii. Re. xii.
Manasses said the same.2. Par. 33. Judas said also that he had sinned. Math.
27. But the affections and intentions of their hearts were very diverse.

Moses in a manner spoke like words at Raphidi, Exo. 17.
when the people asked water to drink. And at the waters of strife. But at the
first time he was in no doubt, as he was in the second. As it appears by the
pain that followed. Nume. 20.


The children of Ruben and Gad, and half the trybe of Manasses, Iosu. 22.
builded an aultare, but in an another intent, then the children of Israel
believed.

Our Lord commended the good will 2. regu. 7.
of David intending to build him a temple: although he would have no temple
of his buildinge.

David sent not for Urias, which was in the host, to exalte him, 2. regu. 11.
but to cloak his sin, the which he had committed with Urias wife.

Judith decketh her self very curyously, but all that deckinge came not of
voluptuousness, Iudi. 10.
but of virtue, to deliver the people of God out of the hands, of their most
enemy.

That Mardocheus would not worship Aman, Esth. 3.
nor bow bys knee unto him, he did it not upon any disobedyence or contempt,
but that he would not, as he says, give the honor due unto God, to any
mortal creature.

Herod said unto the wisemen, that when they had found the child, Math. 2.
they should send him word, that he might worship him also. But he intended
one thing, and pretended an other.

Our Lord charged the two blind men to whom he restored their sight that no
man should know of it: mat. 9.
Yet there follows, that they spread abroad his name in all ye land, wtthout
the reproach of any transgression.

Our Lord does add notablye the end and intention, which every man ought to
have doing well, or suffryng evil. Blessed are ye, Mat. 5.10.19.
when me^ revile you etc. For me, or for my names sake. And who soever shall
give a cup of cold water. etc. Or who so leaves his house. etc.

Our Lord commanded that men should give alms and fast, Mat. 6.
but not for the love and favor of men, least perchance such good works,
should be corrupted and depraved through an euel intention.

Some there were, that ensued and followed our Lord, John. 6.
to take him in his words: some other to eat of his bread. And other, that he
or his friend might be healed of their diseases, and some, to be eternally saved.

Herod was desirous of a long season to se Jesus, Luc. 23.
not of any deuotyon, but upon hope to se some miracle done by him. And
therefore it profited him not to se Jesus.

Of Slothfulness and negligence. Capitu. Cxvii.
Jacob hearing that there was vitayles and corn to be sold in Egypt, Genesis 42.
said unto his sons, Why neglect you this matter? Get you down, and by us
that, that is needful.

The children of Israel in the desert had Angels bread, Nume. 11.
and yet being blinded, they desired the metes of Egypt.

Slothfulness and tediousnes is unto manne the cause of impacience, Nume. 11.
and carnal desire: and the occasion of many lies as it is euidente in the
book of numbers. We remember the fish which we did eat in Egipte for naught.

The children of Israel departed from mount hor, Nume. 21.
and began to fainte by the way, and war weary of their loboure and journey.
And they spoke against God and Moses, saying. Our soul lotheth this light
bread, wherefore our Lord sent fyerye serpents among the people.

Abner kept Saul his Lord very neglygentlye: 2. regu. 26.
for when David came down into his host, he found noman that watched.

Isboseth Saul's son being a sleep was slain. 2. regu. 4.


When other kings were wont to go a warfare, 2. regu. 11.
David tarried at whom, where yt he, by this occasion, committed aduoutry and
most hainusmurther.

It pleased Ioas the king of Judah, to repair our Lords house, 2. Para. 24.
and he commanded the Levites, to be diligente about the same. But yet they
did their part but negligentely: and therefore the king reprehended Ioiada
the hye preaste.

Whylste the men were a sleep, the envious man came and sowde tares among the
corn. Mat. 13.


The slothful and idle are reproved, and they that do work rewarded. Mat. 20.


A great tempest arose in the sea, Jonas ga^e him under the hatches, fell a
sleep. Jonas. 1.
and So the master of the ship came, and said unto him. Why slombrest thou?
Up, and call upon thy god.

Our lord did reprehend very sharply Mat. 25.
the slouthful servant which neglected to multiplye and increase the talent
committed and delivered unto him.

Mat. 25.
The sleping virgins, whose lamps were not prepared, were afterward excluded
from the marriage.

Mar. 14.
The disciples seemed to be at ye hour even very heavy and slouthful, when that
they, after our Lord had prayed them to watch, did sleep continually.

Of the good towardness of children. Capitu. Cxviii.
IT is not red, that Isaac, when his father at Gods commandment would have
offered him up in a sacrifice, Gene. 12.
did either murmur there at, or run his ways.

Joseph accused his brethren to his father of an exceading great crime, Gene.
27.
the which accusement in him, was a sign that he detested sin. And when his
father said unto him, come, for I will send thee to thy brethren, he most
obediently answered, here am I.

Samuel being yet a child, was a minister in the sight of God, 1. regu. 2.3
where the ark of God was.

When David should be anointed king, 1. regu. 16.
he was a little one in the field and kept sheape, obeyinge his father humbly
and abiectly.

Ioas the son of Ioram king of Judah, 2. Para. 24.
was but a child of 7^ year old when he began to reign, he did that which was
right and good before our Lord, all the days of Iehoiada the priest.

Josias was viii. year old when he began to reign. He did that which was
right, 4. regu. 22.
good, and pleasant in the sight of our Lord, and yet he had a very evil
father, and graundfather.

Though Tobias were younger then all other in the tribe of Nephtaly, yet did not
he behave him self childishly in his works. Tob. 1.4.
And afterward when he had begotten a son, he taught him from his
childhode to fear God, and to abstain from all sin.

Dani. 1.
Daniell and his three companions observing the law of God, without Prophet,
priest, or master, lived soberly, justly, and deuoutlye among the gentyles
children.

The seven brethren, young men, had a wonderful wisdom in their aunswers, 2.
Match. 7.
and a marvelous patience in their tribulations.

John the Baptist grew and waxed strong in spirit, Luc. 1.
and was in wyldernes, till the day came when he should show him self unto
the Israelytes.

Our savior a child of.xii. years of age, Luc. 2.
was found in the temple in the mids of the doctors, hearing them, and
posing them. And after that, he went down with Mary and Joseph, and was
subject and obedient unto the.

Of the society and fellowship of good men. Ca. 119.
Genesis 18.
THis is greatly to be considered, that if there had been found ten just men,
in the v. sinful Cities, that for their sakes, our Lord would have spared all
the reast.

Jacob said unto Laban, it was but tittle that thou had before I came to
thee, Genesis 30.
and now thou art increased and made rich, and our Lord has blessed thee for
my sake.

Our lord blessed the house of Egypt for Iosephes sake, Genesis 41
and increased it.

Jacob was well accompanied that said, Gene. 35.
let us make and rear up an altar unto our Lord, for he has heard me in the
day of mitribulation: and was with me in the way which I went.

Israel served our Lord all the days of Joshua, Iosu. 24.
and the elders that over lived Iosna, the which knew all the works of our
Lord that he had done for Israel.

The children of Dan took Lachis, and flue the men, Iudi. 18.
which dwelt careless, without castinge of pearyls, and had no society nor
business with other men.

Saul sent sergeauntes and messengers to take David that was with Samuel and
other prophets, 1. regu. 19.
yt which began to prophesy, and Saul came, and prophesied with them.

For the reverence and honor of Iosaphat king of Judah which worshypped God, 4.
regu. 3.
Elizeus the prophet obtained water for the host, in the which were two evil
kings.

Tobias would have such gestes to dine with him, Tob. 2.4.5
as feared God, and he saught his son the same. Eat not with the sinful. And
he most diligently would know with whom his son should go wythall.

Yo^g Tobias wife said: I have not kept company with those that pass their
time in sport: Tobi. 3.
Neither have I made my self partaker with the^ that walk in light behauour.

When they heard the cruel commandment of king Nabuchodonozor, that all the
wise men at Babylon should be put to death: Dani. 2.
they calde to their fellows, to seek mercy at gods hand. Then was there a
vision showed unto Daniel by night. And so the king by the occasyon of his
servant Daniel, spared the wise men of Babylon.

After the death of Judas Machabeus, wicked men came up, 1. match. 6.
and there was a great dearth in the land, and Bachides made ye ungracious,
lords in the land. And there came great tribulation in Israel, the which
perauenture should not have chanced, if they had had Judas to their lord and
master.

When the first of those vii. brethren was fried in the cauldron, 2. Match. 7.
the other with their mother exhorted one another to die strongly and manfully.

Judas Marchabeus went to take the city of Chytopolis. 2. Match. 12.
But for ye Jews sake which were within it, the which they entreated lovingly,
he did them no evil, but gave them thanckes, exhorting them to be frendlye unto
his kindred.

As long as Peter remained with the Apostles, Math. 26.
he was steadfast and sure, but when he was in the hye pryestes court warming
him self by the fire with his servants, he began to deny our Lord.

John. 9.
Anon after that our Lord had given him his sight that was blind from his
birth, the Phariseys cast him out of the sinagoge. But the beninge Lord Jesus
received him among his faithful.

When all the disciples were with one accord together, Act. 2.
the holy ghost came upon them, and inestimably did teach them and strengthen
them.

It is thus written of the faithful, the which were in the primitive church.
All that believed kept them selves together, Act. 2.
and had al things commen. Then follows. They did eat their meat together,
with gladness and singleness of heart, praising our lord, and hand favor
with all the people.

Saul after his conuersyon came to Jerusalem, and assaide to couple him self
to the disciples, but they were al afraid, and fled from him, and believed not
that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took him, Act. 9.
and brought him to the Apostles.

The men which were with Paul in the ship, when the great tempest raged, Act.
27.
were all saved, because Paul was in their company. For the aungel of our Lord
said unto him. Lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee.

Of the society and fellowshyp of evil men. Capi. Cxx.
ABraham departed well from the Caldees, Genesis 11.15.
where men were infected with Idolatrye, so that our Lord remembers that, as
a benefit saying. I am the Lord that brought the out of Hur of the Caldees.

A man should forsake and leave his country not only in body, but also in
thought and affection. Gene. 12.
Where upon our lord said unto Abraham, which was gone out of his country in
body. Get thee out of thy country. etc. And note the promises which were made
there.

We read not yt our lord appeared unto Abraham as long as he was in company
with evil men in Hur of the Caldees, Genesis 13.15.17.18.
it is not red yt the lord apeared to him although he was taken for a good man.
But after he departed thence, we read that he was oftentimes visyted with
divine apparitions.

Genesis 13.19.
Lot by the occasyon of the wicked Sodomites, with whom he inhabyted and dwelt,
suffered great iniuryes and wrongs.

It appears by Lot, how hard it is to leave the accustomed company of the
euel: Gene. 19.
the which could eue^ scarcely be drawn away by the angel from the Sodomites.
Genesis 21.


Ismaels play and pastime with Isaac, dyspleased Sara.

Genesis 28.
Our Lord many diverse manner of ways did comfort Jacob, auoidyng the company
of his wicked brother.

Jacob would not go on with his ungracious and evil brother, Gene. 33.
although he had pacified him with gifts: Not withstanding his brother
instantlye desired him, and had showed him signs and tokens of dilection and
love.

Moses said to the congregation of Israel: Nume. 26.
depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theyrs, least
ye pearyshe in all their sins.

Our Lord said to Moses, command the children of Israel that they. when they
enter into the land of Canaan, Nume. 33.
destroy all the inhabitors of the land: but if ye will not destroy them, they ye
remain, shall be as it were pricks in your eyes, and Darts in your sides.

By the occasyon of Acham which took with him of the excommunicate things of
Jericho, Iosu. 7.
the people were overthrown in battle.

Through certain children of Beliall, the which had committed a detestable
deed against ye Levites wife: Iudi. 19.20
all the children of Benjamin, few excepted, were slain.

The children of Israel would not destroy the inhabyters of the land, Iudi. 1.2
as the Lord commanded them, and therefore their chance was unfortunate and
evil.

The familiaritye and amitye that Amnon David's son had with Ionadab, 3.
regu. 13.
gave him an occasion and a way to enforce Thamar his sister.

Many simple persons drue unto Absolon rebellyng against his father: 2. regu.
15
the which would never have conspired against David, if they had continued with
good and peaceable men at Jerusalem.

For certain which were yet alive of the house and family of Saul, 2. regu. 21.
there fell a great hunger in the land, until that they, at the peticion of the
Gabanites, were hanged.

Iosaphat the king of Judah was almost slain going to warfare with Achab, 2.
Para. 19.
and was reproved by ye lords prophet, saying. Thou helpest the ungodly, and
love them that hate the lord, and therefore thou deseruest the ire and anger
of the lord.

Ochozias king of Judah, walked in Achabs ways, 4. reg. 8.
and did evil before ye lord. The cause follows, for he was Achabs son in
law.

Elizeus the prophet said unto Iosaphat king of Israel, 2. Pat. 20.
because thou have joined thy self with Ochozia, ye lord has broken thy
works, and destroid thy shyps.

The man of God came to Amasia king of Judah, 2. para. 25
and said. O king let not the army of Israel come with thee, for the lord is
not with Israel. But if thou think that the battayl does consyst in the
strength of the host, God shall make thee fall before thy enemy.

When the children of Israel aft^r their coming again from Babylon, 1. Esd.
3.4.
were a buildinge the Temple, their adversaries would have builded with them:
but they using good counsel, refused them.

When all the other went to the golden calves, Tob. 1.
which Jeroboam ^ad made, Tobias alone fled al their companies, and went to
Jerusalem to worship the lord God of Israel.

Blessed Job said, I am the brother of Dragons, Job. 30.
and the companyon of Estriches.

esa. 6.
When Esaias had said, I am a man of unclean lyppes, he shows the cause why.
For I dwell among people that has unclean lyppes also.

It was said unto Ezechiel, unfaithful, and subuerters are with thee, eze. 2.
and thou do dwell among Scorpyons.

The wicked hurt one another, for the two old men took audacitye and boldness
of this to accuse Susanna: Dani. 13.
because they both agreed to one myschefe.

So long as Judas Machabeus fought for his people, 1. match. 8.9
trusting to the aid and healpe of God, al thing prospered with him, but after
yt he made amitye and societye with the most puissaunt Romans, sone after
he was ouercumd, and slain in battle. The like thing chanced to Ionathas
Judas brother. 1. match. 12.


Peter being with the disciples at the supper of our Lord, was very bold
and sure, mat. 26.
but when he came to the hie priests court, he at the voice of a wenche
denied our Lord.

The blind manne that sat by the way side begginge, Luc. 18.
cried unto our Lord Jesus. And they that went before, rebuked him, that he
should hold his peace.

He that was borne blind, whom our Lord restored unto his syghte again,
Ihon. 9.
was not counted among the faithful of christ, until the Pharysees, had
thrust him out of the synagoge.

At times, many evil and wicked persons draw to one evil society and
fellowship, Nume. 22.
to hurt those that be good. So came Balaac and Balaam together to curse the
people of Israel.

Adonizedech king of Jerusalem, and other four kings came together against
the Gabaonites, Iosu. 10.
because they had made peace with Iosue.

Also Iabin the king of Asor and other.30. kings came against Iosue, and the
children of Israel. Iosu. 11.
And the five princes of the Philistines, of Canane, of Sydon, and Euei. Item
Madian and Amal^ch, and other nations of the East.

And thus is that saying of Esaias understood. Siria rested upon Ephraim, that
is the ten tribes, Esa. 7.
and the king of Siria agreed in one, utterly to extirpate and destroy the
king of Judah.

Luc. 23
Again at the time of our Lords passion. Herod and Pilate were made friends.

Panle does commend the Philipians saying. In the mids of a crooked and a
perverse natyon, Philip. 2.
among whom ye shine as lyghtes in the world.

Act. 2.
Peter the Apostle said unto certain Jews which hard the word of God: Save
your selves from this untoward generation.

Paulus Sergius the ruler desired to hear the word of God: But he had with
him one Elimas the sorcerer, Act. 13.
a pseude prophet, a Jew; the which withstode Paul and Barnabas, sekinge to
turn the ruler away from the faith.

The men of Listria were of such simplicity, that they esteemed Paul and
Barnabas to be gods, and come down to the earth in the likeness of men. And
when Paul had even skarsely apaysed them, and had begone to show the^ the
way of truth: thither came certain Jews, the which persuaded the people so,
that they stoned Paul, and left him for dead.

When that our Lords word did stronglye increase and grow in Ephesus, and ye
god did many miracles there by Paul: Act. 19.
Demetrius which made silver shrynes for Diana, called together workmen of
like occupation, and moved a great sedytion against Paul.

Of good prosperity. Capitu. Cxxi.
THe abundance of temporal things, is oftentimes the occasion of much
sin, as in that regyon and country the which was watered, and like the
garden of our Lord, Genesis 13.
and like the land of Egypt as thou co^mest unto zoar, the which the wicked
Sodomites did inhabit.

When Gedeon was little and threshed wheat, Iudi. 6.8.
he was good, and the Angel of our Lord did visit him. But after he had
obtained the victory against the Madianites, he mysbehaued him self.

Saul or ever he was made king, was good, 1. regu. 15.
but after he took upon him to rule, he waxed proud, and brake our Lords
commandment.

After that David had made great war and had gotten many victoies of his
ennemies, 2. regu. 11.
he remayninge in quietness at Jerusalem, committed aduouterye, and afterward
ensued murder.

David by the occasion of the multitude of his subjects, 2. regu. 24.
waxed proud: and caused his people to be numbered: But yet note, how grievously
he was punished.

In Salomons time silver was of no valor: 3. reg. 10.11
For in Jerusalem silver was as plenteous as stones. But note, how maruelus and
how terrible a thing it was that his abundaunce of things hurt him more,
then his wisdom auayled him,

Or ever Jeroboam had dominion and rule over the.x. tribes, 3 regu. 12.
we read not that he was evil, but that he was a good young man and a deligent:
but sone after he had obtained the kingdom, he made golden calves, and least
he should be turned out of his domynion and rule, he auerted and turned
the people from GOD.

Amasias the king of Judah made war against Edome. 4. reg. 14
Where upon his heart became proud, and intended to fight against Ioas the king
of Isell, but he prosperd not.

When Roboams kingedome was fortified, 2. Para. 11.
and comforted, he forsook the law of our Lord, and all Israel with him.

When Osias the king of Judah became mighty, 2. Para. 20.
his heart arose to his destruction for he went into the temple to burn
incense upon the altar of incense.

Manasses king of Jerusalem was exceadynge evil. 2. Para. 33
But afterward being bound in Babylon, and in tribulation, he prayde unto
our Lord, and did exceadinge great penance before our Lord.

They did eat and were filled, and became fat, 2. Esd. 9
and lived in wealth through thy great goodness. And provoked thee to anger.

Wordly prosperity does sometimes multiplye and much increase and bring
carnal friends together, Tobi. 2.11.
the which aduersitye does avoid and fly, for Tobias kinsmen and friends,
after he had recovered his sight, and was enriched, came unto him: the which
thing is not read that they did as long as he was blind, and that his wife
went to the weauinge work.

After that Nabuchodonozor had ouercomde Arphaxat the king of Medes, his
kingdom was exalted, Judith. 1.
and his heart was lift up.

Although Aman was next unto ye mighty and puissaunt king Ahaswerus, Esth. 3.5.
and had great richesse, children, and friends, yet he was troubled and vexed
that Mardocheus would not bow his kne unto him, as though he had had nothing.

Note the shortness of this prosperity. As long as the plage of the lord was
over Job, although certain friends came unto him, yet they were onerous and
heavy comfortors, nor it is not red that they gave him any thing. But after
the lord had given Job twice as much as he had before, then came there unto
him al his brethren, and all that had been of his acquaintance before, Job. 42.
and did comfort him: and every one gave him a sheep and an earing of gold.

The Image, which Nabuchodonozor saw, Dani. 2.
was smitten of a stone, hewn out of a mountain, and was broken to poulder,
does sufficientlye declare worldly prosperity to be nothing.

The Children of Zambry made a great marriage. 1. macha. 9.
And ye Jews with Ionathas slew many of them. Thus the marriage was turned
to mourning, and the noise of their melodye into lamentation.

King Ptolomy of Egypt, after that Alexander the king of Siria was ouercumd,
1. Match. 11.
and driven into Araby, was exalted, and his honor increased: Gadiel the
Arabian smote of Alexanders head, and sent it to Ptolomy, but the third day
after, died king Ptolomy him self.

The young manne that inquyred of Christ, mat^. 19.
how he might have eternal life, had many and great possessions, and
therefore when our Lord gave him the counsel of perfection, he went his ways
sorry.

Peter denied our Lord in the high priests palace. math. 26.


The Jews received our Lord into Jerusalem solempnlye: math. 21.
but after he had well beheld them, toward even, he went to Bethany. For he
found not one that would receive him into his house, and lodge him.

The example that our Lord does use, Luc. 12.
and put by the rich man, whose ground brought forth ple^tiful fruits, does
greatly serve us to despise the abundance of temporal things. For when he
most diligently thought to break down and destroy his barnes, and build
greater. God said unto him Thou fool, this night will the devils fetch away thy
soul from thee. Then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?

The biers of the farm, and Oxen, and he that married a wife were calde to our
Lords supper, Luc. 14.
and they, as being busy about other things, excused them selves but the
poor, and the feeble were brought in.

Our Lord beholdinge the city of Jerusalem, Luc. 19.
being in temporal peace, and ignoraunte of the miseryes that were to come:
wept on it, saying. If thou had known, thou would weep.

When the people gave a shout, He rode having on his royal apparel, sitting
in his seat, and making an oration unto them, Act. 12.
they said. It is the voice of a God, and not of a man. And immediately the
angel of our lord smote him, because he gave not GOD the honor, and he was
eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost.

Of worldly curiosity. Capi. Cxxii.
THe occasyon of the first transgression seems to have had his beginnynge of
this, Genesis 3.
that Eve did lysten curiously unto the serpent, and did curiously behold the
tree forbode.

Dina the daughter of Lia, went out to se women of the land. Genesis 34.
There follows, that she was seen, rauyshed, and forced.

Our lord commanded Moses to say unto the people: Exo. 19.
beware ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it. Who so ever
touches ye mount, shall surely dye.

And after a few words. Charge the people, that they prease not up to see our
lord, and so many of them pearyshe.

Our lord said unto Moses, that Aaron and his sons only should enter into the
holy tabernacle. Nume. 4.
And that other by no curiosity should see what things were in the sanctuary,
until they were folden up, least they dye.

Ozias the king of Judah, went into the temple of our Lord, 2. Para. 16.
took the Censar, and would have burnte insence upon the altar of insence.
The which thing pertaind not to his office, but to the priests, and by and by
the leprosy sprange in his forehead.

When the Jews saw that our Lord did manifest and profitable miracles, Luc.
11.
they would not so, but sought for a sign from heaven.

When Herod the Tetrarch saw Jesus, Luc. 23.
he was exceading glad, not of any devotion, but of a curiosity, for he trusted
to se some miracle don by him so that the sight of our LORD did little profit
him, but hurt him rather.

Act. 1.
Our Lord refraind the curiosity of his Disciples, which would have known the
time of his second aduent and coming, saying. It is not for you to know the
times, or the seaso^s, which the father has put in his own power.

Act. 8.
It seems to have been of a curiosity, that Simon Magus would have been
baptized, in as much as he saw the signs and miracles which Phillip did.

Act. 17.
The Atheniens, and strangers called Paul for no another thing, but to tell, to
see, or to hear some new thing.

When Paul preached in the city of Ephesus, Act. 19.
many of them which used curious crafts, brought their books, and burned them
before all men.

The Apostle Paul does reprehend and reprove certain Thessalonians which
walcked unquietly, 2. These. 3.
and vnordinatly, working not at all, but being busy bodies.

The Apostle monisheth to avoid young widows, and he does often reprove those
which vage abroad, 1. Timo. 5.
are idle, and curious, and warns us to exchue them, that learn to go from
house to house, that wander about, and that show and sell them selves,
speaking things which are not comely, and when they have lived luxuryously,
they will marry.

Of the great faith of women. Capi. Cxxiii.
THe Apostle commends ye faith of Raab, Hebr. 11.
which pearished not with them that were disobedient, Iosu. 2.
when she had received the spies to lodging peaceably.

Ruth remained with her mother in law Noemy, Ruth. 1.2.
saying. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God, my God. And Booz
afterward said unto her. Our Lord quite thy work, and a full reward be
given the of our Lord, unto whom thou art come, and under whose wings thou
art come to abide.

3. regu. 17.
A widow woman of Sarepta, believed Elias the prophets words, although he
commanded her to do a thing very hard to be done.

2. Match. 7.
That wonderful and marvelous mother the which saw the vii. brethren, her
sons tormented in one day, and did strongly animate them to die for the law
of God, did very well confess the creation of the world, and the resurrection
of the dead.

As touching the misterye of our Lords incarnation, Luc. 1.
women were more prompt and ready to believe it then men. For Zachry was
reproved by the aungel of incredulity: because thou beleuest not my words.
etc. But we read that Elizabeth was not reprehensible, but commendable, the
which even as soon as Mary was com cried out, blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

In like manner the blessed virgyn is to be commended, Luc. 1.
the which gave creadit unto the angel, saying unto her, that she should
conceive of the holy ghost.

And Anna the widow and prophetess spoke unto all men, Luc. 1.
that looked for the redemption of Israel, of a child that was borne.

Our Lord said unto Mary Magdalen. Thy faith has saved thee, Luc. 7.
go in peace.

And the woman that had an issue of blood, Luc. 8.
had so great faith unto our Lord, that it suffised her only to touch the
hem of his raiment. And therefore she deserved to hear a sweet word of our
Lord. Daughter, be of good cheer and comfort, thy faith has saved thee.

The woman of Canane another for long expectatyon, mat. 15.
nor yet for sharp answer, left of to cry unto our LORD, and therefore at
length she heard. O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee, even as thou
wylt.

The woman of Samaria did fully confess, saying, John. 4.
Messiah is come, which is called Christ And afterward many of the Samaritans
believed in our Lord, for the saying of the woman.

Marthas confession of faith, which said, I believe that thou art Christ the
son of God, John. 11.
which should come into the world, was very like the confession of Peter.

We read of many men that doubted of our Lords ressurection, math. 28.
and how that our Lord reproved their in credulity and hardness of heart. There is
no such thing red of women. But that when our Lord rose. First of all he
appeared to a woman, that is to Mary Magdalen, and she with speed brought the
tidinges unto the Disciples, the which were in heaviness.

A certain woman calde Lydia a seller of purple hard Paul preach, Act. 16.
whose heart our Lord opened, and she was baptized, and her household.

Of the wisdom of women. Capi. Cxxiiii.
SAra did wisely understand and perceive, Gene. 21.
that ye play between Isaac and Ismael was not good, and it was the Lords will,
that Abraham should agree unto Saras will, and to hear her voice.

Rebecca was very wilye and subtle to procure, Genesis 27.
that Jacob might obtain his fathers blessing, the which was due unto the
first borne. And afterward she caused him even wyttely to avoid his brothers
anger.

Raab the harlot did very discreatly hide the spies, Iosu. 2.
so that there by, she wholly delivered and saved her self, and all her
household.

Delbora Lapidoths wife a prophesesse. Judged the people of Israel, Iuhi. 4
and laughed Barach Abinoams son, what he should do, to deliver the people of
God, from the hands of Sisara.

Noemi was very careful and wise, to invent how Ruth an aliane, Ruth. 2.
and her daughter in law, might marry with that noble and mighty manne Booz.

Anna Samuels mother discretlye excused her self: 1. regu. 1.
as touching that, that Hely the preast laid unto her, when she required a
chlde of god.

Abigaile through her wisdom, eloquence, 1. ^egu. 25.
and liberality, saved her husbands Nabals life, and let Dauyd from
committing of murder.

The wisewoman Thecuris, induced David to fetch his son Absolon home again.
2. regu. 14.


As Ioab besieged the city of Abel. A wise woman spoke so unto him, 2. regu.
21.
and afterward to the cityzens, that he left ye siege and departed to ye
great vtylitye and profit of all the country.

Bethsaba Salomons mother spoke wisely before king David that her son Solomon
might reign after him. 3. regu. 1.


That woman, of the two, which condented before Solomon answered wisely and
mercifully, 3. regu. 3.
sayinge^ I beseech thee my Lord, give her the living child, and in no wise
slaye it.

There was great prudencye and wisdom in the Queen of Saba, 3. regu. 10.
that came to here ye wisdom of Solomon.

The Sunamite Elyzeus hostess, did wyselye abide with him, 4. regu. 4.
nor would not leave him for all Giezyel, until he had reuyued her son.

Holda the prophetess Sellumus wife, 4. regu. 22.
did comfort king Josias, and foretold the people the evils that were to come
for their offenses.

Sara Raguells daughter prayed our LORD dyscreatly and deuoutely, Tobi. 3.
to deliver her from the rebuke that she had heard of her maid.

Judith speakinge unto the people, Judith. 8.13
and in deceauinge of Holofernes so pusant and mighty a prince: shewde great
constantye and wisdom.

Esther after she had inuyted the king to dynner, Esth. 7.
and that he was well heated with wine, made her peticion circumspectly and
warelye.

Luc. 1.
Elizabeth Ihon the Baptiste mother, knew very discreatly of the coming of
blessed Mary, and named her the Lords mother.

It appears that the blessed vyrgin was wonderfullys prudent and wise, as well
in silence kepinge, as in speaking. In silence, for we find that she spoke very
few words. She spoke with the angel, questioning with him discreatlye, and
agreinge unto him more discreatly. How shall this be^ And again, Luc. 1.
behold the hand maiden of the Lord. And with holy Elyzabeth, when she saluted
her. And note, that after Elizabethes great praises the which she gave her,
she answered her nothing directly, but turnde her to give laud and praises
unto the Lord, saying. My soul magnifyeth the Lord.

Also she spoke with her son, askyng him most swetely. Luc. 2.
Son, why haste thou thus dealte with us? And prayinge or intreatinge him for
the shamefast pore people, John. 2.
saying. They have no wine.

Mary Magdalen did very prudentlye Luc. 7.10.
when she sat her down at the Lords feet. For there she obtained
forgiveness for her self, John. 11.
life for her brother, hard the wisdom of God, and exhibited unto Christ
devout reverence.

Pilates wife spoke so unto him, yt if he would have believed her, Mat. 27.
he had done wisely.

Of the pitye and compassion of women. Cap. Cxxv.
REbecca seeing that Abraham's servant a stranger, Genesis 24.
was desirous to drink, answered without any delay, drink my lord. Ye and
I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have al dronke^.

The mid wives feared God, and did not as the king commanded the^, Exo. 1.
but saved the men children.

When Pharaos daughter saw the child wope, Exo. 2.
she had compassion on it and said. It is one of the Hebrews children. And
causinge it to be nurssed, made it her son.

Iosu. 2.
Raab the harlot, hearing that the spies were sought for to be put to death,
had compassion over them, and hydinge them, delivered them, and sent them a
way safe.

2. regu. 17.
The messengers sent to David, were hydden in a well, and saved by a woman,
which spread a couerlet ou^er the wells mouth, and begiled those that sought
them.

Of those two women which contended before Solomon, 3. regu. 3.
her heart was the pityfulste, that would have left of her suit, whose bowels
yerned upon her son.

The wyddowe woman of Sarepta was Elias the prophets hostess, 3. regu. 17.
and she sustaynde him.

The Sunamite induced her husband to make an apt and a mete place with in his
house, 4. Re. 4.
for Eliseus to lodge in.

When Athalia had destroyed all the kings seed: 4. Re. 11.
Iosaba the daughter of Ioram, conveyed Ioas one of ye kings sons, hyd him,
and saved him that he was not slain.

Esther having compassion on those that were addic^e and appointed to dye,
Esther. 5.
put her self in great pearyll, and yet she obtained of Ahaswerus the Jews
auauncement and pardon.

The pity of the blessed virgin Mary did well appear, John. 2.
in as much as she went to the marriage of the pore, and when they lacked
wine, she vndesyred of any manne, and as an advocate of the pore, said unto
her son, they have no wine. And again her great liberalitye may evidently
be known by this. Math. 2.
For when she had received of the wise men, Gold, Frankensence, and mirrhe,
within a while after at the time of her purification and churching, she was not
able to offer a Lamb. It is therefore to be supposed, that she had given and
distributed all those gifts to the poor.

We read that the savior of the world, walckynge and being in the world,
John. 12.
had his special lodginge with Martha and Mary her sister.

The woman of Canane esteemed ye misery of her daughter to be her own misery,
Mat. 15.
saying, have mercy on me O lord thou son of David, my daughter is pytcously
vexed with a deuel.

And also when he went through out cities and Towns, Luc. 8.
the women ministered of their substance unto him.

And the women stood by him when he suffered, Luc. 23.
and followed him to his cross when his apostles went from him, and were
obsequious and dilygent about him, lying in his grave.

Our lord preferde the two mytes which the poor widow cast into the
treasury, Luc. 21.
above the gifts of the rich. For she of her pe^^urye cast all the
substance that she had. And our Lord does ponder more the devotion of the
mind, than the quantity of the gift. Luc. 11.


Whilst the Scribes and the Pharise is blasphemed our lords miracles, a
certain woman which heard our lords words devoutly, lift up her voice,
saying. Blessed is the wo^b that bare thee.

Pilates wife labored more to let our lords passion, mat. 27.
and the unjust affection of Pylate, then any other manne of whom scripture
does testifye.

The apostle does declare such things unto the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 9.
whereby certain of the apostles pretended that they might, and had power to
lead about with them a woman a sister, to minister necessary things unto them.

For the good works and alms deeds, Act. 9.
which Tabitha did unto the wydowes, they even weping prayed Peter, that he
would come to ye dead. And Peter moved with their tears, kneled down, prayed,
and revived her.

Peter coming out of Herodes prisone, Act. 12.
came to the house of Marye the mother of one Ihon, whose syrname was Mark,
where many were gathered together in prayer. Where by it appears that she was
a devout and a good woman, and the hostess of our lords disciples.

Act. 16.
A certain woman named Lidia, a seller of Purple, through Paul's predication
and words believed, and when she was baptized, and her houshoulde, she
besoughte us, saying. If ye think that I believe, and be faithful to my
Lord God, come into my house, and abide there: and she constrained us. Where s.
Luke does sufficiently enough express, that women pro^ptly and devoutly do
hear the word of God.

Of the fortitude and strength of women. ca. cxxvi.
BArach the son of Abinoe would not lead the host against Sisara except
Delbora Lapidoths wise went with him. Iudi. 4.
She said, I will surely go with thee. But at this time the victory shall not be
ascribed unto the. For Sisara shall be delivered into the hand of a woman.

Booz said unto Ruth, the which had forsaken her country and her goods.
Ruth. 3.
The commen people, yt dwells within the gates of the city does know, that
thou art a woman of virtue.

Michol saved David her husband, strongly and manfullye, 1. reg. 19.
when Saul his father in law sought to slay him.

When Abigail saw that her husband Nabal had answered David's servants
rughly and churlishly, 1. reg. 25.
she hid her, and took diverse gifts and presents, and pacified David being
chafed and angry.

Sara Raguels daughter took her maidens contumelious rebuke, Tob. 3.
most pacie^tly, nor she gave her no answer, but turned her self to prayer.

Queen Esther put her self in danger of death to deliver her people, Esther.
5.
when she presumed to go unto the king vncald.

That mother about al mesure was most wonderful, 2. match. 7.
the which seeing her seven sons die even at one time bare it stronglye, and
joined a man's heart to the weak thought of a woman.

The blessed virgin Mary was very strong in refraininge of the joy that she
had in her sons conception, natiuitye, adoration of the wise men, in his
educatyon, Predication, operation of miracles, and resurrection. And again in
sustayninge and bearinge the grerte heaviness she sufferd in his passion.

The boldenes and audacity af Mary Magdalen was very marvelous, the which was
present at our lords passion, and came often to our lords sepulcher, nor
departed not (although the well be loved disciples went their ways, John. 20.
) but continued there weping. Uery love made her but to bold, when she said,
Lord, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou haste laid him.

Of the auiditye and gredinesse of women. Ca. Cxxvii.
THe first woman saw that the tree was fair and delectable to the eyes. Genesis 3.
Then immediatlye there follows. That without any deliberation she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat.

Al be it that Sara was a good woman, yet she was so desirous to have children,
Genesis 16
that she would have one of her maid, saying unto Abraham. Go in unto my maid.

When Rebecca was asked whether she would go with Abraham's servant by and by
she answered, Genesis 24.
I will go, she said not I will go if it be your pleasure, or any like words,
but I will go.

Lothes daughters had rather have children by their father, Genesis 19.
than to be without children.

When Rachel saw that she was baren and bare no children, Genesis 30.
she enuyed her sister, and said to Jacob her husband. Give me children, or
else I am but dead.

Dina being desirous to see the women of the land, Sichem saw her, and oppressed
her. Gene. 34.
What shall we say then of those which desire to see men, and to be seen of
them? It is no maxnel. etc

The lady who me Joseph served, faried not to be enticed of him, Genesis ^9.
but she required him to gredely.

Ara Calephs daughter obtaind of her father springes of water, Iosu. 15.
for she even with sythes asked them.

Samsons wife lay so sore upon him, that he told her the obscure rydle, the
which he would not open unto his Parents. Iudi. 14.
But she eftsoon told it unto her friends, although it was to the hindraunce
of her husband.

Iudi. 16.
Dalida by great importunitye obtained, that Sampson told where in his mighty
strength did reast.

Anna Samuels mother wept, and could take no sustinaunce, 1. Reg. 1.
for the great desire she had to have Children.

3. Reg. 3.
She was very greadye to have a Child, that took away an another man's.

Iezabel was so desirous and greadye to deliver up Nabothes vineyard to her
husband, 3. reg. 21.
that she brought forth false witnesses, and thrice procured, and caused Naboth
to be stoned most cruelly.

When that the Sunamite would go to Elizeus, 4. reg. 4.
and that her husband would not fullye consent there to, she said, I will go,
so immediately she prepared an ass, and said unto her servant by the way,
look thou by no impediment or let unto me, but do that I command thee.

Athalia Ochozias mother coneting to reign over the land, 4. reg. 11.
destroyed al ye kings sede, except Ioas thinfant, the which was secreatly
hidden, and taken away.

Anna Tobias wife, daily looked, and went about the streets, Tob. 10.
where by she thought there should be any hope of his coming, that she might
see him coming a far of.

Esther was not content, that the king had given her Amans house, Esther. 9.
and that he had destroyed and slain in Susan the chief city 500. men. But also
the next day following she caused 300. mo to be slain.

The woman of Canane obtained her daughters health through importune Math. 15.
prayer.

The mother of Zebedes children: tarried not that our lord should reward her
children after thexcelle^cy of their merits. Mat. 20.
But preventing the time, she desired that the one might be set on his
righthand in his kingdom, and the other on his left.

Herodias laid such wait, and so hated Ihon the Baptist, that she chose yt her
daughter should rather ask his body, Mat. 14.
then the half of Herodes kingdom.

Our lord does put an ensample of a widow, Luc. 18.
the which was so molestious and grievous unto a judge which feared not God,
nether regarded man that at the last he aduenged her of her adversary.

Act. 12.
A maid named Rhoda, perceiuinge that Peter knocked at the door, did not open
it but for gladness, leaving him without, ran in, and told them that were
within.

Of the deceitfulness of women. Ca. Cxxviii.
ADam by the occasion of Eve, was deceived, although he was not seduced in
that, Genesis 3.
yt Eve was: but then only when he by her persuasion and counsel, did eat of
the tree forbyden.

Sara hearing the promise, that she should conceive a child, Genesis 18.
laughed within her self. But when she was reproved of her mystrust, with a
lie she excused her self.

Whilst Lothes ii. daughters desiring to have children by their own father,
Genesis 19^
durst not induce him there unto with words, but with wine they accomplished
their purpose. They would sone have deceived an other, when they spared not
their own father.

Rachel with a proper invention beguyled her father, Genesis 31.
seekynge his Idols.

Joseph's lady and mestres to excuse her self, Genesis 39.
accused him unjustly to her husband, and afterward at her husbands hands
revenged her self of Joseph most wickedly.

Al be it the Hebrews mydwyues had a good and a devout intent in reserving
of the children: Exo. 1.
yet by the fyndinge out of a lie, they decei^ed Pharao the king of Egipte.

The women of Moab deceived the children of Israel, Nume. 25.
when that Balaam the sothesayer with all his magical craft, could do
nothing against them.

Rathab the harlot hyd Iosues spies, and caused those that inquyred for them,
Iosu. 2.
to run and pursue after them, unto the ferye of Jordan, saying, that they
went forth at the shuttinge of the gate.

Iahel went forth to mete Sisara, and said unto him, Iuhi. 4
turn into me my LORD, and fear not, and yet at length she kylde him being
a sleep.

Sampfons wife wept before him, and said. Surely thou hate me, and
therefore thou have not told me the ryddle. Iudi. 14.
And he reuelde it unto her to his own destruction.

Dalida was continuallye molestius unto Sampson, Iudi. 16.
and sufferde him not one day to be at rest and quiet, so that his soul was
faynte and incombred even unto death, thus strong Sampson was ouercomde, and
folishlye opened all things unto her.

When Michol understood, that Saul her father sought David, 1. regu. 19
her husband to slaye him, she caused him to depart, and laid an Image upon
his bed.

The men that should have brought word unto David of Absolons estate and
condition, 2. Re. 17.
were let down into a well, and a certain woman spreadinge a couerlet over
it, as though she had been dryinge furmenty corn thereon, feigned that they
were departed and gone.

Judith al be it she did it of a good zele and intent, Judith. 10.
deceived Holofernes, of whom all the earth stood in awe and fear.

Herod feared John the Baptist, knowinge that he was a just manne, Mar. 6.
and yet Herodias labourd the matter so, that she causde him to be beheaded in
prison.

Saphira and Ananias her husband, did lie unto Peter as concerning part of
the price of the land. Act. 5.
But Peter punyshed that lie most greuouslye.

Of the folyshe and indiscreet communication of women Ca. C.xxix.
WE read that Eve spoke first with the serpente, or ever she spoke with god
how to worship him, Genesis 3.
or with her husband, to receive any erudition of him.

Sara when our Lord did promise that she should have a child mistrustinge it
did laughe: Genesis 18.
and afterward denyde that she laughed.

When Rachel saw that she was unfruitfully and baren, Genesis 30.
she said unto her husband. Give me children: or else I am but dead,
asthoughe it had been in Jacobs power, to make the baren frutfull.

As Soon as Sampsons wife knew her husbands obscure and dark riddle, Iudi. 14.
she disclosed it to her cityzens, to the great hynderaunce of her husband.

As Soon as Dalida saw that Sampson had confessed and opened his hole mind unto
her, Iudi. 16.
how he might be deprived and lose his strength, she caulde his enemies unto
her, and eftsoon dysclosed the thing unto them.

Because David upon great devotion did dance before the arc of our Lord, 2.
regu. 6.
Michol Saules daughter said scornefully unto him. O how glorious was the king
of Israel this day.

When Tobias spoke of the kydde. Saying. Take heed and look that yt be not
stolen. Tob. 2
Anna his wife being angrye, answered. Now is thy hope become vain openly.

When Sara the daughter of Raguel did iustlye rebuke her maiden, she answered
her impaciently, and very iniuriouslye, Tobi. 3.
saying. God let us never see son or daughter of the more upon earth.

Of the two harlottes, which contended and pleated before Solomon, 3. rgu. 3
she spoke folyshelye and wyckedlye that said of the intante. Let it be
neither mine nor thine, but denyde it.

When Amans wife hard the complaynt that her husband made of Mardocheus, Esth.
5.
she answered, and said, command a loftye galous to be made, that he may be
hanged thereon.

As Job was sytting upon the dunghyll, and scrapinge of the fylth of his sores
with a potshard, Job. 2.
his wife said unto him. Curse God and dye. But he made her a good and a
dyscreate answer: saying. Thou speak like a folyshe woman. Shall we receive
prosperitye at the hand of GOD, and not receive aduersitye.

Our Lord approved not the children of Zebedes mothers peticyon, Mat. 20.
when she said. Grant that these my two sons may sytte, the one on the right
hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.

Peter at the voice of a maid, denied our Lord. mat. 26.


The woman of Samaria spoke many simple words unto our Lord, John. 4.
or ever she stumbled upon the truth.

Of the superfluous ornaments and raimente of women. Capi. cxxx.
THamar Judas daughter in law, Gene. 38.
being mineded to entice her father in law, that by him she might be
conceived, put her widows garments from her and covered her self with a cloak.

When the coming of Iehu which slew Ioram the king of Israel was heard of,
4. regu. 9.
Iesabell payneted her eyes, starched her face, and tired her head.

Judith does testify that her ornaments and apparel which she took deceived
Holofernesse. Judith. 16.
She put on the apparel of gladness, she anointed her face with oyntmentes,
she bound up her here in an houe to beguile him.

We read of Esther, that when she should come into the king, Esth. 2.
she required no ornaments, as other women did.

And threatninge it is written. Esaias. 3.
In that day our Lord shall take away the gorgiousnesse of their apparel,
and spanges, chains, partlets, Colers, Bracelets, Houes, the goodly floured
wide and broydred raiment, broches, hedbandes, ringes, garlandes, holy day
clothes, vales, kerchers, pinnes, glasses, cipresses, bonets, and taches.

Solomon describes the reprehensible garments of an evil woman, Prouer. 7.
saying. I spied a young fool, and there met him a woman decked like an
harlot, prepared to entrap the soul of man, full of words, wandering hither and
thither and unquiet.

The wise man not without a cause does monish us, Eccle. 9.
when he says. Turn away thy face from a well decked, and a beautiful woman.
For such women entice and provoke men to sin.

Wemens apparel shall not be outward with broydred hear, 1. Peter. 3.
and hanging on of gold, either in putting on of gorgyous apparel.

Of death in general. Cap. Cxxxi.
THe sentence of God wherewith he said unto man. Genesis 2.
In what dai so ever ye shall eat thereof, shall dye the death. It is plain
and evident that man as soon as sin is committed does die. So that the living
man, does die, as it were continuallye. As Saint Augustine says in his
fourtene book of the City of God.

Notwithstanding that men before the floude lived so many years, genesis 9.
yet scripture after the description of their lives, says. And he died.

It was no marvel that our fore fathers feared to die, and desired to be
long lived. For they as yet could not ascend up into heaven, nor have the
fruition of the divine vision, until the coming of our savior, the which
opened the gates of heaven. And therefore holy Lot was monyshed to save him
self in the mountain. Genesis 19.
He feared to go thither, least some misfortune should fall upon him, and that he
should die there.

The wicked also do desire to dye well. Nume. 23.
I pray God, that my soul may die the death of the ryghteous, and that my last
end may be like his, said Balaam.

Although Moses would not obey our Lords commandment, Deut^. 24
which would he should have passed over Jordan. Yet it seems that he would
gladly have lived longer, if it had pleased our Lord. For he says. Our LORD
is angry with me. Lo I must die in this land, and shall not go over Jordan.

A great part of the reward of Moses law, seemed to consist and stand in long
life. Deute. 32.
Set your haries unto all the words which I testifye unto you, for if ye
fulfill and do them, ye shall prolong your days in the land whether ye go, to
co^quere and to possess it.

Zebee and Salmana desired rather to be slain with the hand of worthy Gedeon,
Iudi. 8.
then with the hand of Iether his youngest son.

Dauyd which wept for his child being sick and dyseased, 2. re. 12.
would not weep for his child which was departed.

When Helyas sat under the Iunyper tree, 3. re. 19.
he desired for his soul that he might dye. And said. It is now enough o
LORD, take my soul, for I am not better then my fathers.

Hezechias king of Judah did walk before our Lord in truth, and was good. Yet
when Esaye brought him word that he should die, Esaias. 38.
he prayed our Lord with sorrowful tears, to prolo^g his life for a while.

Tobias being much provoked with his wives answer, Tobi. 3.4.
took it heauilye, and with tears began to make his prayer, saying. O Lord
thou art righteous, comma^^de my spirit to be received in peace, for more
expedient were it for me to die, then to live. So when he thought his prayer
to be heard, he called unto him his son.

After that Sara Raguels daughter was iniuried by her maid, she prayed unto our
Lord, Tob. 3.
and among all other things said, I beseech the o Lord, lose me out of the
bonds of this rebuke, or else take me utterly away from of the earth.

Jeremy prayed king Sedechia most humbly that he would not slaye him, Ie^e. 38.
nor command him to be led again to that prison where he lay before, least
he die there.

After the death of the cross, which our Sauyoure would sus^ayne and suffer,
Math. 27.
he apertlye and manifestly declared, that a just man ought not only to dye,
but to suffer even readily any kind of death for to obey our Lord.

Before the coming of the holy ghost, math. 26
the Apostles feared death exceadingly, the which when our Lord was taken,
left him and fled from him. But after that they were fortyfyed, and had
received strength from above, they being set before princes and tyrants,
spoke faithfully and chearely.

Paul feared but little, yea he feared not death, which said, I am ready, not
to be bound only, Act. 21.
but also to dye for the name of our LORD Jesus.

If the Jews know that I have hurt them, Act. 25.
or committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die.

And this is to be noted, that when Paul at diverse times to avoid the
deceitfulness of the Jews, did fly from City to City, that he did it not
for any fear of death: but that he, auoidinge the furiousness of the euel,
might reserve him self for the profit of many.

Of sepultures and burials. Ca. cxxxii.
Gene. 23.
ABraham with great diligence bought a field, wherein he buried his wife Sara.

Jacob would not be buried in Egypt among the evil. Ge. 47.49
But caused Joseph to swear, that he should carye him being dead, to the
sepulture and grave of his fore fathers. He repeated the same at the hour of
his death after he had blessed his children. The which thing Joseph
accomplyshed most carefully.

Moses going out of Egypt, took the bones of Joseph with him. Exo. 13


David much commended the men of Iabes Galaad, that so reuerentlye did burye
the bodies of Saul and his children. 1. re. 31. 2. re. 2.


The punishment of the manne of God, 3. re. 13
the which contrary to the commandment of God did eat bread in the house
of the euel and false prophet, was only this, that he was not buried in the
sepulcher and grave of his elders.

Iehu the king of Israel, that caused Iezabell to be slain, 4. re. 9.
wylled her to be buried, because she was a kings daughter.

Tobias is much commended that he with the danger of his own life, Tob. 2
took the dead coarses, and most dilygently did bury them.

The first of all those wholesome admonitions wherewith Tobias instructed his
son, Tob. 4
was of the diligent buriyng of him self and his mother.

The Jews which accused wicked Menelaus, 2. Match. 4
were by an unrightful judge condemned. Wherefore they of Tyrus took
indignation, and buried them honorably, and with great liberality.

After the battle was foughten against Gorgias, Judas Machabeus came to take
up the bodies of them yt were slain, 2. Match. 12
and to bury the^ in their fathers graves.

When Ihon the Baptist disciples heard that Herod had beheaded him they came,
mar. 6.
and took up his body, and laid it in a grave.

It appears that our Lord Jesus had a carfulness for his burial, John. 12.
and that by the answer he made unto Judas murmuringe for the ointment, the
which after his mind should have been sold. Let her alone, says our
LORD, against the day of my burying has she kept this.

Luc. 23.
Joseph and Nicodemus did burye our Lord, and laid him in a new sepulcher that
was hewn in stoane, where in never manne before was laid.

Certain good and devout Jews dressed Steven which was stoned, Act. 8.
and made great lamentation over him.

Of the horrible death of wicked and evil men. Capitu. Cxxxiii.
CAin which flew his own brother, was slain by Lamech. Genesis 4.


The Lord reigned upon Sodom and Gomor, brymstone and fire from heaven, Genesis
19.
and overthrew.v. cytyes most stinkinge in sin and most detestable.

Sichem Emors son, which forced Dyna Jacobs daughter, Genesis 34.
was slain by Jacobs sons, and all the people and inhabytoures of the city.

The waters of the red sea covered the charettes, Exo. 14.
and the horsemen, and all the hooste of Pharao, so that there remained not one
of them. And that even iustelye enough that his body, whose heart could not
be mollyfyed, might be drowned in water.

Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron offering strange fire before the LORD,
Leui. 10.
were devoured and consumed with the Lords fire, and they dyed.

The children of Israel by the lords commandment brought forth the
blasphemer and cursed speaker with out the host, Leui. 24.
and stand him.

Chore, Dathan, and Abiron and their companions, Nume. 16
rebelling against Moses, keuered with earth went down a live unto hell.

And other likewise murmuringe, and committing diverse crimes peryshed with
diverse deaths in the wilderness, Nume. 1.
so that of sir hundred thousand fighting men, there enterd but two into
the land of promise.

And because Acham took bestelthe of the excommunicate things of Ierico,
Iosu. 7.
al Israel stoned him with stones and consumed all that ever he had with fire.

Iahell Abners wife took a nail of the tent, and fastened it into Sisaras
brains, Iudi. 4.
the which being in a deedlye slombre, and werye, faynted, and so he dyed.

If zebee and Salmana had saved Gedeons brethren, Iudi. 8.
he had spared them. But inasmuche as they kylde them, he in like manner slew
them.

The children of Israel took Adonibezeche, Iudi. 1.
and cuttynge of the utter parts of his thombes and great toes (for even so
he had served.70. kings) brought him to Jerusalem, and there he dyed.

A certain woman cast a piece of a mylstone upon Abimeleches head, Iudi. 9.
and all to brake his brain pan. And he called his harness bearer, and
commanded him to slay him. And so our Lord quyted him the evil that he had
don, when he flew.70. of his brethren.

When Hely heard say that the Lord's ark was taken, he fell from his stole
backwarde upon the threshold of the door, 1. regu. 4.
and his neck brake, and he dyed.

David a child, unarmed, nor having the use of harness, 1. Reg. 17.
slew the proud and blasphemus Goliath even with his own swerd.

1. regu. 31.
Saul moved with a certain vnius^e envy, persecuted and followed after David.
But in process of time, he took his swearde, and fell upon it, and dyed.

David's eldest son oppressed his sister Thamar, 2 regu. 31.
and within a while after he being at dynner with Absolon, at Absolons
commandment was slain.

2. regu. 18.
Absolon through a lust to rule afflicted and vexed his father David very
sore: But or ever he came to his purpose and intent, he was hangde between
heaven and earth.

2. regu. 17.
When Achitophel saw yt his counsel which he gave against David was not
accepted nor followed, he gat him whom to his own house, and hanged him self,
and dyed.

2. regu. 20.
Siba the son of Bochry moved the people against David and sleyng to Abell,
where he thought to have had refuge and healpe, there he was beheaded.

David commanded the young man which said that he had killed Saul, 2. regu. 1.
to be slain, notwithstanding he thought yt he had brought prosperous tidings.

The like thing chanced unto the two thieves, 2. regu. 4.
which brought unto David Isboseth king Saul's sons head.

Albeit that Ioab had been a faithful and a worthy man of war, 3. reg. 2.
yet forasmuch as he slew two men proditoriouslye. Solomon commanded him to
be put to death.

Zambrye rebelled against Hela that wicked king of Israel his Lord, and slew
him, 3. regu. 16.
But zambry after.7. days when he saw that the city of Thirza must needs be
taken, went into the kings Palace, and burnt him self and the kings house
with fire.

Achab being wounded in battayl, dyed at even, and the dogs licked up
Nabothes blood, 3. Re. 21.22
the which Achab dissemblinge the thing that he should and might have voyded,
was stoned, and he dyed.

4. regu. 1.
When Eliseus went up to Bethel. a sort of ill taught children mocked him. And
there came out two bears and tare.42. of them.

One of those two which were present with the king of Israel, 4. regu. 7.
would not credit Heliseus words for speaking of the abundaunce that was to
come. The next day after the people that ran to the spoil, trod him down,
and so he dyed.

Benadab king of Siria, which did the children of Israel much woo, 4. regu. 8.
was at the last strangled of Asahell his son.

Iehu beholdinge wicked Iezabell, the which was the cause of much evil, 4.
regu. 9.
commanded her to be cast down hedlyng the which was so trotrode^ with
horses, yt she (albeit she was a kings daughter) was not buried, for there was
nothing left but her skul, her fret, and the palms of her hands.

Athalia Ochozias mother destroyed all the king seed, that she might raygne
over the people, 4. regu. 11.
afterward by Ioiada the preastes commandment, she was slain most
fylthelye.

Ioas that evil and unkind king of Judah, 4. regu. 12.
the which caused Zacharias Ioiada the preaste son to be stoned, was slain
after that, of his own servants.

Senacheryb that proud king of the Assyrians, 4. regu. 19.
and blasphemer of God of heaven, avoided and fled out of Iewry with shame
enough, his own sons flewe him.

Sedechias king of Judah, being evil to God and man, was taken as he fled and
went his ways. 4. regu. 25.
The king of Babylon flewe his sons before his eyes. And after that his own
were put out, he was carried to Babylon, and there he dyed wretchedlye.

Holofernes took and destroyed many conntreys, Judith. 13.
and at length being a sleep and dronken, a woman smote of his head.

Proud Aman, the which caused men to worship him, Esther. 7.
was hanged on the galowes, that he had made for Mardocheus.

Balthazar the king of Babilo^ was nothing amended by the ensample of his
father Nabuchodonozor, Dani. 3.5.
the which even before him was changed into a beast. And being at his banquet,
he saw a writing in the wall. Mane, Thetel, Phares, and the very same night he
was slain, and his kingdom translated to the Medes and Perses.

Dani. 6.
Danyels accusers by Darius the king of Perses commandment were cast into
the Lions den and devoured. The like chanced in the xiiii. chapter.

It is said that Alexander after that he went unto his bed, 1, Match. 1
knew that he should die, as though that before that time, he neither had
remembrance nor knowledge of death.

Alchinus the traitor was to smytten with the palsy, 1. Match. 9.
that he could not speak, nor command any of his house concerning his
business, and so he died in great misery.

Antiochus was sorye in his mind that Andronicus had unjustly put Onias the
hie priest to death. 2. match. 4.
And commanded that Andronicus should be slain in the same place, where he
committed to great impiety and wickedness.

When Lysimachus had committed many great sacrilegis in the temple, 2. Match. 4.
the multitude gathered them together against him, and killed him beside the
treasury.

Wicked Jason, that took his own brother prisonner, 2. Match. 5.
and had expelled many out of their country, peryshed from home, and was
thrown out unburied, no man mournyng for him.

Antiochus which had martired other men's bowels, suffered an horrible and
grievous pain of his bowels, 2. Match. 9.
and he died a miserable and a marvelous death upon the mountains.

Menelaus ye which for a time had gotten the dominion and rule, 2. Match. 13.
was cast headlonge out of a hie tower among the ashes.

The rich manne, whose ground brought forth plentiful fruits, thought to
destroy his barnes, Luc. 12.
and build greater, he trusted to live long? But the Lord said unto him. Thou
fool, this night thou shall die.

The example of the rich glutton is very terrible, Luc. 16.
he died, was buried, and brought into hell.

Because that Ananias, and his wife Saphira craftily kept away part of the
price of the land which was sold, Act. 5.
they at Peter's increpatyon, fearfully gave up the ghost.

Herod arrayed in royal apparel, fate in his judgment seat, Act. 12.
and made an oration to the people. And they gave a shout, saying. It is the
voice of a God, and not of a man. And immediately the angel of the LORD smote
him, because he gave not God the honor, and he was eaten of worms, and gave
up the ghost.

Of the precious death of the just. Cap. Cxxxiiii.
WHen Caine and Abell were in the field, Genesis 4.
Caine rose up against Abel, and slew him. Ihon does show the cause: for his
works and doings were euel, and his brothers just.

Enoche walked with God, Genesis 5.
and he was no more seen, for God took him away.

Abraham dyed in a lustye age, Genesis 25.
very old, and was put^e to his people.

The days of Isaac were an 180. years, Gene. 35.
he died even for very age, and was put unto his people, being old and full of
days.

When Jacob had commanded all that he would unto his sons, Gene. 49.
he plucked up his feet unto the bed, and dyed, and was put unto his
people.

After that Joseph had taken an oath of his brethren, Gene. 50.
and had said, GOD will visytte you, carye my bones hence with you, he died.

Nume. 20.
Moses and Aaron as the LORD commanded them, went up into mount Hor in the
sight of all the multitude. And when Aaron had put of his clothes, and put them
upon Eleazar his son, he died there.

Moses the servant of God dyed at Gods commandment in the land of Moab.
Deuteronomy. 34.
The Lord buried him, but no man knows of his sepulcher unto this day,

1. Para. 29.
David after he had instructed his son Solomon, and made his oratyon unto God
for him and all the people, he died in a good age, full of dais, richesse and
honor.

4 re. 2.
As Helias and Helizeus were walking together, a charet of fire, and horses of
fire departed them a sondre, and Helias went up through ye whirlwinde into
heaven.

2. Para. ^4.
The spirit of God came upon Zacharia Io^adas son. Which said unto the
people. Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye can not
prosper? And they gathered them selves against him, and stoned him at the
commandment of the king, and so he dyed.

Thobias in the hour of his death, Tobi. 14.
called his son unto him, and seven spryngaldes his sons Children, and
said unto them. My death is at hand. And a little after it is said of his
son, that when he was ninety year of age, and had fulfilled them in the
fear of the LORD, with joy and gladness, they buried him.

Job after his afflyctyons lived an hundred and fortye years, Job. 41.
and saw his childers children into the fourth generation, and so died,
being old, and of a perfect age.

David which lamented for his son being sick, 2. re. 12.18.
would not weep for his innocente Child that dyed. But he wept sore for
Absolon the paricide.

Matathias after he had instructed and comforted his Children, 1. match. 2.
gave them his blessing, and dyed, and was put unto his fathers.

1. Match. 9.
When Judas Machabeus saw the multitude of his enemies, and so few of his own
men, he said. If our time be come, let us die manfully for our brethren.

Eleazarus after many torments dyed, 2. Match. 6
leauinge to all the people a remembrance of his death, for an example of
virtue and manliness.

2. Match. 7.
The seven brethren with their devout mother made a wonderful and a laudable
end. And there may be noted many examples of virtue.

Mar. 6.
Ihon the Baptist for the truth and honesty of marriage, was beheaded of Herod
the Tetrarch.

It is written thus of Lazarus that famous poor man. And it fortuned, that the
beggar dyed, Luc. 16.
and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom.

David after he had instructed his son Solomon, 1. Para. 29.
and made his oratyon unto God for him and all the people, he died in a good
age, full of dais, richesse and honor.

How so ever the thief lived, unto whom Christ said. Luc. 23.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. He died happily.

When Saint Steven was stoned, he called on the LORD saying, Act. 7.
LORD Jesus, receive my spirit. And he knealed down and cried with a loud
voice, and said. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had
thus spoken, he fell a sleep. Let us give dylygence that our death may
be like unto his.

And our Sauyoure and LORD JESUS CHRIST, by his syngulare death, Li. 4. de
tri Lib. 14. de ciui. dei.
as says Saint Augustyne, destroyed our dowble Death and granted unto us,
as says the self Augustyne, so great grace of faith, that he was and
became the instrumente of death, the which is, as it manyfestly appears
contrary to life, by the which we should come to life.

The which life the true author of eternal health, that is the way, the
truth, and life, and has the dominyon over death and life. Grant us. The
which with the father and the holy ghost, lives and raygneth one God world
without end. So be it.

FINIS.

