EPICEDIVM, A Funeral Song, upon the virtuous life, and godly death, of the
right worshipful the Lady Helen Branch.

Virtus sola manet, caetera cuncta ruunt. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1594.

EPICEDIVM, In obitum illustrissimae mulieris dominae Helenae Branch, vxoris
multum venerandi equitis Iohannis Branch, quondam pernobilis ciuitatis Londini
Maioris perquam honorabilis.
YOu that to show your wits have taken toil,
In registring the deeds of noble men:
And sought for matter in a foreign soil,
(As worthy subjects of your silver pen)
Whom you have raised from dark obliuions den.
You that have writ of chaste Lucretia,
Whose death was witness of her spotless life:
Or pend the praise of sad Cornelia,
Whose blameless name has made her fame so rife:
As noble Pompeys most renoumed wife.
Hither unto your home direct your eyes:
Whereas unthought on, much more matter lies.
Matter that well deserves your golden style,
And substance that will fit your shadows right,
Whereon his wits a Scholar well may file:
Whereof a Poet needs not blush to write,
When strangers cau^^s should be banished quite.
And this bright Comet* of whose splendant rays,
My too-vnworthie pen shall give a sight,
A Lady was of whose deserved praise
A far more learned Artist ought to write:
Less wits should speak of stars of lesser light.
Yet since their ways, by her light many find,
I (among the rest) may show my thankful mind.
When first her life gave essence to her light,
She was the daughter of a worthy fire,
And Willi^m Nicolson his name it hight:
To whom dame Fortune gave his hearts desire,
Rich, and yet free from haut ambitions fire:
Yea double rich by such an offspring fair,
Who from her cradle, and young infancy
Gave certain augures of her virtues rare,
And what a matron she in time would be:
Her seemly graces wrought her fathers glee.
And for her beauty he gave her the name
Of her, whom Troy did make so much of fame.
Only her face unto her name was like,
Her virtues rather shone like Phoebes pride,
Or her whose shaft did rash Acteon strike,
When from his light her self she sought to hide.
Well might she vaunt of Iudiths wit beside,
Nor was Pollixena so much admir'de
For maidens blush, and seemly modesty:
Nor fair Virginia half so much desir'de
For comely grace, and civil courtesy:
As she was praisde of high and low degree.
As hard it was her constancy to move,
As Cleopatra from Anthonius love.
And thus she lived (whiles she a maid did live)
Till fathers care, and maidens ripened years,
Did to a worthy man as wife her give:
Like takes like, all ages ch^ose their peers,
And now do end her parents cares, and fears:
For as her life did make them happy deemed,
And as her bliss did make to thrive their joys,
So by her loss they had unhappy seemed,
And her mishaps had framed their dyre annoyes:
The husbandman his fields for corn imployes.
And happy he, who from his happy seed,
Does reap a great grandfathers name, for meed.
John Mynors was her loving husband called,
Who blessed her aged parents by his son:
And with three daughters more their joys enstald:
(But foul often falls, when fair is well begun)
For long these lived not but their glass was run.
We daily see when Phoebus in the sky
Is highest mounted, straight he gins descend:
And when good-haps do sit so vvondrous high,
They must decline (although not have an end)
For each extreme, of force must pair, or mend.
It Is better alvvaies bide calamity,
Then once feel, joys and then taste misery.
They gone, with them was gone the fathers bliss,
And with his bliss, the mothers comfort goes:
And with her comfort went her husbands miss,
And by his miss, increast her treble vvoes.
On what worlds prop, may man his trust repose?
The yoonger grass does wither ere the hay,
The stronger flies, and leaves the vveake behind,
The childs life ere the fathers flits away,
The husband dies, ere wife has death assignde,
Daughters son, husband dead, she life does find.
Yet did her joys: the mirth which she could have,
Was with her tears, to vvash their thirsty grave.
Now (like to her who drunk her husbands dust)
She for her husband, loved her husbands trade,
A Chronicle of which needs be they must,
Who by that love full vvealthy have been made:
The witness lives, the fame then cannot fade.
And like to them who do adopt successors)
She, for her children, did regard the poor,
Of whom there live, that may be just professors,
Who often have been relieved at her door,
Nor this was all, for they have had much more*
For Christ his will she executed faithfully,
Imprisoned, sick, naked, poor, she gave his legacy.
And thus she lived (whilst widow she did live,)
Till husbands death, and widows dried tears
Were almost out of mind, and grief did give
A place unto the course of some spent years.
(Unwise whose house does fall and no new reares,)
Then was she grafted in a worthy stem,
And of a green-leau'd Branch the blossom proved
To him more dear, then was the richest gemme:
And so together they both lived and loved,
And still her Orphans care the mother moved.
For though nor Branch, nor blossom fruit did bear,
Yet both in good works always fruitful were.
In time this Branch so far abroad did spread,
That over London it did cast his shade:
(A neast where many virtuous birds are bred)
Of whom, some on this Branch their neasts have made:
Long flourish may his leaves, and never fade.
And though the stock, the Branch, the blossom sweet
Wants sap, is withered, and is fallen away,
Yet does a young plant, spring up at their feet,
Which shall their green leaves up in safety lay,
And they vnscattered, maugre blasts shall stay.
Yea from the root, the juice this plant has gotten,
Shall make them flourish, when their root is rotten.
The Branch being dead, the blossom began to droupe,
Like to a parcht flower in the dogdayes rage:
The ^hepheard fled, toth' wolf the lambs must stoop,
Youths heat being past, there is small resist in age:
And now no comfort could her cares assuage.
Yet still in virtuous deeds she spent her days,
Poor virgins thereof still can make report,
Those naked persons well may tell her praise,
Whom she has clothed in a seemly so^t:
(Surely a treasure laid in a strongest ^o^t)
But now has death cut off her ve^tues prime,
In ripened harvest of her golden time.
Her faithful end, was like her godly life,
Wedn'sday the tenth of April, and no more
It was, when as was seen her breaths last strife:
The year was fifteen hundredth, ninety four,
And grateful Abchurch has her bones in store.
You two strong props that vndershore the vine,
From whose ripe clusters sweetest Nectar flows,
Whereof do drink, the famous Muses nine,
Perform more full, what duty does impose,
Bring hither Cypres sad, see where it grows.
Embalme with Mirrhe, and stick with Rosemarie,
Time is the only herb which rests for me.
Quae te propellat (nimium propensa)
Cura mors? O te properans veloci
Penna quis turbet? Dare terga cogat
Quod medicamen?
Aeque tu regis deruis superbi
Regias, and sic inopum cucumas.
Cura sunt morti iuuenes senesque
Semper eadem.
Sola post mortem, remanet in aeuum
Virtus, quae nunquam peritura probis,
Fama florescet, licet ipsa cumbunt
Corpora in vrnis.
W. Har.

FINIS.

