A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Majesty, in the Church of
Beauly in Hampshire, the thirtieth of July. M.DC.IX.

BY CHRISTOPHER HAMPTON, Doctor in Divinity, and one of his Maties Chapleines.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers, Printers to the Kings most
excell^^^ Majesty. Ann 1620

TO THE MOST HIGH and mighty Prince JAMES by the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith etc.
Most Renowned, most Dread, and most Gracious Sovereign,
IT is not long since I heard a Recusant of understanding and quality
profess, that the Spiritual presence of our Savior Jesus Christ in the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, contented him sufficiently. But he desired
satisfaction, at the same time, in the matter of Supremacy, and to have
reasons why Christian Princes should challenge it. I promised to resolve him in
that point too; and had not any thing so ready to do it withal, as certain
collections which I gathered for a Sermon preached before your most Excellent
Matie. Those I have now published, that all of my charge may take commodity to
read them for their satisfaction or use. And that they are like to do with
more cheerfulness, if your Matie will be Graciously pleased to let them pass
under your Royal protection, with the same Clemency now which you vouchsafed
to countenance them withal, when they were pronounced in your Sacred presence.
The Lord that has given your Matie both this great power, to be his
Lieutena^t, and a prudent heart to exercise it, continue your happy
Government, to the aduanceme^t of his glory, the comfort of these Churches,
and your own Eternal honor. Even so prostrating my self to kiss your
blessed hands, I remain

Your Majesty's most humble and obliged Servant and Almosner, ARMAGH.

A TREATISE OF SOVERAIGNETIE.
LVC. 22.24, 25. And there arose also a strife among them, which of them should
be the greatest. But he said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles reign over
them, and they that rule over them are called gracious Lords. But you shall not
be so, etc.


THE Text deuideth it self into two principal parts.

In the former you see a Contention between the Apostles for SVPERIORITIE.

(...) Their example serves to admonish us, that the Saints themselves are
obnoxious to humane affections, and need the grace of God.

To this purpose the holy Ghost records not only the examples of their
virtues, that thereby we might behold the richnes of Gods mercy toward his
servants; but he mentions their infirmities, and errors too. Paul describes
his own Pharisaisme; notes Peter's halting in the use of things indifferent:
John rehearses his mistaking in the worshipping of Angels. Things registered of
purpose, not for contumely unto them, but for instruction unto us.



and comfort in the sorrows of our falls. Audiant qui non ceciderunt ne cadant.
Audiant qui ceciderunt vt resurgant. Let them that have not fallen, hear these
things prouisionally, that they do not fall. And let the^ that have fallen,
hear them exemplarily, that they may rise again.

Lastly, this may teach us to admire which they exercised in the Acts, when
they had received the holy Ghost, not in their carnal strife and Contention,
which of them should be the greatest. Therefore let no man rejoice in men, but
if any will rejoice let him rejoice in God. Securus gloriatur qui gloriatur in
Domino. The story of this said Contention is frequent amongst the Evangelists,
and rehearsed often. Marc. 10.25 Matt. 20.20.
Here Marc. 10. Matthew. 20. and a Contention of the same nature is set down
Matthew. 18. Matthew. 18.1.
And whereunto tends the ingemination of a thing that is not so memorable in it
self? Doubtless for the prevention and premonition to the Church; that it
should not be swayed with such ambitious prehensations and vast desires,
though they be gilded over with Apostolical styles and titles. Apothecaries
boxes sometimes have the inscriptions of restoratiues, when they be full of
poison. Affectation of greatness is repressed in the Apostles themselves: in
the rampant Bell-weathers of the Christian flock, and then how should it be
allowable in their successors, or Apostolical men? It is not improbable, that
some such windy affection did thrust the Apostles into this strife: but most
certain, that those that vaunt themselves to be successors of the Apostles,
have entertained quarrels with all the world, by reason of some peculiar
favors and indulgences that CHRIST showed to some of the Apostles above the
rest. Thou art Peter and upon this rock will I build my Church, are thought to
be very significant words that way. But Paul tells us, Petra erat Christus,
that Christ was that rock, and not Peter. So says God himself by Esaias: J lay
in Sion a low corner stone, Esaias. 28.16.
elect, and precious; 1. Cor. 3.11.
whosoever believes and rests on it, shall not be confounded. And, no man
can lay another foundation then that which is laid already, which is Jesus
Christ. For, Quis est Deus praeter Dominum? Et quis est Petra praeter Deum
nostrum? Who is God, but the Lord? and who is the Rock (says David) except our
God? Psalm. 18.31.
Again, Unto thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, are used to
the like purpose. But this strife proves directly that the Apostles made no
co^struction out of these words, for Peter's prerogative: Had they conceived
any meaning that way, it had ended the strife, and Peter must have been the
greatest. But they renew their quarrel; after these words, they argued it
again and again: they insisted upon it at the last Supper that ever they had
with their Master. Pregnant arguments that the Apostles understood nothing of
this grant that is urged.

What do they think of Christ, that knew the meaning of his own words? was
he not willing to inform his Disciples, to leave quietness amongst them?
might he not have done it with one word, that Peter should be greatest? or
would he reprove their Contention with an absolute non sic, if he had
concluded any thing for Peter formerly? Multa coguntur male interpretari, qui
nolunt vnum recte intelligere, They are forced to interpret many things
wrongfully, that will not understand one rightly.

It is evident in the 2. Gal. Galat. 2.8.
that Peter and Paul were allotted to several portions: Peter to the Jews,
Paul to the Gentiles; and neither had Primacy, or universal charge of the
whole Church. What shall we say of the Primative times? Aeneas Syluius Epist.
280.
Then every Church was governed by their own Canons, and little respect was
had of the Church of Rome; to the great Council of Nyce, that appointed three
other Patriarckes besides the B. of Rome, to govern the Churches that were
contiguous? to the first Council of Constantinople, that gave the B. of that
See equal privileges with the B. of Rome? to the Council of Calcedon, that
confirmed them? to the learned Fathers, that understood nothing of this
Primacie for diverse hundredth years after CHRIST, until the Church of Rome
began to swell with the Dropsy of this Contention? Then indeed men that were
willing to serve such turns, found this liquor out of the places, that I have
alleged, to quench their mothers thirst.

But they bear witness to themselves, and are not to be heard in their own
cause, unless they compass such a Decree, as Stratocles did for Demetrius,
(...), whatsoever Demetrius will command shall be holy before God, and just
amongst men. Therefore leaving Stratocles and his Bishop together, to court the
World for this Decree, I return to the occasion of the Apostles strife.

The nearest occasion of this Text seems to be taken from the death of
CHRIST, mentioned in the words precedent. After his death they imagined he
would set up an earthly kingdom, and so consequently enter in strife, which of
them should have administration of it. When Mariners fall out in a tempest at
Sea, which of them shall first cast himself ouerboard, every one finds
their Contention absurd and dangerous, because an agreement in their service is
most necessary at such a time, for preservation of the Ship: even so is this
difference of the Apostles. What was the affectation of a Masterie, but a
renunciation to their Ministry? And that could never have been at a more
unseasonable time, by reason of CHRIST his death being then imminent.

When the Shepherd was to be smitten, the sheep had occasion to run
together into an holy Concord, either to prevent, or to adiourne the scattering
and dissipation to come. When the Bridegroom was ready to be taken away,
tears and lamentations would have suited well with the Children of the marriage
chamber. To have no apprehension of sorrow at his death, by whose life they had
received the sweetness of Comfort; no concussion of fear, when their Master
should be taken from their heads: but even then to devise of their own
affairs, to attend and to meditate of their future power, was certainly an
untimely fruit of ambition; which is like the Bitch (if I may speak it with
your reverence) that for have throws out her puppies blind.

Is this the kindness that they show to their Master? O worthy Elizeus, how
affectionat were thine obsequies in the like case! you may remember, That he
could neither be persuaded, nor beguiled, nor forced from Elijah when he should
have been taken from him: but left all other thoughts and did cleave to his
Masters side, with an inseparable resolution: As the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives I will not leave thee. And did the son of God deserve less
respect from his Apostles, then the Tishbite had from the son of Shaphat?
verily no. Where then is their zeal? where is their retaliation? where is the
desire of Peter's devoted affection? Lord to whom shall we go, thou have the
words of eternal life? Forsooth a strong imagination of a kingdom has
suppressed them all. Grant all that they expected, that CHRIST would leave
them an earthly kingdom; Yet pretenders should stay till things were ready,
and not bury their predecessors alive. But their hopes of such a kingdom were
very fantasies, and great thoughts of heart. How should he leave that to them
which he had not himself? The confession he made before Pontius Pilate is an
indefesible evidence, That his kingdom is not of this World: therefore he
could not leave them an earthly kingdom. They had promise of an eternal
kingdom, and there can be no eternity but in that which is spiritual. All
corporal things have their fatal periods, and spiritual things only are
permanent in eternity.

The Prophets describe the kingdom of Christ with words of external
Majesty; but then they add the doctrine of his Passion, and imply an other
kind of Majesty then the world affords. Here Kings must be suffered; they
must not suffer. To be short, Christ left not his glorification, and kingdom
unmentioned; and yet confesses plainly enough, by washing his Disciples
feet, that his kingdom consists in a Ministry, not in any outward
Soueraignetie and command; The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister. Mat. 20.28.


Mark therefore the vanity of this Contention; they strive for precedencie in
Christ's corporal kingdom: but seeing there is no such corporal kingdom (as
I have already proved) neither can there be any such greatness as they
imagine; so their Contention comes to a matter of nothing, conceived of wind,
and ends with wind. Indeed, Contentions, Kingdoms, greatness in such great
places, are nothing belonging to the Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, as
appears in his Censure following.

2. Part.
But he said unto them, the kings of the Gentiles reign over them, etc.

I doubt not but you see that the Apostles came into a just reprehension, and
deserved sharp reproof, yet because they offended not of malice, but of
ignorance, and were carried along with the current of that time, which reduced
all the promises of Christ his government to an earthly kingdom: therefore
their sweet and mild Master instructs them friendly, without bitterness,
and reserueth the thunderboults of his severity for the obstinate and
incorrigible. He exhibiteth the disposition that Esaias foretold; Here is no
Contention, no Clamor, Esaias. 42.2.
no contumelius insultation; but a grave and quiet instruction. He breaks not
a bruised Reed, he quenches not smoking flax: Matt. 12.20.
For he considers whereof we be made; Psalm. 103.14.
he remembers that we are but dust.

I can compare the kindness of his facility to nothing more aptly, then to
the bowels of the Evangelical sheepheards; how affectionately did they yearne
after the lost Sheep? He contemned it not, though it were but one: He
neglected it not through sloth; gives not over his love when it was gone: he
seeks it, and finding it, deals not roughly, nor frowardly, but fairly and
tenderly with it; leaves it not when it was weary, but lays it upon his
shouldiers: O good Sheepeheard, that pains himself to give ease to a poor
weary sheep!

Can ye tell me whether was greater, his care and endeavor when the sheep was
lost, or his compassionate entreaty, and sweet indulgence when it was found
again? was he more careful in the former, or gracious in the latter, or
incomparable in both? Such are the bowels of our Sheepeheard: I serve him for
the one, love him for the other. And though he be infinite in all his works,
Mirabilior tame^ esse creditur in exercitio pietatis. Thus he has done, and
left us an example to follow, that follow him in his Pastoral function. We
which are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1.
and not to please our selves, least passion transport us, and we lose that
through rigor, that might be saved with placabilitie. And thus much for the
manner of the Censure.

The next thing obseruable in the Censure, is the matter thereof, and that is
Soueraignetie, or supreme jurisdiction, given here unto Kings; which
appears by the plain joints and necessary coherence of my Text. The
Apostles quarrel was for Supremacy: CHRIST adiudgeth the matter unto Kings.
What matter? none certainly, but that which was in debate, and question; for I
make it a matter of Religion, to think that the Wisdom of God would wander
and leave the question.

The Apostles contend, Which of them should be the greatest: Is not the
Contention for Supremacy? CHRIST in his Censure says, That the Kings of the
Gentiles reign over them. Is there any greater then he that reigns and
bears rule? Kings therefore are here invested with supreme Authority, by
the sentence, and Censure of the Son of God. This is no strained inference;
it contains nothing but the constant and perpetual meaning of the Son of
God, Mark. 12.17
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
Gods. Here is no interposition of any person, between God and Caesar, but
next under God Caesar has the highest right. We reserve our Consciences for
God; we submit our bodies and goods to Caesar: That which remains is matter
for Politans and Papians to discourse of.

Tell us John the meaning of Christ his style, that is written upon his thigh,
Revel. 19.16
The King of kings; is it not a title of his greatness? yes verily; for so he
is employed to be, higher then the highest. And who would imagine that the
Savior of the World would call himself King of kings, in his greatest
greatness, unless he had meant, that Kings should have the precedence of all
mortal men? or who knowing this to be CHRIST his style, would thrust himself
above Kings in prejudice of the son of God? Christ has a poor advancement
of it, to be King of kings, if another be above them as well as he. If the
Servant of servants be above the King of kings and Lord of lords, then where
is Christ his prerogative? Numb. 16.7
Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levy. Romans 13.1.
Paul subjecteth every soul to the Civil power, and excepteth none. Etiamsi
sis Apostolus, Though thou be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or what
else-soeuer thou be, thou must be subject to Civil power. For this subjection,
says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans Homil. 28.
is no hinderance to godliness: And then it can not be against the faith. The
Apostle persuades this subjection, not for humility, nor by way of courtesy,
but enioynes it of necessity: we must needs be subject, Jdque propter
conscientiam; and that which is done of Conscience, is so necessary to be
done, that it cannot be omitted without heinous sin. Necessity and
Conscience be strong obligations for Civil obedience.

Give me leave on the other side, to let you see the strength and sinews of
Ecclesiastical power: then look on the Decrees of the Church single as they
are in themselves, and severed from the Princes countenance. Act. 15.29.
The Decree that the Gentiles should abstain from things offered unto Jdols,
is of that nature: and is it not limited by the Apostle of the Gentiles? 1.
Cor. 10.25.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, and ask no question for Conscience
sake: but if any man say unto you, this is sacrificed unto Idols, eat it not,
because of him that showed it, and for the Conscience. The conscience I say,
not thine, but of that other. Compare Paul with Paul, Power with power, Bond
with bond, Law with law; Civil authority requires a necessity of obedience;
Ecclesiastical gives liberty to the Conscience: The Civil Magistrate must
be obeyed simply; the Ecclesiastical admits Caution and respect. This binds
me only in Case of scandal; the other as well out of offense, as in offense.
Though I lived without controlment of any eye; yet I am bound in Conscience to
obey the Positive laws. I am bound to obey both powers, but with disparitie:
the Civil ordinances for clearing mine own Conscience from sin; and
Ecclesiastical Decrees for comeliness, for order, for saving my Brother from
stumbling and offense. Judge whether authority is greater, the Mytre or the
Scepter? Primae Ecclesiae Patres, non leges, aut iura vt Reges, sed modestia
vocabuli abijs traditiones suas distinxerunt. Posteriores Pontifices, vt
necessitatem parendi vsurparent vsuque acquirerent, iuris verbum adiecerunt,
Jus Canonicum and Canones appellarunt. Both these Offices are now conjoined
together in CHRIST: and is he not greater in his kingdom? he stands at the
right hand of God, as an Advocate and Priest; he sits as a King. This puts
a Scepter, the other gives a Censer into his hand. His Priesthood reaches but
to the Elect, his kingdom judges quick and dead. He is sweet in his
Priesthood; but in his kingdom High, Potent, Magnificall, Glorious, and
Triumphant. Why must prayers be made for Kings? That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life under them in all godliness and honesty; 1. Tim. 2.2.
Godliness and honesty makes them Guardians of both Tables, as well of the
First, which contains the worship of God; as of the Second, which is the
fountain of public honesty. And what lackes he of Supremacy, that has the
care and superintendance of all things that belong to God and man? Statesmen
tell us that five things must concur together, and meet, to make a
Soueraignetie. First, to give Laws: Secondly, to make War and Peace:
Thirdly, to appoint the principal Officers of estate: Fourthly, to receive
appeals: Fifthly, to grant Pardon.

Jacob said, The Scepter shall not depart from Juda, Gent. 49.10.
nor a Lawgiver from between his knees, until Shilo come. Mark Antiquaries
and Nouelists too, how anciently law-giuing has been an accedent and adiunct
to the Scepter. August. in Io. tract. 6.
Iura humana iura Imperatorum sunt: quare? quia ipsa iura humana per
Imperatores, and Reges saeculi Deus distribuit generi humano. Jn hoc Reges
seruiunt Deo, Aug. contra Crescon.
sicut eis diuinitus praecipitur in quantum sunt Reges. Si in suo regno bona
iubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum
etiam quae ad Diuinam Religionem: Herein Kings serve God, as they are
commanded by holy Writ, in respect that they are Kings, if in their kingdoms
they command that which is good, and forbid that which is evil, not only in
matters of humane society, but of Divine Religion too.

Abigail could tell that King David 1. Sam. 25.28
And it follows in the story, that at length he made peace with all the
nations round about.

Concerning Officers, Ester. 3.1.
Rex Assuerus euexit, vt cunctis Persarum and Medorum Principibus anteferretur,
Et Mordechaium totius honoris and dignitatis eius successore^ constituit. The
Book of Kings, and Chronicles yield clear testimonies, that these Offices were
in the Kings dispose: he placed and displaced them all, even the Highpriests
too. Pope Boniface the 8. would have put himself into these rights in France;
But he got a Great fooliship for this attempt; Sciat maxima tua fatuetas, etc.
and then was quiet.

Paul's provocation unto Caesar, Act. 25.10.
I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to be judged; not only in
respect of himself, because he could not decline that jurisdiction, but of
all others besides; for none could exempt him, because Caesar had the last
resort and supreme Judicature.

Last of all, the grace of deliverance Ioab was mistaken in the midst of his
subtilitie, when he sent the woman of Tekoah to David. 2. Sam. 14.2.
David and Solomon were mistaken too: the one, when he pardoned Absolon and
Shemey; the other, when he gave to Abiathar the high priest his life. 1. Ring
12.26*
Thou art worthy of death, but I will not kill thee; go to Anathoth to thine
own fields: He did confine him. Now who can deny the Kings Supremacy,
seeing all the particulars of Soueraignetie meet together in his person? Peter
graunts it: Submit yourselues to all manner ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as having more then all; that
is the force of the word (...). And in my poor understanding, he that has
power boue all must needs be Supreme.

But why does Peter call it a humane ordinance? The Kings power is like to
Pearls, that are found here below, but carry a resemblance of Heaven in
their brightness, and Orient colors: Such is the authority that I treat of:
S. Peter calls it a humane ordinance, because it is conversant here upon earth,
and exercised amongst men. But it may justly challenge an higher parentage,
when the beauty thereof is marked, and the emoluments considered: Then it is
like to Daniels goodly Tree, Dan. 4.18.
of whose fruit all mortal men do taste and eat, and under whose shadow they
also take rest and comfort. How often have those holy Fathers run to the
defense, and succor of this Tree in storms, which now in their fair
Sunshine go about to shroude and lopp the branches! O unthankful
remembrancers! But to the point: If this power be of men, how is it sacred? and
if it be from heaven, why should it not be Sovereign?

The Royal Law is this, Thou shall make him King over thee whom the Lord thy
God shall choose. Deuteronomy. 17.15.
The people have no authority to make a King, no voices, nor interest in the
business: when they desire a King, God reserueth that power to himself. You
know who says it, Act. 13.21.
Acts 13. When the people of Jsrael desired a King, God gave unto them Saul the
Son of Cys. Samuel did not appoint him, the people did not choose him, but
God: To morrow about this time I will send thee a Man, him shall thou annoint.
There is Samuels warrant: 1. Sam. 10.20 21.
And will you see what part the people had? Samuel assembled the people, and
the tribe of Benjamin was taken. So Saul the son of Cys was taken. 1. Sam.
10.24.
And Samuel said, see you not him whom the Lord has chosen? Nor Priest, nor
Prophet, nor people had Nomination, Election or Approbation of the King, but
God did all according to the reservation of his own Law. The people were
beholders, no actors: they did take Conditions, they could make none. Hoc erit
ius Regis, This shall be (whether you translate it) the Kings right or his
manner: It is an Item to Subjects, that they can never Capitulate with their
Prince: If you translate it, the Kings right, then that may not be invaded: If
you translate it, His manner, or custom, that creates an other right, and
cannot handsomely be avoided. Here is the difference between a Law, that
gives right, and a Custom, that maks a manner: in the former there is an
express allowance; in the second, a secret consent.

The appointment of the second King was like unto the first: and the third also
was assigned to David by God. The greatest diffrence was, that Gods Election
began then to be hereditarie, and to be declared by succession. But men's
inheritances take not away Gods right: they confirm it rather, because he
appoints heirs.

Ego dixi dij estis, He calls them Gods to whom the Word of God came. Psalm.
82.6. Ioh. 10.34.
Which speech of Christ is an Hebraisme, signifying that Kingdoms and
Governments come not by authority, or practice of men: but by Gods holy
Ordinance and Commission. The Word of God must come unto them before they can
be called Gods. And so I will shut up this point with that which they say Peter
spoke to Birthwould a Moncke of Glassenburie, when he was anointing Edward the
Confessor (as I remember): The Moncke was inquisitiue who should succeed him in
the kingdom: And Peter answered, Ne talia cures; Sir Moncke, trouble not your
head with such cares: Regnum enim Angliae Dei regnum est; For the Kingdom of
England is Gods kingdom. Even so Lord JESUS let it ever continue, that it may
be safe under the shadow of thy wings. If the Monckes vision were true, it
brings our Superuisors of kingdoms a Supersedeas from Peter; and that should
be of some force amongst those that cry nothing but Peter, Peter: If it be not
true, yet it shows what the opinion of the world was then, namely, That the
disposition of kingdoms belongs to God alone: And that the Care of Titles
and Successions was no fit Meditation for Monckes, and Parsons of that rank.
Thus much for the Supremacy of the Kings power.

Now the style of Kings follows, which our SAVIOVR, in this place, would have
proportionable to the Majesty of their places. we are commanded, Romans 13.7.
To give honor to whom honor belongs; Surely none has such right unto it
as the King: And the first part of honor consists in Terms and Titles of
respect.

My son, Prou. 24.21.
fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious. God
and the King are proposed jointly, and made the Objects of our fear: therefore
the Holy Ghost inioyneth us to perform no perfunctorie or vulgar reverence to
Kings, but that which is Sacred and Cordial: Bring such reverence, and all
Complements of Honor will follow to content Christian Princes. And remember,
that as they have Gods Chair, and represent Gods image: so he has
communicated his Name unto them, which contains the amplitude of all Honor.
Here the Son of God calls them Benefactors, or gracious Lords; a Title
anciently given to Kings, and none sorteth better with the intent and end of
their office, which is as Aristotle admonishes king Alexander, (...). Paul
expresses it in good English: Romans 13.4.
He is the Minister of God for thy good.

Tu regem patremque geras, tu consule cunctis. You have heard how the Lord that
is anointed, honors the Lords anointed, with Supremacy in his
Jurisdiction, with Majesty in his Style, and Titles. It is our duties to wish
him good luck with his Honor, Psalm. 122.7.8 9.
Peace be within his Walls, and plenteousnesse within his Palaces: for my
Brethren and Companions sake, I will wish him prosperity; yea because of the
house of the Lord J will pray for his good.

Now let us see the last passage what interest the Apostles and their
successors have in this matter of Supremacy, and Titles of Majesty. Our
Savior takes it from them Positiuely: Vos autem non sic, You that are Apostles
shall have no such power. Our Masters of the Church of Rome draws it to them
crookedly: whether will ye believe, him that was indifferent and without
respect of persons, or these that are partial? him in the truth, or these in
their pride? the Son of God, or the Brethren of the Conclaue?

Amongst many differences that be between them, this may be reckoned for one;
That we believe the Savior of mankind upon his word: Jpse dixit is
sufficient. But the other must attend for no further credit from us, then they
can win by the evidence of their proofs. And these are either Blasphemous or
Triuiall.

They now say that we must conceive a secret and employed Oath in our Baptism,
to yield obedience to the Pope. A proof full of horrible blasphemy: true
Christians will detest to swear into the Popes words, and to join him in
their Baptism, as a Consort with the three Persons of the holy and undivided
Trinity. Hear thou not this, O Christ, at the right hand of God; How the
Adversaries, for their own greatness, would euacuate and violate thy holy
Baptism?

The other proofs, Feed my sheep, Ioh. 21.16. Matt. 16.19.
and, Unto thee will I give the keys (for I read no more in the writhen
Divine) are ouerworne and triuiall proofs, unbeseeming the cause, which is now
made one of the principal Articles of Faith, as if none could be faithful
unless he believe in the Pope: unfitting the person that alleges them, from
whom the world did look for Oracles; and behold nothing but that which every
triobolour Papist can tell.

As to the former, Paul in his farewell, told the Elders of Ephesus, that The
holy Ghost had made them overseers, Act. 20.28.
to feed the Church of God. Wherein I note two things: First, the Office of
Elders did consist in feeding: Secondly, that the Church of God which they must
feed, is of equipollent and of as large compass as the sheep of CHRIST.
Therefore if there be any force in the words of our Savior unto Peter for
feeding his sheep, because they are indefinite: There must needs be the same
in these of Paul, to the Priests of Ephesus, because they are equivalent. And
so every inferior Minister should hold a kind of Soueraignetie in their
places, which peradventure our Adversaries may intend, though it be not
expressed, for they conceal many things, till opportunity serve. But, if the
Pope by feeding of Christ's sheep, may exercise authority over Kings; be well
assured that his inferior Ministers which have the same power of feeding, may
and will practice the like upon you that are Subjects. Is it possible that any
Subjects should be in better Condition then their Sovereign? Do not deceive
your selves, my good Brethren and friends, Mat. 10.24.
the servant is no better then his Master. That which is good in the head of
the Church against the heads of Kingdoms, will always be of validity in the
Members of the Church against the Subjects of kingdoms. Therefore beware of
them beloved: They that dare attempt against the Majesty and Persons of
Kingdoms, will much sooner attempt against your lands, and lives, and goods.
Nothing shall be left vnviolable, nothing remain free in any part of the
Commonwealth; all must be at the pleasure and mercy of the Pope and his
Priests: You see how he is not content to sheare, but will skin his sheep; so
as no man has cause to be sorry that he is not of his fould.

Now look upon his Keys, if they be as powerful as the feeding of sheep.

The keys of the kingdom of heaven, is a perspicuous exposition of the
Gospel, teaching men what way they may go to Heaven, and how to be saved. This
Key was not committed to Peter alone, but unto all the rest of the Apostles.
Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo Claves regni Coelorum, Orig. in Mat. 16. tract. 1.
caeteris quoque commune est; Et quae sequuntur velut ad Petrum dicta, sunt
omnium co^munia: This sentence of Christ, Unto thee will I give the keys of
the kingdom of Heaven, is spoken to the other Apostles too: and the words
that follow, which seem to be delivered unto Peter, are common to all the
rest. Then if we marvel that they which are designed to the charge of
expounding of the Gospel, and opening Heaven, undertake other things by the
power of their keys, as Kingdoms and Governments of the Earth; we do it not
without the warrant of Scripture. Here is a Pattern that our Savior leaves
to his Apostles in my Text: Soueraignetie is interdicted, and a Ministry is
enjoined them. Di Consider. ad Eugen.
Bernard writ to as great a Pope as Paul the fifth, Quid vos alienos fines
invaditis? What do you mean to enter upon other men's rights? Disce tibi
Sarculo opus esse no^ Sceptro, vt opus Prophetae facias; Understand that an
Hook to weed withal, is fitter for you then a Scepter, to do the office of
a Prophet. Esto vt quacunque alia ratione hoc tibi vendices, non tamen
Apostolico iure; By what other right soever you can challenge this thing, it is
certain you may not do it by any right derived from the Apostles: Nec illud
tibi dare Petrus potuit quod non habuit; For, that which Peter had not himself
he could never convey to the Pope: And so he concludes. I ergo tu, and tibi
vsurpare aude, aut dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus dominatum, Go too
then, and usurp if you dare, either a Lordlike Apostleship, or an Apostolical
Lordship. Plane ab alterutro prohiberis, You are clearly forbidden the one of
the two. Si vtrumque similiter habere voles, vtrumque perdes, If you will
needs have them both together, you must needs loose them both. Well then; are
not the Keys sometimes a Cognizance of absolute Authority? yes verily: but
that is David's Keye, not Peter's. I; but CHRIST had that keye too. It is true,
but he did not communicate it to Peter, or to any of the Apostles. Reuelat. 3.7.
This says he that has the keye of David, then he had it, he has it still,
he will have it ever, he will never resign it to any of his Apostles: Ioh.
20.21
He sent them, but as his Father sent him into the World, and that was without
any Royalty or Kingly power: But after his Resurrection he says, All power is
given me, both in Heaven, and in Earth: Mat. 28.18.
and adds, Go therefore unto his Apostle: By that power which was given him
both in Heaven and in Earth, he shows that he has authority to send forth
his Apostles; so he adds rightly, Go ye therefore. But how shall they go?
Suerly, not with that fullness of Power over Heaven and Earth, which he
mentioned instantly before (and then was the fittest time to have given it)
But, Go teach all nations, Matt. 28.19.20.
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things that J have commanded you.

This is their Charter, their Commission, their Letters Patents, and it
contains all the notes and marks of the Church. Those things be within
their charge; the preaching of the Gospel, the administration of the
Sacraments, the settling, not of any one model, but of that discipline that may
bring men to the obedience and observation of CHRIST his Commandments: For
planting or transplanting of kingdoms (...), there is no Title in all their
Commission.

Bellarmine makes much ado about the translation of the Roman Empire, from
the Greeks to Charlemaine, by the B. of Rome; and pleases himself with
conjecture more then his Judicious Reader with soliditie of reason. The very
truth of that story is, that Charles the great had it not by the authority
of the Pope, but by Conquest and Transaction with Nicephorus the Greek
Emperor, when he could hold it no longer. But allow the Cardinal, that which
he cannot prove; that Charles obtained the Empire by the Popes authority, then
he may call to mind, That the restitution of the Roman Monarchy must be done
by Antichrist, as it is in the 13. Chap. of the Revelation. Revel. 13.1.
But Bellarmine tells us, that the B. of Rome effected the restitution of the
Roman Empire: therefore Bellarmine makes the Bishop of Rome to be Antichrist,
which I will not confute.

You have heard, how CHRIST his Censure does deiect the Pope from his usurped
Monarchy, Vos autem non sic: You that be Ministers of the Gospel may not
reign like Kings. And some of our Brethren allege the same words also to
dispossess the Reverend Bishops of this Church from their Superiority: But
they set CHRIST'S words upon the tentar-hookes, and stretch them too far. His
meaning is not to make an equality amongst the Ministers, but to set a
difference between Kings, and the Ministers of the Word, that none should
invade the right of Princes, under the pretense of their Ministry.

As for Aequalitie, when one advised Lycurgus to establish it amongst the
Lacedaemonians, whereby the least and meanest might bear like sway, and rule
with the greatest; The wise man answered, that he which calls for that,
should begin it first at home in his own house. And if all men be careful to
exclude Paritie out of their private families: if men experienced in Policy
and Government, will not admit it into the Commonwealth, because that cannot
be preserved with equality, but by authority and rule: Why are not men as
sensible of the House of God, as of their own houses? why should Aequalitie,
that is found intolerable in other Societies, be obtruded to the Church?
Because distinctions, and inequality of Pastors cannot be proved by
Scripture. That is not so. There were diverse Pastors under the Law (so I think
I may call the Priests) but they were not equal: for there was one High
Priest, as it were a Transcendent above them all. But his eminency was to
express the Soueraignetie of JESUS CHRIST. But then there were Captains of
every family of the Levites, and that proves an inequality. Last of all,
there were two joined with the high Priest, which are called Rulers in the
House of God, in the first Paralip. Chap. 24. Verse. 5. 1. Chron. 24.5.


In the New Testament there was distinction, and inequality between the
Apostles themselves; or else Paul would never have called Peter, and James,
Galat. 2.9.
and John, chief and pillars of the Apostles. There was distinction and
inequality between the twelve Apostles, and the seventy Disciples. 1. Cor.
3.10.
Paulus Appellat seipsum Architectum.

We read of many Pastors at Ephesus, Act. 20.17. etc. Reuelat. 2.1.
Act. 20. and in the Reuelat. John writes, To the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus; which euicteth necessarily that there was one greater then the rest.
Par in partem non habet Imperium, One equal has no power over another. But,
Paul gave Timothy authority over Pastors: 1. Tim. 1.3.
Therefore he intended and ordained an inequality, and no paritie, amongst the
Pastors of the Church. The reasons of those that call for equality in the
Ministers of the Church, are not made to build up, and they are too weak to
pull down. Zeal is good, and a sweet thing: it is to vow your hearts unto
God; but every Sacrifice must be seasoned with Salt, least ye go about to
reform the Church with one hand, and to subvert the state with the other.
Abraham says gravely unto Lot, Genes. 13.8.
Let there be no Contentions between me and thee, for we are Brethren: That
is one reason; Psalm. 133.1.
And it is both good and pleasant for Brethren to dwell together. Again, The
Chananite, and the Peryzite are yet in the land, that is another motive. Genes.
13.7.
In which case, who knows not that the adversaries of our doctrine will sooner be
ouercom with united, the^ distracted forces? And so we that fight the Lords
battles cannot dis-joyne our selves without preuarication and booty. Away then
with all singularity, and admiring our own opinions; know ye not that it is
the Seminary of inward Contention? The spirit of the Prophets must be subject
unto the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14.31
Let us have but one heart, and one way, that we may fill the Lords House with
Garlands of victories: that we may beat our Adversaries from humane merits,
and bring them to the divine mercies; from Freewill, and the possibilities of
Nature, to the Grace of God; from Traditions, to the written Word; from
Elevation, Adoration, Circumgestation, Transubstantiation of the Sacrament, to
the Commemoration of Christ's death, and a sweet fruition thereof by Faith; from
their Hierarchy and visible Monarchy, to the Headship of our Lord JESUS CHRIST;
from superstition to the true worship of God. Oh how glorious are these holy
triumphs! how instantly do they call upon us to combine our selves together,
that the Conversion and Offering up of the Papists may be acceptable and
sanctified? And thus much for Concord to my Brethren of the Ministry.

I would not dismiss you of the Laity, after this long discourse of contention,
without some short exhortation to peace. The very name of Peace is a sweet
word, but the work is sweeter. I cannot always speak of it; but that which I
cannot speak of always, you may keep always: as for example, he that
prayseth God with his tongue cannot do it ever, that member must have rest as
well as the other parts of the body: but he that praises God with his life
and conversation, may ever do it. Even so do I commend the words and works of
peace unto you: or if you think me unworthy to commend such a divine blessing;
look if it be not the word of a Great and mighty King that is far above all
exception: Matthew. 5.9.
He commands it unto us from the Author of peace, Beati pacifici, not
pacidici; but pacifici: blessed are not the praysors, but, the practisers of
peace. Let the Mountains bring peace, and the little Hills righteousness unto
thy people, O thou Prince of peace. Hebr. 20.21
And so The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great shepherd of the sheep thorough the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in all good works, working in you that which is pleasant in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ADDITION To the former Treatise of SOVERAIGNETIE: SHOWING THAT THE
POSSESSION THEREOF HAS NOT been in Popes, save by Usurpation and Practices;
but in Emperors and Kings by a continued or perpetual Descent.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers.

1. Cor. Chap. 3. Verse. 21.22.23.

Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours. Whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours. And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GERALD Earl of KILDARE, and the rest of the Nobles,
or Gentry in Jreland: CHRISTOPHER by the mercy of God, Archbishop of Armagh,
and Primate of all IRELAND, wishes much happiness here, and full in the
world to come.
Honored Lords, and esteemed Gentlemen, I have published as well the former
Treatise, as this addition of Soueraignetie, for your sakes, whom J am bound to
inform by the duty of my place, and in retribution of the respects you give
unto me otherwise: that since the sound of my voice cannot reach to the ears
of every one, now it is grown low with years and infirmities; the Meditations
of my heart may nevertheless be offered to the eyes and judgment, of all
which J desire you to peruse and examine by the weights or standard of Truth,
without prejudice or forestalled opinion. ()()

AN ADDITION To the former Treatise of SOVRAIGNETIE.
AT the first institution of the Civil, and Ecclesiastical authority in the
Church, Exodchan. 4. verse. 15. and 16.
God says to Moses: Thou shall speak to Aaron and put the words in his
mouth, and J will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you
what you ought to do. And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he
shall be, even he shall be as the mouth, and thou shall be to him as God.

Aaron obeyed Moses: Exodus 32.
and Moses called for an account of Aaron.

Solomon being King according to his Fathers appointment, 2. Chron. c. 8 verse.
14.15.
ordained the Offices of Priests in their Ministeries, and Leuits in their
orders, that they might give thanks, and minister before the Priest after the
order of every day: For so commanded David the man of God; neither did the
Priests, or Leuits omit any thing of all that he had commanded.

2. Chron. 19. verse. 8.
So it is written of King Iehosaphat, that he appointed the Levites and Priests.

2. Chro. 35.2.
And of King Josias likewise, that he appointed Priests to minister in their
several Offices.

Luc. c. 2. v. 7.
In the New Testament, our Savior Christ at his birth acknowledged subjection
to Augustus the Emperor being borne under his tribute; and setting the example
of his own subjection before his Disciples, asks, Who is Superior, he that
sits at the Table, or he that serves? Js not he Superior that sits? but
J am among you as he that ministers and serves.

Before Pilate he disauowed to have any earthly kingdom, Ioh. 18.36.
and acknowledged that the Roman Empire had authority over his body and life;
for both were then in question, and for blasphemy too, which is a spiritual
crime.

After the death of Christ, Act. 25.11.
his Apostle Paul appealed from the Jews to Cesars judgment, and says in
express terms, That there he ought to be judged; And his cause was for
preaching the Gospel.

Peter likewise patiently endured Nero his Sword, for teaching the truth. This
was the condition of Christ and his Apostles, they professed themselves
subjects to the Roman Emperor. About the year of our Lord. 150.


Eleutherius B. of Rome did write unto Lucius then king of the Britans to take
Laws for the Government of his kingdom out of the Old Testament and the
New, which were then in the Kings hands, and gives this reason of his advise:
Ye are Gods Vicar within your own kingdom.

Ad Scapul. About the year of our Lord. 220.
Tertullian: We Christians worship the Emperor as man next unto God, and
inferior only to God. For so is the Emperor greater then all men, when he is
less then the only true God.

Cyprian libr. 1. Epist. 3.
Cyprian would not give way to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, to absolve any of
Africa excommunicated there.

Nice, there was small or no regard had of the Church of Rome; but every Church
was ruled by their own Canons, or by the common advise of Bishops, until the
Emperors became Christians: Lib. 5. in pro^^mio.
Then Socrates testifies in his Ecclesiastical History in this wise: We have
also herein comprised the Emperors lives; for that since the Emperors were
first Christened, the affairs of the Church has hanged on them, and the
greatest Counsels both have bin, and are kept by their advise.

Eusebius writes: In vita Constant. orat. 1.
Constantine the Emperor appointed Counsels of Bishops to assemble together,
and disdained not to sit in the midst amongst them, and to be pertaker of
their doings. This great Constantine about the year of our Lord, 340. called a
general Council at Nice.

So Theodoret writes: Lib. 1. cap. 9.
A great and holy Council was gathered to Nice by the grace of God, and by the
godly Emperor.

So Eusebius also testifies, De vita Constant. orat. 3.
that Constantine gathered a general Council, and by honorable Writs called
the Bishops of all Countries to repair together. And the same Author
witnesses, that the Emperor Constantine confirmed the determinations of the
Council of Nice.

More also,

De vita Constant. libr. 3. cap. 10.
The whole Council sat in Reverend and comely order, quietly and in silence,
looking for the Princes coming; and when the watchword was given that the
Emperor was come, the Bishops stood up from their places, and his Majesty
passed a long through the midst of them, as if he had been an Angel of God.

In that Council of Nice, the whole body of Christendom was divided into
four Patriarcheships: whereof the first place was given to the Bishop of Rome;
the second to the Bishop of Alexandria; the third to the Bishop of Antioch; the
fourth to the Bishop of Jerusalem; afterward came in the B. of Constantinople
in the place of the B. of Antioch: these four Patriarchs had their peculiar
Circuites and Precincts appointed in such sort, as one of them should not
meddle within another Jurisdiction, to confound their authorities. The cause
why the Fathers, assembled in Council, gave the first place to the Sea of old
Rome, was not for that either Christ, or his Apostle Peter had so appointed:
but that the City of Rome was the most noble City, and of greatest renown in
all the World; as appears in the Council of Calcedon, which writes, That
the Fathers in the Council of Nice did worthily give the chiefetie to the Sea
of old Rome, because that City had the Soueraignetie over others.

Saint Ambrose, speaking of himself and other Bishops, which were at the
Council of Aquileia, says thus: We are met together at Aquileia by the
commandment of the Emperor.

Constantinople, the Bishops wrote thus unto Theodosius the Emperor: We are
come to Constantinople by your Majesty's Commission.

And afterward at the end of that Council: We beseech your Majesty, that as
you have honored the Church by your Letters, wherewith you have called us
together; so it may please you to Confirm the final Conclusion of our Decrees
with your sentence and with your Seal.

Carthage, where S. Augustine was present, Sozimus B. of Rome sends Legates,
Faustinus, Philippus, and Asellus, in favor of Apiarius a Priest, that fled to
Rome for aid against Vrbanus his Diocesan, who had deprived him both of his
function, and the Communion for his lewdness: To these Legates the Pope gave
charge, to claim this Privilege for him and his See; That if any Bishops
were accused, or deposed, which appealed to Rome, the Bishop of Rome might
either write to the next Province to determine the matter, or send some to
represent his Person, and to sit in judgment with the Bishops. And to prove
his desire lawful, he alleged in writing under his hand, a Canon of the
Council of Nice, tending to that purpose. The godly Fathers assembling
themselves out of all Affricke, to the number of 217, and finding no such Canon
in their Books, either Greek or Latin, writ to the Patriaches of Alexandria,
Constantinople, and Antioch, for true and authenticke Copies of the Nicene
Council: and finding their own Copies agree word for word with those that
were brought, and no such prerogative to be seen in any Canon there; First,
by their Decree they cut off all appeals to Rome, viz. That Priests, African.
Council. c. 92.
Deacons and inferior Clerks, if they complained of the judgment of their
Diocesians, should be heard by the Bishops adjoining; and if they think to
appeal from them also, let them not appeal but to the Counsels of Africa, or
to the Primates of their own Province: and he that aduentureth to appeal
over the Sea, let him be received of no man within Africa unto the Communion.

After this Decree, with which they had withstood three Bishops of Rome,
Sozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus; to the last, when the Bishops of Africa had
gotten Copies of the Nicene Council, they writ on this wise: We writ and
earnestly prayed you that hereafter you would not lightly give audience to
those that come from hence to you, neither any more receive such to the
Communion, as we have excommunicated; because your Reverence shall easily
perceive the order taken by the Nicene Council: For if there appear a prouiso
for inferior Clerks or Laymen, how much more would the Synod have the same
observed in Bishops, that being excommunicated in their own Province, they
should not suddenly, hastily, or unduly be restored to the Communion by your
holiness? And likewise your holiness must repel these wicked refuges of
Priests and other Clergy men, as becomes you; for that by no determination
of the Fathers this is derogated from the Church of Africa: and the Nicene
Canons do most evidently commit both inferior Clergy men and the Bishops
themselves, to their own Metropolitans. No doubt they most wisely and rightly
provided that all matters should be ended in the places where they did first
arise. Neither will the graces of the Holy Ghost be wanting to any Province;
by which equity may be gravely weighed, and stoutly followed by the Priests
of Christ; especially where every man has liberty, if he mislike the
judgment of those that hear his cause, to appeal to the judgment of his own
Province, or to a general Council. Or how can the judgments over Seas be
good, whereto the necessary persons of witnesses, either for sex, or for age,
or sundry other impediments, cannot be brought? For that any should be sent
from your Holiness side, we find decreed by no Synod of the Fathers. That
which you sent us hither by Faustinus as a part of the Nicene Council; in the
truer Copies which we have received from holy Cirill B. of Alexandria, and
Reverend Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, taken out of the Originalls, which
also we sent to Boniface your predecessor; Jn them, we say, we could find no
such thing. As for your Agents or Messengers, send them not at every man's
request, least we seem to bring the smokie pride of the world into the Church
of Christ, etc.

Mark how many ways the Bishops of Africa withstood the Bishop of Rome:
Appeals to Rome, which Sozimus claimed by the Council of Nice, they confute
by the same Council, and impugn them by other grave and pithie reasons;
Legates a latere they reject as never spoken of in any Counsel, though he
claimed them; Running to Rome they call a wicked refuge, and sending Messengers
from Rome a smokie pride of the World; The corrupting of the Nicene Canons by
Sozimus, they disprove by Copies that were true and authenticke. Appiarius,
whom the B. of Rome had harbored to the Church the second time, they banished
from the Church of Christ. What would those men have done if Sozimus had
claimed to be head of the Church, or Vice-God upon Earth by Christ's
appointment? If any Scripture had sounded that way, neither the B. of Rome
would have left that certain proof, and trusted only to the testimony of a
Canon in a Council, which could not be found but in his own Library; nor
yet Augustine with his holy and learned company, would have resisted this
demand; if it had either been grounded upon Scripture, or determined in the
Nicene or other Council, or had stood with equity, good order, or reason. So
the Church of Africa continued until Boniface the second came to be Bishop
of Rome. He by communications, threatenings, and allurements brought Eulalius
the. Metropolitan of Carthage, About the year. 534.
and certain other Bishops of Africa, to submit themselves to the Bishop of
Rome, and to anathematise the sixth Council of Carthage where S. Augustine was
present.

Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem would have had his See first and greatest,
because it was the holy City which God had chosen of old; because Christ
taught there, suffered there, rose again there, gave the Holy Ghost there,
Peter, James, and John taught there who were pillars of the Church. The B. of
Rome, Sixtus III. not brooking this well, gathers a Synod at Rome,
questioneth Polychronius for violating the Canons, suborneth Euphemius a Priest
of Jerusalem, to accuse Polychronius. Accusers were sent to Jerusalem with the
Emperor Valentinianus Letters, and he was deposed; but afterward was restored
again by the same Emperor, when his innocence was known, and Euphemius his
accuser had sentence of perpetual condemnation.

Hilarious Viennens. did usually discourse, that Peter himself was not prince
of the Apostles, or had any authority over them; neither ought the Pope to
have any power or right over the Churches in France.

Leo writes thus to the Emperor Theodosius: Epist. 24.
All our Churches, and all our Priests most humbly beseech your Majesty with
sobbs and tears, that ye will command a general Council to be holden
within Italy. This notwithstanding, the Emperor, contrary to the Popes
humble petition, kept the Counsel at Chalcedon, not in Italy; Council. Calce.
Act. 1.
and thither Pope Leo was summoned to appear by the Emperors commandment,
with other Bishops: So that the Emperor commanded Counsels when, and where he
pleased, whether the Pope would or no. And when that Council of Chalcedon had
made the Bishop of Constantinople equal in privileges and respects with the
Bishop of Rome, Lucentius (Pope Leo his Legate) entreated to have that blotted
out but the honorable Judges made him answer negatiuely. At the end of that
Council, the Emperor Martion says, We confirm the Reverend Council by the
holy edict of Our Majesty.

John Bishop of Constantinople went about to illustrate his See by consent of
the Emperor and Council of Constantinople, wherein the said B. was styled
Oecumenicall Patriarch, before any such Title was in the City of Rome; and in
Constantinople it was brought in not by any Law of God, but by the favor and
grant of the Emperors. Pelagius Bishop of Rome withstood it first, and would
have no Bishop or Patriarch to be universal, because that if any one man be
called universal, the name of Patriarch or Bishop is derogated from all
others; but let this be far from all faithful men, to take that upon him,
whereby the honor of his brethren is diminished.

Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome also opposed that Title with more
vehemency, proving that no man ought to be called universal Bishop, which
he terms a new, foolish, proud, perverse, wicked and profane name: and to
consent unto it, is as much as to deny the Faith. He adds further,
Whosoever goes about to extol himself above other Bishops, therein follows
Satan, who was not content to be equal or like unto other Angels. Gregory
also affirms, That none of his Predecessors did ever usurp to himself that
Title, concluding, That whosoever does so, declares himself to be a
forerunner of Antichrist. When John, before mentioned, was preferred from the
degree of a Moncke, and made Patriarch of Constantinople, and obtained of
Mauritius the Emperor also to be extolled above all other Bishops with the name
of Universal Patriarch; he requested Mauritius likewise to write unto
Gregory then Bishop of Rome for his consent thereunto: It appears by the
story of those times and by his own Epistles, that he was willing enough to
have to do with other Churches.
but Gregory, whether in detestation of that Title, or for affectation to the
thing it self, I cannot tell; would not agree. And understanding that he was
in the Emperors displeasure for dissenting from it, he writ to Constantina the
Empress, declaring John his presumption and pride therein, to be both against
the rule of the Gospel, and the Decrees of the Canons, namely, the sixth Canon
of the Nicene Council; and that the novelty of that new found Title did
declare nothing else, but that the time of Antichrist was near at hand.

In the ambitious pursuites for this Supremacy, as well by John Patriarch at
Constantinople, as also in those which Boniface 3. Bishop of Rome used
afterward, it is worthy to be observed, that neither of the pretenders
insisted upon any right in Scripture; but both made their addresses to
several Emperors: John to Mauritius, Boniface to Phocas; both implying
thereby, that it was in the Emperors power, and did belong to him in right, to
translate or confer the Primacie of the Church. It is certain that in
Pelagius, and Gregory's time before mentioned; there was no challenge of
Supremacy openly made for the Bishop of Rome, but a contestation to the
contrary: Gregor. Epist. 32. and 30.
None of my Predecessors Bishops of Rome ever consented to use this ungodly
name, no B. of Rome ever took upon him this name of singularity, We the
Bishop of Rome will not receive this honor offered unto us. And it is not
credible, that the holy Fathers in the Council of Nice could or would have
Decreed that three other Patriarchs should be equal, or have like authority
with the B. of Rome: neither might they have restrained the B. of Rome his
authority to a certain limit, with this Prouiso, that he should not invade
the Diocese of other Bishops; but content himself with the authority of his
own circuit, if Christ had given unto him the universal government of the
Church or world. As to the words of our Savior Christ: Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church. Origin writes: About the year. 233.
In Matthew. tract. 1.
Jf we speak the same that Peter spoke, we are made Peter, and unto us it
shall be said, Thou art Peter: For he is the Rock that is the Disciple of
Christ.

Cyprian: when Paul had reproved Peter, 250. Ad Quiri^.
2. Gal. Peter neither revenged himself, nor took any thing proudly upon him;
as to say that he had the Primacie, Or that others that were but nouices and
after co^mers (as Paul was) ought to be obedient unto him.

This is that only blessed Rock of faith that Peter confessed with his mouth.
De Trinit. l. 2.


The rock is nothing else but the strong and assured faith of the disciple. De
Trinit. in dialog (...) 4


Of Peter and Paul; who ought to be preferred is not known. Sermon. 66.
If you say that the charge etc principality of the whole Church was committed
unto Peter, Chrysostom answers, Unto Paul the whole world was committed, Paul
governs the Church of the world, Paul rules the whole world.

The same Father writes: Not upon the person of Peter, 16. Ser. fest Pontecost.
but upon the faith of Peter Christ has builded his Church: and what is the
faith? Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. What is it to say, Upon
this Rock? that is, Upon the confession of Peter: for if we should say the
Church is builded upon the person of Peter, we should have another foundation
of the Church then Christ; which is directly against S. Paul: 1. Cor. 3.11.
No man can lay any other foundation but that which is laid already, which is
Jesus Christ.

Augustine, who died about the year 432. at which time S. Patrick lived in
great respect, De verb. Domini sed Matthew. Sermon. 13.
August. I say, does write; Christ was the rock, upon which foundation Peter
himself was built also: and adds, Christ says to Peter, I will not build my
self upon thee, but I will build thee upon me.

Asia and Africa, professing Christ as well as we, did not consent to the
Bishop of Rome his Supremacy.

I confess that the Eastern churches and Bishops, for debates of matters of
faith amongst themselves, made suites to the Bishops of Rome: but that was not
for the superiority of Jurisdiction that the Sea of Rome had over them, but
for the division that was within themselves; by reason that the whole Eastern
countries, as well Bishops as others, were much infected with the heresies of
Arrius, whereof the West was in a manner clear. So as amongst the Orients none
were counted indifferent to decide those debates; but all were suspect of
affection for one cause or other: wherefore they desired the opinions of the
Bishops of the west as indifferent, and not entangled with affections of any
of those parts, and uncorrupted of the Arrians. Which appears by the Epistles
of S. Basile, written in all their names for that purpose: wherein it is
especially to be noted, that their suit was not to the Bishop of Rome
singularly by name, but, as the titles do show, to the whole congregation of
the BB. of Italy and France, or of the whole West: and sometimes preferring the
French BB. Gallis and Italis, and never names the Romans.

About the year of our Lord 610. Boniface 3, obtained of Phocas the wicked
Emperor that slew his Mr. Mauricius, his wife and children, That he, the said
Pope, might be called the Prince of all Bishops.

Then the peoples devotion to Religion, and the belief which was settled in
their minds of the power of the Keys, which were said to open and shut
paradise, to bind and loose sins; laid the foundation of the Popes
greatness, and authority.

About the year 680.
Agatho B. of Rome, writ to Constantine the 4. Most gracious Lord, your sacred
Letters encouraging us to show forth effectually our prompt and diligent
service, for performing that which your Edict commanded, and for discharge of
our duty etc. And in a second Epistle: All the Bishops of the North and West
parts, servants of your Christian Empire, give thanks to God for this your
religious intent in calling of a Council.

Leo the fourth, Bish. of Rome, writ likewise to the Emperor: As touching the
chapters and imperial precepts of your Highness, and the Princes your
predecessors, irrefragably to be kept and obeyed, as much as in us did or does
lie, We by all means profess that we will, by Christ's help, now and for
ever observe the same.

Certainly the vain Titles of the Pope, as, Universal Bishop, Prince of
Priests, supreme head of the universal Church, and Vicar of Christ here upon
earth: likewise his vast pretended Jurisdiction, came not into the Church
altogether, but with long working and continuance of time, by little and
little, as occasions were given. Partly by Boniface the third, about the year
610. partly by Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebra^d, about the year
1170. partly by Innocentius the third, about the year of our Lord 1215. and
finally by Pope Boniface the eight, about the year of our Lo: 1300. Of which
four popes, the first brought in a Title; the second brought Jurisdiction; the
third, pope Innocent with his Monks and his Friars, corrupted and obscured the
sincerity of Christ's doctrine: and lastly, pope Boniface the eight, and
Clement the fifth after him (over and besides the Jurisdiction sufficiently
advanced before by pope Hildebrand) added moreover the te^porall Sword, to be
carried before him: and that no Emperor, were he never so well elected, should
be sufficient or lawful, without the popes admission. A confident and high
challenge, differing so much from the obedience and humility of Christ; of the
Apostles of Christ, of the good and holy Bishops of Rome, which did speak and
write to the Emperors in a milder language, full of acknowledgements and
respects; that men impartially affected, need not doubt it proceeded from
another spirit. But when pope Boniface came to make experiment of the
possession of this challenge, and how Christian princes would give way unto his
claim; Philip the Fair, King of France, returns to the popes insolent
demand, an answer swear full of royal magnanimity, as appears by their
Letters ensuing.

Boniface B. servant of the servants of God,
to Philip King of Frenchmen:
fear God, and observe his commandments. We will thee to understand, that
thou art subject to Us both in spiritual and temporal things; and that it
belongs not to thee to give any Prebend or Benefice: If thou have the keeping
of any of them being vacant, thou must reserve the profits of them to the
successors: if thou have given any, We judge thy gift to be void, and do
revoke all that has been done; and whosoever believes otherwise, We judge
them heretics.

Given at Latran the 4. of the Nones of December: the sixth year of Our Popedom.

The King answers him thus:

Philip by the grace of God King of France,
to Boniface (calling himself Sovereign B. little health, or none at all.
Boniface Pope when Edward the first was king of England.

Let thy great Fool-ship be advertised, that in temporal things We
acknowledge no Superior but God; and that the gift of Prebendes, being void,
belongs to Us, by Our Royal Prerogative, and the fruits that grow thereby;
the which We will defend by the Sword against all them that shall seek to
hinder Our possession: esteeming them fools, and without judgment, that shall
think otherwise.


The Realm of England certainly was never by Laws, or long submission,
subject to the Popes authority. For when the Bishops of Africa prayed
Innocentius, either to send for Pelagius the Britain, or to deal with him by
Letters, to show the meaning of his lewd speeches, tending to the derogation of
Gods grace: the B. of Rome made answer; When will he commit himself to our
judgment (write what letters I will) when as he knows he shall be
condemned. And if he were to be sent for, they may better do it, that are
nearer to him, and not so far distant from him as I am. Jnnocentius 400.
years after Christ, confesses that he had no sufficient authority to call
one poor Britain out of this realm. And 200. years after that the Bishops of
Britain would yield no subjection to Austine the Moncke, neither did they
accept him for their Archbishop. Indeed their manner of Baptizing, observing
Easter, and other Ecclesiastical constitutions, contrary to the rites and
customs of the Church of Rome, (as Augustine then objected unto them) make
manifest proof, that they were never under the Jurisdiction of the B. of Rome.

Take a view of the Kings of England, and you shall find that from the
Conqueror unto this day, most of them have either resisted, or abated the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction which the Pope claimed in this land, by right of
the Crown.

William the Conqueror said in a Parliament: For as much as the King is the
Vicar of the High King, he is therefore appointed to that purpose that he
should rule and defend the Kingdom and the people of the Lord, and above all
things the holy Church. And when the Popes eyes were fixed upon the Bishoprics
of England to bring them, and all spiritual promotions, to his own donation,
his Holiness received admonition from the same Conqueror; that he should go
against the most ancient Laws of his kingdom, if he did admit or acknowledge
the power of any forreiner, as the Pope was.

William Rufus, son to the Conqueror, did strictly forbid Anselm, Archbishop
of Canterbury; and charged all other Bishops to have no respect to Rome, or to
the Pope, saying, J cannot endure any equal in my kingdom so long as J live.

Henry the first, by his Attorney did forbid Anselm, returning from Rome, to
enter his land, unless he would faithfully promise to keep all the customs,
both of William the Conqueror his Father, and of William Rufus his brother.

Henry the second made all the Bishops, etc. swear in a general assembly at
Cloredon, that these liberties of the Crown, amongst which one was, That no
Archbishop, Bishop, or any other person, should go out of the Realm without
the King his leave. Another did direct Appeals, That if any were made, they
should come from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the
Archbishop, and if the Archbishop failed in doing Justice, it shall be lawful
at the last to come unto the King, that by his commandment the matter may be
ended in the Archbishop his Court: So that no person shall presume to appeal
further, without the King his consent. And he writ letters to all his
Shiriffes, and Lieutenants in England in this manner: I command you, that if
any Clergy man, or Lay man in your County appeal to the Court of Rome, you
attach him, and hold him fast-ward till Our pleasure be known.

Henry the third: when it was propounded in Parliament, whether one borne
before Matrimony may inherit, in like manner as they that are born after: And
the Bishops entreating the temporal Lords to consent to the affirmative,
because the Canons and Decrees of the Church of Rome are so; all the Earls and
Barons answered with one voice, That they would not have the Laws of England
changed: and so the statute passed with the Lords temporal against the orders
of Rome.

The same King writes in this wise to the Bishops severally, to every one in
his Diocese. Henry the third, by the Grace of God, to the Reverend in Christ
B. of N. Whereas We have heretofore written unto you once, twice, thrice, as
well by Our privy Seals, as also by Our Letters Patents, that you should not
exact or collect for the Popes behalf, any tallage, or other help of Our
Subjects, either of the Clergy, or of the Layetie: for that no such tallage
or help, either can or is used to be exacted in Our Realm, without the great
prejudice of Our Princely dignity; which We neither can, nor will suffer or
sustain: Yet you contemning and vilipending Our Commandment, and contrary
to the Provision made in Our last Council at London (granted and agreed upon
by Our Prelates, Earls, and Barons) have that notwithstanding, proceeded in
collecting the same your taxes and tallages. Whereupon, We do greatly
marvel and are moved (especially seeing you are not ashamed to do contrary
to your own Decrees) whereas you and other Prelates in the said Council, in
this did all agree and grant, that no such exactions should be hereafter
until the return of Our and your ambassadors from the Court of Rome, sent
thither purposely of Us, and in the name of the whole Realm for the same, to
provide for redress against these oppressions. Wherefore, We straightly will
and command you, that from henceforth, you do not proceed any more in
collecting and exacting such tallages, or helps, as you will enjoy Our favor,
and such possessions of yours as within this Our kingdom you have and hold.
And if you have already procured, or gathered any such thing, yet that you
suffer it not to be transported out of Our Realm, but cause it to be kept in
safe custody till the return of the said Ambassadors, under the pain of Our
displeasure in doing of the contrary: and also of provoking Us, to extend Our
hand upon your possessions, further the^ you will think or believe. Moreover,
willing and charging you, that you participate and make known this Our
Inhibition with your Archdeaco^s and Officials, which We here have set forth
for the liberties of the Clergy and of the people as knows God, etc.

John had refused the disordered election of Stephen Langton to the
Archbishopricke and See of Canterbury, Math. Paris.
Jnnocent the third forced the King to resign his kingdom and to take it of
him again, the said Pope, at the yearly rent of 1000. Marks: But the Barons
and the Bishops were so much displeased therewith, that in plain contempt of
the Popes keys and curses, they did choose them another King, and chased King
John, the Popes fermor, in dispite of all his new Landlord could do.

Edward the first, made a Statute at Carlisle, that the Pope should exercise no
Jurisdiction in England; and in his time one bringing an excommunication from
Rome, against a Subject of England, and the same being brought by complaint
before the King, and his Council, the fact was adjudged high Treason, and the
offender had suffered death, but by the mediation of the Chauncellor and
Treasurer the King was content with his banishment.

Edward the second, would not suffer the Peter-penie to be collected otherwise
then had been accustomed.

Edward the third, revived the Statute of Praemunire, made by Edward the first.
Pope Gregory the eleventh writ to him, that this Law might be abrogated, but
prevailed not. Shortly after this time Richard fitz Ralfe lived, and was made
Archbishop of Armagh, a holy and learned man, as appears by his labors, and
disputations against the begging Friars.

Henry the fourth made a Law, that no Popes Collector thenceforth should levy
any money within the Realm, for first fruits of any Ecclesiastical living,
under pain of incurring the Statute of Provisions or Praemunire.

An. 5. Henr. 5. Act. 17. It was enacted in a Parliament, That the Church and
all estates should enjoy all their liberties which were not repealed, or
repealeable by the common Law, meaning the excluding of the Popes foreign
power, which has always been excluded by the common Law.

Henry the sixth, with Duke Humfrey Lord Protector, and the rest of the
Council, were in the Dukes house in the Parish of S. Bennets by Paul's Wharfe,
one Richard Candray, Procurator, in the Kings name and behalf did protest, and
denounce by this public instrument, That whereas the king, and all his
Progenitors Kings before him of this Realm of England, have been heretofore
possessed time out of mind with special privilege and custom, used and
observed in this Realm from time to time; that no Legate, from the Apostolic
See, should enter into this Land, or any of the K. dominions without the
calling, petition, request, inuitement, or desire of the King. And forasmuch as
Henry B. of Winto^ Cardinal of Eusebius, has presumed so to enter as Legate
from the Pope, being neither called, sent for, required, or desired by the
King: therefore the said Richard Candray, in the Kings name, does protest by
this Jnstrume^t, that it stands not with the Kings mind or intent, by the
advice of his Council, to admit, approve or ratify the coming of the said
Legate in anywise in derogation of the right, customs and Laws of this his
Realm; or to recognize, or assent to any exercise of this his authority
Legantine, or to any acts, attempts, or hereafter by him to be attempted in
this respect, contrary to the foresaid Laws, rights, customs and liberties
of this Realm, by these presents, etc.

In the same K. Henry the fixts time, there is a Record in the 17. year of his
reign in Easter term, 28. April, That all the temporalties of the
Archbishopric of Armagh within the realm of Ireland, were taken and seized
into the hands of the King, by his Barons of the Exchecquer, by reason of a
resignation, and an admission thereof by the Pope; which resignation was made by
John Bote, Archbishop of the Archbishopricke aforesaid.

In England there be very ancient Laws, That no Legate from the Bishop of
Rome; or other religious person, should enter the bounds of the kingdom,
unless first he did promise by solemn oath that he will bring in nothing to
derogate from the King, or Laws and customs of the kingdom.

The practice hereof was seen in the late reign of Q. Mary, notwithstanding
all her devotion to the Pope: For when she did understand that his holiness
was not well minded to Cardinal Poole Archbish. of Canterbury; but to abate
his power in England, was ready to make Friar Peto a Cardinal also, and had a
Nuncio with the Hat purposely to give opposition to Cardinal Poole, Q. Mary,
by the advice of the Peers, Counselors, and Judges, disparched a messenger to
Calis with commandment to the Popes Nuncio, That he should not come near her
Coasts, nor stir one foot from Calis toward England. I could tell you of
Charles the fifth, that was Emperor, and grandfather to the K. of Spain that
now is, who besieged Rome it self, and did take it maugre all the Popes Bulls
and curses; yea, and imprisoned Clement then Pope, and 33. Cardinals with him,
seven months space in Adrians tower; neither would he dismiss them till
Clement made agreement of 400000. Ducats for his own ransom, and a greater
sum was imposed upon the Cardinals. In like sort I might relate how Philip
the second, Clarles his son, invaded Italy with an army under the conduct of
duke D'alva, wasted the country, spoiled the people, and cast a trench about
Rome it self; but for brevity sake, I rest only upon the acts and rights
that our own kings and Princes have ever challenged and used. All these
examples, whether they be foreign or domestical, tend to this one point, That
howsoever Princes be content sometimes, for their own behoof, to give way to
the B. of Rome, for the exercises of his superstitions in their kingdoms, and
dominions; yet all of them, out of their magnanimities and heroical spirits,
do scorn that the Pope should usurp or intrude any Jurisdiction over their
people and subjects, further then they themselves like of, and think to stand
with the safety and good of their countries. So it appears, that the Pope
was never any long time in full and quiet possession of his pretended power in
the realm of Engl. and that his Jurisdiction was never made a matter of
conscience: withal this deduction shows, that it was not Hen. 8. Edw. 6.
Elizabeth his sister (all Princes of happy memory) or his Matie that now
reigns most graciously over us, that disclaimd the popes authority and power
first; but all their most noble progenitors have done it co^sta^tly in a
perpetual descent from the Co^queror. And for the K. that now is, besides his
right, his piety, his justice, his Clemency, his learning, and other Princely
indowments (which are able to gain him honor and respect amongst mere
strangers) he has a particular advantage, for which he may worthily
challenge more honor and obedience from you, then any of his famous
predecessors could expect at the subjects of this kingdom, in their several
times: first, he is extracted out of your own blood, descending lineally from
Fergus. Ye are his brethren, his bones and his flesh are ye: why then are ye
the last that give the King his right? Secondly, he has added much more honor
and dignity to your blood the^ he received by it: for whereas formerly the Seas
had bou^ded it within this Isla^d, so as it had no addition or access of glory
elsewhere; his Matie has now given luster and brightness unto it with the best
and highest bloods of Engl. Scotl. France, De^mark, Germany, and out of all the
greatest houses of christe^dom. will you the^ diminish his honor, that has
adua^ced and made yours to shine? will you take away his right, that is of your
own kindred, and transfer it to a mere stranger, that seeks for yours, and
not for you? will you strip a just King of his birthright or due, and bestow
it upon an Italian Priest, unsent of God, uncalled by man, unfit for place;
that has no manner of claim or warrant for it from Scriptures, holy Councels,
or learned and ancient Fathers? Let no such ingratitude be found in your
generous minds. Know ye not that your obedience to the K. begets and
brings forth his protection and defense of you? and can you desire, or in
equity expect absolute and general protection from the K. when you give him
but partial obedience in temporal things only, not in business Ecclesiastical?
There is no reason, no justice, no proportion in that reciprocatio^. Protection
and obedience are of like and equal extent: therefore by the rules of nature
(which wills you to do as you would be done to) if you will have the K. to
protect you, your wives and children, lands, goods, and houses; whilst you are
in the exercises of your religion, even there also you must acknowledge the
king his power, and yield your obedience to his laws, for they are
strengthened by the laws of God: or if you will apply your selves (...)acie to
the popes pleasure in those affairs, the K. by way of retaliatio^, might
withdraw his protection, and leave you for those times to spoil, or to his
defense whom ye obey. Therefore I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ;
eue^ I that must give account for your miscarriage to the chief Bish. of your
souls, with sobs and tears entreat you again and again, to take this matter
into serious consideration, to advise with the word of truth, and uncorrupted
antiquity, even with the godly writers that lived and governed the Churches
when your holy B. St. Patrick converted this country to the faith of Christ;
that you may honor the K. with that Soueraignetie which is due unto him,
illustrat your own noble families, and make me happy in the winding up of my
days, who will never cease to pray for you all, whilst I am

ARMAGH.


