THE BLESSEDNESS OF A SOVND SPIRIT: WITH THE MISERY OF A VVOVNDED SPIRIT.
Where first a sound Spirit is described and differenced, and Lets discovered,
Helps prescribed.

By ROBERT HARRIS.

LONDON, Printed for I. Bartlet, and are to be sold at his Shop in Cheap Side,
at the sign of the gilded Cup. 1628.

THE BLESSEDNESS: OF A SOVND SPIRIT.
PROVE. 13.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded
spirit who can bear?


THis is a short Text, but exceeding rich; the greatest good and evil incident
to man (in this life) are matched together. And it is done of purpose, that so
each might illustrate other.

The commended good is first delivered in [The spirit of a man will bear out
his infirmity:]

The dissuaded evil is next subiouned, in [But a wounded spirit who can bear?]

Subicctum pradicatum.
In the first, we must take notice what the thing is whereof Solomon speaks,
and what it is [The spirit of man] man consists of two parts, a body, and a
soul; which soul sometime from its special seat is termed [Heart,] sometimes
from its natural office and effects, life, soul, breath; from its spiritual,
is termed conscience, sometime from its causes spirit, (being for its matter
not bodily, but spiritual) and for its original, inspired and inbreathed.
This soul and spirit of man being sound and unwounded (for so the opposition
leads us to take it) does bear up and (...)
strength, (...)
comfort, constancy, till it has borne one quite through) his wound and
malady, (...)
that which for the present the divine providence lays upon him, his present
burden (which ever seems the forest) what ever it be, by whomsoever imposed,
how long soever it lie, wheresoever it light, so long as the spirits-selfe
remains unwounded, it will bear it, and bear it again most manfully, this the
first thing the blessing commended, a sound spirit.

(any man) (who can bear it?) That is to say, none can. For so usually (though
not ever) those Rhetorical questions must be resolved. If the question be
negative (so to speak) the answer is affirmative, Job 31.
as in Job 31. Is not destruction to the wicked? The answer implied is, Yes.
Contrarily, if the question be affirmative, as Who can bear it? The answer is
negative, None can. The opposition then is clear, there is a spirit, and a
spirit, comfortable, and broken; the one enables any (the poorest man) stoutly
to endure any the greatest misery: the other so crushes the stoutest, that he
cannot sustain himself without other pressure in the midst of all other
natural comforts and contentments.

For the first, the Doctrine lies before you, Doct. 1. Propounded.
which is this: That a confortable spirit is unconquerable.

As none other good can match it, so no outward evil can ouer-match it.

There is a threefold comfort and contentment Expounded.
One natural, arising from the goodness of man's natural

A second moral, arising from the exercise of

Thirdly, Spiritual, arising from the presence and sense of Gods holy Spirit
curing us, helping us, and sealing up to us the everlasting love of God in
Christ Jesus.

The point must be understood of this last, which excludes not the former, but
eminently and vertually includes and contains them also.

Thus then, that spirit which is supported by the Spirit of God, and comforted
with the true consolations of that Comforter, is invincible: man's spirit (made
comfortable with spiritual comforts) is unconquerable. Indeed natural
^hearefulnesse may be ouertopt with sorrow, comforts springing from a
fairness of carriage, and freedom from staring sins may soon be dashed,
but spiritual comforts which grow from the apprehension of Gods love, and are
grounded and built upon God, are impregnable.

The heart fortified with these cannot be utterly foiled; 3. Proned.
suppose rumors and seares besiege him. The peace of God, and his peace with
God, keeps him in mind and heart, as safe as if he lay in garrison, Philip.
4.7.(...)
etc. Philip. 4.7. He is as quiet as Elisha in Dothus, or Danid, when in the
midst of thousands he could sleep and wake; and wake and sleep again,
Psalm. 3.5.6.

Job, troubles in his estate, troubles in his house, troubles in his children,
troubles in his body; so long as there i^ peace within, he can say, the Lord
gave children, the Lord gave eattell, the Lord gave health, wealth, yea all he
has, and therefore with Job concludes, The same hand that first gave, has new
taken, and blessed be that hand, Job 1.

Suppose hell is let loose upon him, and the Paul is scoffed, he bears it,
Paul is stocked, he bears it, whipped, he bears it, stoned, he bears it:
and how I pray you, with head and shoulders? nay, with life and spirit: Romans 8.
2 Cor. 1.
In all these, faith he, we are conquerours, and I rejoice in my infirmities,
as afflictions abound, so consolations much more; yea he sings: true, a Paul
does this; but who else, why others also, Act. 5.4.
as Acts 5.

Object. These are men of extraordinary spirits, but what do ordinary
Christians? why, see in Hebr. 10. They were flouted, reproached, Hebr. 10.34.
afflicted, impouerished, yet bear it, and how? with joy. And Hebr. 11. see
how they were used, so persecuted, as they were glad to live in caves and dens
of the earth, and wandered up and down in sheepe-skins, and Goat Skins, and
yet bear it, and stand it out: true, but why? because they could neither will
nor choose; no, they might have been delivered upon conditions, but they would
not embrace liberty and p^ upon any sinful terms; so that whether they be
evils feared, or felt, evils growing from out selves, or others; a comfortable
spirit receives the charge manfully, and goes under the burden chearefully.

The Reason why such a spirit will bear its full burden cheerfully,

Secondly,

Thirdly, Prou. 12.25.

Fourthly, a comfortable spirit is not alone, the Spirit of God helps, Romans 8.
as Romans 8. and the joy of the Lord is strength, Nehem 8.
Nehem. 8. and the Spirit of God is a Spirit, says Paul, 2 Timothy 1.7.
of power and strength. We see Satan's spirit can break through many bonds (as
in the Gospel) benum a man in greatest torments, (as in some Heretics) how
much more then shall that spirit, which is accompanied with Gods Spirit, break
through all?

But as we must note the reason why, so we should have noted above the extent,
how far the spirit sustaines a man: First, Generally in all things touching
his calling and condition, considered: First, as a man. Secondly, a civil man.
Thirdly, a Christian man. More particularly, it vpholds him in being, and keeps
out death till it may depart with honor. The soul it self departs with its
treasure and passes through all pikes home to heaven, and leaves the body not
without hopes of following it in due time.

Secondly, it vpholds him in liberty, though

Thirdly, it vpholds one in confidence, and Yet there is hope: and, Ezra 10.
Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him, Job 13.
I will not forsake my uprightness, etc.

Jacob did when he lay a dying. In Gods light, he sees light in greatest
darkness, and the countenance of God is more to him than corn and oil, Psalm.
4. Psalm. 63.3.
yea than life it self: show us thy face and we line, says the Church often,
Psalm. 80.

See first (for humbling) whence our foiles and failings spring, Solomon does
for others, If we faint in the day of trouble, Prou. 24.10.
our strength is weak: indeed when the child stumbles, he blames not his own
feebleness, but outward impediments: so we, when in sickness we fret and
chafe, when in pain we rage and cry, when in poverty we shrink and shiuer,
when in persecution we quake and tremble, when in our callings we faint and
droupe; we do not look inward and observe the guile, guilt, unsettledness and
feebleness of our spirits, but run outward to the occasions, and complain:
Our sickness is such, as none can bear; our pain such, as none can brook;
our states are incurable, our encumbrances insufferable, and the miseries and
troubles we are put unto intolerable. Just like the sore child, who cries out
of his shoe, when the fault is in the foot; and the sick patient, which
faults his bed, when he should his back. For first, what says Solomon, The
spirit of a man (rightly ordered) bears his wound: if sickness be the wound,
a good spirit will bear it, if poverty, if disgrace, if imprisonment, if
fire, a good spirit will go under all. There is no gulf so deep, but a good
spirit will through it; no mountain so high, but a good spirit will over it.
Next, we see Salomons words verified in many instances; What wound has not a
good heart borne heretofore? speak of poverty, some have sung under it; of
pain, some have laughed at it; of imprisonment, some have rejoiced in it; of
flames, some have embraced them with cheerfulness. Whence then is it, that
where others sing, we weep, where others rejoiced and triumphed, we are
altogether disheartened and discouraged? Is it because our miseries and trialls
are greater than others? Alas no, they must not be brought into any comparison
with other men's, with Jobs, Paul's, the Martyrs. Whence then is it? truly the
distraction grows from the Inside, they were upright, we guilefull; they were
at peace with God, we are unreconciled; they were filled with the treasures of
wisdom, faith, zeal, and the like, we are empty; they were ravished with the
comforts of God and consolations of the spirit, we are unacquainted with them;
they were armed with the power of God and patience of Jesus Christ, we are
naked; they kept themselves in the love of God, we interrupt our peace and
make a breach into our consciences. Hence they looked upon Men, Lions, Devils,
with an undaunted countenance, and walked through rackes, and gaoles, and gyues,
and deaths, and hells, without startling, and we fly when none pursues us, and
quake at the shaking of a lease: oh now see your weakness and say, my griefs,
my troubles, my burdens be not greater than others; but my truth, faith,
humility, peace, joy, patience, courage, comfort in the inward man is less
than others, else I might bear my burden, since a good spirit will be, as Simon
to Christ, his Crosse-bearer.

Secondly, Paul's art, how to bear any thing: a Christians duty stands in
these two things: First, to do any good: Secondly, to bear, if need be, any
evil: this latter is hard, but not impossible to a man-like spirit; there is
an art of bearing worth the studying, some men desire to know all things, some
to do any thing, but he is likeliest to speed best, that can endure any thing,
that can with Paul abound and want, Philip. 4.
be in good and evil report, can be sick, can be pained, can look upon
fetters, and whips, and stocks, and stones, and deaths as Paul could; he is a
happy man whom God will not hurt, whom men, nor devils, nor things present,
nor things to come can hurt; labor to be thus happy.

Quest. But you will say, how should we attain to it?

Ans. Why get a good spirit, first naturally good, a cheerful spirit. That,
if a man be sick, is a medicine, says Solomon, a good cordial. Prou. 17.22.
That, if a man be poor, is a continual feast; Prou. 15.15 23.
if pained, is health to the bones, esteem of that as of a great mercy: A
nimble hand, a nimble foot, a nimble eye, a nimble wit, a nimble tongue is
good, but a nimble spirit is better; therefore if thou have that, be thankful
and cheerful, if thou have it not, endeavor to get it, and being dull, whet
it. Secondly, spiritually good; nature may be overcome, that is as the string
of an instrument which snaps in two, if it be strained too high: thus some
crosses are too hard for nature, for nature has its latitude, as a bow its
compass, and must not be ouer-mastered. But spiritual joy cannot be lost,
John 16.
none can take it from us, John 16. It cannot be vanquished, it is strong;
therefore get this, and keep this, which that you may do, thus do.

First, if you will have spiritual joy rest with

Secondly, take heed of sinful lusts, these are so far from bringing peace
to the soul, as that they war against it, 1 Pet. 2.12. (...).
as Peter says. They are so far from comforting, that they oppress, as our
Savior Christ teaches; Luke 21.34.
the end of this mirth is heaviness of spirit, Romans 2.
sorrow, fear, anguish, tribulation and woe upon every soul that sins, etc.
Therefore conceive of sin (yea every sin) as of a disease, a wound, an
enemy to peace, and complain and strive against it, for so long as sin is
relished, no peace nor strength can be had.

Of means of comfort, see more Psalm. 43.
which give, first entrance, secondly accomplishment to thy comfort. Of the
first sort, our Savior in the fifth of Matthew mentions these: Matthew. 5.


of god Esaias 12. and drink of Christ's wines, Cant. 2.4.
Lastly, he must get faith in Christ, cast himself upon Gods mercies in
Christ's merits; and thus it is gotten.

Now in the next place care must be had to keep this life of spirit, as well
as to get it; and to do that,

First, a man must keep himself unspotted of

Secondly, walk in truth and faith, still exercise

Secondly, still walk in the light, and keep 1 John 1.
so peace shall be upon thee, and the spirit will be held up in cheerfulness,
is nothing heavy, nothing better, a man shall be able to go through fire and
water.

Thirdly, Philip. 4.

And when it is put to it, then it works most powerfully, a Christian never
knows his strength (rather Gods strength) till he be put upon it, then he
finds that tolerable, which he thought to be intolerable, and there meets with
greatest comfort, where he expected least, and as a man in bed (whilst he
plods on the stormy weather abroad) thinks it not to be endured, but when be
is one in it (what with busling, what with clothes) he passes through it; So it
is here, etc.

Oh the strength of the spirit, it is great, he is stronger that is in us, than
he that is in the world.

Magna est vis conscientiae in vtramque partem. cis.
Oh the power of conscience both ways, as it makes a happy estate miserable,
if bad; so, a miserable condition blessed, when good.

Oh the consolations of the Lord, they are unspeakable: the rage of fire,
beasts, men, devils, etc. does not pass understanding. Reason can fadome
finite things, 1 Cor. 2.9. Philip. 4.7.
but the comforts of God pass all understanding: we cannot conceive how a man
should bear such things as some have borne; but we see they did bear them, we
see our selves borne through those things, which we thought before insufferable.
Therefore rest on God, hold your hearts in peace with him: Rejoice in him, and
your spirits and Gods Spirit (joining together) will bear any burden that he
will lay upon you; his promise is past, you shall not be tempted above your
strength, 1. Cor. 10.

Fourthly, your strength, your all in all. This makes the Christian laugh
better cheap than another, bear with more patience than another, live with
more comfort, dye with more confidence than another: while the heart is whole,
all is well. Therefore if without thou find no money in purse, no friend in
Town, no ease in body, no comfort in life; yet find faith, patience,
assurance of Gods love within: rejoice in thy estate, bless God for it; the
estate is as the man is, the man is as the mind is, and as is the spirit; a
comfortable spirit makes a comfortable estate.

Quest. But how shall I discern between natural and spiritual comfort?

Answ. Spiritual cheerfulness comes, first, from faith in Christ. Secondly,
from love to God and Saints. Thirdly, begets boldness in prayer, as Saint John
speaks.

Besides, natural cheerfulness may be ouertopt by evils: First, Natural,
for our weakness makes us more sensible of sorrows than comforts. Secondly,
Carnal, for all sin is as poison to the spirit. Thirdly, Diabolical, not so
spiritual comforts.

Moreover, a natural spirit bears some things only, as C. Marius the cutting
of his flesh, but not all, as disgraces, etc. witness Cato, Saul. etc.
Secondly, a natural spirit, though it bite in passion, yet is destitute of
positive joy, peace, confidence, etc.

THE MISERY OF A WOVNDED SPIRIT.
PROVE. 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear?


Thus far of a good Spirit: now to the bad.

A Wounded spirit is a burden intolerable; degrees (as pricking, breaking,
opening the heart) he proceeds not to extremities with his children, partly by
supporting with secret hopes and comforts, for his childrens peace is never
quite taken away, faith never quite fails them: but when he smires as a foe,
the wound proves insufferable to a creature, and such as would soon swallow a
man, did not the Lord sustain nature to bear it, he could not else stand
under it. Indeed when God proceeds to wounding, the spirit would utterly fail,
did not either mercy or justice in God uphold it in being.

Now that a wounded spirit is a burden intolerable, we will prove from
testimony and Reason, Testimony: First Divine, here in the text, and
elsewhere, All the days of the afflicted are cuilt: which if it be true of
other, much more of this affliction that falls upon the soul, Pron. 15. 15.
Secondly, other testimonies, namely, from those that have had experience of it:
as 1. men, and there, First, good men: How have the stoutest yielded under this
burden? How has it ground them to dust? Hear David, Psalm. 32. and Psalm. 51.
His bones were broken as it were: How made it Job to wish death? Job 6. to
quarrel God; others to quake, Psalm. 77. to howl, Psalm. 102. nay some to
attempt death, some (happily) to effect it.

Secondly, from bad men, how does it terrify them, Leuit. 26.
so that they fly at a leaf; pain them, that they cast up all their shame;
and how does it deprive them not only of outward comfort, but of life, and
causes them to cast themselves into hell to avoid it? How have they wished
thousands of years in hell, so that then they might be eased?

Secondly, Devils; they witness this truth against their wills: First, when
(their consciences being terrified at the fight of Christ's Godhead) they cry
out, Art thou come to torment us before our time; and quake as prisoners when
they see the Judge coming. Secondly, When God pursues them, very anguish and
sorrow makes them mad, and to lose all use of their large understandings;
when they would sting Gods creatures to death, and do him and them the
greatest despite, they endeavor the troubles and terrors of conscience, as
well knowing this to be the most crushing and pressing evil.

Thirdly of Christ Jesus, who though free from (My God, my God, why haft thou
for saken me?) and trembled, and sweat, and bled, and groned under this
stroke, which was so intolerable to Christ Jesus, as that the Angels of heaven
came to comfort him, and the Godhead was requisite to support him, who can
stand under? In short, we have heard of creatures that have suffered the
mangling of bodies, the ripping up of bowels, racking of joints, burning of
flesh, boiling in oil, and the like, without crying out (My God, my God, why
haft thou for saken me) but never heard of a wounded spirit, but either it
sunk under despair, or made pitious moan to God, or man, or both.

First from the causes of this wound (as it is mingled with sin) man's self
and Satan join, David and a Goliath, nor David and a Saul, a King and a Flea
opposed, but the Creator and creature. is God

Secondly,

Secondly, it multiplies fears, creates fears, ever doubts more is behind
that which is already felt.

Thirdly, draws matter of discouragement and fear from all things, as we
find in all stories; if God feed, it is but to fat him for the knife; if he
preserve, it is but for further judgment; and so of the rest.

Thirdly, from the subject, the spirit is the life

First, the hand for the saving of the glove, nay to hazard ones head, for the
saving of a hat, of a feather: of all enemies God is the forest; of all wounds
his the deepest; of all parts, the conscience and spirit the tenderest: so long
as there is peace within, peace with the conscience, peace in our affections,
peace with God, with Angels, with creatures, with the Word, so long a man's
burden (be it what it will be) is tolerable; but when God fights against us,
and there is a pitched field within us, that our own eyes, and mouths, and
hands, and wits, and spirits be against us; Oh then who can bear it? a wounded
name, a wounded estate, a wounded leg, a wounded arm may be borne; but when
God breaks the bones within, when our own thoughts and dreams amaze us, and
we be a terror to our selves, and our consciences be wounded, what is then
left to comfort us? whilst a man has some friend, there is some comfort;
whilst some means of comfort (some parts and places whole) there is some
refreshing, but when no one part is well, no one place can ease him, no one
minute is free, no one friend stands for him, no one creature is comfortable to
him: who will not pity such a ones estate? This the state of the wounded
spirit; this wound as it is piercing, so spreading, it goes through all the man,
head, heart, side, back, all parts ache and sweat whilst the spirit is racked;
the eye sees no comfort, the tongue tastes no comfort, the ear receives no
comfort; all is bitter, bitter to the whole man, and the stoutest man in few
days is but a living carcass or skelleton; as there is no ease within, so no
comfort without, no place (nor bed, nor board, nor house, nor Church) no
creature (nor mear, nor drink, nor friend, nor wife, nor child) will afford
any comfort. All above us, all below us, all about us, all upon us, all within
us, makes then for terror and misery, nothing at all for ease and comfort. Oh
consider this, you that make nothing, or but a jest of Conscience, and care not
what ye say, what ye do, how many Sabbaths you break, how many lies you
tell, how many oaths you swear, how many men you cousin, how many sins you
swallow, so you may prevent outward miseries; know, there is a wound of
Conscience beyond all wounds, a misery of spirit beyond all miseries, a breach
of the soul beyond all breaches, and either wound your selves with shame and
sorrow for these wounds, which you have given your souls, and condemn your
selves for fearing debt, or shame, or any trouble more than conscience, or else
know that the sleepiest conscience shall be once awakened, the hardest heart
once broken, and brawniest spirit once softened; and then you shall find a
weight beyond the weight of mountains lying upon you, and wish that you had
been rather famished, or sterued, or burnt, or strangled long before, than
ever you should live to know what a wounded spirit means; believe it, believe
it, howsoever you find for the present an evil conscience no burden, yet
before you and it part, you shall find Salomons words true; A wounded spirit
who can bear?

Secondly,

viz. presently: green wounds are soonest cured; as therefore the Toad
poisoned runs to her medicine, and each creature to his; so let him that has
his conscience wounded, get a healing potion presently.

(...), etc. Ignat. ad Polyc. etc.
Satan is a Mountebancke, as appears by his Apothecaries: some prescribe
poisons, as if Similia similibus, as Papists heal a conscience with treasons:
some prescribe toys, as outward things, drinks, music, and the like; some
think to out-wrastle conscience, as they do sickness, but this disease will
not be opposed, neither will any medicines cure it, but only Gods, and they in
brief are these, Faith, Repentance, and (in some cases) Satisfaction; for this
know, as when an officer is wounded, two things must be done; first, Authority
and the State must be pacified; secondly, the wound cured: even so here,
Conscience is an officer, first cure that; secondly, God and man too
(sometimes) are trespassed, they must be satisfied. Now the way to satisfy the
offended, is, first, submission, secondly, either substitution or restitution.

In sins immediately against God, we must Ioh. 8. till we believe, we be
in our sins: John 8.
secondly, we must submit, first confess our sins, take shame to our selves,
restore Gods glory; secondly, resign our selves, and humble our selves under
his hand, James 4.
James 4 lay our necks on the block, and here comes in Repentance and
Restitution.

Secondly, in sins that immediately concern Numb. 5. Numb. 5.
If thou have run away with this good name, restore; if with his goods, bring
them back again: and here note, that the nearer the tie is, the worse the
trespass; therefore the child that robs his father, is a greater these
(cater is paribus) than he that robs by the highway: so the wife (howsoever
nature gives an interest in goods for proper use, and contract more according
to particulars agreed upon, and something may be presumed upon where is no
exception) yet for wives to give where is no need, against husbands mind,
beyond his estate, and so forth, is utterly unlawful.

Thirdly, consider the method and order of cure, still we must to God, he is
offended, he only can work peace, therefore we must look to Christ the Brazen
Serpent, and weep over him; but yet if man be trespassed, we must first to
him: God would have his work tarry, till there be a purpose (at least) of
being reconciled to man: therefore be first reconciled; secondly, desire his
prayers, Job last.
as Jobs friends did his. Thirdly, apply to conscience, as has been said,
first plucking forth the sting of sin, then washing in Christ's blood; and for
the future, keep the heart above all keepings, as ye do the eye in the
midst of chasse and dust; for as the eye is subject to infinite distempers,
so is the conscience and spirit.



and causes error. Secondly, when his conscience seems to be greater than his
knowledge, as in scrupulosities. Thirdly, when he cannot put a difference
between himself and Satan in his temptations and abhorred suggestions; Of
this see notes on James 4.
hence come horrors perplexities, these must be prevented, First, by sticking
only to the Word which sets our bounds; Secondly, by getting knowledge in the
Word, Philip. 1.
and a discerning spirit.

Thirdly, there is wounding of the Spirit, that

Fourthly, there is deading and searing of the and maimes, some that affect and
afflict sense, some that deprive of sense, as violent blows, palsies, etc, so
is the spirit also. Now this is the most fearful case of all, and comes to
pass three ways: First, when men commit some horrible sin which strikes out
the eye, or lays one for dead, like a blow on the head. Secondly, when they
shun all means of awakening conscience, run from the Word, from Saints
that admonish, from thoughts of death, etc. Thirdly, when they force
conscience, and use all means to stop its mouth, and to crush it for ever:
this is as searing after cutting, when a man never means to have the part
again, but to take away all sense; fear these diseases above all.

Thirdly,

Quest. What is the difference between a spirit healed, and a spirit deaded or
deluded?

Ans. 1. Look to the means and medicines healing, whether our peace arise
from faith, repentance, the word. 2. A healed conscience is pure and clear
throughout, the other spirits make no conscience at all, or only of some
things. 1 Pet. 3.21.
3. A healed conscience makes interrogatories to God, first if doubts arise, it
says as Rebecca, Genesis 26.
Why am I thus? and prays to God; the rest are stiff, and shun all questions.
4. A healed spirit pities others; in this case the dead heart cannot abide the
name of conscience, but says (as Pilate, what is truth? so) what is
conscience? the deluded spirit is fierce toward all but those that be of his
mind, as all Heretics and Schismatikes prove. Now if our pulse beat right,
and we have the comfort of a sanctified conscience, keep it, by two means:
First, by self denial, a man must deny himself in his means (riches,
friends, etc.) Secondly, in his hopes and own worth; first, be nothing in
himself; secondly, expect all from Christ; thirdly, in his sense and feeling,
he must wink and put himself into Gods hands, that is, live by faith, as
Luther did, rest on the naked Word without any pawn, as Abraham did.

Pity the wounded spirit; See notes on Psalm. 43.
Romans 15. but more of this elsewhere: therefore here an end.

FINIS.

