A PROCLAMATION. OF WAR FROM THE LORD OF HOSTS.

OR ENGLANDS warning by ISREAL'S ruin: Showing the miseries like to ensue upon
us by reason of Sin and Security.

Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's Cross July the 23. 16^6.

By WILLIAM HAMPTON Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word.

LVKE 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise per^sh.

Ier. 26.13. Therefore now amend your ways and your works, and hear the
voice of the Lord your God, that the Lord may repent him of the Plague, that he
has pronounced against you.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton for Matthew Law and are to be sold at the sign
of the Fox in Saint Paul's Church-yeard, near Saint Austens Gate. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and most nobly descended, CHARLES Lord HOWARD, Baron
of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham, Lord Lieutenant for the County of Surrey,
grace be multiplied with increase of honor in this world, and everlasting
glory in the future world.
Right Honorable,
WHen Socrates his Scholars brought every one rich gifts to him in token of
thankefulnes, among the rest, Sen. de ben. lib. 1. cap. 8.
he had one called Aeschines, whose hearty affection was as great to him as
any of the rest, but he wanted means to give: whereupon he spoke thus; I have
nothing, O Socrates, to give unto thee worthy thy self, but that one thing
which I have in my possession I freely give, namely, I give my self unto thee.
When I call to mind, the many and noble favors received from your honor, I
wish I could express my thankfulness in a more real manner then my ability
will permit; but having nothing worthy your self, with Aeschines I give my
self to your Lordships service. At this time I offer this poor mite of my
weak endeauours to your honorable Patronage; A work not fit the Press,
neither did I intend (had I not been encouraged to it by your honors
approbation of it, in hope it may redound to the public good,) ever to have
published it. Such as it is, it proceeded ex mero motu, out of a hearty desire
of Gods glory, and my Countries safety. It meets with the security and
iniquity of the time; and if it may rowze us from the one, or the other, or
both, I shall think my time well bestowed. A double respect makes it due unto
your Honor: First the author of it, my particular obligation; because my
labors in the Gospel being first countenanced, and daily encouraged by your
honor, you may of right challenge this, as the first fruits to be offered
unto you. Secondly, the subject of it; because your Lordship (as I attendant in
your Honorable house can witness, being daily acquainted with your wishes and
prayers) following the steps of your loyal and thrice renowned Father, desire
nothing more, then the furtherance of Gods glory, the safety of his royal
Majesty, and welfare of your Country; all which, and nothing else this
aims at: It is all my prayer, all my desire. Thus ceasing further to trouble
your Lordship at this time, with my daily and hearty supplications to the
Father of mercies, for your self, together with your second-selfe, your
religious Lady in whom you are happy, beseeching him long to continue that
blessed knot, with as much happiness as ever he bestowed on Abraham and Sarah, or
Isaac and Rebekah; and to multiply all those blessings on you which Jacob
wished to his deareling Joseph; Genesis 49. verse. 25.
heavenly blessings from above, and earthly blessings from beneath, blessings
of the breasts, and of the womb, I commit you to his merciful and blessed
protection.

Your Honors most obliged and obseruant Servant and Chaplain William Hampton

A PROCLAMATION OF WAR, From the Lord of Hosts.
DEVT. 28. ver. 49, 50, 51. 49 The Lord shall bring a Nation upon thee from
far, even from the end of the World, flying swift as an Eagle; a Nation whose
tongue thou shall not understand.

50 A Nation of a fierce countenance, which will not regard the person of the
old, nor have compassion of the young.

51 The same shall eat the fruit of thy Cattle, and the fruit of thy Land
until thou be destroyed, and he shall leave thee neither Wheat, Wine, nor
Oil, neither the increase of thy Kine, nor the stocks of thy Sheep, until
he have brought thee to naught.


IT was the opinion of Licurgus that wise Lawgiver of the Lecedemonians, that
there was no better way to keep men in good order, then to use partly threats,
and partly promises; partly rewards, and partly punishments: and in a
well-gouerned Commonwealth he thought the one as needful as the other. GOD
Almighty, that great and wise Lawmakers of heaven and earth, has appointed by
these two means, Praemiis and Poenis, by rewards and punishments, to keep the
commonwealth of the whole world in good government, and to bring men to
obedience to his holy commandments: for after he had in the 20 of Exodus given
his most sacred Precepts: that he might the rather stir men up to keep, and
observe them: in the 26. Chap. of Leuiticus, and also in this Chapter, he
propounds certain blessings, and cursings, menaces and promises, rewards and
punishments, as most forcible motives to win them to obedience. From the
third verse to the thirteenth, blessings are promised to the obedient; from the
fifteenth to the end of the Chapter cursings are denounced against the
disobedient. Wherein we may note, what a gradation God does keep in inflicting
punishments on stubborn sinners: first, he tries by his lesser and lighter
chastisments, to make them turn unto him; and if they will do no good, then
he comes with the Sword to consume, and cut them off from the face of the
earth: Psalm. 71 12.
as the Prophet David speaks, if a a man will not turn, God will whet his
Sword. Thus much we see in this Chapter; but more plainly in the 26. of
Leuiticus, where first he threatens to chastise them with the Famine; if that
will not amend them, he threatens to increase their punishment, and to send the
Pestilence among them; If that will not reform them, then in the last place he
gives them over to the Sword as it is v. 25. of that Chap. If ye will not for
these things be reformed by me (meaning the Famine and Pestilence) but walk
stubburnly against me, then will I also walk stubbornely in mine anger against
you, and I will chastise you seven times more according to your sins, and I
will bring a Sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant, and
ye shall be delivered up into the hands of your enemies.

Beloved, God has tried by the two former punishments, by the Famine, and by
the Pestilence, to win us of this Land unto his obedience: we have had of
late many dear years, wherein a number, especially the poorer sort have
pinched for it: we have had the last a dying year, Annum mortalem, wherein
thousands, and ten thousands have fallen in our Streets. Now if these things
reform us not, (as GOD knows there is yet little reformation seen) we are
next in order to expect the Sword, War, and the calamities thereof to descend
upon us; our Enemies to invade, and overrun us, unless GOD be the more
merciful unto us. So the Lord here menaceth his own chosen people, dear
Israel: (and we may apply it to our selves, if we walk in their steps;) if
they will not amend by his former punishments, then he will stir up a
foreign foe to invade them.

The Lord shall bring a Nation upon thee from far, even from the end of the
World, flying swift as an Eagle, etc.

Which Text is a Proclamation of War, or a Commination of a fearful
Invasion; wherein we may note;

First, Who proclaims this War? It is Jehovah the Lord.

Secondly, Against whom he proclaims it? against his own people, his beloved
Israel: Yet if they offend him, and sin against him, he will raise up War
against them. Upon thee.

Thirdly, Who he imployes in the execution of his wrath, to punish his
disobedient servants? A strange Foe. A strong Foe. A stern Foe.


1 A strange or foreign Foe; A Nation from far, from the end of the World,
whose tongue thou understand not.

2 A strong Foe: compared in my Text to an Eagle, to a flying Eagle: because as
an Eagle is the strongest of all Birds, so this Nation: secondly, to a flying
Eagle, because as an Eagle being on her wings is able to ouer-top any other
foul, so this Nation being in Arms, is able to ouer-match any other Nation.

3 A stern Foe: Which will show no respect, no mercy, no favor neither to
old nor young: A Nation of a fierce, or cruel, or barbarous countenance,
which will not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion of the young.

Lastly, the dreadful desolation that shall follow this invasion, the calamity
that shall befall the Inhabitants of that Land, then Enemies shall leave them
nothing, they shall take all that ever they have from them; their Goods, their
Cattle, their Corn, their Sheep; and shall put them either to cruel death,
or to such slavery and bondage, that they shall have no pleasure in their life,
but shall wish rather to dye then Isue; as it is verse. 66. and 67. Thy life
shall hang before thee, and thou shall fear both night and day, and shall have
no assurance of thy life: In the morning thou shall say, Would God it were
evening; and at evening thou shall say, Would God it were morning, for the fear
of thine heart which thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which
thou shall see.

First, I begin with him, who is a and o, the beginning and end or all our
actions, yea of all things, and that is, who proclaims this War: It is
Jehovah the Lord.

But this may seem a strange Paradox to some; that that God, who is Deus
pacis, the God of peace, should stir up War and division, and set Nations
together by the ears upon the face of the earth: that God who is not only
Bonus, sed ipsa bonitas, good, but goodness it self, should be Author mali,
the Author of evil, the raiser of War, which is omnium malorum pessimum, of
all evils the greatest. To unloose this knot, the School affords an old
distinction of malum culpae and malum paenae: or as Tertullian speaks, lib. 2.
cont. Marcionem, page 180. Malum delicti, et malum supplicij: or as Saint
Augustine distinguiseth in other words, but to the same effect. Tomo sexto.
Contra Adimantum, cap. 26. Malum quod facit homo, et malum quod patitur homo.
Evil which man does which is sin, and evil which man suffers, which is
the punishment of sin: Concerning the former, evil as it is sin, God is by
no means the Author of it; and therefore accursed, for ever cursed to the pit
of hell be that abominable doctrine, which the Church of Rome does
slanderously, and blasphemously cast upon us, that we make God the Author of
sin; for we defy and renounce it from the bottom of our hearts as a most
sinful Doctrine. But concerning the latter, evil which is the punishment of
sin, God is the Author of that: All afflictions and calamities which are the
rewards of sin, are sent upon man by the mighty hand of God: Famine a great
evil; yet the Prophet tells us God sends that; A fruitful Land he makes
barren, Psalm. 107.34.
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. The Pestilence a great evil,
yet God sends that; we read 2 Samuel 24. He sent a Plague in Israel, whereof
died more then threescore thousand, in less then three days. So digitus Dei,
the finger of God has been lately seen in our Land, especially in this
City, scourging us for our sins. This stroke came nor by chance; It was the
hand of heaven that smote us; and it is none but his omnipotent hand, that has
healed us: Blessed be his great name for it. War a great evil; yet GOD
sends that upon a sinful Nation: as'tis he alone that gives peace to his
children, and causes Wars to cease in all the world: So it is he alone that
raises War, and brings a revenging Sword upon the sinful sons of men:
This should teach to prepare, and arm our selves with patience to endure it,
if it do come, because a Domino est, it is from the Lord, it is the Lords
doing; the wicked, our Enemies are but his instruments: the rod of his fury, a
sword of his to punish sinners: he sets them on work; O Ashur, the rod of my
wrath! I will send him to a dissembling Nation, and I will give him a charge
against the people of my wrath to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to
tread them under feet like the mire in the street, Isa. 10.5.6. And in my
Text, The Lord shall bring a Nation upon thee. What? Upon Israel? His dear
Israel? his beloved Israel? his chosen people? his inheritance? his
sanctified ones? his peculiars? his favorites? those whom he picked and culled
out of all Nations? Those on whom he bestowed more precious tokens of his love,
then on any other? Will he deal so hardly with them? Will he reject them?
Will he destroy them? forsake them? Yes, if they forsake and reject him, he
will: God is not tied to any Nation, or to any people, longer then they tie
themselves to his obedience, and to his service: 1 Chronicles. 15.2.
Dominus vociscum dum vos cum Domino, The Lord is with you, while ye are with
him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he
will forsake you. So good Azariah fore-warned them, and as he foretold, so it
came to pass, this curse was executed to the full; for when they forsook the
Lord, and gave themselves over to follow strange Gods; the Lord forsook them,
and give them over into the hands of Strangers; they which hated them were
Lords over them, their enemies oppressed them, and had them in subjection; he
brought upon them, A strange Foe, a strong Foe, and a stern Foe, (first upon
Israel, because they first fell from him, then upon Judah) even the
Babylonians, who in^^ded their Land, wasted their Country, ruinated their
City, burnt their Temple, destroyed all their goodly Buildings, slew their
young men with the Sword, even in the middst of their Sanctuary, and spared
neither young man, nor virgin, ancient, nor aged, led many thousands of them
into most miserable slavery and captivity; took the King himself prisoner,
changed his chains of gold into chains of brass, and fetters of iron; killed
his Princes, and all his Nobles, slew his sons before his eyes, put out his
own eyes, and kept him in most pitiful bondage all the days of his life; as
you may see more at large, 2 Chronicles. and the last Chap. Ier. Chap. 52. And if
you enquire after the cause of all this mischief, you shall find it to be
their sins, their disobedience to Gods commandments, their contempt of Gods
word, their sleighting of Gods Messengers, their abusing of his Prophets. GOD
(whose mercies are more in number them all our sins) out of his infinite
compassion was loath to destroy them, unwilling to see their subversion; and
therefore he used all means for their conversion: he sent unto them by his
messengers the Prophets, rising early, and sending (says the Text) for he had
compassion on his people, and on his habitation: but they mocked the messengers
of God, they despised his words, they misused his Prophets, until the wrath of
the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy, 2 Chro. last
Chap. ver. 15.16. His long suffering waited for their conversion, so long as
there was any hope, as a Physician seeing any hope of life in his (...)
Patient, will not give him over; but finding him pa^^ ^ecouery leaves him: So
God seeing no hope of reformation, seeing there was no other remedy, so seek
them, gives them over to their own ^^st(...), bring upon them a Nation from
far, a strong Nation, ^^e^ce and cruel, the King of the Caldeans with all his
armed troops, who brought upon them all these calamities. And after 70 years
of captivity being expired, he brought them into their own Land again, and
restored them to their former and flourishing state: but because they continued
not steadfast in his covenant, but rebelled againg him, rejected his word,
crucified the Lord of life, refused his Gospel; he brought upon them an Enemy
more cruel then the former: even the flying Eagle (as it is in my Text) the
Roman Emperor; who brought upon them all the curses threatened in this
Chapter; War, Famine, (in so much that the tender and dainty women were glad
to eat their own children (as Josephus relates) Joseph. de bell Iud. lib. 7.
cap 3.
as it was foretold, verse. 57.) dispersion, deuastation, a final desolation
Thus is my Text fulfilled in your cares; the curse is executed; Canaan is
invaded; Judah is gone into captivity; Jerusalem is trodden down, the pleasant
Land lies wast: Quid hoc ad nos? And what is this to us will some say? Yet it
nearly concerns Vbi ingentia beneficia, and ingentia is peccata, ibi ingentia
supplicia: If partaking with them in Gods benefits, we partake of their
sins, we may justly fear to partake of their punishments: Let us a little
parallel our estate with theirs: Gods mercies were great to them, no less to
us. His loving kindness toward them appeared in four things:

In freeing them from the bondage of the 1. soul, 2. body.


In giving them blessings for the 3. body. 4. soul.


1 He brought them out of the Land of Egypt, from the bondage of Pharaoh:
Egypt was a Land full of Idolatry, and superstition; the people there
worshipped Devils, they worshipped me^, they worshipped beasts, they worshipped
plants, instead of God: From this Idolatrous Land, God freed them, which was a
great mercy: but he has done more for us; though he has not brought us out of
an Idolatrous Land, yet he has taken Idolatry out of our Land, he has
cleansed it, and swept superstition from it.

2 He delivered them from the bondage of Pharaoh, who did but tyrannize over
the body only, but he has released us out of that cruel bondage of that
proud Pharaoh of Rome, who does tyrannize both over the bodies and souls of
men. He showed wonders for them in the deep, leading through on foot as
through a wilderness, drowning and ouerwhelming their enemies in the midst
of the Sea: The like he did for us in 88. confounding the invincible Armado of
Spain, which came with open mouth to make a prey of us all: neither did he
only with Israel save us out of the water, but also out of the fire; when a
tormenting Tophet was prepared, with Gunpowder and much Wood, to blow up and
consume with one blast, both our King and Kingdom; and wanted but few hours
for the execution of it; then did he most mercifully discover it, and deliver
us from that infernal and hellish plott: so that we may say of this Land, as
the Prophet of Jerusalem: Is not this a brand taken out of the fire? Zach. 3.2.

3 GOD seated them in a fruitful Land, a most pleasant, and delightful Land,
the Land of Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey: so he has planted us
in a most plentiful and fertile land, the abundance and blessings whereof, (as
one said, who did for a while absent himself in foreign parts,) are
perceived magis carendo quam fruendo, rather by wanting, then by enjoying them:
no Nation under the cope of heaven, having such plenty of all Gods blessings,
both for the preservation, and sustentation, and delectation of man's life, as
our land affords; therefore no marvel, if the Pope and his adhaerents,
compass sea and land; use all the tricks, and plots they can devise, by
treason and treachery, by open hostility and privy conspiracy, to gain this
Island into their tyranny, out of which that triple crowned Father sucked so
much sweetness: for it is the eye of Europe, and storehouse of Christendom:
And as it was said, that the Province of Purgatory did yield as much revenue to
the Popes treasury, as heaven and hell both: so it is thought, that that man of
sin, and his generation of Vipers, Monks, and Friars, Abbots and Priors, in
our forefathers time, did suck as much fatness out of this Kingdom, as out
of all Christendom: no wonder then, if they bestirre themselves for it; it is a
sweet bit; terra frugifera, a fruitful land, fitly resembling the land of
Canaan.

4 But the head of all Gods mercies to the^ consisted in beneficio animae, in
doing the soul a good turn: in revealing his will, his word, his truth, his
laws and ordinances unto them: the Prophet reckons it an unspeakable favor;
He gave his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, he has
not dealt so with every Nation, Psalm. 147.19. Such is Gods goodness unto us
also, he has made known his word, his will, his truth, his Gospel to us in
most plentiful manner: he has not dealt so with every Nation; no not with any
Nation: no Nation in the world has such store of heavenly Manna, so much
knowledge of the truth, so much preaching of the Word, so much glorious light
of the Gospel of peace as we have. Thus we see, we go hand in hand with them
in the first step, we have received Ingentia beneficia, infinite, unspeakable
benefits and mercies as well as they. Let us now see if we have not Ingentia
peccata, as great sins as ever they had: would I could say we have not. Have
we been more thankful to God for his favors? more obedient to his
commandments then they? Would I could say we have. God has been as gracious
to this Vineyard of England, as ever he was to the Vineyard of Israel, both
in planting, in pruning, in watering, in hedging, in defending it: but we have
not yielded the fruits, the Grapes he expected: I fear, I may say with Moses,
we have returned to him, the fruits of Sodom and Gomorrah, our Grapes, are
Grapes of gall, our clusters are bitter, our Wine is the poison of Dragons, and
the cruel gall of Aspes, Deuteronomy. 32.32. Sin and wickedness, unthankfulness,
iniquity, impiety, these are the Grapes, these the fruits: never so much
knowledge and light abounded, and yet never so many works of darkness: never
so much Preaching, never so little performing; never did men know the will of
God more perfectly, never did men do the will of God more carelessly. And as it
was said, there was never less wisdom in Greece, then when the seven wise
men lived there; so it is thought, there was never less piety, never less
charity, never more iniquity in our Land among most men; then now when the
light of the Gospel shines most gloriously amongst us. O barren, unfruitful,
unprofitable Vineyard! May we not fear that God will now indispleasure forsake
it, break down the hedge thereof, and let in the wild Bore to root it up,
and the wild beasts to devour it? Has Israel felt his rod, and may not
England fear his scourge? Are we more dear to him then they were? Or is he
more tied to us, then to them? O no: if we partake of their sins, we may
expect their plagues. The time would be too short for me, to trace all the
sinful steps wherein we have followed them: only this I may say, there was no
sin known among them, which does not abound among us. Wherefore as the
Prophet comparing Judah with Sodom and Samaria, affirms that she was
corrupted in her ways more then they both, and had justified them by her
sins, so if we look into the sins of our Land, we shall find that she
has justified and exceeded both Sodom and Samaria, and Judah also in her
filthiness. O sinful England! Sodom thy sister has not done, Ezekiel. 16.48.51.
neither she, nor her daughters, as thou have done and thy daughters, (for
surely Sodom never knew the painting and pranking, and pride of our Land)
neither has Samaria nor Judah itself, committed half of thy sins, but thou
have multiplied thine abominations more then they. Yet Sodom, and Samaria, and
Judah, are ruinated; and have drunk the cup of Gods fury long agone: and do
thou sleep secure, O wretched England, without any fear? Sure thy judgment
sleeps not. When Calice was taken from England, by the French men, in the
time of Charles the fifth: one asked the English men, in scorn, and derision,
when they would win Calice again? a wise Captain hearing it, made answer,
Cum vestra peccata erunt nostris maiora: When your sins shall be greater
then ours; meaning, that whenever God gives any land over to the sword to be
invaded and ruinated, it is for the wickedness of the Inhabitants, for the
sins of the Land: but now Nostra peccata maiora, our sins exceed the
sins of Israel; may we not more then fear to taste of the same sauce with
Israel, Ingentia supplicia, infinite huge punishments as well as they? Never
did our Land (as I can read) enjoy so long a peace, and never did men make so
ill use of such a blessing. Often has it been afflicted with this calamity
of War and Invasion; First, it was ouerrunne by the Romans, then by the
Picts, then by the Saxons, then by the Danes, then by the Normans: and if we
examine the records of those times, we shall find it always imputed to
sin; Sin the cause of all the misery: Gildas an ancient Historian writing
of the destruction of the Britains by the invasion of the Saxons, says it was
for their sins; and reckoning up a Catalogue, in the end he shuts up all
with this sad Epilogue: Non igitur admirandum est degeneres tales, patriam
illam amittere quam praedicto modo maculabant: It was therefore no wonder at
all to see, that such degenerate and wicked men did lose that country, which
they had so polluted by their sins. And in another ancient History (written
as the Author says, ad cautelam futurorum, for the warning of future ages,
instanced by master Fox.) I find the invasion of the Danes, Master Fox Acts
and Monu. page 126.
ascribed to the like cause: In primitiua quidem Anglorum Eclesia, etc. In the
primitive Church of the Englishmen, Religion did most clearly shine; but in
process of time, all virtue so decayed, that in fraud, in treachery none
seemed like unto them, piety was neglected, iniquity respected: wherefore
Almighty God brought upon them (Pagan and cruel Nations like swarms of bees,
which spared neither women nor children; as Danes, Norwegians, Goths,
Suevians, Vandals, and Frisians, who destroyed their sinful Land from one
side of the Sea to the another, from man also unto beast.

And may we not fear the like scourge now? have not we contaminated, and
polluted this Land, by our abominable and horrible sins, more then ever they
did? their sins were ignora^ces, ours presumption: theirs omissio^, ours
rebellion: the sins of our Land are greater now, then ever they were: I am
persuaded if our Forefathers were now alive, they would be ashamed and blush to
see such a degenerate and sinful posterity: As St. Paul told the Corinthians,
there was fornication, and such found among them, as was not named among the
Gentiles; so there is such and so much wickedness found now among us in our
land, as was scarce ever heard or named among our ancestors: They had Plus
conscientiae, minus scientiae: we, Plus scientiae, minus conscientiae; more
conscience, though less science then we; we have more science, but less
conscience then they. We have justified them, they were righteous in respect of
us; Their hospitality is now converted into riot and luxury; their frugality,
into pride and prodigality; their simplicity, into subtilty; their sincerity,
into hypocrisy; their charity, into cruelty; their chastity, into chambring;
their modesty, into wantonness; their sobriety into drunkenness; their Church
building, into Church-robbing; their plain dealing, into dissembling; their
works of compassion and mercy, into works of oppression and bribery: It is
now almost grown out of fashion to be an honest man. Mirandum est degeneres
nos: It is a wonder, and a great wonder, that such a degenerate generation as
this, such a corrupt and sinful Nation as we, who have so far exceeded our
forefathers in all wickedness, should not lose this Country which we have so
defiled with our sins? Miranda Mi, cricordia! Gods mercy is to be wondered
at, that he has spared us so long: It is his mercy, and nothing but mercy,
that we are not consumed. Sin is now in vltimo gradu, at the highest pitch
that may be: Satan (I think) cannot make some more satanicall, more sinful:
our sins cry louder then the sins of Sodom; they ascend higher then the
sins of Nineveh; we may expect a judgment at hand, even that judgment,
which GOD here denounces against Israel: for when his two other rods, Famine,
and the Pestilence, will not serve the turn; to make us turn, then the Sword
must have his turn; although our security tell us no, yet our sins cry, it
will be so. The bane of many Nations has been too much security: Jerusalem
flattered her self, with peace, peace: and would by no means be persuaded the
Enemy should set foot there, till the Enemy had trodden her under foot: who
would have believed that the Enemy and Adversary, should have entered into the
gates of Jerusalem? Lam. 4.12. God grant the same be not the overthrow of our
Kingdom: Ah secure people that we are! we will not (with Thomas) believe;
till we feel and see: we are sick of their disease, we think our selves as
safe as they: when the messengers of God told them the danger was near, they
were as far from believing it, as you are now in London: Ier. 36.23.24.
Those that heard the words of Ieremiahs roll, denouncing an invasion at hand,
were never moved at it: Iehoiakim took the roll, cut it with a Penknife,
cast it into the fire; that was all the reckoning they made of it, such is the
security of these times; our words seem to many as Lots to his sons in law;
as though we mocked: or as the women's to the Disciples, (...), as an old
wines tale, Luke 24.11. They make but a mock and jesting song at all our
warnings; which makes me more to fear, and tremble to think, that the
judgment is at hand, because men are so insensible of it; God (I fear) has
blinded the eyes, and fatted the heart of this people, (as he dealt with
Israel) that we might have no sense, nor feeling of our ensuing misery, and so
seek no means to prevent it. It may be you think there is no danger this
Summer; be it so, God grant. But yet if we defer our repentance, it will
not long be deferred, and it may come before we look for it: it is the
Spanish policy to bark least, when they bite soonest, and sorest.

This was the destruction of the Amyclaeans; they, as we, stood in fear of
an invasion; diverse times it was noysed abroad, that the Enemy was coming,
and nigh at hand. Whereupon the City was raised, and much troubled: and still
they found it to be a false rumor: whereupon the Citizens of that place like
wise men, made a provident law, that no man upon pain of death, should any
more bring such news of the Enemies coming; shortly after the Enemy came
indeed: and then all being secure, and careless, and unprovided, and no man
daring to bring tidings for fear of the law, the City was unawares surprised,
the Citizens taken, and all cruelly murdered. The people of our Land are
almost of this condition, they cannot endure to be told the danger they are
in; it is unpleasing news: GOD grant when we are secure, and think our
selves most safe, the Enemy be not upon us: The Lord for his mercies sake (as
he has put it into the heart of his faithful Servant, our most gracious
Sovereign, to be careful to provide for our defense and safety,) so move the
hearts of the people to furnish him with supplies sufficient for the
performance of it, before it be too late; better part with something, nay with
half, then lose all, lives and all.

O when I call to mind the reigning, and crying sins of our Land; being now
ripe, like the Harvest of the earth, spoken of in the Revelation; I cannot but
fear that God will ere long, (unless our hearty repentance prevent it)
command his Angel, to thrust in the great and sharp sickle to cut us down.
When I call to mind, how little we have profited by his former punishments;
especially by the last years judgment, and by his mercy, in taking it so
soon away; I cannot but tremble to think, that he will ere long (unless our
general conversion turn it away) execute this curse here threatened, and
already executed on Israel; bring upon us a Nation from far, a foreign
invasion; a strange foe, a strong foe, and a stern foe: Now if ever, the
Ignatians cry, let Spain set foot in England: and now if ever, we have cause
to fear. First, A strange foe.

A Nation strange unto us many ways; strange by situation, far remote;
strange in affection, bearing an innate grudge unto us; strange in Religion;
strange in condition; strange in language; strange in manners; every way
strange unto us.

A strange and foreign invasion, a thing dreadful to this Kingdom, it
having so often smarted by it; and the burnt child fears the fire. But it may
be more dreadful to us now, then ever; because we have within us, many
homebred and domestical enemies, who will betray us; who (as we may justly
fear) will join hands with this foreign foe, in working our confusion. We
have especially two domestical foes, who make a foreign foe more to be
feared: -- Peccata. Papistae.


First, our sins, they are our chief, capital Enemies; because they work
God to be our enemy: Perditio tua ex te O Israel: Thy destruction, O England,
will come from thy self; the Snakes which we breed in our own bosoms, will
be the first that will sting us to death. Solum peccatum homicida; Sin alone is
the murthrer, the bloud-sucker that (I fear) will overthrow all: this was the
knife that cut the throat of Adam and all his posterity: Sin it was, and
nothing but sin, that caused the old world to be drowned, Sodom to be
burned, Pharaoh to be plagued, Corah to be swallowed, Achan to be stoned, Haman
to be hanged, Judah to be captiuated: Sin, and nothing but sin, thrust
Caine out of man's presence, man out of Gods presence, Adam out of Paradise,
Angels out of Heaven. When Nicephoras Phocas had built a mighty wall about his
Palace, for his own security, in the night he heard a voice crying unto
him; Cedren hist page 542.
(...) though he built as high as the clouds, yet the City might easily be
taken, there was a Traitor within it, that would betray it, (...), the sin
within would overthrow all: So imagine we were what we are not: imagine we
were as well provided, as I could wish we were; as strong as we could desire;
Imagine our Name were ready; all our Ships tigged, manned, and victualled; all
our Ports and Block-houses fortified; all our Coasts guarded; all our Beacons
watched; all our Castles repaired; all our men Armed; and our Land inuiron'd
with a wall of iron round about: yet it is to be feared, we have a Traitor
within that will betray us all, (...), the evil, the sin which is within the
Land will spoil all, unless we repent, unless God be merciful unto us.
There are especially three sins, which are great enemies to the State; to the
strength and welfare of this Kingdom; and which (unless, they be in time
suppressed) will gnaw the very heart strings thereof asonder; Pride, Gluttony,
Drunkenness; upon which three, more is consumed wastfully, then would
maintain a strong and sufficient Army, able to withstand any foreign force:
the Drunkards idle expenses would serve to victual the Ships; the Gluttons
superfluity would feed a Camp; our excess in apparel would shorethen cloth
an Army.

The second domestical foe, that makes a foreign foe more dreadful to us,
are the Papists; false-hearted, Spanish-hearted Papists I mean; who have a
tongue for the King, and a heart for his enemies; Jacobs voice, Esaus hands:
who if the day should come, would be glad to set their helping hand to cut the
throat of their native Country.

If all were true within our selves, we need nor so much to fear a foreign
Enemy; but what a weak and unstable thing, Regnum diuisum, is, our Savior
tells us, it is feeble, impotent, (...), it cannot stand, (...), it comes to
desolation, Math. 12.25. One said of the Thracians, that they were the
strongest Nation of the world; and yet they were but weak: Strong and weak
too, how could that be? Yes: they were strong, so long as they were true among
themselves, and joined and united all their forces together: they were weak,
being divided, and at variance one against another. We are like the Thracians;
strong and weak: we have the name of a powerful, and strong Nation; and this
were true, if we were all true within our selves, and held altogether in one:
but considering the faction and division which is in our Land; considering how
many well-wishers the Spaniard has, and what a potent party the Pope has in
this Land, we are but weak. And herein lies all our fear, all our Enemies
hope: for if we have false brethren amongst us; who will be ready at every
turn to open the door, and let the Thief in: if we have fly Foxes, who will
show the way, for the wild Bore to destroy, and wild Beasts to devour: If we
have Vipers, who will rejoice to gnaw out the bowels of their own mother: If
there be Canaanites in the Land, who will be pricks in our sides, and thorns
in our eyes; a snare and destruction to us; who, if the time should come, would
rise against us, and help our Enemies; we are but weak, we have cause to
fear. Jerusalem had not so soon been won by Vespatians son, had it not
been for civil discord within the City; and nothing more to be feared for
the ruin of our Nation, then civil dissension, domestical foes. Therefore let
us use the best means we can, for the diminishing, and suppressing of them: for
the first domestical foe; sin; we may every one set a helping hand, to the
suppression of it: every man will be ready to persecute and execute a
Traitor; let us make speed to execute this archtraytour sin; let us hate it
in others, loathe it in our selves: whatsoever sins we find ourselves guilty
of, let us now at last forsake them; kill, mortify, and crucify them: so
shall we not need so much to fear a foreign foe, if this domestical foe be
crushed under.

And though it lie not in every man's power to subvert the second, yet let us
pray unto God to convert them: as for those which will not be converted, let us
beseech God to continue it in the heart of his Majesty, and the Magistrates,
who^ it concerns, to curb them and keep them under: not to let them have the
reins too much at liberty, lest they take head; and like a pampred Palfry
throw their Rider, and bring a ruin to their King and Country in the end.

But imagine they should all prove true Subjects, and abhor to give any aid to
a foreign foe: (yet how can they be trusted, having so often tript?) but
imagine the Leopard should change his spots, and the black More his skin;
imagine they should become new men, and refuse to aid the Spaniard in the
Popes quarrel, and at the Popes command; yet we have cause still to fear:
for this Enemy is of sufficient power himself alone. It is a strong foe:
which was the second property. Compared in my Text to an Eagle, to a flying
Eagle: What is the strength of Spain the world knows; of what power he is
joining his Forces with the Eagle, (I mean with the Emperor whose Arms and
Ensign is the Eagle,) Christendom has felt by woeful and sorrowful
experience: What has Spain of late days undertaken with the Eagle, or for
the Eagle, or under the Ensign of the Eagle, but they have effected it, and
gone thorough with it to the purpose? Bohaemia is subdued, Silesia vanquished,
Morauia conquered, the Pals grave oppressed, the Laut-graue distressed, Breda
sacked, and all by the combination of Spain with the Eagle.

The Spaniard is now stronger then ever he was: all this time of our long
peace, wherein we have slept securely, in vtramque aurem, without any fear,
without any care, never thinking of a wett day to come; they have done all they
can to strengthen themselves, and to prepare for this time of war: all this
whil that we have sought and sued for peace, they have more then made
themselves ready for battle: their huge Armado in 88. was nothing to the
number of Ships which now they have. So that comparing our weakness, with
their strength; their skilfulnesse, with our unaptness; their readiness, with
our want of experience; their sedulity, with our security; our danger is
great: we have no better refuge, then to fly to the mercy and protection of the
Almighty, who has hitherto mightily defended us. Arise therefore, O Lord God
of Hosts, maintain thine own cause, and fight for us; be thou assistant to
the Armies of our Friends and Allies; prosper thou the Work of that renowned
King of Denmark, who is now in the Field, to fight thy bartell, o prosper thou
his handy work: for if they should miscarry or sit still for want of supply,
woe be to us; in the next place have at England, look to thy house David:

Tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek;
Spain, and the Pope, and the Eagle, would all fly upon us; combine and
conioine all their forces to devour us. GOD therefore in mercy look down
from heaven upon us, help, aid, defend, and deliver his poor Church; For if
they should get the Masterie, we must expect no mercy: It is a Stern Foe:
which was the third property. A Nation of a fierce, cruel, or barbarous
countenance, which will not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion
of the young.

Fierce and cruel they are, as being Papists; more cruel as they are
Spaniards: The rudiments of their Religion teach them to be bloody and cruel
toward us; Alco^a Azoar. 2.3.6. Vid. Phil. Morn. lib. de veritat. relig.
Christ c. 33. p. 608.
For as Mahomet in his Alcharon, promises the highest seat in heaven, to him
that kills most Christians, Interficite disperdite, quo mayor strages, eo
dignior and ins^gnior in Paradiso locus: Kill them. slay them, spare them not,
the more of them ye destroy, the more worthy and eminent place shall ye have
in Paradise. So the Pope and Jesuits make it a matter meritorious to kill
Protestants, (Heretics as they please despightfully to term us) yea the more
of us they murder, the more glorious reward they shall have in heaven.

More cruel, as they are Spaniards; The very grimme looks of a Spaniard
threatens blood and slaughter; like the Wolf they suck cruelty from their
mothers breasts: The Spanish Nation (says Quicchiardine) are covetous, and
deceitful, and where they be at liberty, exceeding outrageous, tyrannous, and
very proud and insolent* Where they are Conquerours, they put all to the Sword,
and nothing suffices them but blood. I call bleeding India to witness what I
say: where this cruel Nation has exercised such barbarous tyranny, and made
such infinite effusion of humane blood, as it seems incredible such monsters
should live in the shapes of men: Crudelitat. Hispan in Indies patrat.
Hispaenice conscript. per episcop Bar thol. Casa^^, natione Hispanum, latin
excus. Francosurti. 1598.
I will relate only the words of their own Writers, that ye may not think it
a calumniation cast upon them. Bartholomaeus Casas or Casaus, a Bishop of their
own, who lived in that Country, and was (as he says) oculatus testis, an eye
witness of their doings, has written a Book of it, Dedicaring it to the King
of Spain; out of which, give me leave to produce some instances.

He there affirms that never since the beginning of the World, was such an
havoc of people made, as the Spaniards have made in the Indies.

Page 7.
That more then ten Realms greater then all Spain, with Arragon and
Portugal, and those replenished with multitudes of people, as any Country in
the world, are all turned into a Desert: that of three Millions in Hispaniola,
they left scarce three hundred alive. Page ^.
That within the space of 40 years, 50 Millions of People were destroyed. Page
6.
So soon as the Nation was discovered, the Spaniards like Wolves, and Lions,
and Tigers long famished, entered, and did nothing but tear them in pieces, and
murder, and torment them by cruelties never heard or scene before. In three
months they Page 25.
starued to death 7000. children: Page 96.
they threw down from the top of a mountain seven hundred men together, and
dashed them all to pieces. Page 4.
At one time they murdered 2000 Gentlemen who were Lords sons, and the
flower of all the Nobility. Page 82.
They cut of the Noses and Lips of 200 at one time, and so sent them to their
fellows, a ruefull spectacle to behold. Page ^^.
They would lay wagers who should most nimbly, and with most dexterity butcher
men. Page 67.
They traced the miserable people like horses, and made them carry their
stuff; who dying upon the highwayes for feebleness, when they were laid on
with staves, and had their teeth broken out with the pommels of their swords,
to make them rise from the ground where they lay for faintness, would say, I
can do no more, kill me here outright, I desire to dye. Page 31. and 78.
When any one fainted upon the way with hunger and thirst; they would not
vouchsafe to bestow so much labor as to vnchaine him; but strike off his
head, leaving that in one place, the body in another. Page 20.
They would make them carry a hundred weight, one hundred or two hundred miles
together, wherewith their backs and shoulders were wrung, and galled like our
pack-horses. Page 8.
They used them not as Beasts, but as the dung, and filth of the earth.

When they had wrought all day in the Mines (says Sequanus) at night if they
missed never so little of their task, Praefat. ad Anton. August. praefix. ante
Oser. de gest. Eman. page 15.
they were stripped stark naked, bound hand and foot to a form, scourged all
over with whip-cord, or a Bulls Pizzle, then scalding Pitch was powered on them:
and lastly, their bodies thus rent with stripes, were washed over with Salt and
Pepper, and so they lay.

The foresaid Bishop protests, Page 35.
that no tong^e, skill, knowledge, or industry of man is able to recount the
dreadful doing of these capital enemies of mankind; the actions which they
committed were neither of Christians, nor of men, but of devils. Page 9.
Any Captain durst adventure to ravish the greatest Queen, or Lady in the
Country.

Such was the merciless cruelty of this blood-sucking generation, that they
took none to mercy: Page 10.
They spared no age, no sex, not women with child, nor such as lay in Child
bed, but would rip up their bellies, and choppe them in pieces. Page 11.
They would pluck sucking Infants from their Mothers breasts, and taking them
by the heels, dash cut their brains against the Rocks, or hurl them into
the Rivers. Page 99. and 108.
They trained up Mastiue dogs, of purpose to rend in pieces, and devour the
people, and for that end, fed them with man's flesh, having a ways a great
number of Indians fetterd in chains whom they murdered like Swine, as their
dogs needed, to feed on them. And he tells of one Page 60.
Who wanting dogs meat, took a sucking Babe from the mother, and chopping off
the arms and thighs, fed his Dogs first with them, then with the rest of the
body before her face.

Yea they did not only feed their dogs but also themselves with man's flesh;
Page 50.
Whole Armies of them living sometime like Cannibals, eating nothing but the
flesh of the Indians; For provision whereof an ordinary Shambles was kept in
the Camp, of the flesh of men, and young children, which they roasted, and fed
upon; yea and many times, men must be cruelly butchered only to have their
hands and feet, which the Spaniard counted a dainty dash. These are the
relations of their own Bishop.

Page 46.
In the Province of Guatimala, the Prince accompanied with his Nobles, welcomed
them with Music, and the richest gifts the Country affoorded: The Spaniards
(after their usual custom) demanded Gold; they made answer, they had it not:
(for indeed their Country yielded little, or none:) and for no other offense
but this, they burnt them all ali^e.

Page 29.
Another Prince of his own accord, in kindness, brought them a great present
of Gold, and they in requital ryed him bakward fast to a stake, with his feet
hanging over a gentle fire, to make him confess more: he sent home for all he
had; yet they were not satisfied, but would have more: the poor Prince not
having wherewith to content those insatiable Horse-leaches; they kept him in
that unmerciful and cruel torture, till the marrow dropped from his bones,
and so he died. A pitiful reward for such a courtesy.

To avoid such like cruelty of theirs, the poor people would hang themselves,
with their wives and children about them; the women destroy their conceptions,
and in grief and despair dash their own childrens brains against the
stones, lest they should fall into the Spaniards hands: Some of them professed,
that if the Spaniards went to heaven when they were dead, they would never
desire to come there; As the Page 28.
Prince of the Isle of Cuba, who being tied to a stake to be burnt, a
Franciscan came to him, telling him of God, and of the Articles of our faith,
which if he would believe, he might go to heaven to eternal happiness; if
not he must go to hell to everlasting torments. The Prince after a little
pause, asked the Friar, Vtrum etiam Hispanis caelorum ianua pateret, If the
Spaniards went to heaven? Yea, quoth the Friar; O said the Prince, (without any
further deliberation) then will not I go to heaven, but rather to hell, where
I may once be free from that cruel Nation. These are the words of their own
Bishop, who writes ten times more in detestation of it to the King of Spain,
Page 100.
protesting oftentimes that he does not set down the thousandth part of the
cruelties used: and we may the rather believe him, because many other who write
the Indian History, relate the like cruelties. This it was that made Benzo, who
lived also in the Country, and was an eyewitness of their actions, to cry
out; Benz. hist. Ind.
O quot Nerones, quot Domitiani, quot Commodi, quot Bassiani, quot immites
Dionisij, eas terras peragrauere? O how many Neroes and Domitians, and such
like unmerciful tyrants have harrowed those Countries? Is not this the Nation
spoken of in my Text, of a fierce and cruel countenance, not respecting the
old, nor pitying the young?

Now if they used such cruelty against those poor people which never did them
hurt, what would they do with us, against whom they bear an imbred hatred,
against whom they are so enraged? Those people never offended them, the
foresaid Bishop affirms Page 19. and 101.
That during all the time they were murdered, and made away so cruelly, they
never committed any one offense against the Spaniards, that deserved punishment
by the Law of man. Now if they used such Barbarous tyranny against them, what
will they do with us, by whom they are provoked and stirred up? Assuredly, if
our Land should fall into their hands, (which GOD for his mercy, and compassion
sake avert) they would not only put all the chief Inhabitants to the Sword,
(for that were not a death bad enough) but invent strange, exquisit, and new
found tortures for Englishmen, such is their monstrous spleen toward us.

Let no man promise better to himself; their cruelty extends to their friends,
as well as to their foes: in the Powder Treason Innocents and nocents should
have been blown up both together: the Duke Medina professed, that his sword
knew no difference, between Catholics and Heretics: and howsoever some in
our Land flatter themselves, and repose great confidence in the Spanish Nation;
yet if they should have the day, themselves may chance to rue it: their hands
would be heavy upon them also, neither would there be any respect of persons;
Papists as well as Protestants should all to the slaughter: they would speed no
better then the Catholics did at the sack of Antwerpe; the Spanish sword
should speed and hasten their journey to the other world: or than those false
hearted Britains did, who called in a foreign Nation, the Saxons, to help
them against their lawful Sovereign; but they in stead of ayding, destroyed
them; expulsed them out of their Land; dispossessed Vortigerne the usurper of
his kingdom; slew at one meeting two hundred, seauenty one, of the chief
Barons and Nobles: the Britains fearing no such Treachery; for they had past
promise each to other to come unarmed; but the Saxons brought privy knives
which (the watchword being given) they sheathed in the bodies of the British
Lords: such fidelity would these men find in the Spaniards, should they be
Conquerers, who now wish so much for their aid and assistance: they are too
politic to trust them, that were untrusty to their natural Prince: Religion
then would make no difference; Religion is the least thing they care for;
Religion is but a cloak for their covetousness and boundless ambition: they
have a deeper reach in all their enterprises. Dominion, and Soueraignety.
Religion was pretended in their West Indian voyage, the glory of God and the
conversion of Infidels; but the miserable people found the contrary, by a
woeful experience of many their houses, Cities, Countries, sacked, ransacked,
turned vpside down, and the dust of all their ground most narrowly sifted and
searched, that a wedge of gold was Deus Christianorum, the God of the
Christians. And this they would hold aloft, and make proclamation among
themselves, Eu Deus Christianorum! Behold the God of the Christians! Propter
hoc e Castella in terras nostras venere: For this they came out of Castile into
our Land; for this they are at war among themselves; for this they kill and
destroy one another.

This it is, or some such matter, that makes their teeth so water at our Land;
the riches, the plenty, the fertility thereof: their poor hungry diet in
Spain, feeding for the most part upon cold Sallets, and sower sawces, grass
and herbs, fine Oranges and Lymonds, sharpens their appetites to our
abundance, and full meals. O, if we could but once game little England, we
might feed like Farmers; the world were all our own: we should then have such
a Storehouse, to furnish our Armies with Munition and Provision, that we
would quickly be Lords of all Christendom, and make our King the Catholic
King indeed. The Lowe-Countries would be but a breakefast, France but a
dinner, all Christendom beside but a supper, for these ravenous Harpies. And
this is the best can be expected from them; to have all that ever we have taken
from us: if the Tiger should lose his fierceness, and the Wolf his
bloodinesse; if they should extend unwonted clemency, and take some to mercy;
yet they must look to lose all, and to be made Slaves and Vassalls: for this
is the calamity that follows the Invasion: The same shall eat the fruit of
thy Cattle, and the fruit of thy Land, until thou be destroyed, and he shall
leave thee neither corn, wine, nor oil, neither the increase of thy Kine, nor
the flocks of thy sheep, until he have brought thee to naught.

A calamity incident to an invasion, to a conquest: the natives of a vanquished
land, must look for no better, then to lose all; if they escape with life, it
is the mercy of the Enemy. 2 Reg. 24.13.
When Judah was invaded and overrun by the Babylonians, all the riches of
the Land became a prey unto the Enemy; the Church treasure, the Kings
treasure, and all things else; the Princes, and Nobles, and all the chief
Inhabitants lost their possessions, were put to death, or made bond-slaues;
only some of the poor of the Land, were left to be Vine dressers, and
Husbandmen, to till the Land for the use of their Enemies. But what need we
go so far for examples? Look but back to the last Conquest of our Land by
the Normans: though they submitted, yet did not the Conqueror dispose of all
things at his pleasure? Search our Chronicles, ye shall find it so; M. Fox
act. and mon. p^. 155. and 165. vlt. edit.
He gave away all the possessions of the English men to his own followers,
and Soldiers, in so much that they were forced to hold it under them, as their
Slaves and Vassalls; he altered the Laws and Customs of the Land: rooted out
all the English Nobility, left scarce one house of them standing; Hen. Hunting.
lib. 6.
(as Henry Huntington affirms) permitted no Native to bear any office of rule
or honor, in the Church or Commonwealth: burdened them with intolerable
exactions; yea, to such calamities were they brought, that for many years
after, it was counted a great shame to be called an English man.

But all this was mercy, in respect of that misery, which these men would bring
upon us, should they be Conquerours: they would not only take all from us; cast
us out of our possessions; make us their slaves and vassalls; alter the laws
and customs; extirpate all the Nobility: neither should it only be counted a
shame to be called an Englishman, but they would root out the very name of an
Englishman, from under heaven; and bring us even unto naught, (as it is in my
Text) such is their monstrous and implacable malice toward our Nation.

Where then, O where are the hearts of men, that they have no sense, nor
feeling of this? Shall we resemble those worldlings of whom St. Augustine
complains, Fortius diligentes ressuas, quam seipsos: Love our wealth more then
our selves, more then our lives, more then our wives, more then our children,
more then our Country, more then the Gospel? Shall we hazard the loss of all,
houses, lands, livings, lives, liberties, freedom, religion, rather then part
with any thing? Shall we choose rather to have it all, our selves and all, fall
into our Enemies hands; then bestow the least part, in offending our Enemies,
in defending our selves? O no: God forbid: Let Constantinoples misery be our
warning; they smarted for it; let us take heed, left we drink' of the same
bitter cup.

When that Imperial City was besieged by Mahomet the great; the good Emperor
did what he could to the uttermost of his power, Ric. Knowlles his Turkish
History, in the life of Mahomet the great.
for the defense thereof: sold the very Church Plate, and all his Jewels to
pay the Soldiers: and having no more left of his own, with tears in his
eyes, he besought his covetous Subjects to lend him supplies; or else all would
be lost, there was no remedy: They all pleaded poverty, and still protested
they had it not; they w^r^ grown poor for want of Trading: and thus by their
backwardness in not supplying their Sovereign, and covetousness in keeping
in their money was that famous City lost. For when the Turks had taken it,
they found it to be the richest thing of the world; for Treasure, Money, Plate,
Jewels; meeting in private men's houses with whole Chests full of gold:
wherewith they were so enriched, that it is a Proverb among them at this day,
if a man grow suddenly rich, He has been at the sacking of Constantinople.
They became a wonderment unto the Turks, that men having such abundance, would
part with nothing for their own defense: for if they had in time bestowed some
small part at the Emperors request, they might have safely enjoyed the rest,
and not been made a prey unto their Enemies: whereas by their
close-handednesse they lost all, and fell into most lamentable bondage. It
would make ones heart bleed to read the story of it: Those that were not
slain, were at the Soldiers dispose; what, of whomsoever he could lay hands
on, was his own: the noble Gentlewomen and great Ladies, with their beautiful
Children, who lately flowed with all worldly wealth, and pleasure, became the
poor and miserable bond-slaues of most base and contemptible Rascals, who
made no more reckoning of them, then of dogs (as the story says.) There
might the Parents see the woeful misery of their beloved Children, the Children
of their Parents; the Husband the shameful abuse of his Wife, the Wife of her
Husband. The great Turk feasting his Bassaes and chief Captains for many
days together, caused, at every Banquet certain of the chief Captives, both
men and women, of whom many were of the Imperial stock, to be in his presence
cruelly put to death, as he and his Turks sat banqueting: sawcing his meat
with the blood of the Christians, chearing himself with their misery; deeming
his Feasts much more magnificent, with that doleful music of the dying
Captives: which cruelty he used every day, till he had destroyed all the
Grecian Nobility, and all the chief Citizens. A pitiful calamity! we
condemn them of folly, and say they deserved no better: God grant the world
condemn not us of the like folly, and say we deserve worse; because we are
armed, being warned: their mishap should be our caveat: If we do not in time
take heed, it is like to fare with us, as it did with them. I fear we keep
our wealth, for our Enemies to make merry with: If we part not with something
for our own defense, we are in danger to lose all, as well as they: and to
come to worse bondage and misery; more mercy is to be expected from the very
Turks, then from the bloody Spaniards.

We have a most gracious King, (whom the King of heaven long preserve with a
prosperous and happy Reign; and let all good Christians say, Amen) who is more
careful and desirous of our safety and happiness, then we our selves: his wants
are great, his expenses greater for the common good: what charge he is at, both
at home, and abroad cannot be unknown unto us: he has a strong and powerful
enemy, which wants neither means, nor malice. O let not us discourage him by
our backwardness; Vltraposse, non est esse; he has, he does, he will do what
he may, more he cannot. There is a thing called, nervus Belli, without which
War cannot subsist: If we shrink in these sinews, and withdraw the
nourishment, will not the whole body be in danger to come to ruin? And verily
(from my heart I speak) unless He be in time supplied, we shall all rue it:
the Spaniard will rejoice to work upon such an advantage. That man were mad,
that would not part with a penny to enjoy a pound; and all the world will
condemn our Nation, if we lose our Country for lack of defense, having such
means to defend it. It is every man's case, let us all lay it to heart.

I have heard of a Marquis of Brandenburge, who was wont to say, he had in his
Country, three Monasteries which were three Monsters: one of the Dominicans,
who had abundance of Corn, and yet had no Land to sow; another of the
Franciscans, who were full of Money, and yet received no Rents: the third of
Saint Thomas order, whose monks had a great many Children, yet had no wines.
We are like to be a Monster, and wonder, a Proverb, and a common talk to all
people, as it is verse 37. For unless our Sovereign be supplied, that some
course may speedily be taken for our defense, we shall have neither Lands, nor
Rents, nor Money, nor Corn, nor Wives, nor Children, nor any thing else in
safety, but all will fall into our enemies hands: Lord open our eyes, that we
may see the danger we are in, and in time provide for it, lest when it be too
late, we wish we had. When you see this strange, strong, and stern Foe at
your gates; your Country wasted, your Houses fired, your City besieged: when
you hear the clangor of the Trumpet, the clamor of the wounded, the clattering
of the harness, the beating of the Drum, the roaring of the Ordnance, the
thundering of the Cannon: when you see your wives ravished before your faces,
your friends slain, your children murdered, your Infants dashed against the
stones, or broached on the Pike; and all the Land made nothing but the Shambles
of Castillian and Ignatian Butchers; then you will wish (but alas too late)
would to GOD we had in time been warned; would we had parted with half our
estates, rather then lose all, and come to this lamentable slavery and misery.
God in mercy put it into all our hearts to consider seriously of it; that every
man according to his ability, may condescend unto the necessity of the time.

Now for a conclusion: All that has been spoken, may serve as a strong
motive, to stir us up with speed to turn unto God, that he may turn unto
us, and turn from us this fearful calamity: Let us repent heartily, and cry
unto him mightily, to spare us, to be merciful unto us. Incessant prayers,
repentant tears are most powerful to procure Gods mercy, to divert his
judgment: he is merciful and will receive our Prayers; he is pitiful and
will regard our tears. His Sword was once drawn against Nineveh, a fearful
doom pronounced; Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. The King,
and his Nobles, and all the people fall to repentance; they fast, they pray,
they humble themselves to sackcloath and ashes: their sins cry for judgment,
their repentance for mercy: there was a contention between them, which should
outcry the other: their wickedness ascends up on high, knockes at heaven
gate, clamours loud in the ears of God; Justice, my Lord, vengeance,
vengeance. Their repentance ascends higher, and cries louder in the ears of
God; mercy, good Lord, mercy; spare us, O spare us, we beseech thee. Repentance
gets the victory; GOD is not so much inclined to judgment, as to mercy: he
regards not the cry of sin, if he once hear the cry of sinners: he accepts
their sorrow and humiliation; he puts up his sword, he holds his hand; he
sees them turn from their wicked ways, and he turns from his fierce wrath:
he sees them repent of their evil deeds, and he also repents of the evil he
pronounced against them. The sins of our Land like the sins of Nintueh, are
ascended up on high, and cry alowde for revenge to the GOD of heaven: but our
religious King has proclaimed a Fast; he and his Nobles have led the way; if
we, with him, and them, send up repentance, and prayers, and tears, to cry
alowd in Gods ears; they will dull the cry of our sins, that he shall not
hear it; and dull the edge of his sword that it shall not wound us.

Wicked Ahab had grievously sinned, and a terrible sentence was past upon him;
yet upon his repentance though it were but superficial in outward show, 1
King. 21.19.
GOD was merciful and spared him: See thou not (says God to Elijah) how
Ahab is humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I will
not bring that evil in his days, but in his sons days will I bring evil
upon is house. If God were so merciful to that wicked man upon his false and
fained repentance, how much more if we turn unto him, with true and unfeigned
repentance will he be merciful to us, and not bring this evil in our days?

A second means to divert this judgment, is incessant prayer: wonderful is
the force of prayer with the God of heaven: when the Moabites and Ammonites,
and they of mount Seir, came up against Jerusalem with an huge Army; the people
were amazed, not knowing what to do, for they were not able to stand before
such a multitude in battle: Iehosophat proclaims a Fast, the people all fall
to their prayers; 2 Chro. 2^.
desire GOD to aid, defend, and deliver them: O Lord God of our Fathers, art
not thou in heaven? and raignest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the
Heathen? and in thine hand is power and strength, and none is able to withstand
thee: O our God, wilt not, thou judge them? for there is no strength in us to
withstand this great multitude, neither do we know what to do; but our eyes
are toward thee. And such was the force of their prayers, that GOD gave them
the victory without fighting any stroke: the Lord himself became the Warrior,
and laid ambushments for their Enemies, (says the Text) and made them sheath
their swords in one another bowels, till they were all destroyed.

When Senecharib came into the land of Judah with a mighty Host; 2 Chronicles. 32.
and took the strong and defenced Cities thereof: Hezekiah and the people what
did they? In the first place they used the best means for their safety; they
stopped up the fountains of water, that their Enemies might not be refreshed
therewith; they built all the broken wall, they raised up the Towers, they
repaired Millo in the City of David, they made many Darts and Shields, they
mustered the people of the Land, and set Captains over them: teaching us what
to do; It is not enough to sit still, and cry, Lord have mercy upon us, without
using means for our defense and safety; for GOD works by means be it small
or great; and therefore Hezekiah uses the best means he can, to withstand
and keep out the Enemy: and then he and his people pray unto God for a good
success, and rely on him, as then surest stay for help and deliverance: Fear
not, neither be afraid of the King of Ashur; nor for all the multitude that is
with him, for there be more with us, then with him; with him is an arm of
flesh, but with us is the Lord our GOD, for to help us, and to fight our
battles. And the Lord seeing their confidence, and hearing their prayers, gave
them a marvelous deliverance; sent forth a Captain out of his own Host, a
holy Angel which in one night slew an hundred somescore and five thousand of
their Enemies. So through this strong and stern foe should come against us;
yet let us not be dismayed, if we repent heartily for our sins, pray
earnestly unto God, trust to him; no doubt but he will in mercy look upon us,
and work some means for their confusion, as he did in 88. beyond our
expectation: there be more with us then with them; GOD is on our side; it is
his quarrel; he will defend his Church, if we continue constant in his
service, fervent in prayer.

One Moses by prayer, saved a whole Nation, from a fearful destruction: when
the people forgetting Gods commandment, made them a God of gold, and
worshipped it, and so provoked the holy one of Israel, that he was minded to
make a clean riddance, and consume them utterly for it. Moses stepping into
the gap, and praying for them, stayed his hand. The people sin, God is angry,
draws his sword, lifts up his hand to strike; and Moses lifts up his hands in
prayer: and so long as he prays, God cannot strike, his hands were held by
Moses prayers: Exodus 32.11.
Let me alone, Moses, (says God) let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, for I will consume them at once, but I will make of thee a mighty
people.

It seems Moses by his prayers did hinder and hold God back from destroying
Israel; prayer is like a chain or manacle to tie the hands of an angry Lord:
Vincit inuincibilem, It ouercomes him, that ouercomes all things. And therefore
Moses he still prays, O Lord turn from thy fierce wrath, and change thy mind
from this evil toward thy people: and such was the power of his prayer, that
GOD altered his sentence, turned from his anger, destroyed them not as he had
intended.

Though Gods anger be kindled against this Land for our sins, yet if some
Moses do stand in the gap, if some holy, devout, and faithful men do
intercede for it, no doubt but God will be merciful: And herein lies our
strongest consolation; for as God would have spared sinful Sodom if there had
bin but fifty, but five and forty, but forty, but thirty, but twenty, nay but
ten righteous therein: So, undoubtedly, it is for some good peoples sake that
GOD has spared us so long: for though many are sinful, yet it is to be hoped,
there is here and there a Moses that holds up his hands; here and there a Lot
that grieves for the sins of the time; here and there an Abraham that makes
request for Sodom: for their sakes GOD spares the whole, let them continue
constant in Gods service, zealous in prayer; yea, let us all betake our selves
to earnest, and hearty prayer, for now it is time and more then time so to do.
Spare us good Lord, spare us we beseech thee: O remember not our old sins
and offenses, but have mercy upon us, and that soon, for else we are like to
come to great misery; help us O God, of and salvation for the glory of thy
name, O deliver us and be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake. Or as the
Prophet Joel exhorts, Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, (yea and all
the people) weep between the Porch and the Altar in the Lords house; and let
them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, spare thy people, and give not thine
heritage into reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them.

Let not this furious, bloodthirsty, and cruel Nation, worse then the
Heathen, ever set footing in this Kingdom, or have dominion over us: but let
the Crown flourish upon his head, on whom thou have vouchsafed in mercy to
place it; the man of thy right hand whom thou have made strong for thine own
self: cloth his Enemies with shame and confusion: be as a wall of fire to him
and his Realms: Let those that rise up against him, be like Sisera and Iabin,
who perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth, make them and their
Princes like Oreb and Zeb, yea make all their Princes like as Zeba and Zalmana;
O my God, make them like a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind. Let
them fall upon the edge of the sword, that they may be a portion for Foxes: so
shall the King rejoice in thy strength, exceeding glad shall he be of thy
salvation. For why he puts his trust in thee; and in thy mercy, O thou most
high, let him not miscary. So we that be thy people, and Sheep of thy Pasture,
shall give thee thankers for ever, and will be showing forth thy praise from
one generation to another. So shall thy name be glorified, thy Son magnified,
thy truth defended, thy Gospel propagated, thy poor Church comforted: which
we humbly beseech thee to grant, (O Father of mercies, and God of all
consolation) for our blessed Savior Jesus Christ his sake; to whom with thee
and thy holy Spirit, three glorious persons, one eternal, omnipotent God, be
given all honor, glory, praise and power, now and evermore.

FINIS.

