A Happy Husband OR, Directions for a Maid to choose her Mate.

As also, A WIVES BEHAVIOVR toward her Husband after Marriage.

By Patricke Hannay, Gent.

To which is adjoined the Good Wife; together with an Exquisite discourse of
EPITAPHS, including the choysest thereof, Ancient or Modern.

By R B. Gent.

Propert Exemplo iunctae tibi sint in amore Columbae,
Masculus and totum foemina coniugium.
Printed at London for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at his shop at the
West end of Saint Paul's Church, 1619.

TO THE VIRTUOUS and noble Lady, the Lady Margaret Home, eldest daughter to the
Right Honorable Alexander Earl Home, Baron of Dunglas, etc.
THinking with my self ( Noble Lady) what I might present some way to express
my love in remembrance of those not to be requited favors, which have wholly
obliged me to your House. It came into my mind that what is offered to gods, or
great ones, ought rather to be apt, then equal: and that it was held absurd in
old time to offer an Hecatomb to the Muses, or an I^y wreath to the god of
war. I thought no offering could be more comfortable to your virtues the^
this Husband, which of due does challenge a maiden Maecenas: and none so fit as
your self, who even in these years by your budding virtues, do well bewray
what fruit your upper years will produce. Accept it then Madam as an
acknowledgement of what is due by me to your deseruings, which have bound me
to abide ever yours

in all dutiful observance,

PATRICK HANNAY.

To Women in General.
IN things of weight and moment, care and circumspection are to be used, with a
truly grounded judgment before resolution. Now in humane actions none is of
more conscquence then marriage, where error can be but once and that never
after remedied. Therefore in it is great caution required before conclusion,
the sequel of staid deliberation, or unadvised rashnefse, being a happy, or a
wretched life. And therein is another counsel most necessary (though through
the whole course of man's life it be safer then the selfe-conceiued:) for
affection which in other affairs does often ouerrule reason, (even in the wise)
does in this ever hide the faults of the affected under the blinding vale of
love. This has caused me for the weal of your Sex to produce this Husband to
the light, not gain, or glory; knowing well the vulgar and critic censures
in this age do rather detract, then attribute: but I care not much for their
opinion, who dislike, may freely abstain if any give better, I shall willingly
absent take it as it is meant, for your good, to displease none, and to content
all.

P. Hannay.

To Ouerburies Widow, wife of this Husband.
Leave worthy Wife to wear your mourning weed,
Or bootlesse stain your che^ks for him that's dead;
But rather joy, and thank this Authors pen,
Has so well matched thee with this matchless man:
For Ouerburies Ghost is glad to see,
His widow such one's happy wife to be.
R. S.

To Master Hannay.
THy happy Husband shows thy high ingine,
Whose Muse such method in her measures can,
The matter shows thy manners are divine;
Thy practiced virtues shows thou art this Man:
I half envy that highly blessed Maid,
Whose happy lot shall be to link with thee,
And well-nie wish that Nature had me made
A woman; so I such one's wife might be:
Detraction is distraught thy lines to see,
And sweld with envy, can no words bring forth,
Her baseness cannot parallel thy worth.
Which still shall live unto eternity:
For after Ages reading of thy verse,
Shall deck with Laurel thy adored hearse.
P. T.

To his Friend Mr Patrick Hannay.
FRiend I am glad that you have brought to light,
A Husband fit for Ouerburies Wife;
Whose chastity might else suspected be,
Wanting too long a Husbands company:
But now being matched so well by your endeavor,
She Will live a chaste Penelope for ever.
And you brave Ouerbury make to be,
Your brother in law by act of ingeny.
W. Jewel.

To the Author.
When I behold the Author and his Book,
With wonder and delight on both I look;
Both are so like, and both deserve so well,
Were I not friend, I in their praise would dwell.
But since it would seem partial, I think fit
To leave their praises* to a better wit:
But Husband like to this I wish God send
To those are cha^t, and to me such a friend.
Live each in other, be each others praise,
Time shall not end your glory with your days.
E. Leuenth.

The Argument.
MArriage ordaind; the Man made head,
That kind may be, like like does breed:
God blessed it; youth it best befits,
The Author will not try his wits,
To make one man of manies parts,
Painters do so to show their Arts:
His birth and breeding first he shows,
Equal, and good; the wants of those
What ils they breed, yet selfe-gain'd glore:
He does prefer both these before,
His shape must not deformed be,
Nature makes house and gue^ agree.
His stature neither low, nor tall,
The mean in each is best of all:
Not curious to be counted fair,
Its womanish to take that care;
Free from affecting gifts of others*
That selfe-we^kenesse still discouers.
Such one found, then next is shown
What vice hees*d want, what virtue own;
Wealth must be set aside to try,
(It is a beam in judgments eye.)
What ill does hant her weds for gold,
Is ^old with the content of old;
When virtue and simplicity
Did choose: then he does let her see
The Worthies that the World brought fort^,
Wooed nere for wealth, but still for worth.
With virtue this man should be nursed,
If It be deprau*d, he is worst then first:
Drunkenness, gaming, he must want,
He shows what ils such unthrifts ^ant;
He must not haunt another sheets,
Grace, and whoredom never meets;
He must have spent well his time past,
A wicked crimes bruit long does last:
His humors must with hers agree,
Else true friendship cannot be;
He must fear God, for on that fear
Wisdom does her building rear:
Its that makes ^onest, Honesty
In show, not deed, is policy.
He must propose a certain end,
Whereto his actions all must bend;
He must have unfeigned piety,
And serve in truth the Diety:
The four chief virtues in some measure,
Must hoord up in him their treasure,
Whereon the lesser do depend,
Age, and behavior do him end.
A good Wives description.
To keep him good, his wife must be
Obedient, mild, her huswifery
Within doors she must tend; her charge
Is that at home; his that at large:
She must be careful: idle wives
Vice works on, and to some ill drives:
Not toying, fond, nor yet unkind,
Not of a weak dejected mind,
Nor yet insensible of loss,
Which does with care her Husband cross:
Not jealous, but deserving well,
Not gadding news to know, or tell;
Her conversation with the best,
In Husband, heart her thoughts must rest:
Thus if she choose, thus use her mate,
He promises her happy state.
A Happy Husband OR, Directions for a Maid to choose her Mate.
IN Paradise God Marriage first ordaind,
That lawfully kind might be so maintaind;
By it the Man is made the Woman's head,
And kind immortalized in their seed:
For like produces like, it so should be,
God blessed it with increase, and multiply.
Nature requires it, nothing is more just,
Who were begot, beget of duty must.
It Youth becomes, Age is unapt to breed,
Old stocks are barren, youthful plants have seed.
Then virtuous Virgin, since such blessings springs
From wedlock (which earths greatest comfort brings)
Compeld by love, which to thy worth is due,
How to choose well thy mate, I will thee show;
Whose sympathizing virtues may combine
Your hearts in love, till death life's thread untwine.
It Is not my mind the rarities to gleane,
Of best perfections I have heard or seen;
And take the best, where bounty does abound,
And make a H^sband, (no where to be found:)
The Painter so from boys, and girls did take
Best of their beauties, Helen fair to make;
No, I will paint thy mate in such a hew,
As Care may find: Discretion must allow.
To choose aright, know from what stock he is grown
The birth suites best, is equal to thine own;
Dislike makes higher Birth deem lower base,
Lower will never by thy Birth take place:
In Man the fault is more to be excused,
Who of low birth (for beauty) has one chus'd;
His lightness therein ever love is deemed,
Yet as his place, his Wife shall be esteemed.
But when a Woman of a noble race.
Does match with Man of far inferior place,
She cannot him innoble, He is still
In place as she first found him, good, or ill:
His breeding will his birth still to thee tell,
" For as the caske, the liquor still does smell.
A crab, though dig'd and dung'd, cannot bring forth
A luscious fruit: so hardly man of worth
Does from base stock proceed, still like it self
Nature produces; force of golden pelf
To alter that is not able, yet we know
Often Men of worth, have come of Parents low:
For Parents place is not the Childrens merit,
Yet it adds grace, if they their worth inherit;
If not, it adds to shame: for from high race
Virtue's expected due to such a place:
For indegenerate heroicke minds,
They should possess, are come of noble kinds;
What man's own worth acquires with virtuous ends,
Is truly his, and not that which descends.
Cicero brags (and justly) that his line
He did in glorious virtue far outshine,
Which was his honor: They no honor hau^,
Who idle add not to what they receine;
It is his own worth every Man does grace,
Less or more eminent as is his place:
For Virtue (though aye clear) yet clearest shines
When she does dart her lights from noble lines.
A glorious flame blazing in valley low,
Is soon bar^'d sight, nor does it far way show,
Obscured with neighbor objects: but on hie,
A little Beacon; to both far and nie:
Shows like a bearded Comet in the Air,
Admired of some, of most accounted rare.
Choose thou a Husband equal to thy race,
Who's graced by vert^, and does virtue grace;
" Things different do never well agree,
" Trv^ liking lodges in equality:
Better then birth his Parents virtues know,
" From poisoned springs no wholesome waters flow.
As for his shape I would it should be free
From ( Natures, not of spite) Deformity:
Deformed shape is of so bad a nature,
That its disliked even in a noble creature;
Where comely shape with love attracts the eyes,
By secret sympathy os all it sees.
Englands third Richard, and the wife of Shore,
The one deformed, the other graced with store;
Of bountious Nature^ gifts, do show the effects
Of Love and Hate, to goo^ and bad aspects;
She (when she barefoote with a Taper light,
Did open penance in the peoples sight)
Went so demure, with such a lo^ely ^ace,
That beau^y seemed apparreld in disgrace:
But most when shame summoned the blood too hie,
V^ith native stains her comely cheeks to die
In scarlet tincture: She did so exceed,
That even di^grace in her delight did breed;
Firing beholders hearts* that came to scorn her,
So Beauty clothed in baseness did adorn her:
That even the good (who else the vice did blame)
Thought she deserved pity more then shame.
Condemning cunning Richards cruel mind,
Who caus*d her shame, the multitude to blind;
Lest it his greater mischief should behold,
Which his ambition plotters had in mold:
So in them was the force of feature seen,
Who if less famous, had more happy been.
Thus Nature makes each Body with the mind,
Some way to keep Decorum: for we find
Marked bodies, Manners cross accompany,
Which in well shaped we seld, or never see:
For she does Builder-like a Mansion frame,
Fit for the guest, should harbor in the same.
No Stature choose too low, for so in t^me
Thy offspring may prove dwarffes; yet do not clime
To one too tall: for buildings mounted hi^,
Their upper rooms seldom well furnished be:
Herein observe the mean, its best of all,
Let him not be observed for low nor tall;
Fresh, lively colors, which fair women grace,
Modest, effeminate, alluring face*
Is not so much in Man to be respected,
As other graces are to be affected:
The bloome of Beauty is a fading flower,
Which Age and Care consumes every hour;
It blasted once, is ever after lost,
Like to a rose nipt with untimely frost.
A manly face in Man is more commended,
Then a fair face from Sun and Wind defended.
A Carpet Knight, who makes it his chief care
To trick him neatly up, and does not spare,
(Though sparing) precious time for to devour,
(Consulting with his glass) a tedious hour;
Soon flees (spent so) whiles each irrigular hair
His Barbor rectifies, and to seem rare,
His heat-lost-lockes to thicken closely curles,
And curiously does set his misplaced purles;
Powders, perfumes, are then profusely spent,
To rectify his native nasty sent:
This forenoones task performed, his way he takes,
And chamber-practis'd craving, cursies makes
To each he meets; with cringes, and screwed faces,
(which his too partial glass approved for graces:)
Then dines, and after courts some courtly Dame,
Or idle busie-bout misspending game;
Then suppes, then sleeps, then rises for to spend
Next day as that before, as t'ware the end
For which he came: so womaniz'd turned Dame,
As place mo^gst O^ids changlings he might claim;
What? Do not such discover their wake mind,
(Unapt for active virtue) is inclind
To superficial things, and can embrace,
But outward Habits for internal Grace.
The minds gifts do the bodies grace adorn,
Where that is defective to affect is scorn:
For Actions hindered by too much observing
Of decency: but where a well deserving
And settled reputation is; then there
Each thing becomes, and is accounted rare:
Where that is defective, striving to affect
Another worth, their weakness does detect.
Let thy Mate be what such do strive to seem,
Thou must the substance, not the shade esteem:
When thou have found this well formed cabinet,
Try what rich Jewels are within it set,
Set wealth apart, thou shall more clearly see
His Virtues (Riches dazell Judgments Eye.)
Who weds for wealth: she only wealth does wed,
Not Man, which got, and in possession had,
Love languishes: yet till ones death she is forced
To live with him though wealth fail, yet divorced
They cannnot be; so is she all his life
His riches Widow (though she be his Wife.)
That golden Age (when sullen Saturn reigned
For Virtues love, (not Golds) the glory gained;
To be so styled, it was not then demanded
How rich in gold, or how that he was landed:
When they did woo, simplicity had wont
be first, (which now is last, in least account)
With Virtue leading Love, be Wedlocks aim,
And greatest wealth, a pure unspotted name:
They lived and loved, then ioying each in other,
Not fearing that their Mate should love another
Seduced by tempting Gold; their time they spent
Free from distrust, or open discontent:
But the next Age, when as our mother Earth,
(Fertile before in voluntary birth)
Was sought into; and had her bowels torn
For hidden wealth: then when the keel was worn,
Plowing the Ocean for his hidden store,
The sweet content did vanish was before.
The silly Maid (then ignorant of ill)
Having no wealth, might live a Maiden still,
And die (except seduced) so; the poor swain
(Though virtuous) was straight held in disdain:
But yet the Wort^ies that the world brought forth
Since that blessed Age, posponed wealth to worth;
Great Alexander did disdain the offer,
Declining Darius with his Child did proffer,
Nor Maced's full of Gold, nor Eup^rates brim,
To bound his Empire, could innegle him:
But He for that, rather contemned his Foe,
For thinking He could have been conquered so;
True worth does wealth as an addition take,
Defective virtues wants of weight to make,
Virtues best wealth, wherewith he should be nursed,
That smell stays long, a vessel seasons first:
Yet build not there, for good natures depraved,
Are stil^ the worst, so thou may be deceived.
See that he have so spent his forepast time,
That he be free from censure of a crime,
Yout^s apt to slip: but a notorious deed
From Nature, not from Age, does still proceed;
And though that Fortune herein often has part,
Yet th'actions still are judged from the heart.
Adrastus thinking to revenge the harms
Of his dead Love* his naked weapon warmes
In his brothers bosom (too dear blood to spill)
Instead of his that did his Lady kill:
Fleeing to Craesus, he him entertained,
Where his beha^iour so much credit gained,
As Lydia's hope, young Atis, Craesus heir
He got in charge; whom hunting unaware,
His hapless hand vnfortunat^ly slew,
VVhiles at a Boar his dismal Dart he threw:
Yet was it thought intention, and not chance,
Till being freely pardoned the offense,
Lest more disast'rous chances should fall out,
His own self slaughter cleared them of that doubt:
Thus when opinion has possessed the mind,
It leaves a deep impression long behind,
And they must do much good, that have done ill,
Ere they be trusted, were by fate or will.
See Drunkenness, (from which all vices spring)
Do no way stain him; for that still does bring
Contempt, disgrace, and shame: Cyrce made swine
Of wise Ulysses fellows, drunk with wine.
The Macedonian Monarch (lately named)
Is not for worth so praised, as for that blamed;
He in his drink destroyed his dearest friend,
That did fore him his Fathers deeds commend:
Nor could his after-teares wash off that stain,
Which does to blot his actions still remain:
For if one would his glorious actions shoe,
How strong? chaste? valiant? mild to captived foe?
With such brave deeds, though he the world has filled,
Yet this still stays. He drunk, dear Clytus killed.
No Gamester let him be: for such a Man
Shall still be looser, do the best he can;
His mind and money it frets, and destroys
And wastes the precious time he here enioyes,
Some in less time unto some Art attain,
Then others spend in Play; somes pleasing vain
Will seem so mild, in this dear double loss,
They outwardly not take it for a cross:
But when all is gone (for they but then give over)
Their smothered anguish they at last discover;
Whereof man's foe, the Fiend, advantage takes,
Whiles on selfe-slaughter'd rocks, he gathers wrakes.
Examples ^ereof we may daily see,
How some by halter, some by poison die;
And who go not so far, yet their last ends
Contemned need, and misery attends:
For this ill haunts them, who to play are bent,
They seldom leave till their estate be spent.
With others sheets let him not be acquainted,
(They are still stained, who^ once that sin has tainted)
And never hope to have him true to thee,
Who has often prayed on changed variety:
Be sure who has had choice, will nere digest
To feed on one dish, ( though of sweetest taste)
And who so strayes, loves not, but lusts; in one
Does Love delight, when that leaves, Love is gone;
For Grace and Lust nere harbor in one ^nne,
And where Lust lodges, ever lodges Sin:
Which Sin when it is to a habit grown,
Not fear of God, (but Man) lest it be known,
Does stay the execution: but be sure
Though the Act be hinderd* yet the hearts impure,
Whose Lusts will predomine in time and place,
Not ouerruld by God^ (...) Grace.
Besides, he will be still suspecting thee,
Though thou be pure as spotless Chastity:
For vice is ever conversant in ill,
And guilty as it self thinks others still.
Upon this Earth there is no greater Hell,
Then with suspecting ^ealousie to dwell.
See that his humors (as ncere as may be)
Do with each humor of thy mind agree;
Or else contention, and dissension still,
Will bar your sweet con^ent; while the ones will
The others does resist, Love cannot be
Twixt fire and water, they will nere agree:
True friendship must express twixt man and wife,
The comfort, stay, defense, and port of life,
Is perfect, when two souls are so ^onfus'd,
And plungd together (which free will has chus'd)
As they can never seuer'd be again,
But still one compound must of both remain:
From which confused mixture, nere proceeds
Words of good turns, requitals, helps of needs;
For it is ever after but one soul,
Which both their wills and actions does control;
And cannot thank it self for the own deeds,
( What is done to it self, no selfe-lou^ breeds*)
But this holds not where humors disagree,
There Is no concordance in disparity.
See he fear G^d, then will he fear to sin,
Where vice does leave, there Virtue does begin:
Sin is nipt in the bud, when we do mind
That Gods all light, and can in darkness find
What we can hide from Man* the reins and heart
He searches through, and knows each hidden part,
And each thought long before; we cannot hide
Our faults from him, nor from his censure slide.
The Wiseman says, its Wisdoms first degree,
To have a true fear of the Diety;
For that makes Honest: Honestie's commended,
Whether sincere, or for a cloak pretended*
The vulgar Honesty, servant to Laws,
Customs, Religions, Hope and fear it draws;
Be more or less: According to the times
It still is wavering, difference of climes
Makes it unequal, rather Policy
I may call such Respect, then Honesty;
Which still aspiring, quickly often mounts hie,
And in short time unto that mark comes nie;
At which it aims: but builded on false grounds,
A sudden fall it unawares confounds.
But Honesty does always go upright,
With settled pace; not wavering for the might
Of winds, times, nor occasions: it goes slow,
But still attains the end, toward which does go*
Now such an Honest man I wish th^e find,
As still is Hon^st, out of Honest mind:
That's Wisdome^ first ground, next is to propose
A certain form of life; sor ever those
(Who diverse in themselves) aim at no end,
But as occasion offers, each way tend;
Never attain the mark. If Hawke assay
To trusse two Birds, she does on neither pray:
These grounds being laid, an unfeigned Piety
Must build thereon, and though that diverse be
Religions, Laws; yet ours amongst them all
Is truest, purest, most authentical.
Religion true, loves God, and quiets us,
And rests in a Soul, free and generous:
VVhe^e superstition is a frantic error,
A weak minds sickness, and the own Souls terror*
Religious men do still fear God for love,
The supersticious, lest they torments prove.
Let thy Mate be a man, whose settled faith
In true Religion sure foundation has:
For twixt those bodies love does best reside,
Whose souls no self opinions do divide:
The four chief ^irtues next in order go*
From which the rest as from four fountains flow;
Prudence the first place has, to see and choose,
Which is so needful, and of so great use,
That with it weighty things do seem but light,
Without it nothing can be done of weight;
By it things even against Nature are achieued,
A wise mind gaine^ what many hands has grieved:
Just ^e must be Himself first to command,
For sensual things at Reasons Law must stand,
The Spirits power keeps the passions still in awe,
And strictly bounds them with an austere Law,
With Moderation it guides our desires,
(We must not all condemn) Nature requires
To love things neat and needful, base things hate,
Its wantonness to live too delicate:
But its mere madness to condemn the things,
Which needful use, and common custom brings.
Next to his Nei^hbour, he that right must do
Which he expects* (freely not forced thereto;)
Whom Law constraines, they falsify all trust,
Its conscience, not constraint that makes men just:
As just, so valiant would I have him be,
Not out of rashness or stupidity,
It is a constant patient resoluti^n
Of bashlesse Courage against the revolution,
Of times and fortunes it regards not pains,
Where Honor is the Hire, Glory the gains:
Its sensible careful man's self to save,
Not daring offer wrong, more then receiu^;
As Prudent, Just, and valiant, so He must
Be temperate, this virtue has foul lust,
And pleasure for its object, it commands,
Laps, and re^ormes our sensual thoughts; it stands
Twixt a desire, and dullness of our nature,
And is the spurrer on, or the abater
Of ill or good, shamefast in refusing
Thing, filthy, honest in things comely choosing;
Though with perfection these no one man fits,
Yet let him be free from their opposits:
He must be sober, not given to excess,
It cures, and keeps in health, mind it does dress;
Making it pure, and capable of good,
It Is Mother, and good counsel is the Brood:
Excess does dull the Spirits, and breeds disease,
So after punished by what first did please.
Learned let him be, his learning general,
Profound in none, yet have some skill in all;
Whose deeply learned, his Book is most his Wife,
Conuersing still with it, so of his Life
His Wife not half enioyes: for most i^ spent
In study, so what should yield most content,
Societies debard; I do wish then
Who are mere Scholars, may live single men:
Learning besots the weak, and feeble mind;
But pollishes the strong, and well inclind:
The one ^aine-glory puffes with self-conceit,
The others brain is settled judgments seat.
Then so learned let him be, as may choose
Flow^rs of best Books, whos^ sweet sent he may (vs^,
To rectify his knowledge, and distill
From thence life-blessing precepts, which so will
Temper his understanding, that the frown
Of fickle Fortune, never shall cast down:
Not bold in speech no man of many words
Choose thou a Husband; leauy tree affords
The smallest store of fruit: Both words and deeds
Seldom, or never from one Man proceeds.
Who guides his words, he in a word is wise;
Yet let him not be sullenly precise,
But gentle, pleasing not crabbed, or tart,
The wise man's tongue is ever in his heart;
The fools heart's in his tongue: it is great gain
For to be silent, and ones self contain.
And see with whomsoever he converse,
(Left he be thought ill nurtured, or perverse)
That he be kind, obsequious, affable,
To fit himself unto their humors; able
To change condition with the time, and place,
Is wisdom, and such leuity does gra^e:
So Aristippus each face, each behavior,
Did still become, and was a gracing favor.
Choose thou a Husband older by some years
Then thou thy self art, Man age better bears
Then Women: for bearing of children makes
Their Strength decay, soon beauty them forsakes;
Many crops makes a field soon to be bare,
Where that that b^ares not long continues fair.
Now Lady such a man I wish you find,
As here I have described; with whom'to bind,
Your self, is to be blessed, leading a life
Full of content, free from contentious strife.
A Wives behavior.
But to find good, is not enough to show,
But having found him, how to keep him so;
Then since I have advised you how to choose him,
I will give some advice how you should use him.
Obedience first thy will to his must fit,
(He is the Pylot that must govern it)
It man condemns of inability,
When Women rule, that is born to obey:
Nor is it Honor to Her, but a shame,
To be matched with one only man in name:
But if imperious, He should more desire,
Then due respect does of a Wife require;
Think not harsh stubbornnes will ere procure him,
To be more mild, (it rather will obdure him.)
The whip and lash the angry Horse inrages,
Mild voice and gentle str^ke his ir^ asswag^s:
From steele-struck flint we see the lightning flies,
But struck against wool, the flas^ing flame none spies;
Nor is the clangor hard: the ones soft nature
Is to the others hardness an abature.
VVin thou thy Mate with mildenes: for each cr^sse
Answered with anger, is to both a loss;
Like as the Sea which against a churlish rock,
Breaks brauing billows with a boistrous stroke,
Seeking by raging force to throw on sands
The stiff resisting rock, which unmoved stands,
Repelling his bold billows with like scorn,
As the others bravery had bownst them beforne;
Thus both still strive, and striving are overcome,
The rock is worn, the Billow's crushed in foam:
Whereas the Sea calmely the Sand embraces,
And with smooth forehead lovingly it graces;
Being content that it should bound his shore,
Yielding to mildness, where force failed before.
So let thy mildness win thy Husband to it,
If that do not, then nothing else will do it:
Beware you (willing) to no anger move him,
If he perceiue't, he cannot think you love him;
If anger once begin twixt Man and Wife,
If soon not reconciled, it turns to ^trife:
Which still will stir on every light occasion,
What might have ceased in silence; then persuasion
Of friends will hardly end: for every jar
Is ominons presaging life-long war.
And where two ioin'd do iar, their state decaies,
They go not forward, wh^ draw diverse ways,
Being yoakt together: your first care must be,
That with your Husband you in love agree;
As far from fondn^sse be, as from neglect,
Mixing affection with a staid respect:
If toying fondness were Man's only aim,
Not reason, but his lust should choose his Dame;
Where Whores lascivious, that can ways inuen^
Should equalize thee: nay, give more content:
No, th^se are not the Joys he hopes to find,
The Body not so much he weds, as mind*
Be never fond, nor without cause unkind,
These are the fruits of an inconstant mind:
Thou must not if his fortunes do decline,
Be discontented, or seem to repine;
But bear a constant countenance, not dismayed,
As if you were of misery afraid:
His fortunes you must good or bad abide,
With chains of mutual love, together tide.
The loss of that which blindfold Chance does give,
Cannot a worthy generous mind agrieue:
For it will never take it for a cross,
Which cannot make one wicked by its loss;
Nor by the gaining good, both fool and knave,
Are often rich, if such afflictions have,
They drive them to despair: but draw the wise,
With elevated thoughts, such things despise.
Seneca says, the gods did take delight
To see grave Cato, with his Fate to fight:
O what should we, whose hopes do higher rise?
If Heathens thus could worldly things despise.
Affliction often does mount the Wiser hie,
Joseph and Job rose by adversity:
Its sign of a weak mind to be dejected
For worldly loss, (such never are respected.)
If thou would not be irksome to thy mate,
Be cheerful, not succumbling with his fate:
Yet if that anguish does afflict his mind,
You must not seem so from the world refind,
As to disdain what human cross brings forth,
Pride to be singular, that is, not worth:
Nay, thou must be a mirror, to reflect
Thy Husbands mind; for as is his aspect,
So should be thine. Pale Phaebe yields no light,
When the interposed earth bars his Phoebus sight:
But when no object intercepts his streams,
She decks her self with light rebating beams;
Even so as is thy Husbands joy, or pain,
So must thy joy and sorrow wax, or waine:
Be not too curious in his ways to pry,
Suspicion still makes the suspected try;
Iealousie's fear: for why should she suspect,
That knows her self guilty of no defect?
If he perceive thee of thy self despair,
He will think sweeter joys are otherwhere,
which thou do want; so thou thy self shall give
The first occasion to what may thee grieve*
Thy own desert must Him unto thee bind,
Desert does make a savage to be kind:
It is an Adamantine chain to knit,
Two souls so fast, naught can them disunit;
Where that most sweet communion of the minds,
Save each in other, no contentment finds;
And whatsoever the one touches near,
Jealousy, the other nere conceales for fear.
Brutus his honor dearer pris'd then life,
Concredited to Portia his Wife;
What fear from dearest friends caused him conceal,
Worth and desert made him to her reveal
Great Caesar's death, and who his consorts were,
With their designs, he did impart to her;
Nor is their birth, or beauty of such might,
To alienate their hearts, or give delight:
Who had more beauty then that captived Queen
The fair Statira* when in grief was seen
The pearly hail blasting her beauty fields,
Which seemelinesse ever cloth in sorrow yields;
Being graced with modesty, and unstained faith,
More force still fairness with such fellows has:
Yet could not her fair beauty move the thought
Of Alexander, (though less fair have brought
Often Captains to be captives) nor her state
(She being married) did affection bate:
For then her Virgin Daughter yet unstained,
(Whose beauty all comparison disdaind,
Going her lovely Mother so before,
As she did all the rest of Asia's store)
Should quickly have entangled his desire,
Whose heart all one, Roxane's love did fire:
For if proportion, color, wealth, or birth,
Could have captived the Monarch of the Earth;
These should have won: but he did her prefer,
Whose only merits pleaded love for her.
Deserve then not in show, but from the heart,
Love is perpetuated by desert:
As it befits not Man for to embrace
Domesticke charge, so its not Woman's place
For to be busied with affairs abroad:
For that weak sex, it is too great a load,
And its unseemly, and does both disgrace,
When either does usurp the others place:
Leave his to him, and of thine own take charge,
Care thou at home, and let him care at large,
Thou have enough thy self for to employ
Within door^s, 'bout thy house and huswifery:
Remember that its said of Lucresse chaste,
when some Dames wantoniz'd, others took rest,
She with her Maidens first her task would end,
Ere she would sleep: she did not idle spend
Swift running Time, nor ga^e alluring pleasure
The least advantage, to make any seizure
On her rare virtues. A soul vacant stili,
Is soon seduced to do good or ill:
For like perpetual motion is the mind,
In action still, while to this flesh confind;
(From which foul prison it takes often stains,
For absolutely good no man remains.)
Imploid if not bout good, about some ill,
Producing fruits which do discover still
How it is labored like a fertile field,
Which fruit, or weeds abundantly does yield,
As it is mannur'd; be not idle then,
Nor give vice time to work upon thy brain
Imagined ill: for what it there conceiues,
It often brings out, and in dishonor leaves:
The purest things are ea^iest to be staind,
And it is soon iost which carefully was gaind.
Penelope did wheel and distaffe handle,
And her days work undid at night by candle;
Nor labour-forcing need compeld that task,
which toyling days, and tedious nights did ask:
(For she was Queen of Ithack) it was her name,
which virtuous care kept spotles free from blame;
One of so many suitors of each sort,
As for her love did to her Court resort,
Not speeding; would have spoke that might her stain,
The greatest hate, when love turns to disdain:)
If color could have made their knavery stronger,
But envy could not find a way to wrong her.
Be thou as these, careful of hous-wifery,
With Providence what is needful still supply:
Look thy Maids be not idle, nor yet spend
Things wastingly: for they so often offend,
When careless is the Mistress; yet with need
Nere pinch them, nor yet let them ere exceed:
The one does force them seek thee to betray,
The other makes them wanton, and too gay;
It is no shame to look to every thing,
The Mistress eye does ever profit bring.
Solomon says, the good Wife seeks for flax
And wool, wherewith her hands glad travel takes:
She Is like a ship that brings bread from far,
She rises ere appear the morning Star;
Vittels her H^ushold, gives her Maidens food,
Surueyes, and buys a field, plants vines, with good
Gained by her hands: What Merchandise is best
S^e can discern, nor does she go to rest
When Phoebus hides his head, and bars his sight,
But by her Lamp, her hands do take delight
To touch the wheel and spindle; she does stretch
Her hand to help the poor, and needy wretch:
Her words are wisdom, she ^re'sees her train,
That idle none do eat their bread in vain;
Her children rise and bless her, sweet delight
Her Husband takes still in her happy sight:
Be thou this careful Goodwife, for to lend
Thy helping hand, thy Husbands means to mend.
Last let thy conversation be with such,
As foul mouthed malice can with no crime tutch;
I cannot but condemn such as delight
Still to be sad and sullen in the sight
Of their own Husbands, as they were in fear,
( Sure guilty of some crime such Women are)
But when they gossip it with other wives
Of their own cut, then they have merry lives,
Spending, and plotting how they may deceive
Their Husbands, rule themselves, and mastry have;
O let such Women (for they make bates be
Twixt Man and Wife) never consort with thee:
But shun them, as thou do see one that is fair
Flee the small pox; both like infectious are.
The grave, staid, blameless, and religious Dames,
whose carriage has procured them honest names;
Are fit companions, let such be thy Mates,
When wearied with affairs, thou recreates
Thy self with harmless mirth: yet do not walk
Often abroad, that will occasion talk;
Though thou have store of friends, yet let none be
Saving thy Husband, Counselor to thee;
He Is nearest to thee, and it will indeare him,
He is thy self, thou need not to fear him:
Be free with him, and tell him all thy thought,
Its He must help, when thou have need of ought;
And constantly believe he will love thee best,
When he sees thou preferr'st him fore the rest.
Thus L^dy, have I showed you how to choose
A worthy Mate, and how you should him use;
So choose, so use, so shall you all your life
Be in a Husband blessed, he in a Wife:
And when Death here shall end your happy days,
Your Souls shall reign in Heaven, on Earth your prais^.
FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION of a good Wife: Or, A rare one amongst Women.

AT LONDON

Printed for Richard Redmer, and are to be sold at his shop at the West end of
Saint Paul's Church, 1619.

The Argument.
IN pursuit of Loves enquest*
Heauy-eyde Musophilus,
Restless takes himself to rest,
And desplaies his fortunes thus.
In his sleep (deaths shade) appears
Age, the honor of man's life,
Old in hours as well as years,
Who instructs him in a Wife,
And in brief assayes to ^how,
Who is good, who is not so.
Next his choice, he shows his Son,
(Lest he should his choice neglect)
What by him ought to be done
To his Wife in each respect,
Who though she should ever fear
To give cause of just offense,
Yet he ought not domineere
'Cause he has pre-eminence;
For that conquest's worthy no man,
Where the triumph over a woman.
Age retires, yet in retire,
Wakes close-eyde Musophilus,
Where he sees whom his desire
Bids him woo, and wooing choose:
Wooed and won, he does inuit
Such as aim at virtuous ends,
To be present at the Rite
Of two selfe-vnited friends:
Who if they will, come they may,
If they will not, they may stay.
A good Wife,
Down by a vale a pleasant shade there was,
By which a silver streamling past,
Where I retired and sat me on the grass,
Whilst my dejected eye with sleep locked fast,
Presented thousand objects where I was;
Amongst which a grauer Module the^ the rest
Appeared to me, and made it thus expressed.
A grave old man of reverend aspect,
Whose years imported something that was good,
In sable habit, showing his neglect
"Of earthly Fortunes, as an object stood,
To caution me (me thought) of that respect
Which I should have, and ever ought to have
Of my times Mansion, Frailty, and my Gra^e.
A Sith, an houre-glasse, and a wate^pot,
A fatal Deaths-head, Shrowding-sheete, and Bear^,
An vrne of mouldred ashes, which* were got
From some dark charnell house as t'did appear,
Where on was writ, This is our frailties lot,
This's all we shall possess of all our store,
This beggars have, and Princes have no more.
The se were the r^liks which this old man brought
Which often he moved and brandished over me,
And still by tears he seemed as if he sought
To caution me of my mortality,
But alas his tears still drowned his speech methought,
Till he at last by force did silence break,
And to me sleeping thus began to speak;
Good rest my Son, yet (Son) retire from rest,
And hear thy Father, pray thee then awake,
For th^ugh I Am d^ad, yet is my love expressed
Even in my death; th^n for thy Fath^rs sake,
Lay up these last instructions in thy breast,
Which with observance if thou keep, they may
Che^re thee both here, and in the latter day.
Thou know my Son, though thou were last in birth,
Thou were not l^ast in my affection too,
Witness my care of thee, while I on earth,
Soiorned there in that same vale of wo^;
Yea, I may say, even in my comforts dearth,
When grieves and sorrows did enuiron me,
Which frustrate hopes supplied their hope in thee
Nor could I think so many a widows prayer,
Orphans well wishes, and the poor man's vow,
Would turn my fruit of hope into despair,
Since vows, prayers, wishes, did distinctly show
Their love to me for my deuoutest care,
Which from my heart I ever aimed at,
To right their wrongs, and settle their estate.
O let my hopes then now in my decease,
Confirm my Blessing which I gave to the;
So shall thy Soul enjoy that sou^raigne peace
Which was prepared before all eter^itie,
For such as made a prosperous increase
In every virtuous action, which I Will show
Succinctly to thee in a word or two.
First then my Son^e, because I find thee here
In th'Ile F^olonia, where so many come,
Whose names and Natures with the I Will cohere,
I must by way advertise thee of some
Who (in disguise) not as themselves appear
Earths politicians, who will not stand to stain
Their souls pure lu stre for a little gain.
These can dispe^ce with faith, and wilprofes
What they least think: to guild their guile they will sweat:
Yet be their oaths shrowdes to licentiousness,
(Which though they seem a fair pretense to bear^*)
Take but their vizard off, they are nothing less,
Then what they did protest: Beware of them,
For these be dangerous Hollow har^ed men.
Yet these be fools, though they be politic,
In that they aim more at a private good,
A sensual pleasure, honor* or such like,
Then at that supr^ame end, which understood,
Would their conceits to admiration strike;
For weak's their judgment, and el^ion rash*
That poize souls treasure less the^ worlds trash.
Next unto these, be such as do aspire
Above their pitch, and with ambitious wings
So are far above their sphere: th^se do desire
Naught more then to be popular, which brings
A timelesse merited end, for they conspire
Their own subversion: for few eu^r ^aue
A^bition seen graye-headed t^ ^er grave.
These reach at Scepters, but do ^fttimes fall
Bel^ their Center, and though they do make
Their own opinions Axioms, and will call
Naught good, but what themselves do undertake
Yet by a publiqe verdit, when they shall
Conuict^d be, then they will confess and say,
Non (though more seemin-gwise,) more fools the^ they.
Next these be Prodigals, who spend their time
Like Circes chanted guests: these are but men
Only in form, for th'part which is divine,
Remains obscure and darker shines in them
Then a small star cl^ath'd in a cloud does shine.
These men we well may formal shadows call,
For save mere shadows, these are naught at all.
Alcynous mates, such as were borne to be
But not to live, pageants that go and move,
And wear good clothes, yet view the^ inwardly,
They are but Trunks at best, or Apes, that love
Or make a show of love, whose ends we see,
When they have run on shelfe their whole estate
Their Brothell gr^ting's changd into a grate.
And are not these vain fools, that make a loss
Of credit, body, state, to yield delight
For one poor moment? o when they shall toss
Those leave of their account where appetite
Made them insensate and that weeping cross,
Which their profuser follies brought them to,
They Will style themselves then Fools in f^lio.
Next be th^se stains of honor, which defile
Those Temples which ought to be dedicate
To an Ethereall power: These though they'ue style
Of women are naught less, for why they hate
What best beseemes that sex: and hence this I Will
Deriues her Name (and aptly does it take,)
When th'stronger s^xe is ruled by the weak.
These are those lur^s of death which draw men on
Unto perdition; These are they that show
Like Flowers in May, but they are withered soon
(Even with one breath, for painting (if you blow)
Makes the Complexion to be quite undone:
Unhappy she that when she sees one breath
Dissolues her varnish, will not think on death.
Of these my son no more will I relate
Then what I have: now mean I to descend
To teach thee something for thy own estate
And how thou may be to thy self a friend
With a good Conscience, which to violate
Were worst of evils: and to form thy life
Better, I Will tell thee how t^ choose a wife.
Choose thou thy wife ( my Son) nor fair nor foul^,
Nor gay nor sluttish; silent, yet knows when
And where it is fit to speak, one whose chaste soul
Shows modesty in blushes, and will len
No ear to light affections but ca^ cool
Heat of desire (for such desires may be
In purest love) by her enjoying thee.
Choose a fixed eye, for wandering looks display
A wavering disposition; let her cheek
Be without art: Choose me a bashful nay
Before a qui^k assent; for such as seek
Husbands, for fear they should too long time stay,
Resemble thos^ who know their ware is worst,
And therefore mean to sell't to who^ comes first.
Choose one that is so discreet knows when to spare,
When to express herself in bounty, so
As neither niggard-nature may have share
In her, nor lauishnes, when shees'd bestow
What Rep^tation claims, which special care
Imports a sovereign complement or end
To such, know when and where to spare or spend.
Choose thee no gadder (for a wife should be
In this respect (I Am sure) like to a Snaile,)
Who (hous-wifelike) still in he^ house we see;
For if her care or providence do fail,
Her howse-affaires will go disorderly,
And hardly can that Wife endure to stay
In her own house, whose minde's another way.
Choose thee no liquorish Gossip, whose delight
Is how to please her taste, for seldom can
One that is exposed to her appetite
Conform her to the state of any man,
Which to an honest mind would be a spite,
That when thou wish's thy wife a competent
Fitting her rank, she will not be content.
Choose thee no coy precisian, she is too smooth
To prove sincere, in simpringst looks we find
Often most deceit, for these (as th'water does
Seem calmest where thei're d^pest) let thy mind
Be so prepared, as thou will ever loath
Such formalists She-doct^ns, who have sought
To teach far more then ever they were taught.
Choose thee no wanton that will prostitute
Her soul for sensual pleasure, there attends
Naught upon such, but blasting of repute*
Horrid diseases, miserable ends,
With which their vi^ious lives do ever suit*
And worst of worsts, that issue which is got
Of Such, may seem thine own, but it is not.
Choose thee no Wife that is selfe-singular
She Will be her own instructresse, and in that
She (through presumption) will be bold to err^,
Hating reproof, which will orethrow thy state,
Beware ( my Son) thou shall be tide to her,
Which servitude (though it be too to common)
Disualues man that is subject to a woman.
Choose one for virtue (though a Portion's good)
Yet deare's the Portion if thy wife be ill:
Rank not in marriage with too high a blood
Lest with her birth she chance to twitt ^hee still,
Equality has ever firmest stood,
Where if descent of different order be
It Is seldom seen that th'parties do agree.
Choose one that is wise, yet to herself not so,
Loving to all, familiar to few
Inwardly fair, though mean in outward show,
Seldom conuersing in a public view;
Nor young nor old, but has of years enough
To know what huswife means, and such an one
As may supply thy place when thou art from home.
Choose one that like a Bosome-friend can keep
Th'imparting of a secret, yet before
Thou do commit to her matters more deep
And consequent, thy judgment should explore
And sound her disposition, so mai'st reap
What thou expectst: for if thou find a power
Apt to conceal, make her thy counsell^ur.
Choose one whose Spirit's ready to receive
Impression of remorce for others grieves,
For such, best tempered natures ever have
(And kind is she that others vvoes relieues)
Let her be open-hand'd to such as crave
If they be needy, for thou never heard
Alme^ (in charity) lose her reward.
Choose one whose Education is more good
Then curious, whose life's more approved
Then noted, choose one whose Parentall blood
Makes claim to virtue and is more beloved
For her more choicer parts, then to be wo'ed
To an vnchaster motion, being inclined
To prize her bodies Beauty by her mind.
Choose one whose knowing Parents can augment
Their daughters portion by a firm advise,
One who will measure here is by thy content,
Whose spotless thoghts be written in her eyes,
Whose Breast is thine closed in one Co^tinent,
Who know's yet seems as if she did not know,
Inwardly good without an outward show.
Choose one who can play Mother, ere she have
The name of Mother, one that hates naught more
Then not to learn, one that imprints her gra^e
Still in her memory, adds to thy store
With an advised providence, nor does crave
More of internal knowledge then to try
Her self on earth, and study how to die.
Choose one who makes it greatest of her fear
T'incurre suspicion, that esteems her name
Before a world of Treasure, that can bear
Affliction with indifference, and thinks sh^me
A Matrons comliest habit, one that is dear
In her Creators sight, and fears to do
Oug^t that thy self will not assent unto*
Choose one who does desire to make each* day
Her lises Eph^meris, summing in th'euening tide
With what respect she past her hours away;
Choose (...) that doa^es not on the name of Brid^
With ^ new ^angle itching, but will stay
To reason what it means, and is afraid
(In mod^st shame) to loose the style of Maid.
Choose on^ who is qualifide better in mind
Then Bo^ie: yet if she affect the strain
Of harmless chamber*musiqu^, let her fi^de
Thy mind in consort with her, (for though vain)
Yet 'ti^ an easy vanity, and unkind
Might thou be deemd to bar her that delight,
Which may be shown even in an Angels sight.
Choose one whose countenance promises respect
Unto her honor: one that spends the morn
In praying, not in painting, whose neglect
Is in ^ut-landish fashions and does scorn
To fancy that which lightness does affect:
One whose lives pattern rests as uncontrolled,
And makes her Youth by imitation old.
Choose one whose house has no affinity
With folly, lust, ambition, sel^e-conceit,
Propha^enesse, discord, prodigality,
Schism, Superstition, violence, deceit,
Op^re ssion, surfets, damned usury,
For where these reign ( my Son) we seldom see
Descent of state unto the third degree.
Choose one who^ thou can love, not for constraint
Of fortune or of ^riends, for what are these
That thou by them should measure thy content?
No, No, in marriage thou thy self must please,
Or every day will be an argument
Of thy succeeding sorrow, then be wise,
Carue for thy self, yet hear thy friends advise.
Choose one whose free election can admit
None save thy self that she can dearly love,
Yet so discreet as she can silence it
Till th'time her Parents shall her choice approve,
(For that implies her modesty and wit)
Where rash assents whens 'euer they do come,
Are ever seen to bring Repentance home.
Chus^ one whose Conscience and religion meet
In one set concord with the^, for it is ^his
That cements minds together, and makes sweet
Th'vnse^nedst passions, giving way to bliss
And future glory, where the peaceful seat
Of two distinct minds now reduced to one,
Shows equal temper both in mirth and mo^e.
Choose amongst these thou can not Choose amiss^,
For here is a full variety of such
Will fit thy mind as thou thy self would w^sh,
Yet ( Son) attempt not with unhallowed tutch
To taint their honor with a wanton kiss,
For that is but inducement unto sin,
Since Kisses be the keieslet Treason in.
Therefore choose one, and that but only o^e,
One that may make two Bodies one-vnite,
One that is essence-lesse if left alone
Without her second; One whose sole delight
Is vanished when her second soul is gone:
One that renewes her comfort in her make,
And joys in her affliction for his sake.
Yet know ( my son) when thou this wife do choose,
And (after suit) art master of thy choice,
It Is fit thou should this lovely mirror use
With that respect as she may hence rejoice
To have a mate so rightly generouse.
As with a Wiues-choise therefore I begun,
I Will show what by a Husband should be don.
He may command, yet should not tyrannize,
Show himself head, yet not to make his wife
His f^ot, esteem her as his only prize,
(All other Blanks) hate all intestine stris^
(Save strife in love,) he should not exercise
The patience of his wife, for one may wrong
Silence too much, and force her have a tongue.
He may express his love with modesty,
Yet never coll and kiss in open place,
For I should deem such love hypocrisy
Or some such thing, if I were in her case;
And better is love shown in priuacie
Then before the eyes of men, for they will skan
Fondness or indiscretion in the man.
He may be free in love, for sh^e's his own,
Yet such a love as is exempt from s^aine
Of an insatiate lust: he should not frown
To Express his aw too much, his best of gain
Should be to make her virtues riper grown;
He should dispense with lighter faults, not vex
Himself for trifles, shee'^ the weaker sex:
H^ may restrain her, but it is not so good,
Restraint gives women greater appetite;
He may do much, but who would wrong his blood,
His flesh, himself? he may curb her delight,
But who knows not when women's most with* stood
Their wil's most forward and their wits most near the^,
And will be frolike though their husbands hear the^?
He may have care, but carking it is worse,
He may be getting, yet he should not scrape;
He should not slave himself unto his purse,
But freely use it for his credit sake:
He should not wean his wife from ought by force,
But by persuasion: for deprau'd's her will,
That Is only forced by violence from ill.
He may part stakes, or all, but it were better
To join in purse as they do join in care,
Where each to other may remain a debtor,
For where the man does limit th'Wife a share,
Often turns the Wife to be her husbands cheater,
Which to prevent (if he will be sure of her)
In stake, state, store, make her his Treasurer.
He may be Jealous, but't implies suspect
That he misdoubts what he himself has been,
Or that he is troubled with some weak defect
His Wife perceaues, though to the world unseen
And that from hence proceedethher neglect
Of honor to his Bed: which (sure) would show
Baseness in him, and ^orce her to do so.
He may pick cause and matter of offense
(But that would much degenerate from man)
He may hear such, as would sow difference
Twixt their united loves; but if he scan
And rightly weigh man's native excellence,
He will conclude with this, that there is no (...)
So base, to urge off^nce against a woman.
He may be busy where h'as naught to do,
And intermedle in his wives affairs,
But fit it is not that he should do so
For in employments each have distinct shares,
Nor she to his, nor he to hers should go:
For so the Breeches she might seem to wear,
And he a Coate-queanes name as rightly bear.
He may think well on's wife, yet not commend
(For he does praise himself, does praise his wife):
He should in life prepare him for his end
And mould his end by forming of his life:
He should repose no trust in any friend
In or without him, save in the firm defense
Of a resolved and spotless Consci^nce*
Lastly he may (for it is in his power)
Now in his Exit, when he turns to earth
To make his wife his sole Executour
And by that means to beggar all his birth,
But I should rather limit her a dower
Which might her rank and order well befit,
For then so soon she will not him forget.
These are the Cautions ( Son) I Would have thee keep,
Which well observed will crown thy happy stat^,
Folding thy dull eyes in a cherefull sleep,
Blessing thy fortune with a virtuous Mate;
Storing thy states content with such a heap
Of peaceful Treasure, as thou ^here shall find
Enough of wealth in thy contented mind.
Awake thee then, dull sleep preuents thy (...),
Here comes she whom thy fancy may approve,
Awake I say, and in thy Fate rejoice
That thou have met with such a modest Love:
Come come, if thou in Reasons Scale wilt poize
Thy self with her, thou will not curious be
But take good Fortune while it is offered thee
Awake, I vade: I waked, he vanished,
Where casting my amassed eyes aside
Sent from the Recluse of a troubled head,
A modest bashful virgin me espide,
Whom I approachd, being emboldened
By th'Apparition which assured no less
Unto my hopes then honor and success.
This Virgins name Simpliciana hight,
Daughter unto Zelocto the precise,
Who had me once before discarded quite,
Because my weaker fortunes did not rise
To the hight of her expectance, yet that night
(So fervent is affection) did that Maid
Trace me along to make her Love displaide.
Shame curbed her tongue, yet fancy bad her speak,
While I supplied her silence with my speech,
And thus her passion for her self did break,
Whilst she stood by and seconded the breach
With a teare-trickling eye and blushing cheek,
Where thus I wooed my self, yet in her name,
Showing her love, yet shadowing her shame.
Sir I do love you (thus I did begin)
I pray you make your self your Orator,
And so I did, yet tax me not of sin
Or lightness, unfeigned love omits no hour
Though be distempered, but will let him in
Whom she affects, for when all is asleep,
Loves eyes are said continual watch to keep.
I have a Mother Sir (and then she smiled)
For well she knew what I intend'd to speak,
Whom to obey i am bound because her child,
Yet Reason tells me when we husbands seek,
The style of Parents is in part exiled,
For we (by virgine-losse) lose our first name,
And as our husband's styled, wee're styled the same.
What then though Riches please another eye,
My reason tells me there is something more
To consummate true joy, then can rely
On outward fortunes, therefore once I swore,
And I will keep my vow religiously,
If e'^e I wed (as half resolved I am)
It shall not be the substance but the Man.
Yea, though I were opposed on either side,
(My Father here, my chiding Mother there)
Yet neither of their humors should divide
My dearest Soul from her orbiculer,
For I do know, though that my Mother chide,
My Father fret, and both stand chafing over me,
I did but that themselves have done before me.
With that s^e broke her speech, with, Sr. quoth she
You woo well for your self, but I approve
What you have spoke shall be confirmed by me,
Nor shall my silent passion shroud my love,
For as thy shadow I will follow thee;
Where I assenting to what both had said,
Kissed and clapped hands, and so the match was made.
Now if you like our Match, give us our due
And bid your selves unto our Nuptial day,
Our best of welcome shall attend on you,
Yea, the Bride herself (all niceness laid away)
Will meet you with a frollique game-some crew,
Where to your choice contents, and Loves among,
We Will be as merry as the day is long.
But if (through some dogged humor) you will not come,
The Bridegroom says, A Gods-name stay at h^me.
The Authors choice.
Fair may she be, but not opinion'd so,
For that opinion ever lackies pride;
Loving to all, yet so as Man may know
She can reserve the proper name of Bride,
For weak is that Fort and easy is it to win
That makes a Breach for all to enter in.
I Would have her face and blush to be her own,
Forth' Blush which Art makes is adulter ate,
Spleen may she have, yet wise to keep it down,
Passion, yet Reason too to moderate:
Comely not gaudy: she and none but she
Wears the best clothes that wears to her degree.
To his 5 equally-affectionate Sisters all virtuous content.
TO you that are the chiefest of my care,
Ties of my love and figures of my life,
Send I this Character, where each may share
Her equal portion in my rare-good Wife,
And be the Same, which I Am resolved you are:
So shall your Husbands say (I doubt it not,)
The Sisters lives proved what their Brother wrote.
Yours jointly as his own, MVSOPHILVS.

Upon the Married Life.
HAppy state, yet alas how few
Think them happy in their choice,
When they shun whom they did sue,
And in loathed delights rejoice;
Loathed though loved, since they are grown
To love others, loath their own?
But who marries to impart
Self and substance to his wife,
Ioining with his hand his heart,
Only gains this bliss of life,
Yea to him i^ solely given
To think Earth a kind of Heaven.
Happy then or hapless most,
For of all this has no mean,
Losing least or ever lost,
Being still in her extreme;
Good if used; abused, ill,
Only well where there is one will.
Upon the single Life.
THis by times-distempers fed,
Feels vertigo in his head,
Ever wooing, never sped;
Loved he lives, if loathed, dead,
So as naught but doubts and fears,
Buz like hornets in his ears.
C^re he needs not, yet's his care
More in that he needs less,
Aiming to have one may share
With him in his bale and bless;
Gad he would yet knows not where,
Wandering Starre-like here and there.
Care who loves then, let him live
Single; whereas such need less,
As themselves to marriage give,
For these want what they possess:
Care whereof breeds now and then
Broken sleep^s in many men.
Thu^ choice breeds care, He only may rejoice,
Who has shook hands with care and taken his choice.
REMAINS after Death:

Including by way of introduction diverse memorable obseruances occasioned upon
discourse of EPITAPHS and Epycedes; their distinction and definition seconded
by approved Authors.

ANNEXED THERE BE diverse select Epitaphs and Hearce-attending Epods worthy our
observation: The one describing what they were which now are not: The other
comparing such as now are with those that were.

D^gnum laud virum musa vetat mori.

By RICHARD BRATHVVAYTE Gent.

Imprinted at London by JOHN BEALE

1618.

TO THE READER.
IT may be objected (Reader) that small is the concurrence, less the coherence
in the titles of these two Subjects, pleasantly concluding that it were pity;
Death should so soon seize on a good-wife by the course of nature, as she is
had here in pursuit by Deaths remaind^r. But this objection may be answered by
a twofold solution: First, the Printers importunacie, whose desire was in
regard of the brevity of the former part, to have it by the annexion of some
other proper Subject enlarged; t^ whose reasonable demand I equally
condescended. Secondly, the Subjects propriety, which, howsceuer by the
judgment of the Critik censurer traduced (the pitch of whose knowledge aims
rather at taxing then teaching) concurres as well with the precedent Title, as
Man with mortality, Time with mutabilitie, Life with death. And as the m^re
virtuous the nearer ofttimes their dissolution, which no doubt proceeds from
Gods mercy that they might have of him a fuller contemplation; so we commonly
see the best Wives limited to the shortest times, approved by that Maxim:

For this each days experience seems to show
Ill wives live longer far then good ones do.
Let this suffice: if not, let the Subject it self write his censure, whose
singularity makes of each thing an error.

MVSOPHILVS.

OBSERVATIONS UPON Epitaphs: their Antiquity and use; with Authority from
approved Authors of their deriuations; with diverse other memorable occurrences.
AS the memory of the dead consists upon the life of the living: so their
virtues or vices give testimony of the dead, whether worthy the memory of the
living, or to be buried in eternal oblivion? For this cause are Epitaphs (and
ever have been) engraven upon the Monuments, Tombs and Sepulchers of the
dead, either to express their fame, or by modest silencing what they were, to
intimate how their actions living, deserved no great memory dying. Some I
distinguish (Epitaphs I mean) of this nature, into Moral, others into Divine,
and other is profane. Moral (to give instances in each kind) be such as
include a moral or excellent use to be made by the living of the Actions of
the dead, by recourse had to their Monuments, where mortality is not only
lively expressed, but their conditions sully and amply charactred. Such were
the Epitaphs of Cyrus, Semiramis, Laomedon.

It is recorded Vide Quintum Curtium in Sup. and vit. cyr.
when Alexander that great Monarch of the World came into Persia, and there
chanced to see the famous Tomb of Cyrus whereon was engraven this Epitaph or
inscription: Whosoever thou be, or whencesoeuer thou shait come and beholdest
this Tomb, know that I am Cyrus who translated the Empire from the Medes to
the Persians: pray thee do not envy me, for this little clod of earth that
does cover me. Alexander (I say) seeing this inscription, could not contain
himsel^e from tears: making (without all question) this moral use of it: That
Princes (though never so potent or eminent, so victorious or puis^ant) but
becomes subject to the common doom and censure of Fate, and must of necessity
leave all their conquests and victories (by a forced surrender) to the
ineuitab^e command of death. So as Alexander when he beheld the Tomb of
Achilles, cried out, Felix es, qui't al^m laudum tuarum praeconem habuisti
(nenipe Homerum:) so here he wept bitterly, saying. Infelix es Cyre qui tantis
victorijs inclytus extitisti, tamen a m^rte te vinci patieris. We read (that I
may go forward in prosecution of instances of this nature:) That Cyrus (also)
when he beheld the Tomb of that memorable Queen Sem^ramis, and saw this to be
writ upon it: Whosoe^er shall dig up this stone which now does (...) me,
shall find an infinite mass of treasure under it, (...) the same to be taken
up; which being done (instead of Treasure) he found this moral under it; None
but misers (or godless persons) would d^gge up the Graves of the dead. An
excellent caution for the covetous wretch, who is ever catchi^g by hoo^e or
crook, Quo iure, quaque iniuri^, per fas nefasve; not regarding the means, so
he may attain the end; nor respecting piety nor common humanity public
causes or Countries benefit, so he may please his unsatisfied desires. But this
violation of the dead, thi^ injury done against those who sleep in peace, has
been even by the Pagans themselves esteemed execrable: so as the In the
d^scourse of Asia and Affr. vid. Egypt Solemn. Funer.
Egyptians are interred with their best gems, ornaments, and Jewels: which (so
strickt be their Laws in that respect) are never embezeled, but remain with
them; hoping (says the ^istorian) that their substance will deliver them if
any punishment or unworthy censure should be inflicted on them. The tomb and
monument of that perfidious Prince ( Vide Homer. eleg. same, Graecorum: Odyssea
errorum, Ilias Mad, lorum, etc.
Laomedon) had this Epitaph:

Qui cum Host fidem fefellit
Cum morte fidem seruauit.
The moral thus expressed: When Hercules (in the delivery of Troy from that
devouring monster, a Whale; and in the rescuing of Laomedons fair daughter
Hesyone, should by covenant have received two milk-white steeds: the king
retiring to his (miserable Troy) commanded the gates of the City to be shut
against him; infringing his faith and promise; which so incensed the ire and
indignation of Hercules against him, as within few years his City was sacked
and demolished, his Subjects captiued, his daughter to Telamon espoused; and
himself (to extinguish the remainder of ingratitude, fully to appease the
enraged fury of Hercules, was slaughtered. Whose monument was reserved (as a
perpetual remembrance of perfidious dealing to his posterity, with the
inscription above mentioned.

Tombs The antiquity of Tombs.
have been aunciently used; as we may read in sacred writ: where one
Sepulcher was kept solemnly for a whole family, every one returning in
Sepulchra maiorum: but never so sumptuous before the erection of that memorable
Tomb (or Shrine rather) of Prince Mausolus king of Caria: whose Queen
Artemisia erected such a gorgeous Tomb in his memory, as all Se^ulchers since
(especially of Roman Emperors, and Carian Princes) are called to this day
Mausolea: the inscription this,

Site non teneat, tumulum struet offa tenere,
Quem tibi defuncto coniugis optat amor.
Two monuments we read of to be famous, in that their erection was the
foundation of many potent and puissant people: some also were taken for
preseruers of that Region wherein they were planted and seated: as the Two
ancient Monuments which were called Asyla patrizen.
Tomb or Sepulcher of Ajax in the Rhetzan shore: and the Tomb of A^hilles in
Sygaeum: Which two, even to this day continue memorable: so as in the greatest
depopulations and sackings of Cities, the ruinating of their Forts and Castles
of defense, they were ever kept untouched (as shrines and monuments inuiolate,
obelisks consecrate, or statues deified: supposing (in their own blindness
deceived) that their preserua^ion was derived from them.

But to proceed in Epitaphs (on which our discourse does principally consist:)
they are derived from the Greek (...)
and signify as much as an inscriptio^, or any thing which is placed or-fixed
upon the Tomb ( Quae in scitis and scutis quorundam Regum vidimus, says
Lipsius:) as Epycedion (derived from (...) or lugubria canere) are writ before
or after the corpse interred, but not upon the Tomb: being more dilated
measures, either expressing the memorable actions of his life (or if nothing
worthy in his life) at least modestly to shut up his deser^lesse life, with a
commemoration of humane frailty: silencing ^he person, lest his description
should minister either matter of offense or assentation: of offense, if truly
expressed; of ass^ntation, if above merit praised. He that neither benefited
himself nor his Country; (but vt Canis in presepi) was rightly demonstrated
with this Impressa, Hic Vir diu fuit: This man was long, but lived not long:
for life and being have an essential difference. We are said to live when we
exp^esse our life by external effects, knowing ^or what we were ordained; for
what borne; not to retire our selves from public affairs, for private ease:
but to further our Country, and propagate her glory by serious and vigi^ant
managements, both at home and abroad. This man is said to live, that has left
some monument or testimony behind him that he lived.

We are only sa^d to be, when we only breathe, respectles o^ either public or
private: imitating those Flies Ephemerae, which fli^ker a little with their
wings (limiting their life within one day) and presently die. These as the
Philosopher says, spirant tantum non viuunt. But too much of them, both die:
Yet this is the difference: the one dying, leaves a testimony behind him that
he once l^ued; The other being dead, has no hope that his memory shall ever
be revived.

Many pretty Epit^phs the Romans used; brief, yet ample enough to describe
the nature of the person whom they would have memorized.

Virgil writing on one Balista In vit. Nar. and frag.
(a great sword and buckler-man) as I may term him, frequenting places of
advantage to rob, and surprise passengers unawares cheeres the poor
way-faring-man with ^his comfortable inscription on Balistas grave:

Who ere he be that passes by this way, Mon^ sub hoc lapidum ^eg. etc.

May safely travel both by night and day,
And that he may confirm it with his eyes,
Under this heap of stones Balista lies,
Or thus,
Since the time Balista here interred was,
Or day or night the Traveler may pass.
And that upon his Fly or Gnat:
Here I express what thou once did to me,
Solemnizing thy death to honor thee.
And that of Sylenus the drunken Swain:
Under this tuft of wood lies there a Swain,
Came drunk to Earth, went drunk to Earth again:
And that of Minos king of Crete
Here Minos lies who played the Judge so well
On Earth, that now he is made a Judge in Hell.
This Minos for his excellent judgment and justice in Crete, being severe, and
therefore his attribute was rightly given him: he was s^id to be (...), rough
and severe, exact and austere in all his censures: for which cause he was
translated from the principality of Crete, to the tribunal of Hell: (as Poets
feign.)

In the discourse of arguments of this nature: as we have many write Ep^taphs
(some panegyric) in way of commendation and praise: others inuectiue to
express the merit or defect of any person: we should be wary herein, lest
either by vain Sicut lingua loquentis proficit in (...) ^udientis, ita cala^s
scribentis in ocul^ le gentis, and ad interiora cordis peru^nit se^sus
dirigentis, sicut verba instruentis: Albin. in pr^fatio: comment in Johan.
and adulatorie praise, we give error a warrant, or by too detractiue
inuection, we seem ( grauius in sepulchra mortuorum calcare, that I may use
the Philosophers saying. But to omit the use of Epitaphs, which of themsel^es
have ever ministered occasion of imitation or detestation: I will proceed to
the antiquity of Epitaphs, and afterward descend to the several branches
which I have before in my method to my self propounded.

Epitaphs have been ever used upon the Tombs of the deceased, to express their
Virtues or vices. Of all the seven Vide Laert. de vit. philoso.
Sages of Greece, not one there is, but charactred to the full by their
especial appropriates: and though diverse (in contempt of vain glory or
ostentation) have precisely commanded upon their deathbeds, that no statue,
shrine, nor inscription should be erected or engraven in the^r memories: yet so
grateful was posterity to so noble predecessors, as they would in no wise
suffer so Valiant exploits either public or private, to be buried in silence
and oblivion. Yea ever in those times, where fines imperij tueri magis, quam
proferre, mos erat: as in those Golden times, and empires of Verores King of
Egypt, and Tanais King of Scythia which Historians take to be the first
Monarchs and sole Governors in the world; even the^ (I say) were Epitaphs of
this nature very frequent, and common: and in Ninus time, who succeeded, or
rather dissolved their government, we read Epitaphs even written upon his
Tomb; describing his nature and disposition at large, the manner of his
discipline in war, the continuance of his Empire or Government, and the
occasion of his death.

To speak of the effeminate Government and principality of the Amazons (women
of incomparable and incredible fortune, valor and resolution) we have yet
those Tombs and Sepulchers of the T^muli Amazouum.
Amazons celebrated to this day amongst those Pagans, for the infinite numbers
slain by Hercules, in his i^uasion of Amazon: where the worthy exploits of
those (more then women) for their disci line and ex^erience in wartes, are in
gold^n Characters registered and recorded.

We read even in those (who for their magnanimity and resolution) were termed
(...) or Heroes, men of heroicke disposition to have had in former times insc
iptions upon their Graves and Monuments, to express what they were living,
that deserved so exceeding commendation dying. Such were Alci^es, Theseus,
Hector, Perith^us, and the renown of Greece (the ancient Patroclus,) upon
whose grave whilst Achilles leaned, he imagined true valor to be charactred on
his Grave, and a suffi^ient occasion of exciting and instigating the
unworthiest and vnresoluedst spirits to take in hand managements of greatest
difficulty.

We read of Tarina Queen of Saca, that she was no less memorable for her
sepulcher, (surpassing both in bounty and specious edifice, then the Pyramides
of Aeg^pt: Labyrinth in Crete, co^ triued and invented by Dedalus, or that
sumptuous Monument erected by Artemisia in honor of her husband Mausolus.

If we should descend to the Persian Princes elected after the (premature death
of Gladio sua sponte euaginato grauiter (...) occubuit Just 1. lib:
Cambyses) we shall there more eminently surueigh the process of their
government, and their ends (some with glor^e and renown) others with no less
infamy and reproach attaind.

Yet to use decency in the celebration of funeral rites and solemnities: for
I know (that I may use the morallists opinion) there is a vaine^glorie even in
death; and as the pomp of death does more terrify then death it self, so
does the pomp of death more excite men to die willingly then their expectance
after death. For this all the Roman Emperors would have their Tombcs erected
in their life time, with all external osten^ation, and popularitie: to
intimate a kind of Empire even in death: which may appear by that (which
Suctonius speaks in the life of Augustus) that before his death, the statue
which was erected and set up in his memory being stricken with Thunder^ lost
the first letter of his Name (to wit C.) which signified as the Augurs diuined,
that within a hundred days immediately following, he should depart the world.

Cato in deed (who took it nobile lethum to die for his country and the
preservation of her liberty) would have no shrinc, statue, nor inscriptio^ set
up in his memory; supposing his virtues to be sufficient annals and records to
eternise his name.

Of this mind was Phocion the Athenian (both Stoics for their discipline)
seeming unwilling to imitate the popular in exterior rites: being (as they
deemed) able to express their own lives by their deaths, their deaths by
their li^es. Which may be the cause that moved Flaccus to contemn all
monuments, with this resolved security: Vnde mihi lapidem etc. What auailes it
to have Monuments, Stones, Shrines or Statues to memorise Us? what skils it to
have labels hung upon our Sepulchers (as those silver swords of Greece over the
Sepulcher of Philip; those golden Archers of Persia over the memorab^e tomb of
Artaxerxes? as the same Poet says, -- N^n datur em^sso reditus ^ibi -- It is
true: yet so respective should man be of the demerited and praiseworthy acts
of his Ancestors (^o ceremoniously careful that their monuments be not in
oblivion smothered) as no time should be omitted (wherein we may as the Orator
says, defunctorum memori^ seruire) but with all instance to perfect and
accomplish the same.

We Vid. des^r. Af fric. Qui sepul^ra maiorum ut propria domicil^a ^resque
existimarunt.
read that the Pagans have been so respective hereof, that the momuments of
their parents and kinsfolks have been no less dear to them, then their own
houses, their own habitations and dwellings: Esteeming their reputation (to be
purchased) by the purchase of their Ancestors glory, and augmented by the
preservation of their memory.

Agathocles Prince of Syracuse (willing to erect a Monument or Statue in his
own memory, to express humane frailty) commanded that the head and upper
parts should be made of solid gold, but the feet of earth; with this Impresse:
Sic omnia firma. An excellent observation and caution to put Man in mind of
his substance and subsistence, constitution and dissolution: that standing on
no firmer feet then earth, no stronger arches (then stays of mortality) he
should ever fear lest so proud a building should fall, being supported by so
unstable and unable props.

But for Antiquity (as she is said to be the warrant of things done, the
confirmer of things present, and president of things to come; so ofttimes vi^es
have been bolstered by her, impieties authorized by her, and a direction to
greater laid open by her. I will descend therefore briefly to particularize
such Epitaphs (used by the Ancients) which remained for caueats or observations
in succeeding times. As others (likewise) that moved and excited men to
undertake valiant and courageous exploits in hand.

We read that Augustus (when he died at Nola, being a Town s^ated in the
middle part of Campani^) his soldiers to express and manifest their love to
him dying, as they had done their allegiance to him living, burst out in
several passions of sorrow, grief, and pensive distractions, with these
speeches: O God, that he had either never been borne, or that he had neu^r
died: For the one Alterum enim pessimi incepti, exitus praeclari alteru^ etc.
is an occasion of our misery, the other a president of his glory. For so great
was his love toward the Citizens, that by his own care and diligence, he
commanded great abundance of grain to be brought out of Egypt to sustain his
people welnie consumed with famine.

Few of the twelve Roman Emperors read we so excellent and exquisite
commendations of: save Titus, who received this Impresse even upon his hearse,
to be Amor and deliciae generis humani: Man's darling, the Worlds mirror, and
the flower of all Roman Emperors either before or since; being directed and
enlightened no further then with the beameling of nature. For to recapitulate
the natures of all those Princes, twixt Augustus the first of the twelve (save
one) to Titus, the last of the twelve, save one, we shall see their
dispositions variable, inconstant, dissolute, and generally vicious.

Tiberius taxed for his subtlety, Caligula for his insolency, Claudus for his
effeminacie, N^ro for his cruelty, Galba for his intemperancie, Otho Vita omnis
turpis, maxim adolescentia etc. vid. S^xt. Aur^l. de Oath.
for his inhumanitie, Vitellius for his prodigality, Uespasian for his misery:
These have we charactred (which the Roman Annals have expressed to l^e) such
as either merited eternal infamy by their vicious government, or due
commendation for their many moral virtues wherewith they were endued and
invested. Vita mortuorum est in memoria viuentium (says one very well:) for it
renues and reuiues the memory of the dead, and makes him live in name, honor
and reputation, when the sith of Fate has pruned him.

For this all the Roman Emperors have labored, desiring to become memorable
after death: Curtius throwing himself into the lake; Vtican purchasing his
liberty by voluntary death; Horatius C^cles throwing himself violently into
Tyber to preserve his Countries liberty; In capite eius v^luti cornua eme^se
runt etc. Valor. Max. lib.
Genitius Cippus subiecting himself to death to propagate his Countries glory;
P. Decius who rushed into the forefront of the enemies (encountering a whole
Army) to make his own memory more famous and illustrious: The like of Scipio
Affricane, who to extinguish that menacing fire of H^nnibal devoted himself to
death for the safeguard of his Country. These and many more, who illustrated
their Names by atchieuements done living, expected (without question) no little
celebration of their name and memory dying: and though their opinion reached
not to the souls immortality; yet they could extend their imaginations thus
far, as a famous and memorable death surpassed an infamous and ignominious
life: wishing rather to die in fame, then live in eternal obscu^ity. Which
caused some (of disposition unequal to the former) to perpetrate some heinous
and en^rmious crime, whereby they might purchase fame even by infamy: Such was
Herostratus who burned the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, to purchase himself a
name. Such was Turulius who hewed down the grove that was consecrate to the
Temple of Aesculapius, to erect him a ship, that once Religion (as he himself
auowed) might ride on the water: And such was Q. Fuluius who to enrich himself
(by sinister means) took from the Temple dedicated to Juno Lucinia, tegulas
quasd^m marmoreas, for which he sustained condign punishment; amongst which we
may insert that sacrilegious Prince or Tyrant rather (for his Empire of
Syracuse as it came unto him by an usurped succession, so it was governed by as
cruel and tyrannical a disposition) bearding the Gods, and afterward robbing
the Altars and Temples (of their sacred ornaments.) For coming one day to the
Temple of Jupiter Olympius, and seeing his Image gloriously beautified with a
Quo cum Tyrannus Hiero etc. (...) Cartha^. orna^erat etc.
vestment of gold (of an exceeding weight and inestimable price) commanded it
to be taken from him, and a woollen garment to be given him in the stead of it:
saying, A coa^e of gold was too heavy for him in Summer, too cold (...); but a
woollen garment was fitter for both (...). Many o^ these have we recorded by
Historians, whose lives were no less profane, then their ends miserable.

Upon all which (if we might insist upon this argument) Epitaphs very
answerable to their infamous and despicable lives might be produced. But we
must proceed, because this summarie discourse, (which I have here placed and
prefixed (as a preamble or forerunner) to our Epitaphs following) is but
intended only to demonstrate the use and effect of Epitaphs, with their first
institution, and their distinct kinds arising from their primarie uses.

It is true that there is no necessity in Sepulchers, or specious monuments;
for coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam: which moved Diogenes the Cynick to bid
his friends cast his body unto the dogs when he was dead: and being answered
by them, that the dogs would tear and rent it: Set a staff by me (quoth he)
and I will beat them from it. Yet in this seeming contempt of burial, we
shall read in most of the lives of the Pagans, that they were respective where
they should be interred, erecting (as in part has been mentioned) very goodly
and glorious Sepulchers in their life times to eternise their memory after
death: with whom (it fared many times) as it fared once with Shebna sibi tumula
condit, quem fata negarunt.
Shebna, who made himself a Sepulcher in one Country, but was buried in
another.

The first that buried such as fell in war.
Hercules (we read) to be the first that ever buried such as fell in war.
Many ancient Epitaphs we have by transcript^on, engraven upon the monuments of
the deceased: as in the Northern parts especially, where in the very ruins of
time, we may see some monumentall inscription inserted, to revive the memory of
the dead. As in the wars of the Saxons, Picts, and Danes: no coast being mo^e
frequent then the North, to express the memorable acts done in former time, as
also to set out the very places and circumstances of things achieved, with the
manuscripts traduced from former occurrents even to these present times: many
curious and serious Antiquaries having viewed and particularly set down the
especiallest records hereof with diverse memorable inscriptions happily
occurring to their surueigh, I will ouerpasse the same, lest I should seem to
trifle out my time with an imp^ent discourse.

It is true that a Soldiers resolution eue^ fixed on brave attempts, and the
enlarging of his Countries glory, should rather aim at fame after death, then
to erect for himself a curious monument in his death: which moved Caesar in
the plain of Pharsalie to s^y,

-- (...)* Luc^n.
Capit omnia tellus
Quae genuit: coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam.
And again that martial strain of valor:

Nil agis hac ira, tabesne cadauera soluat, An rogus, haud spectat: placido
(...) receptat cuncta sinu. And so concludes the Declamour in Seneca: Nature
g^es every man a grave: seccnded by old Anthises resolution:

Nec tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos. Yet humanity requires these final
obsequies, not only in remembrance of our dead friends, but even to manifest
the sincerity of our loves, in erecting monuments over them dead, which might
preserve their memory, and confirm our affections in their deaths.

The friends of Cleombrotus (surnamed Ambrociat) seeing his much lamented end,
desired much to express their love unto their dead friend; yet withal to
conceal the infamy and reproach of his death: yet Callim^chus played the
Epigrammatist upon his grave, whilst his dear friends deplored his untimely
end. The Epigram (inscribed after the form of an Epitaph) being fixed on his
Tomb, whence all Epitaphs have their denomination, was this,

-Vita vale, muro praeceps delapsus ab alto
Dixisti moriens, Ambrociata pu^r,
-Nullu^ in morte malu^ crede^s* sed scripta Platonis
Non ita erant a^imo percipienda tuo.
In English thus,
The young Ambrociat, whilst himself he threw
From off the wall, bad to his life adieu,
Deeming (as Plato wrote) in death's no woe,
But he mistook it: Plato meant not so.
This book which moved Ambrociat to this precipitate attempt, is imagined to
be Platoes Ph^do of the immortality of the soul: which also (by a
misconstruction) Cato V^ican apprehending, laid violent hand upon himself, to
free himself from the tyranny and illimited sovereignty of the usurping
C^sar. But to our argument propounded.

We have shadowed briefly the first branch (or kind which we proposed in the
beginning) to wit, moral Epitaphs, being such as conduce to instruction either
public or private, wherein (by the very inscriptions or titles engraven upon
the Tombs of the deceased) some have been moved to imitate their memorable
lives in actions and attempts of like nature; as Caesar in the surueigh of
Mithridates, Augustus in the surueigh of C^sar, Alexander by the monument of
Achilles, Achilles by the fame-engrauen monument of Patroclus, Aenaeas by the
renowned Tomb of the matchless Andromach in Hom. called Hector Troiae (...).
Hector, and Hector by the eternized memory of Antenor: These were moral,
inducing or exciting Impresses, drawing the minds of the beholders to the
management of the like approved and redoubted acts.

We will now proceed to Epitaphs (coming nearer a (...) composition)
excellent for their grave and divinely moving sentences; pithy for their
effect, and profitable for their use.

That is an excellent one of Scaligers: Scaligeri quod reliquum est: and that
no less divine of Ca^us: Fui Cai^s.

Epitaphs of this kind seem little affectiue, yet include so exquisite a
strain, as they may rightly be termed divine: surpassing morality in
description of our mortality; they delineate the state of man, extenuate his
pomp, and show to what end man was created, not to be only, but to live:
there being an essential difference (twixt being and living) as I have before
specified. We have some of these which set out vanity in her natural colors:
and imply divinely, what they propound morally.

Diverse we read of, that fearful (it seems) to commend the writing of their
Epitaphs to posterity, would ever be provided of one in their own time: which
(to express their worth better) did not show or character their worth, but in
a modest silence describe their own frailty, shutting up their fame and
memory, with a farewell to Earth and Vanity. These be sovereign cordials to
cheer the drouping and dejected spirit: such as live iniuried by time,
oppressed by greatness of enmity, and slaued to penury: Such I say, as live
obscurely in the eye of the World, neither noted nor reputed.

When the rich-man sees nothing upon Croesus grave, but a Fui Croesus: nor the
poore-man upon Irus then, Fui Irus: what difference at the^r dissolution?
though in the eye of vain and popular accounts, there be a maine difference.

These divine Epitaphs move the intellectual part to an apprehension of humane
condition; to consider that we are al made ex Homo ex humo. Ter^a a terendo.
Cadauer a cadendo. Vermis quia inermis.
eadem argilla: and as no difference in ^rame and module, so no difference in
the end and period; only that which was writ upon the Bauarians grave shall
either confirm our hopes, or make us eternally miserable: -- Sit comes
intermer^ta fides: or that which was engraven on the Tomb of a Venetian Lord:

Qui Quod Seneca in Vatiae tumulum scripsit. H^c situs est Vatia: dormire enim
magis quam viuere videbatur.
vixit, viuet, qui fuit, ille perit. One no less divine then the other,
distinguishing betwixt being and living: where our actions must be poised, our
intentions discussed, and the universality of nature discovered. We are drawn
by these Epitaphs to disualue the pomp and port of this World; less to pamper
the inordinate and distempered affections of the Flesh: holding as the
Platonists held, only the Soul to be Man, and the body to be a case or cover
to put it in: And as Sene^a terms it, a rind or bark: so to fix only the
light and splendour of the internal part upon that soueraign end, by which we
may end in glory, as we were borne in misery.

And miserable did the Philosopher account that man, whose best of memories
consisted in fair and eminent obsequies; virtue being the best shrine, the
exquisitest monument which can be erected to honor man. How should we best
describe our selves, and the excellency of our own natures, but by the
contempt of death, express our own affections even upon our graves, showing
our selves to be Christians?

The memorable inscriptions of the ancient Princes (who died in their Countries
right) may excite us to managements of no less consequence. The Inscription
upon Qui pannosus sarmenla collo gerens, castra hostium ingreditur. Just.
s^cundo lib.
Codrus Tomb, who was Prince of Athens, was -- Nec mors mihi nomen ademit.

The like we read of Attilius Regulus, who rather then he would infringe his
faith, willingly returned unto his enemies the Carthaginians: where, after he
had endured intolerable torments, and unworthy of so great and equally
disposed mind, he commanded this Epitaph to be engraven upon his obscure
Tomb, Nec sine sp^ perij. Many such may we read in the memorable Annals of
the Romans, specially in the war twixt Carthage and Rome: in which wars,
no man of esteem or ennobled rank died, that was not graced with some
inscription upon his monument.

Yet Pompey the Great, whose prudence in governing, sincerity in disposing,
promptness in attempting, and firm resolution in seconding, got him an
eternal fame, both at home and abroad: abroad in following Scylla, at home in
bearing up the main building of the State with his grave and discreet
supportance: even this P^mpey had but a short Epitaph writ upon him, Hic situs
est magnus. Here lies the pomp of a puissant and potent Pompey: here lies
Romes Atlas, the Eastern terror, and his friends aduancer: one whom neither
imminence of peril, nor mutation of state, nor occurrence in fate could alter
or dismay: Even that powerful Column is now ruin^d, his glory dazzled, and the
mansion which was made glorious by him in Rome, becomes reduced to a poor and
homely S^pulcher in Egypt.

One chancing to come where king Dennis was buried: being deprived of crown
and dignity by reason of his tyrannicke government, and before his death had
retired himself to a simple School, where he taught scholars; saying, Et
regam inui^is fatis: understanding the course and process of his government,
writ this short Epitaph upon his Tomb:

Dennis era^, and Dennis eris, nec rege minorem
Te (...) fata vocant: Rexque Magister eris:
Rex popul^ crudelis eras, puerisque Magister
Saeuior, his celerem fata dedere finem.
Nec regis inuitis fatis, e culmine regni,
Vt cadis, ^dmissum est deseru^sse schola^.
In English thus,
Dennis thou was, and Dennis thou shall be,
For thy own Fates bestow this style on thee,
King both to men and children, yet in them
Thou was more fierce to children then to men:
Which when the fates perceived, they thought t'extend
Thy course continued il with swifter end.
Spurn not against the fates, imperious fool,
For as thou lost thy crown, thouse leave thy scoole
In Epitaphs of this nature, a more then moral instruction or institution is
to be required: expressing only the intellectual part without any profane or
heathenish invention, being transcendent to the vulgar reach or apprehension of
humane understanding: many divine and holy escripts of the ancient Fathers may
be comprehended herein: being such as treated as well of the life and
discipline of the dead, as especial motives of imitation; or cautions of
detestation to the living. Here Ambition pourtraied in her colors, occasions
her own end by her own unbounded desires. There Covetousness (with the
misers Mo^to) is exemplified, and how many evils are continually attending her,
according to the definitive censure of Flac^us, Semper a^arus ^get. Here
Sacrilege instanced in our ancient Albane Br^nnus; on whom we read, that
after his many conquests and victorious attempts in Gaul^, and the sacking of
Rome, with many rich booties and spoils obtained in those wars; at last
attempted the beautiful and rich Temple of Delphos consecrate to Apollo, being
excited and instigated by Euridanus and Th^ssalonus to adventure so difficult a
Province, only in hope of obtaining inestimable treasures, reserved (say they)
for such as would boldly attempt, and without fear of the gods, or
prophana^ion of Religion, durst attempt the rans^cking and rifling of such
sacred treasures. But behold, the purpos^s of the wicked were confounded (and
ever may Sacrilege have the like succ^sse) ^or suddenly Brennus with all his
populous Army, were discomfited, their execrable devices frustrated* and
themselu^s (all or most) subjected to miserable ends: the ^articulars whereof
are more sully and amply dilated on by the Roman Historian Tro^. P^peius.
Their Epitaph we find t^us, (being extracted out of ancient Anna's) concording
wel^ (...) the nature of their crime, and mise^ie of their end:

H^c vi^ Sacrilegis, haec r^a porta (...),
A Delphi laribus lim^n (...) Ditis.
In English thus,

This way Church-robbers go, who seek to fall
From great Apolloes shrine to Plutoes Hall*
These kind of Epitaphs may include or comprehend all such, as for any
excellent part or management domestike or public, have been accounted worthy
memory: or such, as for eminence of place have been no less markeable, then
singular in discharge of their authority: for acts of puissance and renown
that Epitaph engraven on the Tomb of Willina^ Marshall Earl of Pembroke, in
the time of Henry the third:

Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hybernia; Sole^
Anglia, M^rcurum Normannia, Gallia Martem.
And that Epitaph writ upon Theobald Blois Earl of Champaine (too divine for
any mortal creature: Non hominem possum, non audeo dicere num^n. And that of
one Clare expressing (in one man) an Epitome of all virtues:

Hic pudor Hippoliti, Paridis gena, sensus Vlyssis,
Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira iacet.
That memorable one also upon the Sepulcher of Maud mother to H^nrie the
second: describing the excellency of her descent by her Father, the greatness
of her self by her match, and her renowned i^sue which (of all other) made her
most admired, and after death the especiallest motive of her eternal memory.

Or^u magna, Viro mayor, sed maxima partu,
Hic iacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens.
Ancient times have esteemed these Epitaphs sufficient in themselves to
perpetuate their names, being records ever true: for as the Orator says, Quis
tam inf^lici genio, leuique ingenio qui mortuis assentari cupit? and as the
Poet says, Lucan.
Quis Busta timebit? Herostratus was charactred as well for his infamy, as
(...) for his renown and chivalry. Even Metellus modesty, Lentulus leuitie,
Publicolas* piety, Cethegus cruelty, Appius affability, and Ciceroes
constancy had their true lineatures: every one mouldned and molded after
their deserts: for these, as examples, be of more power and efficacy to the
practice and prosecution of virtue, then any instruction or document
whatsoever; draw men more attentively to their imitation, whose virtues they
see merit admira^ion, as I have in part before touched. It is the Historians
observation, that such as had worthy and virtuous Parents, were wont to repair
unto their Tombs ( Quasi ad propria vitae documenta) and by their memory to be
excited to the like means of atchieuing glory and renown, that their ends
might ^nswere such exemplarie par^nts. Though it was Lycas conclusion in the
Tragedy, to attribute all merit to ones proper action, and not to the honor
of their Auncestor. True it is indeed, that our predecessors glory cannot
properly be entitled ours, their actions being only as monuments of their
fame, presidents for us to follow, and indeed proclaimers of our bastardy, if
we chance to degenerate from such rare and exquisite mirrors. Yet was Sextus
Pompeius honored for his Fathers worth: and such as descended from virtuous
parents, were only thought fit to match with Patricians. Those four Aureli^,
Mutiae, Laeliae, Corneliae.
ancient families in Rome, whose virtuous and modest demeanures got them the
name of chaste matrons, were well portraied by proper Epitaphs, and in their
memory were these sentences engraven: He^re Romes honor lies buried: H^ere
lies the foundation of Ancient families:

Here mod^st Laelius from ^is I aelia,
Pompey the younger from Cornelia,
From Mutia, came a Mutius Sceuola,
And good Aur^lius from Aur^lia.
By these memorable Impresses, were their successors ennobled, and to their
imitation more ardently excited then by any precept or instruction whatsoever:
the cause may be drawn from that affectation of honor naturally ingraffed in
us from our birth, whereby we use to be spurred and instigated to the imitating
of such as by any proper demerit either inherent in themselves, or traduced
from others to themselves, have purchased ^enowme: whence it is, that the Poet
says: Im^ensum calcar gloria habet: neither has it been accounted a little
glory, or slender honor for the successors of so noble and famous Ancestors:
whose monuments were as Annals of their worth and proclaimers of their glory;
which that they might preserve the better, they used to solemnize their
Funerals with exceeding honors, and to erect their Sepulchers with all state
and magnifificence, deputing Surueiours (which should look to the erection and
preservation thereof*) calling ever their graves Accommodatissima vitae
specimi^a, Without which the memory of their virtues might seem obscured,
their glory darkened, and a great many of those excellent parts wherewith they
were endued, buried in silence and oblivion. True it is, that gorgeous
Sepulchers little avail the dead: which moved the Philosopher to say, that
they were not so much made for the dead, as for the living. The Orator termed
them mirrors of humane frailty, characters of our glory, and undoubted
Arguments of our mortality. Another examplifying this more fully says, They
are Glasses wherein we may contemplate our selves and others, motives of
imitation wherein we may follow others, and images of affinity being of the
like nature and substance with others. No better or more perfect Resemblance
can be made twixt man and his creation, the image of his li^e, and necessity
of his dissolution; the state of his birth, and occa^ion of his death; the
form of his beginning, and fashion of his end, then twixt a dead-mans
Sepulcher, and the Worlds Theater. Here many Actors (some whereof like your
Pantomimes in Rome, are generally approved in all parts) play on this
terrestrial stage of humane frailty. Some absolute Machiauels (irreligious
politicians) shrouding vicious purposes under virtuous pretenses: other
simple-honest souls, who (like your obscure Actor) stands either not at all
observed, or else so generally derided, as he wishes rather to be a
doore-keeper in the mansions of Heaven, then a disgraced Actor on this stage of
Earth. There your light Curtizan (who like another Salust*
Semp^ronia, tanta est libidine accens^ vt v^ros saepius petet, quam petetur,
prostitutes her body to ruinate her soul, exposing herself to all, that she
might become hateful to all: to be brief, in the surueigh of all sta^es and
conditions (^or every particular vice incurres a peculiar shame) we may bring
the Miser to his grave, who while he lived, was subject to his vice: The
Curtizan from her brothell of vanity, to her fellow-pupils hearse, there to
contemplate her own frailty. The Ambitious skie-soaring thoughts, to Ambicions
fall, reducing his aspyring spirit* to a more retired centure, the period of a
great man's hopes; which moved Praxatiles Sceptrum pe^it, in centrum vergit.
to limne an ambitious man reaching at a Scepter, and rolling below his Center.
Not a vice either occurrent to state public or private, obnoxious to
themselves or others, but was expressed in that flourishing time, when Rome
labored of her own greatness; so as Catilines Tomb became a caution for
aspirers; Seianus a president for Flatterers; Vitellius an example for Rioters;
Julian for apostates and prophaners; Mark Antonie for adulterate meetings;
Caligula for tyrannike designements. Quod meruere tenent post funera: their
lives being set out in lively colors, either in expression of their worth, or
the description of their illimited government. Many we read (and those worthy
memory) who through want of these inscriptions had their living names shut up
in eternal silence, as the Plutarch. in vit.
mothers of Demosthenes, of Nicias, of Lamachus, of Phorm^on, of Thrasibulus,
and of Theramenes which excelled in modesty, and well deserved to be mothers
of such rare Captains, eloquent Orators, and discreet Statesmen as they
were* We read in Plutarch, how Alcibiades assisted by Nicias, was to take his
expedition into Sicilie, the very same day of the celebration of the feast
Adonia, on which the custom was, that women should set up in diverse parts of
the City, in the midst of the streets, Images like to dead coarses, which
they carried to burial in remembrance of the lamentations and disconsolate
passions which Venus expressed for the death of her Adonis: where in this
solemnity, their imaginary hearses were set full of Impresses, that their
Funeral might be with more state and magnificence celebrated. But having
discoursed before of the antiquity of Epitaphs, with their especial uses
appropriate, as well to ancient as following times, I will descend to the third
Definition of the third Branch.
branch, which in my first division I propounded my self; to wit, Epitaphs
Profane, being such as have been used to anatomise vice satyrically, (with an
Inuection against the manners of the dead: which seems different to the
Philosophers instruction, aduising us rather to tread lightly on the graves of
the dead, and to pass over their obliquities with a modest pace, a conniuing
eye, and a charitable judgment; that our pace might not press them, our eye
pierce them, nor our judgment poyze them, but in the skale of amity, with the
eye of pity, and the feet of lenity. But now to our discourse, and that
briefly, whereby the shortness of our Volume may concord with our intention.

Epitaphs of this sort we have too frequent, being forged out of the brain of
unseasoned Satyrists, that without distinction bend their wits to asperse
imputation upon the deserved memory of the dead: men of basest nature,
d^faming such whose silence gives them freer scope and privilege of
detraction: impious violaters of burials, commentors of imaginary vices,
wrongers of the dead, envious libellers, who write either incensed through
spleen, or hired for price: drawn on by others, or voluntarily moved by their
own depraved and distempered inclinations; of which kind we may read every
Nation (even in their flourishingst and successiuest times) to have had their
part: Athens her Eupolis, Sparta her Alcae^, In Cyrus time.
Persia her Aristeas, Rome her Cherilus. These trod not with easy pace on the
graves of the dead, but mixing their ink with more gall then discretion,
instigated more by spleen then charitable affection, ransacked the Sepulchers
of their dead enemies, deblazoned their vices dying, which (through a slavish
pusillanimitie, they durst not unrip nor discover living; these remorselesse
censurers of Vices, these corrupters and stainers of well merited lives, these
foes to virtue, and foments of vice, were well set out by the Tragike Poet: who
brought in the Ghost of the wronged person, pursuing the detractour and
menacing him with eternal reproach for his labor. Yet this digression may
seem not so much impertinent as directly repugnant to my first definition of
Epitaphs and Epicedes, the natures of both which I have in part described:
where I defined Epitaphs to be nothing else then Testimonials of the Virtues or
Vices of the dead: how they were affected, or what especial occurrents
happened them in their life; it is true, but these Descriptions are to be
shadowed and suited with modest allusions, equally disposed Allegories as their
vices, though in part discovered, yet that discovery so entangled as may
minister matter of observation to the judicious, and leave the ignorant in a
continual suspense. And because we produced no authority before (touching the
difference twixt an Epitaph and Epiced^) we will use Seruius opinion herein:
the difference is between an Epic^de and Epitaph, as Seruius teaches, that
the Epicede is before the corpse be interred, and Epitaph or inscription upon
the Tomb: the etymology of the word, (...) -- curare inferias, or funeris
officia peragere. Scaliger in his authority of Poets, confirms the deriuation
as proper and genuine to the nature of funeral celebrities. This distinction
may (serve as a thread to guide the illiterate Poetaster (who perhaps otherwise
would confound these two words) out of the labyrinth of error, in which more
writers now adays wander, then ever in any time before. So that it may seem
the paradox of Erasmu^ in the praise of folly, and that book which Agrippa
writ De vanitate scientiarum, are sub^ects only in request; where every M^uius
will write (and ofttimes be approned) as well as Maro. Ajax in Euripides said:
(...), (...), To know nothing is the sweetest life Which sweetness this age has
attained, where it may be truly auerred, that Never Age had more writers, and
fewer Authors: those only being admitted of as Doctorum dict^ indoctos
do^iores reddunt.
Authors, whose works merit approbation and authority in themselves:
experience being reduced to ignorance, and a desire of knowledge to a
fruitless desire of writing: Littora bobus arant, and arenae semina mandant.
But I omit them: these profane Epitaphs sinisterly aiming at the detraction of
such who rest in peace, as they are utterly to be condemned, so their Authors
as presidents of such obliquities should be severely censured, whereby an
example of punishment in one might minister cause of reformation in all: yet
because sin should in some sort be unmasked, lest vice sue out a privilege,
and purchase her self a monopoly amongst our world-statists (whose best of
traffic is to be the Devils factors, whose eminentst degree is to be Hels
purueiors, and whose only office in request is to be Mammons collectors) I
have instanced diverse Epitaphs, some invented others translated and traduced
from others, which with a tolerable sharpness, and a well tempered
bitterness alluding to the persons on whose Tombs they were engraven,
modestly discover vi^e in her natiuest colors. As, first in description of
Avarice, a vice most incident to Age, and therefore most inherent to man.
Hermo^ dreaming he had disbursed money, died for woe, o^ which dreaming Miser
we read this written:

Under here old Hermon lies,
Who sleeping lived, and dreaming dies.
And that of Phedon who wept not for that he should die, but that the charge of
^is burial should come to four shillings.

Here Phedon lies, who weeps and cries,
not that his life he lost,
But that the charge of his Burial
should full four shillings cost.
at And that of Hermocrates, who would not be se^ charge for a purgation: and
dying made himfe sole Executour:

Hermocrates that catiffe wretch,
who living had no power
To use his own, did make himself
his sole executour.
And that of None, whose Name and nature had relation one to another, being
only to himself without respect of public good, or compassion to others want:

Here lies Hic situs est Nullus, quia Nullo Nullior esto,
Et quia Nullus erat, de Nullo Nil tibi Christ.

None by name, by nature one,
Yet was he one by Name, by nature None.
Something of Nothing often the poor did crave,
Yet could the poor of Nothing, nothing have.
And that of one Hic situs est sitiens atque Ebrius Elaertonus; quid dico hic
situs est, hic potius sitis est?
Elderton, (an inscription too bitter) yet to disauthorize that sin, (which
like that powerful ointment whereof Apuleius relates, amongst the
Thessalonians, transforming and metamorphosing men into brute beasts) to wit
drunkenness, whereof he was taxed, nothing can be too vehement or violent:

Here drunken Elderton in earth lies thrust, Camb. in Remain^

Lies thrust (say I) or rather here lies thirst.
I will end this last part of my division (fearing much I have insisted too
long upon the preamble, and incurring the Mindian censure of making my gate so
spacious, and the maine building so contracted:) I will end (I say) with that
universal doom and home (with which mortality must of necessity end) to
wit, Dust: of which name we read one to have been, and ceasing to be, had
this inscription:

Here Dust lies dead, who that he might be just
In Name and Nature, while he lived loved dust.
And being dust by Nature and by Name,
Thought to return to dust from whence he came.
FINIS.
A Description of Death.
DEath is a raw bon'd shrimp, nor low nor hie,
Yet haz he power to make the highest low,
The Summon-maister of mortality,
The Poor man's wished friend, the Rich-mans foe,
The last Remains of Times Anatomy,
A Thief in pace, in pace more sure then slow;
A Sleep, a Dream, whence we are said to have
In sleep a Death, and in our Bed a grave.
One who, how ere we seem to have the power
To leave our states, wherein we oft-times err,
To such an one as sole executour;
Spite of our nose plays Executioner;
And as the Lean Kine did the Fat devour,
So does this meagre Slave the mightier,
Nor can we if we should be choked for it,
Remove Deaths Action to another Court.
Arts though He know, yet he professes none,
For little haz He, and as little needs,
Yet haz he Tricks to catch the oldest one,
That on this earthie Globe or center treades,
Nor will He leave him till his Breath be gone,
Cheering the worms that on his Body feeds:
Thus fearelesse He, as he haz ever been,
Makes his stroke to be felt, not to be seen.
His Signe's in Sagittary, and the But
He shootes at is man's heart, He ever fits
The shafts he shootes to th'Quiuer they are put;
Won is He not to be by threats, entreats,
Price, power or prayer: at whats'ere He shoot
Or aims to hit, He never fails but hits;
Darte^, He runs as swift as ever ran,
Shot^ herring made, just like an Irishman.
Nor differ they in habit; though He wears
No Mantle, flanning trowses, being known
By his Moath-eaten raiment, He appears
Right Irish, Doublet, Breeches, hose of one;
He haz no shift, yet He no vermin fears,
(For vermin, Death, nor th'Irish harbor none)
Yea in their kind of fight compared They are,
For They invade us both at unaware.
Death is wormes-Caterer, who when He comes
Will have provision though the Market starve,
He will be served before the mighty ones,
And knows before where He intends to carue;
Its He awakes the Sin-belulled Drones,
And cuts Them short as rightly They deserve,
Its He that all things to subjection brings,
And plays at football with the crowns of kings.
Two empty Lodges haz He in his head,
Which had two Lights, but now his Eyes be gone,
Cheeks had He once, but they be hollowed;
Beauty He had, but now appears there none:
For all those moving parts be vanished,
Presenting Horror if but looked upon;
His color sable, and his visage grim,
With ghastly looks that still attend on Him.
Fleshie He was, but it is picked away,
Belike, for that He haz so much to do,
If clothed with Flesh, he should be forced to stay,
And show (perchance) too much of mercy to
To some Young wench, who on the holyday
Might force Him love, if she could tell him how;
Which to prevent, and better to restrain him,
He goes so ugly none should entertain him.
Yet entertained He will; for though He be
Contemned by th'perfum'd Curtezan, whose form
Seems coy to give Him hospitality;
Yet when He comes He Will not one hour adiorne,
To give her Summons of mortality;
Converting that same Beauty, did adorn
Her Composition to corrupted earth,
Whence she derived both Period and Birth.
Snaile-like He comes on us with creeping pace,
And takes us napping when we least think on him,
In's hand an Houre-glasse, which inferres our race
Is near an end; and though we strive to shun him,
He moves when we move; and that very place
Whereto we fl^e, and think we have outrun him,
There he appears, and tells us it is not good
To strive against that which cannot be withstood.
If we shed tears, they are bootlesse, for his eyes
In stead of sight are molded up with clay,
If we assay to pierce his ears with cri^s,
Vain is our Labor, fruitless our assay;
For his Remorcel^sse ears all motions flies,
Nor will He give the Prince a longer day:
His payment must be present, and his Doom,
" Return to earth thy Cradle and thy Tomb.
Nor is his Summons only when we are old,
For Age and Youth He equally attends,
Nor can we say that we have firmer hold
In Y^uth then Ag^, or further from our ends,
Save that we ^re by Natures verdict told,
With length of years our hope of life extends:
Thus y^ng or old, if Death approach and say,
Earth unto Earth, He must perforce obey.
A Breath-bereauing Breath, a vading shade,
Ever in motion, so as it appears
He comes to tell us whereto we were made,
And like a friend to rid us of our fears,
So as if his approach were rightly weighed,
He should be welcomed more with joys the^ tears,
Joy to dissolve to earth from whence we came,
That after Death, Joy might receive the same.
Naked his scalpe, thrill-open is his Nose,
His Mouth from ear to ear, his earthie Breath
C^rrupt and noisome. Which makes me suppose
Some mouldie cell's the Mannor-house ^f Death:
His shapelesse legs bend backward when he goes,
His rake-leane body shrinking underneath,
Feeble he seems, reft both of heart and power,
Yet dare he beard the mightiest Emperor.
None He consorts with save worms and men
Prepared for worms-meat, though he make resort
To Country, City, Village now and then,
Yea where he is seldom welcome, to the Court,
There will He enter, and will summon them;
And go they must, though they be sorry for it:
Thus, Country, City, Village, Court and all,
Must their appeara^ce make when Death does call.
Chop-falne, Crest-sunke, drie-bon'd Anatomy,
Earth-turn'd, mole-ei'd, flesh-hook that pulls us hence
Night-crow, Fates^doome, that tells us we must die,
Pilgrim-remouer that depriues us sense;
Lifes-date, Soules-gate that leads from misery,
Man's sharp'st assault admitting no defense,
Times Exit, or our Intrat to that Clime,
Where there is no Time, nor Period of Time.
Nor stands he much upon our dangerous year,
All are alike to Him, yea often we see,
When we are most secure, then He Is most near,
Where the year clymactericke is his I^bile:
For as He can transpose Him every where,
East, West, North, South, with all facility,
So can H^ come, so cunning is his stealth,
And take us hence when we are best in health.
Since Death is thus described, (for this he is,)
Be still prepared, lest vnprepar'd He come,
And hale you hence, for spending Time amiss
(For Death is Sins Reward, Transgressions Doom)
So when thou dies thou shall be sure of this,
T^ have access unto the Marriage room,
And for thy Tomb, in stead of Iuorie,
Marble, or Brass, shall Virtue cover the.
Epitaphs upon sudden and premature deaths: occasioned upon some occurrents
lately and unhappily arising.
WHo walks this way? what Charity, is it thou?
I need not fear thy doom: for thou wilt al^ow
This Axiom for undoubted: Once we must
Return unto our mother earth: and dust
Our first creation* challenges the same:
"Being the Mould from whence our bodies came.
If Envy pass this way and judge am^sse,
"I rest secure what ere her censure is.
Faith is my Anchor, Comfort is my Shield,
"How should I doubt then but to win the field!
For this is true (as I have often times heard)
No death is sudden to a mind prepared.
My Hope being thus erected; Envy, cease
"To wrong his soul that haz assured peace.
Another Epitaph upon the same subject.
Thou look upon my Tomb, and wagg'st thy head,
And with remorcefull te^res weep'st ore me dead,
As if past hope: thou seem to be my friend,
In that thou grieu'st at my untimely end:
Untimely do thou call it? True: report
Brutes my Repentance was but very short,
Because cut off: I grant it: for the space
It was but short, yet was the c^urse of grace
Abundant, which confirms my Pilgrims wish,
"Where man's prepared, there no death sudden is.
An Epitaph of the same.
Hopeless thou weep'st, and come unto my Tomb,
Descanting on my death, with, oh too soon
Did this poor wretch: I pray thee cease to weep,
"I am not dead, but only fallen asleep:
Ablessed sleep, secure from Enuies sting,
"Flying from earth to heaven with ayrie wing:
Should thou then doubt my end? O do not doubt,
"My virgin-lampe is in, 'tshall nere go out.
Thou say I did too soon: thou say amiss,
"Can any die too soon to live in Bliss?
Wipe then thy Tears, I know thou wish me well,
Heaven is my mansion, Earth I took for hell:
And that was cause I went so soon from thence,
To plant in Heaven my eternal residence:
For men (how short their end) are never tried,
"But how they learned to die before they did.
Upon a virtuous young Lady lying in childbirth.
B^rne at the first to bring another forth,
"She leaves the world, to leave the world her birth:
Thus Phoenix-like as she was borne to breed,
"Dying herself renews it in her seed.
Upon a Soldier, for resolution worthily affecte^ and advanced by his Country,
yet interred an^ by (unworthy Fate) obscurely.
Dead? Yes: Alas, is this the Soldiers tomb,
A silly monument to them shall come
To see it. True; what tho the body lie
Interred low in her obscurity?
Thy virtue (honored Soldier) shall remain
Above the Boundiers of triumphing Spain,
France, or the Belgicke rampires: what Death m^
Sh'haz done already, turned thy corpse to clay:
But death (of Fames possession) may despair,
For she erects her Tomb within the Air,
That whosoever this way chance to move,
"Shall see his corpse here, but his fame above.
Triumphant Soldiers, glorious by thy birth,
Reign'st now in heaven, because thou wer'st in earth:
Then such Professants over blessed are,
That raise their Peace by managements of war.
Upon a Drunkard buried in a ruinous fort in Dunkerke, was this Inscription
engraven, which by the ancientnesse of Time was well near defaced.
In Dunkerke here a Drunkard lies with mickle careysought,
"Drink was the boon the lorden craved for rest he cared naught.
Long may he wun in this large Tomb, and never henceforth sink
"To earth again: that while he lived claimd earth for want of drink:
^eauen rest his soul, and others all, whosere the Lord will save,
"And grant Dunkerk (if it be thy will) may nere such dru^kards have.
An Epigram upon Alphonso Prince of Naples, and upon his Crest, whereon was
engraven a Pelican with this Impressa;
Alios seruans meipsum perdo.
The Crest I wear expresses what I am,
"A soft and tenderhearted Pelican,
Who to recall life to her dying brood^,
Suckes from her own heart life-renewing blood:
Being the same, if I appeal to time,
"She Is not more dear to hers, then I to mine.
An Epitaph upon one who died confined.
Report tells me that thou did die confinde;
Confinde! its true: in body, not in mind.
Confinde the body was, where it had birth,
But mind without confinement leaves earth,
To dwell in those ^efined Groves about,
A Gro^e refined which yields eternal love
To the possessor; let thy mind appear
Free, though thy body was confined here.
This shall remain engraven upon thy Tomb,
To memorise thy fame in time to come.
Upon a Justice worthily deserving of his Country.
The miss of thee, since the decease, is known,
"For whosoever comes to Justice, or her throne,
Shall see her silent (and as o^e that's domb:)
"Good reason why, with thee she lost her tongue.
Upon a Justice of less demerite.
Who comes this way? Let him look down and read,
"Here li^ one, spoke less living, then being dead:
For here in Ri^e Fame speaks of him in time,
"Who whilst he lived spak^ Reason nor good Rhyme:
This yet h^ comfort is, when time is spent,
God will have mercy on the innocent.
Upon a bragging Soldier.
Here lies a bragging Souldi^r that could lie
With (...) and s^te, in face of majesty;
Yet he that lied' against heaven, in earth now lies,
An open mirror to all mortal eyes:
"For though he lied, yet could he not deny
With all his lies, but man is pressed to die.
Upon Peter see me.
Peter see me, thou can not, for thy eyes
"Lie ^here interred, where thy body lies:
How can thou see me then? as Peter's do;
"Not by my worth, but by my outward shew^
For Gallant-like by perfumes I transpose
My knowledge from thy eyes unto thy nose.
That though thou art dead, yet thou may well perceiu^,
"A Perfumed gallant walk's vponthy grave.
Upon a Captain which in the Low Countries was hanged, and afterward taken up
again.
A Captain hanged, and taken from his Grave*
For what? a pardon came, and did him save.
Save. what did it save? his body: Yes.
"From putrefaction? no, but from that peace
All buried corpse enjoy: It was not done
"With Justice: Yes, she is a Saint divine,
And raisd him up, because dead'fore his time.
^ his throwing.
Poor Thrower, art thou dead? Now do I feel
"Even by thy End, that Fortune haz a wheel,
That spinnes and weaues, turns and returns again;
And in men's death esteems the chiefest gain:
For this by thee may very well be known,
That made their own wheel ruinate thy own.
Thou wast a Thrower, Fate a Thrower too;
After this cast thou wilt near make such a throw:
Rest then in peace, it is Fate tript up thy heel,
And bids thee yield unto her Turning wheel.
Upon one Span.
Rightly compared is the life of man,
"For shortness of continuance, to a span,
It is man's met-wand; every one must have
"This span to end his life, and mete his grave.
Then who dare say that he does live secure,
"Possessing that which cannot long endure.
This is expressed by this man lies here,
"Whose name and nature in one span appear.
So lest the name should do the nature wrong,
"Being short by nature, name would not be long.
Upon one Flower a hopeful young Student.
Man's life's a flower: how should it then but fade,
"Since at the first for dying it was made?
Yet if this Flower had been exempted, then
We might have thought this Flower not for men
To crop: no more it was: and therefore given
"As one above desert of earth to Heaven.
Once thou was planted in the Cambrian Grove,
Where thou was watered with the Students love.
But now from thence I see thy glory rise,
"From Cambrian Beakes, to Brooks in paradise.
Upon a Reverend and honorable Judge of this land, was this Epitaph inscribed.
Who so would Honors frailetie pictured have,
Let him behold that picture in this grave:
Where frailetie never was with more honors clad,
Nor more deserved those honors which he had:
Had? less that we should say, we had thee; have
Would be a Tence, the state would rather crave.
Small difference twixt the accents, Have and Had,
Yet the one did cheer us, the other makes us sad.
But whence these tea^es? whence be they? to express
His worth* our want, his peace, our pensiveness:
For to discribe him in each liniment,
He gave his tongue unto the Parliament:
His hands to sacred writ, his ear to hear
Judgment pronounced, his eye to see more clear
In the (...) of Justice, and his feet
To walk in paths, for Christian souls most meet.
Thus his impartial tongue, hand, ear, foot, eye,
Showed him a mirror in mortality.
Yet in his age a Reverence appears,
Many are young in hours, are old in years;
But he was old in both; full seventy six,
Surpassing David's first Arithmeticke:
Fifty one years he with his Lady lived,
That in himself his race, might be revived:
For what was by the virtuous Father done,
Seems (by resemblance) shadow^d in the Son.
Sergeant unto the Queen, Judge o'th kings B^nch
For twelve years space, wherein his eminence
Did not transport his passions: For his thought
Fixed on his end, esteemed all honor naught.
Thus lived he, thus he di'de; lived long, di'de well,
Here Judge on Earth, now Judge in Israel.
Terras Astraea reliquit. Distichon funebre in obit: princip. ob eximiam and
corporis and mentis temperiem. qua licet, nos reliquit, altiora petit.
Qui formam mirantur, ament Uestigia mentis,
Illi forma perit, nescit at illa mori.
An Epitaph upon the Son buried in his Fathers grave.
Stand, go no further: look but down and read,
Youth fed that body, on which worms do feed.
Look lower down, and thou portrai'd shall have
Father and Son, both buried in one grave.
And what does cover them? poor mother Earth,
Which gave to Son and Father both their birth:
Thus one to three reduced, and three to one,
Son, Mother, Father; Father, Mother, Son.
Make then this use on it wheresoever thou come.
Earth was thy cradle, Earth must be thy tomb.
Upon In hunc ferme modum prop^nitur a Mart. ^pigramma.
one who loving honor, died ere he possessed it.
Thus fades honor and returns to naught,
Which is not got by merit, but is bought:
For it affoords the aspiring mind small good,
When wreaths of honor are not drawn from blood,
Nor from desert: for honor cannot bide,
"Being supported by the stays of pride.
Upon Master Laurence Death, an Epicede accommodate to his Name.
Why should one fear to grapple with his Name,
"Death thou wast living, and art now the same;
No, I may say far more: renewing breath
"Tells me the art living; for thou have killed Death.
Live then victorious Saint: still may thou be
Though dead by Name, ^et fresh in memory.
That who so passes, or shall chance to come
This way, may say: Here lies Deaths living Tomb.
Upon one Merry.
Merry why lie thou like Heraclitus,
That used to laugh like blithe Democritus?
Thou seems in dis^ontent: pray thee tell why
"Thou lie so sad? Thou art learning how to die.
Learning to die? why the art already dead:
Is It possible that Peter Meries head
That was so full of wit, so stuffed with sage,
"As he appeared the mirror of this age?
Peter that knew much, and could speak much more
Then ere be knew, should now fall to deaths store.
Alas poor Merry, worms begin to feast,
Upon that skonce, fed Gallants with fresh ieasts,
Those saucer eyes plast in that witty skonse,
Which used to look some twenty ways at once,
For if they had matches been, some might enquire,
Whether they set thy sparkeling-nose a fire:
Those hollow eyes (I say) or lamps of thine,
"Are now like Hogs-heads emptied of their wine:
For hollow Hogs-heads give an empty sound*
"And so does Merry being laid in ground.
Upon one Hog.
Hog by name and by condition,
"Here lies Hog that blunt Physician:
Christian nor good moralist,
But lived and did an Atheist.
Yet (after death) give Hog his dew,
He was a foe unto the Jew.
And that he might express the same,
"He gloried ever in his name,
He bad me write upon him dead,
" Here lies John Hog, or John Hogs-head.
Upon a vainglorious Student that would needs be called Aristarchus.
Fate last night has been in the warke house
Of our renowned Aristarchus:
Where fate no sooner entered in
Then she a starke-Asse made of him.
For Aristarchus (Authors say)
Invited death, from day to day;
But our last Aristarchus prayed,
(Seeing Death come) as one dismayed,
That he his summons would delay,
And come for him another day.
Upon two Twins that died together
Here lie two faithful Brothers in one tomb,
As they did lie together in one womb;
Here they came hand in hand, and they do crave,
That hand in hand they may go to their Grave.
Upon an ancient Tomb was this In Monast^is septentri^: com pertum crat.
inscription found.
Churchmen that should be best of al, are (pardie) grown the worst,
The F^x I ken (the Proverb says) fares best when he is cursed:
This Abbot here that lies in ground proves this to be too true,
Due would he give to Prie^ nor Cleark, yet would he have his due;
But mark his end (who ^re thou be) for 'twas a fearful end,
No friend he had (as he did think) to whom he might commend
His Gold: therefore one day he went to find out some dark cave,
Where be might hoord his treasure up, where he this voice received:
T^ judgment churlish Nabal had, fall presently on thee,
Which voice being past, the Abbot droupt and died presently.
Upon my Lady Woodb^e.
What would my Lady be? less she has sought
To rise to something, and she is fallen to naught.
Poor Lady, that so fair and sweet a face
Should have no other home or dwelling place,
Then a poor Sepulcher; less its not meet
So fair a Lady should shroud in one sheet:
Who whilst she lived, which was but very now,
Did use to lie perfumed and chafed in two.
Upon the same Subject extracted.
Look through and through, see Ladies with false forms,
You deceive men, but cannot deceive worms.
Upon an Adulterer extracted.
Nay heaven is just, scorns are the hire of scorns,
I nere knew yet Adulterer without horns.
Upon a Sexton an Epitaph.
Rest thee well Sexton, since thou lost thy breath,
I see no Man can be exempt from death:
For what will Death do to the simple Slave,
That durst assault him made for Death a Grave?
In peace sleep on: of thee we have no need,
For we have chosen a S^xton in thy steed:
Thy sacring Bell has tinckled all it can,
And now the Sexton shows he was a man.
Upon Kempe and his morice, with his Epitaph.
Welcome from Norwich Kempe: all joy to see
Thy safe return moriscoed lustily.
But out alas how soone's thy morice done,
When Pipe and Taber all thy friends be gone?
And lean thee now to dance the second part
With feeble nature, not with nimble Art:
Then all thy triumphs fraught with strains of mirth,
"Shall be cag'd up within a chest of earth:
Shall be? they are, thou have danced thee out of breath,
"And now must make thy parting dance with death.
Upon one Skeleton.
Here lies one Skeleton, whom death seasing on,
"Changes this Skeleton vnt^ Sce^, or ^n A^ (...)
Sceleton
Though little changed in name, in substance more,
"For now he is rich that was but poor before.
Upon one Babylon.
Of all the stones that reared up Babylon,
"There now remains (of all that pile) but one,
Which serves to cover both the corpse and fame,
Which he had purchased only by his Name.
Upon a spare Patron.
^u patronu^ egentem.
This Man lies here, to say what name he had,
Or to expresse't would make a Poet mad:
For once a Poet offered him a labor,
Which he would hardly read, or vouchsafe favor,
To give the Author one bare smile, or sooth
The Poets good meaning: to be brief, his tooth
Was poisoned: for the occasion of his death,
It first proceeded from his stinking breath;
Which did corrupt his lungs: this has been tried
To be the cause where of this Patron did.
May he ^est yet in peace the Poet prays,
Who though contemned, yet crown^s his Tomb with (bays*
Upon a cashered Soldier.
In Nether land.
A Soldier not for his desert
Cashered was of late,
But for the Captain by his pay,
Meant to increase his state;
For which (in want the Soldier begged)
But could not be relieved:
As Charity (God knows) is cold,
Where at the Soldier grieved;
And swore since war would do no good,
He now would change his sang,
Either to raise his means (by stands)
Or Souldier-like to hang.
Fate seldom favors war like men,
The case so altered was,
As being taken for bidding stand
To one that chanced to pass,
The poor renown this Soldier got,
Down to obli^ion fell;
And he for Gantlet (wrapped with Gives)
Was brought to second Hell
Captivity: what should he do? appeal
from Justice Throne,
That bootelesse were, for now his hopes
Are fully razed down.
The time approached (sad time God wot)
When brought unto the Bar
He gave the Judge blunt eloquence,
Like to a Man of war:
But to be short accused he is,
What he cannot deny,
And therefore by a public doom^
He censured was to die.
But if the Judge had rightly done,
The Captain (by the way)
As he had taken his standing-wage,
Should reap his hanging-pay.
Upon the death of one Vid. Martial: in nom. Thet. and Nympham, and p^storem
hoc nomine inducit in Elegijs and E^pigrammat.
Thete who died, and was cast in a great tempest upon the Sea, into a strait
of that part of the Sea which diuides Mysia from Hell^spont.
Here lies Thete pale and wan,
Buried in the Ocean.
More it seems to augment her fame,
Since from Sea she took her Name.
Thetis was Achilles mother,
Yet of that name there is another
To this day record'd by Time,
That she was a Saint Divine.
Here her Image sleeps in peace,
Promising this i will increase
Nere this Fount
Of Hellespont.
Where Hero and Leander amorous souls,
In midst of her green bos^me daily ^oules;
Which to Abydos (ancient town)
And to Cestos brought renown,
And that shrine
So divine.
Where Paphos was erected to express,
There Hero was to I'enus Uotaresse:
Rest in honor, Thete rest
By the Sea-Nymphs ever blessed,
for they love
to approve
The rare condition of that divine Creature,
Where Art is far surpast by spotless Nature.
Upon Synon that villain which sacked Troy.
Is It possible that worms dare once conspire
"To tutch his shrowde that sacked all Troy with fire?
O says poor Hecuba, that thou had did
Before she had such fatal objects spide
Of her dislaughter'd Sons, weeping to see
M^ther and issue slau'd to misery.
O says (old Priam) and he tears his hair,
Wishing thy Tomb had razed his despair,
When in the ruins of def^ced Tr^y,
And in the Gore of his beloved Boy
His yongling Troylus, he washed his head
In an eternal Concaue buri^d.
Thus does Troy curse, yet may thou defend
Thy Proiects, and the cause of Troyans end
Proceeding from themselves, thou for the sake
Of thy dear Country, and fair^ Hellens rape,
Became a villain, and to keep thy Name,
Thou lived a villain, and thou died the same.
Then villainy is dead! in Synon true,
But he haz left his trade unto the Jew
And English cormorant, who in one hour
Desire both Name and Substance to de^oure,
Then there is no diffrence: both bring like annoy,
Save the one for England is, the other for Troy.
Sleep then in silent slumber, for thy Race,
In right of their succ^ssion take thy place.
Upon Argus.
Argus with his hundred eyes,
Eie-lesse in this Coffin lies;
While Worms keep their Sessions there,
Where once Lamps of eyesight were.
Another.
Earth feeds on me, that once fed me,
Court begot me, Country bred me;
Thus my doat^ preuents my yo^th,
Bastard ^lippes have slowest growth.
Upon Gold a dissolute Hac^ster.
Gold, thou art a knave; and drainst thy golden showr^,
Not from the lap of Danae, but thy whore;
Leave thy base Panders trade, make speed, revolt
From so deformed a standard; who would be boult
To his wifes lewdness, or express his shame,
By vshering the ruin of his name
For money? cease, cease to be impudent,
Transplant thy self to some pure element
More wholesome and less shameful; live enrold,
And have thy Name in characters of Gold,
That whosoever passes may this Impresse read:
Thy age did end in Gold, begun in lead.
Upon a Quackesaluer Doctors grave in Venice, by Transcription we read this
Inscription as follows.
Here lies a pound of Rheu-barbe (as't does seem)
To purge the worms of Choler, Rheum and Fleame:
A Dapper Doctor (ill may Fate befall)
To take from us Sir Jerome Vrinall;
Yet this our comfort is; though he be dead,
Haz left another sauce-fleam'd knave in's stead*
"That can call back from death a breathless corse,
"And cure his grief as he does cure a horse
Farewell Sir Jerome thou with horse began,
And Don begins with Horse, and ends with Man.
Upon Croesus and Irus.
Tw^xt Croesus and Irus difference I know none,
Save Irus haz no ^ombe, Croe^us h^z one.
Nor s^ills it much what shrowdi^g sheet they wore,
"For I nere heard that worms the shroud forbore:
Because the pomp or state wherein they laid,
Might by their terror make poor worms afraid.
But as on earth great ones did feed on small,
"So worms do feed on great ones most of all.
Do well then while we live; for being dead,
"Or Fame or Shame our Actions merit meade.
Upon Delia.
Thou Delos-sacred-chaste inhabitant,
For of thy followers Albion haz but scant;
Plant (pray thee here) some house religiously,
Where we may reverence spotless Chastiti^:
For since thy ship did from this Island lance,
"Best gifts we had were fire In adagium habentur pyrobalae Galliae.
balls sent from France.
Cool us this Climate that seems to aspire,
Not by her own, but by a for rain fire,
That now at last the Albionact may know,
The Delian our friend, though th'Fren^h no^ be our foe*
In Mydam.
Miser nemini est bonus, sibi pessimus.
My das would feed on gold (unhappy wretch)
That starues himself, to make himself more rich.
It Is like a painted cover that conueies
Each sparkeling object to our piersing eyes,
Which while the eyes delight in, they grow dim,
Even so it fares (poor miser) still with him.
"He feeds on gold, for there is his hearts delight:
"But that same object takes away his sight,
And makes him du^kie ^ide, clouded and blind,
Though not in body, yet in the eyes of mind:
Then this shall stand fixed on the misers ^oure, His Epitaph.

"He lived rich (to the eye) but truly poor.
N^c copia nec inopia minuitur. Salust.
In Veprem Iuridicum.
Here lies Brier a Lawyer true,
Yet no true Lawyer, give him's due:
His cause of sickness (as I hear)
Was: There Is but four Terms in the year.
But others think (and so they may)
Because he could not long de^ay
His Clients suite, young Had-lands cause,
Which having got into his claws,
He by renewing of their strife,
Thought to keep't for term of life.
But AEacus that god of war,
Pitched me thi^ Lawyer ouer-barre.
So in despair (unhappy elfe)
The Lawyer went and hanged himself.
Upon a Broaker.
Here lies a Broaker of Long-lane,
Who by Pick-hatch and Hounsditch got infinite gain:
The Pirates of Wapping were lik^wise his friends,
Bequeathi^g to him their clothes at their ends.
"O hard-hearted death, more cruel then any,
That would not be moved at the suits of so many!
Upon Tacitus.
Here lies an old Concealer underneath,
Who hardly could conceal himself from death.
"Thus though man ^e disguised in varied forms,
Concealed on earth, yet not concealed from worms,
Thou th^n that passest by this seely wretch,
"This moral may experience thee teach;
There Is naught so hid, which in Earths bosom lies,
"^ut fate (with pierciue eyes) looks through and spies.
Upon one Holofe^nus an unconscionable Usurer.
Within this Grate lies one Holofernus,
His body's in earth: but his soul in Auernus,
"Under his head lies a bag of red gold,
Which both heart and conscience together enfold.
See worm-holes are sprouting, which seems to express,
They loa^h to feed on an Usurers flesh.
Upon one Gnat.
Sleep on poor Gnat, Gnat was thy proper name,
"And thou as properly expressed the same;
No difference 'twixt thee buried and before,
"Save that in death thou sleeps, in life did snore.
Upon an Actor now of late deceased: and upon his Action Tu quoque: and first
upon his Travel.
He whom this mouldered clod of earth does hide,
New come from Sea, made but one face and did.
Upon his Creditors.
His debt^rs now, no fault with him can find,
Since he has paid to nature, all is behind.
Unto his fellow Actors.
What can you crave of your poor fellow more?
"He does but what Tu quoque did before:
Then give him dying, Actions second wreath,
"That second'd him in Action and in death.
Upon Loves champion.
Once did I live and love, not love, but lust,
And in loves turnament performed my Merely resembling that wan^on Amorist in
Horace, Vixi puellis nuper idoneus,
Et militaui non sine gloria.

just;
But now returned I am, whereto all must,
Rendering my life, love, lust and all to dust.
Amor This inscription writ upon the tomb of a memorable Patrician of ^ome and
may be transcribed, unto one of ours no less memorable for eminence of place,
and sincerity of government.
viuat and crescat honor, inuitis fatis resurgat virtus, augeatur pietas, and
foueatur sanctitas: altera harum miserijs subuenimus, altera Reip. saluti
prouidemus.
Corpus vt perijt, creuit virtus. Virtue that used to sit enthroned in state,
"In purple clo^thed, not in purple sin,
Lies here interred, for she is enshrined in him,
Not pruned as vicious men, by common fate,
For virtue is of higher estimate
Then to subscribe to times abridged date;
Nor can the cloud of Envy, honor dim,
For when she seems to die, she does begin
"To raise her glory higher then before,
Immortalized in Heaven, for evermore.
An happy passage, happy pilgrimage,
"Where our Earths conflict wins eternity,
Securest harbor of tranquillity,
To pass from Earth ^o Heaven, where mutually
The Saints of God rejoice, free from the rage
Of sins assaults, or of this fleshly cage,
Wherein we are enthrald: distressed age
Nibil turpius est quam grandis natu Senex, qui nullum aliud argumentum, quo se
probat diu vixisse, quam ^tatem habet. Senec. de Tranq. anim.
That makes us old in naught save misery:
"But pilgrims, if for Christ perplexed be,
Shall live with him in joy perpetually.
Thrice blessed pilgrim, that have spent thy days
In the promoting of thy Countries weal,
Faithful in all, wherein thou wast to deal,
Shoaring upon thy shoulders those decaies,
Which seemed to ruinate the state always;
These blessed actions do deserve due praise,
Triumphant patro^ of the commonweal:
Who (though she should) unthankfully conceal
"Those many virtues which thy mind possessed,
Thou needs not fear: in Heaven they are expressed.
True Register, where all thy acts remain
In perfect colors lively shadowed,
The map of honor, well decyphered,
Where innocence receives immortal gain
For her pure life, polluted with no stain
Of earths all^rements: Earth cannot contain
A vertu^us mind, for it will still aspire
To Syons hill, ascending eue^ higher,
Till she discern the fruits of her pure love,
By leaving earth to live in Courts above.
Thou that art here immured with bars of earth,
"Returning to the place from whence thou came,
Shall by thy death perpetuate thy Name:
"Si^h foreign Coasts have much admired the same;
And though thy foes, yet they extolled thy worth,
"Being twice noble in thy self, thy birth,
Which no succeeding times shall ere raze forth.
"Honor will ever flourish, as it was
Though not engraven in fair leaves of brass.
For what is Brass, Marble, or Iuorie?
What will avail the Monuments of time,
When those they represent seem to d^cline
In the Worlds eye? in whom our memory
Lives, or lies dead: O then live virtuously,
That winnes a Crown here, and eternally.
Worlds respects a blast, a bud, a flower,
Now sprouting fai^e and blasted in an hour;
But who shall flourish in the Sacred Grove,
"Shall ere stand firm, his Scyons cannot move.
Live in this Hearse: Death to the good's no death,
"But a transportance from a Sea of woes
To future ioye^, from shipwreck to repose:
For such as these, God for himself does choose,
Clipping their Temples with a golden wrea^,
Infusing in their souls eternal breath:
Thrice blessed vine that in heavens Vineyard grows,
Whose spreading branches far more beauty shows
Fulg^buut i^sti vt stelle. Quem autem puta^ i^ eorum mentib^ si (...) in ^rum
corp^ribus (...) ill^xisse videri^? ^id. Aug^st. in M^.
Then Sun or Moon, or th'purest Element;
Or any Star within the Firmament.
Such trees we see bring forth the ripest fruit,
As planted are upon the waters side,
Whose liquid streams their neighbor banks divide:
Even so where Springs of divine grace do glide,
The seeds of Virtue take the deepest root,
Where every sprig both bloome and fruit sends out
A Glorious Harvest: which what ere betide,
Is not by storms dismaide, but fructifide.
Such goodly trees are plants of Paradise,
Which bring forth fruit in such varieties.
And such a ^ree art thou, whose noble stem
Did nourish Learning, and Mineruas friends:
Thy flowrie blossom in their growth extends,
And after death some fruitful gleanings sends
From Heaven above to Earths-suruiuing men,
That seeing them, might seek to foll^w them;
But most to such as 'bout the Court attends,
That vert^ous liu^s may weaue their glorious ends.
"For Virtue was as Ariadnes thread
"That led the living, and empales the dead.
What ^issing Serpent with her venomous s^ing
Can hurt thy virtues which be registered
In Heaven above? where thou art canonized
And with the fruits of virtue garnished;
Shining for ever with the supr^ame King
Of glorious Sion: where the Angels sing
Hymns of delight: whose Quires are polished
With Saphires, Emeralds: repl^nished
With springs still flowing full of sweet delight,
Not crossed by shadows of a gloomie night.
"If we be Pilgrims here (as sure we be)
"Why should we love to live, and live to die?
"If Earthen Vessels, why should we rely
"With such assurance on our frailty?
"Since greatest States do perish soon'st we see,
"And rich and poor have one communiti^
"In the eyes of Fate: nor could I ere epsy
"In human state, ought save inconstancy.
"Times follow Times, motion admits n^ rest,
"But in this motion, Hei mihi, quod non est Tempus vt ante fuit. etc. Ovid.
Temp^ra temporibus succedunt pessima primis.
worst succeed the best.
If love be said to live, honor increase,
Or Virtue flourish in despite of Fate,
I need not fear this noble Heroes state,
Though much pursued (as't seems) by public hate,
His Ship is harbored in the Port of peace:
Where times* succeeding joys shall never cease;
Great are they sure which none can explicate,
And great in worth, which none can estimate.
Thus great on Earth, and great in Heaven together,
Virtue with greatness, makes him heir of either.
Let this same Epit^ph I consecrate
Unto thy Noble Hearse, express my love
And duty both: (for both do me behoue;)
"If of my poor endeavors thou approve.
These lines be the obsequies I dedicate,
Which though they come like Seed that is sown to^ late;
Yet some in due compassion they may move,
To plant more cheerful tendrells in thy Grove.
" Honor attend thy presence (famous Hearse)
"Too much obscured by my impolisht verse.
Epitaph.
Mortis vbi stimulus? pro me tulit omnia Christus:
"Consul eram primo tempore, Consul er^.
A funeral Ode.
O thou heauen-aspiring Spirit,
Resting on thy Saviors meri^!
live in peace,
for increase
Blest^ this Island in thy being:
Minds united still agreeing.
Peace possessed thee,
Peace has blessed thee.
Halcyon days be where thou dwell,
"As in Glory thou excellest.
Death by dying,
Life enjoying.
Richer freight was nere obtained,
Then thy Pilgrim-steps have gained.
Blessed pleasure,
happy Treasure.
Thus many distinct joys in one expressed,
Say to thy Soul, Come Soul and take thy rest.
Upon the death of the virtuously affected Sr Thomas Bointon, a Knight so
wel-meriting, as his virtues far above all Titles, enstiled him worthy the
love of his Country.
Sad^ shadie Meaning a shadie tuft of trees adjoining to Hannaby his
Mannor-house.
Grove, how fair so ere thou show,
"Reft art thou of thy Teare-bath'd master now:
Yet grow thou shall; and mai'st in time to come,
With thy shed-leaues shadow thy Masters tomb,
Which is adorned with this Inscription:
"Weep Marble, weep, for loss of Bointon:
Yet he is not lost; for as the Scripture says,
"That is not lost (for certain) which God has.
Cease Lady then with tears your eyes to dim,
"He must not come to You, but you to Him.
Upon that memorable Act achieved by an Auncestour of the Cogniers in the
discomfiture of a Winged-worme or Snake,
Whose approach was no less obuious then mortally dangerous to the distressed
Passenger;

His Monument remains in the body of the church at Antiquae and nobilis
fam^siae de Cogniers domicilium. Camd. in Britann.
Sockburn, where he lies crosse-legged, (which infers his being before the
Conquest) having his Fauchion by his side, his Dog at his feet,

Grasping with the Snake, the Snake with the Dog: the renowned memory of
which Act adds no less glory to the houses Antiquity, then the worthy
Meaning Sir John Cogniers, now deceased, ^ Knight no less generous then
gracious in the eye of his Prince and Country.
Knight who now possesses it, gains hearts by his affability.

C^lle sub exiguo iacuit canis, vnde peremit
Aligerum vermem, quo sibi fama venit.
Quo sibi Famavenit, veniet, semperque manebit,
Sidera dum coeli, gramina tellus habent.
Paraphrastically translated.
Upon a hill his Gray-^ound lay, till that his Master blew
His writhed horn at whose approach the winged Worm he slew:
Whence Fame gave wings to Cogniers name which ever shall be given
So long as grass grows on the earth, or stars appear in heaven.
Upon his Tomb.
Who slew the Worm is now worms meat, yet hope assures me hence,
Who th'worme ore-threwhe after slew, the worm of Conscience.
Epitaphs upon diverse of the Sages of Greece, translated, omitting Thales and
Solon, and beginning with the rest, originally traduced from Laertius.
Upon Chylo.
Thanks to the blushing morn that first begun
To deck the Laureat brow of Chyloes son,
Which He (old man) as ouer-ioy'd to see,
Fell dead through Joy; I wish like death to me.
This Inscription also was engraven on his Tomb.
Here Chylo lies, in Lacedemon bred,
Who amongst the Seven was rightly numbered.
Upon Pittacus, whose Tomb was erected by the City Lesbos wherein he lived;
beautified with this inscription to perpetuate his memory.
Within this Tomb does Lesbos thee enshrine,
Drencht with their tears and consecrate as thi^e.
Upon Bias whom Priene with all solemnity and magnificence, at their own
proper cost interred: Engrauing these verses upon his Tomb, for the
continuance of his Name.
This well-wrought stone does Bias corp^ contain^,
Who was an honor to the Ionian:
Pleading his friends cause (as a faithful friend)
Pausing to take his breath, He breathed his end.
Upon Cleobulus, who was buried in Lyndus, which boundeth on the Sea-cliffe;
the situation whereof is shadowed in this inscription upon his Tomb.
That wise Cleobulus should extinguished b^,
Lyndus laments en^iron'd with the Sea;
So as two S^as ne^re Lyndus (...),
"A Leuant Sea, a Sea in Lyndus eyes.
Upon Periander of Corinth was this Epitaph ensuing found to be engraven, which
through the injury of time, and want of Art in the impressure* was so defaced,
as by the testimony of Laertius it could scarce be reduced to Sense: yet now
according to the Original faithfully translated, including a Christian
resolution in a Pagans dissolution* reposing a more true happiness in his end
then in his Birth, his exit or passage, then his intrat to this Theater or
transitory Pilgrimage: making his diem fatalem, his diem natalem, the day of
his death the day of his birth; where Man by an imputative goodness, deduced
from God not inherent in himself, may in his death be rather said to be
translated then departed.
Corinth both wise and rich in treasures store,
Keeps Perianders Body in her shore.
Continued by Laertius by way of an Epigram,
Grieve not that Thou should not obtain thy wish,
But joy in that the Gods have given thee this,
For Thou by death have past those sorrows now,
Which many one would do, but cannot do.
Upon the much lamented death of the truly honorable (eminent pattern of
unblemished Justice) Sir Augustine Nicholls one of our Judges of the Northern
Circuit, who died at Kendall the third day of August. Anno 1616.
Sic Nicholaus obit, potius Nicodemus, and astra nunc Astraea petit, quae
mori^ndo tenet.
Nicholls is dead, or Nicodemus rather,
The Widd^ws cheerer and the Orphans father;
Dead! why it cannot ^e Justice should die,
For she has will and power enough to fly
Above the reach of Death. It*s true, yet Death
Ha^h reft this Iustice-patron of his breath:
Of Breath? No matter, Breath is but a wind
That vades, but cannot preindice the Mind
Where Justice sits as Regent: wherefore then
Since Justice lives, should she be mon'd by men
As if deceast? I Will tell you, Here is one,
Or was one rather, for he now is gone,
Who seeing the end of Iustice-circuit nie,
Embracing Death did i^ his Circuit die;
No mar^ell then if men do Justice moan,
When They do find her mansion under stone:
And hard it is to find Her whom They seek,
As ^' hear the stone that couers her to speak.
"This then shall be her Dirge, her dying Song,
"Shepleads in heaven* on earth she has lost her tongue.
Terras Astraea reliquit. Another Dialogue* wise: Eubaeus and Tymaeus.
Eubaeus. Silence, awake not Justice.


Tymaeus. Who can keep the eyes of Justice closed?


Eubaeus. Death and Sleep.


Tymaeus. Death cannot do it.


Eubaeus. Cannot! pray thee see What Death has done then.


Tymaeus. "Less! how mortally lies Justice wounded?


Eubaeus. Wounded! no, she is dead.


Tymaeus. Dead!


Eubaeus. Yes; see tongue, pulse, arm, eye, heart, hand head all motionless^;
come nearer:


Tymaeus. I Am too near.


Eubaeus Do weep?


Tymaeus. I offer to her Shrine a tear.


Eubaeus. Thou art too childish.


Tymaeus. No, if I could more, I would express it.


Eubaeus. Why, did nere know before Justice lie speechl^sse?


Tymaeus. Yes, but nere did know despair of her recovery till now.


Eubaeus. No, the have h^ard that saying (...) grown common.


Tymaeus. What might it b^?


Eubae. That Iustice's like a Woman;


Tymae. In what respect?


Eubae. In this it may be^'ed

When she lies speechles, she is nearly dead.


Tymae. Most true in both


Eubae. It is, but do not weep;

Let Us vanish hence, and suffer Justice sleep.


An Epitaph reduced to the form * Epitaphium in Dialogi form^ compositum.
of a Dialogue; consisting of two Persons and two Parts, representing in the
Persons, Affection and Instruction; in the Parts Passion and Consolation:
prepared at first for the memory of his neuer-sufficiently remembered Father by
the Author, emphatically shadowed under the name of Philopater.
The Persons names are Philopater and Philogenes. Philop. Sleeps my dear
Father?


Philoge. Yes, my Son I sleep:


Philop. Wh^, then I wronged your quiet rest to weep; Since Christians should
not any difference make Twixt Death and Sleep;


Philoge. It Is true, for ^th awake,
Both lie them down* both rise, bot^ bedding have,
The living have their couch, the dead their grave;
For as our Death by Sleep is shadowed,
So by our Bed our Grave is measured.

Philop. O pardon then my tears.


Philoge. My Son I do,
These tears thou sheds do thy aff^ctio^ show,
And bear record in He^uen;

Philop. Where you are blessed:


Philoge. Indeed I am.


Philop. Heavens grant my Soul like rest.


A Divine composition, styled The Pilgrims Petition.
Keep me (O Lord) o daigne my Soul to keep,
Thou art her Shepherd, she the wandering Sheep:
Thou art the living life, the Laborers way;
The Pilgrims staff, Faiths Anchor, Iosuahs day:
Yea Iosuahs Day Star, who (so if thou please)
Can make the Sun go back without degrees*
The Sinners Cymball.
I cried unto the Lord, he healed me,
I sick to death, he sh^w'd me remed^e;
I hunger-staru'd, he gave me Angels food,
I all athirst, he quenched it with his blood.
In obitum De Ambleside.
Thomae Brathwaite optimae spei, indolis generosissimae, vitae probatissimae,
fidei integerrimae, omni ex part parati peri* tique R. B.
Memoriae eius studiosissimus lugubria ista Poemata grati animi pignora diu
meditata and iam sero sed serio in publicam lucem prolata (Dialogi more)
ccmposuit.

Philaretus and Euthymius. Philaret. Quo redis?


Euthym. In gremium matris:


Philaret. Quos quaeris?


Euthym. Amicos.


Philaret. His moriendo ^ares:


Euthym. His moriendo fruor.


Philar. Tunc tibi mors lucrum:


Euthym. M^hi lux, via, vita, leuamen.


Philar. Tunc non amissus;


Euthy. M^ssus at ante meos.


In Anagramma quod sibi ipsi composuit and Annulo inscripsit.
Brathwaite Vita vt herba.
Vita vt Herba tuum est Anagramma, tuaque sub vrna
Hoc videam, br^uis est vita, sed herba leuis,
Annulus hoc tenuit, namque Annulus arctus vt annus,
Quo (velut afflatu) fata futura refers.
Upon the late decease of his much lamented friend and kinsman, Alle^
Nicholson, a zealous and industrious member both in Church and Commonweal.
Hauxide laments thy Death, Grasmyre not so,
Wishing I hou had b^ene dead (...) ago;
For then her market had not so be^ke done,
But had suru^u'd ^hy Age in time ^o come:
And well may Hauxide grieve at thy Departure,
"Since She received from thee her ancient charter,
Which Grasmyre su^s (since Thou art turned to
To bring about and now ha^h brought to p^sse. (grass)
Thus much for th^e: nor would I have thee know it,
For thy pure zeal could nere e^dure a Poet;
Yet for the Love I bore thee, and that Blood
Which twixt us both by Nati^e course has flowed*
"This will I say, and may; for sure I am
"The North nere bred sincerer P^rer man.
In obitum generosissimi viri L. P. genio quam ingenio minus faelici,
Franciscus Ridgeway eius memoriae studiosissimus hosce th^eneticos modos
composuit.
Flebo, cur? amisi memorandi pignus amici,
Falleris, amitti morte pe^ente nequit;
Praemitti fate^r, Quis enim non fata capesset,
Discimur exemplo, sic oriendo mori.
At dol^t exemplis tua fata venisse sub illis,
Q^is si tu perias, fama perennis erit.
Quid dixi an peries? peries sane corpore, quid si
Hac species periat, men's speciosa manet?
Altera pars terram repetat, pars altera coelum,
Nec mutas mores caela petendo tuos.
At vale, ^am faciem nequeo discernere gratam
Qua mihi semper erit gratia sed arcta nimis,
Arcta nimis sed amaena satis, dum fider a vultum
Splendida praestantem continuere tuum.
Sie perijt quod terra parit, quod vertic^ coeli
Profluit, in coelum tendat and alta petat.
Aliud,
Hic fitus est Satyru^ qui stupra latere potentum
Impatiens, patiens limina mortis adit.
Englished,
Here lies a Satyr now reduced to dust,
Who scourged d^sertlesse honor, great men's lust,
These taxt He roundly, and had vowed to do it
More boldly yet, if He had lived unto it.
A Funeral Poem upon the death of the hopeful young Gentleman Mast. Will.
Horsey, who deceased the 24. of April, Ann. Dom. 1615.
"Plants that transplanted are, have (...) grouth,
Yet fares it othe^ise with this blessed youth,
For he transplanted to another Sphere,
Perfects that tender grouth which he had here,
Tender indeed; yet me thinks there appears
Age in his hours, though youth was in his years,
For by experience, of this sur^ I am,
" Never came child more near unto a Man.
Well may we then excuse his mothers moan,
To lose her Son and that her only One,
Whose hope gave life unto her house and her,
"(If mothers err in this they lightly err)
For native love must ^eeds enforce a tear
To see them laid on Bear whom they did bear:
To see their Birth turned Earth, their very womb^
Which brought them forth converted to a Tomb;
Yet this should make his mother change her song,
To see her hope translat'd above hope so young,
To see her only and now happy Son,
To have his Pilgrime-taske so quickly done;
But she has lost him; no, he is not lost,
"For where He seems to lose He gains most:
And though He have not Her, He has another,
" For now the Church triumphant is his Mother
Feeding his infant-glory with her pap,
Dandling him sweetly in her heavenly lap,
For this is confirmed by the sacred word,
" He cannot die that dies in the Lord.
Cease then thou tender Mother, cease to w^epe,
Thy Sonne's not dead, but only fallen asleep;
Which sleep dissolved, his corpse shall be united
Unto his soul amongst the Saints delig^ted.
"Peace happy Soul crown thy eternal dai^s
"With wreath of glory to thy Makers praise,
" That as thou lived a Mirror to thy Age,
" So thou may shine in Sions heritage.
His Epitaph.
Here interred in this Tomb^, * Orimur and Morimur.

Young, yet virtues hop^full Bloome,
Fathers Boy,
Mothers joy
Shrined is; yet from this shrine,
There Is a substance, that is divine,
Which no grave
Can receive:
Making claim to Heavens pure clime.
The Author upon his selected and ever to be remembered E. C. Parragon for
beauty and virtue: who died the 5. of December. Ann. Dom. 1615.
Take mother Earth thy virgin-daughter heer^,
Born^ on her Bear ere she was borne to b^are;
Take her, for of her wonders may be said*
"Heer^ one and (...) lies who di'd^ a Maid.
Upon the much lamented Death of the virtuous virgin A. T. in Scarborough,
lately deceased, and of her sorrowful Parents incessantly moned.
Dead; say no more she is dead, keep in that word,
It will go near to drown her teare-swolne Foord:
Why, He must know it; true* yet such as these
(If grieves) should be imparted by degrees;
How must they be imparted? By her Tomb;
It cannot speak; Such grieves are seldom dumb.
Upon her Tomb.
Weep, weep Rosemarie sprig and show remor^e,
Thou should have decked her bride For near the time appointed for her Bridal,
was the day of her Burial, making way no doubt by her earthly Funeral to a
heavenly Nuptial.
now decks her corse
Upon the Tomb of..... lately erected.
..... Perhaps thou may have Shebnaes doom,
To have thy corpse divided from thy Tomb,
And have name of that crest thou gave thy Neighbor,
To close thy corpse in Earth, and save this labor.
How fond then thou, to build so costly Shrine,
Neither (perchance) for * thee nor none of thine?
Yet if thou want thy Tomb, thou shall not miss
To have thy Epitaph, and this it is:
....... Is Dead: The cause if you would know,
His winde-pipe burst, and he no more could blow. Martial shadows under the
title of Hermu^*
Sic tibi nec tumulum conde nec Herme tuis.


Upon a late deceased Pinch-gut.
Macer did rich they say, but it is not so,
For he did poor, and was indebted too:
How sh^ld that be? Observe me, and I Will tell ye
He did indeb^ed b^th to back and belly:
For all he scrap't from his Atturnies Fees,
Served but to starve his Maw with bread and cheese;
So as'mongst those we rightly may him call,
Whose life spent less then did his Funeral:
For all his life, his House scarce eat one Beast,
Yet Dead, his Son makes up the Churles Feast.
This the Author wrote upon an excellent Bowler and his Friend, aptly
resembling Man's life to a game at Bowls.
The World is the Alley wh^re we play,
The Bowls we play with, Creatures that we use;
The Rubs the Passions of our minds the way
Needs no Ground-giuer, there is but one to choose
The way of all Flesh: Seauen's our Game we say,
( For Seven year is liues-lease that limits us)
The Block our end, which when it draw^th on,
We po^ke our Bowls, and so our Game is done.
Upon a singular Irishman.
By him lies here, I find from whence we came,
Where we must go, how lif^'s an Irish game,
This day in health and wealth, next poor and sick,
"For Irish games have still an Iri^h trick.
Upon the death of one Cooks wife, an Inscription allusiue to her name.
Death's the cook pro^ideth meat,
For the crawling worms to eat;
Why should thou then Cool e repine
Death should dress that wife of thine?
All must die, yea time will be*
Thou will think he pleasur'd thee;
For no question, being told,
She was s^plesse, (...), old,
He thought fit she'sd live no longer,
That thou might choose out a younger.
This then on her Age thy youth
May be writ as grounded truth,
"Here she lies, long may she li^,
"Ere she d. de, was wished to die.
This the Author presently composed upon this occasion; being with sundry
Gentlemen at Waltham exceeding merrily disposed, one Cook a neighbor of the
Hoasts where he lay, came suddenly in, pitteously lamenting the death of his
wife, being newly departed: every one labored to allay his sorrow; but by how
much more instant were their comforts, by so much more violent were his
Passions: at last the Author percei^ing by his Host that he expressed a
dissembling sorrow, being impatient of her life, and therefore (by all
probability) inwardly content with her death, being an old decrepite woman,
and He in the Prime of his age, in stead of all unnecessary comforts, applied
this sovereign Discourse as a salve to his grief, without further
premeditation.

-- coenae fercula nostrae
Mallem conu^, quam placuisse cocis.
Englished:
As in my choice of meat, so in my Book,
I Would rather please my guests, then please my Cook.
In Actorem Mimicum cui vix parem c^rnimus superstitem;
Quaecunque orta sunt occidunt. Salust.
Ver vireat quod te peperit (viridissima proles)
Quaeque tegit cineres, ipsa virescat humus.
Transis ab exiguis n^quam periture theatris
Vt repetas sacri pulchra Theatra Iouis.
In vultum incredibili lepore respersum.
O facies mutata nimis; spectacula praebes
Vermibus, ingenuis saepe probata viris.
Quo muta^a tuae magis est Pr^stantia form^,
Integra nunc r^manet quae peritura fuit.
Vita vt mimus.
Exit vt ex^git soboles lepidissima partem,
Praemia fert hominum, sed meliora Deum.
Upon a Traveler, who taking Inn in a village at the sign of the Boore was
lamentably murdered by his Host.
The brutish-brisled Bore that was my Sign,
Where th'Hoast (Bore-like) shed this poor blood of mine.
Ibidem.
An crudelis Aper magis, an crudelior Hospes,
Nescio; saeuus Aper, saeuus and Hospes erat.
At sae^s magis Hospes erat, nam conuenit vrsis
Inter se saeuis, non Hospes ab Hospite tutus.
Englished.
Whether the Bore or Host more cruel be,
Cruel the Bor^, ^he Host as fierce as He,
I know not: but the Hoast's the cruellest:
"Bears do agree, while the Host betraies his Guest:
Upon certain Bones found of late buried in the ground, supposed to be some
murder committed by the Host, in whose yard these Bones were found; but as yet
only suspicion is grounded, no apparancie of Fact discovered.
Brewed be thy hands in blood, although Thou be
Free to the world, thy Conscience is not free;
For these dry Bones lie mouldred now in Dust,
Will manifest thy guilt, for God is just.
Upon murder.
Murder may seem to sleep, but cannot sleep,
For Fear and Horror do her eie-lids keep.
Another.
Murder sometime to slumber will betake her,
Till fury, wrath, and vengeance do awake her.
Upon a Gentlewoman who died in Childbirth.
One, and my only one lies buried here,
Who in the Birth she bore, was borne on Beer;
To him ask^s more, this for excuse appears*
"Joy can find words, b^t words are drowned in tears.
Upon an Infant (his fathers first borne) was this written:
By this avouch I may, right sure I am,
That meagre Death's an unjust Tithingman,
This was my First, not Tenth, and we do say,
"With Tenth, not First we use our Tithe to pay.
Upon one Gray.
Gray was my name, gray were my hairs of hue,
And Gray to grave returned, pays Natures due.
Upon one Grau^.
Grave I was, where now you see,
Grave is all is granted ^e:
Yet with me my name I have,
Since in grave does lodge a Grave.
Another.
Jesus Christ my soul he save,
Ere my Met-wand tuch my grave.
Upon one Winds toward the North-borders is this written;
Wind ^'se can'd an now I find,
A^ man's life is but a wind;
Whilke an I had wind at will,
I had yet been living still:
But I's, well, though wind be ga^,
Siker I's wind feel I name.
Another.
Miseremini mei my Friends all,
For now the World has informed me to fall;
I must no lon^er endure, Pray for my Soul,
For the World is transi^ory and terrestrial.
Hoc Epitaphium ^re insculptum vidimus cathedrali templo Ebo^acensi,
pulcherrimo more (in aerea quadam lamina) consitum, sed ^rbarie temporis magis
excusanda, aut ineptia Auto^is non satis (...), parum condite dispositum in
Orientali fa^ prope me^iam partem Are^ erigitur.

Upon old Mammon.
Here lies experienced Providence, whose care
Has well enriched himself, made others bare;
And yet when Nature did deny Him breath,
Worms had their Legacy by means of Death:
Pray for his Soul, who prayed on many a Soul,
*And houle amain when as the Bell does toule:
The reason is, if you do ask me why,
" Howling should supply mourning when Dogs die.
Animae m^ae propitietur Deus.
On a Cobbler at Cambridge.
M^ not much though death in doubt did stand,
H^ found ^im always on the mending hand;
Ye^ (...) and by change of weather,
Does ripped his Soul quite from the upper le^ther.
Upon an Eminent STATESMAN in this Land, absolute for his general survey in
all knowledge, his approved judgment in all Learning.
Read STATESMAN here thy own mortality,
O meditate of Death before thy death;
Be not tra^sport'd with Honor: for if we
Ere can show virtue, it is while we breath,
Raising our hopes' boue Earths felicity,
To crown our Temples with Fames glorious wreath:
Behold I was, and being was admired,
Elected STATESMAN, and esteemed fit
At all assaies of STATE, to manage it;
So all that Frame which was so much desired,
Ends in this Chest, where STATE retires expired.
In the memory of that famous Professor of Physic* Mr Butler, generally
renowned for his approved practice.
Death might dissolve thy form, but not thy fa^e,
For she has reared on thee such a frame
As shall preserve thy mem'rie, sure I am,
So long as Age shall need Physician;
Cease Critic then for to traduce his worth
Whose Oil though it be spent, his Light's not forth.
"To sundry States our sundry Fates us call,
Some for the Soul, some body few for all:
Yet we in way of Charity should know
" He had receipts for Soul and Body too. * Sic Aesculapius exit, and v^am in
quam omnes redeunt, repet^ Supremam.

On one More.
Here lies More, and no more but h^,
More, and no more, how can that be?
On one Prick.
Cupid and Death they both their arrows nicke,
Cupid shot short, but Death he hit the Prick.
Upon Sir Ignorance.
Here lies the body of Sir Ignorance,
Who lived in a mist, died in atrance;
And may he so long sleep where he is lain,
Till he forget to come to us again.
Upon Gregory Cade.
Sib my wife did promise me
She wo^ld die when I did die,
But no trust's in Her I see,
And you see'^ as well as I:
For my shr^wde was scantly rotten,
Till my Sib had me forgotten.
FINIS.
The Prodigals Glass.
Fly me delights, Content on Earth fare well,
My mind is aiming at an higher Sphere,
Though I on Earth seem to remain and dwell,
My perfect rest cannot b^ seated here,
Since no delight there is* not matched with fear^.
But when my mansion is where I would ^e,
No fear on Earth can after trouble me.
This life what is it but a living death?
And in that death no rest unto the mind
Can worldlings have. Fly hence my soul and breath
In that eternal Kingdom that is assigned
For faithful Pilgrims: whose content's be^ind,
After Earths loss, to reap a treble gain^
Amongst those blessed Saints that evermore remain.
O that my Glass were run, that I might go^
From this low Center, and transported be
From Earths allur^ments (instances of woe)
To dwell with my Redeemer cheerefullie,
"O then should I forget my misery,
By present joys enjoyed, so much the more
In that I lived, that seemed to die before.
W^o would desire to live, when he may die
And live for ever? Death advantage is
Unto the good: O wherefore then should I
Depr^e my hopes of that succeeding bliss
Which for the good in Heaven reserved is,
For a small pleasure which in time is spent,
And bri^gs no other fruits save this, Repent?
Bitter's that fruit that yields no other gain,
Cursed that gain which has no better end,
Vnh^ppy ^d, that is shut up in pain,
Deserved pain, that ^o it selfe's a friend,
Unworthy name of friend, that does attend
Thy favorite with horror and despair;
"For where tho^ art, despair is ever there.
Read, and amidst thy reading shed a tear,
And with thy tears mix odes of discontent,
As one unwilling to live longer here
In Bethauen of sin, in Kedars Tent
Where precious time is so securely spent,
"As being old, this axiom still appears
We Are young in hours, though we be old in years. * Tempora horis, non Annis
metimur, etc. Vid. Sen. in Epist.

Both ^oung and old: young in the use of time,
Yet old in time: Gray hairs have greener thoughts*
And where Professors should be most divine,
"Their goodly shows (in fine) descend to naught,
Where sancti^ie is often sold and bought.
"O these do ill: these gain themselves a curse,
By their own means, but by N^ ^is pec^ qui ^xemplo peccat.
example worse.
Sa^urne's ascended, and since his ascent
The Golden age trans^ormed is to lead,
And all the World's of one Element;
"For where man was created with his head
Erected, now he bends it, as one dead
Toward the Coe^m respuit, vt respiciat ter^, Amat igitur vt terram, am^ttet
Cae^.
ground* the reason may appear,
For where our heart is, ^yes be lodged there.
Those vain and brainsick humors of ^ur age,
Should be both whipped and stripped: but who dare call
A Gallants humor idle? public stage
May chance to breakea jest, and that is all;
For if in Press some tarter pamphlet fall
Of Whipped and Stripped abuses, ere't begin
To show it self, it must be Si grauius vrat, aequu^ est quod silea^. Senec.
Latere, h^c vna sal^. ibid.
called in.
What Theater was ere erect'd in Rome,
With more ambitious state or emi^ence,
Then the whole Theaters we have of some,
Where there is naught planted save sins residence,
The Flagge of pride blazing the excellence
Of (...) ^anitie? pit^ie to hear^
Where the light is most, most darkness should be there*
But to thy self retire: there thou ^halt find
Causes of new affliction: for what part
Within the glorious mansion of thy mind,
Not subject to the vanities of Art,
Less^ning the substance, to prefer the rind
Before the better p^rt, making the first
In order and degr^e, in honor worst? ^ Corpus ve Cor^icem, mentem vt
^edullam: corticem tamen medullae praeposuimus, etc*

The Body as the rind. soul a^ the pith,
"Yet is the body pris'd above the mind:
The soul, the instrument by which we breath,
The choicest part, and portion most (...):
The Body from beginning was assign'de,
To serve the Soul; yet she is esteemed of least,
And th'Body made to serve, accounted best. ^ Primo enim creabatur, vt placide
seruiat and ancilletur. Lipsi^s.

Come then poor soul, here is no place for thee,
No spring to bath the wearied senses in.
Here is no strain of mirth or melody,
While tho^ art planted in this vale of sin;
But when to Veniet tanquam re^ gloriosus e palatio, tanquam spon^us speciosus
e thalamo: August.
ra^gne, thou shall but once begin,
With thy Redeemer, ioies shall have increase,
And crown thy temples with ^ternall peace.
A happy peace, surpassing misers far,
That tumble in their bed, and take no rest,
For such men in affliction ever are,
And when they seem to have most, then have they least,
With minds perplexed horror still oppressed;
For this to Miserae anu^ and Euclyones, e q^orum oculis millae lachrimas
facilius (...), quam vnum e Bulga nummum.
Rich-men for a curs^ is sent,
Much they enjoy, but little with content.
Rivers that flow with their diurnall course,
And keep their wonted passage, sooner shall
Surcease their bending channel, and enforce
Their streamli^gs upward, then the miser call
For one good meal into his benchlesse hall,
O no, it is true that is spoken of this elfe,
He Is ill to others, Miser nemini ^st bo^us, sibi pessimus.
worst unto himself.
Ascend above the Miser, and express^
His Nature, thou wast once a Prodigal,
Drinking the water of fo^getfulnesse,
"And rising high to give thy self a fall
With f^r more danger: thou shall see him call
For his old-rioters, but there is not one
Will keep him Sic spectanda fides.
company: his state being gone.
Those pompous feasts which he frequ^nt'd are done,
And those Cumrades which promised him their stat^
And means: like Summer-Swallowes now be gon^,
"Leaving him pensiu^ and disconsola^e,
W^shing his crimes with tears, but they are too late:
"He ends his state in sorrow, shame and sin,
And bids us take * example now of him. Tunc tua res agitur, etc.

Ambitious mind^ which fly with Icarus,
"And rule the Sun wi^h hare-braind Phaeton,
May mirrors be and pr^sidents to us
To choose the object which we look upon,
And to be wary, lest being we^ bego^,
Experience come too late, having once proved
"Our fall derived from that which we most loved. ^ Plato ca^leth Ambi^ion
(...), a thing falling out contrary to ^xpectation*

Go to the Tombs of those aspiri^g men,
The Ambitious Caesar, Ninus, Affricane,
And there in due regard, contemplate them,
Whether they now (by their renown and fame,
Redeem their lives from death, or by the Name
"Of Quo maio^es (...) in ^otentia and Gloria, co ma^or morti^ est de illls
^depta victoria.
greatness make them live in spite of fate:
"Less! ^hey are dead, not least admired at.
Fame-Blaz^d Sylla who in Tyranny
Planted a kingdom, and to make his power
More glorious and redoubted, seemed to be
A Prince of Princes, for with him the flower
Of Rome, as Pompey the great, and many more
Were his attendants: yet see Vd. vit. Sy^il. in Plutar.
Syllas reign,
Ambition came from Earth and goes again.
Not like that golden branch or sprig of life
Which Maro does e^presse, that b^ing shr^d,
Sent forth another fair and fruitful griffe,
As a ^ong Scyon in the fathers stead,
For Sylla being cropped, nere did succeed
Any from him which might reui^e his Name
"By lineall V^ tyra^nide^ vsurpaba^ (...), no^ habeb^t, qu^ ei succedat (...),
ibi.
(...) from his fame.
Ambitio^s and Elated minds that fly
Above the firm land of a s^tled room,
And plant themselves in the Eaglects aerie
Ofttimes get for themselves a meaner Tomb
Then those which (with more wary eyes) look down
Unto their footing, for they are sure to find
A state (though mean) well pleasing to their mind. q Intra (...) vit ^m
coercere lic^t, tranquill^ enim est ea vita, quae humili cursu progreditur, and
sup^a se, ^ltius non extenditur.

Tombs though not spacious, nor so specious trimmed,
"As the fair Sepulcher of Mausolus,
Nor Batias Tomb (whose Statue was so limm'd,
That (save the Picture of old Priamus)
Near was proportion made so curious:
Yet what a^ile these? Mon^ments adorns,
Yet cannot keep^ their Et redit a^ nihi^um quod fuit ant^ nihil: alibi,
Recipit populos vrn^ ci^atos. Senc^.
corpse interred from worms.
What then of potent Princes may remain^
Save this? they onc^ lived and were conquerours;
But now by Fates impartial scepter sl^ine:
What difference twixt them, and the obscurest powers
Of their inferior subjects? difference is in hours Parcae a non par^endo.
Qui diu fuit non diu fortas^e vixit: Vixi^ qu^ aliquid memo^ia dig^um egit.
,
How spent? how passed? if ill, I dare say,
Their ^ubiects far more blessed are then they.
O the^ you raised (...) ventis agitatur ing^ns
Pinus, and ^lsae grau^ore casu
decidunt Tu^es, (...), summo^ -- ^ulmina monte^.
And the Eng^ish (...) man be here used.
The Gilloflower i^ not the wo^se because cropped near the g^ound.

Cedars that transcend
The highest Spires of mount Olympus top,
So plant, that you your Branches may extend,
Which neither hail, nor ^empest ^re shall crop,
Let not the root be burden*d by the top;
But ever nourish such in Arms ^f peace,
That spring but low, yet promise much increase.
Alas! how well that ancient Sage of Greece,
((...) to Athens) now may turn^ to us,
And tell poor Albion, Virtue does decrease;
"^or what was well, 's perverted to abuse;
And though a native li^ er^ie of choice
Be planted in us: Such is Adams Vid^o mellora proboque, (...) ^quer. Med. in
Ovid. Me^am.
Curse,
We see b^th good and bad, yet choose the worse.
O Athens (s^id that At the first the Athenians were (...), wise: then they
^ecame (...) lovers of wisdom; after (...), acure (...); (...) lastly, (...),
s^btile (...). Vide Lacr^. ^n vit^ Phil.
Sag^) once wast thou free,
And wast sincerely wise* but tho^ have left
Thy perfect Wisdom for Philosophy,
(The love of Wisdom) and since that* bereft
Of Wisdoms love, and fal^e to Rhetoric;
N^r do thou lea^e there, but that thou might err
O^ degree further, play'st mere Sophister.
Albion that have the name of purity,
Albion that is blessed by peac^full government,
Albion that is freed from foreign enmity,
Albion that is placed in the (...) Britannia appellatur (ab Hippolit^) ob varias
deli^ias, and totius Vbertatis affluentiam: hinc infer^ur Brit. maxim esse
omni^m fer^ilem, quia amaenissimis insulis comp^ratur, etc. ibid.
fruitfull'st continent,
Albion that is temperate in each Element:
Weigh thy self Albion in an equal poize,
And thank thy God for that which thou enioies.
But now thou wandrest silly Prodigal,
Farther from wit, then thou before from grace:
Wha^ am I? or whence came I? what is this all?
This little* World? this Body? but a case
To shroud thy soul in? what is thy pilgrims rac^
But short and brittle? where there is many P^lopis vt repetas tanti monumenta
laboris:
Pelope sic curres, Hippodamenque tenes.
Annexed,

Hippodome tua, virtus erit, Spes currus, habenae
Imperium dubij moris, amoris ^runt.

run:
Never till then, their race is fully done.
Run Pilgrim run, for thou art far behind,
Thy race but short, and many stays there be
Which will oppose themselves to tempt thy mind*
Inducing it with pleasures vanity,
"Vain pleasure reanes thee of felicity.
Let not fair golden Apple force thy stay,
"For Apples were the Scienti* boni and mali, mala, August: * Venenatum pomum:
-- Declinat (...) ^umque ^qlubil*e ^ollit* Atalant^.

cause of man's decay.
What though the world mo^e thee to forsake
Those preciou^ virtues that will lead thee straight
Unto that glorious consort, which partake
The Eternal beauty and the immortal light,
Of S^ons kingdom? Put this foe to flight,
"For none must crowned in that kingdom be Qui pugnat, pugnat vt vincat, nec
qui ^ardior erat praelio, dignus habebitur ^anto praemio
,
But such as got on Earth the victory.
Great Constantine (for Great he was i^ name
And glory) had no other monument,
Or hopeful sign to propagate his fame
Then the Cross of Christ, which from the air Constantij imp^ratoris and
Helenae filius: e nube prodi^um est, ei appa^ere cruc^m: in quam impressum est:
(...) in hoc signo vinces.
was sent,
"Encircled with a (...) Element:
Wher^on engraven wa^ (thou warlike Son)
Take this, for in this thou shall overcome.
What sign but this apt to discomfit sin?
What signal better for sins overthrow?
What greater warrant then the sign of him
That was my Coronat in nobis done su^, non bo^ nostr^, muner^ sua. non mer^a
nostr^: August.
Savior? and his love did show,
In that for me his life he did bestow.
Thrice-happy soldier then, that spends thy time
"Under so good a guide, so blessed a sign.
Here shall the Prodigal himself repose,
And by this sign confo^nd his mortal foes.
FINIS.
A compendious Discourse annexed by the Author, touching Moderate Weeping,
behouefull for every tenderly-affected Reader, who many times offends in the
extremity of this Passion; using such Immoderation, as if Death were no
Passage but a Parting; this life no Pilgrimage, but a dwelling, and our bodies
of no frail substance, but everlasting.
Quid perdis t^mpora luctu? Lucan. WHen the Roman Princes, in their Conquests
and public Triumphs were with acclamations re^eiued, and by the general
applause of the people extolled, there stood always one behind them in their
Esseds or triumphant Chariots, to pu^l them by the sleeue, with Memento te esse
hominem. The like we read of Philip, Caesar, and that (and in that only
memorable) of Agathocles, commanding his Statue to be made with the head and
body of Brass, but the feet of Earth, implying on what infirm ground this
specious Littleworld (the beautcous Epitome of the grea^er world) subsisted.
True it is, that we are to glory in nothing, having of our selves nothing but
Sin, which should rather occasion our Shame then our Glory. And this it was
which moved that devout Father to call our life, A perpetual and continual
Repentance, habitually if not actually, having such evident Arguments of our
Shame, such spiritual eye-sores of sin annoying us hourly. Therefore did
Cicero term it, a Punishment, Seneca a Bondage, Maro a Dream, Pindarus the
shadow of a Dream, Plato a Game at Chesse, Canius a medley of Cares, Mimus an
Interlude of Fears, and Zen^ a Deceiving hope of Years. Thus were the
Ethnickes conceited of this life, discoursing more divinely then our
imagination can extend, considering the palpable darkness of that Time
wherein they lived. Yea if we should but survey the general Opinions of all
the Pagan Philosophers, Poets, and Orators, we might find many Christian-like
persuasions for our Lives indifferency, singular observations to caution us of
our Mortality, with impregnable Arguments of this life's infelicitie. Yea, that
I may use the words of Cicero, giving his opinion of the Tragedies of
Euripides, As many Verses, so many Testimonies be there, moving a Moral by way
of Christian Instruction. Where for indifferency (because nothing can be
taught without examples being ocular and personal, and therefore more
perswasiue then Precepts) we shall see a Theodorus, Leena, Hiero, Phocion,
Vtican, Merula, Scapula, Petreius and Catulus, like generous and true-bred
Romans express their contempt of life by their free and forward acceptance of
Death. Nor were women of a less resolute temper, though more soft and delicate
by nature; for we shall find them likewise well read in Platoes Ph^do, of the
Immortality of the Soul; where Alcesta chearefully embraces death for the
love of her Admet^s, ^damia for her Protesila^s, Paulina for her Seneca, Arria
for her Cecinna, Halcyone for her Ceix, Iulia for her Caesar, Euadna for her
Clorio, Portia for her Cato, Panthia for her Susyus, Artemysia for her
Mausolus: esteeming it a noble death, where the act of death purchases memory
after death. Secondly, for Mortality, we shall read how the eminentest
Princes had the Portraitures of their Progenitors and Ancestors lively
expressed (as moving Resemblances of their own frailty) which they caused to
be curiously engraven in small portable Tables, to represent the intimacie of
their love, and brevity of their life; As for example, that of Mithridates
reserved by Pharnaces his son, as a Mirror of humane mutability, bearing
this tenor: Mithridates that victorious Prince, who had discomfited in diverse
set battles, Lu. Cassius, Oppius Quintus, and Manius Acilius, at last over
come by Sylla, Lucullus, and utterly by Pompey, for all his infinite treasure
in Talauris; those many confederate Princes admired his valor, and the ample
Boundiers of his Kingdom so largely extended; for all this, his body (the
poor remainder of so great glory) was buried at the charge of the Romans,
being sent by Pharnaces in galleys to Pompey. The like of Cyrus, who translated
the Empire of the Medes to the Persians, whose Epitaph so passionately was it
composed) drew tears from Alexanders eyes, reading how A clod of earth did
co^er the Translator of an Empire: and that emphaticall one of the Souldan
Saladine sealing up his grave with a Tandem victus; commanding a little before
his death, that the General of his Army should come unto him; One that had
been his Leader in all the successiue and victorious encounters (wherein he
ever departed Conqueror) during his time, to whom he used these words; Go
(says he) to the great City Damascus, and in stead of a Banner take this
sheet, this shrowde, which thou shall wa^e in the air, and cry: This is all
that the victorious Saladine has left him of all his Conquests. Thirdly, ^for
the infelicitie of this life, diverse Ethnickes have spoken worthily, as Thales,
who affirmed no difference to be at all, betwixt Life and Death; and Crates
reply, who being asked what was the greatest happiness could befall man;
answered, Either not to be borne, or to die soo^e where the entrance to life is
Shriking, the middle Sorrowing, and the end Sighing: and better is it to have
no Being, then to be miserable by Being; confirmed by that sentence of Cneus
Dentatus, I had rather be dead then live as o^e dead (vacancie from affairs
being the grave of a living Soul.) With especial reason may I seem to
approve (which a spiritual man approues in himself) of that divine Oracle;
The hour of our death is better then the hour of our birth: since at the best
we are but here in the state of Grace, and that is only a glory inchoate; but
after in the state of Glory, and that is a grace consummate. It might seem
that the Cusani had some superficial taste of this, in bemoning their
childrens birth, and rejoicing at their death: but the experience of worldly
griefs made them so desi^edly approach their ends; for certain it is, Mori
velle non tantum fortis aut miser aut prudens, sed etiam fastidiosus potest:
where our lives* loving falls to a loathing, and the sacietie of delights
(being external, and therefore far from real) breeds a d^staste.

The consideration of these and many more anxieties which attend man in his
Soiorne of Flesh, has (no question) moved sundry of those divine Fathers to
contemn this life, rejoicing much in the remembrance of their Dissolution: but
more especially, that ardent and unfeigned Love which they bore to their
Redeemer, whose glory that it might be promoted and furthered* death seemed to
them a singular favor, confirming their love by the testimony of their faith:
and such (to illustrate our Discourse by instance) appeared the affec^ion of
blessed Hierome, when he publicly protested; That if his mother should hang
about him, his father lie in his way to stop him, his wife and children weep
about him, he would throw off his mother, neglect his father, contemn the
lamentation of his wife and children, to meet his Savior Christ Jesus.

The like appeared the love of all those glorious and victorious Martyrs,
during the Ten Persecutions, showing evident proof of sanctity in their
lives, of constancy in their deaths; where neither promise of preferment could
allure, nor extremest punishment deter; remaining (to use the words of
Cyprian) as an impregnable rock amiddest all violent assaults; assailed
indeed but not surprised, threatened but not dismayed, besieged but not
discomfited, appearing like stars in the dark night, like green Baies in
the midst of hoarie winter, and like lively fresh fountains in the sandy
Desert. I could amplify this Discourse by instancing the exercise of that
Monastical and Eremeticall life in former time professed, and by an austeritie
(too rigorous for flesh and blood) continued, abiding sequestered not only from
all mundane pleasures, but even enemies to humane society; so as rightly might
Damascene term it, a kind of Martyrdom, being dead as well to men, as to the
world: but I intend to be short, speaking rather by way of admonition then
discourse: to caution such whose Desires seem planted on this globe of
frailty, accounting death the greatest infelicit incident to man, as men
incredulous of future good: These have their treasures on earth, where they
have indiuidually fixed their hearts, for where their treasure is there is
their heart also: Like [ I si^ Asse] idolatrizing their own gainesse, ignorant
(poor makes) how soon they shall b^ stripped of their imaginary glory; but
these are those filij deperditi, senseless of Sin in the Desert of Sin,
little knowing how man's security is the devils opportunity; but crying with
the Horse-leech, More, More, are not to be satissted till their mouth be filled
with gravel; whose speedy Conu^rsion I wish before their Dissolution, lest
Desolation second their Dissolution. Yea may this effect work in them before
the day of forgetfulness receive them; Moriatur Paulus persecutor, Viuat
Apo^tolus and Praedicator; Moriatur Magdalena pe^cans, viuat poenitentiam
agen^; Moriatur Matthaeus Publicanus, viuat fidelis Dei seruus: So shall Death
be a passage to a life subject to no death; so entire consolation shall receive
them, where their sincere conversion reclaimed them, ever applying this as a
cheerful receipt to an afflicted Conscience, (...) est hominis errare, nullius
nisi insipientis perseuerare in errore.

True it is that neither Homers understanding (though he could reduce what
memorable thing soever he had read into a golden verse,) Platoes ^it Aeschynes
art of Oratory, nor Ciceroes tongue shall prevail, when we become (...), a
breathless Corpse: then the hearts sincerity, not the excellency of any outward
faculty shall bring us to the inheritance of glory, which Saint Augustine
compare^ to the Sun: Pascuntur omnes, and non minuitur. Whence it is that Plato
in ^is Timaeus says; If a man lose his eyes, or feet, or hands, or wealth,
we may say of such an one, he loses something; but He who loses his Heart
and Reason, loses all: for in the womb of our Mother the first thing that is
engendered or participates form, is the Heart, and the last which dies, is the
^ame Heart; and the gift which God craves of Man is his heart. But we have too
far digressed, let us now return to those zealous Professors of true
Mortification, those who labored in the Spiritual Uineyard and fainted not,
were persecuted, yet failed not; were put to Death, yet desist^d not from
glorifying their Master in their Death. All which may appear by those pregnant
places of Scripture; I desire to be d ssolued* says Paul, and to be with
Christ, ( Phil. 1. 23. 24.) Neu^rthelesse for me to abide in the flesh were
better for yo; Neither does He desire to be dissolved as weary of suffering
under the Cr^sse of Christ, but ^or the fervent desire he has to see God in
his glory. Again, the faithful cry ever for the approach of Gods Kin^dome,
the reward of immortality, which with assurance in Gods mercies and his Sons
passion they undoubtedly hope to obtain, with vehemence of spirit inuoking and
inuiting their Mediator, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, ( Revel. 22. 20.) Nor
do they ground on a weak Fo^ndation, Knowing how they that die in the Lord
shall rest from their Labor. ( John 5. 24. Re^el. 14. 15.)

O that Man would consider (s^ith a religious Father) what a sinner loses (to
wit) Heaven, what he gets (to wit) Hell; whom he offends, Gods Justice;
what he incurreth his vengeance; for vengeance is his, and he^ will repay it.
Briefly, Magna est ^bis indicta necess^as (says Boaetius) to correct and
rectify our lives, least our own prau^tie deprive us li^e: so by avoiding Sin
man w^e avoid the pun^shment of Death due unto Sin, possessing the reward of
eternal life, summarily comprised in these two; To live in his fear, and die
in his fa^our.

Now (wormeling) let me speak to thee that so much lamentest the loss of thy
friend, as if he were gone from his home to a strange Country; Do Thou
weep that thou have lost him, or that he has left thee here behind him? Too
incredulous thou if thou weep for the first; lost he cannot be, for thy loss
is his advantage: if for the last, prepare thy self so in thy life, that thou
may ^nioy thy Friend aft^r Death; mean time bear with patience thy friends
d^parture, believing that he has purchased rest from his labor. Neither does
this life which moves and acts with all her sensitive operations, prove that
we are alive, but dead, if the Spirit o^ Grace did not quicken us: which
Christ seems to con^irme* saying; Let the dead bury the dead, implying such as
be dead in Sin: for if the vital motions were dead and extinguished in us, it
were impossible we should bury, or do any such offices to the deceased. Hence
may Thou be comforted whosoever thou art, that conceiuest immoderate sorrow in
the Death of a Friend seeing him live worthy thy friendship here, and
translated hence to be joined in the Union and Communion of the Saints
elsewhere. To be short, if he were of approved conversation, his happy
passage may occasion in thee joy rather then grief, being exempted from this
vale of tears, this Surplusage of sorrow, and translated to the Port of rest,
the Harbor of tranquillity, bringing his sheaues with him. If he were evil,
why do thou call him Friend? for no true friendship (says the Ethnicke) can
be amongst naughty men. But suppose him a friend, yet being of a vicious life,
civil society is well rid of him, being so apt of himself to deprave them:
for true is that axi^ as well in Minds Physic as the Bodies: Initium morbiest
aegris Sana miscere: Man's nature being ever prone ( Medaea-like) to have free
^lection of the best, but to follow the worst. Let this then serve as a
Position to limit thy affection: If wor^hy the style of Friend, be sorry not
so much for that Death has taken him, as that thou art left here behind him:
If unworthy, grieve not that thou have left him, but that so much precious time
should be lost by him. But in these extrem^ies there is no receite more
sovereign then recourse to Him, who disposes of us living and dying, ever
meditating how (...), Honor Dei bonum maximum; and to r^commend withal the
whole course of our Actions to his gracious Dispensation that can bring light
out of darkness, and turn our bed of sorrow to the soul solacing repose of
eternal rest. Receive therefore this Resolution which I for some years have
to my self proposed, The Authors resolution.
and by the Almighties help may continue it. I have no friend too dear for my
dear^st friend, nor will I grieve at my friends departure, being ( as my hope
assures me) gone to his Savior; at least if natural affection force me weep,
after a while shall my faith renew my joy: for sorrow may la^t for a night,
butioy comes in the mor^ing.

A restraint we read of amongst the Romans in their Funeral Solemuities, for
immoderate Mourning: so many days being limited, after the end whereof, the
Black habits were left; expressing all other friendly offices in the erection
of their Statues curiously engraven in Marble, Iuory, artificially carved with
many Thracian, Lydian, Ionian, and Paphian works, diversely beautified with
Inscriptions and Impresses to preserve their memory: which seemed a ^ruitlesse
vanity to many of the grauer Consuls, who reposed more trust in the virtues of
the mind (hoping thereby to become more memorable) then in the exterior beauty
of Tombs, which were often times the native Emblemes of them they covered, being
(those Rotten S^pulchers I mean) Ex^rius nitida, interius faetida, Handsome
without* but noisome within; whereas those eminent virtues made their
Possessors truly memorable, having Acts and valiant Exploits insteade of
Statues to recommend them in succeeding times; whence it was that the Poet in
the person of Cato said;

^armor virtus erit, (...) vi^itur ebore Cato. For true Honor as it is
essential to man that merits it, so must it have an internal monument to
preserve it: for these corruptible things are subject to decay, which Honor
(if deservedly purchased) cannot admit (though many have merited it who living
could never enjoy it;) which if time would suffer, might be instanced in the
renowned Asdrubal, an^ many other* who to pre^ent the malice and fury of the
people, fled to his Fa^hers Sepulcher, and ^illed himself with Poison: whence
(so violent is passion i^ once ^xcited) they dragged out his carcass* and
cutting off his head, put it upon a spears point and bare it about the City.
Plenty of like examples will Histories afford, as Bysi^ the Grecian, Osyg^s
the Lac^demonian, Bracaras the Theban, Scipio the Roman, with many others: but
I have to an end, purposing to weaue up the body of this Discourse with a
prescrib^d form of sorrow, yet not so (as if Stoically-affected) through the
obd^acy of my nature I could not weep with those that weep, or so experienst
in Mortality as to seem incapable of ^umane ^assions* nor such a
disciplinarie Heraclytus as to teach men how to make a sorrowful face; but by a
Christian instruction, (the singular motive to the zealously affected) to
persuade such immoderate Mourners as exceed in passion to more Temperance;
telling them withal how far they decline from that godly sorrow which
appeared in the faithful Saints and Servants of God, who were not grieved at
the Handie work of the Lord, but referred themselves to his disposing: who
used now and then to try them by aduerfities, loss of friends and other
afflictions, that by these exterior trialls (which Seneca terms Exercises)
they might like pure gold be purged and refined, to shine afterward like
polished corners in Gods Temple, like Oliue-braunches round about his Table.

We may read (kind Christian brother) that Christ approved of ^eeping, for he
A prescript ^orme in w^eping.
wept over ^erusalem, and Peter his beloved wept bitterly; and Samuel the
Prophet wept for King Saul; yea there is a Blessing pronounced to Matthew. 5. 4.
those that weep, and we are expressly Luke 6. 21.
enjoined to weep. Briefly, we may Romans 12. 15.
read of many holy men that wept, but this their weeping was for their sins;
it was a religious sorrow: for Peter wept for denying his Master, regaining
that place by w^ping that he had lost by denying: Christ wept in the
consideration of Ierusalems Fall* and her miserable blindness not to see her
fall: Likewise over his dead friend Laz^rus, showing friendly compassion before
his miraculous restoration, raising him from death to life; and Samuel wept
for Saules wickedness* but we are now to argue of weeping, touching those that
be asleep, of moderate weeping, and of the inconveniences which proceed from
immoderate Sorrow and Dolor.

Moderate weeping is most highly commended, for it expresses a natural
Affection we had to the Departed, with a Christian-li^e Moderation of our
Grief, whereby our Faith to Godward is demonstrated: the reason is manifest;
Since the Departed rest from their labors, and their works follow them; little
imo opera praecesserunt eos, They have gone before them. Why should we then
weep since they are received into the Throne of Bliss, and are made partakers
of Aeternitie? and therefore Saint Cyprian says, Praemissi sunt, non amissi,
Those that depart in the Faith of Christ, They are sent before us, not lost
from us: They shall receive Immortali^ie and be heirs of Christ's Kingdom.
Again, they who attain to the glory of Gods Kingdom, are to be thought
happy, and in joy, not in sorrow, vex^tion, or woe; and therefore not to be
grieved for, in that they are Departed from us; for of necessity it is, we
must either Depart from them, or They from us. O happy were we, if we were
received into that joy, that glory, that aeternit^e whereof the Saints in
Christ's Kingdom be Partakers: Dispar est gloria singulorum, communis tamen
laticia omnium, A Glory distingu^shed, but a joy communicate; O admirable
mystery! O ineffable mercy! a mystery only to Those ^euealed whom He in his
mercy has reserved to be Inheritors in the Covenant of Peace established by
his Promise, confirmed by his Power, and conferred on his Elect Israelites,
glorified by Jesus Christ our Lord in the highest Heaven, even where the
Cherubims and Seraphims make melody and solace to the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

Touching the inconvenience of immoderate ^orrow, the blessed Apostle* Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4: 13. gi^eth us a taste, where he says; I would not Brethren ^aue you
ignorant, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as other
which have no hope: whence it appears, that excessive and immode^ate sorrow,
implies a diffidence or distrust we ^aue of our Souls immortality,
resurrection, glo^ification, whereby we seem to derogate from that written
verity, who said; Verily, verily, I say vn^ you, the hour shall come, and how
is, when the dead shall ^are the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
it ^all live: Ioh. 5. 25. But many carnal men there be, those spiritual eyes
dazzled, or rather blemished ^ith terrestrial Objects, can extend their
intelle^tuall sight (the eye of their Soul) no further then ^e exterior
Object of Sense leads them: and ^ese (like Nicodemus) will not let to ask,
How ^n a man be borne again which is old? Can he enter to his mothers womb
again, and be borne? Little ^e these con^ider how, Melius est non (...) ^n
renasci: Nor know they how ther^ be children by Procreation, and children by
Regeneration: of which sort might Rachel seem to be, who wept for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they were not: So strangely does
the violence of Passion transport These, as they become stupid and senseless
in the depriuall of a friend, pithily expressed by the Poet:

Leuiora spirant mala grauiora stupent. Some silence grieves, and griefs do
silence some;
"For less griefs speak when greater griefs be dumb.
This was pleasa^tly shadowed in the Moral of Niobe, Alcyone, and sundry
others with singular delight, illustrated and very accommodate to ou^ present
purpose; but our intended breuity preue^t^ us: and rather would I move by way
of Precep^ then Discourse; for the latter tastes of Affectation where the other
ministers argument of use without Ostentation.

To conclude, I wish every immoderate and dispassionate Mourner to reflect to
these two considerations: The first is, to conceive the matter or composition
where of he was made, for whom he mourns The second is (which by a
necessary consequenc^ depends upon the first;) The necessity of his dissol^
tion, being enjoined by that universal doom which cannot be protracted, much
less repeale^ to return to that Moulde from whence He ha^ his Beginning. In
the first (to wit) his Composition thou shall find the matter where of He was
mad^ vile, sordide, and contempti^le, where that Beau^ wherein consisted the
eminent part of his luster, but Earth, which we make our inferior Center;
yea, though He were ennobled in the highest rank of Descent, yet, Non luti
melioris, the matter whereof he was composed is but equal with the obscurest
vassal. In the latter, (to wit) his Dissolution, as the time or instant is
doubtful, and to the knowledge of man illimited; so is the necessity of the
Doom not to be avoided: it was the Pagan Poets Maxim, Earth must to Earth;
and it is Pittacus saying; That the immortal gods themselves could not ^truggle
against Necessity: Seeing then the frailty of his Composition, the necessity
of his Dissolution, have recourse to him in the depth of thy Affliction, who
will infuse into thy teare-distilling wounds the Balm of his Consolation:
acknowledge thou thy infirmities with the Publican, and He will play the
faithful Samaritan; restrain thy too-tender affection, as one that is
believing; so shall not the death of thy happy-departed friend grieve thee, but
by the wings of Faith transpose thee from cogitation of Earth to Heaven;
tran^late thee (a skillful and cheerful Builder of Gods Temple;) as a
faithful Bezalie from Idolatrous Babel to saintly zealous Bethel, from Edom to
Eden; from the Tents of Kedar, and the Habitations of Moloc to those princely
Cedars of Lebanon, from the Son of Syrac, from Marah the water of bitterness,
to Bethesda the Poole of Solace: finally, from this exile of tears and
misery, to the Syloe of joy and eternal Glory.

Mallem me mori quam viuere mortuum. FINIS.
AN EPITAPH Upon one John Comb of Stratford upon Auen, a notable Usurer,
fastened upon a Tomb that he had caused to be built in his life time.
TEn in the hundred must lie in his grave,
But a hundred to ten whether God will him have?
Who then must be interred in this Tomb?
Oh (quoth the Devil) my John a Comb.
Upon the life of Man.
What is our life? a play of Passion;
Our mirth? the music of division;
Our Mothers wombes the tyring houses be,
To deck us up for Times short Tragedy;
The World's the stage, Heaven the spectator is
To sit and judge, who here does act amiss;
The clouds that shadow us from the scorching Sun,
Are but drawn curtains till the Play be done.
On Sir W. R.
The life of Man is like the moving hand
Of every Clock, which still does go or stand
According to the weight it has; if light,
It makes us think it long before t be night;
If weighty, Oh how fast the wheel does run,
That we think midnight ere the day be done:
Thy life was such, thy night did come too soon,
And yet we wished it long ago at noone.
But we (like Idiots) that behold a play,
Do censure as the most, and as they say;
And we (like Idiots) fancy most the Clown,
Not noting how some rise, and some go down;
Nor do we note matters well borne in state,
Nor do we note inevitable fate:
But we alas in all things are so rude,
That we run headlong with the multitude.
To be, and be Commander of great men,
Was to possess the hearts of all men then;
Wherein had thou been either good or bad,
Thou equally should all our loves have had:
For it is our fashion that we give the grace,
Not to the worth of man, but to his place;
This is the cause adoring thee before,
That in thy fall we scorned thee ten times more.
Rising again (as we thought) all put off,
No man more worthily was spoken of;
Yet what mischance did bring thee to thy end,
We willingly (with ignorance) commend:
And (but the State does know a reason why)
We all say now it was pity thou did di^;
Thou had such worth and faults as few men hau^,
May thy worth live, thy faults die in thy grave.
By Sir W. R. which he writ the night before his execution.
Even such is time, which takes in trust
Our youth, our joys, and all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust,
Within the dark and silent grave;
When we have wauered all our ways,
Shuts up the story of our days,
And from which Earth, and grave, and dust,
The Lord will raise me up I trust.
Upon one Owen a Butler of Oxford.
Why cruel death should honest Owen catch,
Into my brain it could not quickly sink;
Perhaps fell Death came to the buttrie hatch,
And honest Owen would not make him drink:
If it were so, faith Owen it was thy fault
And death (for want of drink) made thee his draught;
Nor so, nor so, for Owen gave him liquor,
And death (being drunk) took him away the quicker:
Yet honest lads, let this content your mind,
The Butlers dead; the keys are left behind.
Upon one John Parker.
Here lies John Parker and his wife,
With his dagger and his knife;
And his daughter and his son:
Heigh for our Town.
On Mistress Elizabeth Whorwood, Ad viatorem Prosopopeia.
Si quam chara vir^ C^niux, pia nata Parenti,
M^ter amans fuerim prolis, amata meis,
Si quam Pauperibiu^ facili^, quam Casta, (...)
Quam studiosae, malincsti^, (...) Cupis,
C^nsule, quos dixi. Quod ab isto cernere Saxo
Non po^es, ex horum rite dolor p^tes.
R. I.

FINIS

