A Godly New short treatyfe instructyng every parson, how they should trade
their lives in ye Imytacyon of Virtue / and ye showing of vice, and declaryng
also what benefyte man has received by christ, through the effusyon of his
most precious blood.

Impri^ted At London by me Robert Stoughton. Dwelling with in Ludgate, at the
sign of the Bysshoppes Myter.

Grace mercy and peace of concience be Multyplyed and encreaced among all
them that love our lord Jesus Christ (the truth of God) in pureness of mind
Amen.
Brethren beloved in our Sauyoure Jesus Christ, i. Cor. xv.
Consider (I Pray you) the great goodness of God, i^ that he has called you by
his grace to the knowledge of him self / throwghe the word which is great
mercy toward you in Christ Jesus. for fleashe and blood (says. Sayncte
paul) can not enherite the kingdom of i God / neither can Corrupcyon inheryte
pncorrupcyon. Nichodemus being A aharysey and a man learned, Ye know, dfter
the judgments of men, and enwued also with the gifts of nature / as wit,
reason, knoledge and understanding natural: yet could not he of his own power
and strength comprehend the heavenly doctrine of our Saueour christ, nor
perceive the celestyal mind thereof till he was helped by grace from God above,
and borne a new, Not of mortal sede / but of immortal, which, endures and
lasts for ever. Ihon. iii.
For that which is born of the flesh is flesh (says christ) But that which
is borne of the spyryte is spryte. Therefore said Christ Except thou be borne
of water, and of the holy spirit, thou can not se the kingdom of God. For all thought god since the beginning has appropryated certain gifts of grace
to ye nature of man by reason whereof he does excel in his creacyon, all other
creatures not only in shape of body, statute and contenaunce also in the
aforsayde spyrytuall gifts of grace annexed to nature as wytt reason, knoledge
and understanding. for when god made man at the beginning he gave him a
Reasonable soul, from the which proceeds so God withdraw it not a mind of
understanding in all mankind, above all other creaturs wc the lord has
created upon the face of the whole earth: yet truly without the especyall
grace of the lord GOD, and gift from heaven above (although a man he never so
wise and excellent) Yet can he not obtaygne of his own strenght (which
commethe, of our first birth) the true knowledge, fear and love of god,
which fell from us in adam

But by grace are ye saved through faith / (says paul) and not of your
selfs nor throught works, Roma. iii.
least any man should boast himself: but by christ are we saved and made the
beloved sons of the hyghestt: As Witness the sayncte John saying: He gave
them power to be the Sons of GOD, as many as believe in his name which are not
born of fleashe nor of blood, nor of the will of man / but of GOD. Johan. i.
Roma. viij
And through him (my brethren) ye have obtained not only knowledge and
Judgment to dyscerne and judge betwyxt the good and ye evil: but also ye are
made able through the spyryte which a bydeth in you which ye have of God to
chose ye good and to leave ye evil. Galla. 4. a i. Cor. ij. b
for the lord no doubt, is a spirit, says paul and where ye spirit of ye
lord is, there is lybertye and through him ye are made strong / so yt ye obey,
ij. Cor. iij.
for through Christ (says he) I can do al things, which he has made me
able. Brethren, if ye obey and be now sedde by the holy spyrit of God, Roma
vjij
then truly are ye made the fre sons of God, then shall ye also be made
perfet and obtain vyctory against syn, death and hell, which is the whole
power of Satan our mortal enemy. Brethren, deceive not your selves / for
look to whom ye do obey / truly his seruau^ts ye are, to whom ye do obey,
whether it be by obedience unto righteousness or sin unto death. In Adam
truly we were all dead / but in Christ we are al made alive, as many as
believe in his name as perteynyng to the flesh (as. s. Paul says we were all
naturally born ye children of wrath, Roma vi.
as well as al other because of orygynall Sin, that reygneth in all flesh.

Reason was blind and nature corrupt, therefore could it not obey to the will
of GOD / but vyolentlye strove against him / desiring that he hated, and
hatyng that he loved* i. Corin. iij
For the natural manne (says Saynct Paul) perceyueth not the things of Good
/ that belong to the spyryte, i. Corin. iij.
for they are but folyshnes unto him.

Neither can he perceue them (says he) for they are Spyrytuallye examyned: but
he that is spyrytuall, dyscusseth all things.

Brethern, your minds are now lightened by grace, and ye have now received the
spyryte of God / which bryngethe. knowledge and a perfect willinge obedyent
mind to do the will of God:

But whosoever has not the Spyryte, the same is none of his.

For as much as ye are partakers of the holy spyryte, and are borne a new,
year not now (my brethren) under the law but under grace.

Obey unto the form of doctrine (I pray you) whereunto ye are called. for
truly God has pleasure in a louelye heart. And an obedyente Mind is all
ways at peace with him.

The natural man not renewed, knows not God / neither is he obedyente to ye
ryghteowsenes, which is of value be for him, neither can be / sayethe paul /
For delectacyon and costome in evil / blyndeth there understanding that they
are not obedyente / no not to that goodness that natural reasone teaches them
/ and they say they know God, love him and keep all his commandments. They
deceive themselves utterly thinking them rich, when the world favors
them, when indede they are blind and poor* for though they possess much yet
indeyd they have no thing. Therefore the hope of the ungodly is as the dry
thystle flower. Luke. xij.
For their faith is vain and of none effect. When they hear the word of
God, which is the trwth they are not obedyente to do thereafter* they delyghte
in evil / and have no desire, to follow ryghteousnes therefore / when they come
to the knowledge of the scripture they fall suddenly into many dangerous
erroures. Some because they Would be hid from Gods wind them selfs in a
folyshe cloak of myar necessyty / sayng in the^ selfs / yt if can not
otherwise be: When in deed they strive not at all to make resystau^ce but do
let the fleshelye mind run whether it lusts, So for lack of obedyence
they fall into wyllfull sin, deceauyng them selfs in their own
ymagynacyo^s. To do yuell they have power because they will / but to do well
they have none at al, for they will not. Thus the ungodly abide still in their
own lusts, and will not leave of. But as Sayncte paul says they heap
together the treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance: when shall be
opened the righteous Judgment of God wc will reward eueri man / acording to
his deeds yt is to say / praise, honor / and immortalytye to them which
continue in good doing and seek eternal life.

But unto them that are rebellyous / and do dysobeye the truethe and follow
Inyquytye / shall come Indygnatyon / Wrath / Trybulatyon / and anguysshe upon
the Soul of every manne that does evil / forwyth GOD truly / there is no
Respect of Parsonnes / for he will reward every manne after their deeds.

Nevertheless the multitude of the ungodly will not repent, for they have
pleasure to live in Sin, and some that were escaped from the fylthines of the
woorlde (as Saint Peter says) through the knowledge of the Lord, ij. Petr.
ij.
and of the Sauyoure and Redeamer JESUS CHRIST are yet entangled again therein
and are overcome.

So is the latter end worse then the beginning. For of whom a man is
overcome, to the same he is in bondage.

Therefore their minds are unstable and are to fled to and froo, as a ship in
the sea, with ragynge wyndes with every perswasyon and blaste that comes.

Some have erred / and (as Sayncte paul says) are turned to vain iangli^g (as
if they thought the holy Relygyon of Christ our sauyoure and Redeamer to
stand in speaking and hearing only, and not rather in obeyng to the will of the
Lord GOD to do the same (because they would be teachers) in the most holy
scripture. And (as Paul says) understanding not what they speak, j Tymo. j.
nor whereof they affirm.

But the Lord God has called you dearelye beloved by his Grace, that ye
should obey to the truethe, and be like fasshyoned to his son.

Cast not away your confydence which has so great reward to recompense /
for truly to be in our sauyoure Christ is to be a new Creature.

A willing mind makes an obedyent heart and a dylygent hand: Therefore as the
holy Prophet, says plowe up your fresshe ground like dylygent husbandmen /
and sow no more amongst the thorns: So shall ye bring forth the fruits of
ryghtuousnes, and reap the reward of well doing, the husband man labors the
ground dylygentlye in due season, as ye know, that the lord may prospere the
work of his hands

Consider your time lykwyse and refuse not the grace of God whiles it is offered
you, Math. xv. Hebre. xij.
least at another time when ye would gladdelye ye be not heard, for as much as
year called by grace to be chylderen of light / and heirs of eternal life,
for ye have received of his holy spyrite in earneste of your salvation in that
ye have consented already with your whoale hearts to the Truth of God.

I beseech you by the mercyfulnes of God, obey to the form of doctryn,
whereunto ye are called. Roma. xiij
And facyon not your selves like unto this Woorlde. but beye changed / and as
saint paul says in your shape by the renuynge of your Wits / that ye may
feel what that good and acceptable will of god is. Therefore as it is written:
Psalm. xciiij
To day if you hear his voice / harden not your hearts for truly
dysobedyence is hateful, yea and often times does the lord punysh it. Nume.
xiij i. Reg. xv. ij. Re. xvij.
What was said to king Saul by Samuel the prophet / when he dysobeyed the
lords commandment, ye know / has the Lord (said he) as great pleasure in
brent sacryfyces and offerynges as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold
said Samuel, to obey is better then sacryfyce, and to harke^ is better the^
the fat of ra^mes, for rebellyon or dysobedye^ce is as the syn of wytchcraft,
and stoubburnes as the wyckednes of ydolatrye etc.

For an obedyente heart truly is much accepted with God, and a lowely troubled
spryte will he not despyce, it is a very plesaunt ground prepared and made
ready (as it were by the Industrye and labor of a dylygent husband man) for
the lord to plant all virtue and grace in. Brethern / obey to the will of God
and show a willing mind. By your deydes be no longer slouthefull, nether
over much afraid / neither to hastye wythowte measure, wantynge dyscrecyon.
But keep measure in all your ways: and wisely consider place and time, for ye
are now no more your own, but are dearelye bought with ye most precious
blood of Jesus. If the lord find you faithful in little, know for a suertye,
Eccle. j.
that he will make you rulers over much. 2. Peter. 1.
Therefore (as Saynct peter says) in your faith mynyster virtue in virtue
knowledge in knowledge, te^perauncye intemperauncye, pacyence, in pacynece /
godlynes in godlynes, brother lie kyndnes in brotherlye kindness, love etc.

Remember the matter is wayghty, therefore be not deceived. Surely if ye will
walk by this rule, ye can not fall, neither shall ye be led a wrong way. Go
not from the word of God, declyne neither to ye right hand neither to ye left
/ leafte ye peryssshe from the right way, for as the branch can bear no
fruit of him self except he abide in ye Vine (says christ) no more can ye
except yea bide in me. John. xv.
Se that your faith be lively cleauynge suer to the holy word of god, which is
already grafted in you Trewlye (except you have believed in vain) it is of
power to save your souls, for it is quyck and mighty in operacyon, and sharper
/ then any two edged sword* ye know brethern / the end of the commandments,
is love that comes of a puer heart, of a good conscye^ce, and of faith
unfeigned: whose fruts can not be hid. But as for such as turn back unto
there own wyckednes the lord shall lead them forth with the eueldoers / but
peace shall be upon Israel. Truly knowledge is dangerous / where love and
obedyence is lacking / for it tyckelyth the mind of foles, and lefteth them
up with vanyty: But such as seek to increase in virtue walk surely. Therefore
search not irreverently the sacred word of god* least ye stumbel in your way
/ and take asodeyn fall* knowledge is a gift of the spryte, and in the hand of
god and he measures his gyfts to his creatures at his own pleasure and will,
Therefore, whether ye obtain at his hand either much or little, praise him for it
/ and be concent with his doing. Search not the gronde of such things / (says
the wise man) as are to mighty for the: But look what god commands and
think upon that always: and be not curyous in many of his works for he that
louethe pereyll shall peryshe therein. Grudge not against the good manne of the
house / though he do with his own as he leyst, least thou be reprouyd and
sent away with rebuke.

Be ye therefore dyscret and sobre* settell your Hearts in the true fear of
God, and arm your souls to temptacyon. Turn your ears to the truth, my
brethren, and use the gifts that ye have received with a lowly and an
obedyent heart faithfully / that your fruits may appear and receue not the
grace of god in vayn, for it is written. I have hard the in a time accepted, and
in the day of saluatyon have I succored the. ij. Cor. v.
Behold now in that well accepted time / says paul / now is the day of
health / let us give none occasyon of evil / that in our mynystryng, or
office there be found no fault, But in all things / let us behave our selfs /
as mynysters of God: In much pacyence / in afflycyons, in necessyties, in
a^guysshes / in stryfes / in labors in watchynges, in fastings / and in
pureness. etc. many do hear read and speak the holy scryptures, (praised be
God) and many desire to know much. But blessed and happy are ye, which obey
to the truth / So that ye do thereafter for the kingdom of God, stands not
in words (as ye well know) but in power and workynge the wicked sinners have God,
and his holy word many times in their mouths: but they walk still in there
oun corrupt ways* truly they are the bound servant of sin yt be subdued to
lusts and ouerco^ of sin. ij. Pet. iij.
For of whom a man is ouercomed Says Sayncte peter to the same he is in
bondage. The ungodly manne has not the fear of God, before his eyes: Nether
does he regard the law of the highest. Therefore shall he not be preserved, for
God regards him not, neither will he defend him i^ the time of trouble* can
such prosper / as take part against ye highest, and prouok ye lord to anger,
Apoca. xix
continually with there unlawful deeds? and fight against the holy spryte of our
God: and yet they say in there hearts Tushe, God sees it not, the God of Jacob
regards it not they do evil / and they say they do well ye although they know
/ mary times the contrary because they delight in evil their folysh hearts are
blinded. Therefore must they reap the fruits of their labors when they think
them selves wise they become foles, because their understanding is blinded.
When they think they know God love him, An ydoll is that which has the love
of the heart and is placed in the towme (...) God. Every man (...) treasureis
there wc he l^eth best*
and serve hy^ most truly they serve an ydoll and a false God / in his stead
and place / feigned of their own fleshly lusts and carnal affectyons and of
the eternal God save the name only) they know nothing / for where a man's
treasure is, says Christ / there will his heart be also. In words truly many
say they know god* but with their deeds they shamfullye deny him* in that they
refuse to live according to his commandments and will they have forsaken ye
lively testament of god made in the precious blood and death of our sauyoure
Christ Jesus / to all that believe in him / (yt is to say) which with a free
heart, do put themselves under the covenant of God to do his will. And after
their own Imagynacyon feign themselves an other way to the kingdom of heaven
/ as easy and broad to the flesh as they lust: they refused the narrow
way, This way is narowe, and strayte / to the fleashe / but bread and ca^ye
to a wyl^i^g mynde^
and straight gate that leads unto life and have chosen that brood easy way
to live after their lusts which leads al yt walk in it, into everlasting
co^dempnacyon on wisely do they forsake the word of the lord which he ordained
a lantern and a sure light unto their fete / to walk in extreme darkness, of
their own blind Imagynacyons nevertheless, thus says the lord our merciful
God / unto the ungodly sinners. Eze. 33.
If I say to the wicked he shall dye says the lord yet if he turn from his
wyckednes and do the things wc is equal and right he shall surely live, and
not dye and again, O / turnt you turn you says ye lord / O why will ye dye? As
truly as I live, says ye lord, I have no pleasuri^ the death of a si^ner but
will rather yt he convert and live. etc. Brethren / I beseech you for the dear
mercy of God, esteem your saluatyo^ and health wc is precious and is now so
freely offered unto you in ye precious blood of Jesus: have co^passio^ your own
souls, and show love and charity to the pour opressed / the lame blind and
nedye look upon your selfs with an inward eye / and see that your souls be
refreashed, that they may live O / why will ye dye, convert and turn to the
lord, with your whole hearts / from your wicked and sinful ways, and truly
your sins are forgeuen you* why esteem ye so much the vain pleasures of
this world? Which are the delyghtes of the carnal and earthelye mind seeing
they are so vain and transytorye. Remember Esau: Sell not your enheretaunce
which is precious for so vile (...) a price / least after when ye would
gladlye obtain, ye be put by. Brethren, Consider ye are not now under the
law / but under grace* because ye are grafte / into Iesuchryste by faith O,
therefore I besy^h you / do no more wyllfully evil: So can fynne now do ye
no harm. My little chyldryne* these ^yre^s w^yt I unto you says Saynct John
that ye sin not. But if any man sin: yet have we an Advocate with the
father (says he) Jesus christ which is ryghtuous. etc. For the lord orders a
good man's going (says holy Dauyd) and has pleasure in his way. Though he
fail, he shall not be hurt, for the lord vpholdeth him, Allthough ye rightous
happen to fall sometime into sin: yet they have an advocate for it with the
father, because they would not sin. Psa. 36 and.90
with his hand. etc. O, that ye would now obey to the voice of God,
contained in his sacred word, that ye might receive Christ into your souls.

Brethren beloved in our savior Christ Jesus, I beseech you for the dear love
of Christ Jesus (which refused not to suffer reprove of the worldde, and to
give his life for our sakes that we might live by him) be warned in time
least Satan beguyle you, and bring you a sleep with the world through in
ordynate desire of vain riches, sorry and pleasur thereof, couetyng after merry
and joyful days here relyghtyng the mind in wantonness or worldly lusts, which
is the plain way to utter destructyon. Know ye not, how the ennemy seeks
busuly by these things to betray you? And how he lays carnal fleashelye and
worldly pleasures as a bayte, wherein venym / yeth hid before your eyes to
catch your minds / that he may so carrye you away* For as the fowlers bayt
betrayeth ye fowls. So does the vain pleasures of this world begylde the
minds of fowls: For through the desire of it the enemy ouercometh them*
leadynge the sinner from one vanytye to an other till he have so brought him
in woofull bondage, and most miserable captyuytye. But this ye know my
brethern. I mean the sea sone, how it is time (as Sayncte paul says) that we
should now a wake out of sleep, Romans xiii.
for now is our salvation nerer, then when we believed. The night is paste,
and the day is come nygh. Let us therefore Cast a way the deeds of darekenes,
and put on the Armoure of light. Let us now walk honestelye (says he) as
in the day light: not in eating and drinking, chambrynge, and wantones
nether in strife and enuyeng but put ye on the lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for ye flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. Truly we are called (as ye
know to suffer with Christ, that we might be made partakers with him in glory for
if we were grafted like hi^ in death Then shall we be like him also in the
ressurection, Jesus autem dixit illis. Ame^ dico, vobis quod vos qui sequuti
estis me, in regeneracione cum sederit fisius hominis in se^^e maiestatis fue.
etc Math. xix
the rych man lives here in all pleasures and fared delycyously. And Lazarus
lived in trouble and pain. But after this life Lazarus receued joy says
Christ and the rych man pain for Abraham said unto him: son remember that
thou in thy life time receyuedst thy good and contrary wise Lazarus pain, now
therefore is he comforted, and ye art punysshed. Our savior, Christ truly
being ye lord of our glory (during yt time of this life (walked here through
many trybulacyons. He refused ye scepter and crown of a worldly kingdom with al
ye vayn fre^d ship and glory yt the world could give hi^ / and receued with
mourni^g deares on his head a crown of sharp thorns and a read for a scepter
in his right hand, Mat xxvi
yt he might so for our sakes aco^plysh ye will of his heavenly father, and
get vyctory against yt whole power of ye enemy. Christ suffered for us says.
s. peter leauy^g us an exa^mple yt we should follow his fotsteppes / wc did no
sin / neither was there guyle found in his mouth. etc. Christ had no
felycytye in this present world which is now corrupt, but his reioysyng was
in the will of his father, and he had a great respect to the reward at the
end If the son of God taking our nature upon him, might not escape / but
must drink of this Cup, who said The seruau^te is not above the master,
neither the messynger greater then he that sendethe him. Think not ye to
escape / my Brethern, if ye intend to be made partakers with hy^ of his
fathers heavenly kingdom. Therefore with pacyence possess your sowles, and
like faytheful Sowldiours of Jesus christ, take up your Cross / and follow
him, for truly he has promised, that if ye be partakers with him in
sufferyng / ye shall be partakers with him in glory. But if you live after the
fleash and have your pleasure amongst the wicked: ye must dye: But if ye
mortify the deeds of ye flesh / through the spyryte, then shall ye live.
Brethern / ye are called of God yt ye should be holy. Therefore I would not that
ye should now be partakers in the deeds of the wicked, i. Corin. x.
and have fellowshyppe with deuels, for truly (as saint paul says) ye can not
be partakers of the lords table, and of the table of deuels, neither drink of
the lords cup and of the cup of deuels, Either shall we provoke the lord
(says he) or are we stronger then he? ye can not serve God and mammon, how
agrees light with darkness? ryghtousnes with vnryghtousnes? or Christ with
Belyas? The heart that goes two ways truly is hated, and such as are dobble
tounged / are accursed of God.

What can it proffite a man to win all the world / with the loss and damage
of his own soul? yea what shall he give to redeem it again with all he that
seeks to save his life shall lose it (says christ): But he that will lose
his life for my sake, shall save it. yea blessed and happy are those, (Says
the spyryte) that love not there lives unto the death: Truly they shall receive
a Crown of life. And although ye know the truth already (my Brethere^ dearly
beloved in our Savior Jesus christ yet I think it not vain by these letters
/ to stir up your remembrance for truly it is my dylyee that ye should not
peryshe with ye world. but that ye should turn from your sins, and live
Therefore / seeing God has called you with an holy calling, for he has
supplied your hearts with the oil of grace and opened your understanding, by
his holy spyryte: So that ye have now seen his holy will declared unto us in
Christ Jesus And have consented, yt it is the truth of God I beseech you by
the mercyfullnes of God / make your bodies, a quycke and lyuelye sacryfyce /
holy and acceptable to God / wc as sayncte Paul says is your reasonable
serving of God, And fascyon not your selves like unto this woorlde, but be ye
changed in your shappe by the Renuynge of your wits. Seeing ye are now
risen with Christ, se^te your minds above on heavenly things where Christ
syttethe on the right hand of God the father and not on the things yt art on
ye earth. Brethern deceue not your selves bring furthe the perfect fruits
belonging to repentan^ce / which is amendment of life. Let it appear I pray
you that year of christ / and have hard the word in deed. Truly it is
good yt the heart be establisshed with grace and not with so vanyces, If virtue
encrese, ye cannot be yole, nor yet unfruitful i^ ye knowledge of christ. But
he that wants this / as saint Peter says, is blyndes gropynge for the way
wc his hand and has forgotten / yt he was purged from his old sins for true
faith is lively / and cannot be hid neither may she i^ any wise dwell or
abide alone for she has a great desire to many virtues. She acco^panye the her
self with gods wysedo^ and love She is nouryshed daily with the bright son of
ryghteousnes / and ye highest waters her plants with ye sweet showers of
grace. Through perfect obedyence to the wall of god, she spredeth furthe her
branches in due season whereby she obtayneth a suer hope her fruyctes proseade
from the tree of life / For truly truly they are the works of the spirit of
God, as love, joy / peace, long sufferyng, g^ntelnes, goodness / faythefullnes
meknes / temperancy. for he eye wayteh unto the commandments of the lord to
keep them: for in the mis her life, Dearly beloved ye are called and chose^ ye
are washed from an evil concyence: ye are sanctyfyed by the blood of Jesus,
through the eternalle spyryte / which dwells in you: By whom / ye are able
throught christ. which (as saynct paul says has made us able to be
mynysters of the new testamente. Therefore work owe your salvation, And (as the
Apostle peter says) make your calling and electyon suer / through good works.
Mortyfye therefore your members wc are earthly. And walk not from hensefourth
/ as other hethen people walk in vanytye of their minds, blinded in their
understanding / being strangers from the life that is in God / throwghe the
yngnoraunce that is in them* because of the blyndnes of there hearts / which
being paste repentance, Have given themselves unto wantonness, to work
almaner of uncleanness / even with g^^ dynes. But ye have not so learned Christ
as sayncte paul says. if so be ye have hard of him and are tawght of hi^.
Even as the truth is in Jesus so then as concerning the conuersacyo^ in times
paste, lay from you the old man which is corrupt* (through deceaueable
lusts, and be ye renewed in the spyrite of your understanding minds: And put
on that new man which is shapen after the ymag of god, in ryghteousnes and
true holiness, now therefore as elect of God holy and beloved, put on tender
mercy ki^dnes hu^blenes of mi^d, mekenes, Long sufferynge, forbering one
another / and forgeuyng one another. Colloss. iij*
if any man have a quarrel to an other (says Sayncte paul) even as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye* ye are called to be children of lyhgt that ye
should be holy and with owte blame. if ye put to a wyllyng mind ye shall find
the lord read ye with his grace at your hand. for God loves you and therefore
will be all ways defend you and deliver you in the howl of temptacyon (which
as Christ says shall come to tempte the^ that sytt upon the face of the
earth. But ye have not received the spyryte of the world, that your felycytye
should be in ye things thereof: Neither that ye seek God all way owtewardely,
and to serve him in the letter. But ye have received the spyryte of God, which
lowsed in your hearts the works of sin, and opened the inward eyes of your
mind that ye should now have no more pleasure in them. For ye veil is taken
away for your hearts / and year turned to ye lord that ye may now see the
bryghte face of God / which is his love, and merciful will toward us in
Christ Jesus. Therefore truly we are called and taught of God / to serve him in
a new conuersacyon, in spyryte and verytye and not in the old conuersacyon of
the letter. For the letter kylleth (says saint paul). But the spyryte gives
life. If the first testament had been fautelesse says he, Hebr. viij /
the^ should there no place have been sought for the second. For in rebukyng
them he says, Behold the days will come (says the Lord) and I will fynyshe
upon the house of Israel and upon the house of Judah a new testament not like
the testament that I made with their fathers at that time when I took them by
the hand and led them out of the land of Egypt for they continued not in
my testement and I regarded the^ not says the lord, But this is the
testament and I regarded them not says the lord / But this is the testamente,
that I will make with the house of Israel After those days (says the lord)
I will put milawes in their minds and in their hearts I will write the^: and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. This is ye new testament, yt the
lord has now made with his people* truly he writes his law by his spyryte in
their hearts / yt they may do it according to his will. Saint Paul
testifies, Rom* xv.
yt Jesus christ was a mynister of the cyrcu^cysyo^, for ye truth of God, to
co^fyrme the promesses made unto ye fathers, by who^ ye are called and made
ministers i^ ye new testament / and pertakers of the true circumsysyo^ wc is
inspryt and not in letter / yt ye might receue of his holiness through the sprit
that he has given us. Therefore (my brethren) be ye holy, be ye holy in all your
conuersatyon, for it is wryte^. Be ye holy for I am holy / and surely, the
things that ye have in hand be very holy / know ye not how that ye ar
partakers of the nature of God, by partycipacyon of his holy spyryte which ye
have received? And how that ye are made the temple of God, because his holy
spryt dwells in you defile not the^ this holy place least the lord be angry;
and so ye perysh from the right way. This holy city new Jerusalem, Apoca. xxi.
Ihon saw com down from God out of heaven prepared as a bryde garnysshed for
her husband. And he hard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. etc.

This holy tabernacle and dwelling house / has god pyght among you / and not
man, after which moses was commanded to make all the work which wece but
shadows (says saint Paul) of true things to come: And were ordained until
the time of reformacyo^ with has God now in this last time by Christ opened
unto us, for by his blood have we an open way in into the holy place, and
most holy by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us though
the veil, that is to say / by his flesh. And by Christ are ye beloved, and
made mynysters in the new testamente and pryestes unto the high god to offer
in the holy place in holy vessels of pure gold that acceptable sacryfyce of
praise and thankesgeuyng, Vessels of pure gold are the hearts and conscyences
of me^ purged from the fylthe of sin, and Corrupcyo^
that is to say, the fruits of those lyppes / with do confess his most holy
name / attend therefore to yt thing, that ye have now hard (my dear
brethren) and as dear chylderen, labor earnestly by the help of the spyryt
to keep your selves unspotted of the world, that ye may be saved and be made
the parfecte sons of God / and coheyres with our sauyoure Jesus Christ of
his everlasting heavenly kingdom. Amen.

The god of all patience and consolation give to eueryone of you grace so to
labor and travail in your calling after the example of Christ / that your
gift may increase, least you also be plucked away in the erourre of the
wicked, and fall from your stedfastnes / But grow in grace and the lord will
deliver you from all evil doing, and keep you to his heavenly kingdom: to
whom be all praise / honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The grace of God be with your spyryt. Amen

Yours as charytye byndeth me / Henry heart.
Give all the praise to God, and be always thankful unto him. Anno. 1548.
the.^^ October

