THE DANGER OF Coffeehouse, Entreated of in a Sermon preached at Crow-hurst
in Surrey the ninth of July 1598.

By Simon Harward.

Imprinted at London by W.W. for R. Iohnes. 1. Ian. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. Edmunde Bowyer Esquire, and M. John Bowyer his
brother, mercy and peace be multiplied in Christ Jesus.
FOr as much as some years since (Right Worshipful) it pleased you so
courteously to accept that Sermon, which at your request I then published, as
concerning The fruits of our repentance toward God; Wherein David Psalm. 1.
does place The chiefest blessedness and felicity of man: I have thought good
to add thereunto this Sermon, which I made at the same Church (where you, and
others, Justices and Gentlemen were assembled on the ninth of July last past)
upon a part of the first Lesson, by the order of our Church appointed for that
Sabbath, as concerning that duetifull contentment of mind, which (as good
subjects) we owe all to our Prince and Country; that as in the first we are
put in remembrance of our duty toward the Lord of Lords, and Prince of
Princes: so in this other, as well we which uttered and heard it, as others
into whose hands it shall come to be read, may be admonished of those loyal
affections which we ought continually to bear to our most gracious Sovereign,
and our established Commonwealth. As I am well assured that these affections
are, and have always bin thoroughly settled in your faithful hearts; so I doubt
not, but ye are also as fully desirous, that by this slender labor, and by all
means possible, others may be allured and drawn to the like disposition. Thus
hoping that you will as lovingly accept the reading and publishyng, as you have
already done the hearing, I commit this my short Discourse to your Worshippes,
and you and it to the blessing of the Almighty. From Tondridge this.xij. of
July. 1598.

Your Worships assured in the Lord, Simon Harward.

1. Sam. 12.19. We have added a wickedness to all our other sins, in
asking us a King.


WHen Nachash the King of the Ammonites (Right Worshipful and beloved in
Christ) had now brought the inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead into so great
distress, that only upon seven days respite they were to yield up their
City into the enemies hands upon a very hard condition (which was, that every
one of the Citizens should have his right eye plucked out.) The people of
Israel, partly because they saw Samuel their Judge to be old and feeble, and
partly, because they perceived the sons of Samuel, Joel and Abiah, though
ruling in the place and stead of their Father; yet not walking in the ways and
steps of their Father, as dispayring to have any aid or deliverance by their
Judges, (in which state of government, God had for many years so happily
preserved them) They come (with one consent) to their Judge, and desire that
they may have a King. 1. Sam. 11.12
Samuel when he had used many means, and many forcible arguments to dissuade
them from this their malcontented and dispayring mind, and seeing evidently
that no persuasions could take any place in their wilful hearts, does now at
the last, call upon the Lord in the time of Wheate-haruest, for a sudden and
miraculous thunder and storm of rain, that thereby, as it were by an other
voice of God, the people might be further certified, both how grievously they
had offended, and how for their offense the Lord was highly displeased with
them. When the Israelites saw apparently that Samuel had no sooner called unto
the Lord for that thunder and rain, but that presently his request was heard,
and that in terrible manner, in the sight and hearing of the whole people, they
were astonished: and being wonderfully stricken with sudden fear, They desire
Samuel to pray to the Lord for them, that they die not, adding these words
(which now I have read) as a reason of their petition, and a confession of
their desert: For (say they) we have sinned, besides all our other sins, in
asking us a King. What this offense was which the Prophet does seek so many
ways to lay open unto them, it shall the better appear if we consider these
two especial observations.

First, the mighty providence, and infinite goodness of God extended toward
that people, so many years together, during the time of the government of the
Judges. And secondly how small and weak the occasions were for the which they
desire to shake off that blessed government: as also on the other side, what
great and weighty causes they had to have bin contented with that estate
wherein God had so long and so miraculously protected them.

How long the people had lived, delivered, defended, and governed by Judges, S.
Augustine does record it in his.18. book de Ciuitate Dei, where he affirms,
Aug. de Ciuitate dei, lib 18. Cap. 22:
that at that time wherein Rome was buylt (which was by Romulus, in the time of
Josias king of Judah) the Hebrews had bin seven hundred and eighteen years
in the land of Canaan; whereof (says he) seven and twenty appertain to
Joshua, three hundred twenty and nine to the Judges, and three hundred sixty
and two to the Kings: where he makes three several estates of Government,
under which it pleased God that his people Israel should live. The first was
under Dukes, as in the days of Moses and Joshua. The second was by Judges,
which differed from Joshua, for he was appointed a governor in the time of
prosperity, when Sehon the King of the Amorits and Ogge the King of Basan were
overthrown and vanquished: but the Judges were first inaugurated and invested
into their callinges in some great distresses, by the affecting of some notable
deliverance. Neither were they like the Dictators, advanced amongst the
Heathen; for they were chosen by the voices of men, but these by the voice of
God him self. They were chosen out of men of greatest account, and best
furnished for the undergoing of such a charge: but these were raised up
miraculously out of the inferior sort, and lowest degrees of people, and
enabled extraordinarily by the gifts and presence of the Almighty, as it is
said in the second Chapter of the Judges: The Lord raised up Judges, Judge.
2.16.18.
which delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors: And when the Lord
did raise up any Judges, the Lord (as it is said there) was with that Judge,
and did deliver the people out of the hands of the enemies all the days of
that Judges life.

There were also many differences betwixt them and the Kings which followed. In
the Kings, succession of blood took place: in the Judges it took no place.
The Kings, had a greater authority in ruling and commanding then the Judges
would challenge. The affairs having good success against the Madianites, the
people offered to Gedeon, Judge 8.22.
that he should Reign as king over them: But Gedeon answered, Neither will I
reign over you, neither shall my child reign over you; but the Lord shall
still reign over you. The Kings were some of them holy, and some wicked: Heb.
11.32. Judge. 2.18.
the Judges were all the faithful servants of God, though some times erring,
yet always rising again by repentance. The Kings did some of them save the
people from invasions, and some not: but the Judges did ever deliver them from
the hands of their oppressors: And therefore they have the Hebrewe name
Moshegrim, Iud 3 9.
Saviors, given unto them, as in the third Chapter of the Judges it is said
of Othoniel, that the Lord did stir up a Savior unto the children of Israel.
And in the ninth of Nehemias, Nehe 9.27.
where there is mention made of the former mercies of God during the time of
the Judges: it is added, that God of his mercy gave his people Saviors, who
saved them out of the hands of their adversaries. Some do add hereunto, that
the Judges more then any other, were the most evident types and figures of that
deliverance which we have by Christ, from the tyrranie of sin, death, and
Satan.

A fourth kind of government, under which the people afterward lived, is
mentioned by Josephus in the.xx. chapter of his Antiquities, Joseph Antiq. lib.
20. Cap. penult
(...). After the death of these (to wit) Herod and Archelaus, their government
was Aristocratie, wherein the chief authority of the nation was committed to
the High-priestes. Joseph Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 10.
Of that government he makes mention before, when he declares how Gabinius
had divided the Kingdom into five parts; and ordained five Counsayles, called
Synedriv: he shows what ensued of it, (...) They altering the government,
lived in Aristocratie. They had then, and long before, three several orders of
their counsayles: one was an authority given to three chosen Men, who should
decide all causes in money matters. The second was a council of twenty three
Judges: they were to hear the causes of life and death. The third was a
council of seauentie one: their office was to determine of most weighty
matters, of the high Priesthood, or of a whole Tribe, or of a false Prophet.
Concerning the excellency of every one of these four gouernmentes, and which
of them ought to have the pre-eminence to be most to be desired amongst
Christians, I hold with Calvin, Valde otiosum est, Calvin institut. lib. 4
cap. 20. sect. 8.
quis potissimus sit politiae status a priuatis hominibus disputari, quibus de
constituenda aliqua republica deliberare nen licet. It is a very idle thing,
that about the best estate of government, a disputation should be had amongst
private men, who have no authority to consult of ye ordering of any
Commonwealth. It is a most singular token of the mighty power and providence
of God, that so many several Nations over the face of the whole world, are
vpholden and maynteined by so many several sorts of gouernementes, That
Quemadmodum non nisi inaequali temperatura elementa inter se cohaerent, ita hae
regiones sua quadam inaequalitate optime continentur: As in bodily essences,
the four elements do cleave together by unequal temperaturs, so as it were
by a certain inequality, all these several countries are holden together:
But for every particular Nation, he very well requires, that Voluntas Domini
satisfacial: The will of God ought to suffice every man. Si illi Visum est
reges, regnis praeficere, liberis ciuitatibus senatus aut decuriones,
quoscunque locis praefecerit in quibus degimus, nostru^ est ijs nos morigeros
ac obedientes praestare: Whether it please God to place Kings over kingdoms;
or to set Senators, Counsailours, and Aldermen, over free Cities, whom soever
the Lord shall establish in those places wherein we live, we ought to yield
submission and obedience to them.

Some do highly advance the government of many, because many are not so soon
corrupted as one may be; even as a great quantity of water will not so soon
putrify, as will a small portion: But these must on the other side consider,
that it is a great deal more hard to find many good, then one: and it is most
likely, that such a one will prove best, whom the Nobility of Royal blood,
and Princely ensamples of predecessors, do inuit unto virtue. They rest much
upon the liberty which ought to be in man, and whereunto (they say) man is
horn: But we see, that (by nature) as some are framed fit to command, so
others are made fit to obey. It is an excellent kind of liberty, when men
being set free from the thraldom of their own lusts, do under the rule of
superiors, Tul. parad. penult.
obey godly and wholesome laws. As the Orator does well describe a Freeman,
Qui legibus non propter metum paret, sed eas sequitur atque colit quia id
salutare maxim esse iudicat, Which does not obey the Laws for fear, but does
follow them and embrace them, because he does judge it a thing wholesome and
necessary for the safegarde of man. For better it is to dwell where nothing is
lawful, then to dwell where all things are lawful. Judge. 2.16.
The Judges which were approved in a kind of Aristocratie, are said to be
raised up of God. Psalm. 21.3.
So also the same is said in other places of Kings. Prou. 8.15.
The wisdom of God does pronounce it: By me Kings do reign: Dan. 2.21.
and Princes decree justice. Daniel says, that the Lord does change times and
seasons: Iere. 27.6.
he takes away Kings, and sets up Kings. Nabuchadnezzar in respect of his
kingdom, is called The Servant of God: and a judgment is threatened against
all people which will not submit their neck under his yoke. There is no power,
Romans 13.1.
but of God: and whosoever does resist power, does resist the ordinance of God.
1. Pet. 2.13.
Of all powers, the authority of the King (who is named by the Apostle Peter
such a chief or supreme power as for the Lords sake, is to be obeyed) does
seem first to be most agreeable to nature, Hieron. epist. 4. ad Rusticum.
as S. Jerome does witness in his. 4. Epistle: In apibus principes sunt, grues
vnam sequuntur ordine literato, Imperator vnus, Iudex vnus prouinciae, in naui
vnus gubernator, in domo vnus dominus, in quamuis grandi exercitu vnius signum
expectatur. Bees have their chief governor. The Cranes do follow one in
exquisite order. There is one chief commander, one chief Judge of a
Province, one governor of all in the Ship, one Master in a house: In an
army be it never so great, the ensign of one is especially regarded and
attended on. In the body of man, though the limbs and parts be many, yet they
all obey one head.

Secondly, most fit for the cutting off of seditions and rebellions: and
therefore the Romans in all their extremest dangers had recourse unto this
Tanquam ad anchoram sacram, as to their shoot anchor, as to their last and
best refuge, as Liuy witnesses, Liu. lib. 6.
Trepidi patres ad summum auxilium decurrunt, dictatorem dici placet, The
fearful Senators did fly to their chiefest succor, (which was, to choose
out one to have supreme authority) whom it pleased them to call a Dictator.
Liu. lib. 22*
And when Hannibal pressed the Romans Ad dictatorem dicendum remedium iamdiu
desideratu^ ciuitas confugit, The City went to the choosing and pronouncing of
the Dictator, (...) lib. 6.
which was the remedy they long expected: Because, as in an other place he
writes, Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper obseruatum est, The commandment
and proclamation of the Dictator, was esteemed to be as the voice of God: there
was no appealing from him. (...) lib. 2.
Agedum dictatorem a quo prouecatio non est creemus: Come (said the Consul
Appius) let us make a Dictator, (...) lib. 6.
from whom it shall not be lawful for any man to appeal. Tantus erat
Dictatoris terror apud hosts vt eo creato statim a moenibus discesserint. So
great was the terror of the Dictator, even amongst the enemies, that as soon as he was created, they raised their siege and departed. Whereby appears
plainly, that the ancient Romans as well in war as in peace, found this as
a sure anchor hold against all seditions and dangers, to enjoy one, such a
Magistrate, as from whom there should be no appeal, and whose authority
should possess, as it were, the room of God upon the earth. The Carians were
once a wealthy and flourishing people: but by seditions, which came by the
having of many heads and governors, they were brought to ruin and utter
desolation: whereupon there arose a proverb, (...).
Multi duces disperdidere Cariam, Homer.

Too many Guydes undid the countey Caria.


When many Soldiers were mutinous, prudent Ulysses did repress them with
these words, (...).
Multos imperitare malum est, rex vnicus esto.
It Is not good too many to rule, let only be one King.
Which verse (as Aemilius Probus does testify) Dion did also use when
Heraclides began his faction.

Thirdly, the government of one Monarch does seem to resemble most lively the
image of Gods power and majesty: For as in the firmament, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, do as it were represent some image of the glory of the Eternal:
So the rule of Monarchs, in their several kingdoms upon earth, does call to
our considerations the government and high majesty of the omnipotent God. And
most certainly at this time of the alteration of the estate of the Jewish
commonwealth, the will and purpose of God is in his servant king David, Psalm.
22, 3. Psalm. 2, 6.
to erect an Image and type of the kingdom of Christ. But here (may some say)
If the will of God were now in David and his posterity, to set forth a figure
of the kingdom of Christ, how can the Israelites be said to sin so great a
sin, in asking a king, when they asked only that, which was determined in
the purpose of God? Why does the Lord so punish their request, in sending
them so wicked a king as was Saul, ^. Sam. 13 11 ^. Sam. 15, 9.
who besides his often and wilful difobedience against the commandment of
God, did most cruelly murder the priests of God, ^. Sam. 22, 18,
causing to be slain at one time fourscore and five, which ware the linen
Ephod, if in desiring a king, their will did concur with the will of God? Ye
are here to observe, that the Israelites had no respect to the purpose of God,
but only they showed forth the fruits of despairing and malcontented
affections. In the spoil of the goods of Job, ^ob. 1.15, 17, 21.
the Caldeans and Sabeans had no regard to the will and purpose of God, which
was most just and holy to examine sharply one of his servants, and to make him
a schoolmaster of patience to all posterity: their desire was only
injuriously to enrich themselves with the spoil of Job. In the death of our
savior Christ, the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees had no respect to the
will of God, Act. 2.23.
which was most merciful and just, by that all sufficient ransom for sin,
to save all believers: their intent was only to be revenged of him, whom they
hated with deadly malice, Even so, these Israelites have no desire here to obey
the secret decree of God, in the kingdom of David and of his offspring, to set
out a resemblance of the kingdom of Christ, but only their purpose is, with a
desperate coffeehouse to shake off the government of their good judges
Samuel, contrary to the revealed will of God, which had before decreed, Iud.
2.18.
that Whosoever was approved to be raised up of God for their deliverer, he
should afterward judge Israel all the days of his life. And therefore they
worthily receive a punishment of their obstinate disobedience against the
express commandment of God. And yet notwithstanding this history does show
us that the appointment of God was performed in Samuel, 1. Sam 7, 41.
who is said, To have judged Israel all the days of his life. Seven and
twenty years and seven months he had judged, ^. Sam. 13, 2.
when Saul began to reign. Two years was Saul king: for although he lived
above twelve years after that he was elected king, yet forasmuch as in the
second year he was denounced to be rejected of God, ^. Sam. 11, 7.
his kingdom is named to be but of two years in continuance. And during that
time also, ye authority of Samuel is not abolished, for even in these affairs
against Nachash the Ammonite, a punishment was in a public Proclamation
threatened against every one which would not follow Saul and Samuel, Act.
13.21.
although in the Acts of the Apostles, because the kingdom is the more
excellent state of government, the whole forty years be attributed to Saul,
as the greater power and majesty, swallowing up the less. As concerning the
miraculous providence of God extended toward the Israelites during the time
that Samuel was their Judge, there need no further testimonies, but that only
place in the seventh chapter of this book, 1. Sam. 7, 13*
where it is said, That the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the
days of Samuel. The Philistines were the deadliest and fiercest enemies that
ever molested the Israelits. Seeing then that God overthrew their cruellest and
mightiest enemies, and that not once or twice, but even all the days of Samuel:
what a wretched ingratitude was this, that because a few adversaries had gotten
advantage against one of their Cities, they should therefore unthankfully shake
off that happy government, under which God had granted them so many
triumphant victories? But what were the causes of this their unkind and froward
desire of alteration? First they would be liked to other nations round about
them, as they say: 1. Sam. 8, 5.20.
Make us a King to govern us, like all other nations. And afterward again: We
will be like all other Countries, a King shall judge us, and go out before us,
and fight our battayles. Foreign gouernementes, although they be in them
selves most excellent (as no doubt those were which were established under
kings) are not to be drawn as ensamples to other nations wherein another
estate of government has already taken place. We cannot affirm that because
this or that is now done in the common wealth of Geneua, ^oh. 12, 42.1.
or because this or that was once done in the Elderships and Councels of the
Jews, therefore the same ought to be done in other seniories and assemblies
where there is not that Ius gladij, that civil authority and power, which we
see plainly was in them. Their Synagogues had the ordering of civil
punishments, Math. 10, 17.
to condemn to be scourged, those whom they judged to offend: Math. 26, 47,
^7.
they could send out officers with swords and staves to apprehend Christ, they
could examine witnesses against him, and bind him and deliver him to Pilate.
And whereas when Pilate bade them take him and judge him after their own law:
^oh. 18, 31.
they answered, That it was not lawful for them to put any man to death.
Chrysostom does one way expound it, that it may well be meant of that kind
of death, which (to aggrauate the shame) they sought especially to have
executed on Christ. For otherwise they had authority to stone to death, as it
may seem that Steven was condenmed by them, because as the law was, that the
witnesses should cast the first stone, Deuteronomy. 17, 7.
so the witnesses in the stoning of Stephen, Act. 7, 58.
do orderly lay down their clothes at the feet of Saul. In the Chapter
following, their power does extend to draw out men, Act. 8, 3.
women and children, and to thrust them into prison: which authority Saul
could put in execution at Damascus, Act. 9, 1.
much more at the city Jerusalem.

Tertullus their Orator does acknowledge this before the governor Faelix when
he says of Paul, We took him, Act. 24.6.
and would have judged him according to our law, but that the chief captain
Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him out of our hands.

The ensamples of those which are chief governors in Aristocratie, ought not
to be drawn unto them which are subjects under a Monarchy. There is in every
dominion a supreme power, which the Greeks do call call (...) and (...) the
Latins Maiestatem, the Italians Signoria, and we in England do name it by the
French word Soueraintie. Wheresoever that chief authority does remain,
whether it be in one or in many, from thence must be derived the ordering of
all things, both in Church and Commonwealth.

^. Sam. 8.20
These Israelites here desire that they might have a King to go before them,
and to fight their battayles. Their request had not displeased God, had there
not been before an other form of government established amongst them: for
otherwise of a Monarchy, that may well be said which S. Augustine does write
against Faustus the Manichee, Aug. contra Fastum Manichaeum lib. 22 cap. 75.
Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit vt suscipiendi
belli auctoritas atque consilium sit penes principem, exequendi autem iussa
bellica ministerium milites debeant paci salutique communi. The natural order
most fit for the peace of mankind, does require this; that the authority and
counsel of taking War in hand, be in the power of the Prince: and the duty
of executing the commandments of War, is a thing that the Soldiers do
owe, for the maynteinance of the peace of the Commonwealth. And a little after,
Vir iustus si forte sub rege etiam sacrilego militet, recte possit illo iubente
bellare, ciuicae pacis ordinem seruans, cui quod iubetur vel non esse contra
dei praeceptum certum est, vel vtrum sit certum non est, ita vt fortasse reum
regem faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo
seruiendi. A just man, if he be a Soldier under his King being wicked, may at
his commandment fight, keeping the order of civil peace with his fellow
subjects, when that which is commanded is not directly against the word of
God: or whether it be or no, it is not certainly known; so that perhaps a
sin in commanding may make the king guyltie, and yet the order of obeying
may declare the Soldier innocent. Number. 13.3. Iosu. 11. Iosu. 6, 6.
When God ruled his people by Moses and Joshua, they as Dukes and Magistrates,
disposed all things both in war and peace, in ordering both Church and
Commonwealth, in causing the people to be circumcised, in buylding Aulters,
and every way governing the charge committed to them. When afterward he raised
up Judges, he endued them not only with warlike virtue, but that they might
better also reform abuses in the Church, Judge. 4, 4.
he gave sometimes to the Women, as unto Debora: sometimes to Men, as unto
Samuel, 1. Sam. 3, 20
the spirit of prophesying. When after, he established Kings, the Scriptures
do plentifully declare unto us what supremacy was granted to them over all
persons, 1. Chro. 13. 1. Chro. 23, 4.
and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil. David armed his people
with the authority of the sword, against all their public enemies: he caused
the Arc to be removed from a private man's house: he placed the orders of the
Priests and Levites, Psalm. 132.5.
and had a principal care to find out a seat for the Lords service, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Solomon deposed the wicked Priest
Abiathar, and placed Sadoc a better in his room. 1. Reg. 2, 35. 2. Chro. 8, 14.
He established the orders of the Levites and other officers: and (least any
man should think that Solomon did herein more then he might) it is said by
express words that this his charge of the Church was the commandment of
David the man of God. Asia armed his people against the enemies of Gods Church,
2. Chro. 14. 2. Chro. 15.13, 16. 2. Chro. 20.3.
he made a decree, that they should be slain which would not seek and worship
the Lord God of Israel, he deposed Maacha from her regencie, because of her
idolatry. Iehosaphat ordered the wars of the house of Judah: he sent forth
Elisham and Iehoram Priests to instruct the people: 2. Chro. 17, 8. 2. Chro.
19.8. 2. Chro. 29.1. 2. Chro. 31.4.
he placed in authority the Priests and chief nobles for the judgment of the
cause of the Lord. Ezechias by lawful war withstood Sennacheribs unlawful
oppressions. He repaired the temple, rooted out idolatry, and appointed the
courses of the Priests and Levites. Josias took order for the pulling down of
idolatry, 2. Reg. 23.4
and the execution of the priests of Baal. Afterward when the Romans had
conquered Jury, for as much as there is no power but of God, S. Peter does
also to them attribute this supremacy, 1. Pet. 2.13. Romans 13, 4.
calling the king a chief and supreme governor: and showing also what manner
of supremacy he has: to wit, such a chief power as does extend it self
generally to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of them that do
well. As largely then as goes good or evil, that is, through the observation
and breach of every commandment of either of the two tables, and throughout
all nations that can be either in the Church or commom wealth: so far goes
the supremacy of Princes in their dominions, to show forth their justice in
punishing, their mercy in favoring, and their love in rewarding. Saint Paul
speaks as well of the Roman Emperors of his time, Romans 3, 4.
as also of all other higher powers which are to ensue in any other age or
place, that they bear not the sword for naught, but are the ministers of God,
to take vengeance of evil doers.

1. Sam. 8, 3,
The second cause why these people desire to shake off the government of Samuel,
was, 1. Sam. 2, 3, 4.
because his sons ruling in his steed, did receive bribes, and pervert
judgment. Samuel does in this twelfth Chapter expostulate this matter at
large with them, and is cleared sufficiently in the conscience, and testimony
of them all. The iniquities which his sons committed, 1. Sam. 8, 2.
were not because he did not prescribe good ways unto them, but because they
did not walk in the ways and steps of their father. If a man have but a small
family, he shall yet be abused by some: What then must we think of those
higher powers, who have so many under officers in so infinite places, deriuing
their authority from them? 1 Reg 2, 22
Solomon when he commanded Ioab to be put to death for those wilful murders
which he had before committed, says, that he did the^ Patre suo Dauide
inscio, His father David not knowing of it. So herein Samuel his children, and
in all ages under Christian Princes, many things are done by inferior
Magistrates, which come not to the knowledge of superior powers, and whereof
no fault is to be imputed to them, seeing the offenses proceed not of want of
good and wholesome laws: but, for that there is not due obedience yielded unto
them.

The third cause, 1. Sam. 8, 1.
why they so greedily gape for alteration, was, because they distrusted in the
power and providence of God. They thought that the weakness of aged Samuel,
was not sufficient to deliver them from the oppression of Nachash the Ammonite.
The punishment which God laid upon their distrustful forefathers, might have
been a sufficient warning to them, Number. 13, 3.
to have showed them the greeuousnesse and horror of this sin. When Moses had
sent of every Tribe one, to view the land of Canaan (amongst whom, were Joshua,
of the tribe of Ephraim; and Caleb, of the tribe of Judah:) at their return,
many of them gave great reports of the power and strength of the Canaanites,
Nu^. 13, 34.
that they were mighty men, Number. 14.2, 9.
like Giants, and the sons of Enachim: and that the Israelites were but as
Grasshoppers in respect of them. The people began by and by to murmr and
despair, and to prepare a return into Egypt. Joshua and Caleb did what they
could to encourage the people, bidding them not to fear, Psalm. 78, 18.
for (say they) they are but bread for us: the Shield is departed from them:
the Lord is on our side: But the Israelites were so far from receiving
comfort, that they cried out one to an other, to fling stones against their
comforters. This distrusting mind did so highly displease God, Number. 26, 64.
that they were cut off and destroyed with many fearful plagues, so that of
above six hundred thousand of them, there came but two into the land of
Promise. The Lord had let that people see by sundry ensamples, that there is no
power so small, but that he is able sufficiently to strengthen it against the
enemies of his truth. Abraham having but three hundred and eighteen men, Genesis
14, 14
ouerthrewe the power of five Kings. Samson with a iawe bone slew a thousand.
Sisera the captain of the host of Iabin king of Canaan, Judge. 15, 19.
was of great strength, he had.900. charets of iron, Judge 4, 13. and 22.
yet was he slain at the last by the hand of a silly woman. And to Samuel, 1.
Sam. 7, 13.
though he were old, yet ye Lord gave him power to his dying day, to subdue and
keep under the haughty Philistines. By this continual experience of ye power
of God, they might have evidently seen, that there is no strength so feeble,
but God can plentifully enable it, for the fighting of the Lords battayles:
and thereupon they should have gathered courage and comfort, and not with such
wretchlesse unthankfulness, started back from the living God. What a most
ungrateful part was this, 1. Sam. 3, 20
when Samuel had so long time propounded unto them the heavenly truth of God,
and for the space of above.xxvii. years, as a most careful Magistrate
defended them from all invasions and oppressions, now in old age to forsake
him, and as weery of his government, to desire a King to be placed over them?
These Israelites do deal with Samuel, as afterward the subjects of David did
with their king, at the time of the rebellion of Absalom. David had then
reigned.xxx. years, and therefore was about lx. years of age (for he was
about.xxx. years old at the death of Saul. Psalm. 3.1.
) How his people did carry them selves in Absoloms conspiracy, he declares him
self in his.3. Psalm, wherein he complains that in that his time of need,
he found many so to become his enemies, that in most despitefull manner they
objected unto him, that there was no help for him in his God. But these
unfaithful Subjects, were like unto the Swallows which tarry with us in the
Spring and Summer, but in the cold of Winter do wholly forsake us: they were
like the Doves, which sit upon the house in fair weather: but if once a storm
do come, they are presently gone: or rather they were like that currish kind of
lazy Dogs, that will fawn upon their masters by the fires side, but if they
see him go abroad in foul weather, they are content to let him go a lone: or
like unto cursed Vipers, seeing that as much as in them lied, they sought to
rent the bowels of him of whom next under God they had their being, their
strength, and wealth, and whatsoever they possessed. The sin of many in these
our days, is by many degrees more heinous and detestable, then was the
offense of the Israelites in the days either of David or of Samuel. They
desired an exchange of their governor: but yet they desired to have a King
erected out of the midst of their brethren, according to the law in
Deutronomie. Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Out of thy brethren shall thou appoint thy self a King: thou may not set
over thee a stranger, which is not thy brother. How grievously then do they
offend, which desire to have brought in upon their Prince a foreign power, ye
power of a Priest of Rome? How horrible is their sin (if there be any such
monster in nature) that do gape for the invasion of a foreign Prince, to
weaken or abrogate that authority, which right, and blood, and the law, has
placed over them? What measure we should look for of Strangers, the dealinges
of the Spaniards in the Low Countries may be a sufficient warning unto us.
Their Nobles have been murdered, their ancient inhabitants spoiled, or dryuch
to fly their native soil. Their famous and flourishyng Cities so oppressed
and dispeopled, that the grass does grow in those streets, which have bin
heretofore by wealthy Citizens and Merchants so notably frequented and
replenished. Naples may likewise serve for instruction herein: where, when the
Spaniards prevailed, they were presently most miserably plagued with many new
taxes and tributes, whereof before, they never had mention. No man could have a
fire, but he must first pay six shyllinges for the chimney: none permitted to
eat sundry kinds of meats, but first he must fine for them: none to kill a
Foul, but first stick up a fether to give warning for the Impost: so that the
farmer of the Butcherie and Poultrie, received daily the sum of three hundred
Ducats. None fared the better because he bare the name of a Catholic.
Religion was not the thing which the hungry Soldiers respected: Protestant or
Papist, if he were rich, and had a fleece, all was one.

1. Sa^. 8, 3.11.
The Israelites found them selves grieved, that Samuels children received some
things of them: But by Samuels answer it may appear, that the receiptes of
his sons, were nothing to those infinite taxes and oppressions which a Tyrant
should bring upon them. It was well said of the Poet, Temporibus diris igitur
iussuque Neronis Iuuenal. satyr. 10.

Longinu^, and magnos Senecae praediuitis hortos,
clausit et egregias Lateranorum obsidet aedes tota cohors. etc.
In bloody times, and in rage of Nero the tyrant
Longinus great substance, gardens of Seneca, buildinges
of Laterans serve for fit spoylinges for the men armed.


Quintus Aurilius, when he (having a fair house in Alba) was drawn to
execution in the tyranny of Sylla, cried out, O house at Alba, thou wast the
cause of my death! In civil vprores, and in invasions of strangers, no man can
challenge any privilege for his integrity or profession. Be they Catholics
in name (as are now the Romanistes) or Catholics in deed (as are true
faithful Christians) be they Ministers, be they Merchants, be they Recusants,
be they Reformers, if they be wealthy, and have any thing to loose, all is one.
The most fearful punishment of all, is that which Samuel does warn them off,
that when the Lord shall lay oppression and bondage upon them, as a plague for
their coffeehouse, they shall cry unto the Lord for help, and not be heard:
1. Sam. 8.18.
Ye shall cry out (says he) at that day, because of the King which you have
chosen to your selves, and the Lord at that day will not hearken unto you.
There are three especial duties required in all good Subjects in any
established Commonwealth, whereof every one is wanting in these inconstant
Israelites. The first is in heart to be loyal to the supreme Governor. Eccl.
10.20.
Curse not the King (says the Wise man) no not in thy heart, least the birds
of the air do carry the voice, and the fethered fowls bewray thee. Whatsoever
is amiss in superior powers, seeing that (as Solomon witnesses) The heart of
the King is in the hand of the Lord: Pro 21.1.
it is the part of us that are inferiors, to pray to God to renew and guide
their hearts with his principal spirit: but in the mean time, in no case,
either to take up or move against them, or once in heart to wish for the
subuertion of their estate. When Nero, Caligula, or such Heathen tyrants
possessed the Scepter and Empire, yet did the Apostles of Christ Exhort every
soul to be subject to them: Romans 3.1. 1. Tim. 2.2.
and all prayers and supplications to be made to God for them. Baruch. 1 11
Pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and for Baltasar his
son, that their days upon earth may be as the days of heaven, that ye may
long do them service, and find favor in their sight.

The second duty of a faithful Subject, is in the ordering of his life, to
abandon sin and iniquity: for (as Solomon declares) For the iniquity of
the people, Pro. 28, 2.
the Prince is often changed. These Israelites say, That they have added this,
desiring of a King, to all their other wickedness, as their own conscience
accusing them of many other enormities. Look how odious the name traitor is to
the ears; and so grievous in deed should sin be to the soul and spirit:
for whosoever do by heaping sin upon sin, draw down a vengeance upon the
place where they inhabit, are by the sentence of the Wise man, found guyltie
of high treason against Prince and Country. Hose, 4 1.
There is (says the Prophet) no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of God in the
land: but by swearing, lying, murdering, stealing, and whooring, they break
out; and blood touches blood: therefore shall the land mourn, and the
inhabitants thereof shall utterly be destroyed.

The third duty is in tongue also to carry him self loyal and duetifull.
The Law of God is, Exodus 22 28
Thou shall not rail upon the Iudge^, neither speak evil of the Ruler of the
people* (...). 12.2. (...) 21 6.
The old Israelites were some s^^aen with Leprosies, some destroyed with
Pestilence, with fiery Serpents, and many fearful kinds of death, because
they murmured against the Lords anointed. These Israelites here, 1. Sam. 12.2
do tread in their steps, when because Iabesh Gilead their citte was in great
distress, do therefore impute the fault to the government under Samuel. Such
is the wickedness of many in our age, which because some troubles, dearth, and
scarcity, are for a time befallen unto, do therefore murmr either against
the Word now preached, or the Government now established: whereas in deed the
occasion ought chiefly to be ascribed to their own ungodly lives, and to there
wilful disobedience against the laws both of God and Sovereign. O (says God
by the psalmist) that my people would have harkened unto my voice: Psalm. 81.13.
For if Israel would have walked in my ways, I should soon have humbled their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries: I should have fed them
with the flower of Wheat, and with Honey, out of the stony Rock would I have
satisfied them. Ier. 44.17.
When the Jews (as it is in Jeremy) cried out that things were not so cheap
and plentiful amongst them since they gave over baking cakes to the Queen of
heaven, as they were before, when they worshypped the host of the Skies:
where, I pray you, was then ye fault? Not in the word taught by Jeremy, but
in the want of due obedience in the people to the voice of God uttered by the
Prophet. Even so in these our days, the cause of the dearth and scarcity
which does remain amongst us, is not in the word now preached, or the laws
now confirmed, but in the disobedience of the people both to the one and to the
other. As (not to use many instances) the Word of God, and the Statutes of our
most gracious Sovereign, do condemn pride and excess, as well in apparel
as diet, with all unthrifty gaming, and prodigality of life. Now where there
is no regard to avoid these sins, but that so many run wilfully headlong
to exceed their calling, and to live at a greater rate then their maynteinance
does extend unto, How is it possible, but that thereby many must needs be
brought to great distress, want, and penury. A late writer speaking of a
dearth in Germany, did yield this as the cause thereof, Hulric. Hutten in aula.
Omnes fere per Germaniam principes egent propter luxum et vanitate^, quibus
dediti plurima invtiliter absumunt. Vide sue enim vt multa scurris, ludionibus,
mimis, parasitis ac musicis largiuntur? Vides ne vt in aulis noctu diuque
edatur et bibatur? vt pauimenta vino madeant? vt plus ebrij isti profundant
quam ingurgitent, plus ingurgitent quam far possint? Tum ad aemulationem
quoque dantur vestes, atque is est principum tumor vt quanto magis egent tanto
minus egere videri velint, et idcirco nihil de pompa, nihil de apparatibus
remittu^t. What want we have, must be imputed to our own abuse of Gods
blessings, when for the prodigal wasting of them, God does shorten them, and
make the heaven as iron, Leuit. 26.19.
and the earth as brass. It must be laid upon our haughty disobedience of
the Law, and not upon such decrees, statutes, and proclamations whereby the
said abuses have bin so often and so justly prohibited. And yet if we would
duly call to mind how wonderfully people are now multiplied in every part of
this our realm of England (by reason that although by war we have sometime
lost some men, and by plagues also the Lord has eftsoons corrected us gently,
and as it were shaken the rod at us, and beaten us with a soft hand: yet we
have had no such civil wars, and universal plagues of Pestilence, Sweates,
or other consuming diseases, which heretofore have made waste over our whole
land) if I say, we would duly consider the great increase of people now, in
respect of that they have bin in times past; and how notwithstanding, the Lord
of his bountiful goodness has from year to year, either mercifully
provided for us within the land granting us sufficient not only to sustain
our selves, but also to be helpful and comfortable unto others; or else
plentifully supplied our necessities out of other countries, sending us, though
peradventure not so much as we have desired, yet infinite times more then we
have deserved: we should rather be enforced to admire and reverence the great
mercies of God, then with unthankful minds to repine and grudge against him.
Genesis 12.10. Genesis 26.2.
Abraham was compelled by famine to fly out of Canaan into Egypt. Isaak driven
to fly to Abimilec king of the Philistines, and to dwell in Gerar. Genesis 45.2,
Jacob forced to send his Family and Asses again and again to buy Corn of
Pharaoes servants. And although now through want of grain, we have in many
places endured some punishment, yet has it been nothing so heavily laid on,
as heretofore it has been upon many of our forefathers. In the year of our
Lord God a thousand sixty and nine, men were constrained to eat Cattes,
Dogs; yea, and men's flesh, in sundry parts of this land. In the year one
thousand three hundred and fifteen, some did eat Horseflesh, some their own
children: and in diverse places, when Prisoners came to be committed which had
any flesh upon them, they were welcomed with plucking in pieces, and devoured
half alive. Of late time, in the days of Queen Marie, many yet can remember
how many thousands in this land, for want of their accustomed corn, were glad
that they could feed upon their bread of Ackornes. But we (although our people
be now in a manner doubled or trebled above the number that were then) yet the
Lord of his everlasting mercy, does still vouchsafe to continue his goodness
toward us: Whose providence in thus susteining us is as mighty and
powerful, and in a manner the very same that was in the time of the Flood in
the Arc of Noah: which though it were but a small vessel, Gen 6.15.
the length but three hundred Cubits, the breadth but fifty, the deapth but
thirty; Genesis 7.11.
yet did the Lord in the same for the space of about a whole year together
(for so long were they tossed upon the waters) provide not for Noah only and
his family, but also for all beasts, birds, Genesis 8.13.
and creeping things, two and two of every kind. How was it possible to any
judgment of man, that so small a vessel should contain room, relief and
succor, for so many, and that for the space of so large a time? And how could
it be that those beasts and birds which do commonly one live of the spoil of
an other, should yet be all both wild and tame together, so long a time in the
Arc, and not one devour an other. Here the omnipotent power of God did
wonderfully show forth it self. God multiplied their food. God held his
holy hand over them. God preserved them one from praying upon another, and one
from hurting an other. And* so miraculous in a manner has been, and is the
providence of God to this our Realm of England. It is but a small Arc, but a
handful in respect of other nations: it is with inhabiters mightily
replenished: yet the Lord not one year (as in the Arc) but from year to
year, and many years has favorably preserved us. And though there be many
wild beasts, amongst which with malcontented minds do gape for an
alteration, that they may wreake their malice on the Saints of God, which
have their wills inwardly prove, and as it were the knives in their hands
ready drawn, to cut the throats of Gods children: yet the Lord does so with
his power put a snaffle in their mouth, and a hook in their nostrelles, that
they have not their purpose: The Lords name be blessed therefore, and the Lord
so bridle them ever hereafter, even for his mercies sake, in his son Christ
Jesus.

If these brutish natures had eyes to behold, and hearts to remember, what
singular blessings the Lord has bestowed on this small Island, 1. Sam. 12.24.
that they could (as Samuel speakeeh here to the Isralites) consider what great
things the Lord has done for them, they could not but be touched with remorse
and grief for this their viperous and heinous unkindness: whereas many other
Countries about us, either have not the word of God truly taught, 1. Cro.
14.15.
or if they have it, they have it either with war or bloodshed, or (which is
as ill) with joining together Christ and Belial. We may in all peace and
quietness freely resort to the Temple to hear the word of God and public
prayer in a known language, whereby both heart and tongue may go together; in
which respect every little Village in this realm of England has a greater
blessing, then all that large and ample region of Spain. And whereas other
Nations about us have continual broils and troubles within the land, we stand
as it were in a gallarie, as the Greek proverb is (...), Extra telorum
iuctum, Lucian. in votis.
where we may behold them (though to our grief) bayting and renting one an
others bowels: but we are free our selves from those outrageous mischiefs. We
feel those (...), Aristoph. in ambus. Plin. lib. 10 cap. 32. Plant. in paenulo.
Halcyonios dies, as the ancient Writers have observed, that when the little
bird Halcyon, otherwise called Alcedo, does build her nest in the Sea banks,
be the Sea never so rigorous and stormy before, yet there follows then a
great calm and quietness, which continues till she have hatched her young:
detering all which time, the Shipmen in the Sicilian Seas, do fear no dangers
of tempest.

This calm time, this mild, quiet, and peaceable time, the Lord has granted
to us, not for a few days, but for many happy years together. We enjoy that
sweet blessing which was in Jury and Israel in the time of Solomon, 1. Reg
4.25
To dwell safely every man under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree,
from Dan to Beersheba: from one end of the land to the other, Deuteronomy. 8.14.
even all the days of Solomon. O that we were not become so drunke^ with this
our prosperity as to forget that good Lord, which has given this good Land
unto us! Deuteronomy 32 15.
O that we were not like Ieshurun, spoken of in Deutronomie, like the Horse,
which being fat and well fed, fed, does spurn and flinge against his
keeper, and nourisher! O that we were not like the untamed Heyfar, by reason of
our long running in plentiful pastures, Ier. 31.18.
to forget to carry the sweet yoke of obedience! O that we could make true use
of all the benefits and blessings of our heavenly Father! that the loving
kindness of God might lead us to repentance: Romans 2 4.
that we could (as Samuel speaks here to the Israelites) Fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth with all our hearts, 1. Sam. 12.24.
and consider what great things he has done for us: Psalm. 107.8.
that we could Praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the woonders
which he daily does for this realm of England: 2. Sam. 12.14.
Then should the blessing of God still remain upon us, both upon Prince and
people. Pro. 16.7.
Then should the Lord continue his mercies in going in and out with our Armies.
Psalm. 8.13.
Then should the Lord either make our enemies become our friends, or thoroughly
turn his hand against our adversaries. Romans 13.1.
Then should there be amongst us every soul duetifully subject to the higher
powers. Then should we in all distresses, with contented minds, cast all our
care on God, for he cares for us. 1. Pet. 5.7.
Then should we in heart conceive that assured confidence and trust in the
goodness of God, that we should faithfully say with David, Psalm. 118.6.
If the Lord be on our side, we need not care what man can do unto us. Then
should the Lord long prosper, Psam. 21.4.
and even for ever preserve that happy Monarchy under which we are here so
peaceably governed, and grant us a Kingdom of everlasting peace in the world
to come: Which gifts and graces, the Lord of Lords, and King of all Kings,
vouchsafe to give unto us, for the merits of our savior Christ Jesus. To whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, one true and everliving God, for all his
inestimable benefits bestowed upon us, be all honor, glory, thanksegeuing,
and praise, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

