To all our Christian Brethren in England, which wait for the kingdom of
Christ, increase of the knowledge of the truth be multiplied unto them, with
strength and patience, and perseverance unto the end.
MY state is known unto many of you (my Brethren) how that of certain time
(though weakly and untowardly) I have striue^, and withstood the yoke of
spiritual bondage in the worship of God, which the man of perdition have yet
left behind for our sifting and trial. From the which that I might be
delivered (the Lord God the searcher of hearts I take to record) that it
have been mine only quarrel, and the cause of stirring me up to do that, which
I did. Concerning the which cause, I did not think it lawefull for me
(though I could have escaped in time enough) to withdraw my self into any
other place, for mine own liberties sake, until I had more openly witnessed
the same cause. Which when it seemed good unto God, that I with some others
should do, by abiding imprisonment a certain time: Then having offered our
selves to suffer whatsoever our vexers should lay upon us, and espyinge nothing
like to be done unto us, but to be holden with lingering imprisonement, and
that without liberty of communicating unto others the instruction of the same
cause, which we professed: we thought good rather to undergo some exile (as
it were) for redeeming at least some liberty of worshipping God with safety
of conscience. Which when we did, and diverse of our Brethren, which were
willing to come unto us were restrained: and we were persuaded, that to return
unto them thither, whereas by imprisonment we should again be holden from
them, would little anayle: I have judged that we have been debtors to them to
bestow upon them some thing which might help to increase their spiritual
courage and comfort. In which behalf, when the expectation of me and diverse
others rested upon some, who in the end did but slenderly answer, and
satisfy the same: Then I, which for my unworthiness and poor gift, had
thought never to have set forth any thing publicly, yet was provoked to
endeavor my self, in some part, as far as the Lord should make me able, to
satisfy that want, which I thought to be great. And I went about a piece of
work touching Church government. But partly by sickness, and partly by weying
the cost of the print, and findinge it to be above my reach of ability: I was
hindered, and have let stay that work, until the Lord further enable me.

In the mean time I thought good to write some other little treatse, and I
chose this 122. Psalm, thinking thereby to have occasion ministered to speak of
diverse of those points, which concern the cause mentioned. And I was
determined to have spoken somewhat briefly upon the whole Psalm. But in the
first entrance meetinge with those points, which I thought good they should
be discussed somewhat largely for edifyinge sake: Again, sickness and other
causes cutting me short: I was constreined to end at this time skarce
finishing the first verse. Neither was it my desire to seem to speak much
upon a little Text, (yea I confess that I have passed the bounds of
Scholar like handeling the Text) but the things which offered them selves to
be spoken of, seemed to my judgment to require so much measure. Herein my
desire unto the lord is, that my poor labor may be accepted of him, and may
be profitable to his people.

J Would have the Reader advertised, that whereas in one place of this book, I
have these words: The Author to the Hebrews speak of certain Christians,
which were racked, etc. My meaning was not, but that I judged him to speak
especially of those which suffered persecution, before the coming of Christ in
the flesh: which believing in Christ to come, may also well be called by the
name of Chrstians. Yet after it was printed, I suspecting that it might be an
occasion of cauilling to some: I thought good to set down a word or two of my
meaning therein.

PSALM. C.XXII. ver. I. I rejoiced when they said unto me* We will go into the
house of the Lord.
RIght well is it said, that where ye treasure is, there will the heart be
also: Mat. 6.19.
which thing is seen in this servant of the Lord, who behaved him self
worthelie in the Arc bringinge home. And as it was the Lords work, so did he
carefully acquit him selfet, hat the curse should not lay hold on him,
Iere. 48.10.
which belongs to the working of the Lords work negligentlie. But that he
did, he did with all his power, and when he had finished his joyful work,
his joy was not ended, but rebowned again and again, with a sweet Echo in
his soul. So as it was meat and drink to him to do the will of God: so was
it also his pleasure to think and muse upon the same, and he has conceived
the grace of Gods spirit, and has brought forth this Psalm, as the fruit
of so godly a meditation, leaving us a glass and pattern wherein to see the
spots of our deformed and lothesome negligence, and a lantern he has set
bright before us, that we may see to take our way to go and lay hand on
the Lords plought, to do his acceptable work. Out of whose example and
words in this Psalm, we mind, by the good furtherance of God, to gather
some aduertisementes to stir our selves up, yet whiles it is called to day,
Hebr. 3.13.
least we should be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin.

First we have to speak of his joy and the cause thereof, the remembrance of
which, he does now feed upon, and chewe the cudd upon this joy of that happy
day, which he thus remembers. Psalm. 78.71.
The Lord chose David from the sheep folds to feed his people in Jacob and
his inheritance in Israel. And as it is spoken of him that he fed them in the
simplicity of his heart, Ver. 72.
so did it eue^ appear in his first entrance of his kingdom. For nothing
held him careful in comparison of this, to have the Lord to vouchsafe to
come home again unto his people, and to be at peace with them, to love them,
and remove shame and rebuke far from them, by returninge his holy Arc, the
token of his presence, and the lively image of his countenance upon them, as
the taking away thereof was the turning his back upon them, and turning away
his face, as he had threatened before for sin. Deuteronomy. 31.1^
And it was the reprochefull steyning of the glory of Israel: as it said, The
glory is departed from Israel, 1. Sa^. 4.22.
for the Ark of God is taken. Therefore was the care of David, and his zeal
set on fire within his breast, which thing he mightily declared, and the ^^aine
thereof appeared, when he swear unto the Lord and vowed a vow unto the mighty
God of Jacob, saying, Psalm. 132.^.
I will not enter into the Tabernacle of mine house, nor come upon my palet or
bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyeliddes to slumber, until I
have found out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob. Now although it be my purpose, and order requires to hasten to the
cause of David's joy, which he hear mentions, yet it stands with dew
order in this place, as it does with edifying to stand upon his great care,
in waiting for that thing, which being obtained, this his joy succeeded. For
lively and sound is that joy which the heart feels, when it is refreshed
from care and grief going before.

When the Lord had delivered his soul out of all adversities, which he
sustained in the days of Saul, and had brought him to the glory of his
kingly Throne: herein he showed the simplicity of a true heart, in that he
was not changed by the sudden alteration, nor his heart beguyled by those
pleasures, to cause him to forget God. He was not high minded, Psalm. 131.1.
he had no proud looks. But he kept his soul, as a child that is weyned
from his mothers breast. Yea at this time he thoroughly weined him self, from
taking pleasure in any thing, until the Ark of God should be brought home
and placed in Israel, which he calls by ye name of the Lord, Psalm. 13^.^*
and the mighty God of Jacob. Thereunto does he swear and vow, not to have
regard unto his own tabernacle nor house, not to count it his home, or settle
him self therein, neither to take any sound rest until he had seen this
business of the Lord in dew forwardnes. Thus was he thankful unto the Lord,
which had remembered him, and all his afflictions.

Let us examine our selves and call to mind the years that are past, when the
fyrie sword did hang over our heads in the days of Queen Marie, and that
by so weak a threede, that we looked every hour when it should fall upon us,
when we being strangers from our own houses, walked from house to house, at
such time as the Owls and Backs look forth and fly: And thought it well
if we might live so without house or land, or ought else save bare bread for
the life.

We were as the Jews which by Hamans means were sold to be slain, Ester.
3.13.
and destinate to a day of death. And we were as humble Hester, which would
make no request but for life only. Ester. 7.3.
Now when we sighed and cried for the bondage, and the cry for our bondage
came up unto God, Exodus 3.33.
and God heard our moan, and remembered his covenant: Then he brought again
our captivity, Psalm. 126.1
as he did of Jacob: then were we like unto them that dreamed. Even for
sodeine joy, doubting whither we dremed those happy tydinges, or no. Then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy. The^ the Nations about us
said, that ye lord had don great things for us. And we sang thereunto, the Lord
have done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. Christ Jesus seemed then to
us as a shining and burning Lamp, and we seemed for that time to rejoice in
the light thereof. But our giuinge of thanks and singing praise unto god, was
skarse so good as that of the people of Israel, mentioned in the fourth Chapter
of Exodus, Exodus 4.31.
who when they heard that the Lord had visited them, and had looked upon their
tribulation, they bowed down and worshipped. But when tribulation was
increased upon them, Exodus 16.2.
they murmured against God and his servant Moses. So could we bow down and
worship in the day of our deliverance, but since that time, not through
bitter affliction as did they, but through too much pa^pering with more flesh,
then ye pottes of Egypt have, we have waxen fat, and have forgotten the day
of our penury and hunger. Yea we have forgotten, and forsaken the Lord the
holy one of Israel, in that we are gone backewarde. And better has the Ox
known his owner, Esa. 1.3.
and the Ass his masters cribbe, then we have known him that saved us. For if
we knew him, we would also surely know, that he redeemed us from that fiery
furnace that we should burn with more zeal of furthering his kingdom upon
earth to the aduauncing of his glory. But the people of England in that day
when the Lord did lift up their heads, were far from the zeal and practice
of David, who being advanced to his kingdom, had not yet the thing he would
have, and gave him self no rest, until he had done dew homage unto the
Lords kingdom, by furthering, procuring, and labouringe about those things
which appertayned unto the true worship of God, until he did see them at a
good stay. But our Clergy first, which should with great affliction have
labored about the Lords work, to have seen that first finished, before they
had instauled them selves into their own rowmes: they contrariewise laid
hold on the great livings, catch who catch might the rich Bishoprikes and
fat Benefices.

And as Achsaph the daughter of Caleb, Joshua. 15.19
when her father had given her a portion of high ground, desired still
more, namely, places with springes of water: so was their desiring, and
desiring again. For those which were served with Benefices where corn
ground was most, they must have an other, where good store of pasture lie. And
when they were served with that, they must long for one where store of sheep
are kept, and then they think they should be well. But would to god, it had
bin no worse affection and desire, then yt of Achsaph, which desired the
increase of her portion of that land, which the Lord had given and blessed
unto her people: but these men have been greedy of the fat spoil, and have
not been aware that it was the spoil of Jericho, which ought not to have been
meddled withal, but to have been execrable things unto us. I mean not as
though that wealthful spoil might not have bin taken use of, Joshua. 6.17.
by converting it another way. But those things holding still their nature and
strength which they received of ye Cananitish Roman, ought to have bin to us
execrable things. And even as the lord gave unto ye children of Israel the
first conquest in ye land of Canaan, namely, over Jericho, without bow or
sword, horse, Iosu. 6.
horseman, or any battle, or any hand moving of theirs, in token that he
would always stand on their right hand, and their victories should proceed
from him, if they would go forward to fight the Lords battle: so the Lord
gave us this victory, not with noise of battle, or tumblinge of garments in
blood, but by his own hand alone from heaven, the thing to us unlooked for,
thereby encouraging us to march forward under his banner, and under the good
luck of this watcheword: The Lord lives, which brought the children of Israel
out of Egypt and out of Babel, and the Lord lives which have brought again
the captivity of his poor suppliantes, from the iron yoke of Antichrist: and
the Lord also giving us the earnest of assured victory in those battles which
were to ensue in the behalf of his sons kingdom, against his professed
enemy Antichrist, if we would have been so gracious, as once to have taken
them in hand. But we refused to go to the battle any more, though the
Cananite dwelled still in the land, and bare the sword to slaye every true
Israelite therewith. I mean that man of Rome, who by his Cananitishe offices,
and Canons of his laws, standing still in their strength, bears the scepter
right up, eue^ a rod for the righteous. Thus have we behaved our selves, not
as faithful Joshua, and his soldiers, which from Jericho ceased not to go
forward to more battles, and therein saw ye great salvation of God fightinge
for them, when the Sun and Moon stood still in heaven, Joshua. 1^.13.
and hasted not to go down for a season. But we have done more like the
Amalekites, which invaded Zicklag, which did eat, drink, and dance many
days, 1. Sa^. 30.16.
because of the great spoil they had taken, until sudden slaughter and
vengeance came upon the^ in the midst of their mirth. So let us take heed,
that we do not so long eat and drink of the spoil, and dance in security,
until that David Christ Jesus come at unawares, and take away all, and our
lives therewith also in most just judgment.

We also have done as that other generation of the Jews which arose up after
Joshua, which regarded their own ease more then the Lords commandment, and
his glory, which stood upon the rootinge out of those wicked ones, whose
sin was ripe and their day was come: those Cananites Perezites, and Iebuzits
suffered they to dwell still among them. Therefore the Lord said, that they
should be thorns to their sides, Judge. 2.3.
and their Gods should be their destruction, as it came to pass. Even so have
we ten times more made covenant with that cursed brood of Antichrists
birds, not only entering into near familiarity with the men, but also
borowing many of their ceremonies, intertaining their form of service for the
most part, being turned but from Latin to English: and yet which is worse,
holding our necks under their gyrdles, by making our selves willing slaves to
their Ecclesiastical sword. And because this practice could sonest be
atchiued, and this ungracious work could most speedily be iumbled up: then was
it counted Policy, to wipe men's noses with, and to give them amocke. But be
not deceived, God is non mocked, who redeemed you from adversity to this end,
that you should deal wisely and faithfully in all his house. Therefore it did
stand you upon to have taken better aduisement in the reforming of religion,
and matters about Gods worship, knowinge that above all things it is a
matter most curious. And you should with fear and much trembling, setting
apart your own effaires for a season, as David did here and that with a
solemn vow making, that you would first seek the building of Gods kingdom:
you should thus, I say, have been conversant in this business, knowing that the^
all things would have prospered with you. You should also have known yt the
lord in his worship might not admit any strange devise under pretense of
pleasing some, nor might admit any mingling of his wisdom with men's
wisdom, any tolerations of vanities with a smoothe and feigned promise to
take them away in time to come. Why did the Lord show such a terrible and
fearful example upon the two sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Leui. 10.1.
as to skortche them with fire from heaven? Because they took fire for their
censeres, from the hearth, which they should have taken from the Altar. And
they were but young scholars in those ceremonies, and the observations were
many, and it was at the first beginning of their trayning to practice: yet
the Lords jealousy burned with fire. And why? Had the Lord so great regard, for
a coal of fire? was it not to leave a fearful monument for all men to
behold, that they might take heed least in matters pertaining to the worship
of God, they alter and change even the least thing? If any man want skill,
let him withdraw himself. For it is written: Take heed to thy foot when thou
entrest into the house of God, Ecclesiastes 4.17.
and be more near to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they
know not that they do evil. Behold, how many in the Realm of England
have done and daily do presume to set in their feet into Gods house, and
have not learned how to sacrifize aright. Offer not they the sacrifice of
fools? And they will not know that they do evil.

But to return to those which have been chief master workmen in the
reformation of religion at the f^rste: Can they not behold, how that for
want of this faythefull zeal, which was in this servant of God David: For
want of dew fear and trembling, careful crying for the spirit of wisdom,
and whole attending upon the Lords work, with hearts free from worldly
intanglings: And for want of that intier love and charity, 1. Cor. 13.
which seeks not her own things, but those which are Christ's, and her poor
brethrens: I say, for want of these things, and being drunken with that new
vessel of wine of worldly concupiscence then set a broche: Can they not epsy
how they have drawn their lives so far wrong, that skillful workmen, yea
now every bungler can not but wonder to see such work. For they have framed
their timber, some toe long, and some toe short, in such sort, that the
buildinge hangs all on the one side, tottering and reeling with every wind,
and waits but for a blast from the Lord to cause it to fall, and to slaie
all those, which have committed themselves to such a false building. And as for
the form and fashion of the house, where was the pattern which God showed
Moses in the mount? Exo. 26.30.
It was to be found, but it was not sought, the have was so great to other
things. Therefore because the Lords pattern was refused: no marvel thowgh he
refused to send his spirit of wisdom unto those, which stood in stead of
Bezaleel, Exodus 36.1.
and Aholiab, and the rest of the workmen. For veiwe and try out this
reformation. Look unto your brethren of other nations round about which have
reformed, if they have admitted such things as you, who yet notwithstanding
come short eno^gh (...) duty. But look unto the word of God, and epsy out
there, how many coals of fire, you have taken, not from the altar Christ
Jesus, but from the smoking chimneis of the Cananites which dwelt in the land,
the Papists I mean. Therefore repent and return, or else take heed of the
Lords fire from heaven, who although he use more patience and long sufferaunce
toward you, then he did toward Nadab and Abihu: yet be you assured that he
has not now less regard and jealousy for the body, then he had then for the
shadow.

And whereas some say, what? It is a house, though it be a downegate thing,
though it want roufe, though some walls, though it want this and that. Many
such songs the babes in the cradle hear, to rock the^ a sleep. But by their
own words I will judge them. For suppose that some noble man minds to build
a house, he hireth workmen and many servants: part of their wages he paieth,
for the rest he appoints dew order, and make with his workmen straight
covenant in all things, hastening the work. Since he goes into an other
country, and return five and twenty years after: if he then find his house
half vnbuilded, and the timber which is laid, rotten for default of covering
in dew time, and likewise the mortar crumbled away, and the stones some fallen
and some ready to fall: the workmen they take their wages, and spend it
every day at the alehouses and tauernes, eating, drinking, and playing, when
they should be at work: will not that Noble man at his coming cast in prison
those workmen and servants, and give his steward also a great rebuke, and
put out his house to other workmen? And yet these chief builders of whom I
have spoken, many of them, yea most of them have confessed and do confess
until this day, that many things are amiss in the Church, and yet we must
be content and bear the^. And in deed are there many things wanting and
missing to the finishing of the Lords house, and can they sit still and eat
and drink, and not buckle them selves to their business? Or may the Lords
work above other things suffer delay, and wait our good leisure? Or are
they the Lords remembrauncers, which can give him rest, and them selves also,
Esai. 62.7.
before they see Jerusalem, the praise of ye world, redeemed and reedified
from the ruin thereof? Can they so long time use the tabernacles of their houses
hanged and decked with Arres, and Tapestrie, and fare deliciouslie every day?
Can they so long go to their palet and bed, and suffer their eyes to slumber
and sleep, before they have found out a place for the Scepter of Christ, his
lawful government, and made ready a Throne for him to sit and rule, and
tread Antichriste under foot? This is counted but a small want. O deep
security! This we must bear: and we are content so to do, as long as the
Lord has made any promise to bear with wickedness. But he is merciful, and
long sufferinge: but so, as he will not hold the sinner innocent. Exodus 34.7.
And if he spoke by his Prophet, saying, Esa. 1.14.
that the Sabothes and solemn feasts of the Jews (which notwithstanding were
after his law) were a burden unto him, and he was weary to hear them: How
think we is he weary to bear so many Sabothes, which he never made, and so
many ceremonies and other devises and strange Church gouuernement, which never
entered into his mind: whither are these things a burden or no unto him think
we? Yea such a burden, that as he has spoken concerning them, so has he
concerning us also: Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries. Yea he must needs
skoure our dross. Esai. 1.24.
For in deed our silver is become dross, and our wine is mixed with water,
far otherwise the^ it was among them. But they say, we must bear now, for
the time is past, when the matters of reforminge the Churches were chiefly
handled, and we must tarry until a fit time come again. In deed, there was
a time carelessly slipped at the beginning, when the iron was whote, but the
workmen were lasie, and neglected to frame and fashion the work, before the
iron was cold. What gracious liberty might not have bin obtained, if they, of
who^ I have spoken, had bin as careful and sorrowful for these things, as
Nehemiah, who fasted and prayed certain days, Nehem. 2.2
and mourned so much because the Wall of Jerusalem was not yet builded, that
the King could easelie discern his sorrow by his countenance, and was moved
with compassion, to bid him ask what he would have, before Nehemiah durst
mention his suit unto him. And there is no doubt, but like sorrow and care
should have found like compassion to have bin refreshed with, and no less
furtherance to every godly enterprise. For the Lord would surely have done
it, who have the hearts of Kings and Princes in his hand. And as we have
heard, there wanted not some gracious offer concerning these things. But the
Lord lay not to our charge, that which is past. If occasion offered by him, be
not taken, our care, fear, and grief in repenting, ought to be the greater,
and our endeavor the more behement to recover our losses. Seek the Lord then,
while he may be found* Labor better then before. Disburden you of al, either
offices or livings, which hang on and press down, Heb. 12.1.
to hinder you in the work. Give glory to God and his son Christ Jesus, by
setting up his royal Throne among us, which is that you call Church
government, which many thousand tongues have confessed and complained to be
wanting. Once again, remember I say the Lords deliverance, h^we he saved us
as he did Israel from Pharao in the red Sea. Let us singe as Moses did at
the shore: He is my God, and I will prepare him a Tabernacle. Exodus 15.2.
Therefore are we escaped the drowning, that we should make the Lord a
Tabernacle. Let us not only promise it in singing or saying, but perform
our vows unto the Lord, which we made in the day of our distress: and
let this Tabernacle be so made, that being viewed in the end by our Moses
Christ Jesus, Exo. 39.43.
the work and the workmen, may receive a blessinge. This let us do, and go
on, and prosper, and live in the Lord: if not, let us be sure, the
consumption and plague determined, shall ouerspread and ouerwhelme us by gods
righteous judgment, 2. Cor. 10.6
who have vengeance ready for all disobedience.

Thus have I showed, how especially the Clergy have acquit themselves in
the day of the Lords visiting of us, if it had not ben hidden from our eyes.

And now concerning the rest of the people (I mean those which had some
knowledge and zeal) they also have been well agreed with their guids in their
neclige^ce. For they having once obtained a service in the English tongue,
thought it so great a matter, that they might lawfully be holden excused
though they sought no further: and having gotten a shadow, wherein they might
cool the^ selves in ye heat of the day, and rest a little from their wearines:
They have given them selves to eating, drinking, and sleaping under that
shadow, and forgett the rest of their journey, until darcke night come wherein
no man can walk. John. 9.4.
Neither have they known, that as the Lord gave to the children of Israel a
cloud by day to shadow them from the heat, Exodus 13.21
to this end, that they should journey forward to their resting place: So also
ye Lord gave them a defense from that present heat, to the intent that they
goinge through the vallie of tears, Psalm. 84.6.
should journey forward, and go from strength to strength, until unto every
one of them, God had appeared shining out of Sion the perfection of beauty.
Psalm. 50.2.
No, but the people have been as a strong ass couching down betwixt diverse
burdens of spiritual bondage. Gene 49.14
And they have seen that rest is good, and that the land is pleasant,
therefore they have bowed their shoulder to hear, and have been subject unto
that yoke, which is contrary to ye liberty, Galat. 5.1.
wherein Christ have set us free. Eue^ so it is certainly. For the pleasures
of this world have stolen away the hearts of many, and have caused zeal and
religiousnes to be frosen up: so true is it that one can not serve both God and
Mammon, but either he must love the one and hate the other, Luke 16.13*
or at the least in leaning to the one, he must neclect and despise the other.
For the people of England, I mean those which either at that time, or since,
have felt some motions of Gods spirit unto godliness: the most part of them, I
say, whiles they have applied them selves to eat and drink largely, as in the
days of rest, to buie and selle, and to smile merely upon gain coming in,
and to welcome it with giving it the hand, their hearts have been stolen before
they have been aware: so that they being once delivered from the filthiness of
the world, 2. Pet. 2.20.
through the knowledge of the Lord, have again entangled them selves
therewith, and have returned as the dog to his vomit, and as the sow that is
washed, to the walowing in the mire. For upon this taking a smatch and taste of
worldly ease and wealth, whereof I spoke, the stomach have become gredie, and
there have been no end of seeking gain, laiyng up in store, making the barnes
wider, joining house to house, Esai. 5.8.
and land to land. So that now if one come and tell the^ of further seeking
the face of God, and building his kingdom: he speaks to the belly which
has none ears, and his speech is like unto his, which speaks with a
strange language, and he speaks to them which fare as if they were in a
dream. For the wine of the fornication of this world have cast them into a
sleep, and they have not known, neither will know till it be to late to
recover it, that they have sold their birth right for a mease of potage: Heb.
12.16.
And have not followed the counsel of him which says: When thou eatest
honey, take heed thou eat not too much, Prou. 25.16
lest it hurt thee. Neither have they boughte the precious Pearl of Gods
Kingdom: Mat. 13.45.
but they have sold it for that which glistereth, and yet is no gould.

But we ought to have taken heed of all such worldly things, especially
until we had further finished our work and labor in the lord: herein
following the example of those men, which defer their euentide meele, until
they have ended their work, though in such time of the year, as part of the
night do overtake them. For their experience do teach them, that whilst their
hand is now in work, it is not greatly grievous, though they abide some
wearines and cold: But when they have with eating and drinking been satisfied,
and have basted themselves well by a good fire, then it is death to go to
work again: but forthwith the fealing of that ease craves more, until the
time of sleep.

Therefore ought we to have holden ease and rest, and worldly commodities,
even at the swords point, as enemies to those which fight the Lords battles,
by denying them selves and all things, and taking up the cross, and also as
clogges and weightes to them which have a race to run, except that they were
used, as though they were not used, and let pass as strangers, not
entertained, and welcomed as beloved friends.

Yet notwithstanding this people have in the midst of their carelesnes, an
answer ready as good as an aperne of fig leaves. For say they, we must
abide a time, and the time is not yet come, and they are not ashamed to call
it, the Lords leisure, which is their own leisure, seeing the Lord have
compleined a long while since, as being weary of their lasines, saying: How
long will it be yer this people will go up? And concerning not being yet time,
the Prophet Agge answers them: The Lord of hosts speaks: thus says this
people: Agge. 1.2.
The time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded. Is it time
for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house lies waste? And
with what courage can this people build, yea and that gorgeously, siele, hang
with clothes, and plant: and se^ the stones of the Lords house lyinge still in
the dust? Alas that care is wanting which we have mentioned here to be in
David, who swear and vowed not to take as it were, the possession of his house,
the Ark of God being from home.

That care, zeal, and endeavor is wanting, which was in Nehemiah, and those
which were with him, which in ye speedy buylding of the Wall, Nehe. 4.23.
did not put off their clothes but only for wasshinge, until the work was
finished, which endeavor the Lord blessed with mighty success.

They moreover in their answering pretend that we must be thankful to god for
that we have, and charge them with unthankfulness, who with grief and great
mourning bewail that is wanting, and bend unto it: But what unthankfulness was
in Hanani, one of the Israelits which came to Nehemiah, and being demanded
concerning the state of the Jews, he said, they were in affliction and great
reproach, Nehem. 1.3
because the wall of Jerusalem was not builded up. Was he unthankful to God
which had returned their captivity, granted them his true worship in their
own land, with reedifying ye Temple? And was the material Wall such a
matter, to complain of? And what unthankfulness was in Nehemiah, to conceive
great grief therevppon, Nehem. 1.4.
and to fast and mourn certain days? It should seem that they were
straight in their own bowels, when as the Lord was liberal and bountiful
toward them. But they knew, that the full building of Jerusalem was the Lords
praise, and the honor of his people, and every ruin which was to be beholden
theare, was to all nations and people which should see it, a witness of their
shame: In as much as it was a monument of the Lords anger, which had
dishonored them, who by their transgressions had dishonored him.

And if in those material things, and figures, the case stands so: What
reproachful people are we, and what blind, dissolute, and miserable men, which
see not our reproach and misery, neither do we feel any burden thereof, as
striving to be eased of the same. But rather we bost thereof, and glory in our
shame, and say, thanks be to God, we are well, and have religion reformed
better the^ many other countries: And such like smoth speeches and sweet
words, which we have been taught of diverse of our teachers to heal our deadly
hurt. Iere. 6.14.
For that which we want is more then a thousand city walls: and all the
cities in the world are not worth one lively church which is Gods Kingdom,
wherein the throne of Christ is only exalted, and the throne of Antichrist is
laid for his footstool.

And until you see this thing brought to pass, O ye people, and see your
selves also the living stones of this living buildinge: mourn and lament
bitterly. Fast and pray. Bid farewell to pleasures, and to the day of
mirth. Let ye Bridegroom come out of his chamber, and the bride out of her
closet Weep upon your fair seeled houses your enlarged pastures and fields,
your sweet gardens, pleasant arbours and bowling allis. Know your selves to be
in more grievous bondage of soul, by being holden from Christ his true
government: then the people of Israel were in bondage of their bodies, when
they walking forth by the rivers of Babel, Psalm. 137.1.
could not be refreshed from their woo, but they sat down and wept, when they
remembered Sion. It was not the pleasant walkinge by the rivers of waters, that
could entice them to be merry, and forget their grief, and forget their
country, from which they had now long time been absent. Seventy years
could not instraunge them, nor weane them from the remembrance of Jury, and
Jerusalem, and mount Sion: Not so much because there was their dwelling, as
because they dwelt there together with the Lord, giving there outward tokens
of his presence. Therefore they vowed, and wished hard things unto them
selves, Verse. 6.
if they preferred not Jerusalem before all joy (...) if they should be
joyful, before they should see Ierusale^s full deliverance.

Thus should it fare with us. And even as a woman which full dearly have
loved her husband being now deceassed this life, can take no pleasure in
beholding his garments: but rather renew the remembrance of her loss, and
increase her woo and grief: So should houses, fields, pastures, pleasant
gardens, orchyards, gold, silver, yea wife and children, and whatsoever else
of outward things: we should inioie them, and look upon them, shasting the
head, with wailing and wrinking the hands, crying, alas for our husband Christ
Jesus, which have left us all these good things, and he is not with us: But
our sins have caused him to depart a side, seeing he have been so
despightfullie used amongst us, by exalting the sword of his enemy, and
treading his sword under foot. And lest any should think me to ouerreach, in
saing we are in greuouser bondage then were the Jews in Babylon, though to
speak of it will be thought of some, straying from my matter, yet I must
regard edifying more then any other order. Therefore I demand of those which
have any eyes to see, whither they can behold their souls to be sold for
handefulles of Barlie, and morselles of bread, even for tithe sheaues (whereas
if we had been sold for slaves, appointed to bodily toil, we might have
held our peace) For does not he which have money, or the letter of some great
man, or favor by other means, does he not get the gift of a Benefice of
some Patron, and being presented to the Bishop, he is forthwith sent to be
instauled? and so the guydes of our souls, ar appointed unto us without our
advice and counsel, whose life and death of soul it stands upon to try our
guydes, that after they have been found able to cut and divide our portion of
ye bread of life in dew season, they might be approved of us, and received.
But that which is more grievous, when a blind leader is come to take us by
the hand, we have no authority as the Church of God, to refuse him, or to
complain for redress, or to remove him, after we have tried his inabilitie.
Are not then our souls in bondage? Furthermore, we have no authority to
complain of that, or any other mischief, in our own congregation, 1. Cor.
5.4.
that by the power of our Lord Jesus, which there ought to florishe and bear
the swaye, even in every Church of his, that mischief might be remedied: but
other Lords besides Christ do rule over us, Esai. 26.13.
and over the whole Church, yea over many hundred churches: and them we must
seek up through the province, the^ must we dance great attendance, and to
them we must complain: and if our complaint be of any thing done against the
honor of Christ, or against our liberty which he have given us, our mouth
shall be stopped, and we shall be cut shorter. But if it be a matter against
their own honor, touching their injunctions, as of the garment of obedience,
and the cappe of maintenance, or for taking down the imagerie work about the
Font, or such thing, then we are good parishioners, they will visit us, and
redress those things well enough. Are not now our souls in bondage?
Furthermore, we can not serve God, or worship him publikelie in spirit, as
we ought to do, for we are tied to the dead letter, and stinted out our
measure, that we must give God this day, even as much, and the self same,
which we gave him the last day, that must we also give him every day in
the year, all the time of our life. Whither he be pleased or no, that is his
stinte and his fee, he may no more have. And though he be weary of that and
lothed with it, because it is all one disse of meat continually, (and that
would loathe any man's stomache) yet he must have it all, and never a whit less.
He is a cruel master, which will urge his bond slave to eat up three or
four meases of potage, when his stomache will not bear one, without
regorginge. But the Lord is worse served at our hands. And we are forced to
mock the lord: after this manner, in bringinge him such a worship, as he
spueth out of his mouth, and that to the endless hurt of our own souls. Are
not then our souls in bondage? Moreover, if half a dozen, or half a skore,
do consent and agree together, and choose a man sit to guide them: can they
bring him in? or for want of him, or any other man sufficient, may they
freely go to another place, to hear the word and receive the Sacraments? No,
there is a law, and by that law, they must come home to their own Parish,
there must they feed upon the rocks and stones, or else starve. Will any
unmerciful manne deal so with his beast, as to tie him where there grow not
one spire of grass? And release can the poor souls have none, until there
may come new laws, which may bring redress and grant further liberty,
although they never come, but still streighter and streighter. Even as the
Israelites were more hardly dealt with, after they had motioned their suit of
going into the wilderness to sacrifize and worship God as he commanded. Exodus
5.17.
Are not then our souls in bondage? That I speak nothing of our subjection to
the jurisdiction of that court, which our own conscience, and the voice almost
of all the people in the land, cry out that it is popish and Antichristian,
and yet not one man among a thousand have spirit and courage to withdraw him
self from it, neither will they know it to be a sacrilege, and treason
against Christ, to go and bow before the scepter of Antichriste: and flatter
them selves, saying, that Christ rule in their hearts inwardly, and they serve
him inwardly, and outwardly they serve that idol, which the Devil have set
up, worse far away then the idol which Nebuchadnessar set up in the
plain of Dura. Dan. 3.1.


But the people say, If the Mass and images come again, they will rather dye,
then they will receive those. Will you fight the Lords battelles, and will you
needs choose your own standing? Must not the Souldioures fight with that band
and wing of the enemies, whereunto their Captain appointe them? But O foolish
and blind men. For whither is greater wickedness? The Mass and images, or that
rule and power, which have authorized, and established the Mass and images?
Whither is greater, the apple, or the tree which brings forth the apple? For
the Mass and images and all other wicked ceremonies, were but apples of this
cursed and bitter tree of popish government. And although we have cut of a
few twigges, which bare some kind of apples, yet the tree remain, and the
root has yet very deep hold in the ground, and it brings forth other
cursed crabbes, to set our teeth on edge withal. And though the Devil would
bear us in hand, that they were as good apples, and set as great a praise on
them, as he did on the apple, which he feofft Eve with: Yet in eating thereof,
Genesis 3.
the Lord shall prove our disobedience.

These abominations which I have spoken of, and many more which I have not
named, declare whither our bondage, or the Babylonian bondage of the Jews,
were more grievous and dangerous. And if they hanged up their harpes upon the
willow trees: Psalm. 37.2.
Whither have we cause to set apart Lute and Cithern* Uiols, shalmes, Cornets,
Sackbuts and Dulcimers, and all the instruments of Music with daunsing and
mirthe: and to singe the songs of dolefulnes? Let us rende our hearts and not
our garments. Let us no more sit down to eat and drink, and rise again to
play: but let us eat the bread of adversity, and drink the water of
affliction* and pray continually so, that in praying, our bitter complaints may
ascend up to the Lord, and we may rightly speak with like affection, as did
the poor banished Jews saying: Psalm. 123
Behold* as the eyes of the servants look unto their masters, and the eyes of a
maide^ to the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
until he have mercy upon us. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us,
for we have suffered to much contempt. Yea if we had any grace to take to heart,
the reproaches of the papists which mock our patched service, and skorne us, as
not able to build our house of religion, without borowing most of our stones
and timber from them: And cast in our tethes: Where do you tell your church?
Or whence have you any jurisdiction or church government, but from him whom
you skorne in words, namely the Pope? As in deed it is in every man's mouth
to cry, fie on the Pope: and yet we bow the knee before him by submission to
his Court. Therefore are we mocked of the papists, as our sins have deserved.
Which spiritual evil if our dull hearts could feel: we might add also with
those careful Jews: Our soul is filled full of the mockings of the welthy
and ye despite of ye proud. For it is a time of reproach, and our shame lies
open in the eyes of all nations (if we could discern it) whiles neither Temple
is builded, wherein we may worship the Lord aright, neither the city wall,
whereby the Heathen might be kept out, that they no more come into the lords
heritage, Psalm. 79.1.
to defile his holy Temple, and to make Jerusalem an heap of stones. Now
therefore, although we at the beginning, have not done as faithful David did,
to swear and vow unto the Lord, concerning his acceptable work finishing
with all possible speed: let us yet at the length hear the lords voice, Psalm.
95 8.
without hardening our hearts, and swear and vow to seek his face, and
build his kingdom otherwise, then we have done, and not to rest as
heretofore, till we have performed our vows, and passed even thorough the
vallie of tears and mourning, Psalm. 84.6.
digging fountaynes to quench our thirste (I mean abiding all trouble and
persecution) until we draw near the lords rest in Sion: before the time that
he swear, Psalm. 95.11
and seal the decree of our never entering in thither, and so we be shut also
from his eternal rest, in his kingdom, for our too much contempt of his
glory, which should appear in the advanced kingdom of his dear Son, and
for our luke warm professing his name, without doing his will, and working
his work.

Thus have we heard concerning the care, which David had for ye bringing home
the Arc. It follows to speak of the joy, which he conceived, when the Lord
vouchsafed to be with him, and to bend also the hearts of the people
thereunto, when it was brought home.

I rejoiced when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord.

King David according to the vow and promise which he made unto the Lord, so
he continued faythefull and steadfast, 1. Chro. 15.
and prepared a place for the Ark of God, and pitched for it a tent, and
longed for the day, when it should be placed there. Yet for all his faythfulnes
and exceeding great care, it pleased God to humble him, by that great
judgment, which fell upon Vzzah, 1. Chro. 15.
that he might be sifted, and tried to the uttermost, and the Lord spared
not David, in that little thing which was committed awrye, in that the Arc was
carried on a carte, and drawn by Oxen, which ought to have been borne upon the
Levites shoulders. Exo. 25.14
Therefore the Lord made him to behold a doleful sight in the death of
Vzzah, and turned his joy into heaviness, for that present time. Thus ielous is
the Lord always for his true worship: For he will be sanctified of those,
Leui. 10.3.
which come near him. Where is now any place left for toleration of any
disorder in the state of the Church? when as the Lord would not tolerate and
bear with thus much, for his servant David's sake, whose care was so great,
whose heart was so faithful, whose hand was so forward, and his labor so
painful, to restore true religion, and to promote the Lords glory. But what
have our reformers of religion done? only in one thing have they followed the
example of the^ which were with David to help home the Arc the first time: for
they to ease their own shoulders of the burden, and to avoid that great
labor, which belongs to ye building of gods church rightly and
effectually, have been content to shuffle up the matter, and have committed
the carriage of the Arc to brutishe Oxen: even dumme and blind Ministers. And
these Oxens feet are not shodde with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
Ephe. 6.15.
therefore they stu^ble at every step, and have long ago ouerthrown cart, and
Arc, and all: although there have been Vzzahs appointed to put toe their hand
and help the oxen. I mean teachers have bin appointed, to learn ye ignorant
ministers to preach: how they prosper, men may well know, except they had power
to work miracles, to make ye dumme to speak, and the blind to see, and that
only by teachinge. But let those Vzzahs, and the appointers of them
understand and know a more excellent way, namely, that the Levites take the
burden upon their shoulders, weighe it never so heavy, by trouble,
persecution, and paynefull labor, and let them cherefullie bring home that
Arc, eue^ Christ Jesus, upon whose shoulders the government lies, Esai. 9.6.
and place him in his Tente pitched for him, even his Sion, his Church and
kingdom, that he may bear that rule and gouuernement, which unto him
belongs, without so much as the print of the foul footesteppes of
Antichrist, remaining in his Tabernacle to his dishonor.

And here it shall not be amiss upon occasion, to touch the courage of David,
who although he was a little dau^ted at the first, by that miscarying of the
Arc, in so much that he said: How shall the Ark of the Lord come unto me? 2.
Sam. 6.
yet notwithstanding he fainted not, neither gave over his purpose: but feared
the Lord more, and sought out more circumspectly, where ye fault was, and how
it might be redressed: And again girt up his loins, and addressed him self
with more cherefulnes, yet again to bring it home. Many there be in the
Realm of England, which have been zealous of Church gouuernement, and of the
removing the ceremonies, of men's traditions, and stinted service: and because
they have made long tarying, and have had a cold offeringe, and have hoped
long of redress by Parliamentes, whereunto they have made suit, and have been
disappointed of their hope: Therefore as though they had done their whole
dewtie, they have set them down, and waxed cold and careless, and have slept
on both ears, and think that the Lord must needs now hold them excused,
until the Lord cast it upon them, and put into their mouths. But they must
know, that they are not to cease seeking the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
and for other things they shall be cast unto them without their careful
thought. The kingdom of God must suffer violence of those, Mat. 11.12.
which with violent zeal do draw it unto them. Many run, but few get the
crown. 1. Cor. 9.24
We must so run, as we may obtain. It is not enough to be wishers and
woulders, as many be at this day counted religious and favorers of
government, because they can say: O we must pray, we must pray: thereby
satisfying them selves and others, being not a little gladd, that they may buy
it so cheap, to sit at their ease, and follow the world. Therefore what
cries and complaints their prayers be, may easelie be discerned. Prayers
without practtse, are but poor prayers, and the heart which sets not the
hand a work, do not burn with much heat. We must so pray, as continuing
and increasing in greater ferue^cie, giving ye Lord no rest, nor suffering any
nay: though he seems to send us away with a rough answer, as our Savior
Christ did unto the Cananitishe woman, refusing her suit, and calling her
dog: yet she left him not, but desired at the least that which a Dog
might have, Mat. 15.16
even the crummes which fall from the children, and so obtained her suit with
co^mendatio^ of her faith.

And we, if we have wished and desired, and therewith made suit to the higher
powers, and labored in the behalf of true Ecclesiastical government, and
yet have returned empty, and confounded, because the lord have not vouchsafed
to let us see ye Arc come home: we are to fear so much ye more before the
face of ye lord, Sam. 2.6.
as it is said yt David feared the lord, in y^ vnspedie day: he feared God
before, but now his fear was increased. And in this fear ought we to examine
the cause, why the Lord have not made our enterprise prosperous, and to search
our ways, whither we have taken the right pathe or no: whither we have gone to
the place where it is, or we have sought it in a wrong place: whither we have
put our shoulders to the burden, or we have gone about to carte it, that it
might come easily unto us, and as it were, alone without our helping hand.
Thus ought we to search until we find out in our selves the cause of Gods
displeasure, for the which we are deprived of this benefit. And having
found the cause, let us repent and redress that is amiss, and strengthen ye
feeble knees of ours, Heb. 12.13
making straight steps to our feet, least that which is halting, be turned
out of the way. Let us recover the right pathe, from the which we have
wandered wide, and gyrde up our loins, that we may with more courage and
swiftnes walk therein, then before we have done in our wrong and false way.

And some there be which have atteyned unto this knoweledge, that the kingdom
of God come not by observation, Luke 17.20.
and waiting and suinge, here and there, but is near unto us, even within us:
and no more is to be required, but that we remove our selves from evil, and
worship God according to his word, choosing rather to suffer the cross,
then to deny Christ by slauishe giving over of that authority and liberty,
which he have given unto his people. Some I say, have attained unto this
knowledge, yet notwithstanding they have been dismayed and offended, beholding
the wayward footsteppes of diverse which have gone before, even in the right
path, though not with steadie foot, but have slipped, halted, and fallen in the
way by committing some thing which have displeased the Lord, as sometime in
the chief City in England, there were many which withdrewe themselves from
this spiritual bondage mentioned. But some only making conscience at the
Cappe and Surplesse, and therein stood all their religion. Some entering that
way, despised all other, but pitied them not in the bowelles of compassion,
that they might be brought unto the truth, but were proud in their own
conceyte. Most of them also ignorant how they should come to the end, or
yet to the midst of the way, which they hadd entered, neither being humble in
seeking out the same, but thinking rather that they knew all things. Therefore
when they were tried and weighed, many were found too light, and their
miscarying of the Lord's Ark, and the judgment which fell upon some of the^,
as sore as did upon Vzzah, discouraged many, and weakened their hands. So by
their untowardness they caused the savor of the Lords work to stink in the
nostrels of the people.

And of late an other attempt have been given that way by one, of whom I must
needs say, that the Lord used him as a means to bring the truth to light,
in many points concerning the true government of the Church: who, I wish for
the glory of God, if it had been his good pleasure, that he had stood in
integrity, without swaruing and leaninge to Antichristian pride, and bitterness.
And for me to make mention thereof, may seem very hard, which am not so able
therein to save my self from the reproach of many tongues, as I am to clear my
self of the deserving the same. Yet notwithstanding a wound being made in the
brethrens minds: I have thought it my duty rather to labor to heal it, the^
to feign my self not to see it.

Mat. 24.12.
True it is at all times, that iniquity preuailinge, causethe the love of many
to abate. For every iniquity committed especially in those enterprises,
which bear the cheifest show of holiness before the Lord, and draw nearest his
work, procure a more grievous and speedy judgment, to cause a lamentable
success therein. For as I have alleged: The ieleous God will be sanctified of
those which come near him, Leuit. 10.3.
and he cause his judgment to begin even at his own house. 1. Pe. 4.17.
This judgment being beholden, causes fear, and daunteth the courage of many
which had begone to step in the way. Even as if two men riding through a
water, the former slipp into some groope and perish, the other had rather turn
back, and loose his journey, then to go forward, though there be space enough
to go by, and avoid that danger. At the least with fear and trembling he
seeks out his way. And no marvel it is though the beholding of such
judgment, because of iniquity preuailinge, cools greatly the heat of love,
and dulleth the edge of courage for a time. For even valiant Joshua thereby was
stricken full sore. Joshua. 7.
For he rent his clothes and fell to the earth, at the evil suc^esse in the
battle at Ay. And he cried: Alas O Lord God, wherefore have thou brought this
people over Jorden, to deliver us into the hands of the Amorits, and to
destroy us? Would God we had been content to dwell on the other side Jorden.
Oh Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their backs before their
enemies? Thus he seemed to repent his coming over Jorden, As though that
journey had not been taken in hand in the Lord, and by him furthered, and the
furtheraunce thereof confirmed and honored by a great miracle of the Lords
mighty hand. But the Lord raised him up, and told him that iniquity
committed in Israel, had caused the reproach of that vnspeedie day. Also
Aaron, Eleazar, and Ithamar were so daseled with the judgment, Leui. 10.19
which fell on Nadab and Abihu, that they did not eat the Goat in the holy
place, as they should have done. Moses was so grieved at the evil success of
the children of Israel, not being able to come to their rest because of their
iniquity, that he chose rather to be rased out of the book of life, then to
hear and see that reproach, Exo. 32.31.
which should come unto that people, and to the name of God. Jeremiah wished
that he had never been borne, because Israel in stead of a blessing, had
rewarded evil unto their own souls. Rebekah when the children strove in her
womb, Genesis 25.22
thought it had been better not to have conceived. And David when he saw the
death of Vzzah, brought not home the Arc at that time, but feared and
lamented, saying: How shall the Ark of God come unto me? Great fear came on
the church of Jerusalem, at the terrible judgment of Ananias and Saphira. Act.
5.
Most of these have been partly afraid and discouraged, as though their
interprise and work, which was of the Lord, had in it self obtained that
hard hap, and unprosperous event, which proceeded of some other evil
coming in by the way. But as Joshua, when he had found out the fault, and
purged it, renewed battle again, and saw the mighty power, and great
salvation of the Lord for them, with comfort and gladness: and as David when he
also had espied the fault and redressed it, renewed his endeavor, and brought
home the Arc with more joy and chearefulnes: and as the Disciples of
Jerusalem ceased not from giving alms, but their fear tended to this, that
they should do it with more singlenes of heart: So let not us be offended, and
stumble at the sin of any man, to give over our zeal and love unto the
Lords cause, ye truth whereof his word has confirmed unto us. But rather
let us search out, where the iniquity is, and let the offender bear his shame
and rebuke, how excellent a personage soever he have been, for turninge the
truth of God into a lie: and let the Lord have his glory, who is always
found true, Romans 3.7.
when every manne is found a liar. And his truth abound the more, through
the lie of man unto his glory.

The children of Israel which came out of Egypt to go into the land of
Canaan, could not atteyne thither, but their carkases fell in the wilderness:
Might one have said therefore, that they came not out by the Lords
commandment and his conduct? Yes, and greater was the glory of GOD, who was
not hindered from performinge his promise by the unbelief of that people: but
their unbelief made his faithefulnes more appear. And their unrighteousness
commended the Lords righteousenesse, Romans 3.5.
which recompensed them their just deserte, and yet raised up a better
generation, to enter into his resting place. So will the Lord evermore make
his cause to stand, though they which handle it amiss, shall fall before it
in the way. And as for men of great credit and estimation, the Lord often
times will make their weakness and vanity to appear, that no glory might
be transferred from him self to mortal men, and that we should never make
flesh and blood our arm, neither trust in manne, in whose nostrels is breath:
Esa. 2.22.
for what is he to be esteemed? Solomon the glory of the Kings of the earth,
called also the Lords beloved, 2. Sa^. 12.25
a spectacle for wisdom: whom the Lord used also for a special instrument
unto many things: yet did not he persevere in wisdom, but became a fool
in committing wickedness against the Lord. 1. Kin. 11.6.
Iehu, which valiantly wrought the Lords work at the first, 2. kin. 10.31
turned also to idolatry, and forsook the Lord. And Gedeon, Iud. 8.27.
a worthy instrument, which the Lord chose for his work, made the Ephod,
which was an instrument of evil.

These and many more examples there be, which teach us, that although we see
before our eyes never so many which begin in the spirit, and end in the
flesh, that we condemn not their beginning, neither fear to enter into that
way, but rather take heed that we walk so fast, and so steadelie, and so
well armed, that sin do not overtake us, and overthrow us in the way. The
evil example of life showed by those Nations which are called Christian this
day, make the savor of the Gospel to stink before the Jews, Turks, and
other Heathen, which refuse therefore once to search, what Christian religion
is. Therefore are they still holden back from Christ and his kingdom. Like
recompense shall we reap, if the untoward example of any man quensh our
zeal and care of searchinge out the Lords cause, that we should not take it
in hand.

But there are not wanting, which unto the slow ru^ners about the lords
business, lay more weight of lead upon their feet, and bring them into a
further security, by afraying them, by the example of Vzzah, that they attempt
not any thing about matters pertayninge to the Church, because they have no
calling. As though that vengeance showed upon Uzzah, was for taking upon him
a wrong calling* and not rather for doing that which was no man's calling to
do. For there was no man in Israel which had any such calling, but if that
he had driven the Cart and done as Vzzah did, it is like he should have been
spared as little as Vzzah was. And David in the 13. verse of the 15. of the
first Chron. speaking to Sadock and Abiathar, say not, the Lord have made
this breach among us, because Vzzah did evil: But because we (says he)
sought him not in, dew order. And although he say also, because you were not
hear: his meaning is not that they being present, should have done that which
Vzzah did.

But admit he was punished for ouerreaching his calling: (as in deed
whosoever pass the bounds of duty, pass the bounds of their calling also
in that respect) Is it not the calling of every Christian, to remove
himself from their communion, which worship God vaynlie, as by the
directinge of the blind and dumme ministry, that execrable abominatio^ in
Gods sight: and to join only, where the Lords worship is free, and not
bound or witholde^ with the bands of any jurisdiction of this world. How can
they make the kingdom of God near us and within us, Luke 17.20.
if we can not by gods assistance, make our selves members of his outward
church and kingdom in this world, which only has the promise of blessing
and life for evermore: Psalm. 133.3.
without the authority of man, and waiting their leisure, for a commandment
thereunto. And whereunto are all christians made kings and priests? Reave. 1.6.
Have they no calling thereby to seek ye means of their salvation? If my
salvation should depend upon the courtesy of any in this world, I were in
most miserable taking. But the righteousness of God deals other wise: and our
salvation depends upon that king, whose baner is always displaied before
us, Mat. 28.20
and he is with us to the end of the world.

But now concerning those which are able to teach and instruct in the way of
the Lord, they must not meddle without calling (say they) although there be no
calling suffered and allowed of in a Realm or Dominion, but that which they
confess to be utterly unlawful. So must the flock of Christ tarry and be
starued, whilst we wait for that, which they can not direct us where to have,
or how it should be. It must be, say they, by diverse true Ministers calling
and allowing him: and so he must be ordained. But how many of the Ministers
in the Realm of England dare be seen in this doing? If faith can not be
begotten without a Preacher, and a Preacher can not be without lawful
sendinge: and this be the only way: Romans 10.13
why suffer they the people to be deprived? Why are they afraid and ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ? Why rather do they not abide persecution? But the
lawful calling and sending of the Ministers, which is the only mean to
make them have fruitful wombes to begette faithful children, and fruteful
breasts to nource the same: also dew gouuernement, which is the only
aduauncing of Christ his kingdom, and the cutting short of sin and
wickedness: Also our Christian liberty to worship God with free conscience,
according to his word: and our comfortable joining in the true fellowship and
communion of Saints: And to conclude, the means of our salvation must be kept
from us, until a civil law send them unto us, although there be never so long
delay: as though they were not sent from heaven, and offered to all that will
receive them. We can defy the Papists doctrine, for making part of our
salvation, to hang upon our own deserts: but we can not taste the
bitterness of the root of this doctrine, that the building of gods kingdom,
for the mean and furtherance of our salvation must depend upon civil power,
and Christ Jesus with all things pertaining unto him, are made underlings
thereunto, and caused to dance attendaunce upon it. Those which walk after
this doctrine and teach men so, do break not one of ye least, but one of the
greatest commandments, teaching men so: and therefore shall be counted least
in the kingdom of God, if they do not repent.

And again, concerning this calling, which must needs be done by diverse
Ministers which will not do it: But admit they would, from whence have they
their calling, sendinge, and authority, such as pertains to a Minister?
Had they it not from those which sit in the chair of Antichrist? Yea, how
many are in all Christendom, which have been so rightly ordained, but that
their ordination have come from the popish Prelacie, with in three or four
generations at the most? Now if a man take a griffe of a sour fruit, and
plant it, and then take a griffe of that new planted, and plant that: and take
of that again and plant it the third time, and so continewe unto the hundredth
time: will it loose the sowrenes, and gather sweetness? No more can an
unlawful calling bring forth a lawful, though it descend from one to
another an hundred or a thousand times. Therefore except they can approve the
lawfulness of their calling to the ministry under some other title then yt
which they now have by ye Clergy: it will fall out, that there shall hardly be
found a Minister duly called in all the world, and also that there is small
hope that ever there shall be any. But whatsoever burden they lay upon us, I
lay no more upon them, but that they having the approving and consent of
their flock, do the works of a Minister, namely, that they feed their flock
whereof the holy ghost have made them overseers, if they make not them selves
unworthy, and that they keep back from them, nothing that is profitable.
Act. 20.^^*
So then they must not keep back nor suffer to be kept back (they standing
still) their liberty and authority, which the Church should have, and the
true worship of God in all points safe and sound, the scepter of the
government of Christ borne upright, and having dew honor, removing
themselves and their flocks, at least from all open abomination in life and
religion, whereby reproach should redowne to the name of God. These things if
they do, and whatsoever else appertains to a ministers duty: their work
shall commend them, and testify their calling, and shall be in stead of an
Epistle or rather a license written in their own hearts: 2. Cor. 3.2.
vndestood also and redd of all men. Our Savior Christ being demanded whither
he were the sent Savior, or they should look for an other: did not answer
that he was sent a Savior, Mat. 11.3.
but said: Tell Ihon what you have herd and seen: The blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor receive the Gospel. As if he should have said: I do the works of the
Savior, which the Prophets bear witness of, that he should do: Therefore I
am the sent Savior. As namely Isaiah witnesses, saying: He has sent me that
I should preach the Gospel to the poor, Esai. 61.1.
and that I should heal the broken hearted etc. And our Savior Christ
witnessethe in an other place, saiynge: I have greater witness then the witness
of Ihon: John 5.36.
For the works which the Father has given me to do, those testify of me,
that the Father have sent me. Therefore whosoever do the work of Ministers,
and have not known the deepnes of Satan, neither have the cursed learning of
Antichrist: I judge none other burden to be putt upon them, Revel. 2.24.
but that they hold fast the doctrine of Christ until his coming: And their
work shall declare their calling, and seal it before all men. Otherwise the
answer of our Savior Christ to them which came from Ihon, and the proof of
his calling should not be forceable.

And moreover, whereas they tie the Ordination of every Minister, as it were,
unto the girdle of other Ministers, that of necessity it must at all times
depend and stay upon them: that is to lay a greater bondage upon ye
churches, the^ they are able to bear. For admit there be only one church in
a nation, and they want a pastor: must they seek over Sea and land, to get
a minister ordained by other ministers? But what if there should be but only
one apparent to us in the world: shall that church for ever be deprived, after
they have once wanted a minister, for default of authority to call and ordain
an other? By this reason, every church should not be perfect in it self, nor
have in it self means and power to continue by that measure of lines which
the Lord have measured out unto it. And is it not a dishonor to Christ Jesus
the head of every congregation, which is his body: to say that his body
together with the head, is not able to be sustained and preserved in it self?

Moreover I demand what calling the dispersed disciples of the church of
Jerusalem had, yt they did preach and teach the Gospel as they went? Were
they all ordained ministers, by whose means it is said that many did believe,
Act. 11.21.
and that the Lord was with them? And those whom they did ^egette, and bring
forth as newborn children to God through the Gospel of his son: did they
want authority to feed them and give them suck being so brought forth? Which
if they might do, then came they very near to the work of the pastor, which
has his name of feeding. And was not only charity a calling to these men, who
meeting with such as they found worthy, ouerslipped not that occasion of doing
so great good? If the Samaritan be commended for doing the part of a neighbor
unto him which fell among thieves and was wounded: Luke 10.36
because he hadd compassion on him, took him up, and washed his wounds, and
in all things provided for the safety of his life: Why should they be
reproved as passing the bounds of their calling, who meeting with souls
wounded by the sword of Antichristian robbers, or any way bound by Satan
with the chains of ignorance: shall help to loose them, and mollify their
wounds with the oil of Gods truth, and bestow upon them what spiritual
gift they are able, to refresh them, and save the life of their souls? Yea if
they do it not, they shall be found merciless, and like to fail of mercy in
the time of their need.

In all this I deny not but that there is use of other Ministers, when they may
be had, for mutual help in trying and examining, and alowinge those who^ they
find meet, that by their judgment the other churches may so much the more be
confirmed.

Thus have I passed the bounds of the text somewhat in this discourse, I
confess. But I crave pardon of ye reader. For not without due occasion have I
bin led thereunto. And now at length I come to speak of David's joy, which
I thought to have done long year now.

And first of all, therein we epsy the footesteps of that faith whereby the
author to the Hebrews witnesses, so many excellent practices ^o have been
achieved: which is the ground of things which are hoped for, Heb. 11.
and the evidence of things which are not seen. For hereby David despised all
the glorious things with visible show, which belonged to his Royal
kingdom, and did bid them give place, in comparison of the unspeakable
treasure of Gods favor, and all the good which flow from thence, which he
saw not but by the eyes of faith, and possessed only by the title of that
evidence, which is concerning things not seen but hoped for, yet herein he
ioyed fully. The multitude say: Psalm 4.6.
Who will cause us to see good? They know what they see here, but they know
not what they shall have. But the faythefull say: Lord lift up the light of
thy countenance upon us, and so thou shall give us more joy of heart, then
the people have of their abundant harvest and vinetage. Ver. 7.
They know not, or at ye least will not acknowledge for their own ye things of
this world But those things which out of Gods countenance turned toward
them, they do conceive, they know for their own, and they declare that they
seek an enduring city.

So then even as David by faith had ouerquelled the Lion and the Bear, and by
faith had enterprised to fight with Goliath, and had prevailed: so by faith he
obtained the bringinge home of the Arc. And though he seemed at the first to
be disappointed, and walked on his way weeping, sowing dear seed (as did
Abraham when he so long went without an heir, Psalm. 126.6.
and at last was commanded (as it were) to bury ye hope which he had of the
promise in his only heir, by appointing him unto the death): Yet as Abraham
did, Romans 4.18.
so he believed in hope against hope. Therefore in the Lords appointed day,
he returns with mirth and gladness, bringing his sheaues with him, when as
by faith he had gotten access unto ye grace wherein he stood, Romans 5.2.
and reioiced under the hope of the glory of God, wherein he saw a lively
image in his holy Arc, with an undoubted pledge of love and favor toward
him. Thus he fails not of that wherewith he strengthened his soul in the
time of weakness and temptation, saying: Why art thou cast down, O my soul,
and why art thou so disquieted within me! Psalm. 42.11.
wayt on god for I shall yet see the time to give him thanks for the help of
his presence. He is my present help, and my God. Thus he waited with patience,
which taught him experience, which experience brought forth the increase of his
hope, Romans 5.4.
and his hope made him not ashamed: seeing he was not disappointed of that he
hoped for, but saw the greater salvation of the Lord in the day of his
rejoicing, to the further sustayning of his hope, to wait for greater things
also at the Lords hand. So we see that which I have spoken, that by faith he
entered into the Lords rest, when as the Lord vouchsafed to have his resting
place and holy habitation with him, and by faith he reioysed in this, esteeming
it above all other causes of joy, because he looked to those inuisibe joys,
which hereby were promised and sealed unto him.

And now to apply this unto our selves. This also is a glass which we have
not dressed our selves by: for very many can say, Wait, and tarry. But
whither do we think, that they mean, until the Lord help and further
their paynefull endeavor, which is never a whit, or until they have filled
their insatiable and bottomless Coffers with uncontrolled traphiking? For,
where is the disquiet and casting down of the Soul? Where are the afflictions
which the Lord should remember, as he did David's? Which should whett the
edge of patience, that patience might have her perfect work, James 1.4.
that they might be entire wanting nothing. But above all things, where is
faith, without the which it is impossible to please God? And without the which
God will not show his glory before any people, to their salvation, but to
their confusion? for want of which, our Savior Christ wrought not those
miracles in some places, which otherwise he would have done? Where is this
faith, I say, when those which are the chief and principal leaders of the
people, which should bear the Arc upon their shoulders: they say, and have
taught the people to say, It is not possible it should come home: and why? For
not only the chief of the Clergy, but also the chief which have ye reins of
the civil regiment, are against the establishing of church government. I
demand, whither it be from heaven, or from men. If from heaven: with god all
things are possible, and he will then further his cause in our hand, when we
believe. And when it shall please the Lord to further his cause: Romans 9.19.
who can resist his will? For the^ every Ualley shall be exalted, and every
Hill shall be brought low, for the loftines of men shall be abased, and the
Lord GOD only shall be exalted in that day. Esai. 2.
The roughe way shall be made plain. This will the jealousy of the Lord of
hosts perform, and his own arm shall sustain him to do the work if we
could believe: yet we say it can not be. Where is that faith, whereby our
Fathers subdued kingdoms, Heb. 11.34
wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped ye mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of the fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak
were made strong, waxed valiant in battaill, turned to flighte the armies of
the aliauntes? Let us fear for the grievous judgment of God, which befell to
the children of Israel in the wilderness, which were ready to have entered
into the Lords rest: but suddenly thorough unbelief conceived of the evil
tidinges which the spies brought, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
they did shutt the door against them selves. And what was the matter? The
walls were so high, and the people were so strong. But the height and
strength of the Lords arm was forgotten, which had been stretched out upon
Pharao and Egypt unto destruction: But upon them unto deliverance. Even so we,
for we would feign enter into the Lords Sion, a true reformed Church: but
some body is against it. I know whereof you mean. A Lion is in the way: but
Solomon say, that that is but the excuse of a ^^uggarde. Prou. 22.13
Those spies were evil enough, which went into Canaan, and brought home an
evil answer. But what shall we say to those spies which tell an evil
answer before they will step one foot out of the door? We have high walls
against us also, and strong Prelates, whose bodies if they were grown as far
out of square, as their pomp and authority is grown from the lines of their
calling, they should not be like the Anakims in Canaan: but rather like unto the
Giaunt, which the Poets have feigned, to have stood but up to the knees in the
Sea, where it is at ye deepest. But for a mean to pluck down this height,
and weaken this strength, the hand of the Lord is forgotten, which was
stretched out, even within this generation, upon the high walls and swelling
Babilonishe buildings of the Abbeys and Monasteries. Even when there was no
hope or likelihoode of any such thing by man's reason: Then came a day from the
Lord, upon every high tower, and upon every strong wall, Esa. 2.15.
to make those places void dens. For thistles and nettles grow in their
high halles, and privy chambers, and the owls shrike there, and the crows
and the ravens gaile there by Gods just judgment. There came a day also upon
all their pleasant pictures, and all their galaunt images, whereof they were
gladd to cast some into hooles to the moules and the backs, to keep them from
the fire. Ver. 20.
The day of the Lord came also upon the Cedars of Lebanon, Ver. 13.
and the Oaks of Bashan, even the great and mighty Cardinals, Abbots, Monks
and Friars, and the rest of the Prelates, which bare the sway in the land.
These wanted not strength. For they were like horses prepared to battle, they
were cladd with iron habargions, Revel. 9.7.
they had Lions teeth. They had also crowns on their heads, and stinges in
their tails. For there was not one of them in whose presence to speak any
thing against their idolatry: but that it was as much, as a man's life was
worth. These also have the breathe of the Lords mouth sent into the
bottomless smoking Lake, from whence they came. These things have the Lord
done for us, even in our fresh remembrance, to beat down the hills, and make
the way smother to the residue of our journey. He has opened a wide door unto
us: But we being dru^cken with the ease of this world, have reeled against the
posts thereof, and fallen backwarde and lie sleaping. Let us take heed lest we
sleep so long, until the Lord shut the door, and nail it up also with
an oath in his anger, if he have not done it already.

Seeing then ye Lord have given such an onset, doing so great things for us,
bringing us thus far on our way out of Egypt: let us take heed there be not in
us an evil heart and unfaithful to depart from the living GOD, Heb. 3.12.
least we be deprived. But let us go on our way cherefullie: and fear not the
heat of the day, nor the darkness of the night. Esa. 4.5.
For the Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sion, and upon the
assemblies thereof, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense, and a covering
shall be for a shadow in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge and
covert for the storm and for the rain. Neither let us fear for the high
walls of Jericho, I mean the Antichristian Canon law, which is the strength
of his government. For by faith ye walls of Jericho fell down at the blastes
of the Trumpettes. Heb. 11.30
And what are all the execrable buildings of Antichrist, which still remain
amongst us, that they should stand before the Lords Trumpetters, if they have
faith, and do not only blow their blastes, but also compass the City as
often as they should, and blow their blastes in due time and place, as the
Lord have appointed? Moreover, let us know, that as the walls of Jericho
fell down, so also by faith the walls of Jerusalem were builded up. For
Nehemiah misdoubted not either the fewnes, either the poverty of the Jews,
either the malice of the enemies, but stepped unto the work in the midst of
those vnlikelihoods, for the which their adversaries did mock them drylie,
saying: What do these weak Jews, Nehe. 4.^*
will they fortify themselves? Will they make y^ stones whole again, out of
the heaps of dust, seeing they are burnt? And another answered: Although they
build, yet if a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stony wall.

So therefore when the heart of gods people shall be to work, encouraged by
faith, so that their hands also be strengthened, and put to the business,
though never so many Ammonites and Ashdodims be wroth and conspire al together
to come against Jerusalem, Nehe. 4.7.
and to hinder the building thereof, yet shall God bring their counsel to
naught. For God is in the midst of it: Psalm. 46, 5.6
therefore shall it not be moved: God shall help it very early. Though the
nations rage against it, and the kingdoms be moved: God shall utter his voice,
and the earth shall melt: God shall speak unto them in his wrath, Psalm. 2.
and vex them in his sore displeasure. He will persecute them with his
tempest, and make them afraid with his storm. Psalm. 83.15
So shall the haters of Sion be ashamed and turned backwarde. Psalm. 129.
For the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, when we are
under his Baner, and fight his battles without vain fear. For he will teach
our hands to war, Psalm. 144.1.
and our fingers to fight. He will break the Bow, and cut the Spear, and
burn the Chariots with fire. But our arms will he strengthen, so that they
shall break even a bow of steel. And our feet will he make like Hindes
feet, that by the might of our God we shall leap over the highest wall, which
Antichrist has reared: And though our haters vex us many times: they shall
not prevail against us. Though they plowghe upon our backs: Psalm. 1^^.
the righteous God shall cut their cords in sunder. Though they would
devour us quick: yet God will not give us as a pray unto their teethe. Wait
therefore and know that the Lord is God. Psalm. 46.
He will be exalted among the heathen, he will be exalted in the earth.

Let us give him glory therefore by trusting in him, that we may take his
work in hand, and further it with all our might, not suffering our eyes to
behold, nor our hearts to consider the impossibilities of finishinge the same.
For God is faithefull, who has promised, saying: To him that disposes his
way aright, Psalm. 5^
I will show the salvation of God.

Again concerning David's rejoicing, in the day when the people assembled
willingly to accompany him at the bringinge home of the Arc, and the Lord
made all things to prosper: It seemed to be the fullest and soundest joy that
ever he hadd, both for that he then daunced, and leaped, and sprange as one
ravished, and fully possessed with an heavenly pleasure, and also takes
refreshement, as it appears in this psalm, in remembering, meditating, and
singing of the happiness of that time, which teaches us what affection we
should put on in matters pertaining to the Lords glory, as when his kingdom
is builded, and furthered, when he is well known amongst us, Psalm. 76.
and his Name is great as in Israel, and his Tabernacle with us as in Salem,
and his dwellinge as in Sion.

We read of David, that when the Lord had given him to see his son Solomon
placed in the throne of the kingdom, 1. King. 1.
he worshipped upon the bed, and said: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
who has made one to sit on my Throne this day, even in my sight.

This also was a godly rejoicing, as it is a godly and commendable thing in
all Kings and Princes, to have care to see that matter so well ordered and
disposed in the time of their life, as much as in them lie, that the people
whose safety the Lord have committed to their care and charge, may enjoy
continuance of peace and welfare after their deceasse, Psalm. 144.
that there be no invasion, nor going out, nor crying in the streets of their
dominions afterward: As also it is godly and commendable to joy, and bless
God when he give them to see with their eyes, the hope of a good stay within
their kingdoms: which is so far from derogating from their honor and
renown, that it tends greatly to the increase and advancement of the same.
For David took this for an honorable salutation at his servant hands, when
they said: 1. Kin. 1.47
God make the name of Solomon more famous then thy name, and exalt his Throne
above thy throne. This I say, was one joy of David's, yet not comparable to the
other: as appeared in that his care to behold this thing was not so vehement,
and he was near to have ouerslipped too long, the laying of his hand to the
furtheraunce thereof, in respect of Adoniahs over hasty attempt, and he had
need of stirringe up by the suit of Bethsaba, and the advertisement of Nathan
the Prophet. Whereas in the other business of bringing home the Lord's Ark, he
neded no spurs to prick him on forward. Flesh and blood kindled not that
zeal in him, but the Lord hadd inflamed his heart with the Spirit of love and
fire. And this burninge affection of love bare he from time to time, unto the
Lords holy Tabernacle, for his true worshipps sake, and his glory therein
appearing. And as it was his life to dwell in the Courts of the Lord by often
frequenting them: so was it even death and great distress for him to be a
stranger from the same, as appears by his pitiful complaints in the days
of his banishments, as when he says: Psalm. 42.2
As the Heart braieth for the Rivers of water: so pants my soul after thee O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God. When shall I come
and appear before the presence of God? His tears were his meat day and
night, and he powered out his very heart when he remembered the dear times
past, when he had gone with the multitude, and led them into the house of God
with the voice of singing and praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast. But
we alas declare what poor and feeble joy we would conceive, if the Lord
would restore the glory of his sons kingdom in open sight before our face,
and purge his Court and Sanctuary, and plant us therein, when as we being
berefte of this benefit, have so small thirst, so little panting and braying,
and so little sadness of soul, and shedding of tears, for this manner presence
of the Lord.

Yea we hear the voices of many, and the thoughts of more lie open before
the Lord, whereof some say, and some think, that they have no great need of
Christ his Ecclesiastical gouuernement, seeing they can govern them selves,
and live in the fear of the Lord well enough, as they imagine with them selves.
Therefore they set their hearts at rest. But have they more stay of them
selves, and towardnes unto Godliness the^ David had? Or do they think, that he
was clean absent from God, that he could not pray and praise his name? Yet
do he say: When shall I come to appear before the presence of God? And
skarce could he comfort his own soul, which was then in heaviness, though he
hoped for a day of return. Thus he accounted, that he should stand before
the presence of God, when he should be present in the place, which the Lord
did choose to putt his name theare, and should enjoy the sight of those
things, which the Lord appointed for the tokens of his presence among them.
And therein was his great delight, according as he utters, Psalm. 84.
saying: O Lord of hosts, how amiable ar thy tabernacles? My soul longs,
yea and faints for the courts of the Lord. For mine heart and my flesh
rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they
will ever praise thee. And although he behaved him self carefully before
God, when he was absent from the Lords tabernacle: yet he acknowledged his
strength not to be so great, but that there was danger to be feared by the
want of those things which the Lord had appointed as means to hold them in
his true worship. For this cause he complains unto Saul his persecutor, not
so much for persecutinge him, as for chasinge him from the place where the
Lord vouchsafed to dwell. For he says: If ye Lord have stirred thee up
against me, 1. Sa^. 26.19.
let him smell ye savor of a sacrifice: but if the children of men have done
it, cursed be they before the Lord: For they have cast me out this day from
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods.

This love to Gods house, had King Ezekiah, 2. Kin. 2.20
who in his sickness (whereof word was brought him that he should dye) was
grieved for nothing so much as this, that he should no more go up into
the Lords house.

For this cause were his prayers and tears. As appears by the word which
came from the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet. Thus says the Lord God of
David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears. I have healed
thee, and the third day thou shall g^e up unto the house of the Lord.

This zeal also and love to the Lords house appeared in the ancient fathers
which returned from the captivity of Babylon, who as they could not be
comforted in their exile, but sat down, and wept by the rivers of Babel, when
they remembered Sion. So in the joyful time of their return, yea in ye joyful
day of laying the foundation of the Temple, which they above all things had
desired, in the midst of the ioiful shouting and singing of the residue of
the people, their hearts yet melted within them, and they wept with a loud
crying, in so much that the noise of the shoutinge could not be discerned
from the noise of the weeping, Ezra. 3.12.
and all was for this, because they had seen the former Temple. And the
foundation of this was not co^parable to that. What shall we say, Did these
old men dote? were they fond upon an outward show of fair building? No:
but as their chief delight was in the house of god, so the increase of the
glory thereof, was their joy, and the diminishing of the glory thereof, was
their sorrow and grief of mind. Thus ielous were they over Gods glory, that
in the outward shows and shadows they were impatient of any want. But amongst
us, there is small weepinge, though the buylders in their building have left
out the chief corner stone, which should be the garnishing of all the work.
They have left out the government of Christ, without ye which, that their
Church can be his house, though they face and brace never so much, how should
they think it possible? For they must know, that Christ dwells not, where
he rules not. He may not be an idle Idol. His Church and Kingdom in this
world, is outward and visible, and except he govern visiblie, even by his
outward ordinances: It is vain for us to say, He rules in our hearts: and in
the church that we are joined unto we submitt our selves to the ordinances of
Antichrist. We shall soon banishe Christ from our hearts, if we have no more
care of his glory then so, but can abide to see his Sanctuary profaned and
polluted by that Heathenishe stranger of Rome, which not only set his foot
in there every day, but also erecteth there his own altar of incense* For
prayers and thanks giving must be measured out and appointed after his
fashion.

If ever we had seen the beauty of the first building, I mean in the time of
the primitive Church, we might well now, if we had not stony hearts, weep
and lament with loud crying, in seeinge this buyldinge before our eyes. Not
so much for that it is inferior to the other in glory: but for that it has
neither glory nor beauty at all, being fashioned not after any pattern
showed of God, but after the devise and counsel of man. In which misery if our
notable anguishe and grievous groans were heard in the ears of the Lord, and
in us there were no want to call and stir up one another, and join hands,
for the help of the furtherance of the work in bringing home the Ark of God:
there were then greater hope of the day wherein we might and ought to rejoice,
as David here did.

Moreover, we note in David, that his joy was so great in the Lord, that he
contained not him self, but so leaped and daunced, that he seemed in the eyes
of the wicked, as a fool, which uncovers his shame, and become vile. For
after that manner did Michal his wife reprochefullie taunte him, 2. Sam. 6.
as one which had so vily uncovered him self, that he should be a mocking
stock unto the Maidens of Israel. But he answered, that it was before the
lord, who had performed unto him so great mercy: for whose cause he would be
yet more vile and low in his own sight. And said moreover, that of the same
Maidens whereof he had spoken, he should be had in honor. Whereby we see,
how little he weighed to become base and low in the sight of the world, so he
might set forth the glory of the Lord his God.

At this day amongst us, one of the greatest lettes and hinderaunces of the
Lords work finishing, is, for that it can not be done without the abasinge of
the loftines of many men which are exalted without the Lord. As for the
titles of Gracious and Honorable Lords, our Savior Christ taught his Apostles
that they might not be amongst them. Therefore if these men so exalted, would
love and care for the Lords honor more then their own, and would willingly
give over their monstrous livings, and all their worldly pomp, though they
think it were a great shame for them, and that they should seem vile before
men, (which they ought willingly to undergo, Heb. 12.^.
for his glories sake, who suffered the cross and despised the shame) yet if
they could see it, it would tend to their more true dignity. For of all the
people in England which wait for a more full appearaunce of Gods glory in
his house, they should be had in honor. Where as now contrariewise they
receive honor only of a few flattering seruinge men, within their own
houses, which live by bringinge dishes to their Table, and almost to all the
residue of the people of the land, their name is in reproach, and they are
become a Byworde and a common talk.

Our Savior Christ thought it no shame to abase him self to wash his
Disciples feet: by that example, John 13.5.
and many more teaching those which will follow him, that they must not
think much to be baze and vile, and dishonorable in the sight of men, if they
will look for true honor in the sight of GOD. The Angel Gabriel said unto
Zacharias, Luke 1.15.
that his Son John the Baptist should be great in the sight of the Lord.

But what greatness he had in the fight of the world, it appears, when as his
clothing was of Camels hear, and his meat was Locustes and wild honey. The
author to the Hebrews speaks of some Christians, which were racked, and
would not be delivered, Heb. 11.35.
that they might receive a better resurrection. They would needs abide
torment and shame, that in the Lord they might have their only refreshment,
and their only glory. And he became their glory, and the lifter up of their
head.

Our Savior Christ who thought it no robbery, to be equal with God, he yet in
his nature of man, became vile, and took upon him the shape of a servant: He
turned his face to the striker: He humbled him self, even to the death of the
cross. Therefore was given him a name and dignity above al names, Phil. 2.9.
that at his name every knee should bow.

But great is the darkness and ungodliness of these days, when those which
profess them selves to be his Ministers, do so order their goings, and
conform them selves so little unto the image of his life, that we may sooner
trace out the show of all the great glory of this world, then of Christian
poorenes in spirit by their footesteppes. And it is too manifest, that they are
overcome with the temptation of him which said: All these glorious things
will I give thee, Mat. 4.9.
if thou will fall down and worship me. For they declare how hardly they
would abide themselves to be plucked up by the roots, that they might be
planted in a better resurrection, when as they will not suffer their
superfluous branches to be cut of, which do so ouerhange and annoye the
lanes, that the Lords passengers can not ride on their iourneye toward Sion.

There be also of the Temporaltie diverse, which esteem it to vile a thing, and
vnsittinge for their dignity, to come under the censure of the church, that
their faults should be looked unto, and they should be subject to the
Admonition, Rebuke, and Excommunication of the Minister and the Congregation.
Therefore they say: Let us break their bands in sunder, and cast their cords
from us. Psalm. 2.
But if they understood the great mystery of the Lord, and the decree, which
is sealed up amongst his Disciples: Psa. 8.16.
they should well know, that their renown and glory is no more impaired by
bowyng and giving due homage to Christ's Scepter, then the flower and oil of
the widow of Sarepta was diminished, by giving away part of that little which
she had, unto Elias. For certainly the great and noble Potentates of this
world, if they do not intertaine the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, though their
name reach the clouds: yet in truth their honor and renown is small, and
skarcely to be accounted an handful, which when it is spent, they die. Then
their name perish, and their pomp will not follow them. Ecclesiastes 9.4.
Then is a living dog better then they. For does not their dignity go away
with them? Job. 4.21.
Do they not die and that without wisdom? Whereas if they would be content to
give away unto our Elias Christ Jesus, a little of their honor by abasing
themselves before his Throne of government: they should have never the less,
but a great deal the more: yea the continuance of true honor for ever. For
they should stand as the faithful witnesses in heaven, their names being
registered in the book of life. According as the Prophet Esaiah speakethe of
the renown of the Church, and accou^teth it the renown of Kings and Princes,
to worshipp therein with their faces toward the earth, Esai. 49.23.
and to lick up the dust at the feet thereof.

Lastly as touching David's affection of joy, and his delight which he hadd to
see the glory of God shine forth: as it was declared by signs, yea the whole
disposing of himself, to be great at that present time: so did the continual
practice of his life afterward, give token that it was intiere and unfeigned.
For he continued his care and study to be an instrument to advance Gods
glory.

Of our sone whote and sone cold zeal: and of our gladness, which bewraied it
self to be more for the shining hope of our worldly welfare, then for the
hope of the increase of Gods kingedome, and the speedy coming thereof: And of
our love, which have given place to iniquity soon getting the upper hand:
And of all our forwardnes and goodness, which appeared in the day, when the
Lord opened one door for us to come out of prison, and an other door to have
entered his Tabernacles, if we would have but strained our selves a little to
have removed a few blocks in the way: Of this our goodness and forwardnes,
how that it proved but as a morning mist, which vanished before any heat of
the Sun brast forth: I have spoken before. Little was that we had, therefore
was taken from us even that little. Great was the true and sincere joy, faith,
zeal and love which David hadd: therefore was given unto him more. For he
continued faithefull to him which hadd called him through grace, and for the
remembrance of his great goodness, he still in heart desired to add more labor
unto the Lords work. For the Arc being brought home, and placed in a tent, he
desired to build an house for the same. And if it hadd seemed good in the eyes
of the Lord, to have used his hand therein, as he did accept of his heart and
goodwill: he would have chose rather to have been destitute himself of a
princely palace, then yt the Ark of god should have been without a royal
house, for the more manifestinge of the glory thereof. And when he received
answer from ye Lord, that he should not build an house unto him, but his son
should build it: yet as much as he might, he did with all his power, and
became a chief builder one way, when as an other way he could not, namely,
in preparinge those things which should furnishe the work, and set it
forward with speed, when it should be begone. For he said: My son Solomon
is young and tender, and we must build an house for the Lord, 1. Chro. 22.
magnificall, excellent, and of great fame and dignity thoroughout all
Countries. I will therefore now prepare for him. And he prepared an hundred
thousand Talentes of gold, and a thousand thousand Talentes of Silver: And
of Brass and of Iron, passinge weight: And also Timber and Stones, and he had
set Masons to hew and polish the stones in readiness. And yet for all this,
his hunger for Gods glory, was not satisfied, but he complained that he was
able to do no more. For he said to his Son Solomon: according to my
poverty I have prepared these things. Ver. 14.


There was then no necessity of an house: For the Arc was kept in the
Tabernacle, which figured the church, and that was after Gods institution.
And the necessity of having the Temple came not until the Lords
commandment appointed a time thereunto. Neither was there any ruin of
things pertaining to Gods house at that time. Yet you see how David behaved
himself, not constrained by any necessity of the time, but inflamed by his
true affection, which hungered for the further glory of those things, which
represented Gods glory.

There be witnesses in England, which know, how that exceeding many mouths of
the teachers, and of those which speak as they are taught, have confessed
concerning their Church: Some, that it is ruinous: Yet will they make the
stones whole again out of the duste, not with a work, as Nehemiah did with
building: but with a word or two, in saying, it is the church of God yet
notwithstanding.

Some say, It is naked, and yet a Church: And though it be both hungry and
naked, they give it such a beggars alms, as ye Apostle James speak of: Go
warm thee, and fill thy belly. James 2.16.
For they say, God help it, we shall pray for it. In the mean time
nothing is ministered to sustain it with, touching that they complain to be
wantinge unto it, therefore what helps it?

Some say, It is as a man that want a leg, and yet a church. But the
Scripture say, That that which is halting, is near to be turned out of the
way. Heb. 12.
Some say, It want but an arm, etc. But all this while they epsy not wherein
the greatest deformity lies, namely, In that it has a little pretty body,
and a great sort of monstrous great heads. I mean those of whom we may
well complain with the Prophet, and say: O Christ, Esai. 26.13.
Other Lords besides thee have ruled over us.

But because I know herein my meant will be sifted: I say for my self, that I
judge them not, nor condemn them. The word of the Lord judges all them and
me.

But concerning the Church of England, as they inticle it: It is a notable
dishonor unto Christ Jesus, to make all the Parishes in England generally his
Church, he will give no thanks for that liberality. Yet I am persuaded (the
Lord I take to witness) that in the Realm of England there be diverse
Churches. And I hope also that there be many more true worshippers, or such
at the least as the Lord does accept, which abhor and deteste to bow the
knee to the Antichristian scepter, more I say, then seem to appear, as was
in Israel in the days of the Prophet Eliah. But that the book which is for
Gods worship and service, and yet bears not the name of God, that ever it
caused Tabernacle to be so framed, as that the Lord should know it for his
own, I utterly deny.

But to return to my purpose. Seeing the case so stands that the ruins and
decays of the Churches be apparent by a general confession almost of all:
Yea seeing it is also confessed, that she is sick unto death, and lie panting
for breath: let us not think, that sweet and smoothe words will heal her
deadly hurt, as to say: yet it is a famous Church, and other nations have
thought well and reverently of the Church of England. etc. But let all with
whom is yet the fear of the living GOD, and any desire of his glory, lay
the hand to the work, no more but even thus, by eschewing evil, and doing
good, that although they go forward in fewenesse, according to their poverty
for a time, yet by their example, and aduertisementes, they may win many
unto righteousenesse, by calling, and stirringe up after this manner: Come,
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, Esai. 2.3.
to the house of the GOD of Jacob, and he shall teach us his ways, and we
will walk in his paths.

Let them also say each to other, that because we sought not the Lord in dew
order, therefore hear we this complainte to our rebuke and shame: There was
never more wickedness then is now.

Thus if we do, laboring not more faintlie, because iniquity has gotten the
upper hand, but more valiantly to redeem the times, because the days be
evil, we shall be found in the sight of the Lord, according to our
ability, to have polished and made ready living stones for the Lords
buyldinge, that although we can see the work go but slowly forward in our
days, yet in the next generation it may rise more speedily to the glory of
GOD. And let none utter these words of unfaithfulness, Alas what can I do, or
what can two or three of us do, or how are we like to go forward?

So I may say, what can a grain of Mustarde seed do? It is small to
behold. But being cast into the ground in dew time, and watered, we see
what it does, and how it spreads. So we may say, what can we do, if
we sit still? But if we labor in the Lords business, so as we give our
selves over to be sown in the earth for his truethes sake, undoubtedly, out
of our dead bones or ashes there will spring up many more witnesses, until
the glorious cause florishe gloriously.

But to proceed.

I rejoiced when they said unto me. etc. It is written in the Chronicles,
that David gathered all Israel together, 1. Chro 15.
to go up to Jerusalem. And in that the people were so heartily willinge,
saying, That they would go up to the house of the Lord, and their feet
should stand in the gates of Jerusalem, we may note this, that the Lord
now being with David, after he had feared before his face, and carefully
sought him in dew order, he adds blessinge unto blessing unto him, to make
his joy full. For he does not only make him to see the Arc come home in
peace, but also give him the hearts of all the people, as one man reioysinge
with him, and praising the Lord, then the which nothing could refreshe and
solace his mind more cherefullie over his grief paste.

Thus does the Lord make things to succeed with them (yea oftentimes more then
they look for) which seek him in fear and tremblinge, and attempt to work
according to his will.

Thus Nehemiah, when his heart had conceived that enterprise of building of the
walls of Jerusalem, he not only obtained leave of the King to go thither,
which thing he hoped not for without fear: but also the Lord made him
obtain that which was least looked for, even help and furniture of Timber
toward the work. Moreover, the Lord gave him the hearts of the people, who
notwithstanding their poverty and fewness, yet were encouraged to work with
unwonted forwardness.

So Moses, though he had a froward company to guide, yet when he went about
the Tabernacle making, with all things apperteyning thereunto, according to
the Lords commandment, he found the peoples hearts so willinge and ready
to offer, and their hands so full of gifts, that he cried, Ho, and
commanded them to cease from offringe any more. Exodus 36.6.


Therefore, let there be no vnchearfull words amongst us, to weaken our
hands before we begin to work. As some say, How is it possible? Where shall
we have fit men for Elders? Where shall we have sufficient Ministers
enough? And where shall we have this and that?

It is the property of a slothful servant, to tell before he go out, how
he is not like to speed. Let us in the midst of all streightnes and
impossibilities, take in hand our enterprise in the Lord with humblenes,
wisdom, and single hartednes: and we shall see success not only in those
things which we can foresee and hope for: but also many things unlooked for
of us, shall be prospered into our bosom.

Now whereas the people speak so willingly, saying: We will go up into the
house of the lord: it declares their forwardnes unto a good enterprise. But
the King had called them and stirred them up thereunto. So peradventure it may
seem that the people are not to go up into the Lords house: especially to go
about such an heavenly business, as they now did, without their Kings and
Princes going before them. As for ye Arc, though it bare a spiritu all
representatio^ of holy things, yet it was a material thing, and the bringing of
it home required outward furniture and preparation accordingly. But what the
Priests and people might have done as touching it, if the King should have
been to slack: when I shall understand it to be doubted of: answer shall
be made as GOD shall give leave.

In the mean time, it is not amiss to speak some thing of a question which
flies much abroad, which have been taken up rather of desire to entangle,
then of any love of ye truth, as should seem by the disorderly framinge and
propoundinge thereof. The question is this: Whither the Prince or the people
ought first to begin reformation in the Church?

I answer with propoundinge other questions. Can they tell whether Prince or
people ought first to turn to the Lord? Whether Prince or people ought
first to do their duty? Or, whither ye head, the hand, or ye foot ought
first to do that, which severally appertains to ye office of each of those
members to do? For Kings and Princes ought to reform without delay or waiting
for other, so far as the bounds of their calling reach: and ye people they
ought to reform without al delay or tarying for other, so far as the bounds
of their calling reach also. But how far the bounds of each do extend,
therein lies the chief point.

In the name of God, let Caesar have whatsoever unto him belongs, even all
civil power and Dominion ordained of God. And woe unto him, say I, which
shall hold this, and teach men so, that there is no use of the Magistrates
sword among Christians. For that is to remove ye doole of the great and large
field which the Lord have measured out unto them. And that is also to deprive
Christians of that benefit of peace which the Lord have ordained that we
should enjoy by their means.

For it is written: Exhort, that Prayers, 1. Tim. 2.2.
and Supplications be made for Kings, and all that be in authority, that
under them we may lead a godly and peaceable life.

Therefore I am thus persuaded, that as the Kings of Judah did reform by their
civil power, those things which outwardly were set up for abominations:
namely, as they did break down the altars, cut down the groves, burn the
images with fire, slaye the Preistes of Baal, and such like things: So also
it appertains to the Magistrates now, to break down the idolatrous altars,
pluck down their buildinges, burn their images with fire, and to slaye
those, which have revolted from Christianity to open idolatry. And herein we
praise the Lord, who strengthened our Princes hands, to work so far, as was
wrought therein. And if our sins had not displeased the Lord, we should have
seen more. 2. King. 13.18.
For I would to God the Arrow had not been shot against the ground only three
times, but three hundred times three times, that a full conquest for ever might
have bin gotten over those Antichristian Aramits.

And now concerning those abominations, which remain, which partly I have
spoken of: As the offices, rowmes, and liuinges of the Lordly ouerrulers of
many churches, together with Deanes, and Deanaries, Prebe^ds and Prebenshippes,
Cathedralles with the Chaunters therein, and their Marmaiden music, Bishops
Chau^celors, Archdeacons, Co^missaries, Proctors Officials, Su^ners and
Questmen, which all do rob ye church of her authority and liberty, and
strippe her naked: These I say, with their Courts and Cano^ laws, as also
freehold Parsonages and Uicariges, which hinder the free election and deposing
of the Minister: Also blind and du^me ministers, with ye form of stinted
service to be read, being the staff of strength of upholding the^: All these
wormewoode dregs of Antichrists cupp, and whatsoever more, it appertains
only to the office of ye civil Magistrate, to power out and rince even from
the bottom. Which ye Lord grant that it may soon be done.

And whereas we are charged that we will take upon us to remove these things,
and establishe new laws for other government: we are most iniu^i^uslie
slaundered. For we contrariewise charge al in ye name of God, that they be not
so hardy, as by any authority which they may imagine they have, as being of
the church of God, to meddle once to move the hand to take away these things:
For that were to take ye sword out of Cesars hand. Therefore they ought to wait
for this manner of reformation, with continuing inferuent prayer to God for the
hastening thereof. But herein lies the duty of Gods people, to remove them
selves from these and all other abominations, and not to have fellowship with
ye unfruitful works of darkness: Ephe. 5.1.
not to join hands with open wickedness, but to keep our selves unspotted
thereof, not to go under any yoke of spiritual bondage, Galat. 5.1.
to betraye the liberty and authoriritie which Christ have left with us to
keep, but to stand fast in the liberty wherein he has made us free. By the
virtue of which liberty and authority, the Church of God have to try and
examine the gifts, and conversation, of those which should lead the^, and
finding them meet to choose them, and perceyuinge them afterward to fall to
any evil heresy in doctrine, or to loosenes of life, and will not be
reclaymed by dew admonition, to depose them. Also by the power of the same
liberty and authority, the church of GOD have to use their dew admonitions,
and rebukinges of offenders. Every one may bring his complainte in due
order: And such offenders as will not hear the church, and be reformed,
Mat. 18.17
must feel the sword of excommunication by the word of GOD, to be cut
of, and to be delivered unto Satan, 1. Cor. 5.
to stir them up to bewail their wickedness and to repent, if the Lord so
touch their hearts. And this authority of punishinge the transgressors by
the Ecclesiastical sword, may not be taken out of the Churches hands,
neither can the Church give it over without denyinge Christ, who have left
this his power under their charge: Mat. 18.18
Although the civil Magistrates may and ought also to strike with their
sword, every one which being of the Church, shall openly transgress
against the Lords commandments.

Moreover, it stands with the liberty of the Lords Congregation, to use
prayers and thanks giving always, as the present occasion requires.

These and such like things appertain to the office of the Lords Ministers,
together with their Congregations. And as for the reforminge of these things,
where soever any want be: What ungodly tongue dare be so bold, as to
say, we ought to tarry one hour? No, but if we tarry for a new grant from
men to do our duties in the true worship of God, when as we have already
sufficient grant from heaven: we shall die in our sins, and our blood shall
be upon our own heads.

Now, if the Ministers and peoples duty and charge extend unto this which I
have mentioned: it follows, that nothing is wanting unto true Church
gouuernement, but so much as the people, and especially the Ministers which
should guide them, are wanting unto their duty enjoined to them by the Lord.

Wherefore in the Lord, I do require some of those Ministers in England,
which think hardly of our doings, and yet persuade them selves that they
heartily desire the full repayring of the Walls of Jerusalem: That they would
set down by proof of the word of God, that which is wanting to true and
full church government, besides that which is their duty to do, together
with their Congregation, whom they ought to stir up to their duty likewise.
If there be any thing at all: I will promise and vow faythfullie to tarry
and wait with them also. If there be nothing, why do they make so long suing at
the Parliaments, and suffer so many poor souls at home to be deprived of
their heaue^lie well fare, and to suffer sin so too ouerspreade by their
default, which by their keepinge the Lords watch, might be cut shorter? For
what sewe they for unto the Prince and Parliament? Even for a law to compel
them to do that which the Lord have commanded them to do. Why do they it
not in haste, by the virtue of Gods commandment already given, so long as
they can in peace? And when they no longer can, why suffer they not persecution
for his sake, whom they must obey before man? and who have said: Blessed are
they, which suffer persecution for righteousness sake: Mat. 5.10.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Whose kingdom and glory we must seek both in wealth and woe, (...) in
peace and persecution. His (...) come with speed. And to (...) length, let us
give the hand, (...) the song of hearty entertaine^^^te

Hosanna, Mat. 11.10.
Blessed be the kingdom that comes in the name of the Lord of our Father
David: Hosanna, O thou which art in the highest heavens.

AMEN.

