THE TEMPLE.

A Sermon Preached at PAVLS Cross the fifth of August. 1624.

BY THO. ADAMS.

printer's device of Augustine Mathewes

LONDON, Printed by A. Mathewes for John Grismand, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR HENRY CAREY, Lord HVNSDON, Viscount Rochford.
MY LORD,
AMong the many absurdities, which give us just cause to abhor the Religion
of the present Roman Church, this seems to me none of the least; that they
have filled all the Temples under the command of their politic Hierarchy,
with Idols: and changed the glory of the Invisible God, into the worship of
visible Images. They invoke the Saints by them, yea they dare not serve the
Lord without them. As if God had repealed his vnchangcable Law; and in stead of
condemning all worship by an Image, would now receive no worship without an
Image. I have observed this one, among the other famous marks of that
Synagogue; that they strive to condemn that which God has justified, and to
justify what he has condemned. For the former; He has precisely directed our
Justification only by faith in the merits of Christ: this they vehemently
dispute against. For the other; He has (not without mention of his Jealousy)
forbidden all worship that has the least tang of Idolatry: this they eagerly
maintain. What large Volumes have they written against the Second
Commandment! as if they were not content to expunge it out of their
Catechismes, unless they did also Dogmatice contradict it to the whole world.
They first set the people upon a plain rebellion, and then make show to fetch
them off again with a neat distinction. Thus do they pumpe their wits to
legitimate that by a distinction, which God has pronounced a Bastard by his
definitive sentence: as if the Papal Decrees were that law, whereby the world
should be judged at the last day. But who will regard a house of magnificent
structure, of honorable and ancient memory, when the plague has infected it,
or thieves possess it? And who, in their right senses, will join themselves
to that Temple, which after pretense of long standing, stately building, and of
many such prerogatives and royalties, is found to be besmeared with
superstitions, and profaned with innumerable Idols? Why should we delight to
dwell there, where God has refused to dwell with us.

I publish this argument as no new thing to your Lordship: but, wherein your
well experienced knowledge is able to inform me. Only I have been bold,
through your thrice honored Name, to transmit this small Discourse to the
world: emboldened by the long proof I have had of your constant love to the
Truth, and the gracious Piety of your most noble Mother, the best
encouragement of my poor labors on earth. The best blessings of God be still
multiplied upon her, your self, your religious Lady, and your honorable
Family: which is continually implored by

Your Lordships humble Servant. THO. ADAMS.

THE TEMPLE.
2. COR. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with Jdols?
IT is not fit, they should be too familiar or near together in this world,
whose portions shall be so far asunder in the world to come. The Sheep and
Goats are indeed now blended promiscuously, and none can distinguish them
here, but he that shall separate them hereafter: the right and left hand of
the last Tribunal shall declare them. But they that be alien or opposite to us
in Faith and Profession, are manifest, and we have a frequent charge De non
commiscendo. Now the nearer this ill matched conjunction, the more intolerable:
the same board, ill; the same bed, worse; worst of all, the same Temple. So the
Apostle begins his dehortation, Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: so he
ends it, What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols! Diverse seeds of
grain in one ground, diverse kinds of beasts in one yoke, Deuter. 22.
diverse sorts of cloth in one garment, were expressly forbidden under the Law:
and shall several Religions be allowed in one Church under the Gospel?

The absurdnes of such a mixture is here illustrated by many oppositions; the
sound of all which is Interrogatiue, the sense Negative. Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, Light and Darkness, Christ and Beliall, the Believer and the
Infidel; these can have no society, no communion, no concord, no conjunction;
and What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

I need not by Art divide these words, for they are divided by nature. Now as
Quae Deus coniunxit, nemo separet, Those things that God has joined together,
let no man put asunder: so Quae Deus separauit, nemo coniungat, Those things
that God has put asunder, let no man join together. The scope of the Text,
and the matter of my Discourse, is to separate Idols from the Temple of God;
the holy Ghost has divided them to my hands: they cannot agree in his
sentence, let them never agree in our practice: cursed is he that goes about
to compound this controversy. The Temple is holy, Idols profane; it is not
lawful to mix Sacra profanis. The Temple is for God, Idols for the Devil:
God and the Devil admit no reconciliation. Therefore as two hostile nations,
after some treaty of peace, neither liking the proposed conditions, break off
in a rage, In hoc vterque consentimus, quod consentire nolumus, in this we both
consent, that we will not consent at all; so be it here agreed, that no
agreement can be made. In composing differences betwixt man and man, betwixt
family and family, betwixt kingdom and kingdom, Beati Pacifici, Blessed are
the Peace makers. But in reconciling Christ and Behal, the Temple of God and
Idols, Maledicti pacifici, Cursed are the peacemakers. Here Bella geri
placeat magnos habitura triumphos. God himself in Paradise did first put the
quarrel, his Apostle has here given the Alarm, and he deserves a
malediction that sounds a retreat.

But as no battle can be well fought without order, and martial array, so no
discourse can be made profitable without some method. The Temple therefore we
will suppose to be Gods Castle, and Idolatry the Invasion of it. This Castle is
but one, Idols are many. The Champions that God has set to defend his Castle,
are especially or principally Princes and Pastors, the Magistracy and the
Ministry; the adversary forces that fight against it be the Devils mercenary
Soldiers. The Munition on the one side is the Divine Scripture, the sacred
Word of God: the Engines, Ordnance, and Instruments of assault on the other
side, are Idols, Traditions, and those carnal inventions, wherewith the
corrupt heart of man seeks to batter it. This Siege is continual, this feud
implacable, the difference irreconcilable. Yet at last the war shall end,
with the ruin of those enemies, in the triumph of the righteous, and to the
everlasting glory of God?

Now though this war be every way spiritual, it is diverse ways
considerable. There is a material, and there is a mystical Temple: there are
external, and internal Idols: there be ordinary, and extraordinary
Soldiers. Every Christian, as he is a Temple of God, so not without the
assault of Idols: there is a civil war, a Rebellion within him, wherewith
he is continually exercised. In this militant estate of the Church none are
free: only he that gives full allowance to his own corruptions, is not a
Temple of God, but a Synagogue of Satan; a sink of uncleanness, rather then a
Sanctuary of holiness. Thus from one general arise many particulars; and you
will say, Behold a company; Gene. 30.11.
as Leah said of her son Gad, a Troop comes. Yet all these branches have
but one root: they are but like the wheels of a Clock, taken a little in
sunder to view, then to be put together again. Let not their number
discourage your attention. When a wealthy favorite of the world sent his
servant to bespeake lodging for him, he told the Host, Here will come to night
the Lord of such a Manor, the Landlord of such a Town, the Keeper of such a
Forest, the Master of such an Office, the Lay-parson of such a Parish, a
Knight, a Justice of Peace, a Gentleman, an Usurer, and my Master; Alas,
answers the Host, I have not lodging for half so many: Be content, replies
the servant, for all these are but one man. So if you distrust your memories
for room to entertain so many observations, yet be comforted, for all have
but this one Sum, There is no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols.

The Temple.
That which was built by Solomon, was justly called the Wonder of the world: a
white and glorious Monument, set on the hill of Sion, inuiting passengers to
see it, and amazing their eyes when they beheld it. It was of white Marble
without, of Cedar and Gold within, all of the best, all beautiful, precious,
durable. So magnificent was that holy Structure, that al nations have admired
it, Psalm. 48.2.
all times celebrated it Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth
is Mount Sion. While the favor of heaven was set upon Jerusalem, the joy of
the whole earth was mount Sion. It is fit, he that made the world a house for
Man, should have a house in this world made for himself: neither could it be
too costly, seeing all the materials that went to it were his own. Every
rotten Cottage is too good for Satan, no Fabric could be too sumptuous for
God. While his people dwelt in Tents, Himself was content to dwell in a
Tabernacle: in the flitting condition of Israel, he would have his own house
a moveable, that they might never remove without him. But when their residence
was settled in the promised Land, he would have his Tabernacle turned into a
Temple; that they dwelling where he appointed them, He might also dwell among
them. The former was for motion, the latter for rest: the one for progress,
the other his standing house. All this while God had but one House at once:
first the Tabernacle, then that gave place to the Temple, and Salomons Temple
being defaced, was supplied by Zorobabels. Now he has many houses, even so
many as there be nations, as there be congregations, as there be persons
professing Christ. We have houses of our own, why should not God have his? A
Prince has more houses then one, why should the King of Heaven be abridg'd? A
King in his own person can dwell but in one house at once, let God have never
so many, he can at once fill them all. He has a house of flesh, so every
Believer is his Temple: a house of stone, so this material one is his Temple:
a house neither of flesh nor stone, but immateriall, immortal in the heavens.
And as Christ says, John 14.
that in his Fathers House there are many Mansions; so in his Fathers militant
Church there are many houses.

It were vain to ask what God should do with a house, when we consider what
we do with our own: what, but dwell in it? But how God does dwell in it,
seems to be a question: seeing the Apostle says, that he dwells not in
Temples made with hands. Acts 17.24.
Indeed he dwells not in them, as we dwell in ours. Our house defends us, God
defends his house: our house comprehends us, God comprehends his house. We are
only within our houses, and they are without us: God is so within his house,
that he is also without it, elsewhere, every where, yea his house is within
him. When we are abroad, we cannot keep our houses; yea when we are in them
asleep, they serve to keep us. God can never be absent from his, nor does the
keeper of this Temple ever sleep. Now every material Temple, wherein the
Saints are assembled, the truth of the Gospel is preached and professed, the
holy Sacraments duly administered, and the Lords Name is inuocated and
worshipped, is the Temple of God.

Why is it called His Temple, but for the testification of his presence? When
Cain stood excommunicated for murdering his brother, and might not come to the
place appointed for Gods service, he is said to be cast out from the presence
of the Lord. Genes. 4.16.
Some have interpreted the like of Ionahs flying from his presence; Jonah 1.3.
that he fled from the place where the Prophets used to stand ready to besent
of God. Leuit. 10.2.
Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lord; that is, before the Altar of the Lord.
That which was done before the Arc or Altar, in the Tabernacle or Temple, was
said to be done coram Domino. And yet too many come to the Temple with so
little reverence, as if they thought God were not at home, or did not dwell in
his own house. But the Lord is present in his Temple: in vain shall we hope
to find him elsewhere, if we do not seek him here. Math 18.20.
I will be in the midst of you, gathered together in my Name: not any where,
not every where, but here. Indeed, no place excludes him, but this place is
sure of him: he fills all places with his presence, he fills this with his
gracious presence. Here he both hears us, and is heard of us: Bern.
Audit orantes, docet audientes; he hears our prayers, and teaches us our
lessons. No place sends up faithful prayers in vain, no place has such a
promise of hearing as the Temple. It is the Lords Court of Audience, his
Highness Court of Requests. There humble souls open their grieuances, from
thence they return laden with graces. Why are many so void of goodness, but
because they are negligent of the public devotions? They seek not the Lord
where he may be found, therefore deserve to miss him where they pretend to
seek him. Why should they think to find God in their Closets, while they care
not to seek him in his Temples? When we need the help of our friend, do we
tarry till we meet him by chance, or till he come to us, or shall we not
rather go home to his house? Peter and John went up into the Temple at the
hour of Prayer: Acts 3.1.
they thought it not sufficient to pray in their private chambers, but join
themselves with the Congregation, as a Navy Royal to transport their holy
Merchandise to heaven. Psalm. 134.2.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord. Pure hands are
accepted in every place; but especially in the Sanctuary. What follows? The
Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion. He says not, the
Lord that made heaven, bless thee upon earth: nor, the Lord that made earth,
bless thee out of heaven: but the Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee
out of Sion. Blessings come originally from heaven, mediately through Sion. In
the Temple let us seek, in the Temple we shall find those precious treasures
and comforts of Jesus Christ.

This Temple is not without some enemies. Besides those profane Politicians,
that think with one Eustathius, that there is no use of Temples: or those
Massilians, who (as Damascen reports) did add to other Heresies Templorum
contemptum: or those Pseudo-Apostoli, that laughed at a Temple full of
Suppliants, as a house full of fools. Or those that be of Ieroboams mind, who
to settle himself in the kingdom of Israel, diuerts the people from Gods
house at Jerusalem. In stead of that snowy and glittering Temple, they shall
have two golden representations. Sion is too far off, these shall be near
home: that is a tedious way of devotion, these both compendious and plausible.
Antiqu. lib. 8. cap. 3.
As Josephus brings him in persuading them; My good people and friends, you
cannot but know that no place is without God, and that no place does contain
God; wheresoever we pray, he can hear us; wheresoever we worship, he can see
us: therefore the Temple is superfluous, the journey needless, God is better
able to come to you, then you are to go to him. Beside these, the Temple of
God has two kinds of foes.

1. The Anabaptists tell us; that the old superstition has made those houses
fitter for Stables then for Churches; that they ought no more to be called
Templa Dei, but Templa Idolorum; as they pretend, the Passover was called in
those corrupt times, John 2.13.
not Pascha Dei, but Pascha Iudaeorum. By the same reason they would have
removed all Princes, because some have abused their governments. But we say,
though evil men abuse good things, yet if a kingdom were not a lawful State,
David and Josias would never have been Kings; for good men do not use evil
things. The Temple in Christ's time was become a den of thieves, yet even then
and there did he send up devout and holy Prayers. It is a gross ignorance
that cannot distinguish betwixt a fault that proceeds ex natura facti, Th. 1.
qu. 41. art. 6.
and that which proceeds ex abusu boni: the former is malum simpliciter, the
other is but malum per accidens. No man pulles down his house, because
uncleanness has been committed in one of the chambers. Let offenders be
removed from the Temple, not the Temple demolished because of offenses. The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Math. 21.43.
says Christ; not quite taken away, but only taken from the Jews. When GOD
threatened the like to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.28.
he did not mean to have no more Kings, or to reduce it to the former state of
Judges: no, only the kingdom shall lose Saul, but Israel shall not lose the
kingdom. It is a Maxim in nature, Things dedicated to God, are not to be
transferred to the uses of men: a principle in Philosophy, Plato.
Quae recte data sunt, eripi non licet: and a proverb among our children, To
give a thing, and take a thing, is fit for the Devils darling.

2. The Sacrilegious, to whom God is beholding, if they let his Temple stand;
but for the maintenance of it, they will be so bold with him, as either to
share half, or leave him none. There be many that pray in the Temple, who yet
also prey on the Temple: as if a thief should do homage to that house in the
day, which he means to rob in the night. But alas, why should I touch that
sore which is all dead flesh? or speak against Sacrilege In orb sacrilego,
among them that delight in it? Where Lawyers are feeed, hired, bribed to
maintain Sacrilege, God and his poor Ministers may even hold their peace.
Something would be spoken for Sions sake, but I take this place and time for
neither the right Vbi nor Quando. We know, Abigail would not tell Nabal of his
drunkenness, till he was awoke from his wine. Whenever it shall please God
to awake you from this intoxication, we may then find a season to speak to you.
But God keep you from Nabals destiny; 1 Samuel 25.37.
that when this sin shall be objected to your Consciences on your
deathbeds, your hearts do not then die in you like a stone. One thing let me
beg of you in the Name of him, whom you thus wrong: Howsoever you persist to
rob the Temple of the due Salary, yet do not stand to justify it. By
imploring mercy perhaps you may be saved, but by justifying the Injury, you
cannot but be lost. As the French King, Francis the first said to a woman
kneeling and crying to him for Justice; Stand up woman, for Justice Iowe thee;
if thou beg'st any thing, beg mercy. So if you request any thing of God, let it
be mercy, for he owes you Justice: and in this point, God be merciful to you
all.

It was David's earnest prayer, One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm.
27.7.
and that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. There are many that pray David's words, but not with David's heart. Vnum
petij, one thing I have desired, De praeterito, for the time past: and hoc
requiram, this I will still seek after, de futuro, for the time to come: I
have required it long, and this suite I will urge till I have obtained it.
What? to dwell in some of the houses of God all the days of my life, and to
leave them to my children after me: not to serve him there with devotion, but
to make the place mine own possession. These love the House of God too well,
they love it to Have, and to Hold: but because the Conueyance is made by the
Lawyer, and not by the Minister, their Title will be found naught in the end:
and if there be not a Nifi prius to prevent them, yet at the great day of
universal Audite, the Judge of all the world shall condemn them. By this way,
the nearer to the Church, the further from God. The Lords Temple is ordained to
gain us to him, not for us to gain it from him. If we love the Lord, we will
love the habitation of his House, and the place where his Honor dwells: that
so by being humble frequenters of his Temple below, we may be made noble Saints
of his House above, the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ.

These be the enemies to the Temple, whereof the first would separate Dominum
a Templo, the other Templum a Domino. they would take God from the Temple,
these would take the Temple from God. Let me conclude this point with two
watch-words.

1. The first concerns us of the Ministry, the wayters of the Temple. It has
been an old saying, De Templo omne bonum, de Templo omne malum: all good or
evil comes from the Temple. Chrysostom.
Where the Pastor is good, and the people good, he may say to them, as Paul to
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.1.
Nonne opus meum vos estis in Domino, Are not ye my work in the Lord? Where the
Pastor is bad, and the people no better, they may say to him, Nonne destructis
nostra tu es in seculo, art not thou our destruction in the world? It is no
wonder, if an abused Temple make a disordered people. A wicked Priest is the
worst creature upon Gods earth: no sin is so black, as that shall appear
from under a white Surplesse. Every man's iniquity is so much the hainouser, as
his place is holyer. The sin of the Clergy is like a Rheum, which rising
from the stomach into the head, drops down upon the lungs, fretting most noble
and the vital parts, till all the members languish into corruption. The lewd
sons of Eli were so much the less tolerable, by sinning in the Tabernacle.
Their sacrifices might do away the sins of others; no sacrifice could do
away their own. Many a soul was the cleaner for the blood of those beasts
they shed; their own souls were the fouler by it. By one and the same
service, they did expiate the peoples offenses, and multiply their own. Our
Clergy is no Charter for heaven. Such men are like the conueyances of Land,
Evidences and Instruments to settle others in the kingdom of heaven, while
themselves have no part of that they convey. It is no impossible thing, for men
at once to show the way to Heaven with their tongue, and lead the way to Hell
with their foot. It was not a Jewish Ephod, it is not a Romish Cowle, that can
privilege an evil doer from punishment. Therefore it was Gods charge to the
executioners of his Judgments, Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17. John 2.16.
Begin at my own Sanctuary: and the Apostle tells us, that Judgment shall
begin at the house of God. and Christ entering into his Prophetical Office,
began reformation at his Fathers house. Let our devout and holy behavior
prevent this; and by our reverent carriage in the Temple of God, let us honor
the God of the Temple. It should be our endeavor to raise up seed unto our
elder Brother, to win souls unto Christ. Nunquam cessate lucrari Christo,
qui lucrati estis a Christo. If Christ, while he was upon the Cross, says
Bernard, had given me some drops of his own blood in a Violl, how carefully
would I have kept them, how dearly esteemed them, how laid them next my heart?
But now he did not think it fit to trust me with those drops, but he has
entrusted to me a flock of his lambs, those souls for whom he shed his
blood, like whom his own blood was not so dear unto him: upon these let me
spend my care, my love, my labor, that I may present them holy Saints to my
dear Lord Jesus.

2. The other concerns all Christians; that they beware, lest for the abuses
of men, they despise the Temple of God. For as the Altar cannot sanctify the
Priest, so nor can the unholiness of the Priest dishallow the Altar. His sin
is his own, and cannot make you guilty: the virtue and comfort is from God,
and this is still able to make you holy. When we read, 1 Samuel 2.17.
that the sin of the Priests was great before the Lord, for men abhorred the
offering of the Lord: this we all confess, was ill done of the Priests; and I
hope no man thinks, it was well done of the people. Say their sins, yea their
very persons were worthy to be abhorred, shall men therefore scorn the
Sanctuary, and cast that contempt on the Service of God, which belongs to the
vices of man? This were to add our own evil to the evil of others, and to
offend God because he was offended. Cannot the faults of men displease us, but
we must needs fall out with God? Do we not provoke him justly to abhor our
souls, when we so unjustly contemn his service? Know, that he is able to
sanctify thy heart, even by the ministry of that man whose heart he has not
yet sanctified. The virtue consists not in the humane action, but in the divine
Institution. We say of the Sacraments themselves, much more of the Ministers;
Isti non tribuunt, quod per istos tribuitur: these do not give us, what God
does give us by them.

But this age is ficke of such a wanton levitie, that we make choice of the
Temple, according to our fancy of the Preacher: and so tie up the free Spirit
of God from blowing where he pleases, that he shall be beholding to the grace
of the Speaker, for giving grace to the hearer. So whereas Paul ties Faith to
hearing, they will tie hearing to Faith; and as they believe the holiness of
the man, so they expect fruit of the Sermon. This is to make Paul something,
and Apollos something; whereas Paul himself says they are both nothing. God
only gives the increase, and who shall appoint him by whom he shall give it?
Let the seed be good, and the ground good, and the Lord will send fruit
whosoever be the Sower. But while you make hearing a matter of sport,
Preaching is too often become an exercise of wit. Words are but the Images of
matter, and (you shall hear anon) it is not lawful to worship Images. It
dangerously misbecomes the Temple, when any thing shall be intended there, but
the glory of God, and gaining of souls to Jesus Christ.

Thus much concerning the Temple; the next point I must fall upon is

Jdols.
Idol in Greek signifies a resemblance or representation, and differs not from
Image in Latin: both at first taken in a good sense: but the corruption of
times has bred a corruption of words; and Idol is now only taken for the Image
of a false god. Every Idol is an Image, but every Image is not an Idol but
every Image made and used for religious purposes, is an Idol. The Images of God
are Idols; wherewith Popery abounds. An old man, sitting in a chair, with a
triple Crown on his head, and Pontifical robes on his back, a Dove hanging
at his beard, and a Crucifixe in his arms; is their Image of the Trinity.
This Picture sometime ferues them for a god in their Churches, and sometime for
a sign at their tap-houses: so that it is a common saying in many of their
Cities, Such a Gentleman lies at the Trinity, and his servants at Gods head.
This they seem to do, as if they would in some sort requite their Maker:
because God made man according to his Image, therefore they, by way of
recompense, will make God according to man's Image. But this certainly they
durst not do, without putting the second Commandment out of their
Catechismes, and the whole Decalogue out of their Consciences.

I intend no polemicall discourse of this point, by examining their Arguments:
that business is fitter for the School, then the Pulpit. And, O God, that
either School or Pulpit in Christendom should be troubled about it! that any
man should dare to make that a question, which the Lord has so plainly and
punctually forbidden! Beside the Iniquity, how grievous is the absurdity? How
is a body without a spirit, like to a spirit without a body? A visible picture,
like an invisible nature? How would the King take it in scorn, to have his
picture made like a Wesell or a Hedgehog? And yet the difference betwixt the
greatest Monarch, and the least Emmet, is nothing to the distance betwixt a
finite and an infinite. If they allege with the Anthropomorphites, that the
Scripture attributes to God hands, and feet, and eyes: why therefore may they
not represent him in the same forms? But we say, the Scripture also speaks of
his covering us with the shadow of his wings; why therefore do they not paint
him like a Bird with feathers? If they say, that he appeared to Daniel in this
form, because he is there called the Ancient of days: we answer, that Gods
Commandments, and not his apparitions, be rules to us: by the former we shall
be judged, and not by the latter. It is mad Religion, to neglect what he bids
us do, and to imitate what he has done: as if we should despise his Laws,
and go about to counterfeit his thunder. God is too infinite for the
comprehension of our souls, why should we then labor to bring him into the
narrow compass of bords and stones? Certainly, that should not be Imaged, which
cannot be Imagined. But Christ was a man, why may not his Image be made? Some
answer, that no man can make an Image of Christ, without leaving out the chief
part of him, which is his Divinity. It was the Godhead united to the manhood,
that makes him Christ: sure this cannot be painted. But why should we make
Christ's Image without Christ's warrant? The Lord has forbidden the making of
any Image, whether of things in heaven, where Christ is; or of things on earth,
where Christ was; to worship them. Now till God revoke that precept, what can
authorize this practice?

Their Images of the Saints, employed to such religious purposes, make them no
less then Idola^ers. It is a silly shift to say, the honor done to the Images,
reflects upon the represented Saints. When they cloth an Image, is the Saint
ere the gayer or warmer? when they offer to an Image, is the Saint ere the
richer? When they kneel to an Image, the Saint esteems himself no more
worshipped, then the King holds himself honored, when a man speaks to his
picture be fore his face. Therefore some of them are driven to confess
plainly, that the Image is worshipped for it self. But could the Saints in
heaven be heard speak upon earth, they would disclaim that honor, which is
prejudicial to their Maker. As Calvin is not afraid to say of the blessed
Virgin, that she would hold it less despite done to her, if they should pull
her by the hair of the head, or trample her in the dirt, then to set her in
riuality with her Son and God and Savior. But they tell us, that they
worship not the Images of false Gods, as did the Pagans; but only the Images
of Gods own servants, and choice friends. But will the jealous God endure
this, that his honor be taken from him, upon condition it be not bestowed upon
his enemies, but on his friends? Idolatry is called Adultery in the Scriptures:
and shall a woman quit her self from offense, because though she do commit
adultery, yet it is with none but her husbands friends? Is this done in a good
meaning, or in love to Christ? It is but a bad excuse of a wife, to say that
she exceedingly loves her husband, therefore must have some other man to kiss
and embrace in his absence, and all this in love to her husband.

We are all by nature prone to Idolatry: when we were little children, we
loved babies: and being grown men, we are apt to love Images. And as Babies be
childrens Idols, so Idols and Images be men's Babies. It seems that Idols are
fittest for Babes, therefore so the Apostle fits his caution, 1 John. 5.21.
Babes keep your selves from Idols. As all our knowledge comes by sense, so we
naturally desire a sensible object of devotion: finding it easier to see
Pictures, then to comprehend Doctrines, and to form prayers to the Images of
men, then to form man to the Image of God.

Nor can they excuse themselves from Idolatry, by saying they put their
confidence in God, not in the Images of God. For when the Israelites had made
their golden Calfe, and danced about it, one calfe about another; they were not
such beasts, as to think that beast their God. But so can Superstition besot
the mind, that it makes us not men, before it can wake us Idolaters. What do
they say? Exodus 32.1.
Make us gods that shall go before us. Every word is wicked, absurd, sensles.
1. They had seen the power of God in many miraculous deliverances before their
eyes; the voice of God had scarce yet done thundering in their ears: he had
said, I am Jehovah, thou shall have no other gods; and this they trembling
heard him speak out of the midst of the flames: and yet they dare speak of
another god. 2. The singular number would not serve them, make us gods. How
many gods would they have? Is there any more then one? 3. Make us gods; and
were not they strange gods that could be made? In stead of acknowledging God
their Maker, they command the making of gods. 4. This charge they put upon
Aaron, as if he were able to make a god? Aaron might help to spoil a man,
either himself or them, but he could not make a man, not one hair of a man,
much less a god: and yet they say to him, Make us gods. 5. And what should
these gods do? Go before us? Alas, how should they go, that were not able to
stand? how go before others, that could not move themselves? Oh the
blockishnes of men, that make blocks to worship! Otherwise, how could they that
are the Images of God, fall down before the Images of creatures. Wisd. 13.18.
For health, they call upon that which is weak: for life, they pray to that
which is dead: and a prosperous journey they beg of that which cannot set a
foot forward.

Yet as their sin was bad enough, let not our uncharitableness make it
worse. Let us not think them so unreasonable, as to think that Calfe a God;
or that the Idol which they made to day, did bring them out of Egypt three
months before. It was the true God they meant to worship in the Calfe, and yet
(at the best) even that Idolatry was damnable. So charity bids us hope of the
Papists, that they do not take that board or stone for their God, yet withal
we find that God does take them for Idolaters. They tell us (with a new
distinction) that they forbid the people, to give Divine worship to Images: but
we say, they had better forbid the people to have Images. A block lies in the
high way, and a watchman is set by it to warn the Passengers; Take heed, here
is a block. But how if the watchman fall a sleep? Whether is the safer
course, quite to remove the block out of the way, or to trust the passengers
safety upon the watchmans vigilancie? As for their watchmen, commonly they are
as very Images as the Images themselves: and how should one block remove
another? When Jeroboam had set up his two Idols in Israel, he rakes up his
Priests out of the common kennell; the basest of the people were good enough
for such a bastard devotion: wooden priests were fit enough to wayt upon
golden Deities. So when Micah had made him a costly Idol, he hires him a
beggarly Leuite. No otherwise did the Painter excuse himself, for drawing the
Images of Peter and Paul too ruddy and high colored in the face; that
howsoever they were while they lived, pale with fasting and preaching, yet now
they must needs become red with blushing at the errors and ignorance of their
successors; for such with a loud noise they give themselves out to be.

To conclude, if it were as easy to convince Idolaters, as it is to confound
and tread down their Idols, this labor of Confutation had bin well spared, or
were soon ended. But if nothing can reclaim them from this superstitious
practice, let them read their fearful sentence. Their place shall be
without, Revel. 22.18. Esa. 1.31.
among the dogs, and those desperate sinners incapable of forgiveness. The
strong, the Idol which they made their strength, shall be as towe, and the
maker or worshipper thereof as a spark, and they shall both burn together in
everlasting fire, and none shall quench them. Now the Lord open their eyes to
see, and sanctify their hearts to yield, that there is no agreement betwixt
the Temple of God and Idols: which is the next point, whereof I shall speak
with what brevity I can, and with what fidelity I ought.

No agreement.
There be some points which the wrangling passions of men have left further
asunder, then they found them; about which there needed not have bin such a
noise. But things that are in their own natures contrary, and opposed by the
ordinance of God, can never be reconciled. An enemy may be made a friend, but
enmity can never be made friendship. The air that is now light, may become
dark: but light can never become darkness. Contraries in the abstract are out
of all composition. The sick body be recovered to health, but health can never
be sickness. The sinner may be made righteous, but sin can never become
righteousness. Fire and water, peace and war, love and hatred, truth and
falsehood, faith and infidelity, Religion and Idolatry, can never be made
friends: there can be no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols.

God is Ens entium, All in all: an Idol is nothing in the world, says the
Apostle: now All and Nothing are most contrary. Idolatry quite takes away
Faith, a fundamental part of Christian religion: for an Idol is a thing
visible, Heb. 11.1.
but Faith is of things invisible. The Idol is a false evidence of things
seen, Faith is a true evidence of things not seen. Besides, God can defend
himself, save his friends, plague his enemies: Hieron.
but Idols nec hosts abscindere possunt quasi dij, nec se abscondere quasi
homines; they can neither revenge themselus on prouokers, like gods; nor hide
themselves from iniurers, like men.

The foolish Philistims thought that the same house could hold both the Arc
and Dagon; 1. Sam. 5.3.
as if an insensible Statue were a fit companion for the living God. In the
morning they come to thank Dagon for the victory, and to fall down before
him, before whom they thought the God of Israel was fallen: and lo, now they
find the keeper flat on his face before the prisoner. Had they formerly of
their own accord, with awful reverence, laid him in this posture of an humble
prostration; yet God would not have brooked the indignity of such an
entertainment. But seeing they durst set up their Idol cheek by cheek with
their Maker, let them go read their folly in the Temple floor, and confess
that he which did cast their god so low, could cast them lower. Such a shame
does the Lord owe all them, which will be making matches betwixt him and Belial.
Yet they consider not, how should this God raise us, who is not able to stand,
or rise himself? Strange they must confess it, that whereas Dagon was wont to
stand, and themselves to fall down; now Dagon was fallen down, and themselves
stood; and must help up with their own god. Yea, their god seems to worship
them on his face, and to crave that succor from them, which he was never able
to give them. Yet in his place they set him again; and now lift up those hands
to him, which helped to lift him up; and prostrate those faces to him, before
whom he lay prostrate. So can Idolatry turn men into the stocks and stones
which they worship: They that make them, are like unto them. But will the Lord
put it up thus? No, the next fall shall burst it to pieces; that they may
sensibly perceive, how God scorns a Competitor, and that there is no agreement
betwixt Him and Idols. Now what is the difference betwixt the Philistims and
Papists? The Philistims would set God in the Temple of Idols, the Papists would
set Idols in the Temple of God. Both agree in this, that they would make God
and Idols agree together. But Manasseh found to his cost, 2 Chronicles. 33.7
that an Idol might not be endured in the house of God.

How vain then, are the endeavors to reconcile our church with that of Rome;
when God has interposed this bar, there is No agreement betwixt him and
Idols? Either they must receive the Temple without Idols, or we must admit
Idols with the Temple, or this composition cannot be. There is a contention
betwixt Spain and the Netherlanders, concerning the right of that Country: but
should not the Inhabitants well fortify the coasts, the raging sea would soon
determine the controversy, and by force of her waves take it from them both.
There is a contestation betwixt us and the Pontificians, which is the true
Church: but should not we in mean time carefully defend the Faith of Christ
against Idols, Superstition would quickly decide the business, and take the
possession of truth from us both. A proud and perverse stomach keeps them from
yielding to us: God and his holy word forbids our yielding to them: they will
have Idols or no Temple, we will have the Temple and no Idols: now till the
agreement be made betwixt the Temple and Idols, no atonement can be hoped
betwixt us and them.

I Paul say unto you, Gal. 5.2.
that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. He that would not
endure a little leaven in the lump, what would he have said of a little
poison? If Moses joined with Christ, the ceremonial Law with the Gospel, were
so offensive to him; how would he have brooked Christ and Belial, light and
darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, the cup of the Lord and the cup of
devils, the Table of the Lord, and the table of devils, the Temple of God and
Idols? In the tuning of an Instrument, those strings that be right we meddle
not with, but set the rest higher or lower, so as they make a proportion and
harmony with the former. The same God who of his gracious mercy, has put us in
the right and vniarring harmony of truth, bring them home in true consent to
us, but never suffer us to fall back unto them. Hitherto the contention between
us has not been for circumstance, but substance; not for the bounds, but for
the whole Inheritance: whether God or man, grace or nature, the blood of Christ
or the milk of Mary, the written Canon or unwritten Tradition, Gods ordinance
in establishing Kings, or the Popes usurpation in deposing them, shall take
place in our consciences, and be the rule of our faiths and lives.

We have but one Foundation, the infallible word of God: they have a new
foundation, the voice of their Church, which they equalize in presumption of
certainty with the other. We have but one Head, that is Christ; they have
gotten a new head, and dare not but believe him, whatsoever Christ says.
Sponsus Ecclesiae nostrae Christus, Christ is our husband: they have a new
husband. While Rome was a holy Church, she had a holy husband: but now as
Christ said to the woman of Samaria, John. 4.^8.
He whom thou now have, is not thine husband: so he whom the Romanists have now
got, is an adulterer, he is no husband. So that here is Foundation against
foundation, Head against head, Husband against adulterer, Doctrine against
doctrine, Faith against unbelief, Religion against superstition, the Temple of
God against Idols; and all these so diametrally opposed, that the two Poles
shall sooner meet, then these be reconciled. Michael and the Dragon cannot
agree in one Heaven, nor the Arc and Dagon in one house, nor Jacob and Esau in
one womb, nor John and Cerinthus in one Bath, nor the clean and the leprous
in one camp, nor truth and falsehood in one mouth, nor the Lord and Mammon in
one heart, nor religion and superstition in one kingdom, nor God and Idols in
one Temple. The silly old Hermit was sorry, that God and the Devil should be
at such odds, and he would undertake to make them friends: but the Devil bad
him even spare his labor, for they two were everlastingly fallen out. No less
vain a business does that man attempt, that would work an agreement betwixt
the Temple of God and Idols.

I take leave of this point with a caution. Fly the places of infection, come
not within the smoke of Idols, lest it smother the zeal of Gods Temple in your
hearts. Reuolting Israel calls for gods; but why should this god of theirs be
fashioned like a Calfe? What may be the reason of this shape? Whence had they
the original of such an Idol? Most likely in Egypt: they had seen a black
Calfe with white spots worshipped there. This Image still ran in their minds,
and stole their hearts, and now they long to have it set up before their eyes.
Egypt will not out of their fancies: when they wanted meat, they thought of the
Egyptian flesh pots: now they want Moses, they think of the Egyptian Idols.
They brought gold out of Egypt; that very gold was contagious: the very
Eare-rings and Jewels of Egypt are fit to make Idols. The Egyptian burdens made
them run to the true God, the Egyptian examples led them to a false god. What
mean our wanderers by running to Rome and such superstitious places, unless
they were weary of the Church of God, and would fetch home Idols? If it were
granted, that there is some little truth among them, yet who is so simple as to
seek his corn among a great heap of chafe, and that far off; who may have it
at home, winnowed and cleansed to his hand?

The very sight of evil is dangerous, and they be rare eyes that do not
convey this poison to our hearts. I have heard of some, that even by laboring
in the Spanish galleys, have come home the slaves of their superstitions. Egypt
was always an unlucky place for Israel, as Rome is for England. The people
soiourned there, and they brought home one Calfe: Jeroboam soiourned there, and
he brought home Two calves: Judge. 17.
an old woman (in all likelihood) had soiourned there, and she brought home a
great many. The Romish Idols have not the shape of calves, they have the sense
and meaning of those calves: and to fill the Temple full of Calves, what is it
but to make Religion guilty of * Nonsense.
Pulls?

Consider it well, ye that make no scruple of superstitious assemblies; it will
be hard for you to dwell in a Temple of Idols untainted. Not to sin the sins
of the place we live in, is as strange, as for pure liquor tunn'd up in a musty
vessel, not to smell of the caske. Egypt will teach even a Joseph to swear: a
Peter will learn to curse in the high Priests Hall. If we be not scorched with
the fire of bad company, we shall be sure to be black'd with the smoke. The
soundest body that is, may be infected with a contagious air. Indeed a man may
travel through Ethiopia unchanged, but he cannot dwell there without a
complexion discolored. How has the common practice of others brought men to
the deuillish fashion of swearing, or to the brutish habit of drinking, by
their own confessions? Superstition, if it have once got a secret liking of
the heart, like the plague will hang in the very clothes; and after long
concealment, break forth in an unlooked for infection. The Israelites, after
all their ayring in the wilderness, will still smell of Egypt. We read God
saying, Math. 2.15.
Out of Egypt have I called my Son. That God did call his Son out of Egypt,
it is no wonder: the wonder is that he did call him into Egypt. It is true,
that Egypt could not hurt Christ: the King does not follow the Court, the Court
waits upon the King: wheresoever Christ was, there was the Church. But be our
Israelites so sure of their sons, when they send them into Egypt, or any
superstitious places? It was their presumption to send them in, let it be
their repentance to call them out.

The familiar society of orthodox Christians with mis-beleeuers, has by God
ever been most strictly forbidden: and the nearer this conjunction, the more
dangerous, and displeasing to the forbidder. No man can choose a worse friend,
then one whom God holds his enemy. When Religion and Superstition meet in one
bed, they commonly produce a mungrell generation. 2 Samuel 3.3.
If David marry Maachah, their issue proves an Absolon. If Solomon love
idolatrous women, here is enough to overthrow him with all his wisdom. Other
strange women only tempt to lust, these to mis-religion; and by joining his
heart to theirs, he shall disioyne it from God. One Religion matching with
another, not seldom breed an Atheist, one of no religion at all. I do not
say, this is a sufficient cause of divorce after it is done, but of restraint
before it is done. They may be one flesh, though they be not one spirit. The
difference of religion or virtue makes no divorce here, the great Judges
sentence shall do that hereafter. And the believing husband is never the
further from heaven, though he cannot bring his unbelieving wife along with
him. The better shall not carry up the worse to heaven, nor the worse pull
down the better to hell. Quod fieri non debuit, factum valet. But now, is
there no tree in the Garden, but the forbidden? none for me to love, but one
that hates the truth? Yes, let us say to them in plain fidelity, as the
sons of Jacob did to the Shichemites in dissembling policy; Gene. 34.14.
We cannot give our sister to a man that is uncircumcised: either consent you
to us in the truth of our Religion, or we will not consent to you in the
league of our Communion.

Saint Chrysostom calls this a plain denial of Christ. He that eats of
the meat offered to Idols, Gustu negauit Christum, has denied Christ with his
tasting. If he but handle those things with delight, Tactu negauit Christum,
he has denied Christ with his touching. Though he touch not, taste not, yet
if he stand to look upon the Idolatry with patience, Visu negauit Christum,
he has denied Christ with his eyes. If he listen to those execrable charms,
Auditu negauit Christum, he has denied Christ with his ears. Omitting all
these, if he do but smell to the Incense with pleasure, O doratu negauit
Christum, he has denied Christ with his smelling It is said of the
Israelites, Commisti sunt inter gentes, Psalm. 106.35
They were mingled among the Heathen. What followed? Presently, they learned
their works. The reason why the Raven returned not to Noah's Arc, is given by
some, because it met with a dead carkase by the way. Why do we pray, Deliver
us from evil; but that we imply, (besides all other mischiefs) there is an
infectious power in it to make us evil? Let us do that we pray, and pray
that we may do it. Yea Lord, free us from Egypt, estrange us from Rome,
separate us from Idols, deliver us from evil, For thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Thus far we have taken a literal survey of the Text; concerning the
material Temple, external or obiectuall Idols, and the impossibility of
their agreement. Now to come nearer home to our selves in a moral Exposition:
here first

The Temple of God
Is the Church of Christ; and they are so like, that we often interchange the
terms, calling a Temple the Church, and the Church a Temple of God. The
material Temple under the Law was a figure of the spiritual under the
Gospel. The former was distinguished into three rooms; the Porch, the holy
place, and the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of holies. The Porch prefigured
Baptism, which is the door whereby we enter into the Church of Christ. The
Holy place, the communion of the militant church vply earth, separated from the
world. The Hoon of holies, whereinto the high Priest only entered, and that once
a year, presignified the glorious kingdom of heaven, wherinto the Lord Jesus
entered once for all. There was one Court of the Temple common, whither access
was denied to none: though they were unclean or uncircumcised, thus far they
might be admitted. There was another Court within that, allowed to none but the
Israelites, and of them to none but the clean. There was a third, proper only
to the Priests and Levites, whither the Laity might not come: thus far they
might bring their offerings, but further they might not offer to go. In the
Temple it self there was one room, into which the Levites might not enter,
the Priests might. Another, whither the Priests might not come; but only the
high Priest, and even he but once yearly. Some passages of the Christian
Church are common to all, even to the unclean hypocrites, and foule-hearted
sinners. They have access to Gods holy ordinances, and tread in his Courts; as
the Pharisee came into the congregation, and Judas received the Communion.
Other are secret and reserved, wherein the faithful only converse with God,
and solace themselves in the sweet fruition of his gracious presence.

The material Temple in three divisions, seemed to be a clear representation
of the Church in three degrees. The first signified the external and visible
face of the Church, from which no professor of Christ is debarred. The second,
the communion of the invisible Church upon earth. The last, the highest heaven
of Gods glorified Saints. Neither did those rooms more exceed one another,
then do these parts of the spiritual house of Christ. What are the most
polished corners of the Temple, to the spiritual and living stones of the
Church? What be pebles to Saphirs, or marbles to Diamonds? Howsoever some are
more transported with insensible monuments, then with living Saints. As it was
a complaint long since, Fulget Ecclesia in parietibus, luget in pauperibus. Yet
Temples are built for men, not men for Temples: and what is a glorious edifice,
when the whole world is not worth one soul? Dead walls be of small value, to
the living Temples of the holy Ghost: yea, the temple of our body, to the
temple of Christ's Body, his Church: yea the Temple of Gods Church militant on
earth, to that which is triumphant in heaven. What is silver and gold, Cedar
and Marble, to those divine graces, faith, truth, piety, holiness? Salomons
Temple did last but some 430. years, the Church is for eternity. The Temple
took up but a little space of ground, at most the Hill Sion, the Church is
universally spread: in all parts of the world God has his chosen.

Did our intellectual eyes truly behold the beauty of this Temple, we would
with that good Emperor, esteem it better to be a member of the Church, then
head of the kingdom. We would set this one thing against all worldly glories.
As when Henry 4. that late Great king of France, was told of the king of
Spaines ample dominions: as first he is king of Castile, and I (quoth Henry) am
king of France: he is king of Navarre, and I am king of France: he is king of
Portugal, and I am king of France: he is king of Naples, and I am king of
France: he is king of the Sicilies, and I am king of France: he is king of
Noua Hispania, the West Indies, and I am king of France: he thought the
kingdom of France equivalent to all these. So let thy soul, O Christian,
solace it self against all the wants of thy mortal pilgrimage, in this, that
thou art a member of the church. Another has more wit or learning, yet I am a
Christian: another has more honor and preferment on earth, yet I am a
Christian: another has more silver and gold and riches, yet I am a Christian:
another has large possessions, yet I have an Inheritance in heaven, I am a
Christian. David thought it not so happy to be a King in his own house, as to
be a doore-keeper in Gods house. Were our hearts thoroughly sanctified, we
would undervalue all honors to this, that we are parts of this spiritual
Temple, the members of Jesus Christ.

Jdols.
Every device of man in the service of God is a mere Idol. Whatsoever we
invent out of Gods School, or substitute in Gods room, is to us an Idol.
Howsoever we flatter our selves, with reflecting all the honor on God, yet he
will reflect the vengeance on us. Job 13.7.
Shall a man speak deceitfully for God, or tell a lie for his glory? He is
not so penurious of means to honor himself, as to be beholding to us for a
lie. The doctrine of universal grace seems to make much for Gods glory, but
himself says it is a lie; for he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth. To say that Christ in the womb wrought many
miracles, has a fair show of honoring him; but who can say it is not a lie?
Sure, we read no such matter. To distribute among the Saints departed
several Offices; as one to have the charge of women in childbed, another to
be the Patron of such a City or Country; (to omit their protection of
beasts, one for hogs, another for horses) seems to honor God in thus
honoring them: but it is a lie, and a plain derogation to his universal
providence: yea as absurd, as if the flies should take upon them to give the
charges and offices of this kingdom. To say, the Saints in heaven know the
occurrents of this nether world, and the condition of their ancient friends or
children below, reading them in the Deity, as by the reflection of a glass;
this is a fiction that carries a show of honoring God: but it does indeed
dishonor him, by making creatures as omniscient as their Maker. Besides, how
absurd is it to say, that John in Patmos seeing Christ, did see all that Christ
saw. If I standing on the ground, see a man on the top of a high Turret, do I
see all that he sees. If the sight of him that looks, be to be measured by
the sight of him on whom he looks; it will follow that he which looks on
a blind man, should see nothing at all. And who sees not the blindness of this
consequence?

To say that all the worship done to the Virgin mother, redounds to the honor
of her Son and God, is a gross falsehood. The Idolatrous Jews might as well
have pretended the honor of God, when they worshipped the Queen of heaven.
That fanaticall vision of theirs, Specul. Exempl.
concerning the two ladders that reached up to heaven, while Christ was
preparing to judge the world: the one Red, at the top whereof Christ sat: the
other white, at the top whereof the Virgin sat and when the Friars could not
get up the red ladder of Christ, but evermore tumbled down backward, St.
Francis called them up the white ladder of our Lady, and there they were
received. Did this make for the honor of Christ, when the red blood of our
Savior is not so able to bring men to heaven, as the white milk of his
mother? which must needs be the moral or meaning of it. Barrbad. in Con^ Euang.
Or the observation of Barrhadius the Jesuit, who made bold to ask Christ,
why in his ascension to heaven he did not take his mother along with him; and
makes himself this answer: It may be, Lord, for fear lest thy heavenly Court
should be in doubt, which of the two they should go first to meet, An tibi
Domino suo, an ipsi Dominae suae, whether thee their Lord, or her their Lady:
as if it had been well advised of Christ to leave his mother behind him, lest
she should share part of his glory. Did this make for the honor of Christ? To
choke up the knowledge of God, by preaching that Ignorance is the mother of
Devotion, has small color of honoring God. The ascribing of false miracles
to the living or departed Saints, seems to honor God, but sure he will never
thank them for it. Saint Augustine being sick, a blind man came to him,
expecting that he could miraculously restore his sight: but that good Father
sent him away with a check, Do thou think that if I could cure thee by
miracle, that I would not by miracle cure my self?

It is a foolish thought, that God will be glorified by a lie. Our judicial
Astrologers, that tie men's destinies to the Stars and Planets, pretend Gods
honor, who has given such virtue and influence to his creatures; but indeed
make the^ no better then Idols. Though the Sun and Moon be good and
necessary, yet to adore the Sun and Moon is flat Idolatry. It was not
Mercury that made the thief, nor Venus that made the strumpet: as when the
husband cudgeld his adulterous wife, and she complained that he was unnatural
to strike his ^wne flesh; alleging that it was not she that played the harlot,
but Venus in her: to whom he replied, that neither was it she that he did
beat, but Venus in her, or rather Venus out of her.

To make this useful to our selves; let us take heed of fancying an other
service of God, then he has prescribed us. Every Master in his own family,
appoints the manner how he will be served. He that requires our service,
requires it his own way; or else he holds us to serve our selves, not him.
Shall we make our selves wiser then our Maker, as if he did not best know what
would best please him? Shall heaven give a blessing to that, which was devised
against the will of heaven? Does not God threaten them with the addition of
plagues, that shall add to his precepts? If such devices be good and
necessary, why did not God command them? Did he want wisdom? If they be not
necessary, why do we use them? Is it not our presumptuous folly? The Lords
Jealousy is stirred up by the rivalitie, not only of a false God, but of a
false worship. Nothing is more dangerous, then to mint his services in our own
brains. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, Math. 16.9.
the commandments of men. Is it not grievous for men to lose all their labor,
and that in the maine business of their life? That so many hundred oblations, so
many thousand prayers, so much cost of their purses, so much affliction to
their bodies, so much anguish of their souls, should be all forceles,
fruitles? Like a dog that hunts counter, and takes great pains to no purpose.

Evil deeds may have sometimes good meanings; but those good meanings are
answered with evil recompenses. Many bestow their labors, their goods, their
bloods, and yet receive torments in stead of thanks. When the Apostle bids us
mortify our earthly members, Coloss. 3.5.
he does not intend violence to our selves, but to our sins. There is one
mortification, to cast our selves out of the world: there is another
mortification, to cast the world out of us. A body macerated with scourges,
disabled with fastings, wearied with pilgrimages; was none of S. Paul's
mortification. Who has required this at your hands? Where is no command
imposed, no reward proposed; no promise made, if you do; no punishment
threatened, if you do not; what fruit can be expected but shame? Must we needs
either do nothing, or that which is worse then nothing? Shall we offer so
much, suffer so much, and all in vain? Quis haec a vobis? Let him pay you your
wages, that did set you on work. Never plead your own reason, where God has
set a plain interdiction. He that suffers his faith to be ouerruled by his
reason, may have a fat reason, but a lean faith. That man is not worthy to be
a follower of Christ, who has not denied himself; therefore denied his
Reason; for his reason is no small piece of himself. If Reason get the head in
this divine business, it presently preuailes with will, and will commands the
affections: so this new Triumvirate shall govern the Christian, Saboll par. 1.
not Faith. But as when three Ambassadors were sent from Rome, to appease the
discord between Nicomedes and Prusias; whereof one was troubled with a Megrim
in his head, another had the Gowt in his toes, and the third was a fool; Cato
said merrily, that Embassage had neither Head, nor Foot, nor Heart. So that man
shall neither have a head to conceive the truth, nor a foot to walk in the
ways of obedience, nor a heart to receive the comforts of salvation; that
suffers his reason, will, and affections, to usurp upon his faith.

Hence it comes to pass, that the most horrid sins are turned into Idols; by
setting our own reasons against the manifest will of God. Thus lies shall be
fathered upon the Father of truth, and truth upon the Father of lies. Thus
breach of faith, and perjury, shall be held Orthodoxe opinions. Yea, that
execrable monster, whereof this day remembers us, Treason it self, shall be
held good Doctrine. Rude cacodaemon, that stigmaticke Idol, that gross devil
shall be worshipped. Si fas cadendo coelestia scandere, If this be the way to
the kingdom of heaven, if thus men may merit to be stars in the Firmament,
by embruing their hands in the bloud-Royall of Princes; what Jesuit will not
be a Star? When such be their principles, such must needs be their
practices. What though God condemn Treason to hell, when the Pope will advance
it to heaven? What though the Divine Scripture does rank traitors among dogs
and devils, when the Pope will number them among Saints? It was wont to be
said, Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius, every block is not fit to make an
Image. Yet now, the most monstrous sin that ever the devil shaped in his
Infernal forge, is not only by the practice, but even by the Doctrine of
Rome, turned into an Idol. What is that we shall call fin, when murder and
Treason is held religion? Alas for our age, to bear the date of these
impieties! That our posterity should ever read in our Chronicles: In such a
year in such a day Traitors conspired against their lawful and Gracious
Sovereign: and that in those days there was a sect of men living, that did
labor in voluminous writings, to justify those horrible facts. But oh, may
those pestiferous monuments be as fast devoured by oblivion, as the authors and
abettors themselves are swallowed up by confusion. And the same God deliver us
his people from their conspiracies, that has delivered this his Church from
their Idolatries.

Thus we have looked abroad, but now have we no Idols at home? O how happy was
it, if they were as far from the Temple, as they are from agreement with the
Temple? I will not abound in this discovery; there be three maine Idols among
us; Vain Preasure, vain Honor, and Riches: and it is to be feared, that these
three vanities have more clients then the Trinity that made us. The first is an
Idol of the water, the next an Idol of the air, the last an Idol of the earth.

1. Vain Pleasure; and oh what a world of foolish worshippers flock to this
merry Goddess! She has a Temple in every corner: Ebrietie sits in Tauernes,
burning smoky Incense, and sacrificing drink-offrings to her. So that if a man
should prophecy of wine and strong drink, Mich. 2.11.
he were a Prophet fit for this age: but to preach sobriety, is held but a dry
doctrine. We commend wine for the excellency of it; but if it could speak, as
it can take away speech, it would complain, that by our abuse, both the
excellencies are lost: for the excellent man does so spoil the excellent wine,
until the excellent wine has spoiled the excellent man. O that a man should
take pleasure in that which makes him no man: that he should let a thief in at
his mouth, to steal away his wit: that for a little throat-indulgence, he
should kill in himself both the first Adam, his reason; but even the second
Adam his regeneration, and so commit two murders at once! In every Brothell
this Idol has her temple; where the bed of uncleanness is the Altar, the Priest
a strumpet, and the sacrifice, a burning flesh offered to Moloch. It is no rare
thing for a man to make an Idol of his Mistres, and to spend more time in her
courtings, then he does at his prayers; more cost on her body, the^ upon his
own soul. Images were but dead Idols, but painted Popinjayes be living Idols
Pleasure has a larger extent, then I can now stand to survey: this may be
called an Idol of the Water; fluid and vnsatisfying.

2. Vain Honor is the Idol of fools: no wise man ever sought felicity in
shadows. His Temple is Pride, his Altar Ambition, his Service Flattery, his
Sacrifice Petulancy. Silly Sennacherib, to make an Idol of a Chariot: Esa.
37.24. Ezekiel 28.4.
and no wiser Prince of Tire, to make an Idol of his own brain! Men mistake the
way to be great, while they neglect the way to be good. All the while a man
hunts after his shadow, he mis-spends his time and pains: for the Sun is upon
his back, behind him, and his shadow is still vn-ouertaken before him: but let
him turn his face to the Sun, and follow that, his shadow shall follow him. In
vain does that man pursue honor, his shadow, while he turns his face from
virtue and goodness; he shall miss what he so labors to catch: but let him set
his face toward Christ, the Sun of righteousness, and run to the high prize of
eternity, this shadow shall wayt upon him; for those that honor me, I will
honor, says the Lord.

God resists the proud; and good reason, for the proud resists God. Other
sins divert a man from God, only Pride brings him against God, and brings God
against him. There is nothing in this world worth our pride, but that moss
will grow to a stone. Pride is ever dangerous, but the^ most when it puffes us
up with a presumption of merit. Thus the Romists presume to do more good works,
and those more perfect then God requires: so that he is become a debtor to
them, and bound to make them satisfaction. But doubtless, God will more easily
bear with those sins whereof we repent, then with that righteousness whereof
we presume. Luke 18.
I am not as other men are, said the Pharisee; and the clock of his tongue went
truer then the dyall of his heart; he was not like other men indeed, sure he
was like none of them that should be saved. Humility is so hard a lesson to get
into the heart, that Christ was feign to come down from heaven, in his own
person to teach it.

Pride is even conversant about good works and graces; this Saul loves to be
among the Prophets. So that if a man have some good measure of sanctification,
and of assurance of eternal life; it will be hard not to be proud of that.
Pride has hurt many, Humility never yet did harm. A man goes in at a door,
and he stoops: the door is high enough, yet he stoops: you will say, he needs
not stoop; yea, but says Bernard, Bern.
there is no hurt in his stooping: otherwise he may catch a knock, this way he
is safe. A man may bear himself too high upon the favor of God, there is no
danger in his stooping, no harm in humility. Let me rather be the lowest of
Gods servants, then the noblest among his enemies. The honor of this world is
at best but a golden dream, from which men commonly awake in contempt. This is
an Idol of the Air.

3. Wealth is the covetous man's Idol; Job shows the form of his Canonization:
He makes gold his hope, and says to the wedge, Job. 31.24.
Thou art my confidence. As treason sets up a new king, for David, Absolon: so
covetousness sets up a new god, for Jehovah, Ma^mon. But, O miserable god, says
Luther, that cannot defend it self from rusting or robbing. And, O more
miserable man, that trusts himself upon the keeping of that god, which
himself is feign to keep. Judge. 17.
Micah did not worship his silver, till it was cast into the form of an Idol:
these spare the labor of forming, and worship the very metal. The
Superstitious adore Aurum in Idolo, gold in the Idol: the covetous find Idolum
in Auro, an Idol in the very gold. Metalla seems to sound quasi (...), Post
alia necessaria: when they had manured the ground, sown seeds, gathered
fruits, and found out other things to sustain life, then Itum est in viscera
terrae, they dug into the bowels of the earth. O that man should lay that
next his heart, which God has placed under his feet! that the thing which
might be best spared, should be most admired! Mammon has his Temple, the
world: God has his Temple, the Church: but there be many that balke Gods
Temple to go to Mammons: and they offer fair, that make some reverence to
God, as they pass by him to the world. Hence it is, that so many get riches,
and so few godliness. The Poets feign Pluto to be the god of Hell, and the god
of Riches; (as if Riches and Hell had both one Master.) Sometime they set him
forth lame and slow-paced, sometime nimble as fire. When Jupiter sends him to a
Soldier or a Scholar, he goes limping: when he sends him to on of his
Pandars, he flies like lightning. The moral is, the wealth that comes in Gods
name, comes slowly, and with diligent labor: but that which is haled in with
an evil conscience, is both hasty and abundant in the collection. This is the
worldlings maine god, all the rest be subordinate to him. Si modo Jupiter mihi
propitius sit, minores deos flocci facio: So long as Mammon favors them, or
their Great Diana multiplies their gains; they scorn the other petty gods,
making account with a little money to buy them all. This is an Idol of the
Earth.

No agreement.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon; you may dispute for it, you shall never
compound it. Gehezi cannot run after the forbidden talents, but he must leave
his master. Some indeed here, have so finely distinguished of the business, that
though they serve God, they will serve him more thriftily, and please him as
good cheap as they can. They have resolved not to do evil, though they may
gain by it: yet for gain, they will venture as near evil, as possibly they
can and miss it. But when it comes to push, it will be found, that for one
scruple of gold, they will make no scruple of conscience. But as those
Inhabitants of Judea, that served both God and Idols, did indeed neither serve
God nor Idols: so these higlers, while they would have two masters, have indeed
never a one. For in the evil day, their master the world will renounce them,
and then their master Christ will not receive them: so highly does he scorn
such a competition. Man was made to serve God, and the world to serve man: so
the world at best is but Gods servants servant. Now if we plead our selves Gods
servants, what an indign and preposterous thing is it, to take our own
servant, and make him competitor with our Master? God says, lend, give,
clothe, feed, harbor: Mammon says, Take, gather, extort, oppress, spoil:
whether of these is our God? Even he that is most obeyed. No less might be
said for pleasures and honors, or whatsoever is delectable to flesh and blood.
The love of this world is enmity to God; and the East and West shall sooner
unite their forces, the^ these be reconciled.

It is the Devils especial aim, to bring these Idols near the Temple: he
finds no such pleasure to dominere in his own hell; but he has a mind to
Paradise: One wittily observes, that Christ chose poor Fishermen, as the
fittest to receive his Oracles, and to plant his Church; because Satan scorned
to look so low, as to tempt them. He studied to prevent Christ among the Kings
of the earth, and great Doctors, never suspecting silly fishers. But when he
found himself deceived, he will then make their whole profession to fare the
worse for it; he bears the whole succession of their Tribe an old grudge.
Before, he passed by them, and tempted the great Masters; now he will sooner
tempt them then Kings and Emperors. 1. Cor. 5.12
The Church does not judge them that are without, but them within: and Satan
had rather foil one within, then a hundred without. He has a desire to all,
but especially he loves a religious soul: he would eat that with more
greedines, then Rachel did her Mandrakes. The fall of one Christian better
pleases him, then of many unbelievers. No King makes war against his own
loyal subjects, but against rebels and enemies. The devil is to subtle, to
spend his malice upon them that do him ready service He cares not so much to
multiply Idols in Babylon, as to get one into Sion. To maintain priests of
Baal in the land of Israel, at the table of Iesabel, as it were under Gods
nose: or to set up Calves at Bethel, in scorn of the Temple; this is his
ambition. The Fox seldom preyes near home, nor does Satan meddle with his
own; they are as sure as temptation can make them. What Iailor lays more
chains upon the shackled malefactor, that loves his prison, and would not
change? The Pirate spends not a shot upon a cole-ship; but he lets fly at the
rich Merchant. Cantabit vacuus, the empty traveler may pass vnmolested: it is
the full barn that inuites the thief. If we were not belonging to the Temple,
we should not be assaulted with so many Idols; if not Christians, fewer
tentations.

Now the more potent and malicious our adversaries, the more resolute and
strong be our resistance. The more extreme the cold is without, the more does
the natural heat fortify it self within, and guard the heart. It is the note
of the ungodly, that they bless Idols: Esaias 66.3.
if we would not be such, let us bless our selves from Idols. And as we have
banished the material Idols out of our Temples, so let us drive these
spiritual ones out of our hearts Let us say with Ephraim, we have heard God,
and seen him; Hos. 14.8.
What have we to do any more with Idols? The vices of the religious are the
shame of religion: the sight of this has made the stoutest Champions of Christ
melt into tears. Psalm. 119.136
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. David was
one of those great Worthies of the world, not matchable in his times; yet he
weeps. Did he tear in pieces a bear like a kid? rescue a lamb with the
death of a lion? foil a mighty giant, that had dared the whole army of God?
Did he like a whirlewind, bear and beat down his enemies before him; and now
does he, like a child or a woman, fall a weeping? Yes, he had heard the name
of God blasphemed, seen his holy rites profaned, his statutes vilipended, and
violence offered to the pure and intemerate Chastity of that holy virgin,
Religion: this resolved that valiant heart into tears; Phil. 3.18.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes. So Paul, I tell you of them weeping, that
are enemies to the Cross of Christ. Had he with so magnanimous a courage,
endured stripes and persecutions, run through perils of all sorts and sizes,
fought with beasts at Ephesus, been rapt up to heaven, and learned his
Divinity among the Angels; and does he now weep? Yes, he had seen Idols in
the Temple, Impiety in the Church of God: this made that great spirit melt into
tears. If we see these Idols in others, or feel them in our selves, and
complain not; we give God and the Church just cause to complain of us. Now
the Lord deliver his Temples from these Idols.

But all this while we have walked in generals; and you will say, Quod omnibus
dicitur, nemini dicitur: let me now therefore come to particulars.

The Temple of God
Is every Christian: as the Church is his great Temple, so his little temple is
every man. We are not only through his grace, living stones in his Temple, but
living temples in his Sion: each one bearing about him a little shrine of that
infinite Majesty. Wheresoever God dwells, there is his Temple: therefore the
believing heart is his Temple, for there he dwells. As we poor creatures of
the earth have our being in him, so he the God of heaven has his dwelling in
us. It is true, that the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him; yet the
narrow lodgings of our renewed souls are taken up for him. What were a house
made with hands unto the God of spirits; unless there be a spirit for him to
dwell in made without hands? Here if the Body be the Temple, the Soul is
Priest: if that be not the offerer, the Sacrifice will not be accepted.

In this Spiritual Temple, first there is the Porch; which we may conceive to
be the Mouth, Therefore David prays to have a Watch set at the door of his
lips, to ward the gate of Gods Temple. This may seem to be one reason of
saluting in former times by a kiss; they did kiss the gate of Gods Temple.
Here the Fear of God is the Porter; who is both ready to let in his friends,
and resolute to keep out his enemies. Let him specially watch for two sorts of
foes, the one, a traitor that goes out, evil speaking: the other, a thief
that steals in, too much drinking.

The Holy place is the sanctified mind, that which S. Paul calls the Inner man.
Herebe those riches and ornaments, the divine graces. Here not only Justice,
and Faith, and Temperance, sing their parts, but the whole Quire of heavenly
virtues make up the harmony.

The Holy of holies is the purified Conscience, wherein stand the Cherubins,
Faith and Love; and the Mercy-seat, shaded with the wings of those glorious
Angels: from which Propitiatory God gives the gracious testimonies of his good
Spirit, Romans 8.16.
witnessing with our spirits that we are his children. In this Sacrary does the
Lord converse with the soul; takes her humble confession, gives her sweet
absolution. It is a place whither nor man nor Angel can enter; only the high
Priest Jesus comes, not once a year, but daily; and communicates such
inestimable favors and comforts, as no tongue can express.

Here we find the Arc, wherein the Royal law, and Pot of heavenly Manna are
preserved. the one restraining us from sin to come by a happy prevention, the
other assuring us pardon of sin past with a blessed consolation. Let us look
further upon the golden Candlesticks, our illumined understandings; whereby we
perceive the will of our Maker, and discern the way of our eternal peace.
Then upon the Tables of Shewbread, which be our holy memories, that keep the
bread of life continually ready within us. Yea, Memory is the treasury of this
Temple, which so locks up those celestial riches, that we can draw them
forth for use at all opportunities. Here is also the Veil, and those silken
curtains, and costly hangings; the Righteousness of Christ, which makes us
acceptable to God; both hiding our own infirmities, and decking us with his
virtues. Here is the Altar for sacrifice, the contrite heart: the beast to be
slain is not found among our herds, but among our affections; we must
sacrifice our lusts: the knife to kill them, which would else kill us, is the
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: the fire to consume them is holy zeal,
kindled in our breasts by the inspiration of God.

There be other sacrifices also for us to offer in this Temple, on this Altar.
Besides our praises and prayers; Psalm. 141.2.
the setting forth of our prayer as Incense, and the lifting up our hands as an
evening sacrifice: there is mercy, and charitable deeds. What is devotion
without compassion? What, sacrifice without mercy? Math. 5.23
If thy brother has ought against thee, yea, if thou have ought that should
have bin thy brothers; thy oblation will stink in Gods nostrils. It was an old
complaint of the Church, that her stones were clothed, and her children naked;
that the curious found matter to delight them, but the distressed found not
bread to sustain them. Therefore says S. Augustine, Aug. in Psa. 41.
Si habes taurum pinguem, occide pauperibus: If thou have a fat Bull, sacrifice
it to the poor. Though they cannot drink the blood of goats, they can eat the
flesh of bulls. And he that says, Psalm. 50.12.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; yet will acknowledge at the last day,
I was hungry, Math. 25.
and thou did feed me; Come thou blessed. The poor have Gods commendatory
letters to us, and our prayers be our commendatory letters to God: if we will
not hearken to him, how should he gratify us? Thus, O Christian, art thou a
moving Temple of the living God.

Let this teach us all to adorn these Temples with decent graces. Superstition
cares not what it bestows on material Fanes: mountainous Columns, Marble
Pillars, gorgeous Monuments, which yet are not sensible of their own
ornaments; spangled Crucifixes, Images clad in Silks and Tissues, with
embroydered Canopies, and Tables beset with Pearls and Diamonds. Thus
bountiful is she to her superfluities; Oh that our Religion would do
something for these ancient and ruinous walls. But how much more precious be
these spiritual Temples of our selves? How much more noble ought to be their
furnitures?

First then, if we be the Temples of God, let us be holy: for holiness, O
Lord, becomes thy House for ever.

2. It is Domus orationis; they must have the continual exercises of Prayer.
In Templo vis orare? In te ora. Would thou pray in Gods Temple? Pray in thy
self.

3. The sound of the high praises of God must be heard in these Temples: There
every man speaks of his honor. It pleases the Lord to inhabit the praises of
Israel. Psalm. 38.9.
And Psalm. 48. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of
thy Temple: that is, even in the midst of our selves, in our own hearts. There
let us think upon his mercies, there echo forth his praises.

4. The Inhabitant disposes all the rooms of his house: if God dwell in us,
let him rule us. Submit thy will to his word, thy affections to his Spirit. It
is fit that every man should bear rule in his own house.

5. Let us be glad when he is in us, and give him no disturbance. Let not the
foulenes of any room make him dislike his habitation. Cleanse all the sluttish
corners of sin, and perfume the whole house with Myrrh and Cassia. Still be
getting nearer to thy Landlord: other Inhabitants come home to their houses;
but here the house must strive to come home to the Inhabitant. Whenever God
comestoward thee, meet him by the way, and bid him welcome to his own.

6. Lastly, if we be the Lords houses, then no bodies else. The material
Temples are not to be diuerted to common offices: much more should the
spiritual be used only for Gods service. Let us not alienate his rights: thus
he will say, This is my house, here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein. O may we so adorn these Temples with graces, that God may take
delight to dwell in us.

Idols.
These be the Temples: the Idols that haunt them, we better know, then know
how to expel: they be our lusts, and inordinate affections; the rebellions
of our corrupt nature, which fight against the Soul, defile the body, and
disgrace the Temples of Gods Spirit. So I pass from them, to the last point;
that betwixt these libidinous Idols, and those spiritual Temples, there can be

No agreement.
God will dwell with no Inmates: if uncleanness be there, Revel. 21.27
will the fountain of all purity abide it? Will Christ dwell with an adulterer?
He that will suffer no unclean thing to enter his city above, will he
himself dwell in an unclean city below? O think how execrable that sin is,
which does not only take the members of Christ, and makes them the limbs of an
harlot; but even turns Christ's Temples into stinking Brothels. Our hearts be
the Altars to send up the sweet Incense of devout prayers and cherefull
thanksgiuings; if the smoke of malicious thoughts be found there, will God
accept our oblations? Is it possible, that man should please his Father, that
will not be reconciled to his brother? The Lamps of knowledge and sobriety are
burning within us; will not the deluge of drink put them out? Will the Lord
dwell in a drunken body? Must we not cease to be his Temples, when we become
Bacchus his Tuns and tunnels? There is Manna, the bread of life within us; will
not Epicurisme and throat-indulgence corrupt it? There is peace in us, will not
pride and contention affright it? There is the love of heaven in us, will not
the love of the world banish it? Shall the graces of God cohabitate with the
vices of Satan? Will the Temple of God endure Idols? No, these Eagles plumes will
not brook the blending with common feathers: this heavenly gold scorns the
mixture of base and sophisticate metalls.

Let us search our hearts, and ransake them narrowly: if we do not cast out
these Idols, God will not own us for his Temples. Math. 21.13
My House shall be called the house of prayer: this was Gods Appropriation:
But you have made it a den of thieves: this is man's Impropriation. Let us take
heed of impropriating Gods house; remembering howhe has reue^ged such a
profanation with scourges. We are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20
therefore let us glorify God both in body and spirit, for they are his: His
purchase, his Temple, his inheritance, his habitation: do not lose so gracious
an owner, by the most ungracious sacrilege. You see many ruined houses, which
have bin once kings palaces: learn by those dead spectacles to keep your
selves from the like fortunes: lest God say of you, Hoc Templum meum fuit, this
was my house; but now because it took in Idols, I have forsaken it.

Or what if we do not set up Idols in these Temples, when we make the Temples
themselves Idols? or say not with Israel, Make us gods, while we make gods of
our selves? while we dress altars, and erect shrines to our own brains, and
kiss our own hands for the good they have done us? If we attribute something
to our selves, how is Christ al in all with us? Do we justly blame them that
worship the Beast of Rome, and yet find out a new Idolatry at home? Shall we
refuse to adore the Saints and Angels, and yet give divine worship to our
selves, dust and ashes? If victory crown our battles, if plenty fill our
garners, or success answer our endeavors; must the glory of all reflect upon
our own atchieuements? This is a rivality that God will not endure, to make so
many Temples nothing but Idols. But as the Lancashire Justice said of the
ill-shap'd Rood, though it be not well favored enough for a god, it will serve
to make an excellent devil. So proud dust and ashes, that arrogates the honor
of God, and impropriates it to himself; though he be too foul for a Temple,
yet he is fit enough for an Idol. When David prays, Libera me ab homine malo,
Deliver me from the evil man, O Lord. Saint Augustine, after much study and
scrutiny to find out this evil man, at last lights upon him; ab homine malo,
that is, a me ipso: Deliver me from the evil man, deliver me from my self;
Deliver Augustine from Augustine; I am that evil man. So, of all Idolatries,
God deliver us from a superstitious worship of our selves. Some have Idolized
their Princes, some their Mistresses, some their Manufactures; but they are
innumerable that have Idolized themselves. He is a rare man that has no Idol,
no little god in a box, no especial sin in his heart, to which he gives
vxorious and affectionate Indulgence.

The only way to mend all, is for every man to begin with himself. In vain
shall we blame those faults abroad, which we tolerate at home. That man makes
himself ridiculous, who leaving his own house on fire, runs to quench his
neigbors Let but every man pull a brand from this fire, the flame will go out
alone: if every soul cleanse his own Temple, all shall be quit of Idols, and
God will accept of all. A multitude is but a heap of unities; the more we take
away, the fewer we leave behind. When a field is ouergrowne with weeds, the
best course to have a good general harvest, is for every man to weed his own
ground. When we would have the street cleansed, let every man sweep his own
door, and it is quickly done. But while every man censures, and none amends,
we do but talk against Idols, with still vnclensed Temples.

Let us pray for universal repentance, like a good Josias, to purge the houses
of God: till lust and profaneness, pride and covetousness, fraud and
wantonness, malice and drunkenness, be no more found among us: till every thing
be cast out, and nothing let in, that is unclean. So shall the Lord dwell in
us with content, and we shall dwell in him with comfort. Here we shall be a
Temple for Him, hereafter he shall be a Temple for us. So we find that glorious
City described, I saw no Temple therein, Reu. 21.22.
but the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb was the Temple of it. We are Gods
Temple on earth, God shall be our Temple in heaven. To this purpose, the
Spirit of God sanctify us, and be for ever sanctified in us. Amen.

Some may happily (long ere this) have preiudicated in their censures; How is
this Opus diei in die suo? What is all this to the business of the day? I
might have prevented the objection, by comparing Idolatry with Treason: the
one being a breach of Allegiance to the Lord, the other a breach of allegiance
to the Lords Anointed. Idolatry is a Treason against God, and Treason is a
kind of Idolatry against the King. From both which the divine grace, and our
holy obedience deliver us all. I conclude with application to the Time.

This is one of those blessed days celebrated for the deliverance of our
gracious Sovereign: and well may the deliverance of a King, of such a King,
deserve a day of gratulation. When God delivers a private man, he does, as it
were, repeat his Creation: but the deliverance of a King, is always a choice
piece in the Lords Chronicle. The Story, how he was endangered, and how
preserved, this place has diverse times witnessed; and that in a more punctual
manner, then I have either strength, or art, or time to match. A hard time it
seemed to be, when a King was imprisoned, when he had no guard with him but his
Innocence, no subject but a Traitor. But there was a stronger with him, then
all they could be against him. A good Prince has more guards then one: he
has, 1. a subsidiary guard, consisting of mortal men. 2. An inward guard, the
integrity of his own Conscience. 3. A spiritual guard, the prayers of his
faithful subjects. 4. A celestial guard, the protection of diligent and
powerful Angels. 5. A divine guard, his Makers providence that fenceth him in
with a wall of fire, which shall at once both preserve him, and consume his
enemies.

But my purpose is not to bring your thoughts back to the view of his peril,
but to stir your hearts up to thankfulness for his preservation. He is justly
styled, The Defender of the Faith: he has ever defended the Faith, and the
Faith has ever defended him. He has preserved the Temple of God from Idols,
and therefore God has preserved him from all his enemies. Surely that
Providence, which delivered him from those early Conspiracies, wherewith he
has been assaulted from his cradle, meant him for some extraordinary benefit,
and matchless good to the Christian world. He that gave him both life and
Crown (almost) together, has still miraculously preserved them both, from all
the raging violences of Rome and Hell. Now when the Lord delivered him, what
did he else but even deliver us all? That we might rejoice in his safety, as
the Romans did in the recovery of Germanicus; when they ran with lamps and
sacrifices to the Capitol, and there sung with shouts and acclamations; Salua
Roma, salua Patria, saluus Germanicus: the City is safe, the Country is safe,
and all in the safety of Germanicus. While we consider the blessings which we
enjoy by his gracious Government; that the estates we have gotten with honest
industry, may be safely conveyed to our posterity: that we sit under the shadow
of peace, and may teach our children to know the Lord: that the good man may
build up Temples and Hospitals, without trembling to think of savage and
barbarous violences to pull them down: that our Devotions be not molested with
vproares, nor men called from their callings by mutinies: that our Temples be
not profaned with Idols, nor the Service of God blended with superstitious
devices: that our temporal estate is preserved in liberty, our spiritual
estate may be improued in piety, and our eternal estate assured us in glory:
that our lives be protected, and in quiet our souls may be saved: for such a
King of men, bless we the God of Kings; and sing for his deliverance, as they
did for their Germanicus, as privately every day, so this day in our public
Assemblies; Salua Britannia, Salua Ecclesia, saluus IACOBVS: Our Kingdom is
safe, the Church of God is safe, our whole Estate is safe, we are all safe and
happy, in the safety and happiness of King JAMES. O that as we have good
cause to emulate, so also we would truly imitate the gratulation of Israel; we
for our King that has preserved the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 5.12.13.
as they for their King that built the Temple; while the Levites and singers
stood with Harps and Cymbals and Viols, and the Priests blowing with Trumpets;
as if they had all been one man, and made one sweet harmony to the praise of
God.

For these public and extraordinary blessings, God requires public and
extraordinary praises: that this great Assembly with prepared hearts, and
religious affections, should magnify his glorious Name: and if it were
possible, by some unusual strain of our united thanks, pierce the very skies,
and give an Echo to those celestial Quires, singing Honor, and praise, and
glory, be to our gracious God, for all his merciful deliverances both of
Prince and people. Yea, O Lord, still preserve thine own Anointed: convert or
confound all his enemies; but upon his head let his Crown flourish. Long, long
live that royal keeper of Gods holy Temple, and the Defender of that Faith
which he has of old given to his Saints: and let all true-hearted Israelites
say, Amen: yea, let Amen, the faithful witness in heaven, the Word and Truth of
God, say Amen to it. For our selves, let us heartily repent of our former sins,
religiously amend our future lives, abandon all our intestine Idols, serve the
Lord with pure hearts; and still, and still, God shall deliver both Him and us
from all our enemies. This God grant for his mercies sake, Jesus Christ for his
merits sake, the Holy Ghost for his Names sake; to whom, three persons, and one
eternal God, be all praise and glory, obedience and thanksgiving, world
without end.

FINIS.

