SAMVELS FUNERAL. OR A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL of Sir ANTHONY COPE
Knight, and Barronnet.

BY Mr. ROBERT HARRICE.

PSALM 37. verse. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the
end of that man is peace.

AT LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot in Paternoster row. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE LADY ANNE COPE, LATE WIFE to Sir A. C. Knight,
and Barrennet at Brewdene, etc.
MADAM, Your right is greatest to this Sermon, as being heir to the man,
though not to his lands: what he was, I need not tell your Ladyship; nor will
I say of you as once one said of a Roman Lady: I know not, Hic haeres vxoris
at haereditatis alij possessores. Hiero. of Pammach. and Paulina. Valor. of
Cornelia; Neseis an faeliciorem dixerim, quod talem vir^ habuerit, an
miseriorem quod amiserit. l.4. Nec doleas quod talem amiseris, sed gaudeas quod
talem habueris. Ier. to Heliodor. for his nephew.
whether your unhappiness be greater in now loosing him, then was your
happiness in once enjoying him. A Christian may be happy in losses and
crosses, as well as otherwhere; and we in Christ's school must learn with
Job, to bless God for friends past, as well as present; and rather praise him
for once lending them, then ouergrieue for his calling for them again. The
time will be better spent, if (leaving these impertinencies) I call upon your
Ladyship, and my self, for some improuement of this cross: and first (Madame)
let us observe the crookednes of our nature, which neither fears crosses till
it feels them, nor sees mercies till they are out of sight; it being with the
soul as with the eye, that sees nothing that is not somewhat distant from it.
Next, be pleased (I pray) to consider the vanity of this world, what is now
lest of your Honorable husband more then his goodness? Where is health, where
is beauty, where is honor now? In how short a space were two of the chiefest
flowers in the Copes garden withered? Ah (Madame) it is grace, it is grace and
wisdom that will cause our face to shine, and name to live: as for the glory
of this world, it is like a rotten post, that shines indeed, but it is only in
the dark; never build upon it, for all its glistering, it is but a rotten
post. Thirdly, remember we (I beseech you) our own estate: indeed it were much
if we should forget death, Salus corporis, patrimonium pauperis. Aug. in Psalm.
76.
who are above half dead. For mine own part, the Lord has already stripped me
of the poor man's portion, health: for your Ladyships, a great part of your
self is now turned into dust, seeing parents, children, husbands are gone
before you, and death has come very near you, when thrice it has cut off
your head; the time will shortly come when you also must yield to the stroke of
death. In the mean, I beseech you remember S. John's words, in an Epistle to
another Lady, Look to your self, that we lose not those things which we
have wrought, but that we receive a full reward: indeed your loss will be
ours too (for we expect a tithe in heaven of our heavenly increase, as well as
here): and therefore (good Madame) husband your soul well, sow much, work
much, give much, pray much, and you and we shall speed the better at that
harvest. Thus praying your favorable construction and acceptance of these rude
lines, with humble thanks for all your love to me, (especially to those many
poor members of Christ, to whom it pleases you (thorough my hands) to convey
yearly so great relief) I commend you to the Lords grace; who abundantly
return all that comfort upon you, which you have so frankly yielded to so many
naked backs, and hungry bellies in this Church. From Hanwell, July 11. the
same day whereon (four years before) your worthy husband was there interred.

Your Ladyships in all Christian services, RODERY HARRICE.

TO THE GODLY READER.
THis Sermon, at it was never meant to the Press, so bath it been kept from it
almost four years: Now it is constrained to show it self, as sometimes
Trinces be, lest some counterfeit steal their name, and usurp their place.
Whilst Samuels body slept, the So Austen passim; immundus spiritus, malignus
spiritus.
devil would be Samuel, and deceine with Image Samuelis, sumilitudo Sam,
imaginaria simulatio Samuel, etc. so others v. D. Rayn. lest.
shows, I had reason to fear some such like ingling with Samuels funeral,
being fore-threatned. In this extremity, if I had rather my own child bear my
name then a bastard, blame me not. Now thou see it, take me with thee a
little, before thou read it: Know, that the first point only was enlarged,
the rest thus briefly (as thou find them) touched by reason of have, being
tied to an hour. Secondly, know, that I never wrote forth these notes but
once, and that is the reason of the most of the marginall quotations and
references, it being now my ordinary practice to refer my self in private
notes to such Authors, as have written (within my memory and reading) of the
same subject, although in public I quote sparingly. Thirdly, understand the
true reason of my forbearing personal praises in the close: my text gave me
occasion of saying something before, and me thought it handsomer to lay al my
stuff upon the foundation, then to set up a leane-to. Secondly, I remembered
what a wise man said, Sapientia non quaerit vocis testimon um, sed operum.
Hierod. in Math. lib. 2.
Wisdom grounds upon men's works, rather then words. Thirdly and especially, I
find the practice (though in it self lawful) exceedingly abused, I have no
leisure now to take up the complaints of worthy Writers against this abuse;
only I could wish, that our age would distinguish betwixt funeral Orations,
and funeral Sermons, as former ages have done, and not confound so different
things. It is fit that grace should be followed even to heaven with honor: but
oh that every of Christ's messengers would remember his master, and before he
speaks, ask himself the question; Would my Lord and master speak this
himself, were he now to preach in person? but I must not dwell in the porch.
One thing more before I leave thee, thou see the guise of this world,
Printers get copies for their profit; Readers buy and read for their pleasure,
and (perhaps) some print too for their credit: but where is the man that
proiects his own spiritual good? Verily the number of such is small, be thou
of that number, make some use of others lives, of others deaths, trifle not as
many do: what is this same R. H. etc? who was this A. C. a good or a bad man,
etc? be thou godly, and I care not what thou esteemest of me: as for this
worthy Gentleman in speech, understand, that as I never flattered him living;
so will I not deifie him (as the Heathen did their Patrones) being dead.
Herodian.
He had his wants, his faults, nor did we concur in all opinions: but I
would that thou and I, and especially men of his own rank would follow him in
these particulars: first, in praying most earnestly, and particularly against
our special sins; secondly, in loving and reuerencing our own teachers; and
that so much the more, by how much the more frecly and plainly they reprone us.
For these things (not to speak of other particulars) much commend the truth of
that Honorable Knight, that in his standing prayers with his family, he would
shame himself most in his confessions for his own most special sins. And
again, as he much respected, and greatly countenanced every learned and
vnscandalous Preacher: so most of all those that least favored his
corruptions; often blessing God for such teachers as would not give him rest in
sin, and not seldom provoking them, at least my self (to speak of my own
knowledge only) with such like words: Go on, spare us not; though corruption
may busle a while, yet God will give us hearts to come in at length, and to
submit to the scepter of his Word; howsoever, it shall be a Preachers Crown
to be faithful, and to baulke none. Thus be many a time to me in private,
after that I had been (as the world thought) sharp enough with him in public.
Oh that we had more such Knights, such hearers now! But I forget my self to
remember thee of a duty, Shall I say on: thing more in his bonour? The Papists
never loved him; and therefore if they in thy hearing now persecute his name,
say as a Father once said of a cruel persecuter, That religion which they so
persecute, must needs be excellent: This I can assure thee, his end was most
comfortable, and his honor no way obscured, nor his memory lost in his own
country by death. More then this I have not now to say to thee, only remember,
that thou have gotten one more witness against thee in the last day, by
reading this Sermon, unless thou put it to some use. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord, R. H.

SAMVELS FUNERAL.
1. SAMVEL, 25.1. And Samuel dyed, and all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David
arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.


BY this time you see the sum of our now errand and present text: the work
in hand is a funeral, the party deceased worthy Samuel; the mourners, all
Israel; the place of burial, his own house at Ramah. The whole passage
penned, either by Gad, or Nathan (as it should seem by the Chronicles) at Gods
appointment; whose eye follows every mourner here, and therefore it behoues us
to follow his voice with our best attentions. For my own part, I am very
sensible of the difficulties I now sustain: for the subject of our discourse,
Samuels funeral is enough to astonish any Israelite; for matter, it is not
easy to say, what will be most expediently said; and for manner we have
things, almost incompatible to reconcile, plainness and briefness in the
same speech: the text gives some advantage by its plainness and fullness,
yielding matter of large use from three sorts of men of highest quality; from
Samuel dying, from Israel mourning, from David flying; of all whom, whilst I
speak plainly, do you hear conscionably, so God shall have his end, and I
my aim.

And first of Samuel he dies; the time is gessed at by men, but not expressed
by God: some knit this story with that next before, because of the word (And),
but that particle in the original, is sometimes ordinatiue, as well as
copulative, and begins sometimes a new story, a new book sometimes. 'Paul is
most express for the time, Exodus 1.1. Ezek^ 1. P^ Sam. ^8 S^ A^ Mont. in (...)
V(...)enda^mp. Sa^ A^ 1^. who g^ him a longer time, H^cus yet more, (...) and
I^allus most of all. 1. Sam. 3 20.2. Sam 12.
Act. 12; where summing up the reign of Saul and Samuel, he makes the whole 40
years, whereof not much above two or three (if I mistake not, falls to Saul,
the other are Samuels, so ancient a Ruler as this worthy, yet now he dies:
what further he was we need not say, his name and story speaks it
sufficiently, he was begged of God, borne of honest parents, brought up in best
fashion, advanced to highest emploiments in Church and Commonweal; a Prophet
approved of God and man a Magistrate to whom heaven and earth in the day of his
resignation gave applause; God spoke from heaven in his voice of thunder, man
could not upon the sharpest challenge charge him with any indirectnesse in
government; this Samuel so well descended, so much regarded, so holy in life,
so high in place, a good Christian, a good Churchman, a good Sates-man, now
dies and yields to nature.

In his death lets read our own, and grow to this conclusion, Death is
unavoidable, life and death take turns each of other; the man lives not that
shall not see death, be he a King with Saul, a Prophet with Jeremy, a wise
Solomon, a foolish Nabal, a holy Isaac, a profane Esau, of what sort soever,
he must be deaths prisoner; nay, let there be a concurence of all in one, let
Samuel be both a good man, and a good Minister, and a good Magistrate, and have
as many privilege, as are incident to a man yet can he not procure a
protection against this officer; his mother may beg his life, but none can
compound for his death. Speak we this according to men? says not the
Scripture as much? Psalm. 49.10.
Wise men die (says David) and fools die; rich men die, and poor to; and
therefore he calls both upon the sons of Nobles, and of the earth to mind the
lesson: indeed the Heathens could compare the sons of Adam to Counters,
Chesse, Stage Plays; in reckoning Counters have their several place and use
for a time, but in the end they are all iumbled on a heap; in a game at
Chesse, so ne are Kings, some Bishops, etc, but after a while they go all into
the same bag: on the Stage, one is in his rags, another in his robes; one is
the Master another the Man, and very busy they be, but in the end the Play
ends, the bravery ends, and each returns to his place; such (and no other) is
the estate of man, even in their judgment, al are either weeds or flowers,
both wither; all trees good or bad, both die; as dies the fool, so the wise,
says Solomon, Eccles. 2. In the manner there is some difference, for the
matter none; but why do I prove what none denies? Both living and dead give
testimony to this truth; the living may take up Jobs words in another case; We
are filled with wrinckles, which is a witness against us, we wear death in
our faces, Job 16.8.
and bear it in our bones, we put it upon our backs, and into our mouths,
and cannot be ignorant of it. Yea, the dead proclaim this lesson, and in this
respect (like Abell) are living Prophets, when dead men; Go to the Word, Heb.
11.4.
go to the earth; and they that make their beds in darkness, and sleep in
the dust will tell you, that its neither wisdom, nor power, nor strength, nor
friends, nor place, nor grace, nor any thing else that can exempt from this
tribute of nature (Death), as darkness could call it: our Abel here dead
speaks this to all his friends; If greatness of estate, feature of body,
gifts of mind, chastenes of life, sobernes in diet, diligence in a calling,
prayers of the Church, would have given any advantage against death, darkness
and blackness had not at this time covered us: since the strong is become
weak, let us with Sampson out of the strong gather meat; die: this statute we
read in Paul's ninth to his Hebrews, and in the entrance into Gods book; which
as it was laid upon mankind in Adams, so has it ever hitherto, and shall
hereafter for evermore lay hold on his posterity. No man as yet has breathed,
but he has had his death or translation: no man is yet to come, but he must
see either death, or an alteration; so has heaven concluded it, and who can
possibly reuerse it?

The 2 Cor. 5.1. (...) 19. and 10 9 and 13.12. etc.
as Paul (after Job) tells us: this is the estate of man, of all men; some are
more painted then some, but all earthen vessels; some more clear then some,
but all glasses; all built of earth, all borne of women, and therefore all
short of continuance, Chap. 14.
as Job inferres.

The Sin: sin is poison to the spirits, rottennes to the bones where it
comes; and where does it not come? who can say, his heart is clean? 1 Epist
chap. 1. ves. 8.10.
Nay, who can wash either heart or hand? John answers the question negatiuely,
no man can acquit himself from sin (if grown) either actual or original;
and therefore not from death. Shall we then sum up all, and conclude all
under death with the same breath: thus it stands; It is impossible for any
living wight to frustrate the voice and sentence of God, to be a man or earth,
and not to have a body of earth; to be borne of the unclean, and not to be
unclean; therefore its impossible for him to avoid death. Indeed had Christ
undertaken our freedom from all deaths, as well as from some; or were there
any power, counsel, etc, against the Lord; or could any place privilege any
from being borne of women, or made of dust, or tainted with sin, then such
might contest with death, and impleade corruption: but since the former is
impossible, the latter must be deemed unavoidable. And therefore now what is to
be done?

Surely as men that must travel, that is already concluded; young and old,
good and bad, etc. Whatsoever we be now, we must be dead anon, so says
God; let us say the same, and prepare for it; nay, let us not say it, but think
it; nay, not think it, but conclude it with greatest affirmations: you will
think strange (perhaps) my pains in this kind, whilst I persuade a
mortality; but the argument is both needful and useful; needful in regard
of our insufficiency to assume, and unwillingness to apprehend death in our
selves: for howsoever we can all say in the general, we are mortal, nothing
so suer as death; yet when it comes to our own particular, we dream of an
immortality in nature, we never set any bounds to life, we do not resolutely
conclude, I must die shortly, I may instantly, this day may be the last that I
shall see, this hour the last that I shall spend, this word the last that I
shall speak, this deed the last that I shall perform, this place the last
that I shall breathe in; and so live by the day, by the hour: but when we
enter the hour, the eldest of us thinks to end it, nay the day, nay the week,
nay the year. Hence the most have a years work to do, when they have not an
hours space to live; needful then it is to force this meditation of death
upon our hearts: and as needful, so most useful; this will mind us of the
wofulnes of sin, which turns strength into weakness, beauty into ashes,
life into death, a breathing man into a liuelesse carcass; this will assure us
of the justice and truth of God, who is so pure, that he cannot but threaten
sin; so true, that all the world cannot shift his threats; this will work
humility, when the goodliest man must be twice a child, and run in a round,
beginning with the earth, and ending in the earth, being at last what he was at
first, not able to dress himself, to feed himself, to help himself, or
speak for help; this (in a word) will work repentance toward God, modesty
toward man, diligence in our callings, patience under crosses, watchfulness
in all places, moderation in all cases; and therefore this, this must be
thought upon. Nor must our thoughts be (as most men's be) short and sudden,
fleeting and uncertain, but we must be daily in these contemplations; and
particularly, we must consider what it is to die, what goes before it, what
comes with it, what follows upon it: for first, before we come to the very
gate of death, we are to pass through a very strait, long, heavy lane:
Amari^ita quam mo^s, Amb. de bono mortis, cap. 7.
sickness first tameth us, which many times is worse then death it self, that
renders us unfit for all religious services, prayer, repentance, etc, as being
a time not of getting, but of spending; that cleaues the head, and pains the
heart, and wounds the spirits, and leaves us so distressed, that meat is no
meat, the bed no bed, light no light to us; that makes us catch at death for
help: but alas, what help in death, if not forethought of?

Oh the misery of a poor creature, that is so pained that he cannot live; so
unprepared that he dares not die: he goes to bed, but cannot sleep; he tastes
his meat, but it will not down; he shifts his room, but not his pain; death
(says the conscience) would end and amend all, were thou prepared for death;
but to die before, were to loose those comforts one has, and to fall under
those curses that are insufferable, Salomons officers, and the soul holds (as
Ioab the altar, so she) the body; 1. King 2.
loath they be to part, but death will rend them in twain; the conscience the
whilst that meditates fear, that quakes, that trembles: Whither am I going?
So Adrian dying, Animula, vagula, blandudula, etc.
where must I lodge this night? where shall I live hereafter? Oh that I might
live! Oh that I might die! Oh that I might do neither! and knows not what to
choose; mean while, what case is this man in, whilst death thus rips him up,
and thrusts his hands into his bowels to pull out his heart. Ah beloved, we
may intimate somewhat of his misery; but it falls not within our thoughts to
conceive what his fear, be, who hangs between life and death, earth and hell,
thus forthwith ready to drop into flames at every stroke of death, and to sink
down, down, down, till he be gone for ever. And yet this is not all: when I
am dead (says the carnal wretch), all the world is done with me: he says
truth, all the world, and all the comforts of the world have done with him
indeed; he shall never laugh more, he shall never have a monie^ts ease more: but
though the world has done with him, yet God has not done with him; he sends
for his soul, (having first taken order that ye body be forth-comming)
conuents that, and doomes that, and casts that from him with greatest
indignation, into such a place, such a company, such a condition, as would make
the heavens sweat, and the earth shrink to hear it. Well then (beloved), since
die we must, since we must be sick, be in pain, in fear, in tentation
whilst here; since we must to judgment when we go hence; since that is most
true of death, which antiquity has feigned of the Wolf and Basiliske; if we
see death before it comes to see us, we shall then prevent the sting, and
poison, and fierceness of it; if it steal upon us unseen, it leaves us
dumb, nay dead: be we entreated by all the mercies of God, as we would
please him, and pleasure our selves, to take into our thoughts the often
meditation of death, and to make due preparation for the same. Tell thy heart
every day, when thou take it alone, in the words of Job, When a few years,
Job 16.22.
(or as the text runs) when the years of number (which are allotted me,
namely) are come, then I shall go the way, whence I shall not return: say
with him, Job 17.1.
the grave is ready for me, (indeed graves); I must die, I must from all these
profits, these pleasures, these friends; I must answer for all these deeds,
these words, these thoughts; I must be ashamed, cast, cursed, damned, burned,
plagued as long as God lives, if I prepare not: I shall be spared, saved, blessed,
crowned, and be as near to God as a creature can be to his maker, if I do
prepare, therefore I must; I must, I will prepare for death. This done without
all delays, as a man that is now dying (as well as he for whom the bell toles,
though not happily so near to death) set upon two things: First, set thy house
in order, next, thy soul. For the first, thou have persons and things to look
unto: to begin with persons; so live with thy wife, being a husband; with thy
servants, being a master; with thy children, being a father: exercise such
wisdom, kindness, faithfulness, mercy, every day, as thou would do, if
thou know it to be the last day. And for things (mark me well, ^ken not to
Satan who disswades all seasonable wills, because he would administer the
goods, by being timely in this errand, thou shall not shorten thy days; but
having taken thy leave of the world, shall better attend on death. Things
therefore unlawful, restore, (I say again) restore. Things lawful dispose
of, and as in a journey (hasty and uncertain) wait the call. But what auailes
it to set house in order, with Achitophel, and to forget ones self. In the
second place therefore. (nay in the first) look to thy self, and since the
places be but two, and they so different, go not to hell, so long as heaven may
be had: there is no man so forlornely wicked, (...) etc. Basil.
but if he repent, we may warrant him heaven; if he will not, who can help
him? But what must he do? first, he must repent, that is, see his life and
nature, confess, mourn, hate sin, and leave all in practice or allowance.
Secondly, he must believe, that is, acquaint himself with the Word, and yield
consent unto it, apply it to his own particular, and dwell upon it: he must
threaten himself in every threat, curse himself in every curse, bless
himself in every promise. Thirdly, he must die daily to sin and the world,
he must live daily in the constant practice of al duties, religious toward
God, righteous toward man, private in his place and calling. And so if he does
(in truth and uprightness, though in much weakness) there is no heaven, if he
go not to heaven: if he do not thus (out of a presumption of mercy, of life,
and I know not what), there is none in hell if he be not one. Up then (my
brethren) and foreslow no time: now the wind serves, hoyse up sail, now is the
market, make your provision; now is the seeds-time, sow apace, as yet you have
all advantages from grace and nature, Word, Sacrament, wit, memory, sense,
strength, etc. Now apprehend the opportunity, repent and be pardoned; believe
and be saved; obey, and be for ever blessed: if any has persuaded himself
otherwise, my soul shall weep in secret for his destruction, which I know
will be as certainly effected, as now it is plainly threatened. Be entreated
then, let God entreat you, and once overrule you: you must die, you must die
but once; being once dead, you return not to make a new preparation; do that
once well, which being once well done, will make you men, nay more then men,
then Angels for ever. And this is the use for our selves. A second respects our
friends.

Must all die, is there no remedy? then must we have patience Far quam
sortem patiuntur omnes, nemo it. cusat. Senec.
no man should shrug at, even in the Poets judgment: who quarrels summer for
some heat, or winter for some cold? a thorn for pricking, or a brier for
scratching? who is angry that he is framed like other men, subject to like
hunger, like thirst, like sleep? and why (I pra'y) should not our friends
resemble others in their death, as well as in their birth? we would not have
them have more eyes or hands then others, v. Greg. Nyssen synod. de
dormientibus.
and why more days? what do we make of life, what of death? surely to the
godly, life is but a prison, death is an advantage. Say our friends were tied
in prison, would we begrudge them liberty? say tossed on the seas, would you
envy them the haven? say doubtful in the skirmish, would you be sorry for
their victory? nay, say but beaten with a tempest, would you not wish them at
home? Believe it, Brethren, this world is but a sea, a prison; this life a
journey, a warfare: if God has prevented our wishes, shall he be returned
frowardness? shall we trouble the air with needless cries, my husband, my
husband, my father, my father, as if we were the first widows and Orphans in
the world? no, let them mourn without hope, whose life and death is without
hope: as for Christians, who die living, and live dying, they loose nothing by
death but what may well be spared, sin, and sorrow; they meet with nothing
in heaven worthy tears; they go not from, but to their friends; not from, but
to their home; not from, but to their joys; a change indeed they have, but to
their gain. For first, so soon as death arrests them, the world is well
amended with them, especially for the soul; howbeit the full accomplishment of
their happiness is reiourned to the last day, that day of refreshing, that day
of rejoicing, that day of marriage, of solemnity: then a full, a blessed change
shall evidence it self to the whole world: and this change, if we speak in
general, is only in qualities (as all alterations be) not in substance, the
metal is the same, only it is refined; the stuff the same, only it is
trimmed; the body and soul the same, only it is newly clothed. If we descend
to particulars, the change will be found to be in these following: in body,
soul, estate, place, company: for the body, that is stripped of all sinful and
natural defects (the abortions of sin), and filled with all heavenly
complements; of mortal, it becomes immortal; of corruptible, incorruptible;
of natural, spiritual, (that is, not needing natural helps or props; there
is no use of meat, apparel, sleep, beds, etc;) of dishonorable, glorious,
like (in its measure) to the body of Christ which is the standard. In short,
whatsoever might make to the annoying, blemishing, dishonouring, disquieting of
the body, is removed; whatsoever might make it amiable, active, honorable,
glorious, comfortable, is added; the glory of the Sun will be but darkness
to it. For the soul, that is first eased of all the rags and relics of
sin, delivered of ignorance, pride, selfeloue, etc: Generally all whose
objects are either future or evil.
delivered next of all the consequences of sin, griefs, guilts, fears,
accusations; yea, delivered of all things, which may any way import an
imperfect state, though an upright heart, as faith, repentance, hungring after
righteousness, etc: and then in a second place, it is filled with the image of
Jesus Christ. First, all the powers and faculties thereof are perfected and
advanced above the ordinary strain of nature: next, all those vessels are
stuffed with knowledge, love, and all things else that are there requisite: and
not only so, but the soul is furnished with all the attendances of Christ's
image, everlasting joy, perpetual peace, a constant correspondency and
communion with God: and in brief, whatsoever might offend, stain, blemish,
the soul is removed; and whatsoever may enrich it, ennoble it, and make it
blissful, is (according to each man's measure) added; And thus of the person.
The rest we dispatch with all speed, for the estate thus; there shall be
nothing that shall be wanting, that shall trouble, distract, or discontent;
there shall be nothing that the soul shall then desire, but there it is. For
the place thus: there shall be nothing less then what shall be desired,
nothing more that can be desired: what it is, the Word no where (for ought I
know) tells us. The Church on earth is more tich the^ gold, more precious then
pearl, more bright then the Suaue, more glorious then the Moon; Read. 21.22.
but what is there to be seen, Paul could not utter; we cannot conceive:
only this we know, that none shall be ever weary of it, or willing to alter
it. Lastly, for the company, there be of three sorts: first, Angels, who
shall not then terrify, but attend; the worst and lowest servant there, shall
be as an Angel. 2. All the famous and godly men that ever lived: Illic
Apostularum (...) Pro ^tarum etc. Cypr. de mort. ad fratres.
there shall we meet with Adam, abraham, etc: there shall we be acquainted
with David, Paul, etc. 3. The blessed Trinity, there shall we see him who has
done and suffered so much for us: him, whom the Fathers before, and since his
incarnation so much longed to see, Jesus Christ the blessed: all which
considered and believed, what can we less do then abandon all fruitless and
fleshly tears for friends departed? what way are they gone, but the way of all
flesh? with whom do they live, but with Samuel, with God? where are they, but
in better place and case, with better friends then ever before? In stead of
carking, therefore do two other things, first, whilst friends be present,
Our vulg^ seldom (...) for friends till gone.
do the part of a friend in praying for them, in calling upon them, and in
fitting of them to death, that so thou may have peace in thy self, and hope
of them in their departure: Else when thy conscience shall say unto thee,
Wretched man, thy wife, thy child, thy charge is now dead, and (for ought thou
know) in hell; if not, no thanks to thee, for thou wast never the man that
would call upon the^, pray with the^, or mind them of their departures: when (I
say) thy conscience shall thus greet thee, thou shall not tell how to take it.
Secondly, when they are gone to bed, and fast asleep, awake them not with thy
cries, but make ready to follow after, so the time shall be best redeemed, the
loss and cross best improued, and Satan (who loves to fish in such troubled
waters) most prevented; and so far this use.

We will touch upon a third as we pass, and that is this: must Psalm. 17.
says the Prophet; all the sweet he has, foregoeth death; after he has a
portion indeed, but it is a portion of fire and brimstone, Psalm. 11.
of storms and tempests, of anguish and tribulation, of shame and confusion,
of horror and amazement in a fiery lake, from the presence of God in the midst
of cursed spirits. Thus death must needs be terrible to him, but as comfortable
to the godly; for it makes his crosses as short, as the Anima absoluitur,
corpus resoluitur. Ab. de bono vit. e. c. 8.
pleasure into pain, comfort into confusion; death in an instant eases the
godlies body of all pain, his soul of all sin, his conscience of al fears,
and leaves him in an estate of perfect happiness. Let then the godly comfort
himself in those thoughts, which kill the wicked, even in thoughts of death;
let him for outward troubles resolve, that death will be to him (as Michal once
to David) a mean to rid him of the hands of sorrow; so that afflictions shall
meet with none other then Saul's messengers did, a dead trunk in stead of a
living David: let him comfort himself in the thoughts of his own death, as
once Esau in the thoughts of his fathers, The days of mourning (said he) will
shortly come, then I will slay my brother: but the day of refreshing (let the
Christian say) will shortly come, and then I will slay my enemies, pride,
unbelief, self-love; yea, all corruptions, all tentations, all miseries,
which stand some above us, some about us, as the insulting Philistimes about
Samson, shall end with the same blow, and fall with the same clap with our
selves: happy they whose misery is no longer then life; but woe be to the
wicked, whose iolity ends when death enters, and whose torments survive death
it self, and so we leave Samuel to his rest.

Well, Samuel is well himself, but in what case does he leave his poor
neighbors at Ramah, that the Text now speaks, and it is my trouble (yet
better one then al troubled) that I must speak it so briefly: Israel, says
the Text, Jacobs issue, Gods people, all Israel, distributiuely taken, that is,
of all forts some were gathered in great troops, either by public command, or
of their own voluntary, or both ways; first to lament, according to the then
custom in most solemn manner Samuels end, and their own loss; and next (to
honor him) at his burial in his Ramah. Here you see we have far to go, and
little time to spend, the faster I hasten, the more you will hearken, and then
I run: the points, which in a passage or two must be touched from this part,
are two; the first is this, Samuel a public and prositable man dies, Israel
publicly mourns: you see what follows; Isaiah, The righteous perish,
Isaiah 57.1.
and no man considers it. Next the Church has practiced ever this: when
Jacob died, he was lamented; so Joseph; so Josiah; so Stephen. Thirdly, wicked
men have performed this for good men, as Ioash for Elisha; O my Father, my
Father, 2. Kings 13.14.
the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same. Fourthly, good men have
performed this for wicked men, when useful Governors, as David for Saul, 2.
Sam. 1.19. Lastly, 2. Sam. 1 19.
Lastly, reason calls for it; we must mourn, in respect of the cause of such
men's deaths; not private, but public sins too. Samuel die, it is because God
is angry with the people: the sheep be not thankful nor fruitful, therefore
the shepherd is smitten.

Secondly, in respect of the consequents; take away good men, and good
Magistrates, and secret sinners grow open desperate; the State lies open as a
field unfenced; the godly either, mourn with Israel, or hide themselves with
David. The righteous is taken away from the evil to come, says Isaiah; Isay
57.1.
there is a storm coming so soon as he is housed.

Thirdly, in respect of the loss it self; righteous men in the time of peace
are the pillars of a State, they uphold the Island, says Job: In time of war
and peace the horsemen and Chariots of their Israel; like Salomons waiters, for
safety and honor; as needeful in a State as the head in the body, a stake in a
hedge.

Now should it be thus when useful persons die? David to Jonathan; such
husbands as Abraham, such children as Isaac, Blind Polydor could tax this, de
iuuen. l. 6. c. 9. in us of England.
such fathers as Jacob. These long, and long felt ye loss of their dearest
friends: but now one month is enough to wear out al thoughts of a brother, nay
of a child, nay of a mother, nay of a wife; nay in the nearest ties, one in
that space may be buried, a second woed, a third married. Now when nature
dies, shall we look for any life of grace? When these so near be forgotten,
can we hope that the righteous shall be remembered? The righteous said I? nay his
death is some man's life, they sit like Ahashuerosh and Haman drinking, when all
Israel is lamenting; ^st. 3.15.
they shoot with Gath and Askelon, as in the day of harvest; and (like impure
Philistimes) sport themselves with others miseries. But stay your selves
(profane mockers) died Samuel like a fool (as David speaks of Abner)? or is
his death any advantage to you? No, his death is his own gain, but your
loss; his death tells you, that you must die; those souls of yours must be
torn from your bodies, those bodies of yours must be mangled by death, after
death you must be judged, after judgment plagued a 1000 years; when that is
done, then another, then another, and another, and another; so long as God
lives, so long your plagues shall last. His death tells you, Exodus 32.
that you are left as Israel in Moses absence, naked. The righteous being
removed, you lie open to all sins, snares, tentations, sorrows, and have
none to case and help you by his prayers. Your secret joy at his death shows
you to be secret hypocrites: for what true member can part with a fellow
member, without some sorrow? your rejoicing at calamities, presages your own
miseries, as Solomon tells you; and therefore tremble, and mock not; mourn and
jest not; say (if not in love to the righteous, yet) to your selves, My Father,
my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen of the same. But let us
affoard them a little mirth here, that have none elsewhere; and for our
selves, since God complains, that the righteous perish, and no man considers
his death, lets spend some thoughts upon that point, That the righteous perish,
who sees not? Nay alas who sees it? The Lord has been upon David could go to
Samuel in Ramah, and there meet with good counsel and comfort: but now both
Samuel himself dies, and poor David must fly. Shall I (beloved) speak as
the thing is? In the fall of one Cedar of Ramah we have lost much shade and
shelter; in the splitting of one vessel of price (wherein we had all our
interesses and adventures) we are all loosers: what we have lost, we shall
better see seven years hence, then now: but loosers we are, all loosers; Wife,
Children, Neighbors, Friends, Minister, People, all loosers; so that here that
is verified, which was anciently uttered of another, in one we have lost many;
a chaste Husband, a tender Father, a religious Magistrate, a kind Neighbor, a
good Churchman, a good Statesman; in few, a Samuel. Speak I this after the
flesh to please? No, I speak it for use to profit: I report my self to your
hearts. You tell me that you have a public loss, your mouths have uttered
it, your faces speak it; my ears, and eyes have received it from you: and if
so, then see what follows; if we have Isreal's loss, we must make Isreal's
lamentation; if with them we have lost in one many, at once much, we must be
much and many in bewailing this loss. S^th 1.20.
Is our case Naomies? say with Naomi, call me pleasant no more, call me bitter,
for God has fed me with bitterness, and witnessed against me: by denying me
this comfort, he testifies my unthankfulness for it. Is our place David's? let
us take up David's words with David's affection; I am distressed for thee brother
Jonathan, 2. Sam. 1.26.
very pleasant have thou been to me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the
love of women. Are we as David to Saul, Isaac to Rebekah, sons? Are we as
Jeremiah to Josiah, Prophets? As David to Abner, Kinsmen? are we by any name
entitled to this loss? mourn, then mourn, not as the infidel desperately,
nor bitterly as does the froward; but soberly as did David, when Abners death
put him to a fast. As God in life, so let us in death put a difference betwixt
Samuel and Iehoiachim; Ier. 12.18.
let the one be buried in silence without an, Ah my brother, Ah sister, as
Jeremiah describes it in his 22. Chapter: but for the other, all Israel must
mourn with an holy mourning. Let his dearest yoke fellow say, Ah mine
unthankfulness and unfruitfulness. let children say, Ah our disobedience and
stubburnesse! and servants, Ah our idleness and vntrustines! and all, Ah our
folly and frowardness! Who could not see virtues through frailties, and corn
through chasse, til we had lost all. These sins of ours have stripped us of a
Samuel, and covered us with darkness. He is gone, the arm and shoulder is
fallen from this our little body, the sooner for our sins; let us see it, or
else what abides us. In the body what medicines cannot do, cutting must; what
that cannot, burning must, or else nothing, (says the master of Physic).
Hippocrat.
It is so in the soul to, Oh that we could see it! In our friends sicknesses
we have been medicined, in private distresses launced, but in the loss of
public persons the Lord proceeds to burning. If these wounds upon the very
head of us strike us not down. What shall next be smitten but our heart it
self? Well, Israel laments, and he has cause; what do they next? that next
we must hear.

They bury him, and the place and manner be observed. For the place, they
bury him (at his house in Ramah), the ancient and the Manner house, his father
dwelt there before him, 1. Sam. 1; 1. Sam. 1.19.
where also you may be informed touching the town. Whereas there were of
Ramahs four or five, v. Adrichom, of (...).
this was Ramah Zophim in Mount Ephraim, which borrowes his name from the
situation of it; it stood high, and the name imports no less. In this Ramah
Samuel sometime lived as a Magistrate, and here he is interred. For the
solemnity of the Funeral, it is such as argues Isreal's love, and Samuels
worth, they do him all the honor that is possible. First, (Israel) the first
borne of men, the glory of the world comes to the Funeral, (all Israel) all at
once in the same place; they come from far, they come upon the wings of the
wind, they come (to lament) al mourners they come (to bury him) to bury him in
his own town, (at his own house); what can be done more in Samuels honor?
To be buried is an honor, buried in ones own country much, in his own
place more; but to be so buried as Samuel was, in such a place, by such a
people, with so many tears, so great a solemnity, this is Samuels happiness,
and the Saints honor. You see then our third doctrine.

An holy and profitable life ends in an happy and honorable death: cast upon
him. So Samuel found it, so Jacob, few men comparable to him in holiness, as
few so honorably buried. So Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.14.
Hezekiah, Josiah, David. etc: but especially for Josiah, and Hezekiah, those
great reformers, those profitable members, the text takes special notice of
their obsequies. Josiah having received his deaths wound abroad, is brought
home in his chariot, 2. Chron. 35.29.
and much honor attends him to his grave; he is buried amongst his fathers and
friends; all Jerusalem, nay all Judah, and the neighboring towns are
mourners; nay not professors only, but Preachers too, as Jeremy is expressed.
These so mourned, as that their lamentation grew into a prouer be, Zach. 12.
God and man concurred in this, that Iosiahs name should never die. 2. Chron.
32.33.
And as for Hezekiah, the holy Ghost points us to his life and death; in his
life time he was of greatest use for Church and Commonweal, therefore when he
died, Israel slockes to the burial; and where is he buried? in the chiefest
Sepulcher of David's sons, and how? with greatest honor; all Israel (says
the text), and Judah too met together to do him honor at his death, 2. Chron.
32.33. He studied their good in life, they his honor at his death: thus a
profitable life resignes to an honorable death: thus are they honored of all
that mind. Gods glory, and the common good. A matter of less marnell, 1. Sam.
2 30.
They that honor me shall be honored by me, says truth and honor it self:
and in the hands of Samuel that was so much quarrelled in his life, is as much
honored in his death; when he dies, man's en^e dies, his own corruption dies:
God will see none iniquity in Samuel, men after God shall do the like.

And is this so? then here we see what course must be taken, Elyahs body, they
must with them seek in heaven, 2. King. 2.16.
if ever they will find. All honor comes from above, and there rests where
the God of honor places it; so that he must be won by a godly life, before
that honor can be obtained. Believe it (brethren) nothing mends the name, but
what mendes the soul; Nebuchadnezzar may have wealth, Achitophel wit, Herod
speech, Sh^bna a tomb, Ahab all, and yet be base and contemptible. Doeg may
fawn, Diotrephes climb, Iezabel paint, Absalom plot, and yet leave their name
as a curse: these, these things that grow out of the dunghill, or dust, will
never build a name of honor, because they will never work any life of grace.
The only way to honor is through virtue, in the Heathens judgment; a speech
as true as truth it self, if we understand it of the exercise, not of moral
virtues, but of saving grace. A godly fruitful life, has a fairer prospect
toward honor, then all the advantages in the world besides. Be one as poor
as Onesimus, yet if Onesimus, that is, profitable, his name outliues him: be
one as great as King Iehoram, or Iehoiachim, if he idle out his life, he dies
undesired, he lives unlamented. In the second of Chron. 24, 2. Chron. 24.
we have two notable instances in one Chapter, to this purpose; the men are
Ioash, and Iehoiadah, the difference much betwixt them; the one was a king, the
other a subject: in life this ods, the one was truly profitable and godly, the
other contrary; in death therefore thus they are differenced, Iehoiadah waxed
old, the other was rotten before tipe: next, Ichoiadah died naturally, the
other by a violent hand: Ichoiadah in the love of all, the other in the hatred
of his own men: Ichoiadah buried amongst the kings; the other denied that
honor; the reason? Ichoiadah (says the text) had done good in Israel and
toward God and his house, Ioash neither: what is the inference? surely this,
the memorial of the righteous is blessed, the name of the godly shall remain
for ever. God has allowed both the good and the bad their portion; Prou 10.
the righteous has a double blessing, the wicked a double curse upon his name.
The blessings are these; the name of the righteous is blessed, his memorial
precious, his name a perfume: secondly, his remembrance is for ever, Psalm.
112. The curses these, the name of the wicked rots, it quickly comes to
nothing; whilst it lasts it stinkes like carrion, and at last is left as a
curse behind him, as Esaias says. What we hear spoken, we see executed in all
ages. Consult with your own experience, and tell me whether the names of
Idolaters, drunkards, adulterers, swaggerers, be not rotten and accursed; in
despite of all titles, offices, policies, favors whatsoever: when in the mean
the righteous (notwithstanding all slanders, clamours, imputations, and
aspersions) is of blessed name and memory; and if so, feed upon the wind no
longer, build Babels no more, lay no more foundations in hell, whilst you
think to erect a building by flattery, baseness, dependancie, lying,
swaggering, etc: but go to the Lord of honor for lasting honor; pray much,
read much, hear much; honor him in all the passages of his worship, and you
have his word for your preferment: and as for men, be to them as Iehoiadah
was, profitable, and they shall be to you as Israel to him, merciful. Ah the
fruitful liver finds mercy in his death, his conscience favors him, and
hartens him upon death it self: the Angels of God (those officers of heaven)
comfort him and fetch him in all state to his crown, the Lord of glory
receives him with all honor, and puts upon him the glory of heaven the Saints
departed regard him as a part of themselves, of Christ; the Saints living
honor his name, and follow him to heaven, with their loves and affections: the
wicked have a word of commendations for him, and the blind Balaam can say, O
that my end might be like his! Numb. 23.
thus honor and happiness (and nothing else) abide us hereafter, if now we
can lay forth our selves to God and man's advantage. But for the wicked who
bestow themselves in the world like drones in the hiue, who either have no
calling, or do no service, and toward God so demean themselves, as if they
were his betters; scorning his children, scoffing at his Word, trampling upon
his Name, his Sabbaths, his Worship; let them never deceive themselves, their
names shall rot, they shall find no favor in death, their consciences shall
brawle them out of all quiet: men shall risle into their hues; their
whoredoms, treacheries, villainies shall fly through the world; every drunkard
shall sit upon them; every rake-hell judge them, censure them, libell them. In
the mean, whilst that the name is thus torn below, the soul is brought
before the Judge, convicted, committed to hell; covered with shame, delivered
up to everlasting contempt. O then be not cursed, but blessed, be happy, be
honored, be well thought of in life, well spoken of after death; be
righteous, be humble, be serviceable; this is the way as heaven tells us; a
Samuels life will draw on a Samuels death, nothing else.

In a second place, let this afford a double comfort to fruitful Franzius in
his histor. Sacra.
The wicked (as one speaks) are like hawks, of great esteem whilst living,
but after nothing worth: the godly (on the other side) are compared to tamer
foul, which are hushed forth, and little heeded whilst living; but after death
are brought into the Parlor. Semblably in the days of life, impiety has the
hand: after death the difference is as much between Saul and Samuel, Ioash and
Iehoidah, as betwixt the Faulcon and Capon, Hawk and Hen. Yield then (beloved)
to the worlds sons; let them have the place, give them leave to speak; the
time will come when honor shall know its home, and innocence have its crown:
all the wiles in the world shall not keep the wicked from contempt; nor all
the wits in hell the godly from honor. Samuels name may be ouer-cast and
clouded for a time, but in the end his light will show it self. Whilst he is
present, he is not valued, his sons were naught, his place mean, his
government vile: but this is Samuels honor, when gone, he is mist; when dead,
he is lamented; all Israel strives to do him all honor; blessed be that life
that ends in so glorious a death; thrice happy that man, who^ Angels, Aarons
Leuit. 10.
he must be silent: If he honor ours, shall we murmur? What, shall Bethuel
part with a daughter; Laban with a fister for an Isacks sake? Shall Barzill^i
in his age part with his staff, 2. Sam. 19.
his son, when he is to live in David's Court? Shall men and women bear with
patience the absence of dearest friends, when it is for their outward
preferment; and when Christ would marry a child, prefer a friend, advance our
acquaintance, should we stand off? No: if this be the worst that death can
do to the godly, to strip him of his rags, and clothe him with robes; to free
him from all contempts, and possess him of greatest honors; to redeem him
from all shame, and to crown him with glory in the hearts, mouths,
consciences of men, in the face of heaven and earth: lets never frown upon
friends departure, but rather see (if possible) the messenger of this good
ridings, and bless the Lord for our adua^ceme^tsin theirs. Indeed (beloved) we
weep too fast, when tears deny fight of mercies: in the death of Samuel there
is game to him, as well as loss to us, both should be remembered. I know many
present sensible of the one, I shall be wrongful to conceal the other. Truth
it is, there is fallen a great man in Israel: But how fallen? like Abner upon a
violent hand? or died he like a fool? Was he insensible of his estate? Were
his hands, his mouth, his heart tied? Was his end without honor? No brethren,
he died in a full and ripe age, when the Lord had made the most of his life; he
died in peace, he died with hopes of life in his heart, with words of grace in
his lips, and his Sun did set in the highest point, Vt esse Phaebi dulcius
lumen solet iam tam cadentis.
in greatest brightness: time, place, manner, company, men, Angels, God, and
all conspired together to do him all honor in his death. Bless the God of
all spirits for this, all ye that are interessed in the same profession and
religion. Bless the Lord for this, that he so died, in such a place, in such
a time, in such a sort, as the devil has received a foil, and religion grace
and honor by it. And thus Israel has done his part in mourning, in burying
Samuel at his house in Ramah.

Now where is David? soon after Samuels death, you find him in the Wilderness
of Paran; and this clause is like a corner stone, of double use, it closes one
course and begins another. This Paran was a Wilderness, vast and fearful,
mountenous and rockie, hither David eft soones repaired, when by Saul he was
persecuted: But why at this time? truly now he has fewer friends then
before. Samuel he much used before, as the story shows us: but now Samuel
is gone. Now again he has more enemies then before; Saul will be more
bitter, false friends will be true enemies: yea now Ramahs refuge (perhaps)
will yield persecutours, and Samuels sons as like to hurt as harbor him; so
that it is time for David to fly. I should do you the greatest wrong to
pursue my meditations at large, give me leave to mind you of my thoughts, and I
will favor your patience. What a shame is it for Israel, for Ramah, for
Samuels house, that when the Old man is gone, David dare stay no longer amongst
them? O what a shameful change is this! what a blemish to Samuels successors,
to all the Country! you that be in Israel suruiuing Samuel, take unto you the
heart, spirit, courage of Samuel; when persecuted David comes unto you for
succor, drive him not into the Wilderness; and let the friends of Samuel
continue the life of Samuel in their houses and behauiours. Ramah was a City
of refuge for distressed stressed persons, an habitation for the Levites, a
College for the Prophets, thither David was ever welcome; for David to be
thrust out by Doeg, to be coursed from Ramah into the wilderness of Paran, is
such a blemish to the place as can never be washed out. But why (to go on)
fears David more now then before? good reason, Saul and all like Saul will now
show themselves, and turn the inside outward. Samuels death is twice
mentioned, and either time a shrewd pranke of Saul's: first, he persecutes
David, as here: secondly, he runs to Witches, 1. Sam. 28.3, 7. In Samuels
lifetime Witches went down: but when Samuel was dead, Saul can relish
sorcerie well enough. Thus the thoughts of many hearts will be discovered upon
a Samuels death; let Iehoiadah be buried, and Ioash will come to his bent
again. Let Salomons head be once laid, good men, wife men, a fathers friends
will be neglected; green heads, worthless persons shall be entertained:
Rehoboam would not have done so in Salomons days; but he is dead. Look to it,
look to it (my brethren) all ye that have professed love, zeal, religion in
Samuels days, that now you show not Saul's spirit; be settled, be resolute still
for God, for the Word, for profession, since the precept and the promise, and
the promiser, and heaven promised stands as they did. If now any of you shall
steal from God, and fly to the enemy; shall give over his profession, and
turn persecutor, scoffer, etc; he proclaims his own hypocrisy: God from
heaven proclaims him a traitor, and will follow him with a crying conscience,
and restless heart, till he has laid him as low as hell. But whither flew
David? a poor refuge he has yet some; though Samuel be dead, yet he has a
shelter, such as it is; David's life hangs not wholly upon Samuels. The sinners
of Sion now opened upon him, and followed him with full cry, Now his friend is
gone, now his God is dead, now we will be upon him, etc; Upon him! foolish
men, his God dead! David's God lives, though Samuel be dead. His friend he has
lost indeed, but not his father; he must no more to Ramah, but in Paran there
be rocks, houses; in heaven there is a rock that will never fail: blessed be
the Lord for this comfort; when the devil rores, and the wicked rage, his
David's are carried upon wings into the wilderness, where they find a place.
What shall I say more; Samuel goes to heaven, David must abroad, both must
from Ramah: see what death can do, it makes a divorce betwixt dearest
friends. What of that? Therefore trust not in friends, therefore dote not upon
friends; therefore call upon friends whilst present, and say, this child must
cease to be my child, this father to be my father, etc; we must be to one
another, as if we had never been with one another; and therefore think of a
departure. Therefore (in the second place) make sure Gods love, get him to be
thy friend, and that friendship is impregnable. Children thou may loose, and
wife, and parents, and friends; death can sweep away these: but thy God thou
can never loose, if once at league with him; come what will come, he will be
ever for thee, ever with thee; if in prison, he will be there; if in exile,
there; if in the seas, there; where thou art with prayers, he will be with
comsorts. And therefore if a servant, get this Master; if a child, this Father;
if a widow, this Husband; and then though all friends die, yet thou shall live
so long as the heavens last, and Christ Jesus lives; and live in peace, and die
in hope, and rise with joy, and reign in glory.

Thus Israel and we have brought two Samuels (theirs and ours) to their
lodging; both faithful in their places, honorable in their deaths; both so
near in agreement, that in the story of the one, you may read the life of
the other. My Text here ends it self, and proceeds no lower into a particular
commendation of Samuel; and therefore if I follow my Text, rather then the
times, it will not be offensive. Indeed Samuel is like to such fruit as is
ripe, and good when it is gathered, yet better if it lie a while: let him have
a time of mellowing, now he is gathered; and his own worth and our want, will
set lum far beyond all verbal praises. In the mean, lets turn our selves
from praising man, to praise that God, to whom the praise of all that is
praise-worthie is only due, etc.

FINIS.
Postser.
I Was requested to enlarge and refine these points, but I find so much written
of these arguments already, that were is not more to satisfy others then my
self, thou should not (Reader) have been troubled thus long. If thou can
get any thing by these broken notes as they be, do; if God ever make me able
to do thee a better turn in any other kind, I will. In the mean, the
blessing of God be upon us and our Church.

FINIS.

