THE TRIMMING of Thomas Nashe Gentleman, by the high-tituled patron Don
Richardo de Medico campo, Barber Surgeon to Trinity College in Cambridge.

Faber quas fecit compedes ipse gestat.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Scarlet 1597.

To the Learned.
Eme, perlege, nec te precii poenitebit.

To the simple.
Buy me, read me through, and thou will not repent thee of thy cost.

To the Gentle Reader.
PRoface gentle Ge^tlemen, I am sorry I have no better Cates to present you
with: but pardon I pray you, for this which I have here provided, was bred in
Lent, and Lent (you know) is said of lean, because it macerates and makes
lean the body: if therefore this dish be lean and nothing answearable to
your expectation, let it suffice it was bred in Lent: neither had it any time
wherein it might gather any thing unto it self to make it more fat and
delightful. His Epistle I expected any time these three years, but this mine
answer sine fuco loquar, though it be not worthy to be called the work of
one well spent hour) I have wrought forth out of the stolen hours of three
weeks: for although occasion has been offered ever since the Epistle has
been extant, to answer it: yet held in suspense considering the man and
matter, whether I should take it upon me or no: at last concluding him easily
answerable, I have undergone it: therefore howsoever you see it crept abroad
Gentles, receive it well in worth: Your favors happily might add strength
unto it, and stir up the faint creeping steps to a ^ore lively pace: it by
hard hap being denied of the progress, keeping at home has grown somewhat
greater. To tell you what the man is, and the reason of this book, were but
triuiall and superfluous, only this, you may call it The trimming of Thomas
Nashe, wherein he is described. In trimming of which description, though I
have found out and fetched from the mint some few new words to coulor him,
grant me pardon, I think them fit for him who is so limmed and coullored
with all new found villainy: for if they be etimoligisde, they no whit
disagree from his properties Slender labor has suffised to vveaue this thin
superficial veil to cover his crimson Epistle, and shaddovv it forth unto
the world. For as a garment of too bright a color is too evil an object for
the eyes (as is the Sun) and is nothing gazed after, no not of those who never
savv it before: yet nevve things are desired, because tvvould prove pernicious
to their eyes, but once ore-clovvded and covered with a lavvne vesture,
through that it shines and becomes a less hurting object, and draws the
peoples sight after it: so his Epistle in it own color being too
^esplendent and hurtful to the readers, is laid apart and is nothing in
request, for that tvvould prove as a burning glass unto their eyes, but
vestured with this Caul and rare-vvrought garment, it loses part of it
hurting vigor, and therefore is called to be seen again.

Loathed tediousnes I also eschewed as no less hurtful than too bright an
object: the Book which he dedicateth to me, is so tedious, that had I read it
through, it so loathsome would have wrought more on me both vpvvard and
downvvard, then 3. drams of pills: his Epistle is not behind hand, to that I
might say as said Diogenes to the men of Minda, (whose gates were greater in
analogicall proportion then their City:) O ye men of Minda, look to your
City, that it flies not out at your gates: So his book might well for the
largeness of the Epistle have flowne out at it, and surely I think had his
book any wings, that is, any queint devise flying abroad to please withal, it
would never have staid till this time: therefore I think it prouidently done of
him (though out of doubt the fool had no such drift) to make the gates so
big, that when we have passed through the gates, supposing all the City to
be suitable to the statelines of them: but after we are entered, finding our
selves merely guld, and that all the City is not worth the gates, we may
the more readily find the way out of the City again, the gates being so
great: and this remedy I found once when I took my journey into his City.
But to return, If this be not so well set forth as you could vvish it
were, blame me not: for as the Moon being naked and bare, is said once to
have gone to her mother, and asked of her a coat to cloth her: but she
ansvvered, there could be no coat made fit for her, for her instabilitie,
sometime she being in the full, and sometime in the vvane: so he being a man of
so great revolution, I could not fit him, for if I had undertaken to speak of
one of his properties, another came into my mind, and another follovved that,
which bred confusion, making it too little for him: therefore were it not too
little, it might be tvvold be fit, but howsoever, pardon (Gentlemen) my
boldness in presenting to your favorable viewes this little and co^fused coat.

Yours in all courtesy, Richard L^chfield.

The trimming of Thomas Nashe.
SIR, here is a gentleman at the door would speak with you. Let him come in.
M. Nashe! welcome. What, you would be trimd? and I cannot deny you that
favor. Come, sit down, I Will trim you my self. How now? what makes you sit
down so tenderly? you crintch in your buttocks like old father Pater patriae,
he that was father to a whole country of bastards. Dispatch, st, boy, set the
water to the fire: but sir, hark in your ear, first go provide me my
breakfast, that I go not fasting about him; then go to the Apothecarie, and
fetch me some repressiue Antidotum to put into the basin, to keep down the
venomous vapors that arise from his infectious excreme^ts: for (I tell you) I
like not his countenance, I am afraid he labors of the venereall murre.

Muse not (gentle Thomas) that I come so roughly upon you with Sit down,
without any Dedicatorie Epistle, which (I know) you expected; for that your
Epistle (in some wise) brought forth this small Work: which purposely I
omitted, scorning Patronage against you. For if (by an Epistle) I had made some
Lord or Knight my Patron, it would have mennaged and given courage to you, that
(not sufficient of my self) I should get some Protector to stand out with you.
As in a Cocke-fight, if the Cocke-master takes off his Cock when they are
buckled together, it encourages the other Cock (deeming his adversary to
fly to his Master for refuge): so that he crows forth the triumph before
the victory. Therefore forsooth, if for orders sake (that of custom might be
made a necessary law) you would have an Epistle, I thought it best, respecting
the subject matter, as near as possibly I could to pattern it with the like
Patron. Then not knowing where to hear of some miscreant, O eloquence.
polluted with all vices both of body and mind: and viewing over all the
impressed images of men in the memorial cell of my brain, at last I espied your
self more lively engraven than the rest, and as it were offering your self to
this purpose. Then presently I made choice of you, that like an ass you might
bear your burden, and patronize your own scourge, as does the silly
hedgesparrow, that so long fostereth up the cuckoo in her neast, till at length
she be devoured of her: or the Viper, that is destroyed of her own whelps.
All England for a Patron. But to this sudden joy, (for sudden joy soon ends)
this cross happened; That knowing it to be my duty to gratulate my Patron
with the first hereof, Item for you.
but not knowing where to find you, for that you (the Worlds Citizen) are
here and there, you may dine in this place, and go supperlesse to bed, if you
know where to have your bed: Well put in
you may be in one prison to day, and in another to morrow: so that you have
a place but as a fleeting incorporeall substance, circumscribed with no
limits, that of your own you have not so much as one of Diogenes his poor
cottages. You have indeed a terminus a quo (as we Logic^ans speak) but no
terminus ad quem. Now sir, for the uncertainty of your mansion house, How
hardly I leave this common place?
you having all the world to keep Court in, and being so haunted with an
earthquake, that in what house soever you are one day, you are shaken out the
next, my little Book might kill three or four porters, that must run up and
down London to seek you, and at the last might dye it self for want of
succor before it comes to your hands. Yet it might be, that in your request
you are insatiable, you will take no excuse, your will is your reason, nay may
not be admitted. Well, it shall be yours: for your Epistles sake, have at you
with an Epistle.

To the polypragmaticall, parasitupocriticall, and pantophainouden deconticall
Puppie Thomas Nashe, Richard Leichfield wishes the continuance of that he
has: that is, that he want not the want of health, wealth, and liberty.
Mitto tibi Nashum Nashum
pror^ N puppi hum que carentem.

GOD save you (right glossomachicall Thomas.) The virtuous riches, wherewith
(as broad spread Fame reports) you are endued, though, (...), (as says the
poet) which I confirm: for that she is tam fict^ pranique tenax, quam nuncia
very, as well says Master William Lilly in his Adi^ctina verbalia in ax. I say
the report of your rich virtues so bewitched me toward you, that I cannot but
send my poor Book to be virtuously succored of you, that when both yours and
my friends shall see it, they may (for your sake) virtuously accept of it. But,
it may be, you deny the Epistle, the Book is of you, the Epistle must be to
some other. I answer, you are desirous of an Epistle. Did not Caesar write
those things himself which himself did? and did not Lucius that golden Ass
speak of himself which was the Ass? and will not you (though an Ass, yet
neither golden not silver) patronize that which others took pains to write of
you? Caesar and Lucius for that shall live for ever: and so shall you, as long
as ever you live. Go too I say, he is an ill horse that will not carry his
own prouender. But chiefly I am to tell you of one thing, which I choose to
tell you of in my Epistle, both because of Epistles some be denuntiatorie, as
also considering that wise saying elsewhere of the precise Schoolmaster: If thy
friend commit any enormious offense toward thee, tell him of it in an Epistle.
And truly this is a great and enormious offense, at which my choler stands
upright, neither will I put it up. Therefore in sad^es provide your Lawier, I
have mine, it will bear as good an action, as if you should have come into
another man's house, and never say, Ho^ God be here: that is, you wrote a foul
Epistle to me, and never told me of it before: you might have said, By your
leave sir. I warrant you I write but this small Epistle to you, and I tell you
of it as long before as the Epistle is long. But now I remember me, there was
no hatred between us before, and therefore twould be proved but chauncemedley.
Let it even alone, it cannot be undone, for a thing easily done, never can be
undone: and a man may quickly become a knave, but hardly an honest man. And
thus (maleuolent Tom) I leave thee. From my chamber in Camb. to your where ca^
you tell?
.

Yours in love vsque ad aras. That is, that would follow thee (...) to the
gallows.
Rich: Lichfield.

YOu see how lovingly I deal with you in my Epistle and tell of your virtues,
which (God forgive me for it) is as arra^t a lie as ever was told: but to leave
these parergasticall speeches and to come to your trimming, All your parts.
because I will deal roundly with you, I will cut you with the round cut, in
which I include two cuts: First the margent cut: Secondly the perfect cut: The
margent cut is nothing else but a preparation to the perfect cut, whereby I might
more perfectly discharge that cut upon you, for as in a deep standing poole,
the brinks thereof, which are not unfitly called the margents being pared away,
we may the better see thereinto: so the margents which fitly we may term the
brinkes of your stinking standing poole (for it infects the ear as does the
stinking poole the smell) being cut away, I may the better finish this perfect
cut and rid my self of you. To the margent cut. When first your Epistle came
into my hands, I boldly opened it, and scaling the margents of it I espied a
seely note quasi conversant about heads. I said not a word, but turning over a
leaf or two more to see if you continued in those simple animaduersions and
indeed I saw you to be no changling, for there I espied barbers kn^cking of
their fingers, and lousy (...), as foolish as the other* semper ide^ (thought
I) might be your mot, and so you will dye: then I began to mark the note which
you adjoined to your notes that they might be noted, there tossing and turning
your book vpside down, when the west end of it happened to be upward, me
thought your note seemed a D, ah Dunce, Dolt, Dotterell, quoth I, well might it
be a D. and for my life for the space of two hours, could I not leave railing
of thee all in Ds.

Now to the perfect cut: I cannot but admire you in the tittle you allow me,
seeing we admire monsters as well as virtuous men, and a fool (as often I have
heard Scholars dispute in mine office) as a monster: other Barbers like not the
title, it pleases me, and all the Dukes in Spa^^ cannot show the like, and I
think that half a years study did not bring it out of thy dunsticall
hammer-headed scalpe, but thou do to disgrace me, and think thy title
decketh a Barber, and that a Barber with thy title is as a rotten chamber hanged
with cloth of arras, but it is not so: alas thy reading affoords thee not to
know the ancient and valorous power of Barbers.

I could speak how they flourished amongst the Ab^^ts, a fierce, and warlike
people, and by the Barbers perpolike cunning as it were amending nature and
shaping their faces to more austeritie, they became more victorious, as
Plutarch records in the life of Theseus: and young stripplings newly fit for
arms, first were brought to Delphos, and there offered the first fruits of
their hair to Jupiter, next him the Barbers were served and they cut them, and
were as Jove's, Vises to make them fit for war. They flourished before with
the Arabians, the Mysians, the Dacians, the Dalmatians, the Macedonians, the
Thracians, the Ser^ians, the Sarmacians, the Valachia^s and the Bulgarians, as
says Pollidorus Virgil: afterward Alexander entertained into his camps
Barbers as the spurs and whetstones of his armies.

D^^isius that blood-thirstie Tyrant that feared no peers, stood always in
fear of Barbers, and rather would have his hair burnt off, than happen into
the Barbers hands.

Therefore in a Barbers shop (as Plutarche reports) where some few were
talking of the Tyrany of the tiger Dionysius. What (said the Barber) are you
talking of King Dionysius, whom within these two or three days I must shave?
When Dionysius heard of this, he gate the Barber secretly to be put to death,
for fear of after-claps. The Barbers Chair is the very Royall-Exchange of
news, Barbers the None but Barbers meddle with the head.
^head of all Trades. I could speak of their excellency, for that a man's face
(the principal part of him) is committed only to Barbers. All trades adorn
the life of man, but none (except Barbers) have the life of man in their power,
and to them they hold up their throats ready.

If they be happy, whom pleasure, profit and honor make happy, then Barbers
with great facility attain to happiness. For pleasure, if they be abroad, they
are soght too of the best Companions, Knights and Esquires send for them: if at
home and at work, they are in pleasing conference; if idle, they pass that
time in life-delighting music. For profit, a Barber has living in all parts
of England: he has money brought in as due as rents, of those whom he never
saw before. For honor, Kings and ruling Monarchs, (to whom all men crouch with
cap in hand and knee on ground) only to Barbers sit barehead, and with bended
knees. But for all this, thou sparest not to rail on Barbers (as on all
others): and being full of botches and byles thy self, spuest forth thy
corruption on all others: but I naught respect it, thy raylings rather profit
me. For (as Antisthenes was wont to say) a man might as well learn to live
well of his ill-willing and abusiue enemies, as of his honest friends; of these,
by following their virtues, of the others by eschuing their actions, by seeing
the effects that followed those actions in his enemies: and as Telep^us (being
wounded, and destitute of a saving remedy at home) went even to his enemies
and sworn fo^s, to get some souerraigne medicine, so if of my friends I could
not learn temperance, I might learn of thee by seeing the effects of thy
cankered conuicious tongue, for by that thou art brought into contempt, thy
talking makes thee be accounted as a purse that cannot be shut, and as an
house whose door stands always open, and as that open purse contains no
silver, and in that house is nothing worthy the taking away, so out of thy
mouth proceeds nothing but noisome and ill-sauered vomittes of railinges:
Wherefore draw together the stringes, and lock up the door of thy mouth, and
before thou speak such ill corrupted speeches again, let it be lifted of
the hingelles, rule I say that little and troublesome Vermin, that small tongue
of thine, which in some is not the smallest part of virtue, but in thee the
greatest Art of vice, not unlike the Purple fish which whilst the gouernes
her tongue well, it gets her food and hunteth after her pray, but when
she neglect it, it brings her destruction, and she is made her self a pray
unto the fisher, so that in that small parcel all virtue and vice lies hidden,
as is recorded of Kias whom king Amasis commanding to send home the best and
most profitable meat from the market, he sent home a tongue, the king
demanding a reason, he answered that of a tongue came many profitable and
good speeches, and this tongue thou have not: Then the king sent him to buy the
woorst and most unprofitable meat, and he likewise bought a tongue, the king
also asking the reason of this, from nothing (said he) issues worse venom
then from the tongue, and this tongue thou have, and this tongue cros^e with
the bar of reason, lest thou seem more foolish then those geese in Cilicia,
which when the fly in the night time by the hill Taurus, that is possessed of
Eagles, are said to get stones into there mouths by which as by a bridle
they rain in their cryinges, and so quietly pass the greedy talentes of the
Eagles: but alas why inuect I so against thy tongue? lingua a lingeudo, and you
know we use always to like in, and so thou should keep in thy poison: or
a ligando which is to bind, and so thou should bind up and not disperse
abroad that ranker in thee: thy tongue does but in duty utter that which is
committed unto it, Mark this secret allegory.
and nature has set before it a double bull-woorke of teeth to keep in the
vagrant words which straying abroad and being surprised may betray the whole
city, and the upper bull-woorke sometimes serves for a percullis, which when
any rascallie word having not the watch-worde, that is, reason, shall but
enter out of the gates, is presently let down and so it cuttes it of before
it woorketh wrack to the whole Castle: therefore I must of necessity find
out another cause of thine infected speech, and now I have found it, fie on
thee, I smell thee, thou have a stinkinge breath, but a stinking breath (some
say) comes of foul teeth, and if it be so, wash thy teeth Tom, for if thou
would draw forth good and clean words out of thy mouth, thou would
wash thy teethe as every tapster that goes to draw good bear will wash
the pot before he gooeth: but it may be the filth has so eaten into thy
teeth that washinge cannot get it away, then do as that venome-bitinge beast
that Nile-breede Crocodile, which to purge her teethe of those shiuered reeds
that are wreathed between by feedinge in the water, comes to^ the shoore,
and there gapinge, suffers some friendly bird without danger to creep into
her mouth, and with her bill to pick away the troubling reeds: so come you
but to some shoore, and I Will be that Trochilus, Trochilus
I Will pick your teeth and make a clean mouth, or I Will pick out toungue and
all, but of this stinkinge breath I speak not. Toedet anima says the
Comedian, philosophy
and this I mean not meaning as he meant, for he meant a stinkinge breath,
but by anima I mean the form by which thou art, what thou art, by which also
thy senses work, which gives use to all thy faculties and from which all thy
actions proceed, and this anima if thou termist a breath, this breath stinketh
and from this breath (as little rivers flow from a fountain) all thy words
flow forth and the ^ountaine being corrupted (as you know) likewise all the
lesser rivers needs must be corrupted, and this anima, this breath or
fountain thou must cleanse, but how to cleanse this breath it passes my
cunninge to tell, for though (as I am a Cirurgion) I could pick your teeth,
for the other stinkinge breath, yet this I durst not meddle with, this has
need of a metaphisition, and let it suffice for me rudely to take up the
bucklers and lay them down again, How I bewich thee with fac^^ditie.
only to tune the Lute, but to leave to the more cunning to play thereon,
Count it enough for me that am but an aduincte to a Scholar, that have
nothing of my self but what I gleane up at the disputation of some
Scholars in mine office, let it be sufficient for me (I say) only to tell
the reason of this stinkinge breath, and to leave to more sound Philosophers
to determine and set down the remedy of it, but now it may be t^ipsum
noscis, you smell your own breath, and find it to be so intoxicated with
poison that unless you have present help you are quite undone, you perish
utterly, and knowing me to be a man of such excellent parts, Ha ha a rage
borrowed from your own dunghill.
yea of far better parts then In speech be these eight parts, are very
instant with me to unbind the bundell which I gathered at disputations, and
give you some remedy for this stinkinge breath: lo how virtue in the friend
casts forth her beams ever upon her enemy, I am overcome, A medicine for a
stinking breath.
blushingly I undertake it, and like a bashful maid refuse, yet deig^e you
that favor, then mark, first go get some strong hemp, and work it and
temper it so long together till therearise out of it an engine which we call
Capistrum, then carry this Capistrum to some beam that lies a cross, for
none else will serve, when it must be straynde and the one end of it fasten
to the beam, and one the other make a noose of as round a figure as you can
for the roundest figure is the most retenti^e, let the noose be always ready
to slide, for man's breath is slipperie, then when every thing is fitted,
boldly put through thy head, then work the Capistrum over new again, swinge
up and down twice or thrice that it may be well strainde, and so in short
time your old breath will be gone, despair not yet man, probatum est, old
Aeson was dead a while but revived again and lived many a year after, but
mark, now to the pynche, if Platoes trasmigration hold, (which some men
hold that the animae and breathes of men that be dead do fleet into the
bodies of other men which shall l^ue, then I hold that some breath seeing
thy young body without an anima, and twould be hard luck if some breath or
other should not be yet straying about for a body, their being continually so
many let loose at Tiburne, I say, some vnbespoken vagrant breath will go in and
possess thy body: now if this remedy help not surely thou art vnrecurable,
if also thy new breath happen to be as stinking as thy old, thou will never
have a sweet breath in this world nor then neither. And thus much of my title.

You know or at the least ought to know that writers should eshewe lies as
Scorpions, but your lies that you deuisd of one are the greatest part of the
matter of your Epistle, as, My shop in the town, the teeth that hang out at
my Window, my painted ^ay-poole, with many others which fill up room in the
Epistle in abundant manner, and which are nothing else but mere lies and
fictions to yield the matter, whereby I perceive how threede-bare thou art
wax^^, how^ (...) thy invention is, and that thy true amplifying vain is quite
dried up. Repent, repent, I say, and leave of thy lying which without
repentance is very heinous, Page: 6.
that one lie I make of thee in this book is presently washed away with
repentance. An other lie I cannot but tell you off, which you clappe in my
teeth in the very beginning of your Epistle, which nothing greeueth me for
that I suppose it to be committed of ignorance, that is you tell me that you
come upon me with but a dick^^ of Dickes, but you come upon me with
seventeen or eighteen Dickes, whereby I see thy ignorance in the Greek
tongue, thou know not what a dicker is, a dicker is but ten of any thing,
for it comes of the Greek word (...) which is by interpretation, de k^
Ten*

Thou (...) that old Tooly and I differed, I confess it, I am a man alone, I
scorn such ragged rent-foorth speech, yet thou may well pray for the duall
number, thou scabbed, scalde, lame, halting adjective as thou art, in all thy
guiles, thou never hadest that guile as alone to get thee one crust of bread:
no, I know not who had a hand with you in this seely Epistle, go too, he is
not a minister, he had but small reason for it: again, you remember the time
when your fellow Lusher and you lay in coleharbour together, when you had but
one pair of breeches between you both, but not one penie to bless you both,
and how by course he woore the breeches one day, and went cunny-catching
about for victuals, whilst you lay in bed, and the next day you wore the
breeches to go beg whilst he lay in bed, for all the world like two
bucketes in one well, now suppose, when Lusher wore the breeches, that then
thou should have been carried to prison where now thou art, verily I
think thou should have escaped prison for want of breeches, or suppose that
at that time thou should have been hanged, I cannot but think that the
want of a pair of breeches would have been better to thee then thy
necke-verse, for the hange-man would have his breeches, no fee, no law: but
put case that with much ado, by great extraordinary favor some good
hangman had done thee this last benifitte, that thou might never troble him
again, and should have given thee thy hanginge francke and free (as indeed
happy for thee had it been if this good hap had happened, for then thou should
not have lived thus miserably in this vain and wicked world) I say plainly,
put case thou had been hanged, the hangman not sticking with thee for thy
breeches, then Ghacon would have come upon you for his ferry-penny, fi^ out,
money and breeches as ill as a rope and butter, for if one slip the other
hold, with him no (...) no wastage, and then thou had been in worse case
then ever thou were; thus you see how the want of a pair of breeches might
have been the means to have made thee escape prison, death and utter
damnation: and O thrice happy Lusher that should have been away with the
breeches at that happy time, but when thou were in thy chiefest pride, if thou
had but lent out one pair of breeches thou should have been th^^ happy.

Praise from the praiseworthy, and he is not praised whose prayser deserves
not praise, therefore in these places of the Epistle where thou praysest me, I
take my self most to be dispraised for that thou the prayser art worthy no
praise, for how soever thou lead in a fools paradise, like the fish called a
m^ge, which is said to feed herself with her own snotte Mucu^ snotte.
for thereof she takes her name, thou feadest thy-s^lfe with self-conceite
that whatsoever comes from thee is the very quintessence of true wit, and
that all thy ribaldrie that ever thou fe^^st forth, exceeded in pleasing mirth,
that so thou have embraced true Mi^er^a, when as (God knows) thou art as far
deceived as ever was poor Ixion, that embraced a cloud in stead of Juno, or
that guld-god mostrous accadian Pan, who in stead of that sweet^ Nimphe Syrinx
fumpt a bunche of reeds: yet I must confess thou haste something, thou art as
a bundell of straw that being set on fire consumes it self all in smoke,
but no warmness comes from it, so thou have no true fire in thee, all
smoother, no thing that can warm a man, thou art as many Ciphers without an I,
which they wanting are of them selves nothing, and thou have much apparencie of
wit which is as Ciphers, but thou have not this same 1, Iota is wanting to
thy Ciphers, thou have not one jot nor title of true wit, again, as some
soldiers that were at Cales breaking into a shop for pillage, and there
seeing many great sackes ready trussed up, they with great joy made have
away with them, and so with light hearts carried away their heavy burdens, and
when they brought them into the streets, opening them to see their booties,
found in some of them naught but read cappes, of which afterward they made
store of fires, and in the rest naught but earthen pitchers, chaffendishes and
pispottes, and such like: so whosoever shall see thee trussed up and in thy
clothes, might happily take thee for a wise young man, but when thou shall be
opened, that is, when he shall see but some work of thine, he shall find in
thee naught but rascallitie and mere delusions, and for this cause thou may
be called the very Choroebus of our time, of whom the proverb was raysde, more
fool then Choroebus, who was a seely idiot, but yet had the name of a wise
man, for he might be called Choroebus quasi chori Phos, the light of every
company into which he came, so thou have only the name of a wise man and that
is Nashe, O wise name, I pray let me christen you a new and you shall be
called Choro^^us quasi chori bos, the very bull-heade of all he ttroope of
pamphleters: thou go about to gather iestes and to barrel them up into
thine ale-howse index, that when occasion shall serve thou might be a
Democritus always to laugh thy self or to cause others to laugh by the
ideotisme. Thus to conclude, as Daphne chastity was turned into a laurel tree,
and so kept her chastity, ^uen so I wish that for thy wit thou might be
turned into a^ ass, that so thou might keep thy wit to thy self, and not
defile the world withal. But this thou scornst, and will prove that thou have
a good wit and thus submissiue^y in eloquence, to make us believe thee, at the
first word thou beginst; Nature, that never wont to be unequal in her gifts,
with me has broke her wont, and endowed me with a dowry above the rest of
her children: but every commodity has his discommoditie, and we cannot
always please all; and though all my books did not take as I wished they
should, yet most of them did take, as Piers Pe^^^lesse, and others which I will
not name, to au^yd suspicion of vainglorie Argu that had an hundred eyes
sometime slept, or else he had not dyed for it: and wh^^ (...) ca^e, ^ee had no
power to hold open his eyes O fine speech! By this I gather, that thou
confessest thy self to be Arg^s, and me Mercury: and if you be Arg^s, hold open
your eyes with a pox to ye, I mean ye no ^^rme yet, yet I pipe not to you:
but I think it will be my luck to be as ill a scourge to you, as ever
Mercu^^^ was to Argus. But if you will dispute and prove that you have a good
wit, away with your confused bibble b^bble bind up your Arguments into
Syllogismes and I will answer you directly. Content say you, and thus you
begin. If my fame be spread ^ar abroad, and all the Country confirm that I
have a good wit then it is true that I have a good wit: But the first proposition
is true, therefore I have a good w^t. I answer, ^oore and illiterate Opponent,
to contex no (...) argument against to firm a Logician as I am. A double
R^sponse or Answer extempore I can afford you. First, though your name be
blazed abroad, it fol^owes not that you should have a g^od (...) for as an
empty vess^ll will sound f^rre that ha^h nothing in ^t; so you may crack your
self abroad, and get to be reported the man you are not.

Secondly, I grant that you are famous, and that the Country reports you
wise. Sententiously I answer, that by a figure the Country is taken here for
the common rout only: for none that can but write and read will ever agree to
it; and turba m^lum argumentum, as much as to say, the troublesome Commons
assertion, never goes for current. Thus leaving no hole for you to creep in
with a second Objection, you betake you to your second Argument.

If my wit (say you) were not excellent and unanswerable, many who are
accounted to have good wits, (to whom I have often given particular occasion)
would have answered me: but they have not answered me, therefore my wit is
excellent. Therefore I will answer thee.

I would to God thou and I were to dispute for the best Mayorship in Spain,
faith thou might even cast thy cap at it. Do thou not know that the Lion
scorns combat with the bace? Wisemen (though moved) will not work revenge
on every object? and the more stately oak, the more hardly set on fire? More
plainly in a similitude, the like reason is to be gathered of the nettles.

Even as the nettle keeps her leaf cleanest, for that no man purges his
post-pendence (there your nose Thomas) with it; not because they cannot, but
because it would sting them if they should, and so for that small good turn,
it would work them a more displeasure: so thou art suffered to be quiet, and
not wrote against, not for that thou can not be answered, but that by
aunswering thee they should but give more fodder to thy poison, put more
casting to thy gorge; and he that intends to meddle with dung, must make
account to defile his fingers.

Thus thou art quite put down, thou art drawn dry: me thinks I perceive
thee wish for some Moderatour, that should cry; Egregie Nash (or, you great
ass) satisfecisti of (...) tuum. And now for want of a Moderatour, my self
(for fault of a better) will supplye that room, and determine of our
Disputation. And herein it shall not be amiss, (the Question so requiring,
and you also requiring it in that place of your Epistle, where you lay wit to
my charge) first to tell what a good wit is. And whereas thou burthenst me to
say, that much extraor dinarie descant cannot be made of it: thou lie. For
how unjust were men's wits, not to afford us extraordirie descant of that,
which gives us descant for every thing?

A good wit (therefore) is an affluent spirit, yielding invention to praise or
dispraise, or any ways to discourse (with judgment) of every subject.
Mistake me not (I pray you) and think not that I think all those to have good
wits, that will talk of every subject, and have an oa^e (as we say) in every
man's boat: for many fools do so, and so do thou. These talk not with
judgment: they be like the Fellow, who swearing by God, and one standing by,
correcting him, said; Fie on thee how th^n talkest. What skills it said he, so
long as I talk of God? So I say, thou carest not how without judgment thou
talkest on every thing.

A good wit is it that makes a man, and he is not a man, that has not a good
wit. The very brutish and savage beasts have wit. Oxen and Asses by their wit
choose out the best Pasture to feed in, and thou art no better: for diverse men
will say, and especially Northeren men, to one that does any thing
unhandsomely, whaten a N^sh it is, for what an ass it is, and an ass all men
know has not a good wit.

Thu^ (by these descriptions) the definitive sentence of my determination in
this: Nashe, thou have not a good wit, thou art a ^^lly fellow, and more silly
than Sir Thomas of Carleton, who being a little sick, and the bell ^olling to
have him go read Service, the Clarke of the Parish going to him, and telling
him that the bell toa^de for him, meaning to go Read, he went presently and
made his Will, because the bell toa^de for him: and so do thou, plye thee,
mak^ thy Will* and dye betimes before thou be killd, for thine own wit w^ll
kill th^e: and call you that a good wit that kills a man? All the Wisemen of
Greece and Gotam never came to the misery that thy good wit has brought thee
too. My mind presageth the great confusion that thy good wit will bring upon
thee. For as the Cammell that (come he into never so clear a Fountain)
cannot drink of the Water, till he has royled and fowled it with his feet:
so whatsoever thy wit goet^ about, it first defiles it, and so brings
destruction to th^^e own body. Thy wit, thy wit Tom, has rods in p^sse for
thee, it will whip thee, tw^ll work thine overthrow twill quite destroy thee:
Acteon (as wise a man a^ you) no ways could escape it, for all his love to his
h^unds, and sw^fe flight when he saw their felnes, but was devoured of his own
dogs.

But why then (may thou say) do I oppose my self against an Ass, seeing
now I do no more than all could do, for all the beasts in the field can
insult and triumph over the silly Ass, as well the cre^ping Snayle to her
power as the fiercest Tiger. A sinus ascdend^, because every Child can ride
an ass: therefore it is rather a reproachful shame for me to meddle with thee,
and by that I get more discredit ^hen the two Gods got dishonors that conspired
the down fall of one s^ely, weak, unable woman. The reason is, I only am
left to tell thee thou art an Ass, and if thou should not be told it, thou
would not believe that thou art an Ass. Therefor now at length know th^^e
own strength, and knowing that thou art but feeble and have no strength, blush
and be ash^^ed, and then thou shall see that all the Country has seen thy
ignorance, though kept it in silence, and how this many a year thou have g^ld
them, but they (gentle minded auditors) still, still, expecting better took
all in good part whil^^ thou like a cowardly vnskilfu^l ho^seman moun^ed on a
^ade, coru^ttest and show thy Crankes a^ong a company of valorous famous
capta^nes whose stir^op thou art not worthy to hold: alight and listen unto
me, and I even I, that never till now was acquainted with the press, and
acknowledge my self far unfit for those things thou professest, I (I say)
will read thee a Lecture, harken, in my gibb^idg (as thou termst it) I will
conster thee this short distich which though it wants an author wants no
authority.

Tha^d^te credi^ duxisse, sed (...) D^ana est,
Namque Actoeoneu^ dat tibi Caura capu^.
Ingenuously thou thee compl^^st an I^us poo^e to be,
But thou art M^das for thou art an Ass as well as be.
Or thus. Some says Nashe is (...), but I say he is chaste,
For he by chacing after whores, (...) b^ard away has chaste.
Otherwise. Who says Nash riots day and night, about the streets does lie.
For he inprison day and night in fetters fast does lie.
Again. You say I am a fool for this, and I say you say true,
Then what I say of you is true, for babes and fools say true.
Now I give not every word their litterall sense, and by that you may see how I
presume of your good wit, to see if by allusions you can pick out the true
meaning, but I use a more plain demonstration and apply it to your self: for
if you will vnde^stand any thing a right, you must ever apply it to your self.
It may be thou likest not these veries for that they want riming words, and I
end both the verses with one word: no, Tom, noe, think not so, bewray not so
thy poetry, for that distich is best contrived, and most elegant that ends
both verses with one word if they import a diverse sense: but now I see thou art
no versifier, thou have only a prose tongue, and with that thou runst headlong
in thy writing with great premeditation had before, which any man would suppose
for the goodness to be extempore, and this is thy good wit: come, I say, come
learn of me, I Will teach thee how to pot verses an hour together.

Thou nothing doubtest (as thou say^st) of the pratronage and safe cond^ct of
thy book and indeed thou need not doubt for I never meant it harm, but
always wished it might safely pass by me: yet as I was patron to it, I could
not but read some of it, but I think if I had read it through twould have
poisoned me, it stun^e so abhominablye: therefore all the while I was reading
of it holding my nose, fie, out said I, had I but known this Cockatrice whilst
it was in the shell, I would have broken it, it never should have been hatched by
my patronage: but it is no matter, thy eye-beames will reflect upon thy self,
and will be burning glasses to thine own eyes.

And so in a fury (the countries coming down upon me) I like a stout patron
out of all the countries that pressed me sore, challenged out the most valiant
warrier of them all, Mounse^^^ A^^x to single combat, him I overcame, and of
him I got safe conduct, and he has promised safe conduct to all comers of
that race, and moreover, he as an other patron has gotten for them all s^fe
conduct from hence to E^ly by water.

The good admonition thou give me, that is, to commence, I thankfully take
and willingly would undergo, had I but one with whom I might keep mine acts.

As for mine answer I nothing doubt, that is kept (as I hope) with credit, but
my reply is it I stand on, I can get none to answer me, alas, thou art not
able, neither fit, for thy want of a beard takes away half the subject of our
disputation, not that I say a beard would make thee wise and so by that thou
should be fit to dispute, but because in what Art thou would have me
commence, in that I would dispute with thee: therefore suppose I should demand
of thee the reason why thou have so much hair on thy head, and so thin or
rather almost none at all on thy face? thou could not qu^intly answer,
because the hair on thy head is twenty years elder then that on thy beard,
nor in natural reason, because the brain seated in the head yields more
moisture about it then any way downward, by which moisture hair comes, but
thou have too moist a brain that cannot hold and remember these things, or
rather thou have too hard and dry a brain and so these things were never
impressed into it.

But this is thine answer, it is Gods will it should be so, thou were never
borne to have a beard: it is true indeed, thus thou might answer to all the
arguments in the world: but the want of a beard makes thee thus cold in
answering, for a beard is a sign of a strong natural^ heat and vigor, but
the true answer is, thou seek too many ways to cast out thine exc^ementes,
thou art too effeminate and so becomst like a woman without a beard. Again, if
I should demand of thee why the hair of a man's head g^oweth downward and not
upward, idem ^euolueres, this would be th^e answer, because it pleases
nature. Do thou not know that ha^^e is the cover of the head? and therefore
(...) it will cover it must lie down, and do not all the parts of a man grow
downward, though the whole man grows upwards? And therefore the Philosophers
say that a man turned downward is a plant, that as a plant has all her
bowghes, branches and leaves grow upward, so all the parts of a man are
upward when he stands on his head, as his ^eete, legs, arms, nose, fingers
and the rest: but in faith thou turned upward or downward art but a plant or
stock to be ignorant in those things: why I marvel of what Art thou did
Commence Batch^lor, if I had but the question that thou had at thy Sophisters
Act, I would dispute on that: but now I see I cannot commence for want of an
answerer, and I scorn to keep mine acts inteneb^^s

In this ^hy trimming, thou being so fit for it, I will wo^ke a wonder on thee,
and I will hold any man a w^ger that I will perf^rme ^t, that is, wh^lst I am
w^shing you I will request your (...) and put my ^cife to (...), and sh^u^ you
qui^e through and when I have done you shall not be a hair the worie, you ^^y
make a riddle of the same if you will, but I will do it, and when I have done,
raising my self on my tiptoes, I will so hunt thee for my pay, that thou
should be in worse case then the Beuer, who bites off his stones and lays
them in the way for the hunter: for which otherwise he should be hunted to the
death, Leaning on a ^est.
I think verily and in my conscience, I should break thy head and not give
the rest again.

Thou rude wretch, thou will be so cosmologizd, if thou be caught here, for
calling our Masters of Art first Stigmaticall, that is burnt with an hot Iron,
did thou ever know any of our Masters of Arts burnt with any Irons? then thou
call them si^ckanters, which is a proper Epithet unto thy self, for
Sinckanter comes of sincke and a^trum a hole, and as all the puddle and filth
in the channel, still runs all a long till it comes to a hole or a^trum, and
there it sinckes in: so all wickedness and abhord villainy still straying abroad
and seeking for an a^trum, at last it finds thee which art the very sincke and
center where it restes. And surely if thou should have termed me so, I never
would have suffered it unrevenged, for as the T^rpedo being caught and laid on
the ground, strikes a torpour and numbnes into the hand of him that does power
but water on her: so, I do not think but that in thy Epistle thou calledst me
but Dick, which is my name contract, and other adjuncts which in their own
nature are neither good nor bad, the very remembrance of me stroke such a fear
and numbnes into thy joints, that yet thou shakest as not dispossessed of that
fearful fever. I will stir thee up and make thee seething hot, and when
thou art in thy heat, I will then quell thee by moving of thee more and more,
as when a pot seetheth if we lade it and move the liquor up and down, even
while it seetheth, we shall make it quiet. Thou little wottest of what a
furious spirit I am, for I keeping among such spirits in this place, as thou
say, am my self become a spirit, and go about with howling cries with my
lance in my hand to tortour thee, and must not return home, till
Ignatius-like thou shall be carbonadoed, and I shall carry on my launce-point
thy bones to hang at my shop window, in steed of a cronet of rotten teeth, as
the trophies of my victory: and this shall be done, come thou never so soon
into my swinge.

Therefore keep out of my hant, I have a walk, thou may be blasted before
thou come near my walk, Spirit walks.
if thou do but look back and see me in my walk, thy neck will stand
awry, thy mouth distorted, thy lips ugly wrested, and thy nose hang hooke-wise.
But rather I take thee to be a spirit, for that I talking with thee all this
while, cannot have a glance on thee.

But see, what art thou here? lupus in fabula, a lop in a chain? Now sir
have at you, thou art in my swinge. But soft, fetterd? thou art out again: I
cannot come near thee, thou have a charm about thy legs, no man meddle with
the Queens prisoner, now therefore let us talk freendlye, and as Alexander
said to his Father Phillip, who being sorely wounded in the thigh in fight,
and hardly escaping death, but could not go on the ground without halting, be
of good courage father, come forth that every step thou sets on the ground may
put thee in mind of thy manly courage and virtue: so say I to thee, Nashe come
forth, be not ashamed of thy self, stretch out thy legs that every step thou
go, thy shackles crying clinke, may remember and put thee in mind of all
thy goodness and virtue: I am glad to see thee in this prosperity, t^ou never
were so rich as now, thou never h^dst so much money as would buy so fair a
pair of fetters: in very deed thou art beholding to thy keeper that will trust
thee with so fair a pair of fetters, neither would he if he had thee not by
the leg: but now thou art in good case, thou art no vagabond* now thou
seruest a Master, and have a house to go to, and a coutch to lie in, thou
must be thriuing and provident where thou art, and twill be a good saving
for thee, now thou have a c^og at thy heel as the proverb is, thou must
learn of A^sops dog to do as he did: that is, thou must crinch up thy se^^e
round in thy couch all winter time and dream of a goodly large chamber, fair
lodgings and soft beds, and in the Summer time thou must stretch out thy self,
lie all abroad snoring upon thy couch, and think that silly lodging (seeing
thou feel no cold) a stately chamber built of free stone, Holes in the top.
laid out with stately bay windows for to take the air at. But what need I
tell thee of these things? thou know better then I how to lie in prison,
for what a shame were it else for thee, that have many a day ago been free of
all the prysons in London, now to learn thine occupation? thou art a
iourney-man long since, I do not think but that thou art able to set open shop
in that trade, for if thou went but a nouice in it, this dear year would
quite kill thee.

But say, how do thou for victuals, do not they of thy old acquaintance
help thee? if ever thou had true friend, now let him show himself, for a
friend is tried in adversity: and though the Romans were wont to say, that a
true friend was but the salt and sauce of a banquet; yet I say, that a true
Friend to thee must be salt, sauce, bread, and all the meat beside. But thou
have never a true Friend, yet thou have enough of those friends, that would be
sauce to thy meat; that is, if thou could bid them to a supper, they would
come to eat up thy meat, and sauce it with fine talk. But (God knows) thou
have no need of those friends, thou could be sauce to thine own meat. Fie
on friendship, what is become of it? not one drop nor crum of friendship between
them all? A true Friend (as they say) were more necessary than water and fire:
for unless he come and call for it, thou can not have so much as fire and
water; that is, a fire with a cup of small drink by it to nourish thy body.
What is become of those true Friends Damon and Pythias, Castor and Pollux,
Pylades and Orestes, N^sus and Eu^iolus, Perithous and Theseus, whom death it
self could never separate? Dead? Then ^oue raise some deadly tyrant to
massacre that cancred brood of thy companions, that leave their iester desolate
in the winter of his affliction. I curse them with more vehemency, because I
see some hope in thee, in that thou now seem simply to betake thee to the
truth. For whereas thou were wont to crack and brag abroad, and indeuouredst
to show, that there was no learning in which thou were not expert, and how that
thou were endowed with plenty of the liberal Sciences; which thou know to
be nothing so: now thou recantest, and in simple truth say, thou have no
learning, no not so much as one of the liberal Sciences. Which thou showest
unto us by coming forth in thy fetters, for none of the sciences are
bond-slaues, or kept in chains, they are called liberal quasi libers because
they make men free. If these are not sufficient motives for thee, happily let
this move thee, that by thy proficiencie in philosophy since thou camst into
prison, thou hearing of Aesop that dwelt in a tub; of A^a^agora^, who, In
prison wrote his especial book Of the quadrature of the Circle: of S^crates,
who in prison studied Philosophy, and wrote verses, and yet (as Cardan says)
slept sweetly, so as Socrates gave more light to the prison, than the prison
gave da^knes to Socrates: And lastly of him that put out his own eyes, and so
eclipst himself of the sight of the world, that he might have a more clear
insight into the light of nature: keep thou thy self still in prison, eclispe
thee from the sight of the world, gaze only on thy self, that so thou more
clearly, seeing thine own deformed nature, might labor to reform it, and
bring thy self into light again. But (say thou) you are a merry man M.
Dicke, it befits not the wise to mock a man in misery. In truth thou say
true T^^, and for my minds sake I would not for a shilling but that thou had
been in prison, it has made my worship so merry: but because thou continuest
my precepts that am a Cambridge^man, from whence all virtue flows, and is the
very fountain and Cunduit-head of all learning. O here I could praise
Cambridge an hour by the clock.

Therefore I say, for thy contempt of me I will call thy keeper, and tell how
thou art stolen out of prison and come to me to help thee off with thy
shackles. Noe Thomas noe, I am no pick-locke, I thank God, I live without
picking, though thou live not without locks. But are you gone, thou were
afraid of thy keeper, go to the place from whence you came, etc. with a knaves
name to you. Ha, ha, if I had but followed this matter even a little more, I
could have persuaded thee to live and dye in prison.

Alas, I could do any thing with thee now, all thy senses are so taken down
Happy (quoth I) in prison? hapless indeed. How happy is the owl caught fast
in a lyme-bough, when all the smaller birds do chatter at her for joy? How
happy the Rat caught in a trappe, and there dies a living death? How happy
the tired heart stricken of the Hunter, who runs panting, consuming her breath,
and at last faints for want of breath? how happy the wearied hare pursued with
dogs, ever looking when they shall tear her in pieces? and how happy the
cunny-cat^hing weasell ensnared in the Parkers net, and hanged upon a tree? thus
happy art thou: with the owl thou art lymed and wondered at, with the Rat thou
art sore pressed, with the Heart thou art in a consumption, with the hare thou
always expectest a teareing, and with the weasell thou shall behanged. All
these torments are in prison, a demi-hell, where (like fiends) the prisoners
crawle about in chains, every one perplexed with his several pain; a
darksome laborynth, out of which thou can never pass, though guided by a
thread.

O double unhappy soul of thine, that lives so doubly imprisoned, first in
thy body, which is a more stinking prison than this where thou art; then, that
it accompanies thy body in this prison. Were it not sufficient that one
prison should tortor thy soul enough? No, first because thy soul has too
deep a hand in all thy knaueries, it is so imprisoned and fettered to thy body,
that it cannot go without it Poor So^le, Apostrophe.
more miserable than the kings daughter captiuated and long time kept
imprisoned in the Thieves houses, Apuleius
at last offering to break away, was condemned to be sewed into the asses
body and there to dye; for the asses body was dead, and nothing alive in the
ass (the prison) to trouble the Maid the prisoner. But thy prison is alive,
and all the affections in thy body are as stinking vermin and worms in it,
that crawle about thee, gnawing thee, and putting thee to misery. She in short
time was sure to die, and so to be free again; thou art still in dying, and
hoping for freedom, but still live, and this augments thy calamity: she
should have had her head left out to breathe into the air, but thou breathest
into thy prison thy body, that corrupts within thee, and so retournes to be
thine own poison. Thus much misery (poor soul) thine own body affoords
thee, and by being with thy body in the second prison, all this is doubled.
Now if thou would be free from thy prisons, make a hoale in thy first
prison, Continuata Metaphora.
break out there, and so thou escapest both, thou never can be caught again:
and by this thou shall cry quittance with thy body, that thus has tormented
thee, and shall leave him buried in a perpetual dungeon.

Here let me give a cut or two on thy latest bred excrements, before I go to
the finishing of the perfect Cut.

A littie lump of lead, while it is round will lie in a small room, but being
beaten it will spread broad, and require a larger place to contain it; and a
roape bound fast up, might easily be covered, but unfolded and drawn out at
length, it hardly can be hidden: so you (simply considered) are of no report,
but if you be untrust and beaten out, and your actions all unfolded, your name
cannot be limited. And now you, having a care of your credit* scorning to lie
wrapped up in oblivion the moth of fame, have augmented the stretcht-out line of
your deeds, by that most infamous, most dunsicall and thrice opprobrious work
The I Will of Dogs: for which you are greatly in request; that, as when a stone is
cast into the water, many circles arise from it, and one succeeds another,
that if one goes not round, the other following might be adjoined to it, and
so make the full circle: so, if such infinite store of your deeds are not
sufficient to purchase to you eternal shame and sorrow, there arise from you
more under then to help forward: and last of all comes this your last work,
which makes all sure, and leaves a sign behind it. Cropped ear^
And of this your last work, I must needs say somewhat: for seeing that this
my first work and offspring has remained in my womb beyond the time allotted,
it must needs be grown greater; and if it become a monster, it must needs be
in excess.

O yes, O yes: A proclamation for T. Nashe.
if there be any manner of man, person or persons, can bring any tidings of
Tho: Nashe Gentleman, le^hym come and give knowledge thereof, and he shall be
plenteously revvarded.

Hark you Thomas, the Crier calls you. What, a fugitive? how comes that to
pass, that thou a man of so good an education, and so well backed by the Muses,
shuldst prove a fugitive? But alas, thy Muses brought thee to this misery:
you and your Muses may even go hang your selves: now you may wish, that he
that first put the Muses into your head, had knocked out your horns. But seeing
it has so happened, call for your Thalia among your Muses, let her play some
music, and I will dance at your hanging? But it was providence in thee, to
foresee thy woe, and to labor to eschew it, if not by auerring what you have
said, and standing too it, yet by showing your heels. For as is the Proverb;
Vbi leo^^na peli^s insufficiens est, vulpina astutia assuenda est. If by strong
hand you cannot obtain it, light heels are to be required; for one pair of
legs are worth two pair of hands. And of all the part^ of thy body, thy
legs are thy most trusty servants: for in all thy life when as thou could
not obtain of any of the parts of thy body to effect thy will, yet legs thou
had to command for to walk and flee whether soever was thy pleasure,
neither now in this extremity do they deceive thee. O, how much art thou
beholding to thy legs? Banks was not so much beholding to his Horse, that
served to ride on, and to do such wonderfu'l crankes, as thou art to thy
legs, which have thus cunningly conuayed thee. If every beggar by the high
ways side (having his legs corrupted and half destroyed with botches, byles
and fistulaes) makes much of them, gets stilts and creeps easily on them,
for fear of hurting them, because they maintain them, and prove better unto
them than many an honest Trade; then why should not thou (by an argument a
malo in peius) make much of thy legs, which by speedy carriage of thee from
place to place to get thee victuals, do not only maintain thy life, but also
at this time have saved thy life, by their true service unto thee. Wherefore
(these things considered) thou can not choose but in all humility offer thy
old shoes for sacrifice to Thetis for thy swiftfeet. And it was wisely done of
that high dread Liech Apollo to appoint Pisces the Sign to the feet, to show
that a man should be as swift as a fish about his affairs. Nerethelesse can I
accuse you of lazines,: for all this time of your vagation, with you I think
the Sign has been in Pisces. Now in this thy flight thou art a night-bird,
for the day will bewray thee: the Bat and the Owl be thy fellow travelers. But
to come roundly unto you, this cannot long continue: the Owl sometime is
snarld in the day season, and old Father Time at length will bring you to
light. Therefore, were you as well provided to continue your flight, as is the
beast Ephemeron, which because she has but one day to live, has many legs,
four wings, and all what Nature can afford, to give her expedition to see
about the world for her one days pleasure: or as Pegasus that winged Horse,
which in swiftnes equalleth the Horses of the Sun, which in one natural day
perambulate all the world: or as the beast Alce, which runs on the snow with
such celeritie that she never sinketh unto the ground: Were you (I say) as
swift as any of these, you shall be caught, such is your destiny: and then
your punishment shall be doubled on you, both for your flying, and your other
villainy.

Since that thy I Will of Dogs has made thee thus miserable, I cannot but account
thee a Dog, and chyde and rate thee as a Dog that has done a fault. And yet
do not I know why I should blame Dogs? for Can, which signifies a Dog, is
also a most trusty Servant; for that Dogs are faithful Servants, to whom
their Masters in the night time give in charge all their treasure. They are at
command to wait upon their Masters, whether they bend their journey, to fight
for them against their Enemies, and to spend their lives to defend them, and to
offend their adversaries, as we read of King Cazament: who being exilde,
brought with him from banishment two hundredth Dogs, which (with wonderful
fierceness) wa^red against their resistants: in whom he reposed much more
confidence and hope of victory, again to be seated in his throne, th^n if he
had been defended by a mighty host of armed men. And ^asons dog, his master
being dead, never would eat any meat, but with great grief and hunger died
for company. Tycius the Sa^ine had a dog which accompanied him to prison,
and when he was dead, he remained howling by the carcass: to whom when one
cast meat, he laid it to the mouth of his dead master, to revive him again:
and when his corpse was thrown into the river Tybris, the dog leapt after
it, so that all the people wondered at the love of this faithful creature.
P^^rhus the King going a journey, came by a dog which kept the body of a
dead man: which when he saw, he commanded the body to be buried, and the
dog to be brought home with him: this done, a few days after came
soldiers before the King, among whom the dog espied them which killd his
master, and barked incessantly at them; sometime looking and fawning on the
King, and then barked again. At which sign the King astonished, examined
them, and upon light examinations they confessed the murder, and took
punishment for it. Further, we read of a dog called Capparus in Athens, which
in the night pursude a thief that robbed a Church, and being driven back with
stones by the Thief, followed him aloof off, but always kept him in sight,
and at last came to him, and sat by him while he slept. The next morn, so
soon as ever the Suns golden crown began to appear, and his fiery steedes
trapperd in their capparisons set on their wonted race, the thief fleeing, the
dog still kept his chase, and complaind in his language to the passengers of
the thief. At last he was taken and brought back, before whom the dog came
all the way leaping and exulting for joy, as to whom all the praise was due
for this deed.

The Athenians decreed that for this public good, the dog should be kept by
public charges, and the care of his keeping was always afterward laid upon
the Priests. And I fear me, and almost divine so much, that the very dogs
(wheresoever thou plaist least in sight) will bewraye thee and bring thee to
thy torture. Again, (among the Aegiptians) Saturn was called Ky^n, because as
a pregnant woman, he begat all things of himself and in himself; and in
antique time they worshipped dogs, and had them in great account, till on a
time when Cambyses killed a man and cast him away, no other beast but a dog
rauened in the dead carcass.

Lastly, to come nearer to your self, you shall hear of a dog that was an
excellent Actor. In Rome there was a Stage Player, which set out a History of
diverse personages, among whom there was a dog to be poisoned and revive
again; a Part of no less difficulty than the king or the clown, and was as
well performed: for (at his time) he eat the poison, and presently
(drunkard-like) stackered up and down, reeling backward and forward, bending
his head to the ground, as if it were too heavy for his body, as his Part
was; and at last fell down, stretched himself upon the stage, and lay for
dead. Soon after, when his Cue was spoken, first by little and little he began
to move himself, and then stretching forth his legs, as though he awaked from
a deepesleepe, and lifting up his head, looked about him: then he arose, and
came to him to whom his part was he should come: which thing (besides the great
pleasure) moved wonderful admiration in old Ve^pasian the Emperor there
present, and in ail the other that were spectators.

These pretty tales of dogs might keep me from chiding of thee, but thou
art no such dog; these were all well nurtured when they were whelps, you not
so: the worm was not plucked out from under your tongue, so that you have run
mad, and bit venom ever since: for these are the properties of a mad dog.

First, the black choler which reigns in them turns to madness most
commonly in the Springtime and in Autumn: and you though you are mad all the
year, yet have showed the sign of it especially this last Autumn; they,
always run with their mouths open and their tongues hanging out, we know
how wide your mouth is, how long your tung; your mouth is never shut, your
tongue never tied: slauer and foam fall from their jaws as they run, and it is
but slauer that proceeds from thy mouth: though their eyes be open, yet they
stumble on every object; so though thou s^est who offends thee not, yet thou
all offendest: they whosoever are bitten with a mad dog also run mad, and they
whom thy vlcered tongue did bite, are so stirred up by it, that till they have
got you and wormed you, they cannot be well: thus you may see to what misery
you were borne. Woe to the teats of thy Dam that gave thee suck, and woe to
blind fortune, that she opened not her eyes to see to afford thee better
fortune: and woe to the dog-daies, for in those thou wroughtest that which now
works thy wo^, take heed hereafter what you do in dog-daies. The natures
secretaries record of that kind of goat called Ory^e, that all the year her
throat is shut, the strings of her voice tied, til dog-daies come, and then
that very day and hour in which the dog-starre first appears (at which time
dog-daies begin) she opens her voice and cries: the like miracle these last
dog-daies have done of thee, for what all the whole year could not bring to
pass, and all the Country long have expected, that is, thy confusion, these
dog-dayes by th^ne own words have effected: therefore happy had thou been
if thou had remained still in London, that thou might have bin knocked on
the head with many of thy fellows these dog-daies, for now the further thou
fleest, the further thou runst into thy calamity: there is watch laid for you,
you cannot escape; thou art in as ill a taking as the Have, which being all the
day hunted, at last concludes to dye, for (said she) whether should I fly to
escape these dogs, if I should fly to heaven, there is canissidus celeste: The
dog-starre.
if I should run into the sea, there is canis p^scis marinus, and here on
earth millions of dogs seek to torment me; The dog-fish.
aye me, heaven, earth and sea conspire my tragedy: and as woeful as the Cunny
which escaping the Weasell fell into the hunters net, of which was that pythie
Epigram, Would to God the Weasell with my blood had sucked out my life, for
now I am kept a pray for the ravening dogs, and cruell-harted ma^sits laughing
whilst my body is broken up, and my guts divided into many shares: and though
yet thou have escaped thy snares, it will not be long ere thou be taken and
then the'rs laughing work for all the Country; for though thy body were shared
into infinite indiuiduals, yet every one could not have his part whom thou
have abused, for recompense for thy injury done unto him.

Now let me see thy punishment for thy Isle of dogs, it is an ancient
custom in our Country when we take a dog that has done a fault, presently
to crop his ears, and this surely for thy fault is thy punishment, but why
(might some say) are thine ears punished for thy tongues fault?

I answer, thine ears are worthy to be punished for not discharging their
office, for whereas they should hear before thou speak, as they that be
skillful at the ball, first receive the ball before they cast it forth again;
and into a vessel there is first infusion before there be effusion out of the
same; the over pregnant dog (we see) brings forth blind puppies, and the
spider that prepares her matter and weaues her web together at the same time,
makes but slender work of it, and easy to be broken of every fly. I say,
whereas thou should first have heard, thou first speak, thy tongue was in
thy ears place, and for this cause thine ears are justly punished.

Nature gave thee two ears and but one tongue because thou should hear more
then thou should speak but because thou have spoken more than ever thou
heardst, thine ears shall be taken from thee: She set thine eyes and thine
ears both of equal highness and always open, that they might be ready to
hear and to see, but thy tongue she put into a case that it might be slow to
speak; but thine ears were dull to hear, and thy tongue too quick of
speech: Therefore thine ears deserve their punishment: Then to be short, to
have thine cropped is thy punishment: Ha ha ha.
What Tom, are thine ears gone? O fine man will you buy a fine dog? Why thou
art in the fashion, (...)
thou art privileged to wear long locks by ancient charter, but now if the
fashion were as hot as ever it was to wear ringes in their ears, faith thou
must wear thine even in thy tongue, because that ^osoned thee of thine ears:
are thy ears so moveable? art thou a monster? indeed all beasts have free
moving of their ears granted to them, but for men I never knew any but thee
have their ears moving, and thine I see to have the gentle quite remove: I
think it is a diseased, for I am assure it is a horible pain to be troubled with
the moving of the ears. I conjecture no goodness by this strange accident of
moveable ears this year, I hope shortly we shall have Ball^^^s out of it. I am
afraid I tell you by this strange sign that we shall have a wet winter this
year, for if it be true (which the Philosophers affirm) that when an Asses
ears hang down toward the ground, it is a certain sign of rain instant, then
seeing thine ears not only hang toward the ground, but even drop down to the
ground, how can it choose but be a sign of great wet at hand? and to thee it
should be a cause of perpetual showers that should flow from thine eyes, but
thou art d^ye, no drop of grace from thine eyes. It taking away of thine
ears could take away thy hearing too, twere some profit for thee, for then
thou should not hear thy self raild on, laughed at, nor know thy self to
be a mocking stock to all the Country but there is a more plain way made to
thy hearing organs, so that thou shall more lightly hear thy self every where
called crop-card curre. What will thou give me if I (I am a Surgeon) make a
new pair of ears grow out of thy head, which passes Appolloes cunning, that
so thou may still live with fame in thine own country, or if I heal them as
though thou never had any, that I may go with thee into Germany and there
show thee for a strange beast bred in England, with a face like a man, with no
ears, with a tung like a venomous Serpent, and a nose like no body. The last I
care not if I consented to: if tho^ woldst live in good order but one half
year, but to the first that is to give thee new ears, I never will grant though
thou sholdst be inspired to live orderly all the residue of thy life, no though
I had wax and al things ready, for long a go have thou deserved this disgrace
to be earelesse, ever since thou beganst to write, for libels deserve that
punishment, and every book which yet thou have written is a libell, and
whomsoever thou namest in thy book has a libell made of him, thou purposing
to speak well of him; such is the malice of thy cankerd tongue. Therefore thou
deseruedst to loose thine ears for naming the Bishop of Ely and of Lincoln,
and for writing of Christ's tears over Jerusalem: how dare thou take such
holy matters into thy stinking mouth, so to defile and polute them? your Dildoe
and such subjects are fit matter for you, for of those you cannot speak amiss,
the more you rail of the^ the nearer you touch the matter: but because you
were not punished for those libels, you began your old course again, canis ad
vomitum, you began to chew the cud of your villainy and to bring more libels
into light. But I hope this last libell will revenge the rest.

We hear how you threatened to spoil our stirring Satirist: alas, have thy
writings such efficacy? indeed they are poisoned, but poison will not work on
every subject: and if thou should but name him, so that it might give but any
blemish to his fame, assure thy self to be met withal of troops of Scholars
which will soon make thee be one of Terence his parasits: in wounds thou shall
exceed Cass^anus which was so pitifully pinked of his own Scholars: and now
whilst I am in the hot inuectiue I have a message to do to you, the townsmen
of Cherrihinton send you co^mendations, and they demand a reason of you why you
call them clownes? they say, they never offered you any wrong, wherefore if
ever you come that way, they will send all the dogs in the town after you to
pluck off your ears if they be not gone before you come. Now I think it be
time to remember my promise to the readers, that is that I be not irksome to
them with tediousnes, that so they might with good accep^ance digest what
hitherto they have read: therefore I will draw toward an end and so finish
this perfect Cut.

Whereas thou commendst thy Epistle to me as a garment for a fool, and
therefore that it should be long: I (as is thy desire) have cut it with my
scissers, laid it open, and according to that pattern have made a coat for thy
self, but it is so short that thou shall not need to curtaile it, for some
fools have long coats for that cause only, that they might the better hide
their folly and cover their nakedness, which else all should see, yet I have made
thy coat short and little, that by thy behavior in it thou may bewray to
others thy simplicity, and if I had took in hand to have made it great enough
to cover al thy folly, this is not the twentieth part of stuff that would have
served, neither possibly could thou have had thy new coat against this time*
but seeing thy garment is dispatched for thee, wear it and use it well, for the
fashion of long clothes is wearing away, and short clothes will shortly be in
request again, and then thou shall be a fool of the fashion, as soon as the
proudest of them all.

Again, this coat for thy body and the cool irons for thy legs will be a
most cooling suit for thee all this Summer time, therefore make much of it, let
it not be thy every day suit but as the Vtopians were wont to make them suits
of ^eather, which lasted seven years, in which they did all their labor, and
when they went abroad they cast on their cloakes which hid their leather
clothes and made them seem comely and handsome: so if thou can but get some
old, greafie, cast sustian suit to wear within doors, this coat will serve
thee to cast on to iet abroad in, and do thee credit.

Wherefore (good Tom) I exhort thee to keep thee (whilst thou art) in good
case, thou art well apparelled, it may be thou presently wilt bestow a coat
of me, do not so, all thy coats are threedbare and I need them not, though
thou have many, for I know thou have three or four coats ready made (like a
saleman) for some body: then, to which soever thou sowest but a patch or two
concerning me, that coat shall serve me: thou put diverse stuff into one
coat, and this is thy use in all thy confutations, as in this thy book thou
bring into the party against whom thou wr^^est, his brothers, which argues
(as I said before) want of invention, but it skils not, thou art privileged
never to go from the matter, it might as well be permitted in thee as in the
historian that promising to speak of the faith of the Jews, made a long tale
of N^lus: but (as I said) be a good husband Tom and keep thy coat to thy
self, thou will need them al, and when this coat which which I bestow on
thee shall wax threed-bare, I will dress it for thee the second time and give
it thee again.

This I speak not to wage discord against thee, but rather to make an end of
all iarres, that as wife and husband will brawle and be at mortal fewde all the
day long, but when board or bed time come they are friends again and lovingly
kiss one an other: so though hitherto we have disagreed and been at odds,
yet this one coat shall contain us both, which thou shall wear as the
cognisaunce of my singular love toward thee, that we living in mutual love
may so dye, and at last loving like two brothers Castor and Pollux, or the two
sisters Vrs^ mayor and Vrsa minor we may be carried up to heaven together,
and there translated into two stars.

Finally these things considered aright, in love I beseech thee (that thou
may see I am not past grace) to suffer me to retort thy grace, and so to
end, which my self will follow for you; you suing sub forma pauperis.

A Grace in the behalf of Thomas Nashe.
TO all ballet-makers, pamphleters, press hanters, boon pot poets, and such
like, to whom these presents shall come greeting. Whereas Tho: Nashe the bearer
hereof, borne I know not where, educated sometime at Cambridge: where (being
distracted of his wits) he self into diverse ^^sdemeanors, which were the first
steps that brought him to this poore-estate. As namely in his fresh-time ^ow he
flourished in all impudency toward Scholars, and abuse to the Townsmen;
insomuch, that to this day the Townes-men call every untoward Scholar of
whom there is great hope, a very Nashe. Then being Bachelor of Art, which by
great labor he got, to she^ afterward that he was not unworthy of it, had a
hand in a Show called Terminus and non terminus, for which his partener in it
was expelled the College: but this foresaid N^she played in it (as I suppose)
the Varlet of Clubs; which he acted with such natural affection, that all the
spect^tors took him to be the very same. Then suspecting himself that he
should be stayed for egreg^e dunsus, and not attain to the next Degree, said he
had commenst enough, and so forsook Cambridge, being Ba^chelor of the third
year. Then he raisd himself unto an higher C^ime, no less than London could
serve him: where somewhat recovered of his wits, by the excrements thereof (for
the space of nine or ten year) he has got his belly fed and his back
clothed. As also I hope you are not ignorant how he has troubled the Press
all this time, and published sundry works and vol^mes, which I take with me
as humble fellow-suters to you, that you being all in one strain (and that
very low, he in a highe-key) ^ou would vouchsafe to take him as your graduate
Captain general in all villainy: to which villainy conioyn your voices and in
which villainy pray and say together, Viuat, ^^^iatur Nashe. To these
premises* that they are true, and that he among yo^ all is only worthy this
title, I (as head Lecturer) put too my hand.

Richard Lichfield.

But Tom, thy self art past grace: for some of thine own faction, envying thy
proficiencie and honor to which thou aspirest, has pocketted thy Grace. O
envy, catterpiller to virtue! But let him know that thou have a Patron will
stick to thee, and that thou art gracious in more Faculties than one, I will
put up another Grace for thee, wherein he shall have no voice, and one only
man an old friend of thine shall strike it dead.

A Grace in the behalf of Thomas Nashe, to the right wo^sh^pfull and grand
Commander of all the superrants and sub^ercubants of Englands great Metropolis,
the Prou^st Marshall of London.
FOrasmuch as Thomas Nash sundry and oftentimes has been cast into many
prisons (by full authority) for his mis-behauiors, and has polluted them all*
so that there is not one prison in London, that is not infected with Nashes
evil: and being lately set at liberty, rangeth up and down, g^^hering poison
in every place, whereby he (...) ^he common air; I am to desire you that as
you tender the common good of the weal public, and as the virtue of your
office requires* which is to cleanse the City of all vicious and unruly
persons, when this above named N^she shall happen into your presinctes or
dioces of your authority you would give him his unction in the highest degree,
and cleanse us quite of him, which you shall effect thus. Send him not to
prisons any more which are corrupted by him already, but commit him to the
Procter of the Sp^^tle, where he shall not stay long least he breed a plague
among them also: but pass from him to Bull, who by your permission having full
power over him and being of such amiable and dexterious facility in discharging
his duty, will soon knit the knot of life and death upon him, stronger then
that Gordian knot never to be loosed, and by that pretty trick of fast and
loose, will loose your City from him and him from all his infections, and
will hang him in so sweet and clear a prospect as that it will be greatly to your
credit to see the great concourse thither of all sect of people^ as first, I
with my brethren the Ba^ber-Chirurgions of London, will be there, because we
cannot phlebotamize him, to anatomize him and keep his bons as a chronicle to
show many ages hereafter that sometime lived such a man, our posterity having
by tradition what he was* and you in some part migh: be chronicled (as well as
S. George) for destroying this serpen^: the^ there will flock all the Cunni^
catchers of London to see the portraiture of the arch architectour of their
art: lastly, all the Ballad-makers of London his very enemies that stayed his
last grace, will be there to hea^e his confession, and out of his last words
will make Epitaphes of him, and afterward Ballads of the life and death of
Thomas Nash. Let this grace pass as soon as may be, if not for any
particular love to him* yet as you are a Magistrate of the City, and ought to
know what it is to prefer a public commodititie: (...) this grace pass not,
he is like to be stayde finally till the next year. This head-lecturer
present him to you.

Richard Lichfield.

Thus (courteous Gentlemen) I have brought you ^o the end of his trimming,
though he be not so curiously done as he deserves: hold me excused, he is
the first man that ever I cut on this fashion. And if perhaps in this Trimming
I have cut more parts of him than are necess^rie, let me hear your censures,
and in my next Cut I will not be so lavish: but as the Cu^ate, who when he was
first instald into his Benefice, and among other Injunctions being inioynd (as
the order is) to forewarne his Parish of Holy Days, that they might fast for
them: and thinking all those Holy days which he saw in his Calender written
with red letters, on a time said to his Parishioners, You must fast next
wensday for Saint Sol in V^^go, which is on thursday, because he saw it in red
letters. Which moo^^d laughter to the wise of the Parish; who presently
instructed him, that over what red words soever he saw Fast written, those he^
should bid Holi-dayes: so in short time he became expert in it. In like manner,
I having but newly taken Orders in these affairs, if here I have been too
prodigal in (...) snaps, tell me of it, limit me with a Fast, and in short
time you shall see me reformed.

FINIS.

