THE SYNAGOGVE, OR, THE SHADOW OF THE TEMPLE.

SACRED POEMS, AND PRIVATE EJACVLATIONS.

In imitation of Mr. GEORGE HERBERT.

Stultissimum credo ad imitandum non optima quaeque proponere. Plin. Secund.
lib. 1. Epist. 5. Not to imitate the best example is the greatest folly.
LONDON, Printed (...) for Phil Stephens, and Chrystopher (...), at the golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

The Dedication.
LOrd, my first fruits should have been sent to thee,
For thou the tree
That bare them, only lentest unto me.
But while I had the use, the fruit was mine,
Not so divine
As that I dare presume to call it thine.
Before 'twas ripe, it fell unto the ground:
And since I found
It bruised in the dirt, nor clean nor sound;
Some I have wiped and picked, and bring thee now,
Lord, thou know how:
Gladly I would, but dare it not avow.
Such as it is, it is here. Pardon the best,
Accept the rest:
Thy pardon and acceptance makes blessed.
Subterliminare.
A stepping-stone to the threshold of Mr. Herberts Church Porch.
DIc, Cujus templum? Christi. Quis Condidit? e^e.
Condidit Herbertus: dic, quibus auxiliis?
Auxiliis multis: quibus, haud mihi dicere fas est,
Tanta est ex dictis lis oriunda meis.
Gratia, si dicam, dedit omnia, protinus obstat
Ingenium, dicens cuncta fuisse sua.
Ars negat, and nihil est non nostrum dicit in illo:
Nec facile est litem composuisse mihi.
Divide: Materiam det gratia, Materiaeque
Ingenium cultus induat, arsque Modos.
Non: ne displiceat pariter res Omnibus ista,
Nec sortita velint jura vocare sua;
Nempe pari sibi jure petunt cultusque, modosque,
Materiamque, ars, and gratia, and ingenium.
Ergo velit siquis dubitantem tollere elenchum,
De templo Herberti talia dictadabit.
In templo Herbertus condendo est Gratia totus,
Ars pariter totus, totus and Ingenium.
Cedite Romanae, Graiiae quoque cedite Musae:
Vnum prae cunctis Anglia jactet opus.
WHat Church is this? Christ's Church. Who builds it?
Mr. George Herbert, Who assisted it?
Many assisted: who, I may not say,
So much contention might arise that way.
If I say Grace gave all, Wit straight does thwart,
And says all that is there is mine: but Art
Denies and says there is nothing there but's mine:
Nor can I easily the right define.
Divide: say, Grace the matter gave, and Wit
Did polish it, Art measured and made sit
Each several piece, and framed it all together.
No, by no means: this may not please them neither.
None's well contented with a part alone,
When each does challenge all to be his own:
The matter, the expressions, and the measures,
Are equally Arts, Wits, and Graces treasures.
Then he that would impartially discuss
This doubtful question, must answer thus:
In building of this temple Mr. Herbert
Is equally all Grace, all Wit, all Art.
Roman and Grecian Muses all give way:
One English Poem darkens all your day.
The Churchyard.
THou that intendest to the Church to day,
Come take a turn or two, before thou go,
In the Churchyard: the walk is in the way.
Who takes best heed in going, hastes most:
But he that unprepared rashly ventures,
Hastens perhaps to seal his deaths Indentures.
The Church-stile.
See thou that style? observe then how it rises
Step after step, and equally descends:
Such is the way to win celestial prizes;
Humility the course begins and ends.
Would thou in grace to high perfection grow?
Shoot thy roots deep, ground thy foundations low.
Humble thy self, and God will lift thee up;
Those that exalt themselves, he casts down:
The hungry he invites with him to sup,
And clothes the naked with his robe and Crown.
Think not thou have what thou from him would have;
His labor's lost, if thou thy self can save.
Pride is the prodigality of grace,
Which casts all away by griping all:
Humility is thrift, both keeps its place,
And gains by giving, rises by its fall.
To get by giving, and to loose by keeping,
Is to be sad in mirth, and glad in weeping.
The Church-gate.
NExt to the stlie, see where the gate does stand,
Which turning upon hooks and hinges may
Easily be shut or opened with one hand,
Yet constant in its center still does stay;
And fetching a wide compass round about,
Keeps the same course and distance, never out.
Such must the course be that to Heaven tends:
He that the gates of righteousness would enter,
Must still continue constant to his ends,
And fix himself in God as in his center.
Cleave close to him by faith, then move which way
Discretion leads thee, and thou shall not stray.
We never wander, till we loose our hold
Of him that is our way, our light, our guide:
But when we grow of our own strength too bold,
Vnhookt from him, we quickly turn aside.
He holds us up, whilst in him we are found:
If once we fall from him, we go to ground.
The Church-wals.
NOw view the Walls, the Church is compast round,
As much for safety as for ornament:
It Is an enclosure, and no common ground;
It Is Gods freehold, and but our tenement.
Tenants at will, and yet in tail we be:
Our children have the same right to it as we.
Remember there must be no glatts left open,
Where God has fenced for fear of false illusions:
God will have all or none; allows no scope
For sins encroachments, and men's own intrusions.
Close binding locks his laws together fast:
He that plucks out the first, pulls down the last.
Either resolve for all, or else for none;
Obedience universal he does claim:
Either be wholly his, or all thine own.
At what thou can not reach, at least take aim.
He that of purpose looks beside the mark,
Might as well hoodwinkt shoot, or in the dark.
The Church.
LAstly consider where the Church does stand;
As near unto the middle as may be:
God in his service chiefly does command
Above all other things sincerity.
Lines drawn from side to side within a round,
Not meeting in the Center, short are found.
Religion must not side with any thing
That swerves from God, or else withdraws from him:
He that a welcome sacrifice would bring,
Must fetch it from the bottom, not the brim.
A sacred Temple of the Holy Ghost
Each part of man must be, but his heart most.
Hypocrisy in Church is Alchymie,
That casts a golden tincture upon brass:
There is no essence in it; it is a lie,
Though fairly stamped for truth it often pass:
Only the Spirits aqua regia does
Discover it to be but painted froth.
The Church Porch.
NOw ere thou passest further, sit thee down
In the Church Porch, and think what thou have seen;
Let due consideration either crown,
Orcrush thy former purposes. Between
Rash undertakings and firm resolutions,
Depends the strength or weakness of conclusions.
Trace thy steps backward in thy memory,
And first resolve of that thou heardest last:
Sincerity. It blots the history
Of all religious actions, and does blast
The comfort of them, when in them God sees
Nothing but outsides of formalities.
In earnest be religious, trifle not;
And rather for Gods sake then for thine own:
Thou have robbed him, unless that he have got
By giving, if his glory be not grown
Together with thy good. Who seeks more
Himself then God, would make his roof his floor.
Next to sinceritieremember still,
Thou must resolve upon Integrity:
God will have all thou have; thy mind, thy will,
Thy thoughts, thy words, thy works. A nullitie
It proves, when God, that should have all, does find
That there is any one thing left behind.
And having given him all, thou must receive
All that he gives. Meet his commandment,
Resolvethat thine obedience must notleave
Vntillit reach unto the same extent:
For all his precepts are of equal strength,
And measure thy performance to the length.
Then call to mind that Constancy must knit
Thine undertakings and thine actions fast:
He that sets forth toward Heaven, and does sit
Down by the way, will be found short at last.
Be constant to the end, and thou shall have
An heavenly garland, though an earthly grave.
But he that would be constant, must not take
Religion up by fits and starts alone;
But his continual practice must it make:
His course must be from end to end but one.
Bones often broken and knit up again,
Loose of their length, though in their strength they gain.
Lastly, remember that Humility
Must solidate and keep all close together.
What pride puffes up with vain futilitie,
Lies open and exposed to all ill weather.
An empty bubble may fair colors carry;
But blow upon it, and it will not tarry.
Prize not thine own too high, nor under-rate
Another worth, but deal indifferently;
View the defects of thy spiritual state,
And others graces with impartial eye:
The more thou deemest of thy self, the less
Esteem of thee will all men else express.
Contract thy lesson now, and this is just
The sum of all. He that desires to see
The face of God, in his religion must
Sincere, entire, constant, and humble be.
If thus resolved, fear not to proceed;
Else the more haste thou make, the worse thou wilt speed.
Invitation.
TVrn in, my Lord, turn in to me:
My heart's an homely place;
But thou can make corruption flee,
And fill it with thy grace.
So furnished, it will be brave;
And a rich dwelling thou shall have.
It was thy lodging once before;
It builded was by thee:
But I to sin set open the door,
It rendered was by me;
And so thy building once defaced,
And in thy room another placed.
But he usurps, the right is thine:
Oh dispossess him, Lord.
Do thou but say, this heart is mine,
He Is gone at the first word.
Thy word's thy will, thy will's thy power,
Thy time is always; now is mine hour.
Now say to sin, depart;
And, son, give me thine heart.
Thou; that by saying let it be, did make it;
Can, if thou will, by saying give't me, take it.
Comfort in extremity.
ALas! my Lord is going;
Oh my woe!
It will be mine undoing,
If he go.
I Will run and overtake him:
If he stay,
I Will cry aloud, and make him
Look this way.
Oh stay my Lord, my love; it is I.
Comfort me quickly, or I dye.
Cheer up thy drooping spirits;
I am here.
My all-sufficient merits
Shall appear
Before the throne of glory
In thy stead;
I Will put into thy story,
What I d d.
List up thine eyes, sad soul, and see
Thy Savior here. Lo, I am he.
Alas! shall I present.
My sinfulness
To thee? Thou will resent
The loathsomeness.
Be not afraid, I Will take
Thy sins on me;
And all my favor make
To shine on thee.
Lord, what thou wilt have me, thou must make me.
As I have made thee, now I take thee.
Resolution and assurance.
LOrd, thou will love me. Will thou not?
Beshrew that not;
It was my sin begot
That question first: Yes Lord, thou will;
Thy blood was spilt
To wash away my guilt.
Lord, I will love thee. Shall I not?
Beshrew that not.
'Twas deaths accursed plot
To put that question. Yes I will,
Lord, love thee still
In spite of all my ill.
Then life and love continue still;
We shall and will
My Lord and I, until
In his celestial hill
We love our fill
When he has purged all my ill.
The Nativitie.
Unfold thy face, unmaske thy ray,
Shine forth, bright Sun, double the day:
Let no malignant misty fume,
Nor foggy vapor once presume
To interpose thy perfect sight
This day, which makes us love thy light
For ever better that we could
That blessed object once behold,
Which is both the circumference
And center of all excellence:
Or rather neither, but a treasure
Vnconfined without measure:
Whose center and circumference
Including all pre-eminence,
Excluding nothing but defect,
And infinite in each respect;
Is equally both here and there,
And now and then, and every where;
And always one himself the same,
A being far above a name.
Draw neerthen, and freely pour
Forth all thy light into that hour
Which was crowned with his birth,
And made heaven envy earth.
Let not his birthday clouded be,
By whom thou shinest, and we see.
Vows broken and rewarded.
SAid I not so, that I would sin no more?
Witness my God, I did.
Yet I am run again upon the score,
My faults cannot be hid.
What shall I do? Make vows and break them still?
'Twill be but labor lost:
My good cannot prevail against mine ill,
The business will be crossed.
Oh! say not so; thou can not tell, what strength
Thy God may give thee at the length.
Renew thy vows, and if thou keep the last,
Thy God will pardon all that is past. (may
Vow whilst thou can; whilst thou can vow, tho^ may^^
Perhaps perform it when thou think least.
Thy God has not denied thee all,
Whilst he permits thee but to call:
Call to thy God for grace to keep
Thy vows; and if thou break them, weep.
Weep for thy broken vows, and vow again:
Vows made with tears cannot be still in vain.
Then once again
I vow to mend my ways:
Lord say Amen,
And thine be all the praise.
Confusion.
OH! how my mind
is gravel'd!
not a thought
That I can find,
but's ravel'd
all to naught.
Short ends of threads,
and narrow shreds
of lists,
Knots snarled ruffes,
loose broken tufts
of twists,
Are my torn meditations ragged clothing;
Which wound and woven shape a suit for nothing.
One while I think, and then I am in pain
To think how to unthink that thought again.
How can my soul
but famish
with this food?
Pleasures full bowl
tastes rammish,
taints the blood:
Profit picks bones,
and chewes on stones
that choke:
Honor climbes hills;
fats not, but fills
with smoke.
And whilst my thoughts are greedy upon these,
They pass by pearls, and stoop to pick up pease.
Such wash and draffe is fit for none but swine;
And such I am not, Lord, if I am thine.
Cloth me anew, and feed me then afresh:
Else my soul dies famisht and starved with flesh.
A Paradox.
THe worse the better.
Welcome my health: this sickness makes me well.
Medicines adieu:
When with diseases I have list to dwell,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my strength* this weakness makes me abl^
Powers adieu:
When I am weary grown of standing stable,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my wealth: this loss has gained me more*
Richesadiew:
When I again grow greedy to be poor,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my credit: this disgrace is glory.
Honors adieu:
When for renown and fame I shall be sorry,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome content: this sorrow is my joy.
Pleasures adieu:
When I desire such griefs as may annoy,
I Will wish for you.
Health, strength, and riches, credit and content,
Are spared best sometimes, when they are spent;
Sickness and weakness, loss, disgrace and sorrow,
Lend most sometimes, when they seem most to borrow:
Blessed be that hand that helps by hurting, gives
By taking, by forsaking me relieves.
If in my fall my rising be thy will;
Lord, I will say, the wors the better still.
I Will speak the Paradox, maintain thou it;
And let thy grace supply my want of wit.
Leave me no learning that a man may see,
So I may be a scholar unto thee.
Inmates.
A House I had (a heart I mean) so wide
And full of spacious rooms on every side,
That viewing it I thought I might do well
(Rather then keep it void and make no gain
Of what I could not use) to entertain
Such guests as came. I did. But what besell
Me quickly in that course, I sigh to tell.
A guest I had (alas! I have her still)
A great big bellyed guest, enough to fill
The vast content of hell, Corruption:
By entertaining her, I lost my right
To more then all the world has now in sight;
Each day, each hour almost she brought forth one,
Or other base begot, Transgression.
The charge grew great. I, that had lost before,
All that I had, was forced now to score,
For all the charges of their maintenance,
In doomes-day book: who ever knew't would say,
The least sum there was more then I could pay,
When first 'twas due; beside continuance,
Which could not choose but much the debt enhance.
To ease me, first I wished her to remove;
But she would not. I sued her then above,
And begged the Court of heaven, but in vain,
To cast her out. No, I could not evade
The bargain, which she pleaded I had made;
That whilst both lived, I should entertain
At mine own charge both her and all her train.
No help then, but or I must die or she;
And yet my death of no avail would be:
For one death I had died already then,
When first she lived in me; and now to die
Another death again, were but to tie
And twist them both into a third; which, when
It once has seixed on, never loses men.
Her death might be my life; but her to kill
I of my self had neither power, nor will.
So desperate was my case. Whilst I delayed,
My guest still teemed, my debts still greater grew;
The less I had to pay, the more was due:
The more I knew, the more I was afraid;
The more I mused, the more I was dismayed.
At last I learnt, there was no way but one,
A friend must do it for me. He alone,
That is the Lord of life, by dying can
Save men from death, and kill Corruption:
And many years ago the deed was done;
His heart was piere'd, out of his side there ran
Sins corrasives, restoratives for man.
This precious balm I begged, for pities sake,
At Mercies gate: where Faith alone may take,
What Grace and Truth do offer liberally.
Bounty said, Come. I heard it, and believed
None ever there complained but was relieved.
Hope waiting upon Faith, said instantly,
That henceforth I should live, Corruption dye.
I Would so she died, I live. But yet, alas!
^e are not parted. She is where she was;
Cleaves fast unto me, still looks through mine eyes
^peaks in my tongue, and muses in my mind,
^orks with my hands: her body's left behind,
Although her soul be gone. My miseries
All flow from hence; from hence my woes arise.
Ioath my self, because I leave her not;
Yet cannot leave her. No, she is my lot
Now being dead, that living was my choice;
And still though dead, she both conceives and bears
Many faults daily, and as many fears:
All which for vengeance call with a loud voice,
And drown my comforts with their deadly noise.
Dead bodies kept unburied quickly stink,
And putrify: how can I then but think
Corruption noisome, even mortified?
Though such she were before, yet such to me
She seemed not: Kind fools can never see,
Or will not credit, until they have tried,
That friendly looks often false intents do hide.
But mortified Corruption lies unmaskt,
Blabs her own secret filthynesse unaskt,
To all that understand her. That do none,
In whom she lives embraced with delight:
She first of all deprives them of their sight;
Then dote they on her as upon their own,
And she to them seems beautiful alone.
But woe is me! one part of me is dead,
The other lives. Yet that which lives, is led,
Or rather carried captive unto sin,
By the dead part. I am a living grave,
And a dead body I within me have.
The worse part of the better often does win;
And when I should have ended, I begin.
The sent would choke me, were it not that grace
Sometimes vouch safeth to perfume the place
With odors of the spirit, which do ease me,
And counterpoise Corruption. Blessed spirit,
Although eternal torments be my merit,
And of my self Transgressions only please me,
Add grace enough being revived to raise me.
Challenge thine own: Let not intruders hold
Against thy right, what to my wrong I sold.
Having no state my self but tenancy,
And tenancy at will, what could I grant
That is not voided, if thou say avaunt?
O speak the word, and make these inmates flee;
Or which is one, take me to dwell with thee.
The Curb.
PEace rebel Thought: do thou not know thy King,
My God is here?
Cannot his presence, if no other thing,
Make thee forbear?
Or were he absent, all the standers by
Are but his spies:
And well he knows, if thou should it deny,
Thy words were lies.
If others will not, yet I must, and will
My self complain.
My God, even now a base rebellious thought
Began to move,
And subt'ly twining with me would have wrought
Me from thy love:
Feign he would have me to believe, that sin
And thou might both
Take up my heart together for your Inn,
And neither loath
The others company; a while sit still,
And part again.
Tell me, my God, how this may be redrest:
The fault is great,
And I the guilty party have confessed,
I must be beat:
And I refuse not punishment for this,
Though to my pain,
So I may learn to do no more amiss,
Nor sin again.
Correct me, if thou will; but teach me then,
What I shall do.
Lord of my life, me thinks I hear thee say,
That labor's eased:
The fault that is confessed, is done away;
And thou art pleased.
How can I sin again, and wrong thee then
That do relent,
And cease thine anger straight, as soon as men
Do but repent?
No rebel Thought: for if thou move again,
I Will tell thee too.
The Loss.
THe match is made between my love and me:
And therefore glad and merry now I Will be.
Come Glory, crown my head, and pleasures drown my bed of thorns in down.
Sorrow be gone, delight and joy alone befit my honey moon.
Be packing now you comb'rous Cares and Fears:
Mirth will allow no room to sighs and tears.
Whilst thus I lay as ravished with delight,
I heard one say, so fools their friends requite.
I knew the voice, my Lords; and at the noise his words did make, arose.
I looked and spied each where, and lowdly cried, my dear; but none replied.
Then to my grief I found my love was gone,
Without relief, leaving me all alone.
The Search.
WHither, oh! whither is my Lord departed?
What can my Love, that is so tender hearted,
Forsake the soul which once he through darted,
As though it never smarted?
No sure, my Love is here, if I could find him:
He that fills all can leave no place behind him.
But oh! my senses are too weak to wind him,
Or else I do not mind him.
Oh! no, I mind him not so as I ought;
Nor seek him so as I by him was sought,
When I had lost my self; he dearly bought
Me that was sold for naught.
But I have wounded him, that made me sound;
Lost him again, by whom I first was found;
Him, that exalted me, have cast to the ground:
My sins his blood have drowned.
Tell me, oh! tell me (thou alone can tell)
Lord of my life, where thou art gone to dwell:
For in thy absence heaven it self is hell;
Without thee none is well.
Or if thou be not gone, but only hidest
Thy presence in the place where thou abidest;
Teach me the sacred art, which thou providest
For all them whom thou guidest,
To seek and find thee by: Else here I Will lie,
Until thou find me. If thou let me dye
That only unto thee for life do cry,
Thou dyest as well as I.
For if thou live in me, and I in thee,
Then either both alive or dead mu^t be:
At least, I Will lay my death on thee, and see
If thou will not agree.
For though thou be the judge thy self, I have
Thy promise for it which thou can not wave,
That who salvation at thy hands do crave,
Thou will not fail to save.
Oh! seek and find me then, or else deny
Thy truth, thy self. Oh! thou that can not lie
Show thy self constant to thy word, draw nigh;
Find me. Lo, here Ilye.
The Return.
Lo, now my love appears,
My tears
Have cleared mine eyes. I see
It Is he.
Thanks blessed Lord, thine absence was my hell;
And now thou art returned, I am well.
By this I see I must
Not trust
My joys unto my self:
This shelfe
Of too secure and presumptuous pleasure
Had almost sunk my ship, and drowned my treasure.
Who would have thought a joy
So coy,
To be offended so
And go
So suddenly away? as though enjoying
Full pleasure and contentment were annoying.
Hereafter I had need
Take heed:
Joys, amongst other things,
Have wings,
And watch their opportunities of flight;
Converting in a moment day to night.
But is it enough for me,
To be
Instructed to be wise?
I Will rise,
And read a lecture unto them that are
Willing to learn, how comfort dwells with care.
He that his joys would keept,
Must weep,
And in the brine of tears
And fears
Must pickle them. That powder will preserve:
Faith with repentance is the souls conserve.
Learn to make much of care:
A rare
And precious balsome it is
For bliss;
Which often resides where mirth with sorrow meets.
Heavenly joys on earth are bitter-sweets.
The Circumcision.
SOorrow betide my sins! Must smart so soon
Seize on my Saviors tender flesh, scarce grown
Unto an eight days age?
Can nothing else assuage
The wrath of heaven but his infant blood?
Innocent infant, infinitely good!
Is this thy welcome to the world, great God:
No sooner born but subject to the rod,
Of sin incensed wrath?
Alas! what pleasure has
Thy Fathers justice to begin thy passion
Almost together with thine incarnation?
Is it to antidate thy death? Indite
Thy condemnation himself? and write
The coppie with thy blood,
Since nothing is so good?
Cr^s't by this experiment to try,
Whether thou be borne mortal and can dye?
If man must needs draw blood of God, yet why
Stays he not till thy time be come to die?
Did thou thus early bleed
For us, to show what need
We have to hasten unto thee as fast,
And learn that all the time is lost that is past?
It Is true we should do so. Yet in this blood
There Is something else that must be understood:
It seals thy covenant;
That so we may not want
Witness enough against thee, that thou art
Made subject to the law to act our part.
The Sacrament of thy regeneration
It cannot be. It gives no intimation
Of what thou were, but we.
Native impuritie,
Original corruption, was not thine;
But only as thy righteousness is mine.
In holy Baptism this is brought to me,
As that in Circumcision was to thee:
And so thy loss and pain
Did prove my joy and goine.
Thy Circumcision writ thy death in blood:
Baptism in water seals my livelihood.
Oh blessed change! yet rightly understood
That blood was water, and this water's blood.
What shall I give again
To recompense thy pain?
Lord, take revenge upon me for this smart:
To quit thy foreskin, circumcise my heart.
Inundations.
WE talk of Noah's flood as of a wonder;
And so we may:
The Scrptures say,
The waters did prevail. the hills were under,
And nothing could be seen but sea.
And yet there are two other sloods surpass
That flood as far,
As heaven one star:
Which many men regard as little as
The ordinariest things that are.
The one is sin, the other is salvation:
And we must need
Confess indeed
That either of them is an inundation,
That does the deluge far exceed.
In Noah's food he and his household lived;
And there abode
A whole Ark-load
Of other creatures, that were then reprieved,
All safely on the waters rode.
But when sin came, it overflowed all,
And left none free:
Nay, even he
That knew no sin, could not release my thrall;
But that he was made sin for me.
And when salvation came, my Saviors blood
Drowned sin again
With all its train
Of evils; overflowing them with good,
With good that ever shall remain.
Oh! let there be one other inundation:
Let grace overflow
In my soul so,
That thankfulness may level with salvation,
And sorrow sin may overgrow.
Then will I praise my Lord and Savior so,
That Angels shall
Admire man's fall;
When they shall see Gods greatest glory grow,
Where Satan thought to root out all.
Sin.
Sin, I would feign define thee, but thou art
An uncouth thing,
All that I bring
To show thee fully, shows thee but in part.
I call thee the transgression of the law.
And yet I read,
That sin is dead
Without the law; and thence it strength does draw.
I say thou art the sting of death. It Is true.
And yet I find
Death comes behind:
The work is done before the pay be due.
I say thou art the devils work. Yet he
Should much rather
Call thee father:
For he had been no devil but for thee.
What shall I call thee then? If death and devil,
Right understood,
Be names too good;
I Will say thou art the quintessence of evil.
Travels at home.
Often have I wished a traveller to be;
Mine eyes did even itch the sights to see,
That I had heard and read of. Often I have
Been greedy of occasion, as the grave
That never says enough; yet still was crossed
When oportunities had promised most.
At last I said: What meanst thou wandering else
To straggle thus? Go travel first thy self:
Thy little world can show thee wonders great;
The greater may have more, but not more neat
And curious pieces. Search, and thou shall find
Enough to talk of. If thou will, thy mind
Europe supplies, and Asia thy will,
And Africa thine affections. And if still
Thou list to travel further, put thy senses
For both the Indies. Make no more pretenses
Of new discoveries, whilst yet thine own
And nearest little world is still unknown.
Away then with thy quadrants, compasses,
Globes, tables, cards, and mappes, and minute glasses:
Lay by thy journals and thy diaries,
Close up thine annalls and thy histories:
Study thy self, and read what thou have writ
In thine own book, thy conscience: Is it fit
To labor after other knowledge so,
And thine own nearest, dearest self not know?
Travels abroad both dear and dangerous are,
Whilst often the soul pays for the bodies fare*
Travels at home are cheap and safe. Salvation
Comes mounted on the wings of meditation.
He that does live at home, and learns to know
God and himself, needs no further go.
FINIS.

