KLINIK, OR THE DIET OF THE DISEASED.

Divided into Three BOOKS.

Wherein is set down at length the whole matter and nature of Diet for those
in health, but especially for the sick; the Air, and other Elements; Meat and
Drink, with diverse other things; various controversies concerning this Subject
are discussed:

Besides many pleasant practical and historical relations, both of the
Authors own and other men's, etc. as by the Argument of each Book, the
Contents of the Chapters, and a large Table, may easily appear.

Colellected as well out of the Writings of ancient Philosophers, Greek,
Latin, and Arabian, and other modern Writers; as out of diverse other Authors.

Newly published by JAMES HEART, Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD LORD MONTAGVE, BARON OF BOVGHTON, ALL HEALTH
AND HAPPINESS.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT said of Diogenes that Cynicke Philosopher, that being well stricken in
years, he should now betake himself to his rest and ease: he replied, that
it did not become one that was running a race, to intermit or slack his pace,
the nearer especially he drew to the end thereof. The like may I in some sort
say of my self, who have for these many years past, not hid my talent in a
napkin, keeping within mine own breast that knowledge I had both in the
University, and by many years experience acquired in the profession of
Physic: but have, not only by my practical employment endeavored to be
profitable to this present age and place wherein I live; but also to propagate
some directions to posterity, for leading a more comfortable life both in
sickness and in health. Of late years therefore as my other occasions did
permit, I set upon this task which I now present unto the view of the world.
But because whosoever in this last and literate age of the world steppeth forth
upon this public stage exposes himself to the sharp censures of as many
different humors, as were that Lyricke Poets guests; it has been therefore a
common custom for such as undertake such taskes, to make choice of some noble
and virtuous Patron to protect them from the virulent and venomous tongues and
obtrectations of envious and malevolent persons. And therefore casting mine
eyes about this hemispheare, and thinking on many, my thoughts could rest no
where, until such time as I pitched upon your Honorable Person. Motives to
induce me hereunto I found diverse; First, your eminent place in the public,
being installed in the state chair of higher Honor above the ordinary Gentry.
And here have I a large field afforded me to expatiate into, to wit, the
honor of this noble family, and in what esteene it has been during the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, but especially during the reign of King James, of
famous memory, in what esteem he had it, and to what eminency he has
advanced the same, is yet recent in the minds of most men now living; and how
his Majesty now reigning, has nothing diminished, but rather increased these
former favors and honors, without my relation is well enough known, both in
court and country. It were easy for me also to discourse of the many
honorable houses wherewith this noble family has matched, having been by
marrriage allied to many great houses of this kingdom. But because I know your
Honor is not delighed with such panegyricks of your own praises, I will pass
over these and many other things might be said: besides that all these outward
ornaments and prerogatives, how great and glorious sover, yet are nor
permanent, but perish; and the wiseman, who both by reason of the extent of
his wisdom and understanding, together with the abundance of wealth, had
atteined to as high a pitch of felicity as the earth could afford him, yet
makes this still the burden of his song, Vanity of vanities, all is but
vanity. And this same wise man in this same palinody, or recantation sermon, as
I may call it, concludes with this sentence, worthy to be engraven in letters
of gold, To fear God, and keep his Commandments, this is the whole duty of a
man's life. And therefore all these outward ornaments, howsoever I deny not to
be great blessings, yet compared with true piety (which was that which chiefly
graced great ones recorded in holy writ) they are nothing but the shell, that
being the kernel. And this is that which has so much adorned and beautified
your Honor, as likewise the love to your country which are so well known
over the country, that it need not to be proclaimed by my pen. And this
seems, as it were, with your other large inheritances, to be hereditarily
derived from your noble parents, both father and mother of happy memory, whose
worth and virtues, especially true piety (being especially now again revived
in your own person) are yet so fresh in the minds of many yet alive, that
superfluous were it form to spend time thereon.

Another motive moving me to make choice of your Honor, was the love and
favor I have ever found both from your self and whole family ever since my
first coming into this country: the which, as it has been always extended
to scholars, so to my self in particular, having been diverse times employed
for the recoverie of the health of your Honors last noble Lady of happy
memory, mother to these hopeful Gentlemen your Sons, and to that noble
Gentlewoman, Mistress Manners, in whom may yet conspicuously be seen those
virtuous ornaments which did so much adorn that noble Lady now resting in
peace and happiness.

Again, another motive inducing me heereunto, was, that of late years, a
worthy religious and learned Divine, your near neighbor, had some few years
ago dedicated unto your Honor a book, Mr. Ro^e^^ ^olton, Minister of
Broughto^ in Northampton shire.
called, Some general directions for a comfortable walking with God, I thought
it would not be impertinent for a Physician to follow with his directions how
to order the body of man in sickness and in health, and that by the use of
good and laudable diet, and all other things thereunto belonging, and at great
length in this book to be seen. And although the greatest part of your glass
be now run, yet may it prove profitable for younger people, and in
particular, for these young Gentlemen, in whom you are your self again
renewed, but especially in that hopeful Gentleman, your eldest Son, who, as
he bears the name of your self, and immediate predecessor, and is like to
inherit large and ample possessions, so is my hope and confidence, that he
shall really inherit all those noble virtues, Piety especially, whereof
either your self, or noble Predecessors were ever possessed.

This might yet again prove no small motive and inducement for me to present
these dieteticall Precepts unto your self, in that you have by your own
practice and example lest such a worthy Pattern and precedent to posteritic of
temperance and sobriety, not in diet only, but in your other actions also.
And therefore it is no less true than trivial; Vivimus exemplis, non regulis,
men are commonly more moved by practice than by precept. Neither herein has
your labor been lost, having now atteined to that number of years, with such
a freedom from infirmities, as very few of your age and eminency have attened
unto.

Accept therefore, Right Honorable, this my rude labor, and take these my
pains in good part, as a grateful acknowledgement of that respect and
dutiful observance I owe unto your honorable person, and noble family; and
although conscious to my self, both of the weakness of my parts, and the hard
censures I am like to undergo (from the which, notwithstanding, my betters
have not been freed) yet I shall more willingly undergo this burden under
the protection of so noble, judicious, wise, and pious a Patron. Protect
therefore, and still countenance the learned and honest Artist, and
discountenance ignorant Empiricall Physicians, and such, especially, as erring
out of their own orbs, without due consideration of the weightinesse of their
own calling, too too pragmatically thrust their sickle into another man's
harvest. But because many things concerning this same particular point, are
handled in this subsequent discourse, therefore, to avoid tediousness, with
hearty wishes to Almighty God for your Honor, the continuance of many happy
days for the good both of Church and Commonwealth, and country wherein you
live, with the increase of choicest blessings upon your self and noble family,
I rest

Your Honors in all dutiful observance, JAMES HEART.

The License from the College.
HAving read some part of this Book, and in a general view looked over more,
we think it learnedly contrived, and worthy the reading.

JOHN ARGENT. WILLIAM CLEMENT. THEODORE GVLSTON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS WHOLE TRACTATE.
Of the First BOOK.
CHAP. I. Diverse acceptations of this word Diet. What health is, and whether
Diet be a thing necessary for healthful and sick persons? CHAP. IJ. Whether
by means of Diet the life of man may before may years prolonged? CHAP. IIJ. Of
Climactericall years, with their reasons assigned by antiquity, numericall,
astrologicall and Physical. CHAP. IV. Of things called not natural, and first
of the air. CHAP. V. Of several sorts of wines, and their various effects.
CHAP. VJ. Of the four seasons of the year, and how they affect the body of
man. CHAP. VIJ. Of water in general: of terrestrial water: of water passing
through, or issuing out of the earth; as springs, rivers, wells and ponds. CHAP.
VIIJ. Whether any pure Element be able to nourish a mixed body? and whether any
such compound be able to live by the sole use of the same. CHAP. IX. Whether
the life of man without food be sustained for any long continuance of time.
CHAP. X. Of nourishment, and what therein is to be considered. CHAP. XJ. Of the
times of repast, and how often we ought to eat in a day, and when to feed
freeliest, at dinner or at supper. Something concerning breakefasts. CHAP. XIJ.
Of the matter of nourishment, and first of corn, and bread made thereof. CHAP.
XIIJ. Of roots usually eaten, and in most account for food. CHAP. XIV. Of herbs
in most ordinary use for diet, and first of such as cool most. CHAP. XV. Of
Herbs hot in operation, and in most ordinary use. Of Artichocks, Gourds,
Cucumbers, and musk melons. CHAP. XVJ. Of the fruits of trees, especially of
shrubs and lesser trees ordinarily used for food, and often for physic: and
first of Strawberries, Raspes, mulberries, Gooseberries, Currants (by the
vulgar so called) red and black, of Barberries, and whorts, or
whortle-berries. Of Cherries, Plums, Abricocks and peaches. CHAP. XVIJ. Of
Grapes, Raisins, Currants (properly so called) figs and dates; and of Apples,
Pears, Quinces, Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, Pomegranates, Services, Medlars and
Corneillions, Of wallnuts, Haselnuts, fitbirds, almonds, bitter and sweet,
Chestnut and Fisticke-nut. CHAP. XVIIJ. Of several sorts of flesh, especially
of four footed beasts, with their appurtenances and parts. CHAP. XIX. Of foul
both tame and wild, and their several sorts, as also of parts of fowls, and
of Eggs. CHAP. XX. Of strange and uncouth diet, which some people have in
ordinary use: as of dogs, cats, horses, mules, asses, rats, locusts, frogs,
snailes and man's flesh. CHAP. XXJ. Of several sorts of fishes, both of the Sea
and fresh-waters, together with the various and diverse nourishment they breed
in the body. CHAP. XXIJ. Of seasoning meat. Of salt, and of sauces of several
sorts. Of spices used in diet both in sickness and in health. CHAP. XXIIJ. Of
Gluttony and excess in the use of food. CHAP. XXIV. Of Drink, and what things
in the use thereof to be observed. Of morning draughts, drinking betwixt
meals, beginning or ending the meal with a draught, and drinking to bedward.
CHAP. XXV. Of water as it is used for drink, and of several ways of cooling
the same, and correcting bad waters. CHAP. XXVJ. Of Wine, the several sorts
thereof, with the right use, and for whom most fitting. CHAP. XXVIJ. Of Beer,
Ale, Perry and Cidar, serving us in stead of wine. CHAP. XXVIIJ. Of
drunkenness, and the mischiefs thence ensuing to the soul, body and goods.
Questions discussed and handled in this First BOOK, with relation to the
Chapters wherein they are contained.
1. WHether by means of Diet the life of man may be prolonged? cap. 2. 2.
Whether man's age does not now decline, and the world wax old? Cap. 3. 3.
Whether any compound or mixed body can live by the use of one Element only?
Cap. 8. 4. Whether water conveied through pipes of lead be wholesome for
ordinary use? Cap. 7. 5. Whether man or woman may live many days, months or
years without the use of any sustenance whatsoever? Cap. 9. 6. Whether it be
best to feed freelist at dinner or at supper? Cap. 11. 7. Whether breake-fasts
are to be used? Cap. 11. 8. Whether snailes be good against a Consumption? Cap.
20. 9. Whether morning draughts fasting be allowable? Cap. 24. 10. Whether good
to drink betwixt meals, and to bedward? Cap. 24. 11. Whether it be good to
begin, or yet to end our meal with a draught? ib. 12. Whether old may be
allowed the use of wine? Cap. 26. 13. Whether it be fit sometimes to be drunk
to make one cast in an ague, or no? Cap. 28.
Contents of the Chapters of the Second BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the Diet of the Diseased in general, the utility and profit
thereof. Of the air in particular, and how to be corrected in time of need,
and what fuel for this purpose is best. Something concerning the air of
Churches and Churchyards. CHAP. IJ. Of the particular air wherein sick
lives, to wit, his habitation, and the best situation thereof. As also whether
a country-aire or that of Towns or Cities be better? Where something
concerning the situation of the ancient Town of Northampton. CHAP. IIJ. Of the
clothing and covering of the sick, as also concerning their shifting, and of
the error of the vulgar practicing the contrary. Something also concerning the
bed wherein the sick lies, and whether the sick ought to have his hair cut?
CHAP. IV. Of abstinence, either from some or all sorts of food, for a short or
a longer time, and of several sorts of abstinence. CHAP. V. Of aliment or diet
of the diseased in general: Whether a thin and spare diet or a full and
liberal be better. CHAP. VJ. Certain rules and laws from whence the Diet of
the Diseased is desumed. CHAP. VIJ. What things in prescribing Diet for the
Diseased are to be observed. CHAP. VIIJ Of fit Diet for the Diseased, and that
of several sorts; and first of that which vegetables afford: as bread, herbs
and fruits. CHAP. IX. Of flesh, and what sorts of flesh are fittest for the
sick, and how to be exhibited. CHAP. X. Of Eggs and their use, and whether
they may be allowed the sick? Of diverse liquid substances made of flesh: as
broth, Colice, Gelee, restorative distillations, etc. CHAP. XJ. Of Fish, and
whether they may be allowed the sick? CHAP. XIJ. Of the drink of the
diseased, and first of water, with the frequent use thereof in ancient times.
Whether, and how now to be exhibited? and how before to be prepared, and where
it is not admitted, how to supply the defect thereof. CHAP. XIIJ. Of warm
drink, and whether it be useful or no? CHAP. XIV. Of wine, and whether it may
safely be administered to sick folks? Of artificial wines, aqua vitae,
usquebagh, and other strong waters. CHAP. XV. Of diverse drinks made of honey,
mulsum, mulsa, or hydromel, oxymel, with the various ways of their
composition, and of their excellent virtues. CHAP. XVJ. Of diverse drinks made
of Barley, very useful for the sick, and in frequent request: as Ptisan,
Barly-water, Cream of barley; and wherein ours differ from those of ancient
times. Something concerning Emulsions, both almond-milke, and others. CHAP.
XVIJ. Of milk of diverse sorts, and whether fit to be used of the diseased?
CHAP. XVIIJ. Of exercise which terminateth in rest, the necessity and utility
thereof: together with diverse and various sorts of exercise, as well general as
particular, with several circumstances therein to be considered. CHAP. XIX. Of
the exercise of the mind. Whether at our meals we may discourse and
deliberate of serious and weighty affairs? And what was the custom and
practice among the ancients. Accommodation of Exercises to the sick, how safe
it is for them to use Exercise, and what fittest, and in what diseases.
Questions discussed and handled in this second BOOK.
1. Whether a Country-aire or that of towns or cities be better? cap. 2. 2.
Whether it be better to shift the sick, or to let them lie still in foul
clothes, according to the vulgar custom? Cap. 3. 3. Whether the bed is to be
warmed? Cap. 3. 4. Whether it be good to cut the hair of the sick? Cap. 3. 5.
Whether a thin and spare or a full and liberal diet be better? Cap. 5. 6.
Whether Eggs may safely be used of the sick? Cap. 10. 7. Whether fish may be
allowed the sick? Cap. 11. 8. Whether warm drink be useful? Cap. 13. 6.
Whether wine may safely be exhibited to sick folks? Cap. 14. 10. Whether
milk may safely be used of the sick? Cap. 17.
Contents of the Chapters of the Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF Repletion and Inanition in general, what they are, and the
variety of particular circumstances therein to be considered. CHAP. IJ. Of
Phlebotomy, what it is, the several sorts, and sundry things therein to be
considered. CHAP. IIJ. Whether in contagious, malign and pestilentiall Fevers,
and in the small Pox and Measels, as likewise in the Jaundize, Phlebotomy may
safely be administered? CHAP. IV. Of the veins to be opened in the body of man,
and the manner. CHAP. V. To what persons this remedy may safely be administered.
Whether a woman with child may safely be let blood? where something concerning
the age fit to be phlebotomized. CHAP. VJ. Of the quantity, how long the
Patient is to bleed; as also concerning reiteration of this remedy in the time
of need, with a confutation of some erroneous opinions concerning this point.
CHAP. VIJ. Of the fittest time for evacuation by Phlebotomy, both general and
particular, both of election and coaction: as also whether we may let blood
during the dog days? CHAP. VIIJ. Whether in Phlebotomy we are to observe the
sign, and several other things pointed out to us by our Ephemerides-masters.
CHAP. IX. Preparation before Phlebotomy, during bleeding what to be done, and
how to be ordered after. Of particular Phlebotomy by leaches. Of scarification
and cupping. Of searing, setum, vesicatories, etc. CHAP. X. Of Purgation or
evacuation of corrupted humors in general. CHAP. XJ. Whether we ought to purge
or no? what persons are fit to be purged, and able to endure purgations?
Whether women with child may safely be purged. CHAP. XIJ. Of humors to be
purged: of their preparation; as also of the body to be purged. Of the quantity
or reiteration, or often exhibition in time of need. CHAP. XIIJ. Of vomits,
Glisters, Suppositories, and with which we are to begin when diverse are
requried? CHAP. XIV. Of the opportune time of purgation, both general and
particular, with diverse other things concerning this subject. CHAP. XV. Of the
ways and passages by which we are to purge: of the forms in which we exhibit
Physic; together with the manner of governing the sick during purgation, and
means to keep Physic in the stomach, that it cast it not up again. CHAP.
XVJ. Of sweating and means to provoke the same: diverse sorts of hydrotickes,
or medicines provoking sweat, both external and internal. CHAP. XVIJ. Of
Bathing among the ancients, as also certain ablutions of head, hands and feet.
Of artificial Bathes general and particular; the right use, the time,
preparation, and diverse other considerable circumstances, and how far we
observe the customs. CHAP. XVIIJ. Of natural Bathes or mineral waters.
Whether Leap year, called also Bissextile causes any alteration in these
mineral waters, or infringeth the force thereof? and of the originiall and
first beginning of this time. CHAP. XIX. Of preparation before the use of
mineral waters; the right use and virtues of them, their various kinds both
in this Island and other countries. CHAP. XX. of the excretion by urine, the
retention of urine, together with the nature of diureticke remedies, the right
use and abuse thereof. CHAP. XXJ. Of ordure ^^rfecall excrements, and diverse
things in them considerable, this excretion being sometimes too lavish and
sometimes deficient. CHAP. XXIJ. Of Spittle, spitting or salivation. Of Tobacco
and the great abuse thereof in this Kingdom to the great prejudice of the
health of the body. CHAP. XXIIJ. Of Snot or Snevell. Of rheum falling down
upon the lungs and other pectorall parts. Of expuition or expectoration, the
great abuse committed in the use of expectorating medicines, and the right use
thereof. CHAP. XXIV. Of carnal copulation, the right use and abuse thereof.
What age and constitution it best befitteth. Some thing concerning the
menstruous flax in women. CHAP. XXV. Of Sleeping and waking, the benefit and
use thereof in sickness and in health. The several sorts of sleep, and what
persons may sleep freeliest, and who less. CHAP. XXVJ. Of dreams, and that of
them there may be made good use in sickness and in health. Of Noctambuli,
commonly called Night-walkers, or such as walk in their sleep, especially in
the night-season, together with the reason thereof. CHAP. XXVIJ. Of the soul
and passions thereof in general. CHAP. XXVIIJ. Of lustful love, and what hurt
is thereby procured to mankind. Whether any may dye of love. Some thing also
concerning Iealously. CHAP. XXIX. Of amorous or love-potions, called Philtra.
Whether love may be procured by fascination. CHAP. XXX. Of fascination by
sight, by wordor voice, or yet by spells. Of Imagination, and strange
stupendous effects our Paracelsists attribute thereunto, together with the
absurdity of the same. A digression concerning the weapon-salve, with a
confutation of the chief arguments brought for the maintaining thereof. CHAP.
XXXJ. Of Mandrakes, the nature and virtue thereof, and whether this plan^ has
any power to procure love? CHAP. XXXIJ. Of immoderate and passionate anger: the
hurt thereby procured to the body in sickness and in health, and antidotes
against it. In what diseases best, and in what worst; and whether any may dye
of anger. CHAP. XXXIIJ. Of sorrow, grief and fear; the danger and detriment
comes thereby to the body of man, and how hurtful in sickness and in
health. Whether any may dye of Sorrow and Grief. CHAP. XXXV. Of Joy and
Gladness, and the excess thereof, which may also hurt the body. Whether any
may dye of excessive Joy.
The conclusion of this whole discourse.

Questions discussed and handled in this Third BOOK.
1. Whether in the malign, contagious and pestilentiall Fevers, as likewise
in the small Pox and Measels, and in the Jaundize we may safely let blood?
Chap. 3. 2. Whether a woman with child may be let blood or purged? Cap. 5. and
10. 3. Whether age does indicate Phlebotomy? and whether this remedy in time of
need may not be administered to young children and aged people? Cap. 5. 4.
Whether the party phlebotomized will every year expect the reiteration of the
same remedy? Cap. 6. 5. Whether palpitation of any part of the body does argue
life to be confined to that part, and that a vein being then there opened the
party should presently dye, as is by some of the vulgar conceived? Cap. 6. 6.
Whether we may safely purge and bleed during the dog days? Cap. 7. 7. Whether
in Phlebotomy and purging we are to observe the sign with the Moon? Cap. 8.
and 14. 8. Whether Somnus meridianns, or Sleep in the day time be to be
allowed of? Cap. 25. 9. Whether Leap year alters or infringeth the force of
mineral waters for that year. Cap. 18. 10. Whether any simple by its virtue
can procure love? Cap. 29. 11. Whether love can be procured by fascination or
bewitching. ibid. 12. Whether Fancy or Imagination does work ad extra, or
without its own body upon any external object? Cap. 30. 13. Whether any may
die of love? Cap. 28. 14. Whether Mandrakes have any power to procure love? Cap.
31. 15. Whether any may dye of Anger? Cap. 32 16. Whether one may dye of Sorrow
and Grief? Cap. 33. 17. Whether one may dye of Joy and mirth? Cap. 34.
The Introduction to this WHOLE DISCOVRSE; Wherein is detected the lawless
intrusion of many ignorant Persons upon the profession of PHYSIC.
WEll-weighing (kind Reader) and comparing that golden sentence of the sage
Ecclesiast. 12, 14.
Solomon, that of writing many books there is no end, and much reading is a
weariness to the flesh; with that of the famous (...), etc. Aph. 1. lib. 1.
Hippocrates, vita brevis, ars longa: the life of man is but short, and Arts
and Sciences are long and hard to be attained unto: I thought it always the
part of a wise man to apply his study to that which might prove most
profitable, either for his own private, or yet for the public. And if ever
this was useful, this age wherein we now live requires this care and
circumspection. The multitude of needless and unprofitable pamphlets,
Multitude of idle and superfluous pamphlets printed.
that I say no worse, we see daily to pester the Printers Presses, in such
sort, that it were to be wished there might be some restraint and limitation,
and not every man at his pleasure suffered to vent the idle fancies of a self
conceited brain; so far many times from doing any good, either in Church or
Commonwealth, that they prove rather the causes of a great deal of mischief.
Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim. But I let pass that which is not
in my power to amend, and come to the matter now in hand. Some few years ago,
I stepped forth also my self upon the stage to act some part of mine own
profession. There I detected and laid open some errors and impostures
practiced by some ignorant practitioners of physic in that Semioticall part
of physic handles the signs of diseases, as well diagnosticke as
prognosticke.
Semioticall part of this profession which treats of urine. Now Ille ego qui
quondam gracili modulatus avena, Carmen, etc. I have now undertaken the
handling of an higher task, to wit, that part of the Therapeuticall part of
physic, is that which is conversant about the cure of diseases.

Diet of the Diseased has been much neglected by Physicians.


Therapeuticke part of physic, which handles the diet of the diseased, which
of all other parts of physic has most slightly and slenderly been past
over; and that as well by the ancient, as by our modern and late Writers. And
since the diet of sound and healthful people has been handled by a multitude
both of ancient and late Writers, both in foreign countries, and here at home
amongst our selves; it is a wonder that the diet of the diseased, who of all
others have most need, has hitherto so far been neglected! Having
therefore a long time waited for my elders and better skilled in this
business, and perceiving that no man opened his mouth in the behalf of the
diseased, I took upon me to say something, rather than to be altogether
silent. And so much the more was I animated and encouraged to set upon this
subject, in that I saw it so generally neglected, or at least, most grossly
abused, which notwithstanding, was so carefully among the ancients observed, as
shall hereafter in the sequel of this discourse more plainly appear.

And daily experience does plainly prove, that a small error committed, A
small error in diet much preiudiceth the patient.
either in the due quantity, in the quality, in the time, or any other such
circumstance, proves not a little prejudicial to the patient. And I my self
have in my daily practice observed this to be true, that aliments of the best
nature and laudable condition, yet taken but at an unseasonable time, as toward
the time of the exacerbation of the Fever, called the Paroxysme, and by the
vulgar the fit; has after made the patient confess, that sweet meat had
sour sauce. And from hence may be evinced, Erroneous practice of the vulgar,
especially women in feeding the sick too much.
the erroneous practice of many, of women especially, who think the sick has
never food enough; and for this purpose they never cease to urge them to eat,
morning and evening, night and day, all is one, their too too officious love
and kindness, having neither rhyme nor reason, as we say, produces often this
contrary effect, that, according to the vulgar saving, They kill their friend
with kindness. Jmpura corpora quo magis nutris eo magis laedit, Aph. 8. lib.
That famous Father of Physicians was of a far other mind, affirming, that
unclean bodies, the more they were nourished, the more they received: And the
same Hippocrates was so punctual in prescribing the exact periods and several
circumstances of the diet in acute diseases of his days, that from thence
appears the exact care was had in those days of the diet of the diseased, as
may by diverse places of his writings, appear. The like care had that noble
Lib. 3. cap. 5.
Celsus among the Latins, and not unjustly called the Latin Hippocrates, who
manifests the great care he hd even in this particular point. And this
extraordinary care of theirs was the cause they had a certain kind of
Physicians among them, whose proper office and imploiment was, Clinici, or
bed-Physitians, who attended on the sick.
to assist the sick, observing all that passed about them, having an especial
care that the diet prescribed by the chief Physician, were carefully observed,
all being afterward related to him when he came to visit the sick; and these
inferior assistant Physicians were for this cause called Clinici, from their
office of attending by the sickes bed; as in the second book of this discourse
shall more plainly appear. By the variety of things to be considered, even in
the diet of the diseased (which now notwithstanding is accounted a thing of
small or no esteem) may appear the great care and circumspection ought to be
had in the choice of a Physician with whom thou may safely be trust thy most
precious and costly jewel, thy life, I mean. And therefore kind Reader, give
me leave a little, to say something concerning some erroneous and ignorant
practitioners, before I proceed further, they being so dangerous members in a
wel-governed commonwealth. Most of those persons are styled by this general
name of Emperick, Emperickes and their kinds.

What an Emperick is.


which draws its denomination from experience, and is again subdivided into
many other branches: as the Empericke properly so called, Women Physicians,
Surgeons, ignorant Apothecaries, fugitive Physicians, Mountebankes,
Quack-salvers, Epehmerides-masters, and many more of this stamp. Now, an
Empericke is nothing else but such a person as undertaketh the practice of this
profession by means of some receipts, or traditionary medicines, howsoever,
perhaps, sometimes not without a successful event adhibited; and at the first
with good advice and counsel prescribed for the solace of the sick: yet now
being used by such persons, who are altogether strangers to good education in
the liberal Arts and Sciences, and especially unfurnished of that skill and
sufficiency required in the practice of this so sacred and sublime profession
of Physic; instead of wholesome and laudable medicines, be come now not only
dangerous, but often desperate and often the bane of such as use them,
howsoever not always for the time so sensibly perceived. This sort of
practitioner rejects the inquisiton of diseases and remedies according to
their causes, natures and qualities agreeable to true reason and understanding;
and satisfies himself with such things as often occur evident and manifest
unto sense, and his ordinary experience. And therefore the Empe^ick erreth, in
that he is derived of true method and a rational proceeding according to the
rules and principles of art in his practice; without the which he can never be
able to manage the diseases of the sick, and to bring them to a hopeful and
successful issue, unless now and then by accident, which is never without
great danger, as the learned are well able to understand. And Duplex
ignorantium medicorum genus: alterum little qui sola experien^ia nituntur,
aiuntque nullius rei naturam ^ osse ratione inven^ri. alterum little qui sibi
nomen sapientiae vindicant, and licet parem habeant cum pr^oribus ignorantiam,
opinione tamen scientiae sunt aucupati. Sed little inscitia inde habet initium
quod in rationalibus scientiis ^inime fiat exercitati; quae nos rite
distinguere and secernere docet cas propositiones quae demonstrandi vim habent,
altis quae probabilitatem qu^dem continent, nihil autem very possunt
demonstrare aut invenire, Gal. 1. de diff. Febr.
howsoever among practitioners, some may seem to have attaind to some higher
pitch of understanding than others, yet because they abuse right reason, they
ought not to be enrolled in the rank of right and rational Physicians; and by
consequent ought not to be suffered to practice this sublime profession. Now,
amongst our ordinary Emperickes, we reckon the ordinary Mountebanke and
Quackesalver, Mountebanks, Quack salvers, fugitive Physicians.
or fugitive Physician changing oftener than the Moon, their several seats
and habitations, often hanging out their flagges and banners, promising
indifferently the cure of all diseases. And of this stamp was a certain
Germane, History of an impudent Mountebanke.
who within these few years set up his briefes in this town, wherein he
bragged of a rare water, able to cure all Consumptions whatsoever; and would
bring a weak stomach, that before was scarce able to digest any sustenance,
within a few days to that vigor and strength, that it should be able to
digest a whole shoulder of mutton at a meal. And such another was another of
that same nation two or three years before him, who put out so many eyes in
Northamptonshire, and other places: Another of the same stamp.
and surely, I think they had but a blind understanding that would trust such
a traveller. And yet some of the Gentry, who would have taken it in great
scorn to be called fools, swallowed down such govions; in this verifying
that old saying to be true, Mundus vult decipi: But they paid well for their
experience, and I hope it will make some wiser the next time. Some of them
again, Traveling Empericks.
without any such public show or ostentation, travel to and fro, bragging of
great wonders they have done; and if perhaps, they have but once cured,
although it may be, but in show, some infected with the Neapolitan French
catholic (or how you list to call it) disease, by some Mercuriat inunction or
otherwise, this is sufficient to make such an Aesculapius dare to attempt any
thing after. Such an ubiquitary Physician was that, who few years ago had
almost persuaded a Gentleman of Bedfordshire, then irrecoverably sick of that
sort of Consumption, History of a runnagate Quacksalver.
which Physicians call an ulcer of the lungs, and well known by the judicious
artist to be of hard recovery, where there is not wanting the best care and
diligence of the most industrious and understanding cleere-sighted Physicians;
and that even before the disease be radicated and habituated within the body:
much more then in the decay of natural vigor and strength, accompanied with
an Faciet Hippocraticae est hujusmodi: Nares acutae, ocu^i concavi, ^oliapsa
tempora, auriculae frigidae and contractae, auriumque lobi inversi, quin cutis
circa frontem dura, tum circumtenta, and arida, colorque totius faciei
pallidus, aut e^t niger and tividus, and plumbeus, Hippoci. Prognost. lib. 1.
Aph. 3.
Hippocraticall face, as Physicians commonly call it. Unto this Gentleman then
(my presence being at that time solicited for a neighbor Gentlewoman in the
same town, not far from Bedford) was I entreated to repair, where upon my
first coming, I acquainted his wife and friends there present, with the
danger, which threatened no less than death to the patient, whom a neighboring
Parson-Physitian had a long time before had under his cure. Now, a few days
before my coming, this fugitive Aesculapius had soothed up both this Gentleman
and his friends with a vain hope of a supposed true cure, by means of some
consolidating balsames, which this cogging and coozening Quacke-salver assured
him and his friends would undoubtedly cure his infirmity. The bargain was
ten pounds, five in hand (for money must first be fingered) to buy such
balsames at London, and the rest at his return. And although here a mean and
ordinary understanding, might, as we use to say, smell out a Ratt; yet such
was the confidence, desire, and hope of health, that if I had not with much
ado dissuaded him from this course, whereunto he was likewise persuaded by an
Apothecary of his acquaintance, with his life, he had lost his money also. My
prediction of his death within a few days revolution proved too true, as I
learned shortly after by relation from a worthy virtuous Lady in
Northamptonshire, my patient, and mother to this Gentleman's wife. I instance
in this particular, that it may appear how far people are often deluded, and
even, as it were, bewitched with these maskes and vizards, shows and shadows
without any substance, and where there is no less danger than of life it
self. But we need not now go far, either into Germany or France to fetch
Emperickes, Emperickes abound with us here at home.
they being here every where obvious and at our elbowes; and scarce any town
or corporation of any note or fame, but there are one, if not more of this sort
of counterfeit Physicians: and how many of these supposed Physicians of both
sexes lie skouting in corners of the famous City of London, the College there
can tell. Amongst these lawless intruders there is one sort that is grown to
a saucie and arrogant impudency beyond many others, Surgeons I mean; who from
curing of green wounds, outward ulcers and sores, curing of the Pox by sweating
or salivation, Surgeons commonly too saucy and bold in practicing physic.
by Mercuriat inunctions, and some such other ministerial offices, which
Physicians (Surgery being but a ministerial part of physic) for the better
discharging of their function, have resigned to certain persons to practice.
But it is now so come to pass, that in many places, the servant has rebelled
against the Master, and affirmed all unto himself: as is reported, that
sometimes those slaves of Egypt, called Mamalukes, rebelled against the Sultan
their Sovereign, and assumed unto themselves the Diadem Royal.

And whereas the learned Physician, in regard of the extraordinary care and
diligence required both in his private study, and assiduall pains about his
sick patients, Surgeons are only deputed for the cure of external
infirmities.
be trusted the Surgeon with this external part of physic, reserving unto
himself the curing of internal diseases, being of greatest moment and
difficulty, and withal reserving unto himself a right of direction and
counsel in these external cures: it is now, notwithstanding, so come to
pass, that any ignorant apprentize in this profession, if he has but once
besmeared some Neapolitan patient with his Mercuriat ointment, thinks himself
suddenly matamorphosed into some famous Physician. And if he has made a
voyage into the Indies, or some other remote region (where, for want of better
counsel, those of the company are often cast upon such ordinary advice; their
ordinary infirmities notwithstanding, for the most part being the Scorbut and
Calenture) he thinks at his return he may be allowed to kill his countrymen:
and not with this contented, will not fail to bring up others in the same
ignorant impudency. And whereas the learned Physician, if he would wait upon
such employments, were as fit, if not fitter than some of themselves to go
about such business; yet, for the care he has of the other, being the more
weighty, and where most diligence is required, is willing to relinquish this
manual operation: yet is the impudent audacity of many of our Surgeons such,
that although they come far short of many points of their own profession;
yet are they not ashamed to assume unto themselves the profession and practice
of both these parts. De jure, now let the learned judge. Of the better and more
ingenious sort of Barber-Surgeons of the famous City of London, and some other
places of this Kingdom I speak not, who are so far from this unlawful and
lawless practice; that they are both ready and willing to admit of the
counsel of the learned Physician, as well for diet, as for other directions
tending to the recovery of their patients, even in points of their own
particular profession, wherein they might yet seem to challenge to themselves
some better right: so far are they from incroaching upon the Physicians
freehold, as knowing themselves unfit and unfurnished for so great and weighty
an imploiment. And this is likewise the custom in that famous City in Paris,
Laudable custom of those places where the Surgeon takes no great cure of
Surgery upon him without the advice and assistance of the Physician.
and many other places of that Kingdom, that a Surgeon (I mean of the best
note, not a bold impudent audacious fellow, daring do any thing) seldom or
never undertaketh any cure of importance, without the counsel and assistance
of one or more learned and skillful Physicians. But in defense of Empericks and
ignorant practitioners, there is a seeming strong objection made by the vulgar,
always ready to deceive themselves, and applaud their own ignorance; to wit,
that often good hap, and a prosperous and successful event does second and
accompany the actions and attempts of the Empericke and ignorant Physician; and
therefore (say they) why may we not make use of such persons? As I do not
deny that which cannot be concealed from a very ordinary understanding; so do
I again deny that this argument taken from issue or event, was ever taken in
payment for current coin, by the judicious and more refined understanding. And
although I have already Anatomy of urines lib. 2. cap. 11.
elsewhere made appear the invalidity of this threed-bare argument, yet shall
it not be impertinent to speak a word or two in this place:

The Wise Ecclesiast 9.2.
Solomon says, The like event befalls the good and the bad; all things come
alike (says he) to all there is one event: to the wicked and to the good, and
to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as
he that fears an oath. Even so do we not deny, that the learned and
judicious Physician and the ignorant Empericke have often alike success; for
under the learned Physician, the patient often recovereth his former health;
and the like befalls the Empericke also. And again, as the patient dies
sometimes under the Empericke, so does this as truly and really befall the
skillful and learned Physician. Issue and event is no good argument t^ prove a
sufficiency in the profession of physic.
And therefore conclude the ignorant and vulgar sort, what difference is there
then betwixt the one and the other; at least in regard of their practice? I
answer, that all diseases are either curable or incurable. If the disease be
curable, and a skillful, able and honest Physician be called; by the good
means he uses the blessing of the Almighty accompanying his indevours, he
for the most part recovereth his patient. I say, for the most part, for that
sometimes some unexpected accident, as likewise the morosity of the patient,
neglect of the assistants in performing their parts, may often occur,
Difference betwixt the Empirick and the learned Artist.
and so hinder the good success of the Physicians pains and best indevours,
howsoever the disease were not of it self incurable. And sometimes again,
some disease, howsoever in it self curable, yet may sometimes be accompanied
with such terrible and dangerous accidents and signs, as do usually accompany
such as are shortly to be arrested by sergeant death; and yet after the
Physicians prognosticke, the patient may unexpectedly recover, as sometimes
has been seen. Now, if our Empericke, or ignorant Physician be called to
the former of the two, the patients strength persisting, and no rub nor let
coming in his way, the coast being clear, his remedies, perhaps, not so
pertinent, and appropriat for the patient, yet may this sick party recover
under his hand, yea, and if he should be yet called to the latter of the two,
by the skillful Physician now given over to a desperate Prognosticke, and shall
boldly undertake the cure of such a person, promising fair and boldly (as is
the common custom of such people) although he administer nothing to the
purpose, yea rather, perhaps that which is quite contrary to the right cure (as
comes most commonly to pass, An Empiricke or ignorant Physician may
sometimes casually and by chance hit upon some cure where a more sufficient and
learned Physician may before have past his prognosticke to be past his recovery.
howsoever seldom by watchful eyes observed) and this Patient now
unexpectedly (strength and vigor of body, perhaps blowing away all the former
fears of evil accidents) contrary to the learned Physicians prognostic
recover; will not the vulgar here admire, magnify and extol the casual event
of this new Doctor duns, setting him no lower than on the top of the pinnacle
of fames Temple. The other again, how skillful soever in his profession, and
able artist, yet shall be traduced by virulent and malignant tongues, and often
esteemed a Physician of no account. And yet for all this, neither was the
former the honester man, but still an ignorant ass and a duns. Sifueris
pridem, remanebis asinus idem. Neither yet is the other the more ignorant or
unsufficient, nor will be otherwise accounted of among the learned and better
understanding sort. Sometimes again, it may so come to pass that such an
ignorant Empiricke may at the first be called to such a patient as we last
mentioned, and out of an impudent temeritie (howsoever the danger, to a
judicious eye may not seem small) without any ground of Art or rule in reason,
at random boldly promise the patient speedy recovery, and for this purpose,
still after his Empiricall manner, administer such medicines as his shallow and
ignorant capacity is able to reach unto, and perhaps, at length attain to the
height of his hopes: yet shall I still avouch that this is but a casual cure,
not proceeding from any skillfull sufficiency, or right judgment, and
therefore not to be trusted to. And if but an ordinary artist should with a
watchful eye diligently and narrowly observe the ordinary proceeding of such
an Aesculapius, he should observe him often, where dangers are not so easily
espied, and to none but a judicious understanding obvious, to sooth up his
deluded patient with the saying of old Agag, 2 Samuel 15.32.
Surely the bitterness of death is past, when notwithstanding this grim
sergeant ceizes on the prisoner without bail or main price. And I deny not,
but often in an ordinary and common disease, accompanied with strength of body
without the acquaintance of any troublesome accidents, such a counterfeit,
masked Physician may proceed without detection of error; howbeit if any storm
of evil accidents arise, Ignorance of an unskilful Pilot is not discerned in
a calm.
his ignorance is to the more understanding eye easily discovered, howsoever to
more vulgar capacities, perhaps, scarcely discernible. As in a calm an
ignorant Pilot will make as fair a flourish on the water as a more skillful
and understanding; but in a storm is the true sufficiency of the skilful Pilot
best discerned. Even so it fares often with the unskilful practitioner, who
in a secure and calm disease, as I may call it, carries all fair before him,
and howbeit never without failings, easy by the judicious and understanding to
be detected; yet are they then to the eye most conspicuous, when dangerous and
intricate accidents do appear: whereas the wise and learned Physician
proceeds still in a rational method and manner, making use both of right
reason and ordinary experience, and accommodating them to several occasions
and circumstances, Greatod^ betwixt the learned Physician and the Empiricke.
and with the wise man, forseeing the danger, remedieth also all sudden
accidents: which the other, not endued with that foreseeing providence, nor
skill and ability in his profession, by reason of his want of education in the
liberal arts and sciences, especially this of Physic; is neverable in that
manner as he ought to effect and bring to pass. Besides, it is yet a thing
very considerable into what great danger people do precipitate themselves, who
fall into such ignorant Physicians hands, who work thus by hap hazard, and
play, as it were, at fast and loose with men's lives. Again sometimes, yea and
that very often the learned and judicious Physician is sent for to the patient
now irrecoverably sick of some desperate disease, whereof he shortly after
dies. The honest artist here does his best endeavor both by prescription of
orderly diet, and such physical means as in his understanding he thinks fit
to oppugn the contumacie of the rebellious disease. But the enemy Quod ^ eum
trobe quidem curet medicus, merhi magnitudine superetur ager, haec medici culpa
non est. Sivero eum rite nos curet, neque morbum agnoscat, a morbo superetur,
haec medici culpa est. Hip. lib. de affect.
proves too strong, and of greater power than all his provision is able to
overcome, and the patient at length, by reason of that uncontrollable law of
mortality, succumbeth under the burden of fatal necessity. It may be also he
was called too late, and withal the nicity and morosity of the patient, the
neglect and carelessenesse of the assistants might prove a great hinderance to
the hopeful success of the cure. The ignorant again called unto such a
patient, far differing in his manner of proceeding, as not furnished with so
good provision; or if furnished, yet falling far short of the former Physician
in the dexterity of the right application of the remedies according to the
several circumstances in such cases requisite, the patient likewise dies. Now
the event is here the same with the former, the patient at length paying that
debt which all the sons of Adam owe. Now who sees not, that will not shut
his eyes that he cannot see in the noone-tide of the day, the diverse proceeding
of them both, howsoever the event and issue be all one. And the honest, learned
and diligent Physician deserves no less commendation when the patient dies,
than when he lives; his care and pains being then the greater: The Germans
in danger of death double the Physicians fees.
and for this same cause the Germans in danger of death, having relation to the
Physicians extraordinary pains, double his fees. And yet our ordinary sort of
people for the most part, if the patient dye, conceive the meanlier of the
Physician: and which is yet more gross and absurd, they are so far from
having that due and high esteem of him, as they ought, that on the contrary
they often, howbeit unjustly, impute to him the cause of the patients
miscarrying. And this befalls oftener the skillfull and learned Physician,
Evil events may often befall a skillful and learned Physician, and why.
than the ignorant Empiricke; and that by reason, it may be, they oftener are
called to such desperate bargains, as also in regard they are often called to
some of their patients whom they already had marred: and yet the vulgars eyes
being able to see no further than the outward event, their common plea being
always this, like the Cuckowes song, he helped me and such a one, not being in
the mean time able to discern what hurt these ill prepared medicines,
exhibited often without due consideration of quantity, quality, order and other
considerable circumstances, produce in the body of man; howsoever perhaps, at
first, seldom observed. And if one of these should even exhibit to any a
deadly poison with an intent to kill, and the party should, notwithstanding
unexpectedly recover, the vulgar would I think, little less than deifie such
a malicious wicked person. History of a woman who cured her sweet heart thinking
to have killed him

Galen 2. de simpl. medic facul.


We read in Galen of a woman who weary of her husbands company being a leper,
and carrying a better affection to an other fellow, espying one day a fit
occasion offered by means of a viper drowned in a vessel of wine, gave her
leprous husband some of this wine to drink; which having thus* for certain
days continued, she found it produce an effect quite contrary to her former
expectation, her husband thereby recovering his former health. Now I pray thee
what sufficiency or skill was there in this wicked woman? And yet behold here a
more than ordinary manifest cure. The same Author makes yet mention of another
Leper cured after the same manner in the Harvest time, Another of a leper
casually cured. Ib. idem
and that by drinking wine wherein a viper had been drowned (this verimine much
delighting in this liquor) and by the reapers in commiseration of his miserable
and wretched estate exhibited to him with a full intention to put a period to
his miserable languishing life. Now what skill or understanding was here in
this administration? And yet, according to the vulgars rule taken from event,
these reapers ought to have been magnified for rare and skillful Physicians. By
the like casualties have often strange and stupendous effects been produced,
and yet from a malicious intent in the author of the cure: as some by breaking
of their heads, there following an immoderate effluxe of blood, have by their
no less intending enemy been cured of inveterate headaches, resisting and
frustrating the most generous and noble remedies of the most famous Physicians.
A late writer makes mention of one, who beating his brain against a wall, was
immediately, by means of an excessive effluxe of blood, cured of an inveterate
headache. It is recorded that in that famous pestilential Schenck. observat.
medic. lib. 1. page 54. ex Bernch. Dessen. Cronemb. defen. vet. med. adversus
Paracel. ca. 4.
, sweating sickness, until the right cure was known, by keeping the sick in
a mean, neither too hot, nor too cold, many by reason of immoderate sweating,
miscarried. And yet Jdem obser. lib. 6 de sudore Angl. ex Epist. Simonis
Riquini de febre sudator, ad generof Com. Herma. de Nucnare.

History of a young fellow taking an indefinite quantity of sneezing powder for
the ague.


a certain young fellow contemning the ordinary cure, when he felt himself
surprised with this Fever, crept into a hot oven after the bread was drawn
out, where having for a pretty space sweat liberally, at length came out very
weak and feeble, as the manner was with such as recovered of such a diseas;
and the bread that was next baked in that oven retained still an evil smell of
that stinking sweat. Now who desires to make trial of such desperate
Empiricall proceedings, let him stand to the peril that will fall thereon.
This same last Spring a young fellow being ceized of a tertian, asked counsel
of a woman of good account, what he might use to rid him of this ague: she
wished him to put some sneezing powder within some figs and apply them to his
wrists. The simple fellow supposed they were more operative inwardly taken,
than applied without, and therefore eats them up powder and all, and being
abroad, feeling himself after somewhat sick (as well he might) sat down
upon the ground, and cast up and voided downwards such a quantity of corrupt
matter, that he thought he had been now at the last cast: And yet without
either curious keeping within his warm chamber, or yet warm posset-drinke,
he both recovered this casting-fit, and with all was quite freed from this
Fever. If any be desirous to save charges, let them try such desperate
conclusions. It were easy for me to instance in a multitude of the like
examples in diverse diseases, but that I should then prove too tedious, and my
discourse too prolixe. It is then apparent how absurd and unreasonable a thing
it is to judge of the sufficiency of a physician by bare issue and event. And
this may yet more plainly appear by a comparison taken from the wars.

Those who valiantly defend any besieged town^or fort, but overmatched with a
potent enemy, are at the last compelled to yield to the stronger power; yet
still doing their best endeavor to defend the place wherewith they were
betrusted: deserve no less commendation than others who have at length been
relieved, and so at length freed the place besieged. Those few forces who in
that memorable siege, of Ostend, so manfully defended that place for the space
of three years, although at length overmatched by the power of a potent King
of Spain, supplied by his Indian Ophir; deserved no less, if not more,
commendation, than that late deceased Prince of Oranges commanders, besieged
within that famous Bergenop Zoome, who maintained that siege in despite of all
the Spanish Kings forces, until that manly Mansfield, and brave Branswicke
purchased the besieged their former liberty. Valor of those who so long held
out in that last memorable siege of Rochell.
Neither were those generous and valiant soldiers who in that last and
memorable siege of Rochel, defended that place so long as they were able to
subsist, worthy of less commendation, notwithstanding their yielding at
length, being now overmatched by the power of a puissant King of France, and
all foreign succor failing; than the Sea Joan de Serres his French history in
the reign of Charles the 9.
inhabitants of the same town diverse years ago, besieged then in like manner
by a mighty King of France, yet at length set at liberty by means of the
Polonian Ambassadors arrival, and the election of the Kings brother to the
Polonian crown. But if a white-livered, or freshwater soldier, as we use to
say, and unskilful in the managing of martial matters, ignorant how to defend
the place, and careless in repelling the enemies assaults, etc. If such a one,
I say, surrender the place, especially if it shall appear that there was no
want of men, munition and victuals, whereof we suppose the former
unfurnished: this Captain is so far from deserving commendation, that if he
have to deal with an understanding General, it may endanger his best joint.
And even thus stands the case betwixt the learned Physician and the
Empericall practitioner. Objection.
But some here object, that the most judicious and learned Physician sometime
fails, and is mistaken in his judgment, and so may err as well as another.
Answer.
I answer indeed, that not to err at all, is a prerogative only proper to the
great King of Kings, and never communicated to any of the sons of sinful
Adam. Now, the learned and judicious artist erreth but seldom, not grossly,
ordinarily, nor easily; but frames all his actions according to the square and
rule of right reason: whereas the ignorant unskilful Empericke Physician
erreth ordinarily and usually, not being able to square his actions according
to the former rule: And therefore no wiseman that has his eyes in his head but
may easily perceive the great ods betwixt these two. Besides, the vulgar often,
yea, The vulgar no competent judges of the Physicians errors.
for the most part, judge amiss of the Physicians best actions, accounting
them often erroneous, where to a rectified and well refined understanding there
is not the least seeming show of error. Again, where the ignorant erreth most
grossly, then is he often thought of them to be most free therefrom; so that
by the vulgars verdict the judicious and learned Physician is often condemned,
and the ignorant acquit. But long to insist upon these and diverse other sorts
of such ignorant and unwarranted Physicians; Apothecaries here in the country
take upon them ordinarily to practice physic, and what they do in the City,
Physicians know best.

Women injuriously usurp upon the Physicians calling.

They often whisper about the patient, and suggest needelesse fears unto the
sick.


as Apothecaries, Practisers by spells, Ephemerides masters, Wizards,
figure-flingers, and the like forbidden trash, is not my purpose in this place:
but because the female sex also has proved too pragmaticall and practical,
we will consider whether their action be warrantable, and say something also
concerning this point.

Women then not only assume unto themselves a lawless liberty to prescribe
diet for the diseased, and whispering about the sick, traduce the laudable
actions of the most honest, able and learned Artist, suggesting often idle and
needless fears into the weak and feeble fancies of the sick (apt enough
often of themselves, by reason of weakness both of body and mind, to
entertain such needless fears) and controlling at their pleasures (satis pro
imperio) the prescriptions of the most learned Physicians, howsoever backed
both by sound reasons, and by the manifold experience of many hundreds of
years: but also against modesty and decency befitting that sex; Women
altogether unfurnished with skill requisite in a practitioner of Physic, and
therefore unfit to practice.
as also against good order and against the laws of God and man, being
altogether unfitted for so weighty an imploiment, and with the neglect of that
place and calling whereunto by their Maker they were ordained like busy bodies
intrude upon so sublime a profession, in administering physic to the sick,
and to others by way of prevention: the which how dangerous and pernicious it
is, there being no less danger than of the loss of so noble a creature, who
carries engraven the stamp of the image of his great and glorious Creator, I
leave to the judgment of the judicious understanding Reader. But how should
they ever attain to this skill and sufficiency, as hatn been already proved
to be true in other Emperickes? Nostrates sine analogismo, and experientia
remedia observant: quia immo si legerimus Aristot. plane videbimu^, illos non
percipere quid significet experimentu^. Aristot. 2. post et cap vlt. et 2
Metaphys. Vbi docet. quemodo sia^ experimentum, habe^ haec verba: Ex sensu fi^
memoria; ex multi^ mem^^^s fit experime^tum: multae namque memory numero
experientia una est; ex qua demde universale in anima fit. Empirici, dum vident
po^t exhibitunt medicamentum aegrum sublevari, illico putant de illo factum
experimentum, quod ab experimenti definitione est omnino alienum: aperte nos
docet Philosophus, experimentu^ neque ab unica sensatione, neque a multis;
neque ab unica memoria, sed a multis, and iteratis memorijs fieri: quare tautum
abest ut medicamentum post quod vident aegrum bis, vel t^r, sublevari, dicetur
experimentum, ut neque memoria, neque sensati. bona de illo dici possit: et
ratio est, quia ut plurimum Empirici decipiuntur circa sensationem: Putant enim
sanationem ab hausto medicamento pendere, quando a natura, viribus optimis
praedita, prodit. Prima causa, cur experimentum, Empiricorum sit fallax, est,
quia putant ex re semel visa, colligi posse experimentum, quod Aristoteli, ut
diximus, adversatur. Secunda, quia ^circa res sensibiles decipiuntur: causa
erroris est quia in quolibet aegrotante variae sunt and. diversae conditiones,
naturae, and affectuum idea, and quaelibet potest variare medendi medum: hasque
varietates rerum, cum Empiriet non consulant, nunquam ab experimentis s^iunt
remedia haurire. Quae ig^cur ^ausant varietates; sunt natura aegrotantis, alas
tempus, anni, regio, praesens constitutio, tobur, habitus, confuciudo. s^^letum
exercitium, m^rbus, causa, locus, symptomata, morbi similes, mos, motus,
repletio, figurae partium, pulsuum motus, onimi mores* fuvantia and laedentia:
fine distincto harum conditionum examine nanquam observabimus experimentum,
illae enim variam, and d^versam naturam agentis and patientis patefaciunt.
Sanctorius Sanctorius meth. vitand. errorum in Analog. and experim perquir.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
I know the common thredbare objection that they have many times attained to
the knowledge of some Probatum est, or medicine experimentally tried upon some
one or other individual body, and that most commonly casually, or hab nab as
we say, as the blind man throw* his staff, and even in this where they think
have experience, they are commonly deceived, and neither they nor our ordinary
Empiricks can tell what is the true nature thereof. Now the true nature of any
experiment to make it such a one, is not sufficiently proved by this, that
after once or twice trial thereof there has insued some seeming good effect:
for this is but a mere Paralogisme, ascribing often that effect to such a
cause, which was not the true cause thereof; they often erring, because they
are oftentimes deceived in things even subject to their outward senses; the
cause of their erring proceeding from this, that in several sick persons
there are diverse and various conditions, natures, affections, etc: and each of
these may alter and vary the manner of curing: and therefore since neither
women nor yet any other sort of Empiricks do ordinarily observe, neither are
they therefore ever able to derive their remedies from true experience. Now the
causes of these varieties are, the particular constitutions of the party
Diseased, the age, time of the year, the country wherein one lives, the
present temper of the time, strength of the sick, custom, former exercise,
the disease it self, the cause, the part affected, the symptoms, like
diseases, the manner, motion, repletion, the structure of the parts, the motion
of the pulse, the manners or condition of the sick, things helping or
hindering, without the distinct knowledge of which conditions we can never
attain to any true experiment, concerning which we shall hereafter have
occasion to discourse more copiuosly. And a medicine may at one particular time
fit some one, and not another, although ceized with the same disease, and so in
all these particular circumstances might be easily proved, all occasioned by
reason of the variety of such considerable circumstances. And therefore the
very same medicine which once might have produced a good and laudable effect,
may again at an other time, even in one and the same individual body, at some
other time fail of this effect, the state of the body upon diverse occasions,
altering, and diverse circumstances often inducing the skillful Physician to
betake himself to some other more appropriate remedy, or else to add or
detract from his former prescription, according as in his discretion he sees
indicated by these aforementioned circumstances in such a case required. And
from hence is also detected and evinced the error of some; who having at
sometimes used the counsel of some understanding Physician for some preventing
Physic, this same Physician afterward either absent or perhaps dead, and it
may be neither, yet often either by ignorance, a sordid tenacity, or both,
procure the same medicines again by the Apothecary to be prepared according to
the former prescription, without either addition or detraction of the former
ingredients, little considering the alteration of the body, which might
according to new occurrents demand new counsel. But to return to our Women
again, some of this sex thinking to mend the matter well, answer thus for
themselves, that if they do no good, yet at least they do no harm. I answer,
that even in not doing good, or administering that which in probability with
Gods blessing was like to have done good, they do evil: for in that they are
unfurnished of that sufficiency of administering such fit and generous remedies
as are likely to eradicate and root out the disease, they commonly trifle away
the time, and lose that golden time and opportunity in doing good in dangerous
and acute diseases, which once being lost can never again be recalled and
recovered.

Ante capillata, post est occasio calva. What inevitable danger the neglect or
protracting of fit and opportune time of Phlebotomy in a burning Fever, a
Squinancy, or Pleurisy, or some such dangerous, acute disease does often
produce, I wish it did not by woeful and daily experience too evidently
appear. There lived of late years here in Northamptonshire one of these
Women-physitians, and much sought unto not only by those of ordinary
education, History of a woman-Physitian living here lately in Northamptonshire.
but even also by some of better breeding (I can but pity their simplicity and
ignorance) who would not fail to prescribe directions against any most
desperate and inveterate disease: and yet was altogether averse from
Phlebotomy, vomites, or any generous remedy, were the disease never so violent
and acute; her chief purge being a little Manna, a certain diet-bread composed
of several cordial ingredients, without any due proportion of quantity: and
this diet-bread she used indifferently in all consumptions and weaknesses of
whatsoever kind. A vesicatory or blistering medicine composed of Cantharides
she used much, and applied the same to diverse parts of the body, according as
her she-skill could direct her, which was one of her master medicines, and with
her supplied the place of Phlebotomy and other generous evacuations. The
various and evil favored effects this Pettie-coat Physician produced in
diverse bodies by these blisterings would spend me much time, Particular
remedies must follow after general,
and be too tedious to the Reader. Howsoever the learned Physician is not
ignorant that such particular remedies are not ordinarily used before general
evacuations have proceeded. Many, no question, consulted with this she-oracle,
whose diseases were not dangerous or deadly, who afterward recovering (which
might as well, if not better have been without the use of her means) would
not fail to magnify her supposed skill. Consumptions, especially already
radicated not easily cured.
But as for true radicated Consumptions, (which she would ordinarily undertake
to cure) she was far from curing any such, as not being able to dive into the
depth of the true causes, and by consequent, must needs be ignorant of the true
cure. And this being a task which often poseth the most skillful Artist in his
profession, what then should we expect from such a she-Physitian? And since she
neglected more noble and generous remedies, when there was anything to be done
in dangerous and acute diseases, if nature were not of it self able to grapple
with the disease, and expel the enemy out of his strong hold, the patient was
forced to succumbe under the burden, and in all probability pay his fatal debt
before he otherwise needed, if he had made choice of a judicious and
understanding physician. But what do I insist upon their practicing of Physic,
a thing of a sublime nature, when even in the matter of the diet of the
diseased, yet thought by them a thing of very small importance, they are
altogether ignorant? And that this is not my complaint alone, may plainly by
that which a learned Ioubert des erreurs populaires party second cha. 6. du
regine des seures.
French Physician complains of that sex in that place where he then lived. I
discover (says he) three notable abuses committed by the importunity of women:
first in tormenting the sick with abstinency from drink, be their necessity
never so great, in forcing them to eat far beyond the strength of their
weak and tender stomachs, and in covering them with too many clothes. This is
the ordinary custom of the vulgar and common sort in governing the sick: but
above all others, women pass the bounds of mediocrity, and proceed to an
excess insupportable, and are far more insupportable to the sick than any
other sort of people. And this proceeds from a natural inclination and
condition proper to that sex to exceed the bounds of mediocrity, and in all
their actions and affections to exceed more than men. And therefore if they Aut
te ardenter amat, aut te capitaliter ^dit. Mantuan.
love, it is the highest degree, and their hatred needs no addition or
intention. If they be given to avarice, it is the superlative degree, if given
to lavish expenses, there is no measure in their prodigality. In amiable, sweet
and lovely deportment who can compare with them: as likewise in their choler
and despite, in their brawling and scolding fits, let me choose rather with the
wise man to dwell on the house top than live with such a Xantippe. And the like
excess we find also in their carriage about the sick: for if we ordeine a
warm bath for the sick, they will be sure to make it scalding hot. Aut te
ardenter amat, aut te capitaliter ^dit. Mantuan.
And whereas our meaning is, that it should temperatly warm, their opinion is
that if warmth be good, then the warmer it is, the better it must needs be;
and it would seem in very truth they provided it to scald pigges in. If we
forbid the sick excessive drinking, if women be the attendants, the Patient
shall almost dye athirst. Give a charge that the sick be duly nourished, thou
shall be sure they shall be crammed like fat capons: Give a charge to cover
them well, and be sure they shall be almost stifled. And thus almost in every
thing do they exceed our prescriptions, inclining always to the extremes, and
cannot by any means keep within compass. L'afferme que la complexion des
Persons quise changent Promptement and soudain passene d'vne extremite
al'autre, est simple, pure, and nette^^r se contra^^re (...) and (...) and
(...) d'vne (...) tant ^estice, (...) and (...) te^m^ign^e de (...) mo^lisse,
tendreur, b^aute and del^atesse) qu^elles ont gra^^e promptitude, and excedent
les hommes tant en ^oudaine apprehension, qu^ ensuperlatiue affection Parquoy
else ont mo^ns a'arre^ en leurs propos and deliberations, raison de la
mobilite, qui proceed d'vne legerete saiuant la pare simplic^te, de laquelle
ausse est a^u^le ci^l, par de^us ious les autros corpse. Auss^^a vitesse de l^ur
entendement a comprendre toutes diss^^^tes, and (...) resondre, est (...), que
les hommes n^y pe^ent aduentr. Et pour tant en mesprise leur response, si elle
est praemediteet and dit-on qu^d sant prendre le premier conse it d'vne femme,
auant qu'elle y ait pense, etc. Et un peu anparauant. Car ces affections
extremes ne procedent que d'vn esprit subti^ penetrant and habile, nebasse dans
un corpse mol, delicat, and bien purifie', etc. Le mesme Ioubert au lien
preallegue'.
But let none here mistake my meaning, as though I had a purpose to inveigh
against womankind, as some make it their recreation and delight too, to show
their wits (as they suppose) in inveighing against women: nay far be it from
me, being in a double relation beholden to this sex; my purpose only is here
to reprove their errors, whereof all are not guilty, and for this cause come
not under this censure, and to such I have nothing to say. And even touching
this instability and inclination to extremes, I am so far from laying thereby
any aspersion upon this noble sex, that with mine Author I account it for
their high praise and commendation. For these extreme affections proceed from a
subtle, nimble and able wit and understanding, set and fastened in a soft,
tender and well refined body. And as we esteem that water to be good which is
speedily warm, and again in as short a time cold; even so we may account the
complexion of such persons as are subject to sudden changes and alterations,
and suddenly pass from one extreme to another, is most simple and pure; for
the contray proceeds from a lumpish ponderosity and thickness of the matter,
which procures this contumacious immobility. Women therefore, it seems, are
composed of this pure, refined, soft substance, which is the cause that they
are often so quick and apprehensive, that therein, as also in their
superlative affection, they commonly surpass men. And hence have we this
common Phrase, that if a woman look but on her apron-strings, she will find
out a shift. And for this same cause it is held, that a woman's first answer is
commonly the best, and that if she study longer, it will still be the worse.
But lest I should make women too proud, I wish them to consider that the most
subtle and refined wits are not always most useful in a state or
commonwealth, as is reported of Plutarch. in eius vna History of women's
contradiction and controlling the Physicians prescriptions far out of purpose.
Alcibiades, of this unstable and quicke-stirring spirit: and the like opinion
is holden of the Florentines at this day; and it is no more trivial true, omne
nimium vertitur in vitium. And therefore my counsel is to women, especially
such as partake most of this subtle, mercuriat metal, to keep within the
cancells and compass of right reason: and I wish them not to think so well of
their own wits, as to meddle with matters far above their reach, and too
sublime for their apprehensions, and to keep within the compass of their own
callings, not to prove busy-bodies, smatterers, going from house to house, and
controlling the learned Artist in his own profession, nor his prescriptions
for the sick, the reason whereof they are not at all able to comprehend. The
year 1629. a young woman of this Town of Northampton, under thirty, a
married woman, and then giving suck, participating most of a sanguine
complexion, had for diverse days been much molested with a great distemper of
heat, accompanied with exceeding great pains in her back and other parts,
together with some other accidents. My counsel being craved, I told both her
husband and her self, I doubted Phlebotomy would prove her best and speediest
remedy, on the which, notwithstanding at that time, for certain reasons I
would not adventure, only for the present with prescription of appropriate
diet appointed with all some such things as might then safely by her be
admitted. But her accidents still rather increasing than decreasing, and sleep
now forsaking her, I reiterated my former advice concerning Phlebotomy, which
neglected might endanger her life. This being heard by some of her neighbors
and friends, with great earnestness dissuaded her from this course. But the
young woman her self, her husband, father and mother, were willing to follow
my directions: which being accordingly put in execution, she was immediately
freed from all her former accidents, as, blessed be God, she has been ever
since that time. And whereas it was by some of her neighbors and friends
feared, that this might prove a means to dry up her milk, it proved far
otherwise, being afterward better furnished therewith than before: and good
reason; her great distempering heat, together with the want of rest, and
appetite to her ordinary sustenance, must needs dry the spring of this so
laudable and necessary a nourishment; whereas this seasonable Phlebotomy, by
removing these rubs, did, accidentally, increase the same. I instance in this
one particular and recent example among many, to make it appear what wrong and
injury is often offered both to the Patient and Physician by this pragmaticall
controlling of some of this sex; who being now warned, I hope, will grow
wiser, and let the Physician use his discretion in ordering and curing his
patients; as he medleth not with the businesses of their callings, leaving
them to their own liberty. My purpose is not here to speak against the
charity of some noble personages of this sex, ready both with their pains and
purses, to supply the wants of the poor and needy, unfurnished both of such
means and money; provided always, they do not exceed the limits in venturing
upon things far surpassing their reach: and although they are endowed with
some privileges and prerogatives above vulgar worth: yet I wish them still to
consider their sex, and that they are far from that sufficiency in this
physical profession, as to be admitted to sit upon life and death. And now by
the way, before I finish this point, concerning Women-physitians, I cannot
pass by the great charity, and bountiful libreality of a Noble and virtuous
Lady, living lately in this town of Northampton My Lady Farmer, widow to that
noble Knight, St. George Farmer of Cason by Toceter in Northamptonshire.
a constant good housekeeper, and great reliever of the necessities of the
poor: and so charitable to all true objects of pity, that not only would she
send them food to feed them; but supply them also with her best cordialls, or
other physical drugges in her possession (wherewith she had always her
closet well furnished) as should be advised by wise and learned counsel: and
yet, herself never venturing on such things as might endanger any. And to
poor women in labor she neither spared her pains nor her purse; and would not
disdain in that necessity freely and of her own accord to visit the meanest
and poorest cottages. As for her charity to poor widows, orphans and others,
the memory thereof is so recent, and now in this penurious time so much missed,
that I need not now to dwell upon it. And therefore well might it be said of
her; Job 29.13. V. 31.16, 17, etc.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the
widows heart to sing for joy. u If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; or have eaten my
morsells my self alone, and the fatherless have not eaten thereof, etc. This
were a far more laudable course of life for our great Ladies and gentlewomen
to lead; than to hunt after every new guise and fantastical fashion, spending
their means in the City; and after what manner, of some I am ashamed to
particularize; and being a more proper theme for the Pulpit or pen of some
worthy Divine, I therefore leave it to them, and proceed to my purpose.

Another sort of intruders upon the profession of Physic as dangerous, if not
more than the former.
Now besides all these former offenders, there is yet another sort of
practitioners as pernicious and dangerous, if not more than the former. All
these former offenders, howsoever they be dangerous and pernicious pests in a
commonwealth; yet are they often easily espied, and taken notice of,
especially by a mean and ordinary judicious understanding, howsoever the
simpler sort be often taken in their snares: but these other of whom we are now
to speak, do often deceive some more refined understandings. And this comes
to pass by reason of a certain vizard or show of some learning; and yet not
able by maturity and ability of understandings to perform by practical
operation, that whereof in show they make profession. And therefore such
novices as have perhaps attained to some few scraps of Latin in the
Grammer-schoole; and perhaps proceeded yet further, to reside some space at the
University; and afterward by reading some Physic books, take themselves to
be sufficiently furnished for the performance of so great a task, without
either instruction or manuduction of able masters skilled in that profession,
come here to be reproved. And howsoever an otherwise able and industrious
scholar may have attained to the highest degree the University could afford
him, in an other faculty, yet from hence to evince a sufficiency in the faculty
of Physic were such a non sequitur, as might justly be hissed out of the
schools. But my purpose is chiefly to speak in this place of a sort of
people, The difficulty of the practice of this profession might justly deter
such as are engaged in another great calling from the practice thereof.
who by dividing themselves into two professions defraud both of their due
attendance. My meaning is of such Ministers, who beside that weighty calling
to the cure of souls wherewith they are betrusted, not without the neglect
thereof, do wrongfully and injuriously, both contrary to the Law of God and
man, intrude upon another weighty profession, This their lawless and unlimited
expatiation and pragmaticall intrusion, does justly challenge a vindication
from so great a wrong and injury offered to this Art, and the professors of the
same. And although this injury has heretofore, both out of the pulpit, and by
the pen of the learned been spoken against; and my self also gave a touch
thereof in the preface to my former Tractat; yet has all this as yet produced
no reformation. And therefore courteous Reader, with thy good leave and
patience, let me a little expatiat into this field, to show the offenders, the
heinousness of their fault; and let no man mervaile if I be a little large on
this point, this kind of practitioners now so abounding in every corner of this
kingdom. And that I wrong them not to enter the lists with advantageous
weapons, I shall make choice of such as they cannot justly except against: and
therefore all my proofs shall be taken out of the oracles and aphorisms of
the old and new Testament; out of the ancient counsels and constitutions of
the canon law; adding thereunto a word or two out of the municipall laws and
constitutions of this kingdom. It would seem that the difficulty of the
practicing of this profession of Physic, the multiplicity of knowledge
thereunto required, together with the assiduity and diligence in the practice
thereof, required the Physicians presence with his patient, his necessary
attendance being often even then required for the cure of the body, when master
Parson should be curing and converting souls in the Church assembly. And it
would seem that an honest, conscionable Divine, in regard of the weight of his
own calling, might find work enough without any such expatiation and
intrusion upon another calling, requiring so much pains, The Physicians
presence (if it can possibly be obtained) with his patient were requisite.
diligence and assiduity in the practice thereof. Besides, that this is no
small encouragement for ignorant and idle droanes to tread in the same paths.
Now that amongst the ancient people of the Jews these two professions were not
practiced by one, but had several and distinct professors, I think no man of
a mean understanding will deny, and therefore may save a labor in proving it.
And that Exodus 40.13, etc. Levit. 8.1, 2, etc.
Priests and Levites were commanded to wait and attend upon the service of the
Tabernacle first, and afterward of the Temple, I read in the old Testament;
but concerning the practice of Physic not one word. The Prophets are all
commanded to proclaim their Masters message to that stubborn and
stiff-necked people of the Jews, which was the whole subject of their Sermon.
And as concerning their extraordinary and miraculous gift of healing; as
likewise of our blessed Savior and his Apostles practice, I think no man will
maintain that Practice to be any proof to maintain this lawless intrusion.
In the new Testament the holy Apostles were commanded to preach the Gospel to
all nations, baptizing them, etc. And they are also commanded, I confess, to
heal their infirmities: the first of which was by unavoidable dependancy for
ever annexed to the Ministerial function, the latter being temporary, and tied
only to those times of the infancy of the Church: howsoever our Romanists
would still seem to maintain an apish imitation of Apostolical antiquity in
their anointing oil, the absurdity whereof, together with their different
practice, quite contrary to their pretext, from a very mean and ordinary
understanding can hardly be concealed, and therefore, as not perteining to our
purpose, and being likewise largely, by our learned Divines confuted, I here
leave. The holy Apostle Paul gives a strict charge to his scholar Timothy to
wait on his ministerial function, after he had set down as well the duty
required of such as enter into that profession, as the excellency and eminency
of the calling it self. Tim. 4.13, 14, 15, 16.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to Doctrine. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them,
that thy profiting may appear unto all. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the
doctrine, continue in them: for in so doing thou shall both save thy self and
them that hear thee. Again the same Apostle, and in the same Epistle. 1 Timothy
3.21.
I charge thee before GOD, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that thou observe these things. And again in another place. No man that
warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a soldier. Now then it plainly appears, that
Timothy must not be entangled with the affairs of this life; but wholly
attend upon his ministry. And what was Timothy? That he was a Bishop cannot be
denied: and some would have him a Bishop with authority over others; as may be
seen in a Dr. Downame B. of Derry in a Sermon preached at the consecration of
the B. of Bath and Wells.
late Writer; where this is none of his meanest arguments for the defense of
the Hierarchy; which controversy, I have not here any purpose to meddle with.
But let the case stand as it will, of this I am sure, the best Divines do not
doubt, but that these aforenamed places do concern every Minister of the
Word. And if it were proved he were a Prelate, (as some would have him) the
argument is then the stronger on our side: for if Bishops themselves be thus
tied to such attendance, how shall other ministers, whether Parsons or Vicars,
be freed from this commandment? But hear yet again the same Apostle
confirm his former charge. 2 Timoth. 3.1.2.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, preach the Word; be
instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and doctrine. The words are plain enough, and need no comment
to clear the meaning of this place. Luke 12.14.
Our blessed Lord and Savior, although entreated, yet would not meddle with
dividing of inheritances; so far was he from countenancing this incroaching
upon other men's callings. And in his last Will and Testament, before his
Ascension, what was it he gave so strictly in charge to Peter, and consequently
to the rest of the Apostles? was it not even this, John 21.15, etc.
Pasce oves meas, feed my sheep, three several times repeated? And here was
the whole sum of the ministers duty comprehended, and briefly epitomized; of
meddling with Physic not one word. And although those places already alleged
might suffice, yet shall it not be impertinent, to add yet another place out
of the same Apostle; where giving a charge to the Corinthians, and by
consequence directions with a charge to all other Christians to the end of the
world concerning callings, has these words. 2 Cor. 7.20, 24.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. And a little
after, the better to imprint it in their memories, repeateth the same the
second time. And the phrase is to be observed that it is of a calling in the
singular number, not callings in the plural. A man must therefore carefully
keep within compass of his calling, and not rashly rush upon another man's
profession. And besides, as there ought not to be a remissness in any
calling, be it never so mean, so ought there especially to be a redoubled
diligence in this weightiest of all other callings. Proverb. 22 2^.
See thou a man diligent in his affairs, this man shall stand before Kings,
he shall not stand before mean men, says the wise Solomon. Again, Ierem
49.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, says the Prophet
Jeremy. And the Apostle Paul Romans 12.6, 7.
wills every man to wait upon his own office, and not on another man's.
Ministers must wait on the Ministry, etc. 1 Thessal. 4.11.
Let every man meddle with his busienesse with quietness. But it may be some,
and that not without cause, may demand of me, whether one may not in some cases
enjoy two callings at once? To this I cannot better answer, than in the words
of that worthy and reverend Divine Master Perkins, in these words; In what
cases one may profess two callings at once.

Perkins in his treatise of callings.


Men may not enter upon two distinct callings at once, and that in three cases:
First, if God have disjoined these two callings by his Word and Commandment.
Secondly, if the practice of the one hinder the practice of the other. Thirdly,
if the combining of them together hinder the common good. On these grounds our
Savior Christ being the Doctor of the Church, refused to be a Luke 12.14.
judge of inheritance betwixt the two brethren. And hereupon the Apostles being
to perform the duties of their own callings, refused to perform the Acts 6.2.
office of Deacons. Thus far Perkins. Now that preaching of the Word with the
dependances of the same, and the practicing of Physic are in the Word of God
distinct and several callings, may easily, by that which has been said
already, appear. And in the second place, that the practice of the one
hinders the performance of the other as it ought; those that well weigh the
weight of both callings, their several subjects, large extents pains and
labor to be employed about either of them, must needs confess, that whosoever
will conscionably perform his ministerial function as he ought and is
fitting, shall therein find employment enough without meddling with other
matters: neither ought that man to be trusted with the cure of the body, who
makes so small account thereof, that he makes it not worth the busying of
himself wholly about it. Now in the third place, that the exercising of both
professions by one man is prejudicial to the common good, may also from hence
appear; in that it confounds two so weighty distinct callings, engrossing
both into one man's hand, whereby he is hindered to perform the duties of either
as he ought: each of them, sometimes, demanding his personal presence at one
and the sametime, which without hurt to the public and prejudice to many
private persons, cannot be omitted. And again, in depriving him who is set
apart for the profession of Physic, and whose proper calling it is, of his
due reward, do they not, as much as in them lies, deprive the public of so
great a good? And therefore this in famous bigamy cannot choose but be
pernicious both to the soul and body. The eminency of their place and calling,
as being set, not Math. 3.15.
under a bushel, but on a candlestick to give light to the whole house, does
not a little aggrauate their offense, as likewise that the injury is not done
to a few, but to a many. Isay 5^.1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions (says the noble Prophet) and the house of Jacob their
sins. And the Apostle Paul in his farewell Sermon to the Ephesians assembled
at Miletus, professes that he was free from their blood. And what was the
reason? Ephesians. 4.18.
For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. If these
men were as careful and painful in their callings as was this holy man, they
would not be so pragmaticall in other men's matters. Is not such men's negligence
a great means of nourishing Popery in d^^^ers parts of this kingdom? And
howsoever our Romanists call ignorance the mother of devotion, yet am I sure,
it is the cause of damnation. They know indeed the ignorant is apt to receive
any stamp or impression, and by consequence most pliable to their
superstitions, whereby the ignorant are most easily ensnared: whereas knowledge
would discover their vanities.

But let us now see whether the canon law will not allow and countenance such
lawless intrusion upon other professions. So far is it from giving way to
any such disorder, that it will not so much as give leave to the Clergy to go
and hear the lectures either of law or physic. Religiosi professi exeunte^
ad audiendas leges, vel physicam, nisi infra duos mense^ ad claustrum
redierint, excommunicati sint, and in nulla causa patrocinari possant; and in
choro, and capitu^o caet^ris erunt ultimi, and sine dispensatione Papa non
promoventur. Chap. 1. Non magnopere antiquus hostis invidia, etc. Et infra.
Indenimirum est quod in Angelum lucis se more so^to transfigurans, sub obtentu
languentium fratrum consulend. corporibus, and Ecclesiastica negotia fideliter
pertractandi, Regulares quosdam ad legendas leges and confectiones physicas
ponderandas, de claustris suis educit. Verum ne occasion scientiae Spirituales
viri mundanis rursus negotiis involvantur, statuimus ut nulli omnino post votum
religiosum and post facta^ in loco aliquo religiosam professionem, ad physicae
sive mundanas leges legendas permittantur exire. Sin vero exierint, and infra
duorum mensium spacium non redierint, sicut exco^municati ab ominibus vitentur;
and in nulla causa, si patrotinium prastare volunt, audiantur, ut supra
This is yet made more manifest by the punishment inflicted upon such
offenders: to wit, that if they should stay out of their cloisters but for the
space of two months, upon the foresaid occasion, they should be then shunned
of every one as excommunicated persons: neither yet was their patronage or
intercession in the behalf of any to be heard; and at their return again
into their cloister, they sold sit in the lowest room, whether in the quire,
in the chapter, or elsewhere: And except by special dispensation from the
Sea-apostolike, they shall be deprived of all hope of future preferment. It is
yet worth the observation that the Author adds in the same place. That the
Devil, that old enemy of our salvation, oftentimes transforming himself into
an Angel of light, under color and pretense of helping the infirmities of
their distressed brethren, and of better performing their spiritual functions,
does draw out of their cloisters, certain religious persons to read lectures
of law, and to administer physical drugges to the diseased. But lest such as
are set apart for spiritual imploiment under color of atteining unto
knowledge, should be entangled with worldly business; We appoint and ordain,
that it be not permitted to any, after their entrance in religion, and
profession of the same in any religious place, to go abroad again to hear
physic or law-lectures. And yet further, Parnormitan in his gloss, holds,
that this extends to all the Clergy whatsoever; and not to regular Monks
only. Let such persons therefore be ashamed, to plead any more this threadbare
excuse of doing good to their neighbors. The Can. 80. Quod non oportet Episc.
etc.
Canons commonly called of the Apostles, command Churchmen to wait on their
Ecclesiastical functions. Gratian. decres. distinct. 88.
Gratian in his decrees allegeth the same Canon, and brings in a number of
other places, both out of the Fathers and Counsels; where it may plainly
appear, how far these holy Fathers differed from the judgment and practice
of these lawless covetous intruders, of our times. Idem ex Council. Carthag 4.
Can. 20.
In that place it may plainly appear, that Clergymen are to abstain from
all manner of covetousness, and distracting cares, insomuch, that he would
not have them in their own persons so much as meddle with their own
domestical affairs, but addict themselves wholly to holy and religious
duties. The Popes, Gelasius and Gregory, Ieromie and Austine also are there
produced to testify the same truth. The same Author again, to make yet
stronger his former assertion, adds the testimony of S. Ambrose Cui portio
Deus est nibil curare debet nisi Deum: Jdem Cause. 12. Quaest. 1. ex ambrose. de
fugasaculi.
He that has God for his portion (says he) ought to regard nothing but God,
lest he be hindered by taking upon him the charge and care of another man's
necessity: for that which is bestowed on other employments, is plucked away
from the service of God: for this is the true flight of a true Priest or
Minister, the rejecting, and setting aside of all domestical affairs, and a
certain estranging of himself from his dearest friends, to the end he may
deny himself to his own, who has made choice of the service of God. And
Jerome (says the same Jbidem.
Author) makes two sorts of Christians; one dedicate to the service of God,
and wholly addicted to religious duties, who ought to abstain from all
turmoyle, or meddling with temporal affairs; as Clekes, who have wholly given
themselves to God. Cyprian is also by him produced to testify the same truth.
I will for brevities sake, set down but one of his sentences, and omit the
rest. A mollitiis, and saecularibus rebus laqueisque alligari non debent, qui
spiritualibus alligati sunt, nec ad terrenes seculares actus vacare, etc.
Such as are busied about spiritual employments and heavenly matters, ought
not to be addicted to effeminate daintiness and delights; as also ought to
abstain from all secular and earthly affairs, and such as prove nothing else
but snares. And so far was this holy Father from giving way to the distractions
of the Clergy, that he will not allow a Clergie-man so much liberty as to be
an executor for his deceased friend: which he yet confirms out of the 9
Council of Carthage, where he affirms, Episcopi, and a^tecessores nostri
consuerunt, nequis decedent ad tutelam vel curam Clericum nominet. At fiquis
hoc fecisset, non offervetur pro eo, nec sacrifitium pro dormitio^e eju^
celebraretur, nec onim ante altar Dei merentur nominari in Sacerd^tum praece,
qui ab alteri Saterdotes and Ministres volunt avocare. Idem Cause. 21. Quaest. 3
and Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 18. and 3.3.14.8.11
that whatsoever in his last will and testament had nominated a Clergie-man for
his executor, there were no prayers to be made for him after his decease. And
the reason is there added: to wit, That such as prove any cause or means of
distracting or withdrawing Priests and Ministers from the Altar, ought not so
much as once to be nominated before the Altar in the Priests prayers. It were
no hard matter for me to produce a many more such testimonies; but for avoiding
tediousness, these shall suffice. And as for the laws of this land, although,
I confess they are defective in this particular, yet must I needs confess,
that the intentions of the lawmakers were very honest, and aiming at the
public good, which may from hence be collected, in that it is not allowed to
any to practice this profession, unless they have at least the approbation of
the Bishop of the Diocese, who for this purpose, is first to have a warrant
under the hands of two Doctors of physic. But I wish this had been betrusted
to a set number of Physicians, either of the Universities or college of London,
without troubling those of another profession, and that for very good reasons,
as I could make it appear. Again, the good and laudable desire the sage
Senators had of preventing this confused Chaos in calling in a commonwealth,
may from hence appear; that in another statute of the same Kings reign they
ordeine 30.14, 8, 42.
that no Surgeon take upon him to play the Barber, nor again any Barber to
play the Surgeon, no, not so much as to let blood. And yet let the unpartiall
Reader judge, whether it be not an easier matter, and of less danger for a
Surgeon to shave a beard, or a Barber to let blood, cure a green wound, etc.
than for a Minister (set apart for Gods service) erring out of his own orb of
divinity, to wait upon the necessities of the sick, and to compass Sea and
land; not to make a proselite, but to purchase a patient. Numb. 16.7.
You take too much upon you, sons of Levi. The premises duly considered, I
cannot be so uncharitable as to think that the reverend Fathers of the Church
give license and allowance to such lawless intruders: howbeit I wish they were
more narrowly looked into. And as ex malis moribus bonae leges oriuntur: so I
hope that so great a disorder, and so prejudicial to the commonwealth will at
length in time and place not be forgotten.

But that this practice has some pretext for it, at least in seeming show, and
that it has some appearance to have been practiced by the Priests under the
Leviticall law, some Clergymen (although to small purpose) have pleaded as a
part of their apology; and therefore I will remove this vizard. It is true
indeed, there is a Levit. 13.14.
charge given to the priest concerning the cleansing of the Lepers; but makes
nothing at all for their purpose. In the first place therefore, we are
carefully to observe the scope and intention of this place of Scripture, the
which is also in all others carefully to be observed. Diverse do hold, that
here Moses by Gods appointment, recommendeth to his holy and select people,
cleanness from all manner of pollution; as may appear as well by the
purification of women preceding, as also of other fluxes common to both sexes,
following immediately after the cleansing of the Lepers Calvin in his
commentaries upon this place.
To the outward ceremony whereof (says Calvin) howbeit we be not tied, yet
are we Christians, taught by the same not to suffer any corruptions to dwell
amongst us whereby Gods pure worship and service may be defiled. It may then
plainly appear, that the intention of Moses was not here to give the Priests
any authority or allowance to meddle with physic; the which may yet further
appear by the words of the same Idem ibid.
Author following: In that God appointed Priests, and that of the highest
rank, it is an argument that here Gods spiritual worship is more aimed at,
than the health of the body. And this he sets down yet more plainly in
these words following: The Lord betrusted not here every Levite, but the Sons
of Aaron only, who were of prime note and credit; to this end, that the
authority of the action might be the greater. Therefore the Popish Priests
(says he) not without great error, or rather impudency, have drawn this
jurisdiction unto themselves. That which follows is yet a more gross
mockage. The official, being the Bishops deputy, as lawful judge, calls
before him Physicians and Surgeons, by whose answers being instructed, he
pronounces sentence of whereof that he acknowledges himself altogether
ignorant. But to come to our purpose again, if we should grant that here were
some physical directions addressed unto Priests; yet would not this warrant
every Parson and Vicar to practice physic at his pleasure: for here the
command is addressed to the chief Priests, the sons of Aaron only, and not
to the rest: whence all they would evince (if the precept were perpetual, and
they could prove their succession linially descended from Aaron, better than
those mentioned in Ezra for want of this put from the Priesthood) would perhaps
be this, that the Bishop of the Diocese might practice physic. Besides, the
text says, the Priest was only to pronounce, whether it were that loathsome
disease of Leprosy or no; the marks and signs whereof the Lord himself there
sets down: but that the Priest cured it, or was yet warranted so to do, or
enabled with any skill to effect such a cure, remains yet to prove. Again, if
this place gave any warrant or leave to practice, yet were it only in this
loathsome disease of Leprosy; from the which particular kind, our God of his
singular goodness has freed these our cold climats. Again, when mention is
made of once or twice seven days for the trial of the cleanness of the
party, it cannot be denied, that here was an immediate providence governing
this whole action, not to be by any man drawn into imitation, no more than was
that of the Numb. 5.11, 12.
Adultresse woman. The mentioning of seven days reiterated, does still make
the case more manifest. Now, in the ordinary and common motion of diseases, we
find so great variety and difference, according to the several causes and
constitutions of bodies, together with diverse other circumstances; that very
few do we find among many, howsoever surprised with the same sickness, agree
in all points. And hence also comes it to pass, that we cannot always
precizely determine of the good or bad issue of the disease, neither in one,
two, or three weeks, as the undoubted oracle of the Almighty determined of
this disease, including it within the precincts of this septenarie once or
twice reiterated. The several Acutorum morborum non omnino sunt certa
praedictiones vitae aut mertis. Aph. 19. lib. 2.
crises of acute diseases, occasioning many times a doubtful prediction, do
plainly prove the truth of this assertion. But if they will yet stand stiffely
upon the point, pleading their privilege, we will rather yield to them the cure
of the Lepers than contend: provided they will rest therewith contented:
howbeit they shall never be able from this place to prove, that the Priests did
cure this disease: and yet far less, that any authority is here conferred
upon them to cure either this or any other disease. But when the old will not
serve, some of them fly to the new Testament, thinking there to find some
shelter, and to confirm this their opinion. S. Luke, say they, was both an
Evangelist and a Physician. Ergo, Ministers may be both Physicians for the
soul and the body. In the first place, the antecedent is not yet proved for an
uncontrolled truth: and although there were yet no controversy concerning the
same, yet the consequence might be denied. Whether S. Luke were both an
Evangelist and a Physician.
In the first place then, it is by some questioned, whether Luke the Evangelist
were a Physician or no? Some, I confess, are of opinion they were all one, and
others again deny it. Some of our ancient writers do affirm it; and hence
comes it to pass, that as in Popery, other professions had purchased to
themselves several Saints; so did the Physicians likewise lay hold on S. Luke,
whose day is by them in the Popish church very solemnly observed holy. In his
commentaries upon this place.
Calvin thinks this Epithete to be added for distinctions sake; which I
confess is not unlike. Others jumpe with them in the same judgment. A E^ton
in his commentaries upon this place.
late Writer of this kingdom upon this place alleges, that if it had been
Luke the Evangelist, the Apostle would rather have given him that Title, as
being more excellent, of greater honor and dignity. And again, the same 2
Timoth. 4.11.
Apostle mentioning him in another place, only mentions him without addition
of Evangelist. That which some allege out of Philem. 24
another place, that he was Paul's fellow-helper, is not of sufficient weight
to prove it: for many were Paul's fellow-helpers that were no Evangelists; as
Romans 16.3.
Aquila and Priscilla tent-makers, were his fellow-helpers. But for avoiding
tediousness I will omit the enumeration of more authorities, these being
sufficient to prove the point to be controverted. Again, suppose that were yet
true, what if I should maintain that as in former times he had been a
Physician, but afterwad for a more weighty employment had forsaken it, (which
is very probable) what place of Scripture could they produce to the contrary?
Howsoever, sure I am, he was never such an intruding urine-monging, busy-body,
as these of whom we here speak.

But lest I shall be thought to dwell too long upon this point, I wish both
them and all other offenders in this kind to take warning by that which has
been said already. And let no man mervaile that I have somewhat at large handled
this point, the offenders having so long now steeled their foreheads against
all admonitions; this festered disease breaking still forth afresh in many
parts of this kingdom. I would likewise wish those who shall have occasion to
use a Physician at any time, well to weigh the premises, carefully considering
with whom they betrust their bodies in their greatest need. But in any case I
wish none had a hand in the distracting a Clergyman from his calling, which
may appear by some thing lately said, Learned and able Physicians are not so
frequent nor in that number as ignorant, and why?
how much the ancient fathers of the Church did distaste. It is true indeed
that learned and able Physicians are not so frequent, nor in that number, as
ignorant Empiricks and such other as we have lately mentioned: And that both by
reason learning has not its due reward; and above any other profession the
vulgar sort being least able to judge of the depth of this of Physic
(howsoever with Salomons fool they think their skill here transcendnet)
preferring for the most part any ignorant Mountebanke, Quacke-salving
Empiricke, a meddling Minister, a woman-physitian, before the most skillful and
experienced Physician in his profession. And these idle droanes, who never were
initiated into these medicinal mysteries, spending the honey whereon the
industrious and diligent Be should feed, make them less to abound. And yet
those who will have recourse unto them, especially in any City or great town
of note, may find some to whom in time of need they may have recourse. But as
it is the common custom of the world, that of things of most sublime condition
they make often choice of the worst; so it proves too true, as in former
times, so in this last age of the world, that Mund us vult decipi: It seems
that the world desires to be deceived, and loves darkness rather than
light. Now notwithstanding the sublime nature and bottomless depth of this
noble profession, there is none of the other two, Divinity and Law I mean,
where there is that lawless liberty of intrusion left so free as in this: and
yet I dare be bold to say and avouch, that the pains of neither of these two
callings (I speak it not to vilipend or any ways extenuat the pains of
either of those two noble professions) can be parallelled or equalled with the
pains of the diligent and painful Physician; The Physicians pains far
exceed the pains of other professions.
and yet either of them exceed the Physician in the recompense for his pains.
And this will yet more plainly appear, if we shall parallel and compare
these three professions together. I will begin then with their pains taken
before they attain to any reward of learning. The able and learned Divine (I
mean not a duns, a droane, or Empiricke divine, as I may so call him) has
first been trained up in the common schools of good learning both grammatical
and Philosophical, and has, according to standing and seniority, taken such
degrees in the University, as have been by our forefathers thought fit, to
grace and adorn learning, and encourage scholars to the pursuit of some
eminent excellency in the same. And after this, they attain to some place of
the Church, some of greater, and some of lesser value. And some again rise to
higher preferment, according to worth, means, friends and favor. The worthy,
honest, careful and conscionable Divines (for of such I speak) are laborious
and painful in their callings, preaching in season and out of season;
administering the Sacraments, and visiting the sick, etc. And with those most
laborious I parallel the Physicians pains, and not with many other idle ones,
there being no need of any comparison with such persons. The Divines
prerogative.
Now this is a prerogative common to all Divines, that although many of them
come far short of that allowance which the eminency of their callings, the
excellency of their parts, and great pains do deserve, yet are they sure of
their allowance during life, and during that time and term he knows there is
no body can come betwixt him and home. And this to be reasonable and equitable
no honest man, I think, will deny. The Lawyer is likewise trained up in the
schools of good learning, both grammatical, and sometimes Philosophical (at
least most part of them have spent some time at the University) and what time
is wanting there, it is again supplied by continuance and studying in some
Innes of Court: and after a convenient time they are admitted to the bar to
practice their profession, and are according to custom, paid for their
counsel. Many also in process of time, as the Divines in the Church, so are
they likewise, some I mean, preferred to high and eminent places of the
commonwealth, both of judicature and others. As for the matter of the studies
whereabout both are conversant, the one is employed in the large study of
Divinity, which concerns the soul: The other in the cases of the common law
of this land, which I confess is a painful and laborious study, and many
cases with variety of circumstances therein to be considered, and those who are
employed are requited for their pains, as both equity and reason do require
that a man should live by his labors. Physicians study of a far larger extent
then either of the Divine or the Lawyer.
Now as concerning the Physician, he is not behind either of the other two in
the ordinary time of his study, and that both in the ordinary grammar-schooles,
and the University. And as concerning the nature and quality of the particular
study of this profession, it is as hard and intricate (if not more) as any of
the former two: and besides, it is of a far larger extent. For in the first
place, scholars well know the Theory of Physic to be a great and large field
of knowledge, our Authors many and various, and of several sorts, the Authors
of several nations, and written in several ages and at several times:
Greek, Latin, Arabian, and diverse others, both ancient and modern, of all
which, the learned Physician (for of such, and not of ignorant and unlearned
Empirickes I here speak) makes use. And the Physician does yet herein go
beyond the other two, in that he is, Large extent of the Physicians study.
besides his ordinary Theory, to be acquainted with the whole structure and
frame of the body of man, as being the subject whereabout he is conversant.
Besides, he searches into the secret and abstrusest closet and cabinet of
nature, inquiring into the natures and qualities both of simples and compounds
in the universal world: all things sublunary coming within the compass of
his profession: yea, the Heavens themselves come within the precincts of his
knowledge, although not in that superstitious manner as some do, and would tie
us thereunto. But he considers exactly the air, with the alterations
thereof, and neglects not the other Elements, with all the creatures
contained therein, either for the use of food or Physic. Now come to the
Physicians practical employment, and what profession can compare with the
Physicians pains? The several and various constitutions of men's bodies, so
diametrally differing one from another, Physicians practical pains do far
exceed other professions.
together with the various accidents, like sudden storms arising in the air,
make the Physicians pains often extraordinary. What shall I say of the
Idiosyncrasicall (as I may so call it) or individual several propriety of
diverse patients, differing often as far, as one face from another in feature?
And what a world of work does this breed to an honest and industrious
Physician; while as he is not only forced to prescribe fit and apt remedies
against the disease, of what sort soever (which were work enough) but must
with all accommodate himself to give content to so many several palats,
perhaps, as he has patients, as the Poscentes vario multum diversa palato,
Horat.
Poet said of his guests? Some cannot endure to take pills, some abhor
potions, some must have powders, some electuaries, and upon some we can scarce
fasten any Physic at all, Physicians have much ado to please their patients
palats.
when often it stands them on no less danger than their life. Some again
can abide no sweet thing: and to some again nothing but sugar and sweet things
will down their silken throats, etc: so that many times by reason of this
nicety, we cannot exhibit such fit and generous remedies as are fit to oppugn
the malignity and contumacy of their disease. And thus they verify the
Proverbiall saying: The cat would feign fish eat, but is loath her feet to
wet. And many lazy Christians would feign go to Heaven, if they might be
carried thither in their feather-bed, or walk the broad way of their lusts
and sinful pleasures. And yet, if things succeed not to their own or friends
expectation, how careful and diligent soever the Physician prove in his
endeavor, the Physician oftentimes must bear the blame. Besides all this, the
patients peevishness, frowardness and testy discontents, And many troubles
they must undergo.
and often without a cause finding fault where none is, breeds still a new
trouble to the Physician: that I say nothing of his extraordinary trouble many
times, and pains required at unseasonable seasons. Besides, his best
endeavors are often crossed, or at least suspended by women's, and other
ignorant persons unseasonable whisperings, and idle suggestions, often to the
irrecoverable damage and hurt of the sick patient, and great grief of the
Physician.

Physicians best actions often mis-costrued, and they wrongfully traduced.
And many times, when he has done his utmost endeavor to prolong the patients
life, like a brave Captain, that never surrendereth his fort so long as there
is any provision of munition and other necessaries left within; yet at length,
the fatal period of his life being come, and the oil of the lamp failing,
the Physician is many times, especially by the vulgar and most ignorant,
traduced or blamed; either for some neglect, or else all his actions construed
in the worst sense; and how generous a remedy soever, whether phlebotomy or
purgation, etc. how discreetly soever applied, yet is often accounted the cause
or occasion of the patients death. And many times, if the patient recover,
although under God, the Physicians industrious pains has proved the means of
the patients recovery, yet is he often partaker of the smallest share of the
praise and commendation.

And it fares often with the Physician, as it did sometimes with that famous
Plutarch in ejus vita.
Captain Lucullus, who, after he had subdued the Asiaticke countries, then
came Pompey and reaped the harvest of his honor: so many times, when the art
of the diligent and industrious Physician has expugned the strength, and
shaken the foundation of the disease, then comes some ignorant Empericke, a
woman-physitian, Ignorant and undeserving people often rob the Physician of his
deserved praise and commendation.
or the like, who with a trifle exhibited after the use of many other laudable
medicines, will carry away the due and deserved praise and commendation
belonging to the Physician, and of this I can bear witness, as of many
instances in mine own particular experience; so I will instance but in this
one: Within these few years, I had in cure a Gentlewoman, betwixt 30 and 40
years of age, and a married woman, dwelling within a few miles of this town
of Northampton, who was much tormented with the spleen, the stone in the
kidneys, accomponied with extraordinary hystericall fits, commonly known by
the name of Mother, that few thought she could recover. After I had done my
best endeavor in using means fit for her recovery, and through the blessing of
God upon my labors, History.
she freed from all her former fits and evil accidents which did so much
molest and vex her; a Gentlewoman, a neighbor of hers, her good friend, and
no ill wisher of mine, advised her to drink in a morning a cup of good ale,
with some nutmegg, sugar and a tossed, a good gossip cup I confess; and this
same cup in this gentlewomans apprehension, carried away all the praise and
commendation of this cure, although both her husband and her self had often
acknowledged me under God the Author of her health. Now, the Divine is not
liable to any of the premises, and howbeit, his pains I confess to be great,
Divines freed from many incombrances whereunto the Physician is subject.
yet for the most part, he knows his times and seasons, for the most part
certain and ordinary; unless sometimes some more sudden occasion do now and
then pull from him some extraordinary pains; and then in recompense thereof,
he at another time may be eased by a neighbor; but is always freed from a
number of incombrances, whereunto the Physician is always subject, as by
comparing the one profession with the other, may easily appear. And as for the
Lawyer, And likewise the Lawyer.
although he has this common with the Physician, that his imploiment is not
confined to one place, as is the Divines, yet is he not liable to various and
diverse inconveniences whereunto the Physician is subject. He has his set
times at terms and circuits; and at other times when he travells in the
Country to give counsel or keep courts, he is never tied to night
attendance, but has a seasonable time always allowed him for the dispatch of
his business: and as for other particular incombrances, they are freed from
them. Now, if we compare the recompense of these three several laborers, we
shall find that the Physician, Physicians pains often worse required than of
other professions.
caeteris paribus has still the least share. I am not ignorant of the great
difference betwixt that remuneration and recompense due to ordinary arts and
bodily labor: and that which is due to the labor of the mind: the first by
ordinary confession, acknowledged that it may be recompensed, but the later by
judicious understandings was ever esteemed of an higher nature than could be
recompensed by things of an inferior condition. It has notwithstanding, by
the positive laws and customs of nations been agreed upon, that some tokens
of thankful remembrance have been constituted and ordained for the labors
of the learned, according to the several and diverse customs and countries. In
this, as likewise all other well-governed nations, as the Divines pains are
certain, so is his maintenance in like sort certain, as it is very equitable
and fit it should be: the other two, as their pains are uncertain, so is
their pay. But the Lawyer in this has the pre-eminence above the Physician,
that he has the law in his own hand, whereby such as are not admitted into
their society are kept back from their bar, and by that means reap no
benefit of their practice. Besides this, they have still a gap open, whereby
they are in possibility to rise to places of higher dignity and eminency in
the commonwealth: and this is with them likewise common to the Clergy: and
yet for all this, the Lawyers pay does often much exceed the Physicians. The
Divine has likewise in his own hand the sole power of admitting those of his
own profession: and if he admit of unworthy persons, it is his own fault. As
for the Physician, the University indeed does confer upon them their titles
of dignity, those I mean of their own faculty: and some places have yet a
custom of re-examination, for avoiding of fraud and deceit, before their
admission to practice: the which is likewise used by the college of Physicians
of the honorable City of London. Physicians hardiier dealt with than other
professions.
But the Physician here is hardlier dealt with than either of the former two:
for the Clergy have herein shared with the Physician, and retained not only
power of admitting some Physicians to practice, but many of them have
themselves, without any admission intruded upon their practice, as has been
said already. Now, when the Physician has taken all his pains (besides the
other disadvantages) to attain to some exellencie in his profession (being in
it self so penible and laborious) with infinite pains, both of body and
mind, and cost and charges; yet still with a hope of recovering his former
losses, Physicians have many snarers with them, which injuriously rob them of
their right.
with some competent recompense for his pains past; behold ^ to his great
grief, he finds some ignorant Emperick, who never yet sucked in the juice of
good learning; some Surgeon Apothecary, or woman-physitian, that I say nothing
of a meddling Minister, often preferred before him, in this verifying the words
of the Wiseman: I saw servants riding on horseback, while Princes go a
foot. As for the requital of their pains, although there be diverse generous
and truly noble spirits, who, howsoever they truly acknowledge that the
Physicians pains can never be requited, yet are they not backward, according
to the received custom, to testify a thankful acknoweldgement of his love
and pains. But again, many times the Physician meets with many avaricious,
ignorant, sordid base people, who had almost as willingly part from their heart
blood, as from a penny money, although in danger of life. And many times, for
want of understanding, and better breeding, will make as much, yea, more
account of the m^st ignorant and unsufficient counterfeit-Physitian (provided
especially it cost them little, although many times it cost them more than they
did ever dream of) as of the best and ablest Physician of this Kingdom. And
which is yet worse, many without any fear of God, have often recourse to
Wizards, Spelmongers, Calculators of nativities, and such other forbidden
trash. And I cannot but bewail the blockish stupidity of many of our ignorant
country people. Now, notwithstanding all the premises, both the Divine and the
Lawyer have still a door open for future preferment, whereof there is no hope
left the Physician. But because I have begun to touch upon this string of
ingratitude of some persons (yet wishing none to take this in ill part, my
meaning being only to tax the faulty) to show that this is not mine own
private opinion alone, neither does concern this Kingdom only, I will set
down the words of a famous French Physician translated out of the original,
where there is an entire chapter concerning this same subject. Ingrati vit um
a^imi cum Deo tunc hominibus admodum est odio^um; imo vitii^, haud in^uria
ta^tu^ existim ^tur, ut qui ingratii di^it, ^nsigni and absoluto quem pia
maledicto figa^^^ orro vittu^ hoc ia mortalibus, erga medicos adeo tritum est
and co^munt, ut persaepe demi^er quemp^a^ animo praeditum generoso Medicum esse
velle; quum ejus professio a^^ide calumn^is impense sit opportuna. Eae vero
mentis ingratae vit^o cognatae sint and germanae. Caeteru^ amicos habemus,
hominesque rationi morem gerentes, hon^stos atque grates, qui fastidiu^ hoc,
molestia^ hanc depellu^, nobisque faciunt animos ad artem hanc exercenda^ alij
lic^t permu^t^in nos nimio opere sint ingrati. Siquidem aliqutam human^
deprehenduntur, qui public, nec semel se vitam tenere post Deum ab illis and
illu medicu ingenue fate. buntur; and agnita remuneratione pro sua facultate,
medici industria and labor, ad statum ejus tuendum, nihilominus liberaliter
confitentur se non posse eum integris suis facultatibus compensare; quemadmodum
re ipsa verum existit. Etenim si adjumento medici vitam debent, vita autem
pluris est omnibus eorum fortunis, ipsis in manu non est hoc debitam solvere,
quamquam omnes suas faculiates clargirentur. At compensationis caput gratia
est, quam medico habent, arentes se vitae nomine ipsi obstrictos esse. Atque
hoc perinde est, ac si quispiam ferrum eius o manibus extor sisset qui neci te
dedere paratus esset, aut fanem ei, qui te suffocare conaretur: n^quid vitae
gru^a illi fores obligatus. Omnes tuae facultates poteru^t eu^ remunerari? post
modu^ aiunt perbene medico meo solvi, atque adeo supra id quod debebam, tanto
indus ipsi donato, (...) probe (...) compensatu. Ab ^om^ mi^er! ai quod medico
donatur exiguae est agnitionis ins^^r accepti beneficij, au ^tiijque ma^o tuo
allati. Quippe par pa^^^eserre, aut labo^is ^^us fructu remunera^e, si te ex
fati fau^ibus er^pa^t (ut equidem Divini favoris asflatus aura potest) in manu
tua nonest, nisi pro covitam, profandas, etiam si sua ad te pro^ibendu^ a morte
nequ^quam ^^^fuderit. Ita semper obnoxtus ipsi manes: ac ^portet animo id
ipsunt a quo advertas, ingenue tesalens, obstrictu, etc. Et paulo post, ^orro
deterius quidem agunt, pos^ca quam nimirum bon^ fidelisque auxilij opera
convatuerunt, sese obno^ios medico pati non queum, atque parum a^est quin odium
suum in eum effundant, qui ipsos ia vita servavit. O summum ingrati animi
crimen! Hippocrates in Epistola ad Da^ag^tem ^^a loquentem inducit.

(...). Multi Medico magna faciunt, and amp^a promissa vehementia mali vigente
montes aureos and admirabilia pollicente^: Eum t^tum factu^i sunt aureum,
ge^meumque been magna eaque anniversaria pensio est ipsi anumeranda. Jn summa
ipsis in animo est, illum beneficiis cumulare. Caterum cum quispiam est
sanatus, in opinionem venitur medicumparum effecisse, vel citra ejus operam
potuiste curationem expleri. Nuncupatum votum esse in causa curationis aut
bonum and accuratum, eorum quiad stiterunt obsequium, honas s^r^itiones, aut
pharmocopaum, qui totum vendicare successum sibi volet, aut probam validamque
laborantis constitutionem aut fortuttum abquem casum, etc. In summa medicus
perexiguam aut nullam honoris, gratiae, remunerationis partem ba^ebit.
Ioubertus de e^^or. vulgi lib. 1. cap. 5.


Ingratitude, or unthankfulness, is a very great vice, and odious both to God
and man: yea, so great a fault is this, that whosoever calls a man unthankefull,
he need give him no worse title, as comprehending all. Now, this fault is
grown so common among people toward their Physicians, that I am much amazed,
that any man of generous spirit will take upon him this profession, it being
withal so much subject to calumny and slander, cousin germane to ingratitude.
But we meet sometimes with people of reason and understanding, both honest and
able to judge of the Physicians sufficiency, which makes us more able to bear
our burden, and proceed in our profession, notwithstanding, we meet with a
many unthankefull people. For sometimes we meet with some so courtous and
ingenious patients, that will both publicly and privately profess, that next
under God, they hold their life of their Physician; and having according to
their ability and means thankefully acknowledged his industrious care and
pains, confess, notwithstanding, freely, that to requite him with a due
deserved recompense for his pains, their whole substance would not suffice, as
it is true in very deed. For they owe their very life unto the Physician: and
their life is of far greater value. But the chief recompense they owe the
Physician, is the good will they still bear him, being ready to pleasure him
to power, and still acknowledging their obligation to him for preserving their
life. And this is all one, as if any man had taken a sword out of any man's
hand, that was ready to kill thee, or a halter out of his hand that was ready
to hang thee; would thou not acknowledge such a man for the saver of thy
life? Would thou think all thy substance sufficient to requite such a person?
Is this then reason, to say, I have paid my Physician well, yea, it may be
overpaid him (a fault seldom committed) having allowed him so much for his
daily attendance, and now I am out of his debt. If he has taken pains with
me, I have as well recompensed him for his pains. Alas, I pity thy simplicity
and sottish ignorance! that which is given the Physician, is nothing else but a
small token of a thankful acknowledgement of that help and succor thou have
found and received of him: for to requite his labor and pains, especially, if
he has saved thy life (as by the help of the Almighty God, he may do, and
often does) it is not at all in thy power, unless thou should expose the
hazard of thy life for him, although he has not hazarded his life for thine,
which, nevertheless, sometimes he does: and thus thou still remainest
indebted to him, and must of necessity so confess. And again, a little after.
God delivers from death, and restores us to life by the means which the
Physician uses for our help and succor. And is not this a work rather
divine than humane, and which no man can sufficiently requite and recompense?
And therefore well was it said by the Wise man: Honor a Physician with the
honor due unto him, for the use which thou may have of him: for the Lord has
created him. For of the most high comes healing, and he shall receive honor
of the King. The skill of the Physician shall lift up his head, and in the
sight of great men, he shall be in admiration. Behold then, this is the chief
acknowledgement of thankfulness due unto him, honor and good will, as a
perpetual bond whereby thou art obliged unto him: and not to be thus persuaded
with thy self, that thou have sufficiently requited his pains with a small
sum of money. But there are some yet of a far more perverse and wicked
disposition than these, who, after they have been by the honest and
industrious care of their Physician succored in the time of their greatest
need, yet can they not endure to have it said they are beholden to him; and are
not far from hating him, who has been a means of saving their lives. O
extreme ingratitude! But this is not the day, nor yesterday: for Hippocrates
brings in Democritus in his Epistles, speaking after this manner: I think,
says he, O Hippocrates, that in our profession, many things are subject to
calumny, slander and ingratitude. For the sick, if they escape, ascribe their
recovery to the Gods, their fortune or good complexion, robbing the Physician
of all the honor and credit due unto him, whom in stead of loving, they often
afterward, hate; as being sorry they should be esteemed to have been beholden
to him, etc. And this agrees as well as may be with the times where in we now
live. For sick people for the most part, ascribe their recovery to some
Eccles. 10.4.
The Papists have recourse to many he and she Saints for the cure of diverse
diseases: as also for their cattle, and other ocasions; as may from hence
appear: To St Since for my purse, St Loy save my horse, for my teeth to St
Apol^ine, St Job for the pox, St Luke save mine ox, St Anthony save my Swine,
to Mr John Shorn, that blessed man borne, for the ague, to him we apply. He
iuggleth with a knot, I be shrew his heart root that trust him if it be I. See
the beginning of acts and monuments the first impression.
he or she Saint, to whom they had made some vow, and many times are backward
enough to pay their vows, according to the Italian Proverb: * and thus they
deal many times with their Physicians, during their sickness, promising them
golden mountains, pearls and precious stones, or some yearly pension at
least: but being once recovered they are of a far other mind, pretending many
things which furthered their recovery, and in conclusion, ascribing the
smallest share of the honor and credit of the recovery to the Physicians care
and industrious diligence. And as for all his former fair promises, being now
recovered, he begins to think with himself what his disease has cost him,
and what loss he has thereby sustained. And thus forgetting his bond and
obligation due to his Physician, upon whom he even sometimes lays the fault
of being a cause of some part of his expenses, esteeming it but superfluous and
needless, and bears him a grudge for keeping him so long a bed; thinking,
that he might in a far shorter time, and with less charges have recovered
him. So that by such a churles account, the Physician should be engaged to him:
and it is very like, if he might find judges of his mind, and armed with
authority, he would bring his action against him, and make him pay for his cost
and charges he had been at during his sickness: And now, behold, is not this
a very thankful acknowledgement of so great a benefit? Is there so great
ingratitude any where to be found? I think not, unless in such a case, where
some in despair had hanged himself, and some friend of his having cut the
cord, and saved his life; this party afterward would arrest him for his rope:
or of some other who having fallen into a deep water, in danger to be drowned,
he that drew him out, had in drawing him forth, torn some piece of his
garment, and this party should afterward sue this saver of his life for
reparation of his damage. And thus our debtors become our creditors, to crave
of us that which they owe us, and will not so much as have a good conceit of us
for all our care in curing them; and will rather after ascribe the credit of
the cure to any ignorant person, than to the care and skill of the diligent and
industrious Physician. And this comes to pass for one of these two reasons:
either because they are besotted for want of natural parts, that they are not
able to understand the nature and depth of such a business: or else they be
such as have wit and understanding enough, but would seem to take no notice
thereof, because they are loath to confess it, and thankefully, as they ought,
to acknowledge the same, and this is the worse of the twain. Howsoever, it
cannot be denied, but this is great ingratitude, and odious both to God and
man. Thus far this Author, I shall not need to make any comment upon this
text, although both my self and most, if not all others of this same
profession could instance in too many examples of this kind. Nay, is it not a
strange thing, that many times, when as a Physician has next under God,
recovered a patient out of some dangerous disease, yet afterward shall we
often see the same patient not only neglect his physician ever after in regard
of a continued thankful acknowledgement of so great a kindness; but
afterward in their need, either for prevention or curation have recourse to
others, and these often of very small worth or sufficiency; and as many others,
so have my self often rasted of this potion. Among others, within these few
years, a young man, a tradesman, living in this town, falling sick of that
dangerous disease, called cholera morbus, wherein was abundance of sharp
choler cast up, this disease being also accompanied with an acute fever, which
how dangerous it is, the learned Physician is not ignorant; and the which,
although neither himself, nor his friends thought likely to be cured, yet by
Gods blessing upon the means I used, he recovered his former health. Being
somewhat corpulent, and as in former times, so after now and then obnoxious to
the headache, fearing also some other infirmities, yet did he never vouchsafe
once to ask my counsel, having rather recourse to a Parson practiser,
dwelling some dozen miles off. And this last year, 1631. his wife falling
sick of this malign fever now for many years so frequent in this Kingdom,
yet made he rather use of a Barber-surgeon, and his wife after long
languishing, being at length recovered, himself falls immediately sick of the
same disease, who used still the same counselor, of whom he had formerly made
use for his wife, who after the sight of an amber-coloured urine (as I was
told) promised his patient security, who notwithstanding after the indurance of
a many days great extremity, at length paid that debt, which admits of no
sureties. But of a far different disposition from the former, is a Mr. George
Coals of Northampton gentlman.
very good friend and patient of mine, a man of good esteem and worth within
this same corporation, who for these 16 or 17 years, has made use of no other
Physician but my self, either for himself or family, besides his
extraordinary grateful acknowledgement of my labor and pains, still laying
hold of the smallest opportunity whereby he may testify his love. Howsoever,
this holds firm and sure, that the Physicians pains is the greatest, and
his recompense smallest; I mean still caeteris paribus, making equal
comparisons of all circumstances: and I am sure he does as much for charity as
any other profession. And although the ordinary fees of Physicians in this
kingdom do somewhat exceed some other places beyond the Sea (which some have,
although impertinently objected) yet are they but answerable to ordinary
expenses of the place wherein they live, and the ordinary pay of Lawyers and
others. Besides, that in many places beyond the seas (as in all high and low
Germany) the Physicians have certain set stipends allowed them in towns and
cities where they live, and a house to dwell in rent-free during their lives;
by reason whereof their fees may the better be qualified. Now if any public
persons, and not altogether wedded to their own private, would set this work
a foot, they should, I think, find few Physicians against it. This were far
more worthy of imitation, than their swinish and hellish drunkenness, and
carrousing and quaffing of healths, till health and wealth be both vanished
quite away, that I say no worse. And by this means also there might be good
Apothecary shops set up in many places of the country, to furnish good and
sufficient drugges for his Majesty's subjects; in many places whereof, by
means of ill and fusty or sophisticate stuff, many people are utterly undone;
there being none to control these ignorant country Apothecaries, nor yet our
ordinary Empiricks and ignorant Practitioners, doing every man what seems
best in his own eyes. Many other benefits would from hence arise, if any such
work were undertaken, and the country would find at length that it would
quit for cost. But because I have already touched this in another Tractat; and
besides, menare so wedded to their own private, that I doubt I speak to the
deaf, therefore I will now leave this point, and come to the business in hand.

Causes moving the author to undertake this business.
The cause moving and impelling me to set upon this Tractat following, was an
earnest desire I had to free my self from that neglect I find fault within
others, in not applying themselves to the public good. And duly considering
with my self by what part of my profession I might do the commonwealth most
service: as I have been ready by my practical pains above these twenty
years to help the infirmties of the Diseased; so had I resolved with my self
some years ago the publication of the dieteticall part of Physic, or that
part which handles the diet of healthful people. But in this being prevented
by others, and not willing to give over my former purpose and resolution to
publish something that might be profitable for the public, I bethought me of a
path which had not as yet been beaten by any, which might be as useful and
profitable, if not more, than the other: and this was to set down an orderly
course of Diet for Diseased persons; which having hitherto been neglected, has
proved the cause of much mischief and disorder in diseases. And having now for
a long time with Job 32.4.
Elihu waited for mine elders; howbeit far inferior both in years and
understanding to a multitude of learned and able Artists of this Island, I have
been bold to break this ice, hoping that some abler understandings will after
supply my defects: and in the mean time, although I be not furnished with rich
treasures of silver and gold, pearl and precious stones; yet by my mite I may
testify and make known my good affection to the public good. Difficulty of
this work, and the reasons.

None of this Island has ever written the Diet of the Diseased.


The difficulty of this task then may from hence appear, in that this subject
has seldom been handled by any either ancient or modern Physicians: and none
of the natives of this our Island (who of all others had been best able to set
down such diet as best befitted our sick; as being best acquainted with the
constitutions and other circumstances in such a case fit to be known) has
either in our own vulgar, or any other tongue ever written any tractat
concerning this subject. And besides, even among all our ancient writers, none
of set purpose except Hippocrates above 200 years ago, has handled this
subject. And yet sets he down but the diet of acute diseases, Hippoc. de
vita acut^
and that according to that country and climat of Greece, where he then lived,
the which how far it differs, even at this day, from the diet of this our
Island both in sickness and in health, those who have traveled into those
countries, and the learned Physician are best able to judge. And therefore it
may easily appear that that ancient form of Diet prescribed by him in his
days, did much differ from that of our times, especially of this our Island,
and after the revolution of so many years. Another Tractat concerning the same
subject was published by a learned Portugal in the Latin tongue in the year
1544. almost a hundredth years ago; the which howbeit it was directed to the
English of those times, Brudus Lusitanus di vita febricit. lib. 3.
yet how short it comes in many things of that which concerns the Diet of
our Diseased, the learned Physician is best able to judge; and may partly
appear by that which shall be by us said concerning this subject. Our
practical Writers have indeed here and there set down some precepts
concerning this subject, together with the particular Diet in particular
Diseases, and that according to the customs of the countries wherein they
lived. Now out of the labors of all these learned men both ancient and
modern, as well Physicians as Philosophers, Historians, Poets, etc: have I
collected, this subsequent discourse, having accommodated what I have collected
to these our countries wherein we live, and our custom of life: and have
withal inserted many other things concerning this particular subject both of
my own and others observations, useful and beneficial for the sick and
diseased in this our British soil, and have not heretofore been published.
And besides, I have here and there as occasion served, discovered and detected
some errors of many ignorant and unlearned Practitioners within this kingdom,
and withal, where fit opportunity is offered, I confute diverse erroneous
opinions held by the vulgar sort of people, and by them falsely maintained, to
the no small prejudice and disadvantage both of healthful and sick persons.
Now it may perhaps seem somewhat strange, that I seem to disclaim the
handling the diet of healthful persons, and yet notwithstanding, handle the
same in my first Book. I answer, that howsoever I do indeed handle this
subject; Reasons why the diet of healthful people is also here handled.
yet is it not that I principally aim at; neither yet do I handle many things
in that manner as I would, if this had bin that I principally intended. And
indeed my chief and principal reason was this, that I thought it very
requisite in handling the one to say something of the other. And if we shall
seriously consider of it, we shall see some reason for it; the matter of both
diets being one and the same, howbeit differring in preparation and some other
circumstances, as more fully in its proper place shall appear. Besides, one
finding set down certain sorts of Diet, and yet ignorant of the nature and
virtue thereof, might be somewhat troubled thereat, not knowing how to find out
the virtue and efficacy of the same; and therefore to the end the Reader might
be satisfied in his expectation, I thought good to set down in the first
book, the nature and virtues of the Diet of the healthful, the which
howsoever by others heretofore learnedly handled; yet may the Reader, perhaps
here and there find some things, either not heretofore touched, or at least
some things cooked after a new manner to set his appetite on edge. Besides,
there are inserted many both pleasant and profitable problemes, concerning this
dieteticall point. Sum and subject of this whole subsequent discourse together
with the order and method thereof.
And this is the subject of the whole first book, wherein I thought that
fittest, after the order of right method, to precede, which makes for the
explanation and explication of that which follows. In the second book I come
to that which I principally and first intended, the Diet of the Diseased, where
I proceed in order, as may appear by the titles of the Chapters and contents
of the Book, and so proceed in the third and last* It is likewise to be
observed, that some things concerning all evacuations, but by phlebotomy and
purgation especially are here particularly and largely discussed, whereby
people may the better be enabled to detect and discover the ignorance and
unsufficiency of many ignorant persons intruding upon the practice of this
profession, and to prevent imposture. The learned and judicious Artist I take
not upon me to teach or direct; The sick often much wronged by reason of the
neglect or want of good directions for Diet.
as knowing that were but Sus Minervam. My purpose is only to teach the simple,
ignorant sort of people, whose credulous simplicity is too often exposed as a
prey to every cheating and ignorant ass. And besides, the vulgar are
ordinarily so ignorant of the nature of that which is with them in most
frequent use, that they often judge of it far otherwise than it is indeed.
And whereas in some diseases, diet it self, if duly administered, might
sometimes even cure the disease; and in others accelerate, facilitate and
shorten the cure of the same; the patient is often, by reason of the neglect
thereof, much wronged, and health much hindered. What person^ of ordinary
understanding, if he has either been sick himself, or yet frequented such
places where they have been, but can tell that this is a material thing to
know, in what time of the disease the sick is to be fed; together with the
substance, quantity, order, etc. Give a sick person food in the height of the
paroxysme or fit, and see what will be the success. The like may be said
concerning the due, timely and orderly administration of Phlebotomy, and the
use of all manner of other evacuations. And then consider whether this be all
that belongs to the practice of Physic, to exhibit some medicine at random
without any more ado, as is the too too frequent custom of many now adays. I
know some will perhaps, greedily gape for some long receipts, or remedies
against diverse diseases. Better and more laudable to set down the right use of
remedies, than to prescribe new recei^ts which may cause the ignorant to err.
But the judicious and understanding may easily conceive, that it is far
better and more excellent to set down the right use of those already
published, than to set down a rabble of remedies, which may so easily be
abused to the prejudice of a many people. And I dare be bold to affirm, that
if all the good and the harm these prostituted medicines have produced, were
laid in even scales, the hurt and harm would far weigh down the help. If
it were possible to set down remedies with all the several circumstances,
whereby they might be duly accommodated to several individual parties as
they ought, there were some reason for it. But this was never yet in the power
of any mortal man to effect. And therefore, me thinks, it is far better to
teach the ignorant people, that things without reason are to be ordered and
guided by the laws and rules of reason. Remedies can never be rightly applied
to particular indidividuall persons, but by the learned Artist, howsoever
people are commonly carried a quite contrary way.
Those remedies therefore are to be sought for in the learned works and
volumes (which Empiricks and all sorts of ignorant Physicians are never able to
attain unto, and by consequent unfit to practice this profession) of the
judicious and learned Physicians of all ages; and can by none but by a
judicious understanding, trained up in that profession, be duly as they ought
accommodated to several individual parties; observaris observandis, with due
observation of all the several circumstances of time, place, person, etc.
Hence then may easily be evinced the error and ignorance of such as divulge
abroad in the vulgar tongue, their rare secrets (as they call them) against any
disease whatsoever. I do not deny, but they may sometimes be seconded by some
prosperous and successful issue in some: but that it is but by hap and hazard
(as we say) as the blind man throws his staff; concerning which, something
has bin said already. But when I see the world use these aright, they have
already, then shall I be both ready and willing to communicate further what I
know. My earnest care and endeavor has ever bin since my first setting upon
this profession, is, and ever, I hope, shall be to benefit the public: but by
such a course I should rather abuse than benefit any. What my own pains have
been in this particular work, I leave to be judged by the judicious and
learned; especially such as have themselves been no strangers to these labors
of the mind, undertaken especially to be published to posterity, and to
remain upon record for after ages. And whereas I here and there meet with some
particular offenders faults or errors, let the public plead my apology, whose
cause I have here undertaken. And he who is the searcher of all hearts, is my
witness, that I am far from hating the persons of any of these offenders,
but hate their faults only, and wishing a reformation, where the public,
especially, is so much thereby interessed. The public must be preferred before
any private person.
And therefore as charity is not suspicious, so I hope the honest and ingenuous
Reader will interpret my honest endeavors in the best sense. I might, I
confess, have been deterred from acting any part in the view of so learned,
eloquent and elaborate an age wherein we now live, as is proverbially said,
Obstrepere anser inter olores: yet having now by experience found, that my
former rude labor of so small account, has found some kind entetainment
abroad, I have been thereby the more imboldened to proceed to the publication
of this work, which yet, I hope, shall be of some better use. And if this
shall find expected acceptance at thy hands, courteous Reader, it shall, I
hope, afterward appear, so long as God shall preserve health and life, that I
shall not with that evil servant, hide my talent in a napkin, but put it forth
to the profit of the public. And whereas I have here insisted me pupon
general directions, if God prolong my life, I may hereafter proceed to a more
particular direction for the diet in particular and individual diseases;
although there be here many particulars concerning acute diseases set down. I
am not ignorant also, that among so great a multitude of judicious and refined
understandings, there may occur diverse dainty apitian palates, who will
scarce allow of my course cookerie, how dainty soever and wholesome the dish be
in it self to a hungry appetite: and some critic and sharp censuring
Aristarchus, may, perhaps, condemn both me and my work. But I shall be no
whit thereby discouraged to be a sharer with many betters than my self: My
chief aim and intention, I confess, has been, and is herein to help the
ignorant and deluded multitude, wherein some of the better sort may, perhaps,
be acquainted with something they knew not before: I have for this cause
accommodated my self as much as in me was possible, to the understanding of
the meanest and most ignorant, whose cause I take here principally upon me to
plead. And yet I have so framed this whole building, that the learned shall
find here and there some marginall refreshings. And although I sometimes
handle one and the same thing several and diverse times; yet may it plainly
appear, that this is no tautologie and vain repetition of things already
handled: As water is first handled as an element common to all creatures, and
the various divisions, and the utility thereof in general. It is again
handled as the first and most ordinary common drink, together with the
several ways of cooling and correcting the same. In the third place, among
several drinks of the diseased, this is also mentioned, and whether it may
safely be exhibited to sick people, and when or what may supply the defect
thereof; and diverse profitable points concerning the same. And in like manner,
the air is in the first book handled as a common element, with diverse other
things concerning the sick, with many other things thereunto belonging. But
lest I prove unmannerly in deteining thee too long in the porch, I shall
entreat thee, courteous Reader, now to enter with me into the parlour, and to
accept of such homely provision as I could provide for thee, and what is
otherwise wanting shall be supplied with a hearty welcome.

THE DIET OF THE DISEASED. THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this first book are contained the natures and properties of the air and
other Elements, the winds and such other things thereunto belonging: All manner
of food fit for the use of man; both bread and drink, natural and
artificial, together with the use thereof, and the various ways of
preparation: as also the nourishment afforded us by fourefooted beasts, both
greater and lesser; of fowls of all sorts, and fishes; as also concerning all
manner of pot herbs, sallets, sauces, spices in most frequent and ordinary use.
And by the way are here and there handled diverse pleasant and profitable points
not a little concerning the health of mankind: as namely concerning
climactericall years, concerning the period and prolongation of man's life; and
whether by art it may be prolonged or no; and whether one may live any long
time without food or no? Concerning the use of the Elements, especially air
and water, with the right use and election, and some other things concerning
them. Some questions concerning the use of drink at certain times. Something
also concerning gluttony and drunkenness, being the abuses of the creatures,
with the many mischiefs thereby ensuing both to the party in private, and to
the whole commonwealth in general.

CHAPTER I.
Diverse acceptations of this word Diet; what health is, and whether Diet be a
thing necessary for healthful and sick persons.

AS health of body is accounted the prime and chief happiness that can befall
a mortal man in this earthly Tabernacle of clay, Health best earthly
happiness, as sickness the greatest sorrow.
so sickness being a reward of sin, is one of the greatest sorrows that
can befall a mortal man. Now, as the great Architect of this universe, has
provided a multitude of means, both for preserving in health, and repairing
the same when it is lost, to this Microcosme man; so among all these none more
effectual than a due and orderly Diet: And because the matter of diet, as well
in healthful as diseased persons is one and the same in substance, howsoever
differing in preparation, etc. therefore, I must of necessity say something
concerning such things as are incident to the use of man, for the maintaining
of health, and preventing future infirmities, and afterward descend unto a
particular survey of the diet of the diseased, with diverse things thereto
belonging. But before we proceed, it will not be amiss, first, Diverse
significations of this word Diet.
to explain the ambiguity of this word Diet. Amongst the Greeks, this word
Diet has diverse acceptations; and first, a certain kind of life, or
profession: Secondly, it signifies England, France, etc. Latins, it
signifies a certain place next adjoining to the Varro) they were wont in the
day time to take their repasts. It signifies also an assembly Germans call
their general meetings, wherein the Princes, Electors, and other Princes of
the Empire are assembled, Diets; and such also are our Parliaments here in this
Island. In these latter times, custom has so far prevailed, that not only
hydroticke, or sweating drinks, exhibited And as Physicians commonly us it.
Exercise or motion, and rest; sleeping and waking; passions or perturbations
of the mind: of all which, by Gods good assistance, I purpose hereafter to
speak somewhat largely, and how hurtful and helpefull they are, both in
sickness and in health. Lib. ad Thrasib.
Galen observes, that in the time of Homer, diet was not taken notice of, nor
any ways looked into: And Plato writes, that the ancient Physicians seldom
observed this diet. Hippocrates was the first that brought it in request, and
so is by Lib. 29. Cap. 1.
Pliny acknowledged for the first author of the same. Now, before we descend
into a particular survey of these six things; we must first handle some
general points, and in the first place, What health is, that thereby the
contrary, to wit, sickness, may the better be seen in its colors. Nam
contraria iuxta se posita magis clucescunt. This therefore, and some other
things thereto belonging, shall go before, and then take other things in order.

Plato wisely warns us, that the principles of every Art and Profession, are
diligently and narrowly to be inquired into, because that from any one false
principle, do innumerable false and erroneous conclusions proceed. It is
agreed upon by all for an uncontrolled truth, that then men are said to enjoy
perfect health, when their actions are duly and well performed, as to be sick
when the faculties lie a languishing. Eam vero corporis constitutionem, in qua
nec doloribus cruci^mur, nec in vitae actionibus impedimur sanitatem
appellamus. Sanitas una optima est, and ut sic dica^ consummata, atque s^mma;
quaedam vero, seu deficiens ab hac, nec plano absoluta perfectave, atque hac
etiam latitudinem habet non parvam. Quare etiam sanitates multae variaequon
ipsa co^muni omniu^ forma unde dictae sanitates sunt, sed mai^ris minorisque
ratione inter se dissidentes. Gal. de sanit tuenda lib. 2.
Galen defines it a symmetrie, or due proportion. Now, this due proportion is
double, the one perfect and absolute, the other imperfect, and declining from
the former integrity. In like manner, health is of two sorts; one perfect and
exquisite, and another imperfect: and yet betwixt these two is a great latitude
comprehended, in so much that it may be divided into eight several degrees,
answerable to the eight several temperatures, or constitutions of man's body.
So that we may say, a man is in health, when as there is no sensible impediment
or hinderance of his actions to be perceived, whereby diseases are engendered.
Now, this by Galen is as a fundamental point laid down, that Health is
preserved by things like unto the temper and constitution of the body; neither
need this tenent seem strange to any: for seeing diseases are cured by
contraries, why should not health be preserved by things which are alike;
neither does it any thing at all make against the truth of this principle which
some object Qua propter si eorum quae natura humidiores calidioresque sunt
mutare temperamentum ad frigidiore^ siccioremque speciem libe^, contrariam his
victus rationem instituas oportet, sin id custodire placet, similem. Idem lib.
6. de tuenda sanit.
concerning children that are naturally of a hot constitution, who are to be
accustomed to cooling things: as likewise old men, who by reason of their age,
being of a cold constitution, are to be nourished with diet of a contrary
quality; for, according to the same Galen, there be Vide lib de sanit. ad
Thrasibulum.
two parts of health; one called euectice, preserving it by things like unto it
self; another called correctrix, or the correcting part, amending that which
is amiss. But because this is a question better befitting the schools than
this place, I pass it over, and proceed to that which follows, to wit,
Whether diet be a thing necessary for healthful and sick people or no.

That a strict and precise kind of diet is by diseased and sick people to be
observed, may perhaps find entertainment for truth, from an ordinary
understanding: and that by reason, that whenever the speedy recovery of
former health is hindered, it is for the most part occasioned, by reason of the
omission of the necessary rules of diet, for the which cause amongst the
ancients, after Hippocrates, as the Physicians employment was not in every one
alike, so were there some of set purpose appointed to wait upon the sicks diet,
called for this cause Clinici, or attending the bed of the sick, as hereafter
shall appear. And Galen writes, that there is no remedy whatsoever of so
powerful an operation, that can perform the help it promises; without the
help and furtherance of a good and orderly diet. But whether it be so strictly
by healthful persons to be observed, may, and that not without some show of
reason, be called into controversy, and that by reason of the saying of
Celsus, A good and laudable diet is not only to be observed of the sick, but
even of such as are in health also.
that a healthful man ought to be tied to no rules of diet; and not far
dissenting from this, is that old saying: Qui medice vivit, misere vivit. He
that leads his life according to Physicians prescriptions, leads a miserable
life. Alphonsus, King of Aragon, having heard by what manner of diet one had
attained to 90 years of age; replied, that he had rather die within ten
years then live a hundred years by means of so strict a diet. And I make no
question, that without seeking far, we might easily find many of this
Epicurean Kings mind: but since that health comprehends within its compass a
great latitude, it cannot be that a like diet should fit every individual and
particular person: Such as by reason of a laudable temper, and natural
constitution of body, even from their very cradle enjoy a perfect health, are
by an extraordinary prerogative privileged above their neighbors, and may more
boldly deal with any kind of diet; but let even such not be too bold, but
wise and circumspect, lest they be overtaken: and although the constitution may
be strong, yet we know a strong and able horse may be overloaded, and sometimes
have his back broken: and let the aliment be of as laudable a condition as it
will, and thy stomach as strong as that of the Ostrich, yet may it be mastered
at length. And consider well this sentence, worthy to be ingraved with letters
of gold: Plures gala, quam glaedio periere.

The sword has killed his thousands, but gluttony his ten thousands,


Plures gula, quam gladio periere, The sword has killed his thousands, but
gluttony his ten thousands. How many generous gentlemen of noble parentage, and
of an ingenious and liberal education, might have attained to Nestorian
years, and shined like bright stars in their orbs, by the great good they
might have procured to their common country, if they had not too much
prostituted themselves to their sinful and carnal pleasures, and bin drowned
too licentiously in their worldly delights, which have too much now adays
ceized upon the most part of the Christian world. Now, such as are
valetudinary, and of a more crazie constitution, ought in a stricter manner
compose themselves to a more exact observation of physical prescriptions.
Herodicus his strict diet.
Herodicus being but of a crazie constitution of body, yet by virtue of his
precise diet, attained to the age of an hundred years. Asclepiades relied so
much upon his diet, Asclepiades his confidence of the use of diet.
that he would lay a wager against Fortune, that he would never assume to
himself the name of a Physician, if ever he fell sick. And surely, who so
considers aright the frail and crazie condition of the body of man, dare
scarce be so bold as to lay any such wager. I count it for a miracle (says
Lib. 7. cap. 50.
Pliny) and find but only this one example, that Xenophilus the Musician
lived an hundred and five years without any bodily infirmity; or as Valor.
Maximus l. 8, cap. 2.
another calls him, Pythagoras of Chalcis, Q. Curtius in vita Calani.
Curtius relates the life of the Philosopher, Calanus, who being surprised
with a great looseness, and fearing lest his former felicity of seventy three
years health should be by this noisome disease interrupted, threw himself
into the fire, and so was consumed into ashes.

CHAP. II.
Whether by means of Diet the life of man may be for many years prolonged.

IT is reported of that famous Philosopher Theophrast. moriens natural
accusavit, quod vitam longiorem brutis animantibus dedit, hominibus vero tam
brevem and malignam, ut aequa lance vitam and mortem pensitando, dubites an
vita an mors sit ^ptabilior. Quinetiam aestimatione nocturnae quietis, quisque
dimidio vita suae spatio vivit, and pars aequa morti simi^is iransigitur: ne
reputantur infantiae anni sine sensu, nec senectae in poenam vivaces; tot
periculorum genera, tot morbi, tot casus, tot curae, toties invocata morte, ut
nullum frequentius votum, etc. Reolanus junior in privatis praelect.
Theophrastus, that dying, he accused nature, in that she had given and
granted to brute and unreasonable creatures a long, and to man the noblest of
all other creatures so short and so sorrowful a life: in so much, that
weighing both life and death in even and equal balance, one might, and not
without cause, doubt, whether life or death were rather to be chosen: as also
in regard of the nights rest, a man lives but the one half of his time: that I
say nothing also of the years of infancy, when as he lives void of
understanding; and of old age, his years seeming to be produced to this period
only for a punishment, witness so many cares and casualties; so many dangers
and sicknesses, extorting so frequent an invocation of death, that nothing
seems more welcome then the fruition of such a wish. But unjustly was noble
nature of this unjust judge condemned before she was heard: For, she like a
kind and loving mother, being very solicitous and careful of the life of man,
has not only ministered unto him such things as are necessary for the
maintaining and producing of his life; but besides, has endued him with
reason, and given him hands, to the end he might more comfortably make use of
such things, as she in her bounty had bestowed upon him. What life is.
Now, De vitae definitione variaesunt Philosoph^ru^ sententia and definitiones.
Arist. tamen ut and medici omnes ejus essentiam in calido and humido collocant.

Vide Arist. de longitud. and brev. vitae cap. 2. Johan. Magirum physiol li. 6.
cap. 4, etc.


our life consists in moisture and heat, neither is our life any thing else,
but a ioint-continuance of heat and moisture in our bodies. But since our heat
does daily consume and waste away this natural and radical moisture, it is
again by the like humidity to be repaired. Now, this is performed by means of
food, both meat and drink; the right and moderate use whereof this dieteticall
part does instruct and direct; the which also not only maintains and
entertaineth health present, but helps also to recover that which is by
sickness impaired (and as some would have it) produces the life of man far
beyond the fatal period for all men appointed. And some there were, who by
means of diet, would promise the perpetuity of man's life, and of a mortal
man, to make him immortal; and such a one was that Sophist mentioned by Galen
lib. de marasimo and lib. 1. salut.
Galen, who promised immortality to all such, whose education he had from their
tender years undertaken. Galen is of opinion, that the necessity of death, can
by no solid reason be demonstrated, but confirmed by experience only. Some,
who would make good Galens assertion, argue thus: All men die, either by means
of external, or internal causes. External causes, which procure violent
death, Reasons seeming to prove that death may be avoided.
are either such as may be avoided, and befall the body of man from without; as
blows, bitings of venomous beasts, and the like; all which, since they may
easily be avoided, come not within the compass of this dietetiall art; or else
they are unavoidable, and such be the things we call not natural, by the
excess and defect of the which, diseases are engendered, and death does thereon
ensue. In the golden mediocrity consists this health we now discourse of, the
which, whosoever shall strictly observe, shall prolong his life for many
years. This mediocrity did our forefathers in that first and golden age of the
world, strictly observe, and so many of them attained 900. and some near 1000.
years. Neither are we to suppose that these were Lunary years, or of the age
of a Moon only, as Lib. 15. de civit. Dei.
S. Austine proves against Pliny and Baro. But yet further, the longevity of
these our forefathers, did not only depend upon their simple diet, but there
was besides a special providence in prolonging their lives; and that as well
for the multiplication of mankind, as also by means of their long lives, Why
the Patriarchs lives were so long.
they might the better attain to the knowledge of the arts and sciences,
mathematical especially, and that part principally which concerns the motion
of the celestial orbs, which required no small time. The Naturales causae
fatalis interitus tres sunt, naturalis ficcita^, perenne triplicis substantiae
ef^^uvium, and copia excrementorum.

Idem Gal. loco nupet citat.


internal causes of natural and fatal death are, according to Galen, three;
natural dryness, the continual wasting of our triple substance, and the
abundance of excrements. Now, natural dryness may be prevented by such things
as moisten much. The wasting of our triple substance may be prevented by good
air, meat and drink, of a good and laudable quality, engendring but little
excrementitious matter: and if notwithstanding, by reason of their condition or
quality, they shall chance to engender any excrement; they may either
naturally, or else by artificial means be voided out: And therefore conclude
they, by this dieteticall art, may the natural causes of fatal death be
declined. But this is an uncontrolled truth: Contra vim mortis, non est
medicamen in hortis. It is appointed for all men to dye, and then comes in
judgment, Hebr. 9.27.
says the Oracle that cannot lie. True it is, and cannot be denied, that by
virtue of a laudable diet, the life of man may be prolonged to an hundred, or
an hundred and twenty years, as has been published by Thomas Philologus de
vita ad 120. amos producenda. Et nuper Claudius Deodatus de eodem argumento.

Reasons why the life cannot be perpetuated for ever from the material;

And from the efficient cause.


some of our Authors: but for ever to be perpetuated, is impossible, and that
both by reason of the material and the efficient cause. The matter is either
first or second: the first matter, by reason it has adjoined privation, a
malign principle; therefore cannot always continue the same. The second
matter is of the elements, whereof the body of man is composed; the which,
howsoever it contains in it the substance of the elements well united and
compacted together; yet can their disagreeing qualities never so well be
composed, but some discord and disagreement will arise, which is the cause of
dissolution of the whole frame. The efficient cause is either remote or nearer:
the remote is God himself, who has placed several and contrary motions in
the heavens; Duo diversi sunt in C^^o m^tu^; (...) nempe ab ortu in occasum,
qui dicitur m^^u^ deci^^^ coeli, and quo metu (...) inferiores coeli, atque
adeo omnes planeta spatio Diei and noctis ab ortu in occasum circuner ^piuntur:
alter vero motus est proprius inferioribus coelis, and imprimis spharis
planetarum, quae motui isti decimi (...) veluti obnitentes, contr amoventur ab
occasu in ortum, qui quid^m motus long est tardior quam motus ille primus
decimi Coeli, etc. Kee^erm. System. astron. lib. 1. cap. 13.
one from the East to the West, and is once every day accomplished; Another
again from the West to the East, which are at great length to be found in the
writings of our learned Astronomers. Now, if God would have made the world to
continue for ever (faith Plato) he would never have placed these contrary
motions in the heavens, because identity and unity is the cause of continuance,
as contrariety the beginning of destruction. The nearer efficient cause is our
natural heat, which by little and little destroys our natural and radical
moisture, the which once failing, death undoubtedly follows. And howsoever by
the use of aliments it be in some sort repaired, yet this devouring heat
gets daily ground of it, till at length it gives it the foil; concerning
which, more may be seen in the works of the worthy Plato. It has then
sufficiently and plainly appeared, that the life of man, by means of a good
and laudable diet, may be prolonged, and diseases prevented; howsoever death is
unavoidable. But then here one may ask what is the ordinary period whereunto
the life of man by means of art may be prolonged? Ordinary period of man's
life, not reckoned above 100 or 120 years.
Our ordinary Authors, as we have said, assign 100 or 120: but we have a
certain sort of people, who in show, would seem to transcend vulgar
understanding, and tell us strange things of the prolongation of man's life for
many years, far beyond this abovementioned period; and that by means of
certain medicines made of metalls, of gold especially; and these be Quanquam
and ipse Paracelsistae and qui little medicinis utuntur brevis sint vitae, and
morbis vexentur; tamen ia^^ant suum universale. Novimus aliquos qui metalla per
lapide^ tinxerunt, sed qui nec se, nec alios a morte and morbis praeservare
potuerint. De potentia arti^ multus est Rogerius, nec est ullus Paracelsicus
quin ad oftentationem usque profusus fit promissionibus. Argumenta proferuntur
a quibusdam longaevis sine regimine, quod impossible est esse perfectum sine
medicinis, ^t al. antimony, auro potabili, lapide Philosophorum, etc. Quid
multis? deficis ar^ in ipsis p^ofessoribus; Si obijciaes hoc illis, pratendunt
terminum naturae, defectum medicinae talis, and alia frivola Crollius ridicule
Paracelsum ad vitam longam pervenire potuisse negat, quia veneno sit sublatus.
At si promissa chy^ica sunt vera, debuit and contravenena fuisse munitus: ut
Mithridates, etc. Andr. Libav. analys confess. fratrum de rosea cruce medit. 62.

Memorabile hoc evenit quod Adamus a Bodenstein Paracelsicae sectae Coryphaem,
cum libello edito se pestem pracavere, and curare posse sua theriaca, quam
excbymicis concinnebat, divulgaret: Peste correptus, nemine tunc in ea platea
ag^otante, peste penitus fere in ^rbe cessante, interierit. Plat. observat.
medicin. lib page 309. pestil 6. Accidit tunc quoque hoc memoria dignum, quod
impostor quidam Pseudomedicus circumforanem, globo quadam ex stibio, uti ex
operatione illius potuiconjicere, composito, vinoque immerso, unicum illud
exhibendo, omnes se curare posse peste infectos gloriatus est, peste primum
uxore eius correpta, ipseque mox eadem perierit, poenasque audacia sic ambo
dederint. Idem ibid.


Paracelsus and his followers: And although this great miracle-monger (as his
foolish followers would make him) died (not without tormenting arthriticall
pains many times, notwithstanding all his secrets) before ever he atteined
the 60th year of his age, yet will not their folly depart from them if they
were braied in a mortar, affirming him yet to live in his grave by virtue of
aurum potabile, writing great voluminous books, and inditing many profitable
precepts to his disciples. I hope the Printers shall not want work when they
are ready. But Paracelsus tells us yet stranger tales (for, I doubt the reader
will account them for such) Prateros vixerunt multi vitam alienam, idque iuxta
praescriptum deltica naturae, inter quos fuit Syrus, qui cum de vita laboravit,
robusti cuiusdam edolesecutis, qui tum forte adsistebat, vim atque naturam
attraxisse dicitur; idque per imaginationem sic est consecutus, ut sensus,
cogitationes, demique, animus ipse in alium transferretur. Per talem
imaginationem Archafas uniuscuiusque eruditi, atque prudentis hominis
scientia^s atque prudentiam attraxiss^ dicitur. Parac. de vita longa lib. 1.
cap. 8. Est tertia velut quadam magica, qua quis vitam producit suam adminicule
alienae. Modus antem attractionis tam vitae alienae a Syro, quam intellectus,
seu prudentiae ab Archasa, seu Archel^o consisit in imaginatione, de qua multa
Baco in hoc eodem argumento. Attractionem hanc, si vera est, seq^itur
necessario transcorporatio animarum, quam Johannes Picus perhibet omnes
sapientes credidisse, Indorum, Persarum, Aegyptiorum and Chaldcorum, Leo
Suavius scholio, ad idem cap.
of attracting not only life, I mean strength and vigor from a young man, but
relateh of one who drew learning and knowledge from another; yea, that from any
learned man he met, and kept company with, he could easily by virtue of his
strong imagination attract and draw unto himself the others wit and learning.
The same non minus coarguitu^ ex Plinio longinquitas vita in Bachone and
Paracelso, quam in Anacreonte aut Xenophonte, qui quidem Impetrim Mululcaciorum
insulae Regem 800 annis vixisse scribit, and s^til^ ^ius 600. Qua omnia
existi^nat inscitia temporis scripta esse, quod alii annu^ astate vnum
determinaba^t, and alteru^ hyeme, etc. Id. ib.
Author, and his expositor tell us strange things of the long life of some
particular persons, where is likewise to be observed the great confusion he
uses, as in all his writings, so in this particular, where sometimes he
mentions mortal men, as the Patriarchs, and others: Quantum autem ad
longavitatem attinet, site lunares populi ex Phedone Platonis introducuntur in
altissimo terrae fastigio supra nubes habitantes, qui ob diuturnitatem aevi non
tam mortales homines, quam immortales daemones habeantur. Puschre etiam a
Ficino Arabes Astrologi producuntur qui ultra lineam aequixoctialem ad meridiem
subtilissimos montes narrant, incolas, daemones quosdam, qui neque oriri, neque
mori videantur: sicut scribit Paracelsus de Hildevio, etc. Idem Leo Suavius
scholia ad cap. 1. lib. 4. Parac. de vita longa. Qui^ enim credet ad 1200 annum
posse pervenir^? Add inquit and Mathusalem exemplum propono. Et ex part
sub^ecti natura^em vigorem, de quo in Mose. lib. 1. Derude medicina^
praestantem. Tertio locum eum corpors convenientem; locum inquam in aere seu
esse quinto, vel nubibus, ubi nulla est corporatitas, atque ubi habitant qui
dicuntur somno sepulti, etc. Ide^ ibid.
and again, confounds this narration with a discourse of immortal spirits,
who are neither to be confined with in his 1000. nor yet 1200 years. And is it
not a thing ridiculous, now in these later times, to extend the life of
mankind to 1000, 900, or, at the least to 600 years? And besides, may it not
easily to an indifferent understanding appear, how ridiculous this opinion is,
that Adam, and the rest of the old Patriarchs lived so long by virtue of the
Philosophers stone? And what then became of this so rare medicine, when holy
Jacob complained, that few and evil were the days of his pilgrimage? And how
came it to pass, that Abraham and Sarah lived then so short a while? That
Isaacs eyes were dim? Did their forefathers envy them such a medicine? all
Arts and Sciences were transmitted from the ancient Patriarchs to posterity,
and were they so envious, as to conceal from them so great a good? If these
prattlers could by their own experience make this appear, there might be some
color for us, to believe they had known this Art, and concealed it from their
successors. But the contrary has already appeared, whatsoever they prate of
one Human vitae spatium long aliter est coercendum, licet (inusitato miraculo)
Artephius dicatur a Bachone open sapientiae suae ^000 annos vixisse, quemadmodum
alie^ quidem primo mundi seculo.
Artephius, who by means of his wisdom (as they say) lived 1000 years. But
now, it may be, some will here ask me the question, whether I am not of
opinon, that men's ages now daily decline, the world waxing old, and some
holding that the Copernicus docuit Solemn esse viciniorem terrae quam tempore
Ptolomaei fuerat per miliaria Germanica vicies sexies mill sexconta, and
sexaginta. Phil. Melanchton in physicis ipse queque statuit Solemn ess^
viciniorem terrae, and ait, Deum veluti Solemn terram versus retraxisse, quo
natura effoeta egeat majori calore and fermento. Alii autem Astronomi, and
Physici istam mutatam Solis vicinitatem penitus repudiant, inter quos est
imprin is magnus ille Scaliger qui exercit 90. sect. 2. violenter Copernicum
nostrum insectatur. Disputat autem de ista Solis eccentricitate Clariss.
Mathem, Origanus cap. 1. prog. ad annum 1604. and docet esse quidem revera
Solis eccentricitatem mutatam, sed non esse tantam quantam Ste. Florus ex
sententia Copernici posuerat, sed vix dimidio tanta, ila ut in eo congruat cum
sententia Melanchtonis; qui ia physica, ubi de Sole tractat, dicit Solemn
propiorem terrae esse factum quam fuerit tempore Ptolomei milliaribus
Germanicis novies mill nongentis. Keckerm. systemat. Astron. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Sun, now, by that reason, to wit, of the age of the world, draws near the
earth, as having more need now in this old age of a greater supply of warmth
then heretofore: But as concerning this subject, because 23 Richard Hacluyt
it has been of set purpose in a large volume handled at great length, I
shall need to say the less; yet something I must say concerning this subject
now in hand, I mean the life of man. If this assertion were of an infallible
truth, that the age of mankind had proportionably still declined, then had the
period of man's longest life been by this time comprehended within a very small
number of years. But the contrary of this we see by daily experience
confirmed: that in many places of the world, yea, and in most, Anacreonti poeta
de iis qui 200 annos expleverint Damiatos astipulatur memora^s Pictorium
pracipuum corpore viribusque. Etiam 300 Alexander and Cornelius Dandonem
quendam in Illyrico dicunt vixisse. Leo Suavius in cap. 2. lib. 4. Parac. de
vita longa.
men live as long as in ancient times; I mean, after the times of our first
forefathers, the old Patriarchs. This caution I would withal to be put in,
that in our comparison with antiquity, we must always put in this proviso,
caeteris paribus, making the cases both alike. As they lived a sober and
frugall life, free from excess of meat and drink, and such other things, as
have so much abridged the life of man in diverse parts of the world, so must we
suppose of our times. And that there have been in several ages and times,
such long lived people in the world, may appear to those that will search into
ancient writers: and thus we read of some that lived 200, some 300 years; and
the abovementioned Writer relates the long life of Johannes de Temporibus, or
John of Times, and diverse others; and late Writers tell us stories of the long
lives of the people in The sobriety of the Floridens does lengthen their
dates in such sort, that one of their kings told me (says Morques) that he
was 300 years old, his father which he there showed me alive, was 50 years
elder than himself; when I saw him, me thought I saw nothing but bones covered
with skin. His sinews, veins and arteries (says Landoniere, in description of
the same man) his bones and other parts appeared so clearly through his skin,
that one might easily tell them and discern tho one from the other; he could
not see, nor yet speak without great pain. They showed me their offspring
to the fifth generation, and yet it was told them by the other Indians, that
the eldest of them both might by the course of nature live 30, or 40 years
more. Purchase his pilgrim. lib. 8. cap. 7. Americus Vesputius says, the
Brasilians live 150 years, and that they have always an Easterly wind, which
tempereth their air. Idem lib. 9. cap. 4.
Florida, where it is reported, that some there exceed the number of 300
years, and that generally they live there very long, as living after that
frugall manner, as did our forefathers of old. Besides, Macrobii in Africa,
says Herodot. lib. 7. live ordinarily 120 years; their meat was boiled flesh,
their drink, milk. Idem l. 4. cap. 14.
a late Writer allegeth Herodote speaking of a people in Africa called
Macrobii, living ordinarily 120 years, which is much, if we consider the bad
air generally in most places of that vast part of the world; and it is not
unknown, that in these our Northern cold climates, many people live to a
great age, some coming to 100, some more, yea, some to 140. There are some of
my acquaintance yet alive, who have told me they have known an instance of
this last period, in each of these two several kingdoms of great Britain. To
atteine to 100 is no wonder, having my self known some of both sexes. If I
might dwell upon this point, I could produce many proofs to confirm this
truth; but this I think may suffice, and such as are desirous to receive
further satisfaction, may have recourse to this late Author, of whom before.
The like objection is likewise made concerning the stature of men, which
heretofore, as seems, has bin very great; and have we not even in our days
seen some of a stupendous great stature? And if it shall be again replied,
that such be not ordinary; I answer, that such great statures were not
ordinary, and therefore in holy writ, we have Deuteron. 3.11. 1 Samuel 17.4, etc.
2 Chronicles. 11.23. Switzers tall and lusly men, especially in the Canton Zurith.
such men singled out, and, as it were, pointed out by the finger. I do not
deny, that both among our selves, and diverse other nations, it may be, in
former times, men have been both of stronger and health fuller constitution of
body, and of taller stature; but this alteration proceeds not from any
sensible decay in nature, but by reason of our disorderly diet, luxurious
lives, nice and effeminate education, so far degenerating from our ancient
predecessors, who, through their valor and martial exploits, were famous
through the world; and we now are become contemptible to such as before stood in
awe of this Island. But that even at this day there are people of a very tall
stature, whosoever has traveled into Switzerland, shall perceive by oculare
inspection; where the people are ordinarily of a very tall stature, especially
those of Zurich: and a Platerus observat. medicin. lib. 2. page 548. The
inundation of the whole world by the deluge, was not the cause of the
abbreviation of the life of man.
late learned Writer makes mention of the bones of a Giant, dug out of the
ground, about Lucerne of Switzerland, which being orderly set together, that
sceleton was 19 foot long, and 21 of measure by my feet, as it was drawn in
the picture by him in his study, whereby I measured it, during my abode at
Basil, for the finishing of my physical studies. Now, before I proceed, I must
speak a word or two concerning an assertion, affirmed by some, concerning the
abbreviation of man's life, to wit, that, After the flood, the whole frame of
the earth was so altered, and, as it were, poisoned, that people could not live
so long after, as before. To this I answer, that if we compare lives with
lives, we shall find this false; and beside, that this same abbreviation of
men's lives was begun before the flood, and that some lived as long after the
flood as did before, at least within a little; still comparing the declining of
the age of man before the flood, with that which succeeded after. We see Genes.
3.27.
Methusalem lived 969 years; and his son Lamech came almost 200 short of his
age: again Genes. 9.29.
Noah his son exceeded his fathers age almost 200 years; and his son 11.11,
Sem lived complete 600 years, and 500 of this after the flood; and so
comparing one with another, we shall find that comparing this begun
abbreviation, Sem lived as long after the flood, as Lamech did before, although
this abbreviation did not hold always alike: For, Methusalem, we see, lived
longer than any either before or after him; God, in this, manifesting his
mighty and omnipotent power, lest we should ascribe too much to the order of
inferior causes. But lest I hear ne suitor ultra crepidam, I leave this theme
to the Divine. Howsoever, the days of man were much abridged in the days of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but especially in that age wherein Moses lived; and
therefore we easily perceive this point to be clear, that the time of man's age
has not sensibly declined since that time. It may be also some would ask what
sex is of longest life? I answer that the Man is ordinarily longer lived than
the woman. And why, Arisi. lib. de longitud. and brevit. vita cap. 2.
male, by reason of his superaboundant heat, and good temperature of body:
howsoever, this must still be understood, with that parity we have heretofore
mentioned: for, no question some women are far longer lived than some men; a
temperate woman, and of indifferent constitution of body, therefore may by many
years outlive a debauched swaggering, luxurious good fellow. What complexion
longest lived.
And the several complexions are not here to be past over: the sanguine of all
others being of longest endurance; and next to it the choleric; the
phlegmatic succeed, and the melancholy are ordinarily shortest lived. In what
Climat.
The climat wherein one lives, makes also much for the long life of man, and
therefore we see that in our Northern countries oftentimes people live long:
and in one and the same country, the native inhabitants thrive better, and live
longer many times than strangers; as may appear by the Purchase li. 14. c. 12.
inhabitants of S. Helena, where the natural Negroes lived ordinarily 110
years, although the air of it self be very unwholesome to our Europeans,
insomuch that few of them there exceed 50 years. And there are yet diverse other
things which may lengthen or abbreviate the life of man, as the particular
influence of the superior powers, and to us unknown, etc. But above all, there
is a supreme overruling power in our great and omnipotent Maker, to lengthen
and shorten the life of man at his good will and pleasure. It is naturally
inbred in all men to desire length of days, and without doubt, it is in it
self no small blessing, as being a reward of keeping Gods commandments, let
those therefore, who would comfortably partake of so great a blessing follow
the direction of the Spirit of God, uttered by the mouth of the Wiseman. Prove.
3.1.2.
My son, forget not my law, but let thine heart keep my commandments: for
length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee. And again,
9.10.11.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the
holy is understanding: For, by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years
of thy life shall be multiplied. See again the contrary denuntiation: Eccles.
8.13.
But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days
which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God. Again, the Psalm
55.23.
bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his days; Psalm 90.7.9.
we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled; for all our
days are passed away in thy wrath; we spend our years as a tale that is told.
And therefore it will be good for us still to pray with that holy man, Moses,
in the same place Verse 12.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.
Many old people brag of their old age, how fruitlessely, yea, how wickedly
soever they have spent all their precious time. Indeed, the Wiseman
accounts old age for a prime ornament. Proverbs 20.29.
The beauty of the old man is the gray head. But hear again the same Spirit
speak by the same penman: 16.31.
The hoarie head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness. And therefore, if many old men and women had their blinded eyes
opened, they had small cause to brag of their so near approaching eternal
misery; but I will not here enlarge my self upon this point, but rather leave
it to the Divines pen and pulpit, and so now proceed to that which follows.

CHAP. III.
Of Climactericall years, with their reasons assigned by antiquity,
Numericall, Astrologicall and Physical.

IT is a generally received opinon, that in these years commonly called
Climatericall, great alterations befall the body of man, whereby his health is
not a little hindered and impaired; and therefore my purpose is to say something
of them, as concerning so much, both sickness and health; and first, what is
the meaning of the word. It is as much to say, What is meant by climactericall
years.
as a ladder, by the rounds whereof a man's life, as it were, climbeth up,
until it can climb no higher, and the rounds of this ladder are our years:
and they are of two sorts; either sevens or nines, both decretory and
determining the life of man. Some, as namely Censorinus lib. de saeculis.
Censorinus, according to the doctrine of some of the Ancients, would apply the
seventh to the body, the ninth to the mind. Bodin devises a private opinion
of his own, Lib. 4. de Republ.
concerning this subject, to wit, that because women grow faster, and become
sooner old; therefore he affigneth to them the ninth for climactericall, as to
men the seventh; But in this I think he has but few followers. But certain
it is, that none of our Authors assign any more but these two, either to man
or woman; from the very first beginning of our lives, unto the last period of
the same. Now, these climatericall years begin at the first seventh year of
man's age, asscending by degrees until they come to 98, and the ninth beginning
at 9, and ascending upwards to 99. Amongst these sevenths, some are reputed
more dangerous then others, and amongst the rest (says Censorinus) such prove
commonly more dangerous, which make up their full week of years; and they be
these following: the 21, 42, 63, and 84. But amongst all the rest, the 49 and
63 are accounted the most dangerous; the first arising by the multiplication of
sevens, and the other by multiplication of sevens and nines jointly together
Sunt autem duo a^norum numeri, septimus and non^o qui pterumque rerum vitaeque
^us, imrautationem, ac gravia pericula invebunt. Quo fit us sexagesimus
tert^us, qui utriusque nameri multiplicata^, atque invicem sibi connexam summam
continet non sine periculorum a^^rvo ingruat; nov es namque septem, and septies
novem, sexa^inta eres constituunt, atque ob id climactericus is annus
appellatur; quia a septimo orsus, vitam hominis, velut per gradus quosdam
peragat. Itaque omnes qui per 7, aut 9 annos consurgunt, decretorii dicuntur in
quibus magnam mutationem subeunt homines: nam vel calumnus ^mpeti^olent, vel
gravissimus morbis divexari, vel pe^iculis objici, velaenique aliquod perpeti
detrimentum ac ^actaram, velfacultatum, vel vale^uainis. ^os ergo annoram
decursus, ac volum. na in omnibus etiam aetatibus observare soleo, sic ut
impubere^, etc. Levinus Lemnius de occul^. naturae mirac. l. 2. ca. 32.
Levinus Lemnius is very jealous of the 63, in the which, the life of man is
liable to many alterations and changes: and Augustus Caesar did much rejoice
when he had escaped his dangerous year. And although In lib Hippoc. de
septimestri ^ariu.
Cardan seem but to mock and flout at climactericall years, affirming, that
he never injoied more perfect health than in those years, yet seem they not
altogether to be rejected: and At vero multeribus foetuum conceptiones and
abortiones and partiones, eodem tempore judicaniur, quo and morbi and sanitas
Sed istorum omnium, alia quidem diebus, alia menssbus, alia dierum quad^
agenariis, alia annuo spatio de se signifi^ationem prabent. Et paulo post.
Eteni^^ medicum qui de aegroria^ salute recte consectare volet, animadvertere
opertet, ut omnes dies in contemplationem adhibeat; ex paribus quidem 14, etc.
Hippoc. lib. de septim. partu.
Hippocrates himself acknowledges their efficacy and power; affirming, that
both sickness and health, and such like other notable alterations and changes
have their appointed days, months, and years in which they are produced. And
again, in another 2 Epidem. sect. 6.
place, he affirms, that the solution of any disease, cannot be safe, unless
on a fit and convenient day; as also that there is a necessity that a man
should die on a determinate day, month, and year. But an Averroes cap. 8.3.
collect.
Arabian Author does yet much more magnify these climatericall years: The
leprosy (says he) is never cured by physic, except it be administered in
some critical year, wherein nature of its own accord does attempt some
renovation, and is such a time, as nature has for this same purpose appointed;
and this is yet further witnessed by the great Zachary, and I my self have
likewise tried it. Those who labor to render a reason of these climactericall
years, render a threefold reason: 1 Numericall, 2 Astrologicall, 3 Physical.
To begin then with the Numericall, they much magnify the number of 7. and
that out of Plato, Pythagoras, and Macrobius. And first, say they, because it
is composed of diverse figures, it admits of diverse forms; and therefore
call it a virgin and number of perfection; and that by reason it is a full and
complete number, and may be divided into one and six; and again, to two and
five; and finally, into three and four, which is not incident to any other
number whatsoever. Again, they say, this is called the holy number; for, it is
certain, that God himself sanctified the seventh day, and having made the
whole frame of the universal world in six days, he rested the seventh.
Again, the same God appointed the Jews a seventh Sabbaticall year, in the
which it was neither lawful for them to till their ground, to sow seed in it,
or to dress their vines: And seven weeks of years being past, which was the
fiftieth, was their Jubilee. Again, to magnify this number of seven, they
allege that on the seventh month the arc rested on the Genesis 8.4.8.12.
mount Ararat: on the seventh day, Noah sent out a Dove which returned, with an
olive branch in her bill: after other seven days, he sent her out again, and
then she returned no more. 1 King. 8.65.
Solomon celebrated seven festival days, and all Israel with him, and many
other such numericall niceties. Again, say they, the life of man imitateth the
creation of the world, which was finished in seven days; and so the little
world man, is certainly conceived at furthest on the seventh day: and the
child borne before the seventh month, lives not. And the same Lib. de carn
seu principius, ubi multa de hos numero septenario.
Hippocrates affirms, that the life of man is of seven days continuance,
that is, that without food he can hardly live longer, and so he divides the
whole period of a man's life by this number of seven, Infantia, and pueritia.
and that according to the ages. The first is from the birth until the seventh
year, and is called the infancy: the second from that to the fourteenth,
Pubertas. Adolescentia, iuventus, fluens and consistens. Virilia and proprie
consistens aetas.
which is called childhood; from thence to one and twenty called youth, or
stripling age; from thence to 35 is the consisting age, or stayed youth: from
this year, until 45, is called properly manly, or consisting age; which
falls upon the seventh week of years. What remains of the life of man is
called old age; Senectus.
which is again divided into other seven weeks, especially in temperate
places, and such where men live longest; where the body is of a good and
laudable temper and constitution, and the diet good and wholesome: Cruda
viridisque senectus, seu primum seni^m.

Aetas decrepita, seusenium secundum

Astrologicall reason of these climactericall years.


and then this time is divided into two parts, the first being called fresh, or
green old age, Cruda viridisque senectus, from the end of the seventh week to
the beginning of the tenth, to wit, 62 or 63. the later is called decrepit old
age, continuing from this year to the fourteenth week, which falls on the
97 year. Now, besides this numericall, others assign an astrologicall reason;
every seventh year Ranzenius in genethliace. vide de his annis eundem lib de
sanit. tuend. cap 35.
(say they) the planets return in order to Saturn, who removes then to
another sign, contrary to that from whence he last departed; and therefore by
reason of this malign constellation, as also by the contrary place of the
planet, it comes to pass, that the malign influence of Saturn is
increased. But before we proceed, it must be observed, that these events are
not always precisely confined to the very individual climactericall year,
but often to the year next ensuing, and sometimes also a little before to the
year immediately preceding: And a late Claudius Deodacus Panth hygiast. lib. 1.
cap. 7. ubi, and by versus de hominis aetate reperiuntur.

Infans septenos postquam compleveris annos, Producti dentermurus and oris
erunt Post si septem alios deus huic co^^ess^rit annos ^ it pubes, nato semine,
nomen habens. Est invenis cum septem altos compleverit annos, Et lanugo genas
barbaque prima tegie. His addas septe virtutis nomine clarus Est vir, and haec
aetas optima robur habet. A di^cias alios septem, vo^e^ esse maritus, Er memor
utique posteritatu erit His alias ^ugas septe, prude^tia pectu^ Ornabit,
studium non levitatis erit. Annumeres septem gravitas erit inclyta ^^ngua.
Septem alios, linguae ^o^gruit ingenium. Additur his nonus cum septenarius ipse
est, Perfectus, vires sed nimis interimit. Scitices his a^nis multi periere
duobus, quoru^ laus celebru^ mar te togaque suit. Hi quoque nunc variis fortuna
casibus anni, Subiiciunt multos, exitiumque parant. Accedunt a^^i septem, mors
dura vocabit, and tamulum fessos, decrepitosque senes.


Writer makes the climactericall year, as it were the time wherein sentence
is pronounced, although often execution come not till the next year after,
howsoever the body be before disposed, prepared and fitted, either for
sickness or death; although sometimes also the effect is accelerated, and
falls out before the climactericall year. And this is confirmed by instances
of examples produced in that same place: as to wit, of Adam, having lived 930
years, died in his climactericall year, 931, containing seven times 133.
Abrabam also died in his climactericall year, 175. King Cyrus in his 70, as
likewise the Poet Ennius, and the famous champion Hannibal; and Ioanna, mother
of that famous Emperor, Charles the fifth: and this Emperor himself in the ^63
being his climactericall. The renowned Augustus Caesar, survived his
climactericall year 70, about some three months: And Edward the first, King
of England, ended his days about the same period: Solomon the Turkish Emperor,
ended his days in his 76 year, preventing this his climatericall year by one.
Charles the 8, the French King, prevented his climactericall year 28, only by
the space of 22 days; Many more instances might be to this purpose produced,
and many other things out of many Authors, alleged for the magnifying of this
number of 7, in these years. Now, that many notable alterations are often
observed to befall our bodies in these seventh and ninth years, especially the
sevenths cannot be denied: and with Hippocrates we may well say, that the
seventh years are no less critical in the life of man, than are the seven
days and months in the crisis of acute and chronicall diseases; and yet these
numbers have no virtue to produce any such effect, nor prove any causes nor
occasions thereof; which to prove, any able, yea, ordinary understanding,
making no question thereof, were, I think, to spend my time in vain. And as
for astrologicall vanity, it has been already by so many worthy, and learned
men confuted, and something also shall be said hereafter of their foolish and
superstitious opinions, so that at this present I pass by it. Only this by
the way, let it be kept in mind what has lately been said, that these great
and notable events fall not always out on the same year, but sometimes
before, and sometimes after; and Saturn, to whom they principally impute these
strange events, must keep his set turns in his regular motion every seventh
year: besides, that by their own assertion he is quite excluded from the
ninth. And although some such notable effects fall out about such a time, and
about the time of some great conjunctions; yet are they no more causes of such
effects, than the shining of the Sun is the cause of a man's intended journey,
of him before resolved upon, whether the Sun shone or no. Now then, there
must be some physical cause assigned, the other two failing. A Qua autem rat
one per illus annorum circuitus morbi pler^mque incrudescant, a neminc hactenus
explicatu^ est. Ego ideo evenire conjicio, quod certis an^orum periodis co^tu^
humanum magnam bumorum collectionem, ac redundantiam congesserit, quorum motu,
atque excitatione morbi excitantur. Cum enim natura ad immodicam repletionem
devenerit, conceptacula humorum plenitudinem perserre nequeant, in morbum
erumperere necesse est. Qua^obrem omne fludiu^ omnemque operam conserre
expetit, ne materia exuperant^a evacua^ionem, quam semper vere and autumno, vel
incisione venae vel purgante medicamento molundu^ est. Idem Lev. L^mn^. loco
prius citat.

De bis annis climactscripserunt etiam Antonius Guevarra, Petrus Messiah,
Joseph Roscius, Franciscus Iunius, Franciscus Pet^archa, Marsilius Ficinus,
Ferdinandus Mena, Johannes Lalamanizus, Federicus Bonaventura, Baptist,
Godroachus, etc.


learned late Writer labors to acquaint us with the reason of the prerogative
these climactericall years assume unto themselves. In the periods and
revolutions of certain years (says he) there is a great abundance of
superfluous humors collected in the body of man, by the motion and agitation
whereof diseases commonly are engendered: For, when as the body has collected
such an abundance of superfluous humors, that the places accustomed to receive
the same, are now no longer able to contain them, diseases must of necessity
follow, and, if not remedied, death it self. And therefore to avoid this
danger, he advises people in the spring and fall every year, by purging and
bleeding to unburthen their bodies of this mass of oppressing humors, by
which means at the returning period of these years, they may live more secure
and free from fear. And certain it is, there is a fatal necessity and
disposition to die, from the very first birth, attending and unavoidably
accompanying every man; and this was first procured by that wilful and woeful
fall of our first parents, and from them, as a legacy propagated to all their
sinful posterity: which fatal period is often furthered or hindered, by the
good or bad order of diet, and diverse other external and inevitable causes,
and yet nothing befalling us without the all-disposing and overruling
providence of the Almighty. And in the interim, although many dangerous
diseases do often, both about these especially, and other times also, ceize
upon a man's mortal body; yet, until this appointed period, nothing can cut
the thread of this life. Now, that every one may be acquainted with these
years, I set them here down to thy view: The sevenths are 7, 14, 21, 28, 35,
42, 49, 56, 70, 77, 84, 91, 98. Then ninths are 9, 18, 27, 36, 45, 54, 63, 72,
81, 90, 99. Who so surpasses this number, let him reckon the rest himself.

CHAP. IIII.
Of things called not natural; and first of the Air.

Res 7 naturales sunt, Elementa, temperamentum, humores, membra vel parts,
virtutes seu facultates, operationes vel actiones, spiritus.

Res 6 non naturales, aer, cibus and potus; repletio and vacuation; exercitiun
seu motus, and quies; somnus and vigilia; accidentia, seu animi pathemata.


AS man by natural composition partakes of all the elements, so in this life
can he not long life without the use of them all, especially of this ambient
air; and of the which, for this cause we will speak in the first place. Now,
the utilitie, and necessity of this element, does in this appear, that
howsoever, sometimes, one may live without meat and drink for diverse days, if
not months and years, (as some relate) yet, without the use of this element,
was never any yet able to subsist and continue one day, no, nor yet one hour,
there being so great an use for the body of man, both of perspiration and
respiration. The whole body of man is composed of a triple substance; of an
air or spirituous, and next of several humors; and lastly, of a more solid
substance, flesh and bone. Now, these three, from the very first beginning to
the end of our days, are continually decaying, and therefore must daily be
repaired, if life be continued. The loss then of the first is repaired by
means of this air; of the two later, by means of meat and drink. Now,
since the use of this element is so great, that it not only cooles and
refreshes the excessive heat of the heart, but also repaires our decayed
spirits; we will say something thereof. Quality of the air.
The proper quality then of the air, is reputed to be warm, joined with
moisture; I mean, in a temperate, and not in any excessive degree: howbeit,
according to the several and manifold alterations it is subject unto, it often
alters, not the body only, but the mind of man also. A good laudable and
temperate air, is a great means to uphold the health; on the contrary, being
corrupted, it proves often the cause of many diseases: and that the air does
not a little affect the mind, The air does not a little affect both the body
and the mind.
may from hence be evinced, that such air as we most commonly breath in, such
spirits are there engendered. Of a thick and cloudy air, thick and gross
spirits are most commonly produced. For this cause the Athenians were accounted
wiser than the Thebans, by reason they lived in a purer and more refined air.
And all Scythia brought forth but one famous Philosopher, Anacharsis; and this
they impute to the thickness of the air of that country. Plato made choice
of a Iu Academo, unde academici. Ficinus in vitae Platonis.
moist and moorish place in the suburbs of the City of Athens to teach in; and
that of set purpose, to blunt the sharp edge of his pregnant wit. And Plato
himself affirms, that Minerva being to build the City of Athens, did well
before consider the nature and quality of that country, as promising no less
then such famous worthy wits, as in ancient histories are recorded. Now, the
healthfulnesse and goodness of the air, according to Galen, is determined by
the purity and good temper thereof. A pure air is called a subtle air,
infected with no corrupted vapors, nor noisome smells: A temperate air is
such a one wherein we neither quiver for cold, nor yet sweat for heat. Now, if
the air of any country whatsoever, of it self naturally unhealthfull, What
is meant by a pure air.
no art of man ever can amend it; and then the best remedy I know, A temperate
air. Air naturally unhealthfull cannot be corrected.
is with all possible speed to make choice of a better. If the air be but
accidentally bad, then there may be use of Art, and so it may, according to the
excess in any quality be corrected: as we read that Hippocrates corrected the
malignity of a pestilentiall air, Alteration of the air by means of the
seasons of the year.
by making of great fires of sweet smelling wood: as concerning that
alteration of the air occasioned by means of the times and seasons of the
year, we are always carefully to preserve the laudable temperature thereof by
contrary remedies, as far as in us lies: as the sharpness of winter is to
be helped by good fires, and warm clothes. In the parching heat of summer, we
are to cool and refresh our bodies by correcting the air with contrary
coolers, especially within doors, as also by the use of thinner clothing. Now,
that air which any one has sucked in from his infancy, suteth far better
with that constitution than another, howsoever, perhaps, in it self, of a more
laudable quality. It behooveth therefore every one, as far as in them lies, to
make choice of a good and laudable air. But because most men must be contented
with that air they first breathed in; therefore this would chiefly be
diligently and carefully considered of our new colonies, Advertisement for
undertakers of new plantations.
who transplant themselves into remote regions, that they first make choice of
a country, whose natural temper differs not much from their own; but with
this proviso, that it be rather warmer than colder than their own. In the next
place, let the place of thy particular habitation be settled in a good place of
the country, and that both in regard of the air and water, Error committed
in the fitst plantation of Virginia.
as also all other necessary commodities. Our Virginian colonies therefore
were at the first in this very far over-seene, not being so careful to build
their towns in a good and laudable air: and likewise my Lord of Baltomore was
too confident in settling himself in so tempestuous and cold a place of
New Foundland, which forced him at length quite to relinquish that land. And I
wish all other undertakers may take warning by other men's harms. Now, it is to
be observed, that the air is much altered in quality, according to the high or
low situation of the place; and hence comes it to pass, that there is a
great difference betwixt the air of the high hills, and that of the valleys,
the air being commonly exceeding cold on the top of those hills, yea, even
when it is indifferent warm in the lower regions: and this travelers, that
pass the Alps and Pyrenean hills, do often find true, where the snow
covers their high tops, when there is none to be found in the lower regions.
A Acosta hist. Ind. l. 3, cap. 6.
Spanish Jesuit to this purpose, relates a strange story of such a high
mountain in the West Indies: There is (says he) in Peru, a high mountain,
whereupon he ascended, as well provided as he could, being forewarned by men
expert. But in the ascent, both he, and all his company were surprised with so
sudden pangs of straining and casting, and some also of scowring, that the
sea-sicknesse is not comparable thereunto. He cast up phlegm, choler, and
blood, and thought he should have cast up his heart also. Some thinking
presently there to die, demanded confession; and some are said to have lost
their life by this accident. The best is, it lasts but for a time, and
leaves no great harm behind it; and thus it fares in all the ridge of that
mountain which runs above 1530. miles, although not in all places alike. In
some different passages thereof, he found the like difference and distemper,
but not so grievous as at Pariacaca. He ascribes it to the subtilty of the
air in those hills, which he thinks are the highest in the world; the Alps
and Pyrenees, being in respect thereof as ordinary houses compared to high
towers. In other places of Peru, men sometimes are found dead by reason of this
sharp air, and yet their bodies putrify not, which argues an extreme pure
cold penetrating air. Now, this makes it to seem the stranger, Election of
air according to the several constitutions of bodies.
Peru being of it self situate within the Tropickes. Now, in the air, this is
likewise to be considered, that some air better befitteth some bodies than
others; a moist foggy body agrees better with a good dry air; and a dry
constitution, with a moderate moist air; and so of other complexions, simple
or compounded. We are yet further, in considering the air, to take notice of
it according to the several times of the day; and therefore although the air
admits of many alterations and changes upon diverse occasions; yet that air
is commonly accounted in every country the best which we breathe in in the
morning, the next about noone, the worst of all about night, and especially
after Sunne-setting, Best air according to the time of the day.
which in many countries proves very pernicious; which that noble and valorous
Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, found too true on the coast of Afric, Night air
pernicious on most parts of the coast of Africa.
with the loss and hazard of the lives of many worthy generous Gentlemen. And
the French are very jealous of this night-aire, which they call la serene;
Diverse other things concerning the air, especially of the sick and diseased,
together with the best and most commodious situation of houses, I reserve to
its proper place hereafter, and now proceed to the winds for the affinity they
have with the air.

CHAP. V.
Of the several sorts of Winds, and their various effects.

AS 1 Kings 18.44.
Elias his little cloud no bigger than a man's hand, yet at length so over-spred
the face of the whole heavens, that it distilled down abundance of sweet
comfortable showers, to the fructifying of the hard yronic earth, which had
been so long deprived of these sweet refreshing showers: so these small dry
exhalations, of how little esteem soever they may at first seem to be, Winds
are of great force.
yet we see what prodigious and stupendous effects they often produce, having
their warrant sealed by the great God of heaven and earth. Now, whether thou
please to call these vapors or exhalations by the name of wind, or whether this
wind be an air tossed to and fro, it is not much material for our purpose in
hand, my desire being altogether averse from wrangling about words. Now,
because the wind does not a little alter the body of man, as well in sickness
as in health, it shall not be out of purpose to say something concerning this
subject: and the opinion of 5 De legibus.
Plato is, that where the winds are very various and boisterous, the people of
that country, for the most part, prove crabbed and untoward; and the winds
have ever been esteemed to carry a great pre-eminence both over the bodies and
minds of men. Winds then in the general, are of two sorts: common and sudden,
or such as blow suddendly or at unawares, called repentini; such as we call
common, are such as blow out of certain parts of the world, or else at
certain times or seasons. Such as we call sudden, are winds which neither blow
from any one determinate or certain quarter of the earth, nor yet at any one
certain and determinate time. These common winds are of four sorts, answering
to the four corners of the world; and again, betwixt each of these two
extremes, are other two inserted, making up the number of twelve in all, and
are very well Asper ab axe ruit Boreas, fugit Eurus ab ortu: Auster amat medium
Solemn, Zephyrusque cadentem. Hos inter binae mediis e partibus aurae, Expirant
similes mutato nomine flatus. Manilius lib. 4.
described by the Latin Poet. Tetrub. 2. sermon 3. cap. 100 sect. 3.
Aetius out of the ancient Mariners, reckons up the number of the winds, and
yet mentions only 12 in all, which he ascribes to the 12 signs of the
Zodiac. Our modern Mariners have by their compass observed 32 several winds
in several tracts of the sea. Neither ought so great a number of winds seem
strange to any, since that the ancients observed 24 several sorts of winds, as
witnesses Lib. 1. cap. 6.
Vitruvius; Whereunto Agricola rei metal. lib 3.
Agricola does also agree. And it may be more winds may yet be observed; so
that the number of the winds may by this means be infinite; by reason these
exhalations, when they are engendered, may arise out of any region whatsoever;
and so according to the nature and situation of the place, through which they
pass, their effects are various: Properties of winds according to several
countries.
and that wind which is propitious and benign to one country or place, may in
another place produce a contrary effect. The South wind (says Lib. de Pest.

South Wind best of al others to Africa.


Holler) is very unhealthfull to all Italy, as also to most Northern
countries; and yet to Africa this wind is most comfortable, insomuch, that what
refreshing other countries feel by the Etesian, or Easterly winds, the like
benefit reap the Africans by the benefit of this South wind. Zephyrus, or the
Western wind is generally with us reputed a mild and gentle wind: The
West-wind most terrible to Gasconie.
and yet in Gasconie (says Scaliger) it never blows without the great terror
or amazement of the inhabitants of that country. Hippocrates therefore
observing this variety and multiplicity of winds, wishes Physicians only to
observe four, and for the most part he mentions but two, as being the
principal, the South and the North. And so Hali abbas and Avicenne, when they
have mentioned 12, yet at length pitch upon these four principal winds,
chiefly of a Physician to be observed. Division of winds.
These four chief principal winds then are divided into land-winds and
sea-winds; Land-winds I call such as blow from the land, and sea-winds such as
blow from the sea. Division of Land-winds.
The land-winds again are of two sorts, either common, or else proper and
peculiar to some one country; as the North-westwind to the Athenians, and the
South Wind to Provence in France. Comment. 3. in 3 Epidem.
Galen makes the South Wind of two sorts, one hot and moist, cloudy and rainy;
and another hot and dry, clearing the cloudy and muddy air. The former of the
two proves often the author of great mischief to these our Northern cold
countries; as namely, of that fearful plague of pestilence, The South Wind
for the most part our greatest adversary.

The Northerly wind our best friend.


and diverse other dangerous and epidemicall diseases, whereon in this place to
insist, were too tedious: In general, it is the most unhealthfull wind that
blows in our climat; as I hold the Northerly wind to be our best friend;
Etesian, Easterly, or anniversary winds.
although some would have the Eastern wind, which blows directly from the
Equinoctial line, to be the healthfullest wind for our climat. It may be,
because they blow in most countries in the heat of summer, about the canicular
days, and so qualify the extreme scorching heat of the time, whereof frequent
mention is made by Jn libris Epidem.
Hippoccrates, who does often also prognosticate the approaching of diseases, by
the blo^ing of these winds, called Etesiae. Now concerning maritime, or winds
blowing from the sea, Lib. 2. cap. 1. Maritime, or winds blowing from the sea.
Celsus holds them to be very hurtful to the health of man; the which
opinion many others have embraced. And the more they are confirmed in this
opinion by Lib. de longitud. and brevit. vitae, cap. 3.
Aristotle himself, affirming all those creatures which have their being and
living in this watery element, to be of a shorter continuance, than those that
live upon the land: but this opinion is again contradicted, by Hicronym.
Rubeus in Comment. in praedict. Celsi locum.
others, his own expositor being of another mind; for the sea being warm in
winter, and cold in summer, yet always temperate, yea, even in the opinion of
the Philosopher himself, it must of necessity follow, that the wind which
blows that way, Galen 1. de semine. Commendation of winds blowing from the
sea.
and often also has from thence its original, does partake of the like
qualities: Now, these qualities being temperately hot and moist, of all other
are the fittest to maintain in perfect health the body of man. And hence
comes it to pass, that Gal. in aph. 14. l. 3.
Galen affirms, that the maritime parts of Thracia (in it self a cold
country) are much warmer than the more inward parts of the land: and on the
other side, again, the maritime parts of Libya, and Egypt in Summer, are far
cooler than places more remote from thence: Lib. de tuenda. valetud.
Plutarch seems likewise to favor this opinion, who affirms, that it is
not necessary to prescribe any remedies for the preservation of the teeth of
such as dwell near the sea; and that in regard of the dry quality of that air
and wind, strengthening and corroborating their heads. Again, that the
sea-aire is hot, appears in that Lib. 2. cap. 106.
Pliny writes that no snow falls in the maine Ocean: but, what may then be
the reason, that in may places of Italy the sea air is so bad? Idem Rubeus
loco nuper citat.

Why the sea air in Italy is so bad.


The reason many be, in the first place, because, perhaps, this wind blows
sometimes too violently, and so in too great abundance drawn in by the
inhabitants; or else by reason, that by the sea air, diverse marshes, or
stinking standing pooles and ponds; or yet salt water mingled with fresh, or
any the like occasion, which causing the water to putrify, sends forth such
ill vapors and exhalations, as are altogether hurtful to the health of man.
And by reason this is ordinary in most places of Italy, hence have we this
evil report; and slander raised upon the sea air and wind: which,
notwithstanding, is only accidental, being in it self most healthful, and
without any hurt at all. Hence is it also, that the 10 Probl. 54.
Philosopher affirms, that the sea creatures are far more vigorous, and of
a greater stature: and Averroes affirms that they are longer lived. As
concerning that which was before alleged out of Lib de longitud. and brevit.
vitae.
Aristotle, seeming to maintain the contrary opinion, was spoken of creatures
living in the water, Venetians are vigorous and long lived.
the word Water, taken in a general sense; but is not meant of the sea in
particular. Hence also comes it to pass, that the Idem Rubeus. ibid.
Venetians hemmed in on every side with the sea, breathing in no air, which
does not partake of the qualities of their so near bordering neighbor, are so
lively and vigorous, that many of that republique attain very nigh the hundred
year of their age: and this was verified in that noble and renowned Champion,
and sea Captain Andrew Door, Admiral of the fleet of Charles the fifth,
Emperor; and who spent in a manner his whole life upon the Sea, as the
aforesaid Author averreth. Confirmation of this opinion by experience.
And this opinion seems yet more probable, in that both the snow which
falls near the seacoasts; yea, even in the most Northern parts of this
Island, both falls often in a small quantity, and lies a shorter while, than
in the places further remote from the same: and the corn is also sooner ripe,
caeteris paribus, and no other let or rub come in the way: and yet further to
confirm this truth, we see most commonly, that seafaring men, seldom need any
sauce to provoke their languishing appetites. I have a little the longer
insisted of set purpose upon these winds blowing from the sea, by reason of our
new colonies, now planted and planting in these remote regions, that they may
neither be afraid to settle themselves near the sea coast, if all other things
be answerable: nor yet any such as are there already seated, be by any
needless future fears discouraged by reason of this air. And now being
arrived into these remote regions, ere we return, a word or two of the nature
and property of some of these winds blowing in those far distant contries.
Acosta the Jesuit relates, that upon all the coast of Peru, it blows
continually with one only wind, Of winds blowing in America, lib. 3. cap. 10.
South and Southwest winds blow constantly in Peru.
which is South, and South west; contrary to that which does usually blow under
the burning Zone: and being by nature the most violent, tempestuous and
unhealthfullest of all other; yet in this region it is mavelous pleasing,
healthful and agreeable: insomuch that we may truly attribute the habitation
of that place thereunto. Now, Northern winds noisome to some parts of Peru.
the Northern wind is not usually cold and clear in Peru, and beyond the line
as here. In some parts of Peru, at Lima, and on the plains, they find the
Northern winds troublesome and unwholesome; and all along the coast, which
runs above 300 leagues, they hold the Southern winds for healthful and
cool, and (which is yet more) most clear and pleasant: yea, with it it never
raines, contrary to that we see in Europe, on this side the line. The Solanus,
or Easterly wind is commonly hot and troublesome in Spain, and in Murtia it is
the healthfullest and coolest that is; for that it passes through that large
champian, Various qualities of the Eastern wind according to several countries.
and sweet pleasant orchards. In Carthagena, which is not far from thence,
the same wind is troublesome, and unwholesome. The Meridionall is commonly
rainie and boisterous; and yet in the same City whereof I speak, it is
wholesome and pleasant. In a region containing fifty leagues in circuit (I put
it thus for example) the wind which blows on the one part, is hot and moist,
and that which blows on the other, is cold and dry. Lib. 2. cap. 49.
And Pliny reports, that in Afric it raines with a Northerly wind, and that
the Southern wind is clear: And Acosta tells us yet more, that there is a
certain wind of such a Idem. Acosta ibid^
quality, that when it blows in some country, it causes it to rain fleas,
and that in so great abundance, that they trouble and darken the air, and
cover all the seashore; and in other places it raineth frogs. There are winds
which naturally trouble the sea, and make the water thereof look green and
black; others make it look as clear as crystal; some comfort and make
glad, others trouble and breed heaviness. Such as nourish silke-wormes, have
great care to shut their windows when as the South-westwinds do blow, and to
open them to that opposite to it, having found by certain experience, that
their worms die and languish with the one, fatten, and become better-like by
the other. The same Idem ibid. cap. 9.
Author reports, that in some parts of the Indies, he has seen grates of
iron rusted and consumed, that passing it betwixt your fingers, it dissolved
into powder, as if it had been hay, or parched straw; the which only
proceeded from the wind corrupting it, and it having no power to withstand the
same. But before we conclude this chapter, we must take notice, that See
Purchase his pilgrimage, lib 4 cap. 12. ex Linch^t. l. 2.
without the Tropicks from the twenty seventh to the thirty seventh degrees,
the winds are said to be for the most part Easterly (as some think) by a
repercussion of the air: even as we see waters being incountred with more
force, return with an eddie, in a manner, back. This which is said of the
Easterly wind, is to be understood of the sea: for, at the land, though winds
be, as has been said, certain, and set; yet, that which is the general wind
of one country, is not general to all: yea, in the same country they have a
set wind for the day, and another quite contrary blows for the night: also
near the coast, they are more subject to calmes in this burning Zone, than
further off in the sea; the gross vapors which arise out of the earth, and
the diverse situation thereof, being the cause of these differences. Many other
strange effects of winds may in these Authors be seen, which here I willingly
pass by; having dwelt somewhat the longer upon this point, to acquaint such as
shall travel into this new world, with the condition of the air and winds of
those remote regions.

CHAP. VI.
Of the four Seasons of the year, and how they affect the body.

GOD of his infinite goodness to mankind, after that great and terrible
deluge and inundation of the universal world, Genes. 8.22.
made man a promise, that from thenceforward should not fail the several
seasons of the year; Summer and Winter, Seed-time and Harvest; which has
hitherto accordingly come to pass. Now these seasons, according to several
climats and countries do much vary and differ: Under the Line, and betwixt the
Tropickes, they continue more constant, and less deviation from their ordinary
course is to be observed. Without the Tropicks there is a greater difference
and irregularity therein to be observed: Now these seasons therefore, according
to their unconstant course, must needs diversely affect the body of this
Microcosme, man, both in sickness and in health; and therefore will not be
impertinent to say something of this subject. We will threfore begin with the
natural temperature of the seasons of the year, The natural seasons of the
year.
as they are commonly seen and observed with us here in Europe. The natural
temperature of the Spring then with us here in Europe ought to be hot and
moist; of the Summer hot and dry; of the Autumn, or Harvest, cold and moist;
of Winter cold and dry: These among innumerable others, are the chief
alterations incident to our air, and by the which the seasons of the year are
with us ordinarily divided and distinguished; and these seasons are occasioned
by means of the exaltation, or declining of that glorious prince of Planets.
Now, the further these seasons decline from the aforementioned qualities, the
more intemperate and greater enemies to the health of mankind they prove. Our
Pracipue vero maxim anni temporum mutationes observandae sunt, ut neque
medicamentum purgans lubenter exbibeau^us, neque parts circa ventrem uramus,
aut secemus, antedies december, aut etiam plures. Maxim tamen sufficient december,
ac maximi periculi plena sunt ambo aequinoctia, maxim vero autumnale.
Periculosissima etiam sunt ambo Solstitia, praecip^eque aestivum. Syderum
quoque ortus observandi, praecipueque caniculae, deinde arcturi, and
vergiliarum occasus. His enim potissimu^ diebus morbi indicationem subeunt, and
alii quidem perimunt, alii vero desinunt, aliique omnes in aliam formam and
statum transeunt. Lib de acre, aquis and locis.
Hipporcrates defines not these seasons after this manner; but according to the
rising and setting of certain stars; and the chief times by him observed,
are these following: the two Solstices, the one in Summer, about the eleventh
of June, the other in Winter, about the eleventh of December: then next the two
Aequinoxes; the one about the eleventh of March, the other about the eleventh
of September. These times, because of dangers about these seasons, this old
Father would have us to observe. The So^mer Solstice he accounts most
dangerous; and the Harvest Aequinox. The same Author, again, observes the
rising and setting of certain stars; as namely of the Pleiades, Vergiliae,
rising the five and twentieth of April, and setting about the first of
November: and again, the rising of Arcturus, about the one and thirtieth of
August, and setting about the beginning of March. Besides, this same Author
observes also the rising of the Dog-starre the ninteenth of July, and setting
again the twenty seventh of August; and with these also he observes the
blowing of the West-wind: And this is all the Hippocraticall sphere,
comprehending such stars and seasons as he thought fit for Physicians to
observe. But now, again, as concerning the temper of these seasons, whereas I
say the Spring is hot and moist, it may be objected, that in it self it is
rather temperate. To this I answer, that howsoever it be so accounted, yet in
comparison of the other seasons, it may be called temperate. And again, it may
be called temperate, as some say, effective, by producing the best temper. It
may again be demanded, if heat and drouth be proper qualities befitting
Summer, and cold and drouth approptiated for Winter; Question concerning the
temperature of the seasons, with the answer.
whether the hottest Summer be not the healthfullest? as likewise the coldest
Winter? To this I answer, they are not so, simply and absolutely considered:
Nam omne nimium vertitur in vitium. The extreme hot Summer inflames the humors
of the body, making it subject to hot and acute diseases: and the extreme
pinching cold, accompanied especially with sharp piercing Northerly winds,
disposes the body to rheumes, and rheumatecke diseases; as likewise to
Apoplexies, The humors in the body of man, answer the four seasons of the
year, and the parts of our civil day.
and many other such like dangerous infirmities. The humors in the body of man
have pre-eminence and dominion according to these four seasons: for in the
Spring, blood most abounds; in the Summer, choler; in the Harvest melancholy;
and in Winter, phlegm: and the parts of our civil day, answer likewise to
these seasons; the morning to the Spring, the noonetide to Summer, the
afternoon to autumn, and the night to Winter. Now, these anniversarie, or
yearly seasons, Seasons of the year differ acording to climats and countries.
do much differ according to the climat: For, within the Tropicks the seasons
are much warmer than without; and under the Equinoctial Line, then Winter is,
when the Sorrow is perpendicular over their heads; by reason that then it does
more powerfully attract and draw unto it self diverse moist exhalations, which
descending again in great abundance upon the face of the earth, does
plentifully refresh and water the same; and this season they therefore call
their Winter. But again, when the Sun declineth a little, the beams not
darting down so perpendicularly as before, there not being now that forcible
attraction of vapors; and by consequent, as fewer clouds, and less rain, so
heat to the outward appearance, being then intended, and of greater force than
before: and this time they call their Summer, as being fairer and warmer than
the former, quite contrary to that which befalls us here without the
Tropickes; as in particular may be observed in the country of Chili in the West
Indies. Situation of places alters the seasons: See Acost. in places alleged
in the former chapter.
Now the situation of places (as has before been mentioned) often alters
the nature of this ambient air, and by consequent, alters the seasons in
those particular places, although the elevation of the Pole differ little or
nothing: the which is evidently seen in Peru, whereas the whole breadth of the
country not much exceeding forty leagues, in the plain, it neither snowes,
raines, nor thunders; and in the mean time, upon the Sierra, or hills, the
seasons have their courses as in Europe, where it raines from the month of
September, until April, and in the Andes it raines in a manner, all Winter.
And even here in Europe, no small difference may thus be observed, that
oftentimes, the high hills are infested with terrible cold tempests, when as
the adjacent valleys go many times scotfree, as travelers can testify. And
of this, History of the difference of the season in the hills and valleys.
my self was once an eyewitness, when as in the year 1610, traveling from
Misnia toward Prague, and passing over the high hills which encompasse Bohemia
round about; on Easter eve at night (falling then about the midst of April) as
likewise all Easter day, and the three next days after, it snew continually
without any intermission, accompanied with so nipping a frost and
North-Easterly wind, that I have seldom at any time observed a sharper season:
the next day after, the snow fell no more, and coming down into the plain of
Bohemia, about half a days journey from S. Annaberg, where I rested these
four days, I found neither frost nor snow, nor any sign of the same; but
both corn and grass as green and forward, as had ever been observed about
that season, together with a fine warm temperate air: and inquiring there of
the weather past, they assured me that they had seen neither frost nor snow,
only that morning had fallen a small shower of warm rain, which was scarcely
to be discerned upon the ground. But it is yet stranger, that within a few
miles of ground, one place not exceeding another in height, should be Summer in
one, and Winter in the other, as appears by that which follows: See Purchase
his pilgrimage lib. 4. cap. 16.
At the same time, when in the West part of this Peninsula ( being near
Cambaia) between that ridge of mountains and the sea, it is after their
appellation Summer, which is from September to April, in which time it is
always clear sky, without once or very little raining: on the other side of
the hills, which they call the coast of Choromandell, it is then Winter, every
day and night yielding abundance of raines; besides those terrible thunders,
which both begin and end their Winter: and from April till September, in a
conntrarie vicissitude, on the Western part is winter, and on the Eastern
part Summer; insomuch that in little more than 20 leagues iourny insome places
(as when you cross the hill to S. Thomas on the one side of the hill you
ascend with a fair Summer; on the other side you descend with a stormy Winter.
The like, says Linschoten, happens at the Cape Rosalgate, in Arabia, and in
many other places of the East. But it is as great, if not a greater wonder,
that in some places of the same elevation of the Pole, even upon the low level
ground, there should be such a disparity in the qualities of the ambient air;
as it is reported of the straits of Magellan. Idem lib. 6. cap. 14.
In and about the straits of Magellan (says a late Writer) ( in as high an
elevation of the Pole, as many parts of Spain) the cold is yet there so
violent, that besides the mountain tops always covered with snow, their very
Summer, in the midst thereof, freeth them not from ye. Yea, at that time of
the year the Hollanders encountered an Island of ye in the Sea. The trees yet
there are generally green all the year long. The cold is so extreme, that
Henry Barwell became balld therewith, so continuing a year or two. One Harris
a Goldsmiths, blowing his frozen nose, cast it with his fingers into the fire;
and our Author himself going on shore, And returning wet in his feet, the
next morning pulled off his toes with his stackings, from his benumbed feet.
Those countries wherein the air is so continually warm, as within the
Tropicks, and near to them, prove not commonly so healthful, especially to
our Northern constitutions; whose lives are better preserved in a Northern
air, Observations for undertakers of plantations.
than any of those hot regions, which is diligently to be observed of those who
undertake to transport colonies into remote regions, that they settle not
themselves in too hot a climat. Now, that the distempered qualities of the air
are a means of producing diverse diseases, appears by many places of that
famous Hippocrates his works, where he sets down diverse distempered
constitutions of the air, whereupon ensued diverse dangerous diseases, both
pestilentiall and others. And among our selves the instances, I think, are
fresh enough yet in our memories, of this last year, 1630. which deprived many
of life, and many so pinched with poverty, that the wound is not yet healed up.
It is then apparent that the several seasons of the year, together with the
alterations and changes thereof do not a little affect both the body and mind
of man; and therefore diligently and carefuly of Physicians to be considered.

CHAP. VII.
Of Water in general: of Terrestrial Water, or water passing through, or
issuing out of the Earth; as Springs, Rivers, Wells and Ponds.

IT is now more then time that we come to this so noble and necessary element
of Water, which can never sufficiently be commended. And in so high an account
was it among the Ancients, that Thales Milesius, The high esteem the Ancients
had of water.
one of the seven Wisemen of Greece, thought it to be the original of all
things, quasi aqua omnia, from whence all things have their first being and
beginning; and this was also the opinion of the Greek Poet Hesiod. But in
brief, both the antiquity and utility do highly recommend it unto us. The
Antiquity, Antiquity.
as being that prime and principal liquour where with our forefathers until
the time of Noah after the flood, yea, and even after the flood, Vtility.
continued still to be in greatest request. The utility appears in this,
that it is the most common and natural drink to all living creatures; and
withal the most familiar, and easiest to come by: and hence by the goodness
of our God, have we this Element obvious every where, as well in the highest
hills as in the lowest valleys. And that great Quoniam aqua alterum est ex
duobus elementis quibus constat bominum vita, altera vitae part Aegyptios
spolians, optimo compendio usus est ad humiliandam eorum ferociam, nisi prorsus
fuissent intractabiles. Calvin. comment cap. 7. Exo. verse. 19.
Calvin says, that God deprive the Egyptians of the one half of their life,
when as he inflicted upon them that great plague of turning their water into
blood. The utility and necessity of this noble Element was not unknown to Genesis
26.15, 16, 17. etc
Isaac and Abimelec, which made their herd-men so strive for these fountains
of living water: and did yet more manifestly appear in 1 King. 17.1.
that more than triennal disastrous drought in Ahabs days. And some late
writers relate, that the like In one place Westward from Florida and Virginia
it had not rained for the space of three years; and therefore was there great
scant of food there. Purchase lib. 8. cap. 7.

In Mexico in former times had bin a drought of 4. years continuance, which
forced the inhabitants to forsake the country, Idem ibid. cap. 13.


happened of late years in some parts of the West Indies. And is yet more
clearly in this seen, in that it is the Basis, or foundation of all other
liquors whatsoever; and giving, as it were, the essence even unto that king of
liquors, Wine it self; as without the which, neither it, nor yet any other
ever attain to any perfection. Being therefore so useful both for drink,
dressing of meat, and many other necessary uses, it will be requisite to say
something of it: And first for the temperature, both Physicians and
Philosophers have reputed water to be of a cooling quality. And Aristotle
himself is of this opinion; and as for moisture, Galen holds, that it is an
absurd thing to hold that any thing is moister than this Element. It is then
generally held, that Water is very cold and very moist; And yet Lib. de Aqua.
Division of water.
Cardan thinks it not to be cold, as it is commonly accounted, but rather
temperate, and exclaimeth against his teachers who instructed him in that
manner, which (says he) has done me great mischief. Temperature of water.
And in very truth, it would seem in its own natural condition not to be so
very cold, howsoever actually, as many other liquors, it may partake of an
intense frigidity. All water is either potable and useful for ordinary
emploiments; or else Physical, and appropriated to diverse diseases; or lastly
venomous, Properties of the best waters.
and altogether unprofitable for the use either of man or beast. My purpose is
in this place to speak of such waters as be beneficial for the life of all
living Creatures. In the first place then, let us examine the qualities of the
best water. Jmprimis itaque illa aqua ad potandum optima censetur, quae clara,
pellucida, tenuis, pura, frusti lorum and saporum omnium expers, levisque
reperitur: necnon quae igni admota cito califit, remota vero ocyssime
frigescit, gustu iucundo: quae denque celeriter praecordia pertransit, and fine
ulla ventriculi molestia labitur and secedit. etc Matthiol in lib. 5. Dioscor.
cap. 14. de aqua.
The goodness thereof is principally discerned by the lightness and
thinness; the which, according to Hippocrates, is soon warm and soon cold
again; if it be free from any smell or taste; if any kind of pulse be
quickly tender that is boiled therein; if put in a silver vessel it cause it
no to rust, and leave no slime at bottom. It is also accounted a good sign of
wholesome water, if a handful of sage being thrown therein, it be presently
dispersed: if it nourish good fish, and good and wholesome plants grow in it,
we think well of it: but if it nourish toads, snakes, or other such vermin,
it is utterly to be rejected. The weighing of water is not to be trusted to:
for a venomous water may be as light, as that which is of a more laudable
quality: and besides, one and the same water may be heavy in winter, and light
in summer; as for any other experiments, either by a linen cloth or round
piece of wood, as idle and impertinent, I pass by, and come to the
differences, and several sorts of water. Water that is in request for the
ordinary use, Hippocr. fusius de bi^ omnibus aquu agit. lib. de aere, aquis and
locis. Gal. 1. de salut. 26. Aph. lib. 5. Avic. fen. 2. primi doct. 2. cap. 16
and 17. and alii multi, ut Lang. (...) 1. Epist. ^4.

Division of (...) water.

Raine-water.


as well of man as beast; (as for Physical waters we refer them to their
proper place, and venomous waters we will not meddle with) we will divide into
Celestial and Terrestrial. Celestial are either snow or raine-waters.
Terrestrial, is either spring or river-water, well-water, or of a pond and
standing lake. Raine-water is engendered in the middle region of the air, of
certain vapors, which the Sun by his heat in the daytime draws up. 2
Meteor. cap. 3.
Aristotle is of opinion that some hot and dry vapors are therewith mingled,
which causes the saltness in the sea. In raine-water again, we are to
observe both the time and the manner of falling. Loco prius citato.
Hippocrate^ rejects that which falls in the wintertime, as being heavier
and harder than in the Summer. Best raine-water according to the time of the
year.
The best in his opinion is that which falls in Summer, and in the most
temperate part of the same: not in the extreme heat of the canicular days; it
being then far worse. Rufus apud Oribafi, Columella, Plinius.
Some, notwithstanding, hold that the winter and spring rain water are the
best, and to be preferred before that which falls in Summer and Harvest; and
that by reason it is not so soon putrified. But the opinion of Hippocrates is
to be preferred, who measures the water by the lightness and thinness
thereof. What parts of the day are best.
Of the parts of the day, that which falls in the morning is accounted best.
The manner of the falling is likewise of some moment; The manner of the falling.
whether it fall with force or violence, or mildly and softly; with greater or
smaller drops. That which falls with smaller drops and with violence,
Hippocrates esteems better than that which falls more leisurely, and with
greater drops: and that which falls with great storms of wind, is accounted
worst. The substance of raine-water is most subtle and sweet, by reason that
the most subtle and thinnest parts are exhaled and drawn up by force of the
Sunne-beames. Snow-water is either of snow alone, or of snow mingled with hail
or ye; Snow-water nothing worth.
or else snow and ye are mingled with other water. Both these sorts are to be
rejected, by reason that the thinnest and subtilest parts by congealing do
exhale and vanish away, the thicker and more terrestrious part still remaining
behind. Of this a trial may be made by letting some water freeze in the
nightime, and the next morning being dissolved by the heat, the quantity
shall easily be discerned to be diminished. Now what harm insueth by
drinking of these snow-waters, is by the testimony of Aph. 24 lib. 5.
Hippocrates apparent: Hurt by drinking of snow-water.
and such as do inhabit the Alps and Pyrenean hills, and Auvergne in France,
are sensible of this hurt, being much molested with great throats, whom for
this cause their neighbors call Goitreux. Cisterne waters are of a very near
affinity with raine-water; as being nothing else but raine-water conveyed
into a cisterne, as a fit and convenient receptacle. Cisterne water.
Pliny approves not of raine-waters, because by reason of their standing they
putrify, and engender noisome creatures, harden the belly, and are hurtful to
the throat. But since raine-water is so useful and sovereign, I see no reason
why cisterne-water should be blamed. Correction of cistern waters.
And since of raine-water there be some better and some worse, we must choose
the fittest and convenientest time, to wit, that which falls in the Summer.
As for the slime and filth which often accompanies rainewa-ter, being strained
through gravel and sand, they easily leave all that behind the: as for the fear
of putrefaction, it may easily be avoided, by casting in some small fishes,
Quaity of cisterne water.
which will keep it in continual motion. As concerning the quality of such
water, it is by some Physicians believed, that it binds; but that which is
reserved in the midst of Summer, rather looseneth then binds the belly. And
by the same reason, boiled water rather looseneth than binds the belly,
contrary to the vulgar opinion; A vulgar error.
and that by reason that being boiled, it is more easily again expelled out of
the body.

Consideration of springs and spring water.

Best Springs.

Laso prius citat^ de Aere, ^quis, etc.


Now, as for terrestrial waters, among then, Fountains or Springs challenge
unto themselves the prerogative of the first place above any others. In
fountains or springs, we are to consider three things: their original,
Objection.
situation, and places through which they pass. The best springs, Answer.
in the judgment of Hippocrates, are such as spring out of high places and
earthy hills. In the situation of springs what to be considered.

The soil or place from whence they spring.

Situation in regard of the Heavens.

The ground or soil through which they run.

The manner of running.

Whether water carried through pipes of lead may be safely used.


Such as spring out of rocks he mis-liketh, as also such as run near any
hot bath, or through mineralls. It may be objected, that springs issuing out of
rocks, are by some of the ancients accounted wholesomest and best. It may be,
Hippocrates, in regard of their excessive cold, and that they are not so
passible through the body, rejected them. In the situation of springs, we are
to consider the soil where it is seated, and next the aspect of the Heaven. As
for the soil, the best spring out of high hilly places; but worse that spring
out of champian and plain grounds: for such water in Winter is hot, and in
Summer cold. In regard of the Heaven, such are commended that run toward the
Sun rising, and have their aspect that way. Such as run toward the West or
other parts, etc: are not of that high esteem, although not unwholesome to
drink. Now the ground through which waters run is not to be neglected: The
best ground is a good firm clay, unto the which the filth and corruption of
the water sticks fast. Again, it must run a swift course; by which means
it is freed from all smell and putrefaction. But here arises a question,
whether water carried through pipes, especially of lead, may safely be used.
The reason may be both in regard of Aqua quae per plumheas solenas deducitur
fugienda est, sordes namque et limus plumbi ^i^ adharent, ob id qui illius
subsi^entiam bibunt dyfenterci fiunt. Gal. lib. 7. de medicam. loco affect.
appropr. Verum est ae omni metallo quod propter sulphuream substantiam oliquid
habeat accuitatis; quamvis in flanno and plumbo saper id minime indicat:
probatur tamen per illud, quod aqua quaedam currit vel stat in fistulis
plumbei^, aut stanneis, efficitur in testinorum sive viscerum exceriatio
Albe^t. Magn lib 3. de. metal. tract. 2. cap. 4 Aqua per plumbum ducta ideo
videtur vi^iosa, quod ex cerusa fit and nascitur.

Vit. lib. 8. Pallad. lib. 9 cap. 11 etc.


Galen and others, ancient Authors and famous in their generations: Now besides
the closeness of the passage through which it is conveyed, they allege
another inconvenient; that by this passage the water draws ceruse from the
lead; and these drossie dregs thus drawn from this ceruse, say they,
engender the bloody flixe. I answer, that daily experience evinceth this to
be most false and erroneous, as may be seen in the City of Paris, where
such water is in most common and frequent request. And if they be sometimes
subject thereunto, it is rather to be imputed to the slimy river of Seine,
than to these leaden pipes, as their own Physicians confess. Again, in
Montpeliers the water is brought into the Town by means of such leaden pipes,
and yet are they no ways obnoxious to this disease, and this is likewise the
case of many other cities of that great and populous kingdom of France, who
are notwithstanding as free as the former. Indeque Lang. Epist medicin. loco
nuper citat. Confutation of this opinion.
But that we may come nearer home, what shall we say to the noble City of
London, whither that river of Ware is conveied, and by these leaden pipes
distributed through that great body; and yet it is well known that this is not
a disease that much troubles ordinarily this great and populous City. And this
Town of Northampton makes likewise use of these leaden pipes; and yet the
inhabitants are but seldom troubled with this disease: and no doubt, many like
instances may be produced to prove this truth. Again, ceruse, which Vitru vius
and others so much fear, cannot be extracted out of lead, except it be first
steeped in strong vinegar. If any can object any thing else against such water,
the fire will make amends.

River-water partaketh of the same nature with Spring Water, River-water.
from whence it has its original and beginning, yet comes short of the
former, in regard of the slime and filth they carry with them; as also in
regard of the diversity of the natures of the springs whereof they are
composed; and therefore Avicenne commends rather the water of small Brooks,
than of great Rivers; as likewise, What river-water is best.
the further they run from their springs, the better he likes them; by
reason the further they run, the more subtle and thinner they are: howbeit,
Averroes his countryman is of another mind, by reason that the further it
runs, the more filth and corruption it gains. Such therefore as abound in
mudde and slime are the worst to be liked.

Waters of Lakes being always renewed by their springs, Waters of Lakes and
Ponds.
and tossed to and fro with the wind, are not to be rejected. Well-water being
often drawn, standing in a free and open air, Well-water.
with a large mouth, may also be of good use: but that which is otherwise,
declineth from this bonitie, Pump-water.
and therefore pumpe-water is not so good as open Well-water is.

Standing pond-water of all other is the worst, Pond-water worst of all others.
and very prejudicial to health. Salt Water is not of ordinary use, either to
drink or dress meat with; and this shall now suffice to have said of Waters
in general, as they are serviceable for the use of mankind; reserving a more
particular discourse of water, until we come to speak of drink. As for the
other two necessary and useful elements, we defer speaking of them, until
we come to the diet of the diseased. But before we proceed to speak of
elements assumed within the body, we purpose to discuss two questions: and
first,

CHAP. VIIJ.
Whether any pure Element be able to nourish a mixed body, and whether any such
compound be able to live by the sole use of the same.

But before we enter upon the discussing of this question, it shall not be
amiss to know what Aliment or nourishment is. It is by Quicquid substantiam
nostri corporis auget and conservat, vel ut alii; Alimentum est quod vitales
vires custodire natum existit, per refectionem triplicis substantiae,
spirituosae, humidae and carnosae; quae in nobis quotidie perit, and vires
imminuit. Mercatus tom. 1 lib. 2. quaest. 164. class. 2.
Galen defined to be whatsoever increases or multiplieth the substance of our
body, and conserveth the same. Now the substance of our body (as has bin
said) is threefold; solid, humid, and spirituous, or airy; from whence the
differences of aliments are desumed. The solid parts are repaired by food; the
humid by drink; and the airie or spirits, by sweet and comfortable smells. Now
that any thing carry the name of aliment or nourishment, it ought to be endued
with these qualities following. In the first place it ought to be of quality
hot and moist; that it may the better repair the decay of our natural innate
heat. It is again requisite that it affect our taste with a good relish;
Properties required in nourishment. Quod sapit, nutrit.
for what pleases the palate in taste, often nourishes well. Now that which
does most affect the taste, and is agreeable to nature, is in taste sweet (I
mean not in excess, as to feed on sugar and sweet meats continually, which
being much used are more hurtful than helpefull to health; but in a mean, not
declining to any other; as sharp, sour, etc.) and so is most acceptable to
nature; all other being rather Physical than Alimentall, as I may say. And
howsoever meat may in the taste be somewhat salt, bitter, etc: yet in the
concoction there is made a sequestration of these qualities from the substance
of the food, and that only which is sweet remains for nourishment. Lib. de
carnibus.
Hippocrates writes, that all manner of creatures are nourished only with
sweet things, which 2. Meteor. cap. 2.
Aristotle also repeateth. Again, that which nourishes, ought to be mixed and
compounded, and therefore pure elements are here excluded; according to that
vulgar saying, Ex quibus constamus jisdem nutrimur. And lastly, it is required
that there be a power of giving life; Potentia vitae and animationis: And such
things only nourish which once have lived, says Lib. 2 de cause. plant.
Theophrastus. And there is an easier passage and change of such things as have
a communication, or symbolize in symbol or quality. And for this cause, the
juice which comes of living creatures is far easilier changed into our
substance, than that which is desumed from plants: Now to the question.
Although then it has bin hitherto received for an uncontrolled truth, that no
simple Element can nourish a mixed body; yet some things seem to cross this
opinion, and there is a common proverbial verse tending to this purpose.
Quatuor ex purit vitamducunt elementis Chameleon, talpa, maris halec, and
Salamandra. Halec unda fovet, etc.
Quatnor ex etc. Now to discuss the truth of this question, we will briefly
run through the four elements: and first of the fire. It is reported by
ancient Arist. lib 5. de not. animal cap 19. and Pliny lib. ^0. cap. 67. and
li. 13. cap. 30. Theoph. lib de igne, etc.
Authors, that a certain worm, or fly, called therefore Pyrausta, is both
bred, and lives in the fire, which is notwithstanding, most absurd and false,
and as concerning the vulgar conceit of the Serpent Salamandra, living in the
fire, and with his cold frozen venomous moisture, extinguishing the fiery
flames, it is as false as the former, as witnesses Lib. 2. cap. 56.
Dioscoride: and the Salmandra continuing any space in the fire, is
notwithstanding consumed to dust and ashes. Now come we to ^^e air the next
element: It is the opinion of some, that such as live altogether without any
solid substance of food, may be fed with the air. Indeed, if people were so
contented, corn would be the cheaper, and people then would not be so
destitute of food in a dear year, as was this last, 1630. Some relate strange
things tending to this purpose, as namely A man living only upon the Sun and
air: Olimpioderus, Citante Riolano ficio in praelect.
of a man living only upon the Sun and air; Fides sit penes Authorem: I never
yet could see any such good husbands. Lib. 7. cap. 2.

Men without mouths


Pliny makes mention of a certain man, living without any thing else, save
the attraction of the air, being destitute of any mouth; and for this cause
called Astomi. And the inhabitants of the new world, they say, will live 16 or
18 days with the smoke of Tobacco only. Our Tabacconists here in England, are
commonly as brief with the pot as the pipe; and besides, many say, it procures
them an appetite. And thus Tobacco, like aurum potabile, or that noble Elixir,
is able to do any thing. Athen. lib. 2. Diog. Laertius in eius vita.
Democritus, we read, being ready to give up the ghost, for a certain time
sustained his life with the only smell of honey, to the end he might be partaker
of the Thesmophorian solemnity; and that not only the spirits, but even the
solid parts also are fed by meats, Plinies Astomes (if it be true) confirm
unto us, and Jn Epistolis.

The Chameleon, Rhin. tax, Manu^odiata, avis Paradisi.


Manardus seems to second it. The Chameleon also said to feed upon the air
only: and there is a certain bird in the Indies called Rhintax, Manucodiata,
or avis Paradisi, which being deprived of feet, is said to fly in the air
continually, and feed on the same only. But to answer the former objections; in
the first place it is one thing to speak of the air, as a simple Element, and
another thing to speak of smells. Lib. de sensu, and sensib.
Aristotle against the Pythagoreans tells us that neither the air nor the
water can nourish, by reason of the simplicity of their elementary bodies. As
concerning Plinies Astomes they are mere fictions and fancies, never any such
people having bin discovered by any traveller whatsoever; Confutation of these
former assertions.
no more than many other monstrous and prodigious narrations, by too credulous
antiquity received for uncontrolled truths; Many lies left us by antiquity and
travelers.
and so for legacies left to posterity, which here to confute would spend me
more time than I can now well spare. As for the Chameleon, it has bin observed
to catch flies, which sticking to its slimie tongue, Chameleon lives not on
the air.
it did afterward feed upon. As for that Manucodiata, it has bin hitherto
constantly and confidently believed, that it lived always balanced in the
air, Nor the bird of Paradise.
living upon no other nourishment, but the air only; howbeit now in our late
navigations, it has bin observed to feed upon cloves: and moreover, Notable
imposture.
that the inhabitants so artificially cut off their feet, that no print or
mark of them can ever be discerned. Now as I deny that any creature can live
upon the air only; so again, I will not deny, but by good and pleasant
smells, the exhaust and spent spirits, may again be repaired, a smell being
nothing else, save a certain vaporous exhalation, or corporeal effluxe,
Whether the bare element of earth can nourish or no.
or sliding out. But that the solid substance of the earth should nourish,
would seem to savor more of truth, in that God himself seems to give the
earth to the Serpent for food: and it is reported, that the Mole lives on the
earth only. Besides, we see many women with child troubled with the disease
Pica, to eat earth, coals, chalk, etc. And we see birds to swallow
peeble-stones, the Ostrich to eat iron. But to answer these instances, Answer.
the Serpents and Moles live not on the simple element of earth, which with us
being (...) far from the center is mixed, and not a simple element; and
therefore makes nothing for the purpose. It is true also, that women often
make use of such trash as we have mentioned; but that they have no great cause
to brag of this food, by their ill-favored color, and the evil accidents
accompanying them, may easily appear: the which does argue the evil
nourishment that such food does afford: Besides, they feed not only on this
food; and it may be now and then they will afford themselves a cup of good
liquour, as a lavative, to wash down this rubbish. As for foul, which either
devoured peeble-stones or metalls, they deliver them back again such as they
received them, their appetites being to such things as for physic, rather than
food; and therefore it is but an idle tale Paracelsus tells us, of one that
lived fifteen days only with a turse applied to his stomach. 3 De temporum.
Galen mocks and scoffs at them, who think that one might sustain life with
wine applied outwardly; since whatsoever nourishes must first be attracted by,
and concocted in the instruments of concoction. It is therefore a mere dotage
of our Paracelsists, that tell us that metalls will nourish our bodies. Let
some of these gallants, I pray you, be fed but for a week, or less, with
their best aurum potabile, lapis Philosophicus, or what else you can devise,
and I warrant you at, or ever the weeks end, if he be alive, he will snatch at a
crust of brown bread. Now, concerning water, there is no less controversy
amongst our Authors, and seems to be backed with better reasons. Homer
thought it nourished by his epithete (...). The Jews in their solemn feasts
abstain from water, as did the Egyptians of old.
The Jews at this day, in their solemn feasts, abstain from water, being of
the mind of the old Egyptians, who thought the river Nilus nourished, because
Moses turned the water thereof into blood. Lib. de Anima.
Albertus Magnus reports, that he saw a melancholicke person, who lived not
only many months, but years also with the only use of this element. Comment.
in lib Hippoc. de aere, aquis and locis.
Cardan mainteineth this opinon, and seems by many reasons to corroborate the
same. Comen. Aph. 13 lib. 4. and cap. 7. lib 4. de usu part.
Galen notwithstanding, is of a far other mind, and proves that water
nourishes not at all. And 4 Meteor.
Aristotle is also of the same mind, who tells us, that water cannot at all
thicken, and therefore cannot nourish. To decide the controversy, true it is,
that pure elementary water cannot at all nourish, which nevertheless thick
muddy and slimy water may sometimes effect, and so some fishes may live on the
same; and yet it is well known, that many fishes either prey upon others, or
live upon herbs and weeds; howsoever, they live not on mere and simple water; I
conclude therefore this point, that pure elements, as they are in their own
sphere, especially near the center, do not nourish; but the elements that are
next unto us, being mixed and confused, may in some sort nourish.

CHAP. IX.
Whether man's life may be sustained without the use of food or no.

THis may, perhaps, to some seem but a needless and superfluous question, and
that I might herein have spared my pains. It is true, the matter may seem
somewhat strange, and many will be of opinion, I doubt not, that never was
there any man so foolish, as to maintain any such erroneous and false
opinions. But because this has not been maintained by vulgar wits only, but
men of transcendent understandings, and eminent parts, both Physicians and
others, have not only left us multiplicity of instances in this kind, but even
affirmed, and stiffely maintained the possibility and probability of the same;
therefore, for the readers recreation and satisfaction, before I proceed to the
use of aliments, How long one may live without food.
I will say something concerning this question. Lib. de carnibus*
Hippocrates circumscribeth the full period of a man's continuance without food
within the compass of seven days. If any man (says he) for the space of
seven days neither eats nor drinks, he must die in that space: and
although some do exceed this period, yet when they would return to their food,
their belly receives it not: for in this space of time, the iejunum, or
hungry gut is so dried up, and clunged together, that they die speedily. But
Lib. 11. cap. 54.
Pliny seems to control this truth, affirming diverse to have continued above
eleven days without food, or any kind of sustenance whatsoever. Lib. 3.
observat medicin. cap. de asili^,
Schenckins telateth many strange stories, of such as have lived not only
days and months, but even diverse years without any manner of nourishment: as
namely, of one who lived at Rome the space of forty years, without any
sustenance whatsoever, and that by the testimony of Hermolaus Barbarus. The
same Consili^ adversus famem.
Author relates out of Sylvius, the story of a young maid in Spain, who lived
two and twenty years without taking any thing at the mouth, but a little fair
water. And again, of a German woman, who lived without food for the space of
three years, out of Ioannes Bocacius. And again, of another whom Rondeletius
saw, who had lived ten whole years after the same manner; besides many others
more. But amongst the rest, Idem Schenck. ex Bartholomaei Anull ficta poest
circa finem.
he relates a pretty story of a fellow about sixty years of age, who having
dug a Well about forty foot deep, the earth falling in upon him, thrust
this good fellow thirty foot deep, and so filled up almost all the hollow
again; the fellow, as he fell, held up with his arms as well as he could,
History of a fellow living seven daie^ under the earth upon his own urine only.
some part of the scaffold, which bare the earth so off his body, that it gave
access to some air whereby he might breathe: and in this case he continued
for the space of seven days; when as they thinking to dig up the dead corpse
to bury, they heard some noise, wherewith at first affrighted, yet afterward
encouraged with some hope of life, they made haste, and after a draught of
Wine, would neither suffer himself to be tied, nor use any other help but his
own to ascend out of that deep dungeon. At length being now ascended de
profundis, he confessed that he lived all that while without any sleep, or
any sustenance, saving his own urine, distilled and redistilled in the
alembicke of his own bladder: adding, with all, this jest, showing his purse;
told his companions he had met with a kind Host, who had interteined him
these seven days, and as many nights, without one penny expenses. More such
stories, if thou be disposed, thou may see there, and Vide Marcellum Donatum
de historia medic. admirab. Claudum Deodatu^ Panth. Hygiast. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Lang Epist medic. li. 2. Epist. 27. aliosque.
elsewhere; as of the Maid of Spire, of Berne, etc. who were said to have
lived diverse years without any food. Whether these relations be true or no,
let the Authors answer for them. Now, what should be the cause of so strange
and prodigious fasting? Now sure, if any such fasting be indeed, yet is it hard
to find out the cause and reason thereof, although, as yet, the case is
controverted. Some would ascribe the cause to the influence of certain
stars: yea, and Julius Firmicus Maternus. lib. 4. Ridiculous reason of this
strange abstinence.
some have gone so far, as to explicate unto us what stars do conduce for
the furtherance of this strange abstinence. But were these stars influences
of no efficacy and power in ancient times before this strange fasting came
into the world? and the stars being general causes, and therefore affecting
all equally, what is now become of these influences in these later days?
Surely, Another more plausible.
if these stars had any such efficacy or power, now in this last dear year
1630, it had been time to demonstrate the same. But Laurent Ioubert. decad. 1.
Parad. 2.
some of our Physicians pretend a more plausible reason, desumed from nature it
self, alleging for a natural cause hereof, a cold and moist phlegmatic
constitution; which, as they affirm (and experience and reason both confirm
it) can best bear abstinence; and cold and tough phlegmatic humors abounding
in their bodies, together with a debility of natural heat, does so benum and
stupifie the sense and feeling of the appetite, that the party is able for a
long time to live without any sustenance whatsoever. Ulysses Aldreandus. lib.
de exa^g.
Some more absurdly feign, that there is some store of stony moisture in the
body of man, which touching the guts, turn them presently into a stony
hardness. Now, that some such stony juice or moisture may be engendered in the
body of man, seems to be no fable, by the history of that stony child of
Seen; as also by the history of an Hen dying for hunger in an old castle, which
was afterward found turned into a hard stony substance. It is true indeed, that
of a tough and hard baked phlegm, with the concurse of a strong heat, stones
may be engendered; as we see buckes made of clay: but that of these humors, so
dispersed through the body, the guts should be turned into a hard stony
substance, is not recorded by any ancient Author whatsoever. And it is to be
observed, that most of these histories are of young women, of a cold
phlegmatic constitution, which humor without heat, and that of some
strength, cannot be congealed into so hard a substance. And besides, it is
recorded, that many of these parties returned afterward to their former
appetites again. Now then, as there was a congeling humor within their
bodies; so they must of necessity acknowledge a contrary dissolving, or
degelating humor, as I may say, and so we shall play the fool in infinitum.
Again, if this opinion were true, the substance of the guts must needs be
solid, and so without feeling; and without sense and feeling the inward parts
were never able to subsist. The learned Loco supra citat.
Ioubert is very confident in defense of this long abstinence, and would seem
to make his assertion strong by the examples of some creatures, as the
Chameleon, which we have already answered; and the Bear supposed to live all
Winter without any food; and yet has been observed to provide store of apples
in Autumn, and carry them to his den; that I say nothing of others. But if
there were yet any such matter, In ancient Authour^ no mention made of any such
strange abstinences.
yet is there a great disproportion betwixt these creatures and mankind, the
most temperate of all others. And if these miraculous fastings were so frequent
in these later times, why read we not of the like in former ages? In all the
old Testament we read but of two, Moses and Elias; which, howbeit they did
neither of them exceed forty days; yet were they undoubtedly miraculous. And
the like may we say of our blessed Saviors fast in the new Testament. It is
also to be observed, that most of these strange abstinences are reported of
sickly women; who being once recovered of their former infirmities, returned
again to their appetites. Howsoever, sure I am, we find none here amongst us
that are able to endure any such strict abstinence, in sickness or in health:
and I think four, or five days abstinence, either from meat or drink, None
can long continue without sustenance.
will gravel most men and women; even in sickness it self; what shall we
then say of healthful persons? And indeed, if we consider the matter aright,
we may easily consider, that it is not likely, that any should long live
without food; and that by reason of the daily decay of that triple substance,
whereof something has been said heretofore, and therefore all these former
narrations seem to be but fabulous, and cuningly contrived, and for some
private impostorious respects, set abroach. And whosoever made any show of such
abstinences, their abstinence was not real, but fraudulent to circumvent the
world. And such was that Aelianus in varia historia.
abstinence of Pythagoras, said to have fasted forty days; whose wants were,
in the dark night, by his disciples secretly supplied. And to conclude this
question and chapter, it is worth the observing, what is written, concerning
Iovius Pontanus. Notable imposture of a cozning counterfit Hermit.
one Antony an Hermit, who counterfeiting extraordinary holiness of life,
made likewise a show of absolute abstinence from all manner of food: but after
certain days, this counterfeit hypocrisy was discovered; it being observed
that all his candles were made of the pulpous flesh of pullaine, well minced
and mingled with cinnamon and sugar; and to conceal this fraud from the eyes
of the world, artificially covered over with tallow, after the manner of other
candles. But this need not seem strange among such miracle-mongers, where many
other such juggling tricks pass for current coin, and are by them accounted
but piae frauds; as they please to call them.

CHAP. X.
Of Nourishment, and what therein is to be considered.

IF ever this was true in any age, Flures gula quam gladio periere, More perish
by intemperance than by the sword, I think it may be found true in those times
wherein we now live. Lib. de legib.
Plato esteemed in his time, that City intemperate, which maintained many
Physicians; and used always to exhort his followers to sobriety. And both holy
Writ and profane Auhours are very frequent in their precepts of temperance and
sobriety; and do every where much abhor and detest intemperance in meat and
drink. Intemperance not only hurts our selves, but propagates hereditary
diseases to posterity.
And indeed, if we seriously with our selves consider the shortness of the
life of man, together with the manifold miseries by sickness of all sorts,
sustained, we may see good reason for us not to be so leavish of our lives: I
mean, not to be so cruel, as by intemperance, not only to kill our selves,
but even to derive a multitude of loathsome and noisome hereditarie diseases,
as legacies to our posterity. But because I mean hereafter to say something
of the loathsomeness and hurt this sin procures to intempreate persons,
Things to be considered in all manner of nourishment.

Substance.

Aliments of gross substance.

Of a slender substance.


I will not here dwell upon it. In all manner of nourishment, then there are
these things to be considered; the substance, quality, quantity, the time, the
preparation and order. In regard of the substance, some food is called gross,
and harder of digestion: as unleavened bread, pie-crust, bacon, beef, etc. as
hereafter shall more particularly appear. Some, again, are of a more slender
and smaller nourishment; as wheat bread leavened, baked in an oven, then washed
in fair water, barley bread, ptisan, rockie fish; and such as are of a soft
substance; being especially prepared with vineg^r and opening roots; Of a mean
substance.
wild birds, young pigeons, etc. The mean, betwixt both, is best for ordinary
food and nourishment; to wit, such food as is neither gross nor slender; such
is good wheat bread, not too clean dressed, well leavened and baked; oatmeale
gruell, reare-rosted eggs, new milk of a young cow; amongst fish, the
Pickerel, Carpe, Turbot; and the flesh of Hens, Capons, Turkies, Pigeons,
Veale, Lamb, etc. of all which in their proper places. It is also to be
observed by the way, Quality of aliments.
that such meats are of easiest degestion: As for the quality, they ought to be
of a good juice, euchymi; such as are those we mentioned last, and the like,
which are also the best for nourishments as on the contrary, those of a bad
juice, afford but a bad nourishment to the body of man: such as are bread made
of corrupted corn, of darnel, rye, panick, and millet; as likewise bread baked
on ashes, or embers, So^mer fruits, which last not; and whatsoever is quickly
corrupted in the stomach, etc. As for the quantity, Quantity variable according
to sundry circumstances.
in regard of the variety of countries, complexions, customs, course of life,
age, and such other considerable circumstances, it cannot certainly be
determined. Old age must not feed so liberally, as lusty young laboring men: and
such as lead a sedentary life: as Scholars, women, etc. must not feed so
liberally as husbandmen, sailers, etc. But although we cannot certainly
determine the due quantity of food; yet searching into antiquity, we may find
out the quantity of food ordinarily used, and allotted a man for one day, which
will not be unworthy our consideration. In old times, we read, Allowance of
food for one natural day in old times.
that the ordinary allowance for a man's diet, in one natural day, was that
measure which they called choenix, containing about a quarter of a peck of our
ordinary measure, or forty ounces, according to the computation of Budans lib.
3. de ass.
Budaeus. And this quantity of Manna, did God himself allow his own people of
Israel in the wilderness. This quantity was when they were deprived of any
other sustenance: for this quantity is to be understood both of bread, flesh,
or any other food; all which joined together, did not commonly exceed, in sober
men this aforenamed quantity; howbeit, no question, many sober people did then
content themselves with less allowance: and the like proportion of drink is
likewise to be understood. Observe also, that all this while the people of
Isreal's ordinare drink, was nothing else but water; as likewise most other
nations used this for their ordinary drink, except the better sort, at
festival times, and some extraordinary occasions. As for us in these Northern
parts of the world, although all have not wine, Northern people, and living in
cold climate are allowed a more liberal use of diet, than such as dwell in hot
countries.
yet do we ordinarily use a drink answerable to it, which does not a little
nourish, and therefore may we be the more sparing in the quantity of our food.
And yet I do not deny, but that our Northern cold climats may be a little
freer in the use of food, than the inhabitants of the Southern parts and
hotter countries, howsoever, it is always good to use a moderation.
Husbandmen, and such as labor hard, have able bodies, and take great pains;
we cannot well regulate nor accommodate this proportion precisely to all;
Scholars, and such as have weak stomachs, and weak digestion, not being often
able to overcome this quantity. Besides, that the quality of the aliment, of
hard or easy digestion, does often indicate an alteration of the quantity; and
yet I think few of our people, although reasonable aged, and otherwise
valetudinary, will content themselves with twelve, thirteen, or fourteen
ounces of food for one day, unless their stomachs be exceeding weak; although
Father See Sir William Vaughan his newlander cure, part. 1. sect. 2.
Lessius the Jesuit, and Lodovico Corvario a Venetian could so content
themselves. Custom, education, and out cold climats, do hinder the effecting
of that which otherwise in hotter countries may easily be brought to pass.
Next follows the preparation, which is very various, Preparation various.
according to the diversity of dishes; some being roasted, some boiled, some
baked, some fried, etc. and some requiring one preparation, another must be
ordered after another manner; whereof more hereafter in the particular
discourse of diet. The order of ingestion is that which is next to be
considered, concerning which point, Order of ingestion.
our Authors speak at length, and wish us always to take with us this rule
of direction, that the lightest meat, and easiest of digestion ought first to
be eaten, quite contrary to our ordinary and usual custom; and that both in
regard, say they, the bottom of the stomach is warmer than the upper part,
and because the lightest meats being first eaten, sooner descend into the guts
after concoction, which if last eaten, are by the other hindered to descend, and
so putrify, and engender crudities, the original of obstructions, and
consequently of many dangerous diseases: as for mine own opinion, I think the
stomach mingles all confusedly together, making thereof, that which Physicians
commonly call chylus, and afterward converted into blood. To prevent,
therefore, all disorder, doubts, danger, and fear, were best to eat but of one
or two dishes at most at a meal; and if thou should sometimes take unto thy
self a greater liberty, keep this caution, that the dishes thou eatst of
differ not much in quality, being all easy of digestion. And for the quantity,
let the strength of thy concoction be always thy best guide, and keep rather
within, than at any time exceed the strength of thy stomach. Next follows to
handle the time, upon which depends a question to be discussed, The time.
concerning the number of repasts, whereupon we must insist awhile, not
omitting likewise to handle this question, at what time of the day, at dinner,
or at supper we may eat freeliest.

CHAP. X.
Of the times of Repast, how often we ought to eat in a day, and when to feed
freeliest, at dinner or at supper: Something concerning breakefasts.

MAn being made according to the likeness and image of his Maker, and that for
his service principally, it were not therefore fit that so noble a creature
should make a god of his guts, and at all times mind nothing but his belly:
and therefore not only decency and good order, but even that sublime
emploiment also for the which he was at first framed, requires some certain
and set times for taking his refection. And both Anatomists tell us, and
experience teaches us, that man is of a far different structure in his guts
from ravenous creatures: as Dogs, Wolves, The structure of the intestinall
parts of ravenous beasts differ from that observed in man, and why.
etc. who minding only their belly, have their guts descending almost straight
down from their ventricle or stomach, to the fundament; whereas in this noble
Microcosme man, there are in these intestinall parts many anfractuous
circumvolutions, windings and turnings, whereby longer retention of his food
being procured, he might so much the better attend upon sublime speculations,
and profitable emploiments in Church and Commonwealth. Now, if we shall
consider the fittest time for refection, Fittest time for refection in natural
reason.
it will seem to be when the appetit does demand it. Interrogatus Diogenes
quando sumendum esset alimentum? H^benti inquit, quando ^surit: si non habeat
cum habere poterit.

Diogenes Laert. in cius vita.


And therefore Diogenes being asked when was the fittest time for food,
answered; to him that has it, when his stomak calls for it; and to him that
has it not, when he can come by it. But all our civilest nations have
accustomed themselves to some set times for their ordinary repasts. And because
nature proceeds orderly in all her operations, therefore Tu nunquam comedas
stomachum ni noveris esse pureatum vacuumque cibo quem sumpseris ante.

Shola Salernit.


before we make a new meal we must see that the former be first concocted:
and for this purpose there must intercede a certain distance or space betwixt
our two meals. Lib. 25. contin.
Rhusis would have eight hours distance betwixt dinner and supper; and from
supper to dinner sixteen. But here arises a question to be discussed, How
many meals a day ought we ordinarily to use? This question has been
variously tossed to and fro amongst our Physicians, some being of one mind,
and some of another: Some hold it best to eat but one meal a day, and some
twice. 2 De diaera acut.
Hippocrates seems to favor one meal a day. Others hold that one meal a
day makes men more choleric, by reason the humors by abstinence are too much
sharpened, which by means of food are well qualified. Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Celsus is for two meals a day; the which seems best to agree with reason:
for he that uses but one meal a day, is forced to eat as much at one meal,
as another at two. Now the stomach being oppressed with too great a quantity
of food, it fails under the burden, and the strength of it is quite
overthrown: for by so great a distention it loses much of its thickenesse and
firmness; Cause of the weakness of gluttons and belly-gods stomachs.
which two make not a little for the retention and concoction of the food:
neither is there any other cause to be inquired into of the weakness of gluttons
and belly-gods stomaks. It is further to be observed, that the stomach being
too much stuffed up with food, cannot so freely concoct the same; which may
easily appear in a pot full of meat, where the meat is not so easily boiled
as when there is more room. But let us search into antiquity, and see what
was their manner and custom. A Mercur. vari. lection. lib. 4. cap. 17.

Four names of repasts among the ancient Greeks.

Athenaeus lib. 1. citant. Stuckio. antiquit. conviv. lib. 1. cap. 11.

(...) vocarunt veteres.

No one man used all these four repasts.


late writer would by many arguments prove that the ancients used but one meal
a day. Others are of an opposite opinion. Amongst the Greeks of old, we read
these four names of repasts mentioned: (...); all these four, says
Athenaeus, were used in the times of the Trojan war. The first of these was
used in the morning betimes, and was in stead of our breakefast; the next in
stead of our dinner; and that after answerable to that refection, which some
use in the afternoon; and the last answering to our supper. And it is to be
observed, that seldom any one person used all these several four meals, yea
scarce three; and that chiefly in the wars; when as by their labor and
toil, their bodies were more tired out, and their spirits spent; and therefore
needed a more plentiful measure of nourishment than had been otherwise
requisite. Some used this manner of refection also of later times: but that
this was not always the custom of the Greeks may by that speech of Plutarch.
in ejus vita.
Leonidas appear; Prandete commilitones, apud Inferos forsan caenaturi. Dine
my fellow soldiers, for you may perhaps sup in another world. The Greeks then
ordinarily used but two meals aday, scholars and such as were given to
sobriety, although they used two meals aday; yet one of them, to wit, that of
the morning, was most commonly but sparing; as witnesses Lib. de sanit. tuenda.
Galen of himself, that seldom he eat any thing till night; which if at any
time he did, it was but a little bread in a morning dipped in a little wine:
and this counsel 5. de loco affect ca. 5.
he gave also to Diodorus the Grammarian, who if he fasted long, fell into fits
of the falling sickness. By the premises, as also by Hippocrates himself,
it does appear, that the ancient Greeks had not all, and always the same
times and seasons for their diet, and this last order of diet Epist. 83.
Seneca, seems also to confirm, whereas he makes mention of a morsel of
bread only for his dinner, without the use of a table. The Persians used most
commonly two meals a day, as witnesses De Cyri institut. lib. 8.
Xenophon: although in the time of Xerxes it appears to have been otherwise,
as witnesses Lib. 7.
Herodote; where Magacreon the Abderite gives Xerxes great thanks, that he and
his company used but one meal aday: for says he, if we had been commanded
to provide a dinner like this supper, we had been all undone. The Jews used
commonly two meals aday, as may appear both by that of Exodus 16.10, 11*
Exodus, where they had Manna for their dinner, and Quails for their supper;
as also by the manner of their fasts, which was until the even; as may appear
by the practice both 1 Samuel 14.25. 2 Samuel 1.12.
of Saul and David. Among the Romans we read of five several names of repasts:
Ientaculum, prandium, merenda, coena, and comessatio; the four former
answering to these four already mentioned, and the last was used after supper:
such are our possets here in England, made of drink, milk, bread and eggs,
sugar and spice; Unseasonable use of possets in England.
very unseasonably often used after supper, and being a mere superfluity,
which might well be spared. But two meals were ordinarily in most use among
them, to wit, dinner and supper; and as for all the other they were but for
children or laboring people. Two meals most ordinary amongst most Nations.
And indeed in all civil and well constituted countries and commonwealths two
set meals are most ordinary and frequent. I do not here mean precisely by any
precept punctually to tie every person to the observing of this order; as not
being ignorant of the variety of circumstances, which may easily alter the
same: as namely the climat, the constitution, the sex, age, the time of the
year, and the particular calling or condition of a man. In cold climats we
must yield to a more liberal allowance than in a warmer. And children and
chickens, they say, must not be long kept from food. Old men by reason of the
debility of natural heat concocting the aliment, Fa^^es and mora bilem in
nasum conciunt Adagium.
are not able to receive much at once; and therefore are allowed to eat little
and often. Refert Appollonius in mirabilibus ex Arist. eos qui semel in die
vescuntur iracundiores esse quia per inediam exacerbantur humores, qui cibo and
potu mitescunt. Riolan filius in praelect. privatis.
Choleric persons find much hurt by long abstinence; and so do such as are
subject to engender wind in their stomachs. And sick folks are to be
exempted from these rules, as hereafter shall appear. And here custom is
neither to be neglected, nor yet suddenly altered, be it good or bad: if good,
continue it still; and if evil, alter it by degrees, by little and little, all
sudden alterations breeding danger. Now, as for the particular times of these
two repasts, for dinner the best time is that which is most ordinarily in most
places used, about eleven in the forenoone, a little before or after, and
supper-time betwixt six and seven at night; so that by this means there may
intercede about some eight hours distance; and betwixt supper and dinner
sixteen.

Now as in the sea one wave begets another; so here, one question begets
another. It being already granted that two meals aday are most commonly and
ordinarily to be used, it may now be demanded, in which of these two we may
feed freeliest, Whether dinner or supper ought to be more liberal.
which concerns not a little the health of mankind, and has been as much
controverted, at least as the former question, and probable reasons produced on
both sides. And first for the dinner, they produce these reasons. Arguments for
dinner.
First, for that in the daytime, our natural heat is much helped to perfect
concoction by means of the Sun. Again, exercise and motion, so much used in
the daytime seems still to plead for a more liberal dinner than Ex magna
coena stomacho fit maxima poena ut sis nocte levis sit tibi coena brevis.
Schola Salernit.
supper, after which we go to rest. Besides, the day makes a greater
dissipation and resolution of the triple substance of our bodies; as by the
like reason Summer should consume more food than Winter, and by consequent, the
dinner being compared to Summer, and Supper to winter, should do the like. And
lastly, that nature in the night time being intent upon the concocting of bad
and superfluous humors, as also in the distribution of the nourishment for the
whole body, is not to be disturbed with a liberal meal. Reasons for a more
liberal supper.
Others again, and in my opinion building on a surer foundation, favor more a
liberal supper; and that for these reasons: First, there is a far greater
distance betwixt the time of supper and dinner, than betwixt dinner and supper,
as witnesses 7 Meth.
Galen himself; and this was his own practice. Again, 1 Zaph. lib. 1. and 5.
ac 6. Epidem.
sleep succeeding after supper furthereth the concoction, proved by many of
our ancient famous Physicians: Now the time of rest is of all others fittest
for concoction; as watching is most opposite, ingendring crudities, as
witnesses 2 dae vict. acut.
Hippocrates. And whereas it may be objected, that laborers and husbandmen
oftentimes use violent labor and exercise immediately after meals: I answer,
that the strength of natural heat in their strong and rusticall constitutions,
often overco^meth and concocteth many crudities, which other bodies of more
tender education would produce many dangerous diseases: and yet many times
escape they not scot free; but fall even often into many dangerous and
desperate diseases, Besides, Aph. 15. lib. 2.
Hippocrates tells us, that in the Winter and Spring the inward parts of
concoction are hotter, and therefore our sleep's longer; from whence he
concludes that we may use more copious aliments in those times. Now as the
morning is answerable to the Spring, the middle of the day to Summer; the
evening to Autumn: even so, the night set apart for sleep, is compared to the
Winter. And the better to clear this point, which has made many to stumble,
we must distinguish betwixt concoction and distribution: the later of these
two, distribution, I mean, Difference betwixt concoction and distribution.
is more speedy in the daytime, than in the night; which is often, by violent
motion, and disorderly exercise procured; from the which proceed crudities, and
by consequence obstructions, the fountain and spring of innumerable dangerous
diseases. Concoction again, which is a due, orderly and leisurely conversion
of the aliment into the substance of our bodies to be nourished, is far
better performed by means of rest and sleep, which conquering and overcomming
crudities, preventeth a multitude of dangerous diseases, And if we shall
reflect upon former times, we shall find it was most customarily received among
most nations: as it appears to have been the custom amongst Gods own people
of the Jews; who eating Manna for dinner, were allowed Quails for their
Supper, being of a more nourshing substance than the Manna used at dinner. And
besides the premises, the very Etymology of the word coena, intimating in the
original a communion, as the learned well know, seems to plead for this
pre-eminence; Plutarch. 8. sympos. probl. 6.
and this, it seems, was the custom among most men, that they ate but little
and in private at dinner: but at night they assumed unto themselves a greater
liberty, to refresh and solace themselves with the society of their loving
friends, together with a more liberal allowance of the creatures. But here I
still understand a moderation in both to be used, and not exceeding the limits
and bounds of mediocrity, a heavy supper much disturbing the nights rest,
ingendring crudities and procuring troublesome dreams. And if there should any
excess be committed, I hold it safer at dinner than supper; and that by
reason that after some rest, Supper ought to be sparing, and yet may be more
liberal than dinner.

What cases are here to be excepted.


moderate exercise, and abstinence from supper, nature may overcome and concoct
crudities; by this means preventing future infirmities. I conclude therefore
this point, that caeterit paribus, setting all things in even balance, and both
meals being moderate, my opinion is, the supper may exceed the dinner.
Notwithstanding the premises, this is principally to be understood of
healthful persons, and not subject to rheumes and defluxions, with great
danger often distilling upon the lungs, ioints, and other parts of the body; Of
Breakefasts, and whether they are to be used.
for in such cases to eat a very small, and sometimes perhaps, no supper at
all, will prove to thee a great gain. Besides, if there be any particular
individual constitution, finding ordinarily more hurt by eating freelier at
night than at noone, let such a person follow that course, which best suteth
with the temper of his body; my meaning being to tie no man to that, which
might in any sort prejudice his health. But here it may be asked, whether
breakfast be allowable or not? I answer, in the first place custom, together
with the constitution of the body, must in this case give us direction, as has
partly been said already: for choleric persons, and such as are much subject
to wind, cannot fast long; no more than children and aged people. Paucissima
natura mane exigit, tantumque refocillari pauxillo alimento postulat, ne calor
naturalis flaccescat. Illorum itaque exemplum imitari par est, qui cum post
aliquot horas luculentum ignem excitare meditantur elixandis, assandisque
carnibus, prius nonnullo fonite, aridisque nutrimentis focum instruunt, ne
ignis penitus sepiatur, qui cum sit opportunum, iustam ignem in cocturae usum
e^citant: sic cum exiiguo fomento, ac velut succendiculo ventriculus paulo ante
incaluit, in prandio avidius cibum appetit, ac di^atatis venis validius
concoquit digeritque cum plaerisque qui in prandium vsque ^eiuni persi lant,
appetentia evanescat, calore vel flaccido, vel tantum non extincto. Levin.
Lemnius de occult. naturae mirac. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Levinus Lemnius is of opinion, that a little eaten in a morning, providing it
be but very little and easy of digestion, whets on the appetite for dinner. As
for the time of these repasts I have said already, and expressed my opinion;
and howbeit, I could here expatiat upon the division of the day natural and
artificial, and how several nations divided their days, Hebrews, Greeks,
Arabians, Egyptians, Romans, etc: as also concerning the difference of hours
equal and unequal (the later being in use until the first council of Nice)
yet all this I willingly here pass by, that which has bin said, being
sufficient for the purpose we have in hand: and that time I have already set
down being answerable to the times the ancients used for their repasts
howsoever, they reckoned their hours otherwise than we do now; which arose by
the diverse manner of computing their days, some beginning at one time, and
some at another. And for this matter this shall now suffice; whereon I have a
little the longer insisted, by reason these points seem to me very material
for the preservation of health, and have not as yet been divulged abroad after
this manner; and withal, conduce not a little for the diet of the diseased,
which is the principal scope I here aim at: and therefore, I now proceed to
that which follows.

CHAP. XIJ.
Of the matter of nourishment, and first of Corn, and Bread made thereof.

WHatsoever nourishes and mainteineth this crasy body of man, is desumed
either from the plants, and such fruits as the earth does yield for the
sustenance of mankind; or else from living creatures, and such things as are
from them desumed, and yet are no parts of them: as milk, butter, cheese and
blood. Man's first food.
Man's first food was of the fruits of the earth, such as were produced without
his industry and pains: but afterward by reason of sin, man was appointed to
eat his food in the sweat of his brows. Division of Corn.
And by the means of husbandry, the earth brought forth several sorts of
corn, very useful for susteining the life of man. By the name of corn I
understand whatsoever kind of grain is contained either in ears or husks. That
in ears; as wheat, barley, rye, oats. That in husks; as pease, beans, etc.
As concerning bread made of Corn, Plin. lib. 18. cap. 7. Hordeum, quibusdant
quasi nascituri cibi exordium.

Diverse differences of Bread

1 Difference from the meal whereof it is made.


some will have barley to have yielded the first bread; but shortly after
succeeded wheat, the noblest and most nourishing grain of all others; and
therefore we will begin with this bread. Bread of wheat takes its difference,
either from the parts of meal or flower whereof it is made; or from the manner
of preparing. Of the meal, some parts are finer, and some courser. Bread made
of the courser nourishes less, yet keeps the body more soluble: but that
made of finer flower, as it nourishes more; so makes it not the body so
soluble; and is worse for obstructions and the stone; and as the bread
partaketh more of the one or the other, so are the virtues thereof. The next
difference is taken from the preparation. Second difference from the
preparation.
All sorts of bread were either leavened or unleavened; unleavened bread was
commanded by Exodus 13.1, 2, 3, etc.
God himself in the institution of the Passover, howbeit not for their
ordinary use. But such kind of bread, says Lib. 1, de alim. lacul.
Galen, is unwholesome for nourishment: and therefore bread indifferently
leavened, and a little salted, is of all others most wholesome and convenient
for man's use. The leaven makes the bread lighter, and of easier digestion. To
make our bread light, Bakers abuse the buyers by putting too much barme in
their bread.
there is with us a custom to add barme, whereof the ancients were ignorant:
but the other is better and wholesomer. Many bakers thus abuse the buyers,
puffing up their bread with a great deal of bitter barme, which makes the
bread both more unsavorie to the taste, and unwholesomer for ordinary use. The
French Nation does parallel, if not exceed any nation in the world in good
wholesome light bread of diverse sorts; and yet never use any barme. Now the
baking makes or marreth the goodness of bread: and that which is baked in an
oven, not overheated, is of all others the best: the rest, by reason of the
inequality of the parts of bread so baked, then external parts being burt, and
the internal raw, Third difference from the age.
are not to be ranked with the former in goodness. Another difference may be
yet taken from the age of bread: hot bread 2. de victu acut.
Hippocrates finds fault with, by reason it increases thirst, and is not so
easily concocted, and of the same opinion is Lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 273.
Avicenne. Mercur. varia^. lection. lib. 6. cap. 3. The excellency of Bread
above all other food.
A late writer out of diverse places proves that the ancients used to eat hot
bread; but at length concludes, that the better sort used not ordinarily hot
bread; but new baked bread after it was cooled. Now of all other food or
nourishment, bread is the most noble; as being the staff of man's life, and of
all other foods most necessary for the use of man. And therefore, in that so
absolute and compendious form of Prayer, penned by our Savior himself, under
the name of bread all other necessaries are comprehended. The excellency of
bread may from hence also be collected, that no meal is ordinarily without
bread, if it may be had; according to that trivial, yet true verse.

Quando deest panis tunc est cibus omnis in^uis. Besides, bread is that
nourishment with which a man may longest subsist, and without loathing continue
in the use thereof; whereas any other food, especially long continued, will
weary and tire us out, which bread does not. And the pre-eminence of this food
may also from hence appear; that whereas fish and flesh will in three or four
days putrify, and send out an evil smell, bread, unless it be salted, may
well grow moldy at the worst, or dry; but never putrify. By reason then of
this prerogative, Inconveniences of feeding more on fish and flesh than bread.
I advise all those who have a care of their health, at their meals to eat
more bread than any other food. And such as feed more freely on fish and flesh,
and eat less bread, have not their flesh so firm as those who feed most on
bread: besides, that oftentimes their breath smells strong. And for this same
cause, fish being prone to putrefaction, Bread to be used with Summer fruits.
and very moist, require a more liberal allowance of bread than flesh; and the
moistest flesh, as veale, and lamb more than other. And this reason may also be
a warrant for us to use bread with our Summer fruits, cherries, plumbs,
abricocks, etc. Now besides this most noble, and, of all others, most excellent
and useful bread made of wheat, there is yet bread made of several sorts of
other grain, and first of barley, As for barley bread, although it be inferior
to wheat, yet it is not to be despised: and, howsoever, it nourish not so much
as bread made of Wheat; yet being made of good barley, it nourishes well, and
looseneth the body more than wheat bread. Barley bread.

Oaten Bread.

It yields good nourishment.


As for bread made of oats, it is a good wholesome and nourishing bread, and so
is the grewell made of this grain, in great request in the south parts of this
kingdom: and in the north parts thereof, as also in Wales, and the Kingdom of
Scotland, the bread of this grain is much used: and it is likewise in request
in many parts of Germany. But it is to be noted, that the grain they commonly
make their bread of in those parts, is a fairer and bigger grain, and fuller
of meal, than that which grows further south, and is ordinarily given to
horses. Rye bread.
Rye bread is of a more glutinous substance, more windy, and nourishes less
than the former, and is more apt to engender obstructions; and therefore it is
best mingled with other grain, as is here the custom with wheat or barley.
Rice is a good nourishing grain, Bread of rice, m^ panicke, etc.
whereof in many places, as namely the East Indies they make bread: it is of an
astringent nature, and drying, and of gross substance. Millet and panicke are
not unlike in quality; and howbeit in other countries they be in some request,
yet with us not used. Bread of Maiz.
Maiz or Indian wheat is a grain in great request in the West Indies, whereof
they make their bread, which is of a grosser substance than that of wheat; yet
befitteth well the bodies of the natives of that country. Now besides the
ordinary sorts of bread, there are yet many other sorts made with the addition
of diverse ingredients, which do often alter the nature and property thereof,
and often prove more physical than alimentall: Diverse sorts of physical bread.
yet let this proviso always be put in, that all forts of unleavened bread are
hard of digestion, apter to engender obstructions, and to stay fluxes of the
belly than leavened bread: and yet to strong and laboring people may well be
now and then allowed. Besides Corn, there is another sort of grain in great
request in many places of the world, and commonly called by a general name in
Latin Legume^, and in our English tongue, pulse, In Galens time there was no
bread made of these grains: but later ages have made use of the bread both of
beans and pease. The Lib. de euch. et cacoch. Of pulse and bread made thereof.
same Author is of opinion, that all manner of pulse are of bad nourrishment:
and both these are windy, yet beans more. Green beans are with us here in
England ordinarily fried with persley, and that to good purpose, it correcting
this windy quality. And it is not out of purpose, Bread of pease and beans.

Green pease and beans to be sparingly used.


that dry mints are in Winter and Lent used with pease pottage. Bread made both
of pease and beans is hard of digestion, of a drying and astringent quality;
yet very strengthening; and well moistened is good to strengthen laboring
people. Pease yield the best bread, but beans the more nourishing. Now
howsoever many people eat green pease with a greedy appetite in the
Summertime, as also beans; yet, I wish they be sparing in the use of them:
Other sorts of pulse more used for physic than for food.
for howsoever prepared, yet used in any quantity, especially in sedentary
persons and weak constitutions they may breed no small annoyance. There be yet
some other sort of pulse, as chiches, red and white, lupines, lentiles, And in
many places they make a bread of dried fish, ordinary among the Jchthyophagi or
fish eaters

Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2.

Sic Aeg^ptii pastores e loti semine, milio simili maxim lacte, aut aquae
subacto, panem conficiunt, quo pane negatur quicquam aut solubrius aut lantius
dum calet. Idem lib. 22. cap. 2^.


and some others; which are more in use for physic than for food, and
therefore we will not meddle with them. In diverse places of the world besides
the premises, in defect and want of corn they make use of some fruits and
roots to make their bread of: as in some places of France, as Limosin, and some
other places, the country people use bread made of chestnuts, participating of
the nature of the acorn, a course and gross, yet a strong nourishment. And in
the West Indies, they make bread of a root, called Cassani and others: but I
will wade no further into this subject of bread, but proceed to the most
frequent and ordinary use of roots in ordinary diet.

CHAP. XIIJ.
Of Roots usually eaten, and in most account for food.

AFter our discourse of several sorts of corn, it follows that we should
now say something of other vegetables, to wit, of Plants, useful for the
sustenance of mankind: and that the rather, I join those vegetables with
corn, is by reason this was a food in request, at least before we read that
flesh and other food were frequent: under the name of herbs and plants,
therefore, I understand both the root, the seed and the leaf, and stem or
stalk. And because in plants the root is answerable to the head in sensible
and reasonable creatures, therefore we will begin our discourse with those
vegetables, whose roots are most eminent, and in greatest esteem: and first,
we will begin with the Turnep, as being so well known, that the plainest and
ignorantest countrie-fellow is no stranger in the knowledge thereof.

Of the Turnep.
The Turnep or Navew, which are thought to differ little or nothing, grows
sometimes to so great a bigness, that Pliny lib. 18. cap. 13.
some have been seen of thirty, some of forty pound weight. As for the
properties, 2 De aliment. fac.
Galen thinks this to be the worst of all other roots. Lib. 2. cap. 104.
Dioscoride says, it ingendreth a soft and foggy flesh. It is of a flatuous
and windy quality, as most other roots, howbeit, some more, some less;
troublesome to a weak stomach, being hard of digestion. The best way of use
is accounted, first to boil them, and the water being powered out, then to
boil them again with fat beef, adding to them some pepper. The seed of
Turnep is good in antidotes, and very good against the plague, and all other
contagious diseases.

Of the Reddish.
In the next place we are to say something of Reddishes, the which root,
contrary to the custom of other roots, is eaten raw. At what time of our meal
it should be eaten, our Authors somewhat differ. Lib. 2. cap. 106.
Dioscorides would have it eaten after meals, to strengthen the stomach: but
sure, in my opinion, it being of a nauseous quality and provoking to cast, he
had but small reason for him. But Lib. 2. de alim. facult.
Galen is of another mind, to use it at the beginning of our meals, taxing
both the vulgar error, and some of Physicians also, who used it last. Simeon.
Since. Aloisius. Mundalla etiam Epist. 11.
Some, again, took upon them to moderate the matter thus: if the body be
soluble, and free from any flatuous matter, it should be eaten first; but if
the body be costive, last. We use them after a third, and different way, to
wit, with our meals, as a sauce, and, as is thought, to excite a languishing
appetite. Now, as I see small reason for either of the other two manners of use
of this root, so see I far less for this; and I think the controversy
might be best decided, if this root were left for physics use, it being good
against the stone. It has this inconvenient, that often eaten, it wastes the
teeth, eating into them. Poncetus lib. de venenis.
A late Author gives us warning, that after the eating of Reddishes, we
beware of milke-meats: for, says he, it turns them into venom. There is a
great antipathie betwixt this root and the vine, insomuch, that from hence,
some think they have found a remedy against drunkenness. Loco supra citat.
Dioscorides writes, that the leaves and roots of wilde-Reddish, which we
call horse-Reddish; was usually eaten as other potherbs. In high Germany, where
they call it mere rettich, Wilde-Reddish, or Horse-Reddish.
it is in ordinary use, the root I mean. And I remember in Saxony, we had
this root first grated, and then boiled with our beeefe, which made us many
times water our plants as well as the keenest mustard: but it is hurtful both
for head and eyes, whatsoever our palat-pleasers may allege for its
commendation.

The Reddish is of a cutting quality, and hot; and therefore cutteth tough
phlegm.

The Parsneps are indifferent good, The Parsnep.
boiled and buttered with vinegar and pepper. They are somewhat hot, and yield
better nourishment than the Carrot is; it is somewhat hard of digestion, and
flatuous, yet not so much as many others.

The Carrot differs something, The Carrot.
as yielding in goodness to the former, being something moister, yet of an
easier and freer distribution through the body. They are commonly eaten with
beef. In some countries they make sallets of them, especially of red, or
rather purple-coloured.

The Skirret root in goodness far surmounteth the others, Of Skirret roots.
as being of indifferent good nourishment, and no enemy to the stomach, a
great strengthner of nature, and expeller of urine. It is somewhat flatuous, as
the others, but not so much. Plin. lib. 19. cap. 4.
Tiberius the Emperor, did so highly esteem of these Skirret-roots, that he
sent for great store of them out of Germany, where they abounded, to plant them
in Italy for his own use, there growing none there before.

That outlandish root brought unto us from the West Indies, Of Potato roots.
called commonly Potato, and by some Batato, is of the same nature and
property, or at least goes a little beyond it; but that this pre-eminence it
has, that it is, according to the common proverb, Far fetched and dear
bought, and therefore good for Ladies.

Another root, which has been sent from the same soil, Artichoake of
Jerusalem.
called by the name of Artichocks of Jerusalem; which in leaf resembling our
Solanum, or nightshade, may therefore not without reason be called Solanum
peruvianum esculentum radice tuberosa. These roots are very windy, and engender
melancholy; and therefore howsoever at first, they were extolled by fames open
mouth; yet now, by reason of these aforementioned qualities, their credit is
much cracked.

Iringo roots are also often used, both condited with sugar, Iringo-roots.
and otherwise. They are of a thin attennuating substance, being hot and dry
about the second degree. They are good to cleanse the kidneys, and withal are
esteemed to strengthen nature.

Now come we to our Bulbous roots, beginning with garlic, which Galen
esteems to be hot and dry in the fourth degree; and therefore very sparingly
to be used, Of Bulbous roots. Of Garlike.
especially in hot constitutions of body, and the like seasons of the year. In
cold constitutions and countries it may safeliest be use, especially being
young. It is accounted a great enemy to the eie-sight, and an antidot against
all poison and contagious infection, called therefore, Virtues of Garlic.
Theriaca rusticorum, or the countrie-mans treacle. It is likewise good against
the wind-colicke, and the stone in the kidneys, and pectorall infirmities,
where tough phlegm obstructeth the pipes of the lungs. In many places of
France, especially in Gosconie, although it be far South, and next unto
Spain, yet use they garlic very ordinarily in their sauces; but when it is
yet green, and before the cloves come to their full strength and bigness: and
yet this simple is not so proper for so hot and salacious a people. It is also
ordinarily accounted good against worms, and all manner of vermin. And yet is
it strange, that is reported of Arnulphus the Emperor, who, by the frequent
eating of garlic, at length had his body so full of worms, that by no humane
help could he ever be cured. But howsoever, he was indeed surprised with this
disease, and with that likewise we call phthiriasis, or the lousie diseases,
his body abounding likewise with this vermin; Mulier astuta cum desperata^
videret artis defensionem, per unum ex familiaribus Imperatoris auro corruptum,
Pharmacum ei propinavit, quo ille hausto, statim profundo sopitus somne, ad
diem xertium usque stertivisse scribitur Et paulo post. Sed quod
venenivehemen^^a tetum insecerat corpus, pu^^efactione incurabili, (...) etiam
accessis. Ita mortuus est, erumpentibus toto corpore vermibus, tertio Calend
December etc. Ch^onic. Carrion. a Peucero expositi and aucti, l 4 page 452.
edition. 1617. in 8. apud Crispinium.
yet the History makes mention that he died of poison. The ancients thought
by caring thrice of garlic in a morning, to turn away all evil from them
that whole day following, as the Incussere deos inflantes pectora, si non
predilium ^er mane caput gustaveris alli. Pe^si.
ancient Poet expresses. It is also endued with this property, that Mirum est,
allio delectari homines quod fugit Leopardus: na^ sicubi par^etes litu
infeceris exibit protinus, nec resi^^ et ciuus odorem venenata fera non
patitur; nos interuis visceribus infund^mus Ambros. lib. 7. Hexameri.
some wild ravenous beasts, namely, the Leopard cannot abide the smell of it.
And indeed, it is rather to be used as physic, than otherwise. The evil
smell of garlic is helped by the eating of perslie in a pretty quantity; the
like is promised by eating of greene-beanes; as likewise zedoary. And
Promittit. l^nius all^um omni odore carere fi dum Luna est subterra seratur,
dum est in co^tu colligatur. Lib. ^9. cap 6.
some say, that if it beset when the Moon is under the earth, and gathered when
she is in conjunction with her dearest spouse, it loses all this strong smell.

Onions are also very hot in quality, insomuch, that Of onions. 7 Simpl. medic.
Galen ascribes unto them the fourth degree. Onion is an enemy to the
choleric persons, and to the eyes, and any inflammation of the head, and
causes trouble some dreams: but is good against the stone, provokes urine,
opens obstrutions, and cutteth tough and slimy humors; especially the red,
which is a great deal keener than the other. And this is to be understood of
raw Onions; and yet if they be a little steeped in water, they lose some of
this acrimony: but they are best boiled, and then they nourish somewhat, and
may either be used in pottage, or otherwise in sallets. And as by this means
they lose much of their medicinal virtue; so on the other side they lose as
much of their noxious qualities, whereby they hurt the body of man.

Of Skallions and chiballs.
That which has been said of the nature and virtues of Onions, may be
accommodated also unto Scallions and Chibolls, which are often eaten raw in
sallets: but let young and hot constitutions ever mingle store of cooling herbs
with them.

Of Cives.
Cives are somewhat of this temperature, howbeit milder, and may be used as a
pot-herb, as Onions and Leekes, it being of an attenuating, opening and cutting
quality, is good especially in phlegmatic and cold constitutions.

Of Leekes.
The Leeke is inferior to the Onion in goodness, being hot even to the third
degree: it opens the urinary passages, and other obstructions, but yet
hurts the head and eyes, and causes troublesome dreams. Transplanted into a
fat and fertile soil, they become both greater and milder in force and
operation; and so boiled with other herbs, they lose their noxious quality: The
root is most in request, the which being of a very big size, the French use
ordinarily in their pottage boiled in slices, and often with a fat Capon, or
other meat, and so are of a very good, sweet and pleasant relish. Unset
Leekes are most physical, and of greatest virtue and efficacy.

As concerning Mushroms, or Toad-stooles, Of Mushroms or toad-stooles.
as they are commonly called, although properly they be no roots, yet are they
commonly ranked among them. It is a food (if so it deserves to be called) in
small request here amongst us: howbeit in France, Italy, and adjacent
countries, it is in no small esteem: and therefore I shall need to say less
concerning this subject. Caution for travelers.
I advise therefore all our Centrie, who travel into those foreign
countries, if they be wise, altogether to abstain from such excrements of the
earth; some of them (yea, the greater part) being venomous, as I could by true
histories make appear: all of them being of an evil quality, and breeding no
good nourishment at all. Lib. de historia stirp^um.
Clusius writing the exact history of them, reckons up three and twenty sorts
of such as may be eaten; and five and twenty sorts of venomous Mushroms. Who
then that is wise, will venture on a doubtful dish, when God of his infinite
goodness has affoorded us such plenty of profitable and pleasant food?
Amongst these, are also ranked those roots commonly called Puffes, or Truffes,
Tubera terrae, Of puffes, or Truffes, Tubera terra.
and in the Northermost parts of this Island, by some called Arnuts; growing
under the earth, but in the spring of the year bursting forth. They engender
tough, clammy and melancholicke humors; being apt to engender the stone, and
all manner of obstruction: they are also hurtful for the stomach; further,
and procure the Apoplexy, Strangurie, and many other dangerous diseases: and
therefore here I will leave them, and proceed to speak of more profitable
simples, namely, of such herbs as are in most ordinary use and request for the
use of man.

CHAP. XIV.
Of herbs in most ordinary use for diet, and first for such as cool most.

AFter roots, we come now to such herbs as are in most ordinary use for daily
food, either for sallets, or the pot: and we will first begin with such
herbs as are of a cooling quality. Of lettice.
And among all our herbs, none is of more use in our ordinary diet than the
lettice, taking its denomination from a milkie juice wherewith it abounds;
and is by Galen preferred before all other herbs; who used it both in his
younger years, to cool the great heat of his stomach, and in old age to
procure sleep. The ancients for religions sake, absteined from lettices:
Suetonius in eius vita Plin. l. 19. cap. 7.
but Augustus Caesar having by the advice and counsel of Antonius Musa his
Physician, by the use of this herb recovered his health, brought this herb in
no small esteem among the Romans. It is cold and moist in the second degree,
and ingendreth no evil juice within the body, and by this means carries a
great pre-eminence above most other herbs, In ancient times, it was wont to be
eaten at the later end of the meal* but now quite contrary, at the beginning:
and this moved the Claudere lactuca caenas solebat averum: ^ic mibi cur nostrat
inchoat illa dapes? Martialis.
Poet to ask the reason of this alteration: which probably is this; that eaten
after meals, it represseth the hot vapors of wine, by this means both
resisting drunkenness, and withal procuring sleep, being especially used at
night; and as it would seem, being then most ordinarily used. And this was the
reason, why Flavius Vopiscus in eius vita.
the Emperor Tacitus in his feasts, above all other dishes, used this herb
most liberally. Custom notwistanding has now so far prevailed, that to whet
on the appetite, it is with oil and vinegar used at the beginning of our
meals; and unto it most commonly are added perslie, and some other hot herbs,
which do well allay the coldness and moisture thereof. It has been received
by tradition for an uncontrolled truth, that lettice hurts the eyesight: but
since neither Galen, Whether lettice hurts the eyesight.
nor our ancient Physicians have left any such quality upon record to
posterity, I wonder from whence this slander should first proceed: I know all
the color they have, is, that it too much thickneth the blood, and by
consequence breeds an incrassation in the opticke spirits, conveied to the
eyes. To this I answer, in the first place, Answer.
it is not endued with any transcendent incrassation beyond many other simples,
which nevertheless, were never so reputed, this plant not exceeding the second
degree in either quality. Again, admit this were a truth; that it were endued
with such a specificall incrassating quality; yet must it both be eaten in
great abundance, sole, and of it self; and withal must meet with some
answerable cold and moist complexion (for as for hot choleric bodies,
especially hot stomachs it is for them a most sovereign alimentary medicine)
and that without addition of other things, which correct such a quality, It may
safely be eaten as it is ordinarily used.
if any there were. And therefore being used, as commonly it is with oil,
vinegar, and ordinarily some hot herbs, as said is, what hurt can there be in
it? As for the oil, although it do somewhat loosen and relax some weak and
choice stomachs; yet is this by means of the tartness and sharpness of the
the vinegar well corrected; and the oil also, being of a temperate heat, does
in some sort correct the others cold quality: and of this temper, is the sugar
also, which is often added; howbeit in my opinion, a little salt, as the French
use, would far better correct any superfluous moisture, it correcting also
any cold and crude quality.

Endive and Succory, are moderatly cold, and somewhat drying, Of Endive and
Succorie.
and are ordinarily used as other pot-herbes; are good to open obstructions of
the liver, as also for the heat thereof, and of the stomach: They are best for
young hot-blooded people; if they be used in sallets, the younger they be the
better, used especially with addition of hotter herbs. The French, they keep
Succory buried a long time under the ground, which makes it both white and
tender; A way to whiten Succorie.
which they call Cichoree blanch, and so use it in sallets, with addition of
other herbs. There be diverse sorts of these herbs which grow wild,
participating of the same qualities, yet, I think, scarce so cold, but rather
inclining to some temperate heat, and prove more forcible against obstructions;
although not so pleasing to the palate as those which grow in gardens. Among
these kinds, there is one most commonly taken notice of by the name of
Dandelion, corrupted from the French, dent du Lion, or Lions tooth, and may
well be used in all obstructions of the liver, as the others, and in such other
cases.

Spinach is an ordinary pot-herb, cold, and withal moist, Of Spinach.
yet this more than the other, being cold in the first, and moist in the second
degree. It best befitteth hot and dry bodies, and such stomachs especially,
nourishing very little, loosening the belly, and ingendering wind: In France
this herb shred and made up in balls, fried with oil and vinegar, in the time
of Lent, fills up the room of an ordinary dish.

Beets are of three sorts, which are commonly used for pot herbs, Of Beets.
especially the white and green, the red being more physical. They all are
moderately cold, not exceeding the first degree at most; yet moister, to wit,
about the second. They open obstructions, and loosen the belly, as most of
these cooling and moistning simples do. In some places they make sallets of
the red-beet root, boiled and sliced, adding thereto oil and vinegar. For the
insipidity of taste, the ancients, as seems, were wont to eat them with wine
and pepper; as may by the ancient Vt sapiant fatuae fabrorum prandia betae: O
quam sape petit vina piperque coquus. Martialis.

Of Blites, or Bleets.


Poet appear.

Somewhat like unto them in name is that herb, commonly called Blite, or Bleet,
and not much differing in virtue, howbeit something inferior. And Orach is not
unlike, differing little in operation. Orach.
They loosen the belly, and rather hurt than help the stomach, unless it be
strong, or cold and dry, and the temper of body choleric.

Prick. madame.
That herb commonly called Prick-madam, is yet cooler than any of the former,
and withal very moist; yet used both for a pot-herbe and in sallets. It is
best for hot stomachs, and choleric complexions, as also for younger people.

Of Purslaine.
Purslaine is a herb with us in great request in the summer season; but
especially in sallets. It is accounted cold in the third degree, but wanting
one in moisture. It is best for such complexions and stomachs, as we have often
mentioned. It is good against all internal heats and inflammations. Virtues of
purslaine.
It is good against all manner of fluxes. The leaves and seeds are good
against worms, against the immoderate menstruous flux, spitting of blood, and
running of the reins. If it be pickled up with salt and vinegar, it acquireth
some heat, strengthening the stomach, and whetting it on for food, and
cutting tough phlegm.

Of Sorrel.

To Sorrel may also be referred Bloodwort and Souredock, called Oxalis acuta.
Virtues of Sorrel. Sorrel du bois.


Among all our pot herbs, none I know more useful and profitable, both for
physic and food than this so noble simple, Sorrel I mean. As for the
qualities, it is esteemed cooling and drying in the second degree. The very
vulgar can tell that it is very sovereign in all hot distempers and diseases of
that nature. In contagious, malign and pestilentiall fevers, it is a sovereign
good simple, especially the wood-sorrell, called therefore Sorrel du bois. And
by reason of the aciditie in taste, it is not unwelcome to the palate, in this
particular far exceeding other cold simples: for the which cause it is not
unfitly used in Summer for greene-sauce. Being young and tender, it may be used
in sallets with the addition of some hot herbs.

Of Borrage and Buglosse.
Borrage and Buglosse, and that sort called commonly Lang de beuf (for I take it
to be nothing else) although they do partake of some heat, yet are they by the
vulgar accounted among cooling herbs, their heat, as likewise their moisture
being so moderate, that they exceed not the first degree. It has ever been,
both by Galen, and other Physicians since his time, esteemed good against
melancholy, and may safely be used both in sickness and in health. They be
also ordinarily used for pot-herbes. The flowers are sometimes used in sallets,
and sometimes steeped in wine; and, notwithstanding all this that has been
said, some have not so high a conceit of these simples. So hard a thing is this
to practice, Omnibus placeto.

Of Mallows.

Hither we may also refer the Marshmallow, called Althaea, or Bismalva.


The Mallow is reckoned also among our ordinary pot herbs, which loosneth the
belly, as being of an abstersive quality, and the heat so small, that it is
scarce discernable. The curled, called the French Mallow is most esteemed; they
are not to be used in sallets, as other herbs, being offensive to the stomach.
But indeed, the Mallow is fitter for Physic than for food. Our ancients, for
the high esteem they had of it, called it omni-morbia, that is, good against
all diseases. It is thought to be good against melancholy, to further the
menstruous flux, and good against all oppilations and inflammations of the
kidneys and bladder: and by reason of the temperate qualities, good to be used
in cataplasmes for outward pains.

Of Groundsell.
There is an herb called Groundsell, ordinarily used to loosen the belly, being
boiled in pottage, and withal, sometimes it will procure casting, if taken in
any competent quantity. But boiled in broths, it loosneth the belly as many
others do, being of somewhat a cooling quality, and somewhat drying, of a
bitter taste, and opens obstructions, especally in women's diseases. It is not
good for weak stomachs to use. Of Mercury.


Amongst our loosening herbs, there is one ordinarily used, called by the name
of Mercury; for the which, here in the country is in common use, an herb
called by the the Latins, Matthiol. in libr. 2. Dloscor. cap. 161.
Bonus Henricus, having leaves like that herb, commonly called Wake-Robin, and
is somewhat hot and dry, howbeit not in any excess: and is of somewhat an
abstersive faculty; and is much used in pottage and broths, to make the body
soluble, and is by Matthiolus accounted to participate of the nature of
Lapathium acutum, being a certain kind of dock. Mercuriali^ est eam mas quam
foemina, Dioscoridi Linozostis dicitur. Idem Matthew. in lib. 4. Dioscor. cap.
183.
But there is another true Mercury so called, by the antiens Linozostis, and
by the Latins, commonly Mercurialis mas and foemina, Mercury, male and female.
And this is that right Mercury so much mentioned by Pliny, and Hippocrates; and
ordinarily appointed and prescribed by our Physicians, for glisters. The leaf
of it is not unlike to that of Pellitory of the wall, and does far excel the
other, commonly called Mercury, as may be seen both in that place of Pliny, of
Dioscoride and Matthiol and others: of this therefore I thought to give some
warning.

We use often also in broths strawberrie leaves and roots, Of strawberry
leaves.
which are something cooling, and withal drying. They are good against all
fluxes, good in greene-wounds and ulcers, and inflammations of the bladder and
kidneys; and is also good to strengthen the gums, and fasten loose teeth, being
gargled with a little claret wine, or plantaine water, or both. Of Strawberries
in their own place.

The herb commonly called Cing-foile, or quinquefolium, Of Cing-foile.
from the number of leaves, is much of the same nature with the former, being
of an astringent corroborating faculty, with so small a heat, that, if any, it
is not discernable. It is very much used in broths, and not without great
reason. The roots are most drying. It is exceeding good, both for food and
physic.

Violets are not of smallest note, nor in least request, Of Violet-leaves and
Violets.
both for physic and food, being both leaves and flowers of a moderate
cooling, and moistening faculty. The green leaves of the herb are ordinarily
used among other pot herbs, and sometimes in sallets, and are good in all hot
diseases, fevers, or inflammations whatsoever. But the sweet and pleasant
flowers are the principal in this plant, being used both in sirup, conserve,
candit, and in cakes, etc. Virtues of Violets.
They are very effectual in diseases of the breast, especially where cooling
and thickning of sharp humors is required. The sirup also is a gentle purge
for young children and weak constitutions; and properly, it is rather to be
esteemed a loosener of the belly, than a proper purger.

The Rose is also in no small request, both the red, white and damask. Of Roses.
The damask rose is most of all the other sorts esteemed. Sirup of Rose^.
The sirup of it is much used for a gentle purger of choler, without heating
the body in any fever, wherein it may safely be exhibited and to any age.
Rose Water.
The water is used for many uses, being very delectable and comfortable to all
the principal parts, both head, heart, and all the senses, and so is the smell
of the flower it self. There is yet a Musk rose which does excel in the
purging faculty. The musk rose.
And these three, damask, musk and white do most abound in airie and watrie
parts; the red more in earthy: for the which cause it is more astringent,
corroborating the stomach, liver, etc. And although a sirup may be made of
these red roses new gathered, yet is the purgative faculty far inferior to
the others. Conserve of red-roses.
The conserve of it is good in thin and sharp rheumaticke distillations, and
to stop fluxes. The sirup of the dry leaves is likewise astringent, The wild
rose, and conserve made thereof.
and therefore good against all fluxes of the belly. The wild rose is most
astringent of all the rest, and therefore the conserve thereof is esteemed by
some more efficacious than of the former. The roses participate of a small and
moderate heat, testified by their sweet smell and bitterness, as witnesses De
simpl. medic. facult lib. 7. Matthiol. li. 1. Diosorid. cap. 113.
Galen; although this be but in a very remiss degree; and therefore are
comparatively accounted cold, in regard of other simples apparently hot to any
indifferent understanding: and this is diligently to be considered, especially
in regard of the sick, when there is any use of this simple, or any thing made
thereof.

Of Cabbage and Coole-wort.
But I had almost forgotte Cole-worts and Cabbage, which may well be ranked
among our loosening herbs, partaking of a certain nitrous quality, which
makes it soluble. This plant was much beholden to old Roman Cato, who used no
other physic for his whole family; and came in so high an esteem among the
Romans, that for the space of 600 years, it was the chief drugge they used.
It is now esteemed to be of an evil nourishment, and to engender melancholy.
It is not any ways hot to the sense discernable. Lib. 7. simpl. medic.
Galen ascribes unto it a drying quality, used either inwardly or outwardly,
and helps hard tumors left behind after inflammations; and consolidateth
and cleanses ulcers, as well ordinary, as of a malign nature. Matthiol. in
libr. 2. Diosc ca. 115. ubi multa de Brassicae viribus.
Some use it for an outward medicine to clear the sight, mingled with honey.
Many more virtues some ascribe to this simple, whereon I will not insist. That
it should hurt the eyesight, being eaten, I know no reason. Being boiled, and
the first rejected, and it boiled again, it becomes much better for the use.
It is commonly boiled with fat beef; and by reason of the flatuous and windy
quality proceeding from the grossness of the substance, it is ordinarily
eaten with pepper or other spice. Weak stomachs may easily be offended with
the use thereof. Cole-worts and Cabbages are best in the winter after they have
been frost bitten, as we use to say: I hold the Cole-wort to be less
hurtful than the Cabbage. Claudius Deodatus Panth. Hygiast. lib 1. cap. 22. ex
Hippolito Guarinovio.
A late Writer mentions another Physician, who, in a work by him published,
highly extolleth Cabbage, being pickled up with salt, cumine-seed and
bay leaves; and; next unto bread, gives it the highest commendation that can
be given to any simple. And thus prepared, he relates, that Julius
Alexandrinus medic. Caesareu^.
another famous Physician, who attended on an Emperor, used this dish very
frequently in his old age. They pickle it up in all high Germany, with salt and
barberies, and so keep it all the year, being commonly the first dish you
have served in at table, which they call their sawerkrant. They make also there
a sallet of Cabbage small shred, with vinegar and oil, and all set about the
dish with red-herrings, and hard roasted eggs; the which who so is in love
with, let him have his liking; and I think we might well spare our hard
roasted eggs out of our sallets, and use them after a better manner.

CHAP. XV.
Of herbs hot in operation, and in most ordinary use. As also of Artichocks,
Gourds, Cucumers, muske-melons.

HItherto have we discoursed of herbs of a cooling faculty, or at least of so
small, a heat, that it is scarce to the senses discernible. Now we will speak
of those that are known to be hotter, beginning with the Marigold.

Among other pot herbs the Marigold, Of Marigold.
as well the leaf as the flower, is in no small account, but the flowers
especially; which may also well be kept dry till winter. These flowers are
somewhat hot, yet not exceeding mediocrity, inclining also to dryness* The
flowrs and their virtues.
These flowers are esteemed to be very cordial, and good against the plague
and other contagious diseases. It is also esteemed good against obstruction,
especially of a woman's flux, as also against the Iaundize. The stilled water
of the plant and flower is esteemed good for red eyes, and any inflammation
thereof. The green leaves of the plant it self are not so effectual as the
flowers, being only as ordinary mollifying herbs, helpefull to make the same
soluble.

There is a pot-herbe in use with us here in the country, commonly called
Columbine; the leaves whereof are ordinarily used as others, Of Columbines
called Aquilegia or Aquilina.
having some resemblance unto the leaves of great Celandine, howbeit the
flowers have no resemblance at all. This herb is not very hot, and therefore
ordinarily reckoned among cooling herbs; as the vulgar account all herbs
cooling, which do not evidently evince their senses of the contrary. Although
some would ascribe great virtues to the simple; yet because I find no
certainty, nor any such things recorded by antiquity, I leave it as I found it.

Asparagus, or as we call, it Sperage, is an opening herb, Of Sperage.
temperately hot and moist, and for food, the tops or tender sprouts first
springing out are in most request, and commonly boiled in fair water, and
afterward with oil, vinegar and pepper, eaten as a sallet by themselves; or
else, as in some places, set round about the dish wherein meat is contained,
and so eaten with it: and sometimes it is eaten last with banqueting stuff.
That this was an ancient custom amongst the Romans to beset their dishes round
with them, may appear by an Aspice quam magno distendat, pectore lancem, Quae
fertur Domino scilla, and quibus undique septa, Asparagis. Iuven.
ancient Poet. They are good for the stomach, yielding no bad nourishment to
the body, loosen the belly gently, provoke urine, cleanse the kidneys, open
obstructions, and help the eyesight. They must be but a little boiled; and if
thou will boil them again, they lose much of their bitterness; but withal
some of their virtues. The roots are much used by Physicians in opening
Apozemes and syrups.

And after the same manner may the first young and tender Hop-buds be used, and
produce the same effects with the former.

Avens Cariophyllata.
Avens is also used as an ordinary pot-herbe, being somewhat hot, yet not
exceeding the first, and dry, yet not exceeding the second degree. The leaves
are most ordinarily used in brothes; and yet the roots are most effectual
against obstructions of the liver or other parts, and are of themselves
abstersive, and are very fit to be used in Physical broths, as being both
opening and strengthening.

Of Persley.
No herb in more frequent use than persly, both the leaves and the roots. It is
no ways hurtful, agreeing well with the stomach, opens obstructions,
discusseth wind, and provokes urine. But I advise none to eat it raw, being
best dressed with meat or in pottage. The several ways of using it are so
well known, that it were superfluous for me to speak of it. The roots are
very useful in Physical broths, especially the inward pith taken out: and
thus we use fennel roots also. It has been an inveterate opinion among many,
that Persley was hurtful for the eyesight: but let it be used as we have set
down, and I warrant thee from any harm: but if any will eat great store of
it raw and often, let him look to himself* It is both hot and dry, yet not
exceeding the second degree of either.

Of Alysander or Alexander.
Some use in the Spring to make use of the herb called Alexanders or Alysander
in pottage; and some again use the young leaves and tender stems, first bioled
for a sallet with some other herbs as they please, or else, of it self with
vinegar. This herb has the same operation that persly has; but yet more
forcibly, as being of it self of a hotter quality.

Of Clary. Sela^ea.
The herb Clary is in great use also, especially among women, which they
esteem sovereign good against their immoderate fluxes, and strengthening of
the back, howbeit I cannot find any such thing recorded by antiquity. They use
commonly here with us in the country to fry it with eggs.

Of Penniroyall.
Penniroyall, an herb well known both in town and country, is of very good
use, and very wholesome for the body of man and woman; especially, it is best
for phlegmatic constitutions, and ancient people, and is very good for women,
such especially as are any ways troubled with any manner of stoppage. Some
call it pudding grass; by reason it is often used in puddings, being small
shred, and mingled with the blood, Virtues of penniroyall.
which in my opinion is very good, and would wish none made without it. It is
good for a weak waterish stomach, against the wind colicke, provokes urine,
and cleanses the urinarie passages; it is good in obstructions of the pipes of
the lungs, and others also. It is comfortable in all cold diseases of the head
and nerves. It is hot and dry about the third degree; howbeit our ordinary
garden penniroyall, I think, comes somewhat short of this intense degree.

There is yet an other herb in frequent use amongst other pot-herbes, and
called here in the country Pot-marjoram, Pot-marioram.
which is nothing else save a sort of Organy, called Origanum. The qualities
and properties in Physic, because I think they differ not much from the
former, therefore I need not to insist upon them.

If I should pass by this so sovereign and noble a simple, Of Mints.
I should much wrong the public, it being of so excellent an eminency. The
virtues.
All sorts of Mints are good, howbeit, that we commonly call the garden
Speare-mints is of all others the best. It is hot and dry; howbeit, I think our
garden mints does not exceed the second degree. It is very good to comfort the
stomach, both green and dry, being good against vomiting and all manner of
immoderate fluxes of the belly, or other in women, which both the red mints and
this speare-mints effect. Their smell comfort both the animal and vital
spirits. Besides, it cleanses the kidneyes, kills worms, and stays the
effusion of blood. It has been an inveterate opinion among the ancients, that
this plant procured barrenesse; and therefore was not to be sown in time of
war; as Hener. Meth. ad praxim. lib. 2. cap. 9. ex Arist. probl 20.2.
a late writer allegeth out of Aristotle. But this opinion is most false and
erroneous, if we shall attribute any specificall quality to this plant, whereby
it should cause sterility. I do not deny but in hot and dry wombs, especially
excessively used, it might be some hinderance. But the like may by other
plants of a hot or hotter and drier quality, as easily be effected. But since
that mints not only strengthen those parts of generation; but consume also and
dry up all cold, raw, and uncocted crudities; (ordinarily proving the greatest
hindrances of conception) I see no reason why this plant should not rather be
esteemed a great furtherer and friend to generation. This herb being young may
be used also in sallets with other herbs. And the uulgar do well in using
this herb very frequently in their pease pottage, both green and dry. It is
of all other most proper for the use of the stomach.

Rosemary is, and that not without good reason, Of Rosemarie.
in high esteem among all sorts of people. It is hot and dry in operation, at
least in the second, if not touching upon the third degree. It is exceeding
comfortable in all cold infirmities of the brain, comfort the senses and
the spirits, especially the animal, as also all the noble parts, and
corroborateth all the nervous parts. It is best to be in most frequent use in
the Winter, and cold and aged constitutions of body. Of the flowers of it is
made a comfortable conserve for all these uses. And of the same is made a very
sovereign good water. And of this simple there is a spirit, quintessence, etc;
distilled. But beware of imposture, if thou be not well acquainted with the
preparation.

Marjoram is a sweet, pleasant and well smelling herb, Of Marioram.
hot and dry in operation, and little inferior to the former in this respect.
It comfort all the noble parts, especially the stomach, and may with good
success be used to further concoction, comfort the stomak, and discuss wind.
It much comfort the brain also: and as the precedent, so is this good
against all cold diseases of the brain and nervous parts. But this, as all
other hot plants excelling in strong smell, are most appropriate for
phlegmatic constitutions, cold and moist brains and stomachs. Strong hot
smells of fend hot brains.
Hot choleric bodies are thereby offended. And very hot brains are offended
with any strong smell. I have known some, whom the smell of a Damask rose
would presently make their heads ache.

Of Sage.
Of the sovereign virtues of Sage few are ignorant; and the singular good
opinion the world had always of this simple, did minister occasion to ask the
question, why any man dyed that had sage growing in his garden? Cur moritur
homo cui-Saluiacrescit in borto? Contra vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis.
To which it was as truly again answered, that against death no Physic was
to be found. The qualities for heat and drouth do much accord with those of
the plants last spoken of. It is above all others most effectual against all
cold diseases of the brain, and nervous parts: and therefore good for those
who are obnoxious to Palsies and Apoplexies. It is good also to strengthen all
the noble parts, and very good against wind. It is very good to comfort and
cleanse the cold and moist womb, and fit it for conception. And being of an
astringent and corroborating quality, it is good to prevent abortion in such as
be thereunto subject: as also good against women's immoderate fluxes. The
country people in Germany think themselves free from poison all that day
after, if they eat in a morning three leaves of sage with a little salt, well
dried, and taken in a pipe, as is usual to take tobacco; it would produce a
far more safe and certain effect in cold and moist brains; and so might
prove an excellent preservative against Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and all manner
of cold rheumaticke defluxions, commonly called by the name of colds. And I am
persuaded, that if it were to us unknown, Sage very good and useful taken as
Tobacco.
and brought from the East or West Indies, or some other remote region, and so
begun to be taken by some of our Shagd or Slasht Mounsieurs, we should
quickly have it thus used in the country: for we are all now for the new cut.

Of Bawme.
Bawme is a sovereign good cordial herb, and is very good against melancholy,
strengthens the brain, and helps the memory, where the defect is from a
cold cause. Bawme-water.
It is more used for Physic than for food, and yet it may well be used in
broths, and in sallets mingled with cooling herbs, especially when it is yet
tender and young. There is a strong water stilled out of it, very good in
palpitation of the heart, and other such infirmities, especially where there is
no great heat. It is hot and dry in quality about the second degree.

Of Be tonie.
Betonie is no less hot and dry than the former, a very good herb, howbeit in
greater request for Physic than for food; and yet may it well be used in
broths. It is a sovereign good herb for many both outward and inward diseases.
It is esteemed principally good for the brain, Virtues.
and cold infirmities of the same. It is likewise good against inward
obstructions: and is good also to cleanse the kindneies, and all the urinary
passages, with many other virtues which were here too long to relate, and
shall suffice to have reckoned up the principal.

Of Tarragon.
There is an herb called Tarragon, as hot as any we have yet named* of a
pleasant and delectable smell, and comfortable both to head and heart, whereof
is also sometimes made use in the kitchen, and is used in sallets, being used
with cooling herbs. It may be used of cold and phlegmatic nauseous stomachs,
and so it both warmeth the same, and furthereth concoction.

Hyssop is sometimes used in broths or pottage, Of Hyssop.
although in a small quantity, being hot and dry about the third degree, or not
far off it; being also of a thin, attenuating and cutting quality. It is
good for the head; but principally for the breast, and obstructions of the
pipes of the lungs, and singular good for attenuation and expectoration of
tough phlegmatic humors. Phlegmatic cold obstructed bodies may freeliest
use it.

Time a sovereign good and useful herb, is as hot and dry, Of Time.
if not more than hyssop, and is in no small request both for food and
physic; being especially good in cold infirmities, and phlegmatic
constitutions, against the wind colicke, weakness of stomach, and may also
conveniently be used against melancholy, and for many other infirmities, which
for brevity I here pass by.

Savourie is much of the same virtue that Time, Of Savory.
and appropriated for the like infirmities. It is used amongst other pot herbs,
howbeit always in a small quantity, and mingled with many cooling herbs. And
this is always in the use of pot herbs to be observed, that there be a small
proportion of these hot and dry herbs used to a greater quantity of those of a
cooling quality.

Besides the herbs themselves, some of them bring forth a fr^ut^, Of
Artichokes.
which is in no small esteem among many. We will begin with the garden
thistle* which although it bears not properly any fruit, yet is it answerable
thereunto: for before it flower it sends forth, as it were a fruit, which is
in no small request, and used by most people. It is most commonly eaten boiled
with butter, vinegar, pepper, and salt. The young and tender stalks used after
the same manner are nothing inferior to themselves. The Italians eat
Artichockes raw, while they are yet young and tender with pepper and salt,
which is a food nothing worth, ingendring crude gross and evil nourishment. 2
de alim. facul.
Galen says, it ingendreth but bad nourishment boiled and dressed; much more
than raw. But being used moderately, they will not offend the body. They are
accounted hot and dry; howbeit I think ours do not exceed the first degree.
They are esteemed flatuous, and to excite lust: and are with all diureticke,
provoking urine, and cleansing the passages of urine.

There are three sorts of these fruits of herbs which have some affinity among
themselves, especially two of them. Of the Gourds.
The first is by the Latins called Cucurbita and Citrullus, by the French
Citroulle, and in English a Gourd, and by some a melon. It is cold and moist,
ingendring no good humors in the body, and never to be eaten raw; but boiled,
or rather fried with butter or oil, and onions, or the like, which may correct
this cold and moist quality. It is of it self insipid, and therefore the
French use to add to it vinegar or ver^uice, as some use here in England also.
It may be best used of young and hot bodies* but is an enemy to such as are
molested with raw phlegmatic humors or wind. The seeds, as of all the others
are good to provoke urine, and qualify the sharpness and acrimony thereof,
and therefore of them, as of the seeds of cucumers and muske-melon, with an
appropriate liquor, we may make not only emulsions to provoke urine, and
cleanse those passages; but even in burning diseases of the breast, lungs and
other parts. Of this, as also of Cucumers, may be distilled a water very good
against burning Fevers, and other hot acute diseases.

Of Cucumer.
The Cocumer, as they commonly call it, challenges unto it self the second
place; Authoritatem eis dedic Tibetius Caesar qus nullo non die eos (te^te
Plin) mandebat.
which came chiefly in credit and estimation by the means of Tiberius Caesar,
who scarcely ever either dined or supped without them. The best way of use is,
as is the common custom, sliced, and with vinegar shaken betwixt two dishes,
and then with vinegar, oil and pepper eaten as a sallet. They are very cold
and moist in themselves, exceeding the gourd. They minister no good nourishment
at all to the body of man; and are best for the hot and dry constitutions, and
deadly enemies to the cold phlegmatic body, and such as are subject to wind.
Before they be big, they use to pickle them up with vinegar and salt, and use
them in Winter as a sallet, and so I hold them best, as having then lost a
great deal of their crude and unconcocted moisture. Nos ^ic gravitate medica
decernimu^, a Cucum^^um pepo^umque esu abstinendum: quoniam in venire corrupti
succum pariunt proximam ei, qui a laeta^ibus medicamentis proficiscitur. Et
eodem capite, Galenus cibis hominum perpe^uo abdicandos censuit, ut caetera ^i
aria in^qu^oris su^c^ vivunt, Autore (...), in stomacho in po^^erum diem, nec
persici qu^ani. Quod si ^i^cantur a v^^tricuto (id enim p^ssunt qui^am
peculiari quadam natura) nibilominus longiori tempore in eo durant, atque si
immodice haurtantur, gel. dum simul ac crassum in venas diffunaunt suc^u^; quem
po^ea venae sua oncoquendi facultate vix in probum sanguinum valent commutare.
Compertum est eos qui eu diut^us liberalinsque vescuntur, morosis febribus,
morbisque alijs difficiboribus opportuniores fieri. Audio Venetos in
perniciales pe^titentesque ob ij^ cib^s aegritudi^es ^ncidere: Forenles in
Gallia, propter esum frequentiorem Cucumerum, obnoxios fieri f^bribus non est
dubitanaum. Si quis valctud ni consuluere velit, neque seret neque edet, cum
lantum fit in eorum e^ca periculi. Bru^er. de re ciba^ia lib 8. cap. 89.

O^ mu^k-melons. 8. de simplic. medicfacultat.

^lutt by them procure^ to the body.

Caution for travelers.

How to discern the best.


But a late writer rejects the use of them how curiously soever prepared; and
imputes the reigning of many contumacious Fevers, and other diseases in
France, amongst other causes, to the too frequent use of this unwholesome fruit.

There is yet another fruit called a melon, and with us commonly a muske-melon:
the French call them Melons, and the Poitevins in France Poupon, from the
Latin Pepo, which is thought, was only a great ripe cucumer. This is the best
of the bunch, as is the Proverb; howbeit in this our cold and moist climat I
hold them nothing worth. This fruit moistneth very much, and is by many
esteemed to be cold in quality: but for my part, the sweetness of their taste
(and therefore by the French called sugar melons) make me rather of opinion
that they partake of some heat, or at the least that they are temperate. Galen
esteems them far better than any of the former, as being of a more solid
substance, and nothing so miost. They stir up the appetit, provoke urine, and
moisten the body. They are pleasant to the taste, but are easily converted into
choler, and so produce both putrid Fevers, and the bloody flux; as I have
observed in France, where they abound; and therefore let our young Gentlemen
travelers take heed, lest sweet meat at length prove to have sour sauce.
They are to be eaten before meals, as many Sommer-fruits, and some counsel a
cup of wine after them. But whither that will not too speedily carry those
crudities into the small veins, may be questioned. The best grow in France,
Italy and Spain, and such hot countries: and in France, from Tours southward.
In and about Paris they are nothing so good, the ground being so forced by art,
they growing, as it were on dung-hills. They may be discerned to be good by
these properties following. First if they be heavy, of a pleasant smell; if
they have thick stalks, and the outward skin green; and withal they must
have the inward pulpe firm without moisture, and the seeds sticking fast to
it. I have somewhat the longer insisted upon this point, to acquaint travelers
with the nature, use and danger of such things as are not so common with us
here at home.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Fruits of trees, especially of shrubs, ordinarily used for food, and often
for Physic: and first of Straw-berries, Raspes, Mulberries, Goose-berries,
Currants, (commonly so called) red and black, and Whortles, and Bil-berries, of
Barberies, of Cherries, Plummes, Abricoks and Peaches.

IT is more than time we come now to the fruits of trees which ministered unto
mankind both in the state of innocence, Fruits rare and dear in ancient times.
and after also his food for a long time. But after variety of other food was
found out, they were commonly served in for after-courses; or as the French
call it, for desert. But after a while when men began to neglect this point
of good husbandry, fruits became so dear that gold could scarce buy them. In
the time when Varro lived, they were equalled with the weight of gold. In
Plinies time a Peach was ordinarily sold for three hundredth pence. Division of
fruits.
We will divide all fruits according to the usual manner, into those of a
shorter, or of a longer continuance. Those of shorter continuance, are by
reason of their short continuance, so termed; called therefore fugaces, or
flying away; as also Horarii, as it were, during but for a short season: and
such are Mulberries, Cherries, Peaches, Abricocks, etc. The others again are
called of a longer continuance such as are diverse sorts of Apples, and some
sorts of Pears. Nourishment of fruits.
All sorts of fruits minister but small nourishment to the body; and most
fruits yield but bad, especially those of shorter continuance. The cruditie is
corrected by preparation; whether by boiling, rosting or preserving. Whether
good to eat bread with fruits or no?
And some for this purpose use a draught of wine after them; of the which
something hereafter. But here is a question moved by a Aleisius Mundella Epist.
34.
learned late writer, whether it be good to eat bread with those short
continuing fruits or no? He answers, that if they be used as Physic, they
are then to be used without bread or any other food: but if used for food,
then bread is to be eaten with them.

Amongst all these fruits we will first begin with the Strawberry, Of
Strawberries.
although no fruit of any tree; yet because of the affinity and resemblance of
it to the fruit of some trees and shrubs, I follow other men's method. The
ancient Greeks, it seems, were ignorant of this plant, although Pliny
mentions it, howbeit deceived in the description thereof, while he ascribes
unto it five leaves, which is the right Pentaphyllum or our ordinary Cingfoile.
The Strawberrie cools, Virtues of Strawberries.
moistneth and qualifieth hot distempers; and therefore good in Fevers, all
manner of inward inflammations, hot and choleric constitutions. They are of
themselves no enemy to the stomach, unless it be very moist and phlegmatic.
Their stilled water is very useful for all internal heates, Straw berries
with cream not to be ordinarily of every one used.
and to cleanse the kidneys and urinary passages. In hot stomachs and like
constitutions of body, they may safely be used with rosewater or the like. Some
use them with cream, whereof I advise weak, cold and phlegmatic persons
beware. And yet this is a dish wherein our Gentle-women do much delight,
howsoever not so agreeable to their constitution of body. Some use them again
with a little claret wine and sugar; which in such constitutions is to be
preferred before the former. The Strawberry is also accounted cordial, for the
which cause it may well be used in all cordial juleps; where cooling
especially is required. They are to be eaten before other food; the which is
in all these short-lasting Summer-fruits to be observed.

Of Raspes or Framboeses.
There is yet another small fruit, not much unlike the former either in form or
operation, and in no small request both for food and physic. And although
some prefer the Strawberry before the Raspe, yet is not this the judgment of
all; this being accounted more cordial than the Strawberry. And indeed the
smell and taste, me thinks, do insinuate no less unto our senses; which
occasioned most of the Apothecary shops of Germany to be always well
furnished with the sirup of this simple, in imitation of that great Gesner, who
had it in so high an admiration. And although it be accounted as cooling as
Strawberries; yet I incline rather to think it temperate, if not inclining to
some moderate heat. Howsoever, neither of these fruits nourish much, and
moisten apparently, their siccity being very small. This fruit is also esteemed
good against the inflammations of the mouth and tensills, and fluxes of the
belly. If either of these fruits be eaten in excess, they engender Fevers.

Of Mulberries.
The Mulberry, as well as the former fruits, is of two colors red and white,
Ovid. 7. Metam.
the white is of an unsavory taste, and therefore we will leave this tree to
the silke-wormes. The Poet reports, that Mulberries were at the first all
white; but that afterward, they were died red with the blood of the two true
lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe. They are also to be eaten before meals, or with an
empty stomach; although antiquity used them after meals, as witnesses an
ancient Jlle salubres Aestates peraget, qui nigris prandia moris Finierit.
Horat. sermon. 1. sat. 4.
Poet. If eaten with a full stomach, they engender many dangerous diseases.
And because of their cooling and moistning quality, they are best in hot and
choleric bodies, young persons, and the Summer season, and they loosen the
belly also, much moisten the inward parts, are good against thirst, and
roughness of the throat; and by some are thought to provoke urine, especially
our Arabian Physicians; and besides, are thought to clear the blood from all
corruption, for the which cause, some have been of opinion they were good
against the gout. And a learned late Johan. Bruyer de re cibaria lib. 11. ex
P^thernio apud Athenaeum.
Physician relates a story out of an old Author, that in his country, for the
full space of twenty years together, the Mulberrie trees bare no fruit at all;
and that for this cause, during all that time, the gout did so rage, that not
only men and women, children and eunuchs (contrary to Hippocrates his rule) but
even whole flocks of sheep and goats also were so therewith assaulted, that
scarce the third part of them escaped free. But what should be the cause that
Mulberries should either cure, or yet prevent the gout; I confess, I could
never yet find out: and all the color I can find for it, is, that by means
of loosening the belly, they may scowre away superfluous humors, the cause of
this disease; and so may many other simples, far more effectually; so that in
this, it will come short of many others; so far is it from obteining any
prerogative above them. And why may not this learned man's opinon (granting that
this story were yet true) be a fallacy, a non causa pro causa; assigning that
for a true cause which is none at all? Mercur. variar. lect. libr. 1. cap. 4.
Another learned Physician troubles himself much to find out a cause of it;
but is feign to leave it as he found it: even so must we where none is to be
found; as I am of opinion there is none. Of this fruit is made a sirup for sore
throats, called Diamoron. It is best that is made of Mulberries before they be
full ripe, which are both more cooling and astringent, in this case much
requisite. The Blamble-berry.
There is a bramble growing every where wild in the fields, the berries
whereof, before they be full ripe, may be used in defect of the former.

The Goose-berrie was not known, it seems, in ancient times, The
Goose-berrie.
howbeit now with us, in frequent use. Green Goose-berries.
Green Goose-berries are of a cooling and astringent faculty, and in stead of
verjuice are used as a sovereign sauce to diverse sorts of meat: and although
they yield small nourishment to the body, yet are they good to sharpen the
appetite, and against thirst and choler, much resisting putrefaction,
Goose-berries full ripe, Ripe Goose-berries.
are not so cold as the former, yea, rather inclining to a mean temper. The
full ripe are not useful for sauces, and being eaten in abundance, they
engender corrupt humors, and in hot choleric constitutions, are quickly
converted into choler. The unripe eaten raw of hot stomachs, keeping within
compass, will cool the same; but are safelier used, being boiled, and as they
use to speak, scalded, and a little sugar and rose water with them, they prove
a dainty dish for this effect. Of Goose-berries not yet full ripe, our Ladies
and Gentlewomen know how to make a dainty marmalade, and many other things,
fit to refresh the appetite of a weak and languishing stomach, which for
brevities sake I here pass by.

That little berry, which the vulgar call Currants, Ribes, commonly, but falsely
called currants.
although it have no affinity with them, and by the Arabian Physicians, called
Ribes, is of two sorts, both red and black; although the red is most with us
in request, best known, and most effectual, both in Physic and food. It is
indeed, most ordinarily used for physic, although it may well be used also
for sauces. The ripe Ribes agrees much in virtue with the unripe sour
Goose-berry; howbeit I think, it rather exceeds the same. It is cold
moderatly, not exceeding the first degree, but exceeding the same in moisture,
participating of some siccitie, and a notable astringent quality; whereby it
strengthens a weak stomach, and exciteth a weak and languishing appetite.
It is exceeding good as the other, against all fevers, inward inflammations,
malign diseases proceeding of putrefaction of humors: as also in hot
choleric constitutions, and young age. But in old age, cold constitutions,
and diseases in the breast and lungs, it is not so good: the which is also to
be observed in other acide and sharp liquours and fruits. Of it with sugar is
made that composition, commonly called Rob of Ribes.

Of Barberries.
Of the like nature and virtue is that berrie, which is commonly called
Barberries, and in use for the same purposes, as fevers, hot stomachs, fluxes,
etc. They are used both in conserves, and also preserved.

Lib 3. cap. 69 Of Whotts and whortle-berries.
Gerard in his Herball makes mention of several sorts of whorts, or
whortle-berries, black, red and white, all of an astringent faculty, and are
called by a general name Vaccinia. They stop fluxes, and casting of choler,
cool the body; for the which purpose the black be the best.

Bilberries, or Bleaberries.
There is another berry, which, at London, they commonly call Bilberries, and in
the Northermost part of this Island, Bleaberries, well known by the bluish
violet color, wherewith they die the lips and teeth of the eaters. They use
commonly to eat them with cream and milk, whereof I allow not in cold
phlegmatic constitutions and stomachs; nor yet in the aged, as was already
said of strawberries. This is cold and dry, not exceeding the second degree,
and is very astringent, especially before it be full ripe, and therefore may
serve for the aforesaid uses, and will help well the former infirmities. And
this benefit they also bring us, that they may be used in stead of the
outlandish myrtle.

Of Cherries.
Now, from the fruits of shrubs and the like, we proceed to the fruits of taller
trees, (howbeit these next following differ not much from shrubs) beginning
first with the Cherry. Of Cherries there be diverse sorts differing both in
color and in taste; some being of a pleasant, as it were mixed taste betwixt
sweet and and sour; some, again being very sour; and some yet of a loushous
taste, being black in color; the former two red. The best Cherries.
The first is the best, and of safest use. Cherries are cold and moist, howbeit
some more and some less. Those we first mentioned agree best with the
stomach, and provoke appetite, cooling a hot stomach, liver, and like
constitution of body; and are good in hot choleric diseases, Caution
concerning preserved fruits.
and against thirst. Being preserved, their cruditie and superfluous moisture
is well corrected, howbeit in fevers, and choleric complexions, I wish the use
be moderate, as also of all other such preserved fruits, for fear of
increasing choler by reason of the sugar. The sour Cherries are nothing so
good as the former. The Black Cherry.
The black Cherry looseneth the belly more than the other, and is more for the
use of physic than food, not good for the stomach, and are quickly converted
into choler, especially in some bodies. These be the sorts here with us in
greatest request; although there be yet some other sorts, by means of
grafting, which, nevertheless, all partake of these former tastes, some more,
some less; and by consequent, their faculties are accordingly to be judged of.
In France especially, and hotter countries, there are great diversity and
varieties of this, as of diverse other sorts of fruits: and in France, they use
to dry them in an oven, Dried Cherries.
and keep them all the year, and so they bind the belly. They must be eaten
before other meats, as we have said of others already, Cherries, and other such
fruits, when to be eaten.
and would have it understood of Plums, Peaches, and Abricocks after to be
spoken of. And withal, that such fruits best befit hot choleric bodies, the
contrary whereof ^w see commonly practiced: but by this means, women should
have the least there in them, which might, perhaps, prove more prejudicial to
the Physician than to themselves. Cherries are best new gathered, or eaten off
the tree.

Of no other fruit is there greater variety than of plummes: Of Plummes.
and they are of two sorts, either wild, called sloes, or slane; and bullases
all, of a very astringent and binding faculty, used ordinarily for physic,
rather than food. And this is to be understood also of any sour or unripe
plumme. The ordinary and domesticke plummes, are used both when they are newly
ripe, and dried and kept all year. The best Plummes.
They differ both in color, taste and bigness. The damsons of all sorts
(there being both black, yellow, and near unto black; called by the French,
damas vioolet) are esteemed best among plummes. Those of a firm and dry pulp,
and withal somewhat tart, and of a winie taste, as it were, betwixt sweet and
sour; as pear, plummes black and white, date plum etc. are far better than
others, and in my opinion, are nothing inferior, if not superiors, to the
damson. What has been said concerning the tastes of Cherries, and the
answerable faculties, together with the use and convenient time of eating them,
may well and fitly be applied to plummes, that we need not repeat again the
same things. Prunes, or dried plummes sent us from other countries.
In France and Spain, and hot countries, they dry their plummes, from whence
we have them sent hither: and they are either sweet, and come commonly out of
Spain; or else are tarter in taste, and come out of France. All these kinds
we commonly call by the name of prunes, and are all far better and
wholesomer than the others, and are much used of sick people. The sweeter
loosen the belly best, the other cool more in hot diseases, and choleric
constitutions of body.

Peaches and Abricocks differ not much in their faculties, Of Peaches and
Abricocks.
being both apt to putrify in the stomach, and to produce diverse dangerous
putrid fevers, and other diseases. Peaches are of diverse kinds, Peaches of
diverse sor^^.
and in France, especially the South parts thereof, they are very pleasant to
the palate, being many of them of a pleasant winie taste, betwixt sweet and
sour. All of them are somewhat cold, and with all very moist; yet some more,
some less, according to the soil they grow in. In our cold and moist climat,
they are little or nothing worth, as seldom coming to perfect maturity. Some
do advise, to correct their cruditie, to wash them down with a cup of wine,
acccording to the old Verse: Ronsard.
Petre quid est Pesca? Est cum vino nobilis esca.

But by this means the crude juice thereof is quicklier conveied through the
mesaraicke veins, and so distributed through the whole body. Whether wine be to
be used after Peaches.
The better way were to boil them in wine with a little sugar and cinnamon,
and so eat them. Or if they must be eaten raw, let them be first steeped in a
little sweet Canary wine, or muscadine, which will not so speedily pass through
the capillary veins. The kernel within the peach stone.
The kernel within the stones eaten with them, being somewhat hot and dry,
will help to correct their crude and cold moisture. The like may be said of
Abricocks, Cherries and plummes; the kernells within their stones being used
after the same manner. And what is said here concerning the use of wine with
Peaches, is likewise to be understood of Abricocks and all other such fruits as
abound in such cold and crude waterish moistures.

The Abricocke.
The Abricocke, with us is far better than the Peach, both in regard it
atteineth to the full ripeness in the heat of Summer; as likewise, The
kernells of Abricockes and Peaches kill worms.
because it is of a more firm and solid substance. They are to be eaten before
meals, sparingly. The kernells in the stones are far better than themselves,
and open inward obstructions.

CHAP. XVIJ.
of Grapes, Rasins, Currants (properly so called) Figs and Dates; and of
Apples, Pears, Quinces, Oranges, Citrons, Lemmons, and Pomegranats, Services,
Medlars and Corneilles: of Walnuts, Haslenut, Filberds, Almonds bitter and
sweet, Chestnuts, Pineapple, and Fisticknnut.

IN the beginning of this chapter, we will take these pleasant and delectable
fruits following, beginning with that so noble fruit, the Grape. Of Grapes.
Grapes, if they have atteined to perfect maturity, and be sweet in taste, do
nourish and fatten the body, howbeit they engender wind and crudities, and the
flesh procured by that nourishment is soft and foggie, and not firm and solid.
Bruyerm. de re cibaria libr. 11. cap. 10. ex Plutarch. Probl. 39.
The ancient Greeks therefore did inhibite, that Grapes should not be tasted
before the Aequinox in Autumn after mid September, and so the body might by
this means be least endangered. Sweet Grapes are somewhat hot in faculty, and
loosen the belly, yet some more than other; and the best Grape is that which
brings forth the best wine. That which is called the Muscadine Grape, is
sweet and pleasant to the palate. Best Grapes.
They are much better when they are kept a great while after the gathering: as
in France, they will keep them until the next Spring, and so they lose all
crudity and superfluous moisture. The sour Grapes are the worst to eat,
ingendring no good humors within the body, and wrong concoction; and always
the sowrer and harsh in taste, Their use.
the worse they are for ordinary eating; howbeit made into verjuce, as the
French use green unripe Grapes, they may help a dull appetite, and cool
inward hot distempers. Most of our Grapes here in England, seldom atteine to
perfect maturity, and therefore, The best way of use.
do for the most part offend the body, especially phlegmatic and cold
complexions and stomachs. But, if they be boiled and sweetened with sugar, and
some cinnamon, or the like added, they will not be offensive. They are to be
eaten with an empty stomach.

Raisins, which are nothing else but Grapes dried, Of Raisins.
are far better than any of the former, yielding a good and wholesome
nourishment to the body, especially those that come out of Spain, sweet and
fair and pulpous, Raisins of the Sun.
which we commonly call Raisins of the Sun; and are very good for the liver,
lungs, and the infirmities of the same, and of the breast windpipe; and withal
loosen the belly, the stones taken out. Other raisins that are neither so sweet
nor fat, great and pulpous, how f^^^e soever they are inferior to the other in
taste, etc. so far do they also come short of them in their alimentall
faculty, and loosening the belly, as being more astringent, and less
nourishing.

There is yet another small Raisin, brought unto us here ready dried, Of
Currants.
out of the Straits, called Currants, and is in very great request in all parts
of this Kingdom. They are of a temperate quality, participating of some heat,
and are of good nourishment, a good friend to the stomach, exciting appetite,
and nourish well, especially the red. But let a moderation, as in all other
things, so especially in those sweet meats be used, which, by too much intising
thy taste, may make thee at length find by experience, that sweet meat has
sour sauce. I speak this the rather, for that I find a very great excess in
this kind, A great excess in the use of Currants, and other sweet meats.
through this whole Kingdom. The teeth, as they make the first onset, so are
they often accordingly rewarded for their pains.

As other fruits, so do Figgs differ in their faculties, according to their
age. New ripe Figs are not so hot as the dry barreled Figs; Of Figs.
they nourish well, but withal engender crude and flatuous humors in the
body, being therefore enemies to the wind-collicke, and other flatulent
diseases; and the flesh they engender is spongious, foggie, and not firm and
solid; but withal loosen the belly, which makes some part of amends. But this
fruit is not very frequent here in England, it seldom coming to any maturity:
The virtue of Fig.
but dry barrelled Figs are with us here in frequent use. They are to good
purpose used in pectorall diseases, being of an abstersive faculty: they
cleanse also by a diuretic virtue, the passages of urine; and by old Jn libiis
de morbi^ mulierum pasiim and alibi.
Hippocrates, are much commended for the infirmities of the womb, where
cleansing is required, as he witnesses in many places of his works: they
expel likewise serosities and superfluous humors from the inward parts to the
circumference; useful therefore to expel pox, measells, and such like
venomous matter to the skin: And for this cause much used. They are esteemed
to further the itch, and often lice also. Let those that abound in choler, be
sparing in their use, lest they find in a short space those humors get the
mastery over them. They are far better for the phlegmatic and old age, than
for the younger sort and hot complections.

The fruit of the Palm Tree, called Dates, Of Dates.
is sent us from Syria and Palestina, which are the best: this fruit,
especially the sweet fat Date, nourishes much, and corroborateth and
strengthens nature, is of a hot and astringent faculty, and is very good in
all weaknesses and fluxes, boiled in broths and liquid substances, and are not
to be eaten raw. The green ripe Dates are moister and colder, and yet neither
exceeding in heat: it is good for the breast, and no enemy to the stomach, and
some say, good to provoke urine. But such as are subject to the headache, or
fear obstructious, let them be sparing in the use thereof.

Of fruits used after meals.

Of Apples.

Differances and variety of Apples.


Having spoken of such fruits as are used before meals, now proceed we to such
are ordinarily used after; beginning first with the apple. Now of Apples, there
are as many sorts, and as great variety as of any other fruit whatsoever: their
differences are diverse, both in regard of substance, color, In regard of the
substance.
taste and duration. As for substance, some are of more firm and solid
substance; and some again of a softer. The firmer in substance are the best
for use, and will keep longer: as the Pippin, Pearemaine, Harvie-apple, In
regard of the taste.
etc. Again, they differ not a little in the taste; some being sweet, some
sour; some mixed, and partaking sometimes more of one than another; some again
are insipid, Their faculties are also answerable: Their faculties or virtues.
the sweet partake of some small heat; the sour are cold; the mixed, of mixed
faculties, more or less, as they incline more to the one or the other. Insipid
Apples.
The insipid are full of a crude, superfluous and unconcocted moisture, Sweet
Apples.
and therefore worst for use, being very windy, and bad for such as are subject
to wind: the sweeter and firmer the substance is, the more they nourish, Apples
of a mixed taste betwixt sweet and sour.
and are harder of digestion: the middle taste, betwixt sweet and sour, is the
best, and agrees best with the stomach; as Russetings, Sour Apples.
Queen-apples, Pearemaine, Pippins, etc. and these are also most cordial and
useful in physic. The sour, although they nourish less, yet are they more
proper for hot and choleric bodies; but worse for phlegmatic and aged
people. It is also to be observed, both in apples and other fruits, The best
way of use.
that for the most part, they are not so good eaten raw, as otherwise; But
especially when they are new ripe, or before, worst of all. Quodled Apples.
Raw Apples before they be ripe, if used, are best quadled, adding afterward
some rose water and sugar, which cools young hot, and choleticke bodies: but
it comes most commonly to pass, that the contrary constitutions, women I
mean, have often the better share. But in truth, if reason might bear rule,
their share should be least, especially (as they often use) to add cream to
them. Apples are best, that are suffered to come to maturity, naturally, and
not forced by art, laying them in straw or hay to mellow, When best to be eaten
raw.
which is no right and proper maturation. They are best to be eaten raw in
winter, and afterward; but especially of young people, hot and choleric
bodies. It is no bad custom to use with them Carroway Gomfits, as in many
places they use to eat them. And roasted and eaten with sweet Fennel seeds,
is a very good and wholesome way to correct their flatuous faculty: But I
advise those that love their health, to beware of raw Apples, or other fruit
before they be ripe; and after observing these former directions, they shall
find some benefit thereby.

O^ Pears.
Of Pears, as before we said of Apples, are diverse and sundry sorts, differing
likewise in substance, taste, color, and greatness. As we said before of
Apples, so may we here apply to the taste of Pears, that the sweetest are the
hottest, howbeit they are none of them tart as Apples. Pears are esteemed more
windy than Apples, Faculties of Pears.
and withal, of an astringent faculty, and less durable; being for the most
part to be spent in Summer, abounding with a crude and superfluous moisture,
the cause of their short continuance. The Warden the best
The Warden is of the firmest and solidst substance of all others, and
therefore the best. It is not to be eaten raw, being then hard of digestion,
and ingendring crude and evil humors within the body. Baked or roasted they
become far better, and a wholesome food, in sickness or in health. The
custom of baking them, stuck with cloves and cinnamon, is very commendable,
where rose water and sugar is commonly added. The Bruyerm. de re (...) ^rial^.
i^. ex Athe^. (...)
ancient Greeks were wont to bring Pears to the table in water, that by this
means, the guests might choose the ripest, which would swim on the top of the
water. In France they dry Pears in an oven, and so keep them all the year,
and then they are not so windy, Dried Pears.
but very good against all fluxes.

Quinces are also in no small request, as well for physic as for food, Of
Quinces.
and are of an astringent faculty, and somewhat cold and dry, and are not to be
eaten raw; they are so hard of digestion, that a strong stomach will hardly be
able to overcome them: and therefore they are commonly either baked or roasted.
They are good to strengthen a weak stomach. Being used before meals they bind
the belly; but eaten after, they loosen the same, and repress fumes and
vapors ascending up toward the head; and therefore to strengthen the
stomach, and further concoction, this is the best way of use: they are used
both preserved, in marmalades, red and white, etc. of which I shall not need to
speak, our Gentlewomen in the country, every where being so well acquainted
with all these preparations. Besides the premises, there are some other
fruits which are sometimes, howbeit seldom, used as food, and yet more as
physic, and these are Medlars and Services, cold and dry, Of Medlars, Services
and Corneille^.
and of an astringent faculty, and therefore to be used after, and not before
meals: they must be soft before they be eaten: their green juice is most
effectual in fluxes. There is yet another fruit, or berry partaking of the
same faculty, commonly called a Corneille.

Before we pass from those kinds of fruits, we will make mention of some
outlandish fruits, in no small request, both in the Kitchen and in physic;
howbeit I am not ignorant, that they are rather to be reckoned among sauces
than otherwise; and these are the Orange, Lemmon, or Citron and Pomegranat,
which last is rather appropriate for physic.

The Orange differs in taste, some being sweet, some sour, Of Orange^,
some more and some less, and so their faculties differ accordingly. And the
find and the seeds differ from the pulpe or juice, Difference of Oranges
acording to the taste.
being far hotter than the sweetest Orange, and yet the sweet partake of some
heat; the sour again cold, and the sowrer the colder. The sour are best for
the stomach, used with any meat: the sweet is no wise fit for this purpose.
The sour and tart Orange being cold and dry, is very good for young hot
choleric bodies, and very cooling in burning fevers and hot diseases; but
care must be had in the diseases of the breast, that neither this, nor any other
acide or sharp things be unadvisedly used; such things being utter enemies to
those parts; and withal, they bind the belly, for the which cause
circumspection must be had, even in that regard, where sugar must sometime
qualify the excess. Those that are of a mean, betwixt those two extremes of
sour and sweet, are the sit for use, and will agree well with the
stomach.

Of Lemmons and Citrons.
The Lemmon is much of the nature of the sour Orange, but that it is tarter,
and of a more cutting and attenuating faculty, exceeding good for hot
choleric constitutions, and very cooling and cordial in all burning fevers,
and a great enemy to all putrefaction; and for this cause, singular good
against pestilent and contagious fevers: the excessive aciditie thereof may be
corrected with sugar; and for the sick, we use with good success the sirup
made of the juice thereof: and the whole pulpe of this and the Citron (which, I
think, differ little but in form, howbeit some think the Citron more
cordial) are preserved for cordial uses. The rind of all three preserved, or
candit with sugar, The rind of these fruits.
is good to strengthen a weak stomach, and comfort the heart. The feeds of
Citrons and Lemmons are also very cordial, howbeit both these and the rind are
hot, and the juice very cold, as has been said already.

Of the Pomegranat.
And although the Pomgranat, taking its denomination either from the multitude
of grains, or the country Granada in Spain, be used commonly for physic,
rather than food; yet speaking of the others, we will say a word or two of it
also, some of them being also by some used sometimes for sauces: they are of
three sorts, sweet, sour, and of a mixed or winie taste, betwixt both: the mixed
is the best, and most useful for a weak stomach, Of three sorts.
the sweet being no wise useful to this end: the sour Pomgranat is cooling
and drying, and of an astringent faculty; yet not so much as the Lemmon. What
has been said of the Lemmon may be applied to this fruit, the juice I mean,
with some qualification, the acidity not being so great, and by consequent the
effects from thence proceeding, being more remiss: the rind of it is very
astringent, and therefore much used against all fluxes, as also in putrid and
foul ulcers. The flower is also used for astriction, and boiled in decoctions
for this same purpose.

Of Nuts.
Now we proceed to the several sorts of Nuts in most ordinary use for food and
physic. All such fruits then that are covered with hard shells, we commonly
call by the name of Nut; and amongst all these, the Wall-nut, or Walsh-nut,
bears away the bell. The Wall-nut being new gathered is the best for use, Of
Walnuts.
being of a temperate faculty, howbeit after becoming older, it grows
hotter; and afterward being long kept, it becomes oilie, and then is not to
be used: All Wall-nuts are accounted hurtful for the pectorall parts,
especially the elder they are. Old Wall-nuts require strong stomachs to digest
them. They have even before Galens time been esteemed as a good antidote
against poison, who also makes mention of that famous antidote made of this
same Nut with Rue and Salt; and he gives it also an astringent faculty.
Claudius Deodatus Panth gia^. lib. 1. cap. 3. 1^.
A late Writer gives it some commendation in furthering women's menstruous
flux. They preserve them ordinarily in France and Italy, about mid-sommer
before they be ripe, cutting off their green coat, and after boiling them
while they be tender, sticking them with cinnamon and cloves, and afterward
preserving them with sugar, and so they become very comfortable for the
stomach, and good for the heart. The oil of walnuts is not only used for
lights in lamps, and by painters for vernice; but is of a great use also for
dressing of meats, and in many parts of France, supplieth the room of butter,
and is ordinarily used in sallets: and in my opinion it is better than butter,
and wholesomer for use. Lib, 2. ca^. 14^.
Dioscorides holds this nut hurtful for the head and stomach, to be ill of
digestion, and hurtsfull for the cough; which must be understood of them when
they are old, as has been said already. The shadow of this tree is hurtful
to them that shall sit under it in Summer, and thought to be called Nux a
nocendo, from hurting. Nuts according to our Arabian Physicians, are chiefly
to be eaten after fish, according to that trivial verse.

Post pisces nux sit, post carnes caseus adsit. And this I think in regard of
their astringent and drying faculty. Of Hasell-nuts and Filberts.


The Hasell-nut is not so good as the former, hard of digestion, especially
being any thing old, and hurts the breast and lungs, and therefore sparingly
to be used, especially of weak stomachs. They are best used when they are
young, and newly gathered. When they are old, they are of a terrestrious
substance, hot and dry, whereas young and new gathered, they are far moister,
and rather temperate than hot. The best are those we call Filberds, especially
those that have red skins. The astriction I, think, of all nuts proceeds
chiefly from the skin.

The Almond both bitter and sweet is reckoned among nuts. Of Almonds.
The bitter are for the use of Physic, and not for food. Sweet Almonds are
good for the breast and lungs, they fatten and nourish much, espeally their
cream or milk. They are of an opening and abstersive or cleansing faculty,
and withal participate of some narcoticke virtue, Virtues of Almonds.
whereby they further sleep, and send many vapors up to the head, whereby in
some weaker dispositions headache is sometimes procured. They are rather
temperate, than of any great heat; howbeit the new ripe Almonds are much
moister, and somewhat colder. If they be very old and withered, they are not
good to be eaten, but only for oil. The use of Almond^
The older they are, the harder they are of digestion, and offend the stomach
more. Blanched, their skins being taken off, and eaten with rose water and
sugar, they are easilier concocted, moisten and nourish more; but eaten too
liberally procure headache. They use also to eat them with Raisins in Lent and
some other times. The younger they be, and before they be full ripe the moister
they are, and the more appropriate for hot and dry constitutions, and worse for
phlegmatic; Oil of ^ sweet Almonds.
the riper may be indifferently used of any age or constitution. The oil of
sweet Almonds is exceeding good taken inwardly, being exceeding good in
infirmities of the lungs, helping gently to concoct and expectorat that which
was descended upon those parts; but especially it is good for young children
with a little sugar candy for this purpose. It is also exceeding good in
outward pains and griefs, being of an anodyne faculty, by reason of that
temperate discussing and concocting faculty wherewith it is endowed.

Of the Pineapple or Nut.
There is another Apple or nut, call it as thou will commonly called a
Pineapple, which is much used in pectorall diseases, and therefore used in
compositions for that end and purpose, being good to cut, cleanse and
expectorate tough and Phlegmatic matter out of the pipes of the lungs. These
kernels are moderately hot, and somewhat moister, yielding good nourishment to
the body, howbeit hard of digestion, and no good friend to the stomach. The
newest are the best, and easiliest digested. But because this is not a food
frequent with us, and not every where easy to come by, nor yet much used for
food, I leave it here.

Fisticke-nut.
Fisticke or Pistach nuts are more used in Physic than in food, and are much
of the faculty of the former, and are very wholesome, good for the stomach,
help obstructions of the liver, are good against consumed or weakened and
wasted bodies, and esteemed forcible to procure lust, good to cleanse the
kidneys, and strengthen the same. They are better for the aged, cold and
phlegmatic constitutions, being somewhat hotter than the pineapple kernels.
This nut is sent us out of Syria, Persia and Arabia, and grows also in some
places of Italy and other countries, howbeit the best and most we have come
from those parts.

Of Chestnuts.
There rests yet one Nut, which some rank among the glands, which we commonly
call a Chestnut, which are not very frequent with us, especially in most
places. This nut is thought to be very nourishing: but it is hard of
digestion, and the nourishment thereof is but gross, and fittest for strong
rusticall bodies: This Nut binds the belly, stops fluxes of the belly,
breeds obstructions, and hurts the head. They are used in many places of
France for a desert after dinner or supper, either boiled or roasted, together
with other fruits. Bread of Chestnuts.
And what they can spare from their own use they bestow on their hogs, which
do exceedingly fatten them. In some parts of France where they abound, and
other provision, come especially, is scant; as in the country of Limosin,
Perigort, and some others, the country people make bread of them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the several sorts of flesh, especially of four footed beasts, with their
appurtenances and parts.

OF all food flesh is most agreeable to the nature of man, and breeds most
abundant nourishment to the body. Division and differences of flesh.
Now flesh is of two sorts; either of foure-footed beasts or of foul. The
flesh again of foure-footed beasts differs in quality, not only one kind
from an other; but even the same kind from it self, according to the age, etc.
Differences according to several circumstances.
And of foure-footed beasts some are wild and some are tame, which makes some
difference in their alimentary faculty. The tame are of a more nourishing
faculty than the wild: and among them the male of such as be gelded is commonly
better than the female of the same kind: and so is that of middle age
wholesomer, than that which is either very old or very young And again, among
the young, some are better than other; as young veale (providing it be not too
young) is better than lamb or pigge. Besides, very fat meat cloieth the
stomach, Too fat meat is not good.
and quickly overthrows the appetite; howbeit the lean of fat meat is better
than that which is altogether lean; but the mean betwixt both is the best.
Difference according to the preparation.
There is again some difference in regard of the preparation: for roasted flesh
and fried is harder of digestion; yet nourishes better, and is drier than that
which is boiled. And this is still to be understood of one and the same kind:
as roasted mutton is drier than boiled mutton, etc. Baked meat. Salted meat.
Baked in an oven, smothered and suffocated within picrust is esteemed for
health the worst of all others. Salted meat, and afterward hung up in the
smoke, is far worse than fresh meat, and ingendreth melancholy, and is very
hard of digestion, howbeit a good shooing horn for a cup of good liquor:
although beef and porke a little powdered are good and wholesome food for good
stomachs, and wholesomer than altogether fresh. And the moister the flesh is,
the more days may it endure to be thus corned or powdered: and it is properly
for days, or a week or two at most, not for months or years to be salted;
I mean for ordinary use, and wholesomest diet. But now we will proceed to the
several sorts of flesh, and will first begin with Hogs flesh, for the
likeness and resemblance it has to man's flesh, and for the high commendations
the ancient Physicians gave of this flesh.

Hogs flesh of a middle age, neither too fat nor too lean, Of Hogs flesh,
a little salted, has always been accounted one of the best nourishers
amongst all other forts of flesh. By reason of the superfluous moisture it is
better roasted than boiled. It is best for strong stomachs, and such as use
exercise; but not so fit for students, and such as lead a sendentary life, and
aged people. Bores flesh, of a middle age, reasonable fat, Bo^es flesh or Brawn.
and killed in a convenient season, to a good stomach is no evil food,
especially accompanied with a cup of muscadine, as is the common custom. But
in my opinion it were far better to use it, when there were fewer other
dishes on the table, than, as is the ordinary custom, to use it at the
beginning of great feasts. A pigge, the younger it be, Of Pigges.
the worse it is for health, and ingendreth more glutinous and and phlegmatic
humors, and by consequent is a great furtherer of obstructions; and is not to
be eaten unless it be of some indifferent age: and is the best way of
dressing according to the common custom, to roast it, and make a sauce with
sage and currants: and if the skin were not eaten, it would be far easier to
digest by a weak stomach; although I am not ignorant, that this is ordinarily
of highest esteem. Pigges, in regard of their moisture are best for dry and
chelericke bodies. And for the same reason, it is not so good a dish for
phlegmatic people, moist bodies, and old age.

Of Beef.

^ de alim facul. lib. 3. This assertion of Galens must be understood of lean
old beef.


Next we are to speak of beef, which has been by Galen branded with an
aspersion of an evil meat, and ingendring gross and melancholicke humors, and
so has raised an evil report upon this noble dish, so useful for every man.
This flesh, as diverse others, differs according to age. Beef that is young,
indifferent fat, and a little corned, either of an ox or Cow, is very good and
wholesome meat for any indifferent good stomach, a savory nourishment, and
with the which, the stomach will long agree, without any loathing. It is best
that exceeds not two years or three at most. Old Beef, especially long
salted, is both harder of digestion, and ingendreth gross melancholic humors,
being no wise fit for choice weak stomachs, students and such as lead
sendentary lives. And therefore that which is called Steer or Heyfer-beefe is
the best. Besides, this is yet to be observed, that the younger the beef be,
the better it may be roasted; and the older better to be boiled. Very old
tough lean beef, is only for strong laboring people, that in a manner can
turn Iron into nourishment; especially Bull-beefe, which is the worst of all
others.

Of Veale
Veale being indifferent fat, and of a reasonable age, above a month at least,
is a meat of very good nourishment, and yields not to kid it self, how
highly soever commended. The best way of preparation is to roast it, howsoever
it be also often boiled, especially with bacon, which to a good stomach may
not be hurtful; howbeit a weak one may therewith be offended. Veale is
especially good for those who are not of a very moist and phlegmatic
constitution of body, that which is very young, especially within the month,
is in no case to be used, Very young Veale is not to be used.
if we either regarded health or policy, and the good of the commonwealth.
Otherwise, Veale, such as we have described it, is a very good wholesome
nourishment, and is of easy digestion, not being burdensome to the stomach at
all. And as for excellent good Beef and Veale, there is no country in the
world that can parallel, far less exceed our beeves and veale here in
England; English Beeves surpass others.
whatsoever some talk of Hungary and Poland.

Goats flesh yields no good nourishment to the body, Of Goats.
but rather a tough and melancholic: for the which cause they are not with us
in use. Their young ones, called kids are notwithstanding every where in very
great request, and yield to the body a very good and wholesome nourishment, and
nothing so moist and excrementitious as Lamb. The Arabian Physicians did so
highly esteem this flesh, Of Kids.
that they would have it far exceed any other. We are content to give it the
due commendation, but yet we will not yield too far to superlative
comparisons. They are best in the Spring and beginning of Summer.

Lamb, if of an indifferent age, and not too young, Lambs flesh.
is a good and wholesome food. It may seem strange perhaps to some of our
dainty palats, that I should insert this, not too young, it being now
ordinarily accounted the best that is youngest; and many great folks think
nothing of that which is common, and ordinary people easily may come by. And
therefore the youngest sucking Lambs are by them in highest account and
estimation. But by their leaves they are far deceived that so think: For
being so young they are very moist; Very young sucking Lambs are hurtful to
health.
for the which cause they engender crude phlegmatic humors, wherewith they
pester the stomachs, and bodies of such persons, apt enough of themselves, by
reason of ease, idleness and dainty fare, to accumulate superfluous humors.
This flesh would not at least be eaten before it be six weeks, or two months
old, if not more. And therefore it were a very good policy, if neither Lambs
nor Calves were killed so young as most commonly they are. And as such flesh is
hurtful, so to the phlegmatic constitutions especially, and old people, and
such as are of a moist constitution of body, and is best for choleric hot
bodies, and in the midst of Summer.

Mutton of a middle age, especially of weather, Of Mutton. Weather mutton.
not above two years old, reasonable fat, is a very good nourishment for any
age or sex, and is very wholesome for the body of man. Ewes mutton obtains
the next place in goodness, howbeit it is somewhat moister. Ewes mutton.
Rams mutton.
Rams mutton is worst of all other, and very old and tough mutton is hard of
digestion, and only fit for extraordinary strong stomachs: especially for
laboring people. And it is here to be observed, that the greatest, and fattest
pease-fed muttons, and in rankest pastures, are not the wholesomest for
ordinary food, howsoever most profitable for the masters purse, muttons of a
middle size, and feeding on shorter commons, as the Fuge pabula lata. Virgilius
in Georg.
Poet well described them, are the daintiest, and wholesomest for food.

After our discourse of tame and domesticke beasts, Of Venison. Fallow and red
decre.
we come now to the wild; and here in the first place, we must say something
of our Dear, both Red and Fallow, which we, as the French also, call commonly
venison. All venison is thought to engender melancholy, and to be very hard of
digestion. Young Fallow-deere, reasonable fat, Young Fallow deer a reasonable
wholesome dish.
in in my opinion is a very good wholesome dish, and ingendreth not melancholy,
more than a piece of good young tender beef. It is commonly attended with a cup
of claret, for the opinion of hard digestion. It is a custom to bake it, Baked
venison.
enclosed within a thick crust, the eating much whereof, I think, does more
hurt to the body, and more offends the stomach than the Venison it self.
And again, I think, if the Venison be too fat, it more offends the
stomach, especially being hot, than by any evil quality in the flesh it
self. That which is not too fat, nor yet too lean, is the best. It is
commonly excessively seasoned with salt and pepper; and in my opinion,
oftentimes too much. Red-dee^e (...) to the former.
Red-deere, I confess, is far harder of digestion, and cannot be freed from
the former aspersion of breeding melancholy; and therefore had need of all
helps of correction and preparation, and would be eaten but sparingly like
cheese. And such Venison is the better and tenderer, Erroneous opinion.
the more it be hunted before it be killed. It is the opinion or some, that
Venison is never good until it be moldy, and may be found out by the smell.
But I love not to dine with so good husbands, that will keep their meat so
long till none can eat of it. And I wish every one that love their health to
beware of meddling with such putrid moldy stuff, and let them feed on
wholesomer food.

Of Hares flesh.
Hares flesh was among the ancients in so high esteem, that some ascribed unto
it the pre-eminence above all other flesh, as witnesses the Inter quadrupedes
gloria prima lepus Martial.
Poet. But certainly he was unfit to be a Physician, who was no better skilled
in the nature of diet: for certain it is, this is a very hard flesh, and of no
good and wholesome nourishment, being very hard and dry, and therefore hard of
digestion, and ingendring melancholy, and the seldomer they be used, the better
it is for health. The fattest are the best, Leverets.
and are better boiled than roasted; and being baked with store of butter, or
well larded, they are the moister. Young Leverets are far better, and of easier
digestion.

The Rabbet or Cony
The Rabbet or Cony has some affinity with the Hare, and is somewhat dry in
substance, especially the old ones. But young rabbets, providing they be not too
young, are a good and wholesome dish, in sickness and in health.

Wild Swines flesh.
Wild Swines flesh is esteemed better than the tame; by reason it is nothing
near so moist and excrementitious: but it requires a good stomach to digest
it. Hedge-hogge.


In many places of Germany the country people use commonly to eat Hedge, Of the
parts of beasts
hogs, as we do other food, which are pleasant to the palate, strengthen the
stomach, loosen the belly, and provoke urine.

Before we leave foure-footed beasts, we must yet say something of some parts
of beasts. Among all the parts of the beast, the musculous or fleshy part is
that which affords the best, and most laudable nourishment, Fat of all sorts
as being of a most temperate faculty. Now there be diverse other parts, both
inward and outward, much declining from this golden mediocrity. In the first
place, all manner of fat of beasts yield but little, and that but bad
nourishment to the body of man, swimming on the top of other meats, provoking a
loathing to the stomach, hindering concoction; and therefore hurtful for
weak, moist and nauseous stomachs. It is used more for seasoning than for
food, and helps well dry meats. The fat of Hogs and Geese is of all other
the moistest.

The brains of foure-footed beasts are of a clammy and glutinous substance,
howbeit not altogether cold, Brains.
and engender the like nourishment, are hard of digestion, overthrow the
appetite, eaten especially in any abundance. And the moister the creature is,
the moister commonly are the brains. And yet Calves brains, as also of Pigges
are with us in great esteem; as likewise of Rabbets, Preparation of brains
which are not so moist as the former. It is good to use with them, when they
are used, pepper and vinegar, sage and such hot and dry herbs. Such food, as
also of the eyes and other glutinous, cold and clammy nourishment, do best
befit young and hot choleric bodies and dry constitutions. The Eyes.


The eyes are of a clammy and glutinous substance also, howbeit not so much as
the brain, and are fit for the like constitutions; and the fatter the beast
is, the more clammy and glutinous the eyes are, as of fat Calves.

The marrow is better than any of the former, The M^r^ow
and being used with moderation* it nourishes much, and strengthens and
fortifieth nature, and is good for the throat and pectorall parts. Immoderately
taken, especially by a weak and moist stomach, it overthrows the appetite,
and overturneth the stomach.

The Tongue yields a good and laudable nourishment to the body, and easy of
digestion, being of a thin and spongious nature. The (...),
The nourishment thereof is more or less according to the nature of the beast
whereunto it did belong. A little corned I hold them good; but salted and hung
up to dry, they are best to commend a cup of good drink, and make drink
descend more freely.

Hogs cheeks use to be kept soused in sour drink and fried, Cheeks.
howbeit they yield no good nourishment, are hard of digestion, as being of a
clammy and glutinous substance. And so these external parts, as the ears also
and the feet partake much of this nature, Ears, snowt, feet.
and therefore it is not amiss, that such things are fried with onions and
mustard used with them. The like may be said of other beasts, which are also
better or worse according to the nature of the beast.

The bellies of beasts are much of the same nature, The Belly or Tripes.
yielding a like nourishment, and are hard of digestion; and therefore we eat
tripes with mustard. A Calves belly is better than others, and that also of a
sheep. But of strong stomachs of laboring men, and such as take great pains,
neither this nor any food lightly comes amiss.

The heart is of a hard digestion, and requires a strong stomach, The Heart
especially of elder beasts; but yet yields indifferent good nourishment.

The Lungs are of a spongious substance, nourish little, and that nourishment
they yield, is but phlegmatic, and not of any laudable condition. The Lungs.


That Livers, especially of beasts of full age, are of hard digestion, Liver.
and engender gross humors, and are apt to breed obstructions, howbeit such
food nourishes much. Livers of younger beasts, especially when they suck, are
far better, and of a moister substance; and yet are not free from offending
weak and tender stomachs, and withal from ingendring obstructions.

And what account can we make of the Spleen, the cisterne, Milt
and as it were, the very magazin of meclancholick blood, but that it will
produce such a nourishment.

The Kidneys.
The Kidneys are of a very hard digestion, yea harder than the Liver it self,
and ingendreth no good nourishment: yet the kidneys of the youngest beasts are
the best, and that of a fat Calfe especially. And the older the beast is, the
worse they are.

The Vdder.
The Vdder of a young Cow, if it be not too fat, although somewhat hard of
digestion, yet to a strong stomach, it will not be offensive. It is not indeed
so good for weak stomachs, and phlegmatic constitutions. And all Vdders are
inferior to other flesh, and the worst are those of elder beasts; and therefore
the best is to use them but sparingly.

Stones.
The Stones engender a thick and gross flatuous blood, and nourish well; yet
of the younger beasts they are best.

Blood of beast.
Blood of beasts ministers but a gross and course nourishment to the body; yet
some better and some worse. Bulls blood was a poison among the ancients. The
blood of an Ox or Cow, howbeit in some place they make use of, yet in most
places it is altogether rejected. Hogs blood is now in greatest request in
most countries, as being the sweetest, and pleasing the palate best. And because
Blood is of a gross and course nourishment, and withal somewhat dry; it is
therefore a good custom to mingle with those puddings some fat of the same
beast, some salt and pepper, and penniroyall, or other hot herbs, which help
well other defects.

Of Milk and what it is.
There are some things that come from beasts, yet being no part of the same, as
Milk, whereof is made Butter and Cheese. Milk is nothing else save a second
concocting and refining of the Blood, drawn up into the dugs, and there by
virtue of natural heat refined, and by a proper faculty of that part,
converted into a white milkie substance: and therefore, according to the
quality of the Blood, so is the milk also. Best Milk.
Milk seems to be temperate in regard of heat or cold; but withal very
moist. That milk is best which is of a sound beast, and that both for whole
and sick persons, and that feeds in good pastures. To nourish well, milk
must be new milkt, white and of a good smell; of a mean substance betwixt
thick and thin; sweet in taste, and free from either sowrenesse, bitterness
or saltness; and the beast should be of a middle age, and feeding upon green
grass, and in the Spring, or beginning of Summer. Such milk ingendreth a good
and laudable Blood, and very fit to nourish the body. Now for what bodies it is
best, together with the manner of the right use, shall hereafter appear. In
milk there is a triple substance observed: the first a thin waterie
substance, called the ferositie or whey, In Milk a triple substance
observable. Whey. Butter,
being of good use both in sickness and in health; and is of a cooling
faculty. There is another which swimmeth on the top, called the cream of the
milk, being the most airie part of the same; which after it is separated from
all the other parts, is called Butter; and serves us for the same uses that
oil does in hotter countries, being hot and moist: and moderately used, it
agrees well with the stomach, looseneth the belly, Cheese.
and is good against diverse diseases of the breast. The third part of milk is
that which is most terrestrious; the which being pressed out, and quite
separated from the other two substances, we commonly call Cheese, the which is
somewhat cooler than Butter, yet less or more, according as it partaketh more
or less of the substance thereof.

Cheese binds the belly, is harder of digestion, ingendreth obstructions, and
is a great enemy to the stone: Cheese is distinguished according to the milk
it is made of, the age, the art is used in the making. Of all others that which
is new, somewhat salted, Best Cheese.
and made of good Cowes milk, ingendreth the best nourishment; and moderately
now and then used will do no harm to any. My meaning is, of such as have not
the cream much skimmed off: for such as are made of milk much skimmed, are
far drier, unwholesomer, and less worth than the others. But of this, and
other things concerning this purpose, more hereafter in the diet of the
diseased.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Foul both tame and wild, their several sorts, as also of parts of
Fowls, and of Eggs.

THe flesh of Fowls is of easier digestion, has a speedier passage through the
body; but yields the less nourishment than the flesh of foure-footed beasts.
In all sorts of fowls, Foul best for use according to its usage.
they are best that exceed not a year in age, To make them tender, if need be,
they are to be hung by the heels two or three days; providing always they
hang not till they smell.

Among all our tame foul, our Cocks, Hens, Capons, and young Chickens, are
with us, not without good reason, in greatest request, and engender a good and
laudable nourishment, useful and very wholesome for the body. Of Capon^.
A young fat Capon of all others is the best, and yields best nourishment,
and is easy of concoction. Next unto them are Hens indifferently fat and
young, Hens.
yielding little unto Capons for good and wholesome nourishment.

Chickens are very good, light, Of Chickens.
wholesome and nourishing meat in sickness and in health. They are good for
weak stomachs, and such as lead a sedentarie life, and use but little
exercise. It is not good to use them too young, as is the ordinary custom,
having hatched unto themselves this false and erroneous opinion, that the
younger any thing is, the btter it is in diet. And because such things are not
for the most part so common, therefore partly for this same reason, When best
for use.
and partly out of an affected singularity, many are contented to dwell still
in this error. But when they come to be best, to wit, little pullets, then do
our palate-pleasers esteem them nothing worth.

Of Cocks.
Cocks are inferior to any of the former, yield worse and less nourishment,
but are hotter than any of the other, and loosen the belly.

Turkies.
Turkies of a middle age, and reasonable fat, are a good wholesome nourishing
food, and little inferior to the best Capon, especially the breast and
fore-parts, and breeds very good nourishment. But their fat is somewhat
fulsome.

Caution concerning cramming of tame foul.
And here it is to be observed as a caution in all our tame foul, that it were
far better to let them feed themselves with good grain, then to cramme them
with dough, close cubd up, as is the custom. It is true that thus they prove
often the fatter: but too much fat makes them too fulsome, and nothing so
wholesome.

The Peacocke.
The Peacocke is of a very hard, solid and firm flesh, and hard of digestion,
being of a hot and dry substance, ingendring gross and melancholicke humors,
and therefore need a strong stomach. After they are killed, they are best to
hang some days, to make them the more tender. The younger pullets are tenderer
and easier for the stomach to overcome. Others, again, esteem this to be of
as good a nourishment as a Turkey. It was esteemed a dainty dish among the
ancient Romans, as likewise of late years, as witness Macrob. Saturn. libr.
3.13.
our Writers. And De civit. Dei. lib. 2^. cap 4.

Of Pigeons.


Saint Austine says, he had made trial of it, that the flesh of it would not
putrify.

Pigeons are hot, and nourish indifferent well, especially fat, young plump
ones, being blooded under the wing, and stuffed with cooling herbs, and sour
Goose-berries or Grapes. It is a preposterous kind of cookerie, which is most
commonly used to bake Pigeons with so much pepper, that it is sufficient to set
on fire all the stomachs of those that eat them. It is belike conceived, that
Pigeons are of themselves exceeding cold. Boiled they are coolest and moistest,
and fittest for hot and choleric constitutions, and Sommer-time.

The Stock-dove.
The Stocke-dove is a kind of wild dove, or Pigeon, greater in body than our
ordinary doves, called in French, Pigeon Ramier, from the branches of trees
whereon they sit, most commonly in great companies. They are esteemed
indifferent good nourishment, howbeit somewhat hot and dry: and therefore in
France they often boil them, which is the best way. The younger are the best.

The Turtle.
The Turtle is another wild kind; but less than the tame, or dove-coat
Pigeon, and being young and fat, they yield good nourishment. In France after
they are caught, they keep them commonly up a pretty while in cages, feeding
them with millet seed, by which means they become exceeding fat, and good to
eat.

^ Goose.
The Goose is of no small account among our tame foul, howbeit it yields but
a gross nourishment, and nothing so good as the former, harder of concoction,
and ingendring more excrementitious humors. The young Goose, called a
greene-Goose, is far better, easier of digestion, and ingendereth better
nourishment, howbeit not so good as others.

Wilde-goose.
The wild Goose is drier than the other, breeds not so excrementitious an
aliment to the body; yet nourishes less, is hard of digestion, ingendreth
melancholy, as other the like do.

There is yet a certain sort of water-fowle, Solan Goose.
called by the name of Goose, howbeit not properly, which for this cause,
notwithstanding, we here mention: and this is that Solan-Goose, breeding in a
little rockie Island in Scotland, called the Bast, and in one of the North-west
Islands of the same Kingdom, and no where else that I could hear. This foul
or Goose is called Oysan du Bas, by that famous Du Bartas: and indeed it is
lesser than our Goose, rather of the bigness of a good big Ducke; and yet
for some resemblance called by this name. This foul is of a fishie taste, like
unto the taste of Herring, whereon especially it feeds. It is all fat, scarce
any lean to be seen in the whole carkase. They are found ready in their nests
round about this rock (the young I mean, for the old ones are not eaten)
about the later end of July, or beginning of August. The manner of the eating
of the Solan-Goose.
They are eaten as we eat Oysters, before they sit down to table, piping hot
off the spit, accompanied immediately with a cup of good claret wine. If they
were not eaten thus hot, none were ever able to eat them: for their
nourishment, I cannot much commend it; howsoever it be there (for the raritie
it seems) in no small account, esteeming it in steed of physic (and indeed
it ordinarily loosneth the belly thus eaten) and that they shall enjoy their
health the better a long time after. The nourishment can neither be great nor
very good, as is the nature of other water-fowle, whereof hereafter: but this
pre-eminence it has above others, that it slippeth quickly through the guts,
and so offends the less.

Among wild foul, the Pheasant, without all controversy, The Pheas^n.
bears away the bell: and it is, no doubt, a very dainty dish. They nourish
very well, and are wholesome for any age or complexion whatsoever: they are
much of the nature of our tame Pullaine, howbeit nourish not altogether so
much; yet their nourishment is very good, and easy of digestion, and befit
such stomachs as most ordinarily use them: they are esteemed the more excellent
by reason of their rarity, Omne rarum carum. It is a dish that does adorn
great men's tables: if ordinary people can come by them, I hope I shall not need
to bid them use a moderation in the use of them.

The young Partridge being fat, The Partridge.
is a very good and wholesome nourishment, and of easy digestion; wherefore it
is good for dainty stomachs, for weak and valetudinary people: for it
strengthens nature much: the elder are drier and harder of digestion, and
therefore in bounty yield to the former. Some, notwithstanding, in winter,
esteem the elder better than the younger; I mean, if both were to be had. It
is true, indeed, that in Winter the stomach, by reason of the redoubling of
natural heat, is far better able to deal with them, and digest them. They
are then to be hung up for two or three days, which is also in other wild
foul to be observed: It is to be observed, that generally, all wild foul is
drier than the tame, Wilde-fowle commonly drier than tame.
and yields less nourishment; yet most of them are easily digested. Again,
in some countries this dryness is well corrected by preparation; as in France,
where they lard them, the which cookrie, as I cannot but commend in wild
foul, providing the lard be good and sweet; so I think it very superfluous and
needless, if not worse, to our ordinary tame foul, as fat Capons and Geese,
yet are they there ordinarily in use.

The Quail.
Among wild foul, the Quail is one of the moistest, and is fattest in
Harvest, and nourishes much; but is easily putrified in the stomach. They need
no addition of lard, or butter; but are rather to be baked with spices; being
much used, they engender Fevers, Convulsions, and the falling sickness. But I
hope the seldom using of them will make amends for all. Their rarity makes
them in greater request: but were they as common as our Capons, their credit
would quickly be cracked.

The Powt.
That wild foul, called in Latin Attagen, and by some a Woodcock, but falsely,
being bigger than a Perduch, spotted on the back, like a Jugge, but of of a
browner color, and some call a Powt, the flesh black without, but white
within; is by some accounted of all wild foul the best; is very tender, easy
of digestion, good for all ages and conditions, ingendreth good nourishment,
agreeing well with the stomach.

The Moore-cocke, or Heath-cocke.
There is also a great Moore-cocke or Heath-cocke, called uro-gallus, or uraga,
and greater than our ordinary Cock, yielding little in goodness to our
Turkies, howbeit, somewhat drier, and harder of digestion.

There be diverse sorts of little Birds in no small esteem for ordinary use,
The Lark,
some of them very good, and some again, not worth the eating: the Lark is of
a good and laudable nourishment, and best and fattest in coldest weather: they
have ever been dignified with a certain virtue against the wind-colicke. And
for this purpose, some wish to stuff them with Garlic; but then they lose
much of their reputation, Garlike of it self being able to bring this to
pass. Some to make them eat plump and fat, roast them with their guts: every
man as he likes.

The Thrush.
The Thrush is counted little inferior to the former, yielding indifferent good
nourishment, but that it is somewhat hotter: and as Larkes, so are these also
best in Winter, and cold weather. It was in high esteem Jnter aves Turdus*
siquis me iudice certet. Jnter quadrupedes gloria prima Lepu^.

Ma^^ial^s.

Sparrowes.


among the ancient Romans.

Sparrowes nourish much, and increase both blood and sperme, and yet are they
hard of digestion, especially roasted; but the best way is to boil them; and
then have thou the benefit both of their bodies and their broth, which is
restorative.

Linnet.
The Linnet yields good nourishment, and is easier of digestion than the
Sparrow; and may safely be used of any.

Blackbird.
Blacke-Birds, although esteemed by some a good nourishment, yet others are of
opinion they are better to delight the ear with their music, than to feed
the belly, being bitter in taste, and hard of digestion: but if eaten, the
fattest are the best.

The Ster^ine.
The Starline is rather worse, and therefore utterly to be rejected.

Whatsoever opinion some have of the Wood-cocke, and would parallel it with
the Partridge; yet affords it but a dry, melancholic nourishment, being
withal hard of digestion: the Winter is their season.

The Snite, or Snipe.
The Suite, or Snipe is worse than the Wood-cocke, being more unpleasant to the
taste, harder of concoction, and nourishes less; and is very apt to engender
melancholy.

And the like may I say of that little bird called Fildfare, Frid-fare,
so common and frequent here every where in the Winter season; and therefore
all such as are any ways disposed to melancholy, let them be very careful and
circumspect how they adventure on such meats:

Rails are of very good use, yield good nourishment, The Rail.
and are easy of digestion.

The Plover has purchased a great reputation, The Plove^.
and high esteem of a dainty dish; and although it be none of the worst, so is
it none of the best neither, being somewhat hard of digestion, and not so good
for melancholicke persons.

The Lapwing, by some called the green Plover, is by some likewise in high
esteem, and yet is it inferior to the Plover: The Lapwing.
and therefore I think them wisest that make no use of it at all, especially
when they are well supplied with store of other good food. Such as are in want
must make use of anything.

Some of those already named, live in Moors, Foul living in and about waters.
or watrish and fenny places: but besides these, there are a many more, both
greater and smaller foul, that live both in and about waters; which, for the
most part, are nothing so good, nor yield so good and wholesome a nourishment
as other foul which live most commonly in drier places, and feed on better
food. Amongst all these, Swanne.
the Swan is the biggest, and yet not the best. It ingendereth melancholy, and
is very hard of digestion, affording but bad nourishment. And howbeit it agree
somewhat with the Goose in the nature of nourishment; yet is it far
inferior, and of harder concoction. It is accustomed to be served in for a
dish at great feasts, with the first course: but those that feed well on this
dish, I warrant them need no second course, or else they have better stomachs
than their neighbors.

Of Duckes, there be both wild and tame, Duckes, wild and tame.
all which frequent waters, and live most therein. They are ranked amongst food
of good nourishment, being hard of digestion, and engender store of
excrementitious moist nourishment, especially the tame ones: the wild are of a
more solid and firm flesh, and will indifferently nourish a strong robust body
that can well digest it. But of choicer stomachs these and all water-fowle are
to be avoided; as also of melancholicke persons, and such as use but little
exercise; as students, etc. But Ducklings being fed with good food, are easier
of digestion, and engender indifferent good nourishment: yet they are far
fitter for hot and dry bodies, than for phlegmatic and moist complexions.

The Heron, Storke, Crane, Bustard, Bittour, Heron, Stork, Crane, Bustard,
Bittour.
afford no good nourishment at all; but are all very hard of concoction, and
engender nothing but melancholy, and abundance of bad humors, Caveat emptor.
And indeed, such foul give no approbation to the palate of their worth and
sufficiency; no more than does the Sea-meaw, or Sea-gull, and many other such
foul of an unpleasant fishie taste.

The Teale, notwithstanding, has procured unto it self a good reputation,
(and not without cause) above his fellow-water fowls. Teale.
It is easy of digestion, nourishes indifferent well, and will not offend a
weak stomach, seldom in water-fowle to be observed.

Moore-hen, or Fenducke.
The Moore-Hen, called also by some, a Fenne-Durke, although somewhat more
commendable than many other water-fowle, in regard of the fatness; yet are
they not freed from the faults wherewith other wild foul frequenting waters
are charged. There be yet many more both water-fowles, and which live near, and
in the water and fens, and watery places, which either are not so much in use
and request as the former, or if they be, yet differ they not in nature from
the former, by the which one may easily judge of their natures and properties.
And among such as live in drier places, some are sometime accustomed to eat
some other kinds of foul; as Rookes, or young Crows, and some others: the
which, notwithstanding, are neither so useful, nor yet of so good and laudable
an aliment, as others in more frequent and ordinary use. But these be the
chief, and which most frequently furnish our tables.

Of the parts of foul, daintiest, and in most request.
But before we finish this discourse of foul, I will say something of some
parts of them; as also of things which proceed from them, namely, their eggs.
In foul, both wild and tame, some parts are preferred before others: In fat
Capons, Hens, Turkies, the wing is esteemed the best and daintiest; in Geese,
Duckes and water-fowle, The wing.
the legs, as being in perpetual motion. And for the same reason in
Partridges and other wild foul, The leg.
the wing is esteemed the best. Pulpous flesh about the breast.
But the pulpous flesh about the breast, by reason of the hearts neighborhood,
being drier, declineth from that degree of goodness.

The brain.
The Brains of the great water-fowles; as of Swanne, Goose and Ducke, which are
themselves none of the best nourishment, cannot be much worth. And the moister
the creature is, the brains must needs be the worse, being so much the more
moist than others. The brains of wild foul, themselves of a good alimentall
quality, and somewhat dry (as Partidges and the like) are the best. But of
Pigeons they are stark naught: as among foure-footed beasts, Cats brains are
esteemed poison. Howsoever the brains are always far worse than the rest,
especially in water-fowle, where themselves yield no good nourishment, even
those of the smaller kind also must needs be of no esteem at all

The Maw or Gussord
The maw or Gufford of young Hens, Capons, Pullets, Turkies, Geese, or Ducks,
although they are hard of digestion; yet if well concocted, and meeting with a
strong stomach, they yield indifferent good nouishment. And some have opinion,
that the inward skin thereof prepared, is good to strengthen the stomach,
and to be good against the stone; whereof I am not as yet so well persuaded.

The wings of young fat foul are easily concocted, and yield the body
indifferent good nourishment: but as for those of old lean foul I wish-weake
and tender stomachs to beware, and rather feed on better food.

The Live^
The Livers of ordinary foul, although they be somewhat harder of concoction
than the Musculous flesh it self; yet in young fat foul, as of the Capon,
Hen, Pullet, Turkey or Goose it self, they yield indifferent good
nourishment. The Liver of the Goose among the Romans was in high esteem above
all others: and for this purpose they fed their Geese in such a manner, The
Goose liver in great esteem among the ancient Romans.
that the Liver would grow to an exceeding great bigness. And this the Jews
practice even now in our days. Their meat they eat mingled with milk, is
thought is a great means to bring this to pass.

The stones of Cocks or Cockerrells; as also of Turkies, Geese, The stones.
Drakes, especially of Sparrowes, are commended for good strengthening meat, and
to engender sperme.

The Egg, although it be not properly a part of the foul, The eggs.
yet does it proceed from the same. The Egg is a good wholesome and temperate
food; yet better or worse, according to the Foul that laid it. Hens and
Turkies Eggs are most familiar to man's nature, and best and wholesomest for
ordinary use. The white of the Egg compared with the yolke, is cold and
moist, and is somewhat harder of concoction than the yolke. But concerning
Eggs, more herereafter.

CHAP. XX.
Of strange and uncoth Diet, which some people have in ordinary use; as of
Dogs, Cats, Horses, Mules, Asses, Rats, Locusts, Frogs, Snailes, and man
flesh.

BEfore we enter upon our Fish, we will say something of some strange and
uncoth kind of diet, especially flesh, as also some other things not usual
among us: that by this means we may the more be induced to laud and magnify
the great and extraordinary bounty of our great and gracious God, in
affording us such plenty and variety of good and wholesome food for
susteining these frail bodies, that by this means in all moderation and
sobriety, and without excess, we might the better be enabled for his service.
And besides, that travelers, which shall by any occasioned necessity be cast
upon any such places, may be somewhat acquainted with the nature and faculty of
such uncoth food. It has been already plainly proved how useful and necessary
a food bread is, and how agreeable to the life of man, and without the which,
all other food whatsoever gives but small content: and yet there is a people
(says a Purchase his pilgrimage lib. 4. cap. 12.
late Writer) that live upon flesh only; and these be certain Indians, under
the command of the great Mogere, and bordering upon China; which also hold all
manner of corn to be food for beasts, and not for man: and yet those people
live 100 years. I have seen with mine eyes ( says Caesar Frederick) that the
inhabitants of Pegu or Brama, have eaten Serpents, Scorpions, and all manner of
herbs and grass. This I mean (says he) not of their extremity, or famine,
but ordinarily. Mr Fitch says the same, that they eat roots, herbs, leaves,
Dogs, Cats, Rats and Snakes; they refuse almost nothing: Idem cap. 4.
and this is also the custom in Florida, where they eat such vermin; as also
ants eggs, wood, earth, and dung of wild beasts; and keep the bones of
Serpents and fishes to grind afterward. Jdem libr. 8. cap. 4.
The Guineans diet is strange, as raw flesh, handfalls of grain, large
draughts of Aquavitae, Dogs, Cats, Buffles, Elephants (though stinking like
carrion, and a thousand magots creeping in them:) and that Lib. 6. cap. 14.
Vipers flesh was in use to be eaten, appears by Dioscorides. And Pliny
relates, Lib. 2. cap. 16.
that the Aethiopians, and Indians, called Seres, and the inhabitants of the
hill Athos, (called by Isigonus, Macrobii, or long lived) lived on the like
food; and by reason thereof neither in their head, nor whole body, were bred
any kind of vermin whatsoever. Of Rats.
And that Rats were in request, as an ordinary food among the ancients, as also
that they had warrens for this same purpose, is apparent; and therefore Lib. 3.
cap. 65. and lib. 36. cap. 1.
Pliny mentions, that Marcus Scaurus, in his Censorian law, abolished and
banished from their tables, both Rats, Shel-fish, and foul fetched from
foreign parts. But it may, perhaps, Horses, Dogs and Cats flesh.
be asked, whether Horse, Cats and Dogs may not be eaten? I answer, that
indeed, such creatures not being in ordinary use with us, and being supplied
with other variety of useful creatures, and exceeding any of them in bounty,
good and wholesome aliment, I see no necessity of their use. But because in
some staits and extremity, as sieges of towns, and other occasions, there may
be sometimes a necessity of using such food; howsoever, not to be compared
with our ordinary flesh; yet do they not partake of any evil or venomous
quality. Indeed, such creatures, as also Mules and Asses, Mules and Asses.
especially old and lean, are hard of concoction, yielding a bad and
melancholicke nourishment to the body. The young ones that be fat, are of far
better use, nourish better, and are easilier digested. And as for Dogs and
Cats, especially being young and fat, many have often fed upon them, and found
them good food. In Italy, Cats flesh no uncoth food.
it is no uncoth thing to eat Cats; and even here among our selves Cats have
been sometimes eaten by some of purpose, and by others unawares, who never
found any offense by this food. And this same last hard pinching year, 1630,
some in this same town, ate the flesh of Cats, and made good pottage thereof.
Beside, even Hippocrates himself appointed whelps flesh to his sick, as may
in diverse places of his works appear: whereby it may plainly appear, that
such creatures may in time of need be eaten. But besides these, in diverse
places Pars quaedam Locustis tantum vivit, fumo and sale duratis in annua
alimenta. Ii quadragesimum vita annum non excedunt, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30. and
libr. 7 cap. 2. lib. 11. cap. 29. Diod. Sicul. libr. 3. cap. 3. Leo African.
descript. Afr. lib. 9 cap. 3, etc.
Locusts, which we commonly call Caterpillars, (a creature whereby God often
scourged the inhabitants of hot countries, and wherewith he also often
threatened the rebellious and stif-necked people of the Jews) have been, and
yet are at this day much used for ordinary food among many Nations, especially
the Africans. And this is both by Pliny, and many other Authors, witnessed. How
the Aethiopians catch them with smoke, and salt them up, may be seen in
Authors; this being their chief food whereon in these countries they most
ordinarily feed. They use either to boil them, or else to dry them in the
Sun, and beat them to powder, and make meal of them. And that they were used
of the inhabitants of Arabia Foelix, whereunto Judea adjoined, or was not, at
least, far distant from it, is apparent by John Baptist his diet. Now, by the
way by occasion of mentioning John Bapttist, it is to be observed, that John
did indeed feed upon such beasts; and not upon the buds of certain herbs, as
Michcaell Taxates and Leonabardus Thurnheyleus, in Onoma^tio suo super Theoph^
Parac. de mellescribentem. Vide Sturbrium antiq. conv^^ l^b. 2. cap. ^.
some would have him, drawing the Greek word (...) to their own
interpretation; which notwithstanding in any ancient Author is not found in
such a signification as they would have it. And it is again reported by
Epiphanius contra Ebienaeos. Ibid.
Ep^phanius, that some Jews desirous to be lie the truth, (...) read, (...)
signifying thereby certain junkets made of honey or oil, whereof mention is
made, Exodus 16. and Number. 11. But these, and many others which for brevity I
pass by, are but frivolous and far fetched; and therefore let us rest upon
this, that John Baptist did indeed feed upon such a food, contenting himself
with this austere kind of diet, Locusts and wild honey. Now this same late
alleged author tells us that this need not seem so strange untous, since that
even of late years some Germane soldiers, even in so great an abundance of
all manner of provision, yet used ordinarily to fry Silke-wormes, and eat them
with no small delight; and that not without good reason: Nam quae innoxia sum,
and sapore and odore tetro care^t, sola opinione constant. Idem ibid.
for such things as are endued with no noisome smell or taste, depend only
upon opinion; which is a good rule to be observed in the use of uncouth food.
And the Italians eat another worm, differing from the other but in color to
outward appearance, it being black, and the former of a reddish color; and yet
are such with them esteemed as greatest dainties, although engendered of
putrefaction, and not of Eggs, as both the Locusts and Silke-wormes are. Now
that the Locust was a food, and used to be eaten, even among the Jews
themselves, at least some sorts, may by the 11. chap. of Levit. appear, where
four sorts of Locusts were allowed to be eaten, and therefore called clean,
and other three sorts forbidden, and called unclean. Of these creatures I
could make a long and large discourse, relating their several names and
natures, together with diverse histories of their hurt done in several
Countries at several times, with many other things to them belonging, which I
willingly pass by. Whosoever desires to know more concerning these creatures, Let
him read Pliny and others, even our late alleged Author.

But besides all the sorts of creatures useful for mankind, as though this
were not yet sufficient, and that our bountiful God had abridged us of
necessary provision for the sustentation of this frail life, Alranarum quoque
and coch^earum esum pervenit hominis audaci^, quosi vero tam inops fuerit
natura, ut non opulentissimos ad vivendum thesauros, quovis in loco, ubi vita
peragenda foret, disposuisset. Ars enim inventa est test Libav. lib. 1.
Batrach. cap. 15. Non quo pacto gallinas, aves, oves, juvencos, brassicam,
^etam, frumen^^a and Cyprinos recte mensis imponeremus, sed prodigiosa andacia
portentosoq, ingenio undarum limo vesceremur, ranis; and telluris sordibus,
cochleis; silvarumque scabie, fungis, and stagnorum putredine, ostreis, ut
aterna sapientiae arcem and domiciliun^ eo praecipitaremus ma^is, quam ista
sunt in perniciem procliviora. ^^os artifices mittere oportuit ad Indorum
Gymnosophistas, ut discerent stercoraceis cibis utent^^ homines ad speratam
vitae diuturnitatem pervenire hand posse. Et tamen dum haec facimus, summi
potius quam imi, ferream nobis aetatem, and multos vita annos audaciter
promittimus. Claud. Deod. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 7. cap. 45. ex Andr.
Libav-Barrach. lib. 1. cap. 15.
man's boldness has yet extended it self to strange and prodigious dishes. So
that now we are not contented to feed on Sheep and Cattle, Hens and Capons,
and other such creatures useful for the maintaining of the life of man; and
fit them for our tables: but prodigious gluttony has now devised to feed upon
the excrements of the earth, the slime and scum of the water, the superfluity
of the woods, and putrefaction of the sea; to wit, to feed on frogs, snailes,
mushroms, and oisters. And that this custom has been very ancient, may by
Pliny appear; who writes that they used to feed snailes in warrens, as they
did other creatures. And it seems that such creatures were at the first used
either as Physic, or in the defect and want of better food. And it seems
that some ancient Physicians used frogs in Consumptions and wasting away of the
body, as also in that oppilation of the pipes of the lungs called, isthma. But
this was never their meaning that they should be either of them, or any other
as an ordinary food, but rather Physic, or at least physical food, alimentum
medicamentosum. But to speak the very truth, both frogs and snailes are now
adays rather used for wantonness, and to please our curious palats, than for
any necessity, or defect of other food. And thus are they ordinarily used in
France, and some other countries, although yet not in frequent use with us;
howbeit, one of these days these dishes may become as common as our new French
fashions of apparel. To enter upon a large discourse of the nature,
properties, and preparation of frogs, and the manner of using them, is not here
my purpose; and therefore leave it to them that have more leisure, and purpose
to feed upon them. If any have a purpose to use them, let them beware of those
that are venomous. And my advice shall be rather to abstain from such things,
wherein there may be either danger or doubt, and to make choice of that which
is free from either, where there is such choice and variety. And this I would
have also understood concerning mushroms (whereof some thing has been said
already) and the like. As concerning Snailes, they are used for food both in
France, and other neighboring countries: and for this purpose, as the
Cochlearum vivaria instituit Fulvius Hi^pinus in Parquiniensi, paulo ante
civil bellum quod ^^um Pompe^o magno actum est: distinctis quidem generibus
earum; separatim ut essent: albae quae in Reatino agro nescuntur: Separatim
Illyricae, quibus magnitudo praecipua: Africanae, quibus facunditas: Solitanae
quibus nobilitas. Quin and saginam earum commentatus est sapa and ^arre,
alijsque generibus; ut c^chleae quoque altiles ganeam implerent. Cujus artis
gloria in eam magnitudinem producta sit, ut octoginta quadcantes caperent
singularum calices, Auctor est Marcus Varro. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 56 Verum hoc
raninae escae inventum potius surd^scenti libidinibus palato, semper aliquid
novi, tanquam per certamen exigenti tribuendum est, quo sopita vis, delitiarum
multitudine revocari possi^. Relinquantur ergo ista del^tiae vel extremae
necessitati, vel de^iti^sis Italis, Gallis and Hispanis quibus and ^^maces
(quas gregatim destina is ad id hortis, et nutrint and impinguans)
delica^^ssimus and gratissimus est cibus, quae in delitijs, and mensarum ^uarum
la^titijs, ra^arum cl^nes, seu coxas, modo frixas, cum origani and menthemodico
assumunt, modo elixas, and cum o^ phacio aut agresta conditas mensis apponunt,
nulla necssitate, sed gulae libidine impulsi. Idem Deod. Ibid.
ancient Romans fed them in their warrens, so do some even at this day feed
them in their gardens. Now some are of opinion that Snailes are of a very
nourishing faculty; and for this cause, our women do often ordinarily
indifferently exhibit them in Consumptions of any kind whatsoever; sometimes in
milk, and sometimes in broth, even as their own fancy leads them. But by
the way, if Snailes be so nourishing, I wonder why our Papists use them so
ordinarily in the time of Lent, when as they will not allow so much as a bit of
Porke or powdered beef! They may well answer, they may as well be allowed as
wine; and I think so too, and far better, and nourish far less, and with
less speed, I am sure, than wine and diverse other things they use. The reason
why they are esteemed of so alimentall or nourishing a nature, is by reason
(say some) that in Winter they are able to sustain themselves with their own
substance: and that for this same cause, Galen appoints them in Hecticke
Fevers and consumptions. But the truth is, that these creatures, by reason of
their viscidity, and glutinous tough substance, and the imbecility and want of
natural hear, loose little or nothing of this their tough and glutinous
substance, and by consequent need no reparation of the same. And as for the
exhibition of them in Hecticke Fevers, it is rather by way of humectation and
refrigeration, than for any strong alimentall quality he acknowledges in
them. Etjam fi^entis involvamus, viscidum ^entum, tenacem, ac glutinosum
limacum mucorem, artis Spagyricae beneficio, eo perduci, ut levissimo negotio
in levissimum lapidem conge^etur: quo vel solo argumento omnes ab ca^^m alii
(...). l^berent, qui and ve^tr^cul^ (...), and (...) osis, po^agr^ci^^, ^o
o^ibus and vi^ crum (...) ^nibus obn^ (...). Ide^ ibid.

Anthr^^o^ (...) men^, eaters.


And that they participate of such a slimie glutitinous substance, may from
hence also evidently appear (says the late alleged Author) in that by
Chymicall art and industry, this slimy substance may with small pains be
converted into a stone. This might therefore in my opinion deter any from the
use of such an aliment, especially such as are of a weak stomach, are
troubled with the stone in the bladder or kidneys, arthritical infirmities; as
gout, s^hi^cira, etc. As also any obstructions of the inward parts, liver,
spleen, etc. I have somewhat the longer of set purpose insisted upon this kind
of food, because it is grown an ordinray custom here in the country, as I
have said, in any consumption; nay in any supposed, and but surmised
weakness, or frivolous fear thereof, indifferently to exhibit this dish in
manner as I have said. Besides, this is done without any consideration of
circumstances, either of age, strength, time of the disease, etc. And therefore
I leave it to the understanding and judicious Reader to judge, whether this be
a legal and laudable course or no. And withal, let the judicious and
ingenious Reader judge of the necessity and utility of handling the diet of the
diseased. Besides all the former sorts of diet, there has a barbarous and
inhumane custom of killing and eating man's flesh, not of late only; but even
many years ago, crept into the world; insomuch that we know for a truth,
that now there are diverse of those Anthropophagi, or men-eaters in diverse
places of the world. And truly, I think, there is scare any among us that
would easily have believed, that any that bare engraven the stamp and image of
his Maker, could ever have harbored so barbarous a thought within his breast;
far less to have acted so tragical and inhumane a cruelty, unless it had
been by diverse true histories testified unto us, and related by word of mouth
by those, who, to their great grief, have been spectators of so barbarous and
inhumane a cruel custom. The late histories of such as have traveled of late
years into those parts of the Western world do evidently witness the truth
thereof. And it is yet further recorded, that in Beyond the country of Loango
are the Anziges, the cruellest Caniballs which the Sun seeks upon, etc. They
keep o^^en shambls of men^ flesh. etc. Pureb. lib. 7 cap. 10.
some of those places they keep ordinarily shambles of men's flesh, as we do
of beef and mutton and other flesh: and besides, if they think their Slaves
will yield them more money, cut out by the joint than sold alive (if there were
but a half penny saved) they will be sure to send him to the shambles. I
doubt not but that the very reading of these things will strike a certain
horror and amazement in the minds of many men, with an horresco legens, when
they consider of the customs of these cruellest Caniballs of all others; and
justly so they may. But have we no such devouring Caniballs here at home among
our selves? The law would take hold of so barbarous a fact. But if there be not
as bad, if not worse Caniballs among our selves, let the world judge. I could
instance in many several sorts of extortioners, and daily grinders of the faces
of the poor, if this were a theme befitting my person and profession. But
there is one particular kind, which not in my private opinion alone, but of
many both of the most judicious and honest, has been always accounted and
reputed as horrible and cruel an oppression, as any other whatsoever; if not
far crueller. My meaning is of depopulating enclosure, whereby many wealthy
towns, who before maintained a number of able people, and fit in time of need
to do their country good service, have now for the most part left only a
sheepherd and his dog. But the judgments of God upon their Persons, or at
least upon their posterity (most of them I mean) are yet so recent in the
memories of most now living, that I need say no more, but wish that others may
take warning.

CHAP. XXI.
Of several sorts of Fishes, both of the Sea and fresh waters, and the various
and diverse nourishment they breed in the body.

AS in the land we may not without wonder and admiration, behold the great
bounty our gracious God; so in that liquid element of water is no less to be
seen the rich liberality of our great Lord and Maker, in affording us for food
so great variety of several sorts of fishes. All fishes are of a cold and
moist temperature, but some exceeding others in bounty, according to the nature
of the water, Division of Fishes.
and places wherein they live. Now all fishes live either in the salt water,
which we call the Sea; or in fresh-waters; as Rivers, Lakes, Pools or Ponds.
Division of Sea-fishes
The Seafish are accounted the best; as being of a firmer substance, Best
Seafish.
hotter and drier, and not so clammy and slimy, as the fresh water Fish: they
are also more savory, and nourish better. Among sea-fishes again, such as have
scales and firm substances are the best; and such as are enclosed within
shells, diverse of them, as Lobsters afford the body good and solid nourishment.
Others of a softer and slimier and cartilaginous substance, Nourishment of fish
inferior to tha^ of flesh.
are not so good. That fish that lives in a pure water, tossed to and fro with
waves, is better than that which has less agitation and motion, and lives in
a more muddy water. And such as live most near a rocky or sandy shore, are
better than where there is much slime and mudde: and therefore were Pisces
saxatiles, or rockie fish, for this cause so called, in so high an esteem
among ancient Physicians. And so among fresh-water-fish such as live most
commonly in clear, rockie or gravelly Rivers, and which are of a swift course,
are the best, an of best nourishment. Such fish again, as live in slimy and
muddy waters, in the fens, marshes, Ponds, Pools and motes, are nothing so
good, nor yield any good and laudable nourishment to the body. And howsoever,
Fish have been in use and great esteem among the ancients, especially the
Romans, and sold at a very high rate; yet if we compare their nourishment with
that of flesh, it is in many respects far inferior to it; as not yielding so
wholesome and laudable a nourishment to the body. And it is to be also
observed, that fish are greatest enemies to cold the moist phlegmatic bodies,
and old age, especially the moistest and slimiest. Now something of some sorts
of fish. And first we will begin with the Sturgeon, called of the ancient
Romans, as is supposed, Acipenser and by some, the sea-peacock, which was in so
great request among the ancient Romans, that not only was it served in to the
table with musical Pomp; but even they also who carried it in, Sturgeon.
were to wear garlands on their heads. The Sturgeon is of a reasonable good
nourishing substance, if it be not too fat, which will easily cloy the
stomach; and then take heed of surfeiting with this dish, which has
endangered some, and cost some their life, for want of good take heed. We have
it commonly brought to us barrelled up, from the Eastern countries, being
commonly used at great feasts: and then by reason of the salt and vinegar,
(although it please the palate) yet must it needs be of hard concoction, and
engender melancholy, and bad humors; being especially mingled with so many
several sorts of food. The young Sturgeon is far better, and of easier
concoction than the old; but if thou be wise, eat as little of the fat of
either as thou can. The belly of the Sturgeon is accounted the best.

The Conger, or as some for the resemblance call it, the Conger-Eele, Conger or
Conger-Fele.
is by some had in no small esteemed; howbeit others again, as the French,
care not for it; and in my judgment in this they are the wiser: for whatsoever
account men make of it; it is of hard concoction, and breeds no good
nourishment, and to digest it well, requires a strong stomach, and a body
free from infirmities; and yet let them use this Fish but a while, and they may
perhaps make some work for Physicians.

Turbot is a good firm fish; Turbot.
and yields good and wholesome nourishment to a good stomach; and is called
therefore by some the Sea-pheasant.

The Plaice is not unpleasant to the Palate, Plaice.
and howsoever by some esteemed a dainty Fish; yet is it in very truth very
waterish and phlegmatic, and of too soft a substance: it is best when it is
grown to a good thickenesse, being then somewhat more firm.

The Flounder is much of the same nature and nourishment, Flounder.
yet somewhat firmer.

The Sole is without exception a good and dainty Fish in sickness and in
health; of very easy concoction and distribution, Sole.
yielding a very wholesome and good aliment to the body: it is for this cause
called the Sea-partridge; or as others say, the Sea-capon. Of this there are
diverse sorts differing but little in nature and nourishment. This is among all
others of prime use for the sick.

Cod-fish is by some esteemed hard of concoction, Cod-fish.
and of a clammie and glutinous substance: but by others again it is esteemed
quite contrary, of very easy concoction, and of a laudable nourishment. I
confess the substance of this Fish is of a moderate firmness, and not too
hard; and therefore fresh Cod, a little salted, is an indifferent good
nourishment. When they are salted and dried, they are far harder to be
concocted, and nourish far less. Of these kinds, Haberdene and Ling are
accounted the best and daintiest; as again Stock Fish the worst, concerning
which it was not ill said, profecto non magis nutrit quam lapis. It yields no
more nourishment than a stone. And therefore we will leave it with biscuit
bread to sailers strong stomachs, when they are unfurnished of better food.

Haddocke.
The Haddocke has some affinity in nature and nourishment with the Cod-fish,
howbeit easier to be concocted, and not altogether of so firm a substance.

Whitings.
The Whiting is easily concocted, nourishes but little; yet yields that which
is good, and well suteth with a weak and choice stomach.

Smelt.
The Smelt is a very dainty fish, of a very good nourishment, and free from any
exception either in sickness or in health, and is pleasing to the palate.

Gournard.
The Gournards red and gray are of a firm and solid substance, and yeeld^
indifferent good nourishment, and not so phlegmatic as many others do.

Hallibut.
The Hallibut, called Vmbra marina is of a firm white substance, and in great
request among great ones, as is the Sturgeon; and thought to be nothing
inferior to it, and is a good wholesome fish to an indifferent good stomach,
although some think it is very easily cococted. It is somewhat a big fish,
and has been in great account in Italy.

Mackrell.
The Mackrell is sweet and pleasant to the palate, of a reasonable firm
substance, and yields indifferent good nourishment.

Mullet.
The Mullet living near a stony or gravelly shore, although it be of a firm
and solid substance, is easily concocted, and yields indifferent good
nourishment.

Scat and Thornbacke.
The fish called Scat, Thornebacke, and all the kinds that have any affinity or
neat resemblance to this Fish, are all utterly condemned, as breeding very
bad, gross and putrid humors in the body; and withal is very hard and uneasy
to be concocted, and therefore utterly to be abandoned of all such as would
live in health; especially such as are of a moist and phlegmatic constitution
of body.

Cuttle fish.
The Cuttle-fish is for strong laboring stomachs, mariners especially, being
of very hard concoction, and engender gross and bad humors.

Wolfe-fish.
The Wolfe-fish although it be indifferent easy of concoction, yet is it a very
moist, waterie and phlegmatic fish, ingendring no good humors at all.

Vast and great fish.
The great fishes of Vast bulk and body; as all sorts of Whales Porpuises, and
many other such afford the body no good nourishment, are very hard of
concoction, and are only for strong stomachs, and time of necessity, where
there is want of better food.

Herings.
Hering is a reasonable sweet pleasant fish, and moderately eaten is of
indifferent good nourishment. Of these Herings there are many sorts, some
better and some worse. The best are sweet and pleasant in taste, firm in
substance; and indifferent fat; and such being a little corned with salt eat
very pleasantly, and are no bad food for an indifferent stomach, and easily
digested.

Pilchards and Sprats*
Pilchaards and Sprats participate of the same nature, howbeit they are a
little sweeter in taste, and eaten in too great abundance will easily cloy the
stomach, and so a dangerous surfeit may ensue. But these and Herings use to be
salted up, and sent from one country to another. And some are salted, and
afterward hung up and dried: and then we call them Red-hering and Dry-sprats.
But all salt-fish both nourish little, and engender bad humors in the body, and
are hard of concoction. Red-hering.
And these being dried are enemies to dry melancholicke and choleric bodied;
but very good to make a cup of good drink relish well.

There is yet another sort of small fish of this same nature, Anchoves.
called commonly Anchoves, being never used but pickled up, and afterward used
as a sallet before meat. I can give them no greater commendation than their
fellows went before them, as being both of one and the same faculty, and may
well be called the drunkards delight. They cut tough phlegm in a phlegmatic
stomach, and provoke appetite.

Rochet is accounted a good wholesome fish in sickness and in health, Rochet.
yielding indifferent good nourishment, and not offensive to the stomach.

Besides these, there are yet a great number of other good and wholesome
fishes, Shellfish
which this great vast Ocean produces for the use of mankind, these already
named being but some of the principal, in greatest request and best known.
And as for others not named, their nature and nourishment may by that which
has been said of the former easily be found out; and no other but have some
affinity with some of these already named.

But there remain yet an infinite number of Shellfish, Division of Shellfish
whereof we must say something before we come to the fresh-waters. In general,
Shellfish for the most part engender crude, viscous and phlegmatic humors;
howbeit some more, some less. Of these some are of a far softer substance,
and others of a firmer. Oisters, Mushells, Cockles, and the like are of a soft
substance. Lobsters, Crevices, etc: are of a firmer and solider substance. And
in nourishment and concoction they differ also accordingly.

Oisters, among all others are in greatest request, Oisters.
and for the softness of their substance and easiness to be concocted, they
are commonly eaten raw, and before meals, by which means they are good to
loosen the belly. And although they better befit some constitutions of body
than others; as namely, hot dry choleric body: yet are they indifferently
used by all constitutions, sexes and ages. But they help themselves with the
correction of pepper, vinegar and onions, and a cup of good claret wine for the
most part. But I wish a moderation in the use of this Sea-excreme^t (for it is
nothing else, has bin showed already) is in diverse others, so especially in
this and others of this nature and kind. Cockels, mushells, etc


Cockles, Mushells, and such others not much unlike them, are far inferior unto
Oisters, as being harder of concoction, and yielding worse nourishment to the
body, especially Mushells. All are enemies to obstructions.

Pranes and Shrimps to an indifferent good stomach prove good and wholesome
nourishment, exceeding any of the former, Pranes and Shrimps.
and being indifferent easy of concoction.

Crabs.
Crabs and their kinds, Lobsters and the like Shellfish are of a far more
solid and firm substance, nourish much; but are hard of concoction. The Crab
is the colder, and worst for cold and old complexions.

Lobster.
The Lobster is better than the former, and may better be used of colder
complexions, provided the stomach be strong, it being also hard of concoction.

Tortoise.
The Tortoise, as living most in the water, deserves well to be ranked among
fish. It is of a firm and solid substance, being in foreign nations often used
as an ordinary food. The wood Tortoises are accounted of all others the best.
Tortoises have not an evil taste, and yield to the body abundance of strong
nourishment, howbeit hard of digestion, used liberally they are esteemed to
loosen the belly. They engender tough and clammy humors; and therefore unfit
for the wind-collicke, obstructions, stone, etc. They use to prepare them with
great art and industry against Consumptions and Hecticke-fevers. And for this
purpose the Wood Tortoises are the best.

Fresh-water-fish. Salmon
Among all our fresh-water-fish, the Salmon in all ages has borne the bell
away, even in the days of Pliny. It is very sweet, and pleasant to the Palate,
easy of concoction, and yielding a good and wholesome nourishment to the body,
howbeit it quickly fills the stomach, and taken in any quantity will not so
easily be concocted. The Salmon-trout, Salmon trout, or Salmon-Peale.
young Salmon, or Salmon-peale are yet better and easilier concocted than the
great and older Salmon. Eaten with vinegar they are not so burdensome to a weak
stomach. Many use to keep this Fish sometime in such sour liquor, although it
then nourish less. They are taken in great abundance in many places both of
this Island and Ireland. Salt salmon loses much of its former bounty,
Salt-Salmon.
as nourishing less, becoming harder to be concocted, and ingendring worse
humors in the body, as is the nature of salt-fish.

River-trout.
The little River-trout among River-fish challenges the second place, and unto
it by some is assigned the first place. The best are such, as are bred in
clear and rockie Rivers. The others that live in great Lakes, and more muddy
waters, although in greatness they may exceed, yet in good wholesome
nourishment they are far inferior to the others. The Trout yields a dainty,
moist and cooling nourishment, especially to hot and dry complexions.

Perch.
The Perch that lives in pure Rivers, I ever held for as good a Fish, as the
fresh water brings forth. It is of good taste, pleasing the palate, of an
indifferent firm substance, and may safely be used of the sick.

Pyke and Pyckerell.
The Pike is of a firm and solid substance, yielding to none in good wholesome
nourishment; that especially, I mean, which lives in pure Rivers, and not in
muddie ponds and pooles. The Pickrell or young Pike is easiest of concoction.
Those of middle age are best for ordinary use, for most people in sickness
and in health. It may as well be allowed the sick as any other fish.

Gudgeon.
And the Gudgeon is as good as the best River-fish both for sick and healthful
people, and will easily be concocted with a weak stomach, affording the body a
good, laudable and wholesome nourishment, and may be called the River Smelt.

The Roch is an indifferent good fish, and affords the body no bad
nourishment, howbeit it be far inferior to the Gudgeon. Roch.


The Allows yields good store of nourishment to the body, Allows.
although it be hard of digestion. Take time and leisure to the eating of it,
and take heed of bones.

The Barbell is easily concocted, yielding but small nourishment, Barbell.
and that not very excellent, and somewhat muddie in taste; the greater are the
best. It is to be observed in the use of this fish ( Barbonoa antimonii
vitrificati instar totum corpus perturbant, alvum vomitumque horrende, non sine
vitae discimine ci^nt, ideoque a^ eorum esu sedule cavendum D^o^.
Pant^-Hygiast. libr 1. cap 42. lib 1. Epist. Famil. ad Attitum.
says a late Writer) that the spawne thereof works as violent effects in the
body, both upwards and downwards, as either Antimonie or Sneesing powder, or
the like; and therefore wishes every one to take good heed that they eat none
of this stuff. This fish was in so high esteem among the ancient Romans, that
one cost sometimes near threescore pounds Sterline. And Cicero himself makes
it plainly appear in what high esteem it was then among great ones at Rome.

But me thinks I hear the Carpe complain, The Carpe.
that has been all this while neglected, being nevertheless so highly
esteemed, and reckoned one of the chiefest fish that furnishes our fish
meals. The Carpe then howsoever in so high an account yet scarce deserves so
high a praise and commendation. It yields to the body a viscous and clammie
nourishment, apt to engender obstructions, wind-colicke, stone, etc. and
therefore I wish the use thereof to be but sparing.

The Brame is better, and of easier digestion than the Carpe, howbeit inferior
to the Perch, and some others. Brame.


The Tench delights commonly in slimie and muddy waters, in which it
ordinarily lives: Tench.
and although it yield abundance of nourishment; yet it is naught, ingendring
obstructions, and many dangerous diseases; being especially much used by such
as use little exercise, and are used to feed daintily. Strong robust laboring
people are better able to overcome the harms from thence ensuing.

The Lamprey, not only among the ancient Romans, was in no small esteem and
account; but is even at this day accounted an extraordinary dainty fish; but
especially among the greater sort, Lamprey.
the poor not being able to reach to so costly a sauce. And I may well say of
it, that the sauce is far better than it self. The Lamprey, although
pleasant to the taste, yet ingendereth it tough, viscous and slimy humors,
obstructions, and diverse diseases. They use to correct their evil qualities,
to make for them a costly and dainty sauce, of wine, sugar, atd cinnamon: but
truly in my opinion this cost is but badly bestowed.

Eeles are yet worse than the former, and yield a tough, clammie, Ecles.
glutinous nourishment, apt to engender obstructions, the gout, stone, etc.
They are of a very sweet pleasant taste, and please the palate well; but their
fat, especially, is very loathsome to the stomach: Eeles living in purer and
clearer waters, are yet better than those that live in muddy and foul waters,
especially in the fennes. They are best roasted with sage leaves, as they are
used, and then eaten with a little pepper and vinegar. A little salted, they
are better than fresh; strong laboring people may be bolder with such a ^^od.
Let others, as they love their health, be sparing in the use of such a dish.

CHAP. XXII.
Of seasoning meat, of Salt and of Sauces of several sorts: of Spices used in
diet, both in sickness and in health.

ALthough bodily labor, moderate exercise, and abstinence from food, until
our stomachs crave it, be the best sauces that can be devised: yet because the
world is not contented with that frugality and temperance, Reasons for the use
of sauces.
which produced the lives of our forefathers to a great number of years; and
sick folks have many times need to have their dull appetites quickened and
sharpened with some such whetting sauces: besides, that custom, a sedentarie
life, choice and tender education, and the quality of some such sorts of food
thereby corrected and bettered, do often challenge unto themselves a necessary
use of them: That the quality therefore of such sauces be not altogether
unknown, Virtues of salt.
I will say something of them ere I proceed further. And in these, as in the
aliments themselves, I wish a more moderate use than is customed by many. I
will begin with the most noble, most necessary, and of all others in most use
and request.

Sa^t, and the excellency, vtility and necessary use thereof.
Salt then, which may most justly be called condimentum condimentorum, Sauce of
sauces, in general, is hot and dry, yet drier than hot; and yet participateth
more or less of these faculties according to the nature thereof, there being
so many sorts of Salt, as shall hereafter appear. Besides, it does attenuate,
cut, and penetrate tough, gross and phlegmatic humors. It preserves moist
meats from putrefaction, exhausting their superfluous moisture; and gives a
good relish to many, otherwise unsavory meats: so that it may appear, that
with many excellent virtues is this noble creature endued; insomuch, that it
were form an easy matter to spend much time in the due commendation thereof.
But in the use of Salt, we are to observe, first, that all sorts of food need
not the use of Salt: Cautions in the use of salt.
And again, some need more, some less, according to the superfluity of
moisture, the unsavorinesse, or the time we intend to keep the same. To what
bodies most hurtful.
It is again to be observed, that it is more contrary to the hot choleric,
and very lean people; and such as are molested with scabs, itches, and whose
bodies abound with such humors. The excessive and immoderate use of Salt dries
up the humors of the body, and overthrows and destroieth the radical
moisture which upholdeth nature. I saw in Saxony a young maid about 16 years;
of age, who would empty the Salt-seller on the table to eat, History.
as she would do with as much as she could come by; insomuch that she looked
as old and wrinkled in the face as any other at the age of 70. But yet the
moderate use of Salt, is for most sorts of meats very necessary; and besides
that, it pleases the palate, it helps also concoction and distribution; by
which means, diverse diseases proceeding from crudities are often prevented.
Now, it is to be observed, that some salt is of greater efficacy and power
than some other; and for the same cause, some sorts of salt are more useful
and efficacious for some things than other. Several sorts of salt.
There was a kind of salt among the ancients, dug out of the ground under
the sands of Liby^, called from thence Sal ammoniacus, Sal ammoniacus.
whereof frequent mention is made amongst our ancient Physicians, whereof there
is now none to be found with us. We have now some salt dug out of hills, in
great lumps like stones; called Sal gemmae, Sal gemmae.
and answerable to the former before mentioned: and this kind of salt is found
in great abundance in Poland, and many other places; as in Calabria in Italy,
and in the county of Tirole in Germany. There is again a salt made of salt
wells: as at Nantwich, here in England, and at Hale and Luneburg, Salt of salt
wells.
both in Saxony. Some, again, is made of the Seawater; and that either
naturally by the heat of the Sun in July and August: as at Rochell, Sea Salt
natural, of Bai-salt.
Brouge and Marenes in France, and some places of Portugal* Salt of Seawater
by boiling.
or else artificially, boiled by the heat of the fire; as in some places here
in England, and in Scotland also. And it is to be observed, that where fewest
rivers run into the Sea, the best salt is made. Now, for keeping up fish or
flesh for a long time, for some Sea-voiage, or other use, that which is dug
out of the earth, made by the heat of the Sun, called Bai-salt, or of wells,
is of greatest force. The other is milder, and well befitting our ordinary use,
at table especially. Best salt.
Out of these natural salts by refining is made a fine white salt for ordinary
uses. And besides all these, there are yet infinite other sorts of salts made of
several sorts of vegetables and mineralls, and useful for many diseases. Salt
of simples, vegetables and mineralls
But howsoever, the use of salt moderately used be excellent; yet would I
advise thee, let the use of saltmeats be sparing, for fear of scabs, scurvie,
Dangers by immoderate use of salt-meats.
itches, and many other diseases.

Next unto Salt, Honey shall succeed, Of Honey.
which in all ages has ever bin of high and great esteem. It is hot and dry,
not above the second degree at most: It is a sovereign preserver from
putrefaction, and withal of an abstersive faculty. Choleric constitutions
and young people ought to be careful and circumspect how they use it, and
rather leave it to others, especially to old age, which may safely use the
same. Honey for whom most hurtful, or helpful.
And this is confirmed by the benefit Gal 5. de san t^uend.
Antiochus the Physician, and Telephus the Grammarian found by it. And Plin
lib. 22. cap, 24.
the Roman Pollio being asked by the Emperor, Augustus, by what means he had
prolonged his life to an hundred years? Answered, that he had used honey
within, and oil without. I^ it best for phlegmatic and cold complexions,
being moderately used: for in hot complexions it is quickly converted into
choler. It is far better boiled than raw, and so ingendreth not wind, Boiled
honey best for use.
especially where the body is predisposed; and so it is also more nourishing,
easier of digestion, and less it looseneth the belly than the raw; and new
honey is better than old, as being somewhat moister and pleasanter in taste.
The best honey ought to be very sweet, pleasant in smell, Notes of best honey.
of a clear yellowish color, indifferent stiff and firm, yielding but
little scumme on the top when it is boiled. Garden honey is the best,
Clarifying of honey.
and gathered of sweet flowers; it is clarified by adding a little water unto
it, about the fourth part, so scumme it while any froth arises or while the
water be euaporated, which is known by the bubles rising from the bottom: and
if thou will have it more pure, put into every pound of honey the white of one
egg, Virtues of honey.
and afterward scumme it again in the boiling. Honey is good in diverse
pectorall infirmities, the cough, shortness of breath, pleurisy, etc, as also
in the stone: and of it with diverse liquours, are made diverse drinks for this
same use and purpose; whereof more hereafter in the drinks for the diseased.
And although honey moderately used, opens obstructions, being of an
abstersive and cleansing faculty; yet immoderatly used, it ingendieth
obstructions, and so procures many diseases, arising from thence. Mercur.
variar. lect. libr. 2. cap. 23.
A late Writer allegeth, that there was a certain people in Africa, which out
of flowers made abundance of good honey, nothing inferior to that made by the
Bees. There is made of honey, both a water, a quintessence, Metheglin.
and diverse other drinks. Amongst diverse others, there is one that has ever
been in no small request amongst our ancient Britons, and now known by the
name of Welsh, which is that famous and wholesome Metheglin; the which I will
here set down, as I found it in a Butler his book of Bees and honey.
late published book of Bees. This then is nothing else but a generous kind
of hydromel, bearing an egg, the breadth of a groat or six pence, and is
usually made of finer honey, with a lesser proportion of water; namely, four
measures of water for one: Metheglin, how it is made.
receiving also into the composition, as well certain sweet and wholesome herbs,
as also a larger quantity of spices: namely, to every half barrel, or sixteen
gallons of the skimmed must, Eglantine, Marjoram, Rosemary, Time, Wintersavory,
of each half an ounce; pepper, granes of each two dragmes; the one half of
each being bagg'd, the other boiled loose, so that whereas the ordinary mede
will scarce last half a year; good Metheglin the longer it is kept, the more
delicate and wholesome it will be; and withal, the clearer and brighter. There
are yet diverse other sorts of descriptions of this famous drink, and may be
altered and accommodated to several seasons and constitutions and ages. There
is to be seen in the same Author a long description of a Metheglin, which
Noble Queen Elizabeth of famous memory had in frequent use.

Of Sugar.
Sugar has now succeeded honey, and is become of far higher esteem, and is
far more pleasing to the palate, and therefore every where in frequent use, as
well in sickness as in health. Whether the ancients were acquainted with Sugar
or no, may justly be demanded? Certain it is Gal. 8. Meth and 7. ^mpl. Drosc.
lib 2. cap. ^5.

Plin. lib. 12. cap 8 etc. Solm. cap. 65.


they knew Sugarcanes, and some Sugar they had, which naturally was congealed
on them like salt: as likewise a certain kind of liquid Sugar they expressed
out of Canes, which they used in stead of honey: but that they had the art of
preparing it, as now it is in use, and the several sorts of it with us in our
age used, does no where appear. Sugar is neither so hot nor dry as honey. The
coursest, being brownest, is most cleansing, Sugar, for what dis. ca^es most
^it.

The immoderate (...) of Sugar and sw^^^^ meats breed i^ ^y disenses in the
(...).


and approaches nearest unto the nature of honey. Sugar is good for abstersion
in diseases of the breast and lungs. The which we commonly call Sugarcandie,
being well refined by boiling, is for this purpose in most frequent request,
And although Sugar in it self be opening and cleansing, yet being much used
produces dangerous effects in the body: as namely, ^accharum in (...), s^ee^s,
^ob (...) ^il^m abit, ideeque ab f^cque^t^ore, illius p^tiss^mum. quod cal^^
vivae laxavio, and condidius, and si ^um magis red i^tu^, usa arcendi invenes,
quibus nocentissimum [History]

e^t Sa^charum: dum enim freque^ter and saccharo, and sacchara^^ co^sectionibu^
utuntur, p^ssima scal^^^t, Italorua, Hispanorum and Gallorum, (ad^^ Anglorum
imprimu) consuctuaine mes^at^, perpetua siti v^^antur, sa^gainem contrabunt
re^orridam, u^ and (...), Cachex^am, cum refraxa^^ vis^^rum internorum (...),
and con^^ (...) rh^^ matism^, (...) p^^lore, etiam anhel^tus f^etore, and
dentium nigrad^ae sere vexantar.


the immoderate use thereof, as also of sweet confections, and Sugar-plummes,
heateth the blood, ingendreth the landisc, obstructions, cachexies,
consumptions, rotteth the teeth, makes them look black; and withal, causes
many times a loathsome stinking-breath. And therefore let young people
especially, beware how they meddle too much with it. And if ever this proverb
(Sweet meats has often sower sauce) was verified, it holds in this
particular. I remember, living in Paris, 1607. A young Clerk, living with a
Lawyer in the City, procured a false-key for the closet where his Mistresses
sweet-meat lay; and for many days together, continued thus to feast with her
sweetmeats, and loafe-Sugar (whereof there was there no small store) until at
length, he became so pale in color, lean in body, and withal so feeble,
that he was scarce able to stand on his legs; insomuch, that the skilfullest
Physicians of the City, with the best means they could use, had much ado to
restore him to his former health again. And to what, I pray you, may we impute
a great part of the cause of so many dying of consumptions in the weekly bills
of the City of London? Surely, often admiring at so great a number dying of
this one disease, to the number, for the most part, of thirty at least, and
often upward; I have ever esteemed this one of the principal causes. Before I
leave this discourse of Sugar, I must give the world notice of one thing, to
wit, that there is great store of our finest Sugar, and which is most sought
after; Nam etsi candido illo color, and dulc^^^s suavitate m^au os decipiat;
fi tamen interior c^us anatomia ob o^ulos ponatur sub ilia albedne deterrimam
nigredinem sub eoque dulcore, acerrimos, acutissimorque spiritus, vel eum aquis
Seygi^s, seu fortibus certantes partibus vitalibu^ and respirationi dicatis
infenfissimos, is facile repererit qui in ossi- [Vineger.]

cina chymica sese exercuerit, etc. Claud. Deodat. Panth. Hygiast. lib. 2. cap.
1. Vertitur in bilem praesertim in aestate, and in naturis biliosioribus. Quin
and obstructionibus viscerae ^nplicare creditum, quanquam vi^ obtineat
obstersoriam. Caterum dentibus, siquid aliud inimicissimam: affert enim and
nigredinem, and rubiginem, and mobilitatem, quare ab ejus usu os collui
diligenter prudentiores docent. Nos medica severitate pronuntiamus usui^
Saccari mensis nostrae aetatis plus justo familiarem: prastantissimos enim
escas putamas, quae suapte natura placent. Nec audiendi sunt qui sapares
ciborum dulcedine sacebari fucari praecipiunt. Millia gentium sine s^ccharo,
eleganter, ac falicter vivunt, Johan, Bruyerm ^ere cibar. lib. 10. cap. 8.


refined and whitened by means of the lee of lime, the which how prejudicial
it must needs prove to the health, may appear: so that here it may well be
said, Sub melle dulce venenum. The toothsomest is not always the wholesomest.
Our forefathers in former times; found honey very wholesome; but now nothing
but the hardest Sugar will down with us in this our effeminate and gluttonous
age. I say no further, but let those that will not be warned, stand to the
peril that will fall thereon, I have discharged my duty in giving warning to
the wise, sober, and temperate; I know there are some intemperate apitian
palates, who prefer their bellies before health; yea, before heaven it self.
Verbum sat sapienti, A word is enough for a wise man.

Vinegar is a sauce in no small request for seasoning of meat. It is, as the
word imports, nothing else, but a sour wine, used both to season and to
keep meats, howbeit far inferior to salt. For, although it preserve meat
from putrefaction, yet will it not keep it so a long time, unless it be often
renewed. That it is very dry, even as far as the second degree, is true; but
as for the other qualities, Galen says, it is composed of hot and cold. It is
of a piercing nature, and apt to dissolve hard stones, whereof Hannibal had a
sufficient proof, while he made himself a passage into Italy through the Alps,
in dissolving the hard rocks by means of hot vinegar, with the loss of one of
his eyes. It is good to attenuate gross, tough and phlegmatic humors; it is
not so good for lean, choleric and melancholic people; and the too frequent
use of it is an enemy to the nervous parts, the stomach, guts, the womb; as
also the liver and lungs, and all the pectorall parts. Let women, such
especially, as think to make themseves look lean and fair with the use
thereof (young maids especially) take heed what they do, for fear of a late
repentance. Wine-vineger is the best and most forcible.
These strong and forcible effects of vinegar, are especially to be understood
of that which is made of good strong wine; that which is made of our Beer or
Ale, being far inferior to the other, both in the one and the other qualities;
drying, I mean, and heating and cooling. And that of Wine differs also,
according to the nature and quality of the Wine whereof it is made; that of
white Wine being more opening, and of claret more binding. Vinegar strongly
resists putrefaction; and therefore is good in the time of the plague of
pestilence, and other diseases proceeding of putrefaction of humors, and
strengthens the gums, and dissolveth soft, phlegmatic and rheumatick tumors
thereof. With the addition of some herbs we may make vinegar participating of
the like virtues, as of Roses, Elder, and many others. That made of red Roses
with claret Wine vinegar is very good, and most strengthening for the stomach,
etc. Vinegar made of Cider or Petry, is liker unto the nature of Verjuice made
of Crabs, than to wine vinegar.

Ver^uice.
Verjuice, as it is a general name agreeing with any sour green juice; so is
it most properly taken in Wine-countries, for that which is expressed out of
green sour grapes; and with us, we call by that name the juice expressed out
of our sour Crabs. It is neither so drying, nor penetrating as vinegar: it is
also, without controversy, cold, and is good to stir up a dull appetite, for
hot and choleric young bodies: but enemy to age, moist and phlegmatic
bodies, and cold diseases. Our Crab verjuice is not so forcible as the other.

Oil.
Oil which is expressed out of the Olive berry, has ever bin both for inward
and outward use in no small account and esteem. Outwardly, it has bin much
used by way of inunction; Use of oil very ancient.
but in hot countries especially: and therefore our gentlewomen in this age,
which dirt-dawb their faces with their several slibber-sauces and paints, are
nothing warranted by this ancient custom, as being by them only used by
reason of the parching heat, which did much dry up and wither that tender part
of the body. Oil of two sorts.
Oil of Olives is either expressed out of the yellow ripe berry of the Olive,
or else before it be full ripe, being of a greenish color; and therefore
called oil Omphacine. The first makes the body more soluble; but is more
fulsome for the stomach, and cloieth the same.

Oil Omphacine.
The other agrees far better with the stomach, as being of a more astringent
faculty; and therefore far better to be inwardly used. And this is the best
for sallets, and dressing of meat, in such countries where it most abounds.
There is yet another oil in no small request, in France especially, oil of
Walnuts; Oil of Walnuts very wholesome.
which being fresh, and not too old, I hold to be nothing inferior to the
other: the Walnut, as said is, being esteemed an antidot against poison; and
this, as well as the other, is good for this purpose, expelling by vomit what
is hurtful. And for ordinary use, either for dressing of meat, as also in
sallets it may well be used.

The Olives themselves are ordinarily pickled up for sauce, Pickled Olives.
to stir up the appetite. It is of a temperate heat: they are either full
ripe, being then yellow in color; or else not fully ripe, and green in
color. The first weaken the stomach, and engender but bad humors, the others
are more cooling and astringent, and therefore to better purpose, used for
sauces, as being fitter for corroboration of the stomach, exciting of the
appetite, staying of casting, etc. They are pickled up with salt, or salt and
vinegar: the later are the better, howbeit, no great goodness in either,
ingendering but gross melancholicke humors, and bind the belly.

Among many other sauces, Mustard.
Mustard is none of the meanest esteem among most people, and is hot even in
the fourth degree: and therefore with us, it is commonly prepared with vinegar;
and in hot countries where wine abounds, with must, or new wine, whence have
we this name Mustard, from this Must, and ardor or heat. It is much used with
the grosser sorts of meats, both fish and flesh, especially, it is most useful
with those of a glutinous and viscuous substance. It is best in Winter-season,
in cold and moist diseases and constitutions of the brain. It very forcibly
cutteth and attenuateth tough phlegm in the head, breast, etc. For young
people, especially, hot and dry choleric people, and diseases of the like
nature, it is worst. If immoderately used, especially by these persons last
mentioned, it hurts the eyesight, besides many ill offices it performs to
the rest of the body.

Capers are pickled up after the same manner, in salt and vinger, Capers.
which is the best way, and do very well excite the appetite, cut tough
phlegm, and cleanse it; as also open obstructions of the Spleen, especially.
If dry or lean melancholicke bodies use them, let them be sparing, and wash
off the salt, and after they have steeped them awhile in fair water, they may
use them, especially with a few Currants, alone, or with oil if they love it.

The young buds of Broom flowers, are used also after the same manner, Broom^
b^ds, Ashkeies.
and produce the like effects: and some use ashkeies pickled up in salt and
vinegar after the same manner, for the same uses, and provoking of urine.

Sampeir, or Sea-fennell, is pickled up, and used in sauces after the same
manner, being somewhat hot and dry, exciting appetite, Sampei^.
and opening obstructions, and every diureticke, or forcibly provoking urine,
and cleansing those urinary passages.

The pleasant flowers of Clove-gilliflowers is often also with vinegar and
sugar pickled up for a pleasant and dainty sauce, the which, Clove-gilliflowers.
besides that they excite the appetite, they are also of a cordial faculty.

Cowslip-flowers comfortable, Cowslip-flowers.
especially for the head and animal spirits, are by some after the same manner
pickled up, and used for sauce. and the like art may also be used with diverse
other flowers or herbs, according as to every ones mind shall seem best; and
therefore I surcease speaking any more of them.

Of spices in most request and use. Pepper.
It is now more than time I come to our spices, which are in no small use, as
well in physic, as used for seasoning of meats. Amongst all these, Pepper, in
regard of the general use, may be accounted one of the chief. It is a very
hot and dry spice, even toward the fourth degree: Sorts of pepper, and the
most in use with us.
It is of three several sorts, and all of them are very hot, and brought to us
out of the East Indies, especially the kingdom of Caleent. The white is
esteemed hotter than the black; and the long most of all, and is of least use;
Black Pepper is with us in most frequent use; heateth much, cutteth tough and
gross phlegm, helps the concoction in a cold phlegmatic stomach; is also
good against crudities, wind-colicke, and cold in any part, sinews, or others.
It is not to be too small beaten, for fear of inflaming the blood, and other
profitable humors of the body; it is safelier used in old age, than in younger
people; for whom the too frequent use of it is exceeding hurtful. And
therefore it ought not to be so ordinarily, Caution in the use of pepper.
without any consideration had either to age or season of the year, as it is,
used of every one. Let youth therefore take heed how they use, too liberally,
Venison so much peppered and salted in the Sommer-season; and to mend the
matter after, make it swim in wine. It is thought, pepper heateth less than
other spices: Whether pepper heateth less than other spices, and how.
and this I do not conceive, that other spices are indeed actually hotter; but
by reason the heat of it is less durable, and it is not of so terrestrious a
substance. And for this same cause, I suppose, long Pepper, by reason of a more
terrestrious substance, and more durable heat, is accounted hotter, by reason
of this durable, biting and abiding heat. And this, I suppose, gave the vulgar
occasion to call Pepper hot in the mouth, and cold in the stomach. But let the
dullest taste try a small quantity of Pepper, and I will appeal to his senses,
whether it be hot or cold; so that I shall need use no other argument to prove
it.

Ginger.
That little hot root, which we call Ginger, comes in the second place of
spices to be considered. And although it be not so intense in heat as Pepper, I
mean in the degree, yet heateth it more by reason of its terrestrious
substance. It is brought over unto us either dry, or else preserved green in
sirup: and it is sometimes, yea, very often, preserved after it comes over,
being first steeped and boiled in water, which, notwithstanding, yields much
in goodness to the former. Dry Ginger is very hot and dry, Virtues in Ginger,
and for whom best.
and is used to season cold and moist meats, as pepper is; howbeit Pepper be in
far more frequent use, either for fish or flesh, especially for fish. Ginger is
good to help digestion, and to open obstructions, to cut and attenuate gross
and tough phlegmatic humors, to discuss wind, and help to expel it out of
the body. It is better for aged than for young hot choleric bodies, or the
like diseases. Green Ginger preserved in the Iudies.
Green Ginger preserved in the Indies when it is yet moist and succulent, as it
is pleasing to the palate, so is it nothing so hot and dry as any other sort;
and therefore may safelier be of younger people used, than any of the other
sorts; and is good to eat fasting for a waterish or windy and weak stomach,
and comfort the head, being good for diseases of the brain proceeding of
cold. Ginger here with us at home is both preserved in sirup, as has been said
already; and sometimes also candied to be eaten dry. This last approaches
nearest to the nature of dry Ginger, and is fittest to be used of the elder,
colder and moister age and stomach. Ginger here preserved for inferio^ (...)
that which is brought us from Iudies.
That which is here preserved in sirup, is far inferior in goodness to that
which is preserved in the Indies. And thus prepared, they are hardly concocted
by a weak stomach, and continuing long there, are converted into a tough
glutinous substance; of the which, History.
a late writer brings an instance. A Bishop of Basile (says he) having by
the too frequent use of a certain Mineral water, acquired a very cold and
moist stomach; to correct this crudity, used much this so prepared Ginger,
notwithstanding his Physicians counsel to the contrary. At length he fell into
a desperate disease whereof he died. His body being opened, in the capacity of
his stomach were found about two pounds of putrified water, together with a
petty quantity of the aforesaid Ginger; some part of it yet continuing still in
its own nature, and some part of it converted into a tough, black, glutinous
substance, sticking to the sides and cells of his stomach and guts; some part
whereof, he did also before his death now and then, yet not without fainting
and swounding, often cast up. Let others then take warning to use it more
sparingly.

The Clove is a spice brought us from the Molucks in the East Indies, being hot
and dry in the third degree. Cloves.
It is very much used in the kitchen both for sauces, and sticking of meat.
Cloves comfort the head, heart, stomach and liver; help the eyesight, and
concoction, and strengthen nature. They are good against fainting, swounding,
as also against the plague, and any infectious disease. Besides, they are good
against all fluxes of the belly, proceeding of cold humors, strengthen the
retentive faculty, and make the breath sweet. Of this, as of other spices, are
extracted water, oil, and other things useful for the health of mankind,
whereon I will not now insist. But I advise young people, hot and choleric
complexions to be sparing, as in the use of all other spices, so of this also;
and of any thing extracted from them.

The Nutmegge is the fruit of a tree growing in the East Indies, Nutmegge.
being covered with that spice we call Mace. They are accounted hot and dry in
the second degree, and are good for the same cases for the which Cloves were
commended; and although they be not altogether so intense in hearing and
drying, yet are they very astrigent, and comfort the noble parts, being also
very good for moist, cold, phlegmatic bodies and cold diseases, fluxes, etc.
But still let young, hot, dry and melancholicke persons carefully take heed
what they do. The Nutmeg being yet green, covered over with a green husk,
as are our Walnuts, is preserved in the Indies, and brought us over: the which
is nothing so hot nor drying as our dry Nutmegges; and therefore very
comfortable for the head and stomach, especially, and may be either eaten
fasting in a morning or after meals. Mace covers the Nutmegge, partaking of
the same nature, strengthening all the noble parts, being good against cold
diseases, and against fluxes, and spitting of blood.

Indian nut.
There is yet another great fruit brought to us from the same Indies ready
preserved, called the Indian Nut, which is very good likewise to comfort all
the noble parts, and strengthen nature.

Cinnamon.
Cinnamon is the inward rind or bark of a tree growing in the East Indies, hot
and dry about the third degree; and yet in regard of the tenuity of its parts
(as was before said of black pepper) is thought not to heat so much as some
other spices. This noble spice, both in regard of the fragrant smell, Vertu^s
of Cinnamon.
and pleasantness to the palate may justly challenge the first place of
excellency. It comfort all the noble parts, cheereth spirits, opens
obstructions both of men and women, furthereth the expulsion of the birth,
sweetneth the breath, helps concoction, and expels urine. But still let
the same cautions be observed, Cinnamon water.
which have been mentioned in the use of other spices. There is out of this
likewise distilled a noble water, and in great request for the aforesaid
purposes, in the use whereof, notwithstanding, I wish everyone, especially
women, to be wise and circumspect.

Saffron.
Saffron, although it be a simple growing with us here at home, and in our own
soil; yet is it nothing inferior to any of the former, in regard of the
excellency thereof for use. It is hot in the second, and dry in the first
degree; and much comfort and cheereth the heart, and reviveth the vital
spirits. It is exceeding good against all obstructions both in man and woman;
against all obstructions of the liver, against the Jaundize, and stuffing of
the pipes of the lungs; good also to further the menstruall courses, and
facilitate the birth: and therefore let women with child beware of the use
thereof. And I advise all to a moderate use of it, by reason that taken in too
great abundance it much offends the head and brain, and oftentimes procures
the headache.

And this shall suffice to have said in brief concerning the matter of diet in
general both for the whole and sick, as also of some sauces and spices in
most frequent and ordinary use: and concerning diverse other things, as yet here
omitted in the diet of the diseased, shall hereafter be somewhat said at
greater length. And as concerning our spices, although now we be well supplied
from foreign parts; yet are we not here at home unfurnished of many excellent
and wholesome aromaticall plants, very wholesome both in the use of physic
and food, and whereof we have frequent and often use; such as are, Rosemary,
Lavander, Time, Savorie, Sage, Mints, Penniroyal, Basil, sweet Cervill, Avens,
Angelica, and many others. And a Mirandum interim quod nost^^ Germani, relictis
muitis egregi^s Plantis, patrio and coelo and solo natis, atque insigni
facultate aromati a p^aed^^s; ad exo^icas plantas, aromati^ o^que tum f^uctus,
tum semina, cortises atque eodices, non ^olum peregrino and exotico tum Coelo
tum Climate; acre ac solo productas; sed etiam ob locorum distantiam, vectura
difficultatem, and mercatorum incuriam, dolum, fraude^^que marcidas,
putrescentesve ac verminosas confugiant; cum tamen (...): Germania non (...)
aromaticas planta^ condiendis cibis and oppo^tu ^^ssimas, and salunerrimas, tam
e^dome^^ (...), quam sylv^sis, monto^^^^a campestrious locis indies
subministrent; quales sunt Amaracus, Rosmarinus, Sal^ia, lavendula, Sp^ca,
Co^us. Nardus, Da^^us, ^asilicum, Mentha Hortensis, Palegium, Origanum,
Serpillum, Thymus, Na^^urtium, Piperina, (...) Lep^dium; Pip^r item Germanicum
seu Hispanicum, Ceresolium, Aaronis item, imperat Levistici, ac Angelicae
radices, and aliae sexcentae, quae insigni suo ardore, mordicatione, and
acrimonis, ita saep^^os, linguamque and palotum vellicant, feriunique, ut cum
quovis Zinzibere, Pipere, Cardamomo, macere, aut Cinamomo, etc: certare
videantur. Deodatus Panth, Hygiast. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Germane Physician much wondreth at his own nation, that being so well
supplied at home with so many excellent aromaticall simples, his country men
are so eager of outlandish spices; which both by reason of the remoteness of
those regions, the difficulty of transportation, the carelessenesse of the
merchant, and diverse frauds and impostures, are often brought unto us rotten,
worme-eaten, or at least, that have lost a great deal of their virtues.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Gluttony, and excess in the use of food.

HAving now discoursed of several sorts of Aliments, and the right use of
them, I think it not amiss to say something of the abuse of these creatures,
and the great damage and danger does from thence ensue: and this excess we
commonly call Gluttony, and such as do thus exceed, we call Gluttons and
Belli-gods. Now if ever this saying, Plures gula quam gladio perire; More
perish by intemperance than by the sword; I think, it is verified in this age
wherein we live. Plato in his time esteemed that city intemperate which
maintained many Physicians; and used always to exhort his followers to
sobriety. Inter epulandum (inquit Epictetus) memineris te duos conviva^
excipere, amniam and corpus, utru^que crapula and inpulvia ob^ut, non re^reari.
Riolanus fitius in privatis praelect. Stuck antiq. convir. lib. 3. cap. 9.
And remember (says Epictetus the Philosopher) that at thy meals thou always
interteinest two guests, the soul and body; and that both these are by
gluttony and intemperance oppressed, and not refreshed. Proverb. 22.2.
The wise man wishes thee to consider diligently what is be before thee, and
put a knife to thy throat (says he) if thou be a man given to thy appetite. Be
not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat. And since the life
of man is since the first age of the world so much abbreviated, why will thou
by intemperanee abbreviate that small portion of time allotted thee here to
live? And if it be forbidden to kill another, what barbarous inhumane cruelty
is it for thee to lay violent hands upon thy self? Now Gluttony and
intemperance weakeneth the natural vigor and strength of the whole body,
together with all the senses, and hinders the right operation of the soul,
makes the body crasy, the life short and uncomfortable. Whosoever therefore
loves his life, and is desirous to enjoy the benefit of health, let him use a
moderation in his meat and drink; and so let him use these good creatures to
comfort and strengthen nature, and not to give the full swinge to his
disorderly appetite. To reckon up all the diseases procured by this Gluttony,
were too tedious: but let it suffice, that in a word few diseases there are,
which are not by this belly-god sin of Gluttony procured to the body: as
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Incubus, called Nightmare, Diseases procured by Gluttony.
all manner of distillations or rheumes, oppression of the stomach, Crudities,
Vomits, Lasks of several kinds, putrid Fevers of several sorts,
disquietnesse and watching; together with a multitude of other more. And some
who have been for a long time tormented with that merciless tyrant the Gout,
which contemned most generous remedies, Harms procured to the soul and mind*
by means of abstinence and spare diet, have at length recovered their perfect
health. The mind also, and that reasonable soul, which makes a man differ
from unreasonable creatures, is not a little also by this odious sin of
Gluttony interessed and damnified. Is it not apparent that it blunts the edge
of the understanding? Dulls and deads the intellectual and reasonable part of
the soul? and breeds a sluggishnesse, drowzinesse and stupiditie in the whole
man? and does it not by this means make a man altogether unfit for any noble
or excellent imploiment? Let no man then esteem this a small sin, which is
also so ancient, that it had its original in Paradise; and joined with pride,
Haec fuit origo humanae miseria, hoc malorum omnium seminarium, hinc mortis
mitiu^ natum est, quae crudeli dominatu omnes postea homines oppressit. Stuck
antiq. conviv. lib. 3. cap. 9.
was the first original and beginning of all the misery that ever befell
mortal man. Besides, this Gluttony proves fatal to a man's fortunes, and in a
few years, months or weeks wastes that which might have maintained many, a
multitude of years. And therefore we see daily by woeful experienee, that
many young gallants, having in a very short space galloped out of great
estates; as having never well learned that golden lesson, Non minor est virtus
quam quaerere parta tueri.
It Is no less courage to maintain, than things at first to get and gain.
Fall at length into penury and poverty: and then being brought up in idleness
and ease, Excess and riot of our times.
in affluence and abundance, and without any lawful calling (the bane and
breake-necke of many a young Gentleman) before they will wrong their back and
belly, will rather betake themselves to some such unlawful courses, that will
at length bring them to a tragical and shameful end. Now because, by reason
of sin, the nature of man is so apt to exceed in the too too liberal use of
the creatures; therefore as well the sacred Oracles, as profane writers have
showed their dislike of this odious sin, and exhorted us to sobriety. And if
the wise man commend sobriety in Princes, whose prerogative royal might seem
to bear them out in excess far beyond ordinary people, what shall we say of
others? Eccles. 10.16.
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength and not for drunkenness. Woe unto thee, O
Land, when thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. Haere
again the counsel of Ecclesiasticus 31.
another wise man: A very little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, and he
fetches not his wind short upon his bed. Sound sleep comes of moderate
eating, he rises early, and his wits are with him: but the pain of watching,
and choler, and the pangs of the belly are with an unsatiable man. It is again
in Ezekiel. 16.49.
another place recorded, that idleness and fullness of bread, that is, excess
in diet, was the sin of Sodom. And the Luke 16.22, 23.
rich Glutton, who fared delitiously every day, descended into hell, when poor
Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom. Among the Heathens of old, it will
seem no strange news to hear of such Belly-gods: as for one Idem Stuckius ex
Livio and Aulo Gellio.
Sergius Aurata; Abidius a Citizen of Rome; Fabius, who for his great Gluttony,
was metaphorically called gurges, a gulf or deep pit: Aesop the stage-plaiers
son, is to posterity recorded for a notorious and extraordinary glutton; who
to the end he might the more easily overcome his great patrimony, Gluttons
and belly-gods among the Romans.
dissolved fair oriental Pearls, and served them in at table for ordinary
dishes; and besides, provided great store of Parrats, and other singing birds,
purchased at a high price, and had them likewise served in at table as though
they had been but ordinary Guat snappers. I need not instance in any more of
these ancient and notorious Gluttons, but would wish that the Christian world,
yea, our own country yielded us not too many instances; in so much that of
this one subject I might write whole volumes. But I think there is none but can
find instances enough, without fetching them from far, which may save me a
labor. But let us hear how the very Heathens had this sin in detestation.
That noble Orator Tullie has this golden sentence. (...) ^ummum esse bonum,
vox mihi pecudum (...), non homi^um, etc

Cicero in Parodoxis.


To say that sensuality or voluptuousness is that chief happiness to be
sought after, seems to me a speech better beseeming a beast than a man. The
same Author again relates, that when that famous Philosopher Aristotle had
read the Epitaph of that Epicurean Assyrian, King Sardanapalus, which himself
had commanded to be set over him after his death, Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque
exatura libido
Hansit, at illa jacent multa and preclara relicta.
What I have eaten that I have: this does me grieve and gall,
That good things left my belly paunch cannot devour them all.


What other Epitaph (says he) could thou have set over the sepulcher of an
ox, and not of a King? But hear a little now the heathen Herat. lib. 2. sermon.
(...).
Poets upon Belligod-Gluttons.

-- Quum corpus onustum
Externis vitijs animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
When as the body burdned is with outward sin and vice,
It also loads the inward mind, and weyes it down likewise;
And fastneth unto the earth that little part of heavenly breath,
Hear yet again Pers. sat.
another speak to the same purpose.

Qui pote? vis dicam? nugaris cum tibi calve,
Pinguis aqualiculus propenso sesquipede extet.
O bald head shall I tell thee true? to write it does not boot,
So long as thy fat lericum-panch hangs out full half a foot.
And Iuven. sat. 11.
another speaks yet in the language.

Et quibus in solo vivendi causa palato est
Egregius coenat, meliusque miserrimus horum,
Et cito casurus (in paupertatem lapsurus) jam perlucente ruina
Hoc est, egestate apparante.
Talibus a Dominis (luxuriosis) post cuncta novissimus exit
Annulus, and digito mendicat Pollio nudo, etc.
And those to whom the cause of life does in their Palats rest,
Who sup and dine most sumptuously, still faring of the best,
Yet such men are most miserable, and soon fall to decay,
When they have made their guts their god, and spent their wealth away,
From such like Prodigalls as these, when all things else are sold,
Off from their thumbs and fingers go their rings of purest gold.
Which being sold and spent for food, they still remain full poor,
And are constrained without their rings, to beg from door to door.
But hear yet a lively description of such a spend-thrift set down by another
Ovid Metam^rph.
Poet.

Nec mora quod Pontus, quod terra, quod educat aer
Poscit, and appositis queritur jejunia mensis:
Quodque satis poterat popalo, non sufficit vni;
Plusque cupit quo plura suum demittit in alvum.
Vtque fretum recipit de tota flumina terra,
Nec satiatur aquis, peregrinosque ebibit amnes,
Vtque rapax ignis non ulla alimenta recusat,
Innumerasque faces cremat, and qua copia major
Est data, plura petit, turbaque voraeior ipsa est:
Sic epula omnes Erisichthonis ora prophani
Accipiunt, poscuntque fimul, cibus omnis in illo
Causa cibi est, semperque locus fit inanis edendo.
There Is no delay; what from the Sea, the earth, air does proceed
This man requires, blames fasting when tables are furnished,
He among dainties, dainties seeks, and what is fully able
To satisfy great multitudes, will not suffice his table:
The more he sends into his paunch, the more he still would have,
Even as the Sea from the whole earth, all rivers does receive,
And yet with water is not filled, nor with no rainie showers,
All floods that flow from foreign lands it drinks up and devoures;
And as devouring fire we see no fuel does forsake,
But all the fagots cast therein, does dust and ashes make,
And still the more you cast therein, the more it still desires;
Such is the nature as we see of all outrageous fires:
Even so Erisicthons greedy gut receives and craves withal,
In him one dainty dish of meat does for another call.
This Glutton always has a place still empty in his belly case.
Now I will make it appear that great Princes, even of the Heathens themselves
have had this vice in great detestation. Alexander in Persarum regia prandium
Regis legebat, and coenam in aerea columna inscr^ptam, in qua caetera quoque
leges inerant, quas Cyrus scripserat: de triticea farina pura quadringentae
artabae. Artaba autem medica modium atticum conficit. De secundaria po^tea
farina post puram artabae 300. and de tertia aliae deinde artabae 300. de omni
triticea farina artabae ad coenam mill. Grani avenarij artabae ducentae
Pol^inis in polentam admixtae, pro offis artabae december. De berdeacea farina
purissima ducentae artabae; desecunda posteam 400 atque etidem de tertia 400.
Nasturtij incisi signatique tenuis ptisanae artabae 10: de semine sinapi tertia
pars unius artabae. Oves masculi quadringenti, hoves centum, equi triginta,
anseres saginati quadringenti, turtures trecentae, aviculae omnis generis
sexcentae, agni trecenti, pulli anserini 100, damae 30. lactis recentis december
mary's. Maris autem december valet Choas atticas. Oxygalactis dulcorati december
marios, alli^ talentum, caeparum semitalentum. De asperiorum genere, folij
artaba liquioris silphi) duae minae, cucumeris artaba, silphij talentum
ponderatum. Favi ex cucumere facti quarta pars artabae Grana panici tria
talenta pondere, melanthii tertia pars artabae. Musti ex vino quinque mary's.
Aethiopici cucumeris sex capetes. Capetis autem est che^nix attica. Anethum
arid uin triginta minerum pondere, de apis semine 4 capetes. Oleisesamini december
mary's, Olei lactei quinque mary's, Olei terchutini quinque mary's, Olei
acanthi quinque mary's, Olei de amygdalis dulcibus tres mary's, amygdalarum
aridarum dulcium tres artabae. Vini qumgemae mary's (quod si Babilone aut Susis
caenam faciant, dimidium vinum de palmis praebet) ^ignorum ducenti currus.
Mellis fluentis centum paluthae quadrangulae, quae circiter december minas
capiebant. Cum in Media haec praestat, semen cuici ad tres artabas, Crocum duas
minas excedentem pondere. Haec in coenam and prandium. Consumit autem largiendo
triticeae farinae purae quingenas artabas, hordeaceae farinae purae mill
artabas, sitiginis quingencas artabas, chondri ex far quingentas mary's.
Hordeum pro iumentis vicies mill artabas, siliginis quingentas artabas,
patearum decies mill currus. Olei sesamini ducentas mary's. Nasturtis incisi
tenuis artabas trigenta. Haec omnia dispertit copiis quae sunt enumerata. Rex
autem cum tantum in hunc apparatum quotidie insuna, reliqui Macedones haec
legentes, tanquam beatum admirabantur: Alexander tanquam miserum and infoelicem
deridebat, atque multis negotiis impeditum. Itaque columnam etiam in qua haec
scripta extabant, convellere iussit, diceus ad amicos; nequaquam utile esse
regibus tam intemperanter and prodige caenare discere. Necesse enim est, ut
magnum luxum ac prodigalitatem eximia timiditas atque mollities consequatur.
Videtis autem eis qui tantis coenis impleri solent, in pugnis etiam celeriter
hostibus victoriam dare. Polyaenus stratag. lib. 4. ex interpret Latina Iusti
Vulteii Hermanni patris.
Histories record that Alexander the Great being in the Palace of the Kings of
Persia, read what was written in a pillar of brass concerning the Kings dinner
and supper, and the ordinances concerning that business set down by Cyrus;
wherein was set down of pure wheat-floure about 400 bushells; of a second sort
of courser flower* 300 bushells, and of another third sort 300 more; in all
1000. Of barley flower, a 1000 bushells. Of Oats, 200 bushells: Oat-meale for
pudding, gruell, etc. 10 bushells; and so of all other things proportionably:
as 400 fat hogs, a 100 beeves, 30 horses, 400 fat geese; and so
proportionably of diverse other kinds of foul, and other provision both for
ordinary food and sauces. The Macedonians reading all this great provision for
one day, admired this great Prince as a most happy man. But Alexander deriding
all this prodigality, accounted him most miserable and unhappy; as being
entangled with too many affairs: and for this cause, caused to pull down the
pillar whereon all this was written, saying to his friends about him, that it
was not fit for Kings to learn to sup so intemperately and prodigally: for it
cannot be (said he) but that great cowardlinesse and effeminatenesse must of
necessity accompany such excess and prodigality. And now you manifestly see,
that those who use to fill their bellies with so great suppers, basely yield
the victory to their enemies. And in this, this mighty Monarch spoke the truth,
although afterward mastered by this Persian prodigality.

The same (...) priu^quam (...) ^et, dix (...) commodo^ fe^um du^re, nemp^
m^tuti^^ la^ore ad condiendum pr^ndium, ad (...) vero prandu (...), Cra^on
(...).
Alexander, before he gave himself over to excess of diet and drunkenness,
was wont to say, that he carried about with him curious cooks to provide
sauces for his meat: to wit, his morning labor and travel to season his
dinner; and again a spare dinner to season his supper. (...) que^ (...) eibum
su^^ersussit ^ ebriosos capuali ^upplicio mut^avit. ^uchan, rerum Scotiae. lib.
6. page 166.
It is recorded of Constantine the son of Kennethie, and 71 King of the
Scottish nation, that he compelled all the youth of his Kingdom, at that time
much effeminate and drowned in delights and pleasures, to lie on the bare
ground, and to eat but once a day: and as for that Swinish sin of
drunkenness, it cost them no less than their life. David 91. (...) Rex,
luxuriam lat u^ proserpentem patris exemplo coere^^t: art. sices and inventores
(...) illecebrarum quae galam ^eritant regno esceit. Idem lib. 7 page 113.
David the 91. King of the same Nation, according to his Fathers example,
suppressed all riot and excess, which then began to increase and creep abroad;
and expelled out of his Kingdom all inventors of any dainties and curious
sauces, whereby the appetite might be starred up. By the which, it may plainly
appear that in former times, diverse of the Kings of that Nation bent
themselves against the abuses of their times. And would to God we had now some
course taken for the suppressing of excess in all his Majesty's dominions: I
am sure, those who have but one eye may easily see how necessary a thing this
were. Among the ancient Romans, Longum f^at si c^^merare velim quod
instrumenta gulae inter illos vel ingenio cogitata sunt vel studio consecta. Et
hae nimirum causae fuerunt propter quas tot numero leges de coenis and
sumptibus ad populum ferebantur^ and imperari c^pit, ut patentibus jan^is
pra^sitaretur and caenitaretur: sic oculis civium testibus factis luxuriae
modus si ^et. Prima autem omnium de coenis lex ad populum Orchia pervenit, quam
tulit C. Orchius Tribunus plebis de Senatus sententia, tertio anno quam Cato
censer fuerat: cujus verba quia prolixa sunt, praetereo: summa autem ejus
praescribebat numerum convivarum. Post annum vicesi^^um secundum legis Orchiae,
Fannia lex lata est, anno post Romam conditam, secundum Gell^i opinionem
quingentesimo ^^luagesimo octavo; de hac lege Sammonicus Serenus ita re fert.
Le^ Fannia Augusti ingenti omnium ordinum consensa pervenit ad populum, neque
eam Praetores aut Tribuni, ut ploerasque alias, sed ex omni bonorum consilio
and sententia ipsi consules tulerunt, cum respublica ex luxuria conviviorum
majora quam credi potest deirimenta pateretur. Siquidem eo res redierat, ut
gula illecti plaerique ingenui pueri pudicitiam and libertatem suam
venditarent: plaerique ex plebe Romana vino madidi in comitium venirent, and
ebrii de salute reipublicae consulerent. Haec Sammonicus. Fanniae autem legis
severitas in eo superabat Orchiam legem, quod in superiore numerus tantummodo
coenantium cohibebatur, licebatque secundum eam unicuique bona sua inter paucos
consumere Fannia autem etiam sumptibus modum fecit assibus centum. Vnde a
Lucilio Poeta, festivitatis suae more centussis votatur Fanniam legem post
annos december and octo lex Didia consecuta est: ejus fere^da duplex causa fuit;
prima and potissima, ut universa Italia non sola urbs lege sumptuaria
teneretur, Italicis aestimantibus Fanniam legem non in se, sed in solos urbanos
ci^es esse conscriptam. Deinde, ut non soli qui prandia coenasve majore sumptu
fecissent, sed etiam qui ad ea^ vocati essent, atque omnino interfuissent
poenis legis tenerentur. Post Didiam Licinia Lex lata est a P. Licino Crasso
divite: cujus ferundae pro^andaeque tantum studium ab optimatibus impensum est,
ut consulto Senatus juberetur, ut ea tantummodo promulgata priusquam trinundino
confirmaretur, ab omnibus observaretur, quasi iam populi sententia comprobata.
Lex vero haec paucis mutatis in plarisque cum Fannia co^gruit: in ea enim
ferenda quaesita novae legis auctoritas, exolesente motu legis antiquioris,
etc. Sed legis Liciniae summa ut Kalendis, nonis, nundinis Romany, cuique in
dies singulos triginta duntaxat asses edunai causa consumere liceret: caeteris
vere diebus, qui excepti non essent, ^e amplius appo^eretur quam carnis aridae
pondo tria, and salsamentorum po^do libra, and quod ex ^erra, vite, arboreve
sit natum. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3. ex Tito. Livi. and Aulo Gellio.
this was for a while very carefully looked into, and many sumptuary laws then
made for this same end and purpose. And it is well observed, that before these
laws were made, that people was exceedingly given to excess and riot: for the
which cause, it was commanded that they should dine and suppe, their doors
standing open, that thereby better notice might be taken of their excess, if
any committed. And besides, Gluttony was then come to that height, that many
youths, to please their palates, and satisfy their greedy guts, did not only
sell themselves for slaves; but even abandoned their bodies to be in most
beastly manner abused by those who were addicted to this unaturall and unlawful
lust. The first of these laws was called Orchia, from the Author Orchius: and
in it was set down the number of the guests which were to be invited to any
great meeting, the which number they should not exceed. The next was that,
called Fannia lex, made by the consent of Augustus Caesar, and the whole people
of the City, and this limited the expenses which might be spent at any feast,
which to exceed, was not allowed. And afterward followed that, call Lex Didia,
extending the former Law, (which before was most enjoined to be observed in the
City) to all Italy. And again, adding this likewise, that not only such as
invited their guests; but even the invited guests also themselves should be
accounted transgressors, and breakers of this law. There followed yet another
after, called Lex Licinia, appointing smaller prices, upon diverse things they
were before sold for: but this was not in that esteem, as the former.

Now in Stuck. antiquit. conviv. libr. 3. cap. 4. ex Thoma Aquin. in libr.
quaest. disput. quaest. 14. idem ibid. ex Gregor. meral. 30.
Gluttony, there is a trible fault committed: First, in the substance of the
meat, when it is too curious and delicate: Secondly, in the quantity, when it
exceeds in the same; and thirdly, in the quality, if it be too daintily
seasoned, and too curiously cooked. And then is it not properly called (...)
nourishment, but (...) cupediae, junkets, or wanton fare. Another says, we
transgress in Gluttony five manner of ways: First, sometimes we prevent our
need: Secondly, in providing too dainty fare: Thirdly, when we are too curious
in the preparation of our food: Fourthly, we often exceed in the quantity:
Fifthly, we often err in the too earnest and immoderate desire of dainty
fare; all which are comprehended in this verse following: Praepropere, lante,
nimis, ardenter, studiose.

The remedies against this sin, are set down both in holy Scripture, and
profane Authors. The Proverb. 22.2.
wise Solomon gives us good counsel in his Proverbs: And to this same purpose,
see some precepts in Ecclesiasticus: And a E de citra cruditatem: bibe citra
ebrietatem: nec praesentibus delitiis inhaerebis, nec desiderabis absentes.
Victus tibi ex facili sit, nec ad voluptatem, sed ad cibum accede. Palatu^ tum
fames excites, non sepores. Desideria tua parve redime qui hoc tantu^ curare
debent, ut desinant. atque ad exemplar quasi compositus divinum, a corpore ad
spiritum quantum potes te fastina redimere. Idem Stuck, ibid ex S. Martin
Duminensis Episcopi libello ad Mironem Gallia Regem.
worthy Bishop sends these golden rules to a King: Eat so as thou may
avoid crudity: drink so as thou may shun drunkenness. Be neither too
much addicted to dainties present; nor yet too much desire those thou want:
Let thy diet be ordinary and homely; sit down to wholesome meat, and not to
delight and pleasure: Let hunger, and not exquisite sauces provoke thy appetite
etc. The heathens, from the dignity, excellency, and eminency of this noble
creature above all others, do dehort us from this Gluttony Omnes homines qui
sebudent prae^tare cae^eri^ animantibus, ^^mma open n^ti decet ne vitam silentio
transigant veluti pecora, quae natura prima and ventri obedientia f^uxit.
Salus^-de bello sug.
All men (says one) that would excel the rest of the creatures, should do
their best endeavor, not to pass over their life in silence, as the brute
beasts, whom nature has made to look downe-wards, intending only to supply
the wants of their bellies. And the very structure of a man should put him in
mind of his creation; and therefore not to live the life of a beast.

Ovid Metamorph.
Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera a tollera vultus.
God did give man to look aloft, and bad him cast his eye,
To view me heaven, that golden globe, the Sun and starry sky.
The same Poet in another place gives us very good counsel: Neve diu praesume
dapes, sed desine citra,
Et capias paulo quam cupis esse minus.
Make not long meals, but ever stay thy great longing desires,
And see thou always ear less food, than appetite requires.


And Idem Salust. de bello Iugurth.
another late alleged Author, witnesses that the ancient Numidians used meat
and drink, only as antidotes against hunger and thirst; and not for riot and
excess. And therefore it is Merito Diogenes Cynicus eos ^rridere solitus est,
qui pro bona valetudine dus rem atvinam facerent, and deiude cibo potuque
con^^a sanitatem se ingurgitarent: afferens insanum esse ea a dus petere, quae
in nostra sunt potestate. Diog. Laert. in erus vita.
recorded of Diogenes, that he was wont to scoff and mock those, that
sacrificed to the Gods for their good healths, and then quite contrary to the
rules of health, would stuff up their guts; affirming withal, that in vain
do we ask chat of the Gods which was in our own power. Socrates suadere
solitus erat illes eibos potusve esse vitan^^os qui ultra sit^m famemve^^dandam
preaucant appetentia^, Macrob. Saturnal. libr. 7.
And a famous ancient Author gives us warning, that such meats and drinks are
to be avoided, which, besides the satisfying of hunger and thirst, did yet
provoke the appetite to more meat. It were an easy matter for me to bring in
many more both heathen Poets and other Authors inveighing against this vice,
but that it would take me up too much time. But there is In secretis secretorum
Aristotelis ad Alexa^dium legitur de quibusdam Philosophis a quodam rege
congregatis, ut de sanitatis conversatione saniorem and meliorem proferrent
sententiam. Pluribus vero sententiam intellectam proserentibus, unus suam
pro^ulit, dicens, quod melius conservare non potest quam si digestus comedatu.
Tales enim qui seipsos pejoris non faciunt conditionis, quam falcones, ve^
accipitres suos facerent, qui cibum non darent nisi digestis. Qui etiam seipsos
non minus quam animaliae sua diligunt, sententiam sequuntur sapientis q^i
dicit, non vivo ut comedam, sed comedo ut vivum: Et paucis intercedentibus
lineis. Desiderium ergo talium (Epulonum) simile ea desiderio Daemonum, seu
Inserni: quia sicut infernus multos devorando co^sumit, desiderium tamen semper
manet insatiabile, doletque quod plures ^evorare non potest. Et ideo vias, and
modos Inferni ministri excogitant, quibus plares devorare po^^unt; Ita Gutosi
licet multa devorent, desiderium tamen non satara^ur, quibus, dicitur, Agg. 1
comedistis, and non e^i^s faturati; scilicet quo ad desiderium quo dolent, quia
plu^a devo^are non possunt; and ideo vias and modos diversos exquirunt in
cibariis and potationibus colores, and sapores, and serculorum diversitatem, ut
sapor, odor^tus, color, and diversitas visa appetitu^ provote^t ut ad plura
devorandum provocentur. Jnde est secundum Bernardum apologia, quod grandia
carnium sercula duplicantur, quibus ro^aliter intenti modum nesciunt in edendo,
ne^pe ^is prioribus fuerint sac^ati si secundos attigerint, videbi^tur nec dum
a^tigisse cibo^; fitque ut nec prima impediant novissima, nec sa^ietas minuac
appetitum: palatum quippe dum novellis seducit condimentis, pautatim
disfuescere cognita ad cibos exiraneos, velut adhuc ^e^unum revocatur in
desideria, venture quidem oneratur, sed varietas tollit fastidium. Sic insuper
ut dum gula variis provocatur coloribus, suavibusque d^lectatur odoribus,
transitur nimium meta necessitatu. Et paulo postea. Qui vero omnibus praedictis
non retrabuntur tribulationibus, and persuasionibus, saltem mortis cogitatione,
quales videlicet erunt post mortem, retrabuntur timore: mortem namque gulosi
and omnes percatores timere solent, quam gula, nisi evitetur, velociter
introducit. Ex Iohannis Bromiardi summa praedicantium, cap 5. Number. r. Par. 1.
page 358. de gula. Plura de hac re ibidem, and in Agrippa de vanit, scient,
cap. de art coquinaria. Macrob, Saturnal lib. 7. Gregor 30. Moral. Thom.
Aquin. in lib. disput. quaest, disput^ ^. Stuck. antiqu. conviv. lib. 3. cap.
4. and alios.
a late Writer, who, among many things set down against this vice has this
which follows. A certain King caused assemble many skillful Philosophers (I
think it should have been Physicians) to consult about his health, and some
advising one thing, some another; one among the rest, delivered his opinion
thus, that he could never better enjoy his health, than never to eat until
such time he found his former food digested. And such as will have but that
care of themselves that they have of their Hawks, and many other creatures, to
whom they will give no new food until they have concocted the former; follow
the advice of the Wise man, I live not to eat, but eat to the end I may live:
and again, the same Author has these words: The greedy desire of such
gluttons, is like unto the desire of the Devil, or of hell it self: for as
Hell swallows up many people, yet never is satisfied; yea, rather sorry it
cannot swallow more; for the which cause these hellish ministers leave no wind
unsailed: even right so fares it with Gluttons who are never satisfied, to
whom it is said, Agg. 1. You have eaten, and yet are not satisfied, to wit,
according to their disorderly appetite, being displeased with themselves, that
they are able to devour no more. And for this cause, they invent all the ways
they can, to please their palates, both in the color, taste, smell, and in the
various multiplicitie of meat and drink. And hence comes it to pass, says
Saint Bernard, that they double their great dishes, upon the which, being
totally intent, they can keep no measure in eating, etc. Is not this then a
great blurre and disgrace to our Christian profession, that we should be far
inferior to so many heathen and mere moral men? But especially, is this a
time for riot and excess; for chambering and wantonness, when many of our
neighbors and brethren by Christian profession, lie groaning in grievous
affliction? The want of this sympathising with the afflictions of the Church,
is that which God reproacheth his own people, Amos 6.4. They drink Wine in
bowls, and stretch themselves upon beds of yvorie; but no man remembered the
afflictions of Joseph. And as at all times, so more especially in the times of
penury and scarcity, we ought to be sparing in our diet; and those whom God
has enabled, ought to be the more helpful to the poor; whose pinched bellies
often would be glad of the scraps and crumbs, which fall from many a rich
Gluttons table. Again, I could wish, that many did not so profusely spend upon
unreasonable creatures, and that only for sport and recreation, that which
would fill the bellies of many a poor Christian, who scarce can have a bit of
brown bread to satisfy their hungry appetites, while their beasts have
abundance of the best. If any shall here again reply, may not I do with mine
own what I list? Let me then be so bold again, as to demand what is their
own? And if they will not, I will answer for them, that is, just nothing: they
are but only Stewards, put in trust with their Masters goods, the great God of
heaven and earth, and there will come shortly (and how soon they know not) a
messenger to discharge them of their Stewardship: thou may be no longer
Steward, and then if thou have been a good and faithful Steward, and can
make thy Master a true account, thou may expect with comfort that Euge bone
serve, Well done faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy: but if
otherwise, let them look to it. I will conclude with the words of the late
alleged Author: Now, who so will not by all the former inconveniences and
dangers be reclamed, neither by afflictions and troubles, nor yet by fair
persuasions; yet let this one thought and consideration, what they shall be
after death, affright them: for all Gluttons, and generally all sinners and
wicked people are usually afraid of death, the which Gluttony, if not avoided,
will inevitably hasten and further. I have somewhat the longer insisted upon
this point, in regard this sin is so frequent in this Kingdom, which has
been thereby with our neigbours, the French, reproached, Les Anglois sont grand
mangeurs, English are great eaters. But we have eaten more than enough, it is
time we now proceed to drink.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Drink, and what things in the use thereof to be considered: of morning
draughts, drinking betwixt meals, beginning or ending the meal with drink,
and drinking to bed-ward.

AFter meat it is seasonable, now, to come to drink, the one being as
necessary, if not more than the other. This liquid substance helps the
distribution of the food through the whole body; withal, quenches thirst: and
as without food, so likewise without drink, Veility and benefit of drink.
the life of man cannot be prolonged. And although we read of some, who
without any drink at all, have spunne out the whole thread of their life; as
namely one Schenck. observat. medicin. lib. 2. page 36^.
Lasyrtas Lasionius, Andrew of Argos Mago of Carthage, and Julius Viator, a
Roman Knight; yet is it most certain, that without drink, or some moisture to
conveigh the meat through the body, man cannot subsist: and such persons were
not of a sound constitution of body; and that because they did not sweat at
all, their bones being all solid without any marrow. And our stomach is not
unfitly compared to a pot with meat boiling in it, which without moisture, must
needs be burnt up. Besides, drink seems to be of a greater profit and
utility to the body than meat it self, and the want thereof hardlier to be
endured, it allaying both hunger and thirst, in man especially: and therefore
the old (...).

Aphor 11. lib. 2.


aphorism holds here true: It is easier to be refreshed with drink than
with solid food. Drink is a thin liquid substance, quenching thirst, furthering
the concoction and distribution of the food through the whole body, and often
also apt to nourish the same. Definition of drink.
Drink is twofold, either that common liquor, whereof all living creatures
are partakers as well as man: or else it is desumed from beasts and plants;
from the which a wholesome liquor or juice is expressed, Certain rules in the
use of drink to (...) observed.
fit for quenching thirst, and nourishing the body also. Now, some rules
concerning drink are carefully to be observed; and first we are not to endure
too much thirst, but moderately to drink in time of need, especially good
suddenly to drink either water or strong drink; but especially water, or
small drink. 6. Epidem.
Hippocrates makes mention of wrestler, wh^ after violent motion and agitation
of his whole body, and all covered with sweat, History.
drinking a great draught of cold water, died suddenly: and this was also the
fatal end of the famous Physician Valerius Cordus. Many more such histories
are related by the Observat. medicin. lib 3 loco prius citat.
learned Schenekius. And in France, my body being then in the like case and had
almost bin made an addition to the former examples. For after a draught of col^
water in the heat of Summer, History
I was immediately after surpized first with a single, and after with a double
tertian fever: and to add yet unto my former mis^rte^^l was shortly after,
about the beginning of the canicular days surprised with the blody flixe, (at
that time epidemicall, and for the most part mortal in most places of France,
especially Southward) the which, together with the former infirmities, did
adhere unto me almost a quarter of a year; and recovered not my full strength
again for the space of a whole half year and upwards. Now as meat, so is
drink not to be excessively and inordinatly used, but stinted and limited to a
certain determinate quantity. And howsoever, I confess, it is impossibe to
regulate, and determine how much every particular and individual person ought
to drink; and that by reason of the difference of countries and climats,
Quantity of drink.
of diverse and various constitutions, and several obseruable circumstances;
yet may we still aim at a certain decorum, or golden mediocrity always, as
in other things, so in this diligently to be observed. The ancients, as it
seems, observed even a set number of draughts at their set meals, which Ter
bibe vel to^^ers ter^o^ sic mystica lex est. Autonius.
were 3, as witnesses the Poet: and the same number was determined by the
Synod of Nants. Democritus, as witnesses Pliny, wrote a book, wherein he
averreth, that no man ought to drink four draughts at one meal: and it was a
saying of the ancients, the first draught is good against drougth, the second
is for mirth, the third for pleasure and delight, and the fourth made one
mad. But because the number of draughts is nothing, the quantity of the
draught, being that we are to build upon; therefore that was also regulated
among the ancients.

(...) ordinary measures of drink among the Romans.
There were among the ancient Romans three usual measures for drink, called by
these names, triens, sextans, deunx: The middlemost was the least, being under
four ounces, and with the which, sober people contented themselves: that
called triens was about a quarter of our wine pint, not above four ounces: the
last was above our wine pint. Sober people contented themselves with the
smallest measure; and such as assumed some more liberty, proceeded to the
other: but intemperate persons would adventure on the last and biggest measure.
^ere re^^ica
Cato allowed to laboring men, and such as wrought hard, about three English
pints of wine aday; which, perhaps, was then ordinary for such kinds of people.

But me thinks I hear some, by reason of that which has been already said,
Whether it be good to ^rink in a morning fasting:
ask me a question, whether a draught of drink in a morning fasting, be not,
in the rules of wholesome diet, to be allowed of? Their color to clear this
their custom, is this: a draught in a morning (say they) washes down all ill
humors, that lie in the stomach, or places adjoining, and withal, is good
against the stone. I answer, thy draught is either strong drink, or small: if
strong, then have I the authority of our famous ancient Physicians on my side,
that this is very hurtful to the health. Indeed, during the Empire of
Tiberius Caesar (says Lib. 14. cap 20.
Pliny) the Physicians some forty years ago, appointed that people should
drink fasting; and that only by means of some cunning Physicians, willing by
some plausible novelty to skrew themselves into the favor of the people. And
it seems there is some recent authority, at least to begin our meals with
drink. But Galen is flat against this preposterous custom of drinking thus
fasting; Comment ad d^i 28. lib 6.
averring, that to drink strong drink fasting, is very hurtful for the nerves
and nervous parts, and withal, hasteneth and procures to the body many
dangerous diseases, as Epilepsie, Apoplexy, and many others. Strong drink i^
no^ to be drunk (...)
It is therefore far better for thy health to eat a little before thou
drink. But some will say, I will take but a draught of small drink, Nor small
drink.
which is good against the stone. To this I answer, that howsoever this be a
seeming reason, yet to me it is none at all: for, by this means thou causest
the more speedy descent of those glutinous and feculent humors toward the
kidneys and bladder; and by consequent, rather furtherest than hinderest either
the generation or increase of the stone: as the like is also, by the
unseasonable, and too frequent use of diureticall medicines often procured. But
if thou will drink, Best to eat before one drink in a (...).
then the best will be to eat a little before thou drinkest, and this, like a
Sponge, will drink up this liquor, and afterward these superfluous excrements
will at great leisure be through the guts expelled out of the body. Some hot and
dry bodies, may, perhaps, plead for some privilege, who, of all others, are
most to be excused, especially, if they be not rheumaticke; and in such a case,
let not the drink be too strong. And as for ancient people, and cold
constitutions, who, perhaps, will take it ill to be abbridged of their morning
draught; of wines, muscadine, sweet canary, and the like, with a tossed soked in
them and eaten, are the best, and a cup of good wholesome ale, with a tossed,
some nutmegge and sugar may be allowed. But the ordinary use of morning
draughts, being indifferently of every one used, is not so good for the health
of the body, whatsoever our tossed pots prate to the contrary. And now I proceed
to the next.

In the next place it may be demanded, Whether it be good to begin our meal
with a draught?
whether it be good to begin our meals, as likewise to end the same with a
draught? As for the first, it has been by mani holden as an oracle to begin
the meal with drink; which was also held by the Vt vites paenam, a potibus
incipe coenam* Schol. Salern.
Salernitan School, and with us it is holden for an ordinary and inveterate
custom to begin our meal with a cup of sack. Now, as in many other things,
so in this particular also, can we set down no certain precise rule, which
may fit every particular individual constitution. But this, according to my
opinion, and of our Physicians of the best note, is the best for health, in
ordinary constitutions, and the most part of people, to begin their meals
with solid food. Answer.
And from this rule none is to be exempted, unless some hot dry constitution;
and in such bodies, the pot may be washed, (as some use to say) or rather
moistened before the meat be put into it; providing always there be no pottage,
Best to begin the meal with solid food
or other liquid meats; in which case they may well supply the place of drink.
And besides, as concerning the use of such moist and liquid food, the more an
ordinary stomach uses thereof, the less drink is needful; Caution in the
use of drink and liquid or moist meats.
and not, as too many use needlessely and foolishly to drink immediately after
hot pottage. And as concerning rheumaticke persons, I wish them to be sparing
both in the use of pottage and drink; especially when rheum is most busy.
And as for a cup of sack, it cannot be indifferently good for every one at the
beginning of meals; but only for feeble, phlegmatic, cold and old
constitutions, and that immediately before meals: for otherwise it may even
hurt such constitutions, especially, if subject to any diseases of the head and
nerves: Drinking of sack at the entry of the Table is not ordinarily of every
one to be used.
as Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy, etc. Now to the next, whether it be good to
finish our meal with meat or drink? To finish the feast with a draught of
good drink has been always a very ancient custom, Whether it be better to
finish our meal with meat or with drink.
as by many ancient Authors appears, which I could easily here make good, if
I feared not to trespass upon the Readers patience. Scal^g. de emendat.
tempor. lib. 6. citante Stuckio.
The Jews, it seems, were accustomed both to begin and end their feast
with such a draught; and of the beginning therewith, the practice of our
Savior Christ in Luke 22.27.
Luke makes it clear. The English have long continued this custom, as
witnesses the learned In a dagijs.
Erasmus; and is so used among the Germans, and many other Europaean people,
even at this very day, being commonly used after the washing of the hands,
which in Scotland they call the grace drink: and from the washing of the
hands, this drink took the name, and was called (...), or (...). The Germans
call it Saint Iohannis segen, or Saint John's blessing. Erant enim tres
crateres; primus lovis Olympij, seu Olympiorum ac coelestium; secundus Heroum,
tertius lovis Servatoris perfecti, a ternario numero, in quo sit principium,
medium and finis. Alij sanitatis sive valetudinis poculum nominant. Dictum est
item poculum boni Daemonis, quod ab initio coenae, and in extremo convivio
antequam surgerent asportarenturve mensae a convivis usurparetur. Moris enim
erat, ut omnes in conviv^is mensae post ultimam i^lam Daemonis potationem
removerentur, vel ex impio and sacrilego Dionysij tyranni facmore videre est.
Is enim cum Syracusis in Aesculapij famo aurea ante simulacbrum mensa reposita
esset patera mero repleta, propino, inquit, tibi, Aesculapi boni Daemonis
calicem, and cum dicto auream statim mensam auferre ^us^it. Stuck. antiquit.
com iv, lib. 3. cap. 22. ex Polluce and Athenzo.
Now by ancient Authors it may appear, that there were cups called after three
several names used about that time: one was drunk in honor of Jupiter,
called Olympius, or in honor of all the gods: the second was in honor of
deified men, whom they called Heroes; such as be our Popish canonized Saints:
the third was in honor of Jupiter Savior, called perfect, from the number of
three, wherein is the beginning, the middle and the end. By some also this was
called the cup of health or good luck, which they drank one to another: and
by some also it was called the cup of their good spirit or God, which was used
both at the beginning, and ending of their supper before they rose from table.
And after this last cup was once drunk, then all the guests rose, and all was
taken away; as may by that sacrilegious pranke played by Denis the tyrant
appear: who coming into the temple of Aesculapius within the city of
Syracuse, where was the statua, or image of Aesculapius, with a table of pure
gold standing by it, took a cup full of wine, adding these words, I drink to
thee Aesculapius, the cup of the good God or spirit, and with this word caused
presently carry away this golden table. Among the Indians it was called the cup
of Tantalus. But now to the solution of the question, whether is it better to
close our stomach with meat or drink? I answer, that for the general, and
for the most part, it is holden, that it is best to close it up with meat; yet
with a limitation, that such as are hot and dry, Who are allow to drink last
at their meals.
and are troubled with thirst may drink a little at the latter end of their
meal. And of such is Celsus to be understood, when he wills us to close up
the stomach with a cup of cold water (a custom I am sure would not be very
welcome to the Swill-bowles of our times) and that of Hippocrates, who in fear
of fumes and hot vapors arising up, and fuming into the head, advises us to
use this water or else very thin waterish white wine. But there are many
pleasant astringent means which in such cases may better be used; as namely,
marmalad of quinces, of goose-berries, preserved quinces, conserve of
barberries, of rasps, and many other such things astrigent and acid in taste.
Howsoever, it is the best course ordinarily to close the stomach rather with
meat than drink, according to this verse: Sit tibi postremus semper in ore
cibus.
Let a morsel of meat be ever last in thy mouth.


Now the answer to the other question, whether it be good to drink to
bed-ward, or going to bed, is concluded to the negative, Whether we are to
drink going to bed. Answer.
that we are not at all to drink at that season, for fear of hindering
concoction. But if the body be hot and dry, the stomach especially, and the
party thereunto accustomed, and sometimes in extraordinary great thirst, here
something is to be yielded to necessity: in which case it is good to be
sparing, and when concoction is almost finished, as four or five hours after
meals, a more liberal draught may then be allowed. And this may likewise
serve for an answer to that question, whether one may drink betwixt meals? So
that I shall not need to make any repetion, Not good to drink betwixt meals.
concerning this point. As for very aged people, of cold windy stomachs, I
shall not find fault with them, if they take a little draught of sack, or such
liquor at the end of their meal.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Water as it is used for drink, and several ways of cooling the same, and
correcting bad Waters.

HAving discoursed of Drink in general, as we have done in meats, so must
we here come to the particular sorts of drink; amongst which, Water offers
it self in the first place, Water the most common, and most ancient drink of
all others.
as the first and most ancient; so the most common to all living creatures,
most obvious and easy to come by. And although after the flood, wine came in
request for man's use; yet by many passages, both of holy and profane Writers
(whom for brevities sake I here pass by) it may appear that water was the
most common and ordinary drink, and wine used more at festival times, and
solemn meetings, than for their daily and ordinary use; and it is even at this
day so used in many places. As for the division of waters, their variety and
diversity, I have already said sufficient, as also concerning the qualities:
whereas, I showed, that water was not of so cooling a quality, as has been
by many, both Philosophers and Physicians hitherto deemed. A late Aquam quidem
sua natura frigidam dixerunt Ocellus, Hippocrates, Empedocles, Aristoceles, and
potior medicorum pars: imo Strato Philosophus, omnium frigidorum primum esse
venit. At Bernardius Telesius, Franciscus Patritius, Franciscus Mutus, and
veterum recentiorumque non pauci, ab inditu a natura principiis, lumine,
calore, stuore, mobilitate, etus essentiam, constituentibus, a viribus, ite^
astionibus, generandi multiplici potestate, a perspicuitate, raritate, sapore,
item tam dulci, tamamaro and salso, etc. audeater, and confidenter, omnes
aquas, ipsum scilicet mare, seu Oceanum, quod and loci magnitudine, and aquarum
copia, and molis immensstate primatum obtinet; omnes item lacus, stagna,
flumma, sontes, puteos, tum and ipsas subterraneas aquas, Platonis Tartarum,
aliosque ingentes speluncas and cavernas adimplentes, ut and fluvios
subterreneos a metallorum fossoribus, alijsque curiosis hominibus tum auditos,
tum visos, etc. sua natura calidos, eosque tum salsos secundum magis and minus,
tum and dulces esse astruxerunt. Omnis erum aqua, tam subterraneae quam
superterranea (de aquis enim supercoelestibus hic nobis non est sermo) vel
amara and salsa est; uti maria; vel dulcis, uti flumina, fontes, lacus, etc.
Nisi per accidens alieno s^pore, aliarum rerum accessione tingantur. At cum
omnes aquae, fontes and flumina, ab uno Oceano, seu aquarum universitate, and
abysso oriantur: neque enim ullos habet fontes, sed ipsum fons est and
scaturigo reliquarum omnium aquarum test Moyse; lussit enim conditor omnes
aquas quae sub Coelo erant in unum locum congregari, quam postea congregationem
mare; and abyssam vocavit Maria autem aquae sunt amarae, ita ut omnes aquae a
primordio fuerint amarae, ac salsae, quas post modum qualitates, aquae terrarum
anfractus subeundo, and fontes constituendo, amiserunt, etc. Claud. Deod.
Panth. Hygiast. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Writer confirms this same opinion by the authority of diverse other writers,
by valid and probable reasons thereto persuaded. The chief and principal
reasons are desumed from the inbred principles of this element; as light, heat,
agitation and mobiltie; which constitute and make the essence or being thereof:
as also from the actions; as the manifold generative power, perspicuity,
raritie; the taste also, bitter, salt and sweet, etc. Of the other quality of
moisture there is no controversy. Now, concerning the drinking of water, we
are herein to consider three things, the good quantity, the quality, and the
order. The qualities of the best water have already largely been described,
and that among all waters, rain water was the best; and next unto it, the best
spring water, or good river-water. In quantity, it must not exceed: for so it
would hinder the concoction of the stomach. And as for the order, it must be
drunk, as is already in the general directions of drink set down; little,
and often at a meal. Used before meals, it moistneth much dry bodies, and
cools more than sack, or any wine whatsoever, be it never to small; and
therefore fitter for hot and dry bodies, than wine or strong drink. Used
after meals, it inhibiteth and hinders the hot vaporous fumes of strong
drink to ascend into the brain; and so is said to resist drunkenness: but I
advise weak stomachs to look unto themselves, for fear of too much
debilitation, proceeding from too much humectation. And howbeit in hot
countries, their water, by reason of correction by the splendour of the
Sunne-beames is accounted wholesomer than ours; yet might ours be far more
used than it is, especially by hot and dry bodies, especially such stomachs,
and younger people especially: but this is the mischief, that such commonly
power down most strong drink, by this means adding fuel to the fire,
until Fevers, inflammations, and such furious diseases, in the very April of
their age bring them to an untimely death. And the poorer sort, I am sure,
might make more use of the same than ordinarily they do; which would better
become them than go a begging strong drink; or which is yet worse, steal, to
procure money to buy it. And notwithstanding this our nicity, I know some
honorable and worshipful Ladies who drink little other drink; and yet enjoy
more perfect health than most of them that drink of the strongest. Two things
do most deter people from the use of this noble ancient drink, the coldness
and the crudity. As for the coldness, howsoever it does often actually to the
palate appear such; yet have I showed that there is no such intense cooling
quality here to be feared. The other is the crudity; which is indeed nothing
else but the abundance of moisture, wherewith it is endowed; and most offensive
to weak and moist stomachs: and all is notwithstanding ordinarily imputed to
the coldness of water. Some to correct what they deem amiss in water, use to
add some sugar to it, and so think all is well amended, and is most practiced
by the female sex. But this is no good correction: for of this they cannot be
ignorant, and experience teaches no less, that sweet things do rather hurt
than help a weak and tender stomach. And besides, Sugar being but
temperately hot could add but a little heat to such a drink, if it were as
cold as is supposed. Again, sugar having no drying quality ascribed unto it;
but rather a mean moisture, it will rather add to, than detract from this
moist quality. But in my opinion, the best correction is by boiling it first,
and then if thou will, add thereunto a little honey or sugar, and a little wine
vinegar (which well corrects the moisture, and joined with the other sugar or
honey, gives it a pleasant relish) thou may make thee a pleasant and
wholesome drink.

Now as concerning the boiling of waters, there is a controversy about the
quantity, or how much should be boiled away; Correcting of bad watersfirst by
boiling 2. By distillation.
some willing to boil water to the wasting away of the third part, others of
the half, which others again think too much; and indeed a mean is the best,
Again, some would have water corrected by distillation; 3. By straining.
which I must needs confess to be best, if not too costly: besides, 4. By
boiling with sand.
that it is not so easy every where, and at all times to be effected. Some
strain it through a clean linen cloth; 5. By Coral beaten to powder.
and some again boil it with sand. Some with coral beaten to powder correct
the bitterness of waters; and some attribute a correcting quality to
Penniroall. Pliny reports, 6 By wheaten flower or meal.
that bitter waters are made sweet and potable by casting into them a little
meal or flower of wheat; so that they may be drunk within two hours after.
I doubt this trial would hardly answer our expectation. And I am sure the
practice of the 2 Kings 2.21.
Prophet Elisha in healing the water with salt, was miraculous. It is familiar
with mariners after the use of evil waters to eat garlic. The Arabian
Physicians advise him, 9 By carrying some of the earth of the place.
who is to remove his habitation to a place where waters are not good, to carry
with him some of the earth where he lived before, and mingle with his water,
and being well strained, drink of it.

Invention to cool water.
Now because oftentimes water is either somewhat warm, and therefore quenches
not the thirst so well; or else is not so cold as to please some nice and
curious palats: therefore partly for pleasure and wantonness, and partly for
necessity; especially when all manner of riot and excess began to reign,
amongst many other things, were devised several ways to cool both their
water and their wine. And it cannot be denied that cold water does better
further the concoction of the stomach than warm. And Lib. de cibis boni and
mali succi.
Galen, in Summer allows of very cold drink; yea, even cooled with snow, and
to such especially as labor hard, and use much exercise: but others that live
idly, leading a sedentary life, and free from employment, either of body or
mind, he advises to drink water, as nature has produced it, without any
alteration. Avicen wishes always to eat before they drink water, and to
drink sparingly and often at our repast, and out of a vessel with a narrow
mouth; Six ways of cooling water.

1 By the Air.


that so the draught may be the more moderate. There were six several ways the
ancients used to cool their water, by means of the air; which was familiar to
the Egyptians, as witnesses 6 Epidem* comment. 4.
Galen. In the Summer (says he) the Egyptians of Alexandria, having first
well warmed their water, and put it up in close earthen vessels, exposed it to
the night air, and before Sun rising, set them in some shadie places of the
ground, environed round about with cooling herbs. Sailers have been seen
sometimes to expose their water to the night air, and afterward cover their
bottles with many clothes: and thus it is very certain it reteineth still the
cold quality. The reason why they thus boiled their water, was because that
water once boiled receives sooner and easilier the impression of the cold
air; as witnesses the Arist 1 met e^r. cap. 12.
Prince of Philosophers. And therefore in Pontus, where they fish always in
frost, they besprinkle their angling-rods with warm water (which afterward
congealeth and freezeth so much the harder) which serves them in stead of
glue. The second way of cooling water, is, by letting it down in an earthen
bottle into a deep well: 2 Way, letting it down into a deep well.

3 Way, by salt peter.


howbeit others are of opinion it receives some evil impression from this
close water; and therefore think it better to draw up the water, and so set it
in it. The third way, is by injection of some salt peter, which afterward for
a while is stirred about with a stick: howbeit this is not so well approved
of, with whatsoever present satisfaction it may seem to sooth us up. The
fourth way, 4 Way, by ice or snow
is by means of ice or snow. It was the invention of the Emperor Nero to
boil water, and then let it down into a pit of snow. Lib. 2.
Athenaeus says, it was an old invention, howbeit others affirm it first
found out by Nero. Bellon. observat medicin. lib 3. cap 22.
The Turks at this day familiarly use this kind of cooling their drink. The
fifth way, 5. Way, by deep cellers.
is by means of deep cellars, wherein in ancient times, some were wont to set
bottles full of hot water, and take them out again colder than any snow. In
Paris there are some such deep cellars, wherein the smallest wines will seem
to the taste, twice as strong as they are in very truth. Besides all the
premises, water falling from a high place, acquireth unto it self a greater
coldness than that which runs softly in a river; 6. Way by motion and
agitation.
and the agitation and much stirring of the water furthereth not a little this
cooling quality. And this for the present concerning the use of water shall
suffice; what rests shall be discussed in the diet of the diseased, which
does something also concern them.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of wine: the various and several sorts, with the right use, and for whom it
is most fitting.

IT may be my former discourse of water was to some unwelcome, who would more
willingly, perhaps, hear of some more noble liquor; and therefore now from the
water-pale to the wine-pot. Now although this same subject of wines alone might
well fill up a larger discourse than this in hand; yet will I content my self
with such things as shall be of greatest use for the health of mankind. And
because al wines are not alike, differing in diverse respects, it will therefore
be for us very useful to set down the several differences. Diverse
differences of Wines

1 From the age.


Wines therefore differ not a little one from another, and that in these
respects following. The first difference then is desumed from the age; for some
wine is called Mustum, Mustum or new wine.
or new wine; and others of longer continuance, one, two or three years, etc.
New wine, before it be well purged from the lees, howsoever it may seem to
please the palate, by reason of a sweet pleasant and delectable taste; yet is it
most dangerous for the health of the body. Gal. lib de cibis bor^, and mali
succi.
for by reason of the thickness, grossness; and (as some call it) a
tartareous substance, it is very windy, and apt to engender all manner of
obstructions, wind cholicke, and the stone it self, etc. But among all such
wines, the white and Rhenish do least harm; and that in regard they make the
body soluble, and so all corruption is evacuated, and so in regard of their
short abode within the body, they are least of all others offensive unto it.
New wine pressed out of tart and sour grapes is of all others the worst. The
Qui properant noua musta bibant, mihi fundat avitum, Consulibus priscis condita
testa merum. Ovid 3. de amore.
Poet Ovid could well tell whether new or old wine were better, when he wishes
to drink wine of the continuance of certain Consuls; that is, so many years
old. And as the new wines are not to be allowed for ordinary use; no more are
the very old wines better to be liked of: for then they become far hotter,
sharper, and sometimes bitter also. As for the certain determinate time
orange, when wine might safeliest be drunk, no man can certainly determine,
for some lasted twenty, some more, some fewer years. Very old wine.
Cicero at a supper with Damasippus was served with wine of 40. years old. But
the Emperor Caligula was presented with wine of 160: year old. Now the nature
of such wines was this, that they were not to be drunk, unless mastered with
much water. Our wines now a days differ much from those in frequent use among
the Ancients, the Romans especially: for few of our ordinary wines will
continue good for years, as theirs did; yea a year, and sometimes less, will
put them to the period of their longest endurance. Although I deny not but some
of our sackes, and some such strong wines will continue good far beyond this
prefixed period. 2 Difference from the substance.
The second difference is taken from the substance; some being thin,
perspituous and very small, needing no admixture of water, called for this
cause (...) such as grow plentifully about Paris, Rochell, and diverse other
places; as along the river of Rhene, in Thuringia, Misnia, etc. And yet Cardan
thought no such wine grew in those regions. Others again were of a thicker,
and grosser substance, and may therefore be called (...), or bearing much
water, as being of far greater force and strength than the former. 3
Difference from the color.
The third difference may be taken from the color; some being white in color,
some pale yellow, some sadder in color, or of a high golden yellow color;
some again of a blackish intense red, and others of a pale red color. The
yellow wines are the hottest, the red less; and the white least of all. And it
is to be observed, that mingling grapes of diverse colors, the wine becomes
of a mixed color: as the white and red grape mingled together makes a claret;
and the more red grapes be in the mixture, the higher colored is this claret;
and the more white grapes, the paler colored it is; approaching both to the
color and quality of white wine; as is to be seen in that wine called from
the color of peach flower, couleur du pesche. The fourth difference is taken
from the taste, 4 Difference from the taste.
sweet, sour, sharp or bitter. The sweet are most nourishing, such as are
commonly the high colored red wine, and some sweet sacks brought unto us from
Greece, and other parts: such as are our malmesey, muscadine, browne-bastard,
Canary, and some others of that color; and our high colored red wines, called
vin de Graves. Some again are of tarter taste, as most of our white and
claret. Galen was of opinion, there were no sweet white wines; howbeit diverse
Provinces of France can now witness the contrary. And I doubt not but the
Wine-brewers of the City of London have so well profited in their profession,
that they are able to furnish any with as sweet wine of any color as any other
place whatsoever. The fifth difference is desumed from the smell, 5 Difference
from the smell.
which in wine is also not a little to be regarded, and the wines of best smell
are also ordinarily the hottest. Among our ordinary wines, that which smells
like the raspe, as the French say, sent la fram boose, is esteemed the
daintiest. But here my meaning is not of any artificial smell procured by the
wit and invention of the vintner, no more than that which already has bin
spoken concerning the substance, color and taste. Another difference may yet
be desumed from the soil, and the natural temper of the air where such wines
grow. And thus in one and the same country are so many several sorts of wine
to be seen, differing in goodness one from another; and yet far more those of
one country from those of another. And thus we may apparently perceive what a
great difference there is in the wines of that one kingdom of France. The wine
of Orleance, although far to the North, yet does it exceed in goodness many
others more to the South. And we see several countries produce diverse and
several sorts of wine, and some again produce none at all: and that partly by
the unfitness and coldness of the soil and climate; 6 Difference from (...)
soil and natural temper of the air.
and partly in some places, by means of the neglect and ill husbandry, or
ignorance of the inhabitants. And there is yet another difference desumed from
the faculties: 7 Difference from the faculties: thick red wines.
for the thick red colored wine tending to black, especially the sweetest,
are of all others aptest to nourish and fatten the body. But whosoever uses
them much, let him take heed of obstructions, the stone, the dropsy, etc. Such
wines grow plenteously in Gascony, and from thence conveyed to their chief
city Burdeoux, and so to diverse places of the Christian world. All sweet wines
loosen the belly more than any other kind. The other sweet wines, Strong sweet
wines of a yellow color.
such as we named heretofore, are hotter than the former, and yield somewhat to
them in this alimentary faculty; and are rather of the ancient, and married
people, yet sparingly to be used; than of the younger sort. In France alone many
several sorts of wine, French wines of diverse sorts.
differing not a little in strength one from another. The wines of Orleance are
of prime note for goodness; as also the wines of Aniou and adjacent places are
in no small esteem: and those wines in so great request at the French court;
Small wines.
called vin de Coussy and D'Hay, are very wholesome and dainty wines. But the
wine about Paris, Rochell, and many places of Xaintonge are but poor small
wines in comparison of the former. Again, in Gascoigne; but especially in
Provence, Languedoc, and the south parts of that Kingdom are many strong and
generous wines, equalling, if not exceeding diverse wines of Italy it self. But
it is now more than time, we come to the temperature of wine, the knowledge
whereof does not a little make for our purpose.

Concerning the temperature of wine, there has been some controversy among
the learned, which we will leave to the schools, Or (...)
and briefly declare that which we conceive to be most profitable for our
purpose. Wine then of all sorts, whatsoever, is undoubtedly hot, (...)
howbeit some more and some less; and new wine is at first colder, and in time
acquireth a greater heat; insomuch that must or new wine is by Galen accounted
cold; which must be understood comparatively* having respect to that it is
afterward. Now this heat acquired by (...) ebullution is of a great latitude
and extent, according to the several natures and ages of wines. Thin small
wines, especially white, (...)
participate of least heat: old strong wines are very hot: that which is
betwixt both these extremes, is also of a mean heat betwixt both. But now
concerning the second quality, Wine is dry in the second quantity.
and joined with this first, whether it be moist or dry, is in like manner
controverted. In a word, I think it to be actually moist, howbeit potentially
dry, as we speak in the schools. For howsoever it moisten, as is the nature
of all liquors; yet has it a certain faculty of drying up superfluous
moisture; as we see come to pass in many other liquors extracted out of hot
simple, vegetables or mineralls: and yet this drying faculty differs not a
little according to the strength. Ou^ wines differ much from the wines of the
ancients.
It is moreover to be observed, that our wines much differ from the wines used
in ancient times, in regard of their strength. With us our new wines are hotter
than our old, which by little and little, their heat decaying, grow dead:
Vappescunt. Contrariwise, the wines of ancient times being new, that is, not
exceeding five years age, were not so hot as those of greater age, which
perhaps had atteined to ten or twelve years. The longer they were kept, ^
Caeterorum vinorum tanta cura fuit medicaminu, ut ciner^ apud quosdam, fe^
gypso al^b^ quibus diximus modu instaurentur, etc. Qui and marinam aqua^
ejusdem rei gratia ex alto peti ^ubent, etc. Pix in Italia ad vasa v^^o
condienda maxim probatur Brytia, etc Tot benefici^s piacere cogitur; and
miramur noxia esse in vitium inclinantes. Plin. lib. 19. cap. 20.
the greater heat they contracted, which was not natural; but procured by art:
for they were accustomed to mingle with their new wine, pitch, rosen, brimston,
plaster, ashes, etc; to add smell and quickness to their wines. Some used
also to smoke their wines: and for this end, had certain places in their
houses built for this same purpose. Others again mingled therewith seawater
fetched superstitiously from the deepest Ocean. By so many poisons cause we wine
to please our palats (says Pliny) and yet wonder at the woe they procure us,
yet inclining still to vice. Let Londoners, and others that frequent the city
much, look about them, and moderate their insatiable wine-bibbing humor, lest
withal they drink down some of this stuff, whereof Pliny here complains.
Sure I am our Vintners are as cunning, and witty in invention for their own
profit and commodity, as ever were any of the ancients. But concerning the hot
faculty of wines, it may perhaps be replied, how comes it to pass, if all
wines be hot and dry, it produces cold and moist diseases in the brain: Co^^
diseases produced b^ the use of wine accidentally.
I answer in a word, it comes nor so to pass properly by reason of these
faculties; but by accident, these exhalations being by the brain quickly
converted into such a substance. And that this is true may by this appear,
that the excess of drinking of the strongest wines are aptest to engender such
diseases.

Virtues of wine moderately used.
Now this noble creature moderately used, is a most sovereign means to restore
and renew our decayed and dead spirits, and to preserve the natural heat of
the body: and for the great affinity it has with the nature of man, and
sympathy with the heart, it is as it were in a moment conveied thither; and so
produces that famous effect of Psalm 103. Iu^g. 9 Ecclesiast. 31, etc.
cheerfulness, so often in holy writ ascribed unto it. But the use of this so
noble a creature is not indifferently to be permitted to every age, person and
complexion. Plato would not have children to drink any wine before the 22.
year of their age. 7 Politic. Lib. de salubri diata.
Aristotle forbids wine to nurses and children. f Hippocrates permits the
use of it to some cacochymicall dispositions, and to women of a soft and foggy,
or spongious flesh. 3 de sanit. tuenda.
Galen sets down what constitutions it best befitteth. To those of mature
and ripe years he permits wine, but well watered; but to hot and dry
constitutions, he forbids it altogether, water better befitting the state
of such bodies, What person it be^^ befitteth.
to whom assenteth also Hippocrates. As for old age, especially if very
phlegmatic by constitution, wine is not to be denied them; it being for them
a wholesome milk, and withal a convenient food for the preserving and
cherishing of the radical moisture, and innate balsame of their bodies.

But from hence arises some doubt, in that I allow wine to old men; My doubt
may seem so much the stranger, in that it seems this opinion has always
gone current without any control. But there is ^am vero (...) larvitr^ si
ultius quam (...) ca^oris au e^d gratia, vinum abundanter, meracum praecipue
indulgere Quanto enim vinum calidius est per se, tanto ma^ore ven^ris ac
viscerum omuium c^^ ore opusest ut superetur: aliaqui a mino^i acessic,
crudamque succum auget, unde and calorem naturalem suffocat, and morbos
innumeros ^arit, ac mortem properat. Quare vinum esse lac senum non valde
proho^ censeo, potius senibus sensim esse dandum aiturius, usque dum in extremo
senio constitutis toto vino detracto de ur pro eo mul^a, aut dec^ct: aqua:
satius enim est p^rmittere catori n^turali sensim venire au na^ura^em
interi^um, quam vine obruere, and ^enectam facere mis rabi^torem, and
breviorem. Va^^^. de sacr^ philos. cap. 20.
a late writer, who has contradicted this opinion, and would have them when
they grow in years, to use wine well diluted with water, and afterward when
they are now atteined to decrepit old age, to give them only hony-vvater, or
boiled water to drink. But I think fevv that read this, but will think
this too rigid; and so am I of their mind. His reason is because (says he)
hot strong wine drunk in abundance has need of a like proportion of natural
heat to overcome it, otherwise it sowreth in the stomach, oppresserh natural
heat, ingendreth crudities, and proves the cause of many noisome diseases. But
by his good leave, although a learned man, yet he delivers his opinion too
lavishly and without limitation. Wine in old age moderately taken cheereth the
spirits, furthereth concoction, and overco^meth crudities. The chief hurt
befalls old age by the too liberal use of strong hot vvines, in my opinion,
is by way of ex^ccation, their bodies howsoever replenished with an accidental
and excrementitious moisture; yet the natural Crasis and constitution of their
bodies get, inclining to siccity. The excess in the use of any sort of wine I
allow not of. But I see no sound reason, why the moderate use of our
Muscadines, sweet Canary sackes; and sweet nourishing red wines may not safely
and to good purpose be allowed this age, which besides the former benefits may
likewise by their mild fumes and vapors so irrigate the brain, that it may
procure them quiet and comfortable sleep to this age so acceptable. And by
this moderate use I see not but it may likewise communicate a gentle warmth to
all the parts of the body; although I am not of opinion this is the only use,
as this Author seems to allege.

And in the use of wine among the ancients this is yet to be observed, that
they were either to drink this or water, there being no other in ordinary use
among them; and therefore, whereas they allowed youth at the age of 22. to drink
wine, this is not a precept for us to practice, being furnished with so fit and
wholesome drink, and so appropriated and fitted for this climat, and our
complexions; and the which may safely to any age or complexion be exhibited;
and being in our own power to make it weaker or stronger, there is no danger
in the use of our ale or beer. And besides, we must also withal consider that
in the hot seasons of the year both wine, and other strong drinks must more
sparingly be used; but in colder seasons we may be bolder. Now again, Wine
either drunk^ pure of it self or mingled with water.
among the ancients wine was either drunk pure of it self without any
mixture; or else diluted and mingled with water, and is used also in this our
age. In ancient times some added the water to the wine, and some again wine to
the water. Water was, and is used to be added unto wine, to allay and qualify
the heat and fumes thereof, and is more frequent in those countries, where wine
is their ordinary drink. This mixture differs according to the diversity of
the natures, of the parties drinking, the wine drunk, together with the
several times of drinking: all which points are learnedly and largely set
down by Mercur. variar lect. libr. 7.
a famous Italian Physician; and which were too long for me here to insist
upon. But this I must advertise in brief, that as young people, especially,
hot and choleric constitutions, ought not to drink wine; so if they do at
any time drink thereof, they ought to delute, or mingle it with a greater
quantity of water than others: and the like I wish to be understood of the heat
of Summer, when as both smaller drink, and wine more deluted is best. Some in
stead of ordinary spring water, use rose water, and a little sugar, which is
not amiss: and the like may be practiced with Strawberry, Sorrel, Succory, or
Endive water. But to determine the quantity of water, which differs according
to circumstances, is very hard: but the best will be for people to consider of
that proverbiall speech, Every man is either a fool, or a Physician. The
meaning is, a man should observe what best befitteth the state of his own
body, and so accommodate all things accordingly. Many in hot countries where
the wine grows, sometimes use wine so sparingly, that they add but a little
quantity of wine to a great quantity of water; it may be not the fifth or sixth
part. But with us, where wine is not our natural and ordinary drink, How we
use to dilute or mingle our wine.
this deluting, or mixture of wine and water is not so frequent; except
sometimes in Summer, where often, and most commonly sugar is also added
thereunto, with some Borage flowers, and a sprig of Rosemary, which are not out
of purpose; especially, if the wine be any thing tart, or sowrish.

Of the use of Sugar with wine.
And by the way I must here say something concerning the use of sugar with
wines: It is a common custom through this kingdom, to add sugar to all wine
indifferently sweet or sour, or whatsoever sort. I do not deny, but
sometimes, to help a tart taste, or to inhibit the hot fumes of a vaporous or
strong sack, apt to fly up into the brains, a little sugar helps well: but
to use it indifferently, with all sorts of wines, and without any consideration
of circumstances whatsoever (which is the ordinary and common custom) and that
merely for wantonness, and to satisfy their lustful desires, I hold it not
convenient. Our neighboring Nations, who abound in all sorts of wine, and most
somewhat tartish in taste, yet never use this addition of sugar. And therefore,
as I advertised already, so wish I all, especially our women (aptest in such
cases to exceed) to use a moderation in the use of sugar. As for wines thus to
be mingled with water, they must be indifferent strong, and withal, of an
indifferent thin substance. Wines of a gross and thick substance, are not
thus to be mingled with water; but rather moderately and sparingly drunk
without any addition. And as for our Rhenish and small white wines, they need
far less water than other stronger. Arnoldus de villa nova tractatu de vinis.
Some wish that certain hours before the wine be drunk, water be mingled
therewith, that by this means there may be a more perfect mixture of the one
with the other. There is to this purpose a certain ancient speech recorded:
Vinum lymphatum cito potatum generat lepram, Wine mingled with water, suddenly
drunk, ingendreth leprosy. But concerning wine this shall suffice. Of the use
of wine in the sick, in what diseases useful, and how to be used, hereafter
in the diet of the diseased.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Beer, Ale, Cider and Perry serving us in stead of Wine.

NOw, because all countries are not furnished with this noble liquor of the
grape, therefore our gracious God besides this element of water, with mankind,
common to all living creatures, has furnished these our Northern Regions with
other drinks, which might to us supply the place of wine. This drink has for
its principal ingredients water and corn, Ingredients of our Beer.
and to season it, and make it keep a long time in stead of salt, has hop
added to it. And that this is no new invention to make drink of corn; but
has been in frequent practice in ancient times, may by the relation of our
ancient Physicians plainly appear. The The ancient Egyptians made drink of
corn.

Herod. in Euterpe.


Egypptians, it would seem, were the first authors thereof. But it may be
objected, that the ancients do likewise condemn this drink, as most
unwholesome for the body of man. Lib. 2. cap. 80. and 81.
Dioscoride ascribes to this drink, which he there calls Zythum and Curmi,
differing but little one from another a noxious quality against the reins,
nerves, and nervous parts; as the membranes, of the head especially: and
affirms that it ingendereth wind, fills the body with corrupt humors; and
leaves the body using it much, the leprosy for a legacy. Lib. 6. simpl. m^lic.
Galen sings also the same song, and confimeth his assertion. But whatsoever
was the opinion of the ancients concerning that drink, and that it was of that
nature, Our drink made of corn, differs from that of the ancients, and is a
very wholesome drink.

Diverse differences in our drink to be observed:

First, from the adding or withdrawing of hoppe.

Secondly, from the corn it is made of.


I will not deny; yet I am sure, the drink we make is both wholesome, and
very agreeable to our nature; and besides, is far otherwise prepared, than
that of ancient times. Now, of this drink, there are two sorts, one brewed
without hop, commonly called Ale; the other with hop, and commonly called
Beer. In Beer then, as in wine, there are many differences to be considered,
where the first is taken from the corn it is made of; it being sometimes made
of one grane, sometimes of another, and sometimes of more granes mingled
together: but with us, most commonly malt is made of barlie alone, which does
also with us here most abound. Some do also mingle some oats with this
drink, and so make it more cooling for Summer, very quick to the taste, and
wholesome for the body; the oat being of it self a dainty, wholesome, and
nourishing grain. Some to add strength to their Beer, especially that called
March-Beere, then brewed to last all the year, add thereunto a few pease. In
some places beyond seas, they make Beer of Wheaten malt: as in some places of
Saxony and in Bohemia; which much needs be good: and wholesome, if no error in
the making be committed. Third difference from the age.
Another difference again is taken from the age and duration of this drink:
some being very new, some very old, and kept a long time. Very new drink is
very hurtful for the health, ingendring both wind and crudities with
obstructions, and many diseases from thence proceeding; as has been said of
new wine. That which is very long kept, must needs be strong; as our March
Beer, and some others; and yet are not so good for ordinary use, but rather
now and then as physic. The best and wholesomest, is that of a middle age. A
maine and principal difference is taken from the strength, and is esteemed by
the proportion of the malt to the liquor: Fourth from the strength.
and this varieth much, according to several circumstances; as the place where
one lives, the persons who are to use it, the season and time of the year,
etc. This nevertheless is to be observed, that in Winter and cold weather,
strong drink is more tolerable than in Summer, and warm weather; and to old
age, there is a greater liberty allowed, than for younger people. Another
difference is taken from the substance, thick or thin, and perspicuous or
clear. Fifth from the substance.
Thick and muddy drink is altogether unwholesome, and the mother of many
diseases: and that which is clear, is best and wholesomest; providing always,
that water be not too much master. Thick beer ingendreth wind, all manner of
obstructions, the stone, strangury, and many more dangerous diseases. Again,
that difference taken from the taste is not to be neglected; some being bitter,
Sixth from the taste.
some sweet, some sour, etc. And this the age will often alter: for very new
drink, if much hopt, must needs be bitter: and very small drink, if long
kept, especially in Summer, will grow sour. A mean is best, that it be not
too bitter, too hot and heady, nor sour at all: Seventh difference from the
quantity of the hoppe.
and therefore another difference may be taken from the quantity of hoppe, that
a due proportion thereof be observed; it being hot and dry in the second
degree, and sometimes weaker, and sometimes stronger: and too bitter drink is
more physical than is for our ordinary use fitting. The best course then is to
let the hoppe rot in the drink (as the vulgar people) before we drink it.
There is another difference taken from the color; Eighth the color.
some being of one, and some of another color; some pale; some of a reddish,
some of an amber color, etc. The highest colored drink is not always the
strongest and wholesomest. That which looks of a pure transparent yellow
amber color, like a pure sack, is reputed the best. The best March beer, if
well brewed, and no error committed, is often of this color; and the goodness
of the malt whereof it is made, and the fuel wherewith it is dried, makes
yet another difference, Ninth from the goodness of the malt.
and often alters both the color and taste of the drink. Straw is thought
better than wood for drying of malt. In some places of this Island, in the
Northern especially, they dry their malt with ling, or heath, called there
hadder, which makes very good malt; some also use furs, or whins, as some
call them; and some again, broom. But straw, and heath, or ling are the best;
the solider the substance of the fuel is, the worse it is, there being the
more danger of over-drying the malt, which may make both the drink taste
worse, and sooke with too high a color. The Barlie whereof the malt is made
must be good and fresh, not light, lanke, or worme-eaten, fusty, etc. And
besides, it must not be made of Barley too new, before it has sweat in the mow
(as husbandmen use to speak) and is also to be made in a convenient season; I
mean not in a hot season of the year, and therefore commonly called in the
country, cuckoo malt. The last difference is taken from the water whereof the
drink is brewed; and the best, if it may be had, is to be preferred before the
other, 10 From the water wherewith it is ma^e, and the fuel wherewith it is
boiled.
and in defect of the best, the next best is to be chosen. And what is the best
we have already at large related: and we find here that many times our well
water makes the drink look of a higher color than is suitable to the
strength thereof. And to the water we may add the fire wherewith it is boiled,
which I think is best to be wood, and such as we allowed of in making of malt.
And yet I confess good drink is, and may be brewed with sea-coale, as we see
in all the city of London: and the fuel is not so material here as in making
of malt, where the smoke touches it immediately. Now all these differences,
except that taken from the hop, are common both to ale and beer; the which in
our Ale here is but little, and in the Northern parts of this Island is none at
all. And because the hop makes some difference in these two drinks, therefore
it will be useful to say something thereof. Of the temperature of barley, a
very wholesome grain, Hop and the virtues thereof.
something has been said already, and something yet more shall be said
hereafter. As for the hop it opens the obstructions of the liver, spleen, and
kidneys, cleereth the blood, and cleanses choler, and therefore this drink
must needs be very wholesome. But if there be too much hop in it, or yet
drink very new, the hop will wrong the head, Virtues of Beer.
by sending up to it hot exhalations, and so procures rheumes; and the
bitterer the Beer is, the less it nourishes.

Ale again is of a grosser substance, and nourishes far more; Of Ale.
but is of a more oppilative and stopping faculty: and therefore such as are
obnoxious to obstructions ought to be sparing in the use of this drink. Such
as are lean, and free of this fear, may freelier use it. And although hop
added to beer would seem to make it hotter than ale, yet when the strength of
it wasted, and not much discernible in the drink, in regard of its
penetration, and scowring away of choler, and the ale having a like quantity of
malt in it, I think there will be but little or no difference in their heats.
Howsoever both Ale and Beer are good wholesome drinks; the which if any one
will deny, I will appeal to our own experience: for where can you find
stronger, healthfuller, and lustier people, than in those countries, where this
drink is most ordinarily used? And in this I dare be judged by Valeriola loco
communi.
foreign Writers, who lived in countries where this drink is not used. Who so
desires to know more of these drinks, and their several sorts, according to
several countries, may have recourse to Eibro de cerevisis.
Placotonius, who has written at large of this subject. And what was said
before concerning the use of wine, may here be understood of our strong Ale
and Beer, that they are not good for young people, hot and choleric
complexions, and hot seasons of the year. And this shall suffice concerning
these drinks.

Of Cider.
There are yet some other drinks expressed out of fruits, and in no small use
among many people, called by these two names, Cider and Perry. Cider is the
juice expressed out of Apples, and sometimes attaineth to that excellency, that
it emulates wine in strength and virtue. The sweet is more windy, as when it is
new; and therefore is not to be used until it be 4. or 5. months old at
least. For whom it is best, Virtues.
It is better or worse according to the fruit it is made of; and is best for
hot and dry choleric bodies, hot livers, and melancholicke persons: they are
of an opening and penetrative nature, opening obstructions notably.

Of Perry.
Perry is sweeter than Cider, and withal windier, taking its denomination from
Pears whereof it is made, and differs little in virtue from the former.
These dtinkes are very frequent, and used for ordinary drink in the Province
of Normandy in France; as also in the shires of Gloucester, Worcester, and
Hereford here in England. They are both very good to quench thirst, and to cut
tough phlegm.

Diverse other sorts of drinks in diverse countries.
Besides these drinks in most frequent and ordinary use among us, there are yet
many other sorts of drinks in frequent use among many nations: as in many
places of the Indies, and other countries they made a wine of dates; and others
again, make a dainty wine or drink of rice. And many nations of the
West Indies make drinks of certain roots and herbs. And no question we might
make drink of diverse other fruits and plants, if we pleased. It is reported
that that ancient and warlike people called Picts, inhabiting in former times a
part of the realm of Scotland, made a dainty drink of the herb or shrub,
ling or heath; the making of which notwithstanding, neither for love nor money
(as we use to speak) nor any other means could ever from them be extorted.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Drunkenness, and the mischiefs thence ensuing to the soul, body, and
good.

THE more excellent any creature is, the more pernicious is the abuse of the
same; which as in many other things, so especially in this so useful a
creature which we call drink, may plainly and evidently appear. I have at
large already discoursed of several sorts of drinks, their excellent virtues
and right use; and because the abuse thereof, which we commonly call
drunkenness, is so prejudicial to health, besides the detriment and damage
both of the soul and substance; I will say something of this subject, before I
enter upon the diet of the diseased. And therefore although it be a fitter
theme for a divines pulpit than a Physicians pen; yet, both by reason this
vice now so reigns, and has by other Physicians in the like case been
touched, therefore I will entreat thy patience, courteous reader, but for a
short space, that I may give this beastly sin a lash or two, and then I shall
proceed. And as sin is no upstart, not of yesterdaies hatching; Drunkenne^ no
new sin.
so this swinish sin of drunkenness in particular, has been no stranger in
the world, both in ancient and later times. Hence is it that we have the
drunkenness of certain nations recorded by profane Writers: as of the
Thracians, Assyrians, Parthians Grecians, and in the time of Tacitus, the
Germans, it seems, were taxed with this vice: Nations of old taxed with
drunkenness.
even as at this day it is among them in as high esteem as ever. It may be
thus in brief or generally defined. What drunkenness is.
Drunkenness is an excessive and unseasonable pouring down of strong drink;
and therefore it does plainly appear, that one may be a drunkard, although his
brain were made of brass, that it were insensible of any weakness, or other
inconvenient whatsoever, and no apparent prejudice either to his sense or
reason; whenas some weak brain may be deprived of the use of both with the
third part of that which such a Swil-bole will easily swallow down. And unto
this have relation Isaiah 5.22, 28.7. Habac. 2.13. Amos 6.6. Prove. 31.4, etc.
many of those places out of holy Writ, and others hereafter to be alleged. But
because there is most commonly with the excess of the creature some indecent
action or gesture adjoined; and many times also after this gulletting down of
strong drink, there insueth surfeiting, or heaviness, called crapula;
therefore an ancient Greek Writer compares all three. Clemens. Alexand.
Paedag lib. 2 cap. 2. A large definition of drunkenness.
Drunkenness (says he) is the excessive use of wine, or other strong drink.
Rage or fury, in latin debacchatio, in greek (...) is that unseemely carriage
from thence proceeding. The surfeiting, or heaviness called crapula, is the
trouble and and loathsome nauseous effect following the same. The genus, or
generally word in this definition is ebrius, or ebriosus, concerning the
difference whereof thou may see something in the Ebrius, and ebriosus a se
invicem differunt ut amator and anians Ebriofit as proprie est affectatio, cum
quis biben^er, cito, saepe, and facile fit ebrius: Ebrietas vero est ebriosi
status, eum scilicet quis actu est Ebrius: sic ira differt ab iracundia,
invidia ab invidentia, Cicero 4. Tuscal. Quest
heathen Cicero, where it is apparent, that he makes him a drunkard, that
wittingly, and willingly often follows this trade of drinking, and gulletting
down of strong drink, although they neither reele in the streets, nor will
easily be overreached in a bargain; which is the common plea of strongest
drunkards. Now holy Scripture is every where full of invectives against this
wicked sin. The Prove. 20.1^
Wise man in his golden Proverbs, has many excellent precepts to this same
purpose. Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived
thereby is not wise. The 21 17.
same Wise man has these words also. He that loves Wine and oil shall not be
rich. And 23.21* Verse 29.30, 31, 32* 33, 34, 35.
again, Be not among wine bibbers, riotous eaters of flesh: for, the drunkard
and the glutton shall be clothed with rags, and a little after; Who has woe?
who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds
without cause? who has the redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine,
they that go to seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red,
when it gives color in the cup, when it moves it self aright: at the last
it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder: thine eyes shall behold
strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. Yea, thou shall be
as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, as he that lies down upon
the top of a mast. They have stricken me shall thou say, and I was not sick:
they have beaten me, and I felt it not, when shall I awake? I will seek it
yet once again. And the Proverbs 31.4:
same spirit of God in the same book, by the mouth of a woman, forbids
Kings (who, if any, might seem to challenge unto themselves a greater liberty)
to be given to this vice. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to
drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink: lest they drink and forget the
law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. Give strong drink to
him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts, etc.
Again, Ecclesiast. 31.25.
another Wiseman gives us good directions against this same sin. Show not
thy valiantness in wine: for wine has destroyed many. And a little after;
Verse 29.30.
wine drunk with excess, makes bitterness of the mind, with brawling and
quarrelling: drunkenness increases the rage of a fool till he offend, he
diminishes strength, and makes wounds. A number of other places of holy Writ
might be to the same purpose produced. And whereas mention is made of wine, we
are withal to comprehend under it all manner of strong drink whatsoever. A
Stuck. antiquit. conviv. libr. 3. cap 8.
late Writer proves a drunkard to break all the ten Commandments: For,
first, says he, in stead of the true God, A drunkard breaks all the
commandments.
he makes a God of his guts: and again, mancipating and making himself a
slave to his idol drink; he neglects, and often contemns, yea, even
mocketh at the pure worship and service of the Almighty God. And as for taking
of Gods name in vain, and tearing and rending his glorious attributes, by whom
more frequent than by drunkards at their drunken meetings, and where are more
bloody oaths belched out, than by these swil-bolls and tos-pots, upon their
alehouse benches. As for the profanation of the Sabbath, that drunkards are
most commonly impious in this point, I think will not be denied; and as for
the duties due to our neighbor, a drunken man makes little difference betwixt
superior, inferior, equal, as being injurious unto all. And not only do
they deny their superiors, that reverence and respect due unto them; but even
often mock and deride them. And as for quarrels, murders, uncleanness, and
adulteries, who so ready to perpetrate any such sin as a drunkard? And their
theft in this appears, in the first place of their sacrilegious robbing God
of the time due to his worship and service; their wives and children and
nearest kindred, the poor and public of that portion due unto them. Again,
who so prone to perjury, lying, slandering, backbiting, and taking his
neighbors good name from him? and are not their lustful eyes now inflamed
with the fire of strong drink, set a lusting after strange flesh? And are not
their eyes full of adultery? etc. Ebrietatis vitium fugiendum est, primo
prop^er damnum, and ^e ^ulum, quod affert ipsi in mae, ipsam insatuando,
prodendo and spoliando. ^ Quia multa peccata secum ducit. 3 Quia famam aufert.
4 Quia poenam promerein^ tempo-alem. 5 Quia ad penam ducit eteruam. 6 Quia in
rebus exterioribus depauperat. 7 Quia corp^u^ damnificat, etc. D^x^t Diabo. us
cuidam quem saepe ad poccandum tentaverat; elige consentire uni extribus
peccatis (nimirum ebrietati, adulterio and himi^^iaio) and nunquam te tentabo;
qui elegit potius inebriars. Et postea ad utrumque, adulterium, videlicet, and
homicidium adjecit vinum: quia virum cum cujus uxore ebrius peccavit,
supervenientem occidit. Quando vero de ebrietate reprebandatur, quidam cor^m se
excusant per societatem and amicorum instantiam, Sed in hoc defectum proprium
potius ostendunt, quam se excusant, minus scientes in hoc fa^^o se offendunt
quam irrationabilia animalia, quae od nullius regatum ultra potum necessarium
s^mu^t. Vnde fertur quod quam quidam paterfamilias habuit quendam cervum
demesticum in domo sua, qui ad prandium cervisiam de sciphis solebat hibere,
and quada^^ vice tantum bibit, quod inebriatus erat, and saliens in curia inter
ligna crus suum graviter laesit, nunquam postea cervisiam, re^^al quid praeter
aquam bibere voluit. Ex Johan. Bromardi summa praedicantium, cap. 9. Nu. 2.
page 229. de ebrietate. Ebrietas flag^^ orum matter, cu^parum materio, radix
criminum, vitiorum omnium erigo, homines ad Dei imaginem fictos and formatos
non modo b^lluis, atque feris, sed imman ssimae furiosissimaeque illi bestiae
infernali, hoc est diabolo quam simillimos reddit, sicuti quotidiana
experientia ^atis su^erque testatur. August. lib. ad sacras virgin. cap 1. ubi
multa alia de hac re fusius explicantur. Epistol. libr. 12. Epist. 84.1. de
legibus ^lorat. ode 21 libr. 3. and libr. de art poet.
Another Writer gives us warning to avoid this sin, for these seven ensuing
reason: First, for the damage and detriment it procures to the soul, by
infatuation of the same, and by betraying and despoyling of all its glorious
ornaments: Secondly, because this sin seldom comes alone, but accompanied
with others: Thirdly, by reason it bereaveth one of his good name and
reputation: Fourthly, because it deserves a temporal punishment: Fifthly,
because it leads a man to eternal punishment: Sixthly, because it weakeneth
and impoverisheth a man, even his personal estate: Seventhly, because it
damnifieth the body by diseases, etc. The same Author again, The Devil said
to a certain person whom he had often tempted to sin, Make now thy choice, I
pray thee to yield to me, but in one of these three sins, (to wit, adultery,
murder, or drunkenness) and I will never tempt thee any more; who chose
rather to be drunk. But afterward the same party to his drunkenness, added
both the two other sins: for, being drunk, he committed adultery with another
man's wife, and withal killed the woman's husband, who, by hap came into the
room at the same time. Some, again, (says the same Author) when they are
reproved of their drunkenness, excuse themselves by reason of their
companions, their solicitation, and importanity. But in this they rather bewray
their own want of understanding, than excuse themselves; and in this
particular, show themselves inferior to the very brutes themselves, who by no
means will be urged to drink more than need requires. And to make this good,
it is reported, that a certain housekeeper, kept a tame Heart in his house,
which would often drink of their drink, drawn for dinner or supper: but at a
certain time drunk so liberally, that he was drunk; and after, skipping in
the court, among some logs of wood lying there, at length hurt his leg; who
after that time would never drink any other drink but water. The holy Father,
St Austine, calls it the mother of all mischief, the matter of all offenses,
the root and original of vices, making men (at first mad^ after the Ima^e of
almighty God) not like unto brute beasts, but like that cruel and ravenous
infernal Fiend himself, that is, the Devil; as woeful experience does daily
more than sufficiently witness. But hear what epithites the very heathen give
this swinish sin. Seneca calls it the cause of all public calamities* and
the same Author compares wine and strong drink to a poison, Optum and
Hellebore. Plato calls it a torment; and so does a heathen Poet: But let us a
little consider what mischiefs befall both man in particular, and the common
wealth in general, Mischiefs following upon drunkenness in the mind and
understanding.
by this loathsome sin. In the first place then, it unmans a man; and of a
reasonable man makes him worse than an unreasonable beast, expels all
virtue out of the mind, troubles the understanding, overthrows reason,
destroieth the memory, and inciteth man to many mischiefs. And whereas the
brutes by help of their senses only are able to avoid imminent dangers; these
men oftentimes deprive themselves even of the use of their senses, making
themselves by this means, as senseless as blocks; and contrary to the common
course of nature (always careful and sollicitous to preserve it self) either
rush upon their own ruin, or by their in discreet carriage bring ruin upon
themselves. And of this I need not, I think, produce any instances, Loathsome
diseases procured to the body by means of drunkenness.
there be few, if any; that cannot instance in some particulars of his own
knowledge. And as for diseases of the body procured thereby, they are not a
few: as namely, the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, or falling sickness; Incubus or
nightmare, Palsy, giddiness, lethargy, and the like soporiferous diseases;
besides sudden death, loss of memory and understanding, red and watery eyes, a
corny face, all beset with rubies and carbuncles, accompanied with a copper
nose. Besides, it is often after attended with rottenness and roughness of
teeth, a stinking breath, Dangers from with out attending a drunken man; often
preventing repentance, and so overthrowing the soul.
a stutting and stammering tongue, rotten lungs, filthy and stinking, belching,
vomitings, Fevers, inflammations, defluxions on the joints, procuring gouts of
all sorts; Dropsies of all kinds, the stone, strangury, with many more: yea to
speak in a word, it may prove a means of most diseases which befall mankind.
And besides all these, how many dangers from without attend a drunken man;
which without one minute of an hours time to repent him of his former wicked
course, Drunkenness overthrows a man's temporal estate.
often suddenly send him into another world? Moreover it is not to be omitted,
that drunkenness overthrows also a man's temporal estate, lavishly and
prodigally wasting that substance in a very short space, which had by honest
industry and pains been a long time a purchasing; by which means many times
besides a crasy and rotten body, they pull at length poverty, not upon
themselves alone, but upon their wives, children and posterity also; leaving
likewise a many beggars behind them to be a burden to the commonwealth:
besides, 1 Timoth. 5.8.
that in this is also transgressed the Apostles rule, if any man provide not
for his own, especially those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and
is worse than an Infidel: Besides, they prove also in this pernicious plagues
to a commonwealth by mis-spending and wasting so much grain in drink, as
might feed a number of poor people. Against this beastly sin a many worthy
writers both Christian and Heathen have much inveighed. And the heathen Poets
have not failed to play their parts. Propert. cel. 4. lib. 2:
Vino forma perit, vine corrumpitur atas.
By wine is spoiled quite the beauty of the face,
By wine our life corrupted is, it cutteth short our race.
And again Lucretius.
another describes some effects following this vice. Consequitur gravitas
membrorum, praepediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet men's:
Nant Oculi, clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt.
Hence follow the vnweldinesse, and weight of members weak,
The shaking thighs are hindered, the tongue is slow to speak,
The mind is moist, the eyes do swim, clamors and noise increase:
Deep sighs and sobs, chidings and brawles from such do never cease.
Hear yet Inven. sat. 6.
another speak to the same purpose. Quum bibitur concha, quum jam vertigine
tectum
Ambulat, and geminis exurgit mensa lucernis.
When men are whitled with their cups, when now their giddy brain,
Think that the house does walk about, and judge one candle twain.


It were no difficult matter for me, to produce a multitude of such invectives
against this vice out of these and other Poets, but that I must husband my
time. It is therefore worth the observing, how careful many of the heathens
were, not only in shunning themselves this vice; but by wholesome laws,
suppressing the spreading of it abroad into the commonwealth. And no small
commendation was it for that great and potent Sueton in ejus vita
Emperor Augustus Caesar, that during all the time of his wars, he never
drunk above thrice at a meal. On the contrary, we read of that Q. Curtius.
great Conqueror of the then known world, Alexander the great, unconquerable
by all the Persian forces, was, notwithstanding, at length Alexander Magnus
schypho Herculano victus est antea invictus. Seneca lib, 12. epist. 84.
overcome with their wine; which made him imbrue his hands in the blood of his
dearest friends. And by divine punition in the aprile of his age, by a draught
from the hands of Proteas, ended his days. The like it were easy for me to
instance in many others of high and eminent rank: as likewise of a multitude
of others of inferior degree, if time would permit me. Eusebius, Plato,
Aristole and Galen, greatly commend the laws of the Carthaginians, whereby was
forbidden any man during the wars, to drink any thing but water. Athen. lib.
12. cap. 11.
Among the Indians, it was not lawful at any time to be drunk. And among the
Persians on that day only when they sacrificed to the Sun, it was lawful
for them to be drunk, and to dance after the Persian manner. I have already in
the chapter of Gluttony, made mention of a Scottish King that made a law, that
the drunkard should be put to death. Now as this swinish sin is odious to all
ages, sexes, and conditions; so it is more odious in some than in others. Wime
forbidden youth
And therefore wine Plato 2. de leg. Clem. Alexand. Paedeg. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Gal. 5. de sanit. tuend
was forbidden youth, until certain years, and then permitted with
moderation. And Leont cap. 87.188. Athen lib. 10. cap. 13. Valor. Max. lib. 2.
etc.
women were forbiden wine among the Massilians and Milesians; and at this time
is not usual for women in France, to drink wine before they be married, but
water only. Valor. Maxim. lib. 6 cap. 3.
And among the Romans this same law against women's drinking of wine was in
force. To this purpose it is very memorable which is recorded, that one
Ignatius Melentius a Roman, killed his own wife for being drunk: the which
fact of his was so far from being punished, that there was not so much as one
to accuse him for the same; every one accounting her justly punished for
exceeding the bounds of sobriety. Now, as this sin of drunkenness is
unseemely, Drunkenness unseemly in a Churchmen*
and odious in all ages and degrees of the laity; so it is yet far more
odious in a Churchman, Math. 5.16.
who as a light, ought by his life and conversation so shine before others,
that men seeing his good works, holy life, and good conversation, may glorify
our heavenly Father. This being well considered of the ancient Fathers of the
Church, was the occasion of so many canons and constitutions against this so
loathsome sin in the Clergy. And that this Isaiah 28.^*
same sin reigned even among the Clergy of the Jews, may by some places of
Scripture appear. God forbad Aaron and the other Priests under the pain of
death, when they were to offer up sacrifice, to drink either wine or strong
drink. The Nazarites were also all forbidden wine and strong drink. The
Apostle Paul reckoning up the qualities wherewith a Minister of the Word ought
to be endued, among the rest, reckons up this, that he must not be given to
wine, nor strong drink. And we see that holy 1 Timothy 3* 3* Tit. 1.2^
Timothy was so observant of sobriety, and so fearful to fall into this
sin, that he endangered his own health, and needed by the Apostle to be put
in mind to regard it a little more. It was a care worthy of commendation,
those ancient Fathers had in former times, in constituting so Council. Agathens.
(...) di^^inct. 35 ^em ex conc^^. Nanneten^i. di^^. act. 44 etc.
many worthy Canons in their counsels against this odious sin. And hence came
it to pass, that as well in So^om. lib. 3. cap. 6 S^crat lib 5. cap. 18.
Tripart. hist. lib 6. cap. 29 Sic in can. decret. distinct 35. Jt^m can. Apost.
42. Citante Stuck. antiquit conviv. lib. 3. cap 9.
all the Churches of the East, as also in Greece it self, it was forbidden
Clergymen to enter into Tavernes or victualling-houses, except in travailing.
And that even the heathen Priests, at least many of them, did either wholly, or
at least some days before their sacrifices abstain from strong drink, may by
ancients histories appear. The Egyptian priests abstained all their life long
from wine and flesh, as witnesses Lib. advers Jovinianum.
S. Jerome. And concerning Volater. lib. 13. cap. 4. Alexander ab Alex. lib. 6.
cap. 2.
other Priests, by many other places it may appear. And concerning the
Esseans, it is by De antiquit. Iu^aic. and libro peculiari de eorum vita.
Citante Stuckio. ibid.
Josephus recorded, that they abstained altogether from wine. Since then the
holy fathers in former times were so vigilant and careful to prevent this
loathsome sin of drunkenness in the Clergy, as appears by the former canons
and constitutions, what care and circumspection ought there now to be had
thereof in this our age, when as the light of the Gospel is not now set under a
bushel; but with its bright beams shines overall this our Goshen. I hope the
reverend Fathers of the Church in a laudable imitation of antiquity, will
narrowly look into this so enormious and swinish a sin. If the watchman be
overtaken with strong drink, what shall become of his charge he is set over?
If the minister be a drunkard, how shall he reprove this sin in his
Parishioners? Or if he do, may they not reply, Medice cura teipsum. Luke 4.25.
Physician heal thy self.

Cato.
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. It was a worthy saying of a Petrus
Raven. graviter sane vercque hac de re ita dissent. Eb^ietas, inquil, in la^^o
crimen est, in sacerdote sacrilegiam, quo alter anima suam praesecat, alter se
prop^anat, and spiritum sanctitatis extinguit. Ebrietas enim matter est litium,
suroris genetrix petulantiae magistra. Huic qui obnoxiu^ est, homo non est, hac
qui laborat non modo peccatum facit, sed ipse est peccatum. Haec enim est
rabies voluntatis, invitatus bostis, pernicies honestatis, and pudoris injuria.
Vbi enim regnat, ebrietas, ratio exu^at, intellectus obtunditur, consilia
deviant, and udicia subvertuntur. ^^dem Stuck. ibid.
learned man that Drunkenness in a Lay man was a great and heinous sin, but
in a Clergyman a sacrilege; whereby the one suffocats and kills his soul,
the other (the Clergyman) quite extinguish the holy Spirit. It were therefore
to be wished, that as David would have no liar to dwell in his house; so a
drunkard should not have the charge of souls in Gods house. Too much moisture
will extinguish a light; wherefore, if this cannot be amended, I wish such
might be removed, and better burning lights set up in their rooms. And if any
shall think this too sharp a censure, I answer, that sometimes for lesser
matters, some have been as sharply censured. And whereas men are often so
Eagle-eyed, that they can espy a broken pane in a glass window, or a stone
broken up in the Church pavement; I wish there might be the like vigilancie and
circumspection in presenting and punishing of drunkards, especially the
Minister, if such ^ parish; I speak not here against the keeping of Gods house
in that orderly decency becoming the same; but I would not have Matthew. 23.23.
Luke 11.42.
mint and cumin tithed, and weightier matters of the Law neglected. It is a
true saying Vivimus exemplis, non regulis. People are are apter to imitate the
life and conversation of their minister (especially in any sin whereunto all
Adams sinful offspring are prone enough by nature) than his doctrine. And I
wish these two golden sentences were deeply engraven in all Clergy men's
breasts. Ezekiel. 3.17^
Son of man, I have set thee a watchman, etc. And that of the new Testament:
Matthew. 15.14:
If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. Clergymen
often complain that they are not in that esteem and account, as the eminency
of their calling requires: and I confess it to be too true: but withal I
advertise them, that many times this proceeds from themselves; and besides,
they are often the cause that many honest ministers have the same aspersion,
howbeit undeservedly, cast upon them. But because I purpose not to uncover my
parents nakedness, I leave this point, which I have only touched occasionally
and by the way. Since then drunkenness is so loathsome and detestable a sin,
so hurtful both to the soul and body; leaving both liable to Gods curse; so
hateful to God and man, and by which all Gods commandments are broken; it
being so great an enemy also to the commonwealth, and so great an enemy to
the health of the body, is it not fit that such offenders should be condignely
punished? And if many years ago, Idem Stuck. ibid. and nuper Claud. Deod.
Panth. Hygiast. lib. 2. cap. 17.
some Germane writers did even then acknowledge some judgments, which had then
befalne that Nation, and others then threatened (which nevertheless were but
flea-bitings to that has since befalne them) was, by reason of this beastly
and swinish sin of drunkenness, what may we say now? But this I leave to
them, whom it most concerns to handle such a subject. I confess indeed, we
have good and wholesome laws enacted against drunkenness, and I praise God
for it: and withal my wish is, there were no neglect in the execution. I could
likewise wish, that the superfluous number of Alehouses, the very nurseries
and upholders of this swinish sin did not so much exceed. It seems, that
howsoever drunkenness is no new-upstart, yet in ancient times people were not
come to that height of brazen-faced impudency to be drunk in the day time;
but as it is a work of darkness, so was it the custom to be most used in
the night-season, as may by the Apostles speech appear: 1 Thessalonians. ^.7.
They that are drunk are drunk in the night. But now people are come to that
height of impudency, and have so steeled their foreheads against all shame,
that they dare even in the sight of the Sun; yea, in the open view of the
world; yea, even before God, and all his heavenly host of Angels, reele drunk
up and down the streets. It was again wont to be a proverbial speech, Drunk
like a beggar: but now many of the Gentry (alas the more is the pity!) do
assume this as a prerogative to grace their gentility. And what a pity is it
now, to see Gentlemen of fair estates, Drunkenness does much derogate from
the dignity of gentility.
of ancient houses, descended of noble parentage and pedigree, so far to
wrong themselves, as in Tavernes and Tap-houses to become a companion to any
base varlet, swill-bowle, tosse-pot and pot-companion? If their noble
predecessors, of martial courage and invincible valor, men famous in their
generations, among whom many spared not their blood for the defense of their
country, and to purchase peace to the public; should now behold these their
degenerate successors, with their busy heads, long love-locks, slasht suits,
Italianised, Frenchised, Espaniolised, and what not: and besides, should yet
see their excess in gluttony and drunkenness, chambring and wantonness, in
taverns, alehouses, play houses and whoore-houses, and neglecting that ancient
hospitality and good housekeeping which heretofore has been so common in this
kingdom, I leave to the judicious reader to judge what they would say to such
a sight. But if I should proceed in this point, I should lose my self, and too
much enlarge this discourse. Only this counsel I shall be bold to give to
some that are most exorbitant, that whereas they are often so punctual in their
points of precedence, and such other things, as they suppose, concerns their
credit, that they will sometimes, rather than come short an inch of their own
due, take an ell of another man's right: yet by such carriage make themselves
base and contemptible in the face of their country; howsoever, some of their
flattering claw-backe parasites, and some others for some sinister respects,
may with cap and knee, seem to honor and worship their worthless greatness.
Such as are betrusted with matters of Justice ought to be free from this fault.
Howsoever, my wish is, that such as are betrusted with matters of justice, and
have the oversight of Alehouses, may be free from this fault, or else what
reformation can we look for at their hands? As for his Majesty, he has
always expressed himself and his good affection for the suppressing of this
and such other enormities: it remains therefore, that such as he has
therewith betrusted this business, be careful. Now, in many great cities and
corporations of this Kingdom there is often too much neglect even in this fame
particular; and that often by reason of a mere relation unto and dependence
one upon another, every man's private so overswaying him (quite contray to the 1
Cor. 10.24. Philip. 2.21.
Apostles golden rule, Seek not every man his own, but seek ye one another
good) that it is a hard matter to have justice executed as it ought. And in
such societies there is a certain triumivrat combination betwixt the Master,
and the Baker, and Brewer (Innes and Alehouses especially I mean) having near
relation one to another, and indeed a mutual dependencie one upon another.
Some tradesmen again, for fear of losing some custom, are contented to sit
still, and keeping the formality of the place, and what credit may thereby unto
themselves accrue, go on still the old pack-horse pace, lest they should be
thought too stirring and pragmaticall. And by the way, I cannot but highly
commend one laudable constitution of late years made by this corporation: That
no Victualler, or Innekeeper should be elected Governor or Major of this
corporation; Laudable constitution of the Town of Northampton.
which has also been above these twenty years bypast inviolably observed.
But my speech is not here against the lawful use of these so necessary places
for the relief and comfort of travelers; my speech is only directed against
blind and unnecessary Alehouses, which might well be spared; and others made
to keep the statutes made to that end and purpose. I therefore earnestly
exhort all those with whom God has betrusted authority, and the sword of
Justice; that as they would avoid, and turn away Gods heavy judgments from
themselves, and from the whole land; and as they will give a good account of
their stewardship at that last and dreadful day, they would be careful to
draw the sword of justice against both these active and passive offenders; the
Drunkard, I mean, and the disorderly Alehouse. And whereas by a laudable late
law; there is a pecuniary mulct inflicted upon the Drunkard, I pray you rob
not the poor, but let the offender be punished, and the poor have his due.
And as concerning Gods heavy Judgments inflicted upon great Princes, whole
kingdoms and commonwealths and many private persons, by reason of this same,
it were easy for me to compile a whole volume. But this I can say of mine own
knowledge, that for the space of about twenty years at least, since my first
coming into this place, I have observed few of those who kept such tippling
houses, and died since that time I mentioned, ever attain to the period of old
age; and died for the most part of dropsies, consumptions, palsies, or the like
diseases. My purpose is not here to enter upon a large discourse against
drunkenness, the multiplicity of dehortatory arguments against it, being so
various, so many, and handled by so many, both profane and divine Writers;
what I have said, is but by the way, being an abuse of that good creature,
whereof I have at great length set down the right use, and therefore shortly
and briefly have touched upon it, and how hurtful it is to the body (that
being most prevalent with most men) with a little touch of some other hurts. As
for that forced kind of drinking by measure (commonly called drinking of
health) I think it a Satanicall invention, to rob men both of health and
heaven. The multitude of strong unanswerable arguments, both against this and
all manner of drunkenness; as also the authorities, both divine and humane,
Christian and heathen, laws and constitutions, both civil and
ecclesiastical, as they are many; so are they learnedly, and at great length
set down by a learned religious Gentleman, W. Prin. in his book called.
Health^ Sickness.
whose book I wish those who desire to be satisfied in this particular to
peruse, and there, no question, they may receive full satisfaction. Now, since
by some it has been prescribed to be drunk to drive away an ague, and some
have deemed it good physic to be drunk once a month, it may be demanded,
whether this practice be allowable? I answer, it may as well be demanded,
whether we may not sin, that some future good may thereon ensue, and I doubt
not, but all sound Divines will answer with a negative voice. And besides,
there is no benefit can this way be proved, but we may far safelier, both for
soul and body, effect it by other means. But this assertion is so absurd,
that it needs no further confutation.

The Diet of the Diseased. THE SECOND BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN the second Book we descend to the handling of the Diet of the Diseased,
and in what manner all the premises are to be used by the sick: and first of
the air fit for sick and diseased persons, and in excess how to be
corrected: where also something concerning fire, and what fuel is the best:
and something also concerning the situatian of the house, where the sick
lies, the chamber and bed, the sickes apparel on his body and bed; next we
proceed to some general directions and rules of the diet of the diseased;
concerning abstinence, a thin and spare, a liberal or full, and a mean diet
betwixt both. Afterward we proceed to the particular preparation of the diet
of the diseased; and first of that afforded by vegetables, bread especially;
and what is the best, with some preparations thereof for the use of the sick.
Then follows flesh of several sorts, the various and diverse preparations,
together with diverse liquid substances thereof prepared; as broths, co^lices,
conserves, gellies, etc. And next concerning fish, foul and eggs; and whether
fish may be, and what best used by the sick, and with what cautions. After is
discussed the drink of the diseased, both natural and artificial, alimentall
and Physical Of water, whether and how it may be safely used of the sick. Of
several sorts of Physical drinks; as aqua vitae, usquebath, and diverse sorts
of strong waters; together with their right use and abuse* as also of diverse
drinks made of honey, oximel, hydromel, mulsum or mulsa, diverse drinks made
of barley, ptisin, cream of barley, etc. Of milk, whey, butter, cheese, and
several sorts of possets useful for the sick* and something also concerning
the use of emulsions, or almond mikes. And lastly, of the several sorts of
exercise useful in sickness and in health.

CHAP. I.
Of the diet of the diseased in general something, the utility and profit
thereof. Of the air in particular, and how to be corrected in times of
sickness, and what fuel is the best.

WHat has been hithero handled, has been chiefly in regard of that which now
hereafter ensues; to wit, the Diet of the Diseased, which is the principal
end I at the first aimed at. And I cannot sufficiently wonder, this being a
work so profitable, so necessary and useful for all sorts of people, Diet of
the diseased has been hitherto much neglected.
that it has been hitherto so long neglected. And so much the more am I
hereat amazed, in that so many both ancient and late writers have so copiously
handled the diet of healthful people: yea, even here among our our selves,
some such tractats have been published in our vulgar tongue. Among the
ancients this part of Physic has scarce by any of set purpose been touched,
but scatteringly here and there some few things have been said concerning this
subject. Hippocrates first began this subject.
Hippocrates is the first we read of, that ever set upon this business, and
wrote some thing concerning the diet of acute diseases against the Guidian
Physicians of his time, above 2000. years ago, and which differed not a
little from the diet used in our days. And besides, his witing is so short and
succinct after his Laconicke manner, that they are not obvious to every vulgar
understanding. Since his time I know not any that has published any tractat
concerning this subject, excepting only one Brudus Lusitanus scripsit de victu
febricit. lib. 3.

Strictness of the Locrians in the diet of the diseased.


Brudus a Portugal by nation, who has written but slenderly of the diet to
be used in fevers. And yet we read the ancients were so careful in the
observation of diet, that among the Locrians, it was death without the
Physicians prescription to drink a draught of wine. Q Curtius.
Alexander the great commanded to put to death his Physician Glaucias for
allowing his favorite Hephaestion to drink too much: or as some will have it,
that seeing him drink wine abundantly, he did not inhibite or hinder him.
Among the Egyptians.
Among the Egyptians it was strictly commanded they should fast till the
fourth day. Since therefore, this part of Physic concerning the diet of the
diseased is so much neglected, what marveile, if diseases prove so fierce and
furious? And there is no remedy so effectual (says Lib. de theriaca ad
Pisonem.
Galen) which can produce the expected effect, if either not furthered by a due
and convenient diet, or at least not hindered by disorder. And therefore it is
the opinion of the Meth. med. lib. 11.
same Author in another place, that people of inferior rank, and smaller
means, are often easilier and sooner cured than many of greater eminency and
ability: and that by reason of their willingness to be ordered by the
Physicians presciption; whereas the richer sort often oppose them, desiring
commonly to be cured with slight and trivial medicines, not able to expel so
strong an enemy. And sometimes this is again occasioned (says 1 Meth.
he) by the assentation and indulgence of the Physician, who will give them
drink as much as they desire, let them drink wine when they demand it, and
suffer them to do whatsoever they list: and finally, in every thing carry
themselves in a slavish manner toward their patients, quite contrary to that
which becomes such as are descended of Aesculapius, who ought to command his
patients, as a General of an army commands his soldiers, or a King his
subjects. The office of the physician among the ancients divided into three
parts, and consequently there were 3 sorts of physicians, 1 Clinici. 2
Architectonici. 3 Pepaedeumeni. Aristot 3. polit.
It is moreover to be observed, that among the ancients, the office of the
Physician was divided into three parts, and by consequence there were three
sorts of Physicians. The first were such as assisted the sick observing all
their actions, and seeing them observe the diet, and other things prescribed by
the chief Physicians, called Architectonici, (answerable to our rational
Physicians) when they came at their accustomed hours to visit them. The third
sort were called Pepaedeumeni, who taught this art in the schools, and brought
up others in the same profession: to which are answerable the Doctors of the
chair in our Universities. Now, such as assisted the sick, by reason they
sat by their bedsides, were called Clinici; and from thence this part of
physic handling the diet of the diseased, was also called Clinice. The two
later sorts of Physicians, we have here in our countries; but with the first
sort we are not acquainted. And in truth this is a great defect, The care of
assisting the sick most commonly committed to women.
and the prejudice thereby redounding to the public not small, for as much as
this charge is most commonly committed to ignorant women, with us called
nurses, a people for the most part so wilful, and wise in their own eyes, and
so selfe-conceited, that in stead of furthering the Physician in his course, by
keeping the patient strictly to his prescription, they are often the readiest
to overthrow whatsoever they ordain, unless it please them very well. And
many other women also (the judicious, discrete and better bred, I always
except) who take chiefly this charge upon them, are much of the same stamp.
And this was the reason why that famous Ex his intelligi potest ab uno medico
multor ^non posse curari, eumque (si artifex est) idoneum esse qui non multum
ab aegro recedit Et iterum paulo post. Ille assideat necesse est, qui quod
solum opus est visurus est, qua^do minus imbecillis futurus sit nisi cibum
acciperit, Cells. libr. 3. cap. 4.
Celsus wished an able and understanding Physician never to be far from his
patient. Of this same diet of the diseased, my purpose is with the aid of the
almighty to discourse. Now, howsoever the matter of this diet be the same with
that of healthful people; yet the manner of preparation, use, and other
circumstances do not a little differ, as hereafter shall more plainly appear.
And first, I will begin with the air:

As then the air is that elemenr without the which, in health the life man of
cannot subsist, and a sweet, pure, temperate air a great means to preserve
health: so is the air, endued with the same laudable qualities a great means
to further the recovery of health already lost. In sickness therefore, it is a
matter of no small consequence how the air is ordered. Now, as it will not of
any be denied, but that the best air is to be made choice of, so again, all
are not able to change their own natural air; some for want of ability, and
some in regard of the nature of the disease. In acute diseases ( Fevers I
mean, and such diseases as have Fevers for their continual attendants; as
Pleuresies, Squinancies, etc.) it is not safe to transport the sick: In
chronicall, and diseases of longer continuance; as dropsies, consumptions, etc.
thou may be bolder. The air then is in a double respect to be considered,
either as the common ambient, The air considered in a double respect.
or as it is included within some particular rooms. The air, as the common
ambient, which is of a laudable quality, neither too cold and piercing, nor
too hot and foggy, if it be possible, and thy disease will permit, is to be
made choice of. Now, the properties of the best and most laudable air,
together with nature and properties of several sorts of winds, have been
heretofore at great length related. True is it indeed, that acute diseases
seldom suffer the patient to remove his habitation, after he is once ceized
with the same; for the which cause, we must use art to alter and correct the
quality of the air contrary to the disease, In chronicall diseases the air is
to be exchanged for a better if it may be, but seldom in acute.
as we shall show anon. In chronicall and long lingering and continuing
diseases, such as are dropsies, consumptions, quartanes, and the like, one may
easily exchange the place of his abode for a better. And that this was also the
practice of the ancient Physicians* does by that of 6 Epidem.
Hippocrates plainly appear, who wishes the sick in long continuing
diseases, to retire themselves into another air. And 5 Math med.
Galen himself, sent such as were sick of consumptions, by means of ulcerate
lungs, to a place not far from Rome, called Tabiae, being a pretty high
place, where was a pure dry air, the which is even at this time also much
frequented by such diseased people. And for this same cause in Plinies time,
Custom with us to send the sick into another air.
many, upon the same occasion sailed into Egypt. The like custom in these our
countries we likewise observe, to send the sick either into a better air, or
else into his own native soil. Qualities of the air whither one is to retire
himself.
Now, the air whither they are to retire, ought to be a pure, sweet, and fresh
air, not infected with any noisome and evil smells, nor yet near any fennes,
and standing pooles. But before I proceed, I must needs give an aduertisment to
the reader, concerning the place for burying of the dead, on the which, if I
insist a little, I must needs crave pardon, the matter being of some
consequence for the health of mankind. I say then, Inconvenience in burying of
dead bodies in the Churchyard.
that the inveterate custom of burying the dead in Churchyards, but especially
in Churches, proves often very pernicious and hurtful to the health of the
living. And this inconvenience in populous cities and towns, (especially in
the noble City of London) may not seldom be observed: and that in such places
principally, where the Church and Churchyard are so little, that often times
new graves are dug for new guests, before the old inhabitants be quite
metamorphosed into their mother mold; the which how inconvenient it is,
especially where the corpse must stand unburied until the sermon be finished,
let the unpartiall reader judge. Sure I am this great Church of All Saints, in
this town, was already this last Summer so fraught full of dead corpse, that it
was a hard matter to find a place to dig a new grave* and yet since that
time, how many have there been buried, there are a many witnesses. And so good
Church men would many be after their death, who in their life time cared but
little for coming at the Church assemblies; that if they be of any rank or
means, they must needs lie in the chancell at the least; Against policy to bury
in Churches.
and then after a Popish superstitious conceit, many it may be, think they
shall be the wel-comer to heaven. But they will find I warrant them, that they
reckoned without their host. And that this is not mine own private opinion, it
may appear that it was accounted a matter of policy, not to bury within cities
and towns; as may by a Curet etiam ut loca sepultu^arum and monumentorum sint
extra frequentem coetum hominum, eo nempe loco, quo vivis non possint nocere.

Expostio.

Nempeid vult canon, lo^ ^a sepulturarum debere esse extra urbes; in o and
extra templa, in quibus homines frequente^ conve nunt, id quod probatur ex
perpetua consuetudine popu^i Dei qui mortuos suos sepel^t, non in urbibus and
templis, sed in campis; sicut videre est in historia Patriarcharum, qui omnes
in campis sepeliri voluerunt, and imprimis manifest testatur Evangelista
Lucas. cap. 7. Vbi narrat filium vidua habitantus in u^be Naum, cum mortuus
esset, deportatum fuisse extra urb^m adse ulturam* ^d qu^m lo^um vide quae
an^otet ^octi interpretes, qui id omnes uno ore profitentur, non tantum
Iudaeorum, sed etiam gent^^m (...) remfuisse, ut mortuos suos esserrent extra
urbes. Vide etiam ^^martyr loco commuclall. 2. loco de s^ pu^t.

2 Ratio aucitur ex charitate proximi, cu^ plane aduersatur iste mos
sepeliendorum mortuorum in urbibus and templis, dum nempe valetu^^ni and vitae
vivorum nocetur, per haelitus qui exc^daveribus mortuorum in urbibus and temp^s
tanto copiosiores exhilant, quanto locus est conclasi^r, and ob hominum
frequentiam tepidior; quos quidem balitus, praesertim ex eorum cadave^^bus, qui
peste e^^^^cts sunt evaporantes, venenatos ac contagiosos medici testantur:
inter quos Le^in. Lemn. 2. De mirac Not cap ^. Vt non dicam hoc loco de (...)
and terr^^ in qui (...) plura (...); quam (...) ea ^o a (...) nata quasi quam
materiam (...) m^nument^^ (...) istud mov. a^ and effo^^tur 3 Ratio e^ a caus^
(...) and or^gine estius consu^tud^nu sepeliendorum ma^tu^rum in templ^^; quam
originem (...), vel id testimoniam est, quod nempe Mon^^m, and prae^itim ^^a^
c^^cani. ac praeser^m (...) a^^untes ex ist^ (...) ra mor^u^rum quae in temp in
temp i^ fiant, non nisi lucrain^ qu^lium quaesiverint tur^^ ^mum. and quidem
ita suae si^ erint, ut n^^ ^xpe^^^rint templa (...) quae aqua (...) c^^at (...)
ac con^amin^ri, cum Deuteronomy ipse di^^rte in (...) ^andum ea (...) and pu^ (...) ai
(...) summo altar viciniora. Acce (...), and aliud argumentum ex testimo^io
^uris ci^ilu, de quo^ ure pl^^^t annotare verba: Francisci Ripae extracta de
peste, cap. 4 ante citato, ubi iuquit, ad removencum ^oe^or^^m ex cadaveribus
provenientem a maioribus nostris inventa sunt sepulchra non defunctorum causa,
sed viventium gratia instituta: Nam quia sepulchra ut plurimum foetent, staruit
D. Adrianus poenam ^0. aureorum in eos qui in civitate sepulchrum ^ociunt
locumq publicati iussit, and corpus inde transferri, eadem Magistratibus
patientibus imminente. 3. Divus Adria^us F. de sepulchrorum violatoribus Huc
accidit and lex 12. tabularum, quae jussit humari corpora extra urbem ^^verbis:
Mo^tu^m hominem in urbe ne sepelito. Quam legem citans Franciscus Patricius and
ipse homo Pontificius lib. 5. de institutione reipubl. tit. 10. in^^r alia haec
etiam addit verba: Nullum genus sepulturae megis laudandum puto, quam hum^^ones
sub di^, (...) flores and herbae na^cuntur; tam id in sepulchris vetustissimis
inscriptum sit Sparge rosas lector, vel can^id a lilia pone stem Manibus date
lilia plenis, Item purpureos spargam flores. Et addit Patricius Pulchrius est
and optabilius Germinatiti teriae ^^^di hoc corpus, cum ex tali terra factum
sit, and ut aequum est, ut f^lius in gremium matris revertatur. Denique etiam a
edit hodierna consuetudo laudatissimarum rerum publicarum, Argentinensis
Norib^^ensis, Lipsensis, in quibus vel rara, v^l nulla etiam mortaliorum
cadavera in templis urbanis humantur. De Spartanis m^ror, quod permiforint
mortuos in urbe sepel^i: de quo ^m consuetudine, vide Era^um libr. 3. page 110.
Interim tamen vetuerunt ne monumenta in templis fierent, sed ^uxta, Vide i^id

Ante annos cir^iter 400. haec execrabilis consuetudo coepit, cum ante haec
tempora. etiam Martyrum cadavera extra urbes sepulta (...). Franciscani enim
and Dominicani cum viderent numerum fraterculorum angeri, nec tantos sumplus
ipses su p^^ere, (...) em^ugendae pecuuia artem invenerunt, ut homines in
cucullis Monacborum, and prope altar sepeliri deber, (...) duent, ita ut recte
quis dicat, Nullam artem acquitendae pecuniae esse probatiorem quam mortuorum,
Vide ibedem plu^^ Ca^. 10.


learned late Writer, who proves that the dead should be buried without cities
and towns, and not in Churches; where are frequent assemblies and great
concourse of people, which he there proves by diverse arguments and reasons. 1.
This is proved, says he, by the continual custom of Gods own people, who
buried their dead not within towns and temples, but in the fields, as by the
Patriarchs may appear. And this is yet made more manifest by that place of S.
Luke 7. where mention is made of the son of the widow of Nahum, who being dead,
was carried out of the town to be buried: upon which place, all the learned
interpreters do observe, that, not among the Jews only; but even among the
Gentiles also, it was the custom to bury their dead without their cities and
towns. 2 Reason is taken from charity toward our neighbor, against which is
this custom of burying the dead in towns and temples, the health of the
living by this means being hurt, and that by means of vapors and exhalations
arising from these dead carcasses; and the which must needs exhale and rise up
in greater abundance, by how much more the place is close, and warmed by the
multitude of people. And that such vapors and exhalations (especially if they
proceed from bodies dead of the Plague) are venomous and contagious, our
Physicians do witness. And besides, this earth being thus embrued with those
venomous vapors, when it is moved, and cast up to bury new bodies, must needs
send out evil and venomous vapors to the living. The 3. reason is taken from
the original of this custom, which was evil, and at first introduced by the
Monks, Franciscan Friars especially, and that for their own profit and gain.
And whereas God himself affirmed to the people of the Jews, that the very
touching of a dead corpse made them unclean, and that the place where it was
laid, was thereby polluted: yet, those holy begging brothers hold that the
sepulchers are the cleaner and purer, the nearer they lie unto the high Altar,
howsoever their churches have before been consecrated with their holy water.
4. The civil law it self condemns this custom; and to this purpose are
there cited the words of a learned writer: that to prevent the stinking and
noisome smell proceeding from dead bodies, by our ancestors sepulchers were
divised, not for the dead, but for the good of the living: for by reason of
this noisome smell where dead bodies are buried, therefore the Emperor Adrian
inflicted a mulct or fine of forty crowns to be taken of such, as should bury
any dead body within a city or town, the place likewise to be confiscate, and
the body likewise to be from thence removed; the magistrate permitting to be
likewise punished. And the law of the 12 tables commanded likewise dead bodies
to be buried without the cities and towns. And some have been of that
opinion, that no burial place was to be compared with that of the open fields
whereas grass and flowers grow in great abundance. And 5. This is the laudable
custom of some commonwealths: as of Strasbourg, Nuremberge and Leipzig,
whereas either very seldom, or never bury they any dead bodies in their
Churches. Besides, this same point concerning the burial of the dead, among
other things was thought a matter worth the reformation: and therefore at this
day they have ordinarily other convenient places deputed for the burial of
their dead. And if we will yet more narrowly look into this business,
considering this is Gods house, the which, we ought at least to keep as
clean and sweet as those of our own ordinary abode; I think, we shall find
it but a matter of equity. And I will yet appeal to any, whether they would
have their own houses, especially their parlours or rooms, where they are
most frequently to be made places of burying the dead. And the Papists would
yet make a man wonder more, who were so careful and curious in contenting the
outward senses, that not only would they please the eyes of the spectators
with curious pictures and images, and by melodious music of organs and other
instruments of music besides vocal, give so good content to the ears that
notwithstanding, they were so careless of this other sense of smelling, that
they would not spare to bury the dead even under the high Altar it self. But I
think they may reply, there was another smell which did more affect them, to
wit, that which did so much affect that Roman Emperor, Vespasian, the smell of
gain. And this pleasant smell was that which first forged purgatory,
indulgences, consecrating of Agnus Dei, Episcopal palles, and innumerable
other things, sent to Princes and great persons, and sold at a high rate: and
this same bred first this burying in Churches, in S. Francis his habit, yea,
caven hard by the high Altar; the which was little above 400 years ago brought
into the Church, whenas this begging brotherhood began to increase to a
greater number than their alms and ordinary allowance would well maintain.
But on this particular I will not dwell any longer, but wish that things might
be so carried, as injury might be done to none: and withal, that a public
good might be always preferred before any private or personal respects:
neither were it a hard matter for me to answer whatsoever could be objected
against this so laudable a custom of burying the dead in some place set apart
for this purpose in some out-part of Towns and Cities, or rather without the
same. Howsoever I have discharged my duty as a Physician, giving warning of
the inconveniences from hence arising, and prescribing a sweet and wholesome
air, especially for the sick. But of this, ^^us much shall suffice. Now, when
there is any fault, either by excell^^^ defect in the air, we may safely
correct the same. ^^^^ectio^ o^ (...)
In the Summer time, when the air is too hot, we are to use all means to
cool and refresh it; by strowing our rooms with cooling green herbs: as
lett^ces, (...) to cool the air in Summer.
vineleaves, violet leaves, sallow and the like, by sticking the room with
green boughs, and letting in some air by opening the windows, if any, that
look toward the North. There may also great pales full of cold water be set
in several corners of the house, and sometimes water powered out of one uessell
into another. If the air again be too cold, Warming of the cold air in
Winter.
as in Winter, then the best way is to warm the room with a good fire. And
because fire is so necessary and useful, we must have a special regard,
especially being for the use of the sick, of what fuel it is made. In the
first place then, it must be made of dry wood, and not of green smoakie
sticks, very offensive both in sickness and in health. The fire of coals is
not so good for the use of the sick, The fuel whereof the fire is made.

Sea coal and pit-coale ^re naught.

(...) ^^ndled in a close ^^ome dange^ou^.

History


especially such as are dug out of the bowels of the earth. And those we
commonly call char-coale, if either new kindled, or yet be in a narrow room,
are very hurtful for any sick, yea, will offend a healthful person. And it
is reported that Iovinian the Emperor traveling toward Rome in the
Winter-season, by the way was lodged in a room newly whited with lime, in the
which, to air the room, was made a great fire of char-coale, and the next
morning this Emperor was found dead in his bed, being stifled by the venomous
vapors of these coals and lime. I remember, that living in Paris, 1608. A
young Gentleman of Poictou in France, my chamber-fellow set a great pan of
char-coale within his study in the Winter time, shutting both door and
window, (...)
and within a little space came running out of his study half stifled, whenas
being in mine own study within the same chamber, ^ marvelling, and much amazed,
came to him, asking him the cause of this sudden fright; who scarce able to
speak, related the truth of the matter, and how that being almost suffocated
with the venomous and suffocating vapors of these coals, he was scarce able
to open his study door. Sweet wood, without all controversy, is best fuel;
as Rosemary, Sweet wood i^ the best.
Juniper, Bai-tree, if they were as frequent with us as in the south parts of
France, and many other Countries. With us our ordinary wood of Ash, Elm, oak,
Good fuel (...) Worse fuel.
sallow and beech are good fuel for the chamber of the diseased. But the
poplar, the elder, and all sorts of thorns are far inferior to the former,
by reason they trouble the head more, as witnesses De conservanda valetud.
cap. 7.
Ranzovius: and what if we add to these the walnut tree, which has been ever
reputed an enemy to that principal part? Besides, there is a fuel in the
northern parts of this Island, called heath or ling, whereof there is great use
made, Heath or ling wholesome fuel.
as well for ordinary uses of baking, brewing and drying malt, as for burning
in the chambers sometimes, both of sick and healthful persons* the which in
my opinion is exceeding good, especially for the sick, without any offense or
hurt to any part of the body, being very good in all manner of defluxions,
(...) of (...) wa^e^.
and diseases from thence proceeding, and good to corroborat the sinews and
nervous parts. If the air of thy chamber be infested with noisome smells, if
otherwise unavoidable, then art thou to correct the same with sweet smells: as
of vinegar, roses and rose water, sanders, etc; in hot diseases: and in cold
diseases, with juniper, Hot and (...) woods (...) whom (...)
and many hot aromaticall smells. It is also to be observed, that such hot
woods are best for the sickes chamber in cold, and not in hot acute diseases,
unless the room be large and spacious. If there be no other means to correct
the air, we are, if it be possible, to exchange it for a better, as has been
said already. But it is now time to come to the habitation of the sick.

CHAP. II.
Of the particular Air wherein the sick lives, to wit, his habitation, and
the best situation thereof: As also, whether a countrie-aire, or that of towns
or cities be best; where something concerning the situation of the town of
Northampton.

Consideration of the particular air about the sick.
THe ambient air we considered in a double respect, one general, of the which
already in the former Chapter; now in the next place we come to consider of it
in a particular relation to the sick, considered in the habitation, or place
where the sick dwells. And since it is seldom so safe to remove the
Diseased, there is therefore no small care to be had in the choice, of the place
wherein any one is to live. (...) situation of the (...) station.
The healthfulnes of the house is by the situation and structure thereof
esteemed. That house is by many esteemed the best, which is situate somewhat
high, and on a dry firm ground, sandy rather than any other: the house it
self being of an indifferent and competent height, and looking toward the
south principally; from Sommets heat well shaded, yet not deprived of cooling
winds, and in Summer receiving the benefit of the Sunbeams in abundance: the
which ought also to be accommodated with diverse rooms, differing in bigness
and situation, where the sick may solace himself according to times and
seasons. The next best situation

The worst.


It is also here to be understood that there be no fennes, marshes, or any
such noisome and stinking places near to the sickes habitation. Now next to
this situation is that which is toward the Sunrising: but worst of al toward
Sunsetting, in Summer especially: for in such places the morning light is more
unpleasant, in which time, notwithstanding, the sick should find most solace.
And the morning Sun does purge and rectify the ambient air, provided it be
not admitted within the house, until it has first a little cleansed the air,
and dissipated and driven away the thick vaporous night exhalations, in moist
times especially. And it were to be wished also there were some pleasant
springs, or some little clear brook, or swift running little river not far
from this habitation. Many great houses are now a days so built both in cities
and towns, and in the country that there may be choice of rooms, which way
one will. Low rooms, especially vaults, or caves under the earth are the
fittest for Fevers, spitting of blood, Low ^oomes in what diseases best.
and faintness of heart; by reason of the coolness of the air, which better
upholdeth and mainteineth strength than higher rooms. Great and spacious
rooms.
Great and spacious rooms are fitter for fat and full bodies, by reason they
draw ever in fresh air, which discusseth and resolves collected humors. In
narrow rooms the air is suffocate and stiffled up. And therefore we read that
that great and memorable plague of the Athenians in the time of Thucidides, did
first of all set upon the poor men's cottages. Narrow and close rooms in
contagious and pestilentiall diseases are not good.
And common experience does even so far testify unto us, that in any
Epidemicall, contagious, or pestilentiall diseases, the meaner sort which live
in little close rooms, are sooner and in greater number, than those who live
in more spacious houses therewith surprised; as I my self could instance. And
I believe, many are able to say something to this purpose, the alleies, and
other close places of the city of London, Close rooms when best.
at this last great and memorable plague. But in cold frosty weather, I
confess, especially where is no fear of any such infection, a close room is
not to be refused; provided it be not made too hot, and too many people be
not suffered to be in it at once. Stones and hot-houses not wholesome.
And by the way, with Locoprius citato.
Ranzovius, I cannot but reject the use of the air of stones or hot-houses, as
they are ordinarily used throughout all the Germane countries, which are
ordinarily made so hot, that in the coldest frost of Winter one is not able to
sit in them without sweating, Of Light, and how it maybe used about the sick.
as I have often, howbeit sore against my will, experimentally tried. And by
this means the Pores of the body are so relaxed and dilated, that they easily
receive the impression of the first occurrent cold air. Now to this discourse
of the air and habitation belongs also to say something of the light,
wherewith the patient is often not a little affected. Alium enim lux, alium
tenebrae magis turbant, reperiunturque nullum discrimen deprehendi, vel hoc,
vel illo modo possit. Optimum itaque est utrumque experiri, and habere eum qui
tenebras horret in luce, eum qui lucem ut tenebris. At ubi nullum tale
discrimen est, aeger si vires habet, loco lucido, si non habet, obscuro
continendus est. Cells. lib. 3. cap. 18. and Hippoc. lib. de medico.
If the sick be weak, then the light often offends, and is therefore to be
kept dark; especially if the eyes be weak. If the sick love the light, let
him enjoy it; if no apparent danger be thereby procured: if both be
troublesome, keep a mean betwixt both. Where the sick is not offended with
the light, if the time and place concur, especially in Winter; the beams of
the glorious Planet Phoebus will not a little correct the ambient, and comfort
the patients weak spirits. The color of the walls come also here within our
consideration; which if whited with lime or chaulke, are likewise offensive;
The Color of the walls.

Hangings of the room.


but especially if the room be of it self full of light. Hangings also of
several colors do much trouble the eyesight of the sick, especially if
they be mad. To this place may we also reduce that which writes Hippocrates.
(...) Aph. 1. lib. 1.
That it is not sufficient for the Physician to play his part; but the sick
and the assistants, tending upon the sick: and besides, all outward things
must be accordingly accommodated. Such as are about the sick ought to be
gentle and couteous, not peevish and froward, observing the sickes humor and
disposition, and in reasonable and lawful things ready to fulfill his just
desires; to cheer up and cherish the sick, and to give them good words; but
especially carefully and diligently to observe the Physicians prescriptions.
The Physicians (says Live. ut anima (...).
Aristotle) cannot always cure the sick, because it is in the hand of another
man that he cure according to art, and not in the power of art it self.
Besides, in the room where the sick lies there should be heard no noise, nor
ought the sick be troubled with much talking; and therefore much company is to
be avoided; especially in hot diseases and the like seasons, and narrow rooms,
which are thereby over heated. And (...) cap 3.
P^^nie writes, that it has been observed, that wounds have been the worse
by much trampling and stirring with peoples feet. But concerning the air,
there remains yet a question to be discussed, whether the air of towns and
cities, or that of the country be better?

Now this has been an ancient question among Physicians; and it seems it was
by the ancients decided on the countries side, in that the Temple of
Aesculapius was built without the city of Rome; intimating thereby the
prerogative of the country-aire above that of cities and towns, as witnesses
In quaestion Romany
Plutarch: and not for the gain of Physicians, as (...) 29 cap. 1.

Country air in generally an^ (...) the most part to be prefer^^d.


Pliny prateth. It is true indeed that in the general, and for the most part
the country air is more open and free, than that of cities and towns* which
oftentimes by reason of multitudes of people, nearenesse of buildings,
narrowness of streets (especially if they be not kept sweet and clean) must
needs be far inferior to the other. And yet are there herein diverse
particular cautions and limitations to be observed. Great diversity in
countri^ (...).
Some country-aire is far inferior to that of many towns: witness the
hundreths in Essex, and the fennes in Lincolneshire; by which it plainly
appears, there is great diversity in the qualities of the country-aires.
There is again some country-aire in its qualities simply considered,
especially for the natural inhabitants healthful; and yet for some
constitutions very dangerous: as many places of the North parts of this
kingdom and Island, where the air is very sharp and penetrant, and therefore
might easily offend thin and weak constitutions, and consequently procure
distillations, from whence arise many dangerous diseases. Diversity in the
air of seve^all towns and cities.
There is again a great difference to be found in diverse cities and towns:
for some are very great and populous; as Paris and London, etc: and therefore
in such cities, the air must needs be grosser and thicker, and not so sweet
and wholesome as that of the country: and therefore in such populous places,
it is good for the patient, if it be possible, especially in chronicall, or
diseases of long continuance, to remove into a sweet country-aire. Again, some
towns are so well situated, and so free from the aforenamed annoyances,
enjoying so free an air, that they often equal, if not exceed sometimes a
country-aire: for as I have already said, some country-aire may be too sharp
and piercing, whereas a city or town well situate in a temperate air, and
freed from these former inconvenients, Good and wholesome air of the town of
Northampton.
may prove far fitter for indisposed persons. Of such diverse may by found
within this noble Island, amongst whom, in this respect, few exceed this ancient
town and corporation of Northampton. This town has for its soil whereon it
is seated, a ground gravelly for the most part, and under this digging a little
is to be found a good firm tough clay, producing good store of good stone, fit
for buildings. Situation of this Town.
It is situate in a fruitful country, on the side of a hill, looking toward
the South Sun (the best situation as we have already proved) the streets
fair and spacious; and by the care and industry of good governors, kept
sweet and clean; the buildings fair and beautiful, and adorned with such a
market place, as few corporations in this kingdom exceed it; yea, very few
that come near or equal it. It is not my purpose to discourse of that old
strong castle, together with the first founder, and the famous Churches and
religious houses have been in and about this town. And as the air is good and
wholesome, (...).
so is that other element of water, neither within nor without the walls
wanting. Within are diverse wholesome wells and springs: and without the walls,
besides many wholesome and pleasant springs, that famous River of Nine (so
called from the nine springs, from which it has its first orignall) which
runs all along the South side, River of ^^ne, and good (...) breeding ^^erin.
and the West directly under the Castle walls, and with many serpentine
windings and turnings, through a pleasant meadow ground above 30 miles in length,
and conveighing its silver streams by the ancient city and sea of Peterborrow,
at length marries it self with the great Ocean, being every where furnished
with many good and wholesome fish: such as be, Perches, great Jacks, Pickrells,
Roches, Genious, little inferior to smelts; Chubs, silver-eeles, and diverse
others. ^^stures and (...) about (...).
And as for sweet and pleasant walks of pastures and meadows, it is almost
ever^ where with them environed. And all beyond the town for many mi^^
Northward, it is a dainty light gravelly ground, yet very profitabl^ and
commodious both for corn and cattle. My purpose is not here to set down a
particular and exact geographicall description of this ancient corporation; but
only by the way and occasionally discoursing of the air, took occasion to
acquaint the reader with a touch of the commodious and healthful situation of
the same. Decay of (...) this, com^ (...) many other con^^^^^tions of this
kingdom
But this famous corporation has now for a long time lain lingering under the
burden of wasting and consuming sickness, which has eaten up, and consumed
the bowels, not of this only, but of many other famous cities and corporations
of this flourishing kingdom: my meaning is decay of trading, the which to
supply, as a feeling member of the publikes wants, I wish, it were as well in
my power, as to be moan and bewail the same. It is not unknown to many of
the inhabitants, what great trading by means of clothing has been here in
former times; as the ruins of some great buildings, employed to that purpose,
do yet evidently witness. And I know nothing to the contrary, (...) wood of
Nor^hamp^o^ shire.
why this might not as well now be followed, as it was in former times. This
country is furnished with as good wool as any other, Good water for dying.
and affords this commodity to some of those countries where clothing is in
greatest request. The water is likewise very good for dying, and no other
convenience, that I know, wanting, except good will, This town commodious for
enterta^nment for great meetings.
and an earnest desire to promote a public business. And in so high esteem
has this town been had in former times, that besides Parliaments here kept,
and other solemn meetings, it was once accounted one of the fittest places for
founding an University: and now for these many years has been accounted the
fittest and most convenient place for public meetings, as well of assise and
sessions, as of any other importance: and that in regard of that entertainment
and content which all things in even scales well weighed, may be better had in
it than in any other town in the whole County. And besides, this corporation
yields as much to his Majesty's exchequer, I think, as any other of that
bigness and trading. Neither yet has this Town come short of any in
expression of dutiful and loyal affection to their Princes, according to the
possibility of their powers. My wish therefore is, that a mother in Israel may
not decay, but some regard may be had to the re-establishing of the former
flourishing estate of this ancient corporation. And this by no means, in my
opinion, might sooner be effected, than by setting up this ancient trade of
clothing again: for this purpose it were a worthy work, Clothing would make
this corporation flourish.
and deserving great commendation, if such as have had their first being in
this place, God having now made them his Stewards of a great substance, would
help to uphold their aged, and weak decaying mother. And this were a pious
work (at least in a large acceptance) and a part of that honor the child
owes to an aged, and decayed parent. Remember that the very heathen held this
tenent, that men were not only borne for themselves, but that their common
country claimed some interest in them. To encourage others in the prosecution
of so laudable a work, Master John Denbigh, one of the Aldermen of Northampton
has begun to set up clothing.
one Alderman of this same corporation, has now of late broken the ice, and
again, like a good Patriot, minding the public good (whereof now most are
unmindfull) has at his own cost and charges, begun to set a foot this
laudable trade of clothing: the which, if well followed, and seconded by
others, and neighbors in the country would further to set forward so laudable
an enterprise; it would in a short time, prove no small benefit both to the
town and country; and by this means, many poor might well be set a work,
who now are forced either to beg their bread, or else labor hard at knitting
stockings, which will not furnish them with brown bread to fill their hungry
bellies, especially in these hard pinching times: besides, some other
inconveniences on which I cannot spend time. I add only this, let us follow
and imitate the laudable industry of the Dutch, in providing for their poor,
The river of Nine made navigable would prove beneficial both for town and
country.
and setting them a work. They suffer no straggling beggars among them, and why
may we not as well? Another thing there is, which would much further and
advance this business, and prove beneficial, not to this corporation alone,
but to other market towns also: to wit, Owndel, Thrapstone, and Waldenborrow,
together with the whole adjacent country, and other neighboring shires: and
this is by making the river of Nine navigable from Peterborrow to Northampton.
Now, let every one seriously consider the need, and they shall find more than
enough; if it were but even in regard of the scarcity and decay of fuel in
this Western part of the shire, besides many other benefits would from thence
arise: as preserving the highways (now chargeable to the country in regard
of much carriage by cart) keeping the meddowes from so frequent overflowing;
and that by means of scowring the channel, and raising the banks: besides the
importation of corn, and other commodities in time of dearth; and again,
exportation of the same commodity of corn in time of greater plenty and
cheapnesse; besides many other benefits whereon I may not now dwell. As for any
objections to the contrary, they may easily be answered, and the work known
to be faiseable, having been long since surveied, and the charges cast up, and
an act ready drawn to be put up in parchment diverse years ago; and this same
Alderman lately mentioned (as he has ever manifested himself a good Patriot,
in furthering any public good) at that time followed the same business. I
hope, when time and opportunity shall serve, good Patriots will not be
unmindfull of promoting and furthering the public good; and those whom it more
nearly concerns, even this same in particular. And although, I shall
perhaps, by some be censured for this digression; yet, because I thought it not
impertinent, I must needs crave the courteous reader pardon, and so I now
proceed to the prosecution of the business I have begun.

CHAP. III.
Of the clothing and covering of the sick, as also concerning shifting of the
diseased, and of the error of the vulgar practicing the contrary: Something
concerning the bed wherein the sick lies, and whether the sick ought to have
his hair cut.

NOw, because among other uses of clothes, one is to keep and defend us from
the injuries of the ambient air; therefore after our discourse of air, I
think it material to say something of the clothing and covering of the sick.
Now, our meaning is of such clothes as cover the sickes bed, and lie upon him:
and the sick are either covered with many and thick heavy clothes to defend
them from the injury of the cold air, or else with thin covers, for fear,
lest they be by multitude of clothes oppressed, and internal heat increased.
Lib. de intern. affe^^.
Hippocrates in choleric diseases, covers the sick with thin and soft
clothes. And Asclepiades the Physician, says Lib. 25. cap. 3.
Pliny, did abrogate this troublesome custom of covering the sick with so
many clothes. In that great and fearful sweating sickness it was observed,
that most died by reason they were covered with so many clothes: for, their
opinion was, says Cornel Gemm^ lib. 2. cosmo^^^t.
a learned Writer, that the disease was to be helped by sweating, which by all
means they labored to further. In the beginnings of the paroxysmes, When to
cover the sick*
or fits of fevers, we ought to cover the sick with many clothes, that the
sick may quickly grow warm, and the cold be driven away: and for this
purpose, the parts which are cold are to be rubbed with warm clothes. After
they begin to be warm, More clothes to be used in the night than in the day.
the clothes are to be taken off, and toward the declining of the heat to be
laid on again, the better to provoke sweat. Moreover, it is to be observed,
that more clothes be used in the nightime than in the day, and that by reason
the Galen comment in eam par li^. 6. in epid evidenter vigilans calic^or
e^tertus, etc.
night air is colder than that of the day. But if it should so fall out that
the sick could not sleep with a multitude of clothes, then were it good to
wait while they be asleep, and then to cover them. Now, the bed wherein the
sick lies, is not to be neglected: as for the form of the bed, a high headed
bed, such as is now in greatest request, and we commonly call French beds, Best
form of beds for the sick to lie in.
(especially in Sommer-time, and in hot acute diseases) are the best for the
use of the sick, and afford him most air: and withal, I would have the
ascent, or going up to it low and easy. In Summer and hot weather, in hot
acute diseases, the curtains would be thin, Bed he lies on, and whether
feather beds be best.
in Winter, and colder weather thicker. As for the bed he lies on, down beds
are the hotest of all others, and next to them ordinary feather beds; yet both
do much heat the sick, especially in Summer, and hot acute diseases. And
therefore I can in no wise approve of the preposterous German custom, to cover
them with one feather bed, Wood-beds and mat^^^ces.
and lay another under them. Wool beds and mattrices are cooler* and fitter
than the former, if the sick would be persuaded to endure a little hardship
for a future benefit. Beds of straw and c^affe.
But straw and chafe, especially of oats, are coolest of all other, and
fittest for sick folk, if people would prise more their health than their
ease. In Babylon (says a late Writer) great men used in Summer to lie upon
beds of leather* Bed filled with water. With (...).
filled with cold water, which I would not advise our new fashion-mongers to
imitate. And they say in Italy they use even at this day to lie upon
leather-beds filled with wind, as we do here our foot-balls, and the French
their ballownes. Our low field beds and canopy beds, are not so good in the
former cases as high beds. The best of all others are accounted such as hang by
cords, whereby this benefit may be reaped, Hanging beds.
that the sick may be rocked asleep; as is the custom of the Brasilians, to
have their beds hung betwixt two trees, for fear of venomous vermin.

Now, from the covering of the bed, to the covering of the sickes body in bed,
and immediately touching the same; and first we will begin with the
head-peece, his cap I mean. It is an inveterate and radicated custom, in all
diseases, to cover the head with thick caps or other clothes; Erroneous
custom of too much covering the ^ead.
esteeming all manner of defluxions and diseases to proceed from the head, and
as it would seem by their practice, to proceed of a cold cause: whereas by
this means they rather increase, for the most part this pain, if any there be
already; the head like a ventose, or cupping glass, attracting vapors from
the nether parts. Avicen warns us, that too much covering of the head
weakneth it. And yet it is thought by many that the head can never be
sufficiently coverd. I confess, in this case it is hard to set down and
determine all the particular circumstances; as of the time of the year, the
sex, the nature of the disease, the age and constitution of the diseased,
according to which circumstances, the Physician is forced to accommodate his
particular prescription of clothes. And here I must needs give warning to
younger people, that they would not so much in their health oppress themselves
with such a multtiude of cloths, who keep themselves so warm in their younger
years, that they become far infirmer afterward when they come to age, and
apter to receive harm by the least blast of cold wind. There is a great
difference to be had both in our clothing and diet, according to the several
seasons of the year. Difference of clothes according to the seasons.
The apparel in Summer and warm weather, ought to be thinner than in Winter;
and among these, the hotter constitutions ought to go thinlier clothed than
others. And as on their body, so on their bed the clothes ought to be thinner.
But few, if any, observe the difference to be observed of the beds they lie
on; it being for an uncontrolled custom received, both for young and old, hot
and cold complexions, to lie both Summer and Winter on the softest feather-beds
they can. Down and feather-beds hurtful for hot livers, kidneys, and the
stone.
And yet for hot constitutions, especially the younger sorts, and such as have
hot livers and kidneys, and molested with the stone in the kidneys, especially
in the Summer time, this custom cannot but be hurtful. And as for this
covering of the head, as it is indifferently used, alike in Summer and Winter,
of young and old, and all complexions whatsoever, I hold it a very pernicious
custom, especially in the younger sort, and very prejudicial to their health.
Parents much to be blamed for the toe too nice and tender education of their
children.
It is a great fault in many parents, that they are too careful in the nice
and choice tender educating of their infants, who in their tender years might
be easily accustomed to go thinner in their apparel; and custom would
afterward make this easy. And this we may see apparently in many of our
Gentle-women, who both young and old, both Summer and Winter, go with naked
breasts, wrests and necks; and yet never complain; in this verifying the old
proverb to be true, Pride is never painful. And yet those parts are, according
to Physicians prescriptions, most carefully to be kept warm. And yet all this
notwithstanding, as also all our best Divines preaching to the contrary, and
oppugning this pride by their pens, we see, how careful many are to accustom
and inure their children with this kind of pride; whenas for the most part
(alas more is the pity!) there is but small regard had of their virtuous
education in the fear of God. But I leave this Puritanisme.

Another point in the clothes and covering of the sick to be considered, is
the quality, that they be clean and sweet. Quality of the clothes about the
sick, that they be sweet and clean.
Lib. de medico.

The sick ought to be often shifted.


Hippocrates would have the Physician to be neatly and decently apparelled,
and perfumed with sweet odours, that by this means, he might be the more
acceptable and pleasing to his patients. How much more then ought the sick
himself to be neat and clean in his apparel? And it is no small contentment
to the sick, when he sees himself neat and cleanely in his clothing.
Again, it much discourageth and dejecteth the sick, when he is suffered to
lie stinking like a hog in the mire, in dirty and foul clothes. And Eib. 1.
de sanit, tuend.
Galen advertiseth us, that young children, who after much crying, could
neither by the teat, by rocking nor singing be quieted; by changing of their
foul and stinking clothes, and exchanging them with cleaner; were presently
stilled. Objections of the vulgar.
But, me thinks, I hear some of our wise women, at least in their own
conceits, with open mouth cry out against me, by reason, I wish, the sick
should be often shifted, objecting in the first place, that by this means the
sick may catch cold; and next that it weakneth the sick to be thus shifted.
To the first I answer, it is but a foolish fear, Answer.
the vulgar often fearing where there is no cause: but howsoever, if it be in
cold weather, it may by means of the fire easily be prevented; and if in warm
weather, their fear is frivolous. As for the other fear, which I have heard
some women object, of weakening the sick, it is very absurd, and as frivolous
as the former: And so far is it from weakening the sick, that on the
contrary, it is rather a means to further and increase strength. And to make
this more plainly appear, Three concoctions in the body of man, with their
several excrement^*
we are to take notice that in the body of man, there are three several
concoctions: the first, in the stomach or maw, called chylification; having
for excrement, the fecall ordure, or ordinary egestions. The second, in the
liver, veins, called sanguification; and has for excrement, the urine. The
third, is called nutrition, and is performed in the whole body; and has for
excrements, certain fuliginous vapors, which by insensible transpiration
breath out by the pores of the body; and the sweat, which is apparent to the
eye. Now in time of sickness, especially in all sorts of Fevers, these
excrements do most abound, and make foul the linen they lie in, and that
they wear next their skin; for the which cause, sick folks should have
their linen often shifted, especially when they sweat much. Besides,
Inconveniences and harms by not shifting the sick.
if they be not shifted, this danger yet insueth, that if the sweat continue
about the body, it will be drawn in again by the same way it went forth; and
then judge whether thou likest that better, or sweet clean linen. For this
must be well considered, that the arteries of the body have a double motion,
one whereby they expel these excrements already named; and the other whereby
they draw in the ambient air to refresh the blood. Now whatsoever air is next
unto them, be it good or bad, sweet or stinking, they draw it in. And
therefore, if thou let this dunghill lie about thee, undoubtedly the arteries
will draw in these noisome excrements, which will suffocate natural heat, and
by consequent, prolong thy disease. And a Laurent. loubert. des erreurs
populaires party 2 cap. 5.
learned French Physician who does much inveigh against this nastinesse (that
so also it may appear, this is not mine own private opinion) to prove this
truth brings in an instance: Let any person come newly out of a heat has,
where there is great store of dust newly raised, he shall presently feel a
pricking over his whole flesh; which is nothing else but this small dust drawn
in by the arteries. The case then thus standing, all filth and corruption ought
to be cleansed from the skin, and all the pores and passages thereof kept open
and clean, by removing whatsoever might let or hinder the same, And for this
end and purpose, the Romans and Greeks in ancient times had so frequent use of
their frictions and hot bathes. Let this then be a warning to all those who
attend the sick, that they have a special care of shifting and keeping them
clean and sweet, as has been said already, and let the contrary erroneous
custom be hence forward^for ever buried in the dust. Whether the ^ed ^ee to be
warmed. An^w^^e
One thing yet remains concerning warming of the sickes bed, whether it be to
be used? I answer, in weak and aged people especially, and the Winter time
in others also, there is no doubt to be made of altering the cold air of the
bed with a warming-pan: but in young people, in hot acute diseases, and the
Summer time, when all tends to heat, I see no necessity, yea rather hurt than
any good; unless some cold constitutions, or decrepit old age do plead for a
continuance of this custom, and then I shall not be against it. But whether
this be so convenient for such as live in health, may with better reason be
demanded? Wh^^ or it ^e fit for healthfu^^ people. Answer.
I answer, that for young people I wish, they were not so daintily brought up,
and accustomed to this warming of their beds, which makes them afterward the
more unfit to undergo any hardship. But for the antienter sort, tender women,
and such as have heretofore accustomed themselves thereunto, I am not against
the airing of their bed in cold Winter weather, that so going to bed, they may
still find the bed-clothes somewhat warm about them at their first
downe-lying. Whether in sickness the hair is to be ^ut.
To this place also belongs to say something concerning the hair of the
head, and whether in sickness it ought to be cut, or no? My purpose is not
here to insist upon the generation, utility, and proper use, and the material
cause, and differences of hair with many other things; this only know, that
hair is but an excrement, and properly no part of the body, in the esteem of
all our Physicians; and yet appointed for a special use to cover and adorn
that part whereunto it is appropriated. In women, it has been always a comely
ornament and cover of the head. And to men, (says the Apostle) does not even
nature teach you that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair. Answer^.
But I come to the question, whether in the Diseased, it be safe to cut the
hair of the head or no? Long and thick hair keeps in fuliginous excrements
of the head, and suffers them not so well to breath out of the pores; from
whence rheumes are engendered, the original almost of all diseases. Hence was
it that the Egyptians painted Aesculapius bald; thereby signifying thus much,
that the hair was to be cut short; yea, if it were even shaven, it were better
for a man's health than to wear long hair. It is therefore best in all
diseases of the head, especially in long continuing defluxions of sharp
rheumes, to shave the head, according to the opinion of ancient and late
Physicians. In a word, it is better both in sickness and in health to have
the hair rather short than long; howbeit the too often cutting of the hair is
not so good, and the often shaving of the beard and face is evil, and not to
be used. I enter not here upon particulars, in what diseases the hair is
chiefly to be cut, yea even shaven; whereof something may perhaps more largely
be spoken in any another place. Effoeminate custom^ of our age.
But this which has already been said, may easily convince the more than mad
effoeminate custom of our effoeminate age, Disguising of the head with perwigs.
wherein men are not now contented with that portion of hair, which their
Maker in his wisdom thought fit for them; but besides, must have their head
covered with a great bushie perwig, both to the great dishonor of Almighty
God, and with no small prejudice to their health, as by the premises may
easily appear. I deny not, but some of them have scalded their hair in the
fire of the Barber-surgeons purgatory, and therefore have the more need to
cover that deformity: but let others take warning by their harms. But as for
women, they being commonly of a colder constitution than men, and their heads
weaker, their hair is not commoly so hurtful for them: besides, that 1 Cor.
1^.1
their hair was given them for a cover and ornament. But as for their curles,
false and sophisticate hair, either not content with that color which God
gave them, or else because they would not seem to yield to old age; as I do
not much mervaile at such tricks in a stews strumpet, or a common curtisan: so
I think, they no ways beseem a sober, modest and grave Gentlewoman,
especially in the state of wedlock, and now attained to some competent number
of years. I wish both sexes to call to mind that saying of a French writer,
speaking against the pride of women, painted faces, and many other particulars,
almost 80. years ago. Fra^ca^^ Grand^u, Cure de l'(...) degrate de (...) S.
Joan ^aptistee a^gers an liver da de ^ruition de ^ orgued ^oada^^, etc.
That when as they shall stand before the Tribunal of the great GOD of Heaven
at that last and dreadful day, it is to be feared that the Judge of all the
world will say unto them, get you out my presence into everlasting damnation:
for I do not acknowledge this color, hair, etc; to be of my making. But as
concerning the abuse of this excrement of hair both in men and women, directly
crossing the Apostles rule, men wearing side and long hair, and some wearing
it longer on one side than the other, by them now called a love-locke: women
again, quite contrary to womanly decency and modesty (that I say nothing of
Gods command) cutting and clipping their hair, and the great injury they
herein offer to Almighty God, it being daily by our learned Divines preached
against, and a M. Prin. of Lovelocks
learned religious Gentleman having lately of purpose written a tractate
concerning this same subject in both sexes, where at great length he proves
both the unseemelinesse and unlawfulness of this custom, I will not insist
upon it. I will only tell you of a I (...) pilorum aff^^^u, (...) aliud est
a^^m (...) o vel (...) def^^xiou^ ad a^^a^ nartes (...) gravissime tar queri.
Maximam partem foeminas invadit. Eos etiam qui porriginem capitis, quam vulgus
tineam vo^a^, medicamentis repe^^utientibus represserunt. Praeterea foeminas
quae menstruis temporibus non satis purgantur. Quis non novum, mirab^^e, and
horridum putei, capillos ex propria natura planos, demissos ac simplices,
sponte sua, sub coelo admodum frigido inc^^spari, paulo post erigi, involvi,
atque indissolubiliter conjungi, varias recipere figuras, quandoque maximi
cuiusdam anguis, aliquaudo plu^^um and minorum serpentum, u^dique vermes,
spurcitiem, foetoremque redolere: quodque omnium maximum est, and a seculo in
^^ditum, ac^ perpu^ctos, vel transfixos sangumem effundere. Hercules Saxonia
praxeos suae lib. 10. cap. 1. Horridum quoddam, i^^pexum, adeoque intricatum
capitis atque barbae capillit^um, apud nostros haud infrequens, caeterum
veteribus cuiuscunque aetatis medic^ incognitum o^servare li^et: Quo affecti
praelongas capillorum tricas and cincinnos mirifice intricatos, digitisaepe
crassitiae, ex re^ (...) capi^^ and barbae capillitio, ad bumeros, pectus, and
aliquando ad umbilicum usque demissos, propendere videas, aspectu plane mon^^
^ico, and Gorganeum caput praeserente. Quos illi magna religione incultos, nec
ferro praescindere, nec pectine explicare sustinent. Persuasi omnino,
gravissima capitis morborum fomenta, velut Apoplexiae, Paralyscos, Maniae, and
comprimis Cephalalgiae pertinaces, consimiliumque ma^eriam i^sdem alen^is
absumi. Qua sine superstitione, sine multa hominum observatione ducts, quidvis
petius, quam corundem culturam, aut perfectionem, velut prorsus infaustam and
lethalem admittunt. Factisque de experimento and historia perteulis, sententiam
suam mordicus tuentur. Ioana. Georg. Schenckius, Schenck. E. Hagenones. medicus
observat. m^dic lib. 1. observe. De Tricis I^cuborum.
monstrous and strange disease in the hair, heard of but of late years, and
not recorded by any ancient author that ever we read of. And this is nothing
else but an agglutination, or inviscation of the hair of the head and beard,
by which means it acquiteth sometimes the form of some great adder, or snake;
and sometimes of less serpents: and these horrid and hideous serpent-like
locks do often occupy the whole superficies of the head and beard; insomuch,
that who so beholds this strange serpent like sight, may the easilier be
induced to believe that monstrous Gergonean head, the Poets attribute to
Medusa. And as the author affirms, may it not seem a strange thing, that
plain and smooth hair in so cold a climat (meaning Poland and a part of
Germany) should so curle and balter, and contract such hideous and strange
shapes: besides, that they should be of so loathsome and putrid a smell. And
which has never yet been heard of, that these baltered locks being pricked with
a pin, should presently yield blood. And it has been observed, that such as
have cut off these locks, have either suddenly become blind, or else a great
defluxion of humors has fallen down upon some other parts of the body. This
disease has of late years run through a great part of Poland; and entered
also into some parts of Germany. If God should send it here over among us to
punish this prodigious pride in the use of this same excrement, were it not
just with God, to punish us in the same part we offend in? This Author
affirms, it is most frequent in women: but another affirms, it as often
frequenteth men, and that they let both these prodigious locks of hair and
beard hang down over their shoulders, and many times down to their breast and
navill, a strange and prodigious thing to behold.

CHAP. IIII.
Of abstinency, either from some, or all sorts of food, for a short, or a
longer time; and of several sorts of abstinence.

AFter the air, and such other things thereon depending, I now proceed to the
Diet of the Diseased. But before we come to discourse of the particular sorts
of Diet, we must permit some general rules and directions concerning the Diet
of the Diseased. Now all manner of Diet is of a threefold nature, a thin
spare diet, a liberal or full, or a mean betwixt both. A thin or spare diet
we call, either a total abstinence from all food for a certain time; or else
a very sparing use of one or more sorts. Now of all other Diets this is the
most sparing, when the sick for certiane days takes no sustenance at all. And
this abstinence among some of the ancients, the Greeks especially, was often
very rigid and strict; insomuch that many times the patient was suffered to
take no kind of sustenance for the space of three, four, five or six days.
But because we are now fallen upon this point of abstinence, it will not, I
hope, be unwelcome to the reader to make a particular enumeration of all the
sorts of fasts whatsoever. Now then as repletion and gluttony is the cause of
manifold mischiefs in the body of man; so this abstinence seems to make
amends for that which is don amiss. Abstinence fourefold Natural. In health.
In sickness;
Now this abstinence is of diverse sorts, and may be reduced to these four;
natural, voluntary, miraculous, and violent or forced. Natural I call, when
as nature in her full strength and vigor, and health; or yet foiled with some
sickness, abhors the use of some certain kinds of food, and therefore
abstaineth from the use of the same. Another abstinence again is in diseases,
when as the appetite is either quite lost, or else small or slender, loathing
food for the most part: which refusing and loathing is called by the Greeks,
(...) and (...), and by the Latins, Nausea a navibus and navigatione, quod
navigantibus praesertim in marinausea oberiri soleat.

Voluntary abstinence fourefold.


nausea and fastidium cibi. Voluntary abstinence I call that, which is by
mature advice and deliberation willingly and freely undertaken: and this,
according to the several ends and scopes it propounds to it self, is also of
diverse sorts. For either it is physical, political and civil, religious or
superstitious. Physical
Physical abstinence I call that, whereby people whether sick or in health,
either for preserving and mainteining this healthful estate, or else for
recovering of the same being now lost, by the appointment and prescription of
the Physician, do either abstain from all manner of food, or else from some
certain kinds, contrary to their health and constitution: and this either for
a certain and determinate time, or for ever; and which is therefore called
Diet. Political or civil abstinence.
Political or civil abstinence is that, whereby people upon certain
occasions, as profit or others, for a certain time, abstain either from all,
or some certain particular kinds of food, being then it may be, employed
about some earnest business; as when 1 Samuel 14.25.
Saul followed hard after the Philistines, he discharged any to eat till the
evening. Our Lent fast a political, not religious nor superstitious fast.
And of this nature is our Lent fast or abstinence in this Island both in
England and Scotland, according to the express words of the statute (howsoever
some a little to symbolize with our neighbor- Romanists would feign have it a
little to smell of religion) and was no doubt upon very good grounds and
considerations injoined to be observed. 5. Q Elizab. 5.
Religious fast and is either moral or ceremonial.
The third sort of voluntary abstinence, is called religious, and had its
original from God himself; which is again either moral or ceremonial.
Moral, ordinary or extraordinary. Ordinary.
Moral again is either ordinary and daily, or else extraordinary, and
ordained but for a certain time. Ordinary and daily abstinence is nothing else
but temperance and sobriety, which as it has been in no small request even
among the heathens; and that not for their healths sake alone, but that they
might thereby also the better wait upon their contemplations and philosophical
studies: how much more then does it become us Christians? Extraordinary.
Religious extraordinary abstinence at any time undertaken, is that which we
commonly call a fast; and being not only a bare abstinence from food for a
time, but from all other delights also; that thereby we may the better be
fitted, Extraordinary religious t^st public or private.
to pray either for the removal of judgments present, or keeping off
judgments imminent, and like to overwhelme us. And this was very frequent
among the people of the Jews, and was either public or private. Would to God
we were made more acquainted with this noble ordinance of Almighty God, when as
both in regard of our own selves, and our distressed neighbors abroad, our
need has been so great. Ceremonial abstinence.
Ceremonial abstinence is when we abstain from certain kinds of meats, and
that for religions sake: the which kind of abstinence was by God himself
strictly injoined the Jews, and lasted till the coming of the Messiah, Matthew.
15.11. Acts 10.34. Colost. 2.14. 1 Timoth. 4. etc. Superstitious abstinence or
fast.
which took away that partition wall; as may by diverse places of the new
Testament appear. There was lastly, and is yet, a certain superstitious kind
of abstinence, whereby some people, without any warrant of the word, abstained
from certain kinds of meat: and such were both some heathens, and some
heretics also, and bastard christians. Among the heathens, Pythagoras of
Samus, who lived during the Babilonian captivity, abstained from all manner of
flesh, and that for fear lest some men's souls might be conveied into such
beasts as he might eat of, as witnesses Lib. 7. de civit. Dei. cap 2. and lib.
18. cap. 25. Plutarch. 8 sympos. probl. 7.
S. August. and Lib. 2. advers. Jovin.
S. Ierom. tells us that the ancient Egyptian Priests, after they were once
initiated into that superstitious worship, abstained from wine and flesh ever
after. The Babilonians also lived only upon fish, and the Persian Magi lived
only upon meal and herbs. Lib. bello de Jfide and Osyride.
Plutarch also reported that the priests of Heliopolis abstained from all
manner of diet that might increase lust and wantonness, and never wine to come
within their temples. And it is Caesar. comm. a^ bello Gall. lib. ^.
reported, that the ancient inhabitants of this Island abstained from the hare,
the hen, and the goose. And others again abstained from certain vegetables,
fruits, flowers, etc. Some abstained from all manner of flesh. The Joseph. de
bello Judo. lib 2. cap. 7. Philo. lib. peculiari de eorum vita.
Esseans among the Jews eat neither flesh, nor yet drink wine; nay eat not
of any creature that ever had in it any blood. In the time of the primitive
Church, especially a little after, many heresies sprang up, amongst whom, some
forbad the eating of flesh; and some both that and wine. Epiphanius tom. 2.
lib. 1.
The Eucratite who came out of the school of one Tatianus abstained from all
flesh; withal so strictly abstained from all wine, that they would not so much
as use it in the holy Sacrament, but in stead thereof used water. The Ebionites
also condemned altogether the use of flesh. The Tertul. in catalog. haeres.
Marcionites were so far from eating of flesh, and placed holiness in the
eating of fish. And the Idem lib de ^eiunia adversus Psychos, and lib. de cultu
foeminar.
same father affirms, that the Montanists lived on bread, salt and pulse, and
drank only water: they abstained at certain times from flesh and wine. The
Maniches, of one Manes a Persian heretic so called, about the year of our
Lord 247. among many other and destestable errors, brought in this also of
abstaining from certain meats; as all manner of flesh, eggs, milk, and all
things made of the same: the reasons see in Lib. 6. contra Faustin. cap. 6. and
lib. 3. cap. 5. and lib. de haeres.
S. Augustine. They forbad also the use of wine, were it never so new, and yet
permitted the use of grapes. The same heretics forbad also the use of
marriage. It is also to be observed, Idem contra Faustin. lib. 30. cap. 5.
that all this abstinence was only forbidden their elect ones, and such as they
termed perfect and initiated into their sacred mysteries: but to their
hearers, who were but novices and beginners such meats were permitted. Bernard.
sermon. 66 in Cantica.
The same heresy was again about the year of our Lord 300. by one
Priscillianus in France and Spain renewed, from whom it received also a new
name. And this same heresy, as by many fathers it was spoken against, so was
it by many Synod ancyrana circa annum Domin. 318. can. 14. Total. 1 can. 21
Eraccarensi prima celebrata in Hispania anno 690. can. 14. and 32. Gangrensi.
can. 2. damnara fuit.
councels condemned, Sigismund. Baro in comment, rerum Muscovit.
Among the Russians or Muscovites, the Metropolitans, the Arch bishops and
Bishops always abstain from flesh: and yet when they invite any laymen, or
other priests to their table, they set flesh before them: and yet may neither
an Abbot nor Prior eat any. Besides, the Russians never eat of any thing killed
by the hand of a woman, esteeming it altogether unclean: and therefore in the
absence of all mankind out of the house, if they have any pullaine or other
creature to kill, the women stand in the house-doore, holding a knife in their
hands, entreating any that passes by to perform this kindness for them. Now
besides these aforementioned several sorts of abstinence, Voluntary,
miraculous abstinence.
there is yet another voluntary abstinence, which is miraculous; as that of
Christ, Moses and Elias, which is beyond the reach of any ordinary person;
although we read of many strange stories of such as fasted not only many
days, weeks and months; but even many years also, as has been declared
already. The last kind of abstinence is involuntary, Involuntary or forced
abstinence.
when as any one is forced against his will to fast, and is diverse ways
procured, whereon I will not now insist. True abstinence, and the excellency of
the same.
The excellency then of a right abstinence may evidently appear, which is not
properly an abstinence from any one particular kind of food, either total or
for a time: but a sober and moderate use of all the creatures at all times,
especially in sickness; as it is sometimes necessary for a time to abstain
from all, and sometimes from some sorts of food. In health, moderation and
temperance are never out of season, and total abstinence at sometimes
required; and that both for preventing infirmities, and sometimes a religious
abstinence is to be observed, Abstinence from certain k^nds of meats by
Scripture condemned.
as has been said already. As for religious abstinence from certain kinds of
meats, not I, but the 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
holy oracle it self, which cannot err, does plainly evince to be a doctrine
of devils. And here by the way, if there were no other mark, it may easily
appear, that the Church of Rome is an apostaticall and heretical church, and
jumpeth just with the Heretics of ancient times, whom the Fathers of the
Church have confuted. They would bear the world in hand, they abstain from
flesh in Lent and some other days. Popish abstinence or fast as they use it a
mere mocking of God.
A great matter indeed, when they are fed with the best fish they can come by,
dressed with the most curious sauces, and afterward well washed down with the
best wine or other strong drink. Besides the variety of banqueting stuff,
march-panes, and varieties of other junkets, all which notwithstanding, this
must needs be accounted a strict abstinence and fast, especially, Popish
fasting, Diet as nourishing as ours and iuciceth as much to lust as ours, if
not more.

Wine nourishes and cherishes more suddenly and speedily than any flesh.


if these things come but in the name of a drinking. Now would I willingly ask
one of their wisest prophets, whether a piece of powdered beef, or other meat,
such as we ordinarily use; or a dish or two of dainty fish well dressed, it
may be with wine sauce, and diverse good spices, and afterward made to swim
in the belly with good wine, be more inciting to lust? It is well known that
wine yields a more speedy nourishment, and is far sooner distributed
through the body, and a little quantity thereof more cheereth and cherishes the
drooping spirits, and with less oppression, and withal inciteth more to lust,
than a great quantity of flesh; which must lie a long time heavy in an ordinary
stomach before it be concocted, and through the body distributed, and then by
assimilation and agglutination converted into aliment. And this is the
judgment of all our both ancient and later learned Physicians: yea does not
even ordinary experience instruct us in this truth? And yet here is no small
quarrel, because we will not assent to their Pharisaicall superstition, and
will not in every thing jumpe with them in their erroneous judgment. And I
pray you, Great gluttony and disorders among the Romanists at Shrovetide.
is not this a mere mockage, that a little before Lent, especially on
Shrovetuesday, (by the French called Mardy-gras, or fat tuesday, and by some
here in former times gut-tide) they let the reins loose to all manner of
lasciviousness, and all excess of riot: pampering their bellies with the best
cheer, the most exquisite wines and strong drink is to be had; assuming to
themselves liberty of doing what they list; addicting themselves to dancing,
dicing, drabbing, and all manner of other insolences: insomuch that one would
think all the devils in hell, and all these foul fiends were then set at
full liberty; Insolency in Rome it self; ^qualling o^ exceedin^ the
heathenish Ba^c^^na^^a.
in this equalling, if not exceeding, the heathenish Bacchanalia. And which is
yet more, their Romish god the Pope, must that day depart the city of Rome,
and then all manner of insolences and outrages (greater than which, if as
great, were scarce ever by any heathens committed) of all sorts, without any
control there committed. And in this is verified the saying of that And
although Jtaly be the country of al Christendom nearest to the Roman church,
yet is it most certain that in ^t there is of all others least religion and
piety to be found, and that by reason this holy court does nothing else but sow
distention, and breed all manner of disorders. And if any make a doubt of it,
and that he may assure himself that all this mischief proceeds from the
church of Rome, let him but transport for a certain time the Papal chair into
the country of the Switzers, an honest and peaceable people, and in a shore
time thou should see them as bad as any of their neighbors. Machiavell in
his book of the Prince, part. 1. maxim 4. entitled. That the church of Rome
is the cause of all the calamities that have befalne Jtaly,
Florentine Secretary to be true; that if the court of the Pope with his
Cardinals were translated from Rome, and placed among the Switzers (a people
in those times most ingenuous, and freest from all manner of exoticke vices)
they would in a short space become the most wicked, factious people in the
whole world: in so great credit was then this court of Rome, even in the
esteem of those who made profession of the same religion. But these, and a
thousand more of their pranks are better known to the Christian world than I
can relate them. My purpose is only here to let the world know, how senseless
and absurd is this superstitious kind of abstinence from flesh only, whereof
like proud Pharisees, they make so great an ostentation, and would put out the
eyes of the world, that they should see nothing in the clear Sunshine. And
yet what is all this but a renewing of the ancient heresies lately mentioned?
and renewing heathenish superstition? Nay it does plainly and evidently
appear, that the ancient heretics and heathens did far surpass in this
point, many of our Romanists. If they would, as they pretend, subdue the lust
of the flesh, why do they not then abstain from wine, in that point far
surpassing any flesh, as has been proved? And why do not their Priests and
clergymen abstain from wine, and forbid it the people, at least in Lent and
on fasting days? I have already instanced in the like abstinence both in
heathen and heretics. If Sir Iean and his generation will reply, that they
must serve at the altar, and therefore must both drink for themselves and the
people, who by their Canons, are debarred from the cup: I cannot deny, but as
in many other things, so herein likewise, their clergy have been too hard for
the laity: yet good Sir Iean, if you have purchased such a privilege above the
people, me thinks, you might the better abstain from wine at other times,
especially those of your strictest abstinence; and might likewise abstain from
many flatuous meats, as many sorts of bulbous roots, which all our Physicians
do hold to be irritamenta and incitamenta lib^dinis. The Abissine Priests and
religious persons so strictly observe their Lent fast, that it is reported of
them, that they eat nothing but roots, and drink water during that time; yea,
and stand often up to the chinne in cold water: and the Laity, during that time
only eat bread and drink water. If our supercilious Pharisaicall Romanists
would imitate this rigid austerity, the Clergy I mean, it would cool their
courages, yet withal purchase them a great deal of more praise and
reputation, than many of them have hitherto attained unto. I am not ignorant,
that some of the simpler sort of their religious orders are more rigid and
austere in their manner of living than many others: but this I confidently
avouch, that for the most part, their Clergy, especially the greater sort, are
as licentious and luxurious, as any sort of people this day living under the
face of heaven, upon which point I will not here digress. Now to conclude this
point of abstinence, we are so far from rejecting, and far less from finding
fault with it, that we wish it in far greater request than hitherto it has
been: I mean, not only that ordinary and customary abstinence, or sobriety
in meat and drink, and other delights; but even that other sort of fast also,
which we have wished might be more in practice. But I hate and abhor these
counterfit and hypocritical, heathenish and hereticall-like fasts of our
Pharisaicall Romanists, with their many idle repetitions of their many
mumpsimus upon their beads, making a show of prayer, where there is nothing but
a little lip-labor, without any true religion, or any true devotion indeed.
But having said more than I doubt I shall be thanked for, I leave this point,
and proceed.

CHAP. V.
Of Aliment or Diet of the Diseased in general: whether a thin and spare
Diet, or a full or liberal be better?

FRom the Elements we are now coming to the aliments, of nourishment and food
fit for the sick. Now as by the moderate and timely use of aliments the
diseased reapeth no small benefit; so again by the immoderate and unseasonable
use of the same, the diseased is much indammaged and endangered. And for this
cause no small care ought to be had of the Diet of the Diseased. We made
mention of three sorts of Diet, of the which we have Comment. in lib. Hip. de
victu acut.

Three sorts of Diet.


Galen for our warrant: a thin or slender, a full and liberal, and a mean
or middle diet betwixt both. Now these two extremes have a great latitude and
extension. In the first place, a thin and spare diet is either simply thin
and sparing, more sparing, and most sparing of all. So again, the like by way
of opposition is to be understood of a full and liberal diet. Absolute thin
and spare diet.
Now an absolute thin and spare diet, called victus tenuissimus, is nothing
else but an absolute abstinence from all manner of food whatsoever: or at most,
permitting only the use of a drink made of water and honey, called by the
ancient Greeks, melicratum. And this manner of abstinence did the ancients use
in most acute diseases, which were terminated on the fourth day. And when they
did a little exceed this first so thin and slender diet, or abstinence, they
did then allow the sick some barly-water, ptisan or cream of ptisan at most.
This was usual among the Greeks, which strict and rigid kind of diet the
Arabians were not able to undergo. And it may be the Greeks, Thin and
slender diet
either because they were thicker skinned, or else surprised with sharper
sickenesses, did more easily endure this kind of diet. It may be also the
Arabians fared better than the Greeks, and were not therefore able to endure
this kind of diet. And in this we adhere more to the Arabians than to the
Greeks. Hippocriticall Diet too rigid and strict for our climat,
And therefore, if Physicians should now imitate the Hippocraticall course of
dieting, they should be utterly shent. Galen was not so rigid and strict in his
diet: for he often suffers the sick to use some sustenance in acute
diseases, and often finds fault with certain Physicians called diatritarij,
who pined their patients with abstinence, in the beginning of their disease
made them fast until the fourth day, and after again exhibited something on
the sixth, and again on the eight; and so consequently after the first four
days, they fed them but every other day. And Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 6.

A full and liberal die^


this manner of cure is by Celsus Aurelius called a circular cure. To this
manner of cure was quite contrary that manner of diet, which used that ancient
Physician Petronius, who abbridged his patients of no kind of diet, but filled
them with wine and flesh. And this is that we call a full or liberal diet,
according to the extensions and latitude thereof. To this manner of diet ours
approaches nearest: and it is the common opinion of our people, of our vulgar
women especially, that unless the sick be crammed with all manner of food, he
is quite starved. And this comes often to pass by importunity of those
about them, and sometimes by means of the Physician, says Comment. ad partic.
1 lib. 1. de vict. acut. Whether a thin and slender, or a full and liberal
diet be better?
Galen; who to give satisfaction to the sick, and assistants, oftentimes
gives way to such a diet. Follows now in the next place a question to be
discussed, whether a thin or slender, or a full and liberal diet be the
better? Now as almost all diseases have their original and beginning from
gluttony, and abundance of humors; so would it seem the cure thereof required
principally abstinence and hunger: For by this means the body is dried up, and
superfluous humors exhausted. And it is reported, that the Emperor Aurelian in
his sickness used no other Physic. Flavius Vopiscus in eius vita.
Aph. 4. and 5 lib. 1.
Hippocrates seems in some places to allow of a full diet in all diseases;
and Lib. de victu acut.
again in other places to stand for a thin and slender diet, finding fault
with the Guidian Physicians, who in the beginning of the disease, permitted the
use of a more liberal diet. Comment. in eundem lib. and alibi.
Galen often prefers a slender diet before a full and liberal: and that by
reason a full and plentiful diet breeds innumerable dangers in the body,
which a thin and slender diet does not, the which, if to the body
troublesome, may easily by addition be amended. Answer to the former question.
This question cannot absolutely be determined, by reason both are alike, and
equally necessary, all circumstances well and seriously considered, but
especially having a due regard to the strength of the patient, together with
the nature of the disease. (...) Apo. 9 lib. 1.
We must conjecture, says Hippocrates, whether the sick be like to hold out
with such a diet or no, or whether the disease will not first give over, before
there need any alteration in the diet. But with us we need never be afraid
that there be any fault committed in the defect; we are most commonly inclined
to be faulty rather in the excess. And howsoever, I confess indeed, our
bodies are not able to bear that ancient strict and rigid Grecian thin and
spare diet, yet I wish there were a more moderate course taken for moderating
the diet of our diseased. But riot and excess have so ceized upon us in our
health, that it is a hard matter to regulate our desires according to reason,
when we are diseased. Now, we proceed to other circumstances according to
this subject.

CHAP. VI.
Certain Rules and Laws from whence the Diet of the diseased is desumed.

AS in the structure and building of houses, we must lay a good foundation,
before ever we begin to build: so no less careful ought we to be this
case, where the Diet of the diseased is to be handled, to lay a good and firm
foundation, whereon our building may stand the firmer; we are therefore in the
first place to take notice of certain rules or laws (call them as you list)
which in the ordering of the diet of the diseased are carefully to be
considered: Rules or Laws from whence the diet of the diseased is desumed,
reduced to two principal heads.

In the diseased, what things to be observed.


and they are all reduced to these two principal heads, being all desumed or
fetched from the party diseased, or from the disease. In the party diseased, or
the sick himself, we are to consider, the strength, the temperature, the
disposition or quality of the body, the age, custom, particular, or
individual disposition or property of each person (expressed by this word
idiosyncrasia) the time of the year, and the region where one lives. Now, the
first and principal rule, law or judication, 1 Rule, or iudication from the
strength.
is taken from the strength of the sick person; which by a due and convenient
diet, answerable to requisite necessity must be sustained, to the end the
diseased may the better be enabled to overcome the contumacy of the disease:
for here nature must play the physician in curing of the disease, both food and
physic receiving their power and efficacy from our natural heat, and from
divine benediction principally, which we ever would have to be understood. This
one thing is always, says Vnum illud and semper, and ubique servendum est, ut
aegri vtres subtude assidens in al^us inspiciat, and quair diu sapererunt,
abstinentia pugnet: si imbecillitatem vereri coeperit, cibo subveniat, Cells.
l^br. 3. cap. 4.

2 The temperature of the body.

3 The structure of the body, Habitus.


Celsus, to be observed, that the Physician present, diligently observe the
strength of his patient, and so long as it holds out, to cure him by
abstinence: but if feebleness be feared, let food then supply what is wanting.
In the next place, the temperature of the body is to be considered: for this,
we may easily observe, that choleric complexions are not long able to endure
long abstinence, although in perfect health; and if they be at any time ceized
with any diseases proceeding from choler, they are by a thin and slender diet
much offended. In the third place, we are carefully to consider of the frame
and structure of the body, called Habitus; for such as are of a thin and
slender constitution of body, are more by a thin and slender diet offended,
than others of a thicker. We are not also to neglect the age, for old people
are best able to endure abstinence; 4 The are. Who best indureth abstinence.
and next unto them, those of a consisting or middle age: but children, and
little infants, are with fasting most offended. By old age, I here understand
green old age, as it is called, cruda viridisque senectus, and not decrepit
old age, which by reason of the languishing and decaying of the innate natural
heat, as the oil of a lamp, unless it be frequently by good and comfortable
food, and good drink refreshed, will quickly faint under the burden. And this
must be done frequently, and often, not confertim, or abundantly at once; lest
this small fire be by too much fuel suddenly suffocated and oppressed. 5
Custom,
And since custom often carries so great a stroke, that we see, even poisons
by long continued custom converted into food; it is not slightly in ordering
the diet of the diseased to be past over. And experience it self does even
teach us, that things wherewith we were formerly accustomed, do less offend
us. The prerogative of custom Lib.
Galen well describes by the example of Arius the Peripateticke, who being
much molested with a great weakness of stomach, that he durst neither endure
the cold air, nor once so much as taste a drop of cold water; falling into a
fever, and forced to drink cold water, died suddenly. And therefore if any
were in their health accustomed to eat twice or thrice aday, not only are we
to yield to this custom in their sickness; but even to permit unto them their
accustomed hours, unless some sudden accident (as the fit in a fever or the
like) do hinder us. Now, besides the premises, every one almost has some
certain peculiar property, or condition, 6 Jdiosyncrasia, or an individual
property and condition.
called idiosyncrasia, whereunto belongs often some peculiarity in appetite,
and other things, and to the which sometimes we are forced to give way: and
we find often, by common experience, that when the stomach is whetted on,
and eagerly longs after some particular food, howsoever, it may be in it
self not so fit, having enjoyed it, greedily imbraceth, and with great
facility concocteth the same: and this (...) Hippoc. Aph. 38. lib. 2.

7 The season of the year. ^.


Hippocrates in his aphorisms, did very well express. But herein I would not
that any one should, at random, let loose the reins of his appetite, but
carefully, and with good counsel regulate and moderate his desires. We are in
the next place to consider the time of the year, howsoever, many may, perhaps,
think it to small purpose. But as in health this is to be observed, there must
then be like correspondency in the time of sickness. And certain it is, that
in Winter, the internal heat of the stomach, and inward parts, is far
intenser, and greater than in Summer, and the concoction easilier performed;
and therefore no question is to be made, but that the quantity of aliment must
needs be answerable, and in greater abundance than in Summer, when as by the
heat of the ambient air the internal is extracted, the pores of the body
rarefied and dilated, and sweat with fuliginous excrements more copiously
expelled. And therefore a lesser quantity of food, of a laudable quality and
easy of digestion; as also a more liberal allowance of drink is then to be
permitted. And this was the opinion of Aph. 18. libr. 2.
Hippocrates, and so has been held by all our Physicians, that in Winter we
are to feed most liberally, in Summer very sparingly, and in the Spring and
Autumn, to keep a mean, betwixt both the former, whatsoever any say to the
contrary. 8 The region wherein one lives.
The region wherein any one lives, is likewise not to be neglected: for in
cold countries, where people feed more plentifully, there the sick is to be
allotted a more liberal allowance, 9 The calling, or course of life.
than in hot countries: as Spain, Egypt, and the like. And me thinks, that
besides all the premises, the calling, or course of life one leads is worth
the consideration: for the which cause, scholars, and others accustomed to a
sedentarie life in their health; as then their diet ought to be more sparing
and easier of concoction than for other people: so falling sick, the like
caution must be observed. And here women come also to be considered, who, for
the most part use less exercise than men, and have the pores of their body
less perspirable, and often a colder complexion: and this is chiefly of the
better sort, who live in ease and idleness, Influence and abundance of all
things, to be understood. In the next place we come to rules of diet desumed
from the disease it self, which was the second head we here proposed to
handle. Rules, or indication desumed from the disease it self.
And these rules must be understood by dividing them into their proper ranks,
and must be illustrated by accommodating them to fevers; few diseases without a
fever ceizing on the body of man; and therefore in this discourse we have of
them a special regard, though other diseases also shall not be neglected. All
diseases then are either acute and of a shorter continuance, All diseases,
either acute or chronicall.
and for this cause called acute; or else chronicall, or of longer continuance.
Acute and short diseases, require a slender and sparing diet, and the shorter
and sharper the disease be, the more sparing should be the diet. Again, in
chronicall and long continuing diseases, the diet must be allowed more
liberal; lest in a long journie nature being toiled and tired out, before she
be at her journies end, faint and succumb under the burden of the disease.
Now, of chronicall diseases, some are of a longer continuance than others; The
Diet to be accommodated according to the continuance of the diseased.
and therefore as to them that continue long, we allow liberal allowance, so
to the longer we still allow the more liberal allowance: and on the contray,
since among short and sharp diseases, some are shorter and sharper than
others; as the acute and sharp requires a sparing, so the sharper a more
sparing, and the sharpest of all, the most sparing diet of all; which
approaches nearest to that strict diet of Hippocrates: having all this while a
principal regard to the strength of the patient, and other cicumstances
already nominated. Now, besides, the difference of the nature of the disease,
Diet to be a ministered according to the times of the disease.

The time general and particular.


no less careful and circumspect ought we to be in the observing the times
of the disease, both general and particular. The general time, I call the
whole course and continuance of the disease: the particular, the paroxysmes, or
exacerbations of the same, and in fevers commonly called fits. Now in both
these times, as well general as particular, we are diligently to observe the
beginning, the increase, the height, and the declining: many in the beginning
of the disease, if they foresee the disease, like to be of long continuance,
do use to feed the sick liberally. But according to Lib. 2 cap 16.
Celsus, in the beginning of the disease, the sick should suffer hunger and
thirst: for if corrupt humors abound, the best food is but by them corrupted.
Foul bodies (says Aph 9 lib. 2.
Hippocrates) the more thou feedest, the more thou hurtest. Wherefore in the
beginning, if strength permit, we are by degrees to withdraw their food,
until the height of the disease, in the which, if it be an acute disease,
they are more sparingly to be fed. In diseases therefore, Diet in acute
disease^ how to be ^^pen^ed.
that very speedily come to their height, a very thin and slender diet is to
be used. But where it makes not so great have to the height, then are we in
the very time of the height, as also a little before, to withdraw some part of
their diet, and before permit to them more liberal allowance, that the sick
may the better hold-out. But there being so many several circumstances herein
to be observed, and the several and individual constitutions being so
various, it is very hard to set down any certain rule concerning this
particular. In diseases which give no intermission; as continual fevers,
beware of feeding the sick in the exacerbation or worst time, In continual
fevers.
but wait for some remission, when the sick finds some alteration. In
intermitting fever^.
In intermitting fevers; as tertians, quartanes, etc. except their fit should
prove very long, and their strength feeble, feed them not in their fit, but
wait for the remission or declining of it: or else prevent the fit certain
hours, lest it surprise the sick with a full stomach, and so prolong it. But
if it should come to pass, that the sick were not able to attend this
appointed time, then were it better to take something in the beginning, or
increasing of the fit, and no ways toward the height of it: and yet if
strength should fail, it were better to yield to an inconvenience, than to a
mischief. And there 10. Meth. and sequenti de diata aegrorum agit.
Galen diligently observing the strength of his patients, fed some of them in
the beginning, some in the vigor and very height of the fit, which occasioned
some to mock and deride him. But with us, women, many times, must have their
will, although it cost the patient his life; and what they apprehend to be
right, the Physician may often spend his breath, but do little good. I wish
people therefore to be wise, when they see especially it lies them upon their
lives; and if they will learn wit of no body else, let them learn some of
Satan: Job ^.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life.

CHAP. VII.
What things in prescribing Diet for the diseased are to be observed.

OF the three several sorts of Diet fit for the diseased; to wit, a sparing,
slender, or thin, a liberal or full, and a mean diet betwixt both, we have
already discoursed. Each of these diets is so called in relation to the
aliments which nourish sparingly, liberally, or in a mean manner. Now, in each
of these aliments, we are to consider the substance, quantity, quality, the fit
time for feeding the sick, the order, and the preparation, or manner of
preparing the same. The substance of food is either solid or liquid, of easy
or hard degestion, yielding to the body good or bad nourishment. Properties of
nourishment fit for the use of the sick.
That aliment which is appropriated for the sick, ought to be easy of
digestion, of a good and laudable juice, and nourish much in a small quantity;
and liquid or solid, according to the nature and variety of the disease. Lib.
de victu acut. and alibi passim.
Hippocrates used to feed the sick of fevers with suppings. And Probl. 32.
sect. 1.
Aristotle, wishes us to feed the sick in fevers, with suppings at the
beginning, especially, by reason or their lightness, and facility of
concoction and distribution. The quantity or measure of the Diet of the
diseased, must be ordered according to the sense and feeling of the sick, and
nature of the disease, as Lib. de veteri medicina.
Hippocrates well expresses it. Now, it is not unknown, that whole and sick
folks are not with alike quantity of food to be fed. And this by the practice
in Hippocrates appears, where 7 Epid.
Cratolaus being sick Dimidiata chaenice contentus erat. Lib. de victu acut.
contenteth himself with the one half of his former allowance. To the
quantity we may also refer the number of repast, which must be measured
according to custom, which is consonant to Hippoc. aph. 16. lib. 2. and 6.
Epid.
Hippocraticall prescription. And this according to many several
circumstances, is also variable. The next is the quality, which we are not to
neglect, nor slightly to be past over. Healthful and sound people ought to use
a diet like unto their own temper and constitution: but the sick are to use a
diet contrary to their disease. A hot distemper requires a cooling diet, and
rest from motion. Neither are we in the diet of the diseased, only to
consider the first qualities; as hot and cold, moisture and dryness, but even
the second qualities also; as opening and astringent, etc. If the humors be
tough, then have they need of opening diet; as all manner of obstructions:
defluxions need astringent and strengthening diet. As for the time of feeding
the sick, as witness Lib. ad Thrasib. de deaeta, cap. 57

A double time of feeding the sick; of election and necessity.


Galen, it is very hard to define, and that in regard of the diversity of
fevers, requiring diverse times for diet. In diseases, we may consider a double
time of feeding the sick, one of election, another of coaction, or necessity.
That of election I call, when as the disease gives the sick some truce, and
leaves the sick sometime free for food. That of necessity and coaction, when
as for preserving strength, we are forced at uncertain times to feed the
sick. Now, for feeding the sick, the daytime is always the best, as
witnesses Lib. 3 cap. 6.
Celsus, and many other Physicians. Des erreurs populaires, part. 2 cap. 8.
Ioubert, a French Physician, much inveigheth against that perverse and
preposterous custom of feeding the sick in the night time, and gives this
reason for his assertion: The day is ordained for our nourishment, as the night
for rest and sleep; now, by sleep the noisome and noxious hunmour, cause of
the disease, is concocted, the natural heat now by reason of sleep being
recalled into the center: now, if by nourishment in the night time,
Preposterous custom of feeding the sick in the night.
thou make a distraction of natural heat to help concoction, it must needs
have the smaller force to subdue the disease, and from hence arise many
crudities, the cause of much evil in the body. But if, perhaps, the sick
cannot sleep, and have bin sparingly dieted in the day time; then may we give
the sick some supping, as a little broth, almond, milk, or the like: but in
no case let the sick ever be wakened out of his sleep to take any food; it
being far better to let the sick take his rest, than unseasonably to waken
him for food: for Hippoc. lib. de vict^ acut.
watching suffers not the disease to come to maturity, making all sustenance
harder to digest. It may then be asked what time of the day is fittest to feed
the sick? and in what time of the day may the diseased feed freeliest? If it
may be with convenience, the morning is the best time, or toward noone, and
worst toward night. It has been already proved, that in healthful people a
larger supper is allowed: What time of the day fittest for feeding the sick,
and when he may feed freeliest, at dinner or supper.
but in the sick it is not so, as has been already proved. Besides,
experience it self tells us, that toward night, and in the night time,
diseases most commonly afflict most: what reason then is there to oppress the
body with a double burden? And this is principally to be observed in all
defluxions and diseases of the head, yea, even in health it self, much more
then in sickness to be observed. The order of diet in the diseased is then
chiefly to be observed, when there is variety of dishes; The order of the
sickes diet.

Whether variety may be allowed to the sick


which, whether fit for the sick or no, would be considered. A single diet is
always most profitable, agreeing best with health, and in sickness is
easiliest concocted. The multiplying of many several lusts, Cibus homini
simplex: acervatio saporum pestifera, and condimenia perniciosiora, libr. 12.
cap. 54.
says Pliny, is pernicious, and a multitude of sauces is yet far worse. And
yet some would have the sick use variety of dishes, especially in a weak and
queazie stomach, that by tasting a little of every dish, his weak stomach
might the better be whetted on. But if it be possible, and strength subsist,
the sick is not to be incited to such variety, Preparation of the diet varieth
much.
for fear lest he eat more than he can well overcome. But in the diet of the
diseased, the preparation is not of smallest moment: as whether it be better
roasted, boiled or baked, the which is, according to diverse circumstances,
varied, as we shall hear more hereafter. Sometimes also sauces are not
unseasonable for the sick; and for this cause some Physicians have written
tractats concerning this subject: and to speak the truth, they are the fittest
for the sick, to excite and stir up their weak and languishing stomach,
which often by all our art, we can scarce endure to take so much sustenance,
as will support their weak strength for a few days. Now, as there is a
preparation required in the diet, so is there also in the diseased, who is to
wash his mouth with fair water, Preparation in the sick in himself required.
or water and vinegar, with a little wine, or other fit and convenient liquor.
And is principally in Fevers, where the mouth is often so furred, principally
to be observed, to wash away that slime, and other stuff that sticks to the
tongue and palate of the mouth, and gives a bad relish to all that is eaten.
Besides, The sick should sit up to eat.
as Avicenne says, the sick, if it be possible, should sit up in his bed to
take his food, and so for a while after continue: for by this means concoction
is far better, than any otherwise performed. Now to the particular Diet of
the Diseased.

CHAP. VIJ.
Of fit Diet for the Diseased, and that of several sorts, and first of that
which vegetables affordus, as bread, herbs and fruits.

THe matter of Diet for the Diseased, as we have already said of the Diet of
healthful people, is either taken from vegetables, or plants and fruits: or
else from living creatures and their parts: as from beasts, foul and fish.
Among plants or vegetables, corn, and among corn, wheat, whereof the best and
wholesomest bread for the use of man is made, challenges by right the first
place. That bread then is best for the use of the sick which is made of the
best wheat, Best bread for the use of the sick.
not fusty, mildewd, or of any other evil quality; and withal made of new
ground meal, which is better than long kept. This bread would be a little
salted, and moderately leavened: for so it becomes more pleasant to the
taste, lighter and easier of digestion, and less stopping. In our countries
here we have a custom to add barme to our bread, which other countries, as
France, Italy and Spain, etc. use not; and therefore I give warning, that
this be sparingly used in the sickes bread, very bitter barme especially; which
makes both the bread unpleasanter, and hotter in acute diseases, and hot
bodies. As for salted bread, 7 Meth* med.
Galen himself does not reject it, even in Fevers; and besides, even in the
cure of a dry stomach allows the use of it. Bread for the sickes use is to be
used new, and not old; especially not above two or three days at the most. New
bread is two manner of ways used, either simply as it is of it self, or else
artificially prepared. Simple bread I call such as it is baked, Two sorts of
bread. Simple bread. Prepared bread. Crummes. Crust.
when it is so administered to the sick. Bread is again prepared after the
baking, and that diverse ways. Now whether the one or the other be used, the
crummes are the best, the crust being of an evil quality. Ordinary simple
bread was used either hot, or after it was cooled. A Merc. variar. lect. l. 6
late writer shows that the ancients used hot bread. And Hippocrates used hot
bread in the cure of that kind of Dropsy which we call anasarca or
leucophlegmatia, which nevertheless elsewhere he Lib. de diaeta acut.
allows not of. Hot bread fills suddenly, is hard of digestion, and dries
much; and this later reason might move him to exhibit it in that kind of
Dropsy. Cold bread best, and not too stale.
But cold bread was ever most in request, and is also the best, especially if
not too old, as has been already proved. As for the preparation of bread,
Preparation of bread for the sick.
the ancients used either to wash it in fair water, or else to mingle it with
flesh broth. Elb. 22. cap. 25. How the Ancients washed their bread.
Pliny affirms that wheat-bread being washed either in cold or warm water,
is a very light food for the sick. Now they used to wash their bread two
manner of ways: either they soaked and steeped their bread in warm water,
which they often shifted until such time as it had quite lost all the taste of
leaven and salt: or else they grated and punned it small, and so steeped it in
fair water, and strained it through a clean linen cloth; by this means
making a separation of the solid from the subtilest parts, which subtle thin
part they afterward boiled until it grew thick. This washed bread both
Hippocrates and Galen used to cool in all kinds of Fevers. We use rather to
wash it in rose water, adding some sugar and currants. Our manner.
Neither was it the custom only to steep bread in water, Bread soked in wine.
but in wine also; where they were free from any Fever. We use rathe to toste
bread at the fire, and so steep it in wine, In flesh broth.
And that sometimes also they mingled bread with fresh broth is apparent out of
the same Lib. de affection.
Hippocrates. There are also diverse artificial preparations of bread which may
be useful in some diseases: Biscuits and the like.
as biscuits prepared with diverse ingredients; as yolks of eggs, annise and
fennel and coriander seeds, with a little sugar, and may be useful for weak
stomakes, and rheumatik persons. But because few of our Gentle-women are
ignorant of the preparation of these and the like, March-panes.
I shall not need to insist upon their preparation. Besides these, there are
diverse sorts of march-panes made, partly for superfluity and adorning great
feasts, and great men's tables; and partly also sometimes for physical uses: as
in hecticke Fevers, and some pectorall diseases, which here to particularize,
is neither the particular place, nor my purpose. But before I finish this point
concerning bread, I must advertise all diseased people, Unleavened bread
unwholesome.
that since unleavened bread, as pycrusts, many sorts of cakes and the like,
are not so fit even for the use of healthful people; how much more then are
they unfit for the sick? Such bread is always very hard to be concocted, and
apt to engender obstructions and the stone.

Now in the Diet of the Diseased there is no small use made of herbs, Herbs
useful in the Diet of the diseased.
whereof we have spoken already. Herbs minister but small nourishment, and
serve rather to alter than to nourish the body. And therefore they are of good
use to cool, to open obstructions, and keep the body soluble: of the which
both juleps, apozemes, and diverse decoctions are made, according as the nature
of the disease requires. We use them likewise in the sickes broths, according
as we see occasion. Now that herbs nourish but little, Lib. de facult. nature.
Galen himself avoucheth, affirming, that men cannot live upon herbs,
although beasts are therewith nourished. And Hippocrates affirms, that those
who use this kind of food much, live a shorter while than others. And Comment.
ad eam partic. lib. 6. Epidem. imbecilliora cibaria breviorem vitam habent,
Galen upon that place expounds the word imbecillis cibus, or a feeble food,
to be such as yield little or small nourishment to the body: such are herbs,
and many sorts of fruits growing upon trees: and such, says Hippocrates, are
both of a short continuance, and make them short lived who use them: by reason
such food makes but short stay within the body. Out of this place then is
confuted the opinion of Lib. de sanit tuend.
Cardan, affirming, that such as lived on fruits and herbs were longer lived
than those who lived on flesh, which he would prove by the ancient fathers,
and by Eremites living in deserts only upon such food. But this may easily be
answered, Those who live on herbs and fruits live not longer than such as live
on flesh.
that it was our forefathers frugality, free from all manner of excess and
riot, and not the quality of their food which prolonged their lives. Besides,
their lives were for other necessary and useful ends then prolonged, as we
have heretofore touched. As for Hermites, and others who live long by the use
of such diet, I doubt not but with the moderate use of flesh, and keeping a
moderation in all other things, they might have lived longer, and in as good
health of body, whatsoever Cardan say to the contrary.

Whether fruits may be admitted into the Diet of the Diseased. Answer.
Now it may again be demanded, whether fruits may be admitted into the Diet of
the Diseased? I answer, it would seem that by reason of their waterish juice
they should be excluded: yet no doubt they may safely be used, at least some
sorts; as apples for melancholy, What fruits best.
capers for the spleen, pomegranats for hot and choleric stomachs, the
quinces in fluxes of the belly; in costivenesse, prunes and cherries; raisins
and currants for the liver: and so of diverse others according to several
occasions. Lib. 12.
Trallian tells us that the Egyptian Physicians fed their sick of Fevers with
cucumbers and melons; and that by reason they cooled much and nourished little.
But Lib. de abusu med.
Cardan altogether disalloweth of any such diet. And it were far more
tolerable to use the distilled water of such fruits. I doubt not, but fruits
may sometimes be exhibited to the sick, provided they be first roasted, that by
such means, the moist watery juice may either be corrected or dissipated. How
the ancients roasted their fruits.
Now the ancients had another fashion of rosting their fruits than we have, as
may by the same late alleged Author appear; who speaking of the use of
peaches in a tertian, says, that being hung up, they are to be roasted by the
only heat of the fire. Lib. 2. (...) and initio lib. (...)
Galen in two or three places explaneth this manner. They took (says he) a
high pot, which they filled full of water, and within the pot above the water
they set in grate, on the which they laid their fruits, and so roasted them at
this vapor. And Epist. 83.
St. Jerome writes, that cooks were wont after this manner to roast their
phesants, Preserving of fruits.
which made them far daintier to the taste. Our age has in use to preserve
diverse sorts of fruits in the Autumn, and so to keep them both for necessity
and delight. Sparingly to be used in Fevers.
But I wish they be sparingly used of the sick, especially in Fevers and hot
choleric constitutions, by reason that sugar wherewith they are preserved, is
quickly in such turned into cooler; besides, that the too frequent use of such
things quickly cloggeth and overthrows a weak stomach, whereof we are to
have always a principal regard.

CHAP. IX.
Of Flesh, and what sorts of flesh are fittest for the sick, and how to be
exhibited.

ALthough we have already spoken sufficiently both of the nature and
nourishment that several sorts of Flesh efford the body of man; yet will we
now say something more of this subject, as it has relation to the sick. That
flesh was a strong nourishment, Pythagoras was not ignorant, says Pliny, who
changed the wrestlers diet from pulse to flesh; their fat and gluttonous
substance, having nearest affinity with man's radical moisture: and therefore,
as well in sickness as in health, it yields strength and vigor to the party
that uses it. But all sorts of flesh are not promiscuously and indifferently
to be used of the sick: for, among foure-footed beasts, Flesh fittest for
strong nourishment.

What foure-footed beasts are best for the use of the sick.


some for goodness and wholesomnesse, are far before others to be preferred.
And here for the use of the sick, are principally recommended Weather mutton
and Veale. Among foul, young pullets, Hens, Cocks and Capons, Pigeons,
Partridges, Phesants, What foul.
thrush and some others: and all these kinds of flesh are common to all
diseases; and besides, there are yet some certain sorts of flesh proper to some
particular diseases. Such flesh is in a double manner adminstred unto the
sick; either in substance, boiled or roasted; or else their juice drawn out by
decoction, called broth; or else expressed and strained; called commonly
colices or gelees: or, lastly, distilled; and so called destilled restorative
water of Capon, or any other flesh. Besides these aforementioned, Hippocrates
accustomed to feed his sick with other sorts of flesh; as with the flesh of
Hares, Hogs, Horses, Ancient Physicians dieted their sick with flesh, uncouth
to us.
Asses and Whelps, which with us are now altogether out of request. But a
question may be here asked, whether flesh be in diseases a fit and convenient
food. And it has been by some Arabian Physicians called into question, who
forbid flesh in all sorts of fevers; Whether flesh may be used of the sick.
and that by reason it is easily, by the distempered heat of the fever,
putrefied and corrupted. And by the fame authority was it denied in the
inflammation and consumption of the lungs. And in the I Will of Crete, it was not
permitted to feed the sick with flesh. Lib. de carn.
Hippocrates himself, in fractures of the skull, forbids flesh, until the
tenth day. But there he must be understood of solid flesh, by reason he
forbids any mastication or chewing. But to forbid broths, colices or gelees,
and the like, Answer.
I see no reason: and therefore with the same Hippocrates, and the general
current of all our best Physicians, we allow of the use of flesh for the
sick. Ewes flesh is often used by Hipprocrates, and commended by Galen: Ewes
flesh used by the ancients.
but we to better purpose, use Weather mutton, to them altogether unknown;
and the which we have from the Arabian Physicians, who first used it. Flesh of
gelded creatures better than of others.

Veale seldom used in ancient times.


And in this flesh, it is also to be observed, that it is colder in quality
than either Ewes or Rams flesh: and it is to be observed, that the flesh of
gelded beasts is both sweeter and cooler than of the ungelded. As for Veale,
the ancient Greek Physicians seldom used it, and we read not of it above
once in Lib. de ratione victus.
Hippocraters. And for this are we also beholden to the Arabian Physicians,
and Lib. 4. collect.
Averroes in particular, who averreth, that it may safely be used in all
diseases. Lib. 1. ad Glancon.
Another ancient Physician, would not have the sick to meddle with it,
although in health he holds it to be a singular good nourishment. And some
think it too moist, and that it was therefore in the Eastern countries quite
forbidden. But it is now without any doubt by all our Physicians admitted into
the Diet of the Diseased. Hogs flesh was both by Galen and Hippocrates, had
in high esteem for the sickes use, howbeit it be now altogether banished from
the Diet of the Diseased. And we read, that Lib. de diaeta acut. and Gal. in
comment.
Galen gave to the sick in a tertian, Hogs brains and feet: as also gives
Hogs feet boiled in ptisan for a restorative diet. How would this relish our
dainty palats? And that Hogs flesh, as also pigges to be eaten without the
skin

Of foul, and what nourishment they afford.


Hippocrates himself did use it, may also appear, by that he warns us to
eat it without the skin: and Galen in his commentary, takes it for granted,
that Hogs flesh and Pigges ought to be eaten without the skin, quite
contrary to our custom, who hold that the daintiest of all the rest: but I
warn weak stomachs to look to themselves. Young sucking Rabbets are for the
sick, with us, in no small request, yet let them not be too young. Now, as
concerning foul, 3. de alim. facult.
Galen affirms, that if compared with four footed beasts, their nourishment,
as it is far less, so is it far easier of digestion; especially the wings
of such fowls as are in perpetual motion, and afford the body a wholesome and
subtle nourishment. All manner of wild foul, says 2 de diaeta.
Hippocrates, are of a drier substance than foure-footed beasts: and whatsoever
creatures yield no spittle at the mouth, are of a drier substance than others.
And the wild foul are drier than the tame of the same kind. And therefore
the flesh of the stocke-dove is drier than that of our ordinary Pigeon: Among
all foul, pullaine most familiar for the use of the sick.
among all manner of foul, our Hens, Cocks and Capons for the sickes use
bear away the bell. Neither was it without a mystery that the Cock was
consecrated to Aesculapius. As for the Goose, Ducke, and other water foul,
they are seldom allowed the sick, especially in acute diseases. And it is to
be observed, that in ancient times the comparison was betwixt the flesh of the
Cock and the Hen, which of their flesh was the best, Capons unknown to the
Ancients.
some preferring that the Cock: as for Capons, which we acknowledge both in
sickness and in health to be better than both the former, Pullets best for the
sick.
they were to the ancients unknown. Above all sorts of pullaine, pullets, or
pretty big Chickens are accounted the best for the sickes use, especially if
they be of a white color: for such are not so hot as the others, and therefore
fittest for fevers and hot diseases. The ancients used especially the stones
and wings of pullaine, as may by Lib. 1. ad Glauc.
Galen appear; and this must be understood of young pullets, and not of old
Cocks. Now, as for old cocks, they were of old chiefly used to purge the
belly, Old Cocks how used of old.
being for that end and purpose stuffed with diverse ingredients; which is even
useful with us at this day also. As concerning Capons, a question may here be
moved, whether they engender not the gout: and that this question seem not
strange, it has been by some of later times, Whether Capons engender the Gout.
called into question: and howsoever it has been held both of Vide Crat.
consil. me^icin. consil. 229.225, etc. Answer.
Cocks and Hens also, yet principally and chiefly of Capons; and that
principally if they be old: the reason whereof is pretended, that these
creatures are obnoxious to this disease, witnessed by certain knots growing
sometimes on old Capons legs. But in my opinion, this is but a needless and
frivolous fear, it being a thing most certain, that in a good and strong
stomach, they will be converted into a good and laudable nourishment. As for
those who feed every day daintily upon that or any other delicate food, using
little or no bodily exercise, nor keeping a good moderation in their diet, be
they young or old they shall find they shall either engender the gout, or as
bad, if not a worse disease. So that I cannot adhere to their opinion, who hold
any specificall podagricall quality in this kind of foul more than in any
other food. Turkies.
The young pullets of Turkies may be ranked among our pullaine, and may
likewise be safely used of the sick. Phesants.
As for Phesants, I forbid them to no body that can come by them. Pigeons
whether safe to be used of the sick.
As concerning pigeons, it may be demanded whether they be safe for the use of
the sick? The Arabian physicians, by reason of their heat, utterly rejected
pigeons from the use of the sick, which we understand of the elder. As for
young pigeons, they are nothing so hot, Temperature of pigeons.
especially well blooded under the wing. And therefore, all the controversy
betwixt the Arabian and Greek Physicians concerning the temperature of pigeons
may easily, by distinguishing the ages, be composed. Old pigeons are hot and
dry, and the young rather temperate, participating of some heat. Arist. de hist
avium. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Wild pigeons by reason of their dryness accounted better (especially in moist
diseases) and their young ones hatched in the Spring, better than those in
Autumn. Pigeons good against the plague.
Others hold that ordinary pigeons hatched toward Harvest, when corn
begins to ripen, are best, and feed fattest. There are some which hold an
opinion that pigeons are good against the plague, and that such as eat of them
often in such seasons, free themselves from pestiferous and contagious
diseases. And for this cause, if the plague at any time had been in Persia,
Plinius, secundus the Physician was wont to make pigeons his chief food. It is
moreover to be observed, that pigeons never be roasted with their heads: for it
has been observed, Pigeons to be roasted without their heads.
that such as have often eaten them thus, have by degrees fallen blind: and it
is moreover held, that thus they engender the leprosy. Lib. ^
Rhasis also relates a history of a certain Casipha (as he calls him) who
having thrice in one day eaten of pigeons roasted with their heads, History.
the same day died suddenly. As concerning Partridges, Lib. de euch^m.
Galen writes, that the flesh of young Partridges is of a laudable
nourishment; but the elder of a more solid substance, and harder of digestion,
which nevertheless being two or three days hung up, becomes tenderer. Now
concerning this flesh betwixt the Greek and Arabian Physicians, there is no
less controversy than was about the former, and by distinguishing the ages,
Thrushes.
may as easily be composed. As for Thrushes they are by Galen accounted among
good and laudable nourishment, as ingendring neither too thick nor too thin
humors: and it seems, it was accustomed to be prescribed to sick persons, by
the ancient Roman Physicians: as may appear by the prescription of them to
Pompey in his sickness, Plutarch. in vitae Pompe^^. Larkes.
who would rather venture his life, than be beholden to Lucullus for them. The
lark is of very good nourishment, and easy of digestion, and good in moist
diseases, especially commended against the wind-colicke. It is somewhat dry,
and therefore not so fit in Fevers; and if used, they are best boiled, by this
means becoming moister. The Lark with the tuft on the head is the best. And
it is to be observed that in Fevers, wild foul, by reason of the dryness, is
not near so good as the tame.

CHAP. X.
Of Eggs, and ^^^ir use, whether they may safely be allowed the sick? Of
diverse liquid substance made of flesh; a^^roth, colice, gelee, restorative
distillations, etc.

NExt to foul, for the affinity, we are to say somethings of Eggs, as being
their proper birth and offspring, as I may call them, and will withal
subjoine next after them, for the affinitte, some liquid substance made of
them. This then is a light, liquid and laudable nourishment for the sick.
There is no food (says Lib. 29. cap. 3.
Pliny) that nourishes more in sickness, and burdeneth less the stomach,
supplying the place both of meat and drink. And yet is this food by some
called in question, whether it may be allowed the sick or no? E^^es whether
good for sick folk?
and that for a double reason, both in regard of the plentiful nourishment it
yields in Fevers, and by reason also of a supposed exorbitant heat in this
aliment more than in another. And this has been not a fear among the vulgar
only, but even some learned Alois. Mundella epist. 29.

Latinus Henricus in quaest. medictnal.


Physicians have held the same opinion. And if at any time, say they, the
ancients did allow of eggs in Fevers, it was never in the beginning, but in
the declining of the disease; unless it were in extreme weakness, which
overturneth and alters all order in Diet. Lib. 1. ad Glanc.
Galen in tertian Fevers allows both the yolks of eggs, and rocky fishes;
but withal gives us warning, that this diet was only for the daintier and
nicer sort: but that in others it were better according to the Hippocraticall
rule, to use the juice of ptisan until the crise. And again in 18 method.
another place, in a Fever with swounding he allows of eggs before the
fourth day, and afterward flesh. And Li. de ras, vict in aecut.
Hippocrates where there is no Fever permits the use of rere-rosted eggs,
Eggs permitted b^ Hippocrates.
which in a Fever, it is like he would not have permitted. But it might be
proved, that sometimes in the inflammation of the liver and of the lungs, where
there is always a Fever conjoined, he permitted the use of eggs. But what
talk we of ancient times, when as people lived more frugally, and used not so
liberal and plentiful a diet as now adays, and we were never now able
without danger of life to sustain so strict a diet, as did the diseased in
those days? And therefore in our days to give the sick eggs to eat, Eggs
may safely be used even in Fever or any acute disea^
yea even in acute diseases, we see no danger at all. As for the fear of heat
in eggs it is very frivolous, they being very temperate, allaying the acrimony
and sharpness of humors, and withal moisten much. The Diosc^n. (...). 2. cap
43.
yolke of an egg applied to any part grieved with pain, eases the same: and
according to the common consent of Physicians such things as ease pains,
called properly anodyna, are of a temperate faculty. Besides, the white of an
egg cools, as daily experience teaches us. The white of the eg^e co^leth.
And although the white of the egg be cooler, yet is it withal harder of
digestion than the yolke: and therefore Galen in the aforementioned place in a
tertian admittteth of the yolke only. And a late writer condemns much the
vulgar erroneous opinion of the heat of eggs, affirming withal that the Italian
Physicians do ordinarily exhibit them to their patients, even of hot
constitution of body, and the like diseases, and that even in the heat of
Summer. To nourish much in a small quanti^y is a singular good property.
As for the fear of nourishing too much, we esteem that to be a singular
prerogative in eggs above many other meats, that they nourish much in a small
quantity; as being that which we chiefly aim at in great weaknesses, and
which we may easily regulate according to our pleasure, exhibiting a quantity
answerable to present necessity. Hens eggs best.
My meaning all this while is of hens eggs, as being of all others the most
temperate, and most appropriate for the sickes use. Of a hen trodden with a
cock a^e best.
Such eggs also are esteemed best, which are laid of a hen trodden with a
cock: for others nourish less, are of lesser quantity, and moisten less,
Preparation of eggs.
if we will believe Aristotle. In eggs also the preparation or dressing is of
no small consequence. They are commonly either boiled in water with the shell,
or roasted likewise with the shell, or boiled a little in seething water or
other liquor without the shells, called potched eggs; Boiled without the
shell, called p^^ched eggs.
or fried in a drying pan with butter, and sometimes with an addition of herbs
or others things. Of all these preparations the boiled in water without the
shell, or potched are best and fittest for the sick, and potched in vinegar or
verjuice, as some use to do, they cool, Boiled with the shell.
and withal corroborate a hot and weak stomach. The next in goodness are
accounted those are boiled with the shell in water, Roasted eggs.
by reason they are all alike and equally bo^^^d. Eggs roasted in the imbers or
otherwise are therefore held inferior to the former, because they are not so
equally roasted: howbeit if care be had in the rosting, I hold them nothing
inferior to the other, if not better. But for the use of the sick a special
care must be had, that they be not hard. Fried eggs
Eggs fried are worse than any of the former, and therefore altogether to be
forbidden the sick. Sometimes they have mingled with them diverse sorts of
herbs, Tansies.
tansey especially, (whereof this composition takes the name) and cream;
which howsoever used, are no ways to be allowed sick folks, being heavy of
digestion even for the healthful, especially for weak stomachs, Of Eggs also
are made caudells, which being made of drink that is not too strong may
without any danger be allowed the sick; of the making whereof there is hardly
a woman in the country, I think, that is ignorant. Marks of good Eg^.
But that we may discern the good from the bad, it is material for us to know
some certain marks which may make this appear. The Priests, it seems, in
former times, as they ever loved their belly well, so set they us down three
marks whereby we may discern the best: that an Egg be new laid, long in
figure, and white in color, according to the Regula presbyteri jubet hoc pro
lege teneri, ut bona sint ova, candida longa nova.
old proverbiall verse. But to know the new laid from old, stale and addle, we
must yet find out some more marks. New laid Eggs are commonly full, and the
stale empty toward the brother end, which is also the cause that stale and
addle Eggs swim in the water, when as the new laid fall to the bottom.
Besides, new laid Eggs, betwixt thee and the light look brighter and clearer
than the stale and addle ones, which look more darkly and obscurely. Another
sign is, that when it is opened, an old and stale Eg, the yolke especially
disperseth it self, whereas the new and fresh laid clingeth close together. I
have the longer insisted upon Eggs, by reason it is so useful an aliment for
the sick, and the vulgar is so possessed with a needless fear of a supposed
excessive heat in this food, and therefore thought good to remove all such rubs.

Of the juice of flesh of several sorts.
Having heretofore sufficiently spoken of solid flesh, as also of eggs, I come
now to speak of some liquid substances made of flesh, and fit for the use of
the sick. The juice of flesh nourishes more speedily and easily than the
solid substance it self. It is far easier, says (...).

Hippoc. Aph. 11. lib. 2.


Hippocrates, to be refreshed with drink, than with solid food: which is not
only to be understood of drink, but of liquid and supping meats also.
Whosoever have need of a sudden and speedy refection, Lib. de aliment.
says the same Author, humid or moist diet, is the best to repair strength.
And whosoever have yet need of a speedier way, it may be effected by smells. The
ancient Physicians therefore, taught by experience, that oftentimes the sick
was not able to concoct solid food, found out this way of suppings. The Lib. de
affection.
same Authors counsel is again in another point carefully to be observed:
that such as are able to digest and concoct solid food, to such, suppings are
to be denied: for they exclude the use of other food: but to such as cannot
make use of any other, to such, In the preparation of these liquid substances
made of flesh, care must be had of the cleanliness of the persons, and the
like care of the vessels they are made in.
suppings are to be allowed. Moreover, in the preparation of these liquid
substances, there must be an especial care had of cleanliness, both in the
persons that prepare them, and in the vessels wherein they are prepared. The
persons must be neat and cleanly* skillful in such preparations, and careful
in skimming off skum and fat, offensive to a weak stomach. The vessels
wherein they are made must be clean and free from all filth, Earthen and iron
vessels best, brass the worst.
evil smell or taste. The matter of such vessels are best of earth, iron, or
silver: but brass is the worst of all other, and what is made therein is
likeliest to offend a weak stomach, especially if it stand any space in it, as
experience daily teaches us. Some brass, I confess, is better than other,
and yet the best bad enough. Of all these liquid substances, that which we
commonly call broth, is most ordinary, and made after various and diverse ways,
Broth made after diverse manners.
according to the nature of the disease, and party diseased, and the patients
palate. Some is made with herbs, some without; some with plummes (as they call
them) raisins of the Sun, or currants, or dried prunes, and some without any.
The variety therefore of broths being infinite, it were a tedious task to
enter upon this subject. But one sort of broth was wont to be made by the
ancients of an old Cock to purge the belly, being for that end stuffed with
many such ingredients fit for that purpose, which is even usual with us at
this day also. I will instance in one fit to be used in pectorall diseases.
Take an old Cock, Broth made of an old Cock in pecto^all diseases.
and after a long combat with another Cock, kill him, pull him, and cleanse
him of all his intralls; then fill his belly with barlie prepared as it ought,
raisins of the Sun stoned, violet leaves, maidens hair, a little hysop and
peny-riall, with a little salt: boil him till the flesh come from the bone,
then bruise him well, and squeeze out all his moisture, and of this broth take
a good draught. There are yet many sorts of broth used for several ends and
purposes; some to cool, some to strengthen and cherish nature, etc. Amongst
restorative broths, there is one in frequent use, especially in consumptions
and great weaknesses, China broth in consumptions and great weaknesses.
made with the outlandish root, fetched us from beyond sea, called from the
soil, China-root. The proportion of this root to the liquour is not always
the same in every sick person. The China-root must be heavy, and not
worm-eaten, and being thin sliced, must stand about twelve hours by a soft
fire, not boiling at all, but simpering by it; and afterward provide a good
big young red Cocke-chicken well dressed and cleansed from his intralls,
bruise him and put him to thy China, It may also be made with Veale, or other
meat, howbeit in weak and sick people, a chicken is commonly best liked of.
adding ingredients, as the nature of the disease and other circumstances shall
permit: as in pectorall diseases, such as we nominated already, more or less,
as occasion shall require, which cannot be determined: and in other cases, the
ingredients may be altered accordingly. It must boil till little above the
fourth part remain, and it look red in color, being still well skimmed as it
boileth, and toward the later end add to your broth the bottom of a manchet,
and two or three chives of mace: and when all is sufficiently boiled, bruise
your chicken in a stone mortar, and squeeze out the juice, and add to your
broth; whereof, being sweetened with sugar, the diseased may take a little
draught an hour or two before dinner, supper, or both, if need be. In my
opinion the quantity of China would not be under an ounce, and seldom exceed
two. Howsoever, in time of need it is safest to be directed by learned counsel,
which may direct the right preparation and use according to several
circumstances. Again, sometimes meat is first well roasted, Expression of the
juice of roasted meat, called expressum.
and afterward pressed out in a press or otherwise, and seasoned with sugar,
or made a little tart with a little juice of a lemmon, or otherwise
appropriated to the patients palate, as particular occasions shall require:
which they call in latin expressum, or a juice squeezed out of flesh. And this
is best given by it self without any other broth or liquor: and this is better
for cold constitutions than for hot, and consequently for the like diseases.
Now, when the flesh is let boil until all the substance of the meat be boiled
away in the broth, and then strained through a clean linen cloth; Colice called
cousuptum.
it is called in latin consumptum, and in the English a colice, and may
likewise be seasoned and salted according to the liking of the sick. This
colice is either taken of it self, or else mingled with other broth. Another
liquid substance there is yet extracted out of flesh, which we commonly call a
gelee, which is made of a capon or a big cocke-chicken, Gelee.
and a couple of calves feet, and so let boil until it fall to pieces, and
being sufficiently boiled, the skum and fat being carefully taken off, it must
be well strained through a clean linen cloth, and the juice so strained is to
be sweetened with a little sugar, and seasoned with a little cinnamon, and so
set on the fire again to boil a wame or two, adding thereto, if thou will,
two whites of eggs the better to clarify it. After all is done, strain it
through an Hippocras bag, which being cold will turn to a gelee, and may be
colored with a little saffron or red sanders, and with a grain or two of
musk or amber-greze, if the patient please, this may also acquire a pleasant
smell. This gelee may also be used either by it self, or else mingled with
broth. If there be a Fever, it is best to boil it in fair spring water: if
there be neither Fever, nor yet fear of any, then the one half, or yet less,
may be of white wine, which will make it both pleasant to the pal^t, Gelee of
hearts horn.
and very comfortable to refresh weak nature. Our Gentlewomen have in frequent
use a gelee made of hearts horn, which I hold very good, especially in
pestelentiall and contagious diseases, or in pox and measels is very sovereign.
Those of ability may add to it a little of confectio alchermes or de
hyacintho, and then it will be very sovereign. And if thou will have this or
any other gelee tart, thou may add a little juice of Lemmon or the like to
it. Besides all these, there is yet in use for sick folks, a form of
restorative distillation made of a capon, Restorative distillations of capon or
other flesh.
or other restorative flesh with an addition of cordial ingredients for that
purpose. Some find fault with this distillation, because of the impression of
fire left in it, and may be distasteful to the sick. But this may easily by a
glass still in balneo mariae be prevented. But the truth is, that by this
means the phlegmatic and watery part is only extracted, which has but very
small nourishing power in it: since that which nourishes (as witnesses Lib.
de mercur. cap. 9.
Galen) ought to be of a tough, thick and glutinous substance, to the end it
may be the more firm and permanent. These kind of distillations are very
frequent it France and some other countries; insomuch that they are to be
found ready distilled in many Apothecaries shops; which a learned Rondlet. lib.
de fabric. cap. de causo.
French Physician finds fault withal, as being fusty, and of no value at
all; if they be kept but a little while. With us these are not so in request;
yet to speak mine opinion also, since they retain both some taste and smell
of the meat they are distilled of, (if carefully done) although their
nourishment be but very small, yet see I not, why in great weaknesses, and a
loathing of all food, these may not sometimes be admitted, especially, since
thereby no damage or detriment whatsoever redoundeth to the stomach, or other
part, it passing so speedily through the body. There are also some restoratives
made of flesh bruised and minced, made up in solid forms, and may be used in
chronicall diseases, but are not for Fevers, nor other acute diseases. But at
this present, I will dwell no longer on this, not this subject of flesh, but
will say something concerning fish.

CHAP. XI.
Of Fish, and whether they may be allowed the sick.

NOw, because sick persons are not all and always to be fed with one and the
same food, and some in their sickness loath flesh; it may then be demanded,
whether Fish may not be permitted sick folk, although they be not so
nourishing, and are also endowed with another manner of juice? and therefore
whereas flesh is forbidden in Lent, yet Fish are permitted. It may by many
places both of Lib. de victus rations in morb. a^utis, etc.
Hippocrates and Galen evidently appear, that the ancient Physicians fed their
patients more with fish than flesh. Besides, when as the sick loathed their
honey water and ptisan, Galen allowed them rockie fish boiled in water, prepared
with leekes, dill salt, and a little oil Lib. de sanit. tuend^
Cardan, in the Diet of the Diseased, prefers fish before flesh; and that
because they are of a cooler quality, moisten more, and nourish less. And that
the Arabian Physicians allowed to their patients the frequent use of fish, it
may by Lib.
Averroes appear. Their manner was to fry them in oil, by which manner of
food their opinion was, that the liver was much strengthened. Mercur. v^^iar
lect. libr. 2. cap. 25.
A late Writer is of opinion, that most of the ancient Physicians used to feed
their patients with fish rather of custom, than that they esteemed them better
than flesh. And this may yet the better appear to be true, in that the
Eastern people, and the Greeks especially, used, and do yet at this day,
very frequently use fish; as is by Pellonius observat. libr. 2.
a learned Physician, who, of late years, traveled into those countries, well
observed. But if we shall in even scales weigh both flesh and fish, we shall
find that flesh does far surpass fish in good and wholesome nourishment,
and that even by the testimony of Lib. de affection.
Hippocrates himself. Fish indeed, says he, in the same place, are a light
meat, both boiled and broiled, both by themselves and with other meat. And yet
they differ thus among themselves: fish of ponds and pooles, the fattest
especially, as river fish also, are harder of digestion: but Sea, fish living
near the shore, are lighter; and easier of digestion: and among them again,
Different nourishment which fish afford.
fish boiled are easier of digestion than roasted or broiled. And therefore in
case of restoring strength, feed the sick with the former: but if thou will
either keep the sick at a low ebb, or yet abate some of his strength, feed
him with the latter, which are lighter and nourish less. Flesh therefore
being wholesomer than fish, yielding a more laudable nourishment to the body,
they are rather by way of permission, to satisfy their languishing appetites,
then otherwise allowed sick people; and that even in Fevers, What fish best
for the use of the sick.
where we affect a moistening diet. But then if may in the next place be
demanded, what fish are best for the use of the sick? All fish are either bred
in fresh waters or in the Sea. Seafish again, are either such as frequent the
shore, called littorales: or else live most among rocks, called Pisces
saxatiles; or else they live in the depth of the maine Ocean, callen therefore
Pelagici. Lib. de euch. and cach.
Galen prefers seafish before fresh water fish: and again among seafish,
those who live among rocks; as the sole, sea-perch, and the like, he
accounts best. Neither yet are such as live in the maine Ocean and near the
shore to be misliked. That kind of fish, says Lib. 2. cap. 18.
Celsus, is lighter that lives among the rocks, than among sand; and again,
that which lives among the sand is lighter, than that which lives among mud
and slime. And therefore fishes living in lakes, ponds, pooles, or rivers, must
needs be inferior to the former. What river-fish best.
And yet notwithstanding fishes living in clear and rocky rivers, and which
have a quick current, are not to be misliked: such as are the Pyke and
pickerell, the Perch and carpe. The Gonion especially, called the river smelt,
may as safely as any fish be allowed the sick. Galen would have all his fish
prepared with his white broth, Preparation of fish in ancient times.
as he terms it, being made, as we mentioned before, with fair water, dill,
leekes, and a little salt. But since Galens time the case is much altered, and
our European palats have since that time well improved their sense of tasting.
Preparation in our times.
In acute diseases especially, a tart sour taste gives our patients best
content. And for this purpose we use, not without good reason, the juice of a
Lemmon, as also of a sour Orange, a sovereign good sauce in all Fevers,
infections and contagions especially, both unknown in Galens time. And for a
corrective in all fish sauces, pepper and salt are with us in most frequent use
and request, the former not then so much by him used. In France, Mushell broth
made with the yolke of an egg.
I remember, there was a frequent use of a broth made of mushels with the yolke
of an egg, made tart with verjuice of sour grapes, which pleases the palate
well, and is not impertinent for a weak stomach, whereof in my fever I made
now and then a trial.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Drink of the diseased, and first of Water, with the frequent use
thereof in ancient times, whether, and how now to be exhibited, and how before
to be prepared, and how to supply the defect thereof, where it is not to be
admitted.

WHat cruelty it were, after so many and various sorts of meat, it may be,
scorched with sealding heat in the height of a Fever, without a comfortable
refreshing with that so much desired drink, those who have been scorched in
this purgatory can best tell: and therefore with the assistance of the
Almighty, I purpose to dwell a little upon this so useful and profitable a
point. (...).
And how useful and profitable the handling of this point is, may from hence
easily appear, that many times the stomach refuses all manner of sustenance
whatsoever, especially in great weakness and acute diseases, and yet drink is
seldom out of season. And in this same particular, we see by experience, it is
a hard matter to make the sick keep within compass. But because all times
are not alike fit for drink, therefore must we be a little more circumspect in
the choice of the time when it is fittest for the sick to drink. And
therefore when the time is not fitting, we must acquaint the sick, says
Decendus est aeger, (...) in potione (...) ^bo indugere, (...) cap. 6.

Most opportu^e time for drink.


Celsus, that when the fit is over he shall drink, and that as abstinence
from food will shorten the fit, so when the fit is over past, the less he now
drink, the less desire shall he have after to drink. But because often times
little or no food serves the sickes turn, therefore must we be the more
careful to gratify them in their drink. Now, as for the time, if election
may have place, we are to make choice of that time when he goes to rest. Lib
8. cap. 9. Sitis mendosa. A fal^e thirst.
Celsus in another place, would have the sick in the night time to rest, and
neither to eat nor drink, if it be possible, and drouth be not too urgent, in
which case he would not have the sick too much tormented with thirst. But
because sometimes the mouth and the throat are dry, and crave drink, when as
the internal and inferior parts are plentifully supplied with moisture; which
is that we call sitim mendosam, or a false thirst, as there is also a false
appetite; therefore it will not be amiss sometimes to wash the mouth and throat
with a little cold drink, sometimes with a little fair water, and a few drops
of wine vinegar, or some such other liquor; and sometimes some preserved or
conserved barberries, raspes, ribes, some lemmon sliced and sugared, or the like
acid things; and sometimes a stewed acid prune, keeping the stone in his mouth,
as the manner is, or any other like art may be used to deceive this counterfeit
thirst. But when the house is now all on a fire, we must needs have some
liquour to quench this heat, and extinguish the fire: even so when this house
of man's body is all on a fire, we must needs have some moisture to quench the
same. Now what this must be, Water the most ancient and common drink.
is our purpose here to discuss. The most ancient drink, and most common to
all living creatures is water, of the which, as in general useful to all, and
in particular, as serving for drink in healthful persons has been already
spoken. Now we are to speak of it as it serves for the use of the sick, and
whether it be useful for all or not? Water very frequent among the ancients.
The use of water we read to have been very frequent among the ancients, and
especially the Guidian and Rhodian Physicians used it much, and that chiefly in
acute diseases; whom therefore Lib. de diaeta acut.
Hippocrates reproves for not distinguishing the causes of diseases, which may
often alter our purpose of exhibiting water to drink in acute diseases,
especially where there is a burning Fever proceeding of choler. And this he
there illustrateth by the example of the inflammation of the lungs, where he
affirms, that neither staieth it the cough, nor makes spit up eafilier; but
in a choleric constitution is altogether converted into choler: and besides,
is hurtful to the nether parts about the stomach, overthrowing the whole
body, especially if drank fasting. If there be any inflammation of the liver
or spleen, it increases the same, swimming and floting in the stomach,
descending slowly, being hard and not easy to be concocted: for the which
cause also it looseneth not the belly, provokes not urine, nor futhereth any
excretion. And Gal. in commen
Galen himself also confirms this same opinion, adding, that when as
Hippocrates perceived the harms and mischiefs proceeding from the drinking of
water, abstained from the use of it in all acute diseases, and betook himself
to drinks made of honey and water, of honey and vinegar, and sometimes to wine.
And with them yet agrees Augerius Ferrerius in castigat. pract.
a late Writer, who out of diverse places of both these Authors compared and
parallelled together, mainteineth, that in acute diseases water is altogether
hurtful. And of the same opinion is likewise Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 2.
another learned Physician, yet with this qualification, that if a small
quantity of water be added to a great quantity of choler, it is quickly
converted into choler: but a great quantity of water drunk, tempereth and
allaieth the heat of the choler, and so overcommeth it, whereas a small
quantity increases this humor, being turned into the same. Trallianus.
Another ancient Physician notwithstanding controlleth this opinion of
Hippocrates, How water is to be exhibited without hurt.
and affirms the quite contrary. But to compose this controversy, our
Authors meaning is to be understood of water actually cold, which indeed in
pectorall diseases, and for the breast it self is very hurtful, and hinders
expectoration: but being once boiled, it grows thinner and more subtle, and
then only fit in pectorall diseases to further expectoration. And it cannot be
denied, that cold water is very profitable and useful in acute diseases, as
may even by diverse other places both of Hippocrates and Galen appear: What
things in the use thereof to be considered.
and besides, most of our ancient and modern writers with one unaminous
consent approve of the same. But in the use thereof we must diligently
consider, both the nature of the disease, and constitution of the Diseased. And
it is the saying of the same Lib. de acre, aquis and tocis.
Hippocrates; whose bellies are hard and apt to be inflamed, they are to
drink the lightest and purest water: but whose bellies are soft, moist and
phlegmatic, such are to use hard, thick and somewhat saltish waters,
subsalsis is his word. Now water is not in all diseases to be used after one
and the same manner. In burning Fevers, water is to be drunk cold, in
pectorall diseases, a little warmish. Now, that it was familiar in ancient
times to give cold water to drink in hot acute diseases, I shall make it
appear. Lib. 9 meth, etc.
Galen himself finds fault with Erasistratus and his followers for denying
cold water in burning Fevers. And again, for the same cause 7 Meth med.
reproves Thessalus, and braggeth, that he has often cured distempered hot
stomachs with drinking cold water, yea, even sometimes cooled with snow it
self. And again, in 10 Meth.
another place he cures that sort of Fever, called Ephemere or Diaria, that
is of one day, by this same means. And in the same book, by this only means
he preventeth this same disease. And in Lib. de victa in acut. comment. 4.
another place gives us yet warning, that this is a remedy fit for any sort of
Fever, providing it be drunk in great abundance. Erastus Antipara^. Part. 4.
A late German Physician also braggeth how many fevers he has by this means
cured; and I know it will seem no strange thing to hear a Amat. Lusit.
centur. 4. curat. 14. centur. 1. curat. 3.
Portugal relate what cures he has by this means performed, as in his
centuries is at length to be seen. Neither is it my purpose to spend time, and
increase the bulk of this book by relating of such stories. And it is not
only commended in all ordinary acute diseases, but even in malign and
pestilent Fevers also, as witnesses Lib. 3 cap. ^.
Celsus, and is the opinion of the Arabian Physicians, who all seem to have
borrowed it of Lib. 7. epid. in aegrot^ 7. qui suit meton.
Hippocrates, who relates the story of one sick of a pestilent Fever, who
having drunk great store of cold water, and cast it up again, recovered
presently his health. And besides, the same Libr. 1. cap. 6.
Celsus in fluxes of the belly, and in all defluxions proceeding of choler,
commends this as a sovereign remedy. The point then being reasonably well
cleared, it rests to be considered, how it is to be exhibited. 6. Epidem. How
water is to be prepared for the use of the sick.
Hippocrates, in that hot country would have the drink for the diseased to be
exposed to the night air, that so it might receive the morning dew, which
might increase the coldness thereof: but because this procures to it some
acrimony, some would have other means tried; as saltpeter, snow, etc.
Concerning the which, we have sufficiently spoken heretofore. But I would not
have any such extraordinary actual frigidity by any such means in this case
procured, it being so prejudicial to heath, howsoever, peradventure at the
first not so sensibly perceived. Now, in the exhibition of water to the sick,
two things are to be considered, the fit and convenient time when, and the
quantity thereof. The time is either general, In the exhibiting of cold water,
what things to be considered
to wit, the course of the disease, or particular, the exacerbation or
paroxysme, which we call the fit. Concerning the general time, all are not of
one mind: for 11 Meth and commen. lib de victu acut.
Galen, and our Greek Writers, would have us wait for signs of concoction in
the urines and other excrements. The Rhas. libr. 1. divis. ca. 148. Averih.
collect. lib. 7. cap. 8.

The general time.


Arabian Physicians are of another mind, and would have us give store of cold
drink in the very beginning of the disease. It is indeed very certain, that
better it were to wait for signs of concoction, if the fever were not violent:
but in extremity of heat, and for fear of further inconvenience by means of
too long absteining, it is better to yield to an inconvenience than to a
mischief. True it is indeed, that drinking of cold water before signs of
concoction, may somewhat prolong the disease, and make the humor grosser, and
more crude: but again, this scalding heat would parch up the humors of the
body before these signs of concoction. And therefore 10 Meth.
Galen sometimes foreseeing this danger, was forced even in the beginning of
the paroxysme to take this course. As for the particular time, Particular time.
in intermittent Fevers, it is by Lib. de diaeta acut.
Hippocrates himself determined, while as he wills us in the fit to abstain
from all manner of food: and if he forbid food, why not drink also? since
that by much drinking in the beginning of the fit, we see it prolonged. While
the feet are yet cold, we are to abstain not from suppings only, but from all
manner of liquid substances, says the same Hippocrates, and so the common
current runs, that the sick should not drink during the fit, and yet are
not all of this mind. And there is a Ioubert des erreurs populaires partic. 2.
cap. 7. Contre ceux qui ne permetient aux f^bricitans de boire durant, leur
acces, etc.
learned late Writer, who would not have the sick altogether debarred from
drink during the fit. And although, says he, Hippocrates willed us during
the fit to abstain from all food, even from suppings also, yet must not this
be extended to drink. And Galen himself, in the height of a burning Fever,
ordeineth a good draught of cold water: and the fit of an intermitting Fever is
correspondent and answerable to the whole duration and continuance of
continual Fevers. As for my part, as I would not be too rigid in denying any
reasonable gratification which might not prove prejudicial to the patient; so
would I not be too servile and obsequious without some great necessity, it
being most commonly seen, that if we give an inch, they will take an ell.
Besides, there is difference betwixt our bodies here, and the French in the
South parts of that Kingdom where this Author lived: and both in regard of the
ambient air, and their ordinary diet and drinking of wine, their bodies in any
fever must needs admit of a higher degree of cooling, than our moist foggie
phlegmatic bodies in this our climat. But if any particular individual
patient should be thus by excessive heat scorched up, as I should not my self
be too rigid, The quantity.
so I wish others to be wise. It rests in the next place to define the
quantity, which would seem to be controverted, some allowing of a great
draught at once, and some again, would have drink taken by degrees. It is by
the most, both Greek and Arabian Physicians maintained, that the sick may
drink, ad satietatem; even to satiety. But Proct. 57. sect. 1.
Aristotle seems to be of another mind, and it seems, it was the custom
of some Physicians of his time: Object.
for, says he, Physicians use to give cold drink by degrees, whereof he
renders this reason; that being thus drunk by degrees it moisteneth more than
drunk plentifully and at once: even as we see soft showers moisten more than
great dashes of rain. Answer.
I answer, that we intend not here so much humectation, as sudden extinction
of this exorbitant scorching heat: for even as we see in Smiths forges, that a
little water kindles the fire, and makes it burn faster; even so does a
little drink rather increase the heat of the fever, than extinguish it. Now,
because so great a quantity of cold water, if it should long lodge within the
body, might breed some inconvenience, it is therefore by Physicians appointed,
that the sick should cast it up again, as both by De d^^ta acut. Cells. lib.
3. cap. 7.
Hippocrates, and many other Authors may appear. And Lib. 5. epid.
in another place relating the disease and death of the wise of one Antiochus
in Larissa, to the end of his long discourse subjoineth this, that it seemed
she might have lived, if she could have drunk store of cold drinks, and cast
it up again. But now, to come home to our own country wherein we live, and to
see how the premises may agree with us, I think it will not be impertinent.
It is then to be observed, Accommodation to our own country (...) climat.
that all those countries wherein the Greeks and Arabians lived, were very
hot, and the inhabitants thereof much naturally addicted to drinking of water,
their wine being there too strong for ordinary drink, as it is in many parts
of Europ even at this day, where the vulgar drink most water, or mingled with
a little wine, and therefore in time of sickness cannot so much offend them.
But with us water is not so usual for ordinary drink, and therefore might
more wrong our bodies. Besides, water is hurtful to weak stomachs, whose
bodies abound not with blood, or yet are troubled with any tumor, or inward
inflammation, and oppressed with tough and crude clammy humors. Small beer
with i^ in stead of water allowed the sick, and so to be used.
And therefore we safely permit the use of small beer, which neither
indangereth the body, if not cast up again, neither can it much wrong the body
by sudden overcooling of the same. Besides, the boiling corrects the crudity;
the barley is good in all acute diseases, as after shall appear; and the hoppe
opens obstructions of the inward parts. If the patient, after a good draught
can cast it up again, it will do him good: and if not, it will find a vent
some other way, as being far more penetrant than water. And as for the
benefit might by casting it up again be procured, it may by means of a
convenient vomit easily be effected, which may by a discreet Physician be
according to several circumstances accomodated. But if the heat were yet very
violent, and more cooling drink be yet requisite, we are not unfurnished of
variety of distilled waters, whereof we can easily compose such variety of
cooling juleps, with the addition of tart acid juices and liquors, as may give
content to the nicest and daintiest palats. And we are not unfurnished of
barley waters, posset drinks of several sorts, and many others, whereof we
purpose shortly to make mention. And yet, if we would make use of water in
fevers, I see not but it might be very well, How water may safe lie of us be
used.
and to good purpose used. I would have then pure spring water well boiled, and
afterward well cooled again, and then made tart with a spoonful or two of
good white wind vinegar, or some drops of the acid spirit of vitriole, some
barberries, or the like. This would prove a sovereign good cooling and
wholesome drink in all hot fevers whatsoever, contagious or others: and the
poorer sort might reap as much benefit by this, as any other drink.

CHAP. XIII.
Of warm Drink, and whether it be useful or no.

WHat has hitherto been spoken concerning cold water, and the many ways were
used to cool it its hot countries, to please the palate, will easily find
credit with a vulgar understanding, What thirst is: Hot drinks have bin in use
of old.
hot drink being of no living creature whatsoever desired, and cannot
therefore be natural: for thirst is nothing else but an earnest desire of a
cold and humid substance. Now, de facto, that there were such hot drinks in
use among the ancients, if we should deny, yet many Authors will make the truth
thereof appear. But whether this now used in sickness or in health, or both;
as likewise de iure whether useful for the body or no, rests now to be
discussed. It has been an usual speech among people, that we ought to
drink as hot as our blood, and that for fear, lest natural heat by cold
drink be quite extinguished. And it would seem that the ancient Romans had
this custom in frequent use: for we read that Dio (...).
in Rome there were shops where such hot drinks were sold; called therefore
Thermopolia, Thermopolia in Rome, place^ where hot drinks were sold.
as may appear by that the Emperor Claudius discharged this custom, and
took quite away all such places. And again, Caius Caligula put to death a
Master of one of these shops, for selling of this warm drink, during the
funerals of his wife Drusilla. And from this warm drink was the Emperor
Tiberius nicknamed Biberius Caldius mero. Fiberius Cal^ius mero.
And in great families, one of the servants had the charge of fetching such
warm water, which was always in a readiness to be sold, the which, if he
brought too late, his punishment was 300 stripes. And that the Romans had it in
ordinary use, especially at their suppers, when as they fed most liberally, may
also by many places of the old Quando vocatus adest calid^ frigidaque minister.
luven.

Caldam poscis aquam sed nondum frigidalenit: Alget adhuc nudo clausa culina
soco, Mat.


Poets appear. And the old comicke Poet In Verse. in Trinummo, Rudente, in
pseudolo.
Plantus make thereof frequent mention, and many other Authors, whom for
brevity I here pass by. Stu^k Anntiqu con^^^. libr. ^. cap. 6. ex (...). Iud.
A late Writer rendereth a reason why some of the Eastern nations, as namely
the inhabitants of China and Iapan use warm drink, and yet live long, and in
good health, to wit, that by reason of the extreme heat of the ambient air,
their stomachs and inward parts are cold, and therefore, to warm them within,
use this warm drink. (...) ex (...), tem ex Athen. 8 Di^noso^.
Others again, used this warm drink only for wantonness, to make them cast
up their meat, and so fill their stomach again with fresh food: the which,
the same Author also out of some ancient Writers relates, and that this was a
common custom among the Rhodians. Mercur. ^ariar. lect. (...). 1.

Frigida non d^crit, non decrit (...).


Some again were of opinion, that the ancients never drank warm water of it
self, but mingled with their wine. At least, it seems it was the custom of
some, as likewise that nothing might be wanting at a great and sumptuous feast,
as the Poet intimates unto us. Idem Stuck. ex (...).
Some again think that although they warmed their water, yet that they let it
cool again before they either drunk it, or mingled it with their wine: at
least it seems it was the custom of some, as of some others, to warm both
their water and their wine, and then to cool them being so mingled before they
drank them. Lambi^. and Turne^. in praed. Plauti loc. referente eodem Stuckio
ibid.
Some learned men are also of opinion that these warm drinks were not always
water, but some other sweet artificial drinks, and which people out of
wantonness were wont to drink: as is the custom both in high Germany and
the Low Countries to repair in a morning to certain shops where strong waters
are sold, whereof they drink some, being mingled with sugar or sweet sirup.
Cold drink is best and most useful.
But certain it is, the best course is to drink our drink cold, as it is in
its own nature: and if in extreme cold, as in frosty weather, or any otherwise
be by extreme cold drink offended; then may they qualify this extreme
quality, either by putting a warm tossed into it, or otherwise abate the
extremity of the cold, but in no case to drink it hot. And yet we see, that
even among our selves we have a custom sometimes to drink warm wine, burning
it with spices, as is supposed, Burning of wine whether better for use than
other wi^e*
to qualify the heat and strength of the wine, and so drink it warm. But in
my opinion, this is a wrong both to the wine and themselves also: burning away
the spirit, which is the life of the wine, they procure unto it an accidental
and adventitious heat, more hurtful to the body, than the natural heat of the
wine it self. And besides, although it be often used in cold weather, yet to
drink it so actually hot is nothing so good, the wine howsoever it be actually
cold, yet does it always by a potentiall heat warm the inward parts.

But let us now see whether warm water were in use with the sick or no?
Whether warm drink be useful for the sick
It would seem to be more useful for the sick than for the whole, and the
Arabian Physicians administer it in pectorall diseases, by reason cold drink
is an enemy to all the pectorall parts. And an Cells. lib. 3. cap ^.
ancient Roman Physician commends it in all Fevers. Trallianus and Paulus
Aegineta.
Others commend it in that Fever called diaria, or of one day. Besides, the
Greek Physicians used it ordinarily in diseases of the reins. But yet that it
is not so good for the stomach, cannot be denied. Warm drink in use with us
also.
And although it be not now the custom with us to give our patients
warme-water to drink, yet upon diverse occasions we use also warm drinks* as
warm posset drink to further the operation of vomits, and others to provoke
sweat. And howsoever we use not to exhibit this warm water, as did many of
the ancients; yet because we are accustomed for the sickes use and benefit to
boil our water with addition of some simples, something I will say concerning
this point. Water boiled is more subtle and of a more sudden penetration,
Boiled water.
than crude as it comes naturally out of the earth. The ancients boiled it
either with the heat of the Sun, or of the fire. And the Persian and
Egyptian Kings were wont to boil their water at the he at of the Sun, were
it never so thin and pure in it self. With us we have in use a double
boiling of water: the one by the heat of the fire in ordinary vessels,
Distillation (...) us in frequent use, to the ancients unknown.
the other by way of distillation to the ancients unknown. Which of these two
ways is the best, we are now to inquire. Our Physicians are for distilled
water, and must needs be the best. Indeed boiled water is to be preferred
before the crude, and is far more familiar for the stomach: but in this,
distillation has the pre-eminence, Distilled waters to be preferred before
others.
that whereas by decoction many thin parts are evaporated, this is here
avoided. And indeed by distillation all uncouth taste, if any, is removed, and
by reason of this refining and attenuation, it will also keep a long time
without putrefaction. But this point is so clear, that I shall not need to
prosecute it any longer. And although we are not accustomed to distill ordinary
water, yet is it very frequent with us to distill waters out of simples of all
sorts, both hot and cold, whereof here to speak is not now my purpose. Only
this one thing I add, that whereas some object that waters distilled in stills
made of metal, either are not so good by reason of some relics of the metal
communicated unto them, or else have some smoakie or fiery impression left
behind in these waters: I answer, the first fear is frivolous, and builded on
a false foundation, and the other may by care and diligence be much prevented.
But if any be so curious and fearful, they may have their waters distilled
per balneum Mariae, in glass stills, if they will be at cost. But it is the
custom of many people, Needless fear of some conceived in the use of
distilled waters.
that they would fare well and pay little for it. Now before I finish this
point, I must give warning to such as attend the sick, that they do not
unseasonbly too much obtrude upon the sick these their warm drinks, or
suppings, wherein women do very much exceed, and many times quite debilitate
and overthrow their weak stomachs. And this shall for this particular now
suffice: as occasion shall offer it self, I shall now and then touch upon some
particular abuses and failings in this kind; and now I proceed to some other
drinks, and first concerning wine, and whether the sick may be suffered to
drink any.

CHAP. XIIIJ.
Of wine, and whether it may safly be administered to sick? Of artificial
wines; of aqua vitae, usquebath, and other strong waters.

OF wine we have already spoken at great length and of all the several sorts
thereof, the right use and abuse, rests now to say something thereof, as it
has relation to the sick. Of the excellent virtues of this king of liquors
there is no doubt to be made; but yet the event is often doubtful, whether it
may prove a profitable medicine, or a deadly poison. And therefore Androcide^s
sapientia claruo ad Alexandrum Magnum scripsit intemperantiam eius ^ohibendam
sic scripsit. Vtinam potaturus rex, memento te bibere sanguinem t^rrae. Situti
venenum est hominicicuta, ita and vinum. Quibus praecep is si ille
obtemperavisset, profecto am^cos in temutentia non interemisset Plin lib. 14.
cap. 5.
Pliny relates, that a famous wiseman called Androcides wrote good counsel to
Alexander the Great, as an antidote against his intemperance: when thou art to
drink wine, O King, remember that thou drinkest the blood of the earth: For as
hemlocke is to man a poison, even so is wine. To which precepts if he had
hearkened, he had not in his drunken fits imbrued his hands in his dearest
friends blood. So that of it may truly be said, there is nothing more
conduces to the strength of the body, not yet more dangerous delight than
this, if not regulated according to reason. No mervaile then, if there ought to
be great caution and circumspection in exhibiting this to sick folks: and
indeed there has been some alteration among Physicians, whether wine might
safely be exhibited to sick people? For si^^e diseases are cured by
contraries, and wine in the estimation of all Physicians is reputed hot, it
will follow that to drink wine, especially in hot diseases (for of others
there is no controversy) is to increase the disease. In vita Alexandri magni.
Plutarch writes that Alexander the great falling into a Fever, and drinking
wine liberally, by that means died; howbeit we are not ignorant, others hold
an other opinion concerning his death: and yet it cannot be denied, but wine
might hasten his end. It may be then admired and wondered at, why De victu in
a^utu.
Hippocrates in Fevers and hot diseases permits the use thereof. Neither yet
did In comment and alibi
Galen in like cases deny his patients the use of wine. If the like care and
caution they used in the exhibiting of it were observed, no doubt, it might be
without fear yielded unto. The wine they used was thin, Wine may safely
sometimes be exhibited the sick.
weak white wine, called by him vinum aquosum, or watery wine, much
degenerating from the nature of strong hot wine: and there he finds fault
with the Guidian Physicians, who were altogether ignorant of the right use of
wine; affirming, also that we may safely, even in a Pleuresie or inflammation
of the lungs, exhibit such wines: providing, still there be neither great
headache; nor deliration or perturbation of mind; as likewise that the spitting
up of tough phlegm be not hindered, nor urine suppressed, etc. And a little
after, thou must know that it will be less hurtful to the bladder and upward
parts, if it be thin and waterish, as he terms it: but better for the guts
if it be stronger. It appears then plainly, that even in the opinion of
Hippocrates such small wines might be used of the sick. And therefore these
wines, which in comparison of others may be called Vide Gal. sub finem lib. de
euch and cacoch Circumstances considerable in exhibiting wine to the sick.
cold (of the which both Hippocrates and Galen are to be understood) are often
without danger administered to sick persons. But in the use thereof we are
diligently to consider, besides the quality, whereof we have already spoken,
the quantity and opportune time of offering the same. The quantity cannot well
be determined, yet must it be by moderation regulated, and several
circumstances not neglected. The fit and opportune time is by the same authors
assigned, when signs of concoction appear, or in the declining of the Fever.
As likewise in a pleuresie or inflammation of the lungs, the matter being now
concocted, and the inflammation abated; and by this means expectoration is
furthered, not hindered. Something notwithstanding, is to be yielded to custom
and old age. If any from their youth be brought up with wine, they will hardly
admit of any other drink, neither will the stomach commonly admit of any
other liquor. But hear what Pliny says concerning this same subject. Quod ad
febrium aegritudines attinet, certum est non dandum in febre, nisi veteribu^
aegris vinum, nec nisid ^ clinante morbo. In acutis vero periculis nullis nisi
qui manifestas remissiones habeant, and bas noctu potius. d^midia enim pars
periculi est noctu: hoc est spesomai bibentibus, nec a partu abortuve: nec a
libidine aegrotantibus, nec in capitis doloribus, nec quorum accessiones cum
frigore extremitatum fiant: nec in febri tussientibus, etc. Et paulo post, dari
utique non nisi in cibo debet, nec a somno, nec praecedente alio potu: hoc est
utique sitienti, nec nisi in desperatione summa, etc.
As concerning Fevers, says he, it is certain we ought never to give wine in
that disease, but to such as be of good years, and that in the declining of
the disease only. And in acute diseases to none but such as have manifest
remissions, especially in the night time, the half of the danger being in the
night time, that is, hope of sleep to such as shall then drink. It must
therefore be given only with meat, neither after sleep, nor yet after any
other drink, that is only taken when the diseased is dry, and almost in the
case of greatest extremity, all hope almost now failing us. In such places then
where such small wines grow, as in the I Will of France about Paris, and in the
country of Xantonge, especially about Rochell, Plin. lib. 28 cap. 2.
they may freely give the diseased such small wines without any danger at al.
And of such a thin acid, and somewhat tartish wine, composed of most white
grapes, and a few red, I my self made a trial in a double tertian during my
abode in France. This they call couleur dupesche, or peach colored wine from
the color of the peach flower or bloome: Wine called couleur du pesche.
and this wine mingled with water did both quench thirst without any apparent
heat, and provoked both sweat and urin. But let us now draw nearer home, and
see whether wine may be allowed our sick? It is not unknown that our cold
moist climat brings not this noble liquor of the grape to any maturity or
perfect ripeness, so that whatsoever wine we use, Accommodation to our climat.
we are beholden to our neighbor countries for it: besides, that wine not
being our natural drink in time of health, is neither in time of sickness
of us to be used, especially in hot acute diseases. And our wines are commonly
so strong, that it is not fit to administer them to sick folks; What wine
with us fittest.
howbeit if any, I think our Rhenish were the safest and fittest, if it were
free from brimstone, or such other trash, wherewith our vintner, Beer better
for our sick than wine.
wine-brewers do oftentimes mar our best wines. But God of his singular
goodness has furnished us with a wine befitting our own country and climat,
which being also in ordinary use in time of health, may freely and without any
danger be allowed the Diseased in time of sickness, But because in imitation
of wine, this our northern wine (for so I may call it) we are likewise
furnished with diverse sorts, differing in strength one from another, we may,
according to the nature of the disease and constitution of the diseased, allow
the sick such as shall be thought most fitting. But in acute diseases the
smaller the beer be, In acute diseases the smaller the better.
it is so much the better; provided it be neither too new, too stale, nor taste
too much of the hop, which will make it more heady and hotter. Let people
therefore beware of their march beer and strong ale in all such infirmities,
which may as much offend their bodies, Erroneous opinion of the vulgar,
esteeming strong drink a Panacea or catholic medicine against all diseases.
as strong wines do others in hot countries. But in any case, let this beer
be very clear, and not thick and muddy. Most of our ordinary people, in the
country especially, are persuaded, that wine and strong drink will recover all
diseases whatsoever, be they never so hot and acute. And a bottle of good wine
is commonly the first physic they send for to the next market town. But many
times before their recovery, they are forced to their cost to recant their
former erroneous opinion, and often cry a too late peccavi.

Artificial wine.
Now besides natural wines made of the juice of the grape only, there be also
several sorts of artificial wines made for diverse uses: some made with
purging ingredients to purge the body, and so for diverse days to be drunk,
according as the Physician in discretion shall think fit, and the strength of
the patient, and nature of the disease shall suffer. Some, again, are
appropriated for other uses: as for strengthening of the stomach, opening of
obstructions, and innumerable others. But because these artificial wines are
commonly to best purpose made with new wines, when they are new pressed out of
the grape, therefore we are deprived of the benefit of making such artificial
wines. In stead of them, we use to boil in our new wine, Diet drinks made of
ale or beer.
our wort I mean, such ingredients as we think fitting for that we intend;
either purging simples or others: as sage, wormwood, etc. And thus we make
several sorts of diet drinks, and ales, for several ends and purposes. But
amongst many others, Scurvy grass ale. Scurvy-grasse is good against
obstructions of the spleen, and accidentally clears the blood, and i^
therefore good against the Scurvy.

Of Aquavitae, and other strong sublimated waters.


there is a drink made with scurvy-grasse, much used by our Ladies and
Gentlewomen in the spring of the year for clearing of their blood. Many, I am
sure, make use of this drink without any use or need at all, but only out of a
wanton custom, and a certain preconceived opinion of making them look fair.

Out of wine is also extracted a noble liquor or spirit, called for the noble
effects (as being esteemed the true balsame of a man's life) Aquavitae, or water
of life. This liquour by many has been much magnified, and no small
commendations ascribed unto it, for the preserving and mainteining the life of
man for many years. Among many there is Savonatola tractati^ de aqua vitae.
an Italian Writer, who does exceedingly extol and set forth the praises
thereof, and relates many histories of such as have by means thereof
prolonged their lives for many years. History.
As one Physician called Antonius Sapelius, who, after he had atteined to 80
years of age, by the use of this liquor, lived yet 22 more. Another.
The like he relates of another famous Physician called Iacobus Parmensis,
Aurum potabile produces but few witnesses of its efficacy.
who attributed his long life of 90 years to the use of this noble liquor. But
what? me thinks I hear some secret complaints of aurum potabile, as though it
were somewhat thereby disparaged; by means whereof, notwithstanding, they say
men may live multitude of years. But I hear nothing but words, their smoakie
promises not being seconded by answerable events, as I have already proved. But
I wish people to be wise, and cautelous in the use of this or any other such
hot fiery liquor. Those of whom this late alleged Author made mention,
Srongwaters sparingly and warily to be used.
were Physicians, and of a good age, and no strangers to the state of their own
bodies, and well able to judge what might best make for the preservation of
their own healths, and so might find that benefit thereby, which another might
long seek, and at length, perhaps, for his labor, For whom most useful.
find a late repentance. If it be useful for any, it is especially for old and
cold moist constitutions; and so no question, moderatly used now and then, it
may produce a mavelous good effect in spinning out of diverse years, the
thread of man's life. And therefore let youth, and hot and dry constitutions, be
very wary in the use of this, or any other such hot waters. There is also a
spirit extracted out of our Northern wine, beer or ale, I mean, Spirit of ale
or beer.
the which, although inferior to the former, yet may it well in time of need,
with good success be used. That which is most commonly sold under this name of
Aquavitae, and in most frequent use, Ordinary aquavitae pernicious to the
health of man.
is nothing else but a liquour distilled out of the dregs and washings of ale
and beer barrells, and might rather from the evil it breeds in the body, be
called, Aquamortis. The right spirit of wine, if it be as it ought, The right
spirit of wine how to be discerned.
will suffer drops of oil to sincke to the bottom, and will dissolve Campher:
besides, being once set a fire, it is quickly all wasted away. And such a
liquor would be used only in extremity, in swounding, and the like, and then
but a very small quantity at a time. I deny not but it may be of good use also,
which comes somewhat short of this absolute perfection: howsoever, I advise
thee, as thou love thy life and health, know well what water thou medlest
with, and especially shun such stuff as I have already disclaimed. Somewhat
milder than this Aquavitae is that strong water, we commonly call Vsquebach,
so much in use among the Irish, having for this same purpose some Liquirice and
raisins of the Sun, and withal some Cloves, Mace and Ginger. This is
likewise cautelously to be used, and especially of cold phlegmatic
constitutions, and in a cold and moist constitution of the air. But still
beware of excess, even in those whom it best befitteth. There are yet an
infinite other varieties of strong waters, both simple and compounded, Great
variety of strong waters.
destilled both with wine, ale and beer, and take the denomination from that
simple or simples wherewith they are distilled: as Wormwood-water, Balme-water,
Cinnamon Water and the like; and they retain the virtue of the simples whereof
they are distilled, whereof we have at large already discoursed. Some of these
waters again, are compounded of many several simples; and take the
denomination either from that which is most predominant; as the
Theriacal-water: or else from the sublime and extraordinary effects; as aqua
coelestis, aqua mirabilis, etc. and sometimes from the Author also; as Doctor
Stevens his water. Great danger in the too frequent use of these sublimate
waters, especially in the younger sort.
But whosoever is too busy, or bold with any of these hot waters in ordinary
use, either for furthering concoction, or otherwise, shall at length find them
produce the like effect, as lime laid to the roots of trees; which howsoever it
hasten the fruit for the present, yet kills it the trees in a short time. And
this I have in some of my very good friends and patients often found too true;
with whom I wish sound reason might have more prevailed than their own
disorderly appetites. I have observed in some, who had these hot liquors in too
frequent use, as they pretended, to warm their stomachs, that at length they
came to this pitch, that whether they drunk any of these sublimate waters, or
the best sack or other wine whatsoever, they found no more heat in it than of
a cup of cold water powered down their throats. But this was not all the harm
from thence ensuing, but was after accompanied with an extraordinary great
distempered heat, both in the liver and kidneys; and in some an irrecoverable
scirrbus in the liver, a disposition to a dropsy, and in conclusion, an
untimely death. I could easily, at great length, dilate and discourse largely
upon this one point, but that I hasten to the other matters which yet remain
to handle.

CHAP. XV.
Of diverse drinks made of honey: mulsum, mulsa, or hydromel, and oxymel, with
the various ways of composition, and their excellent virtues.

ALthough we have already handled honey with the virtues thereof, and diverse
other things concerning this subject; yet now we are to speak of it again at
more length, at least of some drinks made thereof, of no small use in the Diet
of the Diseased. And the praise of it may from hence appear, in that the Land
of Canaan was commended, and that by the Author of truth himself, to be a
Land flowing with milk and honey. Of this many excellent drinks were made by
the ancients, which with us at this day are not in so great request. Howbeit
even at this day, some nations, where honey is plentiful, make thereof some
drinks very useful both in sickness and in health: as namely, the Polonians,
Lituanians, or country of Lettow, and other territories subject to the Polonian
Crown, where good wine is scant, and good honey plentiful; and therefore in
stead of wine use this drink. And we have already made mention of Metheglin,
made in Wales. Now, Three sorts of drinks made of hone in use among the
ancients.
of honey were made three sorts of drinks, differing one from another: The
first of those was called Mulsum, or a drink made of honey and wine: another
Mulsa, or Hydromel, a drink made of water and honey; the third of honey and
vinegar, water sometimes being mingled therewith, and by them called Oxymel; at
this day with us in no small request, in pectorall diseases especially. The
first of these then is that which the ancients called Mulsum, and so celebrated
by that Roman Pollio, as we have already mentioned. And that this was a very
ancient drink, may by a Mercur. variar. lect. lib. 6.
late learned Writer appear, who proves the same against Plutarch, who held
it in his time to be but a new invention. His opinion he proves both by the
authority of Homer and Hippocrates, who call this drink (...). Of this drink
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 56.
Pliny makes one Aristeus a Thracian the author, and the which drink he
brought into that credit and reputation, that in these days there was no sort
of drink in greater request, howsoever, now in our days neglected. It was
made of tart or sharp wine and honey, taking its name a mulcendo, from
mitigating and qualifying the sharpness and tartness of the wine. Pliny would
have it made of old wine, as being easiliest incorporated with the honey. That
this is that Oenomeli mentioned by Dioscorides, may by comparing that place of
Pliny with his, easily appear. 4 Sympos. Pro^^ ^.
Plutarch writes, that honey spoileth and corrupts the wine, and may
therefore be questioned, whether it be wholesome or no? I answer, that being
new made, it is windy; but being well boiled, and kept a good while, it
becomes a most wholesome drink. And many, says the same Pliny, have by the
continual use of this drink, atteined to old age, as has been already in
Pollio instanced. This drink is in some places of Hippocrates prescribed in
pectorall infirmities. The likest to this drink, is that famous Metheglin, so
much used in Wales. Piacotonius lib. de cerevisia and mulsa.
In some sea-cities of Germany, they make this Mulsum, and mingle therewith
many aromaticall simples. There was another drink made of the same honey and
water only, Hydromel, and diverse compositions thereof.
and in no small request among the ancients, called therefore Hydromel. Of this
drink, there were diverse manners of composition: Libr.
Dioscorides makes it of two parts of old river water, and one part of honey
boiled together, and set a long time in the Sun. Loco nuper citat.
Pliny composeth it of honey and raine-water long kept, boiling the water with
the third part of honey, until the third part of it were wasted away. There was
also another drink made of honey, in request among the ancient Greeks, Apomell.
called Apomeli, and was made of the hony-combes, washed and boiled in fair
water. 4 De san. tuend.
Galen makes yet mention of another manner of composing this drink; taking of
vinegar one part, of honey two parts, of fair water four parts, and so boiled
them, where no mention is made of the combs. How Hydromel or Mulsa was made
among the Arabian Physicians.
The Arabian Physicians made their Mulsa or Hydromel after this fashion. They
took one pound of very good yellow honey, and not too old, which they boiled
with eight times as much spring water in an earthen or stone vessel, skimming
them well, and boiling altogether at a great fire, and then straining it through
a clean linen cloth. In Lib. de victu acut. Two sorts of it among the Greeks.
Hippocrates, we read of two sorts of this Mulsa, or Melicratum, one raw,
another boiled. The former was made of three parts of spring water, or old
raine-water, and one of very good honey well mingled together, and set a long
time in the Sun. The second sort which was boiled, was composed of the same
quantity, but presently boiled to the wasting away of the third part. Besides,
he makes there two sorts of this drink, according to the predominancy of the
one or the other of these two: for when the quantity of water exceeded that of
honey, Melicratum Aquosum, and sincerum.
it was called Melicratum aquosum, but when there was greater store of honey
than water, then it was call Sincerum Melicratum, or pure and plain
hony-water. In our days, some make this drink of good pure honey one part, and
six times as much good spring water, well boiled and skimmed, till the fourth
part be wasted away. To know whether it be sufficiently boiled or no, To know
when it is boiled enough.
put into it an egg, and if it swim on the top, it is sufficient, but if it
sincke to the bottom it is not. When it is tunned up, for better defecation
and purging, in hot weather, especially in hot countries, it may be set into
the Sun for certain days. It may be about a quarter old before it be
drunk. When it is very old, the use of it is condemned, even by Lib. 31. cap 6.
Pliny himself. This drink might be of good use in many infirmities of the
body, of the breast especially, excepting always hot and choleric
constitutions. It might be made tarter by means of some vinegar, or some other
acid or sharp juice, provided always it exceed not.

Oxymel, or sirup made of vinegar.
There was yet another drink made of honey, in no small request among the
ancients, called Oxymel, or sirup of vinegar; the which is even at this day in
no small esteem and account. This drink is both by Lib. de diaeta acut. Gal.
in commen and 8. meth and 11. m^th.
Hippocrates and Galen highly commended and esteemed of; affirming it to be of
an opening and cleansing faculty, without any danger of heat; and that
increases not the Fever, and yet opens and cleanses effectually, and that
it is very useful for all ages. A Augerius Ferrer^us in castigat. pract.
late Writer affirms, that this is a very wholesome drink, and may safely be
used in all Fevers, and that there is no better drink to quench extreme
thirst. And Thaddeus Dunus in epist. medicinal.
another says no less in the commendation of it. Some differences of opinions
there are concerning the composition of this drink. Hippocrates makes it of
honey, vinegar and water, not expounding the quantity of any one. 4 de san^t.
tuenda.
Galen mentions a threefold manner of compounding this drink, Diverse
composition of Oxymel.
but to none of them adds he salt, as does Dioscoride: Take of veneger one
part, well skimmed honey two parts, let them boil with a gentle fire until
their qualities be well united together. With water it is thus made: for one
part of honey, take four parts of fair spring water, and let them boil over a
soft fire, until it yield skumme, and when a great part of the water is wasted
away, then add thereto half as much vinegar as remains of the water, and
boil them well, until there be a firm union of all their qualities together.
Thirdly, it is thus made: all the three are at the very first mingled together,
taking for one part of vinegar two parts of honey, and four parts of fair
spring water, boiling them until there remain a third. This Hippocrates often
mentions, though not always under one name. We have the composition thereof
set down in our late dispensatories. Iohann. Renod. institut. Pharmaceut. lib.
3. cap. 4.
Some take one part of vinegar, two parts of spring water, and four of pure
honey, letting them all boil until they attain to the form of a liquid
sirup, I mean not so high boiled as some sirups: for it will thus keep well
enough. Val. Cordus ex me^ antidoterio.
Some again make it after this fashion: take of good honey four pounds, fair
spring water two pounds: let the water and the honey be boiled together until
the water be quite wasted away, and the honey well skimmed, and then add
thereto two pound of good sharp wine vinegar, and boil it to the thickness
of an ordinary sirup. This oxymel or sirup of vinegar is a very excellent
medicine for expectoration, or cleansing and cutting tough phlegm stuffing up
the pipes of the lungs, and exceeding good in many pectorall diseases. But
many, by reason honey is not so pleasant to their palats, therefore they use in
stead thereof sugar, which indeed is not so forcible, nor effectual as the
former: but we are fallen into such times, wherein people are all for
toothsomnesse, and little for wholesomnesse. Choice to be made of the
ingredients of this drink.
In the composition of this drink, there must a special care be had of the
honey it is made of, that it be of the best, such as we have already described.
The vinegar would be of the best sharp white wine vinegar, if it can be had,
and the water must be pure spring water, and approaching as near as may be to
our description of such water of best note. Diverse compounded Oxymels are made
of honey.
Besides these ordinary Oxymels, there are yet some other compounded with
diverse ingredients, both purging and others: as with hellebore, with squills
and the like, all which here to set down were both tedious and needless; such
as would make use of any such, may, as occasion and necessity shall require,
have them prescribed by the learned and judicious Physician. Great error in the
ordinary use of Oximel, and other expectorant medicines,
But in the use of this, as in many other medicines, there is a great error in
the ordinary use of it committed; and that by reason, the vulgar use it
promiscuously in any matter whatsoever, distilled or fallen down upon the
lungs, be it thick or thin; whereas in a sharp thin tickling rheum this
can do no good at all, but rather harm. But because this is not the proper
place to convince and confute these errors, this being spoken but by the way, I
will here leave this point. Neither yet will I insist at this time upon any
other compositions made of honey, it being only my purpose in this place to
discourse of such drinks as are made of honey, and by the way to give a taste,
what was the opinion of antiquity concerning honey, and the high esteem they
had thereof, and how useful a thing it is both in sickness and in health,
howsoever in this degenerate and wanton age, wherein we now live, it be too
much contemned and despised.

CHAP. XVJ.
Of diverse drinks made of barley, very useful for the sick, and in frequent
request, as ptisan, barly-water, cream of barley; and wherein our forms
differ, from those of ancient times. Some thing concerning emulsions both
almond milk, and others.

THis grain (barley I mean) in Greece has been in no small esteem and
request, and that by reason of diverse drinks made thereof for the use of the
sick. Temperature of barley.
It is temperate in quality, in all likelihood and probability, howbeit 7
simplic. medica. 1 de alim. lib. de in victu a^ut.
Galen makes it cold and dry in the first degree. Howsoever, it is very fit
and proper in Fevers and hot diseases, and that after several sorts and
fashions prepared. And besides, it participateth likewise of an abstersive or
cleansing faculty, whereby it is to good purpose used in pectorall
infirmities. Of this grain the ancients made a water for the sick, from
thence called barly-water. And of the same grain was there yet made an other
composition, which they called Ptisan. Of this Ptisan, Lib de victu in acut.
and alibi.

Ptisan what in old time, and what with us.


Hippocrates makes frequent mention. Of this now we retain the name only,
ptisan being nothing else (says a Rond. instit. pharmaceut lib. 5. cap. 11.
Pti^a^ made of diverse grains.
late Writer) but a drink made of licorice, and a little barley, and sometimes
without it. The ptisan in use among the ancients, especially with Hippocrates,
was nothing else, but that which we commonly call cream of barley, and served
the sick in stead both of meat and drink. It was made of diverse sorts of
grains, both of wheat, rice and barley, etc. But that of barley for the sick
was always in highest esteem. And this diversity ministered occasion to
Problem. 27. sect. 1.
Aristotle to ask the question, whether Ptisan made of wheat or barley were the
best for the use of the sick? Whether ptisan made of barley or wheat be better?
And Ptisan made of wheat was for these reasons preferred before that made of
barley: first, by reason that such as eat bread of wheat are commonly more
vigorous and sound of body than those who use barlybread. Again, say they,
barley is harder of concoction than wheat. And thirdly, barlybread was never in
so high an esteem, as that of wheat, but always esteemed of far meaner
account. The answer is easy, Answer.
that the comparison here is not absolute, but relative; having relation to the
sick. Indeed absolutely compared together, wheat does excel the other; but in
relation to the sick barley is far better, especially in Fevers and pectorall
diseases, being more cooling and cleansing than the other, which indeed is
rather harder to be concocted, and apter to engender obstructions. And for this
cause Hippocrates uses this most commonly in restorative diet, and that of
barley in acute diseases. The manner of preparation of this ancient ptisan or
cream of barley, as we may call it, Gal lib de ptisana. How the ancient Greek
Physicians prepared this ptisan or cream of bar^y.
was after this manner: they took grains of barley full, perfectly ripe,
neither too old nor too new; this they steeped a little in water, then beat it
in a mortar, to cleanse away the chafe and husks, afterward washed it and
rubbed it with their hands, and afterward let it dry: when they made use of
it, for this ptisan, they took one part of barley thus prepared, and twelve
parts of fair water, which they let boil at a soft fire while it swelled, and
was boiled to a thin pap, having lost all the windiness, and being so boiled
they gave it their sick. Some added to this mess sweet new wine boiled, which
they called sapa, and some a little honey, wheat or flower; and sometimes a
little oil, vinegar or salt. In many places of this kingdom there is commonly
in use for this purpose, a certain kind of ready prepared barley, to be sold in
shops, called French barley, whereof both this cream of barley is commonly made,
and whereof we make use in our broths also, and barly-water. Manner of
preparation with us.
This barley we use to boil and shift twice or thrice the waters until it
color them no more, and then boil it with a sufficient quantity of fair
spring water (the proportion of the ancients may be observed) and then strain
it through a clean linen cloth, adding thereto a little sugar or sugar candy,
and a little rose water. To correct the crudity (especially in a weak
stomach, and it be often to be used) we may boil with it some whole mace:
or else when it is strained, we may add thereunto a little small
cinamon-water, which will both correct the crudity, and not overheat the body
If some acid juice of lemmon or other shall be added thereunto, if need so
require, thou may use thy discretion; in acute and malign Fevers
especially, but not in pectorall diseases. In defect of cinamon-water a little
powder of cinnamon may be used. In this decoction who lists may also boil
other cooling or pectorall herbs, according to the nature of the disease and
party diseased: as violet leaves, strawberry leaves, succory, endive, agrimony,
or the like. But beware the taste be not marred, lest the patient reject all;
and boil no sorrel nor other acid or sharp thing in it, especially if it be
to be kept for oftener than once or twice: but the fresher it be, the better it
is. This is very sovereign good in all Fevers and pectorall diseases,
especially for young people, for hot and dry choleric constitutions. But I
will advertise thee of one thing, that whereas there is an opinion held among
many that no barley but this, they call French, How to prepare our own barley to
make this and other drinks made of barley.
will serve the turn; our own barley may be easily so prepared, that it may
very well serve our use. And to this purpose it may either be beaten in a
bag, as wheat is commonly ordered for frumenty; or else, which is the cheaper
and less chargeable, provide a deep stone or wodden trough, wherein put a
little quantity of rough barley with a little warm water, and then with a
beetle with a long head for the purpose, beat it until the husks come off:
afterward winnow it, still rubbing it with thy hands, and then let it dry, and
when thou will use it, wash it in warm water, which thou may shift until
it look clean and white, and color the water no more. And this may with a
small labor, and I am sure with less charges, be made ready as often as need
shall require. And this may be used whenever we need the use of barley, either
for this we have spoken already, for broth, barley water, almond milk, or any
like use. And thus they prepare it in the north parts of this kingdom, in all
the kingdom of Scotland, and in Ireland also, where they use much barley in
their brothes, and for other uses also; and yet never make use of any but this.
Orgemond, and what it is.
And besides, in Scotland of this grain there is made a dish, which they there
call orgemond; and is made of barley thus prepared, together with milk and
honey, and is answerable to our frumenty here; but in my opinion far
wholesomer: and this is a dish, at most of the country merry meetings in no
small esteem there among them.

Barly-water.
There was yet besides this they called a ptisan, a barly-water in use among the
ancients, whereof Lib. de diaeta acut.
Hippocrates indeed makes mention, howbeit sets not down the manner of
preparation, no more then does Galen explaining that place. Gal. in comm.
To the Arabians therefore for this barly-water are we most beholden, who used
it much. Collectan lib.
Oribasius makes particular mention of the same, where he would not have the
barley prepared, as we have already set down, but only a little bruised, and
twice washed in warm water, and afterward boiled in a gallon of water till it
was burst, ad crepaturam hordei. This liquor being strained was reserved for
the use of the sick, Barly-water of two sorts.
and was called barly-water. Barly-water was in very great request among the
Arabian Physicians, both made of whole barley, Of prepared barley two sorts.
and of barley prepared and cleansed. That of prepared barley was of two sorts,
as may be collected out of Cap de pleurit. Preparation.
Mesue, first thus: take of barley prepared and cleansed one pound, boiling it
in twenty times so much fair spring water, in an earthen glased pot, until
the half, or two parts of the water were wasted away: this they called a
physical barly-water. The other was thus made: take of barley as before well
prepared, often washed in warm water, one pound which they let boil a wame or
two in twenty times as much fair spring water, and after this was cast away,
they added again as much more water, and let it boil until the half of the
water was wasted away; and this they called a physical food. But the
immoderate use of this barly-water is dangerous, Caveat concerning the use of
barley water
in cold and windy stomachs, especially, and in hypocondriacke melancholy,
being it self also somewhat windy. Our barly-water.
But by correction this may easily be amended, as we have said already. We
seldom now use the decoction of barley alone, but with addition of other
simples; as diverse sorts of cooling herbs, and sometimes of opening roots and
some prunes, sweetning it with sugar to liking: and we may also add some
juice or sirup of lemmon, or some other acid juice; as some drops of the acid
spirit of vitrioll or sulphur. Barley water for the poorer sorts.
The poorer sort may make for themselves a decoction of ordinary barley a little
bruised, boiling therewith some cooling herbs, and a stick of licorice or
two, and after it is strained add thereto a little white wine vinegar, and a
stick of cinnamon; or else some whole mace may be boiled in it. Or they may
boil fair spring water with some mace, Another drinks to be used in any Fever.
or without, and afterward add a stick of cinnamon, and a little vinegar and
sugar, or else boil in it a little honey; and so may they make for themselves a
wholesome and pleasant cooling drink, which they may safely use in all hot
diseases.

Besides these drinks made of barley, Of emulsions or almond milk.
we have yet amongst us the frequent use of a drink which was not used among
the ancients, made of sweet almonds in manner of a milk, and is therefore
commonly called by the the name of Almond-milke. This milk is much used, in
Fevers especially, In what cases most useful.
and in pectorall infirmities, being often also called by the name of emulsion.
This drink is sometimes made of water and almonds alone without any addition,
and after sweetened with sugar; or else are boiled in the decoction many other
ingredients. And howsoever Almonds be in themselves a little hot, or rather
temperate, yet being prepared, and made into an emulsion after this manner,
they qualify and moderate the heat of the body, and withal do cut and
attenuat tough and phlematicke humors in the breast, The quantity of the
Almonds must be according as it is made thick or thin, howbeit the vulgar make
it commonly too thick and fulsome,
and further expectoration. And this emulsion serves often in stead both of
meat and drink, and is often used, when as all other food is refused. And I
think it often with us, supplieth the room of that Ptisan so much and so
often by Hippocrates commended; although we have it also in use with us. But
for the most part we use a decoction made with barley, cooling herbs, raisins
of the sun stoned, and sometimes in pectorall infirmities, a little licorice,
and so make a decoction, whereof we make our almond milk. The barley may be of
our ordinary barley without any other preparation, The manner of preparation.
save a little bruising. The almonds are to be blanched in warm water, and
cleansed from their thin skins (unless in some looseness, where we
require astriction) and then beaten in a stone mortar with a wooden pestell,
the liquor by little and little added, and several times squeezed out, until
all the milkie substance be expressed. And take heed the almonds be not too
old, as being then too oilie; and withal let the liquor be warm, when it is
added to the almonds. Sometimes we add some seeds unto this emulsion,
Addition of certai^ne seeds, and how to be used.
as lettice or poppy-seeds, especially in long watching, where sleep is
wanting, and so give a draught of it toward bedtime. Sometimes we add also
some other cooling seeds, as melon seeds, cucumber seeds, especially in
diseases of the kidneys; and then the greater seeds must be cleansed from their
skums, and so mingled with the almonds ready blanched, and beaten with them,
and the other seeds mingled and beaten without any other preparation: and of
these greater seeds we mingle sometimes a greater, and sometimes a smaller
quantity, and so of the others, Cautions to be observed in emulsion.
as necessity requires. In the sweetning of emulsions or almond milkes we are
to observe this caution, that in Fevers we add always less sugar, for fear
of increasing choler: but in pectorall diseases, They must not be too fulsome
not too frequent.
where there is no Fever, we may be the bolder. It is also in the use of these
emulsions to be observed, that they be neither too frequent, nor yet too
fulsome or thick of the almonds; and it is best after the expression of the
almonds, to give it a wame or two upon the fire, and then add some rose water
to it, if thou will. The richer sorts, Some use to make the emulsions or almond
milks with the decoction of flesh; but if the party be weak stomacked, it
may make him loath both that and all other food.
if they please, may make their emulsion all with rose water or
strawberry-water. If any acid thing, as juice or sirup of lemmons or the like
be added, it must only be added to the draught the patient takes at one time;
otherwise it would quickly sour it all. The poorer sort may use a milk or
emulsion like unto this made of the kernels of haselnuts or filberds blanched
as are the almonds, and made with a convenient decoction of cooling herbs or
other things, as we have said already. There are yet besides these, diverse
other sorts of emulsions made without almonds, for diverse intentions; as in
pestilent and contagious diseases, made of many several cordial ingredients:
Diverse sorts of emulsions in time of need may be prepared.
as namely, of the aforenamed seeds and others; as also of coral, pearl,
amber, harts-horne, all extracted with appropriated decoctions or distilled
waters, fitted and appropriated for that purpose, on the which I cannot
particularly insist. And I have so much the longer dwelt upon these drinks of
the Diseased, in regard it does so much concern the sick, as also in regard of
the great neglect in this particular point, and the wrong and injury is thereby
offered the sick. Now concerning milk, and what is made thereof, if, and how
it may be administered to the sick? and so I will finish this point of their
meat and drink.

CHAP. XVIJ.
Of milk of diverse kinds, whether fit to be used of the Diseased? and what is
the best, how to be used. As also of whey, posset-drinkes of several sorts. Of
butter and cheese and white meats.

FRom artificial milk it is high time we come now to natural, there being at
this time more frequently used both to nourish the body, and to alter and
change the quality of the humors. Milk is milked from diverse beasts: as from
mares, asses, goats, ews, Several sorts of milk.
cowes, etc. And woman's milk is both used for the nourishment of her own
infant, and sometimes also sought for thein consumptions, as a principal
restorer of decayed nature. Asses and Camels milk in use for some diseases.
In Spain they use Camels and asses milk both in consumptions and dropsies:
and in old time sowes milk was also in request. Asses milk is yet in great
request in those countries, where such beasts abound: as in France, Spain and
Italy. At this day the Tartars, Mares milk in great request among the Tartars.
as well as the old Scythians, use little other diet either for meat or drink
but mares milk. The Leo Africanus*
ancient Numidians also used for their chief diet mares milk. And some
particular persons have lived all their life time on nothing else but milk; as
Sympos. lib. 4. probl. 1.
Plutarch reports of one Sostrates. And Bruyer in lib. 1. de re cibar cap. ^4.
a late Writer makes mention of a maid living then in the Low Countries,
sixteen years of age, who from her nativite had never tasted of any food but
milk. And Forest. schol ad observat. 5. lib. 4.
another instanceth in a country-fellow in Holland, who in all his life time
never used any sustenance but milk, and yet was very lusty and healthful in
body. Woman's milk best and most temperate.
The milk of all others most temperate, and best, is woman's milk, which is
used to be sucked out of the breast, the which is the best way: for if it be
but a little kept, it sowreth, and is not so apt to nourish. Of this milk
Hippocrates makes no mention, which may seem somewhat strange. The best
excuse we can for this pretend, is to say, that he regarded not so much in
milk this alimentary power, as the abstersive faculty, in cleansing the ulcers
of the lungs. In goodness of nourishment next to it is thought to Ewes milk
by some, Ewes milk. Goats milk. Cowes milk. Use of asses milk in ulcers of
the lungs.
as being thickest and most nourishing, then next goats milk, after which
follows cowes milk, and after it mares milk, asses and camels coming in at
the last. In abstersion and cleansing of the lungs, asses milk has always
challenged the first place, and with us, next to it is goats milk, for camels
milk we cannot come by it. But of all others Cowes milk both in sickness
and in health with us is most usual and ordinary. And goats milk moisteneth
much, Cowes milk with us most ordinary and familiar.
and is not so hot as some imagine, who hold that the goat is never without a
Fever. As for asses milk it is thinner, Commendation of asses milk.
more cooling and moistening than any of the other, and ingendreth no
obstructions, as other milk does; and is therefore more physical. And
concerning this milk, this much upon mine own experience I can testify, that
during my long sickness in France, History.
I found more benefit by a months use of this milk, than by all the other
coolers I used: in so much that whereas before no drink could satiat my
unsatiable drouth, I was with my mornings draught of this milk so refreshed,
that I little regarded any other drink for all that day following. But because
cowes milk is with us in most frequent and common request, we will bend our
speech most to this kind of milk. The beast from whence the milk is milked.
And because the goodness of the milk depends not a little upon the
goodness of the beast from whence it is milked, we are therefore to consider
the estate and disposition of the creature. A brown woman's milk is accounted
the best, even in the judgment of Hippocrates. The beast from whence milk is
to be milked, ought to be of an indifferent size of body, neither too fat or
corpulent, nor yet too lean. The color.
And here the color comes also to be considered. A black Cowes milk is by
most esteemed the best, howbeit some like as well of a red or kindled colored,
as they call it. Some again esteem brown beasts milk the best, as being of a
strong constitution of body. But indeed none of these can come amiss, howbeit
I think that of a black cow rather best than otherwise: but of white beasts,
the milk is worst and weakest. The difference in the goodness of the milk is
likewise taken from the goodness of the food the beast feeds on. The food on
which it feeds.
In the beginning of the Spring therefore, by reason the herbs are then moist
and waterish, therefore the milk is then also thinner, and nourishes less:
it is better toward the latter end of the Spring and beginning of Summer, and
yet better in the midst of Summer. In Autumn it is thicker, In what time of the
year best.
and nourishes far more, although then, especially in Winter, it is not so
physical. The worst milk is that which is milkt from beasts feeding on
grains, in such places where they brew much: as in some populous towns, where
in the Wintertime they feed their beasts with grains; the which, although by
this means it is more copious, The place where the beast feeds.
yet is it thin, waterish, and of small value, as the beast likewise feeding
on this food is the worse. Beasts feeding on high and hilly places yield far
better milk, than they that feed in valleys and moist places. In the goodness
of milk we are likewise to observe the age of it; that is, how long after the
birth. For milk after the birth, The age of the milk.
but a small space being betwixt them, is thick, unclean, and not so
wholesome for use. Neither yet is that so good, that is very old, being too
waterish, and therefore not so nourishing. That then betwixt both these
extremes is the best. In the next place we are to consider the qualities and
marks of the best milk. It ought then to be white in color, Best m^l^e how
to be discerned.
of equal consistence, which being dropped on the nail stands round and
firm without dispersing, or spreading abroad. All which properties if they be
found in any milk, we may freely pronounce that it is good and wholesome.
Asses milk we must here except, which by reason of the thinness, cannot
obtain all these aforenamed properties. In the next place we are to consider
for whom milk may be fit (since for all it is not so useful) and for whom
not? For whom it most sit. ^ac non propinand^m flatulentis, aut vent^^s
^arboruginis laborantibus, non siticulosis, n^c febriculosis, nec eruda and
nidorosa rubiantibus aut ventriculi debilitate and impuritate donatis, Hippoc.
aph 23. lib. 5 Diolcor. lib 2. cap. 4. Gal. lib. 11. simpl.
It is therefore no ways good for such as are much subject to wind, and
rumbling in their bellies, who have the forepart of their belly stretched out,
and as it were pulled up, and obstructed; nor yet for such as are very thirsty,
or are much inclined to headache, nor in Fevers, to weak stomachs, and such
as use to belch up crudities, and often of an evil taste, or that are
oppressed with weakness or impurity in their stomachs: but to such as are
accustomed to this liquor, whose stomachs are strong and themselves free from
any obstruction of liver, and spleen, etc. being free from the burden of bad
humors, and their stomachs neither too hot nor too cold: for in the former,
the milk is quickly converted into choler, and in the later it is quickly
curdled. But howsoever, H^rmes proceeding from the too frequ^nt use of milk.
it is good to be sparing in the use of it, unless thou have been long
accustomed to this food: for it is hurtful to the eyes and teeth, and if the
use thereof be too frequent, it ingendreth the stone in the kidneys and
bladder. The diseased then, who is to use it, How, and with what preparat^on to
be used.
must first have his body by purging prepared, and then it must be taken in a
morning fasting, lest by the admixture of other aliments, it be corrupted in
the stomach. After the taking of milk, After the use there^ what to be done.
the patient is to abstain from all manner of other sustenance, until such
time as it be voided out of the body, if given to loosen the belly: or else
until it be turned to nourishment, if given to that purpose. Now, whether the
patient reap any benefit thereby or no, may be discerned, if he cast it not up
again, To know whether the patient reap any benefit thereby.
and if he feel no raw evil favored belchings. After the drinking of milk
the sick is to rest, lest by the motion and agitation of the body, the heat be
attracted from the center of the body to the circumference, and so the
concoction thereof be hindered. But it may be asked whether the sick may not
sleep after it? I answer, Whether the patient may sleep after milk
that it is only to very weak persons permitted, and not to others, for whom
it is very hurtful, especially if drunk in any great quantity; lest headache,
heaviness and drowsinesse of the whole body follow after. Woman's milk (...)
to be used.
Woman's milk is best sucked out of the breast, which if the sick refuse to
do, then it is thought expedient that it be milked in a clean vessel, Milk
how to be corrected before the use.
standing in water a little warmish, and so presently drunk up. Milk of
beasts is to be drunk warm immediately after the milking, with the addition of
a little sugar rosat, or other ordinary sugar in defect thereof. How the
ancients ^sed it.
The ancients added honey and a little salt to it, especially when they would
have it to purge: and so might we well at this day, if our palats were not now
adays grown so dainty and nice, that no sweetning now will serve our turns,
unless fetched from Madera, Barbary, or Brasill. Howsoever, The quantity or
measure to be taken at a time.
the poorer sort may use it after this manner. The ordinary measure to take at
once, some would have it to be three or four ounces, or about a quarter of an
English wine pint, according as the nature of the disease and diseased shall
indicate to us. Meth. med. lib. 10.
Galen in a Fever hecticke, begins with two ounces, and then adds half as
much more, increasing the quantity, until such time as he saw it sufficient
for the sick. Physicians of old, were wont to give milk to the sick in a
very great quantity: and Lib de intern. affect. and 7 epid and a^bi exhibet
interdum ad 16. beminas, interdum sesquicongium quandoque etiam duos congios
lactis alinini.
Hippocrates gave at once almost five quarts of Asses milk, and sometimes
less. But he gives only Asses milk in this abundant quantity, so far as
we can read: and elsewhere, he gives sometimes above a gallon and a half, and
sometimes above two gallons of this same milk. Lib. de ponder. and mensuris.
Rondeletius adds this caution in the use of Asses milk, that if it be used
to cleanse and purge, we may use an English pint at a time, but if it be used
for aliment, then a lesser quantity will serve the turn, lest it trouble the
stomach. I drank as much as was milk'd from the Ass at a time, the quantity
I remember not. But such as have in their health been accustomed to the use of
milk, may drink as much as they please. Sometimes the ancient Physicians, and
Hippocrates himself also, Water boiled with milk.
in benign and mild Fevers, and in internal heats used to boil good store
of water with their milk, and so gave it their sick to drink.

But because milk in its own entire substance is not always so safe for the
sick; besides, there being so many cautions to be observed, and so many cases
wherein it is not safe to exhibit it; it therefore being composed of three
several substances, the mercuriall or waterish part, called serum, Whey, and
the use thereof.
and in English whey, may far safelier in any disease be exhibited than any
of the other. This serous substance does cut tough humors, The faculties of whey
cleanse and loosen the belly: and therefore whatsoever milk most abounds with
this moist substance, is most wholesome, and although often used, yet hurts
least. Such are Woman's, Goats, Asses and Camels milk: for the whey of such
milk is accounted good against the Iandise, dropsy, arising from the
obstructions of the inward parts, as also against Scabs, Morphewes, Tetters,
Freckles of the face, and Cataracts of the eyes. Best whey.
Of all other wheyes, that of Goats milk is esteemed the best: for it
participateth of a sharp nitrous quality, whereby it cleanses; a thin and
subtle quality, whereby it opens obstructions; cold and moist, Whey of Goats
milk, in what diseases most useful.
whereby of cools and moisteneth in all Fevers: it is good against Dropsies,
Iandise, the Spleen, melancholicke diseases, obstructions from choler,
diseases in the kidneys, and all inflammations. The ancients used also often to
infuse their medicines in whey, made especially of Goats milk; although
sometimes mention be also made of whey of Cowes milk, which now is most in
request. Mesue lib. 2. distinct. 1. cap. 4.

Gal. 10 de simpl. medicin. facult, etc.


Ancient Physicians make mention of two sorts of whey; one of the whole
substance of the milk as it is, and another of milk already skimmed: but the
first is the best, and loosenth the belly most. Both these sorts were prepared
after a double manner; one without commixtion of any other substance, called a
simple manner, and was thus prepared: the milk being very hot, they suddenly
set within it another vessel full of cold water, and so by this sudden
concurse of hot and cold, was made this separation. Some would have this
vessel of Dioscor. li. 2. ca. 64.
silver, some of brass, others care not what the metal be. Boiled with a very
hot fire, it often also quickly curdleth, and then by straining, one substance
is separated from another. Separation called compound.
Another way of separation, was called compounded, by addition of some other
substance, rennet, juice of the fig tree, etc. And many other things,
Qualities acquired by preparation.
as well hot as cold, will easily curdle milk. It is moreover to be observed,
that whey acquireth unto it self diverse qualities according to the various
preparations thereof: for that which is made with rennet is sharper than that
which is made without any addition of any other substance. That which is made
with sour juices, as of lemmons and the like, is more cooling and pleasing to
the palate, and more appropriate, and fitting for hot and malign diseases;
howbeit more hurtful for any internal ulceration, or excoriation. Now, The
quantity or measure.
for the quantity, it must be measured according to the nature and constitution
of the patient, observing also these cautions following: to wit, Cautions to be
observed in the use.
that it be drunk blood-warme in a morning fasting. Some give above a pint, if
for the qualifying of sharp humors; but if to purge, then about three pints,
and Hippocrates to almost two pints more. We follow rather the Arabians
directions, who give it from half a pint to a wine quart and upwards; and this
quantity must be taken by degrees, not all at once, and the patient must walk
a turn or two betwixt, as is the manner in drinking of mineral waters. And as
did the ancients, Clarified whey.
so do we likewise, often boil in our whey diverse sorts of simples, and with
us is much used in the Sommer-time, for cooling and clearing the blood. We use
Endive, or Succory, fumiterre especially, dock-roots, etc. According to the
particular occasion, and the parties constitution, etc. Who uses it. And this
is often used even of healthful persons.

We make our whey for the sick after a far other manner, Of posset-drinke.
Several ways of preparing posset drink for the sick.
which we commonly call posset-drinke, and is made after diverse manners. In
fevers, and hot diseases, we turn the milk only with the juice of a lemmon;
and this we call lemmon posset, Le^mon posset drink.
being both cooling and cordial: and in the absenee of lemmons, we may make
use of the juce of sorrel, or some wine vinegar, which the poorer sort may
use, whenever they have need. And in the use of posset-drinke* this is to be
observed, that it be always made clear for the sick; and if it be not so at
first, Caution.
with an addition of some such acid juice, as we have already named, So^rel
posset-drinke.
it may easily be effected. That made with sorrel is in very great request,
especially of the wood-sorrell, or sorrel dubois is the best, and differreth
in shape and form from our ordinary sorrel. We use often also to boil holy
thistle in our posset-drinke, in fevers especially. Posset-drinke in contagious
and pestilentiall fevers.
Posset-drinke made after this manner, is good in all pestilentiall and
contagious diseases, and are with us every where in great request. Again, we
use another manner of making this posset-drinke; when as we mingle some cold
beer, ale or wine with our hot milk, and so make a posset-drinke not
altogether so cooling as the former, yet safely used in many infirmities. In
diseases that are not of so hot a nature, White wine posset-drinke.
we may make our possets with a little white wine, as also in the declining of
fevers, which is good both to provoke urin and sweat. And this I think be the
fittest and safest way to use wine for the sick, unless in chronicall and
long continuing diseases. Plain ordinary posset drink.
We use also sometimes plain and ordinary posset-drinke, made of ordinary
drink, which is much used for the furthering of the operation of vomits, and
sometime used as a lavative after the taking of purges; in which cases I wish
the milk be not skimmed, but even as it comes from the Cow: as for the curd,
The curd.
I wish sick folks especially, altogether to abstain from it. And as for our
eating possets (although many country people are of opinion, Eating possets
used most for wantonness.
that a posset, a cup of wine, or strong water, will cure any disease) I advise
the sick altogether to abstain from them. And to speak the truth, in best
health, they are used rather for wantonness than need, being altogether
superfluous, being used especially after a good meal, as they are often used
after supper. Best posset-drinke in in health.
In Scotland, the better sort make their posset only of milk and white wine,
with a little sugar and cinnamon, which they drink, and give away the curd,
which is the best way of using it, and least hurtful to health.

Now, in milk, the next substance to be considered, is that which swimmeth
upon the top, and is called the cream of the milk, or flos lactis, Butter,
and the best use thereof.
which we commonly call butter, and use it for dressing of meat, and many other
uses, as in other countries they use oil. It is a very wholesome dish for
healthful people, moderatly, and in due season used; best in a morning, at the
beginning of dinner, or at breakefast. If immoderatly and unseasonably used, it
swimmeth on the top of other meats, hinders concoction, fumeth up into the
head, dulleth the senses, Whether it be useful for the sick, and how to be
used.
and hurts the eyesight. In sick folks it is seldom to be used,
especially in a weak stomach, as it is most commonly: and their meat dressed
with much butter oftentimes, so cloggeth their stomachs, that it makes them
altogether unfit for any other food, and especially butter much boiled, as it
is not good in health, so is it yet far worse for weak and sick people: and
therefore I advise all those who dress the sickes meat, to be very circumspect
in the use of butter.

Of cheese.
The third substance in milk, is the terrestrious substance, which we commonly
call cheese, and concerning this, it may be demanded, whether the sick may
safely eat cheese, Whether the sick may safely use cheese. Answer.
or no? I answer, that in acute diseases, where solid food is not allowed,
far less are we to give way to this solid and terrestrious substance. But in
the declining of the disease, and when the sick begins now to feed more on
solid food, if especially it be earnestly desired; and in chronicall diseases,
if the sick has before bin accustomed to this food, then a little sometimes,
to satisfy a longing appetite, may be allowed: provided it be good cheese,
made of unskimmed milk, neither too old, nor too new, and in a small quantity.
Others, I wish to be sparing in the use of this aliment. In all manner of
laskes and loosnesses, the use of it is most safe, if there be no other
impediment. Cheese sparingly to be used.
Old hard cheese is neither good in sickness nor in health; nor that which is
made of too clean skimmed milk, whereof I have seen some in Saxony which
might well have served in stead of chalk; and to mend the matter, was well
seasoned with black poppy seeds. And what good can any expect from the use of
rotten putrified cheese, crawling full of maggots, so greedily, notwithstanding
of some gluttons gaped after? Now, whereas I say, that too new cheese is not to
be used, I do not exclude the use of new cheese, after it is a little kept, as
is the custom in many places of this Kingdom, and none better than in
Northampton shire, without any disparagment to other places. And of such
cheeses, I think, is he to be understood, who wrote these Baptista Pieria.
verses following: Caseolos nisi lactantes and ab ubere Pressos
Ne crebro comedas consuluisse velim,
Inde putri mordax vesice pondus adhaesit,
Gutta nec inde boni sanguinis ulla venit.
To eat cheese often, I would not wish that thou should make a trade,
Unless it be some new milk cheese, new from the udderne made.
For from thence to the bladder does a smarting pain proceed,
And not a drop of wholesome blood from thence will in thee breed.


Cheese is most ordinarily eaten after other meats to close up the stomach,
which is indeed the best way. And by this means it opens the belly;
howsoever, cheese in it self binds: and yet taken at the beginning of the
meal, it produces a contrary effect, and best to be used in fluxes, according
to this vulgar verse.

Caseus ante cibum confert, si defluat alvus,
Si constipetur terminet ille dapes.
If thy body be laxative, cheese before meat is fit:
If costive, then thou shall do well to end thy meal with it.
Howsoever, cheese is to be used sparingly, especially in weak stomachs, and
such as lead a sedentary life, and use but little exercise: for in such, too
frequently and too liberally eaten, it will breed the stone, and all manner of
obstructions, the colicke, and many other diseases. And therefore it is a good
caveat which was included in this verse following: Caseus est sanus, quem dat
avare manus.
A sparing hand in the use of cheese I hold always the best.


And in making of cheese this caution is to be observed, Caution in making of
cheeses:
that it taste not too much of the rennet, which is nothing so pleasant to the
palate, and makes the cheese hotter. And therefore the Italian Parmesan cheese
is for this cause in far higher esteem, by reason they say it is made with
thistles, only, without any rennet at all. As for strong stomachs, and
laboring people, with Ostritch stomachs, which would overcome iron, and whose
best meals are often made with cheese, these rules do not so much concern
them.

And now in general, concerning the use of milk in healthful people, I deny
not, but for many people it is very sovereign good and wholesome aliment,
especially for hot bodies, and in Summer time, and so it moisteneth very much,
and may be corrected with sugar or salt from curdling in the stomach, or with
some spear-mints put into it. Sometimes milk sowreth of self, especially in
the Sommertime; Sour milk.
and sometimes it is also of purpose suffered to sour, and that for the serum
or sour whey it aftewards yields, which is very pleasing and useful for a
hot and dry body, and exceeding good to quench thirst, and allay the extremity
of heat in any hot disease, being an easy and cheap drink for the poorer
sort, especially. This kind of drink is in very great request in the
Northern parts of this Island, where it is called of some whigge, and of others
wigge. Butter-milke, Whigge, or whegge. Butter milk.
which remains after the chirning, is cooler than other milk, yet not so
good for nourishments, and being a little sowrish, it is best for hot and dry
bodies. For sick people, it is best to make with this milk a posset, Butter
milk. Posset drink.
with a little white wine, which will be a very pleasant and wholesome drink,
the curd being separated from the drink. And it is to be observed, that that
whey which is last pressed out of the cheese is the thickest, aptest to engender
obstructions, and not so useful as that which is thinner. Milk is best, as we
have said, for hot and dry bodies, and good strong stomachs, and if used of
moister and more phlegmatic bodies (for whom it is not so good) it will be
best to boil it, adding thereunto a little sugar or some honey and salt, When
milk is to be eaten.
and a little powder of cinnamon and other spice. And it is always best to eat
milk by it self, a pretty distance from other food, and after the use of it,
wash well thy teeth and gums with beer, wine, or vinegar. As for the
proverbiall speech, If thou will live ever, wash milk from thy liver, it is
most absurd and erroneous; this being a means to make it curdle the sooner, Of
white meats.
which is that we labor here to avoid. But of milk are made many other
dishes, which we commonly call white meats, whereof a word or two before we
conclude this point. White meat is not only here, but in many other places of
Christendom in very great use, and in no small esteem among many; of all
which, to speak, were here too tedious. In general then, all manner of white
meats are apt to engender obstructions, to fill the body with gross, crude,
and phlegmatic humors: and therefore altogether unfit for weak stomachs,
For whom unfit.
and such as are subject to any kind of obstructions, either in the breast or
nether belly: and are worst for old age, cold and phlegmatic constitutions,
and all such as lead a sedentary life, although I shall hardly persuade women
that they receive any harm by the use of them. Of all other white meats, there
is here with us one sort of white meat made of milk and wheat, Of frumenty.
called frumentie, in greatest and most frequent request, which is a strong
nourisher, and therefore requires a strong stomach, it being hard of
concoction, and a great enemy to any oppilations, especially if it be thickened
with flower, as most do ordinarily use it; howbeit corrected with cinnamon or
other spices, it is so much the better, and some add also sugar and currants,
wherewith I can find no fault. Rice pottage made after the same manner, of
Rice and milk, (...), or (...).
is much of the same operation, howbeit the later, I think, is more binding,
and therefore may both be very well used in laskes and fluxes of the belly. And
of the same nature is that which the French use much, Dum (...), or pottage, o^
wh^te meat made (...).
made of millet. And besides, of milk there are no small variety of dishes
made for ordinary food, and for feasts and great banquets, the which were here
too long to relate. But all white meats, especially the more liquid they be,
would be eaten before any other meat, or betwixt meals: When to be eaten.
and all suppings, or liquid meats, brothes, or the like, must be used at the
beginning of our meals; and so ought crustards, Crustards.
although custom has much prevailed to the contrary. But all these white
meats must be left of our sick, especially of acute diseases, as being hard of
concoction, apt to engender obstructions, and by consequence like to prolong
the disease. In some chronicall diseases, as in fluxes, some of them may with
discretion, to good purpose be used. And this shall suffice to have said of
milk, as also concerning the whole drink and Diet of the Diseased; now come we
to certain other things belonging also to this subject.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of exercise, which terminateth in rest: the necessity and utility thereof;
together with the diverse and various sorts of exercise, as well general as
particular, with several circumstances to be observed.

HAving handled somewhat at large both the elements, the air especially, and
the relation they have unto the body of man in sickness and in health: as
also aliments of all sorts, containing the whole matter of the diet of whole
and sick persons: there remain yet, notwithstanding, diverse other things
concerning this subject, of Diet to be handled. In the next place, therefore,
we are now to say something concerning motion or exercise, and rest from the
same. To prove the utility and necessity of exercise, and agitation or motion
of the body, it being so undeniable a truth (yea, even among vulgar judgments,
with whom, nevertheless, other truth in this profession, find oftentimes but
hard entertainment) I hope I shall need to spend the less time in proving the
same. Necessity and ut^it, of exercise.
But that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth may the better be
established; Besides some reasons, I will produce some authorities of ancient
Physicians and Philosophers, that so it may appear this is not mine own bare
assertion only. Now, the utility of exercise duly and orderly used as it
ought, is threefold: the increase of natural heat, a more speedy motion and
distribution of the spirits through the body, and addition of strength to all
the members thereof: and besides the cherishing of natural heat, fuliginous
excrements are expelled, concoction furthered, and strength added to the
nerves, and all the parts of the body. And of these, Exercitatione tria co^moda
^r^mum adveniunt. ^. ea membrorum namque alli tu illorum dar^tic^: tum vero
spiritus fit con^^tatiore, calo^que innatus u^etur. Galen 2 de ^anit. tuenda.
Galen discourses at great length; and not only he but Qui comodit nisi etiam
la^oribus vtatus, sanus esse non potest de vict. rat. (...).

(...). Idem Hippoc. 6 Epid sect. ^


Hippocrates himself. Whosoever eats, says he, unless he use bodily labor
and exercise, cannot long continue in health. (...) Idem ibi^. sect. 4.
And again, in another place, It ought to be the care of such as will be
careful of their health, not to satiate themselves with food, and not to be
averse from exercise. And the (...)
same author averreth, That Nature her self, without the counsel or advice of
any other, has sound out certain motions for the better performance of her
actions. Sanitatis tutula a labor est incipenda, Gal. 2 de sanit. tuenda.
And labor and exercise. says he, are very useful for the ioints and
musculous parts, but food and fleepe for the inward parts of the body. And
Galen in many places of his works, does not a little extol and magnify
exercise, as in these words following. ad sanitatis tutelam mirum in modum
praestat moderata corporis exercitatio at contra quies and diuturnum otinmu^
aximo est nocume^to Gal lib. de Eucb. and Cacoch.
To mainetaine our bodies in good health, we must begin with labor and
exercise. And elsewhere. To maineteine the body in good health, the moderate
exercise of the body is mavelous useful and necessary: but on the contrary,
rest, ease and idleness are very hurtful. And in the same book he affirms,
That both himself, and a companion of his, for the space of many years, lived
in very good health, he attributed to the moderate and seasonable use of their
exercise: by means whereof crudities were avoided. And of the same mind is
the learned Ignavia corpus habetat, stimat labor: illa naturam senectutem, hic
longam adoloscentiam reddit, Cells. l. 1 c. 1 and 2.
Celsus, Sluggishnesse, says he, dulleth the body, exercise and labor makes
it firm and strong: the one hasteneth on old age, the other prolongeth the
time of youth. And the opinion of In Timeo.
Plato, is, that exercise strengthens, but ease and idleness corrupts the
body. But fearing to trespass too much upon the readers patience in the
enumeration of more Authorities, I come next to the time, and then to the
several sorts of exercises, of us seriously to be considered. The fittest and
most opportune time for exercise is agreed upon among all our Physicians, in
the general, to be best before meals, when concoction is accomplished, to be
seen in the urines. And as for the particular time of the day, the morning is
both by Hippocrates, and of others preferred before any other time of the day.
Howsoever, let this always carefully be observed, that thy exercise be not
undertaken before thy food be well concocted, and that now the time of thy next
repast approach. And this a late Writer proves both by reasons, and the
example of Alexander the great. And Hippocrates mentioning the moderate use of
diverse things, which concern the life of man, ranketh labor and exercise in
the first place. (...) Hippoc. ^. epid. sect. 6.
Let labor or exercise, and meat and drink, carnal copulation and sleep,
all be used with moderation. And Quem interdiu vel d^mestica, ve^ civilia
officia tenuerunt, huic tempus aliquod servandum curationi lu^ corporis est:
prima autem e^us cura est exercitatio, quae semper antecedere cilium debet,
etc. Cells. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Celsus wishes those who in the day time have been busied, either with their
own private, or else with the public affairs of the Commonwealth, to set
apart sometime wherein they may take care of their own body. Now, the
principal care thereof consists in the use of exercise, and ought always to
be used before meals: and he that has taken less pains, and his food be
well concocted, may use it more freely: but he that has been toiled out with
labor, and has not well concocted his food, let him use exercise more
sparingly. And this was the sauce the noble Cyrus used in all his warlike
expeditions: for says Lib. 2. (...).
Xenophon, he never supped before he had sweat, or had performed some warlike
exploit, or some rusticall and country imploiment, and by this means, inioyed
his health perpetually. And besides, being not only sollicitous of himself,
but also of all his soldiers and servants health, he had an especial care
that they were never admitted either to dinner or supper before they had
labored hard. And the Hetodor.
Egyptian youth by the command of Amasis, did not eat before they had run about
180 stadia.
20 miles: and Tully relates, that Denis the Tyrant, having supped with the
Lacedaemonians, said, he cared not much for their blacke-broth, which was,
notwithstanding, the principal dish of the feast: whereunto the Cook replied,
that it was no marvel: for, says he, the sauce was wanting. What sauce,
says the Tyrant? Labor in venatu, sudor, cursus ab Eurota, sam^s, sitis: hisce
enim epulis ^acedaemoniorum condiuntur epul^, Cice^o ^. Iuscul
Labor and exercise, says he, in hunting, sweating, running, hunger and
thirst: for these be the sauces we Lacedaemonians use. And (...), 6 Epid. sect.
4.
Hippocrat^^ has one particular precept to this purpose, to use exercise
before our meals. Labor and exercise, says he, must go before our meals.
But to use exercise, especially if it be violent, immediately after meals, is
altogether unfit for the health of man. And that by reason it fills the body
full of crudities; from whence proceed strong and often invincible, and
incurable obstructions, the orignall, and as I may say, the mother of most
Fevers, and a multitude of other diseases: for the food being before
concoction violently expelled out of the stomach, must needs much annoy the
body. Violent exercise immediately after meals hurtful.
Let such therefore look to themselves, and be warned, who, immediately after
meals give themselves to any violent exercise; as jumping, dancing, and the
like violent motions, and agitations of the body. Having now sufficiently
discoursed of the time, we come next to the place. Of the place where exercise
is to be u^ed.
Now the place where exercise is used, is not of small consequence: as whether
it be in a town, or in the country: and in particular, whether within doors
or without; in a warm air, or in a cold; whether in a blustering windy, or in
a calm and quiet air. We are again to consider the place we tread on, or
whether it be hard or soft; grassie, dusty, sandy, wet with water or snow; or
whether hard or dry. And again, we are to consider the Mer^atus tam. (...)
lib. (...). 166
time of the year, whether in Summer or Winter, etc; which do intend or remit
the manner of exercise. Violent exercise in Summer in the heat of the Sun,
heateth much, dissolveth and melts the humors, and procures distillations:
and where the brain abounds with humors, the head weak, and the stomach
stuffed with crudities, it occasioneth sometimes death, or at least very
dangerous diseases. And in Winter exercises in the Sun, being violent, cause
weariness, inward impostumes, as pleuresies; in hot countries, I think
especially, such as is Spain, where this author lived. In the shade it is
safer, yet ought it to be shorter in Summer, and less violent: but in Winter
it may be more violent. In the use of exercise, again we are to consider the
persons to be exercised: as whether men or women, young or old, weak or
strong: for according to these and other the like circumstances, the manner of
exercise must be ordered and altered. The strong may use stronger exercise
than the weak; and the man other exercise than the woman: and again, the same
patient is to alter his exercise according to the seasons of the year and
other circumstances. Children again are not to use such exercise as able young
men; and old age must use such exercise as becomes that age. Choleric
persons also are not so much to exercise their bodies as the phlegmatic and
other constitutions, The persons to be exercise^
and withal their exercise must be gentler: and the like is to be said of
thin, extenuate, dry bodies, who by strong and violent exercise are much in
damaged. And exercise in the quality must also be accommodated according to
several circumstances, as has been touched already, and shall more
particularly hereafter appear. The quality of exercise.
And in it we consider first the manner of exercise; whether violent or no?
whether by lifting any great weight, a lighter, or of a middle size: and
whether it be continued or interrupted; whether the motion be swift or slow.
We are again in it to consider the site and posture of the body moved: as
whether it stand upright, be crooked, or turn and wind about in a circular
motion. Exercise of the body standing upright, is more beneficial, and easier;
bending and stooping is more laborious and painful: but circular motion or
turning round is of all others the worst, procuring giddiness and casting,
especially where the body is thereunto most prone. As for the time of duration
or continuance of the exercise, which we comprehend under the name of quantity,
it is likewise various according to the nature of the party exercised: The
quantity or time of duration.
and is either great, small or a mean betwixt both. That Physicians call
great, which soonest causes lassitude or weariness; that small which neither
increases the heat of the body, nor causes a more frequent respiration: a
mean betwixt both, which both increases the heat, and makes a more frequent
respiration. It is notwithstanding a very hard matter to determine to any the
quantity of exercise he is to use, Hippoc. 3 de diaeta.
there being such a variety and difference in the individual constitutions of
particular persons; and withal, so many several circumstances to be
considered; the exercise being to be accommodated to the nature, strength, age,
and necessity of the party to be exercised. And as there ought to be a due
proportion betwixt the quantity of food, and the duration of exercise, so is
this not so easy to find out. But in the use of exercise we must observe this
rule, that the respiration grow more frequent, or else it deserves not the
name of exercise: and in some exercises we sometimes cease not until Hippoc.
1.6. Epid. sect. 3.
we sweat; which is also variable according to the constitution of the body,
time of the year, etc. Howsoever, whenever thou seelest any lassitude or
weariness, and the alacrity and vigor of thy body any white abated, Order of
exercise.
know for a certain, it is then high time to give over. Now besides the
premises, the ancients observed an order in their exercise, using in the first
place frictions and inunctions, as a preparative for other exercises, as may at
length in 2 de sanit. tuenda
Galen appear. Now these frictions were in very great use among the ancients,
and now among us in little or no use, Differences of exercise.

1 Difference, some exercise the body, some the mind, some both.

2 Difference, some exercise the whole body, and some a part.

3 According to the end.


howbeit in some particular cases they might be yet of good use among us; but
here I will not insist upon them, but proceed to the division of exercises. Of
exercises, therefore some exercise the body alone: as jumping, dancing,
digging, etc. Others again exercise the mind alone: as all manner of serious
cogitations and study. Some exercise both the body and the mind: as playng at
hand-ball, at tenice, etc. Again, some exercise the whole body; as playing at
tenice, and many others: some but one part; as singing, speaking, and reading
aloud, exercises the lungs; ringing, the arms especially, and pectorall
parts; digging the reins and loins, etc. 4 According to the quality.
Another difference of exercise there is also according to the end some being
only exercises; as wrestling, running, walking, and the like, our end in them
being only our pleasure, recreation, or exercise of the body: but in others
there is more labor and toil, and in the which we propound to our selves some
profit, at which we principally aim; as in digging, plowing, harrowing, and
diverse other sorts of husbandry; and the like may be said of diverse manual
trades and handicrafts. Strong and violent exercises sparingly to be used.
And according to the quality, some exercises are valid and strong, and some
more mild and easy. Strong and violent exercises are wrestling, foot ball play,
and the like, which are sparingly to be used; howbeit tennice play used with
moderation, I think has scarce its fellow, as exercising the whole body, and
that without any hurt. Hunting and hawking howbeit they exceed many other
exercises, yet are they more obnoxious to hazard and danger than many others;
and being exercises and recreations chiefly appropriated to the gentry, they
do not so well besit tradesmen and people of inferior condition. And in these
same recreations I wish the gentry would use a moderation, Hunting and (...)
modera^y to be (...).
and not make of a recreation a trade and vocation, and mis-spend so much
precious time, which was alloted them for a better end, and whereof they must
one day give an account. And I wish them seriously to consider, that the end
why they were placed in this world, and adorned with so great dignities and
preheminences above the inferior rank of people, was not to Exodus 3^.6.
eat and drink and play, as was reproached to the people of the Jews: but
the more God has graced great ones, the more honor and service he requires
at their hands. But to our purpose again. 5 Difference, from the principal
agent.
There are again some exercises, wherein sometimes the party exercised is the
principal agent and mover himself; as in walking, running, and the like: and
sometimes the motion depends on an other; as in sailing, riding, travailing
by coach or wagon, by ship, etc. One and the selfsame exercise differreth
sometimes from it self by reason of circumstances.
And the kinds of exercise differ both one from another, and sometimes even one
and the same kind of exercise from it self: as namely, the motion of a coach
or wagon is far more unequal than that of a horse, and the more uneven and
rugged the way is, the more unequal is the motion: as riding on a hard
trotting horse is far more violent and laborious than riding on an easy
ambler. And therefore it is not without good reason, that such as ride post use
to sweath themselves about the middle, Hard trotting horse for whom hurtful.
and eat little: for by this means they become subject to the less danger.
And it is to be observed, that hard riding is hurtful for a weak back, and
sometimes is the means of breaking some small vein, whereupon often ensue
incurable ulcers in the kidneys or bladder, being also an enemy to weak
legs; and besides* hard riding often overturneth the stomach, especially if
it be weak and full, and yet more if the party be not accustomed to ride.
Sailing, and the difference thereof.
Sailing differs likewise according to the water whereon one saileth. On the
Ocean where are great waves, and good gales of wind the motion is more
unequal, and sooner makes a weak and full stomach to vomit, and so proves
a good help for our health. But to sail on a fresh water river on a calm
day, is far easier, and troubles the body far less. Carrying on (...)
shoulders.
Next to this is the carrying of one in a chair on men's shoulders; and
carrying in a litter is a mean betwixt the two former. Now besides the
premises, there are yet a multitude of exercises; both universal, which
exercise the whole body; and also particular, which exercise some part thereof.
The whole body was exercised in that play with a little ball, which De insu
parvae pilae.
Galen so highly commends in a book made in the commendation thereof, which,
as appears, differed much from our tennice play, in that there was in it
mutual imbracings and graplings. But in my opinion, as I have said already,
tenice-play moderately used yields to no other exercise whatsoever.
Tennice-play a good exercise.
We may here take in walking, which used with moderation, is hurtful to no age,
sex, and may (contrary to other exercises) be even used after meals. Besides
these, football play, wrestling and cudgel play exercise the whole body,
(howbeit the taste lights many times on some one part) and many more which I
willingly here pass by. There are also some particular exercises, Exercises of
some particular parts,
which exercise some one part of the body or more: and some of those again,
besides the part moved, move the whole body also. And again, of these some are
appropriate and peculiar to some particular part only; as namely, the voice to
the breast and lungs, mastication to the jaws, seeing to the eye. And therefore
all such members as have a free motion, and for some proper utility and use,
ought to be exercised; as the lungs, breast, arms, legs, etc. But the head,
because it obtained not motion from any proper utility or profit, but only to
avoid dangers, therefore needs it no exercise. Crying therefore or reading
with a loud and audible voice is very beneficial for the lungs, Crying,
reading loud speaking in what diseases helpefull or hurtful.
if they be not too weak, and no ulcer either present or imminent, either
there or in the breast; and therefore very good for preaches that have strong
lungs. If it continue long, it heateth the whole body, helps the shortness
of breath, wastes the superfluous moisture in the muscles of the pectorall
parts, concocteth crudities in those parts, and furthereth expectoration: but
withal, if violent and of long duration, it hurts the head, if weak
already, cacochymicall, Crying aloud, singing and playing upon instruments.
replete and bursten bodies. Great, loud, long, crying and singing, sounding
the trumpet, playing on pipes, and the like instruments, are hurtful to
scholars especially, in that it attracteth the heat upwards. To row with oars
exercises the arms and upper parts strongly. Ringing of bells, swinging with
a rope, playing at shittlecocke, Mixed particular exercise.
and the like, exercise the arms and upper parts especially, and consequently
the whole body also. And so do shooting with bow and arrows, gouf-playing,
and the like. But cleaving of wood, sawing, drawing of water, howbeit they
exercise the arms and pectorall parts, yet communicate they not so much motion
to the rest of the body as the former. Cleaving of wood shakes the head more
than the rest. Commendation of walking
Digging exercises the kidneys and the back. Walking exercises the feet and
nether parts principally, but consequently the rest of the body also. This
exercise as has been said already may be used of any age or sex, and may at
pleasure be intended or remitted according to pleasure. After meals, if
moderate, it may safely be used, especially after supper. It helps too
concoct crudities, is good against the wind colicke, helps infirmities of the
stomach, is good to prevent the stone in the kidneys and the bladder, besides
many other benefits it procures to the body of man; and is very useful for
such as lead a studious and sedentary life. Observation of exercises according
to the trade of life.
Some professions there are, who ordinarily use some parts of the body more
than others; as Tailors and Shoomakers, their hands and arms; Weavers, their
feet; Smithes, and such professions as handle the hammer, their hands and
arms. Such persons therefore, when they are to exercise their bodies, let them
exercise those parts which are most deprived of motion. Such persons as
exercise little, must detract somewhat from their ordinary diet, and feed more
sparingly.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the exercises of the mind: whether at our meals we may discourse and
deliberate of serious affairs, and what was the custom and practice among the
ancients. Accommodation of exercises to the sick, and how safe it is for them
to use exercise.

AS there are exercises of the body, What are the exercises of the mind.
so are there likewise exercises wherewith the mind is busied and employed: and
such are all manner of thoughts, serious cogitations, cares, and all manner of
imploiments, wherewith the mind of man is employed. This must also be moderate
and seasonable, Caution for scholars
otherwise it overthrows the whole man. And this of all others concerns
most such as lead a contemplative and sedentary life; as Schoolers, and such as
are employed about weighty affairs in Church or commonwealth: and therefore
it is with an unanimous consent of all our Physicians agreed upon, that we are
at meals to banish far from us all sad and serious thoughts and cogitations,
as hindering and distracting the work of natural heat, which is to concoct
the aliment in the stomach. And for this cause was it that Physicians did
inhibite study for the space of certain hours after the repast, according to
this trivial verse.

Nec propere a mensa studijs vacaveris unquam,
Sed tribus aut horis quatuor inde vaca.
Haste not from study to thy book, from study still refrain.
Three or four hours, then thereunto thou may repair again.
But this is not of any ordinary, but of very serious and weighty study to be
understood, which is not a good while after meals to be undertaken. Now it
would be well considered, what bodies are most hurt by much serious study and
intent cogitations of the mind. Dry bodies, especially such brains are most
indammaged and endangered thereby. And therefore hot and dry bodies, or yet
cold and dry melancholicke bodies must use a moderation in this particular, or
else they will repent when it is too late. I cannot here enter upon particulars
concerning this point, but advise every man narrowly to have an insight into
the temperature of his own body, and to order it accordingly. Phlegmatic and
sanguine constitutions are freed from this fear, this exiccation which we so
feared in the former, being for them beneficial rather than any ways
prejudicial. Whether at meals we may discourse of of any serious marter or
discuss any serious affairs.


But here arises a question from that which has been said concerning serious
and intent cogitations at meals, whether we may not during meals discourse or
deliberate about serious and weighty affairs, or discourse of any serious
Philosophical or other grave question? Now that this was an ancient custom
both to deliberate of serious affairs in their feasts, as also to discourse of
diverse philosophical questions, Answer.
is by diverse ancient authors apparent. And therefore Nestor in Iliad. 1. and
Athen in dip^^soph.
Homer is brought in at a great feast, all the Peers of Greece there
assembled, persuading Agamemnon to take some speedy course to help the then
distressed Gre^ians against the Trojans. And the Persians in their great feasts
being full of wine; were wont to consult of war, and every man thus full of
wine was suffered to give his voice for the war. But the next day after they
were wont to meet again, and not till then being sober, to make a full
conclusion of all affairs. This same problem is of set purpose handled by
some ancient authors, and the affirmative by them maintained, that during
feasts and great meetings we may freely talk and discourse of serious
affairs. And this is the opinion of two famous ancient Writers, (...). probl.
1.
Plutarch and Maecrobius, the one a Greek, the other a Roman Writer, who have
both of set purpose, ^ Saturnal. lib. 7.
handled this same question. If Philosophy be banished from banquets ( says
the aforenamed C. Macrobius) then let her nurce also, to wit, honesty and
modesty, pack them hence: and then let both piety and sobriety also be gone:
^imitation of conviv^a^l speeches.
for which of these discern greatest commendation, I can hardly discern. But
the same Author in that place sets down at great length many directions
concerning this same point: Amongst others, that we are to not enter upon the
depth of any philosophical point, but such as may be both easy and profitable.
And of the very same opinion is Plutarch also. And indeed in a public meeting
such things are to be discussed, as the whole company may understand, Faule of
the Fox and the Crane.
and may, if need be, reply to the purpose; lest it fall out, as it did with
the Fox and the Crane. Idem Plutarch. ib.
The Fox at a certain time invited the Crane to dinner, and set upon the table
a mess of thin pottage, which the Crane with his long bill could not take up
to satiat his hungry appetite: the Crane therefore in requital inviteth the
Fox to a feast, where was set upon the table a vessel full of food, having a
long narrow mouth, into the which the Cranes long bill could easily entex, and
eat up his food, when as master Fox went home almost famished. And besides, it
is by Lib. 6. cap 13.
Aulus Gellius also apparent, that these philosophical discourses were at such
meetings in very great request, and by Plato himself. This limitation then
being carefully observed there is no doubt, it seems, but we may often
discourse of honest serious matters, and such as may be profitable to the
hearers. And therefore a Po^ra si retores illi Philosophi ve^ae philosophiae
sapientieque ignari ie imperiti, non in Cholis tantum, sed etiam in (...) de
^ebus ^ravibas atque se^^s ad in ac beateque vivendum lissere^e fuerunt (...)
ti, quant magis nos Christianos vere solidaque sapientin cognitione imbutos
decet in nostris symposijs sermones inter nos confer ^rave^ honestos, ^uios,
re^ig^osos, (...) ad aedificationem, ut Apostolus Paulus loquitur, hoc est,
partim ad Dei gloriam, partim ad mu^^^ si (...) confirmationem spectent. Et
^amen sunt nonnulli qui omnem sermonem de Deo, de religione, de rebus divinis
atque (...), de Christiani hominis officio in convivio valde indecorum, eique
minime convenientem esse existiment Itaque ut (...) nonnutti Phi^osophie illi
huminae: sic hodie plurimi Christianorum divinae illi nostra atque coelesti
Philosophiae, hoc est, Theolo^^^ i^ convivus nullum volunt locum esse
relinquendum. Sales tantum, jocos atque dicteria non modolevia, n^getoria atque
ridicula, ^ erumelu^m blasphema in Deum, atque contumeliosa in proximum in
convivijs voluni locum babere. Verum long alia fuit summi illius (...)
sapient^^^^sque magistri atque Domini nostri Jesu Christi meus, sententia ac
consuetudo: Is namque test Evangelica historia, non modo: ^^^mplo, in scholis
sive sinagogis, alusque in locis; verumetiam in tri^linijs, in ipsa mensa non
dubitavit, tum hujusce vitae pi^^^visi (...) transigendae, tum aeternae illius
adipiscendae optima saluberrimaque tradero, ut Luc. 11.14. and alibi passim
(...) ^est. Idem. (...).
late writer discoursing of this subject, has these words. Who (says he) at
such a solemn meeting could endure a Physician prescribing strict rules of
meat and drink? A divine to enter upon that profound point of predestination?
A lawyer upon some intricate case of law? or a philosopher to enter upon a
discourse of the first matter, or any other intricate point of metaphysicke? an
Astronomer to discourse of his circles, epicycles, and the like? But that there
was a custom of handling and discussing of some serious matter, which might
even exercise the wit, among many nations, by the practice of the Philistines
may plainly appear, to whom Sampson (no doubt according to their ordinary
custom at such meetings) propounds his riddle. Now (says the same author) if
these ancient wise philosophers, altogether ignorant of the true heavenly
philosophy, did notwithstanding, not only in their schools, but even in
their parlours; think it not unseemely to discourse of serious matters,
conducing to the leading of a comfortable, quiet and happy life, and of letters
and the liberal arts: how much more does it then become us Christians,
instructed in the true knowledge of heavenly wisdom, in our public meetings
to accommodate all our discourse to honest, pious, profitable and religious
matters, and such as might tend to edification, according to the Apostles rule;
that is partly for the Glory of God, and partly for the strengthening and
confirming of our mutual faith, hope and charity. And yet, says he, some
there are, who think it a thing very absurd and unseemely at such public
meetings, to admit of any speech of God, of divine matters, or a Christian man's
duty: howbeit, on the contrary they admit and allow of the free use of
scoffing, flowting, of unseemely jesting, quips and satyricall tants, not only
vain, idle and ridiculous; but even oftentimes blasphemous against God, and
contumelious to our neighbors. But far different from this was the custom of
our most wise Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST, who, as in the whole Evangelicall
history may appear, not only in the Temple, in the Synagogues and other
places; but even at table took all occasions of giving good and wholesome
precepts, not only for leading an honest and civil life here among men, but
even to atteine to eternal life also. And this same custom was also in the
primitive Church imitated, as witnesses Tertullian. Ita fabulantur ut qui
sciunt Dominum audire, hoc e^, sermones inter se conferunt, ^astos, pudicos,
pro^, religio^o^, quorum noverunt se a^ritum havere testem ipsum Oeum ^^ncta
videntem atque audientem. Facit ibidem mentionem centionum atque pr^cationum,
quae Agapas illas antecedere atque consequi solebant. Idem e^ Tertul Apolog
cap. 39. Vtinam in Tabernis vinariis, in comessationibus and balneis; imo and
ubique de Gehenna disputaretur: non enim sinet in Gehennam incidere Gehennae
meminisse. Propter hoc ipsum quispe illam and paravit and minatus est ne in
ipsam incidamus, timore ipsius meliores sacti, Idem ex Chrysostom. Homil. 13. in
Epist ad Roman. Ab hujusmodi eum Christi tum Christianorum primogeniae ecclesie
sermonibus convivialibus quantum discrepent nostri sermones conviviales
quotidiana experientia satis testatur. Erant illi graves, modesti, casti,
pudici, pii, religiosi, nostri contrasunt leves, nugatorij, mendaces,
scurriles, ^urpes, obscani, blasphemi, contumeliosi, quibus Them patiter atque
homines gravissime offenduntur. Sancte profecto veteres Hebraeorum sapientes
dixerunt, eos qui in conviviis sermonem de rebus divinis non habent perinde se
habere, ac si de sacrificiis mortuorum comederent. Contra vero, qui Dei verbum,
legem and divinae sapientiae opera celebrant, super hos quiescere divinitetem,
and non secus eos habere, atque si de mensa ipsius Dei comederent. Contra hodie
plerique Christianorum sacrum sermonem plane (...) conviviu maxim existimant,
quem siquis inferat, illum seu hominem incivilem, rusticum and agrestem
exp^odunt atque ^ubsannant. Tamei si proh dotor! tanta est hodie nostrorum
convivierum luxuria atque intemperantia, ut fiquis sacrum aliquem and a^vi^um
sermonem it is inferat, ille tanquam margaritas canibus atque porcit objiciens
reprehensione digum esse videatur. Idem ibidem, ubietia^ plura de hac materia
fusuis scripta videre est, ex antiqui^ scriptoribus and patribus, ut ex Plinia
Iuniore, Cicerone, Iulio Capitolino, Seneca, Clemente Alexandr. August,
Chrysostom, etc. excerpta.
So they talk (says he) as knowing that the Lord hears them; that is,
their discourse is chaste, pious and religious, of the which they know they have
an eare-witnesse, even the allseeing, and all-hearing God himself. In the same
place he mainteineth certain hymns and prayers, which did both proceed and
follow these love feasts. And S. Chrysostom has to this same purpose a worthy
speech, not to be past over in silence: Would to God (says he) that both in
the wine Tavern, at their merry meeting in their feasts, in their hot-houses,
yea, and every where men would discourse of hellfire: for the often remembering
of hell, would prove a means to keep men out of hell. And for this same cause
was hell made and threatened, that by the sear thereof being battered, we
might not fall therein. Besides these ordinary grave Philosophical and
religious discoureses during their meals, they had oftentimes also others,
who, during their meals, read to them some ancient history, or some other
memorable matters, as the same Author out of many ancient Writers, makes it
evidently appear. And it is recorded of Alexander Severus the Emperor, that
during dinner or supper, or else, after, either he himself read something, or
else gave diligent attention to others while they read. And of the same
Emperor it is also recorded, that whenever he dined or supped in private,
then he admitted into his company Vlpian, and other learned men, by whose
learned discourses, he confessed he was both refreshed and fed. The like is
also recorded of Charles the great, that during dinner and supper, he had some
histories or exploits of ancient Kings read unto him. And not only the
Christians of the primitive Church, did in laudable imitation of antiquity
accommodate this custom unto themselves, in causing read some portions of holy
Scriptures during meals; but is now become customary in some Colleges of our
Universities. I will add yet but a few words out of this same Author, they
being so pertinent, before I finish this point. Now, from these conviviall
conferences, as well of our Savior Christ, as of the Christians of the
primitive Church; how far does our table talk differ, daily experience
sufficiently does testify unto us. Their speeches and conferences were grave,
modest, chaste, pious and religious: ours again, are light, vain and idle,
filthy and obscene, blasphemous, contumelious and opprobrious both to God and
man. And it was a holy saying of the ancient Hebrews, that such as in their
festival meetings had no talk of divine matters, were as if they had eaten of
the sacrifice of the dead. But on the contrary, such as do magnify the Word
of God, his Law, his works of divine wisdom, upon those rests the divine
benediction, and are as if they had eaten at Gods own Table. But now with us
the custom is far contrary, many Christians being of opinion, that all
religious speeches are then altogether out of season, and if any one shall
speak any thing tending this way, he shall be esteemed an uncivll and
unmannerly person. And now (alas, the greater is the pity) our feasts are so
full of intemperance and gluttony, that if a man should insert any holy and
pious speech, it will be but as pearls cast to Dogs and Swine. I need no
comment to explain these words; the text is plain enough, and I leave the
explication.

Accommodation of that which has been said of exercises to the sick.
It rests now, that I should say something of the exercise befiting the sick,
it being the thing I here principally aim at; howbeit it was necessary I
should make an enumeration of them all; and as the matter of the diet both of
the whole and sick, is one and the same; so are their exercises also, In the
exercise of the sick two things to be observed.
not differing so much as their diets do. In the exercise then of the sick,
two things are to be observed: first, in what diseases exercise may be used,
not being useful in all; and the moderation thereof in such diseases where it
may safely be used. Some diseases then are acute, and others again,
chronicall. Of the former, some are called simply acute, some peracute, and
some perperacute; which are certane degrees of sharp diseases. Of these two
later sorts, the accidents are commonly so violent and fierce, and the diseases
so dangerous, that in a very short time they are terminated either to life or
death; and by reason thereof, they are not to use any exercise at all. Of the
first sort again, to wit, of acute diseases, some are of longer continuance;
What kind (...) diseases (...) it (...)
and some of shorter; some give some intermission, some scarce any remission.
Such as give intermission, admit of exercise also, and in that time when they
find most ease, and such as they were in health accustomed unto, and if it may
with convenience, about the same time, especially when the intermission is of
any long duration: provided always, that the exercise be answerable to their
strength and other circumstances. Where there is no intermission, and the
accidents not very violent, with some remission, some gentle exercise may in
the remission be allowed. Now, where any exercise may be either in acute or
chronicall diseases admitted, walking may safely for the most part be used:
provided still there be not a great debility in the nether parts, which yet by
the help of a staff, or leading by the arms may be helped, and the defect
supplied. As for chronical diseases, Some chronicall ^^^eases admit not (...)
^^ercise^.
although they are commonly of longer continuance than acute, yet unto some of
them is denied the use of exercise which consists in motion, their nature
requiring rest and quietness: such as are ulcers in the lungs and breast. As
for other chronicall diseases, most of them may admit of walking, unless in
great debility of the legs; as in violent paroxysmes and pains of the gout,
or some such other infirmities. And in many diseases where the sick is not so
well able to move himself, Hanging (...) usefu^ for the sick.
yet may he be moved by another, as in a chair: and if hanging beds were here
in use for the sick, they would prove of very good use, and with more
facility procure sleep to the sick, as I have touched heretofore. And
frictions, Frictions in frequent use among the ^^^^ents.
although they be now almost out of use with us, yet were they among the
ancients of very good use in many diseases by way of diversion; as also
ligatures of the extremities are for the same purpose of very good use: as in
swounding, in immoderate fluxes, of blood and other humors. In violent fluxes
tending downwards therefore, Ligatures of extremities.
we are to use frictions and ligatures of the arms, wrists and fingers: and
in the suppression of any wonted evacuation, we use these means, near and
tending to the part affected, to further this evacuation. But to enter upon
particular exercises befitting several particular diseases, this is neither
the proper place, nor yet my purpose, where I can only insist upon general
directions. And as for exercise of the mind, the anxiety and trouble of mind
by reason of the sickness, and the manifold, painful and troublesome
accidents, as individual companions attending the same, together with many
future (howbeit sometimes needless and frivolous) fear do often so wholly
possess the mind of the sick, that he needs no other imploiment: besides,
that many times there is somewhat to do about the disposing of a man's
temporal estate. I wish therefore that the sick (especially in acute
diseases, fevers, and the like) be troubled, as little as may be with any
serious or weighty affairs, either studies or others. I except always the
care of the soul, which is never unseasonable, which nevertheless, I wish, it
be not put off to the last, as is too common with the most part. It is now, I
confess, thought sufficient, if the sick (death especially being apprehended;
or else be sure of silence) send to the Parson of the Parish, and sometimes to
some other, whom perhaps he fancieth best, to say some good prayers by his
bedside, although all his life time he never cared for prayer or any other
good exercise; and then after opus operatum, this formality being now
performed, with a Lord have mercy upon us, whatsoever the former life has
been, without any more ado, thinks to go straight to heaven in a
feather-bed. And here is the greatest misery, that many times they meet with
some Empiricke divine (for there are many Empiricke devines as well as
Physicians; the more is the pity!) who after a formal confession of their
sins in the general, apply presently their plaster of mercy to all
indifferently, without any further searching into the wound, and like a
skillfull spiritual Physician laying first before them the terrors of the law,
searching into the sore, humbling them for their sins, and then pouring in
the oil of mercy. In time of health every one ought to prepare for death.
Therefore as in bodily health, I advise every man to look narrowly to his
Diet, to refrain from such things as may prejudice the health of his body,
and prevent diseases, or at least make them far more easy to be endured when
they come: so I wish every one to be warned to have a special care of the
spiritual estate of the soul, in feeding it with the wholesome food of Gods
Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments and other good means; and in any case not
to surfeit thy soul with sin (that so thou may prevent many dangerous
diseases) which will never with a formal Lord have mercy on us, and some
prayer book of thine own, thy minster or others (for with many to pray
without book smells rank of puritanicall preciseness) without a true and
serious Repentance from the bottom of thy heart, ever be expiated. If this
were carefully observed and practiced, and people would make their reckonings
ready in their life time, and not post off all to the last, but often too late
repentance, the sick would not often be so much dismayed at the pronouncing of
his final sentence; nor the Physician oftentimes so much troubled, how and in
what manner to deliver this unwelcome message. But I know some will say now:
Suitor ultra crepidam, and therefore since the pens and pulpits of our learned
Divines give daily warning of this danger, I will cease from digressing any
further; but among many other worthy works published concerning such subjects,
I wish the reader to be acquainted with two, published by a Robert Polton
preacher of Gods Word at Brougton in Northampton shire
reverend Divine of Northamptonshire: the one a Comfortable walking with God,
and the other, Instructions for comforting afflicted consciences.

Cessation and rest from exercise.
Now after all exercises and motion and agitation of the body, there must be in
due and convenient time a cessation and rest, and into this must all motion and
exercise terminate and end, and alternatively succeed each other. Now as motion
and exercise is accounted useful for all men, and after to succeed; so would
it seem that no person, in health I mean, and able for exercise, is to be
freed therefrom, and so to live in ease and idleness. And yet ^. Epid. sect. 4.
Hippocrates seems to command the contrary, wishing hot and choleric
constitutions to rest, and not to use exercise. And 5 de (...) ^^venda.
Galen has likewise something tending to the same purpose. This is not a
little to be admired, says he, that whereas Hippocrates is of opinion, that
it is farrebetter for hot constitutions to live at rest than to use exercise,
yet many Physicians there are who scarce are able to discern such
constitutions, and therefore indifferently appoint every one exercise alike.
But we are not here simply and literally to understand Hippocrates of a mere
idle sluggishnesse, which was never of any wise Physician yet allowed; Hot and
dry constitutions are not to use ^o viol^nt exercise as others.
but whereas he denies such constitutions exercise, he is of strong and
violent exercises to be understood, and such as may safely be allowed to
other constitutions. And indeed, hot and choleric constitutions, by means of
violent labor and exercise, especially in Summer and hot seasons, fall often
into hot and choloricke diseases, which by avoiding this violent motion might
be avoided.

The Diet of the Diseased. THE THIRD BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe residue of the six things called not natural, and such things as
thereunto belong, are here in this last book handled, the first whereof is
repletion and inanition; and in the first place of repletion in general, and
the division thereof, as likewise of inanition or evacuation, and the diverse
kinds thereof: afterward is phlebotomy handled in particular, and the
diversity thereof, where is set down the utility thereof, the persons fit to be
phlebotomised, the veins to be opened, the quantity, quality, convenient time,
together with the preparation before, and the ordering after phlebotomy are
plainly and largely set down, where something concerning the sign, whether in
phlebotomy to be observed, with a confutation of that and some other points of
judicial astrology: after follow purgations, whether or no we ought to purge?
what persons are to be purged, of the nature of the humors to be purged, and
concerning their preparation. Of purging medicines, reiteration of them, their
quantity, quality, time of exhibition both general and particular. Of vomits,
glisters, and suppositories. Several forms in which medicines are exhibited,
together with the manner of governing the sick, in and after physic. Of
sweating, and means to further the same. Of bathing and baths, both natural
and artificial: of the nature and properties of diverse mineral waters, both
in this Island, and other parts of Europe, and in what infirmities most
effectual. Also concerning urines, the fecall excrements or ordure: of
spittle, spitting, or salivation, and of Tobacco, and the use thereof, as also
of snot or snevell, and of rheumes and distillations descending upon the nether
parts, the lungs especially, and how remedies are for this to be used. Of
carnal copulation, the right use and abuse thereof: of watching and sleeping,
and dreams in sickness and in health: of the soul and the chief passions
thereof: of love, and love potions, and whether they can procure love or no? of
effascination, and something concerning Mandrakes, and the erroneous opinion of
some concerning this simple: of anger, joy, sadness or grief, and the effects
that follow thereupon. The conclusion of this whole discourse.

CHAP. I.
Of Repletion and inanition in general, what they are, and the variety of
particular circumstances therein to be considered.

HItherto have we discoursed of the nature of the air and other elements, and
other things pertinent to that purpose, as well in sickness as in health; as
also of several sorts of aliments; and lastly, of several sorts of exercise:
there remain yet some things to be discussed, which concern not a little both
the sick and the whole: and among these we are now to speak in the first
place of those things which our Physicians commonly call excreta and retenta;
Excreta and retenta.
or such things as are to be retained within the body of man, and such as ought
to be expelled out of the same. The Hippocrates libr. de flitibus.
old Father of Physicians according to his Laconicke manner of speech,
includes the whole body of physic within these two words, adiectio, and
substractio: that is, in adding or supplying that which is wanting, and
detracting that which is superfluous, or superabounding. Now, as in all living
creatures there must be a daily addition of aliment, so must there be something
also retained for the nutrition and preservation of the body nourished. Again,
by the continual addition of aliment, it is not possible but there must be
some excretion of superfluous excrements, Repletion, and (...) engendered.
or of such humors as abound in quantity only. That which does thus so
superfluously abound in the body of man, we commonly call repletion, the which
is remedied by evacuation. If there be accumulated within the body of man a
greater quantity of humors, good or bad, of one kind, or more than is useful
for the mainteining of health, and performing of such functions as become the
state and condition of such a creature, they become a burden to the body, and
by consequent to be expelled. Now, in the body of the daily addition of aliment
for the reparation of that radical moisture (which nevertheless by degrees,
does still insensibly decay and waste away) there are continually some
superfluities or excrements engendered, which must be expelled: and for this
purpose the great and wise Creator and Governor of all things, Emunctories and
passages in the body of man whereby superfluities are evacuated.
has appointed certain emunctories, or passages whereby the body might of
them be unburthened. It comes, notwithstanding, often to pass, that these
humors, whether abounding in quantity, or quality, are by some means still
retained within the body, and so either threaten some disease, or else have
already produced it; and then we are by such physical helps as are fitting,
to further the excretion of such humors. This oppression, or over-burthening
of nature, Plethora, or repletion in general.
if general through the whole body, commonly called repletion, is either of
all the humors jointly, and called by the name of plethora, and is to be
remedied by phlebotomy; or else of some corrupted humors; as phlegm,
melancholy, Cacochymia, and of what humors.
choler, jointly or severally, and called by the name of cacochymia, the which
is to be expelled by purging medicines. There is yet besides the premises,
Profitable excreme^ts
a retention of certain profitable humors abounding only in quantity, and
ought at certain time, for the benefit and better being of the body, to be
expelled: as the seed of generation in both sexes, and the menstruous flux in
women: and sometimes more excrements; as sweat, urine, ordure, etc. are
detained within the body. All these in their due seasons are by fit and
convenient means, by the counsel of a judicious Artist prescribed, by their
emunctories and proper passages to be expelled. Evacuations do sometimes too
much abound.
And sometimes these evacuations either natural, or procured by art, by their
too great abundance, threaten danger; and then we are to use our best art and
skill for the speedy and safe suppressing of any such evacuation. Of all these
in order, by the help of the Almighty, I purpose to say something, after some
general rules permitted, which concern all sorts of evacuation; for the which
purpose it shall not be amiss to begin with the definition of evacuation.
What evacuation is.
Evacuation is an expulsion either natural, or procured by arts industry, of
such humors as abound in the body of man, and that by fit and convenient
passages, whether it be universal, whereby the whole body is evacuated; or
particular, whereby some part is purged. Now that this may be, safely and
profitable undestaken, diverse things are first to be considered: What things
before evacuation to be considered.
as namely the fullness of the body, the strength, temperature, the plight or
state of body, occurring accidents, the age, the time of the year, the former
custom, and the part itself to be evacuated, and the place by which we are to
evacuate, together with the quantity. Among all these, the fullness of the
body, together with the strength of the party, have the pre-eminence. Now, this
fullness exceeding measure and mediocrity, always indicateth evacuation,
whether it come by the abundance of blood, or other humors, and that both in
sickness and in health: howbeit some particular individual bodies there be,
for whom either abstinence, a slender diet, or frictions may suffice. The
strength diligently to be consid^red, especially of the vital parts.
The strength is here likewise diligently to be considered: to wit, the animal
faculties in the brain, the vital in the heart, the natural in the liver:
and among all these, the strength of the vital faculties do chiefly indicate
evacuation: as on the contrary, the imbecility of the same inhibiteth
evacuation. The plight and temperature of the body. Habitus and constitutio
corporis
Again, we are to consider the temperature and plight of the body to be
purged, for thin choleric bodies endure more easily evacuation by vomit and
sweat; but melancholicke and phlegmatic constitutions, having hard and thick
bodies, are more easily evacuated downward. Custom.
Custom does also often indicate the manner of evacuation, nature it self
often inclining that way, to which it was wont and accustomed in former times.
The quantity*
Again, the quantity of evacuation is not to be neglected, which may by a
skillful and wise Physician easily be atteined unto. In great repletion of what
sort soever, great evacuation must be answerable, and in the lesser small
evacuation; and a mean repletion requires an evacuation in the same
proportion; The time.

Cum indicans turget vel urget.


of all the which more hereafter, when we shall come to discourse of each
evacuation apart. The time fit for evacuation, is when that which does indicate
is swollen up, and increased, forces us to evacuation. The time of the year,
day, and other things thereunto belonging shall in their proper places
hereafter be discussed. Besides the premises, we are yet diligently to
consider the ways and passages most convenient for our evacuation: Conv^nient
(...) passag^^.
and that is performed if we have one eye intent upon the pronenesse and
forwardness of nature, and the other upon the part by the which the evacuation
is to be conveied. Now, since all and every one of the humors may be conveied
by several passages and ways; as choler by vomit, sweat or urine; we are
therefore to look into the inclination and propensenesse of nature, and so if
we perceive it incline upward, manifested by a nauseous inclination to cast, it
is then to be purged by vomit upwards: but if it take the course downwards,
and we perceive any propensenesse that way, then we are likewise to follow
natures direction, according to the golden precept of (...). Apo. 21 (...) 1.
Hippocrates. And hence it comes to pass, that we often cure excessive
casting by the same means, and fluxes of the belly by glisters, or some gentle
abstersive purges, howbeit the vulgar often wonder at such proceeding, and out
of their stupid ignorance often traduce this so laudable and warranted way.
Convenient wor^^ of eva^ua^^^^.
The convenient places or passages by which humors are evacuated, are such as
receive these noisome humors without any hurt to themselves; in the which,
nevertheless, we are to consider as well the nature of the part whereunto we
expel the humor, as the consent and affinity it has with the other parts. To
this end we must consider, The nature of (...) part to be cons^^e^ed
that it be no principal part (by which we can never purge without prejudice
to the party purged) and besides, that it be a place for this same end and
purpose of nature for apart, as the guts, bladder, womb, the pores of the
skin, etc. Now, although nature sometimes attempt some such evacuation; as in
critical excretion of blood by the nose, the blood passing by the brain; an
impostume of the lungs by the urinarie passages, the guts, and the hollow
passages of the heart; yet the Physician is not to take this course, unless
when of two evils, we are to choose the lesser. By the consent and sympathy of
the parts, the way of evacuation is also found out, The sympathy o^ consent o^
the par^s (...) considered.
and hence is it, that the hollow part of the liver by reason of the sympathy
it has with the stomach and guts, is purged by those ways: but the back,
and bossed part of the liver, for the connection it has with the kidneys and
bladder, is by them for the most part evacuated. And sometimes when great store
of gross humors conveied thither from the mesentary and hollow parts of the
liver are there seated, then the skillful Physician is careful (lest by their
abundance and thickness they stop up the narrow passages of the kidneys and
bladder) with fa^re greater convenience to convey them to the large passages of
the guts. The sense and (...) of the pa^^s to (...) considered.
The passages by which the humors are to be purged, must not likewise be of
too exquisite feeling, lest by this means ensue swounding, fainting, gnawing
of the stomach, and a sudden overthrow of strength. We must likewise beware,
lest the matter to be purged be conveied by the part already surprised with the
disease. Evacuatio^ must not be by the part affected.
But if nature of it self should attempt any evacuation a wrong way, then this
were suddenly to be suppressed, and the matter to be drawn back again
another way, except some other rub come in the way, And Loco nuper citat 12.
epid. sect. 2.
Hippocrates testifies, that many thick gross and tough glutonous humors are
easilier evacuated downwards by the guts: but thin, sharp serous humors
more easily by urine and sweat. Aph. 9 lib. 4.
And again, elsewhere he testifies that choleric humors are easilier
purged upwards, and melancholicke downwards. And Aph. 4. lib. 4.
again, that in Summer, it is best to purge upwards* and in Winter downwards:
as concerning acute diseases, they are most ordinarily purged by vomit, by
sweat, by the guts, and by bleeding at the nose: except in contagious, malign,
and pestilent diseases where antidots and cordialls, expelling by sweat, are of
most use; and where humors abound, or ill accidents occur, some of the
aforenamed evacuations may be of good use. And this shall suffice for
evacuations in general, now come we to particular evacuation, and first, of
phlebotomy, so famous a remedy both in ancient times and in this our age also.

CHAP. II.
Of Phlebotomy, what it is, the several sorts, and sundry things therein to be
considered.

IN the body of man, of the aliment he receives is ingendered blood in the
liver, and contained in the veins and arteries, and by nutrition communicated
to the whole body. This blood, as it conferreth no small benefit to the whole
body; so from thence are many mischiefs thereunto procured; Many diseases
proceed from the abundance of blood.
and that not only by the excess thereof in quantity, in quality, or both,
but also by the multitude of superfluous excrements from thence proceeding;
which often prove the fountain and wellspring of a multitude of diseases in
the body of this miserable microcosme. Now, according to the repletion of this
or that humor, so is the evacuation of the same answerable. All evacuations
then are either natural or artificial. Evacuations are natural or
art^ficiall.
If natural and withal beneficial, we are so far from suppressing any such
evacuation, Artificial evacuations two told
that we are rather to further it. Artificial evacuations, of which at this
time I intend to speak, are either general or particular. General
evacuation, what it is.
General or universal evacuations I call, such as do in general evacuat all
the humors indifferently both good and bad; or such as do evacuat the bad
humors of all sorts, and that jointly or severally: and thirdly, which does
evacuat indifferently from all the parts of the body. The first is effected by
phlebotomie, the second by purgation, and the third by sweating. The first of
these then is phlebotomy, the which as it is an instrument used by the
Physician, we thus define. Definition of phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy is an aritficiall evacuation of humors abounding in quantity, and
that by the opening of a vein or artery, to this end, that the vessels
distended and oppressed with the multitude of humors may be relieved, or else
that noxious humors may be averted from the part affected. Phlebotomie and
purgation do both in this agree, that both are universal evacutions, are
great and generous remedies, and appropriated to great diseases. They differ
again not only in the instrument, Difference betw^xt phlebotomy and purgation.
but also in the manner and form: and again, that purgation draws forth by
election, humors distinguished by their qualities: but phlebotomie neglecting
the quality, respects the quantity only. The nature therefore of phlebotomy
is to draw indifferently any humor whatsoever is contained in the veins, not
making any election of this or that particular; and although it draws from
the whole body, yet does it draw immediately from the next veins, and the part
next adjoining to it; and secundarily it does evacuat the whole body. Now for
our orderly proceeding in this particular, it being a matter of that moment, we
are to consider these five heads. 1. In what infirmities of the body, this
generous remedy is to be used, In phlebotomic five things to be considered.
and the several kinds thereof. 2. What veins or arteries are to be opened.
3. What bodies may best bear this remedy, or are not able. 4. How much we may
evacuate, how long, or how often this remedy may be reiterated. 5. The time,
when it is to be used. As for the first, we have already mentioned a double
repletion in the body of man; one called Plethora, wherein we make use of
phlebotomy; an other cacochymia, wherein we use purging medicines. This
Plethora again is double, Plethora or repletion twofold.

Plethora quo ad vase; what it is.


or of two sorts, quo ad vasa, and quo ad vires. That which we call quo ad
vasa, or according to the capacity of the veins, is that fullness, wherein by
reason of the abundance of blood, the veins are so distended, and stretched
out, that the party himself may feel as it were this distention, with no
small danger of disruption of some vein, or sudden suffocation. Plethora, or
repletion quo ad vires, according to the strength, when as there is such
abundance of blood contained within the veins, Quo ad vi^es, what*
that nature is not well able to govern the same, but oppresses the strength,
by that means inducing as it were, a heaviness and certain weight. Both
these repletions are incident, as well to the whole as to the sick; but in
health cannot long continue: for in a short space the humors are either
putrified, some vein burst, or some defluxion procured, the cause of infinite
infirmities in the body of man. Again, all repletion or fullness in regard of
the humors contained, is twofold, either exquisite and single, Repletion in
regard of the humors twofold.
proceeding of the abundance of good humors only; or else declining from this
purity, when as with the good some bad are also intermingled, called therefore
plethora cacochymica: as again, when as with abundance of bad humors some good
are intermingled, we call it then cacochymia plethorica. Single plethory
twofold.
This single Plethory or repletion again is twofold, one properly so called,
when all the four humors do equally abound; another called sanguinea, or of
blood, when as pure blood is increased in too great a quantity. Again,
plethora, Plethora or repletion in regard of the body affected twofold, (...)
or repletion in regard of the body affected, is either universal, or diffused
through the whole body; or particular, when as this fullness is settled and
impacted upon some part of the body. Again, there is one fullness in the
vessels or veins, another in the whole bulk of the body. There is also a
repletion or fullness present actu, Plethorie, actual or potentiall.
actually in the whole body, or some part thereof; another potestate, only in
power, which is likely shortly to ceize upon the same: as when by the
suppression of any wonted evacuation of blood, we fear a fullness in the whole
body; or when as by the affluxe of some humor to some determinate part, we fear
some inflammation, putrefaction or pain, etc. Now phlebotomie does evacuat
this fullness in the whole body, or any part thereof, either in any great
disease already present, or yet imminent. A great disease I here understand,
not only that which by reason of the greatness; as some great inflammation or
would is esteemed to be such; but even in regard of the excellency of the part,
and some malignitie of the disease: for a small inflammation in some ignoble
part of the body, although arising from the abundance of blood, does not
require phlebotomie or any other great remedy. In great plethoricall diseases
we are to use this remedy, especially, if the strength be answerable, which is
the chief indication to be regarded. And here we are to observe, Indication of
phlebotomie.
that the indication of this evacuation is sometimes desumed from the disease
it self: as in an exquisite Tertian, we open a vein for eventilation, not for
any great evacuation. Again, in regard of the cause we are often undoubtedly
to use this remedy: as in the suppression of the piles in men, and menstruous
flux in women; and sometimes in dysentericall and lientericall fluxes
proceeding from excessive heat of the liver. The use and end of phlebotomy
twofold.
The use and end of phlebotomy is not always one and the same: for the most
part indeed, we use it as a remedy against repletion, and then we use it for
it self. Sometimes we use it for an other end, when as we would bring some
thing to pass, which without this cannot well be effected: as, when in the
beginning of any disease we use this remedy for ventilation, or breathing of
the blood, and not for any copious evacuation, that thereby concoction may the
better be procured, putrefaction of the humors may be inhibited, and all other
remedies may more commodiously be exhibited. Of it self, and for its own
work we use this remedy in a double respect. First, that this double
repletion, of the which before, consisting either in the whole body, or in some
part of the same, may be evacuated, and that the humor may be diverted or
turned back from the part affected, or for preventing of a particular
repletion. The humor is recalled or turned back two ways: first, when as it
has a sudden influxe upon any part, it being from thence again pulled back
to the contrary part: and again, if the influxe of the humor be without any
force, Phlebotomie threefold.
or this fulness be partim in facto, partim in sieri, or partly in being, and
partly already bred, if it be then derived to the next place. Hence have we
three sorts of Phlebotomy, Phlebotomia evacuant, revellem, and derivans.
evacuans, or evacuating, revellens, or pulling back, derivans, deriving or
diverting, as it were turning aside. That which evacuateth, does either simply
evacuat from the whole body, or else from some one determinate part only; if
the humor be inherent without any new affluxe. But if withal there be any
affluxe of humor, then requires it some derivation to be joined with
evacuation. Evacuating phlobo^^^y whom and when to be used.
Evacuation, or evacuating phlebotomie we use both in sickness and in health
also, if we perceive any plethoricall disposition, or disease imminent; as in
the Hippoc. aph. 2. lib. 2
athleticall disposition, especially, if the strength does not hinder. Single
plethory or repletion of all others is safeliest cured by this remedy; the
false and bastard not so safely; and the more admixtion there be of all other
humors, the more sparing ought we to be in the use thereof. Plethory or
repletion proceeding from choler may safelier thus be evacuated, than of
melancholy; and again, of that safelier than of phlegm; by reason that
phlebotomy not only evacuateth the abundance of humors, but cools the body
also. The second sort of phlebotomy is, that we call revulsio, or revulsion,
(...), Revulsio, (...) taken two ways.
and is taken either in a large or strict sense: in a large and general sense
it is taken for any aversion, or turning away of the humor, whether to the
contrary part, or that which is nearest; but Gal. 6. epid. sect. 2. comm 31.5
and 13 meth
properly it is a retraction of the humor flowing unto any part, to the
contrary place. Now all such may be called contrary parts, as have a sufficient
distance from the part affected. Contrariety and wh^^ is thereby meant.
And by contrary we understand not only the contrary part to that which is
affected, but also to the contrary motion, or the term from whence the humors
flow (...), as Artists speak, observing as much as may be, the rectitude and
communion of the veins. This is apparent in a Pleurisy, where we open the
Basilica of the same side, which is a branch of vena (...), or without a
fellow. Contrariety in motion we call up and down, behind and before, inward
and outward the right side and left. But on this I will not insist; as not
being useful for us to insist upon all these particulars, The use of revulsion
and in what cases to be used.
whereof Galen and our other Physicians discourse at great length. This kind of
phlebotomy is chiefly used in diseases, where the affluxe of is humors is
great and violent, and the humors in great abundance; as especially in the
beginning of inflammations: and is therefore to be used in the Squinancy,
Pleuresie, Phrenesie, Ophthalmy, inflammation of the liver, lungs, and the like
infirmities, engendered of blood, or the eruption of hot and sharp humors.
Neither is it only of use in humors already flowing with impetuosity, but by
way of preservation also, when they have been accustomed to fall upon any part,
or yet when as we fear any such influxe; as also in wounds, luxations*
fractures, etc: having especially, respect to that which we fear will follow;
to wit, some inflammation of the part affected.

Gal 6. epid, comm 2. sect. 7.
Derivation is an aversion, diversion, Derivation what.
or turning away of humors falling without force or violence upon the part
affe^^ed, or of such as have already fal^e upon it, but are not yet impacted,
or settled upon the same; to the place next adjoining to it, to the end that the
part affected may be freed from the noxious humor. Derivation then principally
regards the part affected, and differs from evacuation and revulsion, in
that we derive or divert humors yet in the flux, and not yet impacted into the
part; Difference of this from other evacuations.
not by the parts remote, as in revulsion; neither by the the part affected, as
in single evacuation, but by the parts adjacent, and such veins must of
necessity have a communion with the part affected. In what cases to be used.
This kind of phlebotomie we commonly use in infirmities, having their
original from long continuing defluxions, and after universal evacuation from
the whole body by revulsions; as in great inflammations after the great affluxe
of humors is stayed: we use it also in some infirmities, where other
evacuations have not prevailed, and that two manner of ways: one, that by them
that which is contained in the veins of the parts affected, may be evacuated;
and that that which is collected in the part transmitting, by the veins next
adjoining to it, may be expelled. Again, in some healthful persons it is
useful, although the humors now be still and quiet, yet being accustomed in
times past to seize upon any weak part, although without any violence. Now
because mention has been made of a plethory or fullness, we will briefly set
down some signs or marks of both the sorts. Signs of repletion quo ad visa.
Of that which we call ad vasa, or according to the vessels or veins, these
be the chief signs: a fresh ruddy color, arising either from external
causes; as the heat of the Sun, bathing in a hot house, great labor and
pains taking: or from internal causes, as a conspicuous tumor or swelling up
of the veins, together with a notable tension and largeness of the same; a
pulse also very full, firm, quick and very great. Signs again of fullness
quo ad vires, Of repletion quo ad vires.
or according to strength, be these: there is a natural or voluntary
weariness and a laziness; so that notwithstanding, there may easily be seen
such causes as increase blood, together with some conspicuous tumor or arising
in the veins, there following in the body, as it were some acrimony and
sharpness to the sense. Phlebotomy in what infirmities is fit est to be used.
To draw therefore this Chapter to a conclusion, phlebotomy is a most sovereign
and excellent remedy, not only in the aforenamed infirmities, but also in many
other: as in all Fevers, proceeding of blood, as well without as with
putrefaction, and of any other humor putrified, and that both in continual and
intermitting; even of Quartanes and headaches proceeding of blood; in the
Dropsy, proceeding of suppression of blood, in Strangury, retention or
difficulty of urine proceeding of a hot cause, and in the Palpitation of heart
in health coming without any manifest cause, and in diverse sorts of
obstructions; as the Jaundize, etc. Where these are wanting, the strength
weak, and in the presence of any great evacuation; as flux of the belly,
vomits, much sweating in young children, women with child, (unless in great
extremity) we are not to use this noble and generous remedy. And withal let
this rule always be observed, that it is always better to use this remedy by
way of prevention, in the approaching rather than in the presence of the
disease. Let every one therefore beware how they trust ignorant Empirickes, and
desperate, bold Barber-surgeons, to rely, I mean, upon their judgments in so
weighty a matter, when there is question of losing this noble elixir of life.

CHAP. IIJ.
Whether in contagious, malign and pestilentiall Fevers, and in the small Pox
and Measels, as likewise in the Iaundize, phlebotomy may safely be administered?

BY that which has been said already concerning Phlebotomy it is apparent that
Phlebotomie in Fevers is a sovereign and approved good remedy, which is
confirmed by the common consent of all our judicious and learned Physicians.
And Saluberrimum aut (...) ut praed ^ mus ^st in febri^u^ venam ^ne^^ere, non
continu^ (...) se, verum ^am omn^^us qua^ pu^^^ cens ^um^a (...) nec a^a^,
(...) ^ohinent levata (...) qua orpus nost^^ (...) ^git natura e^o^ (...) eo
quo (...) pr^mitu^, (...) quod reliquum e^, vincet. Gal. 11. meth.
Galen himself is of the same opinion, where he allows of this remedy, as
well in continual as in intermitting Fevers; provided always the strength
hold out, and the age be answerable. But then here arises no small doubt,
whether in contagious, malign and pestilentiall diseases so noble and generous
a remedy may be used? And it would seem that the negative is to be holden, in
that in such diseases commonly the heart, the fountain of life is assaulted,
the spirits also infirm; and for this cause it would seem we should rather
use alexipharmaks and cordial remedies in this case most proper, to strengthen
and corroborate the vital spirits* and to expel, if it be possible, this
poison from the heart: whereas any great evacuation, especially of this so
useful for mainteining of life, may by the evacuation of spirits, rather
hinder then help forward the cure of such diseases. The answer to this
question must be by distinction: Answer.
for we must consider, that the Pestilence it self (for I will begin with
the most dangerous) sets upon the body of man after diverse manners* as
sometimes striking suddenly without any show, or at least it is scarce
discernible, in which case it were a desperate course to attempt any such
evacuation; but then the only cure is, with antidots to oppugn the disease,
and by all means possible to underprop and uphold the decaying spirits of the
patient. Again, often and many times, and more frequently, especially in these
our Northern and cold countries, this infection is accompanied with a Fever,
and often meets with plethoricall bodies as living in ease and idleness,
This has always bi^ the opinion and practice of the lea^ned ^hysitians

^rac^ ib ca^sil medic. tractatu d^p^^ss^ (...) H^ller. li^e ^d p^ste Horest
obser medic. lib. 6 ob^er. 17 ex Aetio, cass etc.


and then I see no reason, why phlebotomie should or ought be denied unto such
bodies; if especially administered in the beginning, strength, age, and other
circumstances then concurring. And that this has always been the b practice
of the learned both ancient and latter Physicians, I could make it easily
appear, if I were not afraid to spend too much time, which by reason of diverse
matters, yet to handle, I must husband. Now if this has place in the
pestilentiall Fever, of all others most dangerous; then much more has it place
in other Fevers, participating indeed of a certain malignity, howbeit not
pestilentiall. Of this nature is that Fever, which has now diverse times,
especially of late years, swept away many lusty people out of this Island. This
Fever is of the nature of putrid continual Fevers, and yet not tied to any one
particular kind. It is called, by reason of the evil quality, Febris maligna,
Mali^ne Fever and the nature of it.
approaching near the confines of the pestilentiall Fever, howbeit comes
far short of it in malignity, this disease being indeed contagious per
contactum only, How it is contagious
when as such as are yet free, are infected by touching the body that is sick,
especially in their sweat, and sometimes also by being too near their breath:
and therefore we see it often come to pass, that a whole family is one after
another infected with the same, when as others who come to the sick by way of
visitation go free, provided they be not too busy about them. But the
pestilentiall fveer infecteth often by inspiration of the ambient air,
although they have no commerce with the sick of the same disease. This fever
is also called febris petechialis, Names.
from the little black or blew spots like unto flea bits, which
notwithstanding differ from those of the pestilentiall fever. It is also called
morbus hungaricus, or the hungarian disease, by reason it has been, and is
very frequent among the people of that nation. It is now become a free denison
in these our countries, Whether phlebotomy be here of u^e.
the smart whereof has been of late years experimentally felt here among us.
Now it may here be demanded, whether Phlebotomy may be of any use in this
malign fever? The reason why I take upon me to discuss this question, is,
because of the ignorance and error of many people, who have conceived so hard
an opinion of this so noble and generous remedy in this disease, that if the
patient die after the use thereof, Vulgar fearful of phlebotomy, especially
in this Fever.
they impute this success to the use of this remedy, and the vulgar often are
affrighted at the very mentioning of it, and as they are commonly jealous of
the best actions of the Physicians, and apt to interpret every thing in the
worst sense, so comes it to pass in this particular. Answer.
It is true indeed, that many after the use of the best means do many times
miscary, the Almighty who first made man having set down a period of time for
every one, which no man can pass: and because the skillfull Physician not
being able to dive into the secret counsel of his Maker (as being a man and no
God) uses the likeliest means, which by reason, and his own and other men's
experiences he thinks fittest to grapple with this strong champion; in the
which combat, the violence of the disease being so great that it will not yield
to any means, (...) o^ the patient, the (...), or the (...) Physician, (...)
many times the (...) of the miscarying of the patient.
is it reason that the Physician for all his care and diligence should be so
sharply censured? I do not deny, but that they had need to have their eyes in
their heads who deal with this disease: but again many stand in their own
light either protracting time and irrecoverable occasion, which as in all, so
especially in this disease, is speedily to be laid hold on; or else using the
counsel of such ignorant and unskillfull persons, who although they assume
unto themselves the name of Physicians, and are so by most reputed, are
notwithstanding altogether unfit for so weighty an imploiment. By these means
an error may be committed in the carriage of the business, and yet will this
be but vitium personae, non rei, a fault in this ignorant person, but not in
the profession it self. And it is by an unanimous consent of all our best
practitioners agreed upon, Phlebotomy by an unanimous consent allowed of (...)
this d^sease.
that in this same fever phlebotomy is a most sovereign remedy, and may safely
be used, if in time, and with due circumspection of circumstances it be
administered. The famous Co^sil^or med^cin. lib. consi^ ^^4.
Crato, Physician to four Emperors, is of this opinion, and did so practice
it, as likewise a famous ^iercat tom 2. cap. 2. (...) de ^ebrib. incurat. f^br.
maligna Rutand de morbe vngar and alij (...)
Spanish Physician, and diverse others do all subscribe to this practice. And
therefore let women content themselves with their own affairs, and contain
themselves within the precincts of their own callings, and not take upon them
to pass sentence in matters of so high a nature, whereof they are altogether
ignorant, and let every man (as is most reasonable) be believed in his own
profession. I do not here aver, that the fever of it self in regard of the
malignitie does indicate phlebotomy, but only in regard of repletion. Neither
yet am I so ignorant, but that I know there are diverse such constitutions which
admit not of Phlebotomy, which may several ways come to pass: Phlebotomy not
always (...) ab^olute necessity in this Fever.
either in the absence of any such repletion, or else in regard of the sex,
age, some ordinary evacuation supplying the place thereof, a thin or rare
structure of the body, the individual and particular constitution of some
bodies, and the like circumstances. And indeed the various manner of the
invasion of this disease, and the diversity of bodies it assaulteth (few being
surprised after one and the same manner, as Raro aut nunquaem eisdem ac^ (...)
and co^^i^onibus in (...) appare, hu^u mea^ febris sed pro varietate ^orpore^
apparatus, and a^^raum r^rum quib^^ corpus umanum muta^ri habent, variant (...)
inde ipsum (...) ^dem Mer^at^ loco nuper citat Crato etiam loco nuper (...).
writers do witness, and I may self have, as very often, so especially this
last year, and 1617. observed: in both which years the constitution of the
air, humid and austrine, was much alike, does require a diverse, and not
always the same manner of cure. And therefore as in all diseases, so in this
more particularly, people had need to consider with whom they deal, and not,
as it the too common and ordinary custom, to be trust their lives with such as
are unfurnished often either of skill or honesty. It is true the patient often
dies after the use of this remedy, and so does he also often recover after it;
and so if the case be to be judged by issue and event, why take they not this
with them then, and set the hares foot against the goose gibblets? Objections
against phlebotomy in this disease.
And whereas it may be objected, that phlebotomy in this disease occasioneth a
sudden evacuation of the spirits, so carefully here to be preserved. I answer,
that the former cautions carefully being observed, there is no such fear: nay
it is more agreeable to reason, that a breathing of the blood by eventilation,
should rather refresh the spirits, and by that means the better enable nature
to subdue the residue behind. And as some have died after the use of this
remedy, and others recover, so have I likewise observed diverse, who without
either this or any other means, died. And many again, especially of the
poorer sort, who after a long endurance of much misery by reason of this
disease, have at length without means recovered. This ministers sometime
occasion to some of the ignorant sort, especially of our too busy women, to
say it is in vain to use the advice of any Physician; which opinion is so
absurd in it self, that I think it needs no confutation. Answer.
But I reply to these pragmaticall busy bodies, that many poor women are in
their lying in hard pinched with poverty, lying upon a little straw, scarce
able to come by a morsel of good meat to refresh their hu^gry appetites, and by
this necessitating poverty, are often constrained within two or three days
after their delivery to go about their domestical affairs; and yet these
people (the blessing of the Almighty supplying the want of that he has
otherwise denied them) all this notwithstanding do well live, and recover
their former strength again. I would willingly ask any of these so wise
women, if they would in imitation of those poor people betake them to their
straw-bed in a raw earthen floor, forsake their warm eawdells, plum-broths,
almond-milkes, and many other dainties, their downe-beds well warmed, and
couches well accommodated, and betake them in so short a time to bussle about
their household business. Histori^^
There was a near kins-woman of mine once delivered of twins in the fields,
a great way from any town (she not thinking her time of delivery then so
near) accompanied only with her two men, the one performing the office of a
midwife, while the other posted to the next town for this same intent; but ere
her coming, the Gentlewoman was delivered, and lived till she was above eighty
years old. Of these swinnes also, the one was afterward a captain in the
Low Countries, and died afterward at home in his bed: and the daughter was
married to a gentleman of good means, and lived to be a mother of many
children. By these and the like these foolish and idle objections are easily
answered, and yet, sure I am, many of those poor people would be glad to enjoy
such comforts as those of the better sort do; Howbeit, I think, they would
scarce exchange their condition with that of those poor people, nor yet
imitate this last or the like example, howsoever the party sped well. Many of
these poor people, I am sure, would be glad to have the counsel and
directions of a good Physician, and would be willing to follow his directions,
at least in diet, if they were able. And howsoever many in this extreme poverty
through the blessing of the Almighty, who is able both with small means, Many
poor people although they recover of their disease, yet often endure much
misery, and are long a recovering.
and without any means at all to bring his own purpose to pass, yet do many
of those poor people also miscary and die; and many of those who recover, for
want many times of a small help, as of a glister, etc; often undergo a great
deal of misery, and especially for want of good, comfortable and wholesome
Diet, lie often languishing a long time. Now the judicious well know and
understand, that the Physician many times neither uses phlebotomy nor purging
medicines, where he sees no use of the same, but when he sees nature able of
it self to do the work, lets it alone, doing nothing but as he sees need:
and many times there is need only of some directions for diet: and yet is this a
thing of no small moment, as has been proved already. Besides, that the
presence of the skillful and expert Physician watches and espieth the fit time
and opportunity of doing, that which in his discretion he shall think fitting.
The vulgar indeed think the Physicians skill consists all in purging and
bleeding, and where either that is not to be done, or they conceive it ought
not so to be, they think there is no use of the Physicians counsel.

Whether Phlebotomy may be used in small Pox.
But now I proceed to the small pox, wherein we are to discuss this question,
whether phlebotomy in this case may be admitted or no? the which may be also
understood of the measells. Of this remedy in the diseases, not only the
vulgar sort, but some of better breeding are also very shy, whether there be
any just cause, let us inquire. To discuss this question, we are to
distinguish the times of this disease, whether before the eruption of the Pox
or after. It has been held hitherto by most people, a great absurdity to let
blood, or administer any manner of physic in the least fear, or suspicion of
any such disease, and many, especially of the more ignorant sort, are still of
this old erroneous opinion: but others have of late years, by the judicious
proceeding of learned Physicians, atteined to some better understanding and are
better satisfied in this point. It is then the opinion of all our best
Tempestive igtur detrahemius langui^ est ex intern^^ achii. Verum u^i iam maium
invests inhabitum corporis periculo^a est ph^^botomia. ^olle^ de ^orb, intern
libr. ^. tract de exanthern.
Physicians, that before the eruption of the pox, consideratis considera^dis,
all circumstances duly considered, it may be safely administered, if we see
need: and this I could both out of mine own, and other Physicians experience
plainly make appear. The late practice of the Physicians of the City of London
1628, where this remedy was used, both in this disease before eruption, and in
many young people for prevention, I think, has rectified the erring judgment
of many people. This last year, 1630. a Lady then living in this I own, had a
chamber-maide, History.
who falling sick, within three or four days after, I was sent for to her;
but perceiving some beginning of either pox or measells, and for this cause
abst^ined from phlebotomy, at first, by reason of the fever by me intended:
but inconclusion, the disease getting the upper hand, the fever increasing, the
Maid died. The same day, a little after, having hired another chamber-maide,
within a little space she also fell sick of a fever, for whom also my
presence and counsel being craved, at my first coming, finding a plethoricall
body, with an intense Fever, yet without any eruption of pox or measells,
although a feared some such matter, I caused open a vein in the arm, and the
next morning after the pox came for thin great abundance; and so through Gods
blessing upon the means, she in a short time recovered her former health. And
yet after the use of this remedy, she confessed, that before her bleeding,
she was not sensible of any thing that was either said or done to her: and yet
immediately after, she confessed she found great ease and allevation of former
accidents. If this party had died then, many of the vulgar would undoubtedly
have said, phlebotomy had been her bane, and yet the former died without it.
Citerum perpet^^^ non (...) ^o^omia cum iam ^^pulae in ^uperfi ie (...)
extite^^nt Etenim fit ^liquando prae^op^^ viti, ^t and (...) rel^quum fit
(...), vt ^eat v^^^ementer diffic^ltas s^^^andi, gra^is fi^^e ris ^ quo
tem^o^^^ si ni^^l repugnat vena s^cunda est ^lioqui san^u^ sagis utendum erit
Idem ibid.
Some Physicians proceed yet further, to the use of phlebotomy, even after the
eruption, in some cases, as in a great plethory, or abundance of blood,
accompanied with a Fever, difficulty of respiration, etc. especially, if there
be no other impediment or contra-indication. And in case this could not
conveniently be effected, then do they advise leaches, or else scarification
with application of cupping-glasses. But herein it will concern that Physician
that shall follow this course, to be very wary and circumspect, for fear of
hindering the laudable course of nature, as also for preventing the clamor and
calumny of such as are always ready to censure the Physicians best actions,
and to interpret all in the worst sense, especially if so it come to pass,
that the patient die of the disease. But because my purpose is not, in this
place to dwell upon particular diseases, I will speak but a word or two of
phlebotomie in the Iaundise, and so conclude this chapter.

Whether in the Iau^dise we may use phlebotomy.
As in many other points, so in this particular concerning phlebotomie in the
Iaundise, the vulgar are much mis-taken. They are always of opinion, that some
ordinary woman's medicine will do the turn, how unfit soever, and without any
consideration of the cause. Now, whether the use of phlebotomie be here
sometimes necessary, let us inquire a little. We are then first to consider of
the cause, and then shall we be better able to proceed to the right cure. This
disease then comes either of it self alone, without any other disease, and
that of diverse causes; or else as a symptom, an accident, or reteiner to some
other disease, a Fever, especially. Vide hac de re Mercatum Tom. 3. libr 4.
cap. 5. de intern. morb. curat. Holler. de morb. intern. lib. 2. cap. 37. de
liter.
If then it be conjoined with a Fever, the Fever of it self, if no impediment,
does indicate phlebotomie, and the Iaundise does not at all hinder our course.
And if it come primarily, and of it self, blood abounding, or being the chief
cause of the disease, it is in no wise to be neglected, as the authorities of
our learned Physicians do evidently witness, as I could prove by a cloud of
witnesses, if I had undertaken of set purpose to handle this subject, and
withal had not said some thing of this subject in Anatomy of urines, libr. 2.
cap. 9.
another place, this being here spoken only occasionally, and by the way, this
being often an accident accompanying Fevers, as we have said already. Hence
is evinced the mad temeritie of many, indifferently exhibiting their ordinary
Iaundise medicines in every sort of Iaundise, without any respect, either to
age, sex, cause, or any other circumstance whatsoever, of the which to judge
they are altogether unable; thus often trifling away irrecoverable occasion,
until the party be ready to be imbarqued into Charons boat. And thus it befell
a young Gentleman of Northamptonshire, some few years ago, History.
and little above thirty years of age, in whom, about the later end of the
Spring, the Jaundise was apparently to be seen, of the which a woman (as it
commonly the custom) took upon her to cure, and thus was the time trifled
away, until at length, in the Harvest, the Gentleman came over to Northampton,
to find some better counsel than this woman's skill could afford him, and did
continue here for a certain space. At my first coming to this Gentleman, I
perceived besides his Jaundise, a double Dropsy of the worst kind, together
with a very hot obstructed liver, whom, a learned Physician then living in this
place also, and my self, doing our best endeavors to cure, yet had this enemy
taken so strong possession, that all our writs of remove could not serve the
turn, nor would any means serve to bribe this grim sergeant, death. Let
people therefore be warned by other men's harms, and learn to be wise in that
which concerns them so near.

CHAP. IIIJ.
Of the veins to be opened in the body of man, together with the manner.

IT follows now in order, that we say something concerning the veins to be
opened in the body of man. Under this name, vein, we understand, besides the
ordinary veins, the arteries also, which by ancient Physicians were often
opened for diverse infirmities; the arteries have their original from the great
artery planted in the heart, and sending branches through the whole body, filled
with a pure, thin, subtle, and more refined blood than that of the veins, and
full of the vital spirits. These arteries are not with us usually opened, as
they were in ancient times, and that both in regard they are not so easily
found, also for the difficulty in the solidation, there being danger of
gangrene, or at least of a dangerous tumor, called ancurysma, which are hard
to be cured: of these therefore I will say no more.

The liver is the fountain and wel-spring of blood, from whence by the veins,
as it were so many pipes, it is conveied through the whole body. The two
principal, or master-veins, taking both their being and beginning, are the
great hollow vein, called by our Anatomists vena cava, Two great ans^^^ vern^s
in (...).
and the other vena porta, or the porter-veine. From these two especially vena
cava, are many great branches full of blood, distributed through the whole body.
Of these branches, a^ need requires, either by way of prevention, Veins
opened for d^vers ends.
or curation, we open sometimes one, sometimes another, as well for general
evacuation; as in great repletions, and prevention of diseases; as also
sometimes to evacuate blood abounding either in quantity, in quality, or both,
in some great and dangerous diseases. It is again sometimes used for
revulsion, and sometimes for derivation, as has been said already. Sometimes
also we use more particular evacuation of the veins: as by leaches,
scarification, with cupping, as afterward shall appear. The veins usually
opened in the arm, are six: Veins usually opened in the arm.
Cephalica, Basilica, Mediana, Axillaris: and besides these, yet two other; the
one running down the arm like a cord, passing betwixt the thumb and the
foremost finger, and another runs out betwixt the ring-finger and the little
finger. Among all these veins of the arm, none more safe to be opened than
the Cephalica, or humeraria, Cephalica, or humeraria may be opened with least
danger.
as having neither nerve nor artery under it, as the others have. These three
first mentioned are most usually opened in the arm: and sometimes the smaller
veins upon some occasions: to wit, either when the great veins are not
conspicuous, or perhaps when we fear the strength of the party; in which case
the salvatella, Small veins sometimes ope^ed.
running betwixt the ring finger and the little finger is opened. For these
great master-veines send down small branches, which are distributed among the
fingers. All these veins are branches of the great ascendent truncke of the
great hollow vein. Cephalica upon what occasion to be opened.

Basilica, orliver-veine Mediana. Salvatella.


The Cephalica, we open to evacuat and pull back from the head and parts above
the neck. The Basilica, or liver vein, to evacuat and pull back from the
liver, and all parts beneath the neck. The mediana or middle vein draws as
well from the parts above as beneath the neck. The Salvatella, as well right
as left are used to be opened in infirmities of the liver and spleen. The vein
betwixt the formest finger and the thumb.

Diverse veins in the head opened upon several occasions.


That which runs out betwixt the formest finger and the thumb is not so
often opened. In the head there be diverse veins which upon occasion may be
opened, howbeit not all in use, there being few Surgeons so skillfull as to
open them well. There is one in the forehead usually opened for a pain in the
hinder part of the head; as also for the numnesse and heaviness of the head,
and for the inflammation of the eyes, called Ophthalmia. The veins of the
temples and in the corners of the eyes help the megrim, old inflammations of
the eyes, scabs and inflammations of the eye lids. But we proceed now to
veins usually opened in the foot, howbeit there be diverse more veins in and
about the head, which might upon occasion by a skillfull Artist be opened;
Veins opened in the foot.

Ischiadica seu vena poplitis.

Saphena.

De his fusius Galenus lib, de ven^ sect.


howbeit there is in frequent request phlebotomy of the veins called ravinae
in a Squinancy, and internal inflammations of the almonds, Tensills and
Tongue. In the foot then there are two veins usually opened; the one called
Ischiadica or vena poplitis in the outside of the foot, usually opened in
inflammations beneath the kidneys, especially after the Basilica of the arm
has been once opened. Saphena in the inside of the foot we open especially in
infirmities of the womb: as in retention of the menstruous flux, etc. And
these veins are branches of the great truncke descendent of the great hollow
vein. Many ignorant Surgeons do indifferently oftentimes open the wrong vein
in the foot in women, that in the outside for the other in the inside, In
phlebotomy a rectitude to be observed.
and so do them wrong. In phlebotomy we are likewise to observe a rectitude,
or answering of the place affected, to the place by which we evacuat, and this
in revulsion is the best way, and gives speediest ease: as in a Pleurisy, to
open a vein in the arm of the same side; as if in the right side, the right
arm; if in the left, the left arm. And Galen himself witnesses, that the
parts of the body which have this relative situation, have likewise a great
communion or sympathy one with another: as likewise eruptions of blood
proceeding from any part of the side affected, bring no small profit; whereas
that which proceeds from the contrary side brings but small benefit, or if
otherwise, it is after a long time. But upon many other particulars concerning
this point, and many other alterations concerning the veins to be opened, I
think it not pertinent now to insist. The manner of opening of the vein, and
the orifice are not to be passed over. The manner of the section.
Now as for the manner of the section, it is of three sorts: oblique or
slopwise, when as we reiterate this operation the same day, transverse or
overthwart, when as we purpose no reiteration: downright, when we intend
reiteration the next day. Sometimes also we make a larger orifice, and
sometimes again a narrower. A large orifice we use when the blood is cold,
thick, clammie and melancholicke, in Harvest and Winter, and in strong and
able constitutions. And therefore in all diseases proceeding from melancholicke
or phlegmatic blood, as in the Fever, quartane, quotidian, madness
proceeding from melancholy in the brain, Apoplexy, suppression of menstruous
fluxes in women, we are to use a large and ample orifice, A smaller orifice.
as likewise, when we are to make use of a plentiful evacuation. Sometimes
again, we are to make a smaller orifice, and that both to prevent weakness,
to evacuat the thinnest blood, and to avoid the dangers which might ensue upon
immoderate evacuation. If the party likewise prove unruly, as in Delirations or
Phrenesies; or yet fall out in the night time, the same course is to be taken,
and the sick to be watched, lest the opening again of the orifice should
procure a dangerous, if not deadly evacuation.

CHAP. V.
To what persons this remedy may safely be administered? And whether a woman
with child may safely be let blood, where some thing also concerning the age
fit to be phlebotomised.

NOw in the next place we are to consider what persons may safely use or not
use this so noble and necessary a remedy. In diseases (...) are not always to
use the remedy by them indicated.
And we are not always when we deal with the sick to set upon that remedy,
which the disease does indicate; but must always in the first place carefully
consider, whether their strength will endure it or no? A great disease present
or imminent does indicate phlebotomy, if strength, age, the time of the year,
etc, do permit. But every weakness and debility does not inhibite the use of
this remedy. The strength then is weakened two ways: first, when it is
oppressed, and again when it is quite dissolved and overthrown. Strength
weakened two ways.

Oppression of the streng^h.


Strength oppressed does not always inhibite evacuation, but only that which
is dissipated and prostrated or overthrown, either by the abundance of humors
or by their stuffing up, ab infarctu: as in that Plethoricall disposition
whereunto the Wrestlers of old were obnoxious, and by interception of the
veins, in fierce fevers, Stren^th prostrated or overthrown.
etc. the strength is dissipated or prostrated by the dissolution of the
substance of the spirits of the musculous or fleshy parts of the body, of the
spermaticall parts, or by the overthrow of their temperature: as comes to
pass in Consumptions, Hecticke and malign fevers, in great crudities and the
like. Strength is to be considered according to the triple faculty, animal,
vital and natural.
The strength is to be considered according to the triple faculty, animal,
vital and natural, and are discerned by their several functions: the animal
by the functions of sense and motion, the vital by the pulfe; and the natural
by the signs of concoction and cruditie: although Galen mentions only the
vital, as that on which all the others do depend. Strength is altered by
means of things natural; not natural, What constitutions of body admit of a
large and plentiful evacuation; and what constitutions admit no^ of it.
and such as are besides nature. So then in the first place the temperature of
the body hot, of a solid and firm substance, with large and ample veins, may
sustain a large and ample evacuation: the contrary constitution either
admits of a very small, or no evacuation at all. Again, a hot and moist
constitution of body, of a soft and thin substance, and often enduring great
dissipation, does in no wise sustain any great evacuation. A temperature of
body, hot and reasonable dry, with large veins, will endure a more liberal
evacuation, than a body either cold and moist, or cold and dry; by reason that
both these constitutions have but small veins. And let this always carefully
be observed, that such bodies as have small veins and little blood, can spare
but little, if any at all, of this so noble and necessary a humor. And for the
most part in fat folks the veins are small: but if they be larger, they
endure phlebotomy better than the former. What age fittest for Phlebotomy, and
what not.
Again, several ages have their strength and natural vigor for the most part
answerable. Middle and flourishing age is ordinarily and most commonly lusty
and strong, abounding both in blood and spirits, and by consequent is more able
to endure a more copious evacuation of blood. But old age, decrepit I mean, by
reason of the defect thereof, is to be exempted from this evacuation. And
children before 14. years of age, although their strength in the substance do
abound, yet by reason of their soft and tender bodies, and by means of much
evacuation, endure a daily dissipation, do therefore either admit of little or
no evacuation at all by phlebotomie; howbeit we take not always our indication
from the age, as hereafter shall appear. Again, The sex.
we are to consider the sex, for men generally and most commonly are for the
most part better able to beat this evacuation than women, such especially as
are of a thin and foggy constitution, with small narrow veins. And during
the time of their menstruous flux we are to abstain from this evacuation,
unless sometimes in case of necessity, Custom to be considered.
when as it exceeds in quantity. Women with child are likewise, unless in
case of necessity, exempted from this generous remedy. And here custom comes
also to be considered: for such as are altogether unaccustomed to this
evacuation, using a spare Diet, turmoiled with cares and troubles of mind, are
less able to endure this evacuation. The contrary is to be understood of such
as are thereunto accustomed, Things contrary to nature do inhibite evacuation.
and feed more liberally: Again, things contrary to nature, in regard they
overthrow the strength, do inhibite this evacuation: as diseases proceeding
from crude and ill humors without repletion; as a Dropsy, or the like. As
also great distempers of the principal parts, great wounds, etc. And so do
likewise distension of the nerves, pain or gnawing in the orifice of the
stomach, swounding, long-watching, immoderate fluxes of the belly, spontaneous
evacuation of blood, so far as it overthrows strength, or does suffiently
diminish the matter of the disease. Neither yet does it suffice to consider the
present estate of the sick, but to forsee also what is likely after to ensue.
By these things we may then judge; not only who may safely bleed, but in some
sort aim at the quantity, and how often and when we may let blood, concerning
which, notwithstanding, we shall say some thing more at large in the next
Chapter. But first I will discuss two questions; one concerning women with
child, the other concerning the age, and whether age does indicate Phlebotomy.

Concerning that therefore which has been said concerning the sex, Whether a
woman (...) blood or no^
especially of bleeding women with child, arises here no small doubt, whether
a woman with child may safely be let blood or no? And great reason there is for
this doubt: first, for that the ancient (...). Aph 30. ^ib ^.
Hippocrates, and father of Physicians has left upon record, that there is no
less danger than of aborsion to let a woman with child blood. There is also
good reason to succor this assertion: for blood being the aliment and proper
nourishment wherewith the child is sustained in the mothers womb, if this
sustenance be by phlebotomy withdrawn, the infant frustrated of its food,
fades and is expelled before the accustomed time of deliverance. Now if this
question were to be dec^ded by a jury of women, I doubt not, but we should have
a verdict for the negative, unless it were composed of some of the wiser sort,
who, perhaps, have sometimes seen this with good success practiced. To answer
this question, true it is, that Hippocrates does totally inhibite this remedy,
Answer.
and that, as is most probable, by reason neither this phlebotomie in women
with child, nor yet any other was so frequent in his age, as it is now adays.
As for that which some allege, that the evacuations in his time were so
copious, and so far exceeding ours, that with good reason he forbids the
same, I think it to be no reason at all: Phlebotomy not so frequent in the
time of Hip^ocrates as in this our age.
for it is not to be supposed, that a man of that eminent understanding and
experience was ignorant of the limitation of so generous a remedy, according to
the several circumstances. But with us this controversy is long ago decided,
we finding by daily experience, that this in many women proves a most
sovereign and singular good remedy both for themselves and their children, as
both my self, and many other Physicians have by daily experience found to be
true. And besides, it is by an unanimous consent of our Si sit in trimis
mersibus, si adhu^ ie dicoti^nes mutendi ^ ag^^n h^c, po^est ^uto mini eo
tempore per sect^onem v^narum orachio^^m, etc Mercur^d^ (...) orb. muliebr lib
22 ca^ 1 Nec adeo uti vet^res fecerunt, i^ grev^dis ple^bo^cis ^hlebo mia
metuenda, cum exodus us usu aliquas abortivisse mi^i non constet etiamsi^ ambis
terve repetier^nt ^ vi^ean usque mustas, etsi vulu^ratae aliterve laesae,
plurimum sanguinis profuderint, tamen foetus minime nocuisse. ^ lat. Praxeos
sua tract. tertio cap. 1.
late Writers of whatsoever nation fully agreed upon and determined. But let us
now see whether there be any reason for this practice? We see many times some
women so abound in blood, that all the time they are with child, they have
their periodicall and monthly flux as constantly as at any other time, and
often also in reasonable great abundance, which argues that besides the
infants ordinary allowance, there is yet a great deal to spare. Besides, it is
not unknown that some women cannot go out their full time, unless they make
use of this remedy. Again, do we not see, that even toward the later end,
when they are now nearest their time of deliverance, notwithstanding the infant
now growing greater, demands a greater allowance of food than in former
times, yet are the breasts now filled fuller with this whitened blood than
before. As also, Reasons proving this asser^ion.
do we not often see some women to void a great quantity of pure, refined
blood at the nose, sometimes in the beginning, man in this case, It may safely
be used if discretion be not wanting.
if surprised with some dangerous acute disease by the advice of a judicious
and understanding Physician; to prevent a further mischief, she make use of
this remedy? It is true indeed, the issue and event is not in the power of
mortal man; and perhaps; sometimes some have observed some sinistrous accident
to have in sued the use of this remedy, which may deter others from the use
of it. But by the same reason we may reject the most laudable and useful
evacuation in time of greatest need, it not always answering our expectation:
I can, notwithstanding, upon mine own experience testify, that some, to whom
upon necessity, In the Authors own experience safe.
I administered this remedy, did afterward confess, they never found more
easy and speedy labor, than after they had used both this and some other
evacuating remedies, being likewise freed from diverse accidents wherewith they
had been in former times after their delivery molested. Others, I make no
doubt, can speak as much Hippocrates allows women with child, the use of
strong purging medicines in certain months, which is yet, in my opinion, more
dangerous, and not so in our power to stop when we please: as for phlebotomy,
it is always in our own power, according to our discretion, as we shall see
need require, to take more or less, and to use reiteration, if we shall not
see it safe to take our full allowance at the first. But let no man here
mis-take my meaning, as though I would persuade women, This remedy not rashly
to be attempted.
desperately and unadvisedly to rush upon this noble remedy: nay, my meaning is
so far from this, that I wish them to be very wary and circumspect in the use
hereof, but when the case without it is dangerous, if not desperate, then my
counsel is, that they rather admit of a lawful warranted remedy, which, by
the blessing of God, is in all likelihood and probability like to do them
good, then to lie still in the ditch and cry God help me, and yet suffer none
to put to their helping hand. But it may be the issue will not answer
expectation. I answer, it is better to admit of a Praestat ancep^ adhihere
anxiliu^ quam nullum Cells. lib. 2. cap. 10.
doubtful remedy, than to continue in a desperate case, admitting none at all.
Moreover, I wish women to be circumspect and wary whom they set aworke, not be
trusting so precious a jewel as thine own, A careful consideration must be
had what Physician one uses.
and it may be, thy childs life also, with some idle, prating, counterfeit
Physician, assuming, though undeservedly, unto himself, the name of a
Physician: but such a one as thou know an Artist, experienced in his
profession, and able to consider of all the several circumstances here to be
taken notice of. It is also to be observed, that it is not here sufficient to
take notice of the strength and greatness of the disease in the woman her
self, but to consider the strength of the infant also, and how much time is
past since her first conception. And let this rule always carefully be
observed, that this remedy be freelier, and in a greater quantity used in the
three or four first months than after. Again, although the woman seem to be
strong and lusty, yet I wish the quantity to be but small, and rather to be
sparing, so committing the rest to nature, than standing too punctually upon
thy set quantity, adventure to overthrow both the mother and the child: and if
there shall seem an urging necessity of a larger evacuation, then will it be
far better, and less prejudicial to either party, to divide thy quantity,
and take it at two several times. Whether phlebotom^ may be used to accelerate
and further the birth.
Besides phlebotomy upon this occasion, there occurres yet another in the which
phlebotomy is used in women with child; and that is, when now their reckoning
is at an end, and they upon the point of their labor, then some Physicians do
advise phlebotomy in the foot, to facilitate and further the birth. The which
course, as it has been practiced by Hippocrates, so can I not altogether
disallow of it; Answer.
yet I wish him that shall undertake such a task, to beware, lest he
precipitate and eject this guest out of his ancient habitation before his lease
be out; and so according to the old proverb, Haste might make waste.

Now, Whether the age does ^ndicate phlebotomy
before we conclude this point concerning the persons who are to use this
remedy, I have yet something to sa^ concerning the age. We have already said,
that Lice^ Grae^^ i^ puer^usque ad 14 annum a venae sect, abstinerent a rabes
(ut a^^^s ix^mus lib 1. schel ad observat. ^^) e^iam in pueris eam a^iqua do
non reliquerant, it nos in puerts c^annorum pteur ^ide laborantibus v^^am
^e^uimas et^am ^ quo^am 13 ann^^ageate, Quida (...) us (...) ensis fael^ci
success^ qu^^^o anno venom ^^cuit A^naeius ven^m ^^cuit (...) puero (...) sangu
n^o. ^ a^no (...) i^ pueris tomen (...) ^culis ((...) c^ae angustiores sunt)
angu^^^^ utuntu^, (...) ^^rum ^aud^ For^e^ (...) serv^e (...). libr. 16. sc^ol
ad observe ^^
children under 14 years of age, were not to use this remedy. Upon this then
arises a question, whether the age does indicate this evacuation or no? This
is the vulgar opinion, that the age simply does indicate this remedy: and
therefore they stand punctually upon the number of years, without any
consideration had to the strength of the party here principally to be
considered. I answer therefore negatively, that the age does not simply and in
it self indicate the strength, and by consequent the use of this remedy, but
we are rather to consider the state and constitution of body: for we see some
bodies to be far stronger at a certain age, than others at the same age.
Some children are stronger and abler at eight, than others at fourteen: and
if we may upon urgent occasion let the one blood at fourteen, why not the
other at eight, upon the like occasion? Again, as Ergo si ^uvenis i^b^cillus
e^t, aut si^m (...) quae grav^da non est parum val^t, mali san^^is mi^t^^ur. At
firmus puer and robustus sene^, and gravida mul er valens, tuto curantur, libr.
2. cap. 10.
Celsus says, if a young man be weak and feeble, or yet a woman that is not
with child, we ought to refrain from this remedy. But a child that is
strong, as likewise a woman with child may safely use this remedy. Put the
case therefore, that a child having overpast his sucking time, of a thick and
strong constitution of body, and full of blood, fall into some acute dangerous
disease, and without the use of this remedy, in all appearance, irrecoverable;
it will be the best course without any further delay to let him blood, yet not
without a due consideration of the time, age, etc. And thus Avenzoar let his
son blood at the age of three years. The like may be said of lusty able men
or women, sick of some dangerous disease proceeding of repletion, as long
experience has taught us. Besides, it cannot be denied, that some men are
abler and lustier at 60 or 70, than diverse others at 40 years. Why then may
not such persons, upon urgent occasion, enjoy the benefit of phlebotomy. Some
dozen years ago, m^ pres^nce was solicited for an ancient Gentlewoman in
Bedford-shire, about 65 years of a^e, History.
at that time much distempered with heat, not without a Fever, and fear of
further danger. After the use of some small means fit for the purpose, fearing
she would hardly admit of phelebotomie, although in my opinion then useful for
her, yet I asked her whether she had ever used this remedy, and whether she
durst adventure upon this remedy, if need should so require? she replied, that
for many ^eeres together, she had used this remedy at least three or four
times a year for diverse years together, and therefore very willingly gave way
to the same, which was not without good success, and was very lately alive.
Moreover, do we not by experience, often see many both children, women with
child, and old men and women lose a great quantity of their purest and most
refined blood, at the nose, and often in a far greater quantity than any
Physician would ordinarily let out of the arm? and therefore to conclude this
point, let not people so much stand upon niceties of age, which as appears,
is of no such validity, as to withstand and oppose in time of need so noble and
so necessary a remedy.

CHAP. VI.
Of the quantity, how long the patient is to bleed, and concerning reiteration
of this remedy in time of need, with a confutation of some erroneous opinions
concerning this point.

IN bodily infirmities we are not only to consider what is fitting for them,
but likewise what nature is able to bear: and therefore we are here to use no
small discretion, lest we give nature more than it either demands, or the
cure requires. When nature therefore is strong, then dare we boldly go about
that which the disease does indicate: for nature it self being once set aworke
by some auxiliary means, does afterward of it self perfect the rest. The
quantity then of evacuation of blood must answer in quantity to that which
abounds in the body, provided the strength can bear it. No certain rule
concerning the quantity can be set down.
But because there is no certain rule and measure of the strength, neither do
we assuredly know or foresee diverse circumstances and accidents to ensue
after; as of the constitution of the ambient air, etc. this quantity therefore
must needs remain uncertain. It being, notwithstanding, in our power when we
open a vein, to take less or more, according to our liking; therefore
comparing the strength with the greatness of the disease and the repletion of
the body, by the proper signs of them both, it will not be very hard by an
artificial conjecture, to come very near to the just quantity. How to find
it out.
But if yet we cannot so well bring our purpose to pass, it shall be the
safer course to keep within compass, and reiterate the remedy another time,
than standing too much upon our precise quantity, endanger the sick by
diminution of strength. Now, we must always measure the quantity of
evacuation, by the quantity or greatness of the causes requiring, and strength
tolerating the same. And from the mutual comparison of the diseases requiring,
and the strength tolerating, A triple quantity observed.
this phlebotomy admits a threefold difference: for there is one sort of
phlebotomy called great or perfect, evacuating all or the greatest part of the
matter of the disease; another profitable but imperfect, which detracting some
part of it, leaves a lesser quantity behind, which therefore nature may
easily overcome: there is yet a third, so small and little in quantity, that
not only may it be called imperfect, but being so small, is also unprofitable,
and no whit beneficial. The like we may say concerning the strength, which is
either absolute, and in the height, in a mean declining from the former, The
strength threefold.
or weak and overthrown: the first requires perfect evacuation; the next,
though imperfect, yet may prove profitable: the last admits either of a very
small, or no evacuation at all. The like division may we likewise make of the
diseases. And if we would safely proceed in our cure, this rule must always
be observed, that we lay in even scales the greatness of the disease with the
measure of strength. If the disease be very great and dangerous, When to use a
liberal and plentiful evacuation, and when a lesser.
accompanied with strength answerable, we are not to defer a full and copious
evacuation: if the disease be less, yet with full strength, a lesser
evacuation may prove profitable, that the cure may be safe, although not so
sudden: for to use a plentiful evacuation at the first, is not always so safe.
Again, if the strength be but small, yet not altogether prostrate, meeting
with a great violent disease, it will be best to divide this evacuation, and in
the time interceding these two evacuations, before we come to reiteration, to
refresh and cherish languishing nature. In acute diseases, Reiteration when to
be used.
by reason of greater danger, we may use a more plentiful evacuation, if
strength be not quite prostrated: but if only oppressed and languishing, we
are not to omit, but divide it, as has been said, which we commonly call
phlebotomy, per (...). In diseases called chronicall, In chronicall disease^
how to determine of the quantity.
or of longer continuance, the longer we think they are like to last, the
lesser evacuation may serve, for fear lest nature sincke in the way: for in
chronicall diseases, we are not only to have an eye to the present, but also
carefully to foresee the future forces. Again, in phlebotomy, In prevention
the quantity.
by way of prevention in approaching of any disease from repletion, we need
not evacuate so much as this plenitude requires; as we see in diseases which
require a present and speedy cure. The ancients, I find, were very lavish in
this kind of evacuation, and let them blood often, till they swounded; and yet
is this no certain rule how long they should bleed, neither yet is it safe,
Swounding no certain sign of the quantity.
although both by Hippocrates and Galen in some cases prescribed; for neither
are such as fall into those fainting fits, always sufficiently evacuated,
neither yet will some swound, although they lose a far greater quantity of
blood than the former. No more is the changing of the color of the blood,
especially in inflammations, and many more cases besides, any certain sign of
the true quantity. Now, this change of color is either to be observed in the
flux, or after: in the flux it is hardly discerned, The changing of the
color of the blood is no certain rule to discern the true quantity.
and after, it is to small purpose: and we see oftentimes, that after a double
or triple reiteration, the blood is still bad, and yet were it not safe to go
on still, until the blood appear better: for so sometimes we might exhaust
all the blood of the body. And this is diligently to be observed of covetous or
ignorant surgeons, either in the City or the country, many being often too
ready to exceed the limits of reason; as little certainty is there to be found
in the changing of the face and eyes. As little certainty by the change of the
face and eyes.
And in the stream or impetuosity of the flux of blood, there is yet as little
certainty as in the former: the which many ways fail before a full evacuation,
The best rule of finding out the true quantity.
howbeit none of these are to be slighted and neglected. We are then to judge
of the competent quantity principally by the ease ensuing, and the patients
easy enduring of the same. Now although sudden alieniation do not always
ensue, yet were it better again and again to reiterate the same, than proceed
too far at first, as we have said already; The ancients very lavish in this
kind of evacuation.
although the Gal. de venae sect
ancients proceeded to an excessive quantity, as 6. or 7. pounds at a time; and
a Bo^all. de venae sect.
late Writer relates strange stories of prodigious and stupendous evacuations
in this kind, which I had rather believe than make trial of the like. Our
Britain bodies, I am sure, would never endure such vast evacuations. But I
hold the rule of the learned Celsus far better, that it is good to be sparing
in the use of those remedies which evacuat strength, the preserver and guardian
of our lives, and in stead of credit purchase often disgrace to the Physician.
Now when as we cannot at once evacuat a due quantity, Reiteration very useful.
then, as said is, we come to reiteration. And this, both in evacuation,
revulsion and derivation, is a very effectual remedy: and the oftener this
reiteration be used, the more effectual is the revulsion, says Lib de (...)
per ^ang m^ffi^n.
Galen. Now in reiteration, if necessity urge us not much, and we not so well
as yet acquainted with the patients strength, it is better to begin with the
lesser quantity: but if necessity constrain us, and we assured of the patients
strength, it is better at first to begin with a greater quantity, and more
the second time than the third. If we are to let blood in any inflammation, we
are to reiterate it the same or the next day, and out of the arm. Reiteration
by way of preservation may be deferred until the third or fourth day.

Erroneous opinion o^ ^he Vulgar.
Now before we proceed, we must say something of a point, whereof some ignorants
make a scruple: for oftentimes it comes to pass, when the physician, not
without great need, prescribes this so lawful and use full a remedy, that
some are afraid to venture on it, not out of any present fear or
faint-heartednesse, but for fear, say they, lest our bodies look for it
again every year. Confu^ation of this folly.
To this the answer is easy, that if there be the like occasion, the year
after, I see not, why thou may not with as good reason, as before, yield to
the use thereof. If there be no need, I warrant thee from incurring any danger
for this omission. Some again use to bleed twice a year, and fear some great
danger if this be neglected; Whether fit to bleed constantly once of (...)
and it may be demanded, whether this be well done or no, blood being the
treasure of life, and the fountain and original of all the spirits? Answer.
I answer, I would wish thee to be well advised, how thou partest from such a
Jewel: yet because some may have more need than others; as namely, sanguine
complexions with large and ample veins, living in ease and idleness, may with
good counsel be bolder than others. Some do this merely out of custom, Many
c^untrie people much (...)

Covetous Surgeons much (...) the people


as many of our country people will, without any occasion, or good counsel,
bleed in the Spring: many covetous country-surgeons (and I wish there were none
in the City) also will sooth them up in this erroneous opinion, and bleed them
without any necessity at all, yea, although it prove oftentimes the cause of
many after-ensuing dangerous diseases. But such as have, without any need for a
long time inured themselves to so base acustome, I advise them by degrees to
change this custom into a better: and if they be such, as have been accustomed
to live in ease and idleness, and to feed liberally, I wish them to be more
frequent in their exercises, and more sparing in their Diet; so shall they both
live longer, and enjoy better health. No certain perpetual rule can here be
prescribed to all bodies; yet will it prove always the safest, especially in a
business of so great a weight and moment, to establish thy thoughts by good
counsel, for fear of a too late repentance. Another gross and erroneous
(...) of the ^ulgar.
There is yet another erroneous opinion, for want of the knowledge of natural
philosophy, and ignorance of anatomy, hatched in the brains of some ignorant
people: to wit, that when as they perceive any palpitation, by reason of some
enclosed air, either in the muscles of the temples, jaws, or any other place,
they are of opinion that the life is then in that place, and by consequent, if
the blood should at that same instant be let out of that place, that the party
would instantly be deprived of life. And a Langius epist. medic lib. 7. ep^st 8.
learned Germane Physician relates, that some ignorant Surgeons, after the
falling of the blood out of the vein into the vessel, perceiving it sometimes,
by reason of some flatuous matter mingled therewith, a little to move or
tremble, made the party presently to drink up this warm blood, affirming that
this was the very life, whose sottish, ignorant and erroneous opinion the same
author does there learnedly confute, on the which I cannot now insist, having
now yet many other things to handle, both concerning Phlebotomy and other
matters. But I hope our people will be wiser, and leave many of their foolish,
idle, ignorant and superstitious opinions, both concerning Phlebotomy and other
points of Physic. As for this flatulent, windy matter, the letting of it out,
if there be not therewith too great an abundance of blood, will rather do thee
good than hurt: and as for the life, it is not confined to any particular part,
but diffused through the whole parts of the body, although it be more
principally, or as we may say, radicative, in the more noble and principal
parts, the Brain, Heart and Liver, according to the seats of the three
principal powers or faculties, animal, vital and natural.

CHAP. VIJ.
Of the fittest time for evacuation by Phlebotomy, both general and
particular, both of election and coaction: as also whether we may safely let
blood during the dog days.

Eccles. 3.1.
AS there is a fit and convenient time for every action under heaven, says the
wise man: so is not time to be neglected in this so weighty a business of
evacuation by Phlebotomy, where especially the life of man lies at the stake.
Time general and particular.
The time is either general or particular. By the general time we understand
the four seasons of the year: by the particular, the day and hour befitting
such a business. Among all our Physicians it is agreed upon; that the Spring
is the best and most seasonable time, Best time of the year.
and next to that the Autumn: but the Summer by reason of excessive heat, and
the Winter by reason of cold, The particular time.
are not esteemed so seasonable. Again, in the particular times the morning is
answerable to the Spring, the noone tide to Summer, the afternoon to Autumn,
and the night to Winter. Best time of the day. Time of election and coaction or
necessity.
Now in the use of Phlebotomy, we consider the time after a double manner, one
of election, another of necessity. In election when it is in our power, we are
to make choice of the fitest time, as well general as particular: in necessity
and cases of extremity and coaction, we must take hold of that which offers
himself, when we stand in most need. Now Phlebotomy is used for a double end,
either to prevent sickness in the whole, or to cure diseases in the sick. In
prevention, In prevention.
where we may have a free election, we are to make choice of the Spring, as the
most temperate time, and a day temperate, neither too hot nor too cold: and in
particular, the morning is the best and fittest, an hour or two after rising,
the party to be bled being fasting, and having unburdened his body of the
fecall excrements, and concoction being fully finished. Next to the Spring is
Autumn, in the which, if any be to bleed, the same cautions are to be
observed. In sickness is the case not a like, where we are not always allowed
this freedom of election. In sickness.
Now all diseases are either acute or chronicall, as we have said already. In
Chronicall diseases
In chronicall diseases we are, as near as we can without the patients
prejudice, to pitch upon the best and most convenient time: In acute diseases.
but in acute diseases the case stands far otherwise, where we are often
cast upon a coacted necessity. Wherefore, in burnning Fevers, in Plurisies, in
Squinancies, and other like diseases, if strength permit, we are not to defer
this remedy, delay here breeding danger; but with all speed, either day or
night, at what soever hour, not regarding any preparation of the body, to go
about it. By protracting of time, strength is often overthrown, and therefore
it will be best at the beginning, and if in the first or second day, we find
this be wanting, we are not to adventure; nor yet after diverse days over-past,
if it be not wanting, to incite it. But according to the (...)

Aphor. 29 lib 2.


Hippocraticall oracle, it is best in the beginning of the disease to undertake
such a work, and when the humors are now settled, it is best to rest. And this
is chiefly to be understood of such diseases as are without intermission. In
acute diseases with exacerbation, whether they admit of remission or
intermission, we are to make choice of this time of greatest tranquillity. In
acute diseases admitting of intermission or remission the fittest time.
And therefore in Fevers with remission we are to take that time; as in those
that intermit, we are then to use this remedy, whatsoever hour it be, whether
day or night: for then nature is most at quiet, and in regard of strength they
then are best able to bear it. But when in any inflammatio^, Inflammation and
great pains without a Fever.
or any extraordinary great pain without any Fever we are to use this remedy,
we are not to wait for any remission, but having respect to the greatness of the
cause, presently to set upon it, and in time of greatest extremity to use this
remedy, to the end there may be procured a retraction of the humor (the other
parts transmitting thither both blood and spirits) from the part affected.
Phlebotomy used only for a general evacuation from the whole body, ought to
be administered in the beginning of the disease: and therefore in putrid Fevers
it is best to be used at the first, according to Method. med. lib. 9. Revulsion
when to be used.

Derivation.


Galens testimony. Revulsion is used in diseases proceeding from distillation,
and is best in the beginning in the impetuous flux of humors: but derivation
after revulsion or general evacuation, the affluxe of humors now ceasing.

By that which has been said already, Whether Phlebotomy may be used during
the dog-daies.
the fittest and most convenient time for phlebotomy appears to be that which
is most seasonable, and by consequent, both the heat of Summer, and the cold
Winter-season is here excluded. But here arises a great scruple in the minds
of the vulgar and ignorant people, who are so fearful of phlebotomy in some
seasons, especially during the Dog-daies; howbeit, The Vulgar shy of bleeding
during the dog-daies.
if they well weigh the premisies it will evidently appear, that in all
seasons we are to yield to necessity. But the vulgar seem to have some reason
on their side, at least the authority of Aphor. 5. lib. 4.
Hippocrates, who has left this upon record, and the ancients did carefully
observe this rule, and that, as seems, not without reason. I answer, Answer.
it is true indeed, we have it recorded by antiquity, that during that time, it
is not so safe to adventure upon phlebotomy or purging, and that by reason of
the excessive heat of the Sun in that season. And indeed in hot countries,
this season is often very tedious to the body of man, In hot countries this
season often very hot
by reason of the dissolution of the spirits, and by consequence debilitating
the whole body: yea, during that season, the sea it self suffering some
alteration is more troubled, and wines in the cellars during that season do
often show themselves therewith affected by a new ebullition, as it were
boiling a fresh. And therefore, good reason had these ancient fathers of
Physic, to wish men, during these excessive heats, to refrain from the use
of any great evacuation. But let us see, whether there be any specificall,
malign influence descending upon the body phlebotomised during that season.
The vulgar, yea and some of a more refined understanding are carried away with,
I know not what, superstitious fear of this season, be it hot or cold; that be
they or their friends in greatest extremity of danger by reason of sickness
in the same, yet shall one hardly many times persuade them to the use of any
remedy. And in this, women (as they are commonly most pragmaticall, and
readiest to control the Physicians prescriptions) show themselves most cross
and opposite. In the first place then, true it is, that this season proves
often the hottest time of the year, the Sun then entering into the sign of
Leo, as they call it, and the dog-starre then arising upon our horizon, the
heat is most commonly then increased. No particular nor (...) call influence
p^^ceeding from the ^og-starre does any ^hit at this time at^ (...) bodies.
But that any specificall malignity, more than is procured by heat, (which is a
general cause, and an active quality) is conveied from this or any other
star or constellation into the body of man more than at any other season. I
utterly deny: although the vulgar are of opinion, that the very season of it
self, howsoever the ambient air be affected, portendeth always danger: even
as the Papists have a strong conceit of their opus operatum, in mumbling over a
set number of their Prayers in an unknown tongue, the receiving of the
Sacraments, Phlebotomy not ab^^lutely (...) ^^dden by the ancient Physi^^ans,
but compara^^vely.
etc. to be of great force and efficacy. And besides, these ancient Physicians
do not absolutely inhibite the use of Phlebotomie or physic during this
season, but hold comparatively, that then they do not so well suit with the
body of man as at other times, and in this do our opinions also concur. And
what judicious Physician of our time makes choice of these canicular days for
any elective evacuation by way of prevention? do we not always advise people,
when it is in their power to make choice of the most temperate time, as may
plainly by our precedent discourse and difference of election and coaction or
necessity, appear? But the question is not here of election, but of coaction;
whether the body being assaulted with some furious Fever or Inflammation; as
Pleurisy, Squinancy, or the like, may not in this case safely admit of
Phlebotomy? If we should deny this truth, we should be injurious to our Maker,
In time of necessity we may freely use this of any other remedy during the
dog-daies.
as though he were not always the same, and would in some seasons leave men
destitute of any help or succor, than the which, what can be more impious? I
deny not indeed, but that if the sick can adjourne his disease (as Lawyers do
their courts) till the Spring or Autumn, I shall be of their opinion. But we
know, and many wilful and peevish patients, though to their great smart, do
often find this old saying true: Ante capillata, post est occasio calva. He
that will not when he should, As no time of the year is free from sickn^sse; so
in no time (...) a miss to use the means.
often cannot when he would. Now as there is no time nor season of the year,
wherein there is any immunity or exemption from sickness, so is there no time
nor season of the same, wherein we are deprived of means and comfort against
this calamity. And this is the generally received opinion of all learned and
judicious Physicians, as I could prove by a multitude of witnesses. Among many
others, there is a famous Laurence Ioubert a ^^^r^urs p^pu^artes (...) ^econd^
chap 6.
French Physician, who lived in the South parts of France, the Kings Physician,
and chancellor of the famous University of Mountpeliers, and Doctor of the
chair in the same University; who of set purpose confuteth this sottish and
erroneous opinion of the vulgar in this particular concerning evacuations. And
yet this place Montpeliers, I mean, is betwixt About ^00 miles to the South
(...) England.
8 or 9 degrees further to the South, than we here in this cold and moist
climat, that known to be very hot, and of the same height of elevation of the
pole, with many parts of Spain, and Italy, yea, of Rome it self: which may be
yet further proved by the strong wines of that country, exceeding many places
of Italy; as likewise by the abundance of Orenges, Lemmons, Olives, Figs and
Pomegranats, together with the abundance of Scorpions, Vipers, and other
venomous vermin (to counterpoise this former felicity) no where but in hot
climats and countries to be found. This En este on doit mavulir le bec et anon
le membre sec. Ibid.
same Physician, among many other passages, inserts a metric advertisement for
women, wishing them, during this hot time, to counsel their husbands, for
their healths sake, to abstain from their amorous imbracings, rather than
trouble themselves with controlling the Physician in his own profession, who
can tell well enough what to do without their directions: although as he
affirms, some would have this abstinence in all the months that have not an
(R) in them, Tous les mois qui n^ort pont de R^^aiffe la femme et prennos le
verre. Ibid.
yet disclaimeth he this rigidity. All this notwithstanding, many people are so
pertinacious and obdurat in this their foolish opinion, without either ground
or reason, that they will often adventure their own, or dearest friends life,
rather than admit of any means for the recovery of their health during this
season, and if, perhaps, sometimes pinched with extremity, by means of some
dangerous disease affrighting them, they use the lawful means not to be
neglected in any season, necessity so requiring, and through the violence of
the disease, the patients, or assistants error, there follow not that
answerable success as was expected, the Physician is presently laid in fault,
and condemned of temeritie and boldness, in adventuring the use of any means
in such a season, when as the ambient air, perhaps, was as temperate as in
April (as in this our country and climat often comes to pass) yet all is
one, the very name of a dog-day, does as much affright them as if some furious
mastiffe dog had bitten them by the breech. History
About some ten years ago, a Knight living in Northamptonshire of any
acquaintance, about Bartholomew-tide, fall sick of a viol^^t Fever, with
extreme drouth and headache, and although at his first falling sick, he would
willingly have sent for me, yet some Ladies and Gentlewomen his friends, at
that season lying at his house, for the space of two or three days, caused him
defer the execution of his intended purpose, and withal, kept him so short
of drink, that scarce would they allow him a good draught of drink in a day.
At length finding no amendment, and fearing some further inconvenience,
neglecting now his women's counsel, he sent for me. At my first coming, I
found him in great extremity of heat and headache, and for this cause I
presently caused administer to him a cooling glister, with diet accustomed with
such a case, giving way also to a more liberal allowance of drink, which of
all other things gave him most content. The next night after, his rest was
better, and after followed great allevation of his former accidents: and
therefore, although my purpose was to open a vein, yet perceiving some
allevation, and hoping still for more, by reason of signs of concoction in the
urine, which accordingly came to pass (withal knowing the hard conceit these
Gentlewomen, as is usual also with others, had conceived of that remedy,
especially in that season, which nevertheless was not them very unseasonable
in regard of the temperature of the air) with cooling glisters, abstinence,
and some other small means, within the space of two or three days, this
Gentleman recovered again his former health, although by some otherwise
indicious, this sudden good success was not expected. And as for phlebotomie
during the dog-daies, and purging, I have both known others use them with very
good success, and have been my self both an agent and patient in time of
need. Many years ago, about the midst of the canicular days, a man of this
same Town, about 64 or 65 years of age, Another of an old man.
fell sick of a dangerous pleurisy, who sending for me, entreated my best
advice and counsel. Acquainting him then with the danger of the disease,
notwithstanding the heat of the weather and his years, I wished with all
speed to open a vein, a remedy of all other most likely to help him in this
extremity. This was by him as speedily put in execution as apprehended,
(notwithstanding many women's opposition, and their peremptory sentence of
temerity and unadvisednesse, past upon me, as it pleased them to speak) and
with as great speed was he rewarded for a voluntary submission to the means,
by a speedy and happy recovery: who after that lived a many years, and with a
thankful remembrance to his dying day acknowledged me under God the means of
saving his life. But lest I may seem too rigid and strict in imposing heavy
burdens upon others, which I would not touch with mine own little finger, I
will add yet one experiment practiced upon mine own person. Some 15 years
ago, Another concerning the Author himself.
during the heat of these canicular days, being newly returned from a noble
Lady of Northamptonshire, and being great with child, and then in some
extremity had desired my presence and counsel; after my return I was
surprised with the headache, a drouth, with other accidents, arguing the
inchoation of a Fever, and therefore well remembering that golden rule,
principijs obsta, I did first use a gentle purge, keeping a diet fit in such a
case, and the next day after sent for my Surgeon, and out of the median of the
right arm, caused him take at least twelve ounces of blood already begun to
putrefie; with a full purpose within a day or two after, in case of continuance
of the former accidents, to have proceeded to a reiteration of the same remedy,
evacuating as much out of the other arm. But the former quantity sufficed, and
followed immediately alleviation, and so with the use of a gentle purging
infusion, by the help of Almighty God, recovered my perfect health: All this
notwithstanding, I kept not at home two days together, but every other day
rode abroad to visit a Gentlewoman, a patient of mine, lying within some few
miles of Northampton, and newly before that come out of Staffordshire; and
this is moreover yet observable, that although the weather was then as hot as
any time I have known it, yet found I no more faintness then in my body
after this evacuation, than at any other time of my perfectest health; but on
the contrary, a speedy alleviation of all my former accidents. It were easy
for me to produce yet a multitude of mine own, and other men's experiments of
this nature, but these few shall suffice to confirm the truth of this
assertion. I will yet add this, that there is no small difference betwixt this
our cold climat, and the country of France, the South part especially; Great
difference betwixt this our cold climat and other hot countries, lying further
to the South.
in the which, notwithstanding, their Physicians, as appears, allow both of
phebotomie, and purging in time of need, be the season as it will, as has
been already proved. And Greece, in the which Hippocrates and Galen lived, is
yet a far hotter country than any of the aforenamed, as extending it self
to diverse degrees near the South. Besides, this our Island being so environed
round about with Neptunes watrie walls, by means of many moist exhalations by
the Sunne-beames attracted into the middle region of the air, is often so
watered with showers, and our air often so overcast with thick cold clouds,
by this means keeping from us the force of Phoebus burning beams; that by
this means we need not be so much afraid of the biting of this mad dog. To
which purpose, I will relate a story told me by a friend. The cruel Cardinal
Beton, History
Archbishop of St Andrews in Scotland, sent for that famous Cardan out of
Italy (for no me^er, nor ordinary Physician would serve the proud prelates
turn) to consult with him concerning some infirmity then troubling him: in his
return homewards, passing through England, he staid some days in London.
During his aboade in the City, many hearing a great fame of an outlandish
famous Physician ( as the Proverb says, A new broom sweepeth clean)
resorted to his lodging to crave his counsel: but when he saw them so shy of
physic, and that few would then in that season adventure on any, he asked
what was the reason? to whom it was replied, it was by reason of the dog-daies,
in the which to take any physic, they were much afraid. He wittily and
wisely replied again, Canis non mordet 10 Anglia.
Canis non mordet in Anglia: alluding to this I have already said, that the
Dogstarre is not much to be feared here in England. And this did yet more
evidently appear, this late year past, 1630. in the which, during all this
canicular season, or Dog days, we had not three hot days, Dogge-daies in the
year 1630 cooler than any other pa^^ of So^mer preceding.
and proved colder than any of the former part of the Summer. If the season
then before or after be hotter than these canicular days, why should not we
be as wary and circumspect, as when the heat falls out in that season? And
when that time falls out seasonably, why are we as fearful of it, as when
extremity of heat scorcheth our feeble bodies? It is the ambient air, hot or
cold, etc. as I said, The ambient air chiefly to be taken notice of.
which does most affect our bodies and not any specificall malign influence
from this or any other star that threatens us with any mischief. Let people
therefore from hence forward be warned, that they be not so superstitiously
fearful at the very naming of a dog-day, that during that season they neglect
good and wholesome means for the recovery of their health in time of need.
But if it be in thy option, no necessity compelling thee, make choice of the
most temperate time. But if thou be surprised with any acute or dangerous
disease, whatsoever the season be, take heed of dallying with thy disease: take
counsel of a judicious and able Artist, and thou shall find, he can
accommodate his physic to any season. The judicious and understanding
Physician goes not hand over head and at random; but knows how to
accommodate his physic both for quantity and quality, not only to the
several seasons of the year, but to the particular and individual
constitutions and diseases also. But if thou cast thy self upon Empirickes,
woman physicians, and unlearned Physicians, I cannot blame thee to be afraid,
not only of dog-daies but of any other season also. But if thou will be ruled
by no reason, upon thine own peril be it, it is sufficient thou have been
warned.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether in Phlebotomy we are to observe the signs, and several other things
pointed out unto us by our Ephemerides-masters.

BY that which has been already said, it has plainly appeared, that in
diseases we are in no hand to procrastinate and spinne out time, but lay hold
on opportunity without respect of time or season whatsoever; yea, even during
the scorching heat of the canicular days. This has been acknowledged, as an
uncontrolled truth, and generally entertein'd by the most learned and judicious
physicians of all ages of all countries; Greek, Arabian, Roman, and others of
all Europe. But as errorum plena sunt omnia, error and imposture carries a
great stroke in this whole universe; so neither the noble celestial creatures
themselves (the heavens I mean, with their glorious orbs, The heavens and
celestial bodies not freed from imposture.
and resplendent ornaments) have been freed from imposture. And all this by
means of wicked and malicious men, prostituting themselves to imposture, and
making bawds of these celestial bodies, the more cunningly to circumvent the
vulgar, and cover their their own covetousness and ignorance in the
principles of this profession. Hence have we so many erroneous and pernicious
opinions now so ruvetted in men's minds, that they cannot without great
difficulty again be extirpate. And this opinion concerning phlebotomie, the
Moon being in certain signs, among others is not one of smallest
consequence. Of phlebotomy, the Moo^e being in the sign, erroniously supposed
to have predominance over that part.
To maintain then this erroneous opinion they have taken for granted, that
there are certain signs, having dominion over certain parts of the body, and
therefore if any shall happen to be let blood in that member, where, say they,
the sign for the time is predominant, portendeth no small danger to the
patient. And therefore when at any time there is occasion offered of using this
remedy, especially to the vulgar sort, or country people above others, they
ask presently how is the sign? And if it shall then happen to be in that
place to be phlebotomised, Superstitious and erroneous ignorance of the vulgar
in this particular.
a man had need to use all his eloquence, and yet should scarce, perhaps,
persuade them to it at that time, until such time as the sign be past that
part. And why, I pray thee, ought we to be so curious in the observation of
the sign, so many thousand miles off us, and in the mean time neglect the
ambient air, which, as sense it self teaches us, environeth us always on
every side. Now, they cannot deny that all diseases are engendered in all times
of the year, in every month, week, day and hour; and hot acute diseases are
as well engendered when old frosty father Saturn is in conjunction with the
Moon, as when fiery Mars is joined with the same affinity: and cold diseases
again engendered as well under the one as the other. Now, then, Master
Astrologer yield me a sound reason, why I may not as well use phlebotomie and
any other evacuation during these conjunctions? And yet I^ centi oq ^io.
Ptolomee was in this particular so superstitious, that he affirms that if
physic be exhibited while the Moon is in conjunction with Jupiter, it does
blunt the edge of the operation thereof. For, says he, our life consists in
heat and moisture, over which qualities Jupiter presideth: wherefore, says he,
if the Moon be also joined to Jupiter, then is vigor and strength so much
increased, that they far surpass the vigor and strength of the medicine, so
making it of no effect or operation, insomuch, that it works not at all. But
by Ptolomees good leave, Confutation of the former opinion
all our Physicians do very well know, that by the vigor of natural strength
and heat, all physical operations are furthered and perfected. And therefore
the Moon being accounted the mother of humidity, if Jupiter add yet more
moisture, there will be great use of all the heat he can communicate unto us:
and by this means, Humidity does not inhibite, but rather indicate phlebotomy,
and so does the heat concurring.
in all probability of reason, it would seem, this active quality of heat
should the more facilitate the operation in the body now replenished with this
double humiditie. And therefore, not without good reason is it that all our
Physicians do prohibit the use either of phlebotomie or physic to old and
decrepid persons, by reason of the want of this natural vigor and strength,
and then only use them when as the body abounds therewith. But now
concerning the sign, says the Languis epist med^^ lib. 1 epist 35. and 36 d^
his agit cop esi^^
same Author, we are nor to open a vein when the Moon passes by that sign
which governs that part of the body: for, says he, and with him Almansor,
that since the Moon fills the body with moisture, that then that part is
replenished with humiditie: and yet it would seem there should be then most
use of phlebotomie. But this doctrine is again contradicted, by Messahala, who
would have us to begin the cure of all diseases, when as the Moon is entered
into that sign which is appropriated to the part affected: as if one were
surprised with a Frenzy or Squinancie, although the Moon were in Aries,
Taurus, or Gemini, yet should we begin our cure by incision of the Cephalica
vein, otherwise called humeraria; which, nevertheless, is quite contrary to
the tenent of Ptolomee. This contrariety caused some to confess, that these
precepts were to be understood only of such diseases as might well without
danger be deferred. It will then follow, that in dangerous and acute diseases,
they are of no force and validity. Of this then the people in their
prognostications ought to be advertised: for, we see many times, that many,
ensnared with this perverse opinion, rather than they will transgress these
irregular rules, often endanger that which ought to be to them most dear. And
have we not too many that sooth them up in this their sottish superstitious
and erroneous opinion? I speak not only of our ordinary Ephemerides-Masters,
and ordinary almanack-makers, but I wish some of the sons of Levi were not
too much addicted to such idle vanities, with calculating nativities, and such
other foolish frothy and forbidden stuff. I will not deny, but since the Moon
is accounted the mother of all moisture, We reject the observation of the Moon
in some cases.
there may be some use in the observation of her increasing and decreasing,
according to her quarters, and when it is in our free election, by way of
prevention, if there be no impediment, we may use evacuation in the increase
of the Moon. And we deny not that this same Planet manifests her power in
many sublunary creatures; as we see in the Sea, and creatures therein
contained; in the fruits of the earth, etc. It is true indeed, that Lib. 2. and
3. de dieh. ^iti^.
Galen, both in the birth of mankind, and other creatures, and in the
critical days ascribes something to the motion of the Moon, according to
the 16 angles of her monthly peragration; and we do not deny the same. But
withal, it as certain, that the observations and effects of these critical,
judiciarie and provocatory days depend upon the disposition of the material
cause of the disease, ^riticall days depend more upon the ^ateriall cause of
the ^isease, than by the stars.
and concoction of the same, and better known by the ordinary and set periods
and paroxysmes of the disease, than by all the stars in the Heavens,
witnessed that worthy Passim in aphor. prog. nost. and epidem.
Hippocrates, in many places of his works. And in 4 De Morb.
one place he makes it yet more plain, where, searching into the cause why
the crisis comes commonly upon the odd day, makes no mention of any star
at all. The Moon of a swift motion, and abides not long in a sign.
Now, besides all this, the Moon is of so swift a motion, that in two or three
days she passes by any of these signs, and that with such a celerity, that
she has quite passed by the sign, before the force of the same can be
perceived, or taken notice of. And yet these wise Masters will have us in no
hand to exhibit any purging medicine, the Moon being in any sign which does
ruminate or chew the cud: to wit, Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, ^^m^nantit signa.
for fear forsooth, say they, lest it be again rejected by the mouth. But I
could tell their wisdoms, that both my self and others have found this most
idle and false; besides, that it is builded upon no reason at all, I have found
by manifold experience, that a nice, A weak stomach especially clogged with
corrupt humors will scarce retain any physic whatsoever.
dainty and weak stomach, but especially oppressed with corrupt humors,
will scarce retain any purgation, unless it be first evacuated by vomit
upwards, the which I have proved to work as well in my self as others, when
the Moon was most remote from those ruminant signs: and again, purgations to
work as effectually in these ruminant signs as in others. And besides, I have
already made it appear out of Hippocrates, that he appoints some times and
seasons fitter by far for evacuation of some humors, than others, Sottish
and idle opinion of ruminant signs, being but a mere fancy.
without any relation at all of the sign. Moreover, this rumination is but a
mere Chimaera, or fancy, and nothing indeed: for these stars fixed in the
firmament for men's better conception and capacity, were by some, at first,
ranked into certain troops, and as it were, certain companies; and unto each
several troop or company, men imposed, certain names of such creatures as in
their conceit they most resembled: as of a Ram, Bull, Bear, Dog, Dolphin,
and the like; although most, if not all of them might as well be resembled unto
some other shape or figure, and so carry another name. Now, then, it is
apparent, that there is neither Bull nor Bear, Dog nor Cat in these
celestial bodies; and therefore what relation can there be betwixt this their
supposed rumination and our medicines here exhibited? I could yet instance in a
multitude of such idle fopperies: as in what signs with the Moon to
administer pills, when potions, and such like; and when to waine children. And
what better is it than mere heathenish, to point us out some days of the
month good, some bad, some critical, some not? Heathenish and superstitious
to account some good and some bad days.
Is there one day of it self better than another? and what makes one day
better than another but divine ordination? If they say this depends upon some
influence of celestial bodies, I answer, that according to their own
doctrine, they are so various and diverse, and do so suddenly change, that
their operations and influences cannot be certain, and fixed upon set certain
days always the same. And therefore, as for their good and bad, critical and
not critical days, we care not at all. But what is the reason that these
wise men do so much neglect that great and glorious triumphant King Phobus,
who sitting in his chair of state, by his access toward, The Sun and his
con^unct^on, with other p^anets (...) neglect^
and recesse from us, produces such an alteration in the seasons, and the
ambient air, that not one of all the rest of that great host of Heaven is able
to parallel his power? Who does not sensibly see and feel the various effects
and changes of seasons he produces in this inferior world, is deprived of
his senses. His effects are more forcible than any of his fellows: the Moons
moisture is but a passive, his vivifying heat an active quality, and therefore
of far greater force and validity. See in his highest exaltation above our
Horizon what a sweet refreshing heat he darteth down upon these sublunary
creatures. Again, in his recesse and lowest declination, Efficacy and p^^net
of this King of planet*
notwithstanding Jupiters hot and moist influence, and all his auxiliary
helps, yet for the most part do we find such frosty effects of old frostie
father Saturn, that nill we will we, forced we are to confess and
acknowledge the noble effects of this King of Planets above all the rest: for
the which cause, not without reason, among all remote causes, in the generation
of mankind, and by consequence of other creatures, Sol et homo ge^e^an^
hominem.
the Philosopher ascribed the pre eminence to this noble Planet. The efficacy
and power of this powerful King does yet more plainly appear, by comparison
of those places where he does most manifest his Majesty and power; namely,
under the Aequinoctiall line, and within the Tropicks, Intolerable cold of
these Northern climats.
and many degrees on either side: with such places as are a great part of the
year deprived of his princely presence; or else by reason of the far
distance from them, are so little thereby refreshed, that in some of those
places, there is no habitarion for mankind, and in some others a life indeed
some lead, but such, as, in regard of the outward estate, a death may rather be
desired. The Hollanders in their navigations, to find out an North-East
passage to the East Indies can testify what enterteinment they found at Nova
Zembla in about 70 degrees elevation of the Northern pole: Forbisher, Davis
and Hudson of this Nation, attempting the same by the North-west, could
testify the same truth. If we will pass but into Poland, and other dominions
of that great Prince; as Life-land, Lap-land, Courland, etc. We may, during all
Winter, make our habitation upon that vast and waterie element, where Neptune
has his dominion, as safely as upon any part of the terrestrial globe. The
Sun abides a complete month in one sign, and yet there is no mention made
of the Sun in the sign.
Besides all this, the Sun has his abode and continuance in each of these
twelve signs, for the space of a whole month; and yet for all this, there is
no mention made of the Sun in the sign, which, in regard of these former
reasons would seem farie more reasonable. Claudius Deodatus panth. hygiast.
libr. 3. cap 10.
A late German Writer makes mention of one of those Prognosticators, who had
lately published an Almanacke, wherein were set down certain days in each
month of the year, on the which, if any were let blood, it portended extreme
danger, if not death to the party: and besides, prognosticated death to all
that should be let blood on the feast of the Annuntiation of our Lady (I hope
the Roman Catholics will have this villain by the ear, for so far
vilifying the power of the virgin Mary that she, that commanded her Son, cannot
divert any dismal event from her holy day) on the day of Simon and Jude, and
S. Andrew the Apostle, with many more other idle fooleries. In the same place,
again, he inveigheth against the foolish custom of some, who postposing
sign, or any other thing whatsoever, in the midst of Winter, be the weather as
it will, frost, snow, or hail, especially upon S. Stephens day, do usually
(as is the custom here with horses) to have a vein opened. Pertinax ista
mu^torum Chir^rgorum consuetudo, nullis rationibus firmata, nulla expe^^entia
stabilita, nullis veterum, nec recentiorum medicorum authoritatibus munita, eo
usque pedem extuli^ ut non solum conjunctiones, oppositiones, aspectu^
insaustos, and pestilentissimos in omni vene sectione, aut purgatione
pertimescendos proclament, quasi venae sectio aliquo illorum diorum adhibita
certa pernicie hominem sit emedio sublatura. Interim huius perniciosae
opinionis, alios, vel authors, vel fautores non h^bent, quam Ani^ulas,
Veneficos, Zingalos, ineptos Empiricos, Astrologos, and Ephemeridum
calcularo^es, etc. Et paulo post unde Gal. 11. method. Has Lunae ^bservationes
adeo nihili fecit, ut etiam magnopere saudet medicum, qui quinquagenarius in
cephalalgia noctu sibi venam inciderit, Jdem Deodatus ibidem.
This pernicious and pertinacious custom of some Surgeons (speaking still of
the sign) and by them stiffely maintained, is a cause of no small mischief in
a well ordered Commonwealth; and yet has no solid nor sound foundation,
either from ancient or modern Physicians of greatest fame, who never have any
regard unto the same. Vide Duncani Liddelii Aberdinensis Scoti art. medic.
libr. 5. de febrib. curat. libros. 3.
And some of our late Writers, of no small note, and as well skilled in all the
Mathematical Sciences as any Ephemerides-master of them all, yet neither in
their cures nor indications once make mention of the Moon in the sign, of all
these idle planetary conjunctions, evil or good aspects, and the like
needless curiosities. Among others, there was of late years a famous
Physician, and native of Aberden in Scotland, and no less skillful in
Mathematical speculations, and therefore by Henry, late Duke of Brawnswicke
(called Henry with the long nose, and married a sister to our late gracious
Queen Anne) chosen for Mathematical profession in his University of
Helmstadt: and yet in his learned works published to posterity in the Latin
tongue, in his tractat of indications, evacuations and curations of all sorts
of Fevers, has not one word of the observation of the sign and the rest of
that rabble of foolish vanity. And this is also the general opinion of all our
most famous and skifull Physicians. Cum igitur illae planetarum conjunctiones,
oppositiones, quadraturae, and catera signa illis mendaciorum tabulis affixa,
non sint vera and legitima vel venae sectionis, vel purgationis, aut
scerificationis indicatoria, non ita scrupulose observanda veniunt, sed multis
nominibus irridenda, expungendaque. Primum enim illorum varietas, diversitas,
and descrepantia, argumento est, nihil omnino, vel ad venae sectionem, vel ad
catera^ vacuationes confer, cum in uno diario bona, in alio mala; in his
multa, in illis vel nul^a, vel exigna depingatur: Idem ex pernicissimo Lunae
per signa Zodiaci rotatu colligiur: licet enim in calendarii tabula Luna
duabus, vel tribus in Scorpionis signo viis excurrere doceatur, tanta tamen id
pernicitate fit, ut citi^^ Lo^o signum illud percurrat quam signi vires exeri,
and animadverti possint. Idem Deodatus loco priu^ citate.
Since then these signs, conjunctions, and the rest of these more than foolish
and superstitious observations set down in these lying Ephemerides tables
(says our former author) are no certain true judicatory signs, either of
Phlebotomy, purgation or scarification, they are rather to be derided, and
blotted out of all books. And At bone Deus a^^antum praestaret ut (...) cipes
and urb^um ^^^ore^, has st^ol^ (...) ^n Ephe^ne^ (...), versum (...) and ^ore
ve^e^^m, (...) d^^rum (...) ^r^nt qu^r^m (...) and sacrorum (...) ^bus diebus
(...) ratione sa^ra deorum m^^eria (...) de^e re^t, and (...) ^^dicabat etc Et
pau^e post, Hu^usmodi ^ane Ephen^er^^es, quae s^derum ortus and o^^asus, ac te^
pestates, d^^que mysteriorum fastos ei ne ^^stos nobis ind^carent nobu satis
forent: quas nugigerulum Astrologorum vulgus su^^ ex imaginar^^^ Lunae and
pla^etarum aliorumque a pectuum i^sortu^^is, exaltationibus atque
triplicationibu^, dierum ^lectionibus defoedavit^* qui ut imperitus S^ytotomus
ex uno calopodio omnibus solularia conficit: sic illi Astrologi ex eadem anni
constitutione hominibus etiam sub diversissimo coeli themate natis, qua di^^
s^^are venam, c^rpus pha^maco purgare, cucurbitulis aut hirudinibus sanguinem
emungere, pueros ablactare, mercari, peregre proficisci, novat induere vestes,
caput and barbam radere, resecare ungue^ faustum sit, indiscriminatim omnibus
praescribunt. Taceo quod bella, principum mortes, annona caritatem, ^erfricta
fr^nte praedicere non erubeseant. Querum^nugis moderatores urbium confifi, nec
eorum prudentia and ratione habenas reipublicae moder^ri, nec Medici aegros
recte curare possunt. At id reipublicae parum interesse censes? Nequaquam:
digniores certe essent in quos omnes anu^ scommata jacerent, quam Thales fuerit
Milesius, qui primus Solis praedixit ectipsim, and stellas ursae minoris
monstravit; hic enim egressus domum ut astra contemplaretur, inque sub^ectam
decidens foveam, irrisus ab anu fertur, quod ea quae in coelis essent scrutari
vellet, quum quae pedibus essent subjecta non videat. Si^aec anu^ nostri seculi
deliramenta vidiss^t quid eam dicturam arbitraris? Annon exclamaret: O vanitas
vanitatum, and super omnia Astrologorum vanitas, etc. Picus Mirandulae ^omes
and Angelus Politianus contra Astrologiam iudiciariam scripserunt. Item August.
lib. 2. supra Genesim, lib. 2. de Doctr Christi and lib. de civit Dei copiose
contra Astrologos genethl. Porphyrius etiam test Iamblicho candem resutavit
Testatur etiam Langius Mars^l. Ficinum qui in libro de vita caelitus comparanda
conscripto hanc Astrologorum curanai morbos methodum docuit and approbavit:
eundem tamen tandem, palinodiam Angelo Politiano and Pico Mirand^lano canentem,
ingenue sateri ha^ Astrologorum observationes ut quomodo libet ad vita
conservationem profuturas se congessisse, non ut eas probaret, sed potiu^ cum
Plotino gravissimo Platonis interpret derideret, and ambobus congratulatur,
quod Astrologica vanitatum and superstitionum Portenta tam argute quam sancte
confutaverint, and quod contra Astrologos qui Iovi coelum frustra ^eripere more
Gigantum moliuntur, hic ut Palladis alumnus, ille ut alter Hercules egregie
decertaverint. Haec ex Ma^sil. Ficin. lib. 12. epistol Porphyrius, test
Iamblico totius eorum artificij fundamentum his verbis evertit and abnegavit,
dum ait: Si quu cognosceret figuram nativitatis, Dominumque figurae, inveniret
quoque damonem suum, and solveretur per ipsum a fato nativitatis Sed subdit,
illam scire, and hunc invenire esse impossible: and regu^as Astrologorum esse
incertas and incomprehensibiles, auctore Chaeremone. Nam certe quis in ta^^
praecipiti fiderum nocturna and diurna vertigine, quum minima momenta ingentes
parturiant mutationes, quae vix quisquam cognitione assequi possit, qui^inquam
exact nativitatis thema assequi possit, non video. Add, quod observationiis
astrorum motus organa, raro fint ad amussim facta, sed plurimum manca. Haec and
alia multa hanc materiam concernentia congessit Johannes Langius medicus
doctissimus and celeberrimus lib. 1. epist. medic. epist. 35. and 36, ex
Macrob. Saturn, lib. 1. Suida, Heschio, Ovid. 1. Fast. Gell lib. 4. cap. 9.
Diog. Laert. lib. 1. Eusebius. de praepar. Evangel. lib. 12, etc.
another famous Physician and his countryman before him, wishes that the
magistrate would take order that in these public prognostications, nothing
might be divulged, save only the Festival times, together with the times and
returns of legal proceedings. The like could I wish might be looked into here
in his Majesty's dominions, that we might have nothing but the moveable
feasts, the motion of the Moon, and the times and returns of the Terms: and
if any memorable accidents or historical relations were set down, I think no
man would be against it. As for Physicians they could make a good shift without
their help and directions, to phlebotomise both the sick and the whole; to
purge by pills, potions and electuaries, as the case and occasion should
require: women could weane their children, the barbers shave beards and cut
hair; and every man pare his own nails without the Almanacks prescription
and direction. And Princes could undertake, and wage war, and others go
about the business of their particular places and callings, without such
busy-bodies intruding upon that which concerns them not. By these particulars
it may then appear, that this judicial Astrology is not so well rooted, but
may easily fall to the ground, being so loosened and weakened by so many famous
and worthy personages of several ages and times: yea, and some who have in
former times favored the same, after they were thoroughly acquainted with the
vanity and uncertaintie thereof, at length forsook it, and have left their
recanaition for a perpetual memorial behind them. Many others things
concerning this subject be said, and many arguments to evince the vanity and
superstitious use of Judicial Astrology, with all the dependants on the same:
but this were besides my text, and withal would prove a task too tedious,
especially for me, having at this time so many other things yet to handle; and
therefore I will now draw this point to a period: protesting nevertheless,
that what I have said, is neither of any hatred or prejudicate opinion
conceived against the persons of any, who have either practiced this Art, or
published any thing concerning the same: but only to vindicate the truth from
error and imposture, and to give the world notice, how far they have hitherto
been deluded. And besides, it never came into my mind to harbor in my heart
the least evil thought against that noble and thrice renowned true Astronomy,
with the subalterne Power it has, from the great Lord, Maker of Heaven and
Earth, received over all these sublunary creatures: Only I would not have the
servant to have dominion over his master, and place a creature in the place of
the Creator, and to abuse the simpler sort of people, as is most frequent with
those which attribute so much to this art.

CHAP. IX.
Preparation before phlebotomy, during bleeding what to be done, and how to be
ordered after. Of particular phlebotomy by leaches: of sacrification and
cupping. Of searing, setum, vesicatories, etc.

IN the first place then before phlebotomy we are to prepare the body,
Preparation to be used before phlebotomy.
by cleansing it from the excreme^ts of the first concoction contained in the
guts, and withal we must have a care to correct the crudities of the stomach
and small veins. Crudities.

Expulsion of the fecall ordure.


Crudities before must be corrected by a spare and wholesome Diet. As for
expulsion of the fecall excrements, it is safest to use a gentle, emollient
glister, of some gentle, lenitive, Manna, sirup of roses, or the like. A broth
made of loosening herbs; as mercury, mallows, betcs, spinach, groundsell, and
the like, will sometimes serve the turn. But if necessity constraines us, or
any other acute disease urge us: as a Pleurisy, a Squinancy, or the like, we
are then to make no delay, but take hold of the present opportunity, delay in
this case threatening no less danger than death. Imbecility of the orifice of
the stomach.
If the orifice or mouth of the stomach be very sensible, if some choler
proceeding from the liver or veins have ceized upon it, or it has contracted
any imbecility or weakness, then before we set upon this work, we are first
to corroborate the stomach, and b^unt the edge of these humors, with the juice
of lemmons, pomegranats, barberies, or rather their sirups: and the imbecility
of the heart is to be remedied with a toste in a little Canary-sacke, hipocras
or the like; as also with some cordial loosings, or the like solid or liquid
substance. If fasting be offensive, an hour or two before, they may take a
little of some liquid substance, broth cawdell or the like. The party to be
phlebotomised, if in health, is to bleed sitting, unless upon a small occasion
subject to swound in which case he may bleed upon his bed. In sick persons,
especially when they are weak, Situation of the patient to be let blood.
this same rule is to be observed, and withal we are to be observe and
diligently to mark, whether in the bleeding strength continue; What to be
observed in the bleeding.
the decay of which may be discerned by the changing of the color, by gaping
and yawning, by stretching and reaching, dazeling of the eyes, singing of the
ears, the hicket, loathing of the stomach, and especially by the changing of
the pulse: in which case it is good either to give over, or else to pause a
little until the party be a little refreshed, and then to bleed again, or
defer it a while as occasion shall require. Swounding.

After how to be o^dered.


If he swound set him backward sprinkle his face with rosewater, or other
ordinary, and present to his nose refreshing smell. After bleeding, especially
in sickness or weakness, the patient is to be laid upon a bed on his back,
not sleeping for two or three hours after; and within an hour or two may take
some food in a small quantity, and easy of digestion: as some cawdell, broth
or the like. And in case of sudden fainting it may be sooner used* or at least
some other comfortable cordial. After this, the patient must keep a good and
spare Diet.

But many times is comes so to pass, Particular phlebotomy by leaches.
that this noble and generous remedy by opening of a vein cannot so well be
effected, or at least is not so fit, in regard blood is oftentimes impacted
into some particular part, so that it cannot by ordinary phlebotomy be
evacuated, and then do we betake our selves to a particular kind of
phlebotomie by leaches, scarification and cupping glasses. Election of leaches.
The leaches must be chosen, such as live not in stinking puddle-water, not
very green, nor having great black heads: and being caught, they are to be
kept in fair water, which is often to be shifted. Preparation of leaches.
Some counsel to put a little sugar in the water, and some a little blood.
They are best that live in waters where moss and frogs abound: not rough on
the back, of the color of antimony, or having blew lines; but round little
tails like unto mice, and small heads. In defect of phlebotomy, when for some
good consideration it cannot conveniently be administered, we may apply them to
the great veins: but most properly they are to be applied to the small veins.
In what cases most useful.
They are much used in the hemorrhoidall veins, and do best of all draw unto
them melancholicke blood: and for this cause, they are of singular good use in
Itches, Scabs, and the like. They are to be put through a quill, Application.
and so applied to the place we please; howbeit some use a sponge, fomenting
the place first with warm water, and then anointing it with a little blood to
make them suck the sooner. Some, when they are a sucking, cut off their tails
that they may draw more freely. If they fall not off in due time, sprinckle
some salt on them: and if they fall off too soon, To make them fall off
bath the place with warm water, and if it may be with convenience, bleed over
warm water; and after they are fallen off, this will still further the
bleeding. If the vein bleed too long, use the same means we use in stopping
the bleeding of a vein in ordinary phlebotomy, adding, To stop the bleeding
if thou will, a little powder of bole armenicke, some powder of galls, etc.

O^ scarification.
Besides these, there is yet another particular evacuation of blood performed by
means of scarification or racing of the skin, and differreth according to
the manner it is used. If deeper, it draws more copiously and from the remote
parts, and withal evacuateth the thicker blood. It may often supply the place
of Phlebotomy. And thus in the arms deep scarifications evacuat from the
whole, as likewise sometimes in the legs, especially cupping glasses being
therewith applied. And thus Oribasius in that great and memorable Asiaticke
plague scarified both himself and many others, and drew out very near two
pounds of blood, and by this means escaped the present danger. In what cases
to be used.
Scarification in this same place is also good in a plethory, proceeding from
the suppression of the piles or menstruous flux. It may sometimes be used, by
way of revulsion, to the remote parts, observing still the rectitude or
communion of the parts, as in the inflammation of the right leg,
scarification of the right hand or left leg. As likewise scarification of the
leg attracteth from the inward to the outward parts, and draws downe-wards,
etc. And in the menstruous flux scarification of the thighs or hands serves
in stead of derivation in furthering this flux. But scarification has always
a most forcible effect in attracting from the remote parts when it is deep,
and a cupping glass presently applied. But the most proper use of
scarification is to evacuat from the part affected, other remedies not
prevailing. And for this cause is effectual in all Scabs, and other breakings
forth upon the skin, as also for an inveterate Scirrhus, Inflammations,
Gangrenes, Pestilentiall tumors, bittings of venomous beasts, etc. But with
scarification for the most part we use also cupping with or without fire;
C^pp^r^ commonly used with scarification
and these cups are made of diverse matters, of horn, glass and copper; and of
several forms, long, round, some of a wider and some of a narrower orifice.
They are for the most part used of glass called therefore cupping glasses. The
matter and form of these cups.
And of these the round with a narrow mouth or orifice are the best, and draw
most effectually; and of these some are bigger, some lesser, according as the
evacuation is to be more or less In regard of the bodies they are to be
applied to, In what bodies most useful.
they have a far more successful operation in thin bodies, than in
thicker constitutions. Again, we are to consider the nobility, consent, and
the vicinity of the parts in the application and use of this remedy; and
therefore not to be applied to any principal part, lest there follow an
attraction of bad humors thereunto. But in the mutual consent of two parts,
they may to good purpose be applied to the one; as in the immoderate menstruous
flux, to the breast. They are not to be used of sound and healthful bodies,
to young and growing people, Manner of application.
nor to old decrepit persons: nor yet of custom, but with good advice of the
learned Physician, as need shall require, especially in the Spring and in
Winter; not in a hot house, but near a good fire, only some frictions going
before. We use them either with or without fire, The time.
also with or without scarification. The time elective is after perfect
concoction, the stomach now being empty, and the guts clean from common
excrements. The time of coaction or necessity is that which requires this
remedy, although the time be not so seasonable, and that to prevent a further
danger. They are not ordinarily to be used before general or universal
evacuations have been used, but in some cases; as in the wind-colicke: or when
as by reason of the thin structure of the body it is not so safe to open a
vein; or when we would attract any tumor from the internal to the external
and superficial parts of the body. We are then to apply this remedy either to
the part affected, or the next to it, when there is now no more affluxe of
matter. Dry cups without scarification draw and evacuat the body insensibly,
especially of wind. Dry cups without scarification in that ^^ses to be used.
They are sometimes for staying of vomits and yexing applied to the stomach.
They are in diverse cases applied to several parts of the body: as the hinder
part of the head, and the crown for diverse infirmities of the eyes and head:
to the forepart for the Frenzy, Lethargy, etc: as also to the shoulders,
chinne, thighs, legs, etc; for diverse infirmities, whereon I must not now
insist, but proceed.

Besides the premises, there are yet some other particular evacuations
performed by the hand of the Surgeon, the which for affinity with the former,
although no bloody evacuations, Burning or searing of some parts.
we will handle in this place. Of these, the chief is burning or searing of
some particular place of the skin both for preservation and recovering of
health; whereunto we refer also the two other, setum and vesicatory. What it
is.
This searing, in Latin called cauterium, is nothing else but a little ulcer
made in the superficial part of the body of man, with some actually or
potentially hot thing, by this means to make a free passage for a leisurely
ensuing out of peccant, noxious matter causing diseases: and that both for
inhibiting corruption, corroboration of the members of the body, and the
restriction of the influxe of humors. Vtility and profit of this remedy.
This remedy is of greater utility and profit than many are aware of; and may
indifferently be used in all ages, not excepting infancy it self, where it is
most sovereign, even when they are yet in the cradle, and that for curing and
preventing many diseases: as Convulsions, Epilepsies and rheumes; and besides,
is not denied to any sex. The several sorts or kinds of it are distinguished
by three several and distinct names: Fonticulu^. Setaceum. V^ficatorium.
the one sonticulus, the next setaceum or setum; from a thread of silk or hair
drawn through; and the last vesicans or vesicatorium, and of the vulgar, a
blister, from the effect: and as for others dropax, sinapismus, psilothrum, as
not being so frequent and useful in sickness and health, as the former, I
pass by. Now as concerning the part or place of the body where this issue is
to be made, we must be very circumspect, The place where we are to make this
issue
and well consider where this noxious matter to be evacuated is engendered. If
the matter be by the issue to be derived, diverted or drawn aside, then is the
issue to be made near to the part affected. If it be for revulsion or pulling
back, then we are to beware of molesting any noble part, and therefore the
place of the issue must be made a little further off; with that caveat
notwithstanding, that the rectitude and consent with the part affected be
observed. Neither are we ever to make any issue in the part affected, unless
the matter be already there impacted, With what cautions.
and universal evacuations have already proceeded. This issue is made most
commonly with an instrument made of iron actually hot, and of diverse forms
according to the nature of the part affected: and some are also made of gold.
With what instrument it is made.
Some again use no material instrument of iron or other metal; but some hot
burning medicine, composed of some ingredients of a hot, burning operation,
although no heat to the outward senses of seeing or touching be therein
discerneable; called therefore potentiall cauteries: Potentiall cauteries.
and these being applied to the part, do in a short time make an issue. Some
again use to open the part by incision, and so make the issue; but is far
inferior to the former. The best way is that which is seared with gold or iron;
and next to that, such as are made of causticke matter; especially, if care be
had that is perform its operation with speed, and with as little pain as is
possible. The particular place.
The particular place where this is to be made, is indicated by the place
affected, where the matter has its residence; which if engendered in the liver
ascends up into the head, then is it to be made in the leg; and if it
descend into the leg, then is the arm of the same side to have an issue
opened. Again, if noxious humors abound in the nether belly, it must be
opened in the leg; if in the middle region, in the arm, if there be no
impediment: but if there be any such matter in the head, it must be made in the
the hinder part of the head: if it take the way down toward the breast and
the lungs, then both in the coronall future in the forehead, and in the hinder
part. If it be engendered in the head, and descend upon the backe-bone, the
loins and nether parts, then must it be made in the beginning of the
backe-bone to intercept the matter. In many other particular places of the body
we use this remedy, which would be here too long to relate.

Vesicatories or blistering remedies.
As for vesicatories, or blistering remedies, they use to be made of such
things as blister the flesh; such as be crowfoot, euphorbium, pellitory of
Spain, mustard, cantharides; being any one or more of these mingled, with
sour leaven and vinegar wrought together; the blister so made is to be opened,
the place to be kept open with a little fresh butter, or cere-cloth.

Setum what.
That which we call Setum or Sataceum, is an issue most commonly made in the
neck with a hot needle drawn through the neck with a thread of white or
crimson silk, the place kept open by drawing the silk to or fro out of its
place, and dressing it afterward as is fitting. Some used heretofore a hair
in stead of silk, from whence this operation takes its denomination.

There is yet mention made of another manner of making of this issue with this
hot needle, recorded by a Guilielm. F^bricius Hild. observat, chirug. observat.
40. and 41.
famous Surgeon, on which now I will not insist. Now all these issues are to be
kept open until such time as this noxious and evil matter be quite spent and
wasted away, at which time it may safely again be closed up. But if they be
appointed by way of revulsion, or pulling back any humor, accustomed to fall
down upon any place, and have been of a long time continued, then may they not
so safely be dried up, unless another be made to supply the place of the
former. This Setum is a singular good means to help all infirmities of the
eyesight, and many inveterate infirmities of the brain: as Epilepticke fits,
bad memory proceeding of moisture, and many more. And thus have I somewhat at
large handled phlebotomy, and all circumstances concerning the same; and so
much the rather, for that I see the world so much herein abused, and so many by
the indiscreet use thereof miscary: now I proceed to the other and second
general evacuation called purgation.

CHAP. X.
Of purgation, or evacuation of corrupted humors in general.

HItherto have we handled Phlebotomy both general and particular, it now
rests, we proceed to other general evacuations. In the body there is a
triple repletion, two with, Triple evacuation in the body of man.
in the vessels or veins, and one without: One abounding in quantity, to be
evacuated by phlebotomy; another abounding in quality, to be purged by
appropriate purging medicines: the third being without the veins, is to be
purged by sweat. And all these are called universal evacuations, by reason
they do not evacuat from any one particular part, as from the head, errhina;
Purgation what it is.
from the breast, bechica, etc: are properly called particular purges. Here we
purpose in the first place to speak of purgations in general, as they purge
evil humors from the whole body. Purgatio est evacuatio humoris qualitate
peccan^is, facta a natura, open and efficaciae pharmaci catharctici,
administratia me^io in eum finem, ut sanitas praesens conservetur* aut amissa
restituatur. Comment. in aph. 2. Dunc. Liddel. art. med lib 5. cap. 12. Purging
medicines of two sort^
Purgation therefore we define to be an evacuation of humors abounding in
quality, procured by the help of nature, together with the efficacy of the
purging medicines administered by the Physician, for the preservation of health
present, or recovering of health already lost. In purgations properly so called
two things are to be considered: first, that which is to be purged, and do
principally indicate purgation: to wit, the humor abounding in quality, which
we call cacochymia, and is of many sorts. Again, in purgation we are to
consider that which purges. Nature it self, or the expelling faculty purges,
yet not simply in it self, but seconded and set forward by the power and
efficacy of the purging medicine, and exciting the expulsive faculty to purge
away the superfluous humor, either upwards by vomit, or downwards by dejection.
Such purging medicines are of two sorts, either such as by a manifest quality
evacuat any obvious humor: and such are ordinary loosening herbs; as betes,
mallows, spinach, coleworts, and infinite others. Again, there is another
sort of purging medicines, properly so called, and by a proper name cathartica,
and make peculiar choice of one or more certain peculiar humors, In purgation
three things considerable.
called therefore electiva purgantia. Now in purgations we are to consider
three things: the first does concern the medicaments wherewith we purge. The
second, the manner or method how to use them. The third, the accidents
following upon purgation, or such things as are to be done after the taking of
a purgation. Purging medicines, as we have said already, are of two sorts,
either purging by manifest qualities, heat and cold, etc; without any
distinction, any or all humors: or else one or more particular humors, A
specificall quality in purging medicines
or from some particular part. Now although purging medicines by reason of
heat, attract unto them peccant and noxious humors, yet that the attraction is
of this or that particular humor* proceeds from a specifical quality, or from
the whole substance. And yet such medicines as together with this specificall
property partake of a greater heat, do more forcibly and effectually attract
the appropriated humor. Each purging medicine most commonly evacuateth one
particular humor, sometimes two, seldom three, and never all, unless, either
the medicine be so violent, or nature so weak, that it is not able to master
them: and then it oftentimes works so violently, (...), seu superpurgatio.
that at length it brings blood; and this the Greeks call (...), or over
purging; very familiar to Empiricks, women-physitians, In purging medicines 4
things to be considered.
and such as have not been initiated in the schools, and so trained up in the
practice of this profession. In these purging medicines then four things are
to be considered. First, what humor they are properly to purge, whether
choler, phlegm, water or melancholy. Secondly, by what ways they evacuate:
for some purge upwards by vomit, and some downe-wards by dejection. Thirdly,
from what parts principally: for some purge from the nether belly, Purging
medicines differ both in strength and by reason of the part to purge.
some from the liver, some from the head, etc. Fourthly, after what manner: for
some purge gently and mildly, some again more forcibly and violently, and some
keep a mean betwixt both. Manna, Cassia, sirup of Roses purge gently: Rhubarb,
Seen, and the like, keep a mean: Scammonie, Colocynthis, strongly. It were
easy for me here to make an enumeration of variety of purging medicines
appropriated to several humors. And although these medicines both weak and
stronger draw some from the more remote parts, some from the nearer; yet have
some of them a nearer relation to one, and some to another part: as Colocynthis
and Agaricke most effectually from the head, Rhubarb from the liver, Aloc from
the stomach, etc. These mild and gentle medicines, by reason of their mild
and easy evacuation, are rather referred to preparations than purges; these
other being of a far more forcible power to attract and draw humors from the
remote regions of the body. Notwithstanding, the judicious Physician can easily
quicken them according to occasions, with an addition of a small quantity of
the stronger; Compou^d medicines
as likewise, with some of the milder medicines, blunt the edge of these
stronger and more violent purgations. Of these simple purging medicines, Their
diverse and various forms.
diverse compounded are made, and that in several forms; which are either
taken inwardly by the mouth, or injected, and put up into the fundament: or
else outwardly applied, by way of cataplasme, ointment, etc. Such as are
assumed at the mouth, are taken either to work upwards by vomit, or downwards
by stool; and are, according to their forms, divided into three several
sorts: some liquid, as potions made after diverse manners; some, again, solid,
as pills, solid electuaries, or confections: some of a soster, and as it were,
of a middle substance, betwixt both; as our ordinary electuaries. In the
fundament we use to make injections by glisters, and put up suppositories, in
constipation of the belly, and diverse other cases. But in some cases, when the
patient is incapable of any of these, or at least refuses them, then are we
sometimes forced to supply this defect by outward ointments, External forms
of purgations
cataplasmes, epithemes, etc. and sometimes by masses and lumps made of strong
purges holden in the hand, until they grow warm, and smelled to at the nose.
Of these purgations again which purge by election, or by choice, Perfect and
imperfect purgations.
some are called perfect and full, which purge away the whole cause of the
disease at once: another again, imperfect, which does not all at once evacuate
the whole matter of the disease. Under this last is comprehended, first, that
which we commonly call a minora^ purgation, Minor a^^ purgation.
whereby we lessen a little the matter and humor causing the disease, which
most commonly is used in the beginning of diseases: and again, Purgatio per
(...)
that evacuation performed by degrees, which we call pe^ (...), whereby we
gently, and by degrees purge away the vicious humor, and in stead thereof
supply the sick with good and laudable humors, which by means of good and
wholesome diet is effected. Now, The manner or method of purgation.
the next thing we propounded to consider in purgation, was the manner how to
use these purging medicines, or the method of purgation, Five things therei^ to
be con^^dered.
which we may reduce to these five heads: 1 whether, and to what persons we
may safely administer purging medicines: 2 what manner of humors we are to
purge: 3 how much, how often we are to purge, and how far to proceed: 4 the
convenient and fit time for purging: 5 by what ways or parts, or passages we
are to purge. And this is the sum of that we have to say concerning
purgation and purging medicines, and therefore of these in order.

CHAP. XI.
Whether we ought to purge or no, what persons are to be purged, and able to
endure purgations, whether women with child may safely be purged.

THat evacuation by purging medicine is to be used in cacochymicall bodies,
abounding in bad humors, has been said already. (...) Hippoc. aph. ^6 lib, 2
Gal, in comment.
But whether bodies living in health may be purged or no, may not without cause
be questioned: for purgations not finding bad humors in the body, trouble the
good, make a colliquation of good flesh, and withal induce diverse evil
accidents. I answer, this holds true of such strong purgations as were used
in the time of Hippocrates and Galen: but in our mild and gentle purging
medicines, there is no such cause of fear, they being rather in stead of a
preparation than of any strong purgation: for the which cause, being my self
administered, they may safely be used of all sorts of people, to loosen the
belly, to expel the common excrements of the guts, and withal, to prepare the
humor causing the disease. And we may safely purge any body, although living
now in health, and that by way of preventing the accumulation of humors, which
in time might produce some disease. Hence appears the frivolous fear of many
people, Needless and frivolous fear of the ignorant people.
who being altogether ignorant of the true knowledge of this sublime
profession, yet, with open mouth cry out there is poison in all our purgations:
but the judicious are not ignorant with what caution and circumspection the
honest and able Artist, even in cases of greatest necessity, and with what
correction and preparation, and in how small a quantity they make use of these
strong medicines, which, notwithstanding, were in only use among the ancients,
and yet many of these plantives themselves will often in their need, sooner
have recourse to some ignorant Empericke, some unskilful Barber-Surgeon, yea,
to a beard-shaver, or a woman, who will adventure upon any the most desperate
medicine, without any preparation, or knowledge of the constitution of the
body: than to the learned and ablest Physician, who is able, if it were a
poison, so to prepare and accommodate it, that it may safely be taken without
any danger: and indeed, who deal with such chapmen, may often cry out with
these Prophets, mors est in olla, death or poisoniis in the body, howsoever the
effects are not always upon the sudden so sensibly perceived. Besides, some of
these severe censurers are often as busy with a pipe of Tobacco, as with their
appointed food? and yet no bill of indictment preferred against it. Now, I will
be judged by the learned, if this simple be not endued with as poisonable and
malign a quality as any of these strong and violent purgations the ancients
used: I will except neither Hellebore, Tobacco as strong a poison as the
strongest purging medicine that is used.
of them, nor Antimonie of us used, nor any other; besides, the narcotick
quality, as we prove by daily experience, of the which more hereafter. It is
then apparent that we may purge, and that no bodies are excluded from the use
of gentle and mild purgations. And yet do we not so indifferently admit of
purgation, that we think they may be of all, and at all times indifferently
used, but with diverse cautions, diorismes and limitations, especially when we
are to purge cacochymicall bodies with strong purgations, when as they will not
yield to gentler remedies. Threefold constitution of bodies.
Before we proceed, we are to take notice of a threefold constitution of the
body: One injoining perfect health, which we commonly call a sound and
healthful constituion: another we call a neuter, or neutrall constitution,
declining from the former perfection of health, ^or^us ueutrum, seu
valetudinarium.
and yet not fallen into any sickness which may be taken notice of: and such
we commonly call crazie, or valetudinarie bodies, and partake of both the
extremes, and so is apt, ready, and inclined to fall, and yet not fallen into
sickness. The third is such a body as is now already fallen sick. Now, as the
first may safely be purged for prevention, so this second sort has yet greater
need, as living still in fear of some infirmity. The sick especially are not
to be abbridged of this benefit, but with these limitations: first, of the
strength, constitution, and other circumstances do not inhibite; we may safely
use it. Again, if nature of it self suffice, When to purge and when not.
and by other gentle means it may be effected, and where nature leads us not
the way; as likewise if the humor be unfit for purgation, we are not to
attempt it. In every purgation then, the first indication is desumed from the
morbisicke cause, or humor peccant, Triple indication of purg^ng.
which does indicate purgation; to the which we are to join also the disease
it self, and the most urging accidents of the same. The second indication is
desumed from the stomach of the patient. The third is desumed from the
condition and nature of the part affected; as likewise the ambient air and
region, which we will refer to the time. As for the first then, in the sick
we are to consider the quality of the Disease, whether acute or chronicall;
whether sole, The quality of the disease to be considered.

The matter.

Continuance of the disease.

Idiosynarasia, or individual propriety.


and of it self alone, or joined with some other, as with a sever, etc.
Again, wear to consider of what manner of matter, whether calm or quiet, or
furious and raging; and whether crude or concocted. The Physician is again to
consider how long the patient has been sick; and finally his individual
propriety, called Idiosyncrasia, and whether formerly accustomed to strong
evacuations or otherwise. It comes also sometimes so to pass, that the sick
is unfit for any Physic at all: wherefore it is good physic sometimes to
administer no physic at all: and yet this must be always at the Physicians
pleasure, and not according to the humor and pleasure of the ignorant
assistants, no competent judges in a matter of this weight and worth. In the
next place, Urging accidents.
urging accidents do often inhibit strong evacuation. Strong Purgations, says
Hippocrates, are not fitting for ill-coloured persons, very dry or drouthy,
that have a dry cough, and distension under the short ribs; as also such as use
evil diet. Such symptoms again and urging accidents as debilitate and
overthrow strength: as violent pain, watching, gnawing about the mouth of the
stomach do inhibit evacuations. The strength is indicated by the age, sex,
Strength how indicated.
temperature of the body, natural individual propriety, disposition of the
body, custom, and urging accidents. First then for age, Aptest age.
the middle age is aptest to endure purgations: old age and infancy of all
others, by reason of weakness most unfit; and therefore unless in time of
great need, to them they are not to be administered. And yet old age is far
abler to endure them than infants. Besides, children have a certain natural
evacuation through the pores of the skin, by which means, Children how (...)
purge.
without any other evacuation, they often breath out abundance of bad humors.
And yet, if there be need, and nature be wanting, we are not to deny even a
sucking child such an evacuation: yet with the counsel of Hippocrates, we are
then to exhibit some gentle purgation to the nurse, which communicates a
purging faculty to her milk: to children of fuller years we may safely
administer some gentle medicine. In the second place, The sex to be considered.
the sex is to be considered in this indication of strength: men then, for the
most part, endure strong purging medicines better than women. Virgins and
widows, and such as are much subject to hystericall infirmities, or fits of
the mother, are not to be purged with strong purgations. Besides, women with
child do not easily endure purgations. And from hence then arises a question,
Whether women with child may be purged,
whether we may at all purge a woman with child? I answer that even
Hippocrates himself, Answer.
who forbad phlebotomy to women in that case (which notwithstanding both by
reason and experience I have proved to be lawful) gives yet allowance to this
remedy. And yet, as has heretofore been proved, the purgations used in his
time were far more violent, and of more malign quality than most of our
medicines now in ordinary use with us. (...). Aphor. 1. lib. 4.
Purge women with child ( says Hippocrates) when we conjecture the child to be
attained to the age of four months or seven, but the last least, for fear
left by the violence of the medicine the ligaments tying the child to the womb
be burst: but if the child be either younger or elder, we must not use these
means. Now in these our days, if a woman with child be ceized with any acute
disease, or the body abounding with bad humors, and without purging there be
apparent danger, may we not administer some of our gentle medicines, in ancient
times altogether unknown? If Hippocrates permitted the use of his helleborate
medicines of so malign qualities, Women with child may safely be purged with
our gentle medic^^^
and so dangerous for the Diseased, why should any be afraid of our gentle and
mild medicines? There is no such danger of bursting those ligaments by the use
of so gentle means. Is it not far better to administer some gentle medicine,
which may prove profitable both to the mother and her fruit? Again if there be
any reason in those women that oppose so useful means (for this sex is, as in
other, so in this action, often most opposite to Physicians prescriptions) let
them answer me, how many women they see, not only for some days and weeks,
but even for months together, molested and tormented with excessive vomiting,
that one would wonder, that ever they should be able to hold out to their
appointed period? And yet through the help of the Almighty both mother and
child do very well, whereof I need to instance in no examples, they being
obvious every where. Now it cannot be unknown, that the succussion and
straining of the body one day in so extreme a manner, offers more violence
both to the mother and the child, then three or four days would do with some
gentle purges downwards. It will be replied, this violence is natural, and
therefore not so dangerous. I answer, violence is always violence, howsoever
procured; and the action is always the same, whatsoever the instrument be: a
man may break his neck as well by a natural fall from the top of a tower
without any violence offered; as when he is pusht down by the hand or
otherwise. Again, the mother many times, for want of appetite, and by reason
she rejects that the takes, indangereth that she goes with. In widows and
unmarried women, Women's bodies are many times more strained upon many outward
occasions than by gentle purgations.
we are willing to use means to free them from such evil and unpleasing
accidents, and why shall we let languish a woman in this case. All the answer
will be, that in them we use to provoke their menstruous flux, which here is
no ways to be tolerated, far less attempted. I answer, we may freely with
gentle medicines purge away these corrupt and evil humors, so offensive both
to the mother and the infant, without fear of any danger whatsoever. Now this
is not my private opinion only, but generally of all our best and most famous
Physicians, wherewith I could stuff up this my book, and make it swell to a
too great voluminous bigness. I will instance but in one of whom I have now
and then already in this book upon occasion made mention, to wit, the learned
Ioubert. Ioubert des erreu^. populair^^, lib. 3 cap. 5.
This famous French Physician of late years, has writ a whole Chapter of this
same point only, where he proves: that many women's bodies are far harder
strained many times by blows, falls, scolding and chafing, than by any gentle
medicine; and yet never for any such violence miscarry. Nay, yet further the
same Author affirms, that many gallants dance the gaillards, the valt, and
the like, ride on trotting horses, are carried in coaches, being full to the
throat, plemees a lagorge (these be the Authors own words) and yet for all
this never are thereby indamaged. Now, besides the case they may from hence
receive of all those evil accidents wherewith they are molested; as casting,
feebleness and fainting, shortness of breath, and the like, are all by this
means quickly cured; and why, says the same Author, should we thus suffer a
woman to undergo so much trouble, when it is in our power to help her? And
upon this insueth yet another great inconvenience, that the child thus soaked,
as it were, in such corrupt and filthy humors, seldom proves afterward so
sound and healthful, as when the body of the mother is kept clean from such
corruption; and for want of this seasonable evacuation, in stead of one
medicine seasonably administered, The child often after smarteth for this defect.
during the abode in the mothers Womb, the child is after forced, it may be,
to take a hundredth. To confirm this truth, I could produce a multitude of
particular examples out of several Authors, where this course has with
prosperous success been used: but to avoid prolixity, I will pass them over,
and instance but in one or two of mine own experiments. History of a woman
with child, using both phlebotomy and purgation with good success.
A woman of this same town, some 8 or 9 years ago, and great with child,
was surprised with a Fever, loathing in her stomach, and a number of tedious
and troublesome accidents, her body both plethoricall and cacochymicall, and
withal much oppressed with melancholy, who, after she had for diverse days
endured these noisome and troublesome accidents, at length craved my counsel.
Her neighbors (of the female sex I mean, they being especially in such
physical affairs, more pragmaticall than men) utterly dissuaded her from any
physic whatsoever. I confess, I was unwilling, if it had been possible, to
have meddled in so dangerous and intricate a business, and where the event was
so doubtful, and where, if all things succeeded not according to expected
desire, I exposed my self to the censure and slander of so many venomous and
virulent tongues: yet being thereunto lawfully called, I first acquainted both
her self and husband with the danger both the mother and the child were in
without the means, and that by the use of phlebotomie and purgation, we might
through the blessing of God hope for some good success, howsoever the issue or
event was not certain. Both her self and husband freely giving way to use
such means as I in discretion thought fitting in this case to be used, by Gods
blessing, upon the means of bleeding, and purging both by vomit, and direction
downwards, with cordialls and coolers, she went forth her full period of time,
and brought forth a sound and living child; having in this, by her own
confession, both easier labor, and more freedom from after accidents, than in
any other before or after. Some two years before that, another woman of the
same Town, being big with child also, Another.
for a fortnight and upwards was so tormented with excessive vomiting, that she
was able to retain neither meat nor drink in her stomach, whereupon insued
great weakness and feebleness, insomuch, that she was much afraid, lest this
young guest should have forsaken his lodging for want of fresh supply; I being
sent for, and finding her stomach pestered and oppressed with corrupt humors,
I gave her a vomit, which wrought to so good purpose, that after the
administering of some other small means for the corroborating of her stomach,
within two or three days not only her appetite returned, her casting ceased;
but she in a short time also recovered her accustomed strength, and at the
time appointed was delivered of a lusty man-child, and although a mother of
many children before that time, yet, by her own confession, Another of a woman
with ch^ld enduring much by natural vom^^. coughing and purging, and yet
recovering.
never better in and after her labor, than at that time. And that it may yet
still more plainly appear, that a woman with child may sometime endure
without aborsion, hear yet of a third, who, notwithstanding, used none of
these generous remedies. About some fifteen years ago, a woman of this same
town, about the third month of her conception, was surprised with a double
tertian, with a continual casting, coughing, and spitting of blood; the which
for certain days, as women in those cases think themselves exempted from all
physical helps, she did neglect, hoping it would not long so continue; but
at length, fearing aborsion at the least, sent to me, but then absent, and
therefore sent to another physician of good account, then living within this
same town, who, after he had administered one glister, this set nature so
aworke, that for the space of two months at least and upwards, to all the
other accidents this was also added. At length the Physician forsook her, as
then irrecoverable, especially by reason of her spitting of blood, which was
supposed to proceed from the lungs. In this case she continued some three
weeks, or near by, and after my coming home she sent for me: but hearing
of all that was past, I refused, although twice or thrice entreated, hearing of
so desperate a business, yet being entreated, to give her satisfaction, at
least by seeing her, although I administered nothing. At length, after I had
seen her, and well considered of this blood thus rejected, I found it
proceeded not from her lungs, whereof I gave her notice, and withal proceeded
with cordialls, and other things fitting for her cough, especially excretion of
blood, which were by this means qualified, and the excretion of blood within a
few days was quite stayed; and although I know both phlebotomie and purgation
to be of very good used for these diseases, yet durst I not then adventure on
any of them, but continued this course with diet such as was fitting. At my
first visiting of her, she was now above a month quick with child, and very
feeble, and for the most part kept her bed: her loosnesse left her about a
month after, and her cought and casting, together with her Fever, forsook her
about a month before she was brought to bed, and was delivered of a son, who
lived a month, and was assaulted with fits of a Fever of the the same manner
as the mother, and died about the end of the month. The mother,
notwithstanding all the premises, a few days after her delivery was assaulted
with the measels, and afterward, recovered her perfect health, and lived after
that many years. It may then plainly appear, that it is not a matter so
dangerous as it is deemed, sometimes in time of need to give a woman with
child some gentle physic, as shall by a judicious and understanding
Physician be thought fitting: Great caution to be used in a^ministring physic
to women with child.
and since this has been the opinion of all our famous Physicians since the
days of Hippocrates, let women be silent, and not too saucy in controlling
such a cloud of witnesses of learned and able Artists. But let no man nor woman
here mistake my meaning, as though I would encourage any women to be too bold
in this case; my meaning is only this, that in case of extremity, women should
not be so wilful, as to let their neighbors perish without means, upon
needless fear, or at least endanger their lives in apparent necessity,
Hippocrates himself giving way to this course, as has been said already,
yea, even during any time of their nine months, although freelier in some than
in others, their physic, notwithstanding, being far harsher, and of far
more violent operation than our ordinary medecines, as has been proved
already. But withal, I wish them still to be very wary whom they trust in so
weighty a business, or else it may cause repentance when it is too late.
Especially beware of such ignorant and erroneous practitioners as I have
already mentioned. But this by the way, although I hope, not out of purpose,
now I proceed.

In the third place then, The temperature and constitution of the body to be
purged.
in the body to be purged we are to consider the temperature and constitution,
which does either indicate or inhibit purgation. The middle, or mean
temperature and constitution, betwixt extremes, is fittest for purgation: but
bodies of dry complexion, What bodies fittest, and what unfittest to be purged.
dry, lean, loose, of foggy, thin, soft, or very fat bodies are not so fit
for purgation: nor such as abound in blood, are much subject to swounding, and
are hardly recovered, and such as are apt to cast upon any occasion: children
also, and women plentifully purged by their menstruous flux: and such as have
clean bodies, and observe a strict and good diet, and such as naturally are
constipat in their bodies, and are easily overtaken with fluxes of the belly:
all such are not so fit to be purged as others, although upon occasion,
necessity so requiring, they are not totally excluded, yet must it then be
done with great discretion and circumspection, and more sparingly than to
others. But on the other side, strong able fleshy bodies, accustomed to labor
and pains, having strong stomachs, who collect great store of superfluous and
excrementitious matter in their bodies, may better undergo this evacuation.
Idiosyneras^^.
Next to the temperature or constitution, we add the specificall and
individual propriety of the body: and this is the reason why some bodies
will bear a strong purgation, and others again, it may be of a stronger
constitution, yet are not able to bear half so much. Besides, Custom.
we must not neglect custom, which does in some bodies facilitate the use of
purgations; which they may therefore better bear, which in others
unaccustomed, we must not attempt, unless to us known to be of a strong
constitution. Besides, the ambient air, the region and place of abode are not
to be neglected, of the which, Other circumstances.
when we speak of the time of purgation. Now, besides the strength, Situation
of the part affected.
we must also consider the situation of the part affected, which is discerned
by the temperature, the use, figure, or form, and sense or feeling of the
same. And therefore the head requires stronger purgations than the stomach
and the liver; and the stomach of a quick and exquisite sense, subject to
gnawing, is gently to be dealt withal. And now we proceed to the humors.

CHAP. XIJ.
Of the humors to be purged, of their preparation; as also of the body to be
purged. Of the quantity and reiteration, or often exhibition in time of need.

THat corrupt humors, commonly called by the name of cacochimia, are to be
purged and expelled out of the body, has been already. These humors are in all
four in number; choler, melancholy, phlegm, and serosity, or thin waterish
humors. Divisions of the humors to be purged.
These humors do diversely in the body abound, and so produce diverse diseases.
Sometimes one humor alone abounds, sometimes one or more, in an even or
uneven proportion; and this noxious peccant humor is always to be purged with
appropriate remedies. Again, in regard of the quality, it is either crude or
raw, or else concocted: and again, either thin or subtle; or thick, or
else participating of a mean betwixt both. It is again, either still and
quiet impacted into some part of the body; or raging, swelling and moveable.
Now in all purgations, as well spontaneous and natural, as artificial, this is
to be observed, (...). (...) 4
that that purgation is profitable, whereby such humors, as nature would of its
own accord expel, be purged out. And again, (...).

Aph 23. lib. 1.

What humors are fittest to be purged, and what not.

Concoction what.


we are not to judge of a profitable purgagation by the quantity (as is the
custom among many vulgar, especially of our country people, who therefore many
times more magnify ignorant Empirickes, who purge away plenty of humors, be
they good or bad, than better skilled Physicians, who purge away but the worst,
although in a smaller quantity, but if the right peccant humor be expelled.
Humors already concocted are easiliest purged, and then next such as swell and
are of a furious nature, and are of thin or a mean substance. Crude humors,
still and quiet, impacted into any part, thick, tough and clammy, are not so
expelled out of the body, and are therefore first by concoction to be prepared.
Now concoction is nothing else but a reduction of the peccant humor in the body
to a right temper and frame, whereby it is fitted for expulsion. Now of these
peccant and noxious humors some are capable of concoction, some not. Humors
capable of concoction.

Incapable of concoction.


Capable of concoction we call, such as grow tame and tractable; as the humors
in putrid Fevers, which ought first to be concocted, and then expelled. Not
capable of concoction are first, such as are sequestered from the blood; as in
the defluxion of rheumes, yellow choler, in suffusion and some sort of the
bloody flux; of phlegm in the wind-colicke, and water in the Dropsy, which
without expecting any preparation are to be expelled. Some humors again, are
in fault by reason of the corruption of their proper substance, which destroy
and overthrow the substance of that part whereon they: fall as comes to pass
in the Plague, in Cankers, and in raging and furious humors, Difficulty of
conc^ction proceeds (...) three causes.
called turgentes, or swelling. The faculty of concoction proceeds from three
causes, the imbecility and feebleness of nature, the narrowness of passages,
and the contumacy or repugnancy of the matter. In these crude and corrupt
humors natural heat has no predominancy nor power, but external and
adventitious, with a debility of the natural, confounding good and bad humors,
dividing humidity from its natural siccity. (...). Apho^. 22. lib, ^.
In diseases therefore of that nature and kind, wherein the humors are
putrified and corrupted in the veins, and nature has not the pre-eminence, we
are not to purge in the beginning, but to expect the concoction of the humor,
which makes a separation of the good from the bad. After concoction whatsoever
noxious humor yet remains within the veins, and by a laudable crise not
expelled, is to good purpose purged away with Physic. Concoction is, by
nature it self, by means of natural heat, performed: now if nature be feeble
and weak, and his heat not in a due proportion answerable, When the Physician
is to use means to further concoction,
it is then the Physicians part, with fitting and appropriate means to supply
this defect. This supply consists in removing the lets and rubs lying in the
way, preparing the humors to concoction, and repairing the breaches made in
the strength and natural heat. Concoction then is performed when nature
overcommeth, and affimilateth the matter making resistance. Now, since the
humor many ways repugneth or resists; as sometimes by reason of the
quality, or the manner of substance beyond the natural course: to wit, by
distemper, thickness and clamminesse; and sometimes by reason of too great a
quantity impacted into the part: hence comes it to pass, that there is not
one only kind of remedy fit to prepare and concoct these crude rebellious
humors. And therefore Lib. de hu^n^ri^
Hippocrates affirms, that concoction is performed by contraries, and that
sometimes it is furthered by hot, and sometimes by cold, and sometimes by dry
means: and again, sometimes by extenuation, sometimes by incrassation,
sometime by abstinence, sometimes by rest, etc. A double preparation.
And thus thick and tough humors are ratified, and made thinner; thin
hamours again thickened, obstructions opened, and each humor with proper and
appropriate medicinces prepared, as the judicious and discreet Physician,
according to circumstances, shall think fitting. There is then a preparation
of the humors, and yet another of the body, which was the meaning of
Hippocrates in these words: (...).

Aphor. 72. lib. 7.


If any have a purpose to purge the body, it must first be made fluid, thin,
and passable. And thus the passages are first to be made slippery, large, and
passable, without any impediment: which may be effected by means of loosening
and opening set brothes, by emollient glisters, and such others means as
easily open the belly and the small capillary veins and other parts
obstructed. Now, since of purgations some work upwards, Different preparation
according to the different manner of evacuation upwards or downwards
and some downwards, there must not be in all a like preparation: for, in
purgations that work downwards, it is required, that the guts and the small
veins be open, and free, as has been said already: but in a vomit,
especially if it be to work strongly, Lib. de salubr, victu^ ratione.
Hippocrates wills us, sometime to bath and anoint the body, to use a
liberal diet, and to rest: but when the time of administering the vomit is
come, then are we to use such means as irritate and loosen the humors, and
make them more easily to ascend upwards. But when to prepare the humors, how,
by what means, and in what bodies, this double preparation is to be
performed, is the work of a learned and understanding Physician: but not of
any ordinary Empiricke, Barber-surgeon, ignorant Apothecary, Woman-physitian,
and the like, who most commonly exhibit their strong unprepared medicines,
without regard of any of these preparations. But I proceed now to the quantity,
wherein they err as much as in any of the premises.

The various and diverse constitutions of several individual bodies breed no
small difficulty in the due dose or quantity of the purging medicine.
Indication of the quantity of the medicine.
But to define the particular dose of these particular medicines is not my
purpose, but only to set down some general rules of direction concerning
this particular. ^he indication then of the quantity is desumed from the
greatness of the disease, and the refractarinesse of the same, the peculiar
and individual propriety of the body, and the strength: as likewise from the
nature of the part to be purged, in the sense, substance, office, form,
situation and society. (...). Aph. 6. lib. 1.
Thus great diseases require great remedies, as witnesses Hippocrates: and some
bodies are moved with gentle remedies, and others again although of a weaker
constitution, yet endure stronger purgations. Again, some bodies are strong
and well able to endure strong purgations; as in the middle age: some again,
as young children, and decrepit old men, are either not to be purged, or very
gently, and so are we also to consider the several parts to be purged: as the
head, liver, stomach, kidneys, etc: and to observe the several circumstances
in them and other parts to be observed. Now to every purging medicine
Physicians do commonly assign three doses, comparing the strength of the
patient with the medicine: to wit, to strong people, the greatest; to weak the
smallest, and the middle or mean to the middle or mean strength. The quantity
of the medicine to be intended or remitted according to several circumstances.
The quantity of the medicine is also intended or remitted according to the
ambient air, region, etc; as also according to the nature of the noxious
humor: for thin moveable humors will give way to a mild medicine; but tought,
thick and clammie humors, and impacted in the part, will not so easily be
removed. Besides, we must neither exceed in giving too small a quantity: for
that often stirs and moves the humor, gripeth the belly, and puts the
patient to great pain, Safer to err in the defect than in the excess.
howbeit to small purpose. Neither yet must it exceed in too great a quantity,
which is yet far worse; and a more dangerous error than in the defect which
is easilier remedied than the other in the excess. Now sometimes we evacuate
all the noxious humor at one time, and sometimes we return again once or
oftener. This first is called a full evacuation, and then only has place where
the body is strong, and nature it self leads the way: and this comes to
pass, when as in diseases the humors are already concocted, and withal do so
abound, that they, as it were, swell and rage. But by reason this seldom
comes to pass, therefore we do most commonly purge by degrees, Purgatio per
epi^r^^^, or ^en^^e (...) purgat^^n.
in reiterating our remedies. And in unknown bodies, rather than to adventure
a full dose, it will be better to begin with a lesser quantity, although it
be not the true dose the patient may endure, by this means trying the strength
at first, and afterward supplying what is wanting. Now in these leisurely
reiterated purgations, the indication is desumed from the nature of the humor
peccant, from the situation, from the condition and nature of the part
affected, and the strength of the patient. Thus we often find, that all this
morbificke matter, The m^^b^ ^^cke matte^ contented in diverse parts, o^ the
bod^, and there^^^^ t^ be pu^ged by severa^l sorts of physic.
is neither altogether, nor yet after the same manner in the whole body, and
the vessels of the same, but distributed into diverse parts; one part being
contained in the stomach, to be evacuated by vomit; another in the guts, by
qlisters; another in the veins, by potions; another in the head, to be purged
by pills. It comes often again to pass, that some portion of the matter is
concocted, another part yet remaining crude, some part thin, another thick
and rough; some part of it quiet and still; and some again unquiet, swelling
or raging: all which ought neither to be purged at the same time, nor at once;
and therefore both Galen and Hippocrates counsel us in some diseases; as
Quotidianes, Quartanes, and diseases of the spleen, and proceeding from
melancholy to purge little and often, which notwithstanding in time will make
up a great evacuation. But (...). Aph. 25, lib, 2.
in acute diseases the same Hippocrates would have us to purge seldomer, and
that not without great care and circumspection. Again, the condition of the
part affected does variat the manner of evacuation: for a part that is common
and of acute sense cannot endure a plentiful, large and sudden evacuation. In
like manner any part that is far distant from the nether belly, or by reason
of small and narrow passages has any communion with the same, must not be
largely at once evacuated: as infirmities of the breasts and joints. Condition
of the part affected varieth the manner of evacuation.
And any part that daily receives a new supply of superfluous humors must not
at once and suddenly, but by little and leisurely be evacuated. But above all
the rest, as in all other, so in this the strength principally must be
regarded. And therefore although both the nature and quantity of the humor, and
the situation of the part do require a strong purgation; yet, if the strength
be not answerable, we are forced to administer more mild medicines, and
reiterate them the oftener. And this is that we commonly call to purge per
(...), when as by degrees we purge any noisome and noxious humors, and, instead
thereof, make a new supply of good and wholesome.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Vomits, Glisters, Suppositories, and with which evacuation we are to
begin, when diverse are required.

IT has been sufficiently already proved, and experience it self does daily
evince unto us, that there are diverse sorts of purgations, some taken at the
mouth, and some injected at the fundament. And of these again taken at the
mouth, some work the same way they went in, which is by vomit; and some again
work downwards by stool. Now, although we have at large spoken of all manner
of purgations in general, yet this being an evacuation not befitting every
one, and which some of the ancients, as Asclepiades, did utterly reject, it
will not be amiss to say something of it. Of this kind of evacuation, Vomitio
cum facili^ and moderata obtigerit sa^uberrima and vacuationum omnium
praestantissima, noxios quippe humores ex ipsis f^ncibus sinceros elicit, and
vacuat omnem quae in ventriculo continetur, ejusve tuni is eluviem. Im^rimu
autem expurgat e praecordiori^ membra^is, and cavis Iecoris ac Li^nis et ex
Pancrea ommis generis supervacuos humores ^nc^ros elicit, quos plerumque nec
hiera, nec aliua vehementissimum in alvum de^urba^e potest Opitulatur item
affectibus qui a praecord^orum impuritati or^um habent, lang^enti apperen^iae,
nauscae, cibi fastid^o* vomitioni crebrae, ventriculo pr^cordijsve distentu,
ictero, cachexiae, febrib intermittent, Hemicraniae, Vertigini, Epilepsiae,
suffusions, omnibusque capitis affectibus qui sympathia praecordi^ru^ contracti
sunt, and quos a praecordiit in reliquum corpus effusa impuritas protulit. Gal.
de usu partium.

Preparation before vomits.

Outward preparation


Galen givieth no small commendation, and in some cases the most sovereign of
all others: to wit, in repletion of the stomach, and tunicles thereof, and in
the hollow parts of the liver, in infirmities of the spleen, the laundise,
many infirmities of the head: as Epilepsie, Vertigo or giddiness, megrim,
suffusion; and all infirmities of the head proceeding from a sympathy with the
nether parts. Now, it comes often to pass, that humors which descend not so
easily into the guts, yet by vomit are easily expelled. Some of the ancients
again, quite contrary to the mind of Asclepiades, were so far in love with
this evacuation, that they prescribed it even in time of health, every month
for two or three days together, which I confess was too much, and tending to
another extremity. But all are not fit for the use of so noble and generous a
remedy, such especially as are not accustomed to it, are not, unless in case
of great extremity to be urged to the use of it. And again, we are to look
unto the inclination of the humor, whether it incline that way or no, and then
are we to second this natural inclination of the humor by exhibiting help for
the bettet furtherance of this work. But great care and caution must be used
in the administering of this remedy in regard of the party to use the same:
for such as are narrow breasted, have a long neck, and disposed to a
consumption, are not to use this remedy: and such, whose stomachs are unfit
for it, a weak brain, women subject to hystericall infirmities, endure not
vomits easily. And to induce this evacuation, there is a good strength required
in the stomach, especialy if the vomit be strong. Now, as in other
evacuations, so in this also, we use in time of need some preparation to
facilitate the operation thereof. Relaxation of the stomach by outward
inunctions and fomentations I hold suspect, for fear of too much debilitating
the stomach after, especially in this so nice and effeminate age. For an
inward preparation to facilitate the operation, we use sometimes to suffer the
patient fill his stomach before, with diverse sorts of food, Inward preparation.
especially such as may cleanse and cut, or attenuate: as salt meats, onions,
and the like; and this is when the matter is tough, congealed and stuffed in
the stomach, where the use of hot herbs, Time, Savory, of Oxymel and the like
may safely sometimes be permitted. But when the humor is thin, fluid, and easy
to be purged, then posset drink blood warm, now and then taken after the
assuming of thy vomit, will serve the turn. Some add butter, which to some
bodies will prove too fulsome. What parts by vomit are to be purged.
Vomit evacuateth and cleanses first the stomach, and the adjoining
meseraick-veins; and next if it be strong, the liver, spleen, and great veins;
and lastly, the whole body: It serves for revulsion, or pulling back of humors
from the stomach, and other inferior parts; and therefore Aph. 16. lib. 16.
Hippocrates affirms, that after great fluxes of the belly, a vomit
succeeding, does presage good to the patient. And by the same reason it is good
in the sciatica, and all other gouts, infirmities of the kidneys, bladder,
fundament, etc. It deriveth or diverteth the humors from the next adjacent
parts into the stomach. It helps therefore hypochondriacke, melancholy,
dropsies and other diseases of the mesenterie, liver and spleen: but especially
if the matter tend upwards toward the stomach; which by bitter belching, spain
and heaviness or gnawing under the short ribs may be discerned. Now as of
other purgations, so of vomits, some are mild and gentle, some stronger, and
others again stronger than any of the former, such as the ancients used. Our
Emperickes, and ignorant practitioners err in nothing more, than in the rash
administration of this remedy, Empericks err much in the rash administration
of vomits.
to any indifferently, present or absent, without any consideration, either of
the body or disease. And yet if there be any vein burst in the breast or lungs,
or the party subject to any hemorrhagie, In what cases dangerous.
or effusion of blood at nose, etc. What danger may ensue to the patient, a
vulgar understanding, I think, may easily judge. I will not now protract time
with instances of such errors, but proceed to that which yet remains.

Besides Vomits, there are yet some purgations, which may be called particular,
and are injected at the fundament into the guts: and such are our gilsters,
which are appropriated to diverse inrfimities, and used for diverse ends, and are
composed of several ingredients, and sometimes of one only, as occasion and
necessity require. Herod. in Enterp.
The use of these glisters, among the ancient Egyptians, was so frequent and
common, that as they used their vomits, so did they those glisters three days
in a month successively, one after another. They are used by way of
evacuation, and sometimes for astriction and healing; as in the bloody flux.
Sometimes we use them only to mollify and supple the guts, that nature may
have the freer passage. Sometimes we use this medicine as a preparative for
other ensuing physic. Glisters used for diverse ends.
They are administered for a number of infirmites of the body, but differ
accordi^^^y in the composition, and that both in the quantity and quality.
(...) ^he quality, some being appointed to purge, some to mollify; (...)
against the wind-cholicke, And used in many infirmities.
some against the stone, strangury, suppre^ (...) urine, of menstruous flux,
or in the excessive flux of the same; (...), again, being administered in
great weaknesses to nourish, (...) of many others, the matter whereof must of
necessity accordingly differ, as the learned Physicians well know. The quantity
various according to circumstances.
Again, the quantity must needs differ according to the nature of the disease,
and party diseased. According to the disease: as in the Wind-colicke, in the
suppression and induration of fecall excrements, the quantity must needs be
small; as also in children, women with child, etc. And nourishing glisters must
be administered in a smaller quantity than others, or else they will purge
rather than nourish. Such as are injected for the infirmities of the small,
must be in a far greater quantity than in the great guts. Besides, glisters
must be retained a pretty while, some more, some less, according to the cause
for the which they are administered: Retention of glisters.
for glisters given only to wash and cleanse the guts, would be retained
about an hour or more; anodine and mitigating of pain, somewhat longer; and
such are given to heal and conglutinat the guts, as in the bloody flux, a
longer time than of the former. Purging glisters commonly give warning when
time serves; and yet, if they be too quick, it is not good to give way to the
first warning. In great weakness.
In great weakness they may be kept by application of hot cloth to the
fundament for a certain time. If it stay too long, it may be helped by a
suppository put up. This medicine not only cleanses the guts, but by
consequent often helps the head, stomach, and other parts adjacent. And
therefore I wish people not to be so shy in the use of so sovereign and so
excellent a medicine, wherein there is so small offense, and in the use whereof
there is no injury offered either to the taste or stomach. But when as many
times either for haste, or else we cannot prevail with the patient to admit of
a glister, Suppos^tories.
we make use of suppositories put up into the same place, but yet with greater
facility and ease; they are not only made of honey hard boiled, but also of
alum and other matter: and sometimes the end of a candle performs such an
exploit; and sometimes a violet comfit, especially in children, and many other
things will make an irritation, to provoke to stool. But let this caution,
as well in glisters as suppositories always carefully be observed, that in
infirmities of the fundament, Caution in infirmities of the fundame^t.
the Piles especially, fistulaes and the like, there be none of those strong
powders or electuaries, hiera simple or compound, or the like used, unless
when we have a purpose to open the piles, or provoke the menstruous flux. But
let this always be done with great caution and circumspection.

(...) diverse reme^^e^ are to be used, (...) first and what ^ext is to be done.
Now in all our physical actions, especially in evacuations, when diverse are to
be performed, we are to consider the order, what is to be undertaken in the
first, and what in the next place. So that when as we have need both to purge
and bleed, it is doubtful with which we must begin. And again, if purgation
be necessary, whether to begin with a purge upward or downward, by glister
or otherwise: If these things be not carefully looked into, they may prove not
a little prejudicial, if not pernicious to the patient. Now in this case, our
rule of direction must be desumed from the order of the causes, and that
especially we are to begin with that which urges us most. It it may be,
conveniently, we are to begin with that operation, which conduces to, and
helps to further the operation of the other, removing that which is the cause
of others ensuing after: but in any case beginning always with that which
presses us most: We are always to begin with that which presses and
urg^th most.
as in some diseases, where with a cacochymicall body is conjoined a great
debility of strength; postposing all evacuations, we begin to repair the
breaches thereof, without this all other remedies conducing but little. In like
manner, if in the veins we perceive a great redundancy of humors, we hold it
the (...) to begin with phlebotomy, and afterward to purge, and what is
remaining to bring to a right temper and frame: and in such cases after
phlebotomy purgation has the better success. But if there be any impurity in
the first region of the body, it will be best to begin with a gentle purge,
left being conveied into the veins it infect the blood. But if there be any
urgent occasion for phlebotomy: as a fall from some height, Squinancie,
Pleuresie, Frenzy, Burning-fever, etc; we are not to defer this generous
and noble remedy. If the stomach be oppressed with choler, or inclined to
casting, and nothing let us, we are to begin with that remedy. If
constipation of body, Wind-colicke, Nephriticall pain pinch, then is it best
to begin with a glister. What further concerns this business, may from
that which has been said already easily be collected, and therefore now we
proceed to the time.

CHAP. XIIIJ.
Of the opportune time of purgation, both general and particular, with diverse
things concerning this subject.

NOw if all other things be duly as they ought performed, in purgation, yet we
if err but in the right and opportune time, all our labor is lost. By the fit
and opportune time I here understand as well the time of the disease, Time
twofold.
as the time and season of the year and day. As for the time of the disease I
understand both the general and particular, as has been said already: and in
both we consider the beginning, the increase, height and declinning. By the
general, the whole course and period of the disease; by the particular, the
paroxysmes or exacerbations thereof: as in fevers with paroxysmes which we
commonly call fits. Now concerning this opportune time, although that which
has been lately spoken may give us some light, yet will we make the point yet
more clear. It may then be demanded, whether it be fit and safe to purge the
patient in the beginning of the disease or no? And that Aegyptios noluisse
quicquam in aegrotis non nisi quarta p^ractae die: alioqui medici suo periculo
id ag^bant. Arist. 3. polit. cap. 13.
among the Egyptians it was strictly forbidden, may by Aristotle appear,
affirming, that the Egyptians would not suffer the Physicians to innovate or
attempt any thing about the sick until the fourth day were past; which if
they did, they were at their own peril to do it. From them it seems
Hippocrates brought this custom into Greece, not determining the day, but
deferring purgation until concoction of the disease, whenever it comes to
pass. And therefore with De diae^a acut. com. meant. 76.
Hippocrates following therein also Galen, we expect the signs of concoction
in the urine and the like, unless the humors be furious and swelling, then we
purge in the beginning, as has been said already. Otherwise we neither purge
in the beginning, nor in the increase of the disease, but defer it until the
end or vigor or height thereof, when as most commonly diseases are concocted,
and by the benefit of nature is made sequestration of the matter, and is often
thereby critically expelled. (...).

Ap^o^ 20. lib. 1.


If nature of it self be strong enough for this work, let it alone: but if
deficient and unable, the Physician is then to further the operation. And this
is the wise counsel of Hippocrates, who again advises us, (...).

Aph. 12. lib. 2.


that if any relics of the matter be left behind, it may procure a relapse;
and therefore it is good wisdom to sweep the house clean, and so may we be
freed from future fears. All this notwithstanding, when as by reason of the
abundance of putrid humors, we fear lest nature faint before perfect
concoction, we may sometimes use a gentle minorative, which may lessen this
quantity, by which means nature is made stronger for the subduing of the
residue behind. In malign and venomous Fevers we are not to defer purgation.
Besides, in malign and venomous humors, threatening to the party sudden
destruction, we are not then to defer evacuation, nor yet fear the danger
the want of concoction might produce; being better always to yield to an
incoveniencie than to a mischief. And (...) ^ctu acut.
Hippocrates himself advises us sometimes to purge even in the beginning of
diseases, before the humors be settled or impacted upon some parts, or else
after they are brought to perfect maturation. In what other cases we are to
purge in the beginning.
For in diseases proceeding from an influxe of humors (such as are Pleurisies,
Squinancies and the like) we are even in the very beginning to use all manner
of evacuations fitting, either by purging or phlebotomy: the like in luxations,
or members out of joint, in wounds, etc; is to be observed, for fear lest the
humor settle upon the part affected. But what is already settled in any part,
cannot, before concoction, be evacuated. The like course is to be taken when
the humor overwhelmeth any noble part, and by that means oppresses the
strength (which often in Apoplexies, and sudden suffocations by reason of
rheumes comes to pass) when delay is not without danger. In other acute
diseases, where we fear not the like danger, we are to be more sparing, and
use it only in case of necessity: but in chronicall diseases, and of longer
continuance we may be bolder in our evacuations, especially signs of
concoction appearing. In them also, by reason of the toughness of the humor,
being especially settled on some part, we may by a minorative lessen some of the
matter, and withal open some of the ways and passages. And therefore if here
we see but the beginning of concoction, we are contented, In Febribus
continuis, qui paribus se^e non criticis pharmaco usi ^unt nunquam nimium
purgati fuerunt: qui vero aiebus imp^ribus forti medicamento usi sunt nimium
purgati fuerunt, multique ex his perierunt Hipp. 4. de morbis.
Now concerning acute diseases, having no set paroxysmes or exacerbations, it
is best to abstain from all manner of physic. And this seems to be the
precept of Hippocrates, bidding us to beware of odd and critical days, on
the which the humors are most moved; as in continual Fevers, etc. The like may
we (...) of the paroxysmes, or fits of intermittenr Fevers, in the which it is
safer to purge on the day of intermisson, especially where the strength is not
vigorous, than on the day of exacerbation, which is, according to Hippocrates,
odd and critical. And yet if the party be strong, in Quartans, and the like
intermittent Fevers, When we may safely purge the humor on the day of the sit.
in the which the humors are not easily moved, it is not amiss, sometimes on
the same day, when the humors are in motion, to expel them. For whenever
the matter is in motion, and the disease exasperated, it is then easiest to
expel it by purgation: but if the party be weak and feeble, it is far
better to attend the time of intermission. Again, The best time of the year.
as concerning the time of the year, the Spring is the best, and next to that,
the Autumn: but Winter and Summer, especially if extreme hot or cold, are not
so convenient; howbeit if temperate, as they often prove here with us, I see no
reason why we should so much fear them: howbeit in elective purgation, and in
chronicall diseases that will stay our leisure, without fear of any danger, I
think it fit to make choice of thy fittest time. On a temperate fair day, The
fittest day.
the purgation is most commodious; howbeit on a warm moist day it is more
copious and plentiful. In diseases therefore free from paroxysmes, in Summer,
and hot times it is best very early in the morning to purge: if in cold
weather, it will be better later in the day, drawing nearer noone, I mean, The
fittest time of the day.
that the medicine may begin to work about that time: and as we see the
ambient, so are we to fit our physic, so as it may work in a temperate time
of the day. Pills, when to be exhibited.
Sometimes we exhibit pills an hour before supper to purge the belly; but
three or route hours after a light supper to purge the head. Strong purgations
when to be taken.
Strong purgations are not to be taken but on an empty stomach: but easy and
gentle medicines are given before and sometimes with meat, especially to
cleanse the guts only.

As in plebotomie, so here may be asked, Whether physic may be administered
during the dog-daies,

Answer.


whether we may safely administer physic during the dogge-daies, or hot
seasons? I answer, as I did before concerning phlebotomy, that there is neither
time nor age does hinder any from this so useful and necessary a remedy;
provided all the circumstances in such cases considerable, especially the
strength of the patient, be well weighed, as I my self have with good success
often found true, both in my self and others. And if any shall yet ask me
concerning the signs, and several conjunctions and aspects of planets, and
their manifold conjunctions, whether in them we may safely purge? my answer
shall be the same, that it is a frivolous fear, to be afraid where there is no
cause, and what we have already pleaded for phlebotomy, will here suit as well
with these evacuations. Whether the sign, several aspects and conjunction of
the planets are to be observed.

Answer.


It is true indeed, Hippocrates gives us warning to mark certain stars,
especially the Dog-starre, during the reign whereof it is not commonly so good
and seasonable a time to bleed and purge. But this is not meant of such a
star as a star; but by reason that about that season of the year, heat
has commonly a great pre-eminence, especially in those hot countries where
Hippocrates lived; but with us, neither is this Dog-starre so dangerous, nor
our ambient so hot, that we need to fear, in time of necessity, either to
purge or bleed, as I have already made it appear. The same Lib de acre aquis
and locis.
Hippocrates gives us yet warning to observe certain other stars as
Arcturus, and the Pleiades; and this only because that about the rising and
setting of these stars, there is commonly a great alteration in the weather:
and not as they are such stars, and do always undoubtedly send down in all
places alike, some particular inevitable influence. The like may be said of the
two Aequinoxes, and Solstices, whereof the same Author also makes mention. But
because I have somewhat largely already explained my meaning concerning the
stars and signs, I will not repeat any thing, but wish people to be warned,
and now to grow wiser, and not to be afraid of Wizards and Prognosticators,
whatsoever they prate concerning signs, conjunctions, aspects good or bad, and
the like: but in time of need inquire of good counsel, and accommodate thy
self so as to follow such directions as are prescribed thee for thy health,
howsoever the season be.

CHAP. XV.
Of the ways and passages by which we are to purge: of the forms in which
we exhibit physic; together with the manner how to govern the sick during
purgation, and means how to keep physic in the stomach, that it cast it
not up again.

IT has been already declared, that the ways by which we are to purge, are
two, either upwards by vomit, or downwards by dejection. The way and passage
by which we are to purge, how indicated.
The way or passage is partly indicated by the place which the humor peccant,
either already occupies, or is like shortly to assault: and partly the
inclination of the humor, In the ways and passages four things considerable.
and motion of nature it self. In the ways and passages by which the humor is
to be purged* we are to consider four things: to wit, whether they be near
the place where the noxious humor is seated, whether it has any communion
with it, and whether they be naturally disposed or no. Now, a noxious humor
either takes hold of the whole body, and all the regions thereof, or else some
one region, or one part of it: as the head, stomach, etc. And we are always
to fit and prepare the place by which the humor may most easily be evacuated;
We are to purge by most convenient ways and passages.
it being always easiliest purged by the passages freest, wide, accustomed*
and most naturally disposed. And therefore what is contained in the stomach,
is easiliest by vomit expelled; that in the guts by dejection, and what is
contained in the whole body, both ways. The like we are also to observe in
particular evacuations: as the excrements of the forehead, by the palate and
the nose: of the bladder and kidneys, by the urine, etc. But when as the matter
is yet in flux, it is the Physicians part by all means, possible to turn it
away by some other passage. Wherefore, if the eyes and brain be affected, When
the matter is in flux.
we are not to purge upwards, except it come by sympathy from the stomach, but
downwards. Contrariwise, if any defluxion fall down upon the legs or nether
parts, we are not to purge downwards but upwards; especially, if nature and
custom can well bear it, and the passages be thereunto disposed. Again, as
(...). Aphor. 21. lib. 1.
Hippocrates teaches us, we are to follow natures inclination. Now choler
inclines most upwards; phlegmatic and melancholicke humors decline more
downwards. And therefore in Summer and beginning of paroxysmes, where choler
is most abounding, it is best to purge upwards: in Winter best to purge
downwards; to wit, when the whole body is to be purged. But if it shall so
come to pass that phlegm and melancholy be lodged in the stomach; as in the
paroxysmes of Quotidians and Quartanes, and it affect the way upward, then may
we safely follow natures direction, notwithstanding the Winter season, as both
Hippocrates and Galen direct us.

The form of the medicine is not here also to be neglected. The form of the
medicine.
A liquid form penetrateth more powerfully, opens obstructions better: but a
solid form, as of pills, stays longer in the stomach, and draws more
effectually from the remote parts. But in hot and dry constitutions and
diseases they are not so convenient. Besides, hot medicines in a liquid form
are not so fit for a weak stomach, except the distance of some part require
it; and in that case they are to be mingled with well-smelling correctives, or
else they much debilitate the stomach. But if the stomach be strong and
unclean, then may they be exhibited with less correction, and long after
meals. Electuaries participate of a mean betwixt both, and are of diverse
sorts; some lenitives and preparatives, and some again strong purgers.

Follows now the ordering of the party that has taken physic, Ordering of
the pat^ent, in and after the taking of physic.

To prevent casting of it up.


both before and after the same. The patient after the taking of physic for
fear of casting up again may wash his mouth with some liquid substance,
whereof he may let down a guple or two to wash and cleanse away the
loathsome-taste of the medicine; and this may be either a little clear
posset-drinke, thin broth, or a little ordinary beer or ale: or yet it will
not be amiss, especially, for our sweet toothed female sex, to eat a
preserved damson, cherrie, or some such thing, which may take away the evil
taste of the medicine. Some wish before the taking of the medicine to chew a
little pellitory of Spain. As for the smell, few are ignorant how to hold a
tossed of bread dipped in rose-vineger to the nose, that the smell offend nor. And
as for the manner of taking physic, Pills how to be taken
I hold it not amiss to take Pill^ in the pap of a roasted apple, as many do,
and better in my opinion then in the yolke of an egg. Some gild them over, and
so swallow them, which is not amiss. The Germane Physicians make them far
smaller than we use; as for our seven they make commonly the double, if not
more, and so give their patients 4. or 5. in a spoone at a time with some sirup
to suppe up, and so proceed till they have taken all. Electuaries are most
usually rolled in sugar, Electuaries.

Potions how to be taken, and how to keep them down.


and so eaten by gobbets, or on the point of a knife without sugar. Potions are
drunk down, and therefore in most danger to be cast up again; and therefore
greater care must be had in keeping them down, for fear of frustrating our
intention: and therefore, besides that which has been said, when that is
feared, it will be good to make the party hold his hand in cold water, to
besprinckle his face with a little fair water, rose water, or rose-vineger
mingled therewith, or to lap the hands in a linen cloth wet with vinegar; and
which is a most sovereign remedy, let tie a warm linen cloth close about
their neck. And some hold a raw egg, shell and all close to the throat.
Besides the premises, let them be silent, and refrain as much as is possible
from spitting, coughing, sit still a while without motion or agitation of the
body. It is to be wished, How long at least we are to keep the medicine.
that the medicine at the least stay an hour: and if there be no means to
retain it longer, yet will it not cease to have its operation, the virtue and
efficacy thereof having in that space diffused it self abroad, and sometimes
in a shorter space, as I have often observed: and besides, it will hardly come
up alone, but bring up with it such corrupt humors as have been collected in
the stomach, which is no small benefit, if it went no further. I have often
observed, that even after half an hours retention, and sometimes less,
although rejected again by vomit, yet has it wrought effectually downe-wards.
Now here it may be demanded, whether after physic the patient may sleep or
no? Whether we may sleep after physic Answer.
It is agreed upon by all our Physicians, that after Pills the patient may
sleep, and are therefore often after supper exhibited: but as for other
physic, most are against it until the physic have finished its operation.
And yet Ioubert des erreurs populaires partic. 2. chap. 17.
a late learned French Physician sometimes heretofore by us mentioned, allows
of sleep after any physic, which he professes to have practiced to his
patients without any prejudice; howbeit after the operation is once begun,
then permits he it not until all be finished. As for vomits, In vomits what
to be done.
we give now and then a draught of thin posset drink to facilitate the
operation, and some dissolve in it a little butter: and some to facilitate the
operation thrust their finger into their throat, and sometimes dip a feather in
oil and so thrust it down the throat, ^rative what time ^ be given.
the better to facilitate the same. Now as for the lavative, ordinarily given,
after purgations (being nothing else but a draught of thin broth or
posset-drinke) it is hard to determine the particular hour: but it is then to
be given, when as we think the medicine al or the most part to be descended
out of the stomach into the guts, which is most commonly three or four hours
after the taking of the purgation: so that if it be taken about six in the
morning, this broth may be given about nine or ten; in some sooner, in some
later: and then there would again interceed two hours to let this lavative
descend into the guts before dinner; which is to be given, when as we guess
that the medicine has wholly, or almost finished it operation, and the patient
finds his stomach empty of it, which is not at one and the same hour in all
alike. (...) of (...)
The dinner must be sparing, and of boiled meat; and as for supper, if the
dinner be late, the supper need to be little or none, unless some cawdell, a
potched egg or two, of some such easy thing. If the medicine be taken early
in the morning, then is the operation of the physic so much furthered, that
dinnertime comes on so early, that supper may be had in due season, which
may likewise be sparing, and roast meat rather than boiled. If pills be taken
over night, the lavative may be taken in the morning betimes, When pills are
taken over night.
and dinner and supper at their accustomed seasons. During this time of
purging, Keeping of the chamber cum custodia and the reason.
it is commonly injoined by the Physician to keep the chamber, which is called
cum custodia: and that for a double reason; both for fear lest the ambient
air abroad, if exceeding in cold, might offend, as likewise for fear of
troubling the operation of the medicine by any objects, which, then occuring,
might hinder the operation thereof. And therefore the room ought not to be too
light, but rather somewhat dark: and the patient to be purged, is that day to
free his thoughts from any weighty cares, not to study, nor admit of company,
which might hinder and divert the operation of the medicine. The ambient air
how to be ordered.
And it is to be observed, that if the ambient air be warm, we need not to
warm the room with any fire; but if the ambient be cold, then are we to warm
it moderatly. If the diseased be weak, then the discretion of the Physician
must appear in accommodating diet and other things according to the strength,
and other circumstances concerning his patient. And when solid food cannot be
received, suppings and liquid meats must then of them be used. And this is the
sum of that I think needful to be said concerning the governing of such as
take physic. In some, I confess, Sine custodia what, and when it may be used.
we observe not always so strict and precise a proceeding: as in some persons,
who, either by way of prevention, or otherwise, for some inveterate chronicall
infirmity (being, notwithstanding, well able to walk up and down, and
dispatch their ordinary and useful affairs) do use some diet drink, or
other gentle medicines for diverse days, yet without keeping close within their
chamber; called therefore sine custodia. Now, we proceed to the signs of a
laudable purgation. That the purge has played its part, Signs of complete
purgation.
we discern by these signs: when the excrements show some alteration in
color, if the party find alleviation, the appetite return, and the accidents
be eased: and sometimes if there be a propensenesse to sleep, and if drouth
appear: provided, it proceed not from some hot rheum, from the heat of the
purging medicine, or of the stomach it self, or some choleric humor, or
that there were no complaint of it before the medicine taken: for oftentime a
great drouth is well qualified and quieted by purgation, the hot cause being
then removed. In other cases, faith Aph. 10. lib. 4.
Hippocrates, such as being purged, have no feeling of drouth, let them purge
until they be sensible of it. Neither yet is sleep simply to be understood,
but when as by sleep and hot humors, great watching preceding, the cause now
removed, sleep ensues: provided always it proceed not from debility of the
body. But that purgation we account not laudable, which mooveth and stirs
the humors, but expels them not: Defective purgation.
or that expels them, yet not as it ought, nor the fit humor to be
expelled; but with great pain, with evil accidents, and the good and bad both
together. Causes of defective purgation.
The cause of these proceeds either from the party purged, in regard of some
fault in the debilitie of the faculty, or want of preparation in the humors,
or by reason of obstructions: it may also come to pass by means of the
medicine; as being either too strong of a malign quality, weak, or not well
corrected. It proceeds also sometimes by reason of some error in diet:
History.
As I remember a young Gentlewoman, my patient, some years ago, having taken
a purge by my prescription, within an hour or two after filled her belly with
baked pears, which hindered the operation of the physic, although strong
enough, and not without danger to her self. If it should happen, as sometimes
it may, that physic should not work, If physic work not.
a gentle Glister, or perhaps a quick Suppository will draw it down. If too
violently.
If too violently, a temperate air, warm clothes applied to the belly,
astringent diet, and rest without motion will help it. If not, a little burnt
claret wine, or some good Venice treacle, Gripings in the belly.
will help it. If gripings proceeding from some tough phlegm, which cannot
pass through the orifices of the small veins, do gnaw thy belly, some warm
clothes applied to the belly will dissolve the humor, and discuss any
flatuous matter. And this ^hen shall suffice to have spoken concerning this
general evacuation, we proceed now to the last general evacuation, which is
sweat.

CHAP. XVI.
Of sweating, and means to provoke the same; diverse sorts of Hydrotickes or
medicines provoking sweat, both external and internal: Something concerning
tears, their causes and prognosticke.

OF two general evacuations, phlebotomy and purgation we have said
sufficiently already, rests yet a third, which by reason it evacuateth in the
like manner from the whole body, is therefore also ranked among general and
universal evacuations. Three concoctions in the body.
It has been said already, there are three concoctions performed in the body
of man: the first, in the stomach and guts, having for excrement the ordure,
which is expelled by the fundament: the second in the liver and veins, having
for excrement the urine: the third in the capillary veins, in the habit of
the body, having for excrements the sweat and fuliginous evaporations, Sweat
an excrement of the third concoction.
expelled by the pores of the body. This last is the subtilest part of this
matter, by a mild and gentle heat resolved into vapors, so and insensibly
expelled: the other of a grosser substance, expelled in the form of moisture;
and this we commonly call sweat. What sweat is.
And it is defined, an excretion of thin, serous, or watery humors by the
whole habit, or outward parts of the body. But Sudoris materiam ab internis
visceribus succo naturali madenti^us emanare contendis, Fernel. lib. de feb
(...). cap. desudere.
Fernel would have all sweat to proceed from the inward parts super abounding
in moisture, whom, notwithstanding, all our best Physicians do contradict.
Sweat is useful both in sickness and in health, and is both natural and
artificial. Artificial sweat is often procured by exercises in healthful
persons, and sometimes by bathes and other means. My purpose and intention is
here chiefly to speak of sweat in the sick, together with the utility
thereof, and many means to procure the same; as also diverse general
directions and rules concerning the use of these means both in sickness and
in health. Sweat is used either in acute or chronicall diseases. In chronicall
diseases, exercise may sometimes further them, which in acute diseases most
commonly cannot be effected. In acute diseases, sweat is either natural or
artificial: Sweating in acute diseases.
and again, natural, besides the ordinary course, is sometimes critical, and
sometimes again symptomaticall. Critical, as when on a critical day,
accompanied with other good and laudable signs, Sweat natural, or artificial.
the strength especially holding out, and alleviation after ensuing. Natural
again critical or symptomaticall.

Symptomatical what.


Symptomaticall, is, when failing either in quantity, in quality, or in the
timely and orderly excretion it is deficient, accompanied with some other ill
accidents, and without alleviation of the patient, often also accompanied with
the overthrow of the vigor or strength; and thus we often by experience find,
when the sick sweateth but in some one or other part of the body; as about the
head, and upper parts only: or when the sweat is of an evil smell, and often
also cold and clammie; and sometimes also coming in too great abundance,
nature now being so much overthrown, that it is not any more able to contain
this humidity within the body, which we then call sudorem diaphoreticum. Now,
Diaphoreticall sweat.
all these kinds of sweats do many times prove dangerous, if not deadly,
especially accompanied with other dangerous presaging signs, as Hippocrates in
many places of his prognostickes, and other places of his works; and after
him, Galen do fully testify. But it comes often also to pass, that nature
is defective in expelling this humiditie, which may proceed from diverse causes;
and is then by the Phsiytian to be helped forward, by administering such means
as may answer the patients expectation. Now, this is by diverse means effected:
sometimes, as was said, by exercise, Sweat how to be provoked.
in cases where it may safely be admitted, and sometimes by other means, as by
covering with many clothes, hydroticke, or sweating medicines, diet drinks,
and the like inward medicines: and sometime by outward means also; as by
perfumes, ointments, baths dry and moist, application of bottles to the soles
of the feet, hot brickes and the like. Of simples provoking sweat, called
therefore sudorisickes, there be diverse sorts, as well vegetables as mineralls,
as also some compositions there are which further this work effectually. The
simples are of an opening quality, somewhat hot and dry, yet with moderation,
Hydrotick simples, or provokers of sweat.
rarefying and opening the passages and pores by which sweat is to pass: as
among vegetables we have diverse woods, both foreign and domesticke: to wit,
lignum sanctum, assafras, Zarzaparilla, China root, Vine root, Box, Ling, Heath
or Hadder, of the which diverse sudorificke drinks are made, in several cases
and manners, according as the nature of the disease, the strength of the
patient, with other circumstances concurring shall permit, with the which
decoctions are often mingled some other vegetables, herbs, flowers, or roots;
and besides, we have yet many other simples of a forcible operation, which may
safely be given in a small quantity: as Bezoar stone, Strong hydrotickes.
Hearts horn calcinated or burnt, Vnicornes-horne (in the esteem of some)
which I value not a rush; a gum found in the eye of an old Heart. Diverse
plants there be also of good use and efficacy for this same purpose: as holy
Thistle, the decoction, water and salt of it and of many other simples. Some
there are also made of mineralls and metalls, which ought carefully to be
prepared, and with great circumspection administered; any Empericke or
Barber-surgeon can tell how to make any sweat apace in the pox, with some
mercuriall medicines, suffumigation of cinabaris, etc. better than to fit and
prepare proper medicines for the strength and constitution of each individual
patient. There are yet a multitude of medicines made of Antimonie, Sulphur, and
other mineralls and metalls, yea, of gold it self: as flores sulphuris,
Hydroticke minerals.
antimo^^i, aurum diaphoreticum, etc. concerning which, our late Writers,
especially our Paracelsists, have written at great length, and undertaken
thereby to work wonders. Compounded sudorificke medicines are Venice treacle,
Mithridat, Dioscordium, etc. But in the use of these sudorificke medicines,
Compounded sudorifickes.
some cautions and rules are to be observed: first, that the body be first
evacuated by purgation, phlebotomy, or both, Cautions in the use of hydrotickes.
if need be. Again, the body is to be prepared, especially where there is
need, and that by some of the gentlest of some of these same sudorificke
medicines: such as are mulsa, or honey water, the decoction of tormentill roots,
Preparation.
squinant, of our ordinary canes with calamus aromaticus, the decoction of
chamomill, sage, betonie, and the like; whereunto may be added cordial flowers
of borrage, buglosse and marigolds, the which, together with the water of the
decoction, will correct both their hot and dry qualities. After the exhibiting
of these preparatives, they are in no case to be forced to sweat. Now, the
preparations may be diverse, according to several and diverse diseases: as
French pox, Fevers, and diverse chronicall diseases. But when then the poison
in the plague* When to be neglected.
and some pestilent fevers has already taken possession, I wish thee then,
neither to stay for purgation nor preparation, but according to strength,
presently by all means possible to expel the enemy out of the house. Some
prescribe frictions as a fit preparation, Frictions.
which I think to be very good, if they be used as they ought. Some, again,
prescribe fomentations; howbeit this better becomes a particular sudorificke,
Fomentations.
I mean, of some one particular part. Sudorifickes in chronicall diseases.
Besides acute diseases, they are very useful in many chronicall diseases: as
in all manner of defluxions, Sciatica, and all other gouts proceeding of a cold
cause; as also in long continuing Fevers, French pox, all long* continuing
fluxes of the belly: as also in Epilepsies. Palsies, and pains of the head,
proceeding of cold humors. We are also to observe, that we urge not the
sick to sweat, How to use these sudorificke medicines.
at least half an hour after the reception of his sudorificke medicine: and
then if it come not freely, we are to force it with covering with more
clothes, or hot brickes quenched in vinegar, and lapped up in linen clothes
dipped in vinegar, applied to the armeholes, soles of the feet and thighs,
rubbing still off the sweat with warm clothes to make it come the freclier.
Some bodies thou shall hardly by any means make to sweat, and there the
physician is to beware lest he offer too much violece nature. The sick is to
sweat as strength and other circumstances shall require. The continuance o^
time of endurance. In what cases hurtful.
This remedy must not be used in extreme weakness, in extenuat persons, wasted
with long lingering diseases, in Consumptions, Fever hecticke, in very young
children, and old decrepit persons, etc. Now because our authors do much
commend sweating procured by bathing, either natural or artificial, we will
therefore say something of the use of both these before we proceed any further,
having first said something of tears for the affinity with sweat.

To this place of sweat we may also refer tears, Of tears.
a moist excrement of the brain, participating of the nature of sweat. I pass
by a punctual description of many particulars concerning this point, which may
at great length be seen in a Mercur. de excrem. lib. 3. cap. 2. de lachrymis.

Differences of teare^


learned late Physician, and come to that which most makes for our purpose in
hand. As for the differences of tears, they are these. Some are called cold,
by reason they seem in trickling down to be cold; some again seem to be
hotter; and others are called dry: and these be such, as falling down are
quickly dry again. Some again are called thick, and stick closer to the
cheeks, and some again thinner, which are quicklier dissolved, and are of a
very thin and watery substance. Tears again sometimes come in great
abundance, and sometimes in a smaller quantity. Some again salt, some sweet,
some bittter. Some again are without any sickness, and some with sickness.
Some come easily and of themselves, and some again are forced. Upon the
several causes of all these particulars, I will not insist. Use of this
moisture.
The use of this moisture is to irrigate and moisten the hard horny tunicle of
the eye, which otherwise with its hardness might easily have hurt the other
tender tunicles, and adjacent parts of the eye. But let us see what tears
signify and prognosticat. Now that a physician ought to contemplate and
consider the nature and signification of tears, there is a warrant in Lib. 1.
de cris. cap. 7*
Galen himself. Abundance of tears argue abundance of moisture in the brain,
as we see commonly in women and children: few tears again argue the contrary
disposition; howbeit sometimes that piece of flesh lying within the corner of
the eyes (called caruncula lachrymalis) may be grown to such a bigness, that
it stops all the passages of this tearie moisture, as I may call it: Why
some can so easily weep, and some not at all.
and this may be well assigned for a reason, why some cannot by any means
whatsoever be forced to shed one tear: others again upon any small occasion
shed abundance of tears. Tears of several tastes argue the dominion of such a
humor in the brain: as bitter, choler, etc. Tears again are observed either
in health or sickness, Natural involuntary tears, what they signify.
and either natural and involuntary, or else voluntary. Natural involuntary
tears proceed either from the want of this caruncle, or abundance of moisture
in the brain, which they signify. If they be accidental, Accidental tears.
then they may proceed by means of cold compressing and condensating: as also
by means of sharp things from without, or taken inwardly; as onions, mustard,
Involuntary tears in acute diseases.

Voluntary tears.


smoke, and defluxions and weakness of the brains. Involuntary tears in the
sick of acute diseases are esteemed bad, as signifying a great imbecility of
the retentive faculty. Voluntary tears both in sickness and in health may
proceed as well from a voluntary compression or a dilatation: and hence is it,
that tears proceed as well from joy and mirth, Cold and hot tears.
as from sorrow and anger. Cold tears are not esteemed good, and so are very
hot and salt; and that not only because they signify too great a heat of the
brain, but also, because, as witnesses Hippocrates, they threaten
exulceration of the eyes. Thick and thin tears.
Thick tears argue concoction. The thinness argues sometimes the crudity of
the humor, and sometimes again the narrowness of the passages, which are also
causes thereof. But this shall suffice to have said concerning this subject.

CHAP. XVIJ.
Of bathing among the ancients; as also certain ablutions, of head, hands and
feet. Of artificial bathes general and particular: their right use, the time,
preparation, and diverse other considerable circumstances, and how far we
observe these customs.

Diverse sorts of ablutions or washings in use among the ancients.
THe ancients had in great request diverse sorts of ablutions, or washings both
of the whole, and also of some parts of the body, some whereof we yet observe,
and some we have forsaken. They were used either before or after meals, and
that for several uses and ends. Bathing and anointing the body before meals.
Before meals they had a custom to bath their whole body, and to anoint it,
as may appear by many places of ancient writers both Poets and Orators, and
many other ancient authors, as well Physicians as others. Of these some were
public, to receive all comers: others private, which private men of means
with great cost and charges builded for their own and friends use: the like
whereof is at this day to be seen in all the Germane countries. My purpose is
not to spend time in entering upon a particular description of those sumptuous
bathes of ancient times, whereof ancient authors are so full. But what excess
was used in this particular, see in that wise Epist. 87. lib. 13. Bathing in
Germany very frequent.
Seneca. At this day the Germans have in very frequent use this bathing once a
week, or at least in a fortnight, those of any fashion having for this same
purpose their hot house in their back court, as we here have other office
houses; and in every town are some of these public hot-houses for the use of
any; where they pay a certain rate for their attendance. Used there
promi^^^ously without any previous preparation
In these bathes they use most commonly to sweat, without any other previous
preparation or purgation, both man, woman and child; and many use immediately
after, With cupping and scatification.
scarification with cupping-glasses applied to some parts of the body, where
they bleed at the discretion of their dog-leach, who yields his attendance
during this time; or yet according to their own foolish fancy, seldom
consulting with a Physician about this business. With us these bathings are
not so much in request; although I deny not, they might now and then discreetly
used prove profitable for the body; howbeit in some places of London there are
some hot-houses, whereof one may make use. It is more frequent here with us to
wash the body in cold water in the Sommer-time, which being but seldom, as
twice or thrice a year used, might well be allowed. But there is a very
perverse and preposterous custom, Preposterous custom of washing the body in
rivers with a full stomach.
used of the younger sort, apprentices especially, to wash their bodies in
rivers or other waters immediately after meals, especially after supper, being
very prejudicial to their health, and disposing the body to diverse diseases.
The hands may be as often washed as one will, both morning, evening and midday,
both before and after meals, in sickness and in health. But whether often
washing of the hands help the eyesight, may not without cause be questioned.
The Mundificat palmas and lumina reddit acuta. Schola Salern. and Arnald. villa
nov. in com. Whether the head ought to be washed or no^
Salernitane school affirms it, howbeit his interpreter thinks it is only
by accident, by reason the hands being clean, they handling the eyes, they are
like to fare the better. Again, whether we may ever wash head and feet may
likewise be demanded? Or whether that old proverbiall speech be true;
Saepemanus, raro pedes, nunquam caput. Now as for the head, in regard it is for
the most part so well supplied with internal moisture, and that as well in
regard of its moist constitution, as also by the continual exhalations from
the nether parts of the body, and there by sublimation metamorphosed into
moisture, it would seem to be against reason, by any new addition to increase
the same. I do indeed confess, we are to be wary in meddling with this sublime
and noble part, the seat of the senses, of reason and understanding it self.
It is notwithstanding, in some cases and certain diseases, Answer.
not only tolerable, but even also necessary to use this lotion of the head;
provided it be but seldom used: How and when it it to be washed.
as namely in heads much subject to defluxions of rheum, in which case we may
wash the head in a lee appropriated for this purpose; as of betony or the like,
and afterward wash it in fair water not fully cold, then dry it with a dry
linen cloth without warming it; afterward besprinckling the head with some
powder made of frankincense, masticke, red-rose leaves, rosemary and sage, it
will much comfort both head and senses. And we see the ancients used much
Embrocations, which was a wetting of the head: Embrocations*
and those who go to the hot bath in Sommerset-shire, sitting in the bath use
these Embrocations, or buckettings, which some do often endure to a very great
number. I wish notwithstanding, that these ablutions of the head be but
seldom used in health: as twice or thrice, or at most four times a year. And
as for the use of it in the sick, as in defluxions and rheums, I advise them,
if they desire to speed well, to be advised by good counsel what and when to
do. As for this ablution or washing of the feet, Washing of the feet.
it has been of very ancient use, especially among the Eastern people, where
the heat was great, where this was an ordinary courtesy used toward strangers,
which was no small refreshing in these hot scorching countries. We use it
often also both in sickness and in health, but in warme-water commonly, with
addition of some well-smelling herbs: as fennel, camomill, hyssop, and the
like, which cannot be misliked, especially to bed-ward, as it is most commonly
by us used. In sickness it is also often of very good use, especially in hot
acute diseases, in burning Fevers, Phrensie^, where often pertinacious watching
is joined with deliration. And in this case we are to boil good store of
lettice, white nymphaea or water-lilly leaves, violet leaves and flowers, and
some poppy-heads, being very forcible to provoke sleep, by reason of the great
sympathy betwixt those two, howbeit far distant and remote parts. But in
this, as in all the rest, if it be possible, be advised by thy learned
counsel.

But now we come to speak of the division and diversity of bathes; and being
of so great use in the body of man, it shall not be out of purpose to insist a
little the longer upon this subject. All baths then are either natural or
artificial.

Of artificial baths.
Of the artificial first, as being most obvious and easy to come by, we will
speak in the first place. The matter.
In the first place then, for the matter of these bathes it is various and
diverse: as water, wine, milk and oil; and sometimes sand, but the most common
and frequent matter is water, sometimes warm, sometimes cold, and sometimes of
a mean temper betwixt both. In the body of man these bathes have a triple use
or benefit: Their use threefold.
some evacuat and cleanse, some qualify and temper the humors of the body, and
some supply and fill up that which is decayed. Now that they do euacuat by
sweat if one should deny, daily experience will evince, and 14. method.
Galen himself witnesses unto us: but to fill up and supply any thing that is
wanting, will perhaps find less credit with ordinary understandings; which
notwithstanding the Qui ex tennibus crassiores volu^t evadere, lavabunt bis,
etc. Id. lib. 3. de sympto. cap. 1. and lib. de salub. diaeta comment. 14.

Virtues of a temperate bathe.


same author yet in another place witnesses. In the sick we commonly use
them of warme-water, intending or remitting this quality of heat as occasion
requires, adding thereunto diverse simples, according to the nature of the
disease, and constitutions of the body to be bathed. Now a temperate warm bath
helps forward natures work in such as have need of moderate humectation and
heat, and by reseration of the pores of the body refreshes and cools, and by
extraction of fuligionous excrements freeth from internal heat. A hot bath
helps contractions proceeding from cold, Of a hot bath.
provokes sweat, exhausteth and draineth the body dry of superfluous moisture.
This bathing in warme-water acccording to a Andernacus de veteri and nov.
medic. comment. 2. dial. 8. circa finem.

The use in diverse diseases.


late Writer is good to be used in diverse infirmities: as in a Diarie or own
days Fever, and in a hecticke fever also sole and of it self, before it turn
to a marasme, and not as yet joined to any putrid fever: as also for such as
have their moisture exhausted with watchings, cares, dry Diet, or medicines of
that nature. And not in these only, but also in dry distempers, and in
decrepid old age. In Fevers proceeding from putrefaction, it is not to be used
but after signs of concoction, unless in a perfect Tertian, the dryness of
the humors urge the use of it. It is also in use in Quartans proceeding from
choler adust. In Rheumaticke distillations, inflammation of the lungs,
pleurisy, after signs of concoction, and in headache, proceeding from humors
or vapors arising from the nether parts, it is of good use: as also for the
falling off of the hair, for Lethargies, Phrensies, Epilepsie not proceeding
from the stomach or head, but from some other part of the body. It is also
good against melancholy proceeding from sharp humors, pains of the eyes,
bleere-eyes, fluxes of the belly, helps defects of the voice, inveterate
infirmities of the spleen, and indurations thereof, the cholicke proceeding of
choler, especially in the younger sort. But proceeding of a cold cause and
gross humors it qualifieth indeed, but cures it not. And it is good against
the gout, proceeding of choler, as also against all extenuation of the body.
But on the contrary is hurtful to plethoricall and cachochymicall bodies, to
Hecticks proceeding from an Erisipelas, In what cases hurtful.
commonly called S. Anthonies fire, and Headaches proceeding from a flatuous
matter: and it is hurtful for the inward parts overtaken with inflammation, in
all diseases of the ioints, excepting the above mentioned; and for all manner
of effusion of blood, whether at the nose, or any other part of the body. And
it is yet hurtful for all such as are inclined to casting, loathing of the
stomach, weakness of body, such as are subject to bitter belchings, and such
as abound with humors, howbeit otherwise good; especially if any fear of a
flux of blood. That bath which is hotter than the former, in provoking sweat
is more effectual, but withal does not communicate that humectation to the
body as the former. Now there was also an use of bathing in cold water
succeeding the former, Bathing in cold water
which was not immediately to be used after the temperate; but from this into a
tepid or a little warmish, and then into cold water. For whom hurtful in
sickness and in health.
But to some bodies this kind of bathing brings some prejudice: as among
healthful people, to such as are yet growing, and to children especially, as
also to women, and ancient people, to small and weak persons. It is also
hurtful for the breast, procures hoarsenesse and the cough, offends the
heart, the stomach; especially if already weak and feeble. And as for the
diseased, it is principally hurtful to weak kidneys, procures pain in the
guts; especially that called Tenesmus, and stays women's fluxes: and it is
hurtful also for humid and cold diseases, as likewise for the Fevers Hectic,
that especially already turned into a marasme. The ancients used often to enter
into another room, where they sweat by means of the air warmed, the which
they called Laconicum, Latonicum, and what it is.
answerable unto which, in nearest resemblance, are our hot houses, or stoves,
as they are in frequent use in all Germany, although the particular manner of
heating this air differs much; these dry stoves being warmed by the heat of
the fire only; but this Laconicum was a moister vapor. This vapor then, or
hot air the ancients used, was twofold: either dry, in respect of the other,
procured by heat of flints, Of two sorts.
or the like, water being cast upon them, and the sick set in the tub, and
covered with clothes made to sweat: or else this was a moister air, procured
by a vapor derived from a vessel full of liquour, with answerable
ingredients, and conveied betwixt the two bottomes of a bathing tub, the
uppermost full of holes, where the sick being set, and covered with clothes,
was to sweat, as need required; and this with us is also in frequent use. We
use often also particular moist bathes, called insessus, and semicapium,
^^micapium cinsessus.
being a bathing tub filled with warm water, or other matter with appropriate
herbs, wherein the patient sits up to the middle or more, being prepared for
diverse uses and ends. And these are chiefly useful for hot and dry bodies.
The other dry sweatings are fit only for moist and cold constitutions,
abounding with gross humors, and for fat and corpulent people, having always
a watchful eye, to the strength of the patient. But such are altogether
contrary to cold and dry, and yet more to hot and dry constitutions. Now, as
concerning the time of these bathings and sweatings, both general and
particular, The time, both general and particular.
we are to consider, whether they are used for any necessity in sickness, or
otherwise, as physic for prevention of future infirmities. If it be left to
election, then the most temperate time of the year is to be made choice of, as
has been said of other evacuations: and the time of the day likewise most
temperate, as in a morning before dinner, and after concoction is perfected. In
sick folks, if there be a necessity, the ambient air, if not answerable to
our desire, must be corrected, as accasion shall require. As for the time of
the day, as has been said already, The time of the day.
the former days food must first be perfectly concocted, as well in the
stomach as in the liver. As concerning the time of the disease, it being with
us unusual in Fevers, and such acute diseases, we need not so curiously
insist upon it: yet if there were any such necessity, the same time already set
down for the diet, and evacuations, both general and particular, Preparation
of the (...).
were to be observed. Before entering into any of these baths of any kind
whatsoever, we are to see that the body be before cleansed, and that the
common excrements of urin and ordure first be evacuated, for fear of some
defluxion upon the feeble parts, by dissolving and liquifying the humors of the
body. Neither yet are we to use exercise before it, for fear of filling the
head with fumes and vapors: and food must also be refrained from, for fear of
crudities, from whence obstructions, and diverse dangerous diseases might after
ensue. If the party be not able to abstain, let him take some little
sustenance in a morning, a little biscuit, In bathing how to be ordered.
or some cordial electuary, or the like. In bathing, the party is to abstein
from all manner of food, as also from drink and sleep, for fear of crudities,
the mother of a many diseases. But if strength should so far fail, that we
should fear fainting, then are comfortable smells to be presented to the nose:
or else the crumbs of a manchet soaked in good sack, or the like, a little
marchpane, manus Christi, or some such comfortable refresher of the spirits,
speedily to be given the patient. As for the continuance in the bath, The
continuance in the bath.
there cannot be one certain rule prescribed to every individual person. Cold
constitutions, unless very weak, may continue a longer time: but temperate
persons, when they begin to grow red may go forth of it: and lean and slender
people, by long continuance therein are much inda^maged. But the strength is
that which must always be our best directer. In hectic fevers, they are first
to go into the warm bath, How to be used in hecticke fevers.
and next into a cold, that by this means a constipation of the skin may be
procured and dissipation prevented. Such as in health were much accustomed to
bathing, in sickness more freely may use this means: and yet if they use
oftener than once a day, they are to interpose 4 or 5 hours betwixt the two
several times. After bathing, After bathing.
the party is diligently to be dried with dry clothes in a warm room, and
well rubd, the head especially, and then sent to bed to sweat a while; and is
afterward again to be rubd and dried with soft linen clothes. After all this
is performed, and the body settled, then are we to offer the sick some liquid
food at first: as namely some broth, or the like, and afterward in a more
solid substance, sometimes in a greater, and sometimes in a lesser quantity,
according to the nature of the disease, strength of the patient, custom, the
ambient air, the season of the year, etc. Dangers arising from the inordinate
use of bathing.
But as in all other things, so are we here to observe the golden mediocrity:
for all manner of hot baths immoderatly used, whether moist or dry, do too
much mollify the body, evacuating and overthrowing the natural vigor thereof:
and if too hot, they cause continual burning fevers, debilitate the body; from
whence proceeds great faintness, and finally death it self. Again, too
much bathing in cold water, procures shivering and shaking, convulsions, and
at length an extinction of natural heat, wherein life consists.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of natural baths, or mineral waters; whether leap-yeere called also the
bissextil, causes any alteration in these mineral waters, or infringeth the
force thereof: and of the original and first beginning of this time.

ALmighty God, out of his singular goodness, and infinite bounty, taking pity
upon miserable mankind, now by reason of sin made subject to so many
sicknesses, a due reward of the fame, as be has affoorded this microcosme
man, a multitude of sovereign medicines for his solace in such diseases; so
among many others he has made many waters, that spring out of the earth to
afford him comfort in his great calamity of sickness. Now, besides the
common waters of several sorts, whereof we have daily use, both in food and
physic, as has been proved already; there are yet many waters that spring
out of the bowels of the earth, participating of the nature of diverse
mineralls and metalls, Mineral waters useful for the health of man.

Thermae, seu aqua ther^ales.


the virtues whereof these waters do retain, and are therefore with no small
success often used of the sick for many and diverse infirmities. And these by
a general word, are by us commonly called Thermae or aquae Thermales, from
that heat whereof most of them do less or more participate. Now, that these
waters were not at first among ancient Physicians in that request they have
been since, may by Homerum C^lidorum fen^i^m mentionem non fecisse miror, cum
aelioqui lavari cali sa frequenter indicarit: videlicet, quia medicina tanc
haec non erat quae a ^uarum perfugio utatur, Plin. lib. 31. cap 6.
Pliny appear: who wondering that Homer made no mention of them, does
afterward answer himself, that in those days there was no Physician that
made use of them; although Homer makes often mention of washing in warm
water. After Homer, Lib. de aere aqu^^ and locis.
Hippocrates, although he seem not utterly to to reject such waters, yet by
reason of their running through mineral and metallicke veins, holds them
therefore for suspected: for the which cause he never admits of them for
the use of the sick. And of the same mind was Galen also, who never that we
read of, made any trial of such waters. The later Physicians made (...) these
mineral waters.
But the late Physicians, as well Greek as Arabians, have introduced the use
of them; as finding by long experience, that in chronicall and long continuing
diseases, there is not a more sovereign remedy: as in old inveterate
obstructions of the inward parts, and the like. Now, it is confirmed by the
Authorities of a multitude of our best Physicians, that some of these waters
are hot, and some again cold in their first qualities; and some mixed: and so
in their second qualities depending upon the first, they differ likewise,
according to those mineralls or metalls from whence they borrow their virtues,
howbeit in general, How their virtues are to be discerned.
all these waters participate of exsication. Now, from what metal or mineral
the water takes its virtue or operation, may partly by the color, taste,
smell, the day in the bottom; and partly by distillation, long boiling,
evaporation, and the dregs left in the bottom be discerned, as also the
nature of such diseases as are thereby cured. And howsoever, many trust much to
distillation, yet is it not so sure a way, that we may always trust to it,
these waters being often of so subtle a nature, that they draw nothing, but,
as it were, the spirituous quality from these solid substances. In general,
it is to be observed, that those which abound in brimstone and bitume,
Sulphu^o^us and ^itum^nous waters.
are all of a loosening and mollifying nature, and do therewith affect both
the stomach and the liver. Waters participating o^ diverse metalls and
m^neralls.
But such as partake more of the nature of iron, alum, copper, or plaster, do
too much condensat and shut up the pores of the skin, by which means it
comes to pass, that no excrement can thereby be excluded. But such as
participate of both these extremes, are accounted the best, and their use
always safest: for they digest and discuss, yet always reserving entirely
the strength and natural vigor of all the parts of the body. But before I
proceed to handle diverse particulars concerning these mineral waters, I must
here discuss a question, whether all these mineral waters be at all times of
a like and equal force? And that this question is not out of purpose, nor
needlessely propounded, Whether leap-yeere does alter or annihi^^^ the virtues
of ^inerall waters.
may from this appear, in that some have been, and some yet are of opinion,
that these waters every Bissextile or leap-yeere, as we call it, lose a great
deal of their efficacy and power, and therefore not so efficacious and
powerful against ordinary infirmities. In the first place then, that the
virtue and efficacy of these mineral waters, is according to the several
seasons of the year, and often according to abundance of drouth or moisture,
is often intended and remitted, as we cannot deny, so is not the point in
controversy: but whether in any one certain determinate time, quatenus such a
time, howsoever the ambient air in all the qualities be affected, does produce
such an infallible alteration in all mineral waters, that during that time,
they are of little or no efficacy against diseases: and this is this
leap-yeere now in question. And although I am not ignorant, that many of the
wiser and more judicious have their judgments well enough settled herein; yet
because not only some of the vulgar, but some of more eminent parts, and more
sublimate understandings, have been involved in this vulgar error, I shall
crave pardon to digress a little upon this point, which in my opinion may not
seem impertinent.

In the first place then, let us take notice of the original of this
leap-yeere, and what it is. Before the time of Julius Caesar, Original of
leap-yeere.
it is thought that most nations used the computation of the year according to
the course of the Moon, the which, because it was uncertain, the Moon in her
motion being so unstable and uncertain; therefore Julius Caesar 54 years
before the nativitie of our Lord and Savior, after he had finished his wars,
taking into his consideration this irregularity of the year, resolved to
rectify the same. And for this same purpose he sent into Egypt for the most
expert Mathematicians of that Kingdom, and among the rest one Sosigenes (from
whence, as from this Julius it is called the Julian, Julian, or Sosigenian
year.
so from this same Sosigenes it is called the Sosigenian year) and therefore
whereas before the year was ordinarily measured by the motion of the Moon, it
was then reduced to the motion of the Sun, which finisheth his course in 365
days, and 6 hours. These days he divided into twelve equal parts, called by
the name of Mensis, or measure. And because there rested yet 6 odd hours, for
avoiding confusion, which in process of time might thereby be occasioned,
every fourth year, there being just 24 hours remaining, these making up a
just natural day, were inserted into the month of February, which before had
but 28 days. And yet this computation is not so perfect, but that it admits
of some defects, here being added unto this year more by the fifth part of an
hour than ought: and by consequence more added every leap-yeere unto February
than ought, by 48 minutes: the which has made an alteration in the Aequinoxes,
and Solstices since this Emperors time, about 11 or 12 days. Besides, that I
say nothing of the motion of the Moon, wherein was likewise some defect,
notwithstanding the course was taken to rectify the same, which made a great
confusion in the time of the observation of Easter betwixt the Eastern and
Western Churches, until the council of Nice. The emendation of this error,
Alteration of the yee^ by Pope Gregory 13.
howsoever for the space of 200 years by diverse Popes attempted; yet until
the time of Gregory the 13 in the year of our Lord 1^82, was never brought to
any pass. This Pope, by the help especially of one Lilius, a Doctor of
physic, took such a course to reform the Calender, that the vernall
Aequinoxe was from the 10 of March reduced to the 21, to the same day that it
was at the Nicene council. Now, this could not be, unless in the Calender and
computation of the days of the year there were 10 days quite cut off. And
for this cause, this same Lilius chose the month of October, wherein this Pope
was borne, and took quite away from it ten days: so that when the 5 of
October was to be numbered, Amputation of ten days from the former years.
in stead thereof was substituted the 15. and October that year had but 21
days. And this is that we call the Gregorian, Gregorian year and account
beyond the seas.
or beyond the seas account or year; by reason it is received in those
countries beyond the seas where the Pope is acknowledged. The which account,
yet notwithstanding, There wants yet about 2 days, in all we want 3 of that
we should have.
is not perfect, nor without exception, as I could make appear, if I were
purposed to insist upon this point. But to come now to our purpose, and to
answer this point: I say it is a thing very ridiculous, and an opinion very
erroneous, Answer.
that this orderly alteration in the computation of time, should infuse any new
influence into these celestial bodies, which should again produce so strange
and stupendous effects upon these sublunary creatures. Now, these celestial
bodies keep constantly the same course they ever did since the first creation,
these humane constitutions neither adding to, nor detracting from these
celestial bodies any new energie, virtue or power. And if there were any such
matter, why then did not some such effects follow upon the Ovid, fastor lib.
alteration of Number 1 Pompilius, who added two months, to wit, January and
February to the former year, consisting only of ten months; and why followed
not there some strange new effects, upon the altering of the names of two
months, Quintilis and Sextilis, to July and August, the names of two famous
Emperors: and finally, why followed not there some strange effects upon the
alteration of the old Roman Julian calender, where there is no less than the
difference of ten whole days betwixt us and the Romanists, whch it would
seem, should produce new and stranger effects; and this would seem a thing
not unbeseeming a papal power, who, as Gods Vicar general here upon earth,
yea, and an earthly God too, as they would make him, possessing not only the
ways of Heaven and Purgatory, but even of Hell it self; and he that can
alter the decree of the Almighty, that from Hell is no redemption, and bring an
heathen Trojan.
Emperor out of those fiery flames, why might he not as well work some new
wonder in the alteration of the influences of these celestial bodies? This
would have purchased far greater credit and reputation to his shavelings,
than all the juggling Jesuits, in Iapan or China, with their counterfeit
miracles, yea, or their whole legend of lies, put in to weigh down the scales,
our Lady of Loretto, and all the wonders of the West Indies, could ever yet
do. This, I confess, would, perhaps, make our Heretics and Huguenots think
better of S. Peter's success. This would be obvious to the simplest
understandings; whereas when we see a dead man's scull through a glass, we may
as well think it the head of some Barabbas, as of a holy John Baptist; and
when we see some milk, which they tell us was the Virgin Mary's, in regard of
the great store, and more than miraculous multiplication of this milk, it makes
many Heretic Huguenot of their Master See Calvin's treatise of relics, where
he proves many bodies of their Saints to be monsters.
Calvin's mind, that if all the milk they say was the Virgin Mary's, and which
for such they keep up, and make the people believe it is such, the best cow in
Holland never gave so much: that I say nothing of the monstrous bodies of the
Saints, some of them having two or three heads, some store of legs, etc. yea,
some double or triple bodied. But if his holiness could but stay a little the
course of the Sun or Moon, there might yet be some witnesses of it. But yet,
to give the devil his right, I do much commend the attempts of some Popes,
for attempting, but this Gregory, especially for effecting some reformation of
the old calender; but withal wish this famous Doctor, that was the chief doer
had been as well kept in remembrance for associating him into this communion
and fellowship of calling the year, as Gregorian, so Lilian, as was done to
that famous Sosigenes. But since those days, the case is quite altered, and
Gregory must go far beyond Julius, our Popes assuming the pre-eminence
alone, and precedence before Emperors. Let this then remain firm and stable,
like the laws of the Medes and Persians, that in these Leap or Bissextile
years, as such, No alteration in the leap-yeere more than any other.
there is no alteration nor difference from other years. As such, I add,
because sometimes this year may much differ from the precedent, or subsequent
year (and so may any other year differ from others) but never as such a
year, neither yet is such a difference ever in every such Bissextile year
observable. Now at the ignorance of country people, and such others as may
easily in such points prove ignorant, I marvel not so much, as that some
better learned in the Arts and liberal sciences, should be so far mistaken.
And this has made me a little the longer insist upon this point, finding a
Claudius Deodatus panth. hygiast. libr. 2, cap. 7.
learned Physician, in his treatise now and then mentioned, to be of the same
mind: Sed Bernardus non videt omnia. But I think that some such year, perhaps
falling out to be very wet, in which seasons, such waters often are not so
forcible, and this falling out it may be twice or thrice in these years, and
so by some observed, was afterward taken for an uncontrolled truth, that
always in every leap year, the mineral waters lost much of their virtues.
But now I proceed to that which follows.

These mineral waters are in a double manner used, Mineral waters used after
a double manner.
being either drunk, or the body bathed in them. They are used for diverse
infirmities: for the cleansing of the stomach, guts, and meseraicke veins; as
also to correct the distemper of the body, to help infirmities of the lungs,
shortness of breath, purging of sanious matter without, an ulcer out of the
breast, and to heal the infirmities of the liver, spleen, guts, and kidneys,
etc. In hot baths the body is commonly bathed; the others are ordinary drunk
for diverse diseases. The time.
The time and season most proper for the use of these baths, especially these
hot watets, when election may have place, as in other evacuations, so in this
must be the most temperate time of the year; as the later end of March, all
April and May: and again, in September, and beginning of October. But with us
it is better to go rather in August, that so the business may be dispatched
before the cold come in, our Sommer-heats here being seldom with us so
excessive. If any necessity require, they may be used also at other times,
correcting the air, as occasion shall require, and thy learned counsel shall
advise, without which, if thou go rashly to work, thou may, perhaps, all
thy life long repent it.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the preparation before the use of mineral waters, the right use and
virtues of them; their various kinds both in this Island and other Countries.

Preparation of the body before the use of mineral waters.
NOw, as in all other noble and generous remedies which concern the health of
mankind, we are not rashly to rush upon them without some previous
preparation and fitting of the body before: no more are we in the use of these
means to neglect the like prudence in the preparation of the body. And the
same are here to be observed, which before in the use of artificial baths were
mentioned: to wit, obstructions to be opened, the body to be well purged
according to the nature of the disease, strength of the party, and other
answerable circumstances, and withal, there must be a care had, that the
concoction be well accomplished, there be an abstinence from the venereall act,
and a freedom from passions and perturbations of the mind. The time of the
day for use.
The fit and convenient time to enter into these baths, is two hours after
Sun rising in a morning: and if the nether parts be affected, the party is to
sit in the water, covered therewith to the navell: if the upper parts be
affected, as far as the neck. And this must all be done in due order, the
first day beginning with the space of an hour, The manner.
so increasing both the time of continuance, and intending the hot quality of
the water. In the meanetime, the same caution both concerning the nature and
constitution of the parties to be bathed, and the rules concerning diet,
before, in and after the bathing, is to be observed, as we have heretofore set
down. In the morning they may be suffered to continue longer, in the evening a
shorter time, the space of five or six hours interceeding betwixt these two
times. No cetaaine nor precise time for the continuance of the use of these
waters can be determined.
But neither can there be a certain or precise time for the number of hours
continuance in the bath, nor yet a certain and set number of days determined,
not other new particular circumstances limited, but must still depend upon the
judgment of the learned and judicious Physician, without whose counsel this
business may prove more pernicious than profitable. Hot baths, and where they
most abound.
Of these mineral waters there be diverse sorts, as said is; every country
being furnished with some one kind or other. France and Italy abound most in
hot baths, desuming their force and efficacy most from Sulphur or Brimston,
wherewith is sometimes conjoined some salt, English baths.
or salt peter. Our English baths in Sommerset shire, take their virtue and
efficacy from this sulphurous substance. In Germany, Diverse mineral waters
in Germany.
baths of all sorts are in great abundance; and as the country abounds in
diverse mineralls and metalls, so do these waters participate of several and
diverse qualities and virtues: as those of Baden in Switzerland, participate of
Brimstone principally, and some little quantity of Alum: those of Baden the
Marquisat, besides the premises, participate also somewhat of salt and
saltpeter. Again, in the confines of Lorreine, there are hot baths called
Plumbarenses, participating of the nature of Lead, Brimstone and Saltpeter. In
the Duchy of Wirtenberg, there is the wild bath, called Silvestres, or
Ferinae, participating of the nature of brimstone, salt and alum: and as some
say, of copper and saltpeter also. And besides these, a great number of many
others also, not differing from the former in operation: some of them, as they
say, participating also of the nature of gold, which I hardly believe, Gold and
silver communicate no virtue to such waters.
it being of so solid and well compacted a substance, that hardly does it
communicate any virtue to waters that run through such mines, no more than
silver also, being likest unto it for solidity of substance. As concerning our
own baths with us here in great use for a multitude of infirmities, and which
do most concern us, because a learned Doctor Venner in his treatise of baths
of Bathe: and since the collecting of this tractat, I saw a learned tractat of
baths, published by Dr. Jorden, residing there.
Physician has lately explained their virtues and use, as being best with them
acquainted, I shall not need to say any thing; the virtues of others of the
same nature and kind in other countries, being much also of the same virtue
and efficacy. But because peregrination and travel, partly for profit, and
partly for pleasure and other ends, is now much in this our age improved, and
by reason it concerns not a little the health of such as are to live or
travel in remote and foreign countries, to know the nature and virtues of such
mineral waters as are found in these countries, I will therefore say a little
concerning some of them. Among all those, Acid or sour waters. They abound in
high Germany.
such as are of an acid or sour taste, and much abounding in many places of
high Germany, bear away the bell. And these waters do commonly participate of
the nature of vitriol or copperas, of alum and iron, with the admixture often
of other mineralls or metalls: as sulphur, salt, etc. There sour waters
sometimes somewhat differ in taste one from another; and sometimes little or no
difference at all in their taste can be observed. Their chief virtues in the
body of man are these following; In the first place, they are very sovereign
good against all manner of obstructions of the liver, spleen, kidneys, and
meseraicall veins, Their virtues.
and for this cause conduce not a little for the infirmities of those parts,
being very good against exorbitant casting, In what infirmities helpful.
which by their astringent faculty they cure: and they help also the
Iaundise, the Dropsy, in the beginning; cleanse the kidneys, bladder, and
other urinary passages, purging away gravel, or any other matter lying in
these passages. They are also good against the itch, scab, and any other
defedations of the skin, all foul ulcers and gangrenes. But Nihil est ex
omni part beatum. In what hurtful.
So are not these acid and sour waters able to help all infirmities: and in
particular, they are great enemies to infirmities of the lungs, especially
where there is any ulcer, wasting or inflammation. They are hurtful also for
the bloody flux, with exulceration of the guts, and any other internal
ulcer, or excoriation, and that in regard of their acidity or sharpness. And
for the dimnesse of the eyes, they have been tried to be sovereign good; and
that they have a singular and forcible faculty in provoking urine, I had the
trial in mine own body, this sour water being ordinarily brought from a
place distant from Ments, in stone bottles to Franckfort mart. The time for use.
These waters are cold, and therefore are commonly drunk in hot months, And
yet they are ordinarily brought to Francksort mart in March and September.
May, June, July, August, September, in a morning fasting, an hour or two
after Sun rising, as is the use in others; and then again at night, after
dinner is digested. The continuance or time of duration of drinking this water,
Continuance or duration in drinking them
is according as necessity shall require, and cannot certainly be determined:
as in some 10 or 12 days, a fortnight, or three weeks. No more can the
measure or certain quantity be gaged, some contenting themselves with half a
pint, and some again will drink double, some 4 or 5. And the more freely they
pass through the body by urin or otherwise, the bolder in the use of them may
we be. How the body before the use of these waters is to be prepared, the
Physician shall in time of need give notice, and according to all several
circumstancess give particular directions. They lose much virtue by carriage.
It is to be observed, that these mineral waters, by carrying from one place
to another, lose always something of their former force and efficacy, how
close soever they be stopped up, and so become less powerful. Observation in
the use of these waters.
It is further diligently to be observed, in the use of all mineral waters
that are to be drunk, that when as they are drunk twice a day, the party
using them must be careful that dinner be well digested before they be drunk
in the afternoon: and for this purpose dinner must either be very sparing, or
else a long distance betwixt dinner and the drinking of them; or else it were
better to drink it but once in a morning, and so double the time of continuing
this drink, as for a fortnight, a whole month. Moreover, if the case should
so require, that the party should need both to drink of this water, and bathe
in it, it would be most expedient to do them several: as first for certain
days to drink them, and afterward for as long to bathe in them. But because
we in this Island are so far remote from these acid and other fountains, that
ordinarily we cannot have recourse unto them, therefore I shall not need to
particularise many of them; of one only, being so much freequented by many of
the gentry, as being nearer unto us than the rest, I will say a little; the so
much renowned Well of Spa I mean. Of the Well of Spa.
This Spa then is in the Bishopric of Liege, a part of the 17 Provinces, and
is much resorted unto year by many Knights and Gentlemen, and sometimes by
Ladies and Gentlewomen also; and that for recovering of their health in diverse
chronicall infirmities: howbeit it is well known, that under this color, some
have other projects in their pates. This water particapateth principally of the
nature of iron, which in the taste it does somewhat represent: and it
participateth also somewhat of a sulphurous faculty, and a little of vitriol.
For what infirmities most beneficial.
It corrects hot distempers, quenches thirst, and is good against all
inveterate obstructions: and therefore useful in all inveterate Quartane
Fevers, or others, and in all sorts of Iaundise, in the Dropsy, and to open
the spleen; provokes also urine, and the menstruous flux, and helps
melancholy Hypochondriacke. These waters are exceeding dry in operation, and
therefore exceeding good against all diseases proceeding of moisture. But yet
it is to be observed, that they fume up into the head, and therefore not so fit
for such as are obnoxious to the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Vertigo, or giddiness
of the head.

Now, to come to our own Island, besides our ordinary baths in Sommerset shire,
so famous, and so much frequented; whereof I have promised silence; therere are
yet many more in this our Island of no small virtue and efficacy against many
infirmities of the body of man. And first I cannot but mention that water of S.
Vincents rock, Water of S. Vincent^ rock by Bristoll.
near that famous and ancient City of Bristoll, which comes now in request
against the stone; and this I need but only mention, the which is to me
altogether unknown, howbeit the D. Venner in the aforenamed treatise.
former Author has likewise past his censure concerning this Spring, and the
right use thereof; and therefore unto his discourse I refer the reader:
howsoever, it seems by his relation, that it participateth chiefly of the
nature of Sulphur and Nitre, and is taken now orderly, being potable, and used
for all manner of internal heats and inflammations.

There is a Well in Yorkshire, A near and ancient town in Yorke-shire,
called by the name of Knare^brough.
thought to participate somewhat of the nature of the Well of Spa, taking its
virtue and operation from iron; and therefore is good against obstructions of
the liver, spleen and mesaraicke veins, and to cleanse and corroborate the
urinary passages, etc. whereon I will not now dwell, there being a little
tractat of late years published concerning the virtues and use of this water.

There is within 7 miles of this town of Northampton, Wellenborow Well in
Northampton shire.
and hard by the market town of Wellenborogh, a Well much of the same nature
and efficacy, participating of the nature of iron, as by proofs may easily
appear: and all the ground through which it runs, colors red. This
water, although it can scarce be discerned from others in taste and color, yet
is it powerful in opening obstructions of the liver, spleen and mesaraick
veins, to cleanse the the kidneys, bladder, and urinary passages, and so good
against the stone, etc. It was but within these few years brought in request by
that famous Physician, Sr Theoder Mayrne, Dr in physic, and Phsitian to the
King and Queens Majesty's; and first renowned by some good success, the right
honorable Lord of Pembrok, then Lord Chamberlain, found thereby: and since,
by our gracious Queens Majesty now living, and diverse others, approved to be of
good use and efficacy. But when I shall be my self better satisfied and
certified concerning this business, I shall be ready, if God prolong my life,
to give more particular satisfaction to the public. But in the use of this,
Observation in the use of such waters to be careful of the stomach.
and other such mineral waters, especially such as are deprived of any
acidity, in the taste, there is an especial regard to be had to the strength
of the stomach, and accordingly to the strength of it to accommodat the
quantity of water, and always to have a diligent care to correct the acidities
of the same; and either before, or together with the use of this water, to be
careful in the corroboration of the stomach. I heard a story of a worthy Lady,
who, History.
by advice of some Physicians, for some infirmities did drink for certain days
of Tunbridge water in Kent: after the use whereof, Tunbridge water,
by means of an irrecoverable debility, her stomach had by the use of this
water contracted, it cost her at last no less than her life; as for the nature
and virtues of this water, because I am not acquainted with it, I will not
meddle.

Some other waters in this Kingdom have for a while been in great credit and
estimation for many infirmities, and their fame again as quickly fallen to the
ground. Some few years ago, Water in Mauborn^ hills in Worcestershire.
there was in great esteem and credit a Well in Mauborn hills in Worcestershire,
which the vulgar (ut est natura hominis novitatis avida, a new broom sweepes
clean) for a while esteemed as some noble Panacaea, or aurum potabile,
supposed good against all infirmities: but in short space, there was again,
altum silentium, and proved, according to the proverb, but a nine days
wonder. I do not for this condemn this water, the nature and virtues whereof
are to me unknown, but I advise people to be wise, and to be circumspect, and
with good and mature deliberation to admit of these mineral waters, and then
should we not have often times such sudden flashes of the fame of some waters,
which as quickly again vanish into smoke, Newname Wells in Warwickshire.
and their credit is as soon cracked.

There has been likewise no small account made of New name Wells in
Warwickshire, which of late years have come in request for the stone, and
infirmities of the urinary passages, etc. The which, as many others, I believe,
do most participate of this same iron, whereof mention has been made
already, and therefore are good to be used against the same infirmities. The
Spa by Aberdene in Scotland.


I have heard likewise, by relation, of a famous Well, near Aberdene in the
North parts of Scotland, called by the name of Spa; and as they say, effectual
against the same infirmities, which the Well of Spa is said to cure. Of this
water a learned Physician of that same Kingdom, Saint Catherins Well, called
now the only Well near Edinburgh in Scotland.
composed a learned tractat, as I am credibly informed, the which as yet I
never saw.

There is within two miles of the City of Edinburgh, in the same Kingdom, a
bituminous Well or Spring, called the oily Well, yielding great store of this
bituminous stuff, being very good against all manner of itches, scabs, and
many other outward defaedations of the skin, etc. This well was in time of
Popery called Saint Catherines Well, and so this Saint carried away the credit
of any cure that was thereby performed: as the like use they made of mineral
waters, not only here, but in many other places, as is the use even at this
day. I make no question, but in that same country, This Island abounds in
mineral waters.
especially in the most mountainous parts thereof, where there is such store of
iron, and all manner of other ore, there might be found as efficacious waters
against any infirmities, as any in remote regions. The like may be said of
diverse places of this Kingdom; especially in Wales, Cornwall, Devonshire, and
many places of the North country; as in Yorkshire, and other shires lying
further to the North. But concerning mineral waters, and all manner of baths,
as well natural as artificial, together with their uses, for the present this
shall suffice.

CHAP. XX.
Of the excretion by urine, the retention of urine, together with the nature of
diureticke remedies, the right use and abuse thereof.

HAving already at length discoursed of general evacuations, being three in
number, De urinarum praesagiis i^ aegretis agit Hippocrat. in locis praen^t. in
prorihet. and libr. de indication.
we come now to some particular, the consideration whereof is of no small use,
as well in sickness as in health. Now, for the affinity it has with sweat,
being much of one nature, although both at diverse passages, and in a different
manner voided, it shall succeed in the next place. Of the nature of this
excrementitious humor, the manner of generation, deceit and coozenage of
ignorant and erroneous practitioners, in the judgment by the same, and many
things which concern this subject, has been See our arraignement and anatomy
of urines.
elsewhere handled at great length; where has been sufficiently proved the
uncertainty of judging the issue of diseases by this bare sign only; being a
sign whereby some diseases only, and sometimes, may be discerned: and yet but a
general one, Uncertain and general judgment for the most part afforded us
by urine.
which can neither acquaint us with the strength of the patient (a thing of all
others in diseases of great moment) nor many other particular circumstances,
wherewith the Physician ought, in so weighty a business, to be acquainted. And
there we likewise proved, that from thence we could neither gather any
certainty of conception, nor yet of the sex. I say, nevertheless, that urine
is not to be neglected either in sickness or in health: but withal, let other
signs not be neglected, but have their due desert. That urine therefore, both
in sickness and in health, which is of a laudable color, and contents
answerable, Best urine.
does commonly argue that body to be in best case, especially if all other
signs concur; as if it be otherwise, we are to conceive the contrary. That
urine we commonly call best, that is of a light golden color, Best color.
with a mean white colored even contents: and the farther it decline from
this golden rule, the worse we deem it: as sometimes when it is of an intense
red color, it often argues Fevers, or inflammations, Red colored urines.
etc. unless sometimes by reseration of some small veins the urine be died
with this color. And yet the urine of a choleric man will look of a higher
color than any other, and so if he shall fall sick, it must needs be of an
intenser color than of a phlegmatic person: and this same phlegmatic
person in health shall have a paler colored urine, and falling into some
fever, the urine may be also paler than the former, and yet the party as
dangerously sick; and so I could instance in many other like cases. Again,
Black urines,
it appears sometimes of a black color, and portendeth often no good to the
party; and yet this same color may often prove critical, and accompanied with
like contents. It may sometimes again appear unto us like pure transparent
water, without any contents at all, Clear transparent urin without co^tents.
signifying sometimes crudity in the first concoction, sometimes obstructions,
with a total overthrow of natural heat: howbeit sometimes it may be
accompanied with extreme heat in a burning Fevet, with a Frenzy, of all
others most dangerous, etc. In general, in sickness, these colors and
contents are very various and changeable, In diseases various.
according to the nature of the disease, and constitution of the diseased, on
which I will not now dwell, nor make any repetition of that which has been
formerly handled.

Quantity of urine in excess.
Vrin again fails sometimes in the excess, being in too great a quanty, and
sometimes in the defect, where little or no urine is excerned. In excess, as
in that disease called diabete, H^drops ad matulam, or pot-dropsie; Critical
excretion of urine.
whersas by weakness of the retentive faculty, and want of concoction, drink
passes through the body with little and small alteration: answerable to that
disease in the stomach, commonly called Lienteria, In the defect.
being a defect of concoction in the stomach and guts; but with us is but
rare. As for critical excretion of urine, it is very profitable, and helps
often to terminate the disease. Now, on the other side, there is a frequent
defect in the expelling of urine, and proceeds from suppression total or in
part; Difficulyy of diverse causes.
or else by difficulty, whereas without great difficulty and pain it is
expelled. Painful pissing comes diverse manner of ways to pass: as either
by the acrimony and sharpness of the humor, or by the imbecility or
weakness of the retentive faculty, proceeding often from cold: and is sometime
occasioned by inflammation, ulcer, clotted or congealed blood, and by the
stone, Suppression of urine from diverse causes
etc. Suppression of urine proceeds likewise from diverse causes: sometimes by
means of the obstruction, or stoppage of the guts; and sometimes of the
emulgent or sucking veins, when as by means of imbecility they are frustrate
of their attractive faculty, or yet by obstruction. De his omibus fusius
Mercatus de intern. morb. curat. tom. 3. lib. 4. cap. 12.
It is procured likewise by obstruction or passage of the kidneys, or urinary
passages, and by means, of the imbecility of the same. By reason of the
obstruction of the foresaid passages, it is diverse ways procured: as either by
inflammation, knob or bunch of either of the these parts, or some tough phlegm
impacted in, and cleaving fast to the place: as also sometimes, howbeit
seldom, by reason of some holes and cavities left in the kidneys after the
voiding of some stones. It is sometimes also caused by means of the bladder,
or parts thereto adjoining, coming diverse ways to pass: as first, by reason
of the want of sense of feeling, by reason of the resolution of the nerve
descending from the loins and hucklebone. Secondly, by reason of the failing
of the expelling power of the bladder, etc. Thirdly, by the too great quantity
of urine longer than is fit, detained. Fourthly, by a resolution of the muscles
of the nether belly. Fifthly, by the total overthrow of the expulsive faculty:
as in burning Foevers, and then proves for the most part mortal, as
witnesses Incoacis aph. 25. and prorrbet. 155.
Hippocrates, and yet diverse other ways comes this also to pass: as by the
resolution of the muscle sphincter, a stone, bunch, clotted blood, etc. And
this comes sometimes to pass by consent of the places adjoining, the bladder
and urinary passages being also sometimes so shut up, that they cannot freely
deliver the urine; and many times also cannot keep it long: as comes to
pass in women with child. All these infirmities to be cu^ed according to
their several causes.
All these several cases are to be cured accordingly, and that with a due
regard had to their several causes. The total obstruction of urine proceeding
from any cause, if long continuing, may prove mortal. Such remedies as provoke
urine, we commonly call diuretics, or provokers of urine. But neither are
these in all cases of suppression to be administered, nor yet indifferently,
when there is need, are they always without a previous preparation to be used.
Now in all such obstructions of the urine, Diureticke remedies, and their right
use.
before we go about the right cure, we are first to procure the expulsion of
the urine out of the bladder, lest o^ by the use Diureticke medicines a greater
attraction of humors increase the obstruction. Preparation.
And therefore in such cases we often use the help of a catheter, insessions,
fomentations, inunctions, glisters, violent motions, Diuretics properly so
called.
as riding on a trotting horse, etc. Such medicines as are properly called
diureticke or expellers of urine, are of a hot and dry faculty, rarefying,
attenuating and making thin the humors. Now such as are properly of this
nature, do not only extenuat and rarefie the blood, but dissolve also,
rarefie, and as it were, melt it, and make a sequestration of the thinnest
serositie, coagulating and thickning the residue, as we see in curdled milk
come to pass: and that serosity so separated, the kidneys, by their attractive
faculty, draw unto the themselves, and from thence transmit it into the
bladder; and such not only provoke urine, but even engender it also. And such
be especially hot and dry simples, seeds especially: as of carrots, cumin, and
the like. Another kind of diuretics.
There is another sort of Diuretics, milder than the former, which does indeed
attenuat, howbeit not so forcibly as the former; which send it only toward
the passages of the urine: and of these there are yet two sorts, some being of
greater force to extenuate and cleanse: Of two sorts.
as the four hot seeds, namely parsley seed, etc. Some again perform this
action more mildly and moderatly, and with a temperate heat; as the four
cooling seeds, of melons, etc: so called in comparison with the other four hot
seeds. Diuretics improperly so called.
Among these diureticke medicines are also reckoned some which supple and make
smooth the passages: as marsh-mallow and licorice root, and prove often more
beneficial than the former more violent medicines, so ordinarily used by
Empiricks and ignorant persons. Now it is a common received opinion among most
people, Erroneous opinion concerning the breaking of the stone by Diuretics.
that those violent hot and dry medicines are of all others most forcible and
effectual, to break and expel the stone out of the kidneys or bladder:
wherein notwithstanding they so far are deceived, that for the most part,
such medicines, not only by reason of their great heat they communicate to the
body, but also in regard they send down too fast uncleanne and corrupt humors,
do rather much increase the matter of the stone. Safest diureticke simples,
and best for use.
Such simples therefore as are endued with a temperate heat, attenuating tough
and clammie humors; such as are Asparagus root, and the like, Medicines
accidentally good.
are for this purpose the fittest. By occult quality.
Some medicines are thought to have a diureticke property accidentally, by
scraping and tearing by their roughness the superficies or outmost part of the
stone: as powder of burnt glass. And some are thought by means of excessive
heat to dissolve the viscosity of the stone, and break it to powder. But I
think thou may sooner by such medicines bake it harder, as we see brickes
baked in a brick kilne. Some medicines by reason of some occult quality are
esteemed good against the stone. And of this kind is the Jews stone, goats
blood, and many other medicines. Acid juices, as juice of Lemon, spirit of
vitriole, if they could in their full force come at the stone, and not offend
the passages betwixt, in my opinion were of all others the fittest. But to draw
this point to an end, there is no disease for the which there are more remedies
boasted of, Many medicines used against the stone, but few answer expectation.

Dangers in the use of hot diureticke medicines.


with the attestation of a probatum est at least, as much worth as the oath of
one of the knights of the post: and yet no disease wherein we see fewer good
effects follow. As for these hot violent diureticke medicines besides the
former inconveniences, they prove often causes of excoriations in those tender
nervous parts, and at length incurable and tormenting ulcers. And sometimes
when as thou think to have made a great purchase, to have procured of some
Empiricke or other ignorant person a rare remedy for the stone, thou art now
fallen, as we say, out of the drying pan into the fire: and thou who before
did so magnify thy Empiricke, and too much trust to his smoakie promises,
art often then forced to implore the help of the learned Physician, when many
times his best skill can scarce allay the extremity of thy painful disease,
whereas by wise counsel at first thou might both have prevented thy pain,
and saved thy purse. And thus the Proverb proves often true, Advertisment.
Covetousness brings nothing home. To conclude then this point of urines, I
wish, that in time of need people make not such an idol of their urines, that
in time of sickness they think it sufficient to send their urine to the
Physician, it may be in an ink or oil bottle, and without any further to
demand of the physician, as of some Oracle, not only the disease; but even
often, all the circumstances thereof: The presence of the Physician is able to
discover more in the disease than a many water.
but if you would speed well, if you will need your old mumpsimus in sending
your urine to the Physician, acquaint your physician with all the several
circumstances of the disease. But an honest learned Physician will be better
able to advise by one view of the patient, than twenty sights of the urine. It
may be others, whose worth and sufficiency is confined to such an excrement,
may like an empty barrel prate apace, and make thee believe wonders by thy
water. And be careful in any case in trustin^ such cheaters with their rare
recits against the stone, and if thou be wise, be warned by other men's harms.

CHAP. XXI.
Of ordure or fecall excrements, and diverse things in them considerable, this
excretion being sometimes too lavish, and sometimes deficient.

NExt unto the urine for affinity we will say something of the fecall ordure, an
excrement of the first concoction performed in the stomach. And howsoever some
may perhaps think the consideration thereof to be of small use, yet has it
always been of great utility both in sickness and in health, and has been
by our ancient Physicians diligently observed: and Mercur. de facibut alvi.

The fecall excrements diligently to be considered.


some have written whole Tractats of this excrement, as well as of urine. The
utility thereof is by Vide Hippoc. in prognost. prochet. and coac. motionib.
Aphoc. etiaem 12. lib. 1.
Hippocrates as well mentioned as of the urine and sweat, and by him as much
commended. Moreover, if we shall compare the urine with the fecall excrements,
we shall find that of the urine far inferior, which may seem a strange
paradox to our urine-mongers, who will have no sign but the urine of any
signification. Now the urine gives only notice of the state of the liver and
the veins, and sometimes of the bladder: but this excrement besides the liver
and the veins, gives also notice of the nature of the mesaraicke veins, the
stomach, and the guts, and finally of the state of the whole belly, for the
which we take so much pains, and for whose sake most men live, says Lib. 26.
cap. ^. What this fecall ordure is.
Pliny. This excrement is then thus defined: the most terrestrious part and
purgation of the unprofitable part of aliment, in the consummation of
concoction separated, and many times mingled with many waters. It is said to
have other matters mingled therewith, by reason of choler which does color and
dye these excrements; which if not thus dyed, then were they not so good and
laudable in quality as is required; and some other substances have been some
times observed, mingled therewith. We will then begin with those excrements
which in every respect are accounted best; Best excrements.
and from thence we may the better observe and know the deviation of others
from that rule. The best then are neither too hard nor too soft, or liquid and
thin, but consisting of a mean betwixt both; compact and firmly united,
without the admixture of any uncouth matter, of a pale yellow color, and in
quantity answerable to the food received; in smell, neither too stinking, not
yet altogether free from all manner of smell, nor of too sharp a quality; and
which are at the time accustomed, without any great pain, labor, straining, or
great noise, easily expelled. Such as decline further from these laudable
marks, are always accounted worse either in sickness or in health. And
therefore thin and very liquid excrements, Excrements declining from the
former laudable conditions.
unless procured by the like diet, by physic, or by way of crise, are
esteemed bad and unconcocted: as likewise such as are white in color, and
reteining still the quality of the food from whence they proceed: and such also
as are of a high golden, or intense yellow color, by reason of the affluxe of
choler into the guts: Diverse some of bad excrements.
and in like manner we approve not of too pale and frothy, and yet worst of all
purulent and materie excrements. Green, black, linid or leaden colored,
unless by reason of such diet, or by way of crises, are dangerous and to be
condemned; and so are viscous and fat ordure, by reason they signify
colliguation and wasting. Besides, whenever a very bad stinking smell is
joined with a bad color, it is very bad: for then it argues a very great
putrefaction. Variety of bad colors in these excrements is also very bad; as
arguing in the body many ill infirmities. Worms in the excrements, and what
they presage.
Worms on a critical day with the ordure expelled signify good: but if in
the beginning of the disease they appear, it is bad: and if they come forth by
themselves without any excrements dead or alive in acute diseases it is
dangerous. There be diverse causes of these several substances of excrements.
Thick, compact and well united excrements proceed from a good concoction of
the stomach, Diverse causes of thin and liquid excreme^ts
and a temperate heat of the guts. Thin and liquid excrements proceed either
from obstruction of the mesaraicke veins, or by reason the food is not
digested and concocted, as in crudities: or else is not altered or changed; as
in the disease lienteria: or is corrupted; as in belches from such matter may
be discerned. Such excrements again from the imbecility of attractive
faculty. Fourthly from defluxion of humidity upon the guts. Fifthly, from the
quality and nature of the food, and such other things as loosen the belly; as
prunes, caffe, and the like. Sixthly, drink descending toward the guts, when
as it is not carried through the mesaraicke veins to the liver, Diverse causes
of soft excrements.
and attracted by the reins and ureters. Soft excrements proceed also from
diverse causes. 1. From the moderate moisture of the guts. 2. From the
mollifying Diet: as mallows, lettice and the like. 3. They proceed sometimes
from the admixture of diverse humors, proceeding from the liver or other parts;
as likewise from the admixture of some fat with the ordure: as in Pthisickes,
Hecticke fevers turned to Marasmes, etc. Mercu. ibid ex Gal. 3 epid. comment.
3. and 8 (...).

Hard egestions and their causes.


And it is the opinion of Galen, that in pestilentiall Fevers the egestions are
almost always liquid, by reason of this fat substance. Hard egestions again
proceed likewise of diverse causes. 1. By reason of immoderate heat proceeding
of great labor, from bathing, or some other external cause. 2. By use of
diureticke medicines, by which means these excrements may be dried up. 3. By
reason of astringent diet: as medlars, quinces, sloes, and the like. 4. The
long continuance of the excrements in the guts may likewise occasion the same,
the small veins implanted in the guts attracting all the moisture from the
excrements, and the guts by this long continuance acquiring a greater heat. 5.
By means of the dry constitution of the guts, and the like distemper of the
whole body. I could here likewise insist on many other particulars concerning
the mixture of several sorts of excrements, and causes, which, to avoid
prolixity, I willingly pass by. But the question may here be asked, how often,
Quest^on concerning the (...) egestion, and how ^^ten.
and when is the best time for this evacuation in health? I answer, that as we
can hardly certainly determine men's particular occasions, constitutions, and
individual proprieties and natures; Answ.
no more can we absolutely set down any verdict concerning this business:
yet is it best in time of health to enjoy this benefit at least once, if not
twice aday: howbeit I am not ignorant, that some, both in sickness and in
health, have continued diverse days, yea, sometimes weeks, In time of health.
without the use of this evacuation. I confess indeed, such as were able to
abstain from all manner of sustenance for diverse years together, needed not
either this, or any other evacuation; And in sickness.
examples whereof I have produced some already. But in ordinary healthful
bodies this is always the best, and so answerable also in sickness; and who
so decline from this rule, it commonly fares not so well with them. I deny not
but there are some individual constitutions, who better endure the want of
this benefit than others. Neither yet is there any set quantity to be
determined: for good and laudable nourishment; as eggs, and the like, The
quantity cannot be determined.
engender fewer excrements than herbs, brown bread, and the like. The best
time is the morning, and if it may be conveniently, in the evening also before
going to bed, will prove beneficial. But it comes many times to pass, than
in Fevers especially, and hot acute diseases, the body being bound, and, as it
were, locked up, there arise and ascend up into the brain diverse hot vapors,
the cause of no small annoyance, In sickness care must be had of loosening the
belly.
not to that noble part only, but to the whole body: there must be therefore a
special regard and care had to expel these excrements, especially by opening
and loosening diet: and if that will not prevail, by lenitive and mild gentle
evacuations, suppositories and glisters. Again, it comes so sometimes to
pass, Diverse sorts of fluxes
that nature is too forward in this kind of evacuation; as commonly in fluxes
of all kinds, proving often very pernicious to the patient. Now, these fluxes
are of diverse sorts; as first, that we call diarrhaea, the mildest and safest
of all the rest; and next, dysenteria, proceeding of diverse humors, but
ordinarily, with the admixtion of blood, and therefore called commonly the
bloody fl^xe, or flux rather; which, if not carefully in time looked unto,
proves often dangerous, if not deadly. Besides, there are yet other dangerous
fluxes, called Lienteria, and Caeliaca, where the parts appropriated for
concoction, being interessed by these fluxes, the body is frustrated its of
proper nourishment. All these fluxes in due and convenient time, are by the
advice and counsel of the wise and judicious Physician, by proper and
convenient remedies to be cured: but now always by the use of astringent
medicines, by most people, Be not too busy with astringents.
ignorantly and unadvisedly used in those fluxes; lest it befall thee, as it
did that woman, of whom Fernel.
Fernel makes mention, who, having been for a long time troubled with a
tedious flux in her belly, at length, by the advice and counsel of some she
neighbor, are a whole roasted Quince, which indeed, History:
presently stopped the flux, but withal burst a new passage through her belly.
But having here no purpose in this place to insist either upon the cure, or
diet of these particular diseases, and not willing any longer to deteine the
reader with the entertainment of so unsavorie a subject, I proceed.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Spittle Spiting, or Salivation: of Tobacco and the great abuse thereof in
this Kingdom, to the great prejudice of the health of the body.

THe brain, not only by reason of situation, as a limbecke attracting many
vapors from the inferior region of the body: but also in regard of the moist
temper and constitution, is apt to engender much excrementitious moisture. But
all this excrementitious matter or moisture is not altogether unprofitable: Use
of spittle.
for some of this moisture is engendered of certain glands or kernells, by our
great Architect and Creator placed in the jaws or uppermost part of the
throat, to the end that those parts might thereby be moistened, lest by
exsiccation of internal heat they should prove less useful for the body. So
then neither are these glands, nor that excrement they produce, without a
profitable use in the body. Of these glands, or kernells, and their utility,
Mercur. de excrem. ex variis Gal locis 14. meth. 1. de sem, etc.
Galen makes frequent mention, and affirms, that by the same, even the
tongue is nourished. This excrement is called in the Greek,, or. and in the
Latin saliva, and with us spittle, spitting, and salivation: and when this too
much abounds, it argues great moisture of the brain. This spittle then is
such a moisture, as in it self, in health, and a sound person, is a
profitable, and laudable, and useful excrement. This spittle then, which of
all others is the best, in a sound and healthful person, should be such, Best
spittle in condition.
as neither exceeds in quantity, nor yet has any ill taste; and this is spit
up without any cough. Now, when it abounds in quantity, Exceeding in quality.
we use to spit it out; and for this purpose, we often use diverse means to
further the same. And the body being ill affected, it sometimes exceeds also
in quality: and thus it appears sometimes of a yellow, In quantity. The
colors.
pale, or black color, howbeit the white be the best. Sometimes again, it is
of an insipid, acid, bitter, salt or sweet taste: howbeit insipid or sweet be
the best. Sometimes again, it is too tough or clammy, The taste.
or else too thin; and the mean betwixt both is the best. These several
colors and tastes in the spittle do often indicate and demonstrat the nature
of the humors contained in the stomach, and therefore, in sickness especially,
are of good use, and to be observed. When excrement exceeds in quantity, we
use to purge it out, not only naturally by expuition, Exceeding in quantity
how to be purged.
or spitting out, but diverse times by some appropriate medicines, used in
diverse diseases of the head proceeding from phlegmatic or rheumatick matter:
and such are commonly of a hot or sharp quality, and are used sometimes to be
chewed in the mouth, and draw down abundance of rheumatick matter: and
sometimes of these are made and composed certain compounded forms: as
gargarismes, Several medicines useful for this purpose.
masticatories, and liniments or ointments. Of the simples whereof these are
composed, some are of a more mild and gentle operation: as green bay leaves,
dill, and annise seed, tops of hyssop, etc. Some again, are of a more forcible
operation: as pepper, pellitory of Spain, mustard seed, etc. The effect
produced by these and the like medicines, Saliva^^on.
we call salivation, or purging by spitting. And this salivation is observed
sometimes not only to purge the humors from the head, but from the whole
body: but this is not by any of these ordinary medicines; as in mercuriall
inunctions for the french pox comes to pass. But in stead of all other
medicines used for the expurgation of this excrement, there has been of late
years, since Sir Walter Raleighs first voyage into the West Indies, in use
with us the smoke of an Indian herb, called by the Indians Tobacco. Tobacco.
To insist upon any large discourse or description of this simple, the use of
it being now so frequent, and so much said, both pro and contra, for and
against it, will be thought, it may be, to small purpose, and thought perhaps,
but to sing the Cuckowes song; yet coming now so handsomely in my way, and
offering it self, as it were, into my arms, left I should leave any thing
untouched, I will yet cast in my mite.

As therefore every creature of God is good, so in this simple, Consideration
of Tobacco, and the use thereof.
this is as easy to be seen and observed. That this simple then is hot and
dry in the second degree, cannot be denied: as for the second qualities arising
from the first, as attenuation, penetration, discussion, etc. they cannot
likewise be denied. And besides the aforementioned qualities, it participateth
yet of a narcoticke or stupifying nature; which, whether it proceed from heat,
cold, or the whole substance, it is not my purpose here to dispute, leaving it
rather to be discussed in the schools. And howsoever out ancient Physicians
did attribute unto those narcoticke medicines a transcending cold, even to the
fourth degree: yet am I sure, that in this simple, with this narcoticke
quality, concurreth both calidity and siccity. By reason then of these first
qualities, Narcoticke quality.
it heateth and dries very much; and by consequent, conduces in cold and
moist diseases, and alike constitutions: and by reason of these second
qualities, it opens obstructions, cutteth tough and slimy humors,
attenuateth and rarefieth them; and therefore helps defluxions of
phlegmatic humors upon the windpipe and lungs, obstructions of the liver,
etc. By its narcotick quality, it stupifieth and benummeth the senses, and so
allaieth pain. And the Indians often endure many days hunger by the only use
of the smoke of this herb, this stupifying quality bereaving the nerves of
sense, and procuring often times an artificial and forced sleep. Besides all
these, we have already proved, Violent purgation.
that it is endued with a violent purging quality, both upwards and downwards
and that in as violent a manner, as either antimony, or that so much renowned
hellebore, and the rest of those violent purging simples, used by Hippocrates
or others. And this proceeds from none of the aforementioned qualities, as
all our Physicians confess. It is likewise by the learned in this profession
confessed, that such violent purges participate all of some malign quality,
contrary to man's nature: and therefore never sole and of themselves exhibited,
without due preparation, and never in any great quantity, and that but seldom,
and in cases of necessity, and for the most part to sharpen and quicken the
dull and sluggish operation of other milder medicines. By that which has been
said then, Abuse of Tobacco, as it is ordinarily taken.
let the ingenuous and judicious Reader judge of the ordinary use, or rather
abuse of this so noble a medicine. We see how nice and shy many people are of
the use of good and wholesome Physic prescribed by the most industrious and
skillful Artist, Indifferently used of all sorts of persons without respect of
any circumsta^ce whatsoever.
still pleading that in all physic there is some poison: and yet may we see,
and observe the same persons all the hours of the day smoking this poison,
sole and of it self, without any correction; morning, evening and midday,
fasting and feasting, before meals and after, before and after sleep, at home
and abroad, in Winter and Summer, and in all seasons whatsoever: and that for
the most part without any respect either of age, sex, or any other circumstance
whatsoever. The dry and melancholicke person is often as forward in the use of
it, as the moist and cold, the lean as well as the far. If it be good for
cold, foggy, moist constitutions, then must it needs be hurtful for the
contrary. If it be good to procure sleep in watchful bodies, then let the
drowsy, Opiat medicines often condemned without just cause.
sleepie sluggard refrain the use of it. Opium prepared in the most
artificial and exquisite manner, although there be scarce the proportion of
one grain to twice or thrice as great a quantity of the best extracted
cordialls, yet is it had in detestation, and such a suspicion had of it, that
it is often condemned before any good evidence given in against it. And yet
dare I be bold to say, that some of those ordinary Tabacconists take in one day
the very quintessence and strength of a many grains, that I say no further, of
this benumming, intoxicating Tobacco. And whereas the other is used but
seldom, by good advice, well prepared and corrected, and that in case of
necessity too: this on the contrary is of all indifferently used, and without
any preparation (although many times, if they knew all the truth, there is some
poison added to the former) of an unlimited quantity, as every ones unbridled
affection, and unlimited lust leads him. But it will be objected, that people
find hereby some benefit, Object.
abundance of rheum being thereby avoided at the mouth. Answer.
I answer, that there is thereby much moisture voided, but many times, yea for
the most part, good natural and radical moisture is thereby extracted. But
this is neither safe, nor yet agrees with sound reason. It purges away the
good with the bad.
It has been already proved that there is a necessary use of this laudable
humor, which ought not thus, without rhyme or reason as we say, be exhaust, when
as again many times by a new supply with the pot we fill in twice as much as
was exhaust. We complain often, and not without cause, of Empirickes and
ignorant practitioners, that they commonly err in this particular, that they
purge away both good and bad humors indifferently: and shall we wrong our
selves in the same kind, wherein we find fault with others? But as concerning
the seeming ease it gives for the present, it is but momentary and of short
continuance; but the hurt redounding by exsiccation of radical moisture and
profitable humidity more permanent, and of longer endurance: so that of this it
may well be said, that the remedy is worse than the disease. The remedy often
worse than the disease.
What shall I say of the venomous and violent deleterious damps from thence
imparted to the brain and animal parts, by reason whereof we often see such
strange astonishment and amazement in the senses? If any shall reply that by
reason of heat and drouth it dries up a moist brain: I answer, that as in
such a brain I hold it best, so again I say, if a cow yield a good deal of
milk, and kick it down when she has done, what have thou here to brag of?
If it do thee good that way, and perhaps hurt thy memory, and by long
continuance leave some ill impression upon thy body, brag of thy winning. And
why may not sage as safely, and without any seeming show of danger be used?
Sage sovereign good to corroborate the brain and animal parts.
It is by all our physicians accorded and agreed upon, that it does apparently
corroborate and strengthen the nerves, and by consequent, all the animal
powers, besides the many excellent virtues thereof recorded, the like whereof
were never ascribed to Tobacco. And in obstructions of the pipes of the lungs,
why might we not with far greater reason use the harmless and innocent smoke
of colts foot (since the world is now become so smoakie) than the dampish
smoke of this deletorious plant? But we see the world is now full of fancies
and phantasticke fashions, and this grown now of late years, a new fashion to
smoke away our precious time with this smoakie weed; besides, Colts foot an
efficacious simple in pectorall infirmities.
that this proves often but a shooing-horne to make them draw down drink
apace, the pip and the pot mutually entertaining one another: the dry
alehouse, (so did a reverend judge on the bench lately style these smoakie
places) as said is, Tabacco-shope di^ ale houses.
proving often a preparative to the other. Some again in defense of this
whiffing plead, Another Objection; Answ.
that it proves beneficial for the furtherance of digestion, without the
which they are not able to eat any. I answer, that Tobacco in this case
proves as lime laid to the root of a tree, which howsoever hasteneth, it may
be, the maturity of the fruit, yet by means of exsiccation, and precipitate
maturation, the tree is far sooner overthrown and decaieth: even so comes
it here to pass, where Tobacco drives the meat down out of the stomach
before it receive that due alteration it ought, Not good to further digestion
by Tobacco
and consequently, howbeit the stomach be sooner emptied, yet crudities the
mother of a multitude of diseases are often thereby engendered, which in their
appointed times bring forth oftentimes a bitter fruit of many incurable
diseases. How much better then were it not to oppress thy stomach, and to
impose no heavier burden on it than it is well able to bear? and if ceized
with any debility, are there not many good wholesome and corroborant medicines
far safer than this smoke? Besides, Moderate exercise and good Diet better
than Tobacco.
that moderate exercise and abstinence till thy appetite return, would perhaps
prove better medicines than thou art aware of: sure I am, far better than all
the Tobacco of Trinidad. Now what has been hitherto said concerning this
simple, Most Tobacco sophisticate.
I understand even of the best not sophisticate: what shall we then say of that
which is sophisticate and adulterate with diverse, yea it may be sometimes
deleterious drugs, yea even sublimate it self? Now if notwithstanding all that
has been said, people will needs be dallying with a doubtful drugge, Diverse
circumstances in the use of Ta^acco to be considered.
yet I advise them, that as in other medicines they are wished to weigh diverse
circumstances: as of time, place, age, constitution of body, the disease, the
quantity, quality, and the manner of preparation: so think I here the like
circumspection, and care not to be neglected. And this I speak to the more
understanding and discreeter sort, who err it may be out of ignorance. As for
our roaring bores, tossepots, pot-companions, and our ordinary swil-bolls, who,
I think, will be readier to jeere and flout, than be reformed and ruled by my
counsel, therefore such I leave to be corrected with their own rod, and it may
be a sharper, For whom most hurtful.
if they persist. I advise especially all thin, clear and choleric,
constitutions, as likewise all melancholicke persons, especially by means of
choler adust, hot brained and young people, women with child, and all such as
are sick of any acute diseases, to abstain from the use thereof. Time of the
year
It is best to be used in Winter, in raw and moist weather, and in cold and
moist brains, in dropsies, defluctions upon the joints and lungs, proceeding
from cold humors, toothache, gout, pector all infirmities, etc. As also for the
megrim, The age.
proceeding from the same cause, the mother, and diverse infirmities of the
brain proceeding from wind and cold moisture. As for the age, What profession
or ^inde of life it best b^fitteth

What places.


it best befitteth old age, where the brain is cold and moist. And as for the
kind of life, Mariners and Sailers, and such as live near waters, and there use
their trade: as Tanners, Pelt-mongers, and the like; and such as live in moist,
fenny, waterish and moorish places: as in Holland, in Lincolneshire,
Correctives to be used with it.
and other like places. And such as make use of it thus physically (for to such
here I direct my speech) I think it very fit they use with it some
correctives, it having as great need as any most violent purge whatsoever,
(...) the brain.
as has bin already proved. In diseases of the brain therefore, a drop or two
of the oil of amber, cloves, mace; or in defect of them, some of their powder,
or half sage, some dry rosemary, or the like: if in Epilepticall fits, some
powder of paeoniae seeds, or roots will much correct the ill qualities of this
intoxicating simple, In dise^^es of the lungs.
and corroborate the animal powers. In diseases of the lungs, joints, cholicke
from wind, or phlegm and the like, a drop or two of the oil of annise seeds,
of mints, cumin or caroway seeds, or in defect of them, some of the powder of
the seeds will serve for a good corrective. But howsoever, let no man deceive
himself so far, as to think this to be some famous Panacea, Nepenthe, or
some golden Elixir, whereof there has been much bragging, but small benefit
as yet reaped. If thou will not be warned by that which I and others have
advertised thee, thou may, perhaps, repent when it will be too late: Quod
differtur non aufertur.
and howsoever thou find not always suddenly such ill success as we
foretell thee, yet remember, that oftentimes in younger years, there is such
seed of diseases by disorder sown in the body, that in old age brings forth
much bitter fruit. And of this I am verily persuaded, Tobacco the cause of
diverse diseases, and many dismal accidents.
that the excessive and disorderly use of this simple, is no small cause, as of
the more frequent reigning of diverse dangerous diseases among us, so of many
strange and uncoth accidents, according to the several and individual bodies
therewith assaulted. But yet before I finish this point concerning salivation,
The dangerous use of salivation by mercuriall medicines in some disea^e^
I must give notice of an ignorant and dangerous custom of some
Barber-surgeons in the use thereof. Some of these many times undertake the cure
of some in^^^^^t^^^ (...) with an ordinary (...) with a (...) by (...) into
this c^^rt, o^ (...) by (...) mercurially (...), which in this cas^ (...)
commonly uses, wh^ (...) no^th all there (...) and (...) into (...) with a
(...). His reason, as s^^be of her (...) ^ted (...) all (...) or this cause
was, to draw the humor upwards, and fr^^ the (...). But here the whole frame
of her body was out of order the live (...) body, especially the nether parts,
by reason (...). Now, whether such a cours^ was then sit (...) the ^^rned
^^dge, and besides, a reasonable in (...) by that which has been said already
(...) and their wai^s, how unfit and indirect a course this was, (...) mak^ it
in th^^ appear, (...)
but that now i^ cann^t, (...) thi^ particular. Only by the way, take a (...)
sottish stupidity, and or (...) of the (...) This so^^ (...) counsel, a (...)
only (...) time, being (...) Winte^, to (...) such a (...) as (...) the (...)
of the (...) from an^ kind of physic, to (...) by (...) and a^e^snesse, and
partly for (...) ^presse upon her, sh^^ seeming (...) to (...) the Spirits of
the year: and yet, (...) it persuasion, she that before was unwilling to
(...) ^tion, submitted her self to this trouble some mercuriall (...) ^vation,
and such other directions he was pleased to ordeine, (...) member* very near
a matter of a year, I speak not this (...) will I bear this man's person: but
pleading now f^r the publi^^ (...) ^he which I have my warrant from my m^ther,
the University. I thought not my duty to betray the truth, but he ^om^ to my
(...) to vindicate the same from error and impo^ture. And thereof for (...)
^^suredly known that the same party has with others pr^ceeded aft^^ this same
manner, in other cases also, and where, I dare swear ther^ was not the ha^t
^^^^ition of the po^e, I thought good to give the country notice, that they be
no more deluded. And that so much (...) ^ther, in that ^ supp^se it be not his
error ^^^ly, but (...) be culpable in th same bind.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Snot or Snevell: Rheum falling down upon the lungs and other pectorall
parts: of Expuition, or Expectoration; and the great abuse in the use of
expectorating medicines, and the right use thereof.

AS in the whole body of man there are diverse emunctories or passages whereby
superfluous and excrementitious matter is expelled; so has the brain for the
same purpose obtained the nose, which besides other uses, has this in
particular, thereby to expel such superfluous excrements as abound in the
brain. This excrement most usually thus expelled, is by the Greek Physician
Hippocrates especially, called (...): in Latin mucus narium: in English snot
of snewell. Mercur. libr. de excrem. cap. 4. de mucit. ex Gal.
This is then an excrement of the brain, the which abounding in phlegmatic
moisture, whatsoever is superfluous or unprofitable, it partly expels by the
nose, and partly by other places. Of this excrementitious matter, some is
sometimes very thin, and some tough and clammy, sometimes in a greater,
sometimes in a smaller quantity: some again hot, some cold; some also sweet,
unsavory, and bitter: again, some without and smell, and some of an evil
smell, as comes to pass in ulcers called ozenae, and principally in the
French pox, where the nose, to the view of the eye, may often be discerned to
be eaten away with this venomous matter. This excrement is again often died
with diverse colors; as reddish, yellowish, white. Sometimes this snot comes
away of its own accord, and sometimes otherwise expelled. Such excrements as
are purged by the palate of the mouth and the nose, Idem Mercur. ex variis
Hippocrat. and Gal. locis.
according to Galen, declare unto us how the brain and the members thereof are
affected. When this matter is thin, it signifies a colliquation, as it were,
a melting of this matter, and the beginning of this distillation: but that
again which is thicker, argues concoction, and that it is either now at the
height, or else declining. When this excrement stinketh, Diverse significations
of this excrement.
it is always taken for an evil sign, indicating an ulcer, and sometimes
taken for a sign of headache proceeding from worms. Great abundance of this
excrementitious humidity in the brain, is signified, where this excrement
abounds, and by consequence, often stupidity, or debility of memory:
descending copiously of its own accord, it is not so good as when it is blown
out. When it is of a reddish color, it is not so to be approved of, as arguing
always some blood. Salt or bitter argue some heat; sweet and insipid, the
contrary. When this excrement is stopped, and the head stuffed, the passages
must by convenient and fit means be opened, by means of the juice of beets,
marjoram, and many other such opening simples, either the juice or dry powder
thereof being for this purpose used. Such are commonly called errhina, or
caputpurgia. If it be too abundant, Medicines to expel this excrement.
then means must be used to dry the brain by powders, perfumes, etc.
especially, a spare and drying diet, and forget not to keep warm the head and
feet.

But we find often, Of rheum descending down upon the pectorall parts.
that a liquid thin excrement takes another way, and from the brain
descends and falls down upon diverse parts of the body; which, when it
falls down upon the pectorall parts, we commoly call the rheum, which, as
also Catarrhus, is a Greek word, signifying a defluxe, or falling down. In
Latin sputum is common to both that we call saliva, whereof before, and this
same whereof we now speak. That Spittle or Rheum in Comment. in aph. 12.
lib. 1. citant. Me^cur. Jdem ibid.
Galens esteem is the best, which is white in color, smooth and equal, being
neither too moist and liquid in substance, not yet too thick and tough: and
Avicenne out of Hippocrates adds, that they be easy, and of speedy
expectoration. Rheum twofold. Without a Fever.
This theumaticke matter is either solitary without any other disease or
symptom; or else therewith accompanied; to wit, a Fever. When it falled down
upon the windpipe, or the pipes of the lungs, and be not very hot or sharp,
it causes hoarsnesse and shortness of breath, in intention or remission,
according as the humor less or more abounds; and as it is tough and clammy,
or thinner; as also according to the strength or weakness of the part
recipient, etc. With a Fever.
When there is a Fever joined with such a matter, fallen down upon the
pectorall parts, it is commonly either a Pleuresie, or inflammation of the
lungs, called Peripneumonia: howbeit I deny not but that there are also diverse
other rheumaticke Fevers, whereof I purpose not here to speak. This excrement
is found to be of diverse tastes: as sweet, insipid, bitter and salt, Rheum of
divert sorts.

And diverse colors.


proceeding from the nature of the humors they are engendered of. And it is
likewise of diverse colors, partaking also of the nature of the humors: as
some are white, some reddish, some yellow, black or green, which variety of
colors is oftenest in Pleuresies to be observed. Most observable in pleuresies.
Sometimes there is also some other matter mingled therewith: as sometimes a
congealed mattery substance, sometime a cartisaginous substance from the
windpipe, and sometimes also little stones. Now, this rheumaticke matter
falling down upon any of the aforesaid parts, Rheum commonly accompanied with
a cough.
if it be not from thence expelled, is not a little prejudicial to the health,
and is commonly accompanied with a cough. Upon the first annoyance of the cough
therefore, it is a common custom to use some means to expel this humor;
which is most commonly done without any order, Great error in the ordinary use
of expectorant medicines.
or distinction, either of causes or constitutions, etc. and none so ignorant,
but they are furnished with some one or other, if not more medicines for the
cold, as they call it. And yet in the use of them there is no small caution to
be observed, both of the state of the body, the time of the disease, the part
ttansmitting, commonly the head; and the part recipient, or receiving, to wit,
the parts within the breast. When as this excrement is hard to be expelled, we
are by all means possible to further and facilitate the same: and this
difficulty proceeds from a double cause, the thinness and sharpness, or
from the toughness and clamminesse of the humor. The former we effect by
incrassation of the humor, Preparation before expectoration.
by sparing and orderly Diet, and diverse other things which do incrassat and
thicken this thin matter: as conserve of roses, sirup of violets, of Jujubes,
etc: and diverse compound medicines tending to this same purpose. If it be tough
and impacted into the pipes of the lungs, then are we to use such means as
may both cut and expel it: as coltsfoot, maidens hair, Diverse preparations.
hyssop, licorice, and the like; whereof are made diverse sirups and other
compositions for the effecting of this business. And when these will not serve
the turn, then make we use of some more forcible means, as of Oxymel simplex,
and compounded with diverse forcible ingredients, as squills, etc: as shall by
the counsel and directions of the learned be prescribed. And this is the
proper way by which diseases of the pectorall parts are ordinarily purged:
howbeit sometimes, although seldom, we use to purge by stool in these cases.
It is here also to be observed, that such medicines as are for this purpose
appointed, The form.
be prepared in a solid, or at least not a very liquid form, that they may be
lickt down, or else let melt under the tongue: for taken in a great quantity,
and drunk or swallowed down, they go only into the stomach, and so into
the guts and veins, and therefore produce not the expected effect. Error of
the Vulgar.
Hence does appear the error of such as think to drive away their cold, as
they call it, by large draughts of buttered beer to bed-wards; which is so
far from answering their expectation, that by hindering and interrupting
concoction, increasing crudities, opening the orifice of the stomach, and
loosening the same, and by fuming up into the head, it rather furthereth and
increases this cough or cold, Caveat concerning sweet things.
call it as thou will. It is in like manner to be observed, that as sweet
things loosen tough phlegm, and so facilitate expectoration, so does the too
frequent use of them much debilitate the concocting faculty of the stomach,
besides that in choleric persons they are apt to engender the like humor. And
the too frequent use of too acid, Acid and tart things.
tart or sharp things, is here also to be shunned: but bitter things, howbeit
better for both, yet scarce so wel-come to the Apitian palats of our age. In
pectorall diseases that which is spit up, is especially to be considered.
And it is here likewise to be observed, that in diseases contained within this
second region, the spittings up, sputa are equivalent to the urines in many
other diseases, whereby we judge of the concoction or crudity of the disease:
as 1 de crisib. etc.
Galen himself at great length witnesses: yea, and he himself wills us, in
the first place, ere ever we view the water, in diseases of this naure to
consider of that which is spit up, which may often reveal unto us the causes
of the disease, and sometimes the indications thereof. For that which is spit
up reasonable thick, except some other worse matter be joined therewith, does
most commonly argue concoction: as again on the contrary, that which is very
thin and liquid argues cruditie, especially in the beginning of diseases.
Very tough and clammy matter spit up in a Pleurisy, argues the length and
contumacie of the disease: yet if it be frothie, it is a sign it proceeds
from putrefied phlegm. Diverse significations and presages of expultion or
spitting up
That which is spit up of it self without any admixture of other matter, is
good and laudable; and yet in a Pleurisy and Inflammation of the lungs argues
the crudity of the disease. If it be thin, salt, and in a small quantity,
according to Galen, argues always cruditie; and Avicenne adds, the long
continuance of the disease: and if joined either with matter, caruncles, or
small cartilages, or little stones, there is no good presaged. In Pthisickes or
ulcerat lungs, if all spitting up fail, it is always a dangerous, if not a
deadly sign. If this excrement should too much abound, we must look into the
cause, and cure it accordingly, by good and sparing Diet, by light suppers, and
sometimes none at all; We are not then to judge of all diseases by the bare
inspection of the urine only.
corroboration of the brain, by perfumes, plasters, and other things in such
cases requisite. By that which has been said then, may evidently be
understood, how erroneous is the opinion of the vulgar, esteeming that all
diseases may by the bare inspection of the urine onley be discerned; as also
of such ignorant, erroneous, and covetous Empiricall practitioners, who being
void of all true sufficiency in the profession of Physic, would by this or
other indirect means magnify themselves, amongst the more rude and ignorant
sort of people.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of carnal copulation, the right use, and abuse thereof: what age and
constitutions it best befitteth. Something concerning the menstruous flux in
women.

BEsides all these unprofitable excrements, and to be expelled out of the body,
there is yet a profitable excrement engendered in the body of man, abounding not
in quality but in quantity only, and that for a beneficial and profitable
end, the propagation of mankind. And this is that we call the food of
generation, which with man is common to unreasonable creatures. Seed of
generation what it is.
This excrement then is nothing else save a remainder of some portion of blood
after the whole body is served in the third concoction, and which being altered
and changed into a white color in the spe^maticall vessels, is in those
places reserved until it be expelled in the act of generation. This is not
found in the body until it have atteined to years of puberty, and these
persons atteined to some reasonable stature, all the blood before being
employed to the growth and increase of the body. The use.
The proper use of this so utile and profitable excrement, is the
multiplication of mankind, and is found both in man and woman. And therefore as
other excrements, so is this sometimes to be expelled out of the body, the
which being too long detained, in some bodies especially, proves often the
occasion of diverse diseases and dangerous accidents. But as in all other
things, so here especially, I mean, a moderation should be observed, and
herein the Laws of God and man be not infringed. The moderate; timely and
orderly use thereof is in many respects useful and profitable: for, besides
that it serves for the propagation of mankind, The moderately and orderly use
many ways profitable.
it inhibiteth also the repletion of the body, reviveth the spirits, exciteth
natural heat, helps the agility of the body, preventeth phlegmatic
diseases, dilateth the pores of the body, quickens the mind, and qualifieth
fury and melancholy. Inconvenience of the immoderate use.
The immoderate and unseasonable use thereof, resolves the spirits, cools the
body, hurts the head, eyes, nerves and joints, ingendreth crudities, dulleth
the mind and senses, procures a stinking breath, pissing of blood,
consumption of the back, etc. And this I say to such as will take warning, and
will not wittingly and willingly overthrow both soul and body. I think it is
to small purpose to speak to these sensual Sardanaples of this our licentious
and luxurious age, our common haunters of whore-houses, to brothel birds, and
the like, who will sell their souls, and part of Paradise for satisfying a
short lasting lust. But because such sensual Epicures are seldom moved with
divine threats, and scarce ever firmly believe there is a hell, until they
fall headlong into it; therefore if the premises will not serve the turn, let
such know, that, besides the loathsome pox, rottenesse of bones, and a world
of weaknesses do often accompany their later years, if divine punition permit
them so long to live: besides, that as the Proverbs 6.26.^
Wiseman says, that by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a
morsel of bread, and if he should yet escape all this, yet is he but led like
an ox to the slaughter, as witnesses the same wise Solomon. And all that
which is in the same golden book of Proverbes set down concerning this
subject, I wish they would read, and seriously consider: I knew, History.
my self, within these few years, a Knight of ancient descent, having left
him by his father of ancient inheritance, 1200 pounds sterling of yearly rent
to spend, who having in a short space wasted all this estate on whores, and
other excess, was at length brought to that pass, that he had not a morsel
of bread to put in his belly, but what he begged, or else sharked for; and for
his lodging, he had some shop door in the City to lie at, a penthis to
shelter him from the rain, and a hard bulk for his feather bed: many that
read this, can, no doubt, out of their own knowledge, instance in a multitude
of the like examples. The age fittest for this act, The fittest age.
is manly age, to the younger sort and old age it being rather hurtful. From
hence may then evidently appear the preposterous course of many, who, for some
sinister respect, either for covetousness to compass some great match, some
great alliance or the like, often cause children to marry before ever they know
what marriage means (although not always consummate, Inconveniences by
marrying young children and young people.
yet in effect, and finished at parents or near friends pleasure) or how to
make a free choice, which ought to be voluntary, and not forced: and hence
comes it to pass, that both their bodies are debilitated, their growth often
hindered (that which should have turned to the nourishing and increasing of the
body, being too soon, as we have already said, turned another way) diverse
diseases engendered, and their issue (if they have any, they being ordinarily
not so fruitful as others) proving often crasie and valetudinary, and by the
just judgment of God, upon such unlawful matches, there is seldom seen that
firm love and true affection, agreement and concord betwixt such parties as
ought to be, in this sacred ordinance, as I have often observed, and by
relation heard of a many more: besides, that many times they prove afterward
more incontinent: for considering that they were not of judgment sufficient
when they were first married, disliking the party that before was, as it were,
pinned upon them, break forth into unlawful lust. It is their sin, Duty of
parents in this case.
I confess, but parents and friends minister occasions, which prove more
dangerous, when these parties have not first been trained up in the fear of
God, which, alas the pity, is too much neglected. Such, therefore, as have
children marriageable, it is the parents duty to provide for their children
matches in due time, observing the disposition of their children, lest the
neglect of this duty done in due time, extort out of them aftewards a too late
repentance. Such as cannot so suddenly, Diligent care ought to be had in the
education of children.
as need requires, be furnished to their liking, let parents be more watchful
over them, and all have a care of their pious education in their younger
years, preventing all occasions of evil; idleness especially, reading of
lewd lascivious love books, frequenting lewd and lascivious company;
stage-plaies especially, the very bane and break-necke of all modesty, honesty
and chastity: and all other things that may work prejudice in this kind. And
such as are of years of discretion, and sui iuris; and now by death of parents
freed from that trial of obedience, I wish them to marry, rather than burn
and break out in sin, and so live to dishonor God, and scandalize their
neighbor. And if they cannot accommodate themselves so suddenly, let them in
the meane-time avoid all provocations to lust, use spare and thin diet,
avoiding the pampering of the flesh, using often for companion the Bible and
other good books, and other good means. But in any case, never abandon thy
self to idleness; but always be employed in some good and laudable vocation,
whereby thou may prove profitable either to Church or Commonwealth. But this
belonging more properly to the Divines pulpit than the Physicians pen, I leave
to them. What persons are thereby most offended.
But now because it concerns every one, both in sickness and in health, to
be acquainted with that which concerns them so near: I therefore advertise
all weak, feeble and infirm persons, What constitutions.
that they be not too busy in this particular. Of constitutions the hot and
dry choleric, and next dry melancholicke persons are most thereby indamaged:
but hot and moist, sanguine and phlegmatic bodies are hereby most benefitted.
And I advise sick persons, especially in acute diseases, Sick persons must
abstain.
and in their recovery, until they have atteined their full strength, for
fear of a relaps, to abstain from this act. As for chronicall, In what
diseases most hurtful.
or long continuing diseases, by reason it is an enemy to the nerves, and
nervous parts, it is therefore in many infirmities of the brain, Epilepsie
especially, and all manner of gouts most hurtful. As for the age, the
particular years cannot so well be determined, some being more able at twenty,
than others at thirty or upwards: and some old men of fourscore, abler than
others at fifty: but yet, as I touched before, The certain number of years
when to marry cannot be determined.
to marry children, or young people while they are yet a growing, it is both
prejudicial to the public, and their own private persons. For feeble old
age, it cannot but prove very pernicious, as any one may easily understand. As
for the time of the year, the most temperate, The fittest time of the year.
keeping a mean and moderation betwixt heat and cold, as in other evacuations,
so here likewise is always most seasonable. But in extreme hot or cold seasons
be wary and circumspect, especially in time of great heat, which is more
hurtful than the cold. As for the particular time, some have preferred the
evening, The particular time.
by reason of sleep ensuing after; but most are for the morning, as most
seasonable. Howsoever, after a full stomach, any violent exercise or bodily
labor that has much debilitated the strength, is not to be used. And besides,
among men, some are sometimes ignorant of that they ought to know, and some
more sensual than becomes so noble a creature; therefore, in time of a
woman's menstruous flux, as likewise that time which is set apart for this
evacuation, after a woman's delivery they must abstain: the which Levit. 1^.
as we see to have been by Gods own appointment practiced among the people of
the Jews, so for diverse good respects, the same is to remain with us
inviolable. Now, if this excrement be not in due time and order expelled,
Abstinence from marriage what inconveniences it breeds in some bodies.

In women.


it proves often the cause of diverse diseases both in man and woman: as that
we call gonorrhaea, or involuntary effluxe of seed in either sex, proceeding
also sometimes from the debility of the retentive faculty. In women it
occasioneth often histericall Passions, or fits of the mother, green
sickness, obstructions, palpitation of the heart, etc. But in both sexes I
wish that moderation which becomes Christians to be observed, Let young
gallants (...) beed
and withal, to consider that a man may be drunk with his own drink, if he
take too much, and besides, that Cartwright in his C^^^ch (...), in the
expre^^ion of the commandments.
a man may (as our Divines hold) even commit adultery with his own wise. There
is yet no small prejudice hereby procured to thine own health, and besides,
has cost many a man his life. Lib 7. cap ^3.
Pliny makes mention of two Roman Knights, Quintilius Horatius, and Cornelius
Gallus, who both died in this act. Divine pu^^tion of unclean persons.
I think, few that read this treatise, but can relate the tragical stories of
many, who have by this means both shortened their lives, wasted their means,
and purchased to themselves many loathsome and dangerous diseases, the pox,
especially (a punishment sent from God to punish this odious sin) and we may
see in every corner of the country the woeful effects of this excess of
luxury. In all that I have already said, my purpose is not to dissuade any from
the use of that sacred ordinance of wedlock, which God in the depth of his
sacred wisdom has ordained as a fit remedy for preventing of sin, and for
the great good and manifold comfort of mankind: but only to advise all people
to a moderation, and withal, wishing every one to know themselves, and who
have more or less need, and accordingly to accommodate themselves in the
lawful use of this ordinance. And from hence may manifestly appear the
malapert sauciness of that man of sin and his shavelings, who in direct
opposition to Gods command, and approbation of this sacred ordinance, will make
it known to the whole world, that he is that man of sin foretold by the holy
1 Timothy 4.3.
Apostle, forbidding marriage and meats. It has, by that which has bin said,
plainly appeared, that some persons, and some constitutions may better and
longer forbear this ordinance than others: God never prohibited any sort or
degree the use of marriage.
but never was it by God absolutely forbidden any estate, degree, sex, or any
sort of people, to use this sacred ordinance, Priest nor people, in the old or
new Testament: nay, is there not a punctual (...)
place to the contrary? Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed
undefiled. But the Pope replies, (lest it should not be taken notice he is
Antichrist) that it is not so, Marriage is dishonorable to my shavelings. But
what? to keep a Concubine, yea, to practice that unnatural sin of Sedomi^,
by God himself punished by fire from heaven, belike is no sin: nay, what
shall it be then for a Clergy man, nay, for a (...). Apod^ (...) and (...), A
chrep^^e (...) ^ene^^^^nus, (...), in Sodom^^ (...) Di^ne, (...) vit, (...)
divi^^m (...) ^^^mavit (...) Julius 3. Innocent (...) qu^nd^m (...) pr^tes ^
(...) h^bu^rat (...) ^ononi^ legetur i^ Cardina^ium (...) ^rum quam (...)
riliqu^ ^l factum (...), es^ in come^^^am con^uctud^nem rur^us ^am fit, Rom^
^an a erat and libellis que ^ pe^^er^ptur^ suit Jove Garit^^edem fo^ers, licet
desormem. (...) vero ali^r^^ scriptores (...) bla^phem^as e^ (...) renda
sce^era stilo in (...), ^^rnavit (...) S^dim tan ^^o^on^mum vniel. ^et, qui
haec editis libr. tum etur, atque defenderet, ad quod ip^e d^pl^matibus suis
approb^t e^. Sixtus 4. Roma nobile a^modum lupanar extru^^t, atque Vent ^i
assignavit, meretr^^ eum cohertes aluit, amicisque and servis exhibuit, non
nihil etiam em^lumenti ex meritric^o quaestu aerario suo atcumulavit: Romana
enim scorta in singul^s hebdomadas nummum adhuc pendent pontifici, qui census
annuits nonnunquam quadra, irta ducatorum mill^a ex^edit: idceque eccle^^^
procerum id munus est, ut vna cum ecclesiarum proventibus etiam lenociniorum
number erent mercedem. Refert We^l^lius K^oningens^^ in tractatu de indulgentiis
papalibus: Quod ad Petri Rueri^ quem pro Cinaedo habebat Sixtus, and Hieronymi
fratris sui postulationes, domestice familiae toti Cardinalis de Lucia, in
tribus anni mensibus calidioribus, Junio, Iulio and Augusto (horrendum dictu)
masculino coitu uti permiserit, addens hanc clausulam: fiat quod petitur.
Johannes 24 accusatur in Concilio Constantrensi ^uca fit ^o domita, Adulter,
Scertator, etc. De Clement. 8. in quodam comment super^articulis magistrorum
Parisiensium ligitur, quod suer^t ^^^thus, Venesicus. Homicida, Leno,
Simoniacus, Sodomita, Periurus, Geomanticus, Stuptator, Rapto^, Sacrilegus,
(...) ^^elerum artifex. Tales fuere Benedictus 1, and 14. Paulus 3. Paulus 3.
sororem suam luliam Farnesiam stuprandam trac^^d t^ut Cardinali^ and Epi^copus
Hostiensis fieret. Alteram deinde sororem suam cum quarem habuerat, vi^iens
quod alios ar^^utius quam ipsum a^^aret, toxico interemit. Hunc Nicolaus
Quercaeus congredientem cum Laura Farnesia uxore sua, sed ne^te^e u^, (...),
ac^t le e^ vninupugione incussit, ut ejus eicatrix ad mortem usque cum eo
maneret, sed and aliam neptem le^tissimam, no^ (...) usv^ginalipa^ore quam
^erma praestantem hircosus senex ad incestum and nefandum stuprum sollicitavit.
Vt vero filia sua Constantia ^um qua sa pissime rem habuerat, potiri liberius
posset, maritum ejus Bosinum S^ortiam veneno necavit. In tabellis habebat
numerata 45. meretri^um mill^^ ex quarum fernicatione singulis mensibus censum
exegit. Hae a Papa in summo h^nore l^^i ^ntur ^ae ^a^a pedes osculantur, hae
Papam samitrarissime alloquuntur, hae cum Papa die nocteque consuetudinem
habent. Landonis. 1. Sergii 3. Iohannis 11. (...) 12. Ioh^^n^ 13. Alexandri 6.
Christophoci primi f^edas libidines lubens praeterco. Et de papissa Iohanne
prius Gilbertad (...), (...) elog^u^, lippis and tonsoribus ut aiunt notum,
apud me altum erit silentium. Haec and plura Stephanus S^^gedinus Po^^^nius
(...) speculo ^o^tificio in titulo, Septimum membrum, ubi qualis quisque fuerit
describi^^, situlus hic (...) Lenone^ ^^ortatores, A^ulteri (...) So ^mitae.
Popish Prelate, not by word of mouth only, but by a book in print proclaim
his own shame to the open view of the world, and the Romish Clergies impious,
abominable, and more than brutish luxurious and lascivious lives. And if one
should make a narrow search, and take a survey of these holy fathers of the
Church, we shall find them nothing inferior to, if not exceeding Sodom by
many degrees in filthy lust; and then what we may expect from children of such
parents, let the world judge. We may read of Julius the 3d. who, to grace that
graceless Innocentius, whom he had before abused in commiting with him that
sin against nature, when he was himself installed into S. Peter's chair,
preferred this base varlet into the number of the Cardinals. And when as some
Writers had by public writings detested his blasphemies and other gross
villainies, he suborned one of his favorites by public writing to defend the
lawfulness of these abominable villainies; and lest he should be unlike
himself, by his bull and broad seal allowed of all this varlets witing.
Sixtus the 4. for another monument to perpetuat the memory, and continue the
practice of these salacious Satyrs, erected in Rome a public stews for the
daily practice of both kinds of uncleanness, for the which they pay even yet
a weekly tribute to this unholy holiness, the which often amounts to 40000
ducats in the year: and this is by his clergy collected, and by them together
with his church revenues brought in to his coffers. This same holy father at
the request and petition of one of his favorites, whom he abused in the same
Sodemiticall sin, granted to his whole family, and to a certain company of
Cardinals freely to use this sin (a horrible impiety to be mentioned, says
mine author) in the three hot months of the year, June, July and August. And
John the 24. was accused in the council of Constans for a whoremaster,
adulterer, and a Sodomite. Of Clement the 8. it is recorded that he was a
Bastard, a Poisoner, a murderer, a Bawd, a Smoniacke, a Sorcerer, a ra^i^h^r,
Sodomite, sacrilegious, and a contriver and inventer of all wickedness. Such
were Benedict, 1. and the 14. and Paul the 3. And for the commendation of this
Paul 3. it is written of him that he prostituted his own sister, that he might
become Bishop and Cardinail o^ Hostia. Another sister with whom he was as
familiar as a man with his wife, by reason he saw her more affectioned to
another than himself, he poisoned. And being taken in the very act of
adultery with another man's wife, received of the husband such a blow, that he
carried the mark of it to his grave. And that he might the more freely enjoy
the company of his own daughter whom he had for a long time thus abused, he
caused poison her husband. He had in his memorial the names of 45. thousand
whores of whom he received a monthly tribute. And these might kiss his foot,
have familiar access unto him, and converse with him both day and night. These
few instances among a multitude more I have set down, that the world may see
the hypocrisy of that filthy Roman strumper, who would bear the world in
hand, they and their clergy are very chaste and continent, and yet none can come
near them in all manner of uncleanness. Nay, there lived a gentleman here in
this town a few years ago, in the Priory of St. Andrews, whose son told
me he saw among some deeds concerning this Priory, his father had then in
custody during his lease, one, wherein a priest, as I remember, living at
Saywell within four miles of this same town, was for something he held of
the Prior, tied to bring him every month a pretty, fair, young wench: and
this was not said to be for lust (they know not what it means, simple babes)
but to cleanse his kidneys: pu^llam pulchram nitidam, etc, non libidinis gratia
sed ad purgandos renes; were the words as I remember. Nay, if I should hold my
peace the multitude of young childrens skulls found in many ponds of these
convents of many Monks, Friars and Nuns, when they were cleansed, would
proclaim the Romish whores uncleanness. And this by the way for a touch shall
suffice to have said concerning this point.

The menstruous flux
Now besides this profitable excrement of seed of generation, there is yet
another in women, appointed also for a profitable and necessary use. And this
is the blood of the menstruous flux, which is good and laudable blood, of the
same nature and property of the rest of the blood of the body, at first
appointed for a profitable use, the nourishment of the infant in the mothers
whomb: and after it is brought into the world, this alimentarie liquor is by
certain vessels, as so many pipes, for this end and purpose appointed,
conveied into the breasts, and there by paps or dugs converted into a white
liquor, which we call milk, the proper aliment of the infant, the which is
still by the mother to be continued, and to be exhibited to this tender fruit
of her womb, so long as shall be needful. In women that are with child,
whether Virgins or married women where this flux is become habitual, (...)
f^^xe s^opt cause of many disease^
that which superaboundeth, in sound and healthful bodies is ordinarily by a
periodicall course once a month expelled. But upon diverse occasions it comes
often to pass, that both in maids and married women this flux being stopped
proves a cause of many dangerous diseases, and therefore by good and wise
counsel this flux is to be furthered, and if it be not regulat and keep not
the due times and turns, we are by fit and appropriat remedies, according to
the several causes and circumstances, to provoke and further the same, on the
which here were too long to insist, my Book already being grown to that
bigness that I dare not be too bold. Howsoever I advise young maids not to
be too idle, and cocketing mothers not too much to maintain them in
idleness. Menstruous flux exceeding in quantity to be stopped, yet not rashly
not suddenly.
This flux is sometimes again faculty in the excess, which is then with
great discretion, according to the several causes and circumstances to be
suppressed. But I advise every woman afflicted with this infirmity to be wise,
and not be too busy with Empirickes, and women's receipts by strong astringent
means suddenly to stop this course, which was never yet by the judicious and
learned allowed for a legal cure of this disease. On the diet befitting both
this and other fluxes proper to this sex, it requiring some more pains and
time then I can now well spare, I will not insist, but reserve it to some
fitter opportunity, when as if God spare my life and health I may give this sex
some more particular satisfaction.

CHAP. XXV.
Of sleeping and waking, the benefit and use thereof in sickness and in
health. The several sorts of sleep; and what persons may freeliest sleep, and
who less.

HAving hitherto at great length discoursed of four things commonly called not
natural: to wit, of the air and other elements; of meat and drink, the uses
and preparations in sickness and in health; of exercises of diverse sorts; and
lastly of diverse sorts of evacuations; we come now to the fifth, watching and
sleeping, not unworthy of our consideration both in sickness and in health. My
meaning is not here to enter into a curious and philosophical discourse
concerning the nature and essence thereof, but leave such speculations to our
schools, and who so will be satisfied herein, let him have recourse to
Aristot. lib. de so^^^^ and vigilia.
that Prince of philosophers who has handled this subject learnedly and at
great length. The same author and Galen also refer both sleeping and waking
to the common sense. As for the seat of sleep, we with Lib. 1 de symptoms
causis cap (...).
Galen and all our famous Physicians do undoubtedly place it in the brain,
from whence the original of the nerves is by the senses to be observed, and
from thence the nerves communicated to the whole body impart both motion and
feeling to every part and particle of the same: although I confess Aristotle
as he would have the original of the nerves in the heart, so following the
same error, would likewise have the seat of sleep feated in the heart: which
we utterly reject, whatsoever Verum Scaligeri effugium Aristot. defendentis
admitti non potest, quia non tantum secundum virtutem, verum etiam propter
originem instrumentorum, quasi nervi and venae ex cord oriantur, cor facit
principtum sentiendi: and quoniam haec instrumenta obstruuntur, cor suo munere
fungi non posse opinetur Itaque si quis maxim (...) Scaligero sentire, and
cordi principium sentiendi ex causa^ efficiente tribuere velit, quateum ex
cord spiritus oriuntur, qui nervis vim sentiendi suopeditant: ratione tamen
instrumenterum and causae materialis, principium sentiendi in cord non erit,
and ita nondum Aristotelis opinio qui hoc sentit, confirmata erit. Magirus
comment. in Physiolog. suae lib. 6. cap. 13.

Benefits of moderate sleep.


acute Scaliger seem to say to the contrary; who by the sharpness of his wit
would seem to think that his ipse dixit should be sufficient to make us
believe that the moon is made of green cheese. But my purpose is not here to
enter upon any polemicall matter, but proceed to that which concerns the
consideration of this subject in sickness and in health. Under watching we
here comprehend both the functions of the common sense. The first is the
distribution of the animal faculty proceeding from the head to the organs of
the outward senses, to the end they may receive the species: and the next is,
the perception it self, and the judging of such species received into these
organs of the outward senses. Now sleep is not properly a function of any
sense, but a certain affection following upon the natural function of the
senses, to wit, waking, that thereby the strength which by waking was tired
out, might the better be repaired and refreshed. The moderation of both these
in sickness and in health are very necessary, and when either exceeds, the
body is much endamaged, and health much hindered. Immoderate watching dries
up, attenuateth, exhausteth and debilitateth the body, and spends the
spirits; and therefore in hot acute diseases, if long continuing, prove* the
very dangerous. Sleep, produces the contrary effects; howbeit exceeding
measure dulleth the body, moisteneth too much, oppresses and suffocateth
natural heat, ingendreth abundance of excrements* and drowneth both the senses
and the mind. But sleep moderately used benefitteth both the body and the mind:
for by this means the concoction of the aliment in the stomach and all the
parts of the body, are by the testimony of 6. Epid. 5.
Hippocrates, best performed, the which is also by 3 de sympt. causa. 2. de
motu muscul.
Galen him self seconded. Sleep moistneth also the body, whereunto it seems
the Virgil.
Poet alluded, fessos sopor irrigat artus. And besides, it nourishes and
makes fat, and what is corrupted expels by sweat or urine, and what is not
fully concocted it perfecteth and makes profitable for the nourishment of the
body: besides all this, it qualifieth and mitigateth choler, the cause of many
dangerous diseases: and it staieth and hinders any evacuation except sweat,
and withal cools the body. What sleep is.
Sleep then is a natural rest, and that almost perfect of all the external
senses; or a natural impotency of the animal faculties to the actions, by
reason of a mild and pleasant vapor arising from the aliment irrigating, and as
it were, besprinkling the brain, that in the mean time, the vigor and
strength of the body may be this means be repaired and refreshed. Now, In
sleep there is not a total cessation of the influxe of the animal spirits in
the organs of senses.
although there be here a cessation of the influxe of the animal spirits into
the organs of the outward senses, yet is there not a total cessation of this
influxe: for then a man should not again waken at all, and this would prove a
stupefaction of the senses, and not a sleep. Sleep is therefore, as it were, a
binding or tying up of the common sense, and a hindering of the influence of
the animal spirits into the organs of the outward senses in part only; as we
see by experience in respiration and many motions the body uses in sleep: but
the influxe of so great a quantity and quality of spirits into these organs of
the outward senses, as for the performance of their functions is requisite,
then is denied. And in a profound, sound or deep sleep, as we may call it,
there is a smaller or lesser influence; in a less profound sleep, when as the
senses work but slenderly, there is a greater quantity of spirits. This humor
or vapor thus moistening the brain, being spent, the body awaketh, and so
becomes more fit and quick to go about all ordinary imploiments; and these
two do thus alternatively succeed each other, according to the Poet.

Quod caret alternarequie durabile non est.
What thing wants rest, thou may be sure,
Long time on earth cannot endure.
And all this is to be understood of natural sleep, useful and usual both
in sickness and in health, there being also some sleeps, or rather
soporiferous affections which are not natural. And this unnatural or
soporiferous sleep is often an accident of acute diseases, sometimes dangerous,
and sometimes free there from. Sleep then being so necessary for all ages,
sexes, and sorts of people, we will say something concerning the fit and
convenient time for sleep, as also of the duration and continuance thereof,
and with what site or posture of the body we are to sleep, and who may safely
sleep longest, and who are not allowed so long a time. The wisdom and
provident care of our Maker, is not a little in this to be admired, in that as
he has appointed the day time for man to labor in, so has he likewise
appointed the night time for a cessation from work and serious imploiment, and
a time to repair that which has been decayed or tired out the day before.
The night time therefore is the fittest and most convenient time for sleep and
rest, The fittest time for sleep.
when as both the Sun withdrawes from us his bright beams, and the darkness
and night-silence seem to invite and summon us thereunto. Whether sleep in the
day time be to be admitted?
But it has been and yet is a question among many, whether sleep in the day
time be not allowable, which by the general suffrage, and unanimous consent of
Physicians seems to have been condemned? The Sic brevis aut nullu^ tibi
somnus meridianus Febre, pigrities, capitis dolor atque catarrhus, Hae^ tibi
proveniunt ex somno meridian^* Schola Salern.
Salernitan school likewise disclaimeth it as hurtful for the health. I
answer, it is not indeed allowable, that especially which is used immediately
after dinner, called commonly somnus meridianus, of the which all our
Physicians are to be understood: and indeed it cannot but be very hurtful to
the body, and prejudicial to the health, filling the head with many vapors,
Answ.
and by consequence procuring many diseases. Such especially as are subject to
rheumes, Epilepticke fits, and diseases of that nature, are chiefly to shun
this kind of sleep. To some thereunto accustomed it is less hurtful, if
especially sparingly, and an hour or two after dinner used. Morning sleep,
although by some longer continued, Morning sleep,
is always less offensive than used immediately after meals, howbeit the
night is always most seasonable. Sick persons cannot always be strictly ti^^
to this rule.
As for sick people we are often forced to suffer them to sleep when they can,
it being often out of our power to accommodate it, as we would, to the right
and proper time and season, especially in acute diseases, and in hot choleric
constitutions: howbeit we are by all means, if it be possible, to help them
to rest in the night time, as they were accustomed in time of health; the which
is always most fit and convenient both in sickness and in health. And Silla,
Pythagorae symbolum de conturband^ vest stragula, vide Plutarch. sympol. lib.
8 probl. 7.
says Plutarch, is of opinion, that this symbol of Pythagoras, whereby is
injoined to mar the print of the bed-clothes wherein any has lien, is to be
understood of sleeping in the day time, as though we were thereby dehorted from
sleeping in that unseasonable time, appointed for action and employment, and
there be no remainder or show of sleeping left behind, there being no more use
of a sleeping, than of a dead man. What shall we then say of such prodigious
monsters, not worthy to be ranked among men, unprofitable pieces of earth, who
seem to have been borne to subvert and invert the orderly course of nature;
while as in drinking, dicing and drabbing, they turn the night into day, and
the day into night. These night owls, the cankers and caterpillars of a
commonwealth, would to God our Magistrates would diligently search and inquire
after, and having found out, would condignely punish, that others might thereby
be warned to live moderatly and honestly in their places and callings, if they
have any; or if without, to force them to live in some useful and lawful
imploiment. Now, although the night time is of all others most seasonable for
sleep, yet are we not immediately after supper to compose our selves to sleep,
but at least to let an bourne or two pass over before we go to rest. Good to
walk a little after supper.
And it is the advice of all our Physicians, after supper to walk a while
gently, that so our food may descend from the upper orifice of the stomach to
the bottom thereof: for as we are not suddenly after our exercise to set upon
our meats, until the perturbation of the body be somewhat settled,; no more are
we immediately after supper to setle our selves to sleep. This was the custom
of Plutarch. in ejus vita.
Cato of Vtica: and likewise Sueton in ejus vitae.
Domitian the Emperor was wont after supper to walk all alone in his chamber
till bed time. The manner how to compose our selves to sleep, Best situation
of our body in sleep.
is at first to lie down on the right side, and after the first sleep to
turn on the left: and the head ought to lie reasonable high, especially in a
disposition to defluxions from the brain, and diseases from thence proceeding.
To lie on the belly, might, perhaps, help and further concoction, Lying on the
belly.
but the harm the eyes might by affluxe of humors by that means receive,
would quickly eat out all the gains would be gotten by the bargain. To lie
upon the back is yet worst of all other, On the back.
and furthereth the Apoplexy, Epilesie, Vertigo, or giddiness, Incubus, or
night mare, and the like. Now, as for the time, duration, or continuance of
sleep, we use to determine it by concoction, continuing the same until it be
quite finished. Duration or continuance of sleep.
But because in all is not required the like length of time for concoction;
hence have we also the uncertainty for the time of sleep. But most commonly,
in ordinary and indifferent constitutions in time of health, Ordinary allowance
for sleep.
we include it within the compass of seven hours, so that we think it
should not exceed this period of time. Some constitutions of body, as the
choleric and the melancholic, are commonly contented with a smaller portion
of rest I was my self acquainted with a gentleman, who many times contented
himself with a nap of an hour or two long, History
sitting in his chair, and that for diverse night^ together, and found thereby
no inconvenience at all. Some again have need of a longer time for sl^epe: as
young inf^^^ (...) abound in crudities, and others also that are (...) travel.
And its written (...)
of Augustu^ (...), that (...) ^bove seven hours at a time. As for (...) to
consider both the nature of the person, and the (...) eases differ much, (...)
both in their nature and in (...) and some chronicall: again, acure, either
(...) all which may make the sleep differ in (...) diseases, which give no
intermission, if it can b^ (...) prove best of the night rest, as was
accustomed in the time of (...) unless necessity and long want of sleep
prevail^ with us. It (...) be wished, that the sick abstain from sleep an
(...) past, if extreme weakness alter not our intention: in which cas^
necessity must be our best guide. And by reason sleep does (...), and withal
cools the inward her distemper, (...)
the (...) in (...) diseases, the sleep may be of longer continuance, (...) b^
any internal inflammation, in which case much sleep (...) ^ning of the disease
increases the same. As for i^t^^mitting (...), we cannot appoint any certain
or precise period of time, might (...) day; and that in regard of paroxysmes,
or exacerbations, which (...) here be our lodestone to lead us. (...)
In the beginning therefore of the paroxysme, or fit, Physicians do with the
sick to abstein^ from sl^^p^ and toward the declining thereof to repair the
^^rmer l^ss^^^ and if the presence of a judicious physician shall some (...)
alter, to his discretion it is left. But as concerning (...) disea^^s, we are
as near as we can to admit of sleep at the time ac^^stomed in time of
health, most of them being of that nature, (...)
that they may easily be guided after that rule. Some diseases there (...),
(...)
as namely some in the brain, proceeding from frigidity and humility where in
the (...) i^ too prone and inclined to sleep, and therefore such we are ^ot to
suffer to sleep too long to shun sleeping in the day time, and to suffer
them to sleep so much in the night as may well suffice to repair decayed
strength For the more ea^ie understanding of this matter* we are to consider
that Physicians make (...) ^^efold sleep; a natural, not natural, (...)
and critical. Of the natural we have already spoken. Of that which is not
natural there are three sorts properly so called: that is, when the sick
either sleeps in the day and waketh in the night; or else when sleep^ is
troublesome and unquiet; and when the sick sleeps both day and night unto
the which some add this also, (...)
when the sick sleeps neither day nor night: and although this may seem
rather to belong to immoderate waking, yet being an extreme, referred to the
same medium or mean, it may be, as we use other extremes, referred hither.
Now, all these in diseases prove often, although not always, dangerous; but
then especially, when accompanied with other dangerous accidents. And it is
often observed, that when the sick has long languished, and it may be for
diverse days been deprived of any rest, that before he exchange this life for
another, some certain time, (...)
before falls into some pleasant sleep, often deluding the friends and
assistance, flattering them with some counterfeit show of some better presage
then is often confirmed by event. And indeed this is nothing else but a drowsy
disposition, arguing an extreme imbecillitie of the animal parts, when as they
are not now able any longer to keep open the shop-windowes, and this is rather
to be termed sopor, than somnus, or a heavy and deadly drowsinesse, rather than
a true and natural sleep. (...)
And most commonly that sleep is to be suspe^ted that brings no alleviation
to the sick party. And this is likewise to be observed, that as well in
sickness as in health, a full stomach to bed-wards, (...)
or too hot and vaporous and flatuous meat or drink, will much annoy and
interrupt quiet rest, which in sick persons especially is carefully to be
avoided. As for soporiserous affections, my purpose is not in this place to
meddle with them, as being now beyond my present intention, but will say a
little of critical sleep. This critical sleep then is twofold, Crit^^all*
^^eepe ^^^^^old.
as being either a presage of a good or bad crise. Of a good crise again two
manner of ways: either when as there is a freedom and liberty for nature,
without any trouble or molestation whatsoever, Good critical sleep.
to order and dispose of their business, that the sick after much trouble or
turmoile, and much watching, falls now into a quiet, profound and comfortable
sleep, a sure presage, especially accompanied with other good signs, of a
good and comfortable crise. And sometimes, again, during this sleep, there is
often an eruption of an orderly alleviating sweat, sometimes also seconded by
some laudable critical excretion, accompanied with a durable and continuing
alleviation. But on the contrary, that which comes with unquietness,
C^^^^call s^ee^e accompanied with evil accidents.
accompanied with many ill accidents, with imperfect sweating, and other
evacuations begun only, and not fully perfected, without any alleviation,
and often seconded with a profound soporiferous sleep, with intense and strong
delirations, bad pulse and urine, does either presage death, or at least a
ttansmutation or exchanged of the disease for a worse. Now, since the benefits
of sweet, comfortable and moderate sleep are so many, and so great, and the
body by extraordinary watching so much endammaged, we are, especially in cases
of extremity, as namely in hot and dry diseases, in fear of delirations and
phrensies to use all means possible to procure the sick some rest; ^^eep
careful some^i^es (...) procured.
which is diverse ways procured, both by fit and convenient diet, cold and
moist in quality, Lettices, Violets and the like; as also by outward
applications of oinments to the temples* and diverse other means as the case
shall require. Sometimes we use lotions of the head and feet, (...) of
hypnotick me^^^ines inward and (...)
hypnoticke medicines inwardly in diverse forms exhibited, and of such means
the vulgar are often much afraid, by reason such means being often used in
cases of extremity, and the patient yielding under the burden of the disease,
after dying, the fault is presently laid upon the medicine, and the Physician
who administered it. Sometimes also, I am not ignorant, that unskilful and
ignorant Emperickes are too busy with narcoticke unprepared, (...) one his
judgment (...) the vulgar concerning hypnoti^^^s and other medi^^ne.
and ill corrected narcoticke medicines, and by this means make the honest and
skillful Physician fare the worse, especially when the matter depends upon
the vulgars voices, who judge all by issue and event. The like comes often
also to pass in phlebotomy and purgations, and other physical helps, little
considering that often through the malignity of the disease, and diverse
dangerous accidents, the Physician is forced to try rather some doubtful
remedy in apparent danger, than to leave the patient in desperation, not once
offering to try some means to succor his necessity. Now, if it shall so come
to pass that through the malignitie of the disease, or multiplicity of evil
accidents, the sick succumbe under the burden of the disease; in stead of
thankful acknowledgement of the Physicians care and diligence in doing his
utmost endeavor for the patients recovery, is often by slanderous and virulent
tongues traduced, and by ignorant persons his actions, and diligent indeauors
misconstrued, and he by false ignorant witnesses, directly against the ninth
commandment, condemned without any hearing. I justify no man's ignorance, nor
patronise empiricall error, but tax vulgar indiscretion in assuming unto
themselves to judge of that which far transcendeth their reach, and making no
difference betwixt a true Physician, and a masked or counterfeit one, where
there is nothing but a shadow and an outside, without any substance. It
behooves therefore every one carefully to consider with what Physician they
betrust this precious jewel of their life: but when the honest and learned
artist has done his best, I see no reason why he should be thus roughly
without any cause dealt withal, as though the Physician were of so malicious a
mind, that he would willingly suffer his patient to perish, if it lay in his
power to preserve life: little considering that, Interdum doct a plus valet art
malum,
Diseases sometimes greater prove than skillful art can cure.


But because I have already touched upon this string, I will no further here
digress. Now then, the excess of sleeping and watching, Whether the excess
of sleeping or waking be more dangerous. Answer.
being so prejudicial to the body, it may, perhaps, be demanded, which of the
twain is most dangerous? I answer, that in weak and feeble persons,
especially in acute diseases, in phrensies, and strong delirations, there must
needs be more danger in contumacious watching, than in profound and sound
sleeping: For, besides that by long watching, Excessive sleep to be preferred
before excessive waking
the motions are often violent, overthrowing the natural strength, concoction
hindered (howsoever distribution may too much by this means be furthered) and
by consequence crudities engendered; whereas in sleep, be it natural, or
symptomaticall, there is some cessation of the senses and motion, and that
little remainder of strength whereon all hope consists, is not utterly
overthrown: besides, that in hot and dry diseases the body is thereby
moistened, and somewhat withal cooled. From this rule, notwithstanding, we
must always except soporiferous diseases of the brain: as lethargy, Carus,
etc. Again, it may, perhaps, here be demanded, whether it be good to sleep
with the mouth open or shut? Whether it be good to sleep with open mouth.

Answer.


I answer, that to sleep with open mouth, does far better breath out such
fuliginous vapors as arise from the concoction of the stomach, than with the
mouth shut: howbeit it dries somewhat the mouth and the throat, but after the
party is awakened, this is again easily amended. Sometimes again, there be
some that sleep with open eyes, like hares, and some with their eyelids close
shut, now then may be demanded which is the best? To s^eepe with open eyes, and
when t^^le^^^le,
I answer, that in perfect health some are accustomed to sleep thus with open
eyes without any hurt or danger whatsoever; and the same party falling sick
may so continue this custom without any hurt or detriment: but if this should
befall another sick person, in former times unaccustomed thereunto, it is then
more dangerous, especially if accompanied with other dangerous signs.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Dreams, and that of them there may be made good use in sickness and in
health. Of night-walkers, or such as walk in their sleep in the night-season,
and the cause thereof.

NOw in our sleep there appear unto us often imaginary visions and
apparitions, which we call insomnium or somnium from somnus sleep, and we
call in English dreams, and by the Greeks (...), Dreams what.
answerable to the Latin somnium. Dreaming then is a middle disposition
without any disease, betwixt sleeping and waking, in the which neither as
waking do the outward senses perform their whole perfect actions; neither yet
as wholly asleep are they altogether idle: howbeit this properly is an
affection or function belonging to the principal faculty, especially the
Fancy; Cause of dreams.
which although the body be asleep, yet is that together with the cogitation
and memory, often set a work; and because in an ordinary or mean sleep, the
Fancy is often free, the discerning faculty confused; therefore if several
objects or species, either remaining still in the senses, or which the body
being yet awake, has done or felt, it composeth together in many vain
visions, and as we commonly for hence call them, Fancies, the which being
asleep we seem to see; and because reason is then weak we give thereunto our
assent. But if it shall so come to pass (as we often find when we are as it
were in a light slumber) that reason is at some more liberty, and gives no
assent to such Fancies exposed to our imagination, then such are not so
properly called dreams. Of Dreams there have been some supernatural:
Supernatural or divine dreams.
and thus we read that in the old Testament, God did often reveal his Will by
dreams and visions. With this supernatural dream my purpose is not here to
meddle at all. Some again are natural, Natural dreams.
arguing and declaring unto us often the state and disposition of the body in
sickness and in health, and are by the Physician only to be considered, and
to this only end and purpose. Concerning dreams Hippo^^atis liber de (...).
Hippocrates among the rest of this works has written one little Tractate,
where he sets down diverse things concerning sickness and health signified
and pointed out unto us by dreams, and the means to remedy the same. And
there he shows* that if such things whereabout we were in the day time busied
be after the same manner represented unto us, it signifies that all is well
within, if otherwise, the coutrary is signified. D^eame^ (...).
The same author there sets down, that to see with a clear and sharp
sight such things as are done upon earth, and likewise to have the sense of
hearing answerable in dreaming portendeth health: as likewise to seem to
travail strongly and securely without any fear, to run apace, and to see
the earth plain and smooth, well manured, planted with pleasant and fruit^
full trees, and bearing good store of fruit: as also to see rivers and
fountains running their accustomed course, and the accustomed quantity of
water, this does also signify sound health; and that both meat and drink and
all excretions keep a due symmetry and proportion. If these things seem
otherwise, says the same Author, D^eame^ (...)
there is a deviation from that former soundness of body, and some inward
distemper thereby argued. If the sight then or hearing in thy dream^ seem to
be endamaged, there is some disease in the head portended A rough and uneven
earth argues some corruption in the flesh. Tr^^^ seeming barren argue
corruption of seed of generation. If leaves fall from the trees, it argues
hurt from humiditie and moisture: but if the same trees seem full of leaves
without any fruit, it presageth some hur^ from heat and drouth. Rivers running
with greater abundance of water than ordinary, (...)
signify greater abundance of blood in the body then is useful; the contrary
argues some deficiency in this n^ble humor Wels and springs signify wind
about the bladder. If the sea seem to be troubled, it portendeth some disease
in the belly. It is also according to the same Author good to see by dream
people apparelled in white and comely clothes. But again, to see any naked or
apparelled with base, black, sordid and sloven-like apparel, receiving any
thing or carrying any thing out of the house, portendeth no good. Many other
things are there set down by the same Author concerning this subject, with
brief remedies for the preventing and curing such infirmities. And there it
may plainly appear, One and the same ^reame may have ^ diverse g^^^i^ation in
sickne^^^ and hea^^^
that one and the same dream may have a diverse signification in sickness and
in health: as if the earth or house seem to move, in a healthful person it
signifies imbecility and weakness; but to a sick person presageth health
and a change and alteration from his former estate. In like manner if any
person seem to swim in a river or pond, in health it portendeth too great
abundance of moisture: but in a burning Fever it portendeth good, and that this
extreme siccity is overcome by the contrary humidity. It is moreover in that
place apparent, that many times dreams do accompany such humors as abound in
the body, and may often from thence be collected. Dreame^ many times
dem^nstrate the humour^ abounding ^n the body.
As much dreaming of rivers and ponds and often swimming therein, abundance of
moist phlegmatic humors in the body. To see black and burnt earth, argues a
great exsiccation of the body by choler adust. Strange and terrible shapes, and
affrighting monstrous forms, signifies that the body is filled with diverse
sorts of uncouth foods, which make a great perturbation in the body. Besides,
all such troublesome, fearful dreams often argue melancholy in the body.
Passing over rivers (says the same Author) armed men often appearing, and many
strange and monstrous apparitions do portend either some great disease or
madness. And thus we see it is apparent, Oppression of the stomach will
produce both unquiet sleep and troublesome dreams.
that by the dreams may often be discerned or presaged some present or future
infirmity. Besides, we find many times that even in our best health,
oppression of the stomach at night with too great a quantity of food will both
procure unquiet rest and troublesome dreams. And several constitutions of
body produce often dreams answerable thereunto: as the sanguine dreameth often
of all pleasant things, green meadows and gardens, etc. The choleric of
fire, Dreams often follow the constitution of the body.
and the like. Such as are much subject to wind, of much flying aloft and the
like: and so of the rest, as may from the premises easily be collected. And
now concerning dreams, so fair as they are observable in sickness and in
health, this shall suffice. Now to give some satisfaction to the curious
Reader, I will say something concerning a point depending upon the former: and
that is concerning such as during their natural sleep, yet perform such
actions as are commonly performed by such as are awake, to the no small
astonishment and amazement of the beholders, and are called therefore
Noctambuli, or night-walkers.

Caterum quando ex causaram somni medioeritate placidus obrepic somnus,
discernendi tamen facultas adhuc vaporum ^ulegine obfuscetur ^ effectrix tamen
visorum facultas libera nullis irretita vmculis si^^ constat: cum ex rebus quas
vigilans sensit, gessi, cogitavit and operata est, plurima somniorum spectra
esfingit, quae tanquam vera dormientes amplectantur, unde tandem solutis a
calore accidentario sensuum, spirituumque meatuum vinculu and motus compedibus,
vigilantium opera exercent, tecta in subtime conscendunt, per trabes and
lacunaria in adibus oberrant, lectos allorum adeunt, omnia intrepide audent,
nec quicquam fi^i timent: quoniam vis illa discernendi sensus communis adhuc
vaporum caligine consopita sacet, nec pericula nisi lamore experrecta agnoscit.
Casus enim eu abrupto, scribit Albertus, ijs qui excelsa conscendnat, tunc
maxim accidere solet, qaum pericula agnoverint, and formidare coeperint: eoque
virtutes raboris ad cor formidolosum confluunt: lacertos, nervos, musculosque
virtutis motivae organa destituunt. Dormienies igitur secur^ores so^t:
acclamationibus experrecti, saepe praecipites cadunt. Johan. Lang. Epist.
medicin. lib. 1. epist. 45 ex Christophoro Marcello 4. de anima cap. 11. and
Alberto magno lib. 2. and 3. de anima. Quae ab ijs (noctambulis) fieri
persuasum habeo ex sanguine turgido ^ospumanti, tum estuoso fervidoque spiritu,
quae in mentis sedem delata, animae vim atque facultatem, qua functiones suas
perfi^it, partesque instrumentarias ad actiones impellit, agitant, atque ad
huiusmodi motu^ effectusque concirant. Quo fit ut corpus spiritus animalis
impulsu, qui nervorum ac musculorum robur, h^e sentie^di movendique mu^us in
cerebro continet ac tuctur, in sublime feratur, eiusque v^etiem per som^um ad
tales actiones incitetur. Sunt autem istiusmodi constitutionis homines raro
laxoque corporis contextu, etc. Lovin. Lemnius de occultis naturae miraculis,
lib. 2. cap. 3.
Of these actions then thus performed our Writers assign this cause; When as by
the mediocrity of causes procuring sleep, we fall into sweet and comfortable
rest, the discerning faculty, notwithstanding, being over-clouded with thick,
misty vapors; the efficient cause of Fancies and dreams, without any let or
disturbance enjoying its full freedom and liberty; then of such things as the
party being awake either felt, thought, or by practice put in execution, this
fancying faculty composeth many sorts of visions or dreams, the which by the
sleeping party are taken for truths: and hence comes it often to pass, that
at length the bonds of the senses, passages of the spirits, and impediments of
motion being removed, they perform works proper to those that are awake; as
to climb up to the tops of houses, to walk upon narrow beams and bridges,
and many other such actions without any fear or danger, which if they were
awake they durst never do: and all this by reason this discerning faculty of
the common sense is yet at rest, not acknowledging nor discerning any danger,
unless by loud houping and crying the party be awaked out of sleep. If they be
suddenly awaked, then are they in danger of sudden precipitation, or falling
down head long, all the spirits and powers of the body then leaving the
extreme parts hands and feet, and flying to succor the feeble heart now
assaulted with no small fear. A late Writer averreth, that this comes to
pass by reason of hot and vaporous spirits, arising from a commotion and heat
of the blood, which being carried aloft into the seat of the mind, does incite
and stir up that faculty of the soul by which it performs its actions, and
by which it does impell the instrumentary parts to their actions, to produce
such motion and stupendous effects, as are often by such persons performed:
Hence also comes it to pass, that if these vaporous and flatuous fumes be
not strong and violent enough to produce the former effects, then the parties
do but stir, or start up in their sleep, uttering some loud cries, and
turbulent speeches, yet still containing themselves within the bed. The same
author adds, that such persons are most commonly of a thin and lean
constitution of body, and of a low stature: and such as have hot brain (as for
the most part choleric persons have) says Hippocrates, are most apt to cry
out in their sleep, and are much subject to motion and agitation therein:
especially, if in the day time their brains be much encumbred and busied with
many matters. Such especially be our busy bodies, who will needs have an oar
in every man's boat, and oftentimes more employed about other men's affairs,
than careful to look home to their own business. But of this now sufficient.

CHAP. XXVIJ. Quemadmodum Ape^l^s celeberimus o^im pictor, eum pulcherrimam
illam atque admirabilem Veneris imaginem depingeret clavum fixit, quo amoto
tota simul imago dissolveretur: in ejus vero clavi summa part ^uam depenxit
imaginem: ita Deus ille o^timus maximus cum elegantissimum hoc miidi opificium
fabricasses, tanquam coronidem and colophonem conjecit hominem, in quo suam
collocavit imaginem, ex cujus inspectione ipse er^fex agnosceretur, ut si vere
dicere sas sit humanus animus Deus quide^ parvo corpusculo conclusus videatur.
Cum itaque res plurimum i^ter se pugnantes atque contrarias homo complectatur,
recte illi scripsisse videntur, qui hominem vinculum esse, quo aeterna caducis
necterentur asseverarunt, etc. Claud. Deodatus Panth. Hygiast lib. 1. c. 1.

Of the Soul, and of the passions thereof in general.

THe noble painter Apelles, after he had drawn that curious picture of Venus,
fastened the whole frame with a peg, or pin, the which being pulled out, the
whole frame fell in pieces; and in the top of this peg, he drew his own
picture: even so it seems the Almighty God, after he had made the whole frame
of this universe, at length, as a conclusion and closing up of his whole work,
he made man the noblest of all the rest of his creatures (for whom all the rest
were made) and stamped on him his own glorious image, by the inspection
whereof the workman himself might be known. This noble creature which we may
justly call the microcosme, or little world, man, is composed of a double
substance, whereof the one is terrestrial, composed of the elements, whither
after a season it must return again, which we call the body; the which,
without the other more noble part, which we call the soul, is but a dead
carcass, as may after the separation of these two loving friends plainly
appear. Now, this soul is of a more sublime and celestial substance, neither
composed of any elementary substance, nor yet ever to be dissolved into the
same; not engendered, and therefore incorruptible and immortal. And as by the
body we take, as it were, roore in the earth; so by the soul again, we take
hold of Heaven, and glorify our Lord and maker: and this was the principal
end of our creation, being then at our first framing fitted for so high and
sublime employment, and all the faculties of our souls being then bent upon
our God, his honor and glory, wherein was then placed man's chief felicity,
and pleasure. But afterward, this so noble a creature by the subtle Serpents
persuasion, rebelled, and took up arms against his Lord and Master, and so
forfeited that great and glorious estate; by which means both the soul, that
sublime and celestial substance, and all the powers and faculties of the same
are now become sinful, prone to evil, and averse from any good. Now this same
soul, although in the estate of innocence, yet was not without certain powers
or affections; as love, joy, anger, fear: the which affections or powers the
soul now by sinning has now not lost, but are become altogether sinful and
evil, and called now in sinful man, animi pathemata seu perturbationes, the
passions or perturbations of the mind; the which exorbitant affections, as they
are displeasing to the Almighty God, so are they many times very hurtful to
health, and in sickness are often the causes of no small mischief to the
patient: for the which cause it shall not be amiss to say something of them,
being especially ranked among these six things not natural, having already
handled the five former, resting now this sixth and last. The Stoickes indeed
would have brought in a certain apathie, or blockish stupidity among men,
whereby they should be, as it were, insensible, and not affected with any thing
whatsoever, which we altogether disclaim. Now, as concerning the diversity
of opinions, and some controversy betwixt Physicians and Philosophers, or
betwixt Philosophers themselves, concerning the seat and place of residence of
these affections or passions, as not being so pertinent for our purpose we let
pass. As for their number, it is not likewise agreed upon among all. Some make
ten, ambition, avarice, pleasure, envy, curiosity, anger, fear, joy, grief
and hope. Some again but seven, excluding the last three: and some will have
but four; joy, grief, hope and fear, excluding the three former. Actus
concupiscibilis sex numerantur affectiones: ni^^irum, amor, odium, desiderium,
fuga, delectatio, and tristitia. Irascibilis quinque elicit actus: and sunt
spes, desperatio, audacia, rimor, ira. Mercatus Tom. 1. libr. 1. part 5. class
5. quest. 154. ex Thom Aquin.
Some again reduce all to two heads, concupiscible and irascible, under which
they comprehend all the rest. Under the concupiscible therefore we comprehend,
love, hatred, desire, a flight, or fleeing from evil, delectation and
sadness, six in number. Under the irascible, these five following: hope,
desperation, boldness, fear and anger. The actions of both these powers are
commonly therefore, called passions or perturbations, by reason that thereby
there is with them some affection or material passion or perturbation caused
in the body: such as is the heat, or ebullition of the blood in anger, etc. All
these again, and whatsoever does participate of the nature of such passions or
perturbations, do consist in the prosecution or avoiding of some thing, by
reason of the opinion we conceive of the show of some good or evil; and that
either present, imminent, or instant and to come. And first of the imagination
of some present good newly represented to us, arises pleasure or delight: the
which again consists either in our own prosperity, or other men's adversity.
As concerning our own prosperity, Gaudium. Lae^itia. In^ultatio.
if it be constant and moderate, we call it qaudium, or joy; if profuse and
exorbitant, we call it laetitia, or joy in a high measure; and if it extol it
self too much, it is called bragging or boasting. If again this pleasure and
delectation arise from other men's adversity, Malevolentia, sea ^^litiae
it is called malevolentia, and malitia, or ill will and malice. Again, from
the opinion of evil present arises an aversation and grief of mind, which
is various and diverse. In the first place, oppressing grief is called angor,
or anguish: Anger. Aerumum. Afflictio.
tormenting grief with labor and pain, is called aerumna, or misery: with
vexation of the body, it is called afflictio, affliction: that which comes
with trouble and profound cogitations, we call sollicitudo, Sollicitudo.
or anxious care; that which comes without any expectation of better hopes,
desperatio, or desperation: Desperatio.
that which is accompanied with weeping, lamentation, howling and yelling,
maeror, Maeror.
being a higher degree of sorrow; if for the death of any friend, luctus,
Luctus.
sorrowing or lamenting: that which proceeds of another misery, which we
desire to help, is called misericodia, pity or compassion; Misericordia.
that which proceeds from others prosperity, if of good things, it is called
livor, Livor.
envy or spite: if of evil things, it is comprised under the name of revenge,
called vindicta, being a mixed affection of anger and grief. Vindicta,
Again, thirdly, from the opinion of a future good, arises hope, Spes.
an expectation and a confidence, and from hence an earnest desire, called
cupiditas, which is yet various; Cupidita^, Cupidia. Libido. Ambitio. Avariti^,
one consists in the lusting after dainty fair, called cupidiae; another in
lust and lechery, called libido, or lust; some in the earnest desire of honor
and glory, called ambitio, ambition; some again, in excessive desire of
riches, called avaritia, or covetousness; some in revenge: the which, if it
suddenly vanish away, we call excandescentia; if it grow inveterate, we call
it odium, or hatred: Excandiscentia, edi^^.
if there be an expectation of revenge, it is called inimicitia, enmity,
Immicitia.
or hostility, etc. On the contrary, from the opinion of any future evil,
arises fear, (contrary to hope and confidence) an expectation of some future
evil, the which, when it is instant, or near at hand, we call it timor;
Timer. Formid^; Terror, Pivor^ Consternatio, Exanimatio, Pigritia, Verecund^^.
if of longer continuance, formido: if it move the body very much, terror; if
it strike a terror in the mind, pavor; if it proceed yet further,
consternatio and exanimatio, or strange amazement and astonishment; if it arise
from fear of labor, pigritia, or laziness, etc. But verecundia,
bashfulnesse, or shamefastness, is a mixed affection of hope and fear. And
these be the chief affections, passions and perturbations of the mind, all
which, for the multiplicity, by reason of the copiousnesse of the Latin, and
penury of the English tongue, cannot all be accommodated with proper English
names. But because all these do not equally affect the body and mind of man,
neither yet produce alike dangerous and sudden alterations in sickness and in
health, therefore omitting the greatest number, we will but single out some of
the principal, and on the which most of the rest do depend. The chief then
of these, and on which I purpose principally to insist, are these four
following: Love, Anger, The chief passions of the mind, and on which all the
rest depend, four.
Joy and Sorrow or Grief: and these are commonly called, and accounted the
exercises of the soul, the which do not a little affect the body both in
sickness and in health. And so forcible and powerful are these passions of
the mind, that by means thereof some have sometimes lost their lives, some
their wits and understandings; and some have by some of them suddenly recovered
out of some sickness. Since then they do so much affect both body and mind,
they are not slightly to be past over. And therefore my purpose is to insist
upon them somewhat the longer, and first I will begin with that noble affection
of Love.

CHAP. XXVIIJ.
Of lustful Love, and what hurt is thereby procured to mankind. Whether any
may die of love; something also concerning jealousy.

AMongst all these passions of the mind* this Love is not the least, nor of
smallest efficacy and force, Great harms droceed by lustful love to the whole
man.
as being often not only the occasion and cause of many dangerous diseases unto
the body, but also depriving the soul of its chiefest happiness, and so
metamorphosing the whole man into an inform monster, void of all reason,
whereby he runs headlong upon his own ruin. My purpose is not in this
place to speak of the love of ambition, honor, riches, dainty fare and the
like, but of that foul lustful love, the author of so much hurt, of so much
mischief to the body of man. Upon this therefore, as witnesses Suidas, Cadmus
Milesius de amore.

Definiton of love.


Cadmus Milesius published 14 books concerning the same subject. De amore, and
aliis affection, unde Gal. lib. 3.4. and 5. de placitis Hippocrat. and Platon.
Now, this mad affection of love is a passion of the concupiscible part of the
soul, residing in the liver and the heart, conceived of the desire and
representation of the thing beloved, and conveyed by the eyes unto the mind:
whose concupiscence, which hardly can be satisfied, both by imagination, and
the common spirits of the liver and the heart is set on sire. And therefore
some deduce (...), from the sight. And this is the opinion of In Tunao.
Plato himself, as may in his works be seen; as also that it has its seat
in the liver. De opificio Dei lib. 4.
And Lactantius also assigns the same seat to lustful concupiscence. And to
this likewise may be referred that which Odyss. 10.
Homer writes concerning Titius, who fell in love with Latona, and for this
cause had assigned to him two ravenous vultures to eat up his ever new renewing
liver. But that which yet surpasses all other authorities, the Proverb 17.32.
Wise man in the Proverbs alluding to this, makes mention of a dart striking
through the liver of a libidinous young man, punishing that part where was the
root of his sin. The like butchery does this cruel tyrant love exercise upon
many, who can scarce ever be satiat, although many times enjoying that they
have long desired; neither can yet the rule of reason so overruled this brutish
and sensual apetite, but that it still burns the very inward marrow of the
bones, as the Ovid de amore.
Poet well expresses it: Fecit amor maciem and longa internodia crurum,
Love makes the body pale and lean,
it marres the members quite and clean.


Now, the infirmities which follow this disorderly passion, are not a few: as
namely decay of strength, fainting and swounding, hollow eyes, a body pale and
destitute of blood, languishing, crudities, continual watchings, palpitation
of the heart, trembling of the joints; sometimes madness, deep melancholy,
consumptions, and the like. These and many more like effects are the attendants
of this lustful and disorderly passion. This passion the cause of great
mischief.
How dangerous a thing then it is to give way to this so disorderly affection,
if there were nothing else but what has been said already, may easily
appear. How many by this means have anticipated the ordinary period appointed
for man to live? And whereas it is natural for all creatures to seek their
own preservation; yet have many so far infringed this sacred law of nature,
that they have put violent hands into themselves, so becoming their own
executioners: and that sometimes by way of desperation, being afraid to be
deprived of that booty they so eagerly pursued after. And of this, that famous
Physician Observation, mi^it. lib. 1. p. 51.
Plater makes mention of a scholar and student in physic, who being far
in love with a Doctor of the same professions daughter, and for some disparity,
despairing of ever obteining that he aimed at, with sublimat poisoned
himself, having first set down in a paper the cause thereof. But with such
examples, and many tragical stories many books are stuffed full; and many of
our young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, I doubt, are better versed in such
legends, than in the sacred history of the Bible. And many have bin by this
disorderly passion so far transported, that at the command of a base strumpet
(a prodigious thing ever to enter into the thought of a reasonable man) they
have cast away that life which the Lord of life had allotted them to do him
service. To omit ancient histories, Deodatus panth. by giast. lib. 2. cap. 21.
a late Writer makes mention of one Galeacius, Duke of Mantua, living then at
Padua, A Mistress of his wished him, if he loved her, to throw himself into
the river, Brenta; the which, being then on horseback, setting spurs to his
horse, he presently accomplished. I wish by the talion law she had her self
been served after the same manner. But it may, perhaps, then be demanded, what
is the remedy to prevent so dangerous a passion? The heathens themselves set
down diverse good directions in this case, which would to God Christians would
imitate; Idleness a great furtherer of unlawful lust.
whereof one principal is to avoid idleness the mother of all mischief. That
Ovid de ^ medi^ amoris.
amorous Poet sets down this idleness as a principal incentive to this
unlawful lust.

Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
Men ask the cause why Ae^isthus adultery did commit?
The reason's plain, he sloth ^ill was, sloth loved, and lived in it.
The same Poet wills us to shun the fight of the object beloved, and
whatsoever may nourish or cherish the secret flame; of the which we are also
warned by Lucret in fine lib. 4.
another, although himself and Epicure.

Sed fugitare decet siumulachra, and pabula amoris,
absterrere sibi, and alio convertere mentem.
All wanton pictures feeding love, avoid, shun and decline,
And turn thou still another way, thine eye, thine heart and mind.
I have a little before in another chapter touched upon a principal remedy,
concerning the care parents ought to have in the education of their children;
and therefore, as likewise being a theme proper for the Divine, I will not here
meddle any more with it, nor repeat any thing that has been said already. But
it will, perhaps, be demanded what is then the remedy for such as are already
entangled with this love passion? I answer, that here I have not undertaken to
set down a particular cure of this, or any other particular infirmity, but
only to set down some general directions to remedy this passion. Things to be
considered in matching.
There must therefore a due consideration be had of the individual party,
considering the sex, age, temperature, and constitution of body, and the
object whereunto this furious passion is fixed. If there may be a yielding to
the parties desire without the breach of the laws of God and man, although,
perhaps, some disparity betwixt the parties, in regard of wealth, birth, or
both; yet, if there be danger in the denial, my opinion is, rather to yield to
an inconvenience, than to a mischief, especially where the disparity is not so
great. But when as this cannot be atteined unto without breach of Gods
commandment, Better sometimes to yield to an inconvenience than to a mischief.
we must never do evil that good may come of it, nor commit one sin to
prevent another; but use all other lawful means, and commit the success to
him that can bring light out of darkness, and is able to bring his own
purpose to pass without any man's sin. Let them use such means as we have
already set down in that place already mentioned. It is true, we Gal. lib. 1.
prognos^. History.
read of Erasistratus the Physician, that he found Antiochus, son to King
Seleucus, to be now almost consumed and pined away with the love, or rather
lust, of Stratonice his mother in law, insomuch, that to his seeming, there was
now no other way but the inioying of his lust to save his life: this too
indulgent parent gave way to his unlawful lust. But we are to remember, this
was but a heathen, and such actions not to be drawn into imitation. But among
us in this age, there is many times a great oversight in parents, who stand
often so punctually upon some points: as of wealth especially, and some others;
that virtue and true worth, the true fear of God especially, is set in the
last place, and scarce, indeed, regarded in any place. Hence comes if often
to pass, that many of our young prodigalls so gallop out of their goodly
estates, and are thrown off their horse before ever they were well settled in
the saddle; and their wealth many times quite vanished away, before they
atteine to a dragme of wit. I speak not here against some suitable proportion
betwixt parties to be matched in marriage, and some competent means according
to their places and callings; but my meaning is, that many times true worth and
virtue is so, by worthless people, undervalued, that this proverbiall speech
is often very truly verified, many times for a little land they take a fool
by the hand. But because it is an easy matter for an ordinary understanding to
make a large comment upon this Text, I here leave it, wishing people to be
wiser, and not so much wrong their children, as is now adays the custom,
which oftentimes brings the gray-haires of the parents to the grave with
sorrow, and a too late repentance, had I known so much, etc. The ancient
heathens against this used man's blood against this intoxication, and histories
make mention of Julius Capitolinus, in vita Antonin^ Philosophi.

History.


Faustina, daughter to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, and wife to Antoninus the
Philosopher, who fell so far in love with a sword-player, that this Emperor
asked counsel of all his wisards what was the readiest and speediest way to
cure this strong and violent affection: and they (being instructed by their
Master Satan, a murderer from the beginning) advised him to put to death this
sword-player, and that afterward Faustina should drink up a good draught of
his warm blood, and then get her to bed to her husband; which accordingly was
performed: of the which copulation was engendered that cruel Emperor Commodus,
who with his frequent sword-plaies, and slaughter of his subjects, had almost
quite over thrown the whole Roman common wealth. And howbeit this woman was
thus freed, yet is this no warrant for the use of such a remedy, although some
of the Plin. lib. 28. Cornel, Cells lib. 3. cap. 23.
ancients have set down this as a remedy both against this and the Epilepsie.
The Paracelsists promise wonders of man's blood; as Paracelsus himself
promises by a secret made of man's blood, to cure all Epileptick diseases. And
one Ioh. Ernestus Burgravius makes a lamp of man's blood, called brolychnium,
or lampas vitae and mortis. Of this lamp of life and death he promises
wonders: to wit, that it shall burn as long as the party of whose blood it was
made continues, and go out at the same instant that the party dies; and
withal, that as this lamp burns clear and quietly without any sparkling,
the party shall live with freedom from any infirmity, either of body or mind;
but if otherwise, it sparkle, or the light be dim and obscure, and the flame
be sometimes lighter than at other times, then it is a token of anxiety,
heaviness, and the like. Credat Iudaeus apella. Let them believe it who list.
It is not unknown how Satan has from the beginning thirsted after man's blood:
hence have we so many sacrifices of mankind: as in ancient stories recorded,
so even unto these our times so many still continue; as our Spanish narrations
make mention of the Western parts of the world. And hence was if also, that
he suggested to his ministers so many remedies composed not only of the
blood, Affinit isti artificio and persuasioni fortitudinis (de aqua martia and
balsamo magnanimitatis sermo ei prius fuerat) est lampas vitae, quam concinnant
no^nulli tanquam fatale quoddam lumen, in quo hominic fortuna, affectus, morbi,
and tandem mors possint observari. Arbitror excogitandi ansam praebuisse magiam
illam, seu observationem popularem, qua arbor, vel herba depacto aut sata in
nomine cuiusdam, tamdiu durat, and late crescit, quamdiu ipse been habet and
floret. Cum aegrotat, arbor quoque aliqua indicia morbi habet; cum instat hora
mortis, marcescit. Ita scribit C. Suetonius in Galba: Cum in Liviae gremium
Aquila gallinam albam ramum lauri'r ostro tenentem demisisset, nutriri alitem
pangique ramulum placuit (Plin. lib. 13. cap. ult.) inde lauretum factum tale
ut triumphaturi Caesares inde laureas decerperent, fuitque mos triumphantibus
alias confestim eodum loco pangere; et observatum est sub cuinsque obirum
arborem ab ipso instituta^ elanguisse* Ergo novissimo Neronis anno and sylva
omnis exaruit radicitus, etc. Tanti est in nomine elicujus quicquam fieri
admurmuratis proculdubio aliquibus verbis, and adjurationibus, quibus postea
magorun sententia est corroborata, aliquam vim habere verba, intentiones,
imaginationes, and similia, qua persuasione fabricant signa cerea, quorum
passiones flant, in his quibus fint dicata, etc. Et paulo post, Videntur baec
ex Sympathia and magnetismorum familiaritate tracta esse, ut and unguentum
sympathetitum Paracelsi, de quo item narant hominem affici eo modo quo telum,
itae ut cum lubet possi^ ei dolorem excitare. Vulgaris persuasionis est, magos
multa posse, si sanguinem nancisci queant. Quocirca qui fibi metuunt, in
profluentem jubent sanguinem ex vena effundere, aut cloacam. Quid chymici ex
sanguine eliciant, quoque modomumiam and lapidem Catbunculi instar fulgentem ad
omnium morborum depulsionem ex eo faciant, etc. Andreas Libavius defens.
syntagen. arcan. cthym. contra Hening. Schernem. Act 1. cap. 3.
but of diverse other parts of the body of man, and as our Magicians still teach
their too too credulous disciples, Tertul. in Apolog cap 14.
as an ancient Father well observes.

Whether one may die ^f love or no*
But now it may be asked whether one may die of love, inseeming not to offer
that violence to nature as to extinguish this lamp of life ^ I answer, that
this passion, as we have heard, may emaciat, dry up and exhaust all the
radical moisture of the body. And so although it do not work such a sudden
impression upon the body, whereby it is in an instant overthrown: yet does it
by degrees so extenuate and debilitate the whole body, that it is thereby often
cast into an irrecoverable consumption. And with histories in this kind, it
were easy to make up a great volume. Observat. medic. lib. ^ page ^^7.
Schenchius makes mention of a maid, who being by her parents crossed of a
match intended betwixt her and a young man, pined away and died; many, I make
no question, can instance of many in their own experience, as it were easy
for my self to do also, but that I hasten to other matter. And besides,
because I think few of judgment will make any doubt thereof, I will therefore
leave it.

(...)
To this place also we may refer jealousy, called In (...) lauda (...) nullum
pram^^m* aut mu^as (...) accipiat: sea illud non perinde probatur, si mo^c^um
interfe^^rit. Vin^^sta enim (...), and magistratu^a (...), figna^o permit (...)
excipiat, (...) ^iviles in pler^^ rebus* [History] (...) hac ma^ito permit^ere:
Respondee, illud parum commode indulgeri. Nam difficile est homini, praesertim
iraecundo, vel potius furen^^, accep^a huiusmodi (...), modum in vindicta
tenere, deinde praecipiti hac and confusarei interfectione, via and aditus
resipi^centiae praecluditur. Thom. Cartwright in Proverb. cap. 6 verse. 34.

1 Plat. Observe. medic. lib 1. page 53, etc.


zelotypia, being nothing else but the excess of love, with a continual fear
of being deprived of that they love, or at least of having any corrivall, which
often makes a man or woman to lose the use of reason, insomuch that the mind
is never at rest. And this fear is merely imaginary, I mean, without any just
cause, and sometimes there is too just cause ministered. It behooveth therefore
both man and woman, to be careful in their choice, and afterward to give no
just occasion to bring their reputation in question. Some instances of
jealousies, both justly and unjustly conceived, a r famous late Physician
sets down. A certain Merchant of a chief town in Switzerland, a man of
good account and esteem in that place, being divorced from his former wife,
married another being a maid, who bare him diverse children. After certain
years, perceiving his man too familiar with his Mistress, conceived a strong
jealousy of his wife, which caused him the more narrowly to observe her
carriage. Upon a time he fained himself to go a journey into the country
about some earnest business, and yet in the evening conveied himself secretly
into a chamber next adioining to his own bedchamber, where he might easily
observe what passed, and within a short space, es^ies his man come boldly to
his Mistress, where he killed them both in the very act of adultery: and then,
as is the custom of that country, laid certain pieces of money upon their dead
corpses, which was a sign, that they were taken in this filthy act, and might
therefore lawfully be killed; the matter being afterward examined, he was
acquitted of the fact. The same Author makes mention of a Doctor of the
civil law in the South part of France, who was very jealous of his wife (and
not without just cause) and suspecting her familiarity with a Scrivener, so
narrowly observed her actions, that one day he comes rushing into the room
where she and this Scrivener were together (being in his own house) masqued
and accompanied with many scholars, students in law; where he first binds him
hand and foot, then cut off his nose, his yard; and afterward cut his
hamstrings, and so let him go: the same maimed Scrivener (says mine Author) I
saw afterward at Montpelier, going upon crutches, and in a miserable and
wretched case drawing his lame legs after him. A just recompense for
adulterers; and it were to be wished we might see some such exemplary
punishment inflicted upon such as thus neigh after their neighbors wives:
since especially Moses law, that the adulterer should die the death (which in
all the Germane countries is in force is not here with us in force. (...)
The ^ same Auth^^ (...) yet mention of another ev^n me jealous of his wife,
(...)
and yet with out any cause: This was a scholar newly returned out of France,
who married Do^^^^ of physickes daughter, with whom a long time before h^e had
been (...) love; (...) Doctor had a patient lying at his house, a Canon: and
because the ^^the^, (...) widdower, often sent for his daughter to help him
out in some domestical all (...) therefore this scholar conceived a great
jealousy against this Canon, as though (...) were more familiar with his wife
than was fitting (howbeit, (...) kept her fathers house, it was not to be
marvelled that he often sent for h^^) insomuch, that he confessed to the
Author, that he sometimes purposed to have killed this supposed corrivall
Canon, when he went at night to fetch home his wife, but after a while, giving
way to reason, and fully persuaded of his wives honesty, and so acknowledging
his own fault, became more wife afterward. But before I close up this
discourse of jealousy, I cannot pass by a story of an (...)
old woman. This woman, although very ancient, yet married a lusty youngman;
and afterward when she bethought her self of her own old age and his youth,
persuading her self, he would outlive her, and marry again another younger
than her self, it did so trouble her, (...) quam (...) esse de (...) ingeu^
(...) siqua ^^num malum dicat, dulce am^^um, sa erum profanum, and contr^^
(...) and illud etiam corruptum and depra^atum e^t si quis in (...) non
assignat^^^^ aut (...) legim^es, 1^. 13, 14 (...) ^ominibus illius saeculi in
quo (...) Solomon; (...) nium enim (...) ^^urem enim omnes (...), and com iti^
(...) sunt, si ^g^i^id^m (Anglicae Gallowes-^lapper, Newgate-bird, etc.)
apellantes: una mensa cum illo vivere renitunt, uno peculo bibere, usque adeo
ut ve^^sea ejus fere abhorreant; denique carceri and morti tradunt. Contra vero
in adulterio nihil hujusmodi, non modo non exprobrant, sed nec abstinent ab
ejus con^ortio. Quis unquam de furto suo se jactabit. Atqui sepe inventi sunt
qui de suis adulteries, cum pulchra or e^ertim aut nabili faemina gloriantur.
^anto autem magis, haec judicij perversitas apud nos locum habet, quanto scelas
adult^ (...) ^mni immunius est; cum tamen furtum seuerissime vindicetur.
Interim tamen Deus sententiam suam non mutabit, suo minu^ adulteros deteriores
iudicet, and suppliciis exquisitioribus puniat, utcunque homines statuant.
Thom. Cartwright comment in verse 27, 28.29, 30* 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. cap. 6.
Proverb. Salom. ubi etiam de hac re plara in medium efferu^tur,
that with much anger and in di^^nation she^ would m^^e her grief known to
her neighbors and gossips, and thus to her dying day persisted. It is good
wisdom therefore to be wary, and take warning, that neither man nor woman
give any just cause of suspicion. How much more then ought both parties to be
circumspect in absteining from the act of uncleanesse it self. And by that
which has been said already, we see that which was spoken by the wise
Solomon, the penman of the holy Ghost, confirmed: Jealousy is the rage of a
man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard
any ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou give many gifts. And a
worthy Divine of this kingdom, expounding the later part of this chapter, by
the Text it self makes it plainly appear, how far adultery does exceed
theft; and how erroneous is the judgment of many men, who will exclaim with
open mouth against a thief, and will scorn to come in his company; and yet
many times brag of this erroneous and detestable crime; which the same spirit
of truth in the same place affirms, to destroy the soul. And besides that,
this reproach shall never be wiped away. But this sin is so frequently in the
pulpits spoken against, and better befitteth the pen of a Divine than of a
Physician, and therefore, Manum de tabula.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of amorous or loue-potions, called Philtra. Whether love may be procured by
fascination?

IT has been an inveterate opinion, and is yet fast rooted in the minds of
many, that there are certain medicines of that natural force and operation,
that being taken within the body, they will inflame that party that takes
them with this passion of love. Now whether this be so or no? and if it be,
whether it can force the affection to any one individual person more than
another, is worth the inquiring. As for the first, it would seem there were
some such medicines, Mention made of love potions among ancient authors.
there being so frequent mention made among our Authors of these love
medicines. The poets both Greek and Latin often mention them, and some also
set down the matter, whereof they are made, Whether any simple be endued with a
property to procure love.
which is without all controversy: but whether they be endued with any such
efficacy, let us now inquire. We have already declared that all simples work
either by their ordinary qualities of three several sorts, as we have said
already: or else by an occult and hidden quality: as we see the loadstone
draws the iron; and diverse purging medicines make choice of certain select
and peculiar humors: as rhubarb purges choler, etc. Now that there proceeds
no such virtue from any of these ordinary qualities, it is so manifest that
none did ever yet affirm it. It rests then that it must needs proceed from
an occult quality. It must needs then follow, that there are some simples that
will procure love: and since love is an affection of the soul, why may there
not be other simples to work upon other affections of the soul: as hearted,
anger, etc? and if so, then these medicines which are corporeal, may work
upon the affections of the soul, which is spiritual, which is absurd. But
will some reply, it cannot be denied, that some medicines there are which
procure love. I answer, that some do provoke lust, Some simples may procure
lust, but none force to love.
I do not deny; but to procure love is not yet proved* and such produce this
effect by an ordinary and to us known quality as some by increasing the
blood, and consequently the seed of generation: some by means of their
flatuous quality: and some again by their acrimony, Some of these
love-medicines are venomous.
sharp and venomous quality, do often provoke an irritation, and are of such
a corroding and fretting nature, that they often make piss blood, and cause
irrecoverable ulcers in the kidneys and obscene parts. And sometimes these
intoxicating medicines fly up into the head, and cause madness, of the which
fearful effects frequent mention is made in diverse Authors. And it is
memorable which is written of Lucretius the Poet, who howbeit he set down
diverse directions against love, yet could he not escape death by this own
violent hands, incited thereunto by means of a love potion ex^^o^ted to him by
his own wife, Lucilla: of the which (...)
another Poet has these words: His qui philtra hibit, nimioque insanus amore
Mox ferro occubuit, sic mente^^ a^^^serat omnem.
In love who drunk his charmed drink, raging on sword did fall
And being mad, did lose his wit, his sense, his life and all.


And it is just with God often to punish men by that means wherein they
promised themselves some extraordinary great contentment. But those same
simples which are supposed of this efficacy and power (howsoever some of the
ancients have by tradition received them from others) yet neither our ancient,
nor modern Physicians do attribute any such efficacy unto them. And besides,
if there were any such force or efficacy in them to be found, then were this
toward all equally, These ^ast are not (...) such (...)
and not toward one individual particular person. If any shall yet reply, that
this has been often observed, that after the use of such medicines, such an
effect has followed; I answer, this is but an evil consequence, and that
Philosophers call* lenchus a non causa pro causa* when that is assigned for a
true cause which is none at all. And this we see often verified in magical
spells, and characters, which in themselves have no such efficacy and power to
produce such strange stupendous effects, where it may plainly appear that
Satan is the chief actor in the action. During my abode in France, some 25
years ago, I was familiarly acquainted with a gentleman of Poitou, who had a
Tennant dwelling in the same town, History.
ever which he was sole Lord, whose wife told me, that some few years before
that time, being married, the very same day as they went out at the Church
door, the one ran away from the other, and could not endure either to come
near, or endure the sight one of another: and when the one was brought at
unawares into the presence of the other, they cried out, that they were in that
case as though they were all pricked with pins and needles, and hated as much
one another, a^ did ever two of the mortallest enemies that lived on earth.
Their Land-lady, a stout and courageous; Gentlewoman commiserating this
distressed couple, and suspecting a knave accustomed to play such prankes, and
living in the same town, sent for him to her own house, and taking him aside
into a private room, drew her knife, and vowed she would presently cut his
throat with her own hands, if he redressed not the wrong he had done her
tennants; who, after a saint denial at first, yet promised he would presently
accomplish her desire, which as soon was performed* for this villain went but
a little way into an adioining closset, where with his knife he dug out of
the ground a point, with certain knots on it, with a cross stick, and I
remember not if any thing else; after the untying of which knots, accompanied
with some secret whispered words, this couple came presently together, without
any feeling of these former painful accidents, and ever after that loved one
another in such a manner as became such as were joined in that honorable
estate. And this I had from the woman's own mouth who was so served; as
likewise from the relation of the Gentlewoman her self, of whom I learned all
these particular passages. Besides, this same Gentlewoman told me that another
time all her pigeons came flying out of the Dove-coat, History
and would not by any means any of them go in: the which this same
Gentlewoman perceiving, used this same fellow after the former fashion, and he
presently went up within the Dove-coat, and took out of a hole a cross
stick, with a little salt, and I know not what else, and before the fellow
came down three or four rounds of the ladder, the pigeons were all got in,
and continued their former custom. Besides, I was credibly informed, by many
of good worth, that this practice toward new married couples was there so
common, that many for this cause married in the night time: and yet many times
the Priest himself that married them was the worker of this villainy, who,
even as he married them would use this charming or inchaunting, call it which
you will. And I was informed of three neigbouring Priests, in the three next
adjacent towns to this Gentleman's dwelling, who ordinarily played such
prankes. And while this lasted, there was neither love betwixt those parties,
nor the man able carnally to know his wife. And these relations I had from
Papists themselves. As for the Protestants, I speak it unfainedly before God,
I never remember that I heard it practiced among any of them, either in that
Kingdom, or any other place of Christendom where I have traveled: far
less did I ever hear any of their Preachers to be tainted with any such
infamous courses. It is then apparent that this was no virtue or power in these
things whereof use was made; but was the immediate operation of Satan, who, by
Gods permission, and for causes best known to himself, sometimes suffered
Satan to afflict the bodies of men after strange manners; the which by the
history of Job, is apparent. And as for these amorous potions, we find they
prove rather poisons, than produce any amorous effect; as by that we have
already said of the Poet Lucrece may appear. And ^ean Wier de l'un post
deidiate, lib. 2. cap. 62.
a late Writer allegeth out of diverse Authors the truth of this tenent.
Cornelius Nepos (says he) and Plutarch have written, that Lucius Lucullus
Emperor, having drunk an amorous potion, given him by his wife Calisthene,
became fist furious and mad, and afterward died. The like is related of
Caligula the Emperor, who having received of his wife Caesonia a like medicine,
became mad therewith; and this was supposed to be made of that so much talked
of Hippomanes. Mais Aristote au liver huiectisme de la nature des animaux,
chapitre 24. escrit que tout ^e que lon croid de l'Hippomanes n'est que fable
de vicilles et invention de ce ux qui sont profession d'enchanterie. Il escrit
aussi ausecond liver des grandei morales, qu'vne femme bailla un brunage
amoureuxa un bomme, lequel en mourut subitement. Aussi est il escrit par
Hippolire Marsil, que la mort est souventes fois advancee par ces boissons, in
d. l. eiusdem adiectio. D. de fica. La on il est parle au text du venin
amoureux: comme il est aussi parle du brunage amoureux en la loy, Si quic aliud
qui abortiuis. D. de poenis. Et encore qu'il semble que Constantine premier des
Empereurs Chrestiens ait pense que C^amour s'acquerois par art magique en la
^oy qu'il sect ^. de molef. L. eorum: etc. Idem ibid.
And yet, even in the opinion of Aristotle, this Hippomanes, and that they
write of it, is nothing but a mere fable of old women, and the invention of
such as make a profession of Sorcerie. But even many of the same heathen Poets,
who plead for all that may procure love, do often disclaim these amorous
medicines, as may at length in their writings appear. And many times a love
potion is pretended to color a great deal of knavery: and many times a
pretense of the affections to be forced by some such means, is made a stalking
horse to hide and cover our own foul lust. Idem. ibid.
Mine Author rehearses to this purpose a history: We have known, says
Henry Jnstitoris, and James Sernger, Doctors in divinity, an old woman, who,
with her love-drinkes, not only bewitched and inchaunted three Abbots one after
another, but likewise (as the common report goes, yet at this same time
amongst the friars of that convent) that she made them all three to die, and
set the fourth besides himself. And this strumpet is not ashamed to confess
in public, that she has not only done, but continues still to do the same
villainy, and that these Abbots are not able to withdraw themselves from her
love, and that by reason they had eaten as much of her dung as her arm was
big. And this woman yet lives (say they) by reason none has as yet given us
any charge to bring her before any Judge that she might be punished. But
(says mine Author) I am of opinion, that this dung she says she has made
them eat, was nothing else but their filthy lust and pleasure, in the which, as
in a stinking filthy mire, these Monks being now as it were drowned, and
having so often now tasted of this carnal and filthy lust with this old
strumpet, they were now at length, as it were, so poisoned, and bewitched
therewith, that they were never after able to leave this beastly sin, and
return again to their right wits. Idem ibidem ex Plutarch.
The same Author brings another history out of Plutarch, of a young maid,
beloved of Philip, father to Alexander the great: This Philip, King of
Macedonie, fell in love with a young maid of mean condition and degree; this
maid, by reason of the great disproportion betwixt these regal riches and her
poor pedigree, without any great difficulty yielded to this great King that
which he demanded. This being brought to Olympias the Queen, it is no marvel
if she took it ill, the which did yet the more trouble her, in that it was
reported, that by means of amorous potions she had attracted the Kings
affections; much therefore moved at this matter, she sends to the lodging
where she lived, commanding to bring her to her, with a steadfast purpose and
resolution to shut her up in some dungeon or else to send her away into some
remote country. Being brought into her presence, and perceiving her beauty and
comely countenance, the excellency of her understanding, etc. she said with a
loud voice, I give now no more ear to false and slanderous reports; for thou
have within thy self power enough to bewitch any. And by this means was her
anger appeased toward this young woman, and her own husband also. I will
instance in no more histories, but now proceed. The absurdity then of this
opinion may yet further appear in this, that such as maintein and practice
such things, Lang. epist. m^dicin lib. 1. epist. 33.
affirm, that the same part of one and the same creature produces diverse
effects, according to the right and left situation in the body: insomuch that
the bone in the right leg shall cause love, and that of the left hatred. These
amorous medicines therefore are in case to be used, as being altogether
dangerous, and besides, unlawful, and by the learned ranked with that sort of
witchcraft, called Sunt and hui^us Goe^ia plures adhuc species, nempe
Epatosco^ia, Hydromantia, Geomantia, Haruspicina, and reliqua id genus
divinationum artificia, etc. Idem ibid.
Goetia, and reckoned for the third sort thereof, there being of this same yet
diverse other sorts, on which we will not now insist; but leave them to such as
delight in such trash, which is all forbidden in the second commandment. And
therefore I think I have proved this point sufficiently, that these
love-potions, or philtra, are not to be used, and that they produce no such
effects as are unto them prescribed, neither yet can they of themselves force
the affection. As concerning medicines which provoke lust, I hold it altogether
unfit for the unmarried to use them: and for such married people only, who, for
the better furtherance of procreation of children, do desire and crave the aid
of the honest and learned Physician, to excite and stir up the force and vigor
of nature now languishing. As for others, yea, even in wedlock it self,
merely for wantonness to increase their carnal lust, I advise all those of
mine own profession, that they yield no satisfaction to these their disorderly
carnal lusts: and that as they will not be accessory to their sin, and as
they will answer it at that great and dreadful day, when that great
Housekeeper shall call for a red Rationem villicationis tuae. The like I say
of our complexion-mongers, who, as our Tailors devise new fashions, so these
are ready to devise new faces, to such of our discontented female sex; who,
not contented with that feature and comeliness of face, which their Lord and
Maker thought fitting, will yet make use of a painter. And I think it much
derogates from the dignity and worth of an ingenuous and generous Physician to
abandon himself to such base imploiments (I mean, both this last and the
former) as become better some Bawd than an honest Artist, professing so
excellent and eminent a calling. Sed manum de tabula. Howbeit I could yet
insist at length on these matters, yet I hasten to that which follows.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Fascination by sight, by word or voice, and by spells: of imagination, and
strange stupendous effects our Paracelsists attribute thereunto, together with
the absurdity of the same.

Of fascination or bewitching.
THere is yet another erroneous opinion crept in, not only among the meaner and
more ignorant; but even among some of the more judicious sort, that love may be
procured by effascination or bewitching: and by this means some have been
strongly persuaded that affections might be forced; and the affection of one by
effascination (as before they conceived of philtra) to be procured to another:
the truth whereof would be a little inquired into. That there is such a thing
as fascination, or effascination, cannot be denied, as by the ancient Poets,
both Greek and Latin may appear; but what it is would be considered. Est
fascinatio, vaporis ^irulentia corpore noxio, natura ab aliis dissidente (...).
id est, de stu^ium, quo aliorum corporis habitus and spiritus per visum,
contactum, invidiam, ob vocis, and maledicae linguae virulentia^, ^er vaporis
halitum conspurcati, corpora tabescere cogunt: quae continuo halitu disflari et
ob id alimento refici oportere. Galenus. n^li^ro de salubrib. re^te do^uit.
Lang. epist, med. lib 2. Epist. 36.
In this fascination therefore, there must needs be an effluxe of something
from some body, and received again into some other body. In this business
then we are to consider the body transmitting, the body receiving that which
is transmitted, the medium, or middle space betwixt them, and that which is
transmitted. That which transmitteth, is most commonly the eye or mouth, the
party receiving, some tender body, apt to receive such an evil impression, as
children especially: the medium, or middle space, the air: and the thing
transmitted, a vapor, called by the Greeks (...). Now, certain it is, that
there is no member of the body that does so abound in spirits as the eye, nor
that sends out more resplendent beams than the ball or apple thereof. And it
is reported of Sueton in e^us vita.
Augustus Caesar, that on whomsoever he had firmly fixed his eyesight, they
were forced after a while to wink, as in the bright shining of the Sun
beams, so clear and bright shining were his eyes. Idem Sueton in ejus v^ta.
And of Tiberius Caesar it is also written, that when he rose in the night
time, he saw as clearly as any cat. And it is reported, that ^ellius scribit
in ultima terra, cur al^aniae nomen est incolas in puer^tia ^^nef^ere, and
noctu a^utius quam interdiu cernere, falgore, scilicet, teneram vis^m ac^^m
obtundente ^dem Lang. ibidem.
in the country of Albania, the inhabitants before they atteine to man's age,
are white haired, and that they see better in the night than in the day time.
These lucid spirits then, the carriers of this fascination, slowing in that
abundance, toward the eyes, and ejaculated upon the object; if these spirits
proceed from unclean blood, it is no marvel, that some most obnoxious to
receive this venomous impression, be therewith surprised: and such vapors our
(...) 5. pro^^. 7. (...). lib. ^. cap. 1^.
Authors affirm often to proceed from bleare-eyed persons, whereby they may
infect others with the same infirmities: as likewise that a menstruous woman
infecteth the glass she looks into. ^igona^ scriptis (...) testatum
reliquit, esse in Triballis and Illeria quas^am ess^scina^^ium famil^as, quae
v^su quos irat^^ or ae^ipue o^ulis asp^v^rint) interimans, e^^que gemina in
ocul^^ pupula esse cognobiles (...) iusque ma^i conta, (...) impuberes sa^i^us
(...) etc. Idem ibid
And some write of certain families among the Triballians and Illyrians, who,
if they look earnesty, especially if angrily, upon any one, they presently
kill them by their bare aspect only; and they likewise write of some women of
Scythia, and of others living near unto Pontus, having in one of their eyes a
double bale, and in the other the shape of a horse, being very terrible to
behold, and who being thrown into the water, clothes and all, could not be
drowned. Now, this fascination among the ancients was so frequent, that the
very brutes were not freed therefrom; as may by the Poet appear. Nescio quis
teneros, etc. Many other things might here out of ancient Authors be alleged,
but that I hasten to that which follows. Besides this fascination by sight,
ancient Authors mention yet another kind by means of speech and tongue. And
Gellius makes mention of whole families in Afric, bewitching with their
speech and tongue: who if they praised much either young children, trees,
corn, cattle, or any thing else, all died, and withered away presently. Hence
have we this custom derived from antiquity, that when we praise any thing in
a high manner, we use a kind of prayer, desiring God to bless it, lest,
perhaps, our tongue hurt it. And there is yet another phrase in use among the
vulgar especially, when any thing prospers not according to our intents and
wishes, to say it is forespoken. But whatsoever credulous antiquity has
believed concerning this matter, yet in truth there is no such efficacy in
either of these as was supposed. I believe no such strange effects produced by
bare beholding of any. If any children or weak natures received any such
venomous impressions from such eyes, it was but rare, and seldom came to
pass. And as I said before, so here again: why might not God sometimes suffer
the devil to inflict some hurt upon children or other, after some such
particular persons intent fixing their eyes upon them, which that arch-enemy of
mankind might afterward make them believe came to pass by reason of their
intent aspect; as he does ordinarily make our deluded witches believe that by
means of certain words, spells, or other creatures, such effects are
produced, howbeit most falsely, as shall presently appear. And that which some
relate, that if a Wolf see a man first, it bereaveth him of his speech, is but
a mere fiction. And so is that which Pliny writes concerning that Serpent
called Catoblepas and the Basil^^k^, which he, believing others, says, do
kill any man on whom they look. All this Ex hac historiae ^aerietate ac
inconstantia facile adducor, ut eredam plerosque ^^^toriam (...), ut fabularem
discripsi (...). Id quod etiam (...) Diosco^^des (...) atque adeo (...)
videtur. Siquidem is ac cum a (...) etur, ^^a^is^ratum ^^avit, aut^er^mque
(...) secit. (...) cap. 5^. (...)
a late Writer confuteth as fabulous, proving the varieties of opinions
concerning this Serpent, the last especially, called by us a Cocatrice, which
our vulgar erroneously believe to be hatched by a Toad sitting on a Cocks egg.
This, as some say kills by sight: some again, affirm only by the bite, and
some by the sound or hissing of it. The history of it therefore is very
doubtful, and diverse ways related. As for the other sort of bewitching by
Socrates recte dixisse fertur incantationes esse verba animas decipientia
humanas, quae ne quidem assis faci^ came nullum realem effectum naturaliter
producere, nec ob id sanitatem in aegritudinem commutave possint, nisi divine
censurae ma^estas annuat: aut nisi quis sorsa^ ex confidentia in medicum
pharmacis plus energiae, sic ex fide verbis incantationum aliquid virium
accrescere non temere suspicetur. ^an. Epist medic. lib. 1. c. 33. Exilis
inflicted upon man or beast are not the works of any man or woman, howsoever
falsely so supposed.
words, there is as little, if not less probability of producing such strange
stupendous effects. And if I should grant that sometimes there might proceed
out at the mouth some virulent vapors which might annoy a tender infant,
especially by near approaching, yet tell me, I pray thee, what so forcible
vapors can come forth at the mouth of any mortal man to infect forests of
trees, and whole come-fields. It is then a clear case, that when any such
accidents come to pass, they are effected by Satan himself, GOD in his hid
and secret wisdom, and for causes best known to himself, suffering some
persons themselves, or their goods, to be in this enemies power: and many times
such persons as are by the vulgar suspected of performing such ill offices, are
ignorant wicked people, filled with envy and malice, often wishing such harms
to their neighbors, which Satan by his power from above, putting presently in
execution, these wicked malicious people are often believed to be the actors;
and sometimes God in his justice suffers such to be punished by the sword of
the Magistrate, although free from any compact with Satan; Satan often the
agent.
God sometimes thus justly punishing their envy and malice, and other sins.
And therefore it behooves those in authority to be careful of the lives of
such people, where there is no evident and apparent proof to convince them.
And it comes often to pass, Old women often accused for witches and why.
that as old age is peevish and froward; so sometimes some poor melancholicke
woman in the country falling out with some of her neighbors, uses froward
speeches, and, perhaps, some imprecations also; and then, if any hurt or harm
suddenly befall this neighbor, with whom this woman wrangled, be it that any
of the cattle miscarry, or any of the family fall sick; especially if any
thing by this poor woman imprecated come to pass: this poor woman then is
presently accused for a witch; and if it lay in their power (so ignorant,
envious and malicious are some of those people) merely upon this pre-conceived
opinion, they would hang this accused party: in which cases, if the reverend
Judges and the Justices of the country were not more judicious and merciful
than the accusers, we should have many an innocent person condemned to death. I
have here a large field offered me to expatiat upon, but not willing to dwell
too long upon it, The cure used against fascination of old.
I must contract my matter. The cure used against such fascination does yet
argue the truth of that which has been said: as to hang some things about
their necks, for the which, coral is commended: although I cannot see what
virtue can proceed out of so sollid a body, to encounter with so subtle and
venomous a vapor, as proceeds either from the eyes or other part. And what
great virtue can proceed out of herbs hung up in the roof of the house? and
what extraordinary virtue was there in Plin. lib. 28. cap. 19.
a Wolfes head nailed upon the entry of great men's gates, as is yet the custom
in diverse places of Germany, although now I think they have no such
intention? and in diverse places in Switzerland they use Boares heads after the
same manner. It is far more probable that Probl. 3^. sect. ^0.
Aristotle writes concerning Rue, which being eaten, is good against
fascination: for being good against poisons, it might also resist malign and
venomous vapors proceeding from any part of the body. Now, Spells and other
trash of that nature have no power or efficacy to do good or evil.
that both ordinary spells, barbarous words, and many other such trash used by
Satan and his imps, have no such power not efficacy in them either to bewitch,
or yet to cure the bewitched, I could makes it by evident arguments appear,
but that I may not now too long insist, howbeit I will relate a story our of
Iean Wiet de l'impost. des diables libr. 4. chap. 15.
a late Writer, who has of set purpose confuted this foolerie, where he
prooveth the force of a strong confidence. A Knave upon a time, says he, went
to visit a woman much vexed with a pain in her eyes, whom this fellow promised
to cure, only by hanging a billet about her neck, wherein were written some
few words, which she was to wear constantly, and never to open or one look
what was within it. This foolish woman, History.
accustomed continually to weep and cry, (the chief cause of all her misery)
conceiving now such a confidence in this cure, gave over her weeping, and
became now as cheerful as ever before, and so her eyes mended. After a pretty
while, her eyes being now reasonable well, she was somewhat careless of her
billet, so that at length she quite lost it. But bethinking her self what
she had lost, and fearing lest she should be again troubled with her former
infirmity, fell a weeping and crying as before she had been accustomed, and
so fell as ill in her eyes as ever before. This note or billet was found by a
stranger, who opening it, found written in it these words in high dutch: Der
teuffel kat zedir die augen auff, vnd scheisse dir in die loocher: that is in
English, The Devil scratch out thy eyes, and fill up the holes with his
ordure. Now, if there had been any virtue in these words, this good woman had
lost her eyes: for they had been pulled out and filled with the devils
ordure. It behooveth then all honest, All honest Physicians ought to shun all
unlawful and unwarranted ways of curing.

People ought not to seek to witches and wizards.


careful, and conscionable Physicians, to shun all such unwarranted and
suspected ways of curing the sick. And I advise sick people to seek for
remedy by lawful and allowed means, and not to Wizards, Witches,
Spell-mongers, and the like forbidden crash. What? in the time of the Gospel
must we needs go to 2 Kings 1.3.
Beelzebub? Is there never a God in Israel? No balm in Gilead? If this be
scandalous for common Christians, what shall it be for one of the tribe of
Levi, anointed with sacred oil? It is not unknown to the country, how that
some of that profession, besides their lawless intrusion upon another
profession, if they do no evil, yet I am sure, do that which is evil like.
I speak nothing here of their practicing of Judicial Astrology, calculating
nativities and the like: but I hear by relation round about the country, that
some remedies they use, which have been by the most judicious accounted to
savor of superstition. And although I have heard much, yet will I instance but
in one particular, and of mine own knowledge, and related to me by a Clergy
man, and therefore, I hope, the credit of the story less liable to exception.
This sa^^e last year there came to me a Minister, desiring to know mine
opinion concerning a doubt whereof he was desirous to be satisfied: A maid
(says he) being obnoxious to Epilepticall fits, History of a Parson using
amulers, and other such trash.
craved the counsel of a Minister-Physitian. He gave her Proinde his periaptis
and amu^c^^s, quae ratione nituntur natura^^ fidem non derogamus: de quorum
substantia, vapori^s defluvia inspirata, vires corporis reficere, internamque
morhi causam alterare possunt. Nam contacta tridente torp^dine trarina
piscatoris manus obstupescere, and echeneida pisciculum quomvis veloce^, navis
procella ventoris agitatae cursu si tere videmus. Sir quoque melanthii semen,
catarrho: radicem paeoniae alhe, quae altera est nostri dictamu: species,
Epilepsiae: and stercus lupi alligatum co^^cis mederi experimur, non ut
Pa^philu, med^cus, inca^tationis viribus, sed quod ab illorum substantia
vopores quidam velut a o^n, de fluerent, qui inspirati cerebrum si carent,
morbique causam suis viribus alteratent. Vnde Galenus experientia horum
edoctus: periaptis (inqua) confidere oportet, ut substantia illoru^, and non
incantationis magorum verba, invet. Cui Theoph^astus libro de historia
p^antarum nono ita lu^scribit: potius inqu^e, a^surda ilia putentur, quae
alligata, and v^a^fic^o^um adversantia va^antur, and tum corporibus, tum
domibus uni^e o^^tulari credantur^ quae ^ommenta ho^^ (...) esse plane
vident^r, qu^fuas arts magn^ficare, ce^ebrar^que eu^erent unde non temere
Antoninus Caracalla Imperator, test Aetio Spartiam, gestan^es amuleta co^tra
tertianam damnavit. Jdem Lang. ibid.
a silver ring to hang about her neck, wherein were written certain barbarous
words, such as are commonly used by those who use unlawful arts. This the
young woman for a while continued, and was so long as she wore the amulet free
from her former sits: afterward being by some put in doubt of the lawfulness
of this manner of medicine she left it off, and still after that was haunted
with her old fits, as before. But being again by some persuaded, if I remember
right, she made again trial of the same medicine with a like effect
following as before. But after a while being without the use of this ring,
whether it was lost, or whether she left it off of purpose. I re^emember not
well, but she was seized with her fits as before. Now, this Minister demanded
of me, whether I thought this to be a regular cure, and warranted by the rules
of our art, and by us ordinarily practiced; my reply was, that cures were all
either supernatural, or natural: the former proper to almighty God, and
practiced both in the old and new Testament. As for natural means, the
Physician makes use of them, as medicus est naturae minister, the Physician
being an assistant and helper of nature in time of need. And thus Physicians
make use of several sorts of simples of all sorts, variously prepared, and
exhibited often inwardly, sometimes applied but outwardly, according to
several circumstances, and such simples as the Physician knows to be endued
with such virtues and qualities, or else he meddleth not with them at all. As
for this ring made of a solid metal, although our Chemists attribute some
antepilepticall quality to silver; yet neither use they this not gold it self
(of the medicines whereof they tell us such wonders) without a laborious and
artificial preparation, and then exhibit it inwardly, most commonly in a
potable form; and yet are many times, yea, for the most part frustrat of her
expected effects. And as I said then, so I say now, that I see no natural
cause of this cure: the silver being so solid a substance, can send out no such
forcible vapors as might produce so strange an effect. Now, then, it rests it
must either be effected by virtue of these barbarous words of the ring, or
force of the imaginating faculty, and her strong conceit of the excellency of
the medicine: the former of the which I have already proved to be false, and
that words have no virtue either to hurt or heal. It rests then, if by any
means, it was by virtue of her strong imagination, by reason of the high
conceit she had of this medicinal ring. But this is false: for howsoever she
might at first have some high conceit hereof, yet afterward her mind was
quite altered, and what she then did, it was rather against her judgment, and
with fear, as not being persuaded of the lawfulness thereof. But now I
appeal to the ingenuous and judicious unpartiall reader, whether this be fit
and comely for a Churchman to make use of such means, which, suppose they be
not unlawful, yet at least are they suspicious. And the Apostle wishes us to
abstain from all appearance of evil; if this precept my be extended to all
Clergy men. And whether there be not here at least an appearance of evil,
that I say no further, let the learned and judicious judge. I cannot dwell
longer upon this point, but wish master parson now in his old age, being now
capularis senex, to leave these vanities, and betake himself to do what good
he can in his own ministerial function, not meddling with such things
especially, as have bin by the honestest and most judicious of all ages
condemned; and so may he at that great day of account give up a good reckoning.
Now, because in this point of fascination there is often much use made of
imagination, and having been lately also mentioned, it shall not be
impertinent, ere we proceed further, to say something thereof.

I purpose not here to enter into any exquisite and accurate Philosophical
discourse, concerning this subject, nor yet the strange effects thereby
produced, but to demonstrate the erroneous opinion of some concerning the same.
Phantasia est sensus interior, species a sensu communi perceptas, vel a se
formatas diutius retinens, and diligentius examinans, Magir-Physiol. caep. 7.
lib. 6. ex Arist. 3. de anima.
The fancy, then called phantasia, is an internal sense, reteining and
examining such species as have been by the commonsense apprehended, or yet by
it self framed. Of the strange effects of this fancy, called also
imagination, both in melancholicke persons, in women with child, and diverse
others, the mouths of every one are so full, that I shall not need to insist
thereon. But all these strange effects are yet immanent, and confined within
the body imagining, not transient or working upon any outward object. For
although we often gape or make water when we see some others do such things,
yet is this but by way of remembrance, and being excited by their example, and
not forced thereunto by their imagination. But here arises now the question,
whether the fancy can work without that body whereunto it belongs: or
whether it can work without its own body for a great distance. This has
been always by an unanimous consent as well of Physicians as Philosophers
ever denied, the which I could prove by a cloud of witnesses, which were but to
small purpose, it being a confessed truth. Notwithstanding the premises, some
have taught us another lesson, and Ferunt alterari corpora nostra imperio
animae propriae, and etiam animae alterius corporis, tanquam a praestantiori
and superio^^ agente, cui obedire tenentur inferiora naturalia-Et sic
imaginationi tribuunt multa opera quae nullus sanae mentis concedet. Hanc enum
statuerunt Arabes in corpore cui inest, and extra se, posse aliquas formas
producere; eo quod anima sit proxima supirau intelligentus, and ea ratione
diversas habere potestates and vires, inter quas est, imperare inferioribus
naturis. Veram quam sit iniqua hujusmodi positio adeo est evidens, ut multis
opus non fit, siquidem intelligentia superiores anima humana, operantur
naturaliu^ agentium interventu, pluvias, germinationes and serenitates.
Praterquam quod si imaginatione vehementi^ aliquid possit fieri extra corpus,
maniaci qui vehementer imaginantur, prascantius and evidentius aliquid
efficere^t. Add quod si homo aliquod objectum distans posset alterare citrae
co^tactum, in infinitumageret, quia nihil est, quod in quavis distantia
impediret agere. Mercar. Tom. 1. lib. 2. class. 2. quaest. 168. Praeterca si
animae esset ea vis viri sapientia and virtute praestantissimi ea praeficerent:
secus autem res se habet, and hi impostores censent hos alexicacos, imperitos,
nebulenes, e^rios, and incontinentes, quorum anima nulta aut virtutis, aut
sapientiae dote illustratur, id posse efficere. Idem ibidem.
that imagination not only within the same individual body, but in others
also may produce strange effects. And this has been by our Arabians strongly
maintained, that the soul approached nearest to the celestial understandings,
and by that means was endued with extraordinary virtues and powers, and among
the rest, to command inferior natures. But to confute this opinion, many
arguments might be produced. In the first place, these supreme intelligences,
by means of natural causes interceding, produce rain, storms, and fair
weather, etc. Besides, that if by this strong imagination any thing might be
without the body produced, then mad men, who are very strong in their
imagination, should in this far excel others. Besides, if by strong
imagination any man could alter any remote object without touching, it might
thus do infinitely, there being nothing in any distance to hinder it. Besides,
if this were true, then the wisest and most virtuous men should perform best
such actions. But the case stands far otherwise: for these impostors are of
opinion, that the most wretched and unskilful knaves and drunkards, whose
souls were never endued with any excellency or virtue, produce such
operations. But besides that which has been said, our Paracelsists have well
improved this doctrine of imagination. So strange things they tell us of this
imagination, that Figmentum est imaginatione forti posse aegrotum ex astante
sano and rebusto sanitalem and vires inse trabere, cum potius valens ex aegroto
contagiu^ eliceret. Sympathetica quoque, ut persicaria, unguentum armarium and
similia nullam habene scientiam. Siquid sit, fortuna fit, seu ex accidente,
fallitque saepissime. Libav. lib. de art. med. Hippocr. and Hermet. typo.
it will draw health from a whole man; whereas, says mine author, in reason
the contrary should rather come to pass, and the stronger draw the weaker,
insomuch, that the sound party should rather draw sickness from the former.
And as concerning that sympatheticall operation, says the same Author, as that
of Persicaria, the weapon-salve, and the like, they have no sound reason for
them: if any thing come to pass, it is but casual and accidental, and often
deceives us. By the same imagination they tell us, that we may inflict any
sickness upon our neighbor: and the stronger be our imagination, and Infligi
credit Crollius maiorem noxam vimque inferri sortiorem si is qui nocere cupit,
si cogitationem fortem, desiderium, and intentionem habeat ad nocendu^: quia
cogitatione diriguntur spiritus, quomodo leprosus possit inficere alium magis,
si simul intendat cogitationem natura^^ virtute in membris, obediente
cogitationibus and desideriis, idque ut in malo, its and in bono, praesertim si
anima munda sit a peccatis, si modo mundus inveniri possit inter immundes.
Hincque concludetur per verba and operationes co^currentibus dictis caussis
posso magna fieri: quod verba fint cum balitu, calore, and spiritu, and
dirigantur cogitatione, seu imaginatione and appetitu sorti, etc.
the more our cogitations that way intended, the greater shall be the
mischief: by reason that by intent cogitation the spirits are directed, the
which holds as well in doing good as harm. This will suit well with the
Popish doctrine, whereas the consecration of the host depends upon the
Priests intention; insomuch that any Sir Iean may gull his people, and give
them a bare wafer for the body of Christ. But now, if imagination do all, our
witches and wizards are mere ignorant fools, let them but turn Paracelsists,
and by their strong imagination they may bring any mischief to pass which
they had purposed, and not be liable to the law. What need they be so much
beholden to the devil, as to sell themselves to be his slaves, if these
operations may so easily be effected. But if this should come to pass, then
the Devil would have nothing to do. This Haec autem cum particularia sint,
and nih^l valcant, nisi patiens quoque sit dispositum ad recipiendam
impressionem; tamen Paracelsiei transferunt ad omnia, indeque fingunt mirabilia
etiam per immanes distantias Idem lib quomodo Magi Biblica scripta depravent,
exemplis ex Crollio productis. Cum autem homo ex astru strinamd^ti suum
sidereum corpus accipia^t, and hominis imaginatio tota ab astris firmamenti
pendeat, ima eadem sit, and una maneat cum ipsis, necesse est quoque
firmamentum habere imaginationem, sed sine ratione, stenti homo proles mundicum
ratione. Ibidem in margin. Coelum totum nihil aliud est quam imaginatio:
operatur in homines pestes, febres, sine instrumento corporeo. He paulo post,
imaginatio in homine operatur inflar Solis: ut enim Sol corpereus sine
instrumento operatur, redigendo illud in carbones, ci^eres; ita hominis
cogitatio in corpore^ tantum spiritu, seu inf^eumento invisibili operatur in
corpus subiectum: quod corpus visibile facit, id facit etiam corpus invisibile,
seu homo sider^us, alteri damnum inferendo. Jmaginatio bominis est magnes,
ettrabens ultra mill milliaria: imo quicquid vult in exaltatione sun, ex
quatuor elementis ad se attraebit. Et paulo ante, Praeterea cum ^omo fit
m^j^ris mundi quentum esse, sequitur illam hominem non solum imitari posse
Coelum, sed illud quoque regere suo nutu, atque eidem dominari si vult. Omnes
res ha^^ut naturalem obedientiam ad animam, and de a cessitate habent motum,
and efficacione ad id quod defiderat anima forti desiderio, and omnes virtutes
operationesque rerum naturalium obediunt illi, quando fertur in magnum excessum
sui desiderij: uniuersas mu^di virtutes in nostrum ministerium cogit, attracta
virtute ab ipso arche^ypo operum nostrotum virtute ad quem cum ascendimus,
necesse est omnem creatur^m nobis obe^^iie, totusque nos sequitur coelestium
chorus. Per fideus naturalem ingenitam qua ipsis spiritibus pacificamur, omnes
magicae operationes atque omnia mirab^lia effi^iuntur imaginatione accidente.
Ex paulo post. Hinc verus Magus seu Sapiens, astrorum operationem attrabere
potest in imaginem, lapides, metalla, ut eandem cum Astris exercea^^ vim atque
potentiam: exemplum sic speculum incensorium, per quod radij Solis cum calore
ad nos derivantur. Quicquid oculis videmus in majori mundo, boc idem imaginatio
quoque potest producere: sic omnes herbae, omniae crescentia, omnia metalla,
per imaginationem, and ve^am Gabaliam possunt produci, etc. Oswaldus Crollius
in praefut. admon^t. ad Basilicam suam Chymicam. page 37, 38, and 39.
Crollius tells us yet strange things of this imagination; to wit, it depends
wholly upon the stars, yea, that it is all one with them, as also, that the
firmament it self is endued with imagination, howbeit it be void of reason; as
man has imagination with reason. And that the whole heaven is nothing else but
mere imagination, sending down upon this inferior world, fevers, pestilences,
and the like, without any corporeal instrument. And this imagination, says
he, is as a lodestone, yea, far exceeding the same, working beyond thousands
of miles: yea, says be, in its exaltation it attracteth from the elements
whatsoever it pleases. So that these wise men can attract the power and
virtues of the stars into any image, metal, or any other thing whatsoever;
insomuch, that the power and efficacy thereof may therein plainly and
conspicuously be seen. Many more such things may there be seen, the confutation
of the which fooleries may in the forenamed Libavius at great length be seen:
where the same Author justly taxes the other, that if he can attract any
thing from the elements, as he seems to have both heaven and earth at
command, why then does not he and his fellows help the public in time of
need? And why did he not, says he, in the year 1613. draw down some warmth,
to qualify the extreme cold of that nipping winter: and if he can do good to
the public, and be so envious, it is a pity, says he, but he had been
buried in the snow. I add yet, where were all our imagination-mongers this
last year 1630. where drouth, and by consequence famine and scarcity prevailed
through the most parts of Christendom? It was a very malicious mind, that had
no pity of the public. If they would not help their enemies, yet they might
have helped their friends. But I am sure for all their strong imaginations, if
our poor people had not found more real comfort by the charity of well
disposed people, they might often have dined with Duke Humphrey, and gone
supperlesse to bed. But concerning this imagination, this shall for this
present suffice, howbeit I could yet have enlarged my self very much upon this
point.

A Digression concerning the Weapon-salve, not impertinent for this place.
COurteous and kind Reader, by thy good leave, let me a little digress upon a
point which, as I hope, will not prove impertinent, of the which howbeit I
might by reason of the precedent Chapter have taken occasion to have
discoursed, yet had I past it over in silence, if there had not come lately
into my hand a little discourse concerning the Weapon-salve, by one impugned,
and then by another in another discourse stoutly maintained: for the which
cause I must entreat a little patience to declare as briefly as I can mine
own opinion also, which whether it be grounded on reason I shall be willing to
be judged by the judicious as well of mine own profession as others. No
partial respo and moved the Author to meddle with this subject.
And first I do here protest before the searcher of all hearts, that in this
particular I aim at no private or particular end, either for mine own
advantage, or yet to injury others; but only to clear and vindicate truth
from error and imposture. Neither is it here my purpose to meddle with any man's
private quarrel, or to adjoine my self as a second in this contention: nay
both the plantife and defendant are to me alike known by any intime
acquaintance, the one being known by sight, and the other by hearsay only,
and by his late published Tractat. And besides, I have never ever had, nor yet
have, any particular relation to the company of Barber surgeons, nor yet any
one person among them in particular; and know none of my kindred either by
affinity or consanguinity of that profession. Surgery indeed is a part of the
Physicians profession, the which, as also the Apothecaries part in Galens time
(as some do yet even at this day) was performed by the Physician alone;
although now the case be much altered, the Surgeon often (here in the Country
especially) undertaking all three. And therefore, if partial respects carried
me away, I had more reason to give sentence against the Surgeons. Besides then,
the ancient, and in all ages accustomed cure of wounds by application of
appropriate and fit remedies to the part wounded, Paracelsus was at least the
man that spread abroad the use of the Weapon-salve.
Paracelsus has brought in a new manner (whether he were the first inventer,
or only the disperser abroad of this cure I care not) of curing the same by
anointing the weapon only which inflicted the wound, or some other drawn
through the wound. In Basilica chymica, page 278.
Oswaldus Crollius a late Germane writer, and a very affectionate scholar to
his master Paracelsus, has both set down the description of this ointment,
and the manner of performing this cure. It is ordinarily known by the name of
Huguentum armarium in Latin, and in Greek (...): but by Paracelsus and his
disciples Vnguentum sympatheticum, the sympathicke ointment; Magneticum and
stellatum, The names.
the magneticke and starry ointment, from the supposed attractive power,
whereby it seems to draw down influence and efficacy from the stars. It is
likewise to be observed, that this Jdem Crollius ib.
Author wills us first before the anointing of the Weapon to stay the
bleeding of the wound: as also adds this caution, that the wound be every day
bound up with a clean linen cloth first dipped in the patients urine. Moreover,
the wounds thus to be cured must neither be in any principal member, and
neither nerve nor artery must be cut. This manner of cure howsoever used by
Paracelsus and his disciples and some others who have been by them caught, yet
has it been by others confuted and impugned, some calling it Andreas Libavius
de impostoria vulnerum per unguentam armarium curatione Paracel. usitata
commendateque.
impostorious and others worse. This same last year there came forth a little
Tractat, disclaiming the use of this ointment, and proving it altogether
unlawful. But the same year there was by a learned Physician of the College
of London published an other Tractat, wherein he not only labors to confute
his adversaries arguments (wherein I confess he satisfies me not, whatsoever
he does others) but with might and maine, by a fresh supply of arguments and
examples, labors to uphold and maintain the credit of the Weapon-salve. In
the first place then to divert our thoughts from any conceit of a cacomagicall
cure (so I call it according to his own mind) or diabolical cure; the
defendant (so here I call the Doctor, The Devil may often do things apparently
good, as cure diseases and the like.
as the impugning Parson the plaintiff) takes great pains to prove, and that
by many places of Scripture, that because God alone operateth all in all
essentially, therefore there is no devil nor evil spirit that can produce any
good work or do any good, his nature being destructive and altogether evil,
quite contrary to the manner of Gods spirits operation; and therefore that he
is altogether for hurting but never for healing of mankind. As for Gods
omnipotent power and goodness, that he is good, yea goodness it self, to
prove the same were but to spend our time in vain: as likewise, that the
devil is the prince of darkness, aiming at the overthrow and utter ruin both
of the soul and body of man, cannot be denied. And although his end be always
evil, yet is his purpose not always prosecuted after one and the same manne.
Can any deny this 2 Cor. 11.14.
text, that Satan oftentimes transformeth himself into an angel of light? And
what more contrary than light and darkness? Why does he thus transform
himself? Is it not because he cannot always in his own lively colors
deceive every one; and therefore when the Lions skin will not serve the
turn, he puts on that of the Lamb. It will perhaps be objected, that then his
actions are still evil, which is the point in hand. I answer, that howsoever
indeed that be true, yet it serves our turn, if these actions be apparently
good, which is that most men look after. Now that God oftentimes suffers the
devil and his instruments to do some apparent good, in healing some diseases,
etc: if any shall deny, experience of all ages will evince the contrary. And a
Pari ratione negari non potest daemones humidum radicale restaurando, nimiam
senectutis ariditatem tempera^do, succum meliorem calidioremque supponendo,
reliqua requisita ad tempus supplendo, posse efficere, ut defecta atate viri,
vires nitoremque juvenilem ac crasin recuperant canos, etc. Rodulph. Gocl.
synarth* magnet part. 22.
late Writer, as stoutly standing for this cure as our defendant, yet cannot
deny but that sometimes the devil may by repairing the radical moisture in
man, and by a supply of benign, warm, temperate moisture, retardate, and for
a while stave off old age. And what, does not this far surpass the curing of
a green wound? And is not this accounted a real good which so many men hunt
after, whatsoever the devils purpose be? Nay which is yet more, did not God
himself make Number. 24.2, 4. etc.
the mouth of wicked Balaam a notorious wizard, to bless his own people
Israel, and yet this same imp of Satan aimed only at the destruction of this
people, as after appeared? And it is not without great reason ordinarily
averred, that the white devil is always the most dangerous. Who likewise is
so ignorant, that knows not, Witches convented before King James.
that there are such as they call good witches, which do more dangerously than
any others often ensnare the simpler sort. In the time of the reign of King
James of famous memory, in his kingdom of Scotland, after his return out of
Denmark, and marriage with Queen Anne, diverse witches were questioned, and at
his own desire convented before him, who affirmed they were in the ship with
him at his return, relating many particular passages which had then happened:
among all these was there one woman called Anna Sampson, who was commonly (for
her ordinary practice in curing maladies) called the good witch, Anna Sampson a
good witch, as they termed her.
who did constantly aver, that she never hurt any, but helped all she could.
Some few years after that, there was in that same kingdom a notorious wizard
called Richard Grahame, who, as I was credibly informed, Richard Grahame ^
notorious wizard.
came to a great noble man, a pious Peer of that kingdom, then lying and
languishing on his deathbed, promising to cure and recover him, if he would
follow his advice; who like a truly noble man indeed utterly refused any
succor from Satan, if God would not by lawful means afford him health and
deliverance, and in this pious resolution resigned his soul into the hands of
his Maker and Redeemer. This same wizard was aftewards burnt at the
Market-crosse of Edinburgh. I will not avouch that this wizard could then have
cured this noble man; but this much to us it evinceth, that he practiced upon
others this trade of healing. And who has not heard that in our forefathers
days in the time of Cimmerian darkness, when this Prince of the world
domineered with less control, there were certain spirits then usually
frequenting many houses, performing in the nightime many works, the servants
were with great toil to have done in the daytime, as threshing in the barn,
dressing up the houses, etc. And these were here called by the name of Hob
Thrush; Hob Thrush Faries, and the like spi^ies frequent here when popery was
openly professed.
and in the northermost part of this Island, Brownie; and beyond the seas other
answerable names. The white Devils, the Faries, or rather (as they say they
were ordinarily to be seen) the green Devils were wont to pinch the maids in
the night time, if all were not clean in the house. And thus those devils
were seldom observed to do any apparent harm either to man's body or goods,
and yet still the same Devil; and no question, this was, notwithstanding, a
far more efficacious means to delude the simpler sort, and to lead them
hood-winked into hell, than when he appeared in his more lively colors. If
God, either for the punishment of his creature, or for other ends best known
to his secret wisdom, shall feale Satan a commission against his creature,
what matter is it whether he delude as an Angel of light or darkness? this
being also a thing most certain, that he neither can, nor dare in the least
point exceed his commission. And therefore it is altogether without sense or
reason to ask, if then the tutelary Angels leave their charge, as though God
had now forsaken them. I answer, that his is meant of either his own
electiones, and then he sometimes leaves them to Satan to try for a time; as he
did to Job 1.
Job, or else they are reprobate; 1 King. 22.22.
Ahab, who was by lying Prophets seduced; and that by Satan's inspiration,
although by Gods own direction. Romans 9.21.
Has not the Potter power over the clay to make of it a vessel of honor or
dishonor? And to no more purpose is it, that because it is said, Wisdom 12.1.
The uncorruptible Spirit of the Lord is in all things, and Psalm. 33.6.
that from the Spirit of Gods mouth proceed the virtues of all things, with
such other places, which for brevity I here pass by, therefore God does not
make use of inferior Angels. And therefore there was no need of the
enumeration of so many places to so small purpose, no man calling in question
the power of Gods Spirit. But whereas the defendant would from hence infer
such a new spirit of Paracelsus, The new spirit of Paracelsus with great reason
we reject.
and his own forging, to operate in this weapon-salve, we have at least as
good reason to deny it. I cannot here for brevity insist upon the several
acceptations of this word spirit in holy Writ, but must leave it with the true
meaning of the several places alleged, to those who have more leisure and
means to effect the same: Yet sure I am, that in all holy Scripture there is
no such signification of spirit as is here intended. The various ways of
preparing this ointment argues the nullity and vanity thereof.
But now I proceed to the salve it self, the ingredients, and manner of use or
application. As for the ingredients, the various ways of composition, do
evidently evince the vanity and nullitie of the operation of this ointment.
Some indeed set down a number of various ingredients collected after a
superstitious manner. Some again are not so scrupulous and superstitious,
either in the number of simples, or curious composition; some contenting
themselves with dogs grease: and Andreas Libavius lib. de impostoria vulnerum
per unguentum armarium fanatione.
a learned late Writer relates an insianee in a woman of high Germany, who
professed, she only stuck a stick or weapon in a piece of lard, and had as
good success as others with their most curious composed ointment. And it is
there usual with others to stick a knife, or any other thing that has hurt
them, or a stick in stead of it, in a loaf of bread, or in the earth it
self, and yet (say they) follows still the same effect. And this, I think,
were sufficient to confute this weapon-salve, if there were no more. But it is
to be observed, Blood by s^o^^ius omitted in the composition of this ointment.
that whereas blood by our defendant is accounted one of the principal
ingredients of this ointment, how comes it then to pass, that Crollius (as
it were Paracelsus his own genius) does omit the same? But howsoever, since
such an account is made of the blood, I will not quite pass over it in
silence. It is then demanded why God gave so strict a charge to his own people
of Israel, that they should Genesis 9.4. Levit. 17.14.
eat no blood* if not for this reason that the life is in the blood? I answer,
that indeed the blood is the vehicle and receptacle of life, which is
communicated to the whole body. But this was not the reason why God forbad them
the eating of the blood of beasts; but as that worthy light of the Church See
Calvi^ on that place of Genetic.
Calvin allegeth: In this prohibition God would accustom men to a gentle and
mild kind of diet, and lest then being too much accustomed to the eating of
blood, they should afterward be imboldned to shed man's blood, which is the
principal scope is here aimed at. Besides (as the same Author allegeth) that
the flesh and the blood are not here as diverse and distinct set down, as
differing so much one from another, but the same in substance; and yet was the
flesh of beasts even then permitted to be eaten, and so was the milk, being
nothing else but blood refined and dealbuted or whitened in these gloobus
mamillarie glands. Moreover, if this had been simply and in it self a sin,
and had obliged us adsemper, for ever, then had it been still a finne, the
contrary whereof is true, this ceremonial precept being but a part of that
legal pedagogie; as the difference of meats, clean and unclean, and the
like. And the blood of the murdered cries as loud in these our times, as ever
it did after the death of Abel, this being still a crying sin, and this being
a figurative speech, as the plantiffe has sufficiently proved. And howsoever
blood by some be esteemed for one of the principal ingredients in this salve,
yet (says the same learned Idem Libav. ibidem.
Libavius) Surgeans hold man's blood to be poison to wounds, and that the cure
is thereby rather hindered than helped: and put the case it were indeed
helpefull, yet were this only applied, and not at so far a distance. And as
for the spirits in the blood, we justly deny so active operating spirits in
the blood now separated from the body. And besides, admit there were any such
matter, All blood have not alike efficacious spirits.
yet were all spirits alike efficacious? Has a heavy melancholicke or
phlegmatic blood as active spirits as a quick choleric and fiery blood? And
what if the blood be putrefied by the pox, plague, poison, or any other
contagious disease, the blood being stark naught, shall these corrupt spirits
be so powerful and efficacious? Surely, the more we stir in this business,
the more it stinketh. And whereas it is said that of man's blood, with the
spirit of wine, A lamp of man's blood, and the spirit of wine.
is extracted a spirit whereof is made that burning lamp which will burn as
long as the party whose blood it is, lives, and at his death go quite out,
with diverse other like allegations; I answer, that even in this they then
confess, that this blood is actuated by means of this operating menstruum,
the spirit of wine, and therefore no such efficious power proceeding from so
far a distance can be the cause of this cure. Besides, that the right spirit
of wine is to be known for such, if it be suddenly quite consumed with the
flame, and put the case the blood might a little retardate and hinder this
operation, yet could it neither wholly inhibit the operation of this devouring
element, nor could there such strange effects follow as are related of this
lump. But for brevity I pass by all other things concerning this point. The
fat is likewise forbidden to be eaten, The fat as well as the blood forbidden to
be eaten, and yet never man heard it cry, etc.
howbeit no vehicle of life, the flesh (permitted notwithstanding to be eaten)
being far nearer the substance of blood, as has been already proved.
Again, as for the bones of the skull, mummy and skull-mosse, or usnea (by them
called the essence, I say rather the excrement of the skull) being now but
parts of the cadaver, or dead corpse, them cannot be that near relation to the
lively microcosme man. There can be no such sympathy betwixt the living and the
dead as is pretended.
And if we plead a sympathy betwixt man and man, what do we know but some of
these may sometimes be taken from an enemy, and then shall we have an
antipathy, and by consequent a contrary operation? And let there be as much
balsamicke salt (as they term it) in the blood and bones, this same answer
will serve. I hold it impious to maintain that by virtue of that balsamicke
salt remaining in the bones of Elisha 2 Kings 12.21.
made to the murdered man revive: for it should then first have revived Elisha
himself, in whom it inhabited radically, or else not suffered him to dye. No
more was there any power in the dead bones mentioned by Ezech. 37.3. etc.
Ezechiel, nor yet in the dead at the death of our Savior Christ, and at the
last resurrection to arise, all these being merely miraculous, and not
effected by any natural means. On these, I say, and the like places, impiously
(in mine opinion) and out of purpose alleged, I cannot now longer insist, but
leave them to the scanning and judging of by the judicious and learned Divine,
and come to the manner of cure.

And here I must entreat the Reader to call to mind what was first said
concerning this cure. In the first place then the blood was to be stanched,
the wound washed with the patients own urine, and well bound up: and that the
Author might act his part more handsomely, if a bone were broken then he put
into this ointment some comfrey rrots. The condition and quality was that it
were neither of any principal part, nor yet yet that any nerve or artery were
cut. And what need such ado about nothing, this being easily by nature
effected? Wash an ordinary wound, and keep it clean, and I warrant it will
heal without this curious ointment, which effects just nothing, This
ointment effects just nothing.
especially as it is used. The beasts (dogs especially) we see licking a
wound or ulcer, and by this means keeping it clean from corruption (the
chief impediment hindering the healing) is thus easily cured without either
stitching or any other help. And therefore if this have been accounted
impostorious to make the world believe that was done by the virtue of such
ointment wherewith the weapon was anointed, Sympatheticall and why.
let no man marvel. This manner of cure is called sympatheticall and
magneticall by way of sympathy and attraction; and from the supposed attracted
virtue from the stars, stellatum, or starrie ointment. Now, as concerning the
operating virtue by sympathy, In sympathies the things sympathising are not
far remote one from another.
as I do not deny, so I say the same is not here to be seen; and where this
sympathy is to be found, the things sympathising are not far remote one from
another: as in the unisone harmony and consent of two lutes or vialls may
easily appear, which is the defendants own instance. But let any one touch
the string of a lute or vial, and see whether the unisone string of another
lute a mile off will make any vibration or stirring of the straw, or make it
leap from one thing to the other unison with that of a miles or more distance;
suppose also there be neither wind stirring, nor interposition of houses, or
any other impediment whatsoever. And therefore the length of a table is no
proportionat distance to that often, yea, twenty miles of the operation of the
weapon-salve, as is applied by our defendant. And as little, or far less for
this purpose make the rest of his examples of sympathy: as of the maw or
gussord of fowls, alleged for this same sympathy, good to corroborate the
stomach, brains to brains, lungs to lungs, heart to heart, guts to guts,
etc. If I should yet grant all this to be true (whereof I have yet just cause
to doubt, if not to deny, whatsoever some others have held to the contrary; and
fox lungs working by their abstersive and opening quality) yet would all this
make just nothing for the purpose, these working, per contactum physicum, by
mutual contact, and their operation exuscitated and actuated by the internal
natural heat; but none of them producing any such effect at a miles or more
remote distance. But on things so plain and evident I need not to insist.
Magneticall and why.
This salve is called also magneticall, for magnetically attracting (forsooth)
a sanative virtue from the weapon and salve to the wound. But the experience of
many years has taught us, that the lodestone will draw iron but at a small
distance, neither twenty, ten, nor yet one mile, take as big a lodestone as
a man's head, and as little a piece of iron as you will. Quoniam igitur nulla
actio fieri porest, nisi per contactum (ut in naturalibus demonstratur) similia
autem haec non sese tangunt, nec per naturam moventur unum ad aliud, necesse
est si applicari invicem debent, demitti aliquid ab uno ad aliud necesse est,
demitti aliquid ab uno ad aliud quod proxime tangat, and ejus applicationis
principium sit. Et paulo post. Nos enim praesentibus multis e nostris medicis
experientiam multorum (magnetum) fecimus perpendiculo been and concinne aptato,
quaele est in navigatoria Pyxide maniseste vidimus magnetem trabere magnetem,
ferrum ferrum, tum magnetem trahere ferrum, ferrum magnetem: porro electrum,
parva electri frustula rapere, argentum trabere argentum, and quod valde mirati
sumus, magnetem vidimus argentum trahere, etc. Vidimus quoque idem frustum
magnetis per unam faciem magnetem trahere non ferrum, per aliam ferrum non
magnetem, per aliam utrumque, quod indicium est una part plus esse magnetis,
in alia plus ferri, in alia utrumque aequaliter, unde fiat diversitas
attractionis. Quare nemini esse dubium debet similia omnia per se, se invicem
trahere, nisi per accidens impediantur. Et paulo post. Constat praeterea
perpendiculum illud declinare a linea quo ad polos spectat, i nostro quidem
himispherio, quod est a fortunatis insulu ad Carygaram declinare dextrorsum per
gradus circiter 9. Jn alio autem hem spherio ultra insulas fortunatas declinare
finistrorsum, and modo plus, modo minus: observant enim qui ad novum orbem
navige^^ quom perventum est ad meridianum quod per Alores vocatas insulat
transit, mutari perpendiculum, and quum in nostro mari dextream ^ectat a polo,
illic sinistrorsum verti etc. Hieron. Fracast. lib. de sympath. and ani^ path.
cap. 7.
And therefore although some agents work at some distance, yet is there
always some proportion to be observed betwixt the agent and the patient; and
although there be not always a natural contract, yet there is commonly some
effluxe, or emanation whereby the one touches the other. And this is the
ordinary manner of operation. And that this is the case with the loadstone may
easily appear, in that it attracteth iron, more or less, as it is of efficacy
and power: and not only does it draw iron, but even sometimes silver it self:
yea, sometimes one loadstone has been observed to draw another, iron to draw
the loadstone, yea, iron to draw iron. And some piece of a loadstone has been
observed, with the one side to draw iron unto it, with another to draw another
loadstone, and with a third to attract both unto it. And as concerning the
point of the needle compass always looking to the North, that is not
universally tree: for sailing toward the Wersterne world, passing under the
Meridian of Asores or Terceres Islands, the compass then turns, and looks not
toward the North pole as before. And not only there, but even in our own
hemisphere also that the needle of the compass declines from the line looking
toward the North, from the Canarie Islands to Carygara, about some nine
degrees. But of this subject, although I could say a great deal more, yet this
shall here suffice. And in the fire this is yet more manifest, where there is
an emanation of heat, which warmeth at a proportionate distance: and therefore
although the fire heat, and warm at a remote distance, yet is this not
indefinite, but proportioniate, the fire warming according to the bigness of
the fire, and the propinquitie or remoteness of the object. Fire warmeth not
at any indefinite distance
And therefore although the fire be a very active agent, yet make a fire of ten
or twenty load of wood or coals, and in a cold frostie morning let any stand a
mile or two off, yea, although there be neither hill, nor any other obstacle
betwixt, yet let him tell me what great warmth he finds thereby. As for the
distance alleged, sometimes to interceed betwixt the bullet and the party
thereby offended, In all these there is still a physical contact, which is not
in the Weapon-salve.
it makes as little for the purpose: for the bullet violently beats the air,
the air thus agitated, works such a violent impression on the body: and the
like may be said of the lithning producing the like effect. But this air so
agitate by such an agent will not offend the party many miles distant from
thence. A friend of mine told me, that in a hot skirmish, betwixt the English
and the Portugalls, in the East Indies, a bullet shot from the enemies ship,
past over him within a yard or little more of his head, and yet never hurt him.
In sweet smells there is a sensible emanation or exhalation from the subject to
the olfactorie organes.
As for the sweet smells of Rosemarie in Spain, and Sassafras wood in the West
Indies, be many miles carried into the air, and by sailers smelt a far off,
what strange thing is here, these countries abounding with such odoriferous
trees and shrubs, by means of the vehicle of the air agitated with the wind,
carries such smells to the olfactorie organe, as I may say, where we see, that
sense it self is here judge of this action: and yet if the wind be contrary,
these odoriferous and fragrant smells are not carried half so far. The like
is likewise here in our own countries, by means of the blossoms of pease and
beans observed. And yet this ointment, being so little in quantity,
notwithstanding all winds, or other interceding rubs or hindrances, can by a
direct line send out for many miles a sanative virtue from this salve and
besmeared weapon to the wound. Now, yet somewhat more concerning this operating
medicine, besides the blood besmeared on the weapon, there is also great store
spilt upon the ground, and on the patients clothes, and in the same, no doubt,
great store of spirits, and therefore the greater store of blood be effused,
the sooner should the cure be performed: and if those few spirits in so small a
quantity of blood so far remote from the patient produce such stupendous
effects, shall all those spirits of the hot blood so near the patient be idle,
and of none effect? But I will yet demand further, whether the blood besmeared
on the weapon, or that mingled with the ointment gives this efficacy and
operation. If that in the ointment, how then, when there is no blood in the
same, The blood used in the Weapon-salve is taken from any man.
as we have already proved. (As for blood on the weapon, we have newly
answered it) and if any, then this blood is taken from any man, and yet
sometimes they tell us of the sympathy betwixt the blood of the wound and
wounded, howbeit this blood may be taken from one that bare the patient small
good will. But if they will yet hold so near a sympathy, then this cannot hold
betwixt those that differ so much, it may be in complexion, and many other
circumstances, but especially betwixt man and beast. This near sympathy, if
any, cease, the blood being once separated from the body.
But if we should yet admit of this sympathy, yet when the blood is now
separated from the body, this sympathy also cease: and although there
remain some virtue in the parts so separated, yet are they far different
from those of a living man, a dead man being a man only equivocally: for the
which cause it comes also to pass, that of the dead carkase of a man are
engendered some other creatures, but never a man being of the same species. And
hence also is evinced the impertinency of the defendants comparison betwixt the
blood and a grain of corn: for, as I said, the blood now separated from the
body has lost those lively spirits and operations it enjoyed being within the
body; therefore when as being yet within the body, Blood now separated from the
body, has not such active spirits as before, neither yet has it that
potential energy as a grain of corn.
it was not able to produce any such effect at so far a distance, far less
now reteining only the nature of a part of a dead carkase. But the case is not
alike with the grain of corn, which has not yet left its proper form and
potentiall energie to produce another corn like it self, being sown in a fit
and convenent soil, as the meanest husbandman in the country can tell; and
when I shall have as good trial of the former as of the later, and as good
reason, I shall be ready to believe it. And therefore the seed of generation
of man, being sown in a fruitful soil, had been more pertinent to be
compared with a grain of corn, howbeit it is true, this would not have proved
the tenent the defendant took in hand. The blood had far more pertinently
been compared with the chafe or straw: and as the straw will never produce
corn, sow it and dung it as much as you will, no more will the blood produce
any such effect as is pretended, order it as you please. There is then no
sympatheticall nor magneticall cure performed by this ointment, as is
erroneously pretended. This opinion symbolles too much with Paracelsus his
imagination, whereof something has been lately said. As concerning the
cruentation, The bleeding of the dead corpse is not a certain and undoubted
sign whereby to discover the murderer.
or bleeding of the corpse killed, at the presence of the murderer, it would
take up a larger time to discourse of, than I can here well spare. Some would
have it by antipathy, and some otherwise; howsoever, it is not always observed
to hold true, although some strange things concerning the same are received,
besides, that sometimes some innocents have been by this means accused. And
if this come by antipathy, then when sometimes at the approaching of some whom
the deceased dearly loved, it must come to pass by sympathy; and thus shall
we have one and the same effect produced by two so contrary causes: and
therefore the defendant finds as little help here, as in the other arguments.
It is likewise to be observed, the time of the year, Many things may hinder or
further this bleeding.
the site or situation of the dead, the nature or quality of the blood,
magical spells, with many other things, may hinder or further such an effect:
as also when sometimes the Magistrate or other makes the party suspected, put
his finger into the wound, etc. And therefore I advise Magistrates not to be
too rash in giving credit to every such show of detecting a suspected person.
This ointment receives no such particular virtue from the stars.
And as concerning the operation this ointment takes (as is supposed) from the
stars, I have already proved, that many times this cure is as well performed
by other things where there are no ingredients collected with the observations
of the heavens. And as I do not deny a power from the superior powers of the
heavens upon our inferior sublunary things here below; so in like manner do I
acknowledge the same to be but general, and so effect things here below, as
they find them disposed. And even in some of those most commonly received and
subject to our senses, all is not so clear, but may admit of some doubts.
Whether the Moon be the cause of the ebbing and stowing of the sea.
As who makes any question of the Moons predominant power over humid and moist
things; and hence is the cause of the flux and refluxe of the sea ascribed to
this planet, together with the spring-tides, and yet might it be asked why have
we so high a springtide in the change of the Moon, when she is quite hid
from our sight, and shines not in our horizon, as well as when she shines in
her full and greatest glory and splendor: and likewise since the sea in most
places keeps a like time of ebbing and flowing, yet in some other again, it
ebbes and flows far oftener, It ebbeth and flows there seven times in 24,
hours.
as in the Euripe and at Bordeaux in France. And why again in some places it
neither ebbeth nor flows: as in the Balticke sea; of some of which, althoug
some have endeavored to render a reason, yet are they not satisfactory and
without doubts. If there be then such doubt concerning this nearest planet unto
us of all others, what may we say of the remotest fixed stars, and their
particular supposed influences? And therefore although superior bodies produce
due effects upon these inferior creatures, yet have they no such particular
influences upon these inferior bodies, as is supposed. And since the stars
are of so vast a bigness, that the least fixed star far exceeds the
whole earth in bigness, they send not down such particular influences upon
the particular subjects, but affect these inferior things, as we have said
already. And therefore we justly deny those particular influences upon
particular simples, Starts make not some bodies stiptick and others prone to
fluxes.
as we have said. As with like reason do we deny that some stars make the
body stipticke, and some again prone to fluxes. But we find by daily
experience, that in obstructed bodies, without previous preparation, physic
will not so well produce its expected effect. But because something concerning
this has been said already, I will here surcease; but withal I would have
the reader take notice of one point whereby the defendant would feign seem to
maintain the credit of particular effects of the stars; he wrests and
detorts some places of Scripture, as in other passages of his book may
evidently appear. He makes use then first of that place of Ecclesiast.
Eccles. 3.1.2, etc.
There is a time to plant and a time to pull up. What can be here collected,
but that we are in all our actions to lay hold on the right time and
opportunity, as he instanceth in the husbandman, and here he shall find no
particular influence. As little for his purpose makes that place of the
Psalm: Psalm. 121.6.
The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by night, where David
witnesses his confidence in God so much, that nothing can hurt him, no, not
the Sun himself, nor the Moon, these being the two planets that have most
powerful operations. Neither is here any particular influencee vinced, but such
ordinary operations as are by them produced upon these sublunary creatures. And
if I should grant the Moon produced the Epilepsie (which is yet to prove) yet
would it not prove this particular influence. Again, there is a place produced
out of the Ephesians. 6.11.
Ephesians after this manner by him alleged. Put on the whole armor of God,
that ye may resist the devil in the unfortunate day. Now, neither in the new
translation, nor other I could find, neither yet in the original Greek, nor
Bezas Latin translation could I find any such unfortunate phrase. Interpreters
understand this of troublesome and sharp times.
See then how far this trash is fetched to prove that which cannot be found.
The place of Job is as little to this purpose, yea, rather makes against the
same. For whereas Ioh 38.21, 22, etc.
the Lord there asks Job whether he knows the course of heaven, etc. this
interogation is to be taken for a strong negation, as in the precedent and
subsequent discourse, may evidently be evinced. I will proceed no further to
this apocriphall proof, which, notwithstanding, would stand him in as little
stead. Now, I proceed to that which remains.

All the former arguments and allegations seeming too weak, The curing by the
weapon salve accounted miraculous, and sometimes mystical.
and the credit of the weapon-salve now being in danger, the defendant is
forced to flee to a miraculous operatoion, whereat indeed, in most of those
general passages concerning the Almighty power of God he aims at. And thus
it appears, that not only in some places, he calls it miraculous, but
affirms, that that man that believes, and relieth upon this spirit, may
effect what he desires, and that even by the true knowledge and use of it,
the Prophets and Apostles did wonders, as well in curing, as effecting matters
of greater moment. Now, that the Spirit, or omnipotent power of the Almighty,
can do whatsoever it pleases, is without all controversy; howbeit here he
seems to intimate unto us this Spirit or power of working miracles, and then
immediately afterward applies it to the dead blood. I know not what he means
to make such a mingle mangle of miracles with this working of the weapon-salve.
If it be miraculous, like the cures performed by the Prophets and Apostles, let
it appear, and we will believe it; and if this be true, he might have spared
all this labor in alleging falsely so many places of Scripture with his other
arguments. And yet I deny, that he that has the gift of miracles may do what
he lists: Moses and Aaron, although endued with the gift of miracles, could
not do what they listed.
for neither Moses nor Aaron, both endued with this spirit, could either
prolong their fatal period of life, or yet atteine to enter into the land of
Canaan, although the chief earthly thing that holy man Moses did desire. And
to the end we may the better believe any dotage that Paracelsus, or any
fantastical spirit has hatched in his brain* we have brought in the
miraculous healing of the John 3.2, 3, etc.
Poole of Bethesda, with the which it seems this weapon-salve is paralleled:
yea, the lying legend of Tob. 6.7. chap. 5.12, Tobias guide call^ himself
Azarias, etc. and again, chap. 12.15. he calls himself Raphael, one of the
seven Angels, etc.
Tobies Angel, and the liver and heart of his fish, the perfume whereof is
there said to chase away the evil spirit. What need we thus to be enterteined
with lies, if this cause be good. Math. 17.21,
This sort of devil (says our Savior Christ) is not cast out but by fasting
and prayer. The perfume of the heart and liver of a fish are used by none to
drive out devils, unless by Magicians; and that it has any such power, out
rational Physicians, I am sure, done where that I have red, avouch. As for the
Poole of Bethesda, when I shall see as good a warrant for the weapon-salve (the
manner of operating I mean at a far distance) as I see for it, I shall be
ready to believe it. Besides, it rests yet to prove, that in this Poole of
Bethesda, did any sanative virtue reside, as also in the River of Jordan,
wherein 2 Kings 5 14.
Naaman the Syrian was cleansed from his leprosy. And in the text it is
affirmed, that at a certain time the Angel of God moved the water of this
poole^, and whosoever after this stepped in first, was healed, and freed from
whatsoever infirmity he was formerly troubled with, It cannot be proved that
the poole of Bethesda had in it any healing power.
and no other, until the next time, although multitudes lay there attending
this motion of the water; which if it had been otherwise, then that infirm
person healed by our Savior needed not to have lain there so long. And
howsoever this cure was miraculous, and done per contactum, and not at a far
distance distance, as the operation of the weapon-salve is pretended to be
effected: although I disclaim here any efficacy in the water, as the like
appears in the John 9.6.
clay and spittle wherewith our Savior cured the blind man, this clay
participating of no such sanative power; yea rather efficacious to the contrary
to put out eyes. And the better to blind the world, and to confirm and
strengthen his opinion of working miraculously, or (as sometimes again he
sayeth') mystically, he would have us quite to abandon and abdicate all
heathen Philosophy, the Coloss. 2.8.
Apostle giving us warning that we be not therewith deceived. But I think the
abuse does not abolish the right use. What? shall all Universities give over
teaching Aristotle's philosophical precepts? Heathenish Philosophy is not to be
abolished, but the abuse to be shunned.
The scope and drift of al is this, that we be not tied to the ordinary
operation of agents and patients, but adhere to Paracelsus and his followers,
and believe their mystical, miraculous, if not cacomagical manner of curing,
and so by this means must we take for current whatsoever they shall obtrude
upon us, as may by the question now in hand plainly appear. By this means
also should all our rational and methodicall proceeding by our ancient
Physicians so carefully prescribed, be quite overthrown. And what? were
miracles in the old Law so seldom, and that by holy men only performed, and
afterward by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and is it now in every man's
power that can greaze a weapon or stick at pleasure, to work a miracle? We
justly tax the church of Rome for their lying wonders and miracles by 2 These.
2. Revel. 13.
Gods own spirit foretold, and shall we believe that whatsoever strange or
wondrous act, transcending the ordinary course of natural agents, is some
miraculous work of God? Nay we have no reason so to do. We know there was a
Acts 8.9.
Simon Magus, who with his counterfeit miracles wonderfully deluded the
Samaritanes. And have we not good reason to suspect Paracelsus, and what he and
his followers obtrude upon us, Paracelsus was addictted to diabolical magic,
and therefore we justly suspect his mystical and miraculous cures.
of such especially as transcend the course of ordinary agents. If he had bin
either Prophet or Apostle, we might have had a better conceit of his strange
cures; and yet not so that we would not have his tenants examined and tried by
the true touchstone of Gods word, with the which this does not agree. And that
he was too much addicted to infamous magic, but that I will not now so spend my
time, I could easily make it appear. And that he was no holy man, may appear
by his manifold impieties in abusing and wresting many places of holy Scripture
to maintain his fantastical and impious opinions, concerning which, a
Possuntne Paracelsici Magiam suam divinaru^ literarum authoritate and
philosophia physicaeque nomine defendere. Author. Andr. Libav. etc.
learned writer has composed a whole tractate. As for his wholesome and
approved chymicall remedies either of his own invention, or collected from
other men, I am so far from disallowing the use of them, that being
discreetly used, I doubt not but they may and do produce very laudbale and
desired effects; neither am I, or ever was I so rigid, that I would refuse the
use of any safe and lawful remedy, whosoever were the Author. As for that they
tell us, that if the weapon be exposed to the cold air, the wound will smart,
and be in pain; but not so, if kept warm in a close place and free from dust.
To that I have already said concerning sympathy may serve for an answer. And
if there be such a sympathy, seeing wounds are much wronged by great noises;
as shooting of ordinance and the like, I mervaile whether such a noise many
miles distant from the party wounded, but hard by the weapon anointed, would
annoy the said wounded party. It is by that famous Lib. 9. cap. 14.
Pare reported, that at the siege of Hesdin in France by the army of Charles
the fifth Emperor, at the shooting off of the ordinance many hurt in the head
were extremely tormented, whether the weapons wounding them were in the open
air or lapt up warm by the fireside. And I marvel whether our soldiers
now in the Germane wars do always keep their weapons in the open air, or
close lapt up. I believe it is not the custom either of the King of Sweden or
his enemies, to lap up their weapons by a fireside; and yet, if one should
make inquiry, he should find, that many of them were notwithstanding easily
cured without great pain, The ambient air^ much hinders or furthereth the
cure of wounds.
as many by experience have heretofore found true. Some wounds again in regard
of the ambient air, although but small, and in themselves seeming secure, yet
many times prove mortal: that I say nothing of the several constitutions of
bodies, time of the year, the country, age and sex, etc. But it seems this
cure like an Empiricke contemns and neglects all such circumstances.

As for the sign of life and death by the blood sweaty drops, The like may be
said concerning drops of blood on the weapon when the patient tra^gresses in
Diet.
I hold it either imposterious or impious and superstitious, the sympatheticall
operation being already overthrown. Powder of red sanders being laid upon the
weapon being warm, and being moister then it may make a show of bloody sweat,
and then this is but to cozen the world: and if otherwise, it is already
answered. And as for the knowledge of life and death by a lamp made of his
blood with the spirit of wine, I have already touched it, and if any such thing
be effected, it is more like to be produced by art diabolical than otherwise.
As for that which is alleged, that lying with a menstruous woman will
frustrate the operation, I hold that the carnal knowledge of any woman is
hurtful to the wounded; and this stands to far better reason than that the
person that anointeth the weapon, lying with a woman should be hurtful to the
wound. But on these and the like I will not any longer insist, but proceed to
some examples.

Now although that which has been said already might suffice to prove the
invalidity and unlawfulness of this cure, Lying with menstruous women.
yet will we say something of these examples also. These examples then are of
two sorts, either of such cures are supposed to have been performed by the
weapon-salve, or of other magneticall and sympatheticall cures (as the
defendant calls them) seeming far stranger than those performed by this
ointment. As for the first sort then, admit they have been performed, wherein I
will not call in question the relaters credit, of what quality soever, the
question is not here de facto, as we say, but de jure; not whether there has
been any such cure performed, but by what means, and therefore they are of no
validity. And the invalidity of this argument desumed from issue and event, I
have already in the beginning of this discourse answered. Of one of those cure
notwithstanding I will speak a word. History.
A fellow (says he) had his finger cut with a since, and when the blood could
not be stanched, the Noble man his Master wished to knock off the handle of
the since, and send him the very sigh to anoint; the which, the wounded fellow
himself went about, and at the very first knock he gave the since that had
wounded him the blood stanched. The mystery of this cure new ascribed to the
secret or invisible spirit in the blood, and not to the salve.
In the same place he avoucheth that the same noble personage acknowledged,
that although there were not drop of blood to be discerned on the weapon, yet
if he anointed the place of the weapon that made the wound (which oftentimes
he confessed was done by guess) he did as well perform the cure, as if the
blood had stuck upon it. out of which revelation or detection (says our
Defendant, for they are his own words) I gather, that all the mystery of this
cure consists in the secret and invisible spirit that is within the blood,
as well remaining still and operating in the wounded body, as that which has
penetrated invisibly into the weapon: or else without the presence of the
visible blood it could not operate. Out of which I again likewise collect,
that if all this mystery consist in the secret and invisible spirit of the
blood; then no part of this mystery consists in the salve; and so by
consequence the variety of ingredients blood, The salve then is of no efficacy.
fat, mummy, moss and bones, the observation of the stars and position of
the heavens in the collection and composition are of no efficacy, and not to be
regarded, and consequently it will follow that this is a mere gull and trick
put upon the world to cozen them, and by this means the cure will answer the
name by some imposed, Mark well.
to wit impostorious. Again, whereas it is said, that the cure was as well
performed without any blood to be seen upon the weapon, as with it; that the
same Noble man ingeniously confessed, that he was often forced to anoint the
weapon by guess, I again gather this conclusion, that the former tenent of
the emanation of the spirits of the blood in the wound to that of the weapon,
and the sympathy betwixt both is frivolous and idle. The weapon is sometimes
anointed by guess, there being no blood sticking on the same whereby to
discern it; and yet this stout Champion, where both sense and reason fail,
loath to have the foil will needs have the spirits of the blood to be there
by secret penetration. I thought strange before to hear of so subtle,
penetrant spirits of blood separated from the body, and now I confess I am
more amazed to heart as much of the emanation of spirits of blood where no
blood at al is to be seen. In a piece of wood, perhaps, there might be more
appearance of this penetrating spirit, but in iron or steel it is far more
unlikely. This as a trick transcending that which has hitherto been published.

Now to prove the operation of the Weapon-salve, and confirm his former
tenent, (although already by himself overthrown) besides that which has been
said already, History of St. Walter Raleigh stanching any flux of blood
he mustereth up a number of other examples both homebred and foreign. One is
of a Noble knight now resting in peace, who often stayed any flux of blood at
a pretty distance, if he might but get a handkercher of the parties with some
of the same parties blood sticking thereon: the which manner of cure, because
built on the same foundation with that which has been said already,
concerning the sympathy betwixt blood and blood, what has been said already
shall now suffice: howbeit the argument used is but impertinent, that if this
knight had thought this cure unlawful, would he have persisted in the use
thereof? A slender argument.
And the Defendant himself says, Bernardus non videt omnia: this knight might
likewise be persuaded of the lawfulness of this cure: and yet do not milions
of people often commit enormious crimes, which their consciences do witness
to be sins? And this I am sure none will deny. I deny not notwithstanding,
that many who both use this weapon-salve, and many other unwarrantable, are
persuaded of the lawfulness of the same: neither yet do I think so
uncharitably of all such persons, as have through ignorance used either this,
or some other cures of the like kind, which is the cause I take this pains to
acquaint them with the truth, and to reclaim them from their erroneous
opinions.

Other sympatheticall and magneticall cures (as they are called) are likewise
in the same chapter produced, Some of the examples alleged are two like
cacomagicall cures.
some of them in my opinion (and I doubt not but I shall have many both of
judicious, learned and religious on my side) as like cacomagicall cures as an
egg is like another; and therefore, if this may pass for current coin,
Strange manner of the cure of withered members.
I warrant we shall not be unfurnished of such commodities. The first is
concerning the cure of withered members, by taking some of the nails, hair,
and skin of this member, stopping them in a hole of a willow or hazell tree,
bored with an auger or wimble, fastened with a peg of the same wood, and close
stopped up: and to give the better gloss to the matter, it is added, that the
motion of the heavenly bodies, the Moon to be increasing, and the good
Planets in such a multiplying sign, as is Gemini, etc. This cure is by him
also called magneticall, concerning which manner of cures, because I have
already said something I shall not now need to speak much. We have had already
much ado about the spirits of the blood moving to and fro, for the which were
pretended many fair shows of reason, howbeit to small purpose, as has been
already proved; and now behold we have as great, yea greater matters performed
without this loud-crying blood and the spirits of the same. Now the very
excrementitious parts (by most of our Physicians denied the very name of parts)
hair, Skin, hair and nails as efficacious as the blood.
nails and skin, seem to be as efficacious as the blood it self. Nay any
old wife can cure warts by rubbing the same with a piece of raw beef, and
after burying the same in the ground, the which as it rotteth and wastes away,
so does the wart. Well then, according to the Defendants own assertion, this
is performed without any observation of the heavens which have here no energy:
and indeed the stars are made but a stalking horse to hide a great deal of
cosenage in the like cures, as may by that which has been already said, easily
appear. But now I would ask mine Author, Star but made a stalking horse to
hide a great deal of co^en^ge
whether there be as great and efficacious spirits in those dry excrementitious
parts, as was in the blood, from whence was fetched the sanative or healing
virtue. In the first place then it is said, these parts were withered and dried
up, and these excrementitious parts, especially now amputated from the part
whereunto they pertained, I think not so well furnished with balsamicke
spirits, as that they might impart some to this member from whence they were
fetched, there being no bond to tie them to communicate that to others which
they have not themselves. From whence then proceeds this sanative virtue? If
it be answered, from the stars, I have already confuted that, yea he himself
has made it void. But if it be answered from the tree, I demand again what so
great a sympathy betwixt the tree willow or hazell and the parts of a man's
body? What? is there such a sympathy betwixt a vegetable and an animal? are
trees and plants furnished with such spirits as may supply the defects in man?
As for the event that so it comes to pass, proves no more than may be said
for any cacomagicall (for so I see I must distinguish) operation. And how like
this is to this satanicall operation of witches and sorcerers, may by that
History by a Bodin. Demon. lib. 2. ex Hect. Boet. Histor* Scot. lib. 2.
late Writer related, History of the bewitching a Scottish king by a picture of
wax.
easily appear. A Scottish King languishing of an irrecoverable Consumption
(as was supposed) at length were certain witches discovered in the country of
Murrey at a small fire roasting the Kings picture made of wax, and as thi^
picture wasted, so the body of this King sensibly decayed and wasted away; and
as these witches pinched this picture with pins or bodkins, so this King found
pain in his body answerable: and these witches being apprehended, and this
picture taken from the fire, the King recovered. The application is easy. This
I leave to the judicious, Christian and unpartiall Reader to judge of. It is
well known I am sure, that witches are very diligent in searching after some
of the clothes or hair, etc: of that party they would bewitch, Witches
practices.
although this be not always. And that they may likewise sometimes help the
sick to health, has been already proved. Operation of the rose of the Sun.
Howsoever sure I am, this is not the manner of operation practiced by God
himself or any of his Prophets and Apostles, either in the old or new
Testament. No more than the others does that relation concerning the herb rose
of the Sun opening and shutting as does the matrix, prove any thing. This
plant is put in plantaine water, and a little of this water given to the woman
with child in the beginning of her labor, and the gentlewoman using this
remedy, judges of the time of the birth by the opening and shutting up of this
plant. In the first place then this is a relation from others, and what may
therein be concealed I know not. Something may be concealed, and something not
truly related.
And admit all be true as is related, yet this plant and plantaine water not
being of one and the same operation, seem not so well to accord* for howsoever
the former may produce a laudable effect, yet the plantaine water being of an
astringent faculty, is impertinent: and were better to use some matricall water
appropriate for such a purpose. Howsoever this instance or argument taken from
such an event (put the case it hold always true, whereof I am ignorant) will
yet prove nothing. And what do I know what may be here hid and concealed from
us in this relation? and what know I whether there be spells, or compact direct
or indirect used by those who make use of this remedy? Much more could I yet
say concerning this, but I hasten to that which follows; howsoever many times
aliquid latet quod non patet. There is likewise related unto us a story
concerning the Jaundize, at the distance, History of cure of the Iaundize at
the distance of almost a 100 miles.
not of 10. or 20. but even almost of a 100. miles, the which because I have
from the same author, and he relates the same from a great personage, yet
because he takes upon him the justifying of such manner of cures, I take it as
his own act. This cure of the Jaundize is performed by means of a paste made
of the ashes of certain wood against the Jaundize, together with the urine of
the patient, A ball for the cure of the Iaundize at such a distance.
with a blade of saffron in the top each ball. As for the ingredients of these
balls, I doubt not of their efficacy and power, being used after an orderly,
legal and methodicall manner of other medicines: but that they have any power
to work at such a distance, I am not so credulous, as by seeming shows to
believe. The manner of the cure is that these balls are laid in a secret place,
where they must not be stirred, lest the cure be hindered. And it is not unlike
that of the Weapon-salve, but that this seems rather to exceed the same. In
that we read not of above 20 miles distance betwixt the wound and the
weapon-salve, and here is near an 100. And besides, there was blood, and the
secret emanation of the spirits of the same from the wound to the weapon, the
blood thereon and the salve, with the speedy posting back again of all these
nimble spirits with their sanative virtue to the wound: and here we have a
tincture of blood and natural salt, and some of the relics of the icteritious
humor. But this emanation of spirits, Note, here, there is no use of the stars
and celestial bodies, which are sometimes so efficacious.

These balls are said to cure any Iaundize indefinitely without any respect
had to cause, continuance, age sex, etc.


and the manner of this cure may easily be confuted by that which has been
said already. And we are yet to take notice, that in the weapon-salve the
simples were to be collected at a certain time, when the aspect of the heavens
were propitious; and in these balls working at a far greater distance we
hear of no such matter observed: and from hence may we collect that this and
some other circumstances are but fopperies, and have no more power to procure
or further any sanative virtue, than spells, characters and uncouth words have
in the cure of diseases. But this may yet seem strange to a rational
Physician, that he affirms indefinitely any Jaundize, of any age, sex, or
proceeding from any cause, may be thus cured. Our best medicines duly applied
per contactum, yet cannot cure any Jaundize whatsoever; and yet these balls are
said to do this at almost a 100. miles distance. Icterus in universum triplex
est, felleus, hepaticus and criticus; qui sane omnes in multo plures species
subsecantur juxta diversitatem causae. Felleus quidem fit vel. ab immodica
plenitudine vesiculae fellis, vel parvitate eius, aut ab imbetillitate
facultatis attractricis eiusdem, aut a meatuum obstructione; sive eorum sit per
quos allicitur bilis, sive eorum per quos pellitu^ ad intestina, quo regurgitat
ad venas bilis, and praedictum gignit effectum. Hepaticus autem efficitur
icterus ab Hepatis obstructione, scirrbo, inflammatione, aut calida
distemperie: ad quod etiam membrum reducitur venarum caliditas exurens, and
totius etiamcorporis; Quippe evidentissimum est praedictis rationibus, and ob
infirmatatem secoris icterum fieri, na^^ multitudo bilis crassae ob scirrbosum
tumorem, and infirmitatem jecoris expultricis tendens per ve^as, in cum
effectum fere semper commigrat: sic ab eiusdem partis inflammatione, and quia
plus bilis generatur: and p^ri ratione obstructo Hepate, quo minus itura bilis
in vesicam conscendat: Sed evidenti etiam eventu cum ^ecur calidum efficitur,
quo tempore plus justo flava bilis generatur, quam vesicula fellis expurgare
potest; quo fit ut venas irruens pradictus color oriatur: Quem quoque affectum
fieri conspicimus venoso genere male affecto, nimirumcorrupto aut exhausto in
venis, and in universo corpore sanguine, ob earum intemperamentum circa hepaein
affectum, aut a veneno assumpio, vel ei aculato a fera, vel a cathareticis non
purgantibus, quae, ut quibusdam placet, vel humorem purgandum alunt, vel
deleteria inficiunt qualitate. Vltima autem icteri sors est cum Crititus
efficitor, qui duplex existit: salutaris unus, qui cursus fit, dum copia bilis
sano existente homine molestatur natura, aut in morborum indicationibus, quae
septimo die, aut post 7. diebus Criticis incidit, antegressis coctionis signis,
etc. Ludo. Market. Tom. 3. lib. 4. de intern. morb. circui^ cap. 5. de icteri
omnibus speciebus.
What if the Jaundize proceed from the debility, obstruction, inflammation,
scirrhus of the liver, will this medicine make up all these breaches,
especially at so far a distance? What if from obstruction of the gall-bag,
from the abundance of this excrement, from the small bulk of this bag, or the
imbecility of the attractive faculty, will this remote agent produce such
stupendous effects, where the united forces of the best Physicians, how
methodically soever applied, are often frustrated of their desired effects? And
if it be a sympatheciall Jaundize, manifesting it self before the seventh day,
by the father of Physicians, deemed so dangerous, will this medicine suddenly
cast nature into a new mold, and so prevent all future danger? And besides,
when the Jaundize proceeds from poison, which has poisoned all the blood of
the body, will these balls rectify and renew the whole mass of blood, and
like some famous antidote extinguish this whole venomous quality: Ordinary
medicines, I confess, sometimes cure ordinary Jaundizes, although, I confess,
there is no small error often committed in the use of these, as those used for
other diseases. But to cure such as have long lain drooping under the burden
of this disease, is not so obvious for any ordinary medicine to cure, and far
less at a very far remote distance. The learned know there is often a great
mistake in the cure of diseases, and some said sometimes to have cured them,
who never had any share in the business, as I have in the beginning of this
Book already proved. Many times the learned Physician has so shaken the
foundation of a disease, that it is now ready to be eradicated, and yet nature
now weakened with a multitude of medicines is not able so suddenly to recollect
it self, howbeit after a while, the good effect of former medicines is to the
patients senses apparent: and yet, if in the mean time the patient shall
happen to use any medicine prescribed by the simplest old woman in the country,
that shall often carry away the credit of the cure, yea, many times, although
nothing be by any administered, and yet there intercede any distance of time
betwixt his physic and time of recovery, it will often be imputed to the
strength of nature, or some other means. In cures of this nature both my self
and many other Physicians could easily instance. And therefore the more I
mervaile that a rational Physician, and a Doctor in his profession should so
meanly account of a rational and methodicall proceeding, and so much to
magnify and extol such unwarrantable manner of cures. A worthy and learned
Divine, History.
and son to an ancient, reverend, grave Divine this last year 1631. having
for a while lost the use of his rational part, for a long time used the
Counsel and advice of some learned and expert Physicians of the City of
London, of whose labors, notwithstanding, no sudden effect did follow, so that
at length they desisted from any further administering Physic. In the mean
time during this rest, mention is made of certain Empirick, a Barber by
profession, but accounted very famous for such cures. The friends of the
patient taking hold of any hope of doing him good, commune with this barber
Aesculapius, who would not under 20. pounds undertake his cure, and for that
sum he made no question of the cure: and after some days demurre, the
patients friends standing upon the sum demanded, the patient suddenly
recovers without any further means than what had been formerly by his
Physicians prescribed. Some were ready to censure the Physicians, See then how
much the learned Artist is often injured.
that they could not help him: and had this bold Empiricke exhibited the least
medicine (yea although contrary to the disease, as is with them most common and
frequent) the whole credit of this cure had been ascribed to this ignorant
Empiricke, whereas, next unto God, it was performed by the means those learned
and rational physicians used, howsoever the effect so suddenly followed not.
But leaving diverse other things I could except against this Jaundize cure, I
proceed.

To confirm this wonderful working of the Weapon-salve, our defendant is not
contented with homebred examples, but seeks abroad for foreign aid. He tells
us of a Noble man of Italy recovering a nose lost. This Noble man having at a
combat lost his nose, History of an Italian Noble man recovering twice a new
nose
afterward by advice of his Physician, for a sum of money and liberty, got
his slave to yield to wound his arm, and so joined his own wounded nose to
his slaves wounded arm, and so caused bind them fast together, until these
two fleshes were united and assimilated, and after a collop or gobbet of flesh
was cut out of the slaves arm, and fashioned like a nose unto this Lord, and
so handled by the Surgeon that it served for a nose. The slave manumitted and
rewarded went from Boloigne to Naples. Afterward it fell out that this slave
died, at which instant the Lords nose did gangrenate and rot off, whereupon the
part of the nose which he had of the dead man, was by the Doctors advice cut
away, and he being animated by the foresaid experience, followed the advice of
the same Physician, which was to wound in like manner his own arm, and to
apply it to his wounded and mutilated nose, and to endure with patience till
all was complete as before. He with animosity and patience, did undergo the
brunt, and so his nose continued with him until his death. Here is then the
story which the Doctor had by relation. Upon this is concluded an undoubted
victory, and this example taken for a strong argument to prove the operation of
the Weapon-salve, how truly let us a little inquire. From hence (says he) is
inferred, that the concourse of these two spirits, or rather (as he calls them)
one spirit, being as a line stretched out from the extremities of so far a
distance, could neither by the tall hills of Hetruria, nor yet the high
Apennine mountains be stopped. In the first place then, for the credit of the
History we have nothing but the Authors own bare relation, so that we must
take it upon his trust; and how well it is known in Italy, I am ignorant. This
makes nothing for the confirmation of the matter in hand
But put the case this were yet true, what will his new nose make for the
confirmation of the matter in hand. He says it was related to him that
immediately upon the death of the slave, the Noble man's nose gangrenated and
rotted off. Well, This artificial nose might rot off about the same time the
slave died, casually, or yet by reason of a like radical temperature of the
part with the whole.
I am neither certain of the time nor manner; and yet of this am sure enough,
that many have not only had their noses, but some other parts also rotted off,
with the Neapolitane or catholic disease. What do I know whether this might
not be so, and concur about the time of the slaves death, it may be a little
before or after, or what, if at the very same instant? What from this effect
will follow for the fortifying of this former position. Moreover what, if, as
we sometimes observe near kinsfolks, brothers, sisters, etc: by reason of a
like radical temperature fall sick, and sometimes dye at one and the same
time, although many miles asunder, as I could instance in examples of mine own
and other men's observations, if I did not fear to trespass on the readers
patience: so likewise this slave and that piece of his flesh, although now
incorporated with the Noble man's nose, participating of one radical
temperature (notwithstanding some difference in their late aliments) might both
perish at one and the same time. Diverse other things concerning this same point
I were yet able to say, if it were necessary* howsoever, if it were but this,
that it might be a catholic, Neapolitane nose, and so perish without any
poasting and repoasting of catholic spirits over the Hetrurian or Apennine
mountains, There might be a satanical operation.
may suffice. And notwithstanding, the Defendants peremptory opinion, that here
can be no operation of the Devil, I affirm, that as wise men, at lea^^ as
will maintain the contrary, might here maintain a possibility of satanicall
operation, but I will not insist upon this point. And thus by way of concession
of the supposed truth of the story, it is apparent, that this story proves no
more than any of the former, which without any further might well satisfy the
Reader. But besides that which has been already said, what if I should hold
this artificial reparation of noses scarce to be faisable, and this story
consequently to be false? I can produce mine Author, one of the famousest Quod
si integer nasus velnasi portio penitus excisa fucrit, non sperabilis
re^^itutio. Ambr. Par. lib. 9. ca. 28
Surgeons of this our latter age, a man famous in his generation, of manifold
experience in peace and war, and who was employed in the continual service
of 4. French Kings succeeding one another. And thus much for these examples.

But to daw now toward an end of this controverted point, I think it is now
apparent to the indifferent and unpartiall Reader, that this cure by the
weapon-salve cannot be ranked amongst ordinary natural cures, being neither
performed per contactum physicum, nor being within the sphere of activity, as
the plaintiff well pleads, howbeit, in mine opinion, the defendant answers
not so pertinently. And besides, there is no such manner of operation recorded
in holy writ. Natural cures are there performed per contactum physicum: as
Isaiah 28.21.
Hezekiahs sore healed by a lump of figs, a medicine befitting the same.
Miraculous cures have sometimes conceived contactum physicum, howsoever the
instrument used have in it no such energy or efficacy: as the river Jordan to
cure the Leprosy, clay to cure the blind, etc: As we have already instanced.
Sometimes again is no instrument at all used, but the absolute Power of the
Almighty: as in the lepers, paralyticks and others may be observed. But such
cures as this of the weapon-salve we have no where in Scripture recorded. And
those who use such cures, let them take heed lest they fall suddenly in to
Satan's snares. I do not deny, that many excellent and rare conclusions are by
that called natural magic, or wisdom brought to pass. But I affirm
again, that this same has often proved a stalking horse to cover a great
deal of cacomagicall impiety, as might easily be proved. This spirit of error
has now by the experience of so many thousand years well improved his cunning
and skill in seducing and deceiving mankind, and although he yet many times
easily seduce the simpler sort, and weaker sex, especially by real contracts
and bonds; yet every one will not bite at this bait; and therefore there are
other more cunning contracts for more refined understandings. Aut exercetur
Magia tacit sive conspicuis signis, aut per instrumenta aspectabilia. Vtrumque
cum peragat diabolus decept^s Magis fraudulente^, ^uanqu^m ^iqui hene sciant se
aut c^^^nerc^^ ^^iabo ^^amen p^aetendunt lumen natu (...) Lumen natura and
precipere spiritibus imm^^^^ a^ a^s^at ad mi^ (...) Lumen naturae est
temp^state^^tere, sata ^^an^ser^c, (...) mont^^per fidem naturalem: capita
demire hominibus, iterumque imponere: subito momento coenas exhibere magicas:
essiagere cornua: bibere cribro: sisterepridem defunctos; tribus jaculis ex
a^cu, aut globulu ex bombera^ emissis omne quicquid (...), etiam non visum
consodere: in speculis videre omnia praeterita, praesentia, futura, facta,
scripta, dicta, cogitata: sanare per maximas distantias: colioqui cum co qui
est in Persia, cum tu si^ in Hispania: in disco lunae legere scripta ab eo qui
mill milliar^a abest: in homine destinato and absente and ignorante ea
perficere, quae in homine cerco, vel alia imagine qua iste repraesentatur:
ligatu^a^ physicas inducere, and iterum demere: Inimicitias and favores
concil^are, affect^sque hominum mutare ad libitum: detrahere uni vires and in
alterum infer: victorias transserre: ingentes exercitus voce, fistula, vel
imaginations in fugam vertere; mures and muscas congregare ut and sagas:
Characterihus, sigillis, pentaculls and alijs ab omni injuria^se immunem
reddere: armaturas, gladios, ^^lypeosque martios facere, quibus saltem visis
fundantur bosliles exercitus; adjurare bo^bardas ne explodantur: equos ita
afficere ut summa celeritate etiam per praecipitia serantur and ex hostibus
salvum reportent sessorem; Canes habere Gamabaas per quos mira effi^ias; and
ita parhedros, suc^ubos, succubas, cervas, aves sacere, etc; facere
tintinnabula quibus meretrices discernas: mutare humanam figuram in leoninam,
ursinam, lupinam, osininam, etc. Sic ludere posse tuesseris, chartis, and alijs
ut numquam succumbas, avium votes intestigere, novacula cutem dissecare,
baculos in serpents mutare, and alia inen^^rabilia patrare, qualia facta
meminerunt ^i^toriae mundana; estque vix alius in tota seu antiquitate, seu
nostro saeculo Magus quem Paracelsus and Paracelsistae non commendent,
admireatur, (...) aedicent. Paracels. Mahumetum nominat, Archeum Hippocr.
quendam; Sarellum, Archasium, Techellum, Virgilium and al^o^ plures, etc. Andr.
Libav. lib. Quomodo magi Isiblica scripta depravent exemplis ex Crollio
product^s
There is therefore a more secret close and indirect compact with Satan, as is
by our Divines and other writers granted, as the plaintiff truly affirms.
And as a learned late writer affirms, the devil is the author of both these
operations, although he cunningly delude such impious Magicians, howbeit some
are not ignorant of their commerce with the Divill, but yet pretend the light
of nature and other fair shifts and colorable excuses. The light of nature is
(says mine Author) to command unclean spirits to be ready at our service: to
cut off men's heads, and set them on again: as likewise to raise storms and
tempests; to translate whole fields of Corn, and that by a natural faith: in
a moment and suddenly to exhibit magical suppers: to set horns on a man's
head, to drink out of a riddle or sieve: to make dead men seem alive: with
gunshot or arrow-shot to kill any thing although thou see it not: in a mirror
or looking glass to see all things past, present and to come, done, written,
spoken, or once but thought: to cure at a far distance (mark with what
company this cure by the Weapon-salve is coupled) to speak with one in Persia,
the other party being in Spain: to work upon a man absent and ignorant by a
wax picture: to read in the body of the Moon written by another a 1000. miles
distant: to induce physical legatures, and at pleasure to undo them again:
to procure hatred and favor, and to change men's affections: to draw strength
from one, and bestow it on another: to convey great victories to their friends:
with the noise of a flute, the sound of the voice, and by imagination only to
put great armies to flight: with characters and the like to free one from
outward injuries: to congregate and assemble together mice, rats and witches:
to make such armor that at the very sight thereof, the enemy shall run away
to conjure ordnance and guns that they shall not shoot off (It is a wonder the
Emperor can find none of these so useful artificers now in his so great need)
to provide such horses as will with incredible colerily carry the riders over
any high hill or dangerous precipices; yea through the midst of an enemy. And
such horses, say our Paracelsians, used the Wise men of the East at the
Nativity of our Lord and Savior. A multitude of such in^tances of other
strange magiciall impieties could I relate. Howsoever many of these be mere
lies, which they cannot effect, yet may the judicious and unpartiall Reader
thereby easily perceive ex unguibus leonem, what such people aim at, whasoever
plausible reason they pretend to the contrary. And such is the doctrine of
Paracelsus and his followers, for the which reason, we have just cause to
suspect such cures, rather then with the defendant call them Dona Dei,
miraculous, mystical, extraordinary, and what not. Proverb 1^.25,
There is a way (says Solomon) that seems right in his own eyes, but the
issues thereof is death. And the 1 Thessalonians 5.22.
Apostle Paul wishes us to abstain from all appearance of evil. And if there
were no other reason, methinkes, a good Christian should be circumspect what he
uses. If some Divines and Physicians have approved of it, that is no warrant
for me nor any man else, it is good for every man to be sure of a good warrant
for his actions. I weigh more the truth than the eminency of the person or his
calling. Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.

And thus have I declared mine opinion concerning this cure done by the
Weapon-salve, although neither of any contentious spirit of contradiction, or
opposing any man's opinion: far less to please or applaud or plead for the
profit of any silver-smith Demetrius; howbeit I think those men (the company
of Barber-surgeons I mean) not so despicable, but that they ought to be
regarded and have their due, that profession being both ancient and famous, yea
most ancient of all the parts of Physic, and practiced by manual operation
(from whence it is denominate) many years before either Anselmus, Paracelsus,
or whosoever was the broacher and propagator of the Weapon-salve was heard of.
Many things here I pass by in the Defendants book worthy of confutation, as
not having taken that in hand, which would have required more time, and made
this book to swell to too voluminous a bigness, my purpose being only to
touch upon such things as chiefly and most nearly concerned this subject of
the Weapon-salve. And what I have said, I refer to the censure of the learned
and judicious. Errare possum, hareticus esse nole.

CHAP. XXXJ.
Of mandrakes, the nature and virtue thereof, and whether this plant has any
power to procure love?

NOw from that which has hitherto been said concerning Philtra or love
potions, there arises yet a question concerning one simple, and which may
seem to cross that which we have already said concerning such simples as are
supposed to provoke or procure love. For it seems, at has been constantly
maintained, and by sacred Writ confirmed, that that simple called Mandragora,
and in English Mandrake, has been endued with this amatory quality. That
truth therefore may prevail, and error may be convinced and confuted, I think
it shall not be impertinent, ere we proceed, to say something concerning this
simple. Of this mention is made in Geniso. 14.
Genesis, where it is said, that Reuben went forth in the time of wheat
Harvest, and having brought home with him Mandrake, Rachel begging them of her
sister Leah, she refused, etc. From whence it is collected, and by some
supposed, that Leah used this simple as an amorous bait to make her fruitful,
and to attract, and so much the more procure her husbands love, into the truth
whereof we are now to inquire. In the first place then, it would seem this
simple was by the ancients used to this same end and purpose; and was for this
same cause by them called Circaea or Circetris, from that famous witch Circe.
Lib. 4. cap. 7.
Dioscoride makes it of two sorts, male and female: the female he makes
lesser in leaves, the leaves smaller, and smelling better: to the male again
he ascribes greater leaves, and the fruit bigger, participating of a sweet,
heavy, loathsome smell. Of any pleasantness of smell Rem comperi pulchram and
suavcolentem, sepore quideus insipido: and ideo cur came mulier tantoper
concupiverit ignorare m^ fateor, nisi propter raritatem, and odoris
j^cunditatem. lib. 22 cap. 56. conti^ Faustum.
Pliny speaks not one word; but whereas all agree that the leaves and root
are of a loathsome and strong smell, Lib. 25. cap. 71.
Pliny averreth, that this apple or fruit does yet exceed them herein: but
neither of them do ascribe unto it any amorous quality. Lambert ^anaehus Phys.
Christ. part. 2. tract. 3. cap. 67.
S. Augustine affirms, he found in his own experience this pleasant smell in
these apples, and withal that they were of an insipid and unsavory taste; for
the which cause, he wondreth why Rachel should so much desire the same, and
acknowledges himself to be ignorant hereof, unless she were in love with the
smell and beauty of this fruit, and the rarity thereof. A Lib. de simpl. medic.
late Germane divine, who also quoteth this same place of S. Augustine, is of
this opinion also, that this was not for any venereous use, that Rachel so much
desired these apples or flowers, or whatsoever it was. Matthiol in praedic.
Dioscorid locum. (...) History of the impostorious cheating with counterfeit
Mandrakes.
Galen gives it no such amorous quality, but ascribes unto it a cooling
virtue in the third degree, together with some portion of heat, especially to
the root: but the apples he acknowledges to be moister; but in all he holds
this narcoticke quality to be predominant. Now by any thing which has hitherto
been said, there has been proved no amorous quality in this simple, which
notwithstanding has been hitherto by many very steadfastly believed, and has
been the cause that many have bought such supposed roots at a very high rate.
There have been many ridiculous tales brought up of this plant, whether of old
wives or some runnagate surgeons or physicke-mongers, I know not, but sure some
one or more that sought to make themselves famous and skillfull above others
were the first brochers of that error. They add further, that it is never or
very seldom to be found growing naturally, but under a gallows, where the
matter that has fallen from a dead body has given it the shape of a man; and
the matter of a woman, the substance of a female plant, with many other such
dotish dreams.
Matthiole a late learned Physician upon that place of Dioscoride above
mentioned, makes mention of the cheating and cosening of impostors with this
counterfeit root. They take, says he, a briony or some other root, in the
which they cut out the proportion of a man, and in the head, place of the
beard, and other parts where hair uses to grow, they make many small holes,
into the which they put some corns of barley, millet, or some other grain, and
burying it in the ground, let it lie until such time as these grains were
grown out: and then with a penknife, or otherwise, cut out those blades of
the grains in the form and fashion of small hairs, and so sell them to
credulous and simple people, women especially, who are persuaded that this is a
special remedy against sterility. And this the same Author affirms that he
learned of a notorious quacke-salving Mountebancke, whom at Rome he cured of
the French pox; who among many other cheating tricks, confessed this also, and
affirmed, that for one of those counterfeit Mandrakes he had had sometimes 25.
sometimes 30. crowns. Now the better and more easily to delude the simpler
sort, and more cunningly to pick their purses, they tell them a There have
been many ridiculous tales brought up of this plant, whether of old wives or
some runnagate surgeons or physicke-mongers, I know not, but sure some one or
more that sought to make themselves famous and skillfull above others were the
first brochers of that error. They add further, that it is never or very
seldom to be found growing naturally, but under a gallows, where the matter
that has fallen from a dead body has given it the shape of a man; and the
matter of a woman, the substance of a female plant, with many other such dotish
dreams.
strange tale of the manner of pulling up this root: that it is very dangerous
for them that do it, and therefore that they bare it about the root, tie one
end of a string about it, and the other end about a dogs neck, and the master
departing, the dog essaying to follow him, pulls up this plant by the root,
Gerard in history of plants, book 2. chap. 39.
and dies immediately; and then there is no more danger either to the master
or any body else. And this fable, it seems, had its first foundation in De
bello Judaico cap 25.
Josephus, who writes such a thing of a root, which he calls Baaras, dug
up after the aforementioned manner. Now this Mandrake root barren women sought
much after, supposing it did further fecundity; unto the which they have been
induced by the mistaking of the true meaning of that place of Genesis. And
there is a Stuck. an tiquit. convic. lib. 3. cap. 1.
learned late writer that labors much to prove this, howbeit in my opinion
to small purpose. His first argument is taken from the Chalde Paraphrasts, who
both in both places (Genesis, I mean, and the Canticles) translate this word
Dudaim, Bed and Dudaim have diverse significations.
Jabruchin in the plural number, the singular being Jabroach: and the Arabians
even at this day call Mandrake, Jabora and Jabroach. Again, says he, both the
septuagint, and the old Latin translation has translated this word Dudaim,
Mandragora in both places. Again, says he, Dod, and in the plural Dodim,
signifies love or charity; and therefore the breast and paps are also called
by this name, being, as he says, the seat of love, and in form like this
apple. But the truth is, that whatsoever fair flourishes these reasons may
make, yet in them is no certain nor assured truth. For as concerning the
signification of the word he himself confesses, that the word Dod from whence
Dudaim is derived, besides this signification, signifies also a caldron, and
labors also to apply this to the form of the Mandrake: and again, Dod
signifies an uncle, and Dodah an aunt, from the effect of love, and would have
this Greek word (...) the breast or dug derived from this Hebrew Dod or Dodim,
how well, let the learned judge. And he confesses also that Rabbi Schelomoth
in both places interprets this word Dudaim sweet and well-smelling figs:
others interpret it violets; others that plant we call Satyrium; and some
again, that we call Winter-cherry: and finally some translate it pleasant and
well-smelling apples. To come then to our purpose, it seems this word is not
proper to this plant only, or rather is a general word, It is a general
word, as appears by the translation of Junius, and Tremellius himself being
a Jew.
signifying well-smelling fruits or flowers; as does appear by the late
translation of the learned Tremellius, himself a Jew, and his friend Junius,
who both in both these places where this word is only found, translate it
well-smelling fruits or flowers; in English indeed, in both places it is
translate Mandrakes. Now if we but consider a right this place of the
Canticles, it seems to stand to best reason that it should be translated
sweet smelling flowers, or at least, of very pleasant and delectable fruit,
there being mentioned before it the vine and pomegranat; and after all manner
of pleasant fruits. Now this apple of Mandrake, take it at the best, is not, I
am sure, to be parallelled with the best and pleasantest fruits. S. Augustine
indeed says it smells well, and some others say it has a mixed smell. I will
not call in question S. Augustines credit, nor argue the case whether he might
be deceived, and being no Physician have some other fruit given him, and called
by this name: but with us, sure I am, there is no such smell to be found in
those that grow in the hottest of our European countries, nor such as I smelt
in the midst of France, nor could learn it of others: and it is proper to all
our narcoticke medicines to be of an evil and loathsome smell, although
growing in a hot climat: as we find it in Opium, as also in Tobacco; although
it be verified in this drug which Divines say of sin, Consuetudo peccandi
tollit sensum peccati, The custom of sinning takes away the sense thereof: So
may I say of this, customary use makes people complain of no annoyance at
all, being so inured to this filthy smell. Ingrari illi cotulae, sambuci, and
camphora odores, satis arguunt, putido quidem ac narcotico, sed quod and
mitigativo sulphur scatea^t. Cu^us generis ^ulphur, mitigando, extinguendo
que, tanto fulminis ardori, in cerebri nostri coelo, surenti, and insulius hos
Epilepsiae, fulgureos jaculanti aptissimum ac congruentissimum est; quod satis
testatur aure a illa nostra Nepenthes compositio, quae promptissimum ac
singular huic morbo (Epilepsiae) ad s^rt subsidium. Atque ut particula^^us
causam audiatis, quae nos ad scobem ligni buxei alioqui admodum foetentis, and
caput serientis addendam impulit: sciatis in eo vim quandam narcoticam and
suporiferum sulphur abunde contineri, unde foetore contrabit, quema^modum
cicuta, ruta, mandragora omniaque papaverum genera, quae ingratum odorem
spirat, quod narcotica sint, hoc est, narcotico sulphur uimium ^incta and
insecta. Joseph Quercet. in Tetrade cap. 15. St Pharmaco^, Dogma^. restit. lib.
1. cap. 24.
This soporiferous and narcoticke quality (say our Chemists) proceeds from a
narcoticke sulphur, whereof this loathsome smell is an individual assistant.
Galen also himself judges of the quality of the simples, not only by the
taste, but also by the smell: and such as are of a sweet and pleasant smell,
not only he, but all other Physicians after him, account to comfort and
corroborate the spirits, and principal parts; which no man yet ever affirmed
of any narcoticke: nay, nor yet of Tobacco it self, although growing betwixt
the Tropicks in Trinidad. Is it then likely, that the holy Ghost, and Solomon
his Penman, and so well skilled in the nature and virtue of simples, would
rank a venomous plant among so pleasant fruits or flowers? But put the case,
that this simple growing in those hot Eastern countries, did smell well, and
lost that loathsome and unpleasant smell, incident to such simples (which,
notwithstanding, is not likely, these hot countries commonly intending their
properties and smell, as appears in Tabbaco, etc.) yet then, why may not I
with as good reason affirm, that many of our ordinary fruits or flowers,
transplanted into Salomons pleasant garden, might much improve their former
properties and smells, insomuch, that they might far surpass this plant and
fruit, and so should be in small request, where there were so many better? I
think now I have made it to the indifferent and unpartiall reader, plainly
appear, that there is small probability, that this Mandrake mentioned in the
Scripture, is our Mandrake. And put yet the case it had been so, yet we see
it produced not that effect in her that obtained this plant; and she that
parted from it had children in a short space. But let us yet search a little
further into this love-property attributed to it: this property is only
confined to help women's sterility by those who stand stiffeliest upon the
point. And yet our ancient Physicians, neither Dioscoride (who reckons up all
the several properties thereof, yea, even a violent purging quality,
equalling, if not exceeding, Hellebore it self) Galen, nor Pliny, make any
mention of this property. And whereas they make mention of some names, tending
to that purpose, they only relate other men's opinions, they never ascribing any
such property unto it. I will not indeed deny, but it might have bin used by
witches and Sorcerers in their love-potions, (as I may call them) and so were
bones of Frogs, hairs of a Wolfes tail, Hippomanes, and such other trash
(which no understanding man ever thought to be endued with any such quality) by
wicked people, notwithstanding, employed for such purposes. And this same late
alleged Author, when he alleges the supposed love quality in this simple,
groundeth his reason on the cooling quality of this simple, fit, says he, to
cool the hot wombs of those Eastern women, as he thinks it to be incident to
most women dwelling in hot countries. But what if this simple be hot in
quality? I think then his building will soon fall to the ground. Loceo prius
citate.
Galen himself joyneth heat with the cold quality in this simple. And I
think, let but a judicious Physician well consider of the purging quality, and
many other operations in this simple, incident (at least many of them) to other
narcoticks also, will acknowledge a hot quality predominating in it, and then
this cooling effect is quite vanished away in smoke. And put the case this
were yet true, then were it only good for women of very hot wombes, and not
proper for ever barren woman; and withal, were not good for women of our cold
Northern climat, who are not, for the most part, so hot wombed as there
Eastern women. Besides, if by reason of its narcoticke and soporiferous
quality, by reason it provokes to sleep, and consequently the better to
retain the seed of generation, why may not opium, henbane, or hemlocke do the
like? Or why should that plead such privilege above other simples of the same
nature and quality? Moreover, if this plant had been endued with any such
virtue, is it likely that Leah, who had now for a long time been debarred from
bearing of children (insomuch that for this cause she had given her maid to her
husband to help out her number) would so easily have parted with so effectual
a means, to her sister especially, betwixt whom and her self there was such
emulation and debate? To conclude then this point, there is no probability,
that this Mandrake has any such power or virtue, as to make barren women
fruitful; and yet far less to procure love, or make any love better,
howsoever, it may be that in ancient times, it has, perhaps, been used as
other poisons for this same purpose, as I have said already. And Pliny himself
mocketh the Magicians, who attribute strange virtues to herbs, and diverse
simples, and such as is impossible for any reasonable man to believe, as
namely, to open any lock without resistance, to dry up rivers and lakes, to
supply all wants, and make enemies to flee. But the same Magi efferunt
Aethiopide herba amnes and stagna f^^cari coniectu, tactu cla^sa omnia aperiri.
Achemenide coniectae in aciem bostium, trepidare agmina, ac ^ergae ver^ere.
Labacen deri solitam a Persarum rege legatis, ut quocunque venissent, omnium
rerum copia abundarent, ac multa fimilia. Vbinam ista fuere, cum Cimbri
Teutonique terribili Mart alularent, aut cum Lucullus tot reges magorum paucis
legionibus sterneret^ Curve Romani duces primam semper in bellis rationem
commerciorum habuere? Cur Hercules Caesaris miles in Pharsalia samem sensit, si
abundantia omnis contingere unius herbae faelicitate poterat? Non satius fuit
Aemilianum Scipionem Carthaginis portas herba patefacere, quam machinis
claustra per tot annos quatere? Siccentur Aethiopide Pontinae paludes,
tantumque agri suburbanae reddatur Italiae. Namque apud eumdem Democritum
legitur compositio medicamenti, quo pulchri bonique and formati giguantur
liberi. Plin. lib. 26. cap. 4.
Pliny wisely replyeth, Where were such herbs when the Romans obtained such
victories of their enemies? And I could make a many questions to this same
purpose, although, I confess, it were but to small purpose. But concerning
these things, as also concerning love, love potions, and the appendixes, or
things thereunto belonging, thus much shall suffice for the present: on the
which I have somewhat the longer insisted, by reason I perceived some erroneous
opinions concerning this subject to be so ruveted in the minds of many, that
it is a hard matter to root them out: wherefore, if I have trespassed upon the
readers patience, let this apology plead for me; that my intention was to
profit the public; the which I wish may likewise plead for any former
trespass of the same nature.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of immoderate or passionate anger, the hurt thereby procured to the body, in
sickness and in health, and antidots against it: in what diseases best, and in
what worst; and whether any may die of anger.

THat the affections of the soul being kept within compass, and ruled by
reason, are not sinful, may by that which has been said already plainly
appear. And a worthy light of this land, a man famous in this generation, and
to whom not this land alone, but the whole Church of God is not a little
indebted, speaks worthily to this same purpose. Animi affectus and (...)
turbatiunes a Deo hominib^ utiliter da^^ ^unt, and rerum praecture g^rendarum
admi^i^uia, and subsidia afferunt, modo D^i timore tanquam freno in
medio^ratate contintantur, neque pro naturae nostrae vitiositate modum tranfire
sina^^r. Quamobrem i^a non vitio datur, sed si quis sit ad iram proclivis, ac
levi momento accendi se patiatur, ut tanquam somes ignem facile con^ipiat, et
instar ollae notius quam aheni, quae ex parvo igne subjecto calescit. Hoc e^t
quod Christus damnas, Matthew. 5. atque hi fere tunt de quibus proverbium
di^itur, dielum colap^o rependitur. Cujus egregium exemplum vide in Lamecho,
Genesis 4. Cartwright comment. in verse. 17. cap. 14. Proverb.
The affections and perturbations of the mind (says he) are, and that not
without great reason, by God himself given unto men, and prove often very
profitable for the atchieving of high and sublime matters; provided always,
that by the awe and fear of God, as with a bridle they be kept within
compass, and not suffered to exceed the bounds of mediocrity. Of the first of
these passions, to wit, of love, we have spoken at great length; we come now
to anger: this the same Author, in the same place, observing what has been
said before, does not discommend; but when a man upon any small occasion shall
so far suffer himself to be transported with this passion, that like a dry
match, he is easily set on fire; according to our common proverb, but a word
and a blow. And therefore, Sundem quippe inter se ordinem h^ben^ ratio et
iracu^d^a, quem eques and equus, quem venator and can^^. Iustius quidem est,
and convenientius, ut quod natura nobilius meliusque est dominetur, aques
videli et equo, cani venator, ir acund^ae ratio. Sed incidit ^uo non semper
naturae sex in hoc consugatarum rerum ordine ad nin^stra^do servetur; equus
enim ferox and inordin^tus interdum sine ullo modo excurrens, sessorem quoque
vel virium imbecillitate. vel equestris artis imperit a succumbentem secum
rap^c. Ita et am^ra noununquam vehemen^atque ad jumeudas intempesti^e ^oenas
pauloviblentius exci^ata, infirmam and in^octem rationem subigit, and secum
trahit. Quod si and eques, and ratio tam viribus qua^ scientia praediti
fuerint, proculdubio and ille equam, and ^eac iracundiam cohebebit, ac vincet:
sin vel u^eque vel horum alterocaruerint, periculu^ imminet, he quod superius
nobiliusque natura est, inferiori, ac vilion sese tradat ac summittat. Hoc
Scythis and Gallis, mutu^que alus barbaris nationibus, atque ex nostris, vel
pueris, vel ineruditis hominibus usu venit ut iracundiam ratione habeant
potentiorem. In quod Homerus cum vellet ostenders, Hectorem and Achillem, and
quosdam alios hic^usmodi invines iracundiae succumbentes indutit: Vlyssem vero,
Polydamantem, and Nestorem, illi dominantes Gal. de Plac. Hippocr. and Plat.
libr. 3.
Galen well compared and paralleled together anger and reason, comparing anger
to a horse, and reason his rider: As the horse then (says he) should be ruled
by his rider, so should anger be ruled by reason, which made Ulysses curb and
keep in his anger, and just indignation conceived against his maids for their
great insolences, it being then no fit and opportune time to punish them
according to their deserts; and therefore when reason bears rule, then this
furious and raging beast, anger, is suppressed and kept under: as when the rider
is master of his horse, and both strong and skillful enough to rule him, then
the horse obeys his Master, and does him what service is sit for him to
perform. But it comes sometimes to pass, that either by imbecillirie and
weakness, or unskilfulnesse, or both; the horse gets the head, and so,
running away, he throws his rider: Even so comes it often to pass, that
this rash and precipitate anger getting the head and mastery, often
over-throweth reason his rider, and so gives him the foil. This, when Homer
would express, he brings in Hector and Achilles, young men, succumbing and
yielding to this furious passion: but on the other part, Ulysses, Polydamus and
Nestor, prevailing and getting the victory over the same. But if I should
speak of the mischiefs procured by this furious wild beast, anger, I scarce
know where to begin, and might compose great volumes of this subject only.
It armeth the will to all manner of villainy, and opens a door to all manner
of wickedness. Is it not often the cause of great wars, broiles, dissension,
of the overthrow of whole countries and famous cities. And therefore well may
it be called a most cruel inform monster, matamorphosing man, not only into
the shape of some furious cruel wild beast, but even into the shape of the
Devil himself: and as smoke dazleth the eyes of the body, so does this the
eyes of the understanding. And what marvel, I pray you, if a man now deprived
of the use of reason, and following the violence of this furious passion be
transported to the perpetration of strange and enormious facts? It was not
therefore said in vain; Ira furor brevis est, anger is but a short fury: and
we may as well say, Fury is but a long anger. How many murders have been by
this furious monster committed? Have not men thereby become more cruel one to
another than the very wild beasts? according to that old proverb, Homo homini
lupus. See how this anger prevailed in that great conqueror of the world,
Alexander the great, who yet could not conquer himself, but in his drunken
anger killed Clitus, etc. It is recorded of Vedius Pollio, a Noble Roman,
having invited Augustus Caesar to a feast, and his Butler having broken a
crystal glass, he cast him into his fish poole to be food for his Lampreies:
for the which cause, that Noble Emperor caused break all the rest, lest they
should afterward be an occasion of any such cruelty. But I should spend too
much time, if I should insist upon many particular relations of this nature. It
will be better to set down some antidots, both out of sacred and profane
writers, against this disorderly passion. The Wise man well acquained wiih the
evils and mischiefs thereby procured, therefore in that golden book of
Proverbs, and in several places of the same, sets down the evils of
anger, and the antidots against it. Besides that place alleged, in another
place he sets down these words: Proverbes 15.7.
A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger: verse 18.
A wrathful man stirs up strife, but he that is slow to anger appeaseth
strife: Chap. 14.17.
He that is soon angry deals foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is
hated. Chap. 16.38.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty: and he that rules his
spirit, than he that takes a city. Chap. 19.11.
The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression. Verse 19.
A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet
thou must do it again. Chap. ^^.9.
It is better dwell in the corner of a house top, than with a brawling woman in
a wide house. And again, Verse 19.
It is better to dwell in a wilderness, than with a contentious and angry
woman. Chap. 21.24.
Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath. 22.24.
Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not
go. 29.22.
An angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression. The learned, if they list, may read the exposition of that
worthy Divine, Cartwright, upon these places. The same sacred Writ affoordeth
us yet in sundry places sovereign remedies against this same passion. Eccles.
7.9.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Psalm., ^.8
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to do
evil. Ephesians 4.31.
Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be
put away from you, with all malice. Colos. 3.^.
But now you also put off these, anger, wrath, malice, etc. Ephesians ^.29. Give
place unto wrath, Rom 12.19.
Be ye angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. And
this last holy anger, not sinful, but against sin, is that which only is
warranted by Gods Word. And thus we see holy Moses was so moved at the making
of the golden Calfe, and to see God so grossly by Idolatry dishonored, that
he brake the two tables. But to discuss this Theme I leave to the learned
Divine, and proceed to show how careful the very heathen Philosophers were to
subdue this foul passion, and what wholesome precepts and directions they gave
against it. Plato Philoso^^us ^apunt^^ auditores a^^ onebat, ut^r^tos (...) tu
specu^o contemp arent^^ Nam ^tim facum ^^am suribundam per oma^a phre^ (...) si
malem cernerent, eo d^^ecore terri^^, in posterum ab ^racurdi^ sacil si^t
t^mperatu^os (...) in A^^ath (...) sic ^racundia, ex ^u^^ lib. 7 cap. 1
Plato very wisely wished his hearers when they were angry, to view themselves
in a looking-glass, and when as they should see their countenance look so
furiously in every respect, like one in a frenzy, it would be a means, for
ever after to make them refrain from this so fierce and furious passion. Idem
ibid. ex Dio^. Laer^ lib 3. Anton. in Me^^ssa par 2. ^er 53. V^ler Max. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
The same Philosopher being angry with his servant, and preparing himself to
punish him, it fell out that in the mean time Xenocrates came in, whom Plato
entreated to punish his servant for him; alleging that now be was angry. This
wise Philosopher, by reason of the commotion of his mind, mistrusted himself.
And yet is this the ordinary custom among men, then to punish and correct,
when they are most transported with this passion. Arist. dic^bat, perinde atque
umus oculo. comov^t, and aspectu ita conturbat, ut neque nobis ca v^denai
potestas fiat quae sunt ante pedes: ita oborta ira ration^ ca^go suffunditur,
ut se celinquere nulla cogitatione deprehendere possit, Ide^ ibid ex Stob. ser.
1*
It was the saying of Aristotle, that Prince of Philosophers, that as smoke so
troubles and dazleth the eyesight, that we are scarce able to discern such
things as are right before us: even so does anger so far blind the eyes of
the understanding, that a man cannot for the present discern he does amiss:
according to that vulgar verse: Impedit ira animum, ne possit cernere verum.

The Aristoteles, Alexandru^ ira excandescentem placare volens, and sedare
summom indignationem haec ad cum scripsit: excandescentia and ira non in
pare^^ed in me^iores ex^tere solet. Tibi vere nemo par est, Idem ibid. ex.
Elian var. hist. l. 12.
same Aristotle being acquainted with Alexanders hasty and angry disposition,
wrote to him after this manner: Anger and wrath is not commonly exercised
against our equals, but against our betters; and now there is no man on earth
to be compared with thee. Drog Laert. in eu^o vita.
Chilon docebat vincendam iram, quod ie affectus sitcaeteris potentior: quam
superare fortius est, qua ho^t^m armatum dei^cere, nec min^s exitu mortali^us
sit ab ira quam ab host. Idem Laert in (...) vitae.
Bias the Prienean, was wont to say, that there were two things contrary to
good counsel, have and anger: for an angry man being besides himself, is
void of all counsel. Chilon taught, that it was good to overcome anger with
reason, the which affection is stronger than any other: the which to overcome,
is more excellent, and requires more strength, than to overcome an enemy;
neither receive we less hurt from anger, than from an enemy. Diogen^ de n^^
irascendo accurate d^^ere ut, Ado esce^s quidam protervus ve^u^i periculum fac^
(...) praestaret ea (...) ^bat, ^nspu^t (...) ^em. Tuli^ hoc (...) sapien^er:
no^ (...) inqui^, rasem^ (...) to tamen ^a (...) ^teat, Idem Lae^^ (...) eiu^
vitae.
Diogenes upon a time seriously disputing against this passionate anger, in
comes a young rake-hell, and to try his patience, and whether he could
practice that himself he taught others, spate in his face: But the
Philosopher replied, I am not angry, howbeit I doubt whether I ought not to be
angry. Democritus ad Lacedaemonium flagris sevien^em in servum: desine,
inquit, te servo tuo simielm ostendere. Servus ea^m e^^, qui suis cupidita^ibus
imperare non potest. Licost. loco supra citato ex Eras^^ Apophth. lib. 8.
Democrates seeing a Lacedemonian in great anger, beating his servant, wished
that he himself should cease to be of his servants servile condition: for he
is a servant that cannot command his own affections. Idem ex Cicer. Tuscul.
Quaest. lib. 4. etc.
Architaes having found some of his servants in some fault, and finding
himself somewhat incensed against them, yet did nothing to them at that time,
but departing, added these words; Happy are you that I am now angry at you.
Demonax cum a quodam cui Imperator exercitum commiserat, interrogaretur, quonam
pacto delegatam provinciam quam optime gerere posset? Si, inquit, iracundia
vacaris. ^ram sensit ver prudentissimus, ad omnem functionem inu^ilem esse.
Idem suadebat, non facile irascendum esse hominibus si delinquerent: sed potius
corrigenda esse vitia, medicorum exemplo, qui non ind^gnantur aegrotis, sed
morbum sanans, Idem Lycosth. ex Era^m^ Apophth. lib. 8.
One Demonax being asked of one to whom a great Emperor had committed an army,
by what means he might best discharge his duty in this so weighty a
business? answered, if thou be free from anger. The same Wiseman advised
people not easily to be angry with any; but rather to use all means to amend
their faults; imitating in this Physicians, who are not angry with their
patients, but labor to cure their infirmities. By that which has been said
may then easily appear, what is the duty of Christians, and how far we come
short of these heathens, destitue of any other guide, but the light of nature;
the which, comparing these two cases, and paralleling the one with the other,
may more perspicuously yet appear. But this I leave to the learned Divine at
great length to prosecute. But before I leave this point, I cannot pass over
in silence that worthy and memorable example of that Patet quod ira facit
co^mitte^e ^aba, ae quibus solet posihac multum dele^e, sicut p^tet per
decretum, in quo factum sheodosi^ ^mpera^oris recitatur, quom^do lecit in ira
quadam multos occidi in Thessalonica, de quo postmodum multum doml^ns
o^dinavit, quod nulla talis ^rincipum sententra effectai^ ab executor^bus
acmand^retur ante triginta dies p^st sententiam ^atam (sicut patet ^1. q. 3.
cum apud Thessalonicam) ut ^aterim impleri possit, quod jubes Apost^lus,
dicens, date locum irae, Romans 12. ne sibi, vel alteri iterum contingat, quod
prius contigit in Thessalonica, videlicet quando per iram homicidij fraternitas
de p^riu. Sapiene 10. In quo patet, quod ira viri justitiam Dei non operatur
Jaco No C^^ 6.3 Johan Bromiardi summa praed. cap. 8 Nu. p. 1 page 412.
famous Emperor, Theodosius, and his constitution, worthy to be engraven in
letters of gold on pillars of brass for a perpetual memorial to posterity,
to shun and avoid rash anger. This great Emperor, by reason of a sudden
sedition, raised in the town of Thessalonica, sent thither his troops, who
slew of the citizens about 7000 men. This good Emperor, although he had no
small provocation to incite him to this revenge; yet because this remedy was
somewhat sharp for the disease, he not only repented him of the fact, being
by Saint Ambrose for the space of eight months first therefore excommunicate:
but made such a decree, as I wish Princes and great ones well to consider of
it: that no decree made by any Prince should be put in execution before the
full space of thirty days were accomplished, that in the meantime that might
be fulfilled, Give place to wrath; and lest the like accident should again
befall any, that had befallen those of Thessalonica. Rapuerat auriga,
gubernator l^dorum Circensiam, adolescentem ad stuprum, hunc aurigam
praefectus, vir honestus, incluse^^i carceri. Quia vero populus hujus aurigae
industria delecta atur, poscit, ut impunitus dimi^tatur; quod cum denegaret
praefectus, per seditionem occisus est: Tria igitur magna scelera co^^^rruc^
quod noluerum (...) ^au umsrelus aurigae; quod seditionem in caussa turpissima
moveru^^: quod praesectum, and alios v^ros nobiles trucidaver^ni: Propter ^as
tantas caussas cum Princeps, justo dolor exarserit, no^ exissimetur deliquisse
more Tyrannorum, qui propter nullas, aut leves caussas, magnam saevitiam
exercent, e^si excessi^ modum. Sed in mag^i^ viris Nemesis valde inflammatur.
Hanc ex^usationem Theodosii addid^, quia multi caussa errant. Chion. Carrion. a
Phil. Melancth, aucti, lib: 3: in Theodos.
And yet (as a late Writer well observes) there were three great and notorious
offenses, which incited this pious Emperor to this severe revenge, lest it may
be imagined, that like a Tyrant he raged thus against his subjects without any
seeming reason, for a small or no cause at all. For in the first place, the
people would not suffer a villain to be punished, who had ravished a youth to
abuse him against nature: again, when as he was by this good governor
committed to prison, they raised a tumult about so infamous a business: and
when as this governor did labor to suppress this their sedition, they killed
both him and diverse others of worth assisting him. But it is now more than time
we come to the hurt it procures to the body, both in sickness and in
health. And first in health, it often alters the natural comeliness and
decency thereof, changes the color of the face, dazleth the eyes, makes the
tongue clamorous, armeth all the parts of the body; as hands, feet, teeth, etc.
And as for diseases thereby procured to the body, they are not a few, and no
passion more prejudicial to the life of man, and which more accelerateth or
hasteneth on old age. And this to be consonant and agreeable to right reason,
may easily appear: for anger being nothing else but a heat, or ebullition of
the blood, and a violent motion of the same in the heart, which at length with
violence is diffused and dispersed over the whole body; as Galen himself
defines it: it must needs over-heat and dry up the body; by which means, it
sometimes exciteth Fevers; in such bodies especially as are apt for a long time
to retain this impression of heat. And although oftentimes the violent motion
of the heart be settled and staid, there remains, notwithstanding, in the body
an unnatural heat, from whence often proceed Fevers. Many also overtaken with
this passion, have been suddenly surprised with Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Convulsions, Palsies, trembling of the joints, and gouts of all sorts. Some
also have fallen into Pleuresies, laundizes, many sorts of laskes, proceeding
of choler, etc. But such especially are most offended with this passion, that
are of a hotter constitution of body than ordinary, either natural, or
adventitious, by means of any infirmity: but such especially, as have the
head and heart hot naturally, or accidentally, are most obnoxious to hurt by
the same. In all hot and acute diseases, therefore, as also in hot choleric
constitutions, we are by all means possible to prevent this passion, the
patient then of himself, by reason of his infirmity, being more peevish and
froward: for the which cause there must such caution and circumspection be used
of those about the sick, that all possible content must be afforded, and such
placed about them in whom they most delight. Their diet also and their Physic
must with all discretion be accordingly accommodated, as has already been
related. But it may, perhaps, here be demanded, Whether anger be useful in any
diseases?
whether anger be not useful in some diseases? Answ.
or whether it be hurtful in all? I answer, that in some diseases it may be
beneficial for the patient. And this is chiefly to be observed in some
infirmities of the animal parts; especially in cold diseases of the brain, In
what diseases and constitutions most useful.
in cold constitutions of body, and where the head and heart, especially, are
of this temperature, and that even by the authority of Lib. 1. cap. 4 de
differ. Febr. and lib. de causae more.
Galen himself; where he affirms, that it exciteth and stirs up natural
heat, in them almost decayed. And this is the opinion of Adhibenda diligentia
est, ut praeceps acerbaque iracundia inducatur, cum coloris reficiendi, tum
etiam succorum in corporis habitum effundendorum gratia. 2 Epid. sect. 4.
Hippocrates himself also, where he affirms, that both it helps the color
of the face, and disperseth the blood through the whole body. In cold and
moist cachecticall constitutions, it may be now and then, and by intermission
used, and that at fit and opportune times: but yet never so as the body be
thereby prejudiced, or the faculty offended. And this must be, as it were, by
way of exercise, and that with great discretion: as for the degrees of anger,
we mentioned them in the general discourse of the passions; and howbeit all
the sorts of this passionate anger be evil, and pernicious; yet the most
violent and most furious are most hurtful to health* and inflict the deepest
wounds. Before I finish this discourse of anger, rests yet I should say
something concerning a question which may here be asked, Whether any may die of
anger, as of other passions of the mind?

Whether one may die of anger.
Now, that I have reason on my side to move this question, it may from hence
appear, that even O^ timorem nonnulli subitaria morte perierunt, prae gaudio
etiam nonuulli, etc At ex ^ratu nemo mortuus est, ut pote quibus, neque ca or
refrigeratur, neque robur dissolvitur. De Sympt. cause. lib. 2.
Galen himself, who freely confesses that of exorbitant joy and grief one
may die, yet, that ever any died of anger, he altogether denies. His reasons
are probable, in that anger neither cools the body, nor yet overthrows the
strength thereof. But by Galens good leave, we have of late years learned
another lesson. In his time he never had observed it, and yet others have
since his time: Bernardus non videt omnia. Plat. Oservat. medicin. lib. 7. page
34.
A late Writer, and heretofore sometimes mentioned, tells us this story: A
widow being married to a captain and Switzer by nation, on the marriage day,
some of her friends having hindered her to bestow upon her new married husband
so much as she desired, was so transported with choler, that she would eat no
supper that night, and fell, a few hours after, into so strong convulsions,
that she died immediately after. Jdem. ibid. page 46. History.
The same Author relates yet another history: A man of good account having
by certain intelligence found, that his maid had one night lien with his
miller, watching her on the morning, as she came home, pulled her by the hair
of the head, and troad her under his feet, and was in that violent manner
transported with anger and indignation against her, that suddenly he was seized
with shortness of breath, and a trembling over his body, insomuch that I
(being called to look upon his wives eye) found I had more need to succor
him: but having used phlebotomy, and findin no alleviation, the former
accidents continuing, and strength decreasing, he died withing two days. By
this then which has been said, the truth of this assertion may appear, so
that I shall not need to instance in more examples of such as have fallen into
Epilepticall, Apoplecticall and convulsive fits, and after died of the same.
Those that are wise, will be warned by that which has been said, to those not
I, but that truth which cannot err tells them, that anger rests in the
bosom of fools, and therefore with these verses I conclude this point.

Ira animis lethale malum procul absit, ahilla
mors saepe ingeniis corporibusque venit.
Turbat enim, caecaque animos caligine versat,
et sensus tota cum ratione rapit.
Sicut enim tactae serro candente lacunae
sic motu calidi sanguinis ira fremit.
Hinc subitis fractos accendit febribus artus,
saepius hic etiam deteriora facit.
Hinc flavam ratione omni praevertere bilem
convenit, and caussis non statuisse locum.
A deadly plague to mortal minds, is fretting wrath and rage,
It kills the body, spoils the wits, thine anger then assuage.
It troubles so, and over-turnes men's heads and hearts always,
That senses, wit and reason quite, it snatcheth clean away.
As water trenches make a noise, hot iron put therein,
So anger meeting with hot blood, to rage does still begin.
Thus man with sudden agues often his broken limbs inflames,
And oftentimes in mortal men, it breeds far worse ill quames.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Sorrow, Grief and Fear, the danger and detriment comes thereby to the
body of man; and how hurtful in sickness and in health: Whether any may die
of Sorrow and Grief.

THere is yet a passion of the mind, oppressing both body and mind, when it
exceeds moderation, and is not kept within the compass of mediocrity, and
ruled by reason. And this is Grief and Sadness, which in Latin has obtained
diverse names, which by reason of the penury of our vulgar tongue cannot all be
Englished by several terms. They proceed all from the opinion of some future
or instant evil oppressing the mind, and by this means often occasioning
great hurt to the body: and are these following: Metus, Tristitia, Timor,
Terror, Pavor, Consternatio, and exanimatio, Several sorts of fear^ and grief.
as we have already in the general discussed. These passions do all, more or
less, concentrat and draw in the spirits from the circumference or outward
parts to the center, or middle region of the body, the heart especially, which
being destitute of heat and spirits, they do by this means cool and dry up
the body; and that less or more, according to the extension or remission of
the passion, the sudennesse of the same, together with the aptitude of the
subject to receive such impressions. Of this effect of sorrow and grief, the
wise Solomon was not ignorant. Proverb^ 12.25.
Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, and again, 15.13.
By sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken; or as it is after expressed, it
dries the bones. This fear or grief, or sorrow, are commonly affections
following melancholy, and depending thereupon; on the which subject, if I
should expatiate, I had need begin another volume; but because this has bin by
Democritus Iunios, or Burton of melancholy.
others, both learnedly and largely handled, as also my purpose and intention
not being here to handle any particular disease, but briefly to say something
concerning these passions of the mind, and what dangers they procure to the
body in sickness and in health, I will not meddle therewith, but prosecute
that I have undertaken. This grief and sorrow then, if too much yielded unto,
Hurts procured by grief and sorrow.
will to some procure irrecoverable Consumptions, will dry up the brain and
marrow of the bones, hinder concoction, and so procure crudities by means of
want of rest, and by consequent prove a cause of many dangerous diseases. Now,
as the excess is hurtful to all, so to some far more than to others:
especially to lean spare bodies, dry brains, persons inclining to melancholy.
And women, especially, if with child, young children, who be reason of their
sex and age are less able to resist such passions, and some by natural
constitution very timorous, are more liable to danger, by reason of fears and
sudden frights, than other people. It is therefore a very unadvised course most
commonly to affright children with bug-beares, hob-goblins and the like: An
evil custom to affright young children.
for there is many times thereby such a deep impression of fear engraven in
their tender senses, that howsoever it does not bereave them of their lives;
yet are they so possessed with an habitual fear, that they are scarce ever
freed therefrom; at least, until they atteine to ripe and mature age. And some
that are yet of a more tender constitution, are sometimees ceized with some
sudden and dangerous disease, if they escape death: as Paralyticke,
Epilepticke, Apoplecticke and convulsive fits, as I could easily instance, but
that I cannot dwell upon it. Dangerous, especially for women with child.
Of all others it is most dangerous for women with child; and that not only for
fear of present aborsion; but even for some future fear of some hurt may
befall the tender fruit of her womb. I have known some little better than
mere naturalls, by reason of the mothers fright, during their ingravidation.
It has been often also observed, that even upon men of mature age and
judgment, the strong apprehension of some future danger, has in them produced
strange and sudden effects. Schenck. observat. med. libr. 1. obs. ^. ex Had.
Junii li. de coma. History of one whose hair turned white in one night.
A late Author relates a story of a young Gentleman, whose hair was in one
night turned white. The Gentleman's name (says he) was Didacus, or Diegus
Osorius, a Spaniard, Who falling in love with a Gentlwoman, one of the Queen
of Spaines attendants, this Gentleman according to former agreements, was got
up into a tree growing within the precincts of the court, but bewrayed by the
barking of a dog, was by the guard laid hold on, committed to prison, and in
danger to have lost his life, for attempting any such thing within the
precincts of the court. The next morning the keeper found this Gentleman's hair
turned to a perfect white color as the antientest man's in the country (and yet
their hair in that country is ordinary of a black color) the which the King
first hearing related, and seeing it so indeed, it wrought such an alteration
in his mind, that not only freed he him from his punishment, but restored
him to his former liberty, affirming, that it was punishment enough to have
changed the flower of youth with white old age. Idem ex Levini Lemni^ de
complex. li. 2. c. 2. Another.
There is in the same Author a like accident happening in the cour of Charles
the fifth, Emperor, whom the Emperor himself could scarce believe to be the
same party that was committed to prison the night before, and granted him
likewise a gracious pardon: And many strange accidents are there out of diverse
Authors related, which for brevity I here pass by. Now, as other passions
excite and stir up some particular humor: as joy stirs up the blood,
These passions excite and stir up melancholy.
and anger choler; so does fear and grief stir and move melancholy. But it
may then be demanded, whether such passibe contrary to all sorts of people, and
whether one may ever give way ons thereunto? What sort of people are least hurt
thereby.
I answer, some people are more privileged than others; provided always, that
it be not in excess: and such are principally Arnold Villa nov. com in c. 1.
Schol. Saler. Faul. Aegin lib. 1. c. 57. Aetius cap. 32. Rhas. lib. 4. ca. 9.
ad Almans.
gross, fat and foggie people, with full bodies, and such as have their
spirits hot and moveable. And in such people sadness, fear, and profound
cogitations and cares do somewhat blunt the edge of those hot and fiery
moveable spirits, and withal do extenuate and take away some part of that
bulk of body wherewith they are so burdened; the which both Greek and
Arabian Physicians do with unanimous consent witness. Such as are of a
contrary constitution, of body, brain, or both, as we have said already,
are by all means possible, as they love their lives and healths, to shun and
avoid these passions. But in sick persons especially, which is that I here
principally aim at, there must a singular care and regard be had, that as
little distaste as possible be given. And herein that golden rule of
Hippocrates has chiefly place; Aph. 1. lib. 1.
that it is not sufficient for the Physician to play his part, but the
assistants also, and attendants; and all other things must also be answerable.
The sick, we know, by reason of his sickness, has sorrow enough,
especially, if the party be of a feeble, fearful and pusillanimous spirit,
the fancy still framing unto it self new fears of some bad and sinistrous
event. And thus we see through rashness and indiscretion of some about the
sick, sometimes by relating to them some evil tidings, and sometimes putting
them in needless fears, without any sure ground: or yet when there is just
cause of fear in the sick; yet being indiscreetly revealed to him, either by
the Physician, or others, or yet at an unseasonable time: as about the time of
rest, or before meals, may much prejudice the sick. And therefore I advise
all those whom it concerns, Care and circumspection to be used whom we
suffer to come about the sick.
to be very vigilant and circumspect, whom they suffer to come about the sick,
we finding by daily experience, that many times ignorant and unadvised people,
prove the causes of infinite evils to the sick: and that sometimes by
dissuading them from a laudable and legal course for the speedy recovery of
their health, prescribed by learned and wise counsel; especialy if their
shallow capacities be not able (as seldom they are) to dive into the depth of
the Physicians intentions: and sometimes also by erring in the manner
abovementioned. Such constitutions of body as we named heretofore, are not
hereby so much wronged, providing we go not too far. My meaning is not here,
notwithstanding that which has been said, to forbid any that true sorrow for
sin, and a true compunction of heart, for offending the Majesty of the
Almighty God, the which will be so far from producing those effects of
worldly sorrow, that on the contrary, it will purchase to thy soul more solid
comfort and content, and more enlargement of true heavenly joy to thy drouping
and sorrowful soul, than all the silver and gold of Ophir, and both the
Indies, and all the gracious gems and jewels ever gave to the greatest upon
earth that possessed them; yea, if it were yet possible they were all in one
man's possession: And as Proverbs 14.23.
the wiseman says, that, Even in laughter there is sorrow; so may I as well
invert it, that even in this godly sorrow, is joy in the holy Ghost, and
comfort unspeakable. Worldly sorrow causes death (says the Apostle) but godly
sorrow causes repentance not to be repented of. But many are the volumes
written by our learned Devines, concerning this subject; among others Robert
Bolton, preacher of Gods Word at Broughton in Northampton shire.
a learned late Divine has handled this point very punctually, in his learned
and elaborate Treatise of comforting afflicted consciences. But this not being
my proper element, therefore I proceed.

There is yet a doubt concerning this point, Whether one may die of sorrow or
grief.
which rests to be discussed, whether of grief or sorrow any may dye? To
this question Itaque etiam ob ^^^morem, and immentum moerorem ^^nnulli
repeniana merte ^interie unt, quod sci^icet imbecilla suaple natura animula
eorum sub valido affectu oppr^ssa confertim extincta and suffocata sit. De
causa symptom lib. 2
Galen himself makes answer that one may dye of these passions, and to this
do all Physicians assent; and experience makes it so appear. And this same
Author seconds his authority with sound reason: for in such passions the blood
and spirits having a speedy and sudden recourse to the heart to succor the
same in so great a need, where aboarding it with too great violence, and in too
great a quantity, they leave the outward parts of the body quite destitute of
this blood and spirits. We see what a strange effect this grief wrought on 1 Samuel ^.18.
good old Heli (alas how small is our grief for matters of this nature) when
he heard the ark of God was taken. And 1 Samuel 4.20.
that worthy woman his daughter in law, although her husband were a profane
and wicked man, yet at the hearing of the taking of the arc, she was so much
therewith affected, that nothing, no not the news of a son borne of her
womb, could give her any comfort, or hinder her from following the footsteps of
her father in law in giving up the ghost And Joseph. antiquit. Judaic. lib. 12.
cap. 13.
histories relate that Antiochus Epiphanes, or rather, as some well call him,
Epimanes, that tyrant, being chased out of Persia, and hearing also that his
general Lysias was defeated, and chased away by the Jews, by reason of grief
and sorrow fell into grievous diseases: although there was yet in him divine
punition to be observed, and yet not excluding natural causes. Platerus
observat. medic. lib. 1. page 49.
A famous Physician, and now and then mentioned in this discourse, relates a
story to this same purpose. History.
A preacher of this City ( Basil he means) accompanied with his wife only,
in the month of November returning from a village not far from the town,
hearing them call to shut up the gates, he ran before to cause them keep
open the gate until his wife came in, and so entering himself supposed his
wife had been entered after him, the gate was shut and she excluded ( the keys
being, as is the custom, immediately carried to the Burgermaster, no entry is
of any to be expected for that night, as I found once too true by mine own
experience) and neither could he get forth to her, nor she suffered to come in
to him, the night very dark; this poor desolate woman, all the night filling
the air with her complaints (there being no house nor town within a great way
of this city) passed a part of the night, and in the morning of this fear and
grief was found dead at the gate. Idem ibid. page 33.
The same Author relates yet two other stories making to us appear the truth
of this point. A company of young wenches in the Spring of the year, walking
abroad in a fair morning, they came to the place of public execution, where
was still hanging upon the gallows one who had been lately put to death. These
wild wenches began to throw stones at this dead corpse: at length one throwing
a greater stone than the rest, this corpse turned round: at the which motion,
this maid apprehended such fear and terror, that strongly apprehending this*
dead corpse to be alive, with all possible speed she ran home, still
supposing this dead body followed her. Being come home, she fell into strong
and violent convulsive fits, Another.
and so died suddenly. Idem ibid.
Another young maid about 16. years of age went down into a grave new dug,
where had been laid heretofore some matron of the City of Basil, and not as
yet consumed: this dead carcass this young maid essayed to lift up by the
arms; but was presently stricken with such a fear and terror, that she went
home, and was seized with so violent Convulsions, that her eyes were like to
leap out of her head, and so presently died, and was the next day buried in a
grave hard by the other; as though this dead corpse had called for her company;
as she cried out a little before her death. In the late year 1630. in the
beginning of January, my presence and pains was craved for a young Gentleman
living within some few miles of Northhampton then sick of a Fever. History of
a young Gentlewoman recovering of a dangerous fright and convulsions.
Within some two or three days this gentleman still continuing very sick, the
gentlewoman his wife being now quick with child, terrified with some accidents
she saw in her husband, and withal fearful of some future event, fell
suddenly one morning into strong and violent fits of Convulsions (being at
other times also subject thereunto) the agitation of her head and arms being
so violent, sometimes drawn one, and sometime another way, that much trouble
it was to hold her: but withal the blood and spirits flying all upwards, the
nether parts were left so feeble, that she was presently deprived of the use of
her legs, insomuch that she was in a chair carried into another room. But yet
the gentleman her husband recovering, she was in a few days freed from all
her former fits and fears; and at her full appointed time was safely delivered
of her burden, without any hurt or danger either of herself or infant. I have
the more willingly instanced in these particulars, to make every one more
carefully and circumspect in avoiding and shunning these passions, and
whatsoever may provoke or incite us thereunto. The remedies shall appear in
the next Chapter, where we purpose to speak of the last passion.

CHAP. XXXIIIJ.
Of Joy and Gladness, and of the excess thereof, which may also hurt the
body: and whether any may die of excessive joy.

THat the former passions are prejudicial, and often very hurtful to
mankind, especially if they exceed, may easily obtain credit, perhaps, with
an ordinary understanding: but that joy and mirth so agreeable to our nature;
and so acceptable to our senses, should ever produce any such effect, will
hardlierreceive entertainment. And this may seem yet so much the more strange,
in regard this is that we all principally aim at, as being a sovereign and
excellent means, not only to preserve and maintain our health, but likewise
to recover the same, being already lost. And good reason there is for this; Est
letitia animi motus ad extimas corporis parts, cum libidine amplexandi gratum:
in qua adeo fit sanguinis and spirituum motus vehemens, ut pusillanimes
exanimato corpore reliquerit, ex nimia ipso^rum prosuslone. Mer. tom. 1. lib.
2. class, 2, quaest. 1^8,
Joy being a motion of the mind to the outward parts, with a certain
grateful and delighting desire to lay hold on that which may give us content.
And yet there is withal such a violent motion and agitation of the blood and
spirits, that weak and pusillanimous people may be much thereby endangered.
And the wise man intimates unto us such a moderation in every thing, where he
warnes us to be wary even in visiting our near and loving friends, under the
comparison of eating honey moderately, wherein if we exceed, we may fare the
worse for it. But as for moderate Joy it is commended by the Holy Ghost
himself, and in the same Book of Proverbs the utility thereof extolled. Animi
and corporis tame^si sua substantia and materia lo^^e maximu discrimen si^
tamen tam arcto illa vencuio Deus colligavit, ut mutua sit utriusque in se
invicem compassio, seu (...) Nam corpore afflicto dolor ad animum redit: and
contra, animo exulcerato corpus concutitur. Sed mayor tamen corporis quassario
cum malum ab animo initium capit, quam cum contra fit. sametsi vero malum per
totum corpus se diffundat, tamen quia eius mali indicium primum in^vu tu
aspicitur, ideo Solomon vultus praecipuam mentionem facit; and docet a^imum
latum and hilarem n^n tantum sanum corpus efficere sed porro reddere vultum
aspectabilem and amabuem, ut si^ut corpus sanum est, sic etiam sanum and macre
apparet. Vnde sit ut cum cor laetum sit, oculus sit vividus, versabilis, and ad
videndum acutus, genae sint rabicundae, sanguis purus and purgatus, cutis
pulcbra and spectabilis: contra vero cum animus afflictus est. Hoc quanti sit
ad omnes vitae parts, non facile est explicatu. Number in cultu divino operae
pretium est, ut animo laeto ac alacri fiat. Hince est quod Isaacus ad filiorum
suorum propheticam benedictionem se acci^gens, priu^ mandat ferinam sibi
comparari and vinum, quibus exbilaratus liberius posset manus Propheticum
obire. Genesis 27. Elizeus contristatus aspectu impij Regis ^orami, antequam quid
conatu^ sit, quo 3. Reges siti laborantes reficerentur, ^ussit sibi peritum
musices adduci, cuim art, and in pulsando perit^a ra^^ror^m pelleret. Quod si
Prophetae qui per inspirationem locuti sunt hoc laetitiae animi adminiculo opus
habent ad culium Dei pro dignitate exercendum; 2 Reg. 3.13. nedumalij, etc.
Apud homines etiam officia quae a ir^stibus and maestis praestantur ingrata
sunt, ut in Mardocheo and Nehemia liquido constat. Esth. 4 2. Nehem. 2.1, 2.
Animum vero laetum vultum jucundum reddere apparet exemplo Esau^, munere a
lacobo exhilaratus, vultu tam se amabilem and jucundum exhibuit, ut lacobus in
eo, visus sit fac^em ^ei benignam intueri. Genesis 33.10. Sed in pijs hoc magis
illustre est, qui pace conscientiae ^ecreati vultum habent and aspectum (...)
lem Vide Naz^^eos, qui cum vinum non biberent, tamen, etc. Vide porro exemplum
Danielis and sociorum, qui tametsi leguminibus and aqua pascerentur, tamen,
etc. Haec igitur animi laetitia, quae consistit in reconciliatione cum Deo,
vnde nascitur bona conscientia, omnibus fucis and pigme itis, quae moltes and
delicatae foeminae ^udiose ad se infucandum and ^pingendum conquirunt, potior
and praestabilior est; praestabilior omni ^taeta and delectu ciborum, in quo
tamen plurimi multum ponunt, vel omnia potius, (...) ad valitudinem and colorem
tuendum pertinent. Cartwright ad verse. 13 cap. 15. Proverb.
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance. And a learned expositor upon
this place affirms, that although the substance of the soul and the body
differ much; God has notwithstanding tied and united them so fast together,
that there is no small harmony and sympathy betwixt them: insomuch that either
of them being affected, the other suffers also. And although the harm
redoundeth to the whole body; yet because it is most conspicuous in the
countenance, therefore the Wise man makes chiefly mention of the countenance;
and teaches us here likewise, that a cheerful and merry heart not only
makes the body sound and healthful; but makes a cheerful and amiable
countenance. Hence comes it to pass, that when as the heart is merry and
cheerful, the eye is lively and quick sighted, the cheeks of a comely, ruddy
color, etc. But all contrary, when the mind is heavy and dejected. In what an
account and high esteem this is in all the parts of our life can scarce be
declared. For first, in Divine worship and service it is very requisite that we
be of a cheareful countenance. And hence was it that Isaac preparing himself
for that prophetical benediction of his sons, calls first for wine and
venison, whereby his heart being cheered and refreshed, he might the better
perform this Prophetical function. And the holy Prophet Elizeus being much
grieved at the sight of wicked Joram, before ever he went about to refresh
those three Kings distressed with thirst, calls first for a cunning Musician,
whereby the grief and sorrow of his mind might be mitigated. Now if the
Prophets themselves, inspired with a prophetical spirit, had need of this
cheerfulness of heart for the better performance of Gods worship and service,
how much more have others use thereof? And such services as performed by sad
and heavy persons, we see, are not so acceptable: as may in Mardochee and
Nehemia plainly appear. And we see that Esau being cheered with Jacobs gift,
was of so cheerful a countenance, that Jacob confesses he beheld his
countenance as though he had beheld the face of God. But in the godly (says
the same Author) this does yet far more plainly appear, who being refreshed
with the peace of a good conscience, have a cheerful and lovely countenance.
This may plainly appear by the example of the Nazarites who drunk no wine,
etc: As likewise by the example of Daniel and his fellows, who although they
fed but on pulse and water, yet their countenance was far fairer and better
liking than of any of the rest who were fed with all the Kings dainty fare. And
therefore this Joy and mirth consisting in our reconciliation with God from
whence proccedeth a good conscience, is far to be preferred before all the
most curious washes and paints, wherewith the lascivious and dainty Dames of
our times do dawb, and as they think, so curiousl^ adorn their faces: yea,
and of far higher esteem than all the most curious and dainty diet that can
be devised, in the which nevertheless, many, if not all, place all that
pertains to the preservation of health and maintaining the comely color of
the countenance. That the life therefore might be the more comfortable, and
that grief, sorrow and sadness might not too much prevail and oppress us,
it was the bounty of our good God to give us not only food and raiment for
necessity, and water to quench our thirst: but to give us also wine to cheer
the heart, oil to make glad the countenance (in the hot Eastern countries
then in great request, howbeit in our cold climats not so useful) and music
both vocal and isntrumental, to stir up, and excite the dejected
melancholicke mind. And therefore the moderate use of all these comfortable
creatures is, as we see, allowed by God himself: and besides good merry
company, either at meals or otherwise; provided, the mirth be honest, not
scurrilous, and offensive either to God or man: and thus may these verses
following be understood: Quaere igitur sed honesta tuis solatia curis,
quae tibi nec somni, nec loca sola dabunt.
Vtere convivis, non tristibus, utere amici,
quos nugae and risus, and ioca salsa dabunt.
Quem non blanda iuvent varii modulamina cantus?
hinc iecur, and renes, agraque corda stupent.
Nam nihil humanas tanta dulcedine mentes
Afficit, ac melica nobile vocis opus.
Seek comforts in thy grief and cares, which may thy heart solace,
Much more than either drousie sleep, or solitary place.
But let thy comforts comely be, and honest all thy jests.
Converse with cheerful merry friends, at banquets and at feasts.
Sad company avoid and shun, such company frequent,
As love in laughter and delights to have the meeting spent.
What man so lumpish is of mood, whom music does not move,
And merry songs? these from thy heart all pensive quames remove.
For nothing does with such sweetness the mind of man rejoice,
As does that noble worthy work, of man's melodious voice.


But my meaning is not here of such mirth and music as is most commonly and
ordinarily used in Tavernes and Tap-houses, in Play-hous and Alehouse, where
the most dissolute and deboist companion is often accounted the best fellow;
and he that can most dishonor God by blasphemous bloody oaths, and by that
swinish sin of drunkenness show great manhood in un-manning himself, carries
away the bell for good-fellowship, and such are accounted the only merry
companions of the country. If one should advise them sometimes in their merry
mood to sing Psalms, it were puritanisme; and yet such a puritaine was the
James 5.13.
Apostle James: If any be merry, let him sing Psalms: and such a puritan was
the Ephesians. 5.19.
Apostle Paul, willing us to use Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual songs. I know
there are times and seasons for all things; and as excess of mirth is always,
so, especially, in these bleeding times of the Christian world most unseanable.
1 Kings 5.20.
And as the Prophet Elisha said in another case, Is this a time to take silver,
etc: So may I say, is this a time for such excess? The Lord (says the Prophet
Isaiah) God of hosts did call to weeping and mourning, Isaiah 12.22.
and to sadness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold, joy and gladness,
staying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; let us eat
and drink and be merry, for to morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in
mine cares by the Lord of hosts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from
you. And the words of that worthy Vriah ought never to be forgotten: 2 Samuel
11.16.
The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into mine
house, to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? as thou live, and thy soul
lives, I will not do this thing. There is yet a pregnant place for this same
purpose. Amos 6.4.
That lie upon beds of yvory, and stretch themselves upon their couch, and eat
the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall: that
chaunt to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of
music, like David. That drink wine out of bowls, and anoint themselves with
the chief ointments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph:
Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive, and the
banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. Let our Preachers
apply these places; I will not thrust my sickle into another man's harvest.
Sick folks chiefly to be cheered up, and who have greatest need.
But now, as concerning mirth, and cheerfulness in diseased and sick
persons, I think it is to them by all means to be procured; and, as I said
already, all manner of discontents are to be avoided. But of all other, sick
people, to such especially as are otherwise of a melancholy constitution of
body, or sick of any disease tending that way, although but accidentally: as
likewise such as are of themselves fearful and pusillanimous, and easily
dismayed at a small matter. And herein is required great wisdom and
circumspection, and that the Physician do accommodate himself to the several
dispositions of his patients, and to many particular circumstances concerning
them, which cannot punctually be set down. And howbeit this passion as well as
others may sometimes exceed the bounds of mediocritie, yet are not the sick
for the most part so much hereby endangered as by other passions: Rests now
to discuss one question before we conclude.

Whether any may die of mirth and joy.
Since joy and mirth is so agreeable to mankind, and less offensive than any
of the rest, it may then, not without good reason, be demanded, whether any may
die of this passion? I answer, that even Praegaudio autem nonnulli supra modum
pusillanimes mortui sunt, haud aliter quam timentes, de Symptom. cause. lib. 2.
Galen himself, who was ignorant that any could die of anger, yet did
confess, that some might die of too great joy. And there is some reason for
it: for the blood and spirits flying all from the center, or heart, to the
circumference or outward parts, the party must needs die, the heart now being
left destitute of such necessary provision: and Gaudio praeter Chilonem de quo
diximus, Sophocles, Dionysius Siciliae tyrannus uterque accepto tragicae
victoriae nuncio. Matter pugna ila Caennensi filio incolumi viso contra falsum
nuncium, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Pliny makes mention of some: as of one Chile, Sophocles, Denis the Tyrant, and
of her, who after that dismal battle of Canes, contrary to a false rumor,
received her son alive, whom she supposed to have bin dead. And Purchase
makes mention of the like accidents even in this our age. Purch. lib. 4. cap.
9.
Abraham Kendall (says he) put into the I Will of S. Helena, about the year,
1592. and left on shore a sick man, whom Edmund Barker 18 months after found
in good plight: but their unexpected coming, as it seems, so ravished his
weak spirits with joy, that it distracted him, and being otherwise of
constitution very well, he died 8 days after. The like he says of a
Portugal in the same place: I wish therefore thou use moderate mirth and
cheerfulness, and such as be too much subject to sorrow and grief, to
refrain therefrom, and not to give way to any anxious cares, which are the
causes of many mischiefs both to the body and the mind. Take therefore this
counsel with thee: Omnia curarum somenta relinque, nec ullis
Corpus habe pressum sollicitudinibus.
Anxia men's, non ipsa sibi, non rebus agendis
constat, ab hac vitium corpora saepe trahunt.
Hince variae pestes, morborum mill figurae,
creed animam nostri corporis esse ducem.
Saepe graves ista, veniunt ex arce labores,
sicut ab aercis pestilens aura plagis.
All things that may thy cares increase, avoid and lay aside,
Keep still thy heart from heaviness, let joy there still abide,
A pensive mind even to it self, inconstant is always,
And in all things it undertakes, it keeps no constant stay.
From thence the body often draws corruption and vice,
Hence plagues, and of sore maladies a thousand sorts arise.
This know, that of each man the soul is of his body guide:
From whence, as from corrupted air, great pains in him reside.


And thus much shall suffice to have said of joy and mirth, the true antidot
against sorrow, grief and fear. And this likewise shall suffice concerning
all the passions and perturbations whereof I undertook to speak: and as I
said at first, I am not ignorant, but that there are yet a many more affections
which in time work a deep impression both on the body and mind of man; yet
work they but leisurely, and by degrees, and work no such sudden impression,
and therefore I pass them by.

The Conclusion of this whole Discourse.
BY that which has been said already, may plainly appear how excellent, and
how useful is this Diet of the Diseased, and how necessary it is to be
careful in the prescription thereof, and from hence may evidently be evinced,
into what danger they precipitate themselves, who fall into the hands of such
unskilful persons, who are not able to advise them what Diet is best, and what
is worst. And yet, as by this precedent discourse has plainly appeared; Diet
is that which principally, and above all other means, is narrowly to be looked
into. And that this is not a matter of so small a moment, as by the vulgar it
is accounted, has at great length, Many things in this discourse to be
considered.
by the authority of the learned in all ages, been plainly proved. In the
first particular then, we see, we must consider the nature of the aliment,
whether it be a vegetable; as all sorts of (...) plants, fit for the use of
man; the variety whereof, together with their several virtues, we have at
length set down. Again, there being such variety of other creatures,
foure-footed beasts, foul and fishes, which afford food for susteining of man's
life, their natures must be well known, and what food they afford the sick,
and how safe it is to administer the same. Besides all this, the right
preparation is duly and carefully to be observed; some sickenesses requiring
one, and some another kind of food, and a different preparation. And besides,
the quantity must carefully be observed, and that according to several
individual bodies; and the order, when more than one dish is allowed. Now, all
this is yet nothing, if the state of the individual body thou dealest with,
be not without great care and diligence looked into. And principally, and above
all other things, we must have a watchful and careful eye over the strength
of the sick, and not only narrowly observe the difference of several and
individual parties, one from another, according to their several complexions*
but even one and the same individual party, how it differs from it self,
according to the several seasons, not only of the sickness, but even of the
time of the year also. All the which circumstances, as they have been at
great length discussed, so does it as evidently appear, that this is not the
task of any ignorant quack-salving Mountebancke, Empericke, Barber-surgeon, or
of an ignorant busie-bodie woman-physitian; nay, nor yet of a meddling
pragmaticall Minister: but of a skillful and judicious Artist, able upon all
occasions to add what is wanting, to alter what is not useful, and detract
what is superfluous. If it transcend the skill of the ignorant Physician, to
prescribe good and wholesome diet for the diseased, how shall they be able to
prescribe physic fit for the state of the sick bodies.
If this then be true in this dieteticall part, as has bin proved, what shall
we then say of the administration of physic it self? If the unlearned, by
reason of their unsufficiencie, are not to be allowed to deal with this
dieteticall point, how much more are they unable and unfit for this other of so
great a consequence? If the vulgar be so afraid of physic, that scarce can
they sometimes be persuaded in cases of greatest extremity (and I cannot in
some sort blame them, there being so many dog-leaches, and ignorant
practitioners of all sorts suffered, as it were, to throw lots upon men's lives)
to admit of any lawful remedy, although exhibited by the hand of a skillful,
learned and rational Physician: why are some of them, yea, and some of a more
refined judgment often so lavish of their lives, that they will sooner commit
themselves into the hands of any quack-salving Mountebancke, or Barber-surgeon,
than into the hands of the must learned and judicious Artist, and are often so
shy of physic, as of some deadly and deleterious poison: But it often
befalls them according to the old Proverb.

Incidit in Scillam, dum vult vitare Charybdim.
They leap out of the drying pan into the fire.
And whereas the learned and skillful Physician is furnished with store of
gentle and benign medicines, which offer no force nor violence to nature; and
if at any time the greatness and malignity of the disease indicate an addition
of stronger remedies, either to acuate and quicken the dull and sluggish
quality of the others, or to eradicate some inveterate disease; yet is he able
so to correct the malignity thereof, that he can make it a sovereign medicine
for the healing of his infirmity: the other on the contrary uses most commonly
his crude, malign and unprepared medicines both mineralls and vegetables; the
hurt and smart whereof, howsoever they be not at the first felt, yet are they
often afterward the causes of many mischiefs: besides, that this kind of
counterfeit Physician purges often away as well the good as the bad humor, the
which is impossible for the patient to observe or discern, howsoever he knows
it to his cost. But besides Empericks, there is yet another sort of intruder
upon the profession of phycsike as faulty (if not more, all things considered)
as the former: practicing Ministers, I mean, concerning whom although I have
in the beginning of this discourse said something; yet by reason of some
seeming colorable objections might by themselves or others be made in their
behalf. I will add yet something before I make a full end: although in my
opinion, this one place of S. Paul, if there were no more, 2 Cor. 2.^6.
Who is sufficient for these things? were sufficient to confute them. Charity
is not sufficient to warrant any with the neglect of his own calling to meddle
with another calling, wherein is as much, if not more difficulty than in the
former, and no less danger then of life in the errors committed therein.
But I have heard some of them pretend a charity and love to their neighbors
to help them in their need. This reason, as it first makes a glorious show, so
if we shall narrowly view this pretended reason, we shall find it like Joseph.
de billo Iudaic. lib. 5. cap. 5.
those fair apples of Sodom, which being once touched, turned into ashes; and
like Matthew. 23.27.
those painted sepulchers being within full of rotten bones. But this is no new
practice to cover vice with the mantle of virtue; which as it is most common,
so it is most accursed: Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas. And this by many
places of Scripture I could make manifest, but that I think it will not be
denied, and I am loath to spend too much time on it. Charitable works, I
confess, are to be performed; but every person is not fit for the performance
of every work of charity. The ministers charity is to have a care of his
peoples souls, to visit and comfort them when they are sick; and even to
extend their charity to their bodies, according to their ability. As for the
curing of their bodies, that exceeds the compass of their callings, and in
so doing they break down hedges, and intrude upon another man's right. If they
shall reply, that sometimes they do it to supply the place of a Physician
(perhaps) wanting. I answer, they are very witty to devise wiles to maintain
a wrong cause. And it was a good speech of a worthy Divine of this shire, now
resting in peace: O quam argutatrix est humana ratio, praesertim quum aliquid
de suis commodis and emolumentis deciditur! How hard do men plead for their
profits! I say again, If a minister be endued with any competent skill in
this profession (as perhaps having learned it before he betook him to this
profession) and any of his parishioners be amiss, either in the absence of a
sufficient Physician, or yet in case of the patients poverty, the ministers
charity in such a case is most seasonable. But my meaning is principally of
such as make a pecuniary traffic of this profession, erect Apothecary shops
in their houses, and often train up others in that profession which they are
yet themselves to learn, and have been known to have been most busy, where
able and sufficient Physicians were to be found. And the want of able and
learned physicians is often by means of their lawless intrusion occasioned.
It is not unknown to some, that some of these men have been so impudent and
shameless, that they have often offered their service to the Gentry, and
people of best note, some of them traffiquing to and fro to engrosse all
employment into their own hands, debasing and vilipending the actions of other
able physicians: and if (perhaps) at any time, some success does second their
bold attempts (as sometimes Audentes fortuna juvat, fortune helps the hardy)
thou shall then have them like that proud Men^erates celebris Ep^lepsiae
medicus nunquam sine in publicum, nifi suis quos curaverat, rabitu ^eorum
vestius st^^^o^us, and ipse vero purpura vell^ tus, aurea orona deco ratus,
sceptrum demque ^n ma^ibus velat alter Jupiter gest^nt, prodire solitus est
Lang Epist. medic. lib ^. epist 25 ex Athen dipn. lib 7.
Menecrates brag and boast of their noble exploits. It is no doubt a hard
case, when no Physician will serve the turn but Levies Tribe; and if Lucullus
were not, Pompey cannot live, scilicet! It is a hard case, no question, when
Physickes sufficiency is all covered under a Clergy man's cassocke. But I would
feign know what Aesculapius has infused this sufficiency into them. The famous
Universities of this Kingdom do quite disclaim them as inform Monsters, and
births borne out of season, which never yet received the right shape of a
Physician. The famous Physicians of the College of London acknowledge them to
have no part in the Hippocraticall commonwealth. Their grave and learned
Brethren of best note deny them, The reverend Bishop of etero^riow in a Sermo
pirached at Northampton this same year 16 ^ a little before midsommer, out of
this text, Gen 47.3. What is you^ trade or occupation taught that a minist^
(...) trade, and should have but that on: the question being Quid operu in the
singu^ar number. That ministers therefore are not to meddle with other
callings. They are not then (says he) to meddle with Galen and Hippocrates,
which he there proved ^oth learnedly and religiously, by the weightinesse of
the calling, and pains there^n to be im lo^ed. And as there was there a great
deal of good counsel for the clergis, ^o I hope he will have a care to be all
faults and abuses of armed.
some preaching against their practice, and some again As it is unlawful for
a Physician to preacher administer the Sacraments: so I think it unlawful for
a minister to be a professed practicer of Ph^sicke. Parre on the (...) to the
Romans
publishing this dislike in print. But it may be, they will claim kindred to
the Theslal^s quum ostendit se in Hippocratica Disciplina nequaquam institutum,
nec eius opera sub prae^eptore leg^sse, tamen non veretur talis quum sit,
palmam sibi ipsi eri^ u^e Gal. meth. med. lib. 1.
methodian Thessalus, who taught that the profession of physic might in six
months space be attained unto. Similes habent labra lactucas. Like lettice
like lips. But there rests yet an objection, and more material, at least in
show than the former. Venture non habet aures. Need makes the old wife to trot.
A necessity by some is pretended, their livings being too little, and their
maintenance too mean to maintain them and their families. I do not deny,
that many of our learned Levites are not rewarded according to their due
desert, learning not being rewarded according to its worth; which is far
easier form to lament than to amend But all the offenders cannot cover
themselves with this cloak: nay, the most gross and notorious offenders for
the most part enjoy greatest livings, of one, two, or three hundreds a year,
if not upwards. One of them in my knowledge has played the usurer; although
some of the principal is gone into a bottomless bag. Let the ingenious
Reader then judge, whether any of these can justly plead poverty. Others
again, I confess, have smaller allowance, and therefore would seem to
deserve more favor. In the first place, as I grant the antecedent, so I deny
the consequent, as false and erroneous. Many honest men and good scholars of
unblamable life and conversation I my self well know, whose livings come not
near the others who have least; many of them not exceeding forty, thirty or
twenty pounds, and some not twenty Marks, yet far more painful in their
calling than the former, of whom none that I could yet hear of under fifty,
three or fourscore pounds. But put the case this were yet true, what then?
Must they strike Richard for Robert? Must they rob Peter to pay Paul? If they
themselves be wronged, must they of necessity injure others? Must they of
necessity deprive the people of their pains, and encroach upon an other
calling too weighty and heavy for their shoulders? But if they will needs make
an addition to their means, why meddle they not with some other calling of
lesser consequence, in the performance whereof the error of the Artist brings
less danger and detriment? If they shall reply, that were too base for them, I
answer, that Acts 18.3. and 20.34. 1 Cor. 4.12. 1 Thessal. 2.9. 2 Thessal 3.8.
S. Paul, notwithstanding, in the nightime made tents, and in the daytime
was diligent in delivering his masters message. And there are yet some other
means in case of necessity might far easilier and safelier be used, than the
profession and practice of Physic, and that without derogation from the
dignity of a scholar. And yet the Abissine Priests even at this day keep this
custom, of For this same practice there were canons in former times set down.

Clericus quantum libet verbo Dei eruditus, artificiolo victum quaerat.

Et postea.

Clericus qunntum libet verbo Dei eruditus artificiolo, vel agricultura absque
officij sui detrime^to victum praeparet. Lib. Council. Council. Carthag. 4. can.
51, and 52.


laboring in some trade or calling, their ordinary maintenance being but very
mean. But let no man mistake my meaning, as envying the maintenance of worthy,
learned and religious, painful Divines, as willing to reduce all to that
ancient, Apostolical custom, which in our established Churches now for good
reasons, I confess, to be out of use. Absit, nay it never came into my
thought. Nay, would to God I might be so happy to live to see abuses reformed,
buyers and sellers whipped out of the Church, and Levi to enjoy his full
allowance, that I might then with Luke 2, 29.
holy old Simeon, sing a joyful Nunc dimittis. On the the otherside, let
ministers wait on their ministry: I neither plead for Simoniacke Patrons, nor
yet for lazy Levites: but as I think them worthy of double honor, so let them
consider who deserve the same; such as labor in the word and doctrine. As for
idle loytering Levites, who seek the fleece and not the flock, I think them
so unworthy of any honor, that I wish, like drones they may be driven out of
the Church. Some again, willing to mince the matter, maintain, that a
minister may at least so far play the Physician, as the Physician is sometimes
to play the part of the minister: and that as sometimes the physician in absence
of the minister may administer spiritual physic to the sick, so may the
Minister in absence of the Physician administer to the patient corporal
physic. I confess this makes the fairest show of reason of any of the
former, and my meaning is as far from hindering charity in time of necessity:
provided always, the party be able to exercise that kind of charity, and this
particular case occurreth but seldom. Again I say, there may here fall out by
this means some inconvenience; so that still, Latet anguis in herba. Besides,
these two cases are far unlike, there being therein a great disparity.
Consider the diversity of these two cases.
The Physician may in time of need give the sick good and wholesome counsel
for his souls health: and this may sometimes a neighbor as well, yea, it may
be, better perform, than either the Minister or the Physician. The Physician
then performs this charitable work, as the duty of a common Christian, and
that which any other that is able is allowed to do, there being no danger in
applying this remedy, if done but in any ordinary discretion: although it were
to be wished the spiritual Physician himself were able always to administer
his own Physic. Now the case stands not alike with the minister, who may
easily be mistaken either in the disease, or the remedy due to the same, or yet
in the due and convenient time of application, with diverse other considerable
circumstances, unless he be skilled as well in a theoricall knowledge, as in
the practical imploiment of this profession: unto the which he shall hardly
ever atteine, without the neglect of the worthiest of the two. And put the case
he may yet help some distressed neighbor in his need, it will both draw him
on to do the like for others, who may plead the like interest in him; and
again, his example may encourage some ignorant and idle dames to do the like.
Principiis obsta. Resist occasions of error at first. All the errors of the
Roman Church at first crept in upon fair and plausible pretenses, as might
easily be proved; the which now are become so many, and so strongly maintained,
that we had now need of some Hercules to cleanse this unclean and filthy
stable. And the Pope himself, made he any small account, think you, of such
ware, whenas History of the council of Trent.
he sent his holy ghost so often post in a cloak-bagge from Rome to Trent, to
inspire the Fathers of that council, to stand stoutly to the mainteinance of
this their freehold? But if they will yet plead any sufficiency in themselves,
whereby they may safely practice this profession, and if any Aesculapian genius
has infused into them the Hippocraticall skill, I see no reason why they
should be debarred from doing good, even in this same kind. But let this
proviso be put in, That they first resign their livings to those who will
afford them better attendance. I need not mention that young frye of able
scholars, these famous nurseries of good learning, like two fruitful mothers,
send yearly abroad into this our fruitful Canaan, flowing with milk and
honey: and how many of these stand idle in the marketplace, no man hiring of
them into his Vineyard; when as others undertake and ingrosse far more work
than either they are able, or is fit they should deal with. But if the dole be
a dealing, I see no reason why the Physician may not claim a share in it, as
well as they do in others. The Talion Law will allow it, and I make no
question, but they may find some of them as fit to preach, as they to
practice. As for that objection taken from the affinity of the soul and body,
I think it not of that worth, Objection taken from the affinity of the soul
and the body, idle, and to small purpose.
as to be objected by any scholar: and yet I have heard that some have pleaded
this. Now, if it may take place, it will make as much for the Physicians
preaching, as for their practicing. And besides, if this argument may take
place, then by reason of this affinity of the members of the body one with
another, the Tailor shall become a Shoo-maker; and again, the Shoo-maker a
Tailor: and the Haberdasher (because he deals with the head, the most eminent
part, and seat of the sense and reason it self) will, perhaps, plead a
privilege in all three, and more also. I have somewhat the more at large
insisted upon this point, not only for that this notorious abuse, has so long
continued; but likewise to give warning for the time to come, that Ministers
keep themselves within the precincts of their own calling. To this the weight
of their own calling, if there were nothing else, might be a sufficient
motive: besides, that I have proved in the beginning of this discourse, that
the Physicians pains and trouble are greater than of any calling, yea, even of
the painful and laborious Divine himself. It is true, the Divine has his
evasion: for many of them have this trick (although scarce honest) that they
are ready to gleane what gains they can gets by sitting still in their cells,
casting waters, as they call it, prescribing medicines to the absent, fall out
as it will: and when the patient has most need of their presence, Mr Parson
cannot come then: and by this means, many times Mr Parson has his gains come
in easily, declining the greatest pains; and if the patient rely wholly upon
him, he shall either be denied that attendance is due in time of danger, or else
cast upon another physician, who must now take the worst, when Master Parson
has had the best. Some again will sometimes, and that often, attend, as
another Physician, on the necessity of the sick: and here is then another
inconvenient, that many times, when Master Parson or Vicar should be in his
pulpit, his patient calls for his presence. Let the judicious and unpartiall
reader then judge of the equity of this cause. We still hope, (and have hoped
a great while) that the reverend Fathers of the Church will have an ear open
to hear this more than just complaint. No ignorance can be pretended, this not
being done in a corner, but in the eyes of all Israel. And among them, such
especially, as are too much addicted to judicial Astrology, and many
suspicious, if not sinful things thereupon depending: as calculating of
nativities, and prognosticating future events thereby; using amulets without
any show of reason, to cure diseases, and to prevent many outward accidents,
are to be inquired into: if the ancient Si quis Astrologia, vel mathesi
existimat esse credendum anathemafit. Toletan. 7. con. 21.
Canons and Constitutions of the Church forbid such trash indefinitely, shall
this be suffered in a Churchman, now under the clear Sunshine of the
Gospel? But I leave this text, wishing withal, that people would not prove a
means of distracting the Divine, and hindering him in that whereunto he is
called and set apart, lest they prove accessory to his neglect, if he have not
so much grace to look to it himself. I have In the preface to the arraignment
of urines.
elsewhere alleged the example of David, 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.
who would not drink the water that had bin fetched with the hazard of men's
lives: see then how you seek health with the hazard of men's souls.

But before I end, Sordide and base objection in the defense of Empiricks.
although I have already said somewhat of Emperickes, yet a word or two more.
There is an ordinary objection wherewith many people deceive themselves in this
care of Emperickes: for, say they, we are by using Emperickes often freed from
a great deal of charges which learned counsel would cost. I answer, Answ.
that in the first place they build on a false foundation, parallelling and
equalling ignorant Empetickes with the judicious and learned Physician: and
this erroneous opinion is often confirmed by means of the like events often
befalling both the one and the other, which I have sufficiently confuted in the
beginning of this discourse. It is then apparent, that this seeming saving of
charges, is but a mere fallacy, and so many of them find it at the last,
when it is too late. For in the first place, the ignorant and unskilful,
howsoever most presumptuous of their own skill and sufficiency, yet are they
not able often to find out thy disease; especially, if either it be uncouth or
intricate, composed or partaking of diverse diseases, accompanied with various
and several symptoms: Emperickes can neither find out the disease, nor apply
right remedies.
far less then are they able to apply a right and laudable remedy to the
same. Again, put the case they both find out the disease, and apply some
remedy: yet are their remedies often so rough, venomous and unprepared, that
they leave a virulent and evil impression behind them; the which, howsoever,
peradventure, not at first felt, yet at length often pays both the principal
and interest. Besides, that I say nothing of their ignorance in the
application, according to the several constitutions of the individual bodies,
sexes, ages, order, time, quantity, quality, due preparation and correction;
but especially the strength of the patient, etc. Besides all this, when they
have thus hazarded their lives, spent their money, poisned their bodies, and
neglected good and wholesome remedies, which in time and place, in all
probability were like to have cured the infirmity: it comes often to pass,
that at length, howbeit too late, they are forced to fly unto the learned and
judicious Physician, as I could instance in many particulars. Now, if the
patient recover, what is here saved? is he not here at a double charge, besides
the hazard of his life? and if he die, I confess there is something saved:
but I think people that are wise, should in this be of Satan's mind, Job. 1.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. I mean,
use the likeliest means to save thy life, and leave the success to God. As
for the meaner and poorer sort, there is no honest Physician, but in charity
he will be ready in time of need to further their health with his best
counsel. But this fault we find to be as frequent in the rich, as in the
poorer sort: some I know do it out of mere ignorance; but others out of mere
avarice and fordid tenacitie. And yet I have heard some say, their Empericke
cost them as much as better counsel had done in former times. The ignorant are
more to be excused, and therefore it were to be wished (and I doubt we may wish
long enough) that there stumlbing blocks, which vulgar eyes are not able to
discern, were removed out of the way. Then should our Surgeons betake them to
curing of their sores, wounds, and other things thereunto belonging:
Apothecaries to their compositions; and other ignorant and illiterate
Emperickes, forced to forsake their profession, and if they were of any before,
to betake them to the same again, or to same imploiment befitting them, if
they were of no calling before. As for women, they might find them work
within doors about their housewiverie, far better beseeming their sex, than
to play the busie-bodie abroad, meddling with that whereof they are altogether
ignorant. But because a Doctor Venner, in his advertisement of the ^reat
utility that comes to man's body, by taking of physic in the Spring.
late learned Physician of this land, has lately said something concerning
Emperickes, making well for our purpose, I will insert them also into this same
place. But here I must advertise you, that you expose not your body to the
unlearned Empericke, that can neither find out the peccant humors, nor parts
affected; but to such as are learned in that art, that can well judge of your
state of body, and accordingly prescribe you remedies, as your constitution and
affected parts shall require. Many men think, yea, some of a generous note,
wherein they bewray their carelessenesse, if not their stupiditie too, that
whilst they are in health, they may for prevention take physic from any one,
it matters not from whom it be, nor what physic it be, so it work with them.
I must tell you, that many overthrow their bodies thereby, and that there is no
less art and judgment required for preserving the body in health, than for
curing of it being sick, if they did but know how the four humors are, or
ought to be proportioned in their bodies: for inioying according, to their
constitutions, a sound and healthy state, they would, I am persuaded, be more
cautelous, than to commit themselves into the hands of the unlearned, who, by
their inconsiderate courses, take humors from them at an adventure, so well
those that are not offensive, as those which are, to the utter subversion of
the oeconomie of the body: whereof though, perhaps, in regard of their
strengths, they are not by and by sensible, which is that which only cloaketh
the errors of Emperickes, and as a veil masketh many men's eyes and
understanding therein: yet they will, as I have in diverse observed to their
peril, by little and little, incur a lapsed state of body. It is strange to
see the ignorance of most people, how backward they are to give to the learned
professors of physic their due, ready to lay scandalls upon them; but
forward to magnify Emperickes, their physic, their honesty, their care,
willing to pass over and excuse their gross slips and absurdities, O mira
hominum stupiditas! But proceeds this altogether out of ignorance? I suppose
no: for doubtless many seek unto them, and magnify their physic, because
it is cheap: but such are fools and Gulls indeed; for they wrong, and even
poison their bodies with gross and ill qualified physic to save their
purses. But to answer the reasons, or rather words which they produce and
allege in the favor and behalf of Emperickes: to what purpose is the working
of that physic which respects not the peccant humors, nor parts affected,
but to the overthrow of the body? What is a supposed honesty in a Physician
without learning, but a snare wherein the ignorant do voluntarily entrap
themselves? I say supposed: for I cannot think that man to be honest, which
usurps a calling, which with a good conscience he is not able to discharge. Or
to what purpose is the care that Emperickes take about their preposterous and
ill composed medicines, but to the utter ruin of the patients body, as too
too unluckie happened of late to a Gentleman of good worth and note, who taking
physic by way of prevention, History.
of a Pill-boasting Surgeon, in a short space, by his ill qualified and
preposterous physic, incurred an incurable and mortal lapse of his stomach
and liver, being in his constant age and perfect strength of body. Vain
therefore, and very absurd is that conceit, which many have in favor of
Empericks, viz, If they do no good, they do no harm. Admit that sometimes by
their trivial petty medicines they do no harm; yet nevertheless for that,
I must tell you that they do much harm: for the sick body relying upon
their skill, and they being not able to direct and execute such courses as
shall be sitting and effectual to impugn the disease, while there is time
fitting for the same, the sickness gets the masterie, and then (perhaps) when
the strength is too much weakened, and the disease become incurable, they seek
help of the learned Physician. So basely verily, are most of our people
affected to their health, that until some practical Minister, parish Clerk,
Apothecary, Surgeon, or the like, have done their utmost hurt, they secke not
to the Physician. And here to vindicate our Art from calumny, I cannot but
tax the most sort of people, that being affected with any great or difficult
disease, which by reason of the nature thereof, or contumacie of the peccant
humors, will have such progress, as that it cannot in a short time, by the
medicines and best endeavors of the learned Physician, how forcible soever, be
evicted, will reject their Physician, and betake themselves, which is an
absurdity, super omnem absurditatem, to some ignorant sottish Empericke, and
every good wives medicine, to their great hurt, and oftentimes utter overthrow.
But if it happen that they recover thereupon, they lay an imputation upon their
Physician, and grace their Empericke with the cure; whereas, in very deed, the
matter of the disease was wholly, or at least the greatest part thereof
eradicated by such fit and powerful remedies, as the learned Physician had
formerly ministered unto them: whereupon the residue of the cure was effected by
the force of nature, not by the weak endeavors of the Empericke, or trivial
medicines of any other whatsoever. I have of purpose enlarged this
advertisment, and do leave it far a memorial and caveat to all posterity,
especially to the Gentlemen of this our age, who, for the most part of them,
very much wrong their judgments and understanding, in taking physic of the
unlearned; and wherein they do not only wrong themselves, but also give
occasion of hurt others: For the meaner sort of people following their example,
do the like, whereby it comes to pass, that in all likelihood, more untimely
perish (which I believe to be true in the We may say as much in these parts we
live in, if the matter might be narrowly looked into.
Western parts of this Kingdom) under the hands of Emperickes, than die
otherwise. Such as will not take notice hereof, in Empericorum manus incidant.
And if any Asinus Cumanus, or Terrae filius shall object, that diverse recover
under the hands of Emperickes; I answer in a word, that the recovery is not to
be attributed to their physic, but to the strength of Nature, that bears up,
both against the disease, History of a bold Empericke, disgraced by that
matchless prince King James, of happy memory.
and their preposterous courses. A grave Divine lately told me a story of a
notorious old Empericke, living in the West country. This Empericke was by a
Noble man brought before that famous Prince, King James, of happy memory,
thinking thereby to grace him (a small grace for a great man to grace such
worthless persons) which notwithstanding, was not answerable to expectation.
This Noble Prince then, as he was most judicious, and Eagle-eyed in all Arts
and Sciences; so had he a singular dexterity in discerning a skillful and
learned Artist in the profession of physic, from an Empericke, an ignorant
and counterfeit Physician. This bold Empericke (as is the custom of such
empty barrells to make a great sound) bragged before this learned Prince, how
many Consumptions, and other dangerous diseases he had cured: to whom his
Majesty replying, asked him how many he had killed. This learned Prince asked
him after if he could cure mad men? that I can, quoth the Empericke: Being
asked after what manner, by making of them madder, quoth the Empericke. I
believe thee well says his Majesty, and withal, asked him whether he had
ever read Hippocrates, A speech well befitting such a Prince.
Galen, and other physical Authors? Who answered, that he had never studied
in any such books. His Majesty at length, thus closed up his discourse, Go
thy way man; for if I have need of good advice for my souls health, I will be
advised by the honest and learned Divine; for my bodily health, the learned
Physician; and for my temporarll estate, the learned Lawyer shall give me
directions. Now then, since people are commonly so carried with apish imitation
of great ones, why will not people in this particular imitate the pattern of
so great a Prince, of whom it may well be said, that since the days of
Solomon, the world saw not a wiser. But now to draw to an end, what I have
said, either against these, or any other erroneous practitioners, if the
unpartiall reader will but seriously consider that which has been said
already in this precedent discourse, he will, I think, say, it was no less
than necessary. I doubt not also, but according to the several and various
humors and dispositions of people, this my pains shall find censurers of
several sorts. But against all envious detractions the uprightness and
innocence of my intention, being a desire to profit the public, shall be to
me as a brazen wall. Now, if I have done any thing well, as is fitting, it was
that I aimed at: and if otherwise, yet was my principal aim and endeavor, to
do good: and therefore, in this imitating our gracious God, I pray thee to
accept of my endeavors in a good part, and charitably to interpret any error
or oversight, Farewell.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of THE CONTENTS OF THIS WHOLE DISCOVRSE, WITH relation
to the page: Intr. is for Introduction.
Ablution of the body, page 294. Abricocke, page 64. Abstinence from food, 157.
Abstinence natural, voluntary, miraculous, violent or forced, moral,
physical, religious, superstitions, etc. 158, 159. Abstinence of the
Archbishops and Bishops among the Russians, 159, 160. Abstinence of the
Abyssine Priests, 192. Abstinence of the Church of Rome, 160. Abstinence of
diverse Heretics, and of the Egyptian Priests. 159. Acid or sour waters, 395.
Acid or sour waters abound in Germany, their virtues, and in what infirmities
hurtful: the continuance or duration of their use, ibid. Egyptians rigid in
the time of purgation, 283, 284. Age best admitting, or not admitting large and
ample evacuation, 242. Age does not always indicate, nor yet inhibit
phlebotomy, 245. All ages may be purged, 271 Age aptest to be purged, ibid.
Many things therein considerable, 267. Air, the utilitie and qualities of it,
how our bodies are thereby altered, 14. A pure air, and what it is, 15.
Advertisement concerning the air to our new colonies beyond Seas, ibid. Best
Air according to the time of the day: night air bad, 16. In the coasts of
Africa especially pernicious, ibid. Air of the Sea, see Sea-wind. Air of no
small consequence in sickness and in health, 141. Air the general ambient,
142. Ambient air chiefly to be considered, 255. Air temperate, correction of
bad air, and how to order the body according to the seasons of the year, 142,
145. Air of Churches and Churchyards, in populous places especially
oftentimes noisome, 142, 143, 144. Air of stoves, or hot houses not wholesome,
147. Air in sickness how to be ordered, and how to be corrected, 145. Air of
the Country, and several differences thereof, 148. Of towns and Cities, and
the differences thereof, and whether a country air, or that of cities and
towns be better, ibid. Air of the ancient town and corporation of
Northampton temperate, 149. Air considered in a double respect, 142. Air of
the room where the sick lies, 146, 147. Albanians they see better by night
than by day, 355. Ale, and the virtues thereof, 127. Ale without hops. ibid.
Alehouses nurseries of drunkenness, 135. Dry alehouses, see Tobacco. Alexander
the great sober before his Asiatick victory against the Persians, 106.
Alexander Severus had something read during meals, and after meals, 220.
Allows, 93. Almonds, 69. Almond-milke, 201. Almond-milke, or nutmilke for the
poorer sort 202. Allisander, 54. Alphonsus King of Arragon his Epicurelike
speech. 3. Amulets, and of what power and efficacy against fascination, 356.
Anchovies, 91. Andrew Dure his life by sea, 19. Anger a cruel monster, 388.
Anger hurtful to the body. 392. Anger the cause of many dangerous diseases in
the body of man, ibid. Anger has sometimes caused death, 392. Anger for whom
most hurtful, ^91. Anger in what diseases most useful, and in what diseases
most dangerous, ibid. Antidotes against anger, both out of holy Writ, and out
of diverse ancient Philosophers, 388.389, 390. Apples of several sorts, how to
be used, and when best, 66. Apples of what operation, ibid. Aqua-vitae, 193.
Aristotle his counsel to Alexander the great, 389. Arteries seldom opened,
239. Artichockes, 57. Artichockes of Jerusalem, 45. Ash-keyes, 99. Asparagus,
or Sperage, 53. Asses flesh, see uncoth flesh. Astomi, or men without mouths,
29. Astringent medicines in fluxes not rashly to be exhibited, 315. Aveus, 34.
Augustus Caesar very sharp sighted, 134. Aurum Potabile, 6. 193. Autumn, and
the temperature thereof: See Seasons of the year.
B.
Barble, 93. Barlev and the commendation thereof, 198. French Barley, 199.
Cream of Barley, 198, 199. Barley-water how used among the ancients, both
Greeks and Arabians, 200. Barley water cautelously to be used, and how to be
corrected, 201. Barley-water for the poorer sort, ibid. Our ordinary Barley,
how to prepare both for Barley-water, and Cream of Barley, 200.
Basiliea-veine, 288. Basiliske, 355. Bathing and anointing the body before
meals, 294. Bathing very frequent among the ancients, ibid. Bathing very
frequent among the Germans, Used there promiscuously without any previous
preparation, 294, 295 Bathes artificial 296. Use of Bathes in man's body, ibid.
Warm or temperate Bathes and their virtues. ibid. Hot Bathes, and their use in
diverse diseases, and in what cases most hurtful, 296, 297. Bathing in cold
water, and for whom hurtful in sickness and in health, 297. In Bathing how to
be ordered: continuance in the Bathe, 298. Bathes natural of several sorts,
300, 304, 305, 306, etc. Bathes participating of the nature of iron, alum,
copperas, plaster, silver and gold, ibid. Of Sulphurous and Biluminus Bathes
ib. Immoderate Bathing dangerous, 299. Bawme, and Bawme-water, 56. Beans, 43.
Bed whereon the sick lies 152. Down Beds and feather-beds heat the back
much, in summer especially, and in hot diseases. ibid. Beds filled with wool,
ibid. Beds filled with Oat-chaffe very useful, etc. ibid. Babylonian Beds of
leather, filled with water, ibid. Italian beds filled with wind, ibid. High
French Beds best in summer, and hot diseases, ibid. Field-beds and canopy beds,
ibid. Hanging Beds good for the use of the sick, ibid Beds should differ
according to the disease and season of the year. Beef, 72. Beer, and the
virtues thereof, 123. Differences of Beer from the malt it is made of, from
the age, the strength, substance, taste, quantity of hops, the calour, the
fuel wherewith the malt is dried, and the water wherewith it is brewed, 126.
Bitter Beer, 127. Beer better for our sick than wine, 192. Buttered Beer,
and the abuse thereof, 324. Beetes, 49. Belly or Tripes, 75. Benedict. 1. and
14. Popes, and their licencious lines, 330. Barberies, 62. Beteony, 56.
Bewitching: See fascination. Bilberries, 62. Bird of Paradise, 29. Bissextile
or leap-yeere, 229, 300, etc. Blacke-bird, 80. Bittowre, 81. Bleare eyes, the
and effects they produce, 355. Blites, or Bleees, 49. Blood of beasts, 76.
Blood abounding causes many diseases, 228. Blood-leting: See phlebotomie.
Borrage. 50. Boare-heads nailed on great men's gates in Switzerland, 356.
Brains of beasts, 75. Brains of foul, 82. Bramble-berries, 61. Brawne: See
Hogs flesh. Bread of several sorts, 42. Bread of Wheat, and the differences
thereof; from the meal, prepration and age, ibid. Bread made of Barley, of
Pease, Beans, Oats, Millet, Panicke, etc. 43. Bread made of roots, ibid.
Bread of other grains seldom used for food, more for physic, ibid. Bread of
Chestnuts, 70. Bread yields the best nourishment. Bread to be used both with
Fish and Flesh, ibid. Bread, what best for the sickes use: how for them to be
prepared, and how to be used, 170, etc. Bread of new flower fittest for the
sick, and how the ancients washed their bread, ibid. How it is washed with us,
ibid. Unleavened Bread hurtful for the sick, ibid. Artificial preparations
of Bread according to occasions, ibid. Breake-fast, and whether it be usedfull,
49. Broom, 93. Broome-flowers, 99. Brothes for the sick, 179. Buglosse: See
Borrage. Burial in Churches and Churchyards: See Air. Burning lamp made of
blood: See lampas vitae and mortis. Bustard, 81. Butter, 76. When best, 208.
Whether useful for the sick, and how to be used, ibid.
C.
Cabbage and their qualities, 52. Cacochymia what, 231. Calipha died by eating
pigeons roasted with the heads, 275. Camels milk: See milk. Camels flesh: See
uncouth flesh. Capers pickled, 99. Capons flesh, 77. Capons unknown to the
ancients, 154. Capons whether they engender the gout, 175. Cardan contemned the
dog-daies: His voyage into Scotland to Cardinal Beton, 255. Carnal
copulation, and the moderate use thereof, 325. Moderately useful, and
profitable for the body, 326. Immoderate use thereof procures great hurt to
the body. For what bodies most useful: For whom most hurtful; sick folks
must abstain from it. Some other things concerning this subject, 326.327, etc.
Carpe, 93. Carrot, 45. Carrying on men's shoulders, 219. Cats flesh: See uncouth
diet. Cephalice vein when to be opened, 239. Chamelion lives not on the air.
29. Charles the great had something read to him during meals, 229. Cheeks of
beasts, 75. Cheese. 76. The best. ibid. Cherries and their kinds, 62.
Chestnuts: See Nuts. Chickens. 77. Children are not to be frighted with
bug-beares and the like, 394. China broth: See broth. Cider, 128. Cinnamon, and
the virtues thereof, 102. Cinq-foile, 51. Circaea or Circelus: See Mandrakes.
Citron or Lemmon, 63. Cives, 46. Clary, 54. Clement the 8 Pope, a bastard, a
Bawd, etc. 329. Climactericall years, with the signification of the word 10.
Climactericall years of diverse sorts, and what they portend, ibid. According to
some, diverse in man and woman, ibid. Three several causes of these years,
Astronomicall and Physical, Numrical, 11. Clothing of the sick, 153, 154.
Clothing would enrich Northampton, 150. Clothing begun to be set up in
Northampton, ibid. Clovegillisiflowres, 99. Cloves, 101. Cocatrice: See
Basiliske. Cockes-flesh, 78. Old Cocks, 157. Cockles, 91. Cod-fish of diverse
kinds, 89. Coelica passio* See Fluxes. Cold of Northern countries, 259. Cold
countries may feed more liberally than hot, 38. Colice, 180. Columbines, 53.
Col-worts: See Cabbage. Concoction, natural and artificial, 277. Concoction
when to be expected, ibid. Conger, 89. Conie, 74. Constantine, King of
Scotland, made strict laws against riot and excess, 106. Conviviall
discourses: See exercises of the mind. Corn, and the kinds thereof, 4.
Corneillons, 67. Covering of the sick, 151. 152. Too much covering of the
sick, ibid. Countrie-people often much wrong themselves in the use of
phlebotomy, 148. Country-Surgeons often much wrong the people in this same
particular, ibid. Cow-slip flowers, 99. Crabfish, 92. Crane, 81. Critical
days depend more upon the material cause of the disease, than on the stars,
358. Crustards: See white meats. Crying: See exercise. Cucumer, or Coucomber,
58. Cupping most commonly used with scarification: See Scarification. The
matter and form of such cups, and in what bodies most useful ibid. Dry cups
without scarification, ibid. Currants, 61. 65. Cuttle-fish, 90.
D.
Dates, 65. David, King of Scotland, suppressed all riot and excess in his
kingdom. 167. Days good and bad, a heathenish superstion, 259. Deer: See
Venison. Derivation, and when to be used: See phlebotomy: What it is ibid.
Distillation unknown to antiquity, 190. Distilled waters, ibid. Distilled
restoratives for the sick, 180. Dinner, and the time thereof among the
ancients, and among us, 37. 38. Dinner or supper, which may be more liberal,
39. 40. Dinner the day of purgation, 288. Discourse of weighty matters during
meals: See conviviall discourse. ibid. Directions for Conviviall discourse,
ibid. Divines and their education in good literature: Intr. 19. Their pains
and prerogative: ibid. Their advantage beyond the Physicians: ibid. They are
freed from many incombrances whereunto the Physician is subject: ibid. They
have the sole power of admitting those of their own profession, Intr. 19. 21.
Diureticke remedies, and their use, 311. Their right use and preparation
before. ibid. Of two sorts, ibid. Error in the use of diuretickes: Safest and
best diureticke simples, ibid. Danger in the use of hot diureticke simples,
ibid. Dog-daies, whether to be observed, 151, etc. Whether phlebotomy and
physic may not safely be administered therein, ibid. They are often
needlessely feared, ibid. This season often colder than other seasons of the
summer, 251. 252, etc. Dogs-flesh: See uncouth flesh. Dosis of medicines
diverse, 278. Dreams and their several kinds, 338. Signification of dreams,
and whether they concern the ficke, 338. 339, 340. Drink and the utility
thereof: 312. What drink is: ibid. Division of Drink, and rules to be
observed in the use thereof: ibid. Quantity of Drink: ibid. The ordinary
measures of Drink among the ancients, 113. Morning draught. ibid. Strong
Drink not to be used fasting. ibid. Beginning the repast with a draught ibid.
Drink often used in ancient time to close up the stomach, 114. Drinking to
Bed-ward, 115. Drink made of corn used by the ancients, especially
Egyptians, 125. Drink made of corn with us differs much from that of the
ancients, ibid. Drink very useful in many diseases, but in hot and acute
Fevers especially, 183. Diverse drinks useful for the diseased. 198. 199, etc.
Drunkards break all the Commandments, 130. They are pernicious to a
commonwealth, 132 To be put to death by the Laws of a Scottish King, 133.
They are often short lived, and many times dye of long lingering diseases, 137
No new sin, 129. What it is, ibid. Nations taxed with drunkenness, ibid. It
is the cause of great mischief to the mind and understanding, 131. It
procures diverse diseases to the body, making the same also subject to many
outward dangers, 131, 132. It proves likewise often dangerous to the soul,
and many times overthrows a man's temporal estate, 132. It is unseemely to
all estates and degrees, 133. Diet has diverse significations, and what
properly among Physicians, 1. Diet whether necessary for healthful and sick
persons? 3. Whether by Diet the life of man may be prolonged for many years?
4. Diet cannot perpetuate the life of man, and yet a most forcible means both
to preserve and recover health. 5. Diet of the Diseased but slenderly handled
heretofore, and by very few, 140. Strictly observed among the Ancients, ibid.
Among the Egyptians and Locrians, ibid. Diet of the Diseased in general, 162.
163. A full and liberal Diet: A spare and strict Diet, and the mean betwixt
both, 163. Hippocraticall Diet too rigid for our country climat, ibid. Arabian
Diet better suteth with our bodies, ibid. Diet of the Diseased reduced into two
heads; the diseased, and the disease it self, 164. Diet in acute diseases how
to be ordered: 167. In intermitting Fevers: ibid. In continual Fevers without
intermission, ibid. In prescribing the Diet of the diseased diverse things to be
considered, 165. 168. By whom the most sparing diet is to be observed, 166.
Diet drink: See drink of the diseased.
E.
Ears of beasts, 75. Earth nourishes not, 30. Ebionites haereticks and their
abstinence: See abstinence. Eeles not wholesome, 93. Egestion: See excrements.
Eggs and their nourishment, 83. Eggs whether fit for the sick: they are not
so hot as is supposed by Hippocrates in acute diseases, 176. 177. Eggs man
safely be allowed in fevers, ibid. Eggs of Hens best of all others, ibid. Eggs
prepared after several ways, in sickness and in health, ibid. Marks of
Eggs, and how to discern a new laid Egg. 178. Electuaries how taken, 288.
Elements pure and simple nourish not, 21. 29, etc. Elephants flesh: See flesh.
Embrocations, 293. Empericke-physitians, Intr. 2. Empericke what, ibid.
Empericks of diverse sorts, ibid. Empericks abound here with us, Intr. 3.
Emulsitions, their compositions and several sorts of them, 201. Emunctories in
the body of man, whereby excrements are expelled, 225. Endive, 49. Error of
such as divulge secrets (as they call them) in the vulgar coung, Int. 26.
Esseans fast, or abstinence: see abstinence. Evacuation, what, 226. Evacuations
sometimes too much abound, ibid Before Evacuations what to be considered, ibid.
Evacuations of several sorts, general, and particular, when they maybe most
liberal, 228. Ewes milk: See milk. Excess of the Persian Kings in their
ordinary expenses, 106. Excrements of the guts, or fecall excrements. 313. Best
excrements, ib. Worse excrements, Evil colored excrements of diverse sorts,
worms in excrements: Liquid excrements and the causes, 314. Soft excrements
with their causes: hard excrements, and their several causes: Quantity of
excrements: Time of egestion, and how often it is useful in sickness and in
health, ibid. and 315. Exercise and the vtility thereof, 211. Useful in
sickness and in health: Fittest time foe exercise, 213. Violent exercise
immediately after meals hurtful to health, etc. ibid. Place fit for exercise,
the persons to be exercised: the quantity or duration, quality, order, etc.
213. 214. Exercises ought not to be too violent, especially in some persons,
214. Difference of exercise, ibid. Exercises of the whole body: Of some part,
mixed particular exercises, ibid. Exercises of some particular profession, 216.
Exercise must differ according to several constitutions, 213. Exercise in what
kind of disease may be permitted, 221. Exercises in chronicall diseases, ibid.
Exercises of the mind, 217. Expectoration, 323. Error in the use of
expectoration, ibid. Caveats in the use of expectorants: preparation of the
humors to be expectorated, 324. Form of expectorants, ibid. Expectoration in
diseases of the lungs and pectorall parts chiefly to be considered, ibid.
Expectoration ceasing in ulcers of the lungs, and the presage thereof 26.
Expressum: See Broth. Eyes of beasts, 75. Eyes full of resplendent spirits,
354.
F.
Fable of the Fox and the Crane, 218. Fecall excrements: See Excrements.
Fancy: See Imagination. Fascination, and the several sorts thereof, 334.
Fascination with the eyes, ibid Fascination by speech and voice, and how
procured, 333. Fast: See abstinence. Fatt of Beasts, 74. Fear, and the
several kinds thereof, 39^. Fear produces strange effects in the body of
man: Fear may cause death: What persons it hurts most: Fear and Grief
stir up melancholy in the body of man: Sick folks are carefully to avoid
this passion, and great circumspection for the prevention thereof to be used,
393, 394, 395, 396. Feet of beasts, 75. Figs, 65. Filbird: See Nuts. Filled
fare. 81. Fish, and their several kinds, 88. Fresh Water fish, 92, Fish in
ancient times how prepared: how in our time, 182. Fish, whether fit for the
sick, ibid. What Fish fittest for the sick, ibid. Fisticke, ibid. Flesh of
several sorts, 72, etc. Goodness of Flesh, according to their several
circumstances. 71. Uncouth Flesh, 83. Flesh for the sick, and diverse
preparations made of the same, 178, 179, 180. Flounder, 89. Fluxes of diverse
sorts, 315. In Fluxes, astringent medicines cautelously to be used, ibid.
Fonticulous; See searing. Food: See nourishment Food of a gross, slender, and
of a mean substance, 34. Football play, 214. Fore-spoken what: See
Fascination. Foul of several sorts. 77. Tame-fowle, wilde-fowle, 79, etc.
Water-Fowle, 81. Frictions usefell for the sick, 221. Frogs; See uncouth
flesh. Fruits and their nourishment, 59. Fruits of several kinds, together
with their qualities and nourishment, ibid. Fruits, what fittest for the sick,
172. Frumentie: See white meat.
G.
Garlic, 46. Gelee, 180. Gelee of Harts-horne, ibid. Ginger, the virtues and
cautions in the use thereof, 100. Glisters used for diverse ends, and in diverse
infirmities: they differ both in the quantity and quality: quantity
differs according to several circumstances; Retention of Glisters, 281, 282.
Gluttony with the incoveniences thereof, hurtful both to soul and body, 103.
Gauseth many diseases, 104. Goats-flesh. 73. Goats-milke: See milk. Gold and
Silver communicate no virtue to mineral waters, 305. Goose-berries, 61. Goose,
tame and wild 78. Solan Goose, 79. Gourd, 57. Gournard, 90. Grapes, 64.
Gregorian year: See Bissextile. Grief and sorrow, and the effects thereof,
what sort of grief allowable, what sort of people it most hurts; and whom
least, 393. Gripings in purgation, 290. Gudgeon, 92. Gufford: See maw.
H.
Haddocke. 90. Hair, whether it ought to be cut in sickness, 155* Whethet it
ought to be short or long, 156. It ought not too often to be cut, especially
that of the face and beard ought not too often to be shaven, 155. Hair
baltered together after a strange serpentine form, a very strange and
prodigious thing to behold 156. Hollibut, 90. Hares-flesh, 74. Heatt of beasts,
75. Haslenut: See Nut. Head and brains, 75. Health a chief earthly
happiness, 1. What Health is, 2. Health twofold, ibid. Heathens and
Heretics far surpass our Romanists in strictness of abstinence: See
Abstinence. Hectickes how to be bathed, 296. Hedge-hogg, 74. Hen, 77. Herbs,
and their use in diet. 48. Their use for the sick, 171. Heron, 81. Herring,
90. Red-herring, ibid. History of a woman-physitian in Northamptonshire, Intr.
10. Of a noble virtuous Lady of Northamptonshire very charitable and
beneficial to the poor, Intr. 12. Histories of quacksalving Mountebanks,
Intr. 3. History of a young woman cured by phlebotomy, howbeit much diswaded by
her friends therefrom, Intr. 11. Histories of Leprosies cured contrary to
intention, Intr. 7. History of a desperate cure in the sweating sickness ibid.
Another of a desperate fellow casually curing himself of an inveterate
headache, ibid. Another of a fellow taking an indefinite quantity of sweating
powder for the Ague. ibid. Another of a Gentlewoman cured of the mother, stone,
and spleen, Intr. 20. History of a man living only on the Sun and air, 29.
History of the diversity of weather in a small distance, 22. History of
Democritus his life prolonged for certain days, 29. Histories of some who
lived diverse years without any manner of sustenance, 31. History of a fellow
living 7 days under the ground on his own urin only, ib. History of a dead
Hen turned into a stone, 32. History of Pythagoras his supposed forty days
fasting, 33 History of the imposture of an Hermit counterfeiting long
abstinence, ibid. History of a maid eating all the salt she could come by: See
salt, Histories of some living all their life time without any drink, 109.
History of Iovinian the Emperor killed with the smoke of charcoale, 145.
History of wine permitted in a fever, 192. History of one living long on the
spirit of Wine, 193. Histories of some living all their life time on milk
only, 109. Histories of diverse dying about their climactericall year: See
Climactericall year. History of a Gentlewoman delivered of twins in the
field, far from any town, 236. Histories of women with child purged and
phlebotomised, 273. History of phlebotomy in an ancient Gentlewoman. 245.
History of phlebotomy an in old man during the dog-daies, 254. History of a
Knight cured during the dog-daies, 233. History of a tame Bucke once drunk,
which never after would drink any strong drink, 131. History of an absurd
cure of sore eyes, 257. History of Galeacius, Duke of Mantua, 345. Another of
Faustina, wife to Amonius the Philosopher, who drank the blood of a
sword-player. 347. History of Antiochus in love with his mother in law,
Stratonice, 346. History of one killing his wife and a man in the very act of
adultery 348. Another of a French Doctor, severely punishing his corrivall,
ibid. Some others to the same purpose, especially of an old woman, fearing lest
after her death, her young husband should marry a young woman, 359. History of
Philip king of Macedon falling in love with a fair young maid, 353. History of
a ligature in a young country-fellow and his wife newly married, 351. Another
of Priests in France, ordinarily using ligatures, ibid. History of one by the
Devil tempted to drunkenness, who by this means fell also into two other
foul sins, 131. History of a old strumpet-killing certain Abbots with her love
drinks, 352. Histories of some dying of fear, 396. Others of some by fear
having their black hairs changed all white in one night, 394. History of a
Gentlewoman in Northamton: shire big with child, by reason of fear falling
into strange convulsion fits, yet recovering, 397. Another of a widow newly
married, who after a great anger, died of convulsions, 392. Histories of
Philosophers concerning anger, 389. 391. History of a much renowned Empericke,
disgraced by King James of famous memory 410. Hogs flesh, 71. 72. Wild Hogs
flesh, 74. Honey and the virtues thereof, 95. 96. For what complexions most
useful, ibid. Boiled Honey; it must not be over-boiled, ibid. Course Honey,
quintessence of Honey, 96. Clarifying of Honey, skimming of Honey: Effects of raw
Honey, ibid. Horseflesh: See uncouth flesh. Hot-houses or Stoves, 147. Humors
to be purged out of the body: Humors capable of concoction: See purgation.
Hydromell, 196. Hydrotickes, or medicines provoking sweat of several sorts,
291. 292. Hydroticke mineralls, ibid. Hydroticke inunctions, ibid. Hydrotickes
cautelously to be used: preparation before their use, ibid. In chronicall
diseases how; in what cases hurtful: Caution in the use of strong Hydrotickes,
ibid. Continuance or duration, 243. Hyssop, 57.
I.
Idleness a great incentive and stirrer up of lust, 345. Jews abstain from
water during their solemn fasts, 30. Ignorant and unskilful persons are not
fit to deal with this dieteticall part of Physic, far less with the
particular part thereof, Intr. 26. Ignorance of the vulgar in judging of a
Physicians sufficiency, Intr. 4. 5, etc. Ignorant and undeserving people often
rob the Physician of the praise and commendation due to his desert, Intr. 20.
Ignorant and unskilful practitioners often more chargeable to the patient than
the most skillful Physician, 410. Illyrians hurting by aspect, 355. Imagination
produces strange effects within the same body, 359. Imagination cannot attract
influences from the heavens; according to the doctrine of Paracelsus, Crollius,
and other Paracelsians it works wondrous and stupendous effects, attracting
from the heavens plagues, pestilent Fevers, etc. And like a lodestone it
attracteth any power from the elements, and works beyond thousands of miles:
As likewise that the imagination of the sick attracteth health from the
healthful, 160. 161. Indication of phlebotomy, 230. Indication of purging,
271. Indication of the quantity, 278. Infirmities following lustful love, 345.
Ingratitude of patients toward their Physicians, Intr. 22, etc. Ingratitude of
old, blameworthy, ibid. Intemperance: See Gluttony. Iringo-roots, 45. Joy and
gladness good if they be moderate: Exceeding measure may prejudice the health,
and may sometimes cause death, 398. 400. Joy and gladness useful for the
sick, and carefully to be procured ibid. Ischiadica, or vena poplitis when to
be opened, 240. Issue and event in Gods hands; it falls out alike to the
learned and unlearned Physician, Intr. 5. etc. Issues where to be made, 265.
K.
Kid, 73. Kidney, 76. S. K^aherines well a bituminous spring, near Edenbourgh
in Scotland, 307. Knaresbor^w well in Yorkshire, ibid.
L.
Labor of the mind cannot be recompensed: See Physicians. Laconicum what, and
for what bodies most beneficial; together with the time, both general and
particular: Preparation before the use of it, 297. Lamb, 73. Lampas vitae and
mortis, 347. Composition of this Lamp, 365. Lamprey, 93. Lapwing, 81. Lark,
80. Lavative broth, 288. Lawyers and their great pains: They have many
advantages of the Physicians: See Physicians. Leaches, their election and right
use, 263. Leape-yeere: See Bissextile. Leeke, 46. Legs of foul, 82. Lemon:
See Citron. Lettice, 48. Levret: See Hares flesh. Ligatures, their utility and
profit, 221. Ligatures unlawful, and their too too frequent use among some,
351. 352. Linen of the sick: It ought to be often shifted: Error of the
vulgar in this point detected and confuted, 163. Linet, 80. Liver of beasts,
Lungs of beasts, 75 Liver of foul, 82. Lobster, 92. Locusts: See uncouth
flesh. Love, and what it is: Lustful Love and harms thereby procured:
Remedies against this unlawful lust, 144, etc. Lovepotions mentioned in
profane authors: simples provoking lust of diverse kinds: they prove often
poison to the body: They have no such virtue as our ancient and modern
Physicians write of: they cannot force affections, or produce such effects of
themselves, 361. Whether love can be procured by any medicine? 352.
M.
Mace, 101. Mackerell, 90. Magistrates should not suffer any niceties to be
published in Almanacks, 261. Mallows, 50. Mandrakes and the consideration
thereof: Description of Mandrakes: Imposture of cheaters with their counterfeit
Mandrakes: Opinion of the ancients concerning this point: Opinion of S.
Augustine and others, 382. 383. It is rather hot than cold in operation: It has
no power to make the barren bear children, 386. Apples of Mandrake: Narcoticke
qualities of this plant, 384. 385. Man's flesh: See uncouth flesh. Shambles of
man's flesh, ibid. Manichees error concerning fasting: See Fasting. Manucodiata:
see Bird of Paradise. March-panes and their use: see bread for the sick, 328.
329. Marigold. 53. Marioram: Pot Marioram, 55. Marrow, 75. Maw or Gussard, 82.
Mawborne hills springs, 307. Meal: See Repast. Mediana, or Median vein, 239.
Medlar, 67. Melicratum: See Hydromel. Melon, Muske-melon, 58. Menstruous flux
stopped, cause of many diseases, 331. Menstruous flux abounding, ibid. Mercury,
52. Metheglin used much by the ancient Britains, 96. Milk, and what it is,
76. Best Milk and the parts thereof, ibid. Milk, Milk of diverse sorts: Mares
milk in great request among the Tartares: Woman's milk: Ewes milk: Cowes
milk: Goats milk: Sowes milk: Virtues of these several sorts of milk: In
what time of the year best: It differs according to the nature of the beast
from which it is milked: the color and food it feeds on: qualities and
properties of the best milk, and of whom it may safeliest be used: too
frequent used offensive: how, and with what preparation to be used, and what to
be done after the use thereof: How the ancients used it: Cautions before it be
used: Ancients boiled water with their milk: The quantity. page 203. 204, 205.
Sower-milke: Butter-milke, 280. Milt, 75. Mineral waters brought in by the
later Physicians, 300. The lose not their virtue in leap-yeere: See Leap-yeere.
They lose much of their efficacy and power by carrying and warming, 306.
Useful for the health of mankind, 299. They are used in a double manner, 303.
Preparation of the body before their use: The time and manner of using them,
304. Ministers too busy with the practice of Physic, even where able
Physicians are to be found, 404. They have no reason to plead for want or need:
Diverse reasons against this practice, and the unlawfulness thereof proved,
ibid. etc. Moon in some cases observable: She is of swift motion, and abides
not long in a sign, 257. 258. Moore-Cocke, 80. Moore-Hen, 82. Mulberries, 60.
Mules flesh: See uncouth flesh. Mullet, 90. Mulsa, Mulsum, 196. Mushroms, 47.
Mussells, 91. Mussell-broth: See Broth. Mustard, 99. Mutton, and which kind is
the best, of Ewes, Wedder, etc.
N.
New-name Wells, 308. Night-walkers. 304. Nine runs hard by the ancient
town of Northampton, 149. This River made navigable would enrich all the
country round about it. 150. Noctambulones: See Night-walkers. Northampton
situate in a good fruitful soil, 199. It is situate toward the South Sun:
the air very temperate, and healthful for the body of man, ibid. Nourishment
in general, 34. Things to be considered in nourishment, ibid. Nourishment of
herbs, 48. 49, etc. Nourishment of fruits, 59. 60, etc. Nutmegs, 102. Nuts, 68.
Indian Nuts, 112.
O.
Oil, and the use of it very ancient, 98. Oil of two sorts, ibid. Oil of
Walnuts wholesome, 99. Oisters, 91. Olives pickled, 99. Onion, 46. Orach, 49.
Orange, 67. 68. Orgemond, and what it is* See Barley-water Orifice of the
vein: Large Orifice: a small Orifice, 240. 241. Oxymel and the commendation
thereof: simple and compound; how prepared of old, and how with us, 195.
P.
Paracelsians swelling promises, 6. Paracelsians commonly short lived for all
their smoakie promises to others: They fail grossly in their antidotes
against the Plague, and other contagious diseases: They hold that metalls
nourish the body, but falsely, ibid. Paracelsus himself short lived: His
strange opinion concerning long life: the lives of our forefathers, and
prolonging of life by imagination: To save his credit, said to be poisoned, ib.
Parslie, 54. Parsnep, 44. Partridge, 79. Peach, 63, 64. Peacocke, 78. Pears,
dried Pears, 67. Penniroyall, 54. Pepper, the kinds, right use and abuse
thereof, 100. Perch, 92. Perry, 128. Fancy: See Imagination. Phesant, 79.
Philtra: See Love-potions. Phlebotomy what, 228. 229. How it differs from
purgation: What things therein to be considered, 229. Preparation before,
during, and after bleeding what to be done, 262. Phlebotomy threefold, 230.
Indication of Phlebotomy: Use and end of Phlebotomy, and in what cases to be
used, ibid. Use thereof in pestilentiall, contagious and malign Fevers, in the
small Pox, Measells and laundise, 233. The vulgar shy of Phlebotomy, and why?
and causes of the often evil success of this remedy, 234. Not so frequent in
Hippocrates time, 243. To what persons it may safely be administered: It may
safely be administered to women with child in time of need; and safely to both
young and old, 141. 142. Quantity in Phlebotomy has no certain rule, and how
to be found out, 246. Large evacuations when to be used, 247. Swounding
yields us no certainty concerning the quantity, nor yet the changing of the
color, ibid. Ancients very lavish in this evacuation: Reiteration of
Phlebotomy, and diverse kinds thereof, 248. Diverse vulgar errors concerning
phlebotomy: Oportune time of Phlebotomy, general and particular; of election
and coaction; in prevention and in sickness; in chronicall and acute disease,
250. 251. It may with us in any season of the year be administered, ibid.
Phlebotomy evacuateth Plethory, 231. Things to be considered in the opening of
the vein, strength especially, 241. Particular Phlebotomy by leaches and
scarification, 263. Physic a more painful, laborious, and troublesome
profession than any other, Intr. 18. Physicians practical pains exceed the
pains of other professions: Pains of the three chief professions paralleled
and compared together, Intr. 19. Extent of the Physicians study exceeds that
of other professions, Ibid. Physicians often much incombred to please their
patients: Their best actions and endeavors often misconstrued, and they
wrongfully traduced: Their pains greatest, and yet often worse requited than
those of other professions: They have many sharers with them which often rob
them of their due, Intr. 21. Pigeons, 78. 175. Whether to be used of the sick,
ibid. Pigge, 72. Pilchards or sprats, 90. Pills, how, and when to be taken,
280. Pineapple: See Nut. Plethora: See Repletion. Plover, 82. Plums and their
properties, 65. Pomgranat, 68* Pope Julius a Sodomite, 329. Pope Sixtus 4,
erected in Room, stews for both kinds of uncleanness, and allowed the use
of Sodomy, ibid. Pope Clement the 8: See Clement the 8. Pope John the 4, a
whore-master, an adulterer, a Sodomite, ibid. Pope Benedict: See Benedict. Pope
Paul the 3 prostituted his own daughter, 330. Posset-drinke, and several
ways of preparation, 207. White Wind posset-Drinke, ibid. Sorrel
posset-drinke, ibid. Posset-drinke in malign and pestilentiall fevers, ibid.
Plain ordinary posset-drinke, ibid. Best Posset for healthful people, 208.
Eating Possets, and the abuse thereof, ib. Potato roots, 45. Pricke-madam, 50.
Prescilli^mists fast: See Abstinence. Ptisan: See Cream of barley. Puff, 47.
Purgation what, 267. In Purgation what to be considered, ibid. and 368. Purging
medicines different, 168. Compound medicines various and of diverse sorts, ibid.
Of diverse forms, 269. External and internal, ibid. Purgation perfect and
imperfect, ibid. Minorative purgation, ibid. P^r epierasin, ibid. Method of
Purgation, and what therein to be considered, 269, etc. Error of the vulgar
concerning Purgation, 270. Indication of purging threefold, 271. When to
purge, and several circumstances in purging to be considered, 283 Humors to
be purged, 276. Preparation before purgation, ibid. Preparation of the body and
humors requisite, 277. Difference thereof, ibid. Quantity of purging medicines,
278. Time of our purgation, general and particular, 283. 284. When to be
deferred, 284. In the beginning when to purge, ibid. In the fit when useful,
285. Best time of the year, fittest day and time of the day, ibid. Strong
purgations, 268. Gentle purgations, ibid. Defective purgation, and the cause
thereof, 289. 290. After Purgation, how the patient is to be ordered, ibid.
Diverse forms of purging medicinces, 280. Liquid and solid forms, etc. 287.
Passages by which we are to purge, and what therein to be considered, ibid.
Perfect purgation and the signs thereof, 289. Purselane, 50. Pythagorean
abstinence: See abstinence. Pyke and Pycarell, 29.
Q.
Quail, 80. Quince, 67.
R.
Rabbet or Conie: See Conie. Rail, 81. Raisin: Raisin of the Sun, 65.
Raspes, 60. Rats-flesh: See uncouth flesh, Reddish, Horse-Reddish, 44. Repasts
and meals, and their number for one day 37. Times fittest for Repast, 38.
Repasts and their times differ in several countries, ibid. Repletion, and how
ingendered, 225. Repletion indicates evacuation, ibid. Revulsion: See
Phlebotomy. Rheumes distilling down upon the breast, and how to expel this
excrement, 323. Rheumes troublesome to the body, ibid. Rheum differs both in
color and in taste, ibid. Rheum, or that which is spit up must be observed in
pleurisies: Error of the vulgar in the use of expectorating medicines against
the Rheum, ibid. Rhintax: See Bird of Paradise. Ribes: See Currants.
Rice-bread: See Bread. Rice-pottage: See white meats. Riot and excess abound
much in this our age: See gluttony. Rochet, Roch, 92. 93. Roses of several
sorts, 44, etc. Roses their several kinds and virtues, 51. Rue eaten against
fascination: See fascination.
S.
Saffron, 102 Sage, 56. It is far more sovereign for the corroboration of the
bram and animal parts than Tobacco: See Tobacco. Sailing, and the differences
thereof: See Exercise. Sal gemmae: See Salt. Sal ammoniacus, ibid. Salivation,
and the use the thereof, 316. Abuse thereof, ibid. and 321. Salmon,
Salmon-trout, 92. Salt a sauce of sauces, 94. Salt of several sorts, 95. Salt
what best, ibid. Salt of salt-wells, ibid Salt made by the heat of the fire,
ibid. Salt of plant, ibid. Salt, what complexions it best befitteth and to whom
an enemy, 94. Cautions in the use thereof. ibid. Immoderately used hurtful.
Properties and virtues of Salt, ibid. Salicatella vena, 240. Sampierre kept for
sallets, 92. Saphena vein, 240. Sardanap^lus his Epicure-like Epitaph, 105.
Savory, 56. Scarification, 264. Often used with cupping: In what cases to be
used, ibid. Scald, 90. Scurvie-grasse ale: See diet-drinke. Searing or burning
of some part, What it is, 265. The benefit and utility thereof. The place of
the issue, with some cautions, and the instrument wherewith it is made, ibid.
Seasons of the year considerable in sickness and in health. 20. How
ordinarily defined and limited, 21 Otherwise distinguished by Hippocrates ibid.
Seasons differ according to Climats and Countries within and without the
Tropickes. ibid. They differ according to the situation of places, 22. Section
or opening of the vein: See vein. Seed of generation what, and for what use,
315. Service, 67. Setaceum and Setum: See searing. Shifting of the sick: See
clean linen. Shooting with a bow: See exercise. Shrimps: See pranes. Sign
whether to be considered in Phlebotomy? 256. Erroneous and superstitious
custom of the vulgar in so punctually observing the sign, ibid. Confutation
of this opinion, 257. The Sun ought to have a greater share in the sign than
the Moon, and the reasons, 259. Signs ruminant a mere fancy and Chimara.
258. Signs not to be observed in purging, ibi. Signs neglected of our best
Physicians, howsoever some of them expert Mathematicians, 260. Silke-wormes
eaten: See uncouth diet. Situation of the sick, house: See air. Skallions:
See Onions. Sleep moderate, and the benefits thereof, 332. Immoderate sleep
with the harms thereon ensuing, ibid. What sleep is, ibid. It is not properly
a function of any sense ibid. Fittest time for sleep, 333. Sleep in the day
time whether allowable, ibid. For whom most hurtful, ibid. Best situation of
the body for Sleep, Morning-sleepe, ibid. Sleep of the sick, 335. Time
fittest for sick folks to sleep in, ibid. In acute diseases fittest time.
ibid. In what diseases it may be of longest continuance, ibid. Sleep in
intermitting Fevers, ibid. In (...) diseas^s ibid. In sop^^^^rous diseases it
must be s^^^ted. ibid. Whether the sick may sleep after physic? 288. Sleep
not natural threefold, 335. Drowsy or deadly sleep, ibid. Critical Sleep,
and the several sorts of the same, 336. Sleep carefully to be procured, ibid.
The vulgar very shy of hypnoticke or sleepy medicines, ibid. Skirret, 45.
Smelt, 90. Snailes and their use: See uncouth flesh, Snailes whether useful in
Consumptions and Hecticke fevers, ibid. Snot and Snevill, and the
significations thereof, 303. Snowtes of beasts, 73. Sodomie by a Popish
Prelate maintained lawful, and allowed by a Pope, 329. Sorrel, 30. Wood
sorrel, ibid. Soul and the passions thereof, 341. Spa. See Mineral waters.
Spa by Aberdene, ibid. Sparrow, 80. Spells, characters and strange words of
themselves have no power to produce any strange effect, 357. Spices used in
Diet, 100. Spinach, 49. Spirit of wine: See aqua vita. Spirit of Ale or Beer,
1^3. Spittle, and the use thereof. 316. Spittle best in condition. Several
tastes of Spittle: Several colors, ibid. It is to be considered in sickness
and in health, 3^6. Sprats: See pilchards, Sterline, 80. Stipendary Physicians,
Intr. 24. Stipends for Physicians would prove very profitable for the
commonwealth, ibid. Stock dove, 78. Stones of beasts, 76. Stones of foul,
82. Storke, 81. Stove: See Hot-house, Strawberrie, 59. Sturgeon, 89. Succory or
Cichoree: See Endive, Sugar and the virtues thereof, whether known by the
ancients, 96, 97. Sugar and sweet meats much used often prove dangerous, and
for whom especially, 97. Sulpherous Bathes: See Bathes, Supper: See repast.
Suppositories, their use, and with what caution to be used, 282. Surgeons ought
to be careful. They are often too busy with the profession of Physic, Intr.
4. Swan, 81. Sweat an excrement of the third concoction, 290. Sweating in acute
diseases, 291. Natural and procured by Art: Sweat diaphoreticall: Sweat
critical and symptomaticall: Sweat how to be procured: siimples provoking
sweat, ibid. Swounding in phlebotomy no certain sign of a sufficient
evacuation, 247.
T
Tansey: See eggs, Tarragon, 56. Teale, 81. Tears, their diverse kinds, and
several significations in sickness and in health, 293. Tench, 93 Tennis
play: See Exercise. Theodosius his cruel execution at Thessalonica. His worthy
decree and constitution against the sudden execution of Princes decrees, 390.
Thirst hardlier endured than hunger, 109 False thirst, Sitis mendosa, 183.
Thrush, 80. Thornebacke: See Scate, Tiberius Caesar as sharp sighted as a cat,
354. Time, 57. Tobacco as strong and violent a purger, and partaketh as much of
a venomous or poisoning quality as any other simple accounted therefore most
infamous, 317 It evacuateth often good and laudable moisture with the bad: It
is indifferently used of all without respect of any circumstance whatsoever:
Qualities of Tobacco. Violent purging faculty. Abuse of Tobacco, with the best
use: It is a strong narcoticke or benumming medicine, ibid. Often unseasonably
used to further digestion, 318 It often causes crudities, ibid. It is much
sophisticate. For what infirmities fittest. In what season of the year, and
with what correction to be used. Circumstances in the use thereof to be
considered. For whom most hurtful. It is the cause of many diseases and
dismal accidents, 329 330. Tongues of beasts, 75. Tortoise, 92. Triballians:
See Illyrians, Tripes: See belly, Trout, 92. Truffe: See Puff,
Tunbridge-water, 307 Turbot, 89. Turkey, 78. Turnips of several shapes and
forms, and their faculties, 44. Turtle, 78.
V
Vdderne of beasts, 76 Veale, 72. Veins to be opened in several parts of the
body of man. 239. Venetians vigorous and long lived, 18. Venison, 73. Verjuice,
and the use thereof. 98. Vesicatories or blistering medicines: See searing or
burning, Violets, 51. S. Vincents rocke-water, 307. Vinegar. The virtues and
various use thereof, 98. Vomit, and the commendation thereof: Rejected by some
of the ancients, 280 But very frequently used by others, 281 What parts best
purged by vomit. Often rashly exhibited by Empirickes. ibid. For what persons
most useful, and for whom most unfitting. Preparation before, and what after a
vomit to be done, 280, 281. Vrines, and their use, 309. Best urine in color
and contents. Golden colored urine. Black urine. Urine a fallacious sign
thereby to judge either of the disease or issue thereof. ibid. Vrines vary much
in diseases. 310. Critical excretion of urine. Retention and difficulty of
avoiding urine. Quantity of urine. Suppression of urine from diverse causes,
ibid.
W
Walking a profitable exercise: See exercise, Walking after supper, ibid.
Wal-nut: See nut. Washing and anointing of the body after. Washing in cold
water, 294, 295. Washing of the hands. Of the head. Of the feet usual with us.
295. Washing of the feet in sickness, 296. Watching what it is, and to what
function to be referred, 332. Immoderate watching hurtful, and how, ibid.
Water highly esteemed of the ancients. Antiquity, utility and division of
water, 24. Weighing of water, deceitful. Division of useful waters. 25.
Raine-water. Snow-water. Harms of snow-water. Cisterne-water, and the
correction thereof. ibid. Vulgar error concerning the boiling of water, 6.
Terrestrial, or water springing out of the earth. Spring Water. Best
spring water according to situation, place, aspect of humors, etc. ibid. Water
carried through pipes of lead, whether useful? Water of rivers, of pooles and
ponds. Of wells and pumps, and which of all these is the best. ibid. Water the
most ancient and common drink of mankind, with diverse observations in the use
of drinking water, 116, 184. Not to be despised for drink. 187 Bad water how
to be corrected, 117, 118 Water destilled to the Ancients unknown. Destilled
better than boiled, 290. Water in great request among the ancients Not to be
indifferently exhibited in all diseases, 184, 185 Water how to be exhibited
without hurt, and what in the use thereof to be considered, ibid. Cold water
how to be prepared for the use of the sick, together with the time of use
general and particular, the quantity, etc. ibid. Water warmed in frequent use
among the ancients. Whether useful for the sick, 188, 189. Strong waters of
several sorts, and the great abuse thereof. For whom most useful. 193, 194.
Weapon-salve. The names. Various ways of preparation. Blood sometimes omitted
in the preparation. It effects just nothing. Sympatheticall and why?
Magneticall and why? Blood used in the Weapon-salve is taken from any man. It
receives no particular virtue or efficacy from the stars. It is accounted
sometimes miraculous, and sometimes mystical. Confutation of many arguments
brought for the confirmation of the weapon-salve, and such other cures as are
sometimes supposed to be done at as great or greater a distance without any
Physicians contact, 362. 363, 364, 365, 366. Welling-borrow-well, 367. Whey,
and what it is. It may safeier in sickness be exhibited than milk it self.
Virtues of Whey Best whey. Whey of goats milk, and the virtues thereof. It
differs according to the preparation or separation, 206. Clarified whey, 207.
Whigge or wigge: See sowre-milke. White meats, and for whom fit, 21^. Whiting,
90. Wild-fowle: See foul. Winds alter the body of man in sickness and in
health. They are of great force, 16. Their number, natures, and properties
according to several countries. Principal winds to be observed. Division of
winds. Division of land-winds West-wind most t^rrible to Gascony. South Wind
our greatest, for the North Wind our greatest friends. Etaesian, aniversary, or
East-winds: Maritime, or winds blowing from the Sea, with their commendation;
Why in Italy this proves otherwise, 17. 18. Winds of the Western world, or
America: South and South-west winds bl^^ most constantly in Peru: Various
qualities of the Easterne-wind according to several countries, 19. Several
effects of winds, 20. Wine, and the differences thereof, from the color,
taste, and smell, 119. 200. Wi^^ whether it may safely be exhibit the sick,
192. What wine best for the sick: what not useful fo them, ibid. and 196.
What is the best; Artificial wine, ibid. Wine is hot: It is potentially dry:
White wine: Small white wine least hot of any other: Red wine: Strong yellow
wines, 121. 122. Our wines differ much from the wines of the ancients, 122.
Wine moderately used, for some beneficial: ibid. For whom most useful, 123.
Sugar mingled with wine, 24. Wings of foul, 82. Wolf fish, 90.
Women-physitians, and who unfit and unseemly it is for their sex, Intr. 8.
Women too censorious and busy about the sick, and yet ordinarily ignorant of
that which is to be done, ibid. Women's cures are casual, and therefore not to
be trusted to, ibid. and 9. Women fail much, and for the most part in dieting
of the diseaded, Int 2. Why women so ordinarily exceed in their actions, ibid.
and 10. 11. Women with child may safely be phlebotomised and purged, 143. 269,
270. Women of Scythia of a venomous aspect, as also those about Pontus, 355.
Old women often froward and peevish, 356 Wool of Northamptonshire very good:
See Northampton.
Y.
Year altered by Numa Pompilius, 302. By Julius Caesar, 301. By Pope Gregory
13. ibid. Youth ought not to be too tenderly educated, 153. Youth made to lie
upon the ground, to accustom that age to hardship, 107. Youth ought not to
accustom themselves to cover their heads too much, 253.
COurteous Reader, by reason of the Authors absence, and the strangeness of
his Character, diverse faults are committed, which you may thus correct:

Introduction page 2. line 24 read, more hurt, l. 52.^ deprived p. 1^.44 it
(...) p. 11. marg. note 47. responce d'vne, p. 1^ l. 2^. (...). l. (...) of, p.
25. l. 17. 2000 years, p. (...), person of.

In the Tractat it self, page 15. line 1. be of it self, etc: p. 3^. l. 31 in
bodies, (...) p ^5 l 4^ the livers, 89. (...), 93. (...) 4.^ ^^l^eve, 95. ^4.
It is, 97. 3. that which we, ^^.4^ very (...), 1^4.^^ (If such) of the pa^sh,
135.^^ bus^i^ heads* 136 ^6 (...), 146 (...), 147. 21 concerning the a^^yes,
(...) g^^ions, 156. m. n. 2. Franco^, 164. ^8. indication, 166 26 affluence,
18^ ^^^go^ion, 1^8 (...) this were (...). alter^ation, 19^ ^9 (...) have this
(...) thought to be li^^es, ^15. 46. blow lights, 116. 6. for any, 233.
(...). 22 ^ractatu^ de pest^, ^34. 15. Fe^^^s (...) the same (...) beginning
from the ^^ver, 240. 4^ (...), ^3. 12. to second, 248, ^. alleviation, 151. 3
(...), ^61. m. n. 39. (...), ^65. 48. preceded, ^69. 11 minora (...) ibid in m.
n. 282. 13. (...), 285. 1. we say, 286. 30 to wit, whether the passage be free
and o^e^, etc. ^02. 25 (...), and 36. su^^^ssor, ^^7. 3^ be crudities, 3^^. 27
many mat^er 13 14. 10. ^o^liquation, (...) seed of, l. 3 ^ permaticall (...), 5
33. 5* (...) required, ^^5 of sleeping in (...) our intention, 332. m. n. 1
imposture des d^ables, 360. m. n. 59 quintum ^sse, 3^6. (...) ^^^ndize, l. 44.
^aker, 380, 1^. is it 3^6 (...).


