A Comedye concerning three laws, Compyled by Johan Bale.
Baleus prolocutor.
IN ych commen welthe, most high prchemynence,
Is due unto laws for soch commodyte,
As is had by them, For as Cicero gives sentence
Where as is no law, can no good order be,
In nature, in people, in house nor yet in city.
The bodies above, are underneath a law,
Who could rule the world, were it not under awe?
Like as Chrysippus, full clarkely does dyffyne,
Law is a teacher, of matters necessary,
A knowledge of things, both natural and deuyne
Perswadynge all truth. dysswadynge all injury.
A gift of the lord, deuoyde of all obprobry,
An wholesome doctrine, of men dyscrete and wise,
A grace from above and a very heavenly practyse.
Our heavenly maker, mannys living to dyrect,
The laws of Nature, of Bondage, and of Grace,
Sent into this world, with vycyousnesse infect,
In all righteousness, to walk before his face.
But Infydelyte, so works in every place,
That under the heavens, no thing is pure and clean,
So much the people, to his perverse ways lean.
The law of Nature, his fylthy dysposycyon.
Corrupts with ydolles, and stynkynge Sodometry.
The law of Moses, with Auaryce and Ambycyon.
He also poluteth. And ever contynually,
Christ's law he defyleth. with cursed hypocresy,
And with false doctrine, as will apere in presence,
To the edyfyenge, of this Christen audyence.
Of Infydelyte, God royll himself revenge.
With plages of water, of wild fire and of sword.
And of his people, due homage he will challenge.
Ever to be known. for their God and good lord,
After that he has, those laws again restorde,
To their first bewtye committing them to faith.
He is now in place, mark therefore what he says.
Actus Primus.
Deus Pater. I Am Deus pater, a substance inuysyble,
All one with the son, and holy ghost in essence.
To Angel and Man. I am incomprehensyble,
A strength infynyte, a righteousness, a prudence,
A mercy, a goodness, a truth, a life, a sapyence.
In heaven and in earth, we made all to our glory,
Man ever having, in a special memory.
Man I say again, which is our own elect,
Our chosen creature, and servant over all,
Above the others, peculyarly select,
To do us homage and onour name to call,
Acknowledgynge us for his author princypall.
Endued him we have, with gifts of special grace
And laws will we send, to govern him in place.
Step fourih ye iii. laws, for gydau^ce of Mankind
Whom most inteyrly, in heart we love and fauer.
And teach him to walk, according to our mind,
In clennes of life, and in a gentle behauer.
Depely instruct him, our mysteryes to sauer,
By the works of faith, all vices to seclude,
And preserve in him, our godly symylytude.

Naturae lex Of duty we ought, always to be obeysaunt,
To your commandment, for just it is and plesaunt,

Moseh lex. Your precepts are true, and of perpetual strength
On justice grounded, as will apere at length.

Christi lex. Proudenesse ye abhor, with like inconuenyentes,
All they are cursed, wych go from your co^mau^edeme^tes

Deus Pater. Our laws are all one, though you do three apere
Like wise as our will, is all one in effect.
But because that Man, in himself is not clear
To time and person, as now we have respect,
And as three teachers, to him we you dyrect,
Though ye be but one. In token that we are three,
Dystyncte in person, and one in the deyte.

Naturae lex. We consydre that, for as concerning Man,
Four several times, are much to be respected.
Of Innocence first, of his transgressyon than,
Than the long season, wherein he was afflycted,
Finally the time, wherein he was redeemed.
Of pleasure is the first, the second of exyle.
The third does ponnysh, the fort does reconcyle,

Moseh lex. Wha^ Angel was made, this law he had by and by,
To serve you his lord, and with lauds to prosecute
This law was given Man, in time of innocence,
In no wise to eat, of the forbidden fruit.
These two laws broken, both they were destytute,
Of their first fredome, to their most high decay,
Till your only son, ded ma^nys whole rau^some pay

Christi lex. When Angel in heaven, and Man in paradyse,
Those laws had broken. The law of wicked Satan
Impugned your laws, by craft and subtyle practyse.
Where you said. Eat not. He said unto the woman,
Eat, Ye can not dye, As Gods ye shall be than.
By this first of all, your lawdes Man proved true.
And Satan's law false, which he now daily rue.

Deus pater. Let him tha^ beware, how he our laws neglect
Only to Angel, and Man we gave lyberte,
And they only fell, becommynge a froward sect.
Not by our mocyon. but their own vanyte.
For that we gave them, to their felycyte,
Abused they have, to their perpetual evil.
Man is now mortal and Angel become a devil.
Lose Man we will not, though he from us does fall
Our love toward him, will be much better than so
Thu law of Nature, teach thu him first of all,
His lord God to know, and that is right to do.
Charge and enforce him, in the ways of us to go,
Thu law of Moses, And Christ's law finally
Raise him and save him, to our perpetual glory*

Naturae lex. For time of exyle, than I must be his teacher.

Deus Pater. Yea, for three ages, both gyde and gouerner.
From Adam to Noah, from Noah, to Abraham,
And than to Moses, which is the son of Amram,

Naturae lex. Where must I remain, for the time I shall be here?

Deus Pater. In the heart of Man, his conscience for to stere,
To ryghteouse living, and to a just believe,
In token whereof, this heart to the I give.
Hic pro suo signo cor ministrat, Thu shall want no grace, to confort him with
all,
If he to the faith, of my first promise fall.

Moseh lex. Then my course is next, for time of his po^nishment^

Deus Pater. For three ages more, to the must he consent.
From Moses to David from thens to the Jews exyle
And so fourth to Christ, which will Man reconcyle

Moseh lex. Where shall I sweet lord, for that same season dewell

Deus Pater. With soch hard rulers, as will the people compel.
Our mind to fulfill, withuot vain gaudes of fables
For a sign of this, hold these same stony tables.
Hic pro signo lapideas dat ei tabulas. All they that observe, our laws
inuyolablye,
Shall every where prospere, increase and multyplye

Christi lex Then I perceive well, my course is last of all.

Deus Pater What though it b^ so? yet art thu pryncypall,
Our all the world, thy beams shall thu extend,
And still continue, till the world be at an end.

Christi lex. Where shall I father, for that same time persevere?

Deus Pater. With the faithful foet, must thu continue ever.
Thu shall my people, return from far exyle,
And for evermore, to my grace reconcyle.
Take this precyouse book, for a token euydent.
A seal of my covenant, and a living testament.
Hic pro signo datei nouum testamentum They that believe it shall live
foreuermore,
And they that do not, will rue their folly sore,
Blessed shall he be, that you my laws will keep.
In city and field, whether he do work or sleep,
His wife shall encreace, his land shall frutyfye.
And of his enemies, he shall have vyctorye.
The sky will give rain, wha^ seasonable time shall be,
The works of his hands, shall have prosperyte.
Cursed shall they be, that will not our laws fulfill,
Without and within, at market and at myll.
Of corn and cattle, they shall have non increase,
Within their own house, shall sorrows never cease
Never shall they be, without byle, botche, or blayne,
The pestylence and pox, will work the^ deadly pain,
Show this unto Man, and bid him take good head,
Of our righteousness, to stand always in dread.
We vysyte the sin. and the great abhomynacyon*
Of the wicked sort, to third and fort generacyon.
Thu law of Nature, instruct him first of all,
Thu law of Moses, correct him for his fall,
And thu law of Christ, give him a godly mind.
Raise him unto grace, and save him from the find.
Our heavenly blessing, be with you every chone,

Omnes simul. All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.

Christi lex. Here still to tarry, I think it be your mind.

Naturae lex. My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.

Moseh lex. Than God be with you, we leave ye here behind,

Finit Actus primus
Incipit Actus secundus.
Naturae lex. Exeunt. THe law in effect. is a teacher general,
What is to be done. and what to be laid aside
But as touching me the first law natural
A knowledge I am whom God in Man does hyde,
In his whole workynge, to be to him a gyde,
To honor his God and seek his neybers health,
A great occasyon, of peace and publyque wealth,
A sore charge I have, Mankind to over se.
And to instruct him, his lord God to obaye.
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my dewtie
That he be pleased, and Man brought to a stay.
His bryttle nature, his slyppernesse to way,
Much does provoke me. But if God set to hand,
He shall do full well. For non may him withstand,

Infidelitas. ^Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye ^bye. Bromes for
shoes and pow^h^rynges, botes and ^buskyns for new bromes / Brom, brom, brom.
Marry God give ye good even,
And the holy man saint Steven,
Send ye a good new year.
I would have brought ye the paxe.
Or else anymage of wax.
If I had known ye hear.
I will my self so handle.
That ye shall have a candle,
When I come hither again.
At this your soden mocyon.
I was in soch devotion,
I had nere broke a vain.

Naturae lex. That might have done ye smart.

Infidelitas. No, no, it was but a fart,
For pastyme of my heart,
I would ye had it forsooth.
In serupp or in sowse,
But for noyaunce of the house,
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in deed,
God send me well to speed,
And sweet saint Antony.
I thought I should mete a knave,
And now that fortune I have
Among this cumpany.

Naturae lex. Why do thu call me knave?

Infidelitas. I said. I would be your slave,
If your grace would me have*
And do your work anon,
I would so rub your botes,
Therofe should from the rotes,
When ye should do them on,

Naturae lex. Thu art dysposed to mock,
Sone may thu have a knock,
If thu with me so game.

Infidelitas. Your mouth shall kiss my docke,
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?

Naturae lex. I am the law of Nature.

Infidelitas. I thought so by your stature,
And by your ancient gature,
Ye were of soch a rature,
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately,
And now ye are his bailey,
Mankind to rule dyscretely,
Welcome sir huddy peke.

Naturae lex. If thu use soch vyllanye.
I shall dysplease the truly.

Infidelitas. By the mass I the defye,
With thy whole cuckoldrye,
And all that with the hold.

Naturae lex. Why do thu me blaspheme,
And so ungodly deem?

Infidelitas, For by this blessed book,
I went ye had been a coke,
And that made me so bold,
For a coke ones having age
With ^ face demure and sage,
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place,
With a heard upon your face,
What is he but a coke old?

Naturae lex. Ye are dysposed to dallye,
To leap and ouersallye,
The compass of your wit?
I counsel ye yet in season,
Sumwhat to follow reason,
And gnawe upon the byrte,

Infidelitas. Then after our great madness,
Let us fall to some sadness,
And tell me what ye in tend,

Naturae lex. God sent me unto Man,
To do the best I can,
To cause him to amend.
Soche creatures as want reason.
My rules obye yche season,
And that in every bondre.
The sun and moan does moan,
With the other bodies above,
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs does grow,
The sea does ebb and flow,
And varyeth not a nail.
The floudes and wholesome sprynges,
With other natural things,
Their course do never fail
The beasts and birds engendre,
So do the fyshes tender,
According to their kind
Alonlye man does fall,
From good laws natural,
By a froward wicked mind.

Infidelitas. Now will I prove ye a liar,
Next cosyne to a friar,
And on the gall ye rub.
Ye say thy follow your law,
And varyee not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe /
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clerenesse slyppes
And darkened is the day,
Of the planetee influence,
Aryseth the pestylence.
To many ones decay,
Does not the sea so rage,
That non can it aswage,
And swellowe in town and streate?
The air which gives breathe,
Sumtyme infecteth to death,
By his most pestylent heat.
The beasts often vndemure,
Which were left to mannys cure,
Will him sumtyme devour.
Thus are your rules forgote,
As things of slendre note,
In creatures day and hour,

Naturae lex. It is the will of God,
To use them as a rod,
Of his just ponnyshment.
When Man does not regard,
The lord nor his reward,
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh,
But when God does Man ponnysh.
For his unhappiness.
From God they never fall,
Nor from laws natural,
Doing his business.

Infidelitas. And you are the same law,
That keep them under awe,
By youy most polytyke wytt?

Naturae lex. God has appointed me,
Mankind to ouerse,
And in his heart to sytt.
To teach him, for to know,
In the creatures high and low,
His gloryouse mageste,
And on his name to call,
Or power celestyall,
In his necessyte,
To think him everlasting,
And wonderful in workynge,
And that he creates all,
Both govern and conserve.
From them he never swerue,
That to soch faith will fall.

Infidelitas. In deed here is good sport.
But why do you resort,
Unto this present place?

Naturae lex. Man always to exhort,
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice,
And than with open voice,
To worshypp him alone.
Knowledgynge his deyte,
His power and eternyte.
When he shall make his moan*

Infidelitas: I shall keep ye as well from that,
As my grandame kept her cat,
From lyckynge of her cream.

Naturae lex. What wylt thu keep me fro?
Tell me ere thu farther go,
Me think thu art in a dream.

Infidelitas. From causynge of Mankind.
To give to God his mind,
Or his obedyence.

Naturae lex. What is thy name? tell me.

Infidelitas. Marry Infydelyte,
Which never will agree,
To your benyuolence.

Naturae lex. Thu cannyst not keep me from man.

Infidelitas. Yet will I do the best I can.
To trouble ye now and than.
That ye shall not prevail.
I will cause ydolatrye.
And most vile sodomye,
To work so on gracyouslye,
Ye shall of your purpose fail.

Naturae lex. I defye the wicked find,
With thy whole venemouse find,
God puts now in my mind,
To fle thy cumpanye.

Infidelitas. Ye are so blessed a Saint,
And your self so well can paynt,
That I must me acquaynt,
With you no remedy.

Naturae lex. Avoid thu cruel enemy,
I will non of the truly,
But shurne thy cumpanye,
As I would the devil of hell.

Infidelitas. Exit. And are ye gone in deed?
Small wyttam be your speed,
Except ye take good head,
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work soch masterye,
By crafts and sutyle polycye,
The law of nature to poison.
With pestylent ydolatrye,
And with most stynkynge sodomye,
That he shall have no Foyson.
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The deuyls own kyd^yn slaves,
That them I can not se.
I conjure you both here,
And charge ye to apere,
Like two knaves as ye be.

Sodomismus. Monachus. Ambo is a name full clean,
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.

Infidelitas. By Tetragrammaton,
I charge ye, apere anon,
And come out of the dark.

Sodomismus. Intrantsimul. Have in than at a dash,
With swash myry annet swash,
Yet may I not be to rash,
For my holy orders sake.

Idololatria. Necromantic Nor I son by my troth,
Cha caute a courage of sloth,
And soch a comberouse couth,
Ych wot not what to do.

Infidelitas. At Christmas and at Paske.
ye may dance the devil a mask,
Whyls his great cawdron plawe.
you soch a prati mynyon.
And you now in relygyon,
Soch two I never saw.
Is not thy name ydolatrye?

Sodomismus. Yes, an wholesome woman verelye.
And well seane in Phylosophye,
Mennys fortunes she can tell.
She can by saying her Aue marye,
And by other charms of sorcerye,
Ease men of toth ache by and bye,
Yea, and fatche the devil from hell.
She can milk the cow and hunte the fox,
And help men of the ague and pox,
So they bring money to the box,
When they to her make moan.
She can fatch again all that is lost,
And draw drink out of a rotten post,
Without the help of the holy Ghost.
In workynge she is alone.

Infidelitas. What, sumtyme thu were an he,

Idololatria. Yea, but now ych am a she,
And a good mydwife per de,
Young children can I charm.
With whysperynges and whysshynges.
With crossynges and with kyssynges
With blasynges and with blessings,
That spretes do them no harm.

Infidelitas. Then art thu like to Clisthenes,
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules,
Which themselves often transfourmed.
Into a womannys lyckenes,
With agylyte and quyckenes,
But they had Venus syckenes,
As writers have declared.

Sodomismus. Let her tell fourth her matter.

Idololatria. With holy oil and watter,
I can so cloyne and clarter,
That I can at the latter,
Many suttylters contryue.
I can work wyles in battle,
If I do ones but spattle,
I can make corn and cattle,
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fatt,
If the bruar please me nart,
The east shall fall down flat.
And never have any strength.
No man shall tonne nor bake,
Nor meat in season make,
If I against him take,
But lose his labor at length.
Their wellys I can up dry,
Cause trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pullerye,
Whereas men does me move.
I can make stoles to dance,
And carthen pottes to praunce.
That non shall them enhaunce,
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plowgh,
And also for the cowgh,
She shall give milk ynowgh,
So long as I am pleased.
Apace the mylle shall go,
So shall the credle do,
And the musterde querrie also,
No man therewith dyseased.

Infidelitas. Thou art thu for me fytt.

Sodomismus. The woman has a wytt,
And by her gere can syxt,
Though she be sumwhat old.
It is mine own sweet bullye,
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye,
Yea, mine own sweet heart of Gold.

Infidelitas. I say yet not to hold.

Idololatria. Peace fondelinge, tush a button,

Infidelitas: What wylt thu fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton,
Before this cumpanye?
Rank love is full of heat,
Where hungry dogs lack meat,
They will durty puddynges eat,
For want of befe and conye.
High, mynyon for monye,
As good is draffe as honye,
When the day is whote and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.

Sodomismus. Say fourth your mind good mother,
For this man is non other,
But our own loving brother.
And is very well content.

Idololatria. I never mysse but paulter,
Our blessed ladies psaulter,
Before saint Sauers altar,
With my bedes ones a day.
And this is my commen cast,
To hear Mass first or last.
And the holy frydaye fast,
In good time mowt I it say.
With blessings of Saint Germyne,
I will me so determyne,
That neither fox nor vermyne,
Shall do my chuckens harm.
For your gese seek saint Legearde,
And for your duckes saint Lenarde,
For horse take Moses yearde,
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkyn folte,
With the byas of a bolte,
For the healynge of a colte,
No better thing can be.
For lamps and for bottes,
Take me saint Wylfrides knottes.
And holy saint Thomas lottes,
On my life I warande ye.
For the cowgh take Judas care,
With the paring of a pear,
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy,
Three syppes are for the hyckock,
And vj. more for the chyckock,
Thus may my praty pyckock,
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber.
Give otes unto saint Vncumber,
And beans in a serten number.
Unto saint Blase and saint Blythe*
Give onyons to saint Cutlake,
And garlyke to saint Cyryake,
If ye will shurne the head ache,
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle.
And good saint Frances gyrdle,
With the hamlet of an hyrdle,
Are wholesome for the pyppe.
Besyden these charms before,
I have feats many more,
That I keep still in store,
Whom now I over hyppe.

Infidelitas. It is a spoart I trow,
To hear how she out blow,
Her witch crafts on a row,
By the Mass I must needs smyle.
Now I pray the let me know,
What seeds that thu cannyst sow.
Mankind to over throw,
And the law of nature begyle.

Sodomismus. My self I so behave,
And am so vile a knave.
As nature does deprave,
And utterly abheire.
I am soche a vice truly,
As God in his great furye.
Ded ponnysh most terryblye,
In Sodom and in Gomoire.
In the flesh I am a fire,
And soch a vile desire,
As bring men to the mire,
Of foul concupyscence.
We two together began,
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Aquyne scanne,
In the fort book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomytes,
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes,
And now the popysh hypocrytes,
Embrace me every where.
I am now become all spyrytuall,
For the clergy at Rome and over all,
For want of wives to me does fall,
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I ded so move,
That they the daughters of men ded love,
Workynge soch ways as ded not behoue,
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Tha^ I was half joined,
When he his dronken father scorned.
In the Gomorytes I also reigned,
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Onan not unacquainted,
When he on the ground his increase shed,
For me his brethren Joseph accused,
As Genesis does tell.
David ones warned all men of us two,
Do not as mules and horses will do,
Confounded be they that to images go,
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiel.
Both Hieremy and Daniel,
Of us the abhomynacyons tell,
With the prophets euerychon,
For us two God struck with fire and watter.
With battle, with plages and fearful matter,
With paynefull exyle, than at the latter,
Into Egypt and Babylon.
As Paul to the Romans testyfye,
The gentyles after Idolatrye,
Fell to soch bestyall Sodomye,
That God ded them forsake.
Who follows us as he confess,
The kyngedom of God shall never possess,
And as the Apocalypse express,
Shall synke to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles,
Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles,
Tibernius and Aristoteles,
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fulmus,
Semiramis and Hortensius,
Crathes, Hyliscus, and Pontius,
Beasts to abuse most monstru^uslye.

Infidelitas. Marry thu art the devil himself,

Idolotria. If ye knew how he could pelf,
Ye would say he were soch an elfe.
As non under heaven were else

Infidelitas. The fellawe is well decked,
Dysgysed and well necked.
Both knave balde and pyepecked.
He lacks nothing but beles.

Sodomismus. In the first age I began,
And so perseuerde with manne,
And still will if I can,
So long as he endure.
If monkysh sects renew,
And popysh prestes continue,
Which are of my retynue.
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marryage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what has betyd,
When they have been in parell.
Often have they buried quycke,
Soch as were never sick,
Full many a propre trycke,
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall,
Both Bishop and Cardynall.
Monk, fryre, pressed and all,
More rank they are than antes.
Example in pope Iulye,
Which sought to have in his furye,
Two laddes, and to use them beastlye,
From the Cardynall of Nantes.

Infidelitas. Well, you two are for my mind,
Step fourth and do your kind.
Leave never a point be hynde,
That may corrupt in man,
The law wryt in his heart.
In his flesh do thy heart. Ad Sodo.
And his soul to peruart, Ad Idol.
Do thu the best thu can.
Here have I pratye gynnes.
Both brouches, beads and pynnes,
With soch as the people wynnes,
Unto ydolatrye.
Take thu part of them here, Ad Idol.
Beads, rings, and other gere,
With their abhomynacyon.
Idolatry with wickedness,
And Sodomy with fylthynesse.
To his most utter dampnacyon.
These two will him so use,
Ich one in their abuse,
And wrappe him in soch evil.
That by their wicked cast,
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her noynges,
Idolatry has kings,
With their nobylyte.
Both dukes, lords, knights and earls.
Fair ladies with their pearls.
And the whole commenalte.
Within the bownes of Sodomye.
Does dwell the spirytuall clergy,
Pope, Cardinal and pryst.
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and fryre,
With so many else as do desire,
To reign under Antichrist.
Detestynge matrymonye,
They live abhomynablye,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I fell ye farthernewes?
At Rome for prelates are stewed,
Of both kinds. This is just.
The law of Nature I think,
Will not be able to wynke,
Against the assaults of them.
They having so high prelates.
And so many great estates,
From hens to Jerusalem.
Pause now a little while,
Mine ears does me begyle,
If I hear not a sound.
^yen folk has sped I guess,
It is so by the Mess,
Away now will I round, Exit.

Naturae lex. I think ye maruele, to se soch alteracyon,
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure*
Of me it comes not, but of mannys operacyon,
Whom daily the devil, to great sin does allure,
and his nature is, full bryttle and unsure.
By him have I got this foul disease of body.
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his heart, as God bad ernestlye,
Him often provoking, to love God over all.
With the inner powers, But that false Idolatrye.
Has him perverted, by slayghtes dyabolycall.
And so has Sodomye, through his abuses carnal.
That he is now lost, offendynge without measure.
And I corrupted, to my most high dyspleasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyons bestyall.
That they daily use, which boast their chastyte.
Some at the altar, to incontynency fall,
In confession some, full beastly occupied be.
Among the close nonnes, reigns this enormyte.
Soch children slay they, as they chance for to have.
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, so you for this a way,
Be not illuded, by false hypocresye.
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permyt prestes rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they should incur, most bestyall Sodomye.
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorysh kyngedom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodom.
With Man have I been, which has me thus defiled*
With Idolatrye, and unclean Sodomye.
And worthy I am, from God to be exyled,
Pytie me yet lord, of thy most bownteouse mercy.
I will fourth and mourn, till thu send remedy
Promise have thu made, to a gloryouse lyberte,
To bring heaven and earth, tha^ wylt thu (I trust) restore me.

Incipit Actus tertium.
Moseh lex. THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corupted,
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses,
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected.
And brought in again, to a trade of godlynes.
For I am a law, of rygour and of hardenes.
I strayghtly command, and if it be not done.
I thretten. I curse, and slay in my anger sone.
To God I require, a perfyght obedyence,
Condempnynge all soch, as do it not in effect.
I show what sin is, I burden sore ma^nys conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect.
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him dyrect,
Forgiveness to have. with light, health and salvation,
Least he should dyspayre, and fall into dampnacyon.

Infidelitas. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastyme quoth A, I know not the time nor when,
I ded laugh so much, seen I was an honest man.
Believe me and ye will, I never saw soch a spott,
I would ye had been there, that ye might have made the fort.

Moseh lex. Where would have had met tell me good brother (...).

Infidelitas. At the Mynorasse ser, late yester night at complyne.

Moseh lex. At the Mynorasse? Why. what was there a do?

Infidelitas. For soch an other, would I to Southampton go.
In deed yesterdaye, it was their dedycacyon
And thydre in Gods name, came I to se the fashyon.
An old fryre stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Beginning this Anteme, a my faith I do not gloss
^Lapides preciosi.

Moseh lex. And what ded follow of this?

Infidelitas. I shall tell ye ser by Gods blys.
Then came Dame Isbell, an old No^ne and a calm,
Crowynge like a capon, and thus began the Psalm.
^Saepe expugnauerunt me a iuuentute mea.

Moseh lex. And what includes this mysterye?

Infidelitas. A simple problem of bytcherye.
When the fryre bego^ne, Before the Nonne,
To sing of precyouse stones.
From my youth say she, They have confort me,
As it had been for the nones.

Moseh lex. I assure the plain, I set not by soch gaudee,
Thy usage show the, to be brought up among baudes

Infidelitas. It was a good world, wha^ we had soch wholso^ stories
Preached in our church, on sondayes and other feryes.
With us was it merye,
When we went to Berye.
And to our lady of grace,
To the blood of hayles,
Where no good chere fayles,
And other holy place.
When the prestes might walk.
And with young wives talk.
Than had we children plentye.
Than cuckoldes might leap,
A score on a heap,
Now is there not one to twentye.
When the Monks were fat.
And rank as a ratte.
With bellyes like a Bore.
Then all things were dear,
Both befe, bread and bear,
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Bishops might burn.
And from the truth turn.
The syllye simple soul.
Than durst no man creake,
Open mouth nor speak.
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
Now are the knaves bold.
With Scriptures to hold,
And teach them every where.
The carter, the sowter.
The bodger, there clowter,
That all will away I fere.
At us so they pulle.
Our lyuynges are dulle,
We are now like to fall.
If we do not fight,
For the churches right,
By the Mess we shall lose all.
But I pray ye ser, tell me what is your name*

Moseh lex. The law of Moses, to lie I were to blame.

Infidelitas. In these same parties, what do ye now intend?

Moseh lex. Mankind to refourme, that he his life amend.
I show what sin is, and what thing pleases god,
I confort the just, and the ill I ponnysh with rod.
The common people, have thought it commodyouse,
Diverse Gods to have, with rytes superstycyouse.
My commandment is, to seek one God alone,
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan.
Among the Gentyles, was it thought no^ iniurye,
If a man were hurt, to slay his aduersarye.
This thing I forbid, and say, thu shall not kill,
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordynatlye love.
Those are persuaded, all things them to behoue.
Which I inhybyte, saying contynuallye,
No rape shall thu do, nor yet commyt aduouterye.
Thu shall do no theft, nor couete that is not thine.
Against thy neyber, shall thu not falsely dyffyne.

Infidelitas. We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus.
Neither you nor God, to that hardetrade shall bring us.
We must have one God, and worshypp him alone?
Marry that in deed, would make a Turk to groan.
If we be stryken, we may not stryke again?
A proper bargayne, and dyscretelye uttered plain.
For cumpanyes sake, ye say we may not love?
I defye your worst, and to you there is my glove.

Moseh lex. What, thu wylt not fight? thy wits are better tha^ so

Infidelitas. In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go,
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your fence.

Moseh lex. Thu were much better, to keep thy pacyence.

Infidelitas. Nay by cocks soul frynd, I must lay ye on the coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may sone have me a floate
Nay, have at your pysche, defend ye if ye may.

Moseh lex. Soch a fool art thu, as seek thine own decay.
If Jones meddle, to the it will be death.
Dedyst thu never hear that law sleath i^ his wreath

Infidelitas. By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.

Moseh lex. Why, what part wylt thu play?

Infidelitas. By cocks soul give over. so sone as I sele smart.

Moseh lex. It will be to late, if I ones cupple with the.

Infidelitas. Then let me alone, and we shall sone agree,
And I shall be glad, to be acquaynted with ye.

Moseh lex. Acquayntaunce good fellawe, thu may sone have of me.

Infidelitas. The worst fault I have, I am hastye now and tha^,
But it is sone gone, I took it of a woman.
But what mean those tables, that ye have in your hand?

Moseh lex. Keep silence a while, and thu shall understand.
Three things I declare, the first are the precepts moral.
Next, the laws iudycial, and last the rytes ceremonyal
The moral precepts, are Gods commandments ten.
Which ought evermore, to be observed of all men.
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare,
And ye plesau^t works, to God they teach and prepare
They stir man to faith, and provoke him also to love
To obey, to sorne, and to worshypp God above.
In two stonye tables, God wrote them first of all,
That they should remain, as things contynuall.
The first has but three, which te^de to Gods high honor,
Given has the second, and they concern our neybour.
The first does expound, the first law natural.
The next the other, making them very formal.
In sprete is the first, yt we should God honor and love.
To outward workynge, the second does us move.
Forbyddynge all wro^ges, preserving just marryage,
Norryshynge true peace, and other godly usage.

Infidelitas. What is the effect, of your laws Iudycyall?

Moseh lex. Soch things to command, as are cyuyle or te^porall.
From vice to refrain, and outward iniurye,
Quiet to conserve, and publyque honesty.
These are to support, the laws of the second table.
Ceremonyall rytes are also commendable,
In holy days, garments, temples and consecracyons,
Sacryfyces and vows, with offerynges and expiacyo^s
Which are unto Christ, as fygurs, types and shadows
As Paul does declare, in his pystle to the Hebrews.
These are only fygures, and outward testymonyes,
No man is perfyght, by soch dark ceremonies.
Only perteyne they, unto the third commandment,
Of the Sabbath day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death endyng, the whole Iudaycal presthode.

Infidelitas. Good days might ye have, ye speak it full well by the rode.
I am a poor lad, and by my troth bent ernestlye,
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackye.

Moseh lex. What art thu called, I pray the hartelye.

Infidelitas: Graye fryre am I non, by the Mess I ca^ not flatter.
I am Infydelyte, to tell the truth of the matter.

Moseh lex. And have thu so long, dyssembled thus with me*

Infidelitas. Yea, for advantage, to smell out your subtylyte.

Moseh lex. Avoid hens I say, thu false Infydelyte.

Infidelitas. Nay that I will not, by Yngham Trynyte.

Moseh lex. Wylt thu not in deed, tha^ will I fet hither the pour
Of judges and kings, to subdue the within this hour.

Infidelitas. Exit. Soch knights will I have, as shall co^founde the^ all
As Sadducees and scrybes, with the sect pharysayeal
By help of my children Idolatry and Sodomye.
The law of Nature, I kest ones in a leprye.
I have yet two more, Ambycyon and Covetousness.
Which will do as much, to the law of Moses.
Where are my whoresons, that they come not away.

Auaritia. Iurisconsultus. Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array.
I will thu know it, I am a worshypfull Doctor.
A Scrybe in the law, and a profitable proctour.

Infidelitas. By wrastynge the text, to the scriptures sore decay.

Infidelitas. And what wylt thu do, my fellawe Covetousness?

Auaritia. A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moses,
That no^ shall perceive, the clerenes of his co^tenau^ce.
Which is of the law, the meaning and true ordinance.

Infidelitas. Why, what will ye say, unto ye ten commandments?

Ambitio. We must poison them, with will works and good intentes.
Where as God does say, No siraunge gods thu shall have,
With Saints worshyppynge, that clause we will deprave.
And though he command, to make no carved image,
For a good intent yet will we have pilgrimage.
Though he will us not, to take his name in vain,
With tradycyons yet, thereunto will we constrayne.
No Sabbath will we, with Gods word sanctyfye,
But with lyppe labor, and idle ceremonye.
To father and mother, we may owe non obedyence,
Our relygyon is, of so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we heretykes burn,
If they will not sone, from holy scripture turn.
What though it be said. Thu shall do no fornycacyo^,
Yet will we mayntene, much greatter abhomynacyon
Though theft be forbid, yet will we contynually,
Rob the poor people, through prayer and purgatory
God has inhybyted, to give false testymonye,
Yet we will condemn, the Gospel for heresye.
We should not couete, our neybers house nor wife,
His servant nor beast, yet are we therein most ryfe.
Of me^ make we swyne, by the draffe of our tradycyo^s
And cause the^ nothing, to regard but superstycyo^s.
As dogs unreasonable, on most vile carren feed,
So will we cause them, seek ydolles in their need.
And always their ground, shall be, for a good intent.

Infidelitas: More myscheues I trow, the devil could not inue^t
Than your two can do by the Mess ye are alone,
Little could I do, were ye ones from me gone,
To the corruptynge. of the law of Moses,
Go forward therefore, in your deceytfulnes.

Auaritia. With superstycyons, the Jews ceremonyall laws,
I will so handle, they shall not be worth ij. strawes.
The laws Iudycyall. through cawtels and delays.
I will also drown, to all ryghteouse me^nys decays
To set this forward, we must have sophystrye,
Phylosophye and Logyck, as science necessary.
The bishops must hold, their prestes in ignorance
With long latyne hours, least knowledge to them chance.
Let them have long mattens, long eue^ songs and long Masses.
And that will make them, as dull as ever were asses.
That they shall never, be able to prophecye,
Or yet preach the truth, to our great iniurye.
Let the cloysterers, be brought up ever in silence,
Without the scriptures, in pain of dysobedye^ce.
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne,
Let them have their Creed, and service all in latyne
That, a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul,
Let them nothing know, of Christ nor yet of powle
If they have Englysh, let it be for aduau^tage,
For pardons, for Syrges, for offerynges and pilgrimage.
I reckon to make them, a new Creed in a while,
And all in Englysh, their conscye^ce to begyle.

Infidelitas, Rehearce unto me, the Artycles of that Creed.

Auaritia, The artycles are these, give ear and take good head
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope,
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then in holy church. with sencer, cross and cope.
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacrame^tals.
In purgatory then, in pardons and in trentals,
In praynge to saints, and in saint Fra^ces whoode,
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed roode.
They shall believe also, in rellyckes and relygyon,
In our ladies psalter, in fre will and good wurkes.
In the ember days, and in the popes remyssyon,
In bedes and in belles, not used of the turks.
In the golden Masses, against soch spretes as lurkes
With charms and blessings. This creed will bring in money.
In Englysh therefore, we will it clarkely co^ueye.

Infidelitas, Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe that, creed,
That into the dytche, the blind the blind may led

Ambitio, Then I hold it best, that we always condemn,
The Bible readers, least they our acres contempne.

Infidelitas, Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bytar,
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy mytar.

Ambitio, Why, what do thu think, my mytar to sygnyfy?

Infidelitas, The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by and by.
If thu stoop downewarde. loo, se hom the wolf does gape.
Redye to devour, the lambs, least any escape.
But thy woluyshnesse, by three crowns will I hyde,
Making the a pope, and a captain of all pride.
That when thu do slay, soch as thy laws conte^yne
Thu may say, Nor I, but the powers ded them condemn.
These Labels betoken the laws of senon and cannon

Ambitio. I trow thu would say, the ij. laws Cyuyle and Canon.

Infidelitas. As I spoke I thought, and still think by saint Johan
Yea, persecute still the instructers of the people.
And thu Covetousness, let no bell ring i^ steple,
Without a profyght. Tush, take money every whear
So nygh clyppe and shave, that thu leave never a hear?

Auaritia. I caused the pope, to take but now of late,
Of the Graye fryres, to have canonyzate,
Franciscus de pola, three thousand duckates and more,
And as much besides he had not long before,
For a Cardynall heart, of the same holy order,
Thus draw we to us, great goods from every border.
Pope Clement the seventh paid ones for his papacye
Three hoored thousand, good duckates of lawful monye

Infidelitas. I maruele how he, could come to so much good.

Auaritia. Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blood.
Crosers and mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce
And all to little, to maynteyne their pomp and vice.

Ambitio. The pope for whoredom, has in Rome and Viterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearlye
Tush they be in England, that much rather would to dwell,
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Christ's Gospel.

Infidelitas. They do the better, for by the^ they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night,
Well, now step forewarde, and go do your busynes.
To the corruptynge, of the law of Moses.

Auaritia. Doubt not but we shall, make him a crepple blind.

Infidelitas. Sing then at our farwell, to recreate our mind.
Finita cantiuncula exeunt ambo.
Infidelitas. Now am I left alone. And these, ii. merchau^tes gone,
Their myschefes to conclude.
I think within a while, They will trappe and begyle
The worthy law of Jude.
Ambycyon first of all, With his rytes bestiall,
will make the people swyne.
In draffe will he the^ led, And with tradycyo^s feed
Where they shall suppe or dyne.
Covetousness will warke, That many one shall bark,
Like dogs against the truth.
Some shall Gods word defyle, and some will it reuyle
Soch beastlynesse ensuth.
Ambycyon has this hour All the whole spirytuall, pour
And may do what him lust.
Now covetousness does rule, And has both horse and mule.
All matters by him dyscust.
Now byshopryckes are sold, and the holy ghost for gold
The pope does bye and sell.
The truth may not be told, under pains manyfolde
With sendynges down to hell.
The people prestes do famysh, And their goods from them rauysh.
Yea, and all the world they blind.
All princes do they mock, And rob the syllye flock
Nothing they leave behind.
On the face of Moses, A veil they have cast doughtles.
The light of the law to hyde.
Least Me^ to Christ should come, from ceremonies do^me
As to their heavenly gyde.
The law can never be, at any lyberte.
Where soch two enemies reign.
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk,
when I come hither again.

Moseh lex. Exit. If pytie may move, your gentle christen hearts,
Let it now stir ye, to mourn this heavy chasice.
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts.
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce,
And I think also, to your more hynderaunce.
To lead you to Christ sometime, a gyde I was.
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, Alas.
Most rygorouslye, those enemies now of late.
Ded fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight.
One was Ambycyon, which ever ought me hate,
And Covetousness, the other enemy hight.
Now forsooth and God, in their most cruel spyght.
The one made me blind, the other made me lame,
And wha^ they had done, there at they had great game
Thus a blind crypple, I wander here alone,
Abiding the time, and grace of restauracyon,
By the son of God To whom I make my moan,
My cause to pytie, and grant me supportacyon,
Least I be left here, to utter desolacyon,
And extreme decay, without any remedy.
If he ded not help, of goodness and of mercy,
Ye christen princes, God has given you the pour,
With scepture and sword, all vices to correct.
Let not Ambycyon, nor Covetousness devour,
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect.
Have to your clergy, a dylygent respect
And se they do not* corrupt the laws of God,
For that does require, a terryble heavy rod.
God gave me to man, and left me i^ tables of stone,
That I of hardenesse, a law should specyfye,
But the pharysees, corrupted me anon,
And took from me clean, the quyuernesse of body,
With clerenesse of sight, and other pleasures many.
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore,
To more perfeccyon, than ever I had before.

Finit Actus tertius.
Incipit Actus quartus.
Euangeliu^. Unfaithfulness has, corrupted every Law,
To the great decay, of Adams posteryte.
Were is not for me, which now do / hither draw,
All flesh would perysh, no man should saved be.
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallyble veryte,
Soch a power of God, as saves all that believe,
No burdene nor yoke, that any man will grieve.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgiveness,
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confydence.
I am soch a grace, and so high tidings of gladness,
As raise the sinner, and pacyfye his conscience.
I am sprete and life, I am necessary science.
I require but love for ma^nys iustyfycatyon,
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation,

Infide^itas. Gods been son have ye, it is joy of your life,
I have heard of ye, and of my mastres your wife,

Euangeliu^, If thu heardest of me, it was by the voice of God.

Infidelitas. Nay, he that spoke of ye, was selling of a Cod,
In an oyster bote, a little beyond queen hythe,
A northen man was he, and b^sought ye to be blythe,

Euangeliu^, If he spoke of me, he was some godly preacher,

Infidelitas. Nay ser by the roode, nor yet a wholesome teacher.

Euangeliu^, After what manner, ded he speak of me? tell.

Infidelitas. He swore like a man, by all co^tente^tes of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he ded swear and swear again.

Euangeliu^, That speaking is soch, as procures eternal pain.
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And is so dampnable? To hear it I am sorye.
But what dedyst thu mean, wha^ thu spakest of my wife?

Infidelitas, Nothing, but I thought, it was joy of your life,
That ye were so good, to your neybers as ye are.

Euangeliu^, Why, how good am I? thy fantasye declare.

Infidelitas, Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear,
When ye are a broad, there is fine myry cheer.

Euangeliu^, As thu art, thu speak, after they hearts abundau^ce
For as the man is, soch in his vtteraunce.
My wyf^ is the church, or christen congregacyon,
Regenerate in sprete, doing no vile operacyon,
Both clean and holy, without either spott or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, ded her wash and be spryncle,
This is not the church, of dysgysed hypocrytes
Of apysh shauelynges, or papystycall sodomytes.
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone.
But, a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone,
On the hard rock Christ, which is the sure foundacyon.
And of this church some, do reign in every nacyon,
And in all co^trayes, though their nombre be but small

Infidelitas, Their number is soch, as has ro^ne over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain,
Which should over ro^ne, this realm yet ones again.

Euangeliu^, What Danes speak thu of? thy meaning show more clerlye.

Infidelitas, Dane Johan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane harrye.
These same are those Danes, that lay with other me^nys wives.
And occupyco their lands, to the detryme^t of their lives.
These are accounted, a great part of the church,
For in Gods service, they honorably wurche,
Yellynge and cryenge, till their throtes are full sore.

Euangeliu^ That church was descrybed, of Esaye long before.
This people (says God) with there lyppes honor me
In vain worship they teaching me^nys fatuyte.
Apparaunt is that church, and open to the eyes,
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies.
That cou^terfet church stands al by me^nys tradycyons
Without the scriptures, and without the hertes affeccyons.
My church is secret, and evermore will be,
Adorynge the father, in sprete, and in veryte.
By ^he word of God, this Church is ruled only,
And does not consyst, in outward ceremonye.
This congregacyon, is the true Church mylytau^t
These cou^terfet de^a^des, are the very Church malygnaunt.
To whom Christ will say, I know no^ of your sort.

Infidelitas. Much are they to blame, that there brethren so report

Euangeliu^, Soch are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blood.
As put salvation, in shaven crown, mytar, or whode.

Infidelitas. I pray ye how long, have your sweet spowse co^tynued

Euangeliu^ Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ renewed.
Adam had promise, of Christ's incarnacyon,
So had Abraham, with his whole generacyon.
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel,
Into salvation, and delyueraunce from hell.

Infidelitas By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?

Euangeliu^ She is not barren, but bears and never cease.
The Corinthes first epistle, has this clear testymony
In Christo Jesus, per Euangelum vos genui.
I have begote you, in Jesus Christ says powle,
By the Gospel preaching, to the comfort of yur soul

Infidelitas. Than are ye a cuckolde, by the blessed holy mass,
As I said before, so comes it now to pass.
For I am a prophet, by high inspiracyon led.
Now like I my self, much better than I ded.
Ye sayt that saint paul, begat your wife with child

Euangeliu^ By mysundersta^dynge, thu art vngracyously begylde
An only mynyster, was paul in that same doing,
That he therein ded, was by the Gospel preaching.
His mind is the Gospel to have done yt operacyon
And this must thy hold, for no carnal generacyon

Infidelitas. Marry so they say, ye fellawes of the new lerynge.
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wynynge,

Euangeliu^, Nay, they forsake whoredom, with other da^pnable usage.
And live with their wives, in lawful marryage,
whyls the popes oyled swarm, reign styl^ in their, old buggerage

Infidelitas. Yea, poor married men, have very much a do,
I count him wysest, that can take a snatche and to go.

Euangeliu^, Thu semest one of them, that detesteth matrymonye,
Which is a fore God, a state both just and holy.
Of soch as thu art, saint paul ded prophecye,
By the holy Ghost, that a serten cu^panye,
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
A rendynge to spretes, of error dyabolycall.
Which in hypocresy, will teach lies for advantage,
W^^h marked conscyences, inhybytynge marryage.
Thu aperest by thy fruits to be Infydelyte.

Infidelitas, I am non other, but even the very he,
And hither now come I, to common the matter with ye

Euangeliu^, Avoid cursed find, and get the out at the gates.

Infidelitas, Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And he^e will I not for this place is for me?
Who should here remain, but Infydelyte?

Euangeliu^, Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens,
But this first will I say, before this audyens.
Easyer will it be, concerning ponnyshment,
To Sodom and Gormor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those cities, that resyst the veryte,
At the suggestyons, of Infydelyte.
That people will be, for ever and ever lost,
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost.
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed,
Than came his son Christ, and made it more manifest.
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme da^pnacyon will fall.
No prayer remains, nor expyacyon for sin,
To them that no profyght, or the word of God will win.
Take good head therefore, and say that ye have warnyng

Infidelitas, Exit. God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is well out of the way,
Now will I contryue, the dryft of an other play.
I must work soch ways, Christ's law may not continue,
In a while am I like, to have non else of my retynue.
Companyons I want, to begin this tragedye,
Namely false doctrine, and his brother hypocresye.
They will not belong, I suppose now verelye,
By cocks foul me think, I se soch a cumpanye.
Hem I say children, will not my voice be heard?
As good is a beck, as is a dew vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own co^panyons both.

Pseudodctrina. Intrant. Thu shall sure have, a lyuery of the same cloth,
Gramercyes by God, my old frynde Infydelyte.

hypocrisis. What, brother snyp snap, how go the word with the?

Infidelitas, What, fryre flyp flap, how say ye to, Benedicite?

hypocrisis. Marry nothing but well, for I cry now aduau^tage

Infidelitas. At her purse or arse, tell me good fryre fuccage?

Hypocrisis. By the Mess at both, for I am a great penytensar,
And sit at the pardon, Tush, I am ye popes own vycar
If thu lackest a piece, I know where thu may be sped.
With coyse of a score, and brought even to thy bed.

Pseudodoctrina. Art thu not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?

Hypocrisis. No, for it is soch gere, as the holiest of us will have,
Pope, Cardynall, bishop, monk, chanon pressed and fryre,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.

Pseudodoctrina. Our orders permyt us not* to have them in marryage

Hypocrisis. No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carryage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.

Infidelitas. By the Mess I laugh, to hear this whoreson prate

Pseudodoctrina. What fashyon use ye, to us here intymate.

Hypocrisis. Ego distinguo, whether ye will have lions or paris.

Pseudodoctrina. Of them both to show, it will not be far amys.

Hypocrisis. In paris we have, the mantell of Saint jews,
Which women seek much, for help of their bare^nes.
For be it ones laid, upon a woma^nys bellye,
She go thens with child, the miracles are seane there Saylye.
And besides all this, ye would maruele in co^fessyon.
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgressyon
Johan Thessecclius, assoyled a young woman ones.
Behind the high altar, till she cried out of hes bones.
And as for lions, there is the length of our lord,
In a great pyller. She that will with a coorde,
Be fast bound to it, and take soch chance as fall,
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all.
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre tha^ this,
In course to hear them, I think ye would blys.

Pseudodoctrina. As thu have begun, go forewarde in it and tell.

Infidelitas. Soch a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.

hypocrisis In our relygyon, was an holy popysh patryarke,
Which of all bawdrye, might be the great monarke.
The no^nes to confess, he went from place to place,
And two ho^dred of them, he broached in that space.
Many spyces he eat, his currage to pruuoke.
Soch a fellawe was he, as of that gere had the stroke.

Pseudodoctrina / Now, sumwhat will I tell to confirm thy tale withal
In king ferdyna^ds time, in Spain was a Cardynall
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean.
Of some as he had, great nombre besides the queen.
One of his bastardes, was earl, an other was duke,
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Ioannes Cremons, an other good Cardynall,
For reformacyon of the clergy spyrituall,
Came ones into England, to da^pne prestes matrymonye.
And the next night after, was taken doing bytcherye.
(...) E^fius also, which fearcely came to dyspute,
In lipsia with luther, minding there him to confute
For marryage of prestys, three children had that year.
By this may ye se that su^tyme we make merry cheer.

Infidelitas, Marry that ye do, I shall bear ye record now.
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow?

Pseudodoctrina. We never break vow, so long as we do not marrye,
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold and busye.

Infidelitas, By your order than, ye may walk much at large.
What have thu hypocresye? to lay for thy dyscharge.

Hypocrisis. Saint Fra^ces habyte, with the holy gyrdle and whode,
Non can go to hell, that therein dye by the rode,
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side,
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide.
For I read of one, that should have gone to the devil
But the spretes of hell, could do to him non evil.
Till saint Frances came, and took from him his cowle,
Then went he to hell, the fryres ded hear him howl.
I will therefore serve, S. Frances with heart and mind
With daily memoryes, that he may be my frynde.
And than I care not, for all the deuyls in hell,
That I have told you, is more true than the Gospel.

Infidelitas, Then are ye more sure, tha^ monks for your heretage,
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.

Pseudodoctrina. Yet is it to them a very plesaunt thing,
Their abbot at home, to be called lord and king.

Infidelitas. Nay, monk and chorle, for here is no king butone.
If he be a king. his mace is a mary bone,
Any his crown a cow torde. Soch knaves as come from the carr,
Must be called kings, for playenge a popysh part,

Pseudodoctrina. It become not the, the Romyshe pope so to lurche.
Considering he is, the highest of the church.

Infidelitas. If he be the highest, than is he the wether cock,

Pseudodoctrina. Ah, now I perceive, thu art dysposed to mock,
Of all holy church, he is the pryncypall head.

Infidelitas: Marry that is true, he sends out bulls under lead
And he has two keys, the one to open hell,
The other speareth heaven, thus do new heretykes tell
They report also, that dogs have no deuocyo^,
To his holy laws, not to his old instruccyon.

Pseudodoctrina. Why should dogs hate him? make that more euydent.

Infidelitas. They love no pese porrege, nor yet read hearynges in lent,
Stock fysh nor oysters, but curse him body and bone,
And would his read sprottes, and rotte^fysh were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.

Hypocrisis. Either thu do mock, or else thu art sure mad.

Infidelitas I hear the people, complain very much of the.

Pseudodoctrina. What is their pratlinge, I pray the heartily tell me.

Infidelitas. They say, thu teach, nothing but lowsy tradycio^s
And lies for lucre, with damnable superstycyons.
And thus they conclude, yt the draffe of popysh prystes
Is good enough for swyne, by whom they mean the papystes.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all.
To most vile carren, the dogs will sonest fall.

Pseudodoctrina. Than do they compare, the papystes unto dogs.

Infidelitas. Marry that they do, and to soch swynysh hogs.
As in swyll and soffe, are brought up all their life.
Soch are the papystes, they say both man and wife.
They say of the also, that thu art a noughty knave,
By prowlynge and lyenge, ye friars would all have.
Thine order they say, is spronge even out of hell,
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.

Hypocrisis. Why, where is he now, I besych the heartily tell,

Infidelitas By the mess abroad, and I wara^de ye makes revel.
I commoned with him, and he ded us despise,
Against him therefore, sumwhat must we deuyse.

Pseudodoctrina. Marry that must we, or else it will be wrong,
He will sure destroy us, if we do suffer him long.
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.

Infidelitas. Why mad brayned whoreso^s, how ded ye handle Christ?

Pseudodoctrina. As he preached here, we followed from place to place,
To trappe him in snare, and his doctrine to deface.
Than found we the means, to put him so to death,
Least he against us, should open any more breath.
And we set four knights, to keep him down in his grave.
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve, the Gospel, no remedy,
Else will be destroy, our living perpetuallye.
Better one were loft, than we should perysh all,
As Cayphas ones said, in counsel pharysaycall.

Infidelitas. By God and well said. Wha^ ye have him this grave,
Sta^pe him down till he shyte. and serve him like a knave.

Hypocrysis. We must so order him, that he go no more at large.

Pseudodoctrina. Four knights will we hyre, who^ we shall streyghtly charge,
To keep him down hard. The first are ambycyouse prelates,
Then couetouse lawers, that Gods word spyghtfully hates,
Lords without learning, and justices unrightful,
These will keep him down, and rappe him on the scull.
There someners and there scribes, I wara^de ye shall stere
With balyues and catch polles, to hold him down every where.
I trow Rugge and Corbet, At Norwych will do their part.
With wharton of Bongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.

Hypocrysis. And I will raise up, in the vnyuersytees,
The seven slepers there, to aduau^ce the popes decrees
As Dorbel and Duns, Durande and Thomas of Aquyne
The mastre of sentens* with Bachon the great deuyne
He^ricus de Ga^dauo. And these shall read ad cleru^,
Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulicrum,
With the co^mentaryes, of Auicen and Aueroyes.
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys.

Infidelitas, Yea, and let the pope, as Gods own vycar here,
In his hand three crosses, and iij, crowns on his head here.
His power betokenynge, in heaven, in earth, and in hell
That he may command, all kings to subdue the Gospel.

Pseudodoctrina. His self may do that, he need command no^ other.
Is not he the head, of the holy church our mother?
May not he make saints, and deuyls at his own pleasure?
Which has in his hands, the keys and churches treasure?
So well as he made, S. Herma^ first a saint,
And twenty years after, of heresye him attain?
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacyon,
And from thens to hell, by an excommunycacyon,
We read of Formosus, that after he was dead,
One pope his fyngars, an other cut of his head.
And threw his carkas, into the floude of Tyber,
With the head and fyngars, as Platina does remember.
In token that he, is judge over quyck and dead,
And may da^pne and save, by his pardons under lead,
Syluester the second, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high office, that he might dampne and save.
He offered also, his stones to Satan, they say,
For prestes chastyte, and so went their marryage away.

Hypocrisis. Here is one coming, inquire what he intend.

Infidelitas. Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God us defend.

Pseudodoctrina. Exit secreto. Show me brother mine, who ded the hither send.

Euangelium. The father of heaven, of his mere benyuolence,
I desire therefore, to have fre audyence.

Pseudodoctrina. Ye mind than to preach, before this cumpanye?

Euangelium. In the laws of God, would I instruct the^ gladlye.
For non other way, there is unto salvation,
But the word of God, in every generacyon,
That quyckeneth, that saves, yt brings unto heau^^
As before his death, Christ taugh the Apostle aleuen.

Pseudodoctrina. Preach here thu shall not, without the auctoryte,
Of pope or bishop, or of some of their affynyte.

Euangelium. Gods word never takes, his autoryte of man.

Pseudodoctrina. Thu shall not here preach, do thu the best thu can.

Hypocrisis. Gods blessing on your good heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye know this day ser, we have a full holy feast,
And must go processyo^, with the blessed rode of reast.
We have long mattens, long lauds, long hours long pyyme.
Mass, eue^ song, co^plyne, and all must be done i^ time.
Sensynge of the aulters, and casting of holy water.
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.

Euangelium. Have God commanded, any soch things to be done?

Pseudodoctrina. What is that to the? go meddle thu with old shone.
Cannyst thu say but they, are good sygnyfycacyons?

Euangelium. I say they are fruits, of your ymagynacyons
To bring in lucre, and darken Gods high glory,
Of you God does axe. no soch vain beggerye.
Christ never sent his, to show sygnyfycacyons,
But his living, word to all the christen nacyons.
Ye forsake the lord, as Esaias does tell,
And hyghly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chaptre, this horrible sentence is,
Quis haec frustranea quaesiuit de manibus uestris.
Who has required, of you soch sacryfyce?
In vain offer you, that vnco^maunded service.
Your incense to me, is great abhomynacyon,
I fore abhor it, and much detest your fashyon.
When ye pray to me, I give ye non attendaunce,
But auert my face (says God) and my countenance.
By this ye may se, that the lord does not regard,
Your ma^gy mutterynge, neyher grant it any reward
No man wylleth Paul, to speak in the congregacyon
In a strange language, without interpretacyon.
In your latyne hours, the flock do ye not consydre,
But declare your selves, to be Romysh all togydre.
Be not led about (says Paul) by any strange learning,
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popysh thing?
He testyfyeth also, Non enim vt baptizarem,
Misit me Christus, sed ut euangelizarem.
Christ has not me sent, that I should baptyse, says Paul.
But to preach his word, to the confort of mannys soul.
Loo, though baptyme be, a thing very necessary,
Yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remedy.
Why than prefer ye, your draffysh ceremonies?
To the Gospel preaching* O dampnable iniuryes.

Hypocrysis. Why suffer ye him, to pratle here so long?

Pseudodoctrina. Get the hens shortly, or with the it will be wrong.

Infidelitas. Intrat. Peace be here and God, Mastre doctor, by your leave,
That I may declare, a pardone here in my sleue.
Of our lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Johannes frarye,
With the indulgence of blessed saint Antonye.

Pseudodoctrina. Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardelye.

Hypocrisis. Sir he does me wroge for this day it is my ^acyon.
To preach my brotherhede, and gather my lymytacyon

Pseudodoctrina. Who first speak first speed, step fourth and read thy
pardon,
And when he has done, your course is father warde^

Euangeliu^, What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel

Pseudodoctrina. I would thy Gospel, and thu were both now in hell.

Euangeliu^. Why, and shall this baggage, put by the word of God?

Pseudodoctrina. Thu wylt not be answered, till thu feel a sharper rod.

Infidelitas. Good christen people, I am come hither verelye,
As a true poctour, of the house of saint Antonye.
Of clean remyssyon, I have brought ye indulgence,
A pena and culpa, for all your sin and offense.
By the auctoryte, of pope Leo and pope Clement,
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Johan and pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with a wynge of the holy Ghost.
From thonder to save ye, and from spretes in every coost.
Lo, here is a belle, to hang upon your hog,
And save your cattle, from the bytynge of a dog.
So many as will come, to this holy fraternity,
Come pay your money, and ye shall have letters of me

Pseudodoctrina. Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother.

Hypocrisis. Then give me a belle, for I will be an other.

Euangeliu^, O dampnable leadynge, of Babylonicall sodomytes,
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrytes.
Lord pytie thy people, and take away these gydes,
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homycydes
Soch prophets are they, as God ded never send,
As Hieremy says, they dampnable ways pretend.
Woe hypocrytes woe, for here ye tryfle and mock,
With christen people, and the kyngedo^ of heaven vplocke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ has bought,
With his precyouse blood. and here most derely sought
Oh ye are wretches, and pestylent Antichrists,
Mynysters of Dagon, and most deceytfull papystes.
Like rauenouse wolves, poor wydowes ye devour,
By tyttle of prayer, eternal da^pnacyon is your,
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more wayghtye,
Ye do not esteem, as judgment, faith, and mercy.
Woe pharysees woe, ye make clean outwardlye,
But inwardes ye are full, of covetousness and baudrye,
Painted tumbes are ye, a pryenge right bewtyfull,
But within ye stynke, and have thoughts very ^hamefull
Ye slew the prophets, your doings yet bear witness,
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteousness?
Oh ragynge serpe^tes, and vyperouse generacyon,
How can ye escape, the danger of dampnacyon?

Pseudodoctrina. Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? An heretyke art thu sure?
If due search were made, we should find the (I think) no pryst.

Euangeliu^, Yes, anointed of God, but no popysh Antichrist.

Pseudodoctrina. Let me se, where are, the letters of thy orders?

Euangelium Where Christ his self is, and not in these same borders
No soch pryst am I, as is anointed with olye,
But the holy Ghost, for I am non of this soil.

Pseudodoctrina. Here I attache the, for a busye scysmatyke.
And will the accuse, for an haynouse heretyke.
Lay hands upon him, and depryue him of this aparell.
Hic vest spoliatum sordidioribus induunt. Loo, thus will I handle, all the^
yt shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this gere, and lay it fourth a side.

hypocrisis. Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shall thu not slide

Euangeliu^, I am not going, why do thu slander me?

Infidelitas, Burn him to ashes, and show to him no pytie.

Pseudodoctrina. Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellawe how say thu? wylt thu here abjure or no?

Euangelium. I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.

Pseudodoctrina. I offered the reason, and thereto thu wylt not apply,
Well get the forewarde, for thu shall sure dye.
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire,
At our accusement, and holy relygyouse desire.

Euangelium. Though you for my sake, impryson men cruellye,
Famysh them, stock them, and them with fagotesfrye
Hurt me ye shall not for I can never dye,
And they foy my sake, shall live perpetuallye.

Pseudodoctrina. Here is a pratynge, with a very vengeance hens.

Hypocrysis. Exeunt cum eo This horrible heretyke, now shall we well recompens

Infidelitas. Yea, burn him well fryre, and let him no longer raygne,
Lay on grene fagotes, to put him to the more pain.
By the mess I laugh, to se how this gere does wurke
He is like of the^, to have no more grace than a turk,
For soch knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find,
And take hell over. Companyo^s they are to my mind
My business all, is now at a good conclusyon,
That I have here brought, these. iij. laws to co^fusyon
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceablye,
And make frowlyke chere, with hey how fryska Iolye.
The law of Nature, I kest first in a leprye.
By the secret help, of ydolatrye and sodomye.
The law of Moses, I made a crypple blind,
Auaryce and Ambycyon, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have brent for heresye,
By help of false doctrine, and my cosyne hypocresye,
On these same. iij. laws, all other laws depend,
And can not prevail, now these are at an end.
If christen gouerners, do not these laws uphold,
Their cyuyle ordynau^ces, will sone be very cold.
Well, this valeau^t George, has made them all to stoop
Cheer now may I make, and set cock on the houpe.
Fill in all the pottes, and bid me welcome hostess,
And go call me hither, mine own sweet mynyo^ Besse

Finit Actus quartus.
Incipit Actus quintus.
Vindicta Dei. QVid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate.
Thu vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice,
Why do thu thus rejoice, in cruelty and malice?
Thynkest thu that God slepeth, and will not his defend
And that thy myschefe, shall never have an end?
The blood of innocents, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour. must I fearcely upon the fall

Infidelitas. Thu sprete of the air, I strayghtly conjure the here.
By panton and Craton, and charge the to com no nere.

Vindicta Dei. Thynkest thu to stop me, with thy folysh co^iuracyon
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacyon?

Infidelitas. What art thu called? thy name to me rehearce.

Vindicta Dei. I am vindicta Dei, in po^nyshment most fearce,
With water, with sword, and with fire I must the pearce.

Infidelitas. Be good in thy office, and thu shall have money and meat.

Vindicta Dei. By fylthy rewards, thu cannyst not me entreat,
But that I will do, as God has me commanded.
For if worldly gifts, my furye might have changed.
The universal world, had not been drowned with water,
Nor Sodom and Gomor, with so fyery fearful matter.
Nor yet the Israelytes, with terror of the sword,
With hungre and pestylence, in the anger of Gods word.
Pharao in Egipte, the plages had never felt,
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for gelte.
Into Egipte I brought, ten terryble po^nyshmentes
Upon the people for breaking his commau^deme^tes
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood,
I multyplyed frogs, to poyso^ therewith their fond
I made waspes and dranes, them grievously to stynge,
And all kinds of flies, sone after ded I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestylence,
Both borche, byle and blayne, they had for their offense.
Lyghtenynges and haylynges, destroyed their corn and fruit,
A swarne of hungry locustes, their pastors destytute
The space of three days, I gave them palpable darkness,
I slew the first goote^, of man and beast for thy rudenes
For I never stryke, but for the, Infydelyte.

Infidelitas, Stryke for me quoth A? By the mary Mass I defye the.

Vindicta Dei. What, thu wylt not so, thy brains are not so light.

Infidelitas. Anger me not to much, for if thu do, I fight.

Vindicta Dei. All that will not help, thy wicked workings now,
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thu have with a leprye?

Infidelitas, Nay, it was not I, but that wytche Idolatrye,
And that polde shorn knave, that men call Sodomye

Vindicta Dei. Of whom spronge they first? but of Infydelyte?
Therefore thu shall have that plage of penalte,
Which they first tasted, for their inyquyre.
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water.
In token whereof, I plage the with the same matter.

hic Infidelitatem lympha percutit. Infidelitas, Tush, I defye thy worst. This
shall not drive me hence
For after the floude, with Cham had I resydence.
And so continued, till Moses law came in.
With his iolye tryckes, a new rule to begin.

Vindicta Dei. And him thu corruptedest, with Auaryce and Ambycyo^,
And so dedyst leave him, in miserable co^dycyo^,
Thu shall have therefore, that than to them was due,
Most terryble barrayle, the Israelytes untrue,
That time ded suffer, for their infydelyte,
Wherefore with this sword, I iustlye bannysh the.
Because thu shall here, give place to Christ's gospel

Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cedit. Infidelitas. Yet will I not hens, but
against ones rebel.
Sed not I remain, with Judas and other more?
When Christ preached here, and taught them in vexed him sore?
Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus.
With Saunder Copper smyth, with Elimas and Demetrius.
And now I persevere, among ye ra^ke rabble of papystes
Teaching there shorlynges, to play the Antichrystes.

Vindicta Dei. The innocent blood, of saints contynuallye,
Does call unto God, to revenge their iniurye,
Against false doctrine, and cursed hypocresye.
Whom thu have raised, the glory of the Gospel,
To darken, and his fryndes, most myserably to quell.
Wherefore thu shall have, like as thu have deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy ponyshme^t now doubled.
Ignis ip su^ precedet, the Prophet David says thus
Arque inflam mabit in circuitu inimicos eius.
A consumynge fire, shall run before the judge,
His enemies consumynge, they shall find no refuge.
Ob scelera and culpas hominum, ritusque nephandos
In cineres ibit tellus, tenuemque fauillam.
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the.
The earth to ashes, by fire shall turned be.
Ignis flamma Infidelitatem locum exire coget
Infidelitas Credo, credo, credo, I say, Credo, credo, credo,
To the devil of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.

Deus pater. Exit. As ye have seane here, how I have strycken with fire
The pestylent vice, of Infydelyte.
So will I destroy, in the fearcenesse of mine ire,
All sects of error, with their enormyte,
Which has risen out, of that inyquyte.
For as it is said, that my hand has not set,
Shall up by the rote, no power may it let.
The Apostle Johan, in the Apocalypse does say,
He saw a new heaven, and a new earth aperynge.
The old earth and see, were taken clean a way,
That heaven is ma^nys faith, that earth his understanding,
Whom we have renewed by our most secret workynge.
The old cancred earth, exylynge with the sea.
Which is superstycyon, and Infydelyte.
A new Jerusalem, the said Johan also se,
As a bewtyfull bryde, prepared to her husband.
Our true faithful church, is that same fair city,
Whom we have cleansed, by the power of our right hand.
As a spouse to Christ, in every christen land.
Bannyshynge the sects, of Babylonicall poperye,
That she in the sprete, may walk to our glory.
Resort ye three laws, for you will I clear also,
Of soch infeccyons, as by Infydelyte,
Ye have received, That ye with her may go,
Declarynge the ways, of Christen lyberte,
That us she may take, without perplexite,
For her only God, and be our people still.
In our laws walking, according to our will.

Omnes simul. At your commandment, we are most blessed lord.

Deus pater. Approach nyghar than, and ye shall be restorde.
Thu law of Nature, we first begin with the,
Restorynge the again, to thy first puryte.
Avoid Idolatrye, Avoid vile Sodomye,
We charge ye no more, this law to putryfye.
Keep still that same heart, for a sign perpetual.
That thu were written, in mannys heart first of all.
Thu law of Moses, give me that veil from the,
No longar shall thu, neither blind nor crooked be.
Hens thu Ambycyon, and cursed Covetousness,
I here bannysh you, from this law ever doughtles.
Lose not those tables, which are a token true,
That thu in the flesh, shall evermore continue.
Thu law of the Gospel, though thu be last of all.
In operacyon yet, thu art the pryncypall.
From the I exyle, hypocresy and false doctrine,
With all that depend, upon the papystycall line.
Reserve the same book, for a sign of heavenly pour.
For that book thu art, that Johan from heaven ded devour.

Naturae lex. Everlasting praise, to thy gloryouse majesty.

Moseh lex. Our heavenly governor, great is thy gracious pytie

Christi lex. Of mankind thu art, the eternal felycyte.

Naturae lex. Now leauest thy servants, in thy perpetual peace.
To do the service, from hens will we not ceace.

Moseh lex. For our eyes have seane, what thu have now prepared.
For thy peoples health. which has been here declared

Christi lex. A light thu have sent, which is thy ioyouse Gospel.
To the consolacyon of the house of Israel.

Naturae lex. In rejoice of this, make we some melodye.

Moseh lex. The name of our God, to praise and magnyfye.

Christi lex. I assent thereto, and will sing very gladlye.

Hie ad Dei gloriam cantabunt. In exitu Israel de Aegypto, Velaliud simile.
Deus pater: Now have we destroyed, the kyngedom of Babylon,
And thrown the great whore, into the botto^lesse pyt,
Restorynge again, the true faith and relygyon,
In the christen church, as we have thought it fyt,
Depurynge these laws, so to continue yt.
Man is our creature, and has grace in our sight,
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delyght
Man is our people, his God we are again,
With him will we have, contynuall resydence.
Away will we wype, from him all sorrow and pain:
He shall no longar, dyspayre for his offense,
Nor have i^ his soul, any careful doubt of conscye^ce
The old popyshnesse, is past which was da^pnacyon,
We have now renewed, our christen congregacyon,
Grande fourth christian faith, and take our aduertyseme^t
We here appoint the, to govern our congregacyon.
Se thu do nothing, without the admonyshment,
Of these three laws here. Enprent their declaracyon
Of my sweet promyses, and than make thu relacyon,
To my folk again, that they may walk to me.
Without popysh dreams, in a perfygt lyberte.

Fides Christiana. Most heavenly maker, in yt thu do commau^de me,
Evermore will I, full prompt and dylygent be.

Deus pater. Thu law of Nature, shall teach man God to know
And that to refuse, whereby any ill may grow.

Naturae lex. From this your precept, shall I not varye I trow.

Deus pater. The ache thu him also, to worship one God above,
And his poor neyber, to prosecute with love.

Moseh lex. I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behoue.

Deus pater. And thu shall teach him, to love God in his heart.
And those to forgive, by whom he suffers smart.

Christi lex. In your appoyntmentes, will I do also my part.

Deus pater. Work thu in the heart, a knowledge necessary,
In the flesh work thu, by outward ceremonye.
Change thu to the spret, the workings of these two,
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go.
Take heed christian faith, to the teachynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the veryte.
The promyses we made, in all these three at Gospel,
We would thu should so, to our congregacyon tell.
Our everlasting blessing, be with you evermore.

Omnes simul. To thy sweet name lord, praise and perpetual honor.

Fides Christiana. It has pleased God, to put me in this office,
To govern his church, and christen congregacyon,
And therein to do, as ye shall me entyce.
Give me I pray you, soch wholesome exhortacyon,
As may be to Man, a clear edyfycacyon.
And I will be glad, to take your aduertysement.
As it shall become, any child obedyent.

Christi lex. Ye speak it full well, tha^ mark what shall be said
And dylygentlye, look that it be obeyed.

Naturae lex. The effect of me, is for to know the lord.
Everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly.
And as touching Man, to have fraternall concord.
Fauer to norrysh, and to do non iniurye.
To keep couenau^tes made, and love true matrymonye.
These noble effects so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfill, he do the best he can.

Moseh lex. The effect of me, is for to worship the lord.
As one God alone, and to fle from Idolatrye.
Nor to slay nor stele, nor yet to bear false record,
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy,
Publyque peace to hold, and sore to po^nysh the gyltye.
From these good effects, se that Man never swerue,
Than shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.

Christi lex. The effect of me, is for to love the lord,
In the innar sprete, and to fauer frynde and enmye,
And in all points else, with Gods will to accord
To preach remyssyon, to save and to iustyfye,
In Christ all to seek, life, justice, peace and mercy.
These heavenly effects, in Man so incorporate,
That he may in sprete, be newlye regenerate.

Fides Christiana. More sweet than honye, are your three exhortacyons,
And regestred they be, in my momoryall.
Now will I forewarde, to all the christen nacyons,
And sem effect, these laws observed all,
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papystycall.
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away,
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good christen people, to these three laws apply,
First know that ye have, a living God above,
Than do him honor, and his name magnyfye,
Worship him in spret. as the Gospel you does move
Than obey your king, like as shall you behoue,
For he in his life, that lord does represent,
To sauegarde of the just, and sinners ponnyshment.
Se that ye regard, soch laws as he does make,
For they are of God, as Solomon does report.
Of these laws doubtless, those laws their groundynges take.
To the publyque wealth, to give aid, strength and comfort
For preseruacyon, of all the christen sort.
In no case follow, the ways of Reygnolde Pole,
To his dampnacyon, he doubtless plays the fool.
Save a due respect, unto your contreye natyue,
Which has brought ye up, and given ye norryshment.
Even from your cradles, to these days nutrytyue.
So that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment,
My master to her, no hateful detryment.
A dog to his frynde, will never be vnlouynge,
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural workynge.

Naturae lex. Who lives without law, shall perysh without law
And* therefore we have, three laws to you descrybed,
That after their live, ye should in your living draw
We* have also showed, how they have been corrupted,
By foul Idolatres, and sodomytes poluted,
By couetouse prestes, and by ambycyouse prelates,
Hypocryticall fryres, false doctors and false curates

Moseh lex. Who has restored, these same three laws again?
But your late Josias, and valeau^t king Henrye.
No prince before him, took ever yet soch pain,
From England to ba^nysh, Idolatrye and foul sodomye
Covetousness. Ambycyo^, false doctrine and hypocresye,
It was he that brought, Christ's veryte to light,
When he put the pope, with his fylthynes to flight.

Christi lex. From damnable darkness, as my bother here does say,
He has delivered, this realm of England godly
Bringing his subjects, into the true path way,
Of their sowles sauegarde, if they now follow it wyselye.
And left them he has, the same way still to fortyfye,
His noble son Edward, soch a kings of god elect
As questyonles will, perform it in effect.

Fides Christiana. Pray all to the lord, for the long contynuaunce,
Of his graces life, in this worlds habytacyon.
And that of his nobles, he have true mayntenaunce,
In the pryncyples, of this most worthy foundacyon.
That he may to Christ, bring us from desolacyon.
Pray for queen Bateryne, and ye noble lord protector
With the whole counsel, that God be their directour,

Amen.
Into five personages may the parts of this Comedy be divided.
The Prolocutour. Christen faith. Infydelyte. The first.

The law of Nature. Covetousness. False doctrine. The second.

The law of Moses. Idolatrye. Hypocresye. The third.

The law of Christ. Ambycyon. Sodomye. The fourt.

Deus pater. Vindicta Dei The fifth.

The aparellynge of the six vices, of fruits of Infydelyte.
Let Idolatry be decked like an old wytche, Sodomy like a monk of all
sects, Ambycyon like a bishop, Covetousness like a pharyse or spyrituall
lawer, false doctrine, like a popysh doctor, and hypocresy like a graye fryre.
The rest of the parts are easy enough to conjecture.

portrait of John Bale

A song upon Benedictus Compyled by Johan Bale.
BEnedictus dominus, Deus Israel,
Which has overthrown, the mighty Idol Bell,
The false god of Rome, by pour of the Gospel,
And has prepared, from the deep lake of hell,
Redemptionem plebis sue.
Et erexit cornu, of mercy health and grace,
That cruel tyrant, now clearly to deface,
Whose bloody kyngedome, demynysheth apace,
By the word of God, which lately has take place.
In domo David pueri sui,
Sicut locutus est, the lord celestyall,
That Romysh Antichrist, is like to have a fall,
With his whole table, of sects dyabolycall,
And now the nombre, will florysh over all,
Prophetarum eius.
Salutem exinimicis, now we may daily hear,
The enemies of Christ with him does witness bear
Saul is become a paul, and preaches every wheare,
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De manu eorum qui derunt nos.
Ad faciendam, misericordiam,
The son of our God, from his high glory came,
To redeem the sin. of the children of Adam,
And to remember, to faithful Abraham,
Testamenti sui sancti.
Iusiurandum, which God has made before,
Unto our fathers, he will keep evermore,
Promesed he has, if we regard his lore,
Forsakynge the pope, with his dampnable store,
Daturum se nobis.
Vt sine timore, from Romysh tyrauntes fre,
The lord grant us grace, that we may speakers be,
Of his holy word, and therein to agree,
That in the Gospel, and christen lyberte,
Seruiamus illi.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life,
Let us now travail, both maiden man and wife,
All ryghtwys doings, in us be ever ryfe,
That we persevere, without debate or strife,
Omnibus diebus nostris.
To puer propheta, elected of the lord,
King Edward the sixth, to have Gods law restorde,
Folowest Josias, thereof to take record,
In all thy doings, and in Gods holy word,
Parare vias eius.
Ad dandam scientiam, for mennys health and sauegarde
Christ's holy Gospel, by these frelye heard,
Wherein does consyst, their life and full reward,
With preseruacyon, from daungerouse icoparde,
Peccatorum eorum.
Per uiscera, misericordiae,
Christ our dear master, us daily ouerse,
Least we here perysh, in our myquyte.
Our medyatour, contynually is he,
Oriens exalto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire,
To men in darkness, and in the popysh mire,
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tire,
But us deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In uiam pacis.
Amen.
The commandments breuelye.
Love thy lord God. Swear thu non oath.
Thy sabbath keep, Please thy fryndes both.
Wytnes non ill. Hold no mannys wife.
Brybe no mannys good. Slay not with knyfe.
Wysh no mannys house. Nor ox nor ass.
As thu wylt have, So thu like casse.
Thus ends this Comedy concerning three laws, of Nature, Moses, and Christ,
corrupted by the Sodomytes Pharisees and papystes most wicked. Compyled by
Johan Bale. Anno M. D. XXXVIII, and lately inprented per Nicolaum Bamburgensem


