A PLAIN AND PROFITAble Exposition, of the Parable of the Sower and the Seed.
Wherein is plainly set forth, the difference of hearers, both good and bad. To
which is added a learned answer to the Papists, in diverse points of
Controversy between us and them, the heads whereof are set down in the pages
following.

Luke 8. 18. Take heed how ye hear.

LONDON, Printed for William Bladen, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Bible, at the great North-doore of Paul's. 1625.

SECT. 1. and 2. THe word written, and the word preached, both one. SECT. 3.
Nothing to be preached but what is written. SECT. 4, and 5. Of diverse kinds of
faith. SECT. 6, and 7. Of justifying faith. SECT. 8. Justifying faith proper to
the Elect. SECT. 9. The faith of miracles. SECT. 10. The name of historical
faith. SECT. 11. The difference betwixt historical and justifying faith. SECT.
12. Of Temporary faith. SECT. 13. Whether Justifying faith may be lost. SECT.
14. Whether Peter lost his faith. SECT. 15. Of Virginity and Marriage. SECT.
16. A friendly admonition to all ignorant Papists, against the lies and
falsehoods of their Priests and lesuits.
TO THE MOSTREVEREND FATHER IN God, George, Lord Bishop of Chester.
RIght Reverend. When I first preached these Sermons, I little thought to have
put them forth to public view, yet such has been the importunity of some of
my best hearers, in moving me to pen them, or some others of my Sermons; As I
might have been thought unkind and discourteous, if I had altogether denied that
their godly and earnest request. And the rather was I persuaded by them,
because it was hoped that the publishing of these, might yield some benefit
not only to those persons who former^ heard them, but likewise to those, who
hereafter should read them.

It is well known that the papists make small account of hearing Gods word
preached they hope to be saved, rather by sight then by hearing.

Though hearing be a duty Deuteronomy 6. 3* 4. and 31 12. 13. Math. 17. 5.
commanded by God; exacted by Isai 28. 23. and 66. 2. 5. Ier. 6. 18. and 9. 2
and 10. 1.
the prophets: Enjoined by Math. 11 15. and 13 9. 43 Math. 15 10 Luke 14. 35
Christ: Required by the Act. 13. 16 and 15. 13 Revel. (...). 7. 11. 17.
Apostles, and practiced Neh^m. 89. Luke 51 L^k. 15 1. and 21. 38. Act. 10 33
and 13. 7 44 Act. 16. 14
by all good people.

Though it be an apparent sign of Ieh 8. 47 and 18. 37 1. Ioh. 4. 6
Gods Elect. An infallible mark of Ioh 10. 27
Christ's sheep. A true note of Deuteronomy. 33. 3
Gods Saints. An evident token of our Luke 8. 21
spiritual kindred with Christ. A plain testimony of Luke 11 28
our happiness. A comfortable assurance of our Math. 7 24 Lu^. 10. 42
perseverance. Though it be an ordinary and effectual mean Ier 23 22 Act. 2.
41 1. Cor. 14 24. 25
of our conversion, of Act. 4. (...). and 15. 7 Romans 10. 17
working faith, of Act. 10. 44 Gal. 3. 2. 5
receiving the spirit, of obtaining Revel. 3. 20.
fellowship with Christ, and of enjoying (...). Tim. 4. 16 ^am. 1. 21.
salvation in heaven. And though the neglect and contempt of it, 2 Ch^o. 24.
19. 23. ^em. 9. 30. Ier. 26. 4. 5
has been, and Deuteronomy 18. 19 Math. 10, 14, 15. Math, 12. 42:
shall be severely punished. Yet the papists little regard the word preached,
and seldom will vouchsafe to hear it. As they do wilfully refuse to hear us;
so do they judge it, to be neither greatly necessary, nor much profitable to
hear their own teachers. Moses was read and preached Act: 15. 21.
every Sabbath in the Jews Synagogues. It was the custom of Luk: 4: 16.
Christ and his Act: 17. 42: 44: and 17: 2: (...). and 4
Apostles, to preach to the people in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. The
^ustin: Ma^tye apolog: 2: Te^^ull: apolog: c: 39: Origin: in ^x. od: ^omil: 7.
ancientest of the fathers testify, that in their times, the people heard a
sermon, each Lords day. And diverse councills have made Colon: ca^: 9: Lao^ic:
cap: 16, ^^ul. lan: ca: 19: Mag^^t: cap: 25.
decrees for the continuance of that custom in succeeding ages. Yet the Romish
Bernatdin^de Sen^s de obserua^: sabb: sermon: 1^: cap: 3. Toll^t. instruct:
sacerdo^ lib. (...): ca: 6, Vaux: catech: cap 3.
prelates have made it a precept of their Church, that every one shall see a
mass on each Sabbath, but will not make it a precept, to hear a sermon each
Sabbath. As if the often sight of a mass were more necessary and more
profitable, then the hearing of a sermon: And as if the Sabbath were better
sanctified and the peoples souls more edisied, by the mass, then by the
preaching of the word. As the priests are accustomed often to say mass, but
seldom to preach: so the people for one sermon which they hear, do see forty
or fifty masses. Imitating whom; Wassingh. hist Augt: in Exwar ^1, p: 43. and
Ido^ dagm: Neustr: p: 472. De Henrico, 3.
that king, who saw three masses each day, but seldom heard any sermon. And
being admonished by Lewis king of France, that he must not bestow all l^s time
on masses, but sold oftener hear sermons, answered, that he had rather often
see his Friend, then hear one speaking of him, though he spoke never so good
things. As if they might with their eyes see Christ corporally present in
masses; and could only hear some talk of him at sermons. Wherein as they do
most blasphemously prefer their own invented idol, before Gods most holy
ordinance: So do they bewray their ignorance, touching the necessity and
efficacy of the word preached. If they would duly consider the scope and
doctrine of this parable, they might easily perceive, that the hearing of the
word, is as necessarily required for the direction of their lives, and the
salvation of their souls: As the sowing of the ground with good seed, is
necessarily required of them that would reap a plentiful crop at harvest. And
that it is not the sight of their abominable idol, but the reverend hearing
of Gods sacred word, that must make them fruitful in all good works.

Again, we cannot but acknowledge, that the Lord has sent many skillful and
painful Husbandmen, to sow his sielde with us: who according to their office
and duty, sow it in due season, after a good manner, and with the best seed.
And yet it yields little fruit. People hear much, learn little, and practice
less. Which cannot be imputed to the want of good preaching, but rather to the
want of good hearing: the fault is rather in the ground, then in the sower, or
in the seed. The seed is good, and great store is sown, but the ground is
barren. The doctrine is sound, and the manner of teaching prositable, but the
people hear amiss, and so for want of good hearing, loose the fruit of many
good sermons; because the profit of hearing, depends on the manner of hearing.
A medicine sitly prescribed and rightly compounded, loses his virtue in
curing the patients disease, if it be not duly administered, and orderly
received. We to our great griese loose our labor in preaching, and the people
to their great peril, loose their labor in hearing, because they hear
amiss. As therefore I was at first enduced to preach these sermons, so was I
afterward persuaded to pen them, that by them the simpler sort (for whose
sake only I do now publish them) might have some plain direction how to hear
for their profit.

There be some among us, who seem Math. 26, 8. Ioh: 12, 4.
to be of Judas his mind, and say quorsum perditio haec? The pentions given by
his majesty, for the maintenance of preachers in these popish parts, might
well be spared, or else converted to other more necessary uses, what good do
they in the country? Whom his Majesty may answer, (And no doubt, if he heard
their murmuring speeches, would answer them roundly) as the Master of the
Vineyard answered the murmuring laborers: Is it not lawful for me, to do
with mine own as I will? Is thine eye Math: 20, 15.
evil, because I am good? They may here behold, and if they please, take a
taste of the meat wherewith his Majesty's subjects are daily fed. Though their
diet be homely, yet I hope it is wholesome, though the manner of teaching be
plain, yet is it profitable, especially for such people as I am appointed to
instruct: My judicial hearers can testify, that these sermons were suitable to
my ordinary teaching, and that in penning them, I have altered very little,
either for matter, method or style. I think few will complain of the
unprofitableness of our labors, but those who do rejoice thereat, and would
have us removed, lest our labors should become more fruitful hereafter: who
would rather have the country still remain addicted to popery and impiety,
then brought to the obedience of the Gospel. How fruitful our labors have
been, your Lordship can better judge then any of them. Yet must we needs
confess that the fruitfulnes thereof, has been, and still is greatly hindered
by two sorts of persons, namely by popish priests, and profane Pypers. The
priests like Samballat and Tobiah, N^hem. 4, 7, 8
hinder us in edifying the Lords Temple, and labor to pull down, as fast as
we build up: like the old seducers, they creep into houses, and lead captive,
simple women laden with sins, and 2, Tim: 3, 6
led with diverse lusts. They withstand us, as Iannes and Iambres withstood 2,
Tim: 38
Moses. Yea they subvert whole houses, Tit: 1, 11
teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre. They are sent by the
Pope to recover, if it were possible, the reuenews, rents, and tributes which
once he had out of this kingdom, who having no other means whereby to live,
have raised a gainefull trade of seducing, and through covetousness, do make
merchandise (...). Pet: 2, 3. 1. Sam. 28. 7.
of the peoples souls. Though it pleased his Majesty to banish them: yet as a
Witch was found in Endor, after that Saul had banished all out of Israel; So
now upon diligent search many priests might be found in these pants.

Though they lurk in secret corners, and dare not show their faces, yet may we
tra^e them by their footesteps, and take notice of their presence by their
practices, even as we may discern where a snaile has crept on the wall, by
the slime which it leaves behind it. Who maryeth our recusants, who baptizeth
their children, but they? Not one recusant is married, not one of their children
is baptized by our ministers. Shall we think that they who hold Matrimony to
be a sacrament, would live together as man and wife, and never be married? Can
we imagine that they who hold baptism to be absolutely necessary to
salnation, will suffer all their children to remain unbaptized? Therein they
verify the Poets saying: In vetitum nefas gens humana ruit. Before we had any
statute law against marriages and baptizings by popish priests, it was a rare
thing to hear of any one who offended that way: But since that law was made,
it has been a rare thing in this country, to hear of a Recusants marriage
solemnized, or a Recusants child baptized by any of our ministers. So as if
our lawmakers had foreseen the issue, it may be they would have forborne the
making of that law, least as Solon thought of a law to be made against
Parricides, they should put men in mind of such an offense. What is the reason
of this their wilfulnes? Not only impunitie, our laws made against them,
being like an untimely birth, dead as soon as borne, and wanting execution
which is the life of them: but especially because the priests do evermore
excite them to disobedience, and will canonize them for holy confessors; for
that their contemptuous breach of our laws.

And whence comes it, that scarce one of an hundredth, of all our Recusants
and non-communicants, would come to take the oath of allegiance, when they were
thereunto lawfully called? but because the priests dissuade them from it, by
authority of the Popes bulls, and by warrant of the Cardinals books.

Augustine acknowledged that through Epist. 48. ad viacent.
fear of the imperial laws put in execution, not only some few persons, but
likewise many whole cities, who formerly had been Donatists, became right
Catholics: So if our laws might be duly executed, if not against all
papists, yet against the priests, I doubt not but within a while, we should
draw most of the people to due conformity. All their books have been
answered, Leges principum recte implora^i aduersus hosts fider modo id fiat
animo corrigendi, non studio vindicandi. August: epist: 48 Vides epist: 50. 60.
61, 127 167.
all their dispersed pamphlets confuted, and many disputations have been
granted them; Seeing then that after so many conuictions they remain
obstinate, I hope all will acknowledge with the same Father, that we may
lawfully crave the execution of the law against the enemies; of the faith, if
it be done with a mind to correct, and not with a desire to revenge.

Moreover I cannot but lament, and with grief of heart complain, that still
in this part of the country, the course of religion is exceedingly hindered,
the fruits of our labors greatly frustrated, the Lords Sabbath impiously
profained, by public pyping, by open and lascivious dancing on that day. That
it is not consecrated as holy to the Lord, but rather kept as a feast of
Bacchus and Venus. That pyping should put down preaching: that dancing should
draw the people from their duty: That for one person which we have in the
Church, to hear divine service, sermons and catechism, every pyper (there
being many in one parish) should at the same instant, have many hundreds on the
greenes.

Our learned and late P. Martyr. comment. in Iudic: 21, 19 21, fol. 177 Simler.
comment: n Exodus: 20, 8
divines do teach, that the virgins of Israel giving themselves to dancing on
their feast day, did thereby abuse it. And that it was no marvel, if at the
same time, they were all ranished for the punishment of that their sin.
Gregory Nazianzen Orat: in Christi natruit. paulo p^st ^itium.
exhorted his people to celebrate their feasts divinely, and not by dancing.
And Contra (...). orat. z prope finem.
accounts the use of it, and such like things, an hethenish manner of
celebrating feasts. Isidor Clarius Apud Dad^ae. loc: com^ tit: ^estus dies.
thought that gamsters, players, and dancers, sinned more haynously, and should
be punished more g^sly, then he who gathered sticks, and (...) the ^^wes who
gathered manna on that day. Augustine taught In psalm: 32 ^onc: 1, In solitrac^:
3 De december chord: cap: (...)
that it was better for men to dig and delue, and for women to card and spin,
then to dance wantonly on the Sabbath, which he meant not of the Jewish Sabbath
only, but also of the Christian Sabbath, because in the same places he
exhorted christians to keep their sabbath spiritually, end not carnally as the
Jews did by idleness and dancing. The council of Toledo, Toletan. corcil. 3.
1. Canon. 22.
forbad that custom of the common people on their holy days: And charged
Priests and Judges to suppress that bad custom in all their provinces. Leo 4.
with 67. Bishops in a Synod at Rome, decreed Can. 35. Vides Flac. Illy^is.
catalog test. verit. in Leo 4
that priests should admonish men and women, not to gather companies together
on their holy days, after the manner of Pagans to dance and sing filthy songs.
And that those who were admonished, and would not cease, should be suspended
from the Communion.

Yet the greatest part of our people, spend more then the one half of the
Sabbath, in as wanton and lascivious dancing as ever was used by any.

The ancient Christians would not celebrate the solemn days of the Emperor,
with bone-fires, public dancings, and drinkings. And were defended Verae
religionis homines etiam solennia eorum, conscientia potius, quam lasciuia
celebra^t. etc. Siccine exprimitur publicum gaudium pet publicum dedecus:
haeccine solen es dies principium decent, quae alios dies non decent Apologet,
cap. 35.
by Tertullian for that their refusal: because they would celebrate those
days rather by conscience, then by wantonness: because that were to express a
public joy by a public shame. And those things which were not seemly on
other days, were not seemly on the Emperors solemn days. Chrysostom
Sozom. hist l. 8, c: 20.
would not suffer the people to set up the image of the Empress, with public
dancings and stage plays. Neither would In Genes. 24, homil: 47 in (...), and
homil. 55. mino.
he tolerate any pyping and dancings at weddings. The council of Laodicia
Can. 53, 54.
forbad dancing at weddings, and enjoined Clergy men to depart from meetings
where it was used. Yet our people judge it an honest and lawful keeping of the
Lords Sabbath, to pype and dance all the afternoon.

And who are greater maintainers of this impiety, then our recusants and new
communicants. Their purses are ever open for the ^yring of the pyper, their
children and servants, always ready to dance after him, and themselves seldom
fail to be spectators. By this means they keep the people from the Church,
and so continue them in their popery and ignorance.

Though we often preach against this abuse, though we let them know that the
best learned in the Romish Church, Ludou. v^ues de institut. faem. lib. 1. c.
11. Catech. Rom part 3. cap. 7. p. 351. Iudolph de vita christi. part. (...).
c. 66. A. Tho Aqu^. Hugo cardio. Ferus. in Math 14. Iansen, concord. euangel.
cap: 59.
have condemned it as a trick of wantonness, as a provocation to lust, as a
breach of the seventh commandment, and an exercise Polydor vitgil: de invent:
lib 5. c: 2, and (...), 8, Vaux. catech. cap: 3
unfit for the Sabbath, yet sturdo canimus, They will not forbear it, because
they are not restrained by authority. Augustine witnesses, N^tum is it omnibus,
nugaces and turpes saltationes ab episeopis solere compesci. Contr: epist.
Parmen: lib: 3 cap: 6.
that the Bishops of his time were accustomed to suppress such vain and
filthy dancings. As your Lor: does tread in their steps, by painful
preaching: so if you would imitate them, by reforming this great disorder, you
might greatly further the fruit of our ministry.

The papists of our time and country, do esteem so little of the authority
of the Canonical scriptures, and ascribe so much to humane writings, that
though we prove our doctrine by most pregnant places of scripture, yet they
will not believe it, unless they be assured that the old Fathers, and their own
late writers have taught the same. Therein dissenting from the ancient Fathers,
who would try and Hiero. nim. epist. Tranquilin Augustine. cpiss: 19, and co^*
Crescon. lib. 2 cap. 31, 32 Dionys. Alexandr. apud. Enseb. hist. lib. 7 cap. 23.
judge of men's words and writings by the Canonical scriptures: but would not
judge of the doctrine of the scriptures by humane writings.

I have therefore added unto the sermons, a Postscript to papists, to let them
understand, that what we preach in the pulpit against them; is not only
warranted by the divine scriptures, but is also witnessed by the fathers, and
some of their own Church. And therefore if they condemn Quis te non videat in
me apertum iacta^e conuitium, de illis occultum quidem; sed tamen simile babere
iudicium. contr. Julian. lib. 1. cap. 2.
us as heretics for teaching such doctrine, we may say to them, as Augustine
said to Julian the Pelagian, condemning him for teaching the same doctrine,
touching original sin, which other Fathers taught. Who sees not, that
openly you condeme us, and secretly you condemn them, yet have you the same
judgment both of them and us.

These sermons, together with the Postscript, I now offer unto your Lordship:
not as if the matter of them were worthy your reading: but rather that they
being approved by your judgment, and protected by your authority, may better
escape the spiteful censures of envious and superstitious persons. As also
that I might thereby testify my thankefulnes to your Lordship, who not only
from time to time have much countenanced, and greatly furthered my poor
ministry in these backward parts: but also of late, considering my long
labors, and small means of maintenance, did procure the continuance of that
Pension, which was granted unto me by the royal gift of two famous Princes:
when as some upon stinister pretenses, and by indirect means went about to
abridge me of a great part thereof.

Thus presuming of a pardon for this my boldness, I humbly commit your Lordship
to the merciful protection of Almighty God: who long continue your health and
happy estate, and make you a blessed instrument of much good unto his church.

Your Lordships in all duty to be commanded, WILLIAM HARRISON.

THE DIFFERENCE OF HEARERS. Or an exposition of the parable of the Sower.
Luke 8. verse. 11. 12. 11. The parable is this. The seed is the word of God.

12. And they that are beside the way, are they that hear: afterward comes
the devil, and takes the word out of their hearts, least they should believe
and be saved, etc.


CHrist Jesus our blessed Savior, did no sooner begin to preach the Gospel,
but had many hearers. With such authority did he teach, such excellent and
profitable doctrine did he deliver, such admirable miracles did he work, to
confirm his doctrine, and such great fame of him was spread abroad, that all
people were willing and desirous to hear his sermons: yea all manner of
persons out of all coasts and quarters of the land, flocked unto him in great
multitudes. Whereupon he not only taking a view of their number, but also duly
considering their disposition, how al of them came not with same intent and
purpose, how all of them were not alike qualified for profitable hearing, and
how all of them, should not receive the same benefit by hearing of him: he
propounded a parable, of a sower of corn, to declare the diversity of
hearers, who be unprofitable, who be profitable hearers. Lest any should
imagine, that by any kind of hearing, they might be saved, he lets them
understand, that there be bad hearers as well as good. And because many of them
were husbandmen, who lived by tilling and sowing of land; and all of them were
well acquainted with matters of that nature, for their better capacity he
fetched his similitude from husbandry.

This parable is first propounded, then expounded; propounded in the 5. 6. 7.
8. verses of this chapter: whereof I forbear to speak, because the doctrines
thereof, may be better considered in the exposition.

It pleased Christ for the instruction of his disciples, and for the
edification of his Church in future ages, to expound this parable. And it is
the first parable which we find penned with his exposition. The occasion of
the exposition is set down in the two verses immediately going before: namely
a question moved by the Apostles, what should be the meaning of it. And a
reason rendered by Christ why he would explane it to them, and not to others,
because it was given to them to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but
not to others.

Now in the verses following, is contained the matter of the exposition, which
is double: the former respects the seed: the later respects the ground: The
seed says Christ, is the word of God.

The ground was of four kinds, and signifies 4. sorts of hearers.

1. The first kind of ground was the high way. What hearers are signified
thereby, is declared here, verse. 12. and more may be supplied out of Math. 13.
19. touching whom we may observe 2. things, 1. the manner of their hearing, 2.
the issue and event of their hearing: 1. the manner of their hearing is not
here expressed, yet is mentioned, Math. 13. 19. they hear and understand not.

2. The issue and event of their hearing: which is set forth by the devils
practice and behavior toward them. And that is described, 1. by the manner, 2.
by the end of it, 1. by the manner of it; for he is said to come and take the
word out of their hearts, 2. by the end, wherefore he does so, which is double,
he does it to prevent 2. things which they might receive by hearing, the one
being subordinate to the other, the former being a mean of the later, and the
later being a reward of the former: the one is, least they should believe: the
later is, least they should be saved.

2. The second kind of ground was stony: who are meant thereby, is specified,
verse. 13. Another sort of unprofitable hearers, who are described by 4.
properties, whereof the two first, declare their present estate, and the two
last, their future condition: 1. they receive the word with joy: 2. they have
no roots: 3. they believe for a while: 4. In time of temptation they fall away.

3. The third kind of ground was thornie: which also represents another sort
of bad hearers; described verse. 14. by the causes, and by the effect or issue
by the causes; for 3. things are named, which like thorns choke the seed of
the word, 1. cares, 2. riches, 3. voluptuous living: by the effect, or issue
that follows thereupon, they bring forth no fruit.

4. The fourth and last kind of ground, was good ground, in which the seed
sprang up and did bear fruit. That is a resemblance of good hearers, as
appears, verse. 15. And those are described by 3. properties: 1. by the manner
of their hearing: they hear with an honest and good heart: 2. by their keeping
of it after they have heard it: 3. by their fruitfulnes. And that is amplified
2. ways, 1. by the manner of it, hear, with patience: 2. by the measure and
variety of it: some bring forth more, some less, in Math. 13. 23. Mar. 4. 20.
some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold.

1. To begin first with the first, and so to proceed in order to the rest,
Christ shows what is meant by the seed, when he says the seed is the word
of God. By which title is plainly manifested the virtue, force and efficacy
of Gods word. As seed is the beginning and cause of all the fruit afterward
reaped, so is the word the beginning and cause of all goodness in us; even of
all grace in the heart, of all good words in the mouth, and of all obedience in
the life. And as good seed if it be well sown in a fertile soil, will yield
fruit, so the word being well taught to capable and docible persons, will
produce some good fruit, for the glory of God, and for their comfort and
salvation. The word is resembled to many things in regard of the power and
virtue of it: As to an hammer that will bruise us: to Ier. 23. 29.
a fire, that will either purge or consume us: to a light that will direct us:
to salt Psalm. 119. 105. Mat. 5. 13. Ephesians. 6. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 23. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
Eccles. 12. ^1.
that will season us: to a sword, that will defend us: to seed that will beget
us: to food that will nourish us: to goades that will prick us forward: so
also to seed that being sown, will yield plenty of fruit, because of it own
nature through Gods ordinance and blessing, it will provoke people to
obedience. If therefore you receive it, and do not bear fruit, the fault is
in you, and not in it: you are but barren soil, unworthy of such seed.
Moreover, it is to be observed, that Christ compares the word to seed that is
sown: for in the propounding of the parable, he said the sower went out to
sow his seed: and now Verse. 5.
he says the seed is the word: meaning the seed sown. Matthew says, that
the Math. 13. 19. Mar. 4. 14.
devil catches away the word sown in the heart. And Mark says, that the
sower sows the word. And therefore it must needs be understood of the word
preached. The word of God as it is written in the scriptures, and contained in
the books of the old and new testament, is good seed indeed: yet it is as
seed in the barn vnthrashed, or as seed laid up in the garner: but the word
read and expounded, preached and applied to Gods people, is as seed sown in a
field. And preachers be the sowers of it: for albeit Christ does not expressly
declare who be the sowers, yet that is apparent from other circumstances: for
if the word be the seed sown, then they who preach the word are the sowers.
And if they who hear the word taught, be the ground in which the seed is
sown: then the persons who teach them, and whom they hear, are the sowers. So
Christ by preaching the word, was a sower, yea the chiefest of all others: the
ground was his, the seed was his, and he like a good husbandman, with his own
hands, did sow his own seed in his own field. So the Apostles Athanas. de
sement.
were likewise sowers. Christ was a sower to the Jews only, they also to the
gentiles: he in the little field of Judea, they in the large field of the whole
world. Wherefore S. Paul said, If we have 1. Cor. 9. 11. 1. Cor. 3. 9.
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal
things? as also, we together are Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandry. And so
all those who preach the same word which they did, are sowers: for as the sower
fills his hand with seed, and casts it abroad among the furrows of the
field, not setting it seed by seed, or choosing a peculiar place for every
seed, but lets it lie as it lights: So the preacher disperseth and
dispenses the word in a mixed people, not able to give it success, but as it
pleases God to give a blessing, and as the hearts of the hearers are prepared
for it.

Hence then we may learn the necessity of preaching, no sowing, no reaping.
As you cannot in any field reap a crop of corn at harvest, unless it were
sown with good seed at the seed time, no more can any fruits of grace, or
any good works, be found in the Church, or children of God, unless the seed
of the word be sown among them. Indeed there may be sometimes good sowing,
and little good fruit to be reaped. As the Lord did all that could Esai. 5. 4.
Luke 13. 7
be done to his Vineyard, and yet it brought forth nothing but wild grapes:
but if there be no sowing, it is impossible to gather any fruit at all: Christ
therefore said; Except the wheat corn Ioh. 12. 24.
fall into the ground, it abides alone. Our hearts are the ground, they must
be sown with the seed of Gods word, otherwise they will be altogether
barren, or else bring forth nothing but briars and brambles, thorns and
thistles. Experience may verify this. Look into those places and Parishes
where the word is never taught, or to those persons who will not hear, though
they might; and you shall find nothing among them, but Atheism, Popery, and
profaneness. Yet in those places where it is taught and heard, we may find
the fruits of holiness and righteousness: If not among all, yet among many.

The consideration whereof should move the Ministers of the Gospel, to Use. 1.
be instant in season and out of season; as Paul exhorts them: The less
they preach, the less shall they profit the people. The more seed they cast
into the furrows of the peoples hearts, the greater plenty of fruit may they
expect. We should follow Salomons advise, who Eccle. 11. 6.
says; In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest:
for thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall
be alike good. What shall we answer to the Lord our Master, and owner of
the field, if through our negligence in sowing, his field of the Church
yield him not such store of fruit, as otherwise it might have done?

And you people should likewise apply Use. 2.
this to your selves, and learn from hence to hear often. If you contemn the
word, and will not suffer your hearts to be sown with the seed of it, you
shall bring forth no good fruit, but remain as a barren Heath. Do you not
remember what the Apostle says; That Heb. 6. 8.
the ground which bears thorns and briars is reproved, and is near unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. Fearful is their case, who are such
ground: yet no better can they be who refuse to hear. As you are content to
have your fields sown yearly, that so you may reap a croppe at Harvest: So
must you be content to have your hearts continually sown with this heavenly
seed, that so you may be fruitful in all grace and godliness, though your
fields be sown but once a year, yet must your hearts be sown continually,
because you should yield and bear fruit continually. As we are content to
bestow our pains in sowing this seed continually (though it be as toylesome
a labor as you find in your seede-time) so be ye willing and ready to
receive this seed into the furrows of your hearts continually, that so you
may from time to time, abound in fruit, for Gods glory, and your own comfort.
But whose word is it, that is this spiritual seed? It is not the word of
Angel or of man, but the word of God. This seed did Christ sow, and none
else. And therefore he Ioh. 7. 16.
said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. As my Father has taught
me, so I speak. This seed did the Apostles sow, Ioh. 8. 28.
and none else. For when Christ sent them abroad, he bad them teach all Nations
Mat. 28. 20.
to observe all things, which he had commanded them. All those things must be
taught, yet nothing else. And lest they should forget what those things were,
he promised to send the Holy Ghost, who should bring all things to their
remembrance, Ioh. 13. 26. Ioh. 16. 13.
which he had told them: who should lead them into all truth: Because (as he
said) he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak. And so careful were the Apostles to sow this seed only, as
they did confidently protest, that they received of the 1 Cor. 11. 23. Gal.
(...). 8. 9.
Lord, that which they delivered to their hearers. And if they, or an Angel
from heaven, or any man, preach otherwise then they had received, let him be
accursed. And no other seed must we sow, if we will make the people fruitful.
Christ and his Ministers sow none but good seed in his field: If bad seed, as
Tares or Cockle Mat. 13. 24. 25.
be sown, it is done by the envious man, the Devil and his instruments. As
there be doctrines of God, so there be doctrines of Devils: namely errors and
heresies: those be as tares among wheat, and do greatly hinder the
fruitfulness of the good seed. There be also doctrines of men, as the
inventions of their own heads, unwritten verities, Decrees of Popes, Canons of
Counsels, traditions of the Church, which wanting the warrant of Gods word, are
but as chafe to the wheat: and being taught in the Church, will yield no
Ier. 23. 28
more fruit, then chafe that is sown in a field. Under the Law, God would
not permit the Jews to sow the same Leuit. 19. 19.
field with mingled seed: And shall we think, that now under the Gospel, he
will permit us to teach for doctrines See postscript. Sect. 3.
men's traditions, to mingle truth with error, and his divine Oracles with
humane inventions?

We therefore that be sowers, must see that our seed be good. As the
Husbandman Use. 1.
against seed-time, will not only provide good seed, but will also winnow it,
fan it, and try it, that so he may neither sow chafe, nor light corn, nor
darnell; but pure grain, which is like to fructify. So we, before we come
to the Pulpit, must try and examine our doctrine, that it be sound; and that
we deliver nothing but that which will edify the hearers. And because, Non
omnis fert omnia tellus; Each ground will not bear each kind of grain. We
must, like wise and careful Husbandmen, sow that seed which is fittest for
our ground; and deliver such doctrines, as are most fitting for the capacity
and present condition of the Auditorie: that will yield the best increase.

And you Christian people, as you Use. 2.
must take heed how you hear, so also take heed what you hear. It is the
word of God, not the word of the Devil: It is the word of Christ, not the word
of Antichrist, that must make you fruitful. As you have great care, that your
ground be sown with sound and clean seed: so be careful that your souls
be instructed with sound and wholesome doctrine. Believe not every 1. Ioh. 4. 1
spirit; but try the spirits whether they be of God. Despise not Prophesying,
1. These. 5. 21. Act. 17. 11.
but try all things, and hold that which is good. With the Noblemen of Berea,
search the Scriptures daily, whether those things be so which are taught
you: What you find contrary thereto, that reject as tares: what is not
warranted thereby, blow away as chafe: what is proved thereby, that receive
as good seed into the furrows of your hearts. I know the Popish Seminaries
will not suffer you to try their seed, you must trust them, and take it upon
their word; but we allow and require you to try ours.

If two men offer you Seed to sow your ground, and the one bid you try it,
and view it well, the other tell you of it, but keeps it in his sack, you must
not view it: whether dealing would you like better? whether seed would you
receive? If their seed were good, if they taught Gods word, they would not
refuse trial.

Verse. 12. And they that are beside the way, are they that hear.


IN the former verse you have heard the exposition of the seed: Now see the
exposition of the ground, in this verse, and the rest. There were 4. sorts of
grounds mentioned, CHRIST shows that by them he meant 4. sorts of hearers:
some good, some bad.

Before we come to speak of them severally and particularly, we may note one
thing in general from them all. That as the same seed, sown in diverse kinds
of ground, does not fructify in all alike: in some, it yeeldes little or no
fruit at all; in some, both good and plentiful fruit. So the same doctrine
taught to diverse people, does not profit all alike. It may profit some nothing
at all: others very much. Though seed be never so good, yet badnes of ground
may spoil it, and cause the sower to lose both labor and cost. Even so,
though the doctrine we teach be never so good and profitable, yet through the
ill disposition of the hearers, it may become unfruitful. This seed does
fructify, or not fructify; according to the quality and disposition of the
ground into which it is cast. If the ground be bad, the seed perishes; if the
ground be good, it increases. And because some men's hearts be as a barren
ground, and other men's hearts be as a fertile soil: in some it yields no
fruit at all, in some it yields great abundance. This difference may by seen
in each mixed company and populous congregation, to which we preach. It was
found among Christ's hearers, it was found among the Apostles hearers, and may
also be found among ours. The consideration whereof, serves for the instruction
both of Preachers and people: 1. Of Preachers, to comfort them, and to
encourage them in their labors, when they see them unprofitable unto a great
number. Christ spoke this Parable, especially of him self and of his hearers:
He taught the true word of God, and in the best manner that might be, yet did he
not profit all his hearers; he had 4. sorts, whereof three were unprofitable,
one only was profitable. The Disciple must not be better then his Master: if
he be no worse, let him be well content. It does not a little grieve the
Ministers of the Gospel, to take great pains in teaching the truth, and that
in a good manner, and yet see most of their hearers to receive little or no
profit at all; but still remain, after many years teaching, as ignorant, as
Non seminantis sed suscipient is cul^a. Chrysostom. in Mat. 13. hom. 45.
Popish, and profane, as they were at the first: Yet let them not be dismayed,
it was Christ's own case; the fault is in the hearers not in the teachers. God
will reward thee for thy paineful preaching, though few do profit by it. Let
not their fault hinder us in our duty, but let us instruct with meekness them
that be 2. Tim. 2. 25.
contrary minded, proving if any time God will give them repentance: They who
be unprofitable hearers now, may prove profitable hereafter. Till the time of
bearing fruit do come, we know not which will prove good ground, which will
prove bad.

2. This also serves for the instruction of hearers Seeing that these 3. kinds
of bad grounds do paint out 3. sorts of bad hearers, who never receive profit
to their souls by the word which they hear: You must know, that you may be
receivers of this heavenly seed: You may be hearers of Gods most holy word,
and yet be never the better for it, never come to heaven by it. Three parts of
Christ's hearers were bad, as appears by this Parable: And he tells us that
many shall say; We have eaten Luke 13. 26.
and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: but he shall
say. I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. And the
Apostle says: We are 2. Cor. 2. 16.
to some, the savor of death unto death: and unto others, the sweet savor of
life unto life. Every kind of hearing will not save your souls. It must be
good and profitable hearing, with good hearts, to understand, believe, and obey
what you hear: Yea, not only they, who wilfully refuse to hear, but likewise
they, who hear unprofitably, stall be damned. And therefore as Christ
afterward exhorts you in this Chapter; Take heed how you hear. As many
seek Verse. 18.
and find not, because they seek amiss: Many run, and obtain not, because
they run amiss: Many ask, and receive not, because they ask amiss: So
many do hear, and profit not, because they hear amiss.

Some imagine, that if they be no Recusants, if they be no profane contemners
of the Word and Sacraments; but repair to the Church every Sabbath day, and
hear divine Service and Sermons orderly, as by Law they are enjoined, they are
good Christians, and sure to be saved: But let the^ know, that they may do all
these things, and yet not be saved: They may offend in the manner of their
hearing, and then their case will be no better then if they heard not at all.

The Devil is very subtle, and this is one of his subtilties, whereby he
deceives many people to their perdition: First, he labors by all means, if
it be possible, to keep them from hearing, because he knows it is Gods
ordinance, and is afraid least it be powerful in them: But if he cannot
keep them back from hearing, he deceives them with this conceit; that any
kind of formal hearing will serve their turn. But do not herein believe the
father of lies: believe Christ, who is the way, the life, and the truth: He
tells you, that there be 3. sorts of hearers which shall not be saved; only one
sort among 4. shall be saved. And therefore examine your selves what kind of
hearers you be: and do not cortent your selves with that hearing that shall
not edify your souls.

Now let us come to the several kinds in particular: And first, let us see who
are they which receive the seed on the highway. Some hearers are compared to
such ground. You know that if Land lie by the highway side, or an highway lie
through the midst of a plowed field, some seed in the sowing will fall on the
highway, and so be lost. Thereunto are some hearers compared, and that very
fitly: For first, as the highway is not kept several and private, but lies
open and common to all travelers and passengers; so these men's hearts are not
enclosed and kept several for heavenly things, but lie open to all tentations
and suggestions of the Devil, to all inticements of the world, and to all idle
thoughts and vain imaginations, and that in the time of hearing. Again, as
the highway is so trodden and trampled by the feet of passengers, that it
cannot cover the seed, or if it should cover the seed, yet the trampling
will so harden the soil, as the seed can never sproute: So these men's hearts
are so hardened by wandering thoughts, both in, and immediately after hearing,
as the word cannot enter, or at least, cannot take any rooting in their hearts.
And as corn sown in the highway, will never yield croppe like other ground,
so these hearers will never yield such fruit of the word as Mat. 13. 19.
others do. But who are these? Matthew sets down one property of them, and
Luke another. Matthew says; They are such as hear, and understand not.

There be 2. sorts of hearers who understand not the word. 1 Some through
natural infirmity, and through defect of capacity, conceit, understanding,
and memory. If these natural faculties be not perfect, they cannot possibly
understand the word which they hear: but of these Christ does not hear
speak: this is rather an infirmity then a fault, rather a punishment of sin,
then sin it self. God may bear with their weakness; especially if their mind
and understanding be as weak in apprehending worldly matters, as it is in
diume: If they understand the fundamental grounds of Religion: If they mislike
this their infirmity, and desire to have it redressed: If they have a care,
according to their small capacity, to increase in knowledge: And if they frame
their lives according to the measure of knowledge which they have received.

2. Some understand not the word, through negligence, carelesnes and contempt:
who hear the word, but heed it not, regard it not, mark it not, care not much
for it, let it pass as it comes, and are thinking of some other matter,
while they should attend to it; who are so far from laying it deep in their
See Beza. annot. mayor in Mat 13. 19.
hearts, as they will not suffer it long to continue in their heads.

Of these persons does Christ here speak: for he notes it as a great fault
in them, and opposes them to those, who receive the word with joy. And fitly
are they resembled to the high way, as before was declared. This kind of
hearers is not wanting in these days; who mark, and understand little or
nothing of that we speak, though we speak never so plainly. If they hear a
long discourse of worldly matters, they give attentive ears, can carry it
away, and repeat it to others: but let them hear a point of necessary
doctrine, on an article of their faith discussed, they conceive little, and
afterward can rehearse nothing at all: So that in them is fulfilled that
Prophecy of Esaias, applied by Christ to the obstinate Jews: By hearing, Mat.
13. 14.
they hear and understand note by seeing, they see, and perceive not. Let them
know, that their hearing shall not profit them, unless they understand. Indeed
there be some, who understand what they hear, and yet shall reap no benefit
by it: yet is there not any, who shall have any commodity by that which he
hears and understands not. Wherefore we must say to them, as Christ said to
the multitude: hear and understand: you Math. 15. 10.
loose your labor in hearing if you understand not. The Eunuch thought it
impossible for him to understand the scripture he read, without a guide: yet
Act. 8. 31.
thereby employed, that if he had a guide, he could understand. Our people have
such guides, and yet many of them understand little. If one ask them the
meaning of a text, which they heard lately and learnedly, pithily and plainly
expounded, they cannot tell the sense of it. If one ask their opinion touching
a point of doctrine lately taught them, they are not able to speak any thing
of it: which declares that they understood it not: and so they prove
themselves to be no good hearers.

Some say they are not learned, they are of a dull capacity, yet they have a
good meaning, and as good an heart, as those who understand most: they hope God
will bear with them, and accept of their good meaning, when as they should
rather accuse themselves of negligence. If they did duly prepare themselves,
and carefully attend, they might understand much more then they do. But let
them first know, that though they be not learned, and cannot read, yet ought
they, and may be able, to understand, for God has furnished preachers with
learning, and appointed them so to explane the word, that the simple may
understand it. Even as Ezra and the Levites, read the book of the law Neh:
8. 8.
distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand it. Though
thou be not able to understand the word of thy self, yet may ^st thou be made
able by them: yea and shall be made able to understand the most necessatie
points of salvation, before thou can be made fit for heaven: yea many of the
most necessary points are so easy of themselves, that thou may understand
them at the first hearing, if thou will carefully mark them.

The entrance into Gods word shows Psalm. 1^. 13.
light, and gives understanding to the simple. And therefore if thou
understand not, thou should rather blame thy self for want of attention, then
for want of capacity or learning. Again, know this, that God will never
accept of thy good meaning, nor of thy good heart, unless thou d oin some
competent measure understand his word; for it is the word rightly understood,
that must direct thy good meaning, and correct thy heart: thou may think thy
meaning is good, and thy heart good, when both be naught: as indeed they are,
if thou understand not the word aright. And how should God accept of thy good
meaning, void of understanding? It is but the sacrifice of fools: blindness was
a blemish, which made beasts unfit for sacrifice. And do thou think God
will accept thy blind devotion? deceive not thy own soul herein, but seek
for understanding. There be some that be desirous to understand what they
hear, and it may be, would gladly know how they may be able: I would advise
them to do these 6. things.

1. Let them prepare themselves before they come to hear. As we must prepare
our selves before we pray, if we will not pray vainly, and as we must prepare
our selves before we come to the Sacrament, if we will not receive it
unworthily, so must we prepare our selves before we hear, if we will not
hear unprofitably. The husbandman prepares his ground by plowing it before he
sow it. If thou go rashly to hear without preparation, thou shall yield no
more fruit then a field that is sown before it be plowed. Thou may prepare
thy self by considering before hand, that the word which thou go to hear,
is not the word of a mortal man, but the word of the everliving God: that not
man only speaks unto thee, but that God speaks unto thee, in and by the
man. That the word is the power of God to salvation, that one day thou must
give account to God for thy hearing. If thou do seriously consider these
things before hand, they will prepare thee, to hear with more reverence and
understanding. Again, prepare thy self by unfeigned humiliation for thy former
sins; least God for the punishment of them, should blind thy understanding
when thou hear. Likewise prepare thy self, by renewing thy faith, in the
truth of Gods word, and of his promises, knowing that the word, will not profit
the Heb. 4. 2.
hearers, unless it be mixed with faith.

2. Pray earnestly unto the Lord, that he would enlighten thy mind by his holy
spirit, for the natural man perceives 1. Cor. 2. 14. 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
not the things of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. It is that ointment, which teaches us all things. David prayed
often for illumination. Open mine eyes that I Psalm. 119. 18 33. Col. 1. 9. 2.
Tim. 2. 7.
may see the wonders of thy law. Teach me o Lord, the way of thy statutes, and
I will keep it unto the end. Paul prayed for it, to be bestowed on others. As
for the Colossians, that they might be fulfilled with all knowledge, in
wisdom and spiritual understanding. And for Timothy, to whom he thus wrote,
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Much
more should we pray to obtain it for our selves. It is the Lords gift, beg it
of him by prayer, the more dull os capacity you are by nature, the more
earnestly and the oftener should you pray to God, that by grace he may make a
supply of that, which you want by nature. This is one reason why many hear and
heed not, and understand not, even because they will not pray before they
hear. James says, If any man lack wisdom, let Iam. 1. 5.
him ask of God, and it shall be given him. So if you want understanding, ask
it of God, and it shall be given you.

3. Exercise your selves daily, in reading the word, in meditating of it, in
conferring and talking of it. David said, I have had more understanding then
all Psalm. 119. 99.
my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. The Apostle said, that men
of age, to whom strong meat belongs, through long custom have their wits
Heb. 5. 14.
exercised, to discern both good and evil. If you will often read the
scriptures, or hear others read them, you shall be better able to understand
the^ when you bear them expounded, and better carry away the doctrine drawn
from them.

4. Attend diligently to that which is delivered, mark and consider it, think
then on that only, and nothing else. Even as the people gave heed unto those
Act. 3. 6. Act. 16. 14.
things which Phillip spoke. And as Lidia, when God had opened his heart,
attended unto the things which Paul spoke. This is wanting in many, and
therefore they understand not: for no attention, no understanding. Paul long
ago forbad 1. Tim. 1. 4. Tit. 1. 14.
men to give heed to fables, yet is it now practiced by diverse. If a man tell
a winter tale, a feigned fable, or a merry jest, many listen very attentively
unto him, mark it well, and will talk of it afterward: but when the preacher
speaks of heavenly matters, which tend to the salvation of men's souls, he is
heeded by a few: which persons are like the Athenians, who regarded not
Demosthenes Plutarch in Demosth:
when he spoke of matters for the welfare of their city: but listened well
unto him, when he told the^ a tale of a contention about an asses shadow,
betwixt the owner and hyrer of the ass. You must know, that you cannot
understand, unless you do carefully attend, and expel all other by-thoughts
out of your minds. And that you Luke. 4. 20.
may the better attend, you must as Christ's hearers did, fix and fasten your
eyes on the preacher: lest gazing on other things, your eyes withdraw your
mind from the doctrine delivered. And if your bodies grow drowsy and
sleepie, sit not long, but stand on your feet. Even as that worthy and
Christian Emperor Constantine the great, used Suseb. de vit a constant. lib.
4. Cap. 33.
to do, who for reverence to the word, and for his better attention, could not
be persuaded to sit down, but would most commonly stand at sermons.

5. When you understand not a point, ask them which be learned and do
understand it: This was the usual practice of the Apostles, when they
understood Math. 15. 15.
not the meaning of this parable, they asked Christ and he told them: when they
understood not his doctrine, of the things which defile a man, they asked him,
and he made them to understand it. Be not you therefore ashamed to ask, you
shall find many ready to resolve you: if you will ask, what you cannot
understand of your selves, and at the first bearing, you may afterward
understand by asking of them.

6. Lastly, be careful to practice, what you do already know and understand;
then shall you be able to understand more afterward: for as David says, The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, all they that observe them,
have Psalm. 111. 10. Ioh. 7. 17.
good understanding. And Christ said, If any man do the will of my father, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self. Obedience is the key of knowledge. If men sin against their own
knowledge and conscience, the Lord in judgment blinds their minds, and
hardens their hearts, that they shall understand less afterward, and less
regard what they hear. So contrariwise, he in his mercy will reward former
obedience, with future illumination. The servant who hid his talent, lost it,
but he who employed his talents, had them multiplied.

Whosoever will observe these rules shall hereafter understand, and profit
more by one sermon, then he has done by many sermons in times past.

The second property in the first kind of hearers, is set forth by the issue
and event that falls out at his hearing: The devil comes and takes the word
from him. The former property came from himself, this from the devil.

In this behavior of the devil, toward these hearers, we may note 2. things.
1. his presence: 2. his practice.

1. His presence, in that he is said to come, he comes to the persons that
do hear, and to the places where they hear. Though here it be translated
(afterward) comes the devil: yet it might be translated, then comes the
devil. Mark says, that Satan comes Mar. 4. 15.
immediately, to wit, as soon as they have heard, and before they go away
from the place, as well as afterward. Even as fowls come to the field that is
sown, so will the devil come to the persons that hear, and to the places
where they hear. This is to be considered, because it is not simply said, the
devil takes the word: but all three Evangelists add this, he comes. And
this not only teaches us, Tellet. in Luke 8. annot. 26.
as some have observed, that the devil is out of us, is not always present;
is sometime near, sometime a far off: sometime tempts, sometime tempts
not. But likewise that he neither fears the persons that hear Gods word, nor
the place where they hear it. He came to Adam and Eve while Job. 1. 6.
they were in Paradise, he came and stood before the Lord, among the children
of God: that is, the holy Angels. He approached near to Christ's most Math. 4.
5. 8.
holy body, and carried it from one place to another. We must not therefore
think it strange, that he dare come among them, that meet together for the
hearing of Gods word, and into Churches which be consecrated and dedicated for
the worship of the Lord. Papists imagine that the ringing of consecrated bells,
will drive him away: And that permanent crosses of metal and wood, and
transient crosses made on the forhead with their fingers, will put him to
flight. Let them show why he should be more afraid of these, then of Christ's
body? have they more holiness, or more virtue in them, the^ Christ's body had?

Seeing the devil comes to hearers, let us before we hear, and afterward we
have heard, arm our selves against him.

2. The devils practice, he takes the word out of their hearts: The heart is
not here taken strictly and properly, but generally, for the mind and
affections: yet cannot the devil immediately, directly, and by himself, work
upon the soul or heart of man, that belongs only unto God, who alone is the
searcher of the heart. The devil works immediately, indirectly, and by
means even by external objects, outward senses, and corporal fantasies; he
takes the word out of the heart, by interrupting the fantasy, and making it
unfit to convey any thing to the understanding or to the heart: and by
conueying other thoughts into the heart, and turning the mind another way, so
as it shall no longer affect the word, nor think of it any more. Neither can
he take it by violence, without their liking, that heard it: but with their
consent, he takes it only from them who were careless hearers, who never
suffered it to sink deep into their hearts; but being like to the high way
side, did not cover it with the moist mouldes of holy affections: yea he takes
it from those who never had any great love unto it, and therefore might easily
be persuaded to let him take it.

In regard of this his practice, Christ in the propounding of the parable,
compared him to the fowls of the air, because as they will follow the sower,
and will pick up that, which lies by the high way side, or any other place
uncovered: so the devil haunteth the assemblies, where the word is preached,
that he may take from the hearers, that which has been taught. Yea, in this
respect the devil is far worse then any fowls; They eat the seed of
necessity, because they want other food to nourish them: but he of malice, he
needs it not, it does no good to him. And therefore he takes it away, not to
do himself any good thereby, but to do them harm, from whom he takes it.
Again, the birds are soon satisfied, and that with a little; if they have once
eaten their fill, they fly away, and leave the rest, though it lie uncovered;
but the devil is never satisfied till he have picked up every grain that is
not covered in thr bottom of the heart. Birds are easily kept away, or driven
away, but it is an hard matter either to keep the devil away, or drive him
away from those that hear carelessly: till they alter the manner of their
hearing, he will not be kept from them.

See then what an enemy the devil is, to hinder the efficacy of Gods word in
man's heart.

As the preacher labors to cast the word into the heart, so be to take it
out. He thrusts many evil things into the heart, he put treason into the
heart of Judas, to betray Christ: he filled the heart of Ananias, to lie unto
Ioh. 13. 2. Act. 5. 3.
the holy Ghost. So also does he keep all manner of good from the heart, by
the one he would make us bad; by the other, he would hinder us from being good.

Except it be in praying, he does not trouble a man so much in any business, as
in hearing of Gods word, because he is afraid lest man should be converted and
saved thereby.

This his practice is evidently seen in many. It appears by the event, that
he takes the word from many of our hearers, for when the people have heard the
preacher speak a whole hour together, and deliver many profitable points of
doctrine, and that very plainly, yet few can repeat any thing at all: many
will say they like him well, he is a good man, and made a very good sermon, yet
cannot tell one word that he spoke. What is the reason hereof? the devil has
taken it out of their hearts and heads.

Report to them an humane history, tell them some strange news, or a tale for
their worldly profit, or corporal health, they will keep it well enough, and
at any time, and in any company will relate it very readily: but teach them a
mystery of salvation, instruct them in a duty to God or man, they forget it
as soon as they have heard it: What is the cause hereof but this? the devil
knows that the one will never profit their souls, nor further their
salvation, and therefore he will not take it from them: he is afraid lest the
other should profit their souls, and further their salvation, and therefore he
labors to deprive them of it.

If a man put coin in a chest, and wares in a chamber, and within a while come
and find none there, he will say, a thief has been there. So if people hear
much, and keep little or nothing, it is certain the devil has been there,
to steal it out of their he^ts.

This should teach every one of us that be hearers, to look well to our
selves, and carefully to keep that which we have heard. The devil will do
what he can to deprive us of it. If he cannot keep thee from hearing, he will
(if he can) rob thee of that which thou have heard. If thou be careless in
keeping, he will be sure to take all from thee. You know, that if a man have
some special goods, and look negligently unto them, and care not much whether
he keep them or loose them, and a cunning thief be very desirous of them, he
is like within a while to get them.

Wherefore, as Abraham drove away the Genesis 15. 11.
Fowls that troubled him, when he was sacrifising; so drive ye away the
Devil, who troubles you when you hear. Even as you chase away the birds that
would eat up the corn sown in your fields: And as by harrowing of your sown
fields, you cover the seed with earth, that so the Fowls may not devour it,
and that it may better fructify: So cover the seed of the word in the
furrows of thy affections, and let it enter deep into thy heart, and so shall
it both be safe from the Devil, and fit to yield fruit in thy life.

This practice of the Devil is amplified by the ends of it, which are two, the
one subordinate to the other. The former is, least they should believe. Whence
we may observe two things; one in respect of the word; and another in respect
of the Devil.

1. In respect of the word: namely, that the hearing and receiving of the word,
is a special mean to bring men to faith: for the Devil does therefore hinder
men in hearing, least by hearing they should believe. Saint Paul says, That
faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. How can they believe in
Romans 10. 17.
him, of whom they have not heard? and and how can they hear without a
Preacher? And those for whom Christ prayed, must believe in him, through the
Ioh. 17. 20. Act. 8. 37.
Apostles word. Was not the Eunuch brought to faith by Philips teaching? Did
not Cornelius believe by Peter's preaching? Did not the Iaylor believe Act. 10.
Act. 16. 31. Non om^ium est fides, qui audiunt verbum, sed quibus Deus partitur
mensuram sidei. August. epist. 105.
by hearing of Paul? Though all do not believe, who do hear, because some
hear amiss: yet is hearing Gods ordinance to beget faith. Those then that
desire faith, must hear and receive the word. Those that may hear and will
not, cannot believe. Woeful is their case who hear not at all: for whence can
they have faith, if they hear not? Fearful is their case who hear seldom:
they have no faith, or a weak faith. But happy are they who hear often and
well; they believe, and shall be saved.

2. Another thing is to be observed in respect of the Devil; namely, what an
enemy he is unto faith: for he takes away the word, as it is entering into men's
hearts, lest they should believe. This is the very cause why he is so busy in
hindering the word; because he would keep men from faith. And no marvel
though he be a deadly enemy unto faith: he knows that the word will not Heb.
4. 2.
profit the hearers, unless it be mixed with faith. He knows that by faith
we Romans 3, Act. 10.
are justified in Christ: that by faith we obtain remission of sins, and
everlasting life. Very loath he is that we should enjoy these blessings; and
therefore will do what he can to hinder us of faith, which is the hand whereby
we receive them. He knows, that without Heb. 11. 6 Romans ^14. 23.
faith it is impossible to please God. And that whatsoever is not of faith is
sin. Unwilling he is that we should better please God then himself does: but
gladly would he make all our actions sinful, like his. He knows that faith
is the Ephesians. 6. 1. Ioh. 5. 4
shield, whereby we quench all his fiery darts; and that it is the victory,
whereby we overcome the world, one of his Champions. And therefore will seek
to keep this weapon out of our hands, lest himself and his champion be foiled
therewith. We may now say with the Apostle, 2. These. 3. 2.
All men have not faith. And no marvel, seeing the Devil is a spightfull foe
against it, and will hinder as many from faith as possibly he can. At the end
of the world (as Christ foretold) the son of Luke 18. 8
man shall scarce find faith on the earth: Let it not seem strange: for, as at
all other times, so then especially will he keep men back from faith, his
wrath shall then be great, because he shall Revel. 12. 12.
know his time is short.

Do not therefore imagine that it is an easy thing to get faith, and that
thou can believe when thou list; thou can not have faith, but in despite
of the Devil; so long as he can hinder thee by any means, thou shall not
believe. The Lord must enable thee to frustrate his attempts, and must bestow
this gift on thee against his will; otherwise thou can never receive it.

But the more he labors to keep us from faith, the more earnestly should we
labor to obtain it* the more he hates it, the better should we love it: If
it were not a most excellent grace, he would not hinder us of it.

2. The other end why he takes away the word is this; Lest they should be
saved: Where also two other like things may be considered: one in respect of
the word and faith; another in respect of the Devil.

1. In respect of faith and the word, that they will bring men to salvation:
For, whereas Christ says, the Devil takes the word out of men's hearts, lest
they should believe and be saved: he thereby insinuates, that if the word enter
into the heart, do there abide, and work faith in it, the man shall be saved.
And so he shall indeed: For the Gospel (as Paul says) is the power of God
unto salvation Romans 1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 21. Ioh. 20. 31.
to every one that believes: to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. And
it pleased God, by the foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe. And
therefore the Evangelist says; These things are written that ye might
believe, and in believing have life through his Name. The word brings us to
faith, and faith to life everlasting. If we get the one, we cannot fail of the
other.

Oh what an heavenly comfort is this to a believing soul! Cannot the Devil by
all his practices and policies, hinder the word from working faith in thy
heart? fear him not, he cannot possibly hinder thee of eternal salvation in
heaven. Look what assurance thou have of thy present faith, the same assurance
may thou have of the future salvation of thy soul. If thou now believe, thou
shall receive the end of thy faith, which is the salvation of thy soul. But 1.
Pet. 1. 9.
if Satan so take the word from thee, that thou do not believe, never look
for salvation in heaven. Only he that believes shall be saved.

2. In respect of the Devil, he is an utter enemy to the salvation of men's
souls; he takes away the word, and hinders them from faith, that so he may
prevent their salvation. This is the end of both the former.

The Devil is envious; unwilling he is that any of us should enjoy that glory
in heaven which he has lost. As he drove Adam and Eve out of the earthly
Paradise; so does he, what lies in him, to keep us from the heavenly
Paradise. He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

As the Ammonites, Moabites, Amalekites, and many other heathen people, would
have hindered the Israelites from entering into the land of Canaan: So the
Devil and all his Angels seek to hinder us from the Kingdom of heaven. And as
the Israelites subdued them, before they could get possession: So must we,
through the mighty power of Christ, subdue the Devil, before we can enjoy
that most happy and glorious Kingdom.

Lastly, to conclude all the points touching these hearers: See what excellent
things they lose, who suffer the Devil to take the word out of their hearts:
They loose says, which is much more precious then gold; as Saint Peter says.
And hereafter they shall lose the salvation of their souls; 1. Pet. 1. 7.
which is more worth then all the world. For as CHRIST says; What aduantageth
it a man to win the Mat. 16. 26.
whole world, and lose his own soul?

You may think it little danger to suffer the Devil to take the word out of
your hearts. And it may be some had rather have it taken from them, then the
least part of their worldly riches: but know that it is a precious Jewel. If
you keep it, you retain all grace and happiness with it: If you leave it,
you lose all goodness with it. Oh then when you have heard it, make much of it,
and keep it safely, and be content rather to lose any thing, yea all things
that you have, then lose it. If you did truly know, and would duly consider
the danger of this loss, you would be more careful to keep the word, and
more afraid of losing it. You, who have Deeds of your Lands, and Leases of
your houses, are very careful to keep them safely, you will keep them under
lock and key, and that in the safest place of your houses, because you hold
your lands and livings by them, and may lose your lands and livings, if you
lose them. As careful should you be to keep the word; you hold your
inheritance by it: It is your evidence: If it be taken from you, you shall lose
faith and Gods favor in this world, and the happy possession of an everlasting
and glorious Kingdom in the world to come.

And they that are on the stones, are they which when they have heard, receive
the word with joy.

Now follows the exposition of the second kind of ground; to wit, the rockie
and stony ground. Christ declares who are meant thereby; even another sort of
unprofitable heaters. And that he might the better lay open their nature and
condition, and let all men see who they are, he describes them at large, by 4.
several properties. 1. They hear, and receive the word with joy. These
hearers go farther then the former. The former sort heard the word, but
understood it not; if they understood the words, they understood not the
matter. But these are not blamed for that fault; they understood it well: and
therefore are said to receive it: their receiving of it, is made a distinct
thing from their hearing. Again, the other lost it as soon as they heard it:
the Devil soon took it from them; but these keep it a great while, even all
the time of peace, they do not renounce it, till they be presecuted for it.
Moreover, those did not affect it, the Devil kept it from entering deep into
their hearts, he took it presently out of their hearts, lest it should work
upon their affections: they were such as heard it for fashion sake, yet had no
great liking or love of it in their hearts. These do much affect it, it
pierces their hearts, it moves their affections, they rejoice in it.

Lastly, those did not so believe as these do: either they did not believe it
at all, or with an hystoricall faith only, believe it to be true; but not
making such profession of it, nor yielding such outward obedience to it as
these do: as afterward shall be showed.

The first property is, that they receive the word with joy. For the present
time they rejoice in the doctrine of the Gospel, it cheareth their hearts,
delights their souls, contenteth their minds, moves their affections, and
is to them the most joyful news that ever they heard: and yet for all that
they are but unprofitable hearers. Such an hearer was King Herod: when Mar. 6.
20.
John Baptist preached, he heard him gladly; not only willingly, but also
cheerfully and joyfully: he took delight and pleasure in hearing of him; and
yet afterward was the author of his death. Such hearers were most of the Jews:
for Christ told them, That Ioh. 5. 38.
John was a burning and shining lamp, and that they would for a season have
rejoiced in his light. They ioyed in his doctrine, yet but for a season. He
preached but a while. Christ foresaw, that if he had lived and preached
longer, they would have forsaken him. Such hearers also were the Capernaites,
who liked Christ's Ioh. 6.
doctrine so well, as that they followed him for a while; but afterward
forsook him. Such hearers had the Apostles: And such hearers have we at this
day.

These hearers are not like Pharoh, who Exodus 5. 2.
said; Who is the Lord, that I stould hear his voice? Nor like those impious
persons, who say to God; Depart from us, Job. 21. 14. Act. 13. 45.
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Nor like the Jews, who spoke
against those things which were taught by Paul, contradicting them, and railing
on them, and thrusting the Apostles from the^. They do willingly hear the
word, they approve the doctrine of it, they love it, and like it, and rejoice
to hear it. They will rather say to Preachers, as Cornelius Act. 10. 33.
and his kinsmen said to Peter; We are all here present before God, to hear
all thing that are commanded thee of God.

And if these hearers rejoice in the word, they will not scorn to be taught by
the Ministers, but very willingly submit themselves to the Ministry of the
word. They will be as forward as any, in frequenting Sermons: for who will not
desire to hear that often, which comfort his heart? Yea, they may sharply
reprove, and severely censure them, as impious and profane, who are careless
and negligent in hearing of Gods word. Yea, they may reverence the Minister, as
Herod did John Baptist: they may patronage, protect and countenance him; they
may maintain him, and be very bountiful toward him: for who will not make
much of him that does greatly comfort his heart? Yea, after they have heard,
they may talk and confer of the doctrine among their familiar acquaintance:
for who will not often talk of that which rejoices his heart. Of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. All these things may be found in
these hearers of the second sort, who notwithstanding are reckoned among
unfruitful hearers.

See then what fair shows an unregenerate man may make, in hearing of Gods
word. And consider it seriously, that not only the public persecutors, bitter
raylers, wilful contemners, careless and forgetful hearers; but likewise some
that love and like the word, diligently attend it, and find some comfort in
it, may be out of the state of grace, and kept back from entering into heaven.
A fearful thing to consider; it should rowse us out of security, and make us
look well to the manner of our hearing. There be some who are nothing at all
moved with the word, neither terrified with the threatenings and curses of the
law, nor comforted with the heavenly blessings, and sweet promises of the
Gospel: whom we may compare, as Christ did the Jews, unto little children,
which sit in the markets, and call to their fellows, and say; We have piped
unto you, and you have Mat. 11. 17.
not daunced: we have mourned unto you, and you have not lamented. We sing both
mercy and judgment, and yet they are not moved. Seeing Christ reckons them
in the Catalogue of fruitless hearers, who are so moved, as they rejoice at
the word: what is to be thought of them, who are no more touched, then if their
hearts were of Adamant? If this joy may be found in the unregenerate, it Quest.
will be hard to discern who are regenerated. It is a property of the
regenerate to rejoice at the word. David said; Thy testimonies have I taken as
an heritage for ever: for they are the joy of mine Psa. 119. 111. Nehe. 8. 12.
Act. 2. 41.
heart. The holy people of the Lord made great joy, because they understood the
words which Ezra and the Levites had taught them. Those three thousand which
were converted by Peter's Sermon, did receive his word with joy. The Eunuch
converted by Phillip, and the Iaylor converted by Paul, received their doctrine
with joy of heart. Is there no difference betwixt the regenerate and the
unregenerate in this their joy? Indeed both of them receive Answer.
the word with joy: yet there may be found great difference betwixt the joy of
the one, and the joy of the other. They differ in these four things.

1. In the cause of it: and that is faith. And therefore Paul calls it; The
joy Phil. 1. 25
of faith. The joy of the regenerate man arises from a justifying faith,
whereby he believes that all the promises of God in Christ, shall be performed
to him in particular. The unregenerate has only a general and historical
faith, whereby he certainly believes that many shall be saved by grace in
Christ, has some doubtful hope that he is one of the number, but no certain
assurance. As, if there be many offenders in the same prison; one is certainly
assured, that the King has granted pardon to a great number of them, hops
that he is one, yet is not sure. And another is assured that he is one of the
number. Both of them will rejoice; yet there will be difference betwixt their
joy.

2. In the measure and degree: for the regenerate have a greater measure of
joy then the unregenerate. The regenerate have as great, or greater joy in the
word, then in any thing else whatsoever. Therefore David said; I have had as
great delight in the way Psalm. 119. 14. verse. 72.
of thy testimonies, as in all riches. The Law of thy mouth is better unto
me, then thousands of gold and silver. I rejoice at thy word, as one that
finds a verse. 162.
great spoil. Their joy is so great, that S. Peter says; They rejoice with
joy unspeakable. 1. Pet. 1. 7.
It may be felt, it cannot be expressed. The greatness of their joy, Christ
Mat. 13. 44.
sets forth by the example of a man, who finding a treasure hid in the
field, for joy thereof departs, and sells all that he has, and buyeth the
field.

But the joy of the unregenerate is nothing so great. They seldom have so
great joy in the word, as in the world, but never greater. Their worldly
profits, their earthly honors and preferments, their carnal pleasures, do as
much rejoice them, and more comfort them, then the word can do.

3. Their joy differs in the companions: for the joy of the regenerate is
never found alone, but is always accompanied with many other holy affections.
They so rejoice, as that they also fear and tremble in respect of the Lords
Majesty, and their own infirmity. According as David exhorts; Rejoice with
Psa. 2. 12
trembling. He himself rejoices greatly: yet he says; My flesh trembles
Psa. 119. 120.
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments: yea the godly do work
out their salvation with fear and trembling, when as the unregenerate so
rejoice, as that withal they are secure and presumptuous.

Again, the regenerate so rejoice in the word, as they put great trust and
sure confidence in God and his word. As David, who said, I rejoice in God,
because of his word: In God do I trust, Psalm. 56. 10. 11. Psalm. 119. 42.
I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. I shall make answer to my
blasphemers, for I trust in thy word. When they see no means for the
performance of Gods promises, they will trust his word, which confidence is
often wanting in the unregenerate, he will trust Gods word, no further then he
see means for the accomplishment of it. Moreover, the godly man so rejoices
in the word, as he loves it above all things: Therefore did David say of
himself, Oh how love I thy law? it is Psalm. 119. 97. verse. 47. verse. 121. 136.
139.
my meditation continually. And my delight shall be in thy commandments which
I have loved: yea they so love it, as they hate all things contrary unto it. I
hate vain inventions, but thy Iaw do I love, said the same holy man of God:
yea his eyes gushed out with rivers of water, because men kept not the law: his
zeal did even consume him, because his enemies had forgotten Gods word. These
affections cannot be found in the unregenerate; If they sometime have them, it
is in a far lesser measure.

4. Lastly, their joy differs in the countinance. The unregenerate man
rejoices much at the first hearing and understanding of the Gospel: afterward
his joy abateth. Even as the Israelites liked their Manna well, at the
beginning, but loathed it within a while after. And as Jews well have rejoiced
in John Baptists doctrine, for a season, but not long. Ioh. 5. 35.


But the joy of the regenerate continues always one and the same. In process
of time, it rather increases then decreaseth. Their faith grows strong,
their hope more steadfast, their outward man decays, their inward man is
renewed daily: their graces increase, and they continually find more experience
of Gods favor toward them in Christ, and therefore their joy must needs be
greater and greater. The joy of the unregenerate is like to a violent motion,
which is swifter at the beginning then at the end: but the joy of the
regenerate, is like to a natural motion, which is as swift or swifter at the
end then at the beginning.

Besides this, the joy of the godly continues as well in adversity as in
prosperity: as well in persecution as in peace. David in the midst of his
afflictions could say, I rejoice in God because of his Ps. 56. 4. Psalm. 119.
50. Verse. 143.
word. I will not fear, what flesh can do unto me. It was his comfort in
trouble, the Lords promise did the^ quicke^ him: yea when trouble and anguish
was come upon him, the Lords commandments were his delight. Christ promised
such joy to the Apostles, as no man could take from them. Men did revile them,
Ioh. 16. 22. Act. 5. 41.
did imprison them, did whip and scourge them, and cruelly persecute them, yet
could they not take their joy from them. They rejoiced that they were accounted
Act. 16. 25.
worthy to suffer for Christ's sake, and did sing chearefully in prison, when
their feet were made fast in the stocks.

But it is not so with the unregenerate hypocrites. A little persecution for
the Gospel, will turn their joy into sorrow. Even these hearers who in the
beginning of this verse, are said to receive the word with joy; in the latter
end of it, are said in the time of tentation to fall away. Seeing then there is
such difference of joy, do not content your selves with such a joy as may be
found in the unregenerate, but seek for such joy as is peculiar to Gods Saints.

2. The second properties in these hearers is this, they have no roots. Not as
if they had no roots at all, for then they should not grow at all: they could
not be said to fall away in time of tentation, they would presently wither away
before tentation did come: but the meaning is, that they have no deep roots,
they have no such roots as will feed them, and make them able to yield fruit:
therefore are they resembled to rockie and stony ground which lacks moisture,
and will neither suffer corn sown in it, to take any deep rooting, nor to
prosper long. Rocks and great stones are oftentimes hid in the ground, and
covered over with earth: And therefore the land there, is soft and moist above,
but hard and dry below. And the corn sown there, may sprout and grow for a
while, but not long, if heat and drought do come, it will be parched and
wither away for lack of moisture. Such is the case of some hearers, their
hearts being mollified in part somewhat soft above, but very hard below toward
the bottom, will not suffer the word to take any deep rooting in them. It may
enter into their hearts, yet it cannot pearce into the bottom of them. It may
be some rooting, yet very ebb and shallow. It may prosper for a while, and
they make some profession of it, yet not long. And in regard hereof, they
become unprofitable hearers. So as from hence we may observe a double danger
and inconvenience, of an heart that is not thoroughly mollified to the bottom:
It both hinders the rooting of the word, and also the fruitfulnes of it.

1. It hinders the rooting of the word, so as it cannot possibly go deep
enough, the word should descend to the bottom of the heart, and there take
rooting, and be continually nourished with the moisture of it; but it cannot
descend so far, unless it be thoroughly mollified. Not only they whose hearts
are altogether hard, as was the heart of Pharaoh, when he heard Moses and Aaron;
and the Scribes and Pharisees when they heard Christ: but also they whose hearts
are softened only in part, are unprofitable hearers: As not only those rocks
which be bare on the top, and altogether hard, and have no manner of soil and
moisture above, but likewise those which be covered with a little moisture and
earth above, but not much, are unfit to receive seed. The one will not receive
the seed at all, nor suffer it to sprout, or shoot forth a blade; the other
will cause it to sproute and shoot forth a blade, but never to bear a ripe
ear.

So they who have hearts altogether hardened, will not hear, or at least not
receive the word of God at all into any part of their hearts, but those who
have hearts partly soft, and partly hard, may receive the word, and retain it
for a time, but will never bring forth the fruits of it. Wherefore the holy
Ghost says in the Psalms, and it is applied by the Apostle, to the hearers
Psalm. 95. 7. 8. Heb. 3. 7.
of the Gospel, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
Because the hard hearted can never hear the word of God, so reverently and
effectually as they ought to do: the Lord bids us not to harden, but to
soften our hearts, if we will hear his voice. The harder the heart is, the
more unprofitable shall be the hearing: the softer the heart is, the more
profitable shall the hearing be.

Again, this hardness will cause men to deny the word in time of tentation. The
moisture and softnes above, is the cause of receiving the word with joy, and
believing for a time: but the hardness and dryness below, is the cause of
reuolting afterward.

When Gods hand was heavy on Pharoh, he somewhat relented, humbled himself,
and confessed his sin, but as soon as it was removed, he returned with the
dog to his vomit, and became as obstinate as ever he was before. So if a man's
heart be mollified only in part, he may relent while he hears the word, and
may embrace it with peace, but in time of persecution, may grow as hard as ever
he was before: even as iron is soft, in some measure, while it is in the fire,
but becomes hard again when it is cold.

Let us not therefore content our selves with an upper softening, but see that
our hearts be softened to the very bottom, that they may melt like wax at the
fire, as good king Iosiahs heart did, when he heard the law read. I 2. King.
22. 19.
know that none of our hearts are so soft as they should be. But if thou
feel thine own hardness, do mislike it, desire earnestly that it may be
more and more mollified, and do use all good means for the further
mollifying of it: thy heart either is already, or shall be within a while, so
softened, as it may receive the word profitably to thy salvation. If Goats
blood being warm, can soften the hard Adamant, doubt not but the blood of
Christ can sufficiently Cyprtan. de dupl. mart.
mollify thy heart, though it were as hard as a rock.

If thou pray earnestly unto God, to take away the stony heart of thy body,
Ezekiel. 36. 26.
and to give thee an heart of flesh, be assured that he will perform it,
seeing he has promised it by his holy Prophet.

3. Let us now come to the third property of these hearers. They believe for a
time. Matthew and Mark say, they endure for a season, that, is they endure in
their faith but a while. They do believe, yet not long. But it is to be
considered what kind of faith this is. Though the Papists teach that there See
postscript. Sect. 4. and Sect. 5. and Sect. 6.
is but only one kind of faith, yet may we find many several and distinct
kinds thereof in the holy scriptures. There be four kinds of faith.

One is proper and peculiar to Gods elect, and to the regenerate.

The rest are common both to the elect and the reprobate.

That which is proper and peculiar See postscript. Sect. 7. and Sect. 8.
to the elect, is a true justifying faith, whereby a man does apprehend and
apply to himself, all the promises of God in Christ, and all the merits of
Christ, for the pardon of his sin, and the salvation of his soul. This is
called by S. Paul, the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1. 1.
because only they, and all they be endued with it.

And therefore it is said, that as many Act. 13. 48.
as were ordained to eternal life, believed. Though all of them do not
receive it at the same time, but some sooner, some later, yet is there not any
of the Elect, but at one time or other, they do receive it.

This is called an unfeigned faith, or a 1. Tim. 1. 5. (...)
faith without dissimulation or hypocrisy, because it is not counterfaited,
and is a faith in deed and in truth: and is seated not in the tongues or the
head, but in the bottom of the heart.

This faith is said to purify the heart, Act. 15. 9. Revel. 13. 10.
and is called the faith of the Saints, because none have it, but those who be
sanctified.

By this faith are we now justified without the works of the law, and by this,
must we be saved as the Apostle Romans 3. 28. Ephesians. 2. 8.
proves at large in his Epistles. But this is not the faith here spoken of.

Again, there be other kinds of faith, which be common both to the Sea
postscript. Sect. 9. (...). Cor. 13. 2.
Elect and reprobate. And these are either extraordinary or ordinary.

Extraordinary, as the faith of working miracles, whereof the Apostle
speaks, saying; If I had all faith, sothat I could remove mountains, and had
not love, I were nothing. Judas the child of perdition had this faith, as well
as the rest of the Apostles, for he wrought miracles as well as they.

And many shall say to Christ, have not we in thy name cast out devils, and by
thy name done many great miracles? to whom he shall answer, I never knew you,
depart from me, ye workers Math. 7. 22.
of iniquity.

This was extraordinary, given to some few, at the first preaching of the
Gospel, but has ceased long ago.

The ordinary kinds of faith, which may be found in the reprobate, are two in
number. The one is called an See postscript. Sect: 10. and Sect: 11.
hystoricall, the other a temporary faith. The one I say is called an
hystoricall faith: or a dogmaticall, because it is a bare knowledge, and
acknowledgment of the history of the scriptures, and of the things written
therein, concerning God, his works, his promises, and concerning Christ, his
merits and benefits: without any apprehension of the things known and
acknowledged. This is the faith Ioh. 5. 46. 47. Act. 26. 27. Ioh. 1. 1. August.
de temp. sermon. 181. Credere vera esse quae loquitur, multi and mali possunt,
August. ibid. Iam. 2. 19.
whereby men believe Moses and his writings. This is the faith which Paul would
needs fasten on Agrippa, to believe the Prophets. This is not fides qua
cridimus in deum, sed qua credimus deo, id est credere vera esse quae loquitur.
It is not the faith whereby we believe in God, but the faith whereby we believe
God; that is, whereby we believe all things to be true which he speaks. And
so differs very much from a justifying faith. This faith is found in the
unregenerate. They may believe all things to be true, which are written, though
they little regard them: yea this faith is in the deuells: for they believe and
tremble, as James teaches.

And therefore those Atheists, those profane and obstinate scoffers against
Qui non ^redunt, peiores sunt quam daemonis, ad huc, nec dae mones imitantur,
August. in epist. Ioh. tract: (...). See postscript. Sect: 12.
religion, which will not believe the scriptures, nor acknowledge the truth of
the things therein revealed, are worse then the devils. And if they be worse
then devils of hell, they must needs be far from entering into heaven.

The other kind of common faith, is termed a temporary faith, which is a
certain ape of justifying faith, yet is not the same, for although it go some
degrees beyond an historical faith, yet it comes short of a justifying faith,
not only in regard of sincerity, and manner of apprehension, but also in
regard of the efficacy in internal and external acts, and in regard of the
time of continuance.

This is called a temporary faith, not only for distinction sake, to put a
difference betwixt it and other kinds, but also because it continues but for a
time as appears by this place. For this is the faith here spoken of. And
although some Papists laugh at the very name which we give it, as if it were a
new coined term, yet you see it is grounded on this text. And they might also
have seen it taught by others, if either they had read the writings of the
ancient, or their malice against us, had not blinded their eyes. Augustine
August. de verarelig. cap. 50. Bernard. paru. sermon. ser. 1. fine. and epist.
42. ad Henr. Scnon archiepiscop. to 2. col. 63.
gives the title: and Bernard does not only give it the like title, in calling
it sides ficta, and comparing it to earthen vessels that are easily broken,
but likewise distinguishes it from the dead faith which is without good
works: and from the tried faith, which endures to the end. And also
describes it at large, by the very words of this my text.

This faith was in those Jews, who by the sight of Christ's miracles at
Jerusalem, believed in him. They are said Ioh. 2. 23. 24. Non curabat eorum
verba, nec mouebatur eorum applausu, vt qui little feru^rem mo^ refrigeseere
c^gnoscebat. Sciebat quod non adhaererent sibi constanter, nec erat cor eorum
rectum cu^ eo. Ferus in Ioh. 2. Act. 8. 13. Act. ^. 21. 23.
to believe in his name, and so doubt were persuaded, and did acknowledge that
he was the Messiah to come: yet Jesus did commit himself unto them, because he
know them all, and what was in them. If he had seen a sound and permanent
faith in them, no doubt he would have trusted them, but because he saw their
faith was neither sound nor constant, he would not trust them, he foresaw that
for all their present profession, they might forsake him afterward as the
Capernaites did.

The faith also was in Simon Magus, who though before he had been a notorious
sorcerer, yet hearing Philip preach, did believe, and was baptized, and
continued with Philip, as a professor of the Gospel, and wondered when he saw
the great miracles which were wrought, yet when he would afterward have bought
the gifts of the holy Ghost for money, and have made a merchandise of them;
Peter told him that he had neither part nor fellowship in that business, that
his heart was not right in the sight of God, that he was in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And after that (if we may Epiphan.
cont. haeres. lib. 1. to 2. haeres. 21. Eusebius. hist. ^. 14. Niceph. 2. 36.
give credit to humane writings and Ecclesiastical hystories) he became a
sorcerer again, and an open enemy to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, and
in a fearful manner died at Rome.

This faith was in Judas one of the twelve, he understood the mystery of the
Gospel, professed himself an Apostle of Christ, preached the Gospel as well
as other Apostles, and for a long time was of honest behavior, yet Christ
called him a devil, and the Ioh. 6. 70. Ioh. 17. 12.
child of perdition: Afterward he betrayed his Master for money, and then
hanged himself through desperation.

This faith was also in those who fell into the unrecoverable sin against the
holy Ghost, for they were enlightened, had a taste of the heavenly gift, were
partakers of the holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of God, and Heb. 6. 4.
5.
of the powers of the world to come. And yet they so fell away, as they could
not be renewed by repentance, did crucify again the son of God, and made a
mock of him. And this faith have many others, who hear the word acknowledge
the truth of it, hope to be saved by it, make prosession of it, live in outward
obedience, and receive the Sacraments, and yet in time of persecution, prove
Apostataes.

But that you may the better discern the nature of this faith, I will note the
several degrees of it, for thereby you may clearly see how far it does
agree with an historical and a justifying faith, and how far it does differ
from them both. There be six degrees of it.

1. The first degree is illumination and knowledge. These believers have a
knowledge of Gods word, especially in the chiefest points of Gods will and
worship: in the fundamental points of man's redemption, and in the most
necessary points of man's duty. Judas could not have been a Preacher of the
Gospel, unless he had known these things: Christ would not have sent him to
teach these things to others, if him self had been ignorant of them. Those
which fell away to the fearful sin against the holy Ghost, were before
enlightened. Unless men know the truth, they cannot believe it. How shall they
believe except they have heard? And herein this faith agrees both with an
historical and a justifying faith. Christ said of the Apostles; They have
known Ioh. 17. 8.
surely that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou have sent me.
Knowledge is the first step and degree to each kind of faith. And therefore
those who be ignorant of the principles of Religion, come so far short of a
true saving and justifying faith, that as yet they have not attained to an
hystoricall or temporary faith.

2. The second degree is an assent to the truth of the Gospel. They are
infallibly persuaded that the whole doctrine of the Gospel is true, and every
part of it; and that it teaches us the right way to heaven: and that all
things therein contained, shall certainly be accomplished; both for the
condemnation of unbelievers, and for the salvation of believers. In regard
hereof Christ says; He that receives his testimony, has sealed Ioh. 3. 33.
Romans 7. 16
that God is true. As Paul said; I consent to the Law that it is good. So this
believer will say; I consent to the Gospel that it is good. Yea, he will avouch
with the same Apostle; This is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
and worthy by all means to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners. Herein also this faith agrees with an hystoricall and a
justifying faith. And therefore those who in their hearts will not assent to the
truth of the gospel, are mere Infidels: though they live in the Church, yet
they have no faith at al.

3. A third degree is, that he has a desire in his heart of the pardon of his
sin, and of the salvation of his soul, through the merey of God, and merits of
Christ. Even as Balaam desired to dye the death Number. 23. 10.
of the righteous: and that his last end might be like unto his, though he had
no care to live the life of the righteous, nor prepare himself for death, as
the righteous man does. And as the people of the Jews, who followed Christ
from place to place, when they hard him speak of the bread which comes from
heaven, Ioh. 6. 34.
and gives life to the world, desired him evermore to give that bread. And yet
many of them afterward fell from him. Yea moreover, they which have this faith,
may not only have this desire in their hearts, but may also express it by
prayer to God Almighty, and by using the means of salvation. They may seek to
enter in at the straight gate, and shall not be able. As Christ says many Luke
13. 24.
shall do. Herein they go beyond those that have only an hystoricall says:
for many have it, yet contemn Christ and his merits, never seek for salvation
by him, rather fear him then love him: and with the Devils, believe and
tremble. Yet herein they come short of them who have a justifying faith: for
their desire is not so earnest, nor so constant, nor so effectual. Not so
earnest; for the desire of the elect is vehement and very earnest: set forth
by hungring and thirsting, which are vehement and strong appetites in them that
have long wanted meat and drink: yea, the strongest desires that can be found
in man: but these men have a desire in a lesser measure. Neither is their
desire so constant: for it comes but by fits, and may soon be gone again,
like to lightning, which is a sudden flash, and soon gone. But the desire of
the other, is like the light of the Sun, which is permanent. Their desire may
be quenched, before they have fully obtained the thing desired: but the desire
of the other can never be satisfied, till they be assured that they have gotten
the thing they wanted. Nor yet is it so effectual in using the means of
salvation, with such care, diligence, painfulness, and constancy. The one
sort think no pains too great, no labor too long: the other think less will
serve the turn; and therefore leave off, or lessen their labor in using the
means, before they have gotten saving grace for their souls.

4. The fourth degree is this: They may have an apprehension of Christ and his
benefits, an inward feeling of some grace, and a persuasion of Gods favor in
Christ. So they are said to taste of the heavenly gift, and to taste of the
good word of God, and to be partakers Heb. 6. 4.
of the holy Ghost, as was showed before. Which words must needs import a
particular apprehension, and an inward cense of some good received, and some
favor expected. As some of the Israelites tasted of the fruits of the Land of
Canaan, did thereby perceive what a good Land it was, and conceived some hope
of enjoying it; and yet never enjoyed the Land, but perished in the
wilderness. So these believers may have a taste of heavenly gifts, and an hope
of enjoying everlasting glory, and yet perish in the end. And indeed these
believers could not have received the word with such joy as was spoken of
before, unless they had an apprehension of Gods favor, and some sense of
grace in their hearts. Yet herein do they greatly differ from the regenerate.
1. In the seat, and so in the synceritie of these graces; for these believers
hearts are as stony ground, they cannot receive the word into the bottom of
their hearts, nor suffer the roots of it to go deep enough; and so their
faith and graces are not rooted in the bottom of the heart, but stick in the
superficies or upper part of it. All things in them are superficial, and they
full of hypocrisy. Whereas the justifying faith, and the saving graces of the
regenerate, are like a solid body, having three dimensions, length, breadth
and depth; and do possess the deepest and lowest part of the heart. 2. In the
reason and ground of this their apprehension. And so it is nothing but vain
presumption: for it is built upon false and mistaken grounds: they take the
shadow for the substance; do ouerweene their own graces, and take their faith
to be unfeigned, their repentance to be sound, and their regeneration to be
effectual: when indeed they are not. And so they are like unto beggars, who
in their sleep dream that they are become very rich. 3. In the measure: and
therefore their apprehension of heavenly things, is compared to tasting,
because the heart does as it were, but with the tip of the tongue, lightly
taste these spiritual things, and does not feed on them. Look what difference
there is betwixt Cooks and others that taste meat before it be served up to
the table, and the guests that eat the same at the table: the same difference
there is betwixt the vngenerate and the regenerate, touching the measure of
grace which they receive. Though the regenerate do here receive but the first
fruits of the spirit, do know in part, and prophecy in part, and believe in
part, and find no perfection in themselves; yet have they a greater measure
then the unregenerate. 4. In the sense and judgment of their want. The one
wants more, and yet does less discern his want: like the Angel of Laodicea,
who thought he was Revel. 3. 17.
rich, when he was poor, miserable and naked. The other wants less, and
does better discern his want: and therefore will say with that man in the
Gospel; I Mar. 9. 24. Luke 17 5.
do believe, Lord help my unbelief. And with the Apostles; Lord increase our
faith. Yea, the one like a Pharisie, is proud of that which he thinks he
has; the other is humbled, by knowing what he wants. The one contenteth
himself with that which he has, grows secure, and labors not to better
his estate: the other strives to grow in grace, as he grows in years.

5. The fifth degree of this temporary faith, is outward profession of the
Gospel. A man may have an hystoricall or dogmaticall faith, yet never make
profession of it. As many of the chief Ioh. 12. 42.
Rulers among the Jews believed in Christ; but because of the Pharisees did
not confess him. But they who have this temporary faith, do profess Christ as
long as they keep it. So did Judas: he called Christ his Master, did follow
him, was content to acknowledge himself to be one of his Apostles, and at his
sending, to go abroad to preach the Gospel. So did Simon Magus: he was
baptized into the Name of Christ, and continued with Philip as a Disciple of
Mat. 22. 14.
Christ. And so do all those, who be called, and not chosen.

6. The last degree of this temporary faith, is outward obedience unto the
Gospel. This was likewise in Judas. His carriage was so honest among the
Apostles, all the time of Christ's passion, that when Christ told them, that one
of Mat. 26. 22.
them should betray him, they did not suspect him any more then any of the
rest: yea, every one did as much suspect Mar. 14. 19. Ioh. 13 24.
him self as Judas: and therefore every one said; Master is it I? Yea, they
caused John, who then leaned on Jesus br^st, to ask him who it was. And Christ
did manifest him, by giving him a soppe, before they could tell who it was. And
so this faith does far excel that dead faith, whereof S. James speaks,
which Iam. 4.
is destitute of good works. Yet even in this respect is it much inferior to a
true justifying faith. In regard of outward obedience, they differ three ways.

1. In the cause or fountain whence it proceeds. The obedience of the one
proceeds from an heart which has the corruption of it suppressed and
restrained, but not mortifyed: and the affections builded, but not changed by
regeneration. But the obedience of the other, proceeds from a pure heart and a
good conscience: the corruption whereof is not only repressed and kept under,
but likewise mortifyed: and the affections not only brydeled, but also changed
by regeneration. Yea, and the man himself is in Christ become a new creature.

2. In the measure: for the one may yield obedience in many things, yet seldom
in all things: he usually takes liberty to live in some one gross sin or
other, either openly or secretly. As Mar. 6. 20.
Herod did many things which John Baptist taught him, yet continued still his
whoredom: he would not put away his brothers wife, though he was taught so to
do. But the other is careful to avoyde Mat. 14. 4.
all manner of sins whatsoever, and to perform all duties alike; knowing
that if he fail in one point, he is guilty of all. And though sometime he
Iam. 2. 10
fall by infirmity, yet he lies not long, he rises again by repentance.

3. In the continuance: for the one continues not long in his innocence; at
last by one occasion or other, his corruption will break forth, and carry him
to some gross sin or damnable apostacy. Judas for a while lived ciuilly,
but at last was drawn through covetousness to betray his Master. Simon Magus
for covetousness would have bought and sold the gifts of the holy Ghost: and
being reproved for that fault, became a notorious apostate. And Hos. 6. 4.
therefore the righteousness of such, is fitly resembled to the morning deaw,
which is dried up and gone, as soon as the Sun ascends on high.

But the other perseuereth in his uprightness unto the end: he has a good
beginning and a good ending. Even as Job, who neither by the suggestions of
Satan, nor by the loss of his goods, nor death of his children, nor diseases
of his body, nor advise of his wife, nor uncharitable censures of his friends,
could be induced to sin against God.

Now then, seeing hereby you may discern what this faith is, and how it
differs from a saving faith; examine yourselues of your faith, to see whether
it be this or no: and do not content your selves with such a faith as is not
able to save your souls. Above all things, see that you have a special
application and inward renouation; for therein consists the very life and
soul of saving faith.

As you have seen the nature and degrees of this faith, so now see the
continuance: for it is here said; They believe for a time. A while they receive
this faith, not always: they lose it in the end. As they are hypocrites, for
want of synceritie in the bottom of their hearts; so likewise are they
temporizers, for want of continuance in their courses. The Rhemistes in their
marginall notes on these words, would have this to be observed against the
heretics (as it pleases them to term us,) that say, Faith once had cannot be
lost: and that he which now has not faith, never had. Bellarmine and other
Papists allege De iustificat. lib. 3. c. 14. Staplet. prompt. in fer. 4.
post. dom. pasch.
this place, to prove, that true faith once had, may be quite lost.

But we answer, that the faith whereof Christ here speaks, may be quite
lost, so as a man which once had it, may want it afterward: yet Christ does not
here speak of the true justifying faith of Gods elect, but of the temporary
faith, which may be in the reprobate: as has been showed before. And See
postscript. Sect. 13.
this is apparent out of the words of the text: For the persons who thus
believe, are compared to stony ground, who by reason of the hardness of their
hearts, are no more able to bring forth fruit, then stony ground is able to
yield a good croppe of corn. God forbid that we should imagine that any of
the elect in the state of grace, should be no better then these. In the 15.
verse Christ speaks of them; resembles them to good ground, and says they
hear the word with a good and honest heart, do keep it, and bring forth fruit
with patience. Again, the persons here spoken of are said to want roots, and
so their graces are like corn sown on the top of a rock, which wants depth
of earth to send down and feed the roots. Now dare they say that true
justifying faith wants roots? or is it in any man's heart where it has
nothing to grow upon? Does not the Apostle teach, that they in whose hearts
Ephesians. 3* 17.
Christ does dwell by faith, are rooted and grounded in love. And that they who
have received Christ Jesus the Lord, are rooted and built in him, and
stablished in the faith. True justifying faith is the root of all virtues, on
which they grow, and from Laudo fructum bonioperis, sed in fide agnosco
radicem. Praefat. in enarr. Psalm. 31. Uide August. prefat. in Psa. 139. Col. 2.
5. Romans 11. 29. De corrept. et great. c. 12. Romans 8. 30. Romans 9. 33.
which they receive life, nourishment, and efficacy. Augustine said of Abraham's
offering of his son; I commend the fruit of the good work; but I acknowledge
the root in faith. And shall we then say that it has no roots it self?
Certain it is, that a true justifying faith once had, can never be lost: for
it is called a steadfast faith in Jesus Christ. It belongs to that calling,
and is one of those gifts of God which are without repentance. And so it has
been reckoned long a^oe by that ancient Father Augustine, and thereby proved
never to fail. By this faith we are justified, as the Apostle plainly and
often teaches: and our adversaries cannot deny, though they hold that we are
not justified by it alone. Now if we be justified, we shall also be glorified.
Yea whosoever thus believes, shall not be confounded. The Saints do keep
this faith in the hottest persecution that can befall them. And therefore in
describing the cruel tyranny, and grievous persecution, under the great
beast which opened his mouth to blaspheme GOD and his Tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven, and made war against the Saints, led many into
captivity, and killed many with the sword. The holy Ghost breaks forth into
these speeches; Here is the patience, and Revel. 13. 10.
the faith of the Saints: because the Saints do not loose but keep and
express their patience and faith in such afflictions. Neither can Satan by
his tentations deprive them of faith: as appears in the example of Peter.
Satan des^red to winnow him as wheat: yet for his comfort, Christ told him
that he had prayed for him, that his faith might not Luke 22. 32. Ioh. 11. 43.
See postscript. Sect. 14.
fail. Christ's prayer was not in vain. He at another time acknowledged to
his Father, that he heard him always. And therefore though Peter did
afterward fall most grievously in denying his Master, and that with an
oathe, and with cursing himself: yet did he not loose his faith. It remained
in his heart, though he did not profess it with his mouth. Neither could this
be a singular prerogative to Peter: for Christ has as well prayed for others
as for him: not only for all the Apostles, but likewise for all those that
should believe in him Ioh. 17. 20. Qui fecit bonos* faciet perseuerare in bono.
August. de perseuerant. sanct. cap. 12.
through their word. And therefore in the midst of all afflictions and
tentations, they shall be kept constant in faith. He who gave them faith, will
make them to continue their faith: as he who made them good, will make them
continue in goodness. He is so faithful, that he will not suffer them to be
tempted above that which they be able to bear, but will give them the issue
with the tentation. Their faith may be assaulted, but not destroyed; weakened,
but not wasted; eccl^psed, but not extinguished: hid and covered as the Sun
under a cloud, and fire raked under the ashes, but not abolished. The act of
it may be lost for a time, but not the habit: for if their faith may fail,
and they perish, why did the Apostle say, that after they believed, they were
sealed with the holy spirit Ephesians. (...). 13.
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the possession purchased by Christ? And how is it true, that they are kept by
the power of God through 1. Pet. 1. 5.
faith unto salvation?

And if justifying faith may not be lost, then it is certain, that if any fall
away, and utterly loose their faith, they never had it. Diverse of Christ's
Disciples did seem to believe in him, yet afterward forsook him: and
thereupon he said to them, there are some of you that believe not. And the
Evangelist adds a reason, for Ioh. 6. 64. So teaches Maldonatus in Ioh.
(...). 6. out of Augustine and Beda.
Jesus knew from the beginning which they were that believed not, and who
should betray him. As if there were some of his Disciples that believed, and
some believed not, namely those that took offense at his doctrine, and
forsook him; as also Judas the traitor. Even while they followed Christ, they
wanted this faith. Does not S. John say of reuolters, they went out from us,
because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
should have continued with us. Who then do fall away from the Church, but
only those, who indeed were never of the Church: were in it, but not of it? And
who are they that live in the Church and be not of it? but those that want a
true justifying faith, for by it we are made members of Christ, and
incorporated into his mystical body, the Church.

But as for the faith spoken of in this my text, it may be lost, yea it is of
such a nature, that seldom it is kept to the end of a man's life. Inward
tentation by the devil, or outward persecution by men, may rob the owners of
it.

It is like to corn growing in the house top: which may flourish for a while
in the spring time, but in heat and drought of summer will wither away. And
herein consists a maine difference betwixt justifying, and temporary faith:
the one is perpetual, the other for a time. And no marvel though it continue
not long, seeing it is built on temporary causes, namely these three.

1. It arises from curiosity, for these believers will hear, and learn,
receive and profess the Gospel for the newnes of it. As the Jews rejoiced
for a ^me in John's light, especially for the novelty (...). 5. 35.
of it. And as the Athenians, would hear Paul preach, and would know the
meaning of his doctrine, because as they Act. 17. 20. 21. Sunt quiseire volu^t,
^o ta^tum fine, vt sciant, and turpis curiositas est: In cantis. sermon. 34.
said, he brought certain strange things to their ears. And they gave
themselves to nothing but to tell and hear some news. Bernard noted diverse
sorts of persons who desired knowledge of heavenly matters, and several ends
for which they desired it. And the first was of the^, who desired knowledge
only for this end, that they might know, and this is foul curiosity.

Now you know that a wonder lasts not long. They who have curious heads and
itching ears after novelty, will not long like the same thing, but as the
Israelites at the first liked their Manna, because it was a strange kind of
meat, but afterward loathed it, when they had been a while fed with it. So
these men at the first hearing of the Gospel, for the strangenes of the
doctrine, may admire it, receive it with joy, and profess the faith thereof,
and yet afterward wax weary of it.

2. It often arises from pride and vaineglory: Because others do condemn the
enemies of the Gospel, but do like and love; honor and commend those that
believe it, and profess it, and live accordingly: they to get credit and
honor among men, will profess the faith of Christ, and submit themselves to
his holy Gospel. Eue^ as the Pharisees Math. 6,
did fast and pray, and give alms, to be Scire volu^t vtsciantur ipsi, and
turpis venitas est. (...).
seen and praised of men. These persons as Bernard said, desire knowledge,
that themselves may be known: and this is foolish vanity, which men cannot
escape, the girding taunt of the scoffing Satyricke. Scire tum nihil est, nisi
te scire hoc, sciat alter.

It does thee naught avail to know, unless thy knowledge others know.

Those that embrace and profess religion for this end, cannot continue
constant. If the time should come, that true Christians should be reviled, and
evil spoken of, should be made as the 1. Cor. 4. 13.
filth of the world, and the ofscouring of all things as the Apostles were:
these men would renounce their faith.

3. It often proceeds from covetousness: for the getting and keeping of wealth
and riches, that they may clime up to high preferment in the world. As
appears in those, who sought out Christ, and followed him from place to
place, not so much for the miracles which they had seen, and doctrine which
they had heard: as for the loaves Ioh. 6. 26.
whereof they had eaten, and wherewith Scire v^lunt vt scientiam suam vendant,
and turpis quas^us est: ibid.
they were filled. There be others says Bernard, who deserve knowledge, that
they may sell it for money, for honor, and this is filthy lucre. There be
other two ends, whercat some do aim, for some desire knowledge, that they may
edify others, and this is charity: some desire knowledge, that themselves may
be edified: and this is wisdom. And these are to be allowed, but all other
ends are to be condemned. Those that (...) Ad Trall. epist. 2.
profess Christ for worldly profit, are not Christians, but merchants of
Christ, as Ignatius terms them: And will profess his Gospel, no longer
then it may stand with worldly profit. As may be seen in Demas: who for a
time, was such a professor of the faith, that S. Paul reckoned him in the
Cathologue of the Saints, which saluted the Colossians. Coloss: 4. 14. 2. Tim.
4. 10.
Yet Paul afterward thus wrote of him, Demas has forsaken me, and has
embraced this present world. As an house will fall, if the foundation be
removed, and fire will go out of it self, if fuel be withdrawn: so these
men's faith will fail, if the Gospel bring no gain but loss.

And seeing those temporizing professors have these causes propounded to
themselves, in hearing and receiving the word, in believing and professing it
with joy, their faith cannot be sincere, for nothing is sincerely done, unless
it be done for Gods glory. And if it be not sincere, it cannot be sound and
firm. And both ways it differs from justifying faith, for as it does all
things of sincerity, for God himself, for Christ himself, for the spiritual
and heavenly benefits of Christ, as far as humane infirmity will permit: so
is it firm and constant, being built on such grounds as will not shrink.

Do not therefore content your selves with this temporary faith, but seek for
that which will abide for ever: as well in persecution as in peace; as well in
time of tentation, as out of tentation; for if your faith fail, Satan will
prevail Revel. 2. 10. Luke 10. 42.
against you; your hope is gone, you loose the favor of God, and the salvation
of your own souls: you must be faithful unto death, if you will receive the
Crown of life. Did not Christ commend Mary, for choosing the good part, which
should never be taken away from her? Imitate her in your choice of faith. The
one will fail you, when you stand in most need of it. As in the time of
tentation, in the time of affliction, and at the hour of death. But the other
will abide with you to comfort and strengthen you at all seasons, and against
all the enemies of your salvation. If once you get it, whether you live long,
or die soon, whether you be assaulted with many suggestions, or be free from
tentation; whether you pass away your days in peace, or under the cross, you
shall be able at your last end, to say to the great comfort of your souls, with
the Apostle, I have fought a 2. Tim. 4. 8.
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge,
shall give unto me (...) that day.

4. The fourth and last property of these hearers, is their reuolting, which
is here set forth by the time or occasion, as also by the manner of it.

First by the time and occasion, that is the time of tentation. There is a
double tentation that does befall men, the one is spiritual and inward: the
other is corporal and outward.

The spiritual and inward tentation Math. 4. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. 1. Cor. 7. 5.
Math. 6. 13. Iam. 1. 2. (...). Pet. 16.
is from the devil. And therefore he is often called the tempter: and is said
to tempt us. And his suggestions and practices against us are called tentations.

The corporal and outward tentation is from men, who do afflict us, who do
hurt and persecute us. And so all outward crosses, corporal afflictions, and
bloody persecutions, are called tentations: that is trialls, because they try
what men are, whether dissembling hypocrites, or sincere Christians; whether
their faith be fained or unfeigned: wavering or steadfast, little or great.

And of this tentation, must this place Math. 13. 21. Mar. 4. 17.
be understood: for in Matthew and Mark, it is called tribulation and
persecution for the word. Christ foresaw, that the hearers and professors of
the Gospel, should afterward be graciously persecuted: he therefore foretold
what it should work in this kind of hearers, it would cause them to revolt.

For the manner of it, it is said in Matthew and Mark, they are offended; and
that by and by, and immediately: but here they go away, they depart, will not
stand to it, as men of courage but shrink and fall away. And this comes to
pass by reason of their own hardness, as this parable declares: for as stony
grounds mingled with some earth, are commonly hot, and will cause the corn
cast into them, to sprout and come up very speedily: but will not suffer the
roots to go any reasonable depth into the earth, there to be fed with
moisture: therefore in the dry season of summer, the blade of the corn will
wither, together with the roots. So these men, though they have some good
motions and affections in their hearts, and receive the word with chearefulnes,
and seem to be very forward for a time, yet in time of persecution, all their
goodness will be dried up: they will loose their first love to the word, and
fall from their former profession. They never did cleave to Christ, with their
whole hearts, and therefore are more easily drawn away. Men may fall away from
Faith, either by error and Heresy, or by sin and wickedness. By error and
heresy: as did Hymeneus and Alexander, who made ship-wracke 1. Tim. 1. 19.
of Faith. As did Hymencus and Phyletus: who erred concerning the Truth:
Saying, that the Resurrection is already 2. Tim. 2. 18.
past, and did destroy the faith of many. As did Nicholas, whom for his
profession, was chosen for a Deacon, yet afterward became an Arch-hereticke;
Revel. 2. 6. 1. Tim. 4. 1.
first Founder of the heresies of the Ni^^laitanes.

And as those did, of whom Saint Paul prophesied, that in the later times Men
shall depart from the Faith, and give heed unto spirits of Errors, and
doctrines of Devils. And as those that in former Ages, fell from the Truth, to
the Heresies of Arrius, Pelagius, Nestorius, and other damnable Heretics. And
as those that in the days of Queen Mary, did fall from the truth of the
Gospel, formerly professed, to the Errors and Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

Again, men may fall away by sin and wickedness in their lives, as those who
put away a good Conscience. As those who begin in the spirit, but end in
the flesh. As those who turned back after Satan. As those who had escaped from
the filthiness of the world, 1. Tim. 5. 15. 2. Pet. 2. 20.
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, are yet tangled
again therein, and overcome: whose latter end is worse then the beginning.
Fulfilling the Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own Uomite, the Sow that
was washed, to the wallowing in the mire.

Now these do not fall away in part only, and for a time, as the Apostles did
at Christ's Passion, but wholly and perpetually.

This is a fearful falling away. Corporal relapses into natural diseases,
are not so dangerous to the body, as these relapses into error and sin, are
dangerous to the soul. For by them, men procure to themselves a double
punishment: Poenam damni, and poenam sensus; A punishment of loss. For they
loose the reward of their former profession and obedience.

If the Righteous forsake his righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousness shall be forgotten, and he shall die in his iniquity, says the
Lord. Likewise a punishment of sense, 2. Pet. 2. 21.
and that so grievous, as it had been better for them never to have known the
way of righteousness, the^ after they have known it, to turn away from the
holy commandment given unto them. By their backsliding, they more dishonor
God, and offend others, then if they never had made any profession at all. And
therefore their punishment shall be greater, then if they had never known the
Gospel.

Here then see the danger of persecution, it drives many from Christ: Such is
the disposition of some, as they will not suffer any thing for the Gospel:
they like and love it, when it brings peace and prosperity with it, but they
bid i^ farewell, when it brings persecution. Though Christ has suffered much
for them, yet will they not suffer any thing for him; they would feign reign
with him, but they will not suffer with him, nor for him.

And therefore if they be called to bear the cross, they will rather renounce
the Gospel, then bear the weight of it. But let them know, that if they deny
Christ or his word before men, he will deny them before his father in heaven:
he that sets his hand to the plough, and looks backward, is unfit for the
kingdom of God.

Let us arm our selves against this danger, that we may continue constant Gal.
6. 9.
in the day of trial. Let not any crosses make us weary of well doing,
knowing that in due season we shall reap if we faint not. And because
persecution can never harm us, if our hearts be good, let us take heed, as we
are exhorted by the Apostle, left there be in Heb. 3. 12. 13.
any of us, an evil heart, and unfaithful to depart away from the living God,
but exhort one another daily, lest any be hardened with the deceitfulnes of sin.

If any of your hearts be not yet mollified, so as the word of God cannot take
deep rooting in the bottom of them, troubles for the Gospel, can no sooner
befall you, then you will renounce it: but if your hearts be thoroughly
mollified, if the word take deep rooting and work justifying faith in you,
neither tribulation nor anguish, Romans 8. 35.
nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, shall
separate you from the love of Christ, but in all these things you shall be more
then conquerours.

And finally, if it be such an heinous offense, to fall away in time of
persecution, See Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 1 in Julian.
what shall we say of them, who fall away in time of peace? those do it by
compulsion, by force and violence; these of their own accord: those do it
half against their will, but these most willingly: those to save their own
goods, and preserve their lives; these to save neither, being in danger of
neither; those by constraint: these through contempt: Those among their
enemies, who were ready to hurt them, if they would not recant; these among
their friends who will help them, if they abode constant. Those in the field,
where Ante ^cie^ victi, sine congressione prostrate, Cypria^. de saps. Sect. 6.
they feared an overthrow: these in a la^d of peace, where they expected no
combat. These must needs be more faulty, and more inexcusable. Those subjects
who yield to the enemies through fear, and for safeguard of their lives, are
more favored and more easily pardoned; then they who being in no danger, did
willingly run to the enemies, and of their own accord join with them against
their lawful Prince. Oh then what favor can those expect at Gods hand, who in
these our happy days, and in this our peaceable land, do fall away from the
truth of the Gospel, to popery and profaneness? These are far worse then
dastardly cowards, for they yield not, till they see some danger; these yield,
before any danger appears. These are like Pro. 28. 1. Heb. 12. 4
those wicked ones, who fly when none pursues them. We should resist unto
blood, striving against sin. As Christ shed his blood for the salvation of
our souls, so should we be ready to shed our blood, for the maintenance of
his Gospel. How far are they from this, who fall away, before they saw any
enemies to resist? what hope can they have of mercy from Christ, who are so
easily turned from the sincerity of his Gospel, which they should defend with
their dearest blood? Think seriously of this, and take heed of declining in
such an happy Luke 17. 32 Fact^ est statua sal^s, vt cond^^t te. In P^al. 69.
fine.
season. Remember Lots wife, as Christ bids you. And consider that she for
looking back toward S^dome was turned into a pillar of salt, and that to
season us withal, as Augustine thought. Deceive not your selves, but know for
a certainty, that the hearing of the Gospel, will not further your salvation,
but rather aggrauate your condemnation, if you fail away from it, either in the
time of persecution, or in the time of peace.

Verse. 14. And that which fell among thorns, are they which have heard, and
after their departure are choked with cares, etc.


NOw follows the exposition of the third kind of ground, which notes unto us
a third kind of hearers. And those also are bad hearers. The ground is full of
thorns. There is some reasonable depth of soil, yet the seed, and the corn
sprouted, is choked by thorns and briars, that come up among it, so as it
yields no good crop at harvest. In like sort there be some hearers, whose
hearts are not so hard as the former, and who are not tried by tentation and
persecution as they we^e, whose hearts seem to be much moved, and deeply
pierced with the word, and live in such peaceable times, and places, that they
are never called to suffer for the word; and yet all is afterward marred by
corrupt affections, which are not yet mortified, but still live and reign in
their hearts. And so these hearers suffer much from both the former kinds.

The first sort were hindered in their fruitfulness by the Devil, who took
the word out of their hearts. The second sort were hindered by other me^, who
persecuted them for the Gospel. But this sort are hindered by their own
carnal and worldly lusts. They differ from the first kind, because those
understood not the word: but these understand it, and would have embraced and
obeyed it, but that it crossed their corrupt affections, which they could not
bridle. They differ from the second sort, because they fall away in time of
tribulation and persecution. These fall away in time of peace and prosperity:
those were urged by external means, coming from others: these are drawn
away by internal means, proceeding from themselves. Those were hindered in
their perseverance and fruitfulness, through the want of good: these through
the having of evil, even sinful lusts, and bad affections in their hearts,
which like thorns choke the word which they hear. Those renounced their
profession: these keep their profession, and yet are unfruitful. These
hearers are not all alike: for though the word be choked in them all, yet it
is not choked in all, by the same causes and means. In some it is choked by
worldly care: in others by the deceitfulnes of riches; and in the rest by
voluptuousness. And therefore touching these heare^s, we may observe some
things in general, which concern them all jointly together, and some things
in particular, which concern them severally. The things in general which
concern them all, are two: whereof, the one respects the time of their
choking: the other respects the causes of their choking.

1. The time of their choking: for it is said of them; That when they have
heard, Oi acousan tes kai poreuomenoi sumpni gontai.
and are departed, or gone their way, they are choked, etc. They are not
choked while they are in hearing, but rather afterward, when they are departed
from the Sermons, and go about their worldly affairs: then are they choked
by those things whereon their hearts were set. As thornie ground may have some
good moist mouldes, and depth of soil, and cause the seed sown in it to
sprout and come up, but afterward will not suffer it to prosper, the thorns in
time will choke it. So may a man hear the word, reuere^tly and attentively,
mark it carefully, and receive it willingly: yea, he may take it to be the
word of God indeed, and the only word that must save his soul: he may wish
that he were able to follow it, and have a purpose to follow it: and yet
afterward be hindered in the obedience of it, by the corruptions of their own
heart.

As Pharaoh was humbled while the hand of God was heavy upon him: but became as
hard as he was before, when it was removed. And as some are Sea sick while
they are on ye water, but well again when they come to land. And as the hardest
Metals are hot, soft, and pliable, while they are in the fire, but become
cold, hard, and stiff when they are taken out of the fire. So are some
hearers much moved while they are in the Church, and so long as they hear: and
yet afterward, when they are gone away, and betake themselves to their worldly
affairs, loose the efficacy of the word, and become transgressors of it.

These are unprofitable hearers, the word which they hear will not save their
souls. Men may often hear after this manner, and yet never come to heaven Do
not therefore content your selves with these present motions, while yo are in
hearing, but let them continue, and show their efficacy after you have heard,
and when occasion is offered in your lives. Let not the word only move your
affections, but also mortify them. And let it not only stir up your
affections, while it is hard, but direct them, and overrule them in your
conversation afterward. Let not any thing in the world, or any affections in
your own hearts, hinder your obedience to the word. You know that the S^nne,
who being commanded by his Father to work in his Vineyard, did promise Mat.
21. 30. 31.
and purpose to go, and went not: was condemned for not fulfilling the will of
his Father. And do you think that you shall be taken for dutiful children to
God Almighty, if while you hear his word, you love it, and like it, and
purpose to follow it: and yet afterward by some sinister occasions, be hindered
in the obedience of it? Know this, that God will never accept of good purposes,
without good performance; nor of good motions in your minds, without good
manners in your lives.

There be some covetous and voluptuous persons, far worse then these of whom
Christ here speaks: for these do hear, and receive the word willingly for
the present, they are choked afterward. But there be some covetous worldlings,
and voluptuous Epicures, who will not hear at all, or not with any patience.
They will not receive the seed at all, and do choke it as soon as they
receive it. Such were the Pharisees, Luke 16. 14.
who mocked Christ when he taxed their covetousness. Such were the Jews, who
would not hear the Law of the Lord, but said unto the Seers, See not: and
Isa. 30. 11 Micha. 2.
to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering
things unto us: Prophecy errors. Who would have none to be their Prophet, but
he that would lie falsely, and would prophecy to them of wine and strong
drink. And such be those in our days, who cannot endure to hear any thing
spoken, to curb them of their carnal pleasures, or abridge them of their
worldly profits: who rail against the Preacher, and hate him as Ahab did
Michaiah, and hear him with no more patience and liking, then the Jews heard
Stephen, when their Act. 7. 54.
hearts brast for anger, and when they gnashed at him with their teeth.

But if these hearers, who give reverent attention to the word when it is
delivered, have some good liking of it, and a purpose to obey it, and would
obey it, but that it does cross their pleasures and profits, are reckoned in
the number of unfruitful hearers. What may be thought of those that be worse,
who will not hear it, who will not believe it, who do mislike it? yea,
malign him that teaches any thing that is against their pleasures or profits,
and are ready to work him some mischief: Oh that these would consider their
estate, and remember how far they are from that profitable hearing which must
save their souls!

2. The second thing to be observed in general, respects the causes of their
choking, which are three in number; Cares of the world, riches and voluptuous
living. From all which together, we may learn, that noisome lusts, and bad
affections in the heart, do greatly hinder the fruitful hearing of Gods word.
Yea, though the heart be much moved with the word for a time, and be very like
to profit by hearing, and the hearer have a purpose to follow the word, yet
corrupt affections, of care, covetousness, and voluptuousness, will hinder the
fruitfulness of the word. As thorns are to ground that is sown, so are these
affections to the hearers of Gods word. You know, that although the Soil were
reasonable good of it self, yet if thorns grow among the corn, they will not
suffer the ground to yield any good croppe. So if hearers have indifferent
good minds of themselves (especially if some froward affections were
expelled:) yet so long as those affections remain in them, they will hinder
the grows of the word. And therefore Peter exhorts us; first, to lay aside
all malitious^es, and all guile, 1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
and dissimulation, and envy: and then, as newborn babes, to desire the
sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby. And James bids us Iam.
1. 21
lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of malitiousnes, and receive with
meeknes the ingrafted word, which is able to save our souls. If gross humors
abide in the stomach, they will not suffer it to digest the meat which is
eaten, but will make it rather to hurt, then to nourish the body. So if there
be froward and inordinate affections in your hearts, they will so hinder the
efficacy of the word, as it shall not profit you to the aluation of your
souls.

This should teach you, so often as Use.
you come to hear, to look unto your hearts, and to empty them of all wicked
affections remaining in them. As you are careful when you plow and sow your
fields, to rid up by the roots all thorns, briars, and bushes, left they
should hinder the corn; So be you careful to free your hearts from these
badde affections, when you come to hear. Christ biddeh you to be as wise Mat.
10. 16. Epiphan. contra haeres. haer. 37 Ambros. praefat in enarrat. Psalm. 37.
Bernard. de modo vivend. sermon. 28. Ier. 4. 4.
as Serpents. Now this is one point of the Serpents wisdom (as the learned
does teach;) That when he is thirsty, he goes from his hole to the water: yet
before he drink he casts up the poison which was near his throat. Imitate
him therein; If any poison of bad affections be found in your hearts, expel
them, lest they hinder the efficacy of the word. Yea, as the Prophet says;
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. Be circumcised to the
Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your hearts, that so you may hear, to
the profit and comfort of your souls

Let us now see in particular, and severally, what are the things, which like
thorns do choke the seed of the word: Three be here named; The first of
them is Care; and because there be two kinds of care, the one a godly and
spiritual care, to care for the things 1. Cor. 7. 32, 33.
of the Lord, how we may please him, and to care for the things of the soul,
how it may be saved. The other a worldly and carnal care, to care for the
things of the world, how to please men, and how to provide for our bodies in
this world. In the other Evangelists, Mat. 13. 22. Mar. 4. 19.
both in Matthew and Mark, they are called, for distinction sake, Cares of the
world. These cares are as thorns to choke the word in the hearers hearts:
They do oftentimes keep men from hearing at all. Martha was Luke 10. 40. 41,
careful to provide good fare for her guests, and troubled herself about many
things, when with her sister Mary she should rather have heard Christ's
doctrine. Those guests, who were invited to the wedding feast, made excuses,
Luke 14. 18.
that one had bought a Farm, and must needs go see it: another had bought 5.
yoke of Oxen, and must go prove them: another had married a Wife, and
therefore could not come. Worldly cares keep many from the Church, who would
not be absent if their worldly business did not draw them another way: yet
will not be present if their absence serve for their gain. So do these cares
make their hearing altogether unprofitable, even as thorns make the sown
ground unfruitful. Some have their hearts so exercised with thinking and
plotting of worldly matters, that they cannot attend to the word delivered.
Others having beaten their brains, and busied their heads before, fall to
sleep when they should hear. Others that be awake and listen, have no love
nor liking of that which is taught. The things of the world have so put their
mouths out of taste, as they can find no sweetness in the word.

Others attend, and seem to like all well for a time, yet afterward the cares
of the world enter into their heads and hearts, and drive the word out of
them, even as one nail drives out another. There may be in them for a time
some striving and struggling betwixt the world and the word: but the world
ouercomes in the end, and makes them no better, then if they had never heard.
Christ bad his Disciples take heed to themselves, least at any time their
hearts Luke 21. 34.
were oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and
least the last day should come on them at unawares. Because cares of the world
do oppress the heart, as well as surfeiting and drunkenness, and make us unfit
for his coming to Judgment. Our people are much oppressed with worldly cares:
they rise early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulnes: they
busy their heads, they beat their brains, they weary their bodies, they
break their sleep, they weaken their strength, they hinder their health, and
shorten their lives, with carking and caring, toyling and moyling about worldly
affairs: and this is one special cause why they hear so much, and profit so
little.

These then who would be profitable hearers, must before and after their
hearing, keep these cares out of their hearts. Let them remember the
exhortation given by Christ; Be not careful Mat. 6. 25.
for your life, what you shall eat, nor what you shall drink; nor for your
body, what raiment ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth then meat? and
the body then raiment? Which of you by taking care is able to add one cubit to
his stature?

It is not sufficient for you to free your minds from these cares while you
are in hearing, but likewise beware lest they entangle you afterward. Expel
them so soon as they enter into your minds, even as you will cut up thorns,
briars, and thistles, which you see spring up among the corn after it is
sown. If they be in your hearts before you hear, they will keep you from
attending, from understanding, or else from affecting that which you hear. And
if they enter into your hearts after you have heard, they will hinder you from
practicing that, which before you liked, and purposed to obey. Such enemies are
they to your fruitful hearing. Who then would have his mind disquieted with
them?

What? (will some man say) must we have no care of any thing at all? must Ob.
we set all at six and seven, and let the world wag? must we be like some
idle and prodigal unthrifts, who cast away all care?

Not so, we must distinguish of care; Sol.
Est solicitudo diligentiae, and solicitudo dissidentiae. There is a care of
diligence, when men in a good manner, and due measure, use all honest and
lawful means, to get, and to keep things needful for this life, and for
the maintenance of themselves, and those which belong unto them.

The Wiseman sends the sluggard Pro. 6. 6. 8.
to learn this care of the Pismire, who prepares her meat in the Summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. And the Apostle says, that if there be any
that provides not for his own; and namely for them of his household, he
denies 1. Tim. 5. 8.
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. This care ought to be in all.

There is also a care of diffidence and distrust, which is an inordinate care:
when we keep no measure in our care; when we are not content to use lawful,
but also use unlawful means: and when we will not depend on Gods merciful
providence, for a blessing on the means; but forecast before hand what shall
be the success, and disquiet our minds with thinking what shall be the
issue, and with fearing an ill event.

This care we must renounce as a fruit of unbelief; and as a thorn that will
choke the seed of the word. We must with diligence and care use necessary
and lawful means; but leave the issue to him, who knows best what to do.
We must cast this burden on the Lord, as the Psalmist teaches us, and he
shall nourish us. We Psalm. 55. 22. 1. Pet. 5. 7.
must cast all our care on him: as the Apostle exhorts: for he cares for us.

Let us rest in his good pleasure, and be content to take in good part
whatsouer he sends, knowing that all Romans 8. 28
things work together for the best to them that love God. And so our care
shall not hinder the fruitfulness of the word.

2. But to proceed in the text, what is the second thorn that choaketh the
word? Christ here names riches; they are as dangerous this way as worldly
cares. Though some confound these two, and make both but one thorn, yet is
there indeed great difference betwixt them. They are here distinguished one
from the other, as well as voluptuous living is distinguished from them both.
And in truth they are oftentimes severed, and not found together in some
persons. A man may be perplexed with worldly care, yet not grow rich thereby.
The poor are oftentimes as careful how to live, and to get wealth as the
rich: yea, sometime more careful, because their charge is greater, and their
wantes more, but their means be fewer and weaker. It may be GOD does plague
their great care with great want: the more careful they are, the more needful
they be. If they would be less careful, They might be less needful.

Again, rich men are sometime without care: As is seen in the godly: Abraham
was rich, so was Job, both in the beginning and also in the later end of his
days: and yet both of them, free from distrustful care: yet are riches as
pricking thorns to choke the word as well as those cares.

Not only they who vex themselves with griping cares, how to get, and how to
exercise their wealth: but likewise those who think they have enough already,
and care not much for more, but like the rich man in the Gospel, say to their
souls, Live at ease, eat Luke 12. 19.
drink and take your pastime, you have much goods laid up for many years; may
be unprofitable hearers.

Although this Evangelist names riches simply and absolutely without any
addition, yet is he to be expounded by Matthew and Mark, who call this thorn
the deceitfulnes of riches. And that declares the manner how they choke the
word, namely, by deceiving the owners. Then be they thorns, when they
deceive. If thou enjoy them, and use them in great plenty, Chrysoft. in Math.
13. ho. 45.
yet shall they not choke the word in thy heart, unless they first deceive thy
soul, but if they once deceive thee, they will choke thee. Not the world, but
the cares of the world: not riches, but the deceitfulnes of riches, make the
word fruitles.

And certain it is, that they deceive many, because they make many unfruitful
hearers. In regard whereof, Christ said, we cannot serve God and Math. 6. 24.
Math. 19. 23.
riches: And that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And Paul said, they that will be rich fall into tentations and snares, and into
many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition. And while some
have lusted after them, they erred 1. Tim. 69. 10. I^. 4. 4. 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And James
said, Whosoever will be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of
God. And John said, If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in
him.

But how do they deceive men? we would feign know that, will some say.

I answer, that riches deceive men four ways.

1. In respect of the cause of them. They make the owner believe, that God in
special favor and mercy did bestow them upon him, and that he would never
have given him such abundance, unless he had dearly loved him. And therefore
imagines that he is deep in Gods books, and in greater favor then those
that sustain losses, and endure wants. This is a gross deceit. Solomon
teaches, that a man Eccles. 9. 1.
knows neither love nor hatred, of all that is before him: that is, he
neither knows whether God love him or hate him, by his outward estate,
neither by his riches nor by his poverty. And he gives a Verse. 2.
reason, because all things come alike to all men: And the same condition is to
the just, and to the wicked: to the pure and to the polluted: to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: As is the good, so is the sinner:
he that swears, as he that fears an oathe. And Christ shows, yt by doing
good Math. 5. 45.
to al, we may be children of our heavenly father; who deals so in making his
sun to shine on the evil and good; and sending a reign on the just and
unjust. Hereby a man may be led into a fools paradise, and made to think that
he is happy, when he is miserable; and that God is his friend, when he is his
foe. And a most dangerous deceit this is, hurtful to himself, and odious to
God: hurtful to himself, because it will make him secure, and to content
himself with his present estate, and never seek to better it; yea it will
cause him to contemn the word, which should make him better, and to think
that he is already as good as the word can make him. And therefore he will
refuse to hear it often, and when he hears, it is without profit; he
deceives himself in his own imagination, Gal. 6. 3.
seeming to himself, that he is somewhat, when he is nothing. And therefore
puts off from him, the curses of the law, as not deserved by him, but
applies to himself the blessings of the Gospel, as if they properly belonged
unto him. I would we had none such deceived rich me^ in this our age. Those
that be such, let them know, that this fond conceit is odious to God: for he
threatens, that when a man hears the curses of the law, and blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.
peace, although I walk according to the stubbornenes of mine own heart; thus
adding drunkenness unto thirst: The Lord will not be merciful unto him; but
then the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against that man:
and every curse that is written in his book, shall light upon him: and the
Lord shall put out his name from under heaven. Wherefore let all rich men take
heed lest they be thus deceived: let them know, that riches are common both to
good and bad: yea, that the worst often have them, and the best often want
them: and therefore let not the having of them, make them to presume any whit
the more on Gods favor, or less fear his judgments.

2. Riches deceive men, in respect of the nature of them: In making them to
think that they be far better then indeed they are. That they are good in
their own nature, that they make the^ better that have them. That they yield
the greatest blessings, benefits and comforts, that man receives on the earth.
That those who enjoy them are the happiest, and those who want them are the
most miserable in the world. This is a notorious deceyt: for they are not good
in their own nature, but only in the use. Not good to all, but only to the
good: who know how to use them aright. They are not Riches in truth, but in
show, and do as much differ from true riches, as the shadow differs from
the substance. Happy men may want them, and miserable men may have them.

Naball had them, when David wanted them. The Rich Glutton, that at at his
death was sent to hell torments, had them in abundance; when as Lazarus, who
after death was carried to Abraham's bosom, did want them. The Apostles had
neither gold nor silver, and yet were happy. They make few better, but many
worse, and are occasions of much evil. Neither can they yield any great
benefits to the owners, 1. Pet. 1. 18.
either for souls or bodies. They cannot redeem our souls: we were not
bought with corruptible things, as silver and gold.

The whole world, and all the wealth thereof, were not a sufficient Ransom for
one soul, nor a full satisfaction to Math. 16. 26.
God for one sin. They rather hinder, then further our salvation.

Can they exempt men from Gods judgments? Do not Rich men feel them as well
as poor? Can they free our bodies from diseases? Are not Rich men subject to
diseases, as well as poor men? Can they preserve us from death? Do not Rich
men dye as well as poor?

All the benefits which you can reap by them, are no better, and no more then
Luke 16.
the Rich Glutton had; who was costly cladde, and daintily fed. Are not they
then fondly deceived, who think so highly, and make so great account of them?

Wherefore take heed least you be thus deceived. This deceyte is also a Thorn
in the heart, to choke the word. It will cause men to set their hearts on
Riches, to love them, and desire them, and seek them more then they ought.

It will make them to serve God, and keep his word, no further then it serves
for their commodity. If the word command any thing, which they think will
hinder their profit, they will rather transgress the word, then forgo their
gain. Such men will not get and employ their wealth, as the word does direct:
but would have the word and the teachers thereof, to allow them to get and
employ their wealth as they list.

Take heed of this deceit. If thou be deluded in this sort, every trifling
commodity will hinder you in obedience to the word.

3. Riches deceive men in regard of their effects, because they will not
perform that which they seem to promise, and which their owners expected at
their hands. They seem to promise, and men expect nothing but good from them;
and yet they bring much evil with them. As thorns do bear green leaves,
white flowers, and sweet blossoms, yet under the same, do carry sharp
pricks, that will make a man to bleed, if he do not handle them choysely and
warily.

So riches do promise to men great ease, high honor, many pleasures, and much
contentment; and yet withal they bring great pain, much trouble, and little
contentment. They are not gotten without great labor; nor kept without great
care and fear; nor lost without great sorrow. And so they are little better,
then the apples of Sodom, August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 21. cap. 5.
which seem to be fair and ripe, and fit to be eaten, but if one taste them,
they vanish into powder and smoke.

And that which is worse, they will seem to make a man more fit, and yet in
truth do oftentimes make him more unfit for Gods service. They puff up his
heart with pride, they make him more secure and careless of heavenly things,
less to fear God and his judgments, and less to regard and obey his word.
And therefore the Lord, not without just cause, gave warning before hand to the
people of Israel, that when they were placed in Canaan, (a land that flowed
with milk Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
and honey) and had eaten and filled themselves with the fruits thereof, they
should beware that they forgot not the Lord their God, not keeping his
commandments, and his ordinances. And afterward he thus complains of them: I
spoke unto thee Ier. 22. 21.
when thou wast in prosperity: but thou said, I will not hear, this has
been thy manner from thy youth.

David in the time of his exile and persecution, committed no such sins, as
he did when he was settled in his kingdom. And it has been observed and
confessed by many of the learned, that the Church more abounded in piety and
zeal, when it was persecuted and poor; then when it was peaceable, and
endowed with riches. And thereupon it was said, Religio peperit diuitias, sed
silia deuorauit matrem. Fox. Acts. and monu^ p. 716. ex August.
Religion brought forth riches, but the daughter, has devoured the mother.

That as the Church increased in possessions, so it decreased in virtue. Hieron.
Some write, that when Christian Emperors, with good entents, enriched the
Polychron. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Church with lands and possessions, a voice was heard to cry; This day is
venom or poison powered into the Church. And afterward the Church began to
complain, and say, In pace mea amaritudo mea maxima; In pace mea, Bernard. in
cantic. sermon. 33.
amaritudo mea amarissima. In my peace, my bitterness is the greatest; In my
peace, my bitterness is the most bitter. Not so bitter before by the death of
Martyrs, and conflict with Heretics, as now by the manners of the household.

So that not a few, but many, have been deceived and corrupted by riches this
way, and therefore all had need to look to themselves.

4. Lastly, riches deceive men, in respect of the continuance. Many trust to
them, and hope to enjoy them long, when as they are presently deprived of them.

Thus was David deceived. In his prosperity, he said, I shall never be moved:
the Psalm. 30. 6. 7.
Lord of his goodness had made his mountain to stand strong, but the^ the Lord
did hide his face, and he was troubled. In regard whereof, Solomon says, Will thou cast Pro. 23. 5.
thine eyes upon that which is nothing? for riches takes her to her wings,
like an Eagle which flies into the heaven. And Paul bad Timothy, charge rich
men, not to trust to uncertain 1. Tim. 6. 17.
riches, uncertain they are, and therefore not to be trusted; they will
deceive those that trust to them. They will fail us in our greatest need, as
namely, at the hour of death. That rich man, who enlarged his barnes, and laid
up goods for many years, when Luke 12. 20.
he was in great hope of enjoying them long, had his soul taken from him that
night, and knew not who should enjoy them. Naked came we into this world, and
naked must we return: 1. Tim. 6. 7.
we brought nothing into it, neither must we carry any thing out of it: hic
Ambros.
acquiruntur, hic relinquntur, here they are gotten, and here they are left.

All those ways do riches deceive men. And whom they deceive, in their hearts
they choke the word.

Such impediments are they to the word, as they hinder many from receiving and
professing it.

Christ said, the poor receive the Gospel. Math. 11. 6.


And Paul said, you see your calling, that not many mighty or many noble 1.
Cor. 1. 26.
are called: but God has chosen the weak ones to confound the mighty: and
base and despised ones, to confound the noble.

So likewise they hinder men in the obedience and practice of the word. Rich
men are more bound to serve the Lord then the poor, for on whom he bestows
much, of them he requires much: As he is more bountiful to the^, so should
they be more dutiful to him: yet oftentimes it comes to pass, that they
seldomer hear it, and less obey it, then others do. But the greater is their
sin, and the more fearful shall be their judgment, if they do not amend.

You then that be rich, look well about Use. 1.
you, take heed lest your riches deceive you, and in deceiving you, make the
word fruitles. It had been better never to have enjoyed them, then thus to be
deceived and hindered by them. Solomon thought this to be an evil sickness which
he saw under the sun: to wit, riches reserved to the owners Eccles. 5. 12.
thereof for their evil. And is it not verified in them: whose Riches do
choke the word in their hearts, and make it unfruitful in their lives? what
greater evil could befall them? Do they not hereby endanger their own souls?
In a woeful case they are, and far worse then the poorest in the world.

CHRIST says unto such, Woe be unto you that are rich: for ye have received
Luke 6. 24
your consolation. Some comfort they may find now, but none hereafter. And
James says to them, Go too now ye Rich men, weep and howl, for the miseries
that shall come upon you: your Iam: 5. 1. 2. 3.
gold and silver is cankred, and the rust thereof shall be a witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh, as it were fire. Ye have heaped up Treasure for
the last days. Though now they fear no danger, yet one day they shall feel
it, to their great sorrow. It is strange to see how crafty and wise Rich men
be in worldly affairs. In all their dealings, they take such good heed, that
they can hardly be deceived by any, yet in spiritual matters, touching the
salvation of their souls, they may easily be ouer-reached.

They are to their great loss often deceived, and yet do not perceive it:
Their own riches deceive their souls, and yet they cannot discern it, nor
will acknowledge it.

Oh consider, that as the Devil may deceive you, and as other men may deceive
you, so also your own wealth may deceive you, and that as dangerously as any.

It may so deceive you, as it may procure your everlasting destruction, if in
time, you do not epsy it, and redress it.

CHRIST would never have said that the deceitfulnes of Riches, as Thorns
choke the seed of the word, unless riches did deceive men, and make them
unfruitful hearers. Let his words then be an admonition, to make you take
better heed.

There is not any one of you, but if a Friend told you of a Couzener, that
had beguyled many, and went about to deceive you, to your great damage, you
would take warning, and either refuse to have any dealings at all with the man,
or else, if by necessity you were compelled thereunto, you would be so very
circumspect in your dealings, that he should hardly defraud you. Christ Jesus
here lets you understand, that riches are deceitful, and that in deceiving
men, they hinder them in that which serves for Gods glory, and the good of
their own souls. And will not you receive warning, and beware of them? Take
heed of them, they seem to be your good friends, and much to pleasure you,
yet is there falsehood in their fellowship. The better you like them, the more
you love them: and the more you trust them, the more ready are they to deceive
you.

And indeed this is one of the strangest and grossest deceits that can be found
in the world In other matters men are deceived against their wills, but in
this, with their wills. In other things the deceived, do of themselves soon
epsy the cosenage, and seek to help themselves: but in this, many are
deceived continually, and yet cannot discern it? yea, if another tell them of
it, yet will they not believe it. In other frauds the deceivers are most in
fault; but here the deceived are in greatest fault: for riches deceive you, not
through their own craft, but through your corruption: not through their
fraudule^t persuasions, but through your fond affections: not through their bad
practices, but through your mad behavior. Riches are no causes, but
occasions of the deceit. Men take occasion by them, and use them as means to
deceive themselves. As Paul said of Romans 7. 11
Sin and the Law; Sin took occasion by the Commandment, and deceived me,
and thereby slew me. So may we say of man's corruption and riches: His
corruption takes occasion by riches to deceive himself, and thereby to destroy
himself. He is deceived by the supposed pleasantness of riches; as Eve was
deceived by the pleasantnes of the Apple. And as Eve was more to be blamed then
the Apple; so is the rich man more to be blamed then his riches.

If riches do so dangerously deceive Quest.
men, how may we use riches, that they may not deceive us; nor like thorns,
hinder the fruit of the word.

You need not to cast them away, as Answ.
Crates the Thebane, and some other Philosophers did. They are the good
blessings of God, and may be well used, for Gods glory, and man's good. Observe
these 5. Rules, and they shall not deceive you, nor choke the word in your
hearts.

1. Set not your affections on them, desire them not too earnestly, love them
not too dearly: according to the instruction of the Kingly Prophet; If riches
increase, set not your hearts thereon: Psalm. 62. 10. 1. Cor. 7. 31.
but rather as the Apostle exhorts; They which use this world, let them be as
though they used it not. It is your inordinate affection toward them, that
makes them to deceive you, and hinder you in the obedience of the word. The
more you love them, the less will you love the word, the less desire will you
have to hear and learn it, and the less care to obey it. If your hearts be
set on wealth, it will so deceive you, that no sin can be gainefull, but you
will be ready to practice it: and no duty bring any damage, but you shall
neglect it. Is not the desire of money the root of all evil? What 1. Tim. 6.
10.
makes some to lie in their bargayning? some to swear vainly and falsely? some
to use fraud and cousonage? some to oppress and wrong others, but an
immoderate desire of riches? This is the very spawne of all sin, in unjust
dealing: therefore learn to moderate it. Does not Christ say, that he who
loves Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26.
father or mother, son or daughter, wife or children, or his own life, more
then me, is unworthy of me: he cannot be my Disciple: And is he worthy of him,
or can be his Disciple, who loves lands and living, wealth and riches, better
then him? Does not he say; If Ioh. 14. 23.
any man love me, he will keep my word? Those then that transgress his word
for their own advantage, and sin against him, to get, to keep, or to
increase their riches; do they not love their riches better then him?

2. Be content to employ your riches as the word directs you. You are but
Luke 16. 2
Stewards of your riches, the Lord is the owner, and will one day call you to
give an account for your Stewardship: you must not therefore use them as you
list, but as he will: how he would have you to use them, he teaches you by his
word. Wherefore make the word your Counselor in all your dealings. Do not
get your wealth by any other means then the word allows: do not keep it
any longer then the word permits: and do not otherwise bestow it or spend
it, then the word approves: Then cannot your riches hinder, but will rather
further your obedience: the use of them will be a practice of the word.

3. Account the word of God, and the graces and blessings conveyed unto thee
thereby, greater riches, and more precious Jewels then all the wealth of the
world. Know that godliness (as the Apostle teaches) is great gain. 1. Tim.
6. 6. Phil. 3. 9.
Be of Paul's mind, who thought all things but loss, for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus our Lord: for whom he counted all things loss,
and did judge them to be dung, that he might win Christ. As the soul is
more excellent then the body; and as heaven is more excellent then the earth;
so those things whith belong to the soul, and come from heaven, are more
excellent then those things which belong to the body, and come from the earth.
If thou do so esteem of them, thou will not suffer the wealth of the world to
hinder thee of them. If thou can not enjoy both together, thou will rather
forgo wealth then the word. The want of this due estimation, causes riches to
be an hinderance to many. They think too highly of worldly wealth; but too
basely of Gods word and his graces: and therefore had rather get and keep there
wealth, then obey the word, and increase in grace.

4. Pray earnestly unto God, that he would give thee grace to use riches
aright, even for the glory of his Name, for the good of thine own soul, and
for the benefit of others. Say unto the Lord with David; Incline my heart to
Psalm. 119. 36.
thy testimonies, and not to covetousness: for thy heart cannot be inclined to
both together. Pray thus before thou come to hear; pray thus after thou have
heard. And in all thy dealings of the world, pray to God to pluck these
thorns out of thy heart, lest they hinder thee in the obedience of his word.
The more thou prayest thus, the less shall the deceitfulnes of riches hinder
thee.

5. Though thou abound in wealth, yet be not proud; but be as lowly and humble
as if thou lived in want: for GOD resists the proud, and gives 1. Pet. 5. 5
1. Tim. 6. 17.
grace to the humble. Paul would not have commanded Timothy, to charge rich
men, that they be not high minded, unless there were some danger that way.
They are in danger of being proud, and when they are proud, they are in danger
of disobedience: for proud men will despise the word, and will think scorn
to be taught their duty, and to be reproved for their faults by a poor
Minister: and will no further obey the word then they think it may stand with
their credit and honor. Know that God is no respecter of persons: the poor
may be as acceptable to him as the rich: he more respects man's disposition
and behavior, then his outward estate. If thou be poor, be not dismayed: if
rich, be not proud.

Lastly, if riches deceive men, and Use. 2.
hinder them in the obedience of the word, let not the poorer sort always
follow the example of rich men. Their riches does often choke the word which
they hear, so as it takes no effect in their hearts, nor yields any fruit
in their lives. If then the poorer sort will do as they do, they will prove
unprofitable hearers. In worldly matters the poorer sort will follow them no
further then serves for their present profit. If the rich should sow among
thorns, and reap a course croppe of corn at harvest, through ill husbandry;
the poor will not be drawn by their example to use the like ill husbandry,
nor be content to reap the like croppe: but whatsoever the other do, they
will be careful to dress their ground after the best manner, and seek to
make the best profit of that little land which they occupy.

And why then should they imitate their ill husbandry in spiritual and
heavenly things? If in Christ's time, and the Adostles time, the poor had
been led by the example of the rich, very few had embraced the Gospel: many
of them did receive it, though most of the rich did reject it. Consider this,
that their example will not excuse you before God: your mean estate has least
impediments. The wise man desired God to give him Pro. ^0. 8. 9.
neither riches nor poverty; but to feed him with food convenient, lest being
full, he should deny GOD, or being poor, should steal, and take Gods Name
in vain. And therefore as ground without thorns, yields greater increase
then that which is full of thorns: So you who be of middle and mean estate,
should perform greater obedience, then those that be exceeding rich, or very
poor.

The third and last thing, that as a thorn choaketh the word, is voluptuous
(...).
living, or the pleasures of this life. Though Matthew omit this, yet Mark
mentions it as well as this Evangelist; and calls it, The lusts of other
things, or lusts about other things. This differs from the former: for men
may be rich, and yet enjoy no pleasure. Solomon said, he saw this evil under
the Sun, and it was much among men. A man to whom God had given riches, and
Eccle. 6. 1. 2.
treasures, and honor, and wanted nothing for his soul, of all that it
desired: but God gave him no power to eat thereof, but a strange man shall
eat it up. This is vanity and an evil sickness. Some are so miserable, as
they cannot find in their hearts to use their riches for their own comfort;
but let them lie by them, as a sick man does his meat. Again, there be many
who live in pleasure, and yet enjoy little wealth; who waste their wealth in
wantonness, and care little for riches, so that they may have their pleasure
for a time. Such are the wanton youths of our age, who like the prodigal
Son, spend their patrimony by Luke 15.
riotous living.

These carnal pleasures will no less choke the seed of the word, and hinder
the fruits of it, then cares of the world, or deceitfulness of riches.
Solomon was a myrrour of wisdom: yet when he gave himself to
voluptousnesse, he forgot himself, neglected his duty to his Creator, and
gave way to abominable Idolatry. And for this cause did Job sacrifice for his
children ^ob. 1.
when they were feasting, lest the pleasures thereof should make them blaspheme
God in their hearts. And Paul 1. Tim. 5. 6.
said, that the widow which lives in pleasure, is dead while she is alive:
because such are no more able to perform the duties of Christians, then one
that is dead is able to perform the office of a man. These pleasures hinder
the fruitfulnes of the word in three respects.

1. In regard of the nature of the word, and the obedience thereof, it affords
no such carnal pleasures as the natural man desires: though it yield
spiritual and heavenly pleasures, yet it it yields no corporal or carnal
pleasures. And therefore voluptuous persons, who mind nothing but their
pleasures, have no care to obey the word, which bringes them no such pleasures
as they desire. Nay the word does crucify our lusts, does curb and moderate
our pleasures. And therefore the natural man, who has his heart wholly set on
pleasures, and will not be stinted in the use of them, cannot endure it.

2. In regard of the effect of pleasures, they breed security in the heart,
make it more unfit for grace, more prone to vice, and less fearful of sin
and punishment. And therefore it is said, That Whoredom and Wine take Hos. 4.
11.
away the heart. Pleasure, like another Cyrce, so enchanteth men's minds, that
like brute beasts, they are altogether given to sensuallitie, and wholly
neglect their duty to God.

3 In regard of the matter of pleasures: for many carnal pleasures consist in
the use of unlawful things, and in the practice of some sin. Now if a man's
heart be set on pleasure, then to satisfy his pleasure he will sin against
GOD, as Eve did in eating the forbidden fruit. And as Herod did, who though
he heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things that he taught, yet he
would not put away his brothers wife, as he was commanded.

Voluptuous persons will not embrace such doctrine, nor follow such teachers as
condemn their unlawful pleasures. They will not suffer wholesome doctrine 2.
Tim. 4. 3.
(as Paul foretold,) but after their own lusts, get them an heap of
teachers, to try whether any will tolerate their sinful pleasures, and them
will they like best. Uolupt as est escamalorum: Homo capitur voluptate, sicut
hamo piscis. August.
Pleasure is the bait of sin. And man is taken with pleasure, as the fish
with an hook. As the Fisherman covers his hook with a bait, that the fish
biting at the bait, may be catched with the hook: So the Devil does bait
many sins with pleasure, that man receiving the pleasure, may be catched with
the sin. In regard whereof, the voluptuous man, who will not be abridged of
any pleasure, commits many sins against God, and fails often in the
obedience of the word. He may often hear the word, yet will not obey it in any
point which crosses his pleasure. As some sick patients are content that the
Physician prescribe them a diet, and sometime ask him a question, whether such
meat be good for them or no: though the Physician, who best knows what is
hurtful for him, do forbid them some kinds of meat, yet have they so strong
an appetite to some of those meats, as for all his direction, they will not
forgo them, but only would have been glad if he would allow them. So men
come to hear the word, and thereby to learn what is good and ill for the
health of their souls: though the Preacher give them good direction, yet so
earnest is their desire of pleasure, that they will take their delight in those
things which he by the word does forbid.

This may teach us, to take heed of Use.
pleasures. If our hearts be drawn away with them, we shall be barren soil.
We professed and promised in our Baptism, to renounce the vain pomp and
glory of the world, and all carnal desires of the flesh: shall we then by
seeking and following them, choke the word in our hearts? Although before our
conversion, we were (as the Apostle speaks of himself and others) Tit. 3. 3.
disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures: yet now after
our conversion, we must forgo many pleasures, that so we may yield better
obedience to the word of God. It was foretold by Paul, that in the last days
shall come perilous times: for men should be lovers of pleasures, more then
lovers of God. I may say to you, as Christ said of 2. Tim. 3. 4. Luke 4. 21.
Isaiahs Prophecy; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: now are
come those perilous times. Now do many men love their pleasures, more then
they love God. The love of God is seen in keeping his Commandments. Those
then that are more careful, take more pains, and defray more charges, to
satisfy themselves in their pleasures, then to glorify God, by the obedience
of his word: Are they not lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God? And
those that wilfully break Gods Commandments, that so they may enjoy their
pleasures; as some by whoredom; others by surfeiting and drunkenness; others
by scoffing and jesting; others by lascivious dancing, riotous gaming, wanton
sports and profane pastimes on the Sabbath day; Are they not lovers of
pleasure more then lovers of God? And if they love their pleasures more then
they love God, they may rather be counted profane Epicures, then godly
Christians. The greater their pleasures is now, the Revel. 18. 7.
greater will their pain be hereafter.

Many of these are so addicted to their pleasures, as they will not by any
means be reclaymed: we find it an harder matter to reform them, then to
reform other offenders.

The Philosophers observed that many Eras. apophth. lib. 7. in Arcesil.
fell from other Sects to the Epicures; but not any from the Epicures to other
Sects. When we speak against their pleasures, we but speak to the belly,
which wants ears. Surdo canimus; they are like the deaf Adder, that
stops her ear. But if they will take no warning, let them go on, and try
what will become of them in the end. Rejoice Eccles. 11. 10.
O young man in thy youth (as Solomon speaks) and let thine heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth: and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine own eyes: but know that for all these things GOD will bring
thee to Judgment. He that is unjust, let him be unjust Revel. 22. 11.
still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: yet shall they find
that Christ will come shortly, and his reward is with him, to give to every one
according to his work. And then those which with poor Lazarus, endure pain,
shall be comforted: but those which with the rich glutton, enjoyed their
pleasures, shall be tormented.

What? will you abridge us of all Quest.
pleasures? must we become Stoickes? may we not take pleasure sometime for our
refreshing?

We will neither with Stoickes condemn Answ.
all pleasures, nor with Epicures commend all pleasures. Only we teach you
what pleasures are to be avoided, and how other pleasures are to be moderated,
least they hinder you in grace, and in your duty to your good God. We
acknowledge that GOD has given us his blessings, and granted us the use of
his creatures, not only for necessity, but likewise for delight and pleasure.
Adam enjoyed pleasure before his fall: Paradise where he was placed, was
called the Garden of Eden, that is, The Garden of pleasure. The Lord has
proomised delights and pleasures as a reward and blessing to his people that
obey his voice. The Lord (says the Prophet) shall comfort Zion, he Isai 51. 3.
shall comfort all her desolations, he shall make her desert like Eden: and her
wilderness like the garden of the Lord: joy and gladness shall be found therein:
praise and the voice of singing. And God gives not only bread Psalm. 104. 15.
to strengthen man's heart; but also wine, to make his heart glad, and oil to
make his face shine. But take heed how you use them: The abuse of them,
dishonors God, and hinders the salvation of many men's souls. If you will
know how to use them aright, observe these four rules.

1. Regard the matter of them, that it be not a thing forbidden by God, for
every sinful pleasure, shall be punished with a sorrowful pain: voluptas
transit, peccatum remanet. The pleasure passes Augustine.
away, the sin remains, and the punishment shall follow: he that takes
pleasure in any act of sin, is like to gnats and flies, that play with a
candle that burns them. As Dalilah spoke fair to Sampson, and much delighted
him for a time, but at last betrayed him, and delivered him into the hands of
his enemies, and was the cause of his destruction. So these sinful pleasures
may delight men for a season, yet in the end, they will betray them, and
procure their everlasting condemnation. There be but two ends of these
pleasures, either repentance or punishment. Those that do not seriously
repent, shall be severely punished.

2. Observe a due measure in them. Though the things wherein thou take
delight be lawful, yet moderate thy self in the use of them: thou may taste
of them, but not surfeit: honey is sweet and wholesome, but he that eats
much, may surfeit of it, and annoy his body. So pleasures are necessary to
satisfy the infirmity of our frail nature, and to make us more cheerful in
Gods service: yet superfluity is dangerous to the soul, and will breed
security, and contempt of spiritual things in the heart. Do not turn
Christian liberty, into licentious Epicurisme. As he that will have an
healthful body must use sobriety in his diet: so he that will have a sound
soul, must use temperance in his pleasures.

3. See that the time be fitting, pleasures must not be perpetual; nor
continual. It is noted as a fault in the Luke 16. 9.
rich man, that he was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared delicately
every day. Now and then had been enough. There is a time for all things,
Eccles. 3. 4.
said the wise man. A time to weep, and a time to laugh. And so there is a
time when we may take our pleasures, and a time, when we must abstain from
them. The Lord reproved the Jews, that when he called them unto weeping and
mourning: to baldnes and girding with sackcloath. Then Isai. 22. 12. 13.
there was joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep: eating flesh and
drinking wine. And therefore if God do visit the land with any public
calamity of pestilence, famine or the sword, we should rather humble our
selves with sorrowful repentance, with fasting and prayers, the^ delight our
selves with the pleasures of the flesh. If any will the^ addict themselves to
their wo^ted delights: we may say to them as Elishah said to his servant
Gehazi: Is this a time 2. King. 5. 26.
to receive money, and to receive garments, and olives, and sheep and oxen? Is
this a time to sport your selves with carnal pleasures, and worldly delights?
Is it not rather a time of mourning, then of joys? We must weep with them
that weep. And therefore if our brethren and near neighbors feel the hand
of God heavy on them, we must then forbear our pleasures, and mourn for
them. The Lord denounced Romans 12. 15.
a fearful woe, against them that were at ease in Sion, which did lie upon
beds of Iuorie, and stretch themselves upon their beds; did eat the lambs of
the flock, and the calves out of the Amos. 6. 4. 5. 6.
stall. Did sing to the sound of the violl, and invented to themselves
instruments of music like David. Did drink wine in bowls, and annoint
themselves with the chief oyutments, but were not sorry for the affliction of
Joseph. Know then, that all times are not seasonable for your pleasures. And
then only use them when it is fitting.

4. Do not content your selves only with carnal and earthly pleasures, but
also seek for spiritual and heavenly pleasures. Do not count this to be your
only pleasure, to live deliciously for 2. Pet. 2. 13.
a season, as some heretofore have done, and were justly taxed by the Apostle.
But know that there Romans 7. 22.
are delights for the inward man, as well as for the outward. There is Psalm. 1.
2.
a delight in the law of God. There Romans 1. 4.
is consolation by the scriptures. There is Phil. 21.
consolation in Christ. And a rejoicing Gal. 6. 14.
in the Cross of Christ. There is Romans 14. 17.
a joy in the holy Ghost. There is Phil. 1. 25.
a joy of faith. There is Romans 12. 12.
a rejoicing in hope. There is a 2. Cor. 1. 12. Psalm. 1. 2. Ps. 112. 1.
rejoicing in the testimony of a good conscience. Do not therefore satisfy thy
self, with outward and corporal delights, but seek also for those that be
inward and spiritual: these are more permanent, and profitable, and will yield
true comfort to thy soul. Be like that blessed man, who delights in the law
of God, and meditateth therein day and night, who fears the Lord, and
delights greatly in his commandments. Imitate the blessed Virgin, Luke 1. 47.
whose spirit rejoiced in God her Savior. And the holy Apostle, who delited
in the law of GOD, concerning the Luke 1. 47. Romans 7. 22.
inward man.

Then shall thou be satisfied with the fatness of the Lords house: and he
shall give thee drink out of the River Psalm. 36. 8. Ps. 16. 11.
of his pleasures, as David speaks.

There be also pleasures in heaven: for in the presence of God is fullness of
joy: and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Those far excel all
the pleasures of the garden of Eden. They yield full contentment, and make all
them happy which do enjoy them: Therefore seek especially for them.

A woeful thing it is, to enjoy pleasure in this life, which is but short, and
to endure pain in the other life, which is eternal. If you cannot be
partakers of both together, seek for the better. Make Moses choice, who
refused the delights of Pharaohs Court: and chose Heb. 11. 25
rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.

Lastly, from the consideration of all these Thorns together, we may observe,
that not one only corrupt affecction, but likewise many corrupt affections in
man's heart, do choke the seed of the word: Even all these three, mentioned
before. A man may as well be hindered by one of them, as byan other; as well by
any one of them, as by all of them. It is not impossible to find them all
three in one and the same man.

A man may be much perplexed with worldly cares, how to get and increase
riches, and when he has gotten them, he may be deceived by them, in thinking
too highly of them, in loving them too dearly, and trusting too much unto
them. He may then also live in pleasure: he may be careful to get riches, and
to increase them, that so he may consume them on his own lusts. By reason of
his worldly care, and the deceitfulnes of his riches, he may be sparing and
niggard-like in relieuing of others, yet in regard of voluptuousnes, he may
spend much on himself.

That Rich-man, Luke 12. had much Lu. 12. 19
goods laid up for himself, for many years. Not any for others, but all for
himself: and therefore he would live at ease, eat, drink, and take his
pastime. And the rich glutton, which would not Luke 16. 19. 21.
give so much as the crumbs that fell from his table, to poor Lazarus: was
given to pleasure, and spent much on his own back and belly: Such men as
these, have many thorns growing in the field of their hearts: they have many
impediments to hinder them in the obedience of the word. And therefore cannot
be profitable hearers, and diligent practisers of the word. The more thorns
grow in a sown field, the less corn is reaped at harvest. So of all carnal
hearers, these yield the least fruit.

Yet are these three things distinguished one from another, as was showed
before, are oftentimes severed in their subjects, one of them may be found in
one man, and not either of the other. And one of the other may be found in
another man, and not that. A man may be careful: and yet poor. A man may be
rich, and yet not given to pleasure. And all of them have their special and
several effects, one hindering after one manner, and another after another
manner.

And therefore any one of these, is able of it self to hinder the fruitfulnes
of the word. You know there be many kinds of thorns: with us there be white
thorns, and black thorns, hawthornes, and slowthornes: And the word in the
original, is taken not only Scapulae lexicon in Akantha.
for thorns, but likewise for briars and brambles, and any thing that has
pricks. And therefore as one kind of thorns, (if there be many of that kind)
may as well hinder the fruitfulnes of your fields, as many kinds. So one kind
of corrupt affections in your hearts, may hinder the efficacy of the word, as
well as many. And therefore as when you plow and sow your ground, you rid up
not only one kind of thorns and briars, but likewise all of each kind. So
when you hear the word, expel out of your hearts, not only all bad
affections of one kind, but likewise all bad affections of each kind.

It is lamentable to see, how fondly people deceive themselves herein. Many men
do harbor one noisome lust, one corrupt affection or other, in their hearts,
and because they keep out many others, they hope all is well with Quid refert,
si hoc vel illo modo pereas. Agricola quocunque modo perenutia semina pariter
luget, etc. Chrysostom. in Math. 13. homil. 45.
them. The covetous worldling condemns the voluptuous epicure: And the
voluptuous epicure, condemns the greedy and miserable worldling. The covetous
man thinks that he is a good Christian, because he is not given to prodigal
licentiousnes: And the voluptuous man, would be esteemed a good hearer, because
he abhorres worldly cares and miserable covetousness. But let them both know,
that either of these two sinful lusts, are sufficient to condemn their
souls: and let them not purge their hearts from the one alone, but from both
together, if they will be fit soil for the Lords seed.

The last thing to be observed in these hearers, is the effect of their
choking: namely, what is the issue and event that befalls them, when they are
thus choked by those corrupt lusts: they bring forth no fruit. Though they
do not fall away from their profession, as those hearers mentioned in the
former verse: but still continue professors and hearers of the Gospel, yet
are they unfruitful in their profession. The original word does properly
signify, that they do not bring (...).
forth any full and perfect, any ripe and truly fruit. As if they might bring
forth some kind of fruit, yet no good fruit, no full corn, nor profitable
gain. Corn sown among thorns, may yield some kind of fruit, yet not such
as will please the husbandman: It will be an untimely fruit: it will wither
away, before it be thoroughly fed, and fully ripe. It will be very thin on the
ground, when it is reaped, it will prove nothing but short ears, and small
gains; and when it is threshed, nothing but light corn, and unprofitable.
Such is the obedience of those men, which be given to covetousness, and
voluptuousnes, they may perform some outward duties, yet not many: only such
as do not hinder them in their worldly profits, nor abridge them of their
carnal pleasures. And those which they do perform, are very imperfect,
neither acceptable to God, nor comfortable to their own souls. They are not
such as God exacted, they do not proceed from such sincerity of the heart,
neither are they directed to that right end, neither are they performed in such
an holy manner as he requires. Though they seem to begin well, yet their
inward lusts do so hinder them, that they cannot bring their actions to a due
perfection, but wax weary of doing well: And either quite cease from their
enterprises begun; or else efaint much in their proceedings, before they bring
any thing to a good end.

Whence first we may take notice of the nature, quality and manner of their
obedience, whose hearts are still possessed with the cares of the world, and
the pleasures of this life. They may perform many good duties, yet fail in
some maine duty.

And yet those which they perform, cannot please the Lord, we have pregnant
examples hereof in the scriptures.

Naaman the Syrian, being cured of his leaprosie by the Prophet Elisha, vowed
unto him, to worship none other God, but the God of Israel, yet desired he to
be tolerated in one point: that when he went with his Master into the house
of Rimmon, and when 2. King. 5. 18.
his Master leaned on his hand, and he did bow as his Master and others did,
the Lord would be merciful unto him therein. Though he misliked that idolatry
in his heart, yet because he could not enjoy his gainefull place and office
under his Master, unless in that point he dissembled, he for his gain would in
outward behavior, join with others in that idolatrous worship, he would be a
Proselyte, so far as it might stand with his worldly commodity, but no
further. And the reason was, because worldly lusts were not then mortified in
his heart. Judas had diverse commendable things in him, otherwise Christ would
never have chosen him to be one of the twelve: he heard his sermons, lived a
long time ciuilly, and preached the Gospel to others: yet because covetousness
did still reign in his heart, for money he betrayed his Master.

That rich young man which came to Christ to know the way to eternal life, had
so kept the commandments for outward acts, as Christ loved him, Mar. 10. 21.
yet because his corrupt affections were only kept under, and not killed, he
left Christ, and had rather break his commandment, then leave his own wealth.

Herod (as you heard) did many things which John Baptist taught, yet because
the word was not powerful in his heart, to mortify his sinful lusts, he
would not break off his incest, nor put away his brothers wife.

If you suffer the like affections to abide in your hearts, your obedience will
be no better.

You see by experience, that corn growing among thorns, is neither so much,
nor so good, as that which grows in other ground; And that it might have been
more, and also better, in the same ground; if the thorns before the sowing,
had been rid up.

Do not then imagine, that your obedience can either be plentiful or
acceptable, so long as these inordinate affections be harbored in your hearts.
Know this, that though other affections be suppressed, yet so long as these
bear sway in you, so long as they do hinder you in good, and provoke you unto
evil; you are not mortified by the spirit of sanctification: for mortification
is a change and reformation not of part only, but of the whole nature of man,
yea of all the faculties of the soul, and of all the affections of the heart:
he that is washed (says Christ) Ioh. 13. 10.
is clean every whit. And will God accept of any fruits, that come from an
heart not sanctified? Wherefore purge your hearts from these lusts: And be
willing to yield obedience as well to those commandments, which seem hard and
unpleasant unto you, as unto those that be more easy, and delightful. For
this is not thanksworthy to obey those commandments which do nothing cross
your worldly profits and carnal pleasures: but herein is your dutifulnes
especially seen, if you be content to forgo your profit, and abridge your
selves of your pleasures, that so you may keep the commandments of the Lord.

Moreover, if those which bring forth such fruits as these, be condemned, what
shall we say of them, that be worse then these? that bring forth very little or
no fruit at all: which hear much, and practice almost nothing: who receive
Gods seed into their hearts, but bring forth the devils fruits in their
lives. We have many such hearers, as the Prophet Ezekiel had, the people came
unto him, and sat before him, Ezeck. 33. 31.
and heard his words, yet would not do them: but with their mouths made
iestes, and their hearts went after their covetousness.

Let such know, that not the hearers, but the doers of the law are justified.
Romans 2. 13.


And that they, who be hearers only, and not doers of the word, deceive Iam.
1. 22.
their own souls.

To show their folly and their danger, Christ compared them to a foolish Math.
7. 24.
man, which built his house upon the sand; The rain fell, the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof
was great.

James likeneth them to a man that beholds Iam. 1. 23
his natural face in a glass, and when he has considered himself, goes his
way, and forgets immediately what manner of one he was. They do not only
lose their labor and reward, but likewise provoke the LORD to wrath, and
procure fearful judgments against themselves. Their punishment shall be more
grievous, then if they had never heard. Christ shall say to them which heard
him preach in their Cities, and would not obey him; Depart from me, ye workers
of iniquity, Luke 13. 26. Ioh. 15. 22.
I know you not. And he said of the Jews to whom he preached; If I had not
come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin; but now have they no
cloak for their sin. The Ministers which have preached unto them, shall one
day be witnesses against them: and their Sermons shall be so many bills of
indictment against them. As it is an heinous thing in the Ministers to say and
not do; so is it also an heinous thing in the people, to hear and not do: yet
are many of our people faulty this way: There is no sin forbidden, but they
may often hear it condemned by the word: As the filthy sins of Whordome: the
beastly crime of Drunkenness: the profane sin of Swearing: the impious
sins of polluting the Lords Sabbath: the uncharitable sins of Injustice,
fraud and oppression: the malicious sins of railing, backbyting and
slaundering: and yet the people will not forsake them: But like the Ier. 7. 10.
presumptuous Jews, they steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely,
and practice other sins; and yet will come and stand before the Lord, in the
house where his Name is called upon. There be no duties of the first or second
Table, which they owe to God or man, but they are often taught them, and yet
they do as carelessly omit them, as if they never heard them. They content
themselves with bare and idle hearing, as if that were all which God requires,
as if that were sufficient to save their souls. Oh remember you what Christ
says; If ye know these things, blessed are ye if you do them. Though you
hear Ioh. 13. 17.
them never so often, though you know them never so well, yet are you not
blessed except you do them. Would it not greatly discontent you, to send your
servants each year to sow your fields with the best seed, and yet after many
years sowing to reap no croppe, but to lose both labor and cost? And do you
think that the Lord will be well pleased, to send his Ministers from year to
year, to sow the good seed of his holy word among you; and yet after many
years labor, to reap no fruit at all? The Apostle teaches, that the land
which drinks in the rain, Heb. 6. 7. 8.
and brings forth fruit for them, by whom it is dressed, conceiueth blessing
from God: but that which bears thorns and briars, is reproved, and is near
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Are you as soil sown with the Lords
seed, and dressed by his Husbandmen, and yet yield no fruit for his glory,
and for the comfort of those that take pains among you? And will you expect a
blessing from the LORD? Those that be such, may rather fear a curse. Did not
CHRIST curse the Fig Tree, which bare leaves, but no fruit? if they still
continue barren, their case shall be worse then theirs of Sodom Mat. 10. 15.
and Gomorrah: for if the Sermons which have been preached among us, had been
preached in Sodom and Gomorrah, they had repented long ago in sack cloth and
ashes: but therefore shall it be easier for them of Sodom and Gomorrah at the
day of Judgment, then for these disobedient people. Take heed lest by your
contempt of the word, you lose it. Christ takes his Kingdom from them that be
unfruitful; Mat. 21. 43.
and will give it to a Nation which shall better bring forth the fruits
thereof. If you often sow a field with good corn, and at harvest can reap no
good croppe, you will sow it no longer, you will let it lie, and sow some
other. And can you think that GOD will still continue his word to you, if
after long sowing, you will not yield any fruit? It is a special favor and
mercy of God, to have the Gospel among us. God has not dealt so with every
Nation. Happy are our eyes, to see Psa. 147.
those things which we see: and happy are our ears, to hear those things
which we hear: Many righteous men would have been glad to have seen and
heard them, and yet could not. Let us walk worthy of this blessing, that it
may be continued to us and to our posterity.

Uerse. 15. But that which fell in good ground, are they which with an honest
and good heart hear the word and keep it.


YOU have already heard the exposition of three sorts of ground, and what
kind of hearers were signififyed thereby. Now see the exposition of the fourth
and last kind of ground. And that was good ground, in which the seed sown
sprang up, and brought forth fruit with great increase. Unto this ground good
and profitable hearers are compared. As all the other grounds set forth to our
view the nature and properties of bad hearers; so this describes the
conditions of good hearers.

Before we come to the special properties of these hearers in particular, we
are to observe one thing in general, and from the coherence; to wit, That
although Christ had diverse sorts of hearers; and nany of them were bad, some
one way, some another way; yet all of them were not bad, some were good and
profitable hearers: all his seed was not lost; some sell on good ground, and
yielded plentiful increase. Though the Scribes and Pharisees, and many of the
common multitude were bad hearers; yet the Apostles and many other Disciples
were good hearers, did keep the word in their hearts, and brought forth fruit
in their lives. And therefore he told the Jews, that whereas they neither
received John nor him: John came neither Mat. 11 19. 20.
eating nor drinking; and they said he had a Devil: The Son of man came eating
and drinking; and they said, Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend
of publicans and sinners. They would neither receive the one for his
austeritie, nor the other for his affability: yet Wisdom is justified of her
children. Mat. 11. 25.
And he gave thanks unto his father, because, that although he had hid these
things from the wise and men of understanding; yet he had revealed them unto
babes. Though some of his hearers in Capernaum took offense at his Ioh. 6. 66.
68.
doctrine of eating his flesh, and drinking king his blood; and from that time
went back and walked with him no more. Yet the Apostles would not forsake him,
but freely ackdowledged that they would never leave him, because he had the
words of eternal life: and they did believe that he was the Christ, the Son
of the living God. When he preached in the Temple, at the Feast of the
Tabernacles, there was dissension Ioh. 7. 40. 41. 43. 46
among his hearers: Some said; Of a truth this is the Prophet. Others said;
This is the Christ. Some said; Shall Christ come out of Galilie? Others said;
Never man spoke like him. At another time, some that heard him, said he Ioh.
10. 20. 21.
had a Devil, and was mad, and blamed men for hearing him any longer. Others
said; These are not the words of one that has a Devil. Can the Devil open
the eyes of him that was borne blind? Such diversity of hearers had Christ: his
word did not work alike in all that hard it. Some waxed worse, and some were
made better by hearing of it. The like effect was seen in Paul's hearers: When
he and Barnabas preached at Iconium, a Act. 14. 1. 2. 4.
great multitude, both of Jews and Graecians believed: though there were some
unbelieving Jews, that stirred up, and corrupted the minds of the Gentiles
against the brethren. In that division of the City, though some were with the
Jews, yet some were with the Apostles. And when he preached Act. 17. 32. 34.
at Athens, some mocked him for his doctrine of the Resurection: some would
hear him again, as if they were not fully resolved, but desired to be further
instructed: yet certain men did cleave to Paul, and believed; as Denis a
Judge, of Mars Street, Damaris a woman, and others with them.

And thus it pleases GOD still to bless the Ministry of his servants.
Though they cannot convert all, yet they do convert some; they do not
altogether lose their labor. As there is no field so barren, but if it be
sown, some seed will come up, and yield increase: so is there no place or
congregation so bad, but if the truth be there sincerely taught, it will in
time win some. Though some continue obstinate, and remain as ignorant, as
Popish, and as profane, as ever they were before they heard. Yet Wisdom
shall be justified of her children; as many as are ordained to eternal life
shall believe. Some shall be called, and by hearing shall grow in knowledge, in
grace, and obedience.

This may comfort and encourage us in our labors: Though it be some grief to
see many non proficients, who hear much, and are never the better: yet if it
please the Lord to give some happy issue unto our labors, that we edify
some, though not all, that we profit a few, though not many: we should
therewith be content, and praise the Lord for it. If indeed we should convert
none at all, yet must we not faint, but still continue our pains, and expect
a reward at the Lords hands: for he will reward our labors, though we should
do others no good thereby. And therefore the Prophet said; I have Isai. 49. 4.
labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, and for nothing: but my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. It is not our work, but
the Lords work, to convert souls. Paul may 1. Cor. 3. 6
plant, Apollos may water, but it is God that gives the increase. We have
received and taken upon us, Curam non curationem; A care and a charge, not a
Bernard. de consi. der. lib. 5. cap. 3.
curing. Non est in medico, semper releuetur vt ager; It is not in the power of
the Physician to cure his sick patient at his pleasure. Every one of us shall
receive a reward. Secundum laborem, non secundum 1. Cor. 3. 8.
prouentum; according to his labor, not according to his fruit. As Bernard
well observed. And therefore Paul 1. Cor. 15. 10.
said not; I have profited more then all; but I have labored more then they
all. And rather rejoiced in the abundance of his labors, then in the
fruitfulness of his labors. It a quaeso, fac tu quod tuum 2. Cor. 11. 23.
est: Nam Deus quod suum est satis absque tua solicitudine and auxietate
curabit: Do then I pray thee, that which is thy office and duty; God will
have care enough of that which belongs unto him; said the same Bernard; But
if we convert and edify some by our poor Ministry, we may comfort our
selves by them: and say of them as Paul did of the Corinthians; Ye are the 1.
Cor. 9. 2. 1. These. 2. 19.
seal of our Apostleshippe in the Lord. And as he did of the Thessalonians;
What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even you it in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?

When we sow good seed in the Lords field, the envious man sows tares. We
must not look that in a populous congregation all should be good and true
hearers: If some only be good and profitable hearers, let us praise GOD for
them, and pray unto him, daily to increase their number.

But to come nearer to the properties of these hearers in particular: In the
description of them, and by comparing them with the former hearers, we may
easily perceive, that in some things they do agree with them: in some
things they differ from them, and do much excel them. There were some
commendable things in diverse of the former hearers, and would have wrought
good in them if they had been well used. In these things do these good
hearers agree with them. They have the selfsame things, though in a better
manner, and with better use.

1. They agree with them, in that they hear as well as the rest. All the
persons spoken of in this Parable are hearers, both good and bad: and they all
hear one and the same doctrine, though not after one and the same manner, nor
with the like efficacy and fruit. And therefore those which refuse to hear,
either through error, as our Recusants: or through contempt and negligence, as
some careless and carnal people, are so far from being the ground here
mentioned, as that they are worse then the bad ground spoken of before. There
cannot be any goodness in their hearts, nor yet in their lives. Can any field
yield a good crop of corn at harvest, which was not sown at the seed time?
They are worse then many reprobates have been and are: How then can they look
to be as good as the Elect are and shall be?

2. They agree in the understanding of the word: for it is said in Matthew; He
that receives seed in good ground, Mat. 13. 23. Mat. 13. 19.
is he that hears the word, and understands it. And although the first sort
of bad hearers are said to hear and not understand: Yet the other two sorts
are insinuated to have understood: for how could they receive the word with
joy, unless they understood it? How could cares of the world, the
deceitfulness of riches, and voluptuous living, choke the word after it was
heard, unless it had been understood? So that as the understanding of the
word is not sufficient to make you good hearers: so on the other side, the want
of understanding, declares you to be bad hearers. All good hearers understand
the word, though not only they. Good hearers must practice that which is
taught them: But how can they practice that which they understand not?

3. They agree in their affection to the word. Those that be as stony ground,
receive the word with joy. So also do these good hearers, though the thing it
self be not expressly mentioned. The Gospel is glad tidings, and rejoices the
hearts of all that embrace it. There is no commendable property in the
reprobate and unprofitable hearers, but it is found in the elect and profitable
hearers, and that in a more excellent manner. And therefore those who are
nothing moved nor comforted by the word, are worse then some bad hearers, and
must not be reckoned in the number of good hearers. Notwithstanding, in this
description of these good hearers, we may perceive that in diverse other
things, they differ much from all the former hearers, and therein do greatly
exceed and excel them all. They are described by three properties, and by
them all, they differ from the rest. 1. By the manner of receiving the word:
They receive it with an honest and good heart. 2. By the manner of reteyning it;
They keep it. 3. By the manner of practicing it; They bring forth fruit, and
that with patience and plenty.

Touching the first property 2. things may be noted: The one more genenerall;
and that is the instrument of hearing, it is with the heart. The other more
special; and that is the quality and disposition of their heart, it is an
honest and good heart.

1. Concerning the former, we may hence observe, that those, who will be
profitable hearers of Gods most holy word, must hear it with their hearts, not
only with their ears to harken unto the sound of it, while it is uttered: nor
only with their heads, to understand that which is delivered, but likewise
with their hearts, to keep it and obey it. The Lord required of the Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
Jews, that the words which he commanded them, should be in their heart. The
wise man thus exhorted his son, Prou. 3. 1. 3.
Forget not thou my law, but let thine heart keep my commandments: bind them
on thy neck, and write them upon the table of thine heart. And for this cause,
when Lydia went to hear Paul, Act. 16. 14.
the Lord opened her heart, that so she might attend to the things which Paul
spoke. If her heart had been shut, so as the word could not enter in, she had
been an unprofitable hearer: but God opening her heart, that she might receive
the word into it: she became a profitable hearer. And there is great reason
why al profitable hearers should receive the word with the heart, and into the
heart.

1. For the reformation and direction of the heart, by nature man's heart is
corrupt: Genesis 6. 5.
yea, all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart, are only evil
continually. And out of the heart (remaining corrupt) come evil thoughts, Mat.
15. 19.
Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Testimonies, Slanders, and
such like sins, which defile the man, as Christ teaches. Now the word is an
Instrument of sanctification: Christ Ioh. 15. 3.
said his Disciples were al clean through the word which he had spoken to them.
And prayed to his Father; Sanctify them Ioh. 17. 17. Ephe. 5. 26.
with thy truth, thy word is the truth. And the Apostle teaches, that GOD
does sanctify the Church, and cleanse it by the washing of the water through the
word. Now the^ the plaster must be applied to the place that is wounded or
sore. If it be applied to any other place, it will do no good. If the disease
come from the heart or inward parts, it is in vain to lay the plaster to the
head, to the ear, to the hand, or to the foot, so long as the heart and
inward parts are not cured, they will minister new corrupt matter to the
outward parts. If then our hearts be corrupt, we must not only be content to
apply the word to the ears by hearing it, to the head by understanding it, to
the tongue by talking of it, but also to the heart, for the purging of it, at
the first; and for the guiding of it always afterward.

2. Again, the heart is the seat of the affections, you must therefore
receive the word into your hearts, that so it may work on your affections,
both to sanctify them, as also to stir them up unto good. Thou must love the
word, trust in the word, and rejoice in the word, or rather thou must love God,
trust in God, and rejoice in God, because of his word: as was showed before in
the example of David. Thou can not do this, unless thou receive the word with
thy heart. As meat cannot nourish thy body, unless it be received into thy
stomach. And as seed can never sprout nor come up, unless it be cast into the
furrows and clods of the earth, no more will the word profit thy soul, unless
it be received into thy heart.

3. Moreover, the heart is the commander of the whole man, and sets all on
work according to the disposition of it self. Of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaks, as says our Savior. A good man out of the good treasure
Math. 12. 34. 35.
of his heart brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things. As the primum mobile does
turn all the other inferior orbs, round about with it. And as the watch
wheel of a clock, guides all the other wheels. If it stand, they stand: if
it go, they go: if it go slowly, they go slowly: if it go swiftly, they go
swiftly: So does the heart of man, rule and order all the senses and parts of
his body, either to good or evil: they are exercised, as it is affected.

Those then that would be obedient hearers of the word, must needs receive and
embrace it with their hearts: that so their hearts loving and lyking, and
believing it, may set all their senses, and all the parts of their bodies on
work, to practice it.

4. Lastly, the heart is the safest place for it. As sown corn, if it lie on
the top of the furrows, may easily be devoured by the fowls of the air: but
if it be hid and covered, is free from that danger: so the word which thou
hear, if it go no further then thy ears or head, it is easily taken from
thee: but if it descend to the bottom of thy heart, it may there be safely
kept. It is an heavenly treasure. And therefore thou must imitate that man, who
finding a treasure in the field, did Math. 13. 44.
hide it, and for joy thereof, went and sold all that he had, to buy that
field. Though men will suffer their baser stuff, and wodden vessel, to be
more common, and lie more open, and remain in greater danger: yet their best
and most costly stuff, their jewels and coin, they will lay up in the safest
places. So seeing the word of God, is most precious, of great value and worth,
lay it up safely in the bottom of the heart.

And if this be a property of good hearers, Use.
to hear the word with their hearts, then those who bring their bodies to the
Church, and leave their hearts at home: who draw near to God with their lips
and with their ears, when their hearts are far from him, cannot be good
hearers. If thou would be of that number, prepare thy heart before hand, and
while thou hear, let not thy heart be thinking on any by-matters, but only
attend to that: hear with thy heart, as well as with thy ears, and then shall
thou be blessed by thy hearing.

2. Again, note hence more specially, the quality and disposition of their
hearts, who hear profitably, they hear with an honest and good heart. It is
not any kind of heart, that will make your hearing profitable, it must be an
honest and good heart. Though thou should hear with thy heart, as well as
with thy ears, yet unless it be a good heart, it will little avail thee. For
in the goodness of the heart consists a maine difference, betwixt these
hearers, and some of the former. Those which be compared to stony ground, did
hear with their hearts: For they are said not only to hear, but also to
receive the word with joy. Yet were they not good and honest hearts.

They were hard and stony, and would not suffer the word to take rooting deep
enough. And those that be resembled to Thornie ground, did hear with their
hearts, yet were their hearts not good: They were full of worldly cares, and
carnal delights, which afterward choked the word. But these received it with
good and honest hearts, Kale ka^ agathe.
and therefore did both retain it, and obey it.

In describing of the quality of this their heart, Christ here uses two words
which be of a near, yet not of the same signification. There is some
difference ketwixt them: the one properly signifies fair, beautiful, seemly,
and comely: the other signifies good and excellent. The one notes the outward
apparent quality, the other expresses the inward nature, and inherent
property of the thing. And so here by is Beza anot. mayor in hunc locu^.
signified, that the heart of these hearers is good each way: both outwardly
before men, manifesting it self to be good by open profession, by abundance of
fruits, and by constant perseverance. And also inwardly in it self, and
before God, by a sincere sanctification, and holy disposition. And so their
heart differs from the hearts of the former hearers. For though they in
receiving the Word with joy, in believing it, and bringing forth some fruits
of it, did make some fair show, and gave some outward sign of a good heart,
yet their heart was not effectually sanctified within: and they made those
fair shows but for a time; Afterward they reuolting in time of Tentation, or
failing in their fruits, thorough worldly cares and voluptuousnes, bewrayed
the filthiness of their hearts.

Those then that would be good hearers, must have good hearts both ways. Both
inwardly, in their own nature and inclination, as also outwardly before men,
by the fruits and testimonies. As is the heart, so will the hearing be.

Good meet will not nourish that man's body, who has a bad stomach, that
cannot well digest it, before it be sent to other parts, but either leaves it
raw, or turns it to gross humors. No more can sound Doctrine profit that
man, that has a corrupt and wicked heart.

If this be so, that no man that has a Objection.
bad heart should come to hear: and if he do come, he shall loose his labor,
and never be made better by hearing. But we know the contrary, many have
been amended by hearing: yea, their bad have been made good.

This must be understood of the whole act of hearing. Not only of Answer.
the time before they come to hear, but also of the whole Time, while they are
in hearing.

Those men which had badde hearts before they came to hear, and still have
badde hearts all the time of their hearing, and go away with as badde hearts
as they brought with them, shall never reap profit by their hearing. But if
their heattes were badde before, yet are changed and sanctified by their
hearing, they are profitable and fruitful hearers.

The hearts of those three thousand, which were converted by one of Peter's
sermons, were not good, till they heard Acts 2. 37 41. 42.
him preach: but then were their hearts pricked and made good. And at that
instant they became fruitful hearers: For they received the word gladly, were
baptized, and added to the church, and continued in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.

The heart of Lydia was not good before she heard Paul, but God then opened
Act. 16. 14
her heart, and by opening it, made it good; and it being made good, caused her
to attend to his doctrine, and to bring forth the fruits of it, by kind
entertaining of her teachers.

That vnbelieuer and unlearned man, which as the Apostle writes, came in 1.
Cor. 14. 24. 25.
when all did prophecy, brought a bad heart with him. For he was rebuked of
all, and judged of all, and the secrets of his heart made manifest: yet was his
heart made good in the very time of hearing: and therefore did he fall down on
his face, and worship God, and said plainly, that God is in you indeed.
Wherefore know this, that so long as thy heart is bad, thy hearing cannot be
good; but so soon as thy heart is changed, thy hearing shall be profitable.
Some write that Manna tasted according August. in epist. 118. c. 3. Retract. 2.
20. Roffens. li. 1. c. 12. Heskins parlicine^t. 3. 12.
to the disposition of the caters: to the good it had a sweet and pleasant
taste, even such a taste as they desired: but to the bad a bitter and loathsome
taste. Though this be uncertain, Augustine once wrote it for certainty, but
afterward doubted of it, because he could find no warrant for it, but only in
Apocrypha: yet the like may be seen in the word of God, our heavenly Manna. It
tastes, it nourishes and profits the hearers, according to the several
dispositions of their hearts. To them which have good hearts, it is sweet,
comfortable, and profitable: to them which have corrupt hearts, it is
loathsome, terrible, and unprofitable.

This should teach every one of us, Use. 1.
to look to our hearts, and see that they be good, that so we may be fruitful
hearers: husbandmen have great care to make their ground good and fertile,
before they sow it. If it be barren, they will mark it, they will set mucke
and dung on it, to make it more fruitful. As careful should thou be to make
thy heart good, seeing it is the soil in which the Lords heavenly seed must
be sown. If it be not good already, use all good means to make it good, pray
earnestly unto God, that he would sanctify it by his holy spirit.

And if it be good, labor to make it better: the better it is, the more
fruitful shall thy hearing be: And for this purpose, hear the word oftener,
for it will make thy heart better. The longer that the ground of your fields is
tilled and sown, the more bare and barren it will be. But it is not so with
the ground of your hearts, the oftener and the longer they are sown with the
seed of Gods word, the more fruitful will they be. Such is the nature of this
heavenly seed, that it will not make the ground more barren, but more fertile
by often sowing.

As the seed is good, that is sown in your hearts, so let the soil be made
answerable unto it, and then you need not to doubt of a plentiful increase.
Let not so good seed be lost, by lighting into bad soil, hear with penitent
hearts, with sanctified hearts, with believing hearts, with resolved hearts, to
receive and obey, whatsoever is taught out of the word, and you shall be happy
hearers.

2. Furthermore, we may hereby discern, Use. 2.
who have good hearts, who have bad. It is the goodness of the heart, that makes
the hearer to bring forth fruit. It is the corruption of the heart, that
hinders his fruitfulnes. Those then that hear much, and practice little, have
bad hearts: but those that hear and practice the word in their lives, have
honest and good hearts. Though none know the heart of another, immediately and
directly, but God alone, who is the only searcher of it: yet as the Physician
can judge of the inward temperature of the body by the pulse, and as we may
judge of the tree by the fruits: so may we judge of the inward goodness and
badnes of the heart, by the outward behavior in the life. And to keep me to
the present comparison of this parable.

If a man knew a field sown in a good sort with good seed, yet afterward did
see the corn to be thin and course, and yield no good crop: he will say the
ground is barren. But if he pass by a close, toward harvest time, and see the
corn very thick and rank, and bear a long ear full of corn, he will say
it is good land. So if we know people to be well taught, and yet yield little
obedience in their lives, we may justly suspect. that their hearts be not
upright before God: but if we see them reform their lives according to the
word, avoid those sins which it forbids, and practice those duties which
it commends, and that in a constant course of their conversation, we may be
assured that their hearts be honest and good.

If therefore you would have others to think, that you have honest and good
hearts, show forth the fruits of the word in your lives.

The second special property in these hearers, is their keeping of the word.

They do not only receive it with their hearts, and lay it up in the bottom
of them, but likewise there they keep it fast. They will not let it go
Katechousie. Beza Annot. mayor. in locum.
out thence, nor suffer any to take it from them.

The original word as some have observed, is very emphaticall, and imports a
keeping with much labor and difficulty.

And so fitly expresses the manner of their keeping, which is with striving
and struggling against their own corruptions, against Satan's suggestions, and
against the worlds allurements. Though all conspire, and join their forces
together, yet do they keep it so safe and sure, as that they cannot wrest it
from them. And herein they also differ from all the former hearers.

The first sort lost it as soon as they received, it: even while they were in
hearing, the devil took it from them. The second sort kept it a while, but
not long, for they believe for a time, they keep the word no longer then they
kept their faith. Though they kept both in time of peace, yet they lost both in
time of persecution. The third sort kept the word, yet not long, when as
afterward it was choked by cares and pleasures, it was taken from them. But
these kept it for ever, neither the devil by his suggestions, nor other men by
their persecutions, nor their own lusts by their prouocations, can deprive
them of the word. Such an hearer was the blessed virgin, the mother of Christ,
she kept all her Saviors sayings in her Luke 2. 51.
heart; she did not only lay them up, but also kept them. And not only in her
head, but also in her heart: and not some only, but all his words. And such
keepers are all profitable hearers, for if the word enter into men's hearts, and
afterward go out again, it will do them little or no good at all.

Though the meat which a man eats, be received into his stomach, yet
unless it continue there for a time, and be there digested, it will not
nourish and feed his body.

Though seed be cast into the furrows, yet unless it do there remain for a
season, to sprout and take rooting, it will not yield any crop to the reapers.
Even so, though the word should be received into the heart, yet unless it do
there abide, it cannot fructify in the life. But if it be there safely kept,
it will bring forth plentiful increase. And therefore Christ said, Happy are
Luke 11. 28.
they which hear the word of God and keep it. Yea he accounts them more
happy for that their keeping of it, then was the womb that bare him, and the
pappes that gave him suck. The benefit of this keeping is double.

1. It serves for direction: for the word, kept in the heart, will direct a
man in his life, teaching him what sins to avoid, what duties to perform. It
will be a lantern unto his feet, and a light unto his path. It will be a
guide, to say unto him, this is the way walk in Isai. 30. 21. Psalm. 119. 11.
it, when he turns to the right hand, or to the left. And therefore David
said of himself, I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. As if the hiding and keeping of the word in the heart, were a
special and an effectual mean to keep men from sin. And he also writes
of others; The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue
Psalm. 37. 30. 31.
will talk of judgment: for the law of God is in his heart, and his steps
shall not slide. If you will carefully and safely keep the word in your
hearts, you shall show forth the fruit of it in your lives.

2. It serves for perseverance. It will make a man constantly to continue in
grace, in obedience, in the Lords favor, and in state of salvation. It is
certain, that so long as men keep the word in their hearts, they cannot wholly
fall away from God. Now those that hear with good and honest hearts, shall
always safely keep it: neither can the devils tentations, nor the worlds
persecution rob them of it: neither can their own corrupt affections being
mortified, expel it out of their hearts. Though other hearers may loose the
word by those means, yet not any of these which have these honest and good
hearts. And therefore as they are now in grace, and in state of salvation, so
shall they continue therein for ever. Whereupon John says; Whosoever is borne
of God, sins 1. Ioh. 3. 9
not: for his seed remains in him: neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God. He cannot sin totally and finally, so as he should thereby quite cut
off himself from grace, and from salvation.

Wherefore this property of these hearers, confuteth their opinion, who hold,
that a man once in state of grace, may utterly fall away, and become a
reprobate. If any will object, that so long as they keep the word in their
hearts, they cannot fall away: but they may loose the word, it may be taken out
of their hearts, and then they may perish. I answer. That in this their
argument they beg the question: for neither can any other take the word from
them, neither shall they lose it of themselves. For this perpetual keeping of
the word, is a special property in these good hearers, whereby they differ
from all other hearers. As their hearts are far better then the rest; so
shall they better keep the word then any of the rest. Those bad hearers, which
had their hearts mollified but in part, or had their hearts fraught with
worldly cares and voluptuousnes, may receive and keep the word for a time, and
loose it afterward, as you heard before: but these who have honest and good
hearts shall keep it, and bring forth fruit. This is a maine difference
betwixt them; that the rest keep it for a time, these keep it for ever. If
these hearers might afterward loose it as well as the rest, and bring forth no
fruits of it, then were there no difference betwixt them and the former. But
certainly there is great difference. And therefore those who receive it, and
keep it not long, receive it with bad hearts. Those who receive it with good
and honest hearts, shall keep it unto the end. In this respect Christ compared
him that heard his words, and did the same, to a wise man, which built his
house upon a rock: the Mat. 7. 24. 25.
rain fell, the floodes came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell not: for it was founded on a rock. So firmly is this hearer built
on Christ, that sure and immovable Rock, that no troubles, trials,
persecutions, or tentations can overthrow him. In the same respect Christ said,
Every branch Ioh. 15. 2.
that bears not fruit in me, my Father takes away: and every one that
bears fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. To signify,
that none are cut off but barren branches: those that be fruitful shall never
be cut off, but be made more fit to bear more fruit.

If it be further objected, that so long as their hearts are honest and good,
they shall keep the word, and bring forth the fruits thereof: but their hearts
may be corrupted, and lose that goodness, and then they shall lose the word. I
also answer, that if their hearts be once made such good and honest hearts, as
be here spoken of, they shall never be wholly and finally corrupted, they shall
keep their goodness to the end. For as the Apostle Romans 11. 29.
says; The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. He who first made
them good, will continue them in goodness. He will confirm the^ unto the end,
that they may be blameles in the day of 1. Cor. 1.
ye Lord. Has he not promised to make an everlasting covenant with his people?
and never to turn away from them, to do them good? and to put his fear into
their hearts, that they shall not depart from him. For this purpose did
Augustine De bono perseuerant. lib. 2. cap. 7. Quifecit bonos, fa^iet
perse^erare in bono. de perseuerant. sanct. cap. 12.
allege that, and other places. And further says; Sicut operatur vt
accedamus, sic operatur ne discedamus; As he works, that we may come to him,
so does he work, that we may not depart from him. I confess, the grace and
goodness of the heart, may lie for a time, as fire under ashes; yet is it never
utterly extinguished. A man in a trance seems dead for a time, yet does he
revive, because his soul is in him. So shall these within a while recover,
because grace still remains in them.

Hence then must we learn to keep the Use.
word, that so we may enjoy these benefits, and be reputed good hearers. The
Apostle exhorts us to let the Col. 3. 16.
word dwell in us plenteously, teaching and admonishing us. It must not lodge
in us as a stranger does, for a night in his Inn; but have continual
residence and abode, as a man has in his dwelling house. The voice of it must
not be like the stroke of a Musician, which only affects a man while he
hears the sound: but rather like the receipt of a Physician, which works in
the body a long time after it is taken.

It may be while you hear some doctrines, you know no present use of them;
yet keep them in your hearts for the time to come: Hear for afterward, Isa^.
42. 23.
as the Lord speaks by his Prophet. As Joseph in years of plenty, laid up
store for years of famine. And as the Ant in summer gathers provision for
winter: So must we at one time learn instructions, which may stand us in stead
at another time. In time of peace we must furnish and prepare our selves for
war: in health, for sickness: in prosperity, for adversity: in life, for
death. The Lord will not admit us to be of his privy Counsel, to acquaint us
before hand how he will use us, and what he will bring upon us: we must
therefore so keep the word, as we may be prepared for all occasions, and know
how to behave our selves in all estates. We must be like the wise Virgins, who
kept Oil in their Lamps for all seasons. A careful Householder will not cast
away an implement, because he has no present use of it, but will keep it for
7. years, thinking ye within that space he may need it. No more do you reject
any doctrine which serves not for your present purpose, keep it still in your
hearts, the time may come, when it may much comfort your hearts, much edify
your souls, and be a good direction for your lives. We have in these days
few such hearers. Many men's hearts are like a broken pitcher, that will hold no
water. Or like to Siues, which hold water no longer then they are kept in the
water. There be some who are desirous to hear much, and yet they keep little;
they forget as fast as they learn. As it is better to eat less meat, and
keep it in the stomach, and digest it, then to eat much, and presently to
cast it up again: So is it better to hear less, and keep it well, then to
hear much, and presently forget it. No more shall profit us then that we keep.

What must we do, that we may be able to keep it? Qu^st.


1. Empty your hearts of evil thoughts and wicked imaginations, worldly Answ.
cares, and carnal lusts: and if they be once expelled, keep them still out:
for as you often heard, they will choke the word. Isaac and Ishmael could not
dwell together in one house. The Ark of God and Dagon could not stand together
in one Temple: No more can the word and these lusts be kept together in one
heart: therefore keep them out, that it may be kept in. Country Farmers hedge
and ditch, and make good fence round about their sown fields, lest beasts
should break in, and destroy the corn. So must thou guard and defend thy
heart, lest these ungodly lusts break in, and destroy the seed of the word.

2. Meditate often of that which thou have heard; that is also a good means to
keep it: it will imprint it more deeply in thy heart, and cause it to work
more effectually upon thy affections. In this respect, he is reputed a blessed
man, that does meditate in the Law of God Psalm. 1. 2.
day and night. Beasts after they have eaten their meat, will chew the cudde;
fetch it up again out of their belly, and chew it over a new. Such were clean
Leuit. 11. 2.
under the Law, fittest for meat unto man, and for sacrifice unto GOD. The
best learned in old and late times, have thought, that holy meditation is
signisied thereby. You must then after you have heard, call the doctrine to
mind again, meditate of it, so it will best nourish your souls, and make you
most fit for the Lords service. He that neglects this, cannot long keep the
word.

3. Use holy and Christian conference with others, touching that which you have
heard. This was commanded under the Law. The Lord enjoined the Jews, that the
words which he commanded D^ut. 6. 6. 7.
them, should be in their hearts: yet not that only, but they must rehearse
them continually to their children. Yea, every one must talk of them when he
tarried in his house, when Deuteronomy. 11. 16.
he walked by the way, when he did lie down, and when he rose up. It was
practiced and approved under the Gospel: The two Disciples that traveled to
Emaus, conferred together touching Christ: Christ liked their conference so
Luke 24. 14. 15. 17. 27.
well, as he vouchsafed them his presence, made a third person in the
conference, and opened to them the Scriptures, which foretold his death and
resurrection; and made their hearts to burn within them, while he talked
with them; and did manifest himself to them, to confirm their faith in the
truth of his resurrection. So graciously did he approve and bless that holy
exercise. In conference we may help others, and others may help us, one
bringing that to the others memory which he had forgotten. So also we may
help our selves: for that which is then repeated, is more surely imprinted in
the memory, and is not afterward so easily forgotten.

4. After thou have heard, pray earnestly unto God, that he will imprint his
word in thy heart. He promised by Ier. 31. 33.
his Prophet, that in the new covenant of grace, he would put his Law in the
inward parts of his people, and write it in their hearts. The Laws of the
former Heb. 8. 10
concnant he wrote in Tables of stone: but the Laws of the latter covenant
he will write in the fleshly tables of men's hearts. If he write them in your
hearts, by the finger of his holy spirit, they shall never be rased or blotted
out. Wherefore pray earnestly unto him, that he would write them, and so shall
you be able to keep them for ever. Wherefore be careful to use these means.

What is the cause why people hear much and keep little, but are like to
bottomless barrels, which let water run out as fast as it is powered in? That
of all the Sermons which they have heard in their whole life time, they have
scarce the abridgement of one left in their hearts or heads, for their
direction and consolation? But even because they have neglected these means.
Use them hereafter, and you shall find how well they will make you able to
keep that which you hear.

And bring forth fruit. The third and last property in these hearers is this;
They bring forth fruit. And this is another special difference betwixt them
and all the rest: For the rest, either bring forth no fruit at all, as the
first sort; or but for a time, as the second: or imperfect fruit, and in some
things only, as the third. But these bring forth not for a while, but
continually; not in some things only, but in all; and that type and perfect
Fruit. If good seed be sown in good ground, it usually brings forth
fruit, for the use of them which owe it and sow it; So if some Doctrine be
preached, and people hear it with good hearts, it will bring forth fruit in
their lives.

These fruits are brought forth, not by profession, but by practice; and do
consist not so much in words, as in deeds. And therefore Paul prayed that
the Philippians might be filled with the fruits of Righteousness. And that the
Colossians might please God in all Phil: 1. 11
things, being fruitful in all good works. And he says of the Romans; That
they Coloss: 1. 10.
being freed from sin, and made seruaants unto GOD, had their fruit in
Holiness. So that this fruit cannot Rom: 6. 22.
be understood of the reward which the saints receive in heaven, but of the
obedience which they perform on Earth: for that is a fruit which they
receive: this is a fruit which they bring forth: That they receive from God,
this they yield unto God: that is a fruit of glory, this is a fruit of grace.

See then the disposition of these good hearers: They do not only hear the
word with their ears, and understand it with their minds, and keep it in
their hearts; but they do also practice it in their lives. This is the
chiefest end of all the rest. Therefore do they hear it, and learn it, and
keep it in their hearts, that they may order their lives by it, and practice it
when occasion is offered. Happy are all those which thus hear. For as James
says; Who so looks into Iam. 1. 25
the perfect law of liber^ie, and continues therein, he not being a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed.

If therefore you would have your hearing to be acceptable to God, and
comfortable to your own souls, let it end in obedience. Ground that is sown
with good seed, though it shoot forth a broad and rank blade, will not
content the owner unless it bring forth a good croppe. No more can you please
the Lord by hearing, understanding, and professing the word, unless
therewithal you bring forth fruit of obedience in your lives. All the
knowledge and learning that men can possibly have in any Art or Science, is
nothing worth without practice. And can you think that your knowledge in
matters of Religion will profit you any whitte without practice. And indeed
we learn no more then we practice: As that Pambo acknowledged; who (hearing
the first Verse of the 39. Psalm, I said I will take heed to my Socrat. hist.
lib. 4. 18.
ways, least I offend with my tongue) confessed that he had not learned it in
many years, because he had not in many years attained to the right practice of
it. We should be careful to bring forth these fruits, both in respect of God,
and also in respect of our selves.

First, in respect of God, because they serve for his glory: Therefore say de
CHRIST to his Disciples; Herein is Ioh. 15. 8.
my Fathet glorified, that ye bear much fruit. And therefore Paul prayed,
that the Philippians might be filled with the Phil. 1. 11
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and
praise of God. Those which glory in the Law, and break it, do dishonor
God: but Romans 2. 23.
they which hear it, and obey it, do honor him. If then you have any zeal of
Gods glory, bring forth those fruits.

Again, in respect of our selves, because we shall receive the reward of the^.
Those that have their fruit in holiness, shall have their end in eternal life.
The Romans 6. 22. Ephesians. 5. 11.
works of darkness are unfruitful works, they bring no good to the authors: but
the works of Righteousness are fruitful, and procure a great reward to the
doers. The fruits of grace are the seeds of the fruits of glory. He that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap eternal life. Gal. 6. 8.


Let us therefore, as the Apostle exhorts us, not be weary of well doing:
1. Cor. 15 38.
for in due season we shall reap, if we fainte not. Let us be steadfast and
immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord: For as much as we
know that our labor is not in vain, in the Lord. Yea, let us be fruitful
in all good duties, as well in those that abridge us of our fleshly delights
and worldly gain, as in other; seeing the loss and want of those here, shall be
recompensed with greater pleasures and profits in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But take heed, least you be deceived, in judging amiss of these Fruits; For
some have erred, in taking those to be good Fruits, which are none: and those
to be none, which are.

1. These fruits come of the seed, and be of the same kind and nature with
the seed. As nothing is good seed, but the Word of God: so nothing is to be
taken for good Fruit, but the practice and obedience of the Word. And
therefore the acts of Will Worship, the Observations of unwritten Traditions,
and the practice of men's precepts, are not the fruits here spoken of. The
Lord may say to them that bring forth such fruit; Who required these things
at your hands? These things, (as the Apostle says) may Call: 2. 23.
have a show of wisdom in voluntary Religion, and humbleness of mind, and
in not sparing the Body, nor having it in estimation, to satisfy the flesh;
yet they perish with the use: they are after the commandments and doctrines of
men, and therefore cannot please the Lord. God requires, that you, who have
been taught the word, should bring forth the fruits of it, and not the
fruits of humane traditions. If a man sow his field with corn, and it bring
forth more grass then corn, it will not content him, the grass would have
grown there, though it never had been sown with corn. In like sort, if you
be taught the word of God, and be more careful to observe man's traditions the^
Gods truth, you shall not please the Lord thereby, but rather offend him.

2. Again, as some have erred in taking those to be fruits which are not, so
on the other hand, some have erred in taking those to be no fruits, which
indeed are good fruits. Know you, that the practice of every duty commanded in
the word, is good fruit. Notwithstanding, as there be diverse kinds of seed,
some of one grain, some of another, and also diverse kinds of fruits, some of
one grain, some of another: So there be diverse kinds of doctrines, and diverse
kinds of duties. And as al fields are not sown with the same grain, but some
with one kind, some with another, as they will best bear. So all doctrines
and duties are not imposed and enjoined to all persons, but some to one, some
to another, according to their calling, place and estate. And therefore as all
fields do not bring forth the same grain, but every one that kind wherewith
it was sown: So all persons cannot perform the same duties, but some one
kind, some another, according to their estate and calling. The Magistrate
therefore brings forth one kind of fruit, the minister another, the people
another. The father one kind, the child another, the Master one kind, the
servant another: The rich one kind, the poor another. Yet as that is accounted
a fruitful field, which brings forth a plentiful increase of that grain
wherewith it was sown, though it be not the least grain of all. So those
persons are fruitful hearers, who carefully perform all such duties as belong
to their place, state and calling, though they be not able to perform such
good works, as are accounted the greatest and most profitable.

Some have imagined, that the Founding of Colleges, and Schools, erecting of
Hospitalles, buylding of Churches, bountyfull Alms, given to the Poor, and
such great good works, which can be performed by a few, are the only, or
chiefest good-Fruites. Though we will not deny, but that these be excellent
fruits in their kind, if they proceed from a good root, and be directed to a
right end: Yet are there many other good Fruits, that may be as acceptable
to God, and as comfortable to the dooers. Not only the common duties of all
Christians, but likewise the particular duties of every man's especial calling
and estate; (though it be never so mean and base, in the judgment of the
world) if they be performed in such a sort as the word directs, are most
acceptable fruits: such as God will approve and reward.

He that is a servant, and in his service is put to many base works: yet if
he perform the common duties of all Christians, and likewise perform the
works of his calling, in such a manner as the word teaches him, the work of
his service are good fruits. And therefore Paul bad servants be obedient
Ephesians. 6. 5.
to their Masters in singleness of heart, as unto Christ: not with
eye-seruice, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart. As if by serving their Masters, in a good sort, they did
serve Christ: Yea, he lets them understand, that God would reward that their
service: for whatsoever good thing any man does, that shall he receive of the
Lord, whether he be bond or free. And elsewhere Verse. 8. 2. Cor. 8. 12.
the Apostle teaches, that if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not. This
bringing forth of fruit is amplified two ways: 1. by the manner, 2. by the
measure of it. First, by the manner of it, for they are said to bring forth
fruit with patience. And herein may also be seen a difference betwixt these,
and one sort of the other hearers: Those that are compared to stony ground, in
time of tentation fall away, and so fail, both in profession and practice; and
the reason is, because they want patience to bear the crosses that do follow
the word. But these at all seasons and in all estates, continue constant both
in their profession and practice, because they be endued with patience, to
endure all troubles that do befall them for the words sake. After ground is
sown with corn, it endures many violent storms, and intemperate seasons:
fair weather and foul, frost and snow, cold and rain in winter, heat and
drought in summer, before it can bear fruit in harvest. So those who hear and
receive the word, for the salvation of their souls, do oftentimes endure
great troubles, and suffer much affliction, before they can bring forth the
fruits of it. Yet if they be endued with patience, they will be content to
bear all. Hence it is, that the Apostle tells the Hebrews, that Heb. 10. 36.
they had need of patience, that after they had done the will of God, they
might receive the promise. As if by patience, they might be made able in those
bloody days of cruel persecution, to do the will of God, and so to receive
the promises. And thorough want of patience they should fail in the deed, and
not obtain the promise. And for this cause he exhorts us to run with
patience, the race that is set before us. As if none could hold Heb: 12. 1
out to the end of the Race, but only the patient. And therefore in the midst
of the greatest persecutions, the patience and faith of the Saints is commended
and admyred: As when it was said; Here is the Patience, and the Faith of the
Revel: 13. 10.
Saints; Because by patience in bearing the Cross, and by faith in believing
to receive the Crown, they were made constant. Thus will Patience arm a man
against all Crosses, so that by it he shall be made able manifestly to encounter
with them, and safely to pass thorough them, and not be hindered by any of
them, in the obedience of the word. Howsoever in others, Cross^s and
Tribulations do breed faynting and Relapse: yet in these Hearers, Tribulation
Rom: 5. 3. 4.
brings forth patience; patience, experience; experience hope; and hope
makes not ashamed. What is the cause, that one hearer, to prevent some
inconvenience which he fears, or to remove some trouble that he feels,
will refuse to perform the duty taught him. And another will rather choose to
endure all Crosses and losses, all disgraces and dangers, yea imprisonment and
death, then sin against his God? but because the one wants patience, the
other is endued with patience. So necessary is patience for our practice. So
greatly does it further us in our obedience.

This should be a motive to persuade every one of you to seek for patience. It
is in vain to hear Gods word with intent to obey it, unless by patience you
possess your own souls: For otherwise your own cross, will stop your
course, to turn you out of the way that leads unto life. The more patience,
the more obedience: the less patience, the less obedience: we should love
Religion so dearly, we must be content to suffer persecution for the
profession and practice of it, and rather lay down our lives for the
maintenance of it, then fail in the obedience of it. The same mind ought to
be in us, which was in the blessed Apostle Paul; who knowing that bands and
afflictions did abide in every place: yet passed not for them; Neither was his
Acts. 20. 24. Act. 21. 13.
life dear unto himself, so that he might fulfill his course with joy. And
when he was told by Agabus the Prophet, that he must be bound in Jerusalem;
did openly protest, that he was ready not only to be bound, but also to dye
there, for the Name of the Lord JESUS. Yet consider that you cannot endure the
least of those things, unless you be endued with patience; you know not what
may befall you hereafter, and therefore pray unto God, that he will grant you
patience, to bear that which shall come.

In time of public peace, and when the Gospel is defended by the authority
of Magistrates, men may endure some secret and private persecution, by
inferior persons: Especially in these popish parts, where some hold of Christ
some of Antichrist: where papists grow headstrong through impunitie. And where
many are Protestants in show, but Papists in Truth.

If they cannot persecute you by the Sword, they will persecute you by the
tongue. If not by fire and faggot, as they were wont, yet by private wrongs and
spiteful displeasures. Yea the Church Genesis 19. Gal. 4. 29.
is no better now; then was Abraham's house, in which the son of the
bondwoman, by scoffs and mocks, did persecute the son of the free woman.

Did not Cayne and Abel sacrifice together? Genes: 4.
yet Cayne enuyed Abel, because his Sacrifice was better accepted, 2. Cor: 11
26.
and afterward slew him for it. Was not Paul often in perilles among false
Brethren? And did you not hear out of Bernard, how the Church complained, Pax
a paganis, pax ab haerelicis, sed non profecto a filijs. In cant: sermon. 33.
that in her peace, she had greatest bitt^rnes? Of a peaceable time he said,
Et pax est, and non est paz; There is peace, and there is not peace: peace from
Pagons, peace from Heretics, yet not peace indeed from the sons. Many
friends, were foes indeed. We must therefore in all times look to receive
some Affliction for the Gospells sake: And therefore seek for patience at all
seasons, that so in the time of persecution, and in the time of peace, you may
continue constant in the profession, and practice of Gods word.

2. Moreover, this their bringing forth of fruit is amplified by the measure
of it, which was great in all, yet not alike in all.

All were fruitful, yet there was great difference and variety in the
quality of their fruit, some brought forth less, some more.

Though this be not here noted in Math: 13 8. 23.
this Evangelist, yet is it mentioned by the other two Evangelists; and that
Marc: 48 20.
both in the propounding of the Parable, and in the Exposition of it. They say,
Some brought foroth thirty fold, some fixty fold, some an hundred fold. So
much did each Seed multiply and increase.

Wherein CHRIST speaks according to the quality of the best ground in Judea:
The whole land was very fertile, as the Scripture teaches. It was a land that
flowed with milk and honey: and therefore would yield great increase of Corn.
The worst of it was as good as the best of our grounds; and therefore the best
must needs be exceeding fruitful. The ground of other lands, have yielded
great increase. When Isaacke sowed corn in Gerar, he received an hundred
measures for one G^nes. 26. ^2. Plin. Hist. lib. 18. 10. Herodot. in M^lpom lib
4. page 125 E^in Clio. li. 1. p. 35.
that he sowed. Foreign writers record that Byzazu^ in Africa, for one bushel
of seed yielded an 150. of increase. That the country of the Euhesperites
yields an hundred fold. The country of the Cynopeans, three hundredth fold.
And the land of Babylon in some parts has been so fruitful, that it never
yielded less then two hundred fold, sometime three hundred fold. Now the land
of Canaan especially in some parts, and in a seasonable year) was not
inferior to them, and therefore would yield great increase, yet not all alike:
some parts of it was more fertile then other, and so brought forth greater
store of fruit.

The^by does Christ set forth the di^^^sitie of fruitfulnes in his hearers.

All good hearers yield plenty of fru^ yet some more, some less.

The word works powerfully in them all, yet more powerfully and effectually
in some then in others. So fruitful is the seed of the word, that of a few
grains there springs an admirable increase of all virtues. A plentiful
store of all graces in the heart; many heavenly meditations, holy thoughts, and
godly motions in the mind: all sorts of good words in the mouth; and all
manner of good works in the life: yet all good hearers, have not all these in
the same quality and number.

In some they more abound, in others less. And therefore as before you saw
some difference betwixt bad hearers: so here you may behold some variety and
difference among good hearers. For one does much exceed another in the
multitude, and increase of fruits, according to the measure of Gods grace
given to every one.

The Rhemistes teach, that this difference Annot. on Math. 13. 8. sect. 1. See
postscript. sect. 15.
of Fruits, is the difference of merits in this life, and rewards for them in
the next life: according to the diversity of states. As that the hundred fold
agrees to virgins professed, threescore fold to Religious widows, thirty
fold to the married.

And hence would many popish writers prove, the excellency and dignity of
single-life, above Widow-hood, and Marriage.

But therein they manifestly declare, that they neither understand the scope of
the Parable, nor the meaning of Answer.
Christ's Exposition.

1. For first it is apparent that Christ spoke it not of receiving fruits, or
rewards: but of bearing, and bringing forth fruits of obedience.

Though these be so linked together, as the one sort does certainly follow
the other: yet do they much differ.

The one sort of fruits, are our deeds, performed by us unto God: the other
sort are Gods rewards, which he in mercy bestows on us, and which we
receive from him.

The one sort are the fruits of grace, here brought forth for a time on the
Earth; the other are the fruits of glory, received and enjoyed in Heaven, for
evermore.

Of the former kind, Christ speaks: For it was not his purpose to show the
difference betwixt men in heaven; but a difference betwixt good hearers, in
bringing forth the fruits of the word on the earth. Even as before he noted a
difference betwixt bad hearers, not as they shall be hereafter in hell, but as
they are now living in the world: how then can his words prove any merit of
works, or difference of merits in the next life?

2. Christ in this parable spoke not of any outward estates, or different
degrees of men in the world, but only of diverse sorts of hearers. People of
all estates and conditions, did then hear him, and afterward hear the
Apostles, and do now hear us. Now Christ teaches, that of what state or
condition soever they be, whether single persons, or married, or widows, they
shall bear fruits, according to the manner of their hearing, and according to
the inward disposition of their hearts.

And therefore a married person hearing in a better manner, and receiving the
word with a better heart, then a virgin then a widow, shall bring forth more
fruits of the word, and receive more benefit by his hearing.

3. Again, God will neither respect nor reward any, for their outward estates
and conditions, but for the right use of them, and for their good carriage and
godly behaulour in them.

And therefore Augustine said, M^lior est maritata humilis, quam virgo superba.
Inpsal. 75
An humble married woman, is better then a proud virgin.

And Cyril compared virgins which In leuit. lib. 2. in sine.
had chastity of body without purity of mind, without grace in the heart,
and obedience in their lives, unto those five foolish virgins, that had lamps
without oil, and were not suffered to enter into the bridegromes wedding
chamber.

And Augustine preferred married martyrs, De virginit cap. 45.
before chaste virgins.

But to leave them with their absurd collection, and to come to the doctrine
here intended by Christ, we are here taught, that many may hear the word of
God together, and all be profitable hearers, and all be saved by their hearing,
yet all do not profit alike, nor bring forth the same fruits of obedience in
their lives: but some fewer, some more; according as their hearts are prepared,
and according as it pleases the Lord to bestow his graces. Yea though they
all hear one and the same man, and the same sermons, and one hear as often as
another: yet may one be more plentiful in the fruits of the word, then is
another.

All furrows of the same land, do not bring forth an equal number of ears:
and all ears of the same furrowe, do not bear an equal number of grains:
but some more, some less, as it pleases the Lord to give an increase.

The consideration whereof, serves for the instruction of all sorts of good
hearers, whatsoever measure of fruits they do bring forth.

1. First, this may comfort those good hearers, who profit not so much in
hearing as some others do, do not attain to such a measure of knowledge, nor
are able to yield such abundance of fruit as others do.

If their hearts be holy and good, if they do all of Faith and sincerity,
and desire to bring forth more fruits: God will account them profitable
Hearers, Sieve paru^, sieve multum, omnes horreo erunt. August: in Psalm: 128.
and accept of their obedience. And the Word which they hear, shall save
their souls.

As Husbandmen are glad of all Ears which have Corn in them; though some be
longer, some shorter; some contain more grains, some contain fewer; yet will
they gather all into the Barn. So God does accept of all persons that bring
forth the fruits of the word, and will bring to Heaven, as well those that
have lesser, as those that have more fruits.

Such is his Mercy and Bounty, that although he require the same measure of
all, yet finding difference among them, because of the diversity of his grace,
he does so receive the first and the best, as he does not refuse the second,
and middle-sorte, nor yet reject the last, and least. Under the Law, there
were some Sacrifices cheaper, some more costly; If men or women, Leuit: 12. 8.
by reason of their poverty, were not able to offer the better, the Lord was
content to take the meaner. And therefore CHRIST commended the pore widows
two mytes, above all the great gifts, which rich men cast into the treasury.
Mar: 12. 43. Mat. 25.
And under the Gospel, the Servant which received two Talents, and by
employment made them four, was commended and rewarded of his Master, as well
as he that had received five, and made them ten. And they that wrought but
one hour in the Vineyard, Mat: 20.
received the same penny at night, with them that had borne the heat and
burden of the day. Wherefore let not thine own penury, and other men's plenty
of fruit dismay thee: but consider; That if thou practice what thou know,
do as many good works as the Lord does enable thee; and art willing, and
desirous to do more, if ability were afforded, and occasion offered; thou art
a good hearer, and may go to heaven with those that far exceed thee in
the number of their fruits.

Yet let not any take occasion hereby to be more backward and sparing in their
fruits, as if a small quantity would serve the turn All of us ought to strive
to bring forth abundance; yea each year more then other. Those which be
planted in the house of the Lord, do flourish and bring forth in their old
age. It is to be feared, that he who desires Psa. 92. 14.
to be no better, is not good at all: and he that desires to bring forth no
more fruits, brings forth none at all that be good. Let them understand,
that none bring forth such store of fruit as they ought. And that he which
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he that sows liberally, shall
reap liberally. 2. Cor. 9. 6.
God will crown his own gifts in us. The more fruits they bear hear, the
more glory shall they enjoy in heaven. Let them therefore strive to abound
more and more in all good fruits: knowing that this consolation belongs not
to the which will not abound with more, though they might: but only to those
which would abound with more, and cannot, being hindered by their infirmities,
or through want of ability and opportunity. In them GOD will take the will
for the deed, and will no less reward them, then those who having more
means, and better ability, have brought forth more fruits.

2. Lastly, this diversity of fruit in good hearers, may teach them that be
more plentiful in hearing them then others be, not to be proud of themselves,
nor to despise those that bring forth fewer: for both of them are reckoned in
the number of good and profitable hearers. They which bring forth some lesser
fruits, may have good hearts, may be justified, may be sanctified, may be in
favor with God; and at last enter into heaven as well as thou, who aboundest
with more. Paul labored more 1. Cor. 15. 10. 2. Cor. 11. 23.
abundantly then all the Apostles, and suffered more then any of them. And
therefore far more then any common Christian. Though toward his end, the
remembrance thereof did much comfort him, so as he could say; I have fought a
good sight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: hence forth is
laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge, will give unto me at that day: Yet he adds these words, concerning 2.
Tim. 4. 8.
his copartners in the reward; And not only unto me, but unto all them also
that love his appearing. Because many others, who came short of him in the
abundance of labors and sufferings, should be crowned as well as he.

Do thou surpass others in the multitude of fruits? be not high minded, 1.
Cor. 4. 7.
do not despise them: for what have thou, which thou have not received? And if
thou have received it, why boastest thou of it, as if thou had not received
it? If thou abound more then others, thou may say with the Apostle; It is not
I, but the grace of God which 1. Cor. 15. 10.
is with me; and by his grace, I am that I am. The more lowly thou art, the
better are thy fruits. The more and the better grains that an ear of corn
has in it, the lower it will bow downward; but the fewer and the worse
grains it has, the higher and straighter will it stand up. Even so, the more
good fruits for number, and the sounder for quality, that any man has, the
more lowly and humble will he be. The prouder he is, and the more he insulteth
over others, the fewer and worse be his gifts and fruits. Therefore be lowly and
humble, not Arrogating to thy self, but ascribing to God the glory of all thy
fruits. Not disdayning any, for the small measure of their fuits: but honoring
them for their good beginning, and praying to God, that they may abound more
and more. And this I pray for you all, as the Apostle did for the Phlippians;
that your love may abound Phil: 1. 9. 10. 11.
yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment: that ye may discern
things that differ, that ye may be pure, and without offense, until the day
of Christ, filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by JESUS CHRIST;
unto the glory and praise of GOD. The Lord grant you all these things, for
his mercies sake, in his beloved Son,

Amen.
A POSTSCRIPT, to the Papists in Lancashire.
I Am not ignorant how hasty and rash many of you be, in condemning all
things spoken and written against the Doctrine of your modern Priests. If you
vouchsafe to read our wrytings, you commonly give no more favorable Censure
of them, then Julian the Emperor gave of the Ancient Fathers Sozim: hist: 5.
17. (...).
books: who thus said of them; I read, I understood, I condemned. And we might
justly answer you, as Basil, and other Learned Bishops answered him. Thou have
read, but not understood; For if thou had understood, thou would not have
condemned. (...). Ibid: Jude. 10.
Some of you are like those men, whereof the Apostle Jude spoke: who condemn
those things which they know not. Others of you know and understand more, yet
reject all things as erroneous and Heretical, which you know to be
contradictorie to the positions of your popish priests. Yea, many of you be
such unequal judges, that although you cannot but approve almost all points in
the book: yet if there be but one only thing which you distaste, you
presently condemn all the rest for it; And take it to be as a leaf of
Coloquyntis; which marreth a whole mess of pottage: and as a dead Fly, that
spoyleth a whole box of Ointment.

In regard whereof, I may justly fear your sharp and bitter censures of these
my Sermons, now put forth to open sight: I can expect no more indifferency
and favor at your hands, the^ others my betters have formerly found.
Notwithstanding, as often hereto fore I have labored by many means to give
you satisfaction, in your Doubts and demaundes, both by private Conference,
with diverse of the Layitie, by several Answers made to the wrytings of the
learned on your side, and also by open disputations with your priests, (as some
of you cannot deny, if you would testify truth.) So would I now give you full
contentment, (if any reasonable thing will content you,) for all such
exceptions which I think you will take against these Sermons. Whereas the
learned on your side do charge us, that in our sermons and writings, we
interpret the Scriptures according to our own fancies, and private conceits:
and not according to the uniform sense given by the Fathers, and the common
exposition of the Church; and thereupon would persuade you, not to hear, or
read, or believe any thing which we prove by the scriptures. I will make it
apparent, that in those points of co^troucrsie, touched in these sermons, and
confirmed by several texts of scripture, I have the consent of the ancient
Fathers, and also of many of your own late writers.

Cardinal Bellarmine acknowledges, that before the Pelagian heresy arose,
the Fathers did not exactly handle the questionof Degra. and lib. arbitr. lib.
2. cap. 11. initio.
Praedestination by grace: but only when occasion was offered, did briefly set
down their opinions. And that Chrysostom: did not plainly preach preue^ting
grace, because at that time they were not risen up, which denied it. Ibid. lib.
6. cap. 6.


As if the Fathers did speak and write plainly and fully of those points
only, which were controuerted and impugned in those days. Now is it certain,
that few of those points which I mentioned, were called into question in their
days. There were many controversies de eo quod creditur, non de eo quo
creditur (as the M. of Sentences, out of Augustine distinguishes) of the
things Lumb. sent. lib. 3. did. 23. c.
to be believed, or of the object of faith: yet not of the habit of faith, or
of the gift or quality whereby we believe. And therefore the truth is not to
be gain-sayed, though we could not produce very pregnant and plentiful
testimonies out of their writings, touching the nature and kinds of faith.
Notwithstanding, they have not left themselves without witness, in that they do
upon occasions, declare their judgments therein, which serve to confirm the
truth on our side. These testimonies of theirs, and the testimonies of your
own Doctors, I did forbear to recite in the Pulpit, or write in the copy of
the Sermons, that so I might avoid tediousnes. Yet having diligently perused
them, and hoping that they would be of force with some that duly consider them,
I thought good to set them apart by themselves, and to add them as a
postscript after all.

SECT. II.
WHereas I taught, that the word of God is the spiritual seed, which must be
sown in our hearts, to make us fruitful in all good works: And that
Preachers ought to teach, and people ought to hear and receive nothing but the
word, and did limit the word, to the word written: I know it crosieth the
doctrine of some in your Church: and therefore may perhaps be misliked by you.

First your countryman, Doctor Stapleton, writing a Postill for the
instruction Promptuar in Dominica sexagesim. To the same effect the Rhemists.
of Popish Preachers, could not find in all this Parable, any point to be
observed against us, but only this, that the word is the seed. And will have,
not the word written, but the word preached to be the seed. Yea, he makes two
words of God; the one (...)

Now, what is preaching, but expounding of Scripture, and delivering the true
sense of it? As appears by the practice of Ezra, and the Levites, who Nehe.
8. 8.
read the Law of God distinctly, and then gave the sense, and caused the
people to understand what was read. Those then, who in their Sermons deliver
the true sense of the word written, according to those several kinds of
expositions, must needs deliver the word of GOD, even the selfsame word that
is written.

Again, not only the things expressly set down in the Scriptures, but
likewise such things, as by sound and necessary consequence be collected
thence, are taken for written truths, and not unwritten traditions. Alfonsus
Uiruestus, a Popish Bishop, and a bitter Aduers. Luther. dogmat. philippi. cap.
9. p. 147.
enemy to Luther, acknowledges so much: For he says, That things may be
contained in the Scripture, either formally and expressly: or materially, being
drawn by a necessary collection from the contents. And this he says is called
Uirtualis continentia. To deny this (says he) is not Christian wisdom, but
Jewish superstition. And then teaches, that we are as much bound to give
assent to those things that be materially, contained and drawn thence by a
lawful collection, as to those that be formerly and expressly contained.
Bellarmine cannot deny, but that Scotus taught, there was De Eucharist. lib. 3.
c. 23
not any express place of Scripture to prove Transubstantiation, without the
declaration and exposition of the Church. Neither dare the Cardinal reject
that Quia colligitur ex scriptura diuina.
assertion; but says, that Transubstantiation belongs to the Catholic
faith, because it is collected out of the divine Scripture. In his judgment,
then that is a written truth which is collected from the Scripture, as well as
that which is expressly set down in the Scripture.

If therefore Preachers deliver no other doctrines in their Sermons; if they
confute and condemn no other errors; if they teach no other duties; if they
reprove no other sins; if they minister no other consolations; and if they
urge no other exhortations, then they have warrant in the written word of God,
either by express testimonies: or by necessary collections, the word which
they preach, is the very same in kind, in nature and substance, with the word
written. And so there is not one word written, and another word preached, as
the Docter would bear men in hand; but one and the same word diversely used. So
absurd is this his observation, so void of reason, so destitute of proof, and
so discre^ant from the doctrine of his own Church, that it may well be
thought, that rather malice against us, then any warrant from the text, caused
him to s^t it down. And here behold how far malice does carry your
teachers, even to forsake their own companions, and to overthrow the common
and received doctrine of their own Church, that so they may cross and
condemn us. And to conclude with him: he that will regard what he writes in
the latter end of his observation, may easily perceive how he overthrows his
own note observed in the beginning: For he produces the Apostle Peter, as an
in different witness in this case: who says, that the Word of God endures for
ever: and this is the word which is preached among you: whose testimony does
evidently prove, that the word written, and the word preached then by the
Apostles, and other Ecclesiastical persons, was the very same word. For it is
apparent by that verse which he alleged, that the word of God which endures
for ever, and the word which then was preached, were one and the self same
word.

Now what was the word that endures for ever? was it not the word written? If
any will deny this, let him read the former verse in Peter, and compare that
verse and this, with the Isaiah: 40. 6. 7. 8.
words of the Prophet Isaiah, and he shall find it to be the word written by
the Prophet. So as Peter makes the word written by the Prophet, and preached
by the Apostles, to be the same.

Again, this great Docter says, Immutabile est in natura and substantia sua,
etsi propagatione and explicatione variu^.
the Word is the Seed, because it is unchangeable, in it own nature and
substance: though diverse in explication: and proves it out of Basil and
Uincentius Lyrenens^s, who make that agreement between the word written, and
the word preached: that they are both one in substance, for they preached
nothing but what was written, yet the word written was made fruitful by
preaching.

SECT. III.
But to leave the Doctor and his observation; It may be some others will
acknowledge, contrary to his mind, that whosoever preaches nothing but such
doctrines, as are either expressly taught, or necessarily gathered from the
scriptures, preaches nothing but the written word. And yet will likewise
contradict me, because they hold that there is another word of God, besides the
written word. Bellarmine De verbo D^i non script. lib. 4. e. 1.
says, there is verbu^ Dei scriptu^, and verbum Dei non scriptum. A word of
God written, namely, the books of the old and new Testaments. And a word of
God not written, namely, the traditions of the Church, which be not written in
the scriptures. Gregory de Ualentia Refutat. falsar. causar. Herbrand. cap. 1.
holds it for a most certain thing, that the word of God is not only
contained in written letters (as it pleases him to term the scriptures in
way of disgrace) but is also put in the voice of the Church, and there does
sound. Coster the Jesuit, speaks more plainly and peremptorily. Et aute^
scriptura, ecclesiae catholicae consensus, and concors omnium Christianorum per
totu^ terrarum orbem, doctrina. H^ius scriptura, praestantia ^ltis partibus
superat scripturas, quas nobis in membrams Apostoli reliquerunt. En^h^ria. cap.
1 So also says Hosius. Quod ecclesia docet, expressum Dei verbum est. De
expresso, Dei verbo: fol. 119. in 106.
That the consent of the Catholic Church, and the consonant doctrine of all
Christians throughout the world, is the scripture. And in many points excels
the scriptures which the Apostles have left us in parchments. And this he
makes the first and chiefest kind of scripture, which now we have under the
Gospel, and says, that is a scripture penned with their own hands. The
scriptures penned by the Apostles and Evangelists, he places in the second
rank. And adds, that a scripture of the third kind, is in the degrees of
general Counsels; The decrees whereof, if a man respect truth, if he respect
the seal and confirmation of the holy Ghost, or the presence of Christ have
the same weight and moment, So also says Hosius. Quod Ecclesia docet expressum
Dei verbum est. De expresso De^ verbo. fol. 119. in 16.
that the holy gospells of God have. And so, whereas Bellarmine made but two
words of God, he makes three, and two of his three, are neither of the
Cardinals two. Now those who depend on such teachers as these, will hold, that
albeit the seed be ye word of God, and Preachers must teach nothing but the
word, yet they may preach the traditions of the Church, and the canons of
counsels, as well as the contents of the written word, because these be the
word of God, as well as the written word.

Whereunto I answer, that if the Traditions of the Church, the word put in the
mouth of the Church, and the decrees of Counsels, be either expressly taught in
the written word, or may be warranted thence, by just and lawful consequence,
we will acknowledge them to be the word of God. But if they be praeter verbum:
besides the word written, having neither way, any warrant thereby, they are not
to be preached as the word of God, but to be taken as the word of man. And if
they be contrary to the word written, they are so far from being the word of
God, as they must rather be reputed to be the word of the devil. I need not
to stand on the first and last kind. For we acknowledge the first, as well as
the papists; and the papists do in general condemn the last as well as we,
though they justify some in particular. All the doubt is, whether such
traditions and canons, that be praeter verbum, are to be taught to the people,
as the true word of God, and be ye seed, which was sowed by the sower, and is
able to make the receiver fruitful in all good works, and heir of salvation
in heaven. To that which I delivered in the sermons, I will add more for your
satisfaction, to prove them not to be Gods word, nor to be taught by the
preachers of the Gospel.

1. Christ himself when he was upon the earth was a Sower, and a principal
sower, when he preached the word, as is acknowledged by Athanas. Chrysostom:
Hieronym: Tho. Aquin. Ludolph: Hugo Cardi:
all writers in the parable. Look then what word he preached, that only was ye
true word of God, (there called Seed,) and no other: what he taught not, that
was not the word of God. For he called his Disciples Ioh. 15. 1^.
friends; because he had made known to them, all things which he heard from his
Father.

Now it is most evident, that Christ never taught any Traditions of the church,
nor decrees of councils: he often Matt. 5. 21. 27. Math. 15. 2. 3. 9.
condemned the decrees of the Elders, and the traditions of the Pharisees. And
told them, that in vain they worshipped God, who taught for doctrines, men's
precepts: But himself never taught any such.

He received his doctrine immediately from his Father. And therefore he said,
Ioh. 7. I. Ioh. 8. 26. 28.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. The things that I heard of
him, those speak I to the world. As my Father has taught me, so I speak
these things.

Will they say, that Doctrine received immediately from God, and presently
taught to people, is at the first teaching of it a tradition? Then all the
visions of the Prophets, and all the revelations of Saint John were traditions.
They hold only those to be traditions, which being not written, are conveyed
from one man to an other.

Again, though Christ received his doctrine from his Father, even as the
Apostles did from him: yet was it no other, then that was caught and written in
the Books of the old Testament, either by Types, or Precepts, or Prophecies,
or Promises.

And therefore he bad the Jews Ioh. 5. 29.
Search the Scriptures, because they testified of him. And Ioh. 5. 46. 47.
told them that Meses accused them. For had they believed Moses, they would
have believed him. But if they believed not Moses writings, they could not
believe his words.

His Sermons were Math. 5.
expositions of the Law, and the Prophets. (12) Luke 4. 17.
He (11) took Texts to expound. He alleged Testimonies out of the Old
Testament, to prove his Doctrine; And Ioh. 7. 38.
that both in his public Sermones, Luke 24. 27.
and in his private conferences.

Whereas he preached pardon of sin, to all that believed in him, Peter told
Cornelius and his company, Asts. 10. 42.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, all that believe
in him, shall receive remission of sins. Augustine said pere^ptorily In eo
tanta praedicat^^ and prenun^atio n^^itestament^ est, vt nulla in cua^gelica
atque aposto^^ca disciplina reperiuntur, qua illis etia^ libris veteribus
desint. Contr. Adi^^ant: cap. 3.
there was in the old Testament so great preaching and fore-shewing of the New
Testament, that nothing are found in the Evangelical and Apostolical
discipline, which be wanting in these old Books. Yea, he found so great
consent of doctrine betwixt the two Testaments, that he affirmed, Quaest: super
Exodus: qu: 73.
that in the Old, the New was hid, and in the New, the Old was revealed. Let
the Papists name any one doctrine taught by Christ, which they take for a
tradition, and I will undertake to prove it, out of the old Testament.

Moreover, what Christ taught, the Apostles afterward did write, though not
every word, yet the sum and substance of all.

Luke did Luke 13
perfectly search out all things from the beginning, to write thereof: from
point to point. And said, Act. 1. (...).
he made the treatise of his gospel, of all that Jesus began to do and teach,
until the day that he was taken up.

Beda, Lyra, Hugo Cardinal. in Act. 1.
Expositors hold, that the Evangelists wrote all his words and deeds, which
he thought worthy and fit for the office of his dispensation. Augustine De con
sensu Euang: lib: 1. ca. 35.
said, whatsoever Christ would have us to read of his deeds and sayings, he
commanded them to write. And although any one of the Evangelists did not of
himself make a perfect narration of all Christ's doctrines and deed. Yet all
of them together have don it. For they who wrote last, took a view of those
things which the former had written, and by direction of the spirit, added such
things as they had omitted.

It is testified by Eusebius: hyst: lib: 3. c. 21. Epiphan. haeres: 51. Hieron:
Catalog: scriptor. in Iohanne. August: praesat. ad tractat: in Euang. Johan.
most Authors, that when John percceyued how other Evangelists wrote only the
things of one year, even the year after John's imprisonment, he Antonin:
sum: hist: part. 1. tit. 5. cap: 8.
approved those: and in his Gospel added the things done and taught in the
former years.

And because some Heretics denied the Godhead of CHRIST, he Sixth: Senens:
Biblioth. lib. 1. in Ioh: p. 18. and lib. 7. haeresis. 5. p. 583.
considering that other Evangelists did at large describe his Humanity, but
spoke little of his Godhead, did in his Gospel write such things as proved
him to be GOD. And added those Sermons, which the rest had omitted.

And therevppon, Sixtus Senensis Exomnibus simul coniunctis, co^sonantissima ac
perfectissima salutis nostrae hystoriaresultet. lib. 7. haeresis, 5.
said against the Alogan Heretics, That from them all joined together, there
arises a most Consonant, and most perfect History of our salvation.

It is then to be examined, whether the Evangelists have written that Christ
taught any traditions received from men. If they write no such matter, it is
certain that he taught none at all.

Let our Adversaries run thorough the whole Newe-Testament, and they shall
not be able to find any one of their Traditions recorded by the Evangelists,
as a doctrine taught by Christ.

Seeing then Christ taught no traditions, why should we presume to teach any?
must we not receive from him the matter of our Doctrine, and imitate him in
the manner of teaching?

Said not Ambrose well, Nos noua omnia, quae Christus non docuit, iure
damnamus, quia fidelibus via est Christus. Si igitur Christus non docuit quod
docemus, etiam nos id detestabile iudicamus. De virginib. li. 3.
that we do justly condemn all new things, which Christ has not taught,
because Christ is the way to Belieuers.

If therefore Christ have not taught that which we teach, even we do judge it
to be detestable?

2. Again, the Apostle Paul was a painful Sower, and did sow all the word
of God. And therefore could Act. 20 26.
protest to his hearers, that he had kept nothing back from them, but had
showed them all the counsel of God.

Now what word taught he? Did he teach traditions, and man's ordinances? Did he
not teach only written truths? Did he Acts. 17. 2
not prove his doctrine by the scriptures? Did he not in his apology before
Festus Act. 26 22.
avouch that he taught none other things then those, which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come.

And how could the Acts 17. 10. 11.
Bereans have examined his doctrine by the Scriptures, if he had delivered
any thing not taught in the Scriptures?

Yea, Saint Paul was so far from preaching any other Doctrine then that which
was written Galath. 1. 89.
that he denounced him to be accursed, whether he were man or Angel, that
should teach otherwise. I know Bellarmine would elude that place by two
several answers, yet all in vain.

First, De ver bo Dei non script. lib. 4. cap. 10.
he says that the Apostle speaks not only of the word written, but of every
word, whether it be written, or it be by tradition. But besides that he
beggeth the question, he has the words of the Text, and the testimonies of
the Fathers, and of some Popish writers against him. For the Apostle speaks
of that word, which he and the rest of the Apostles preached, and therefore
he says;

If we or an Angel, preach otherwise then that which we have preached; And
what word he preached, I have proved before: not any traditions, but the
written word. If it be true which Irenaeus and Nicephorus do Iren. li. 3. c.
1. Niceph. hist. lib. 2. c. 34.
write, that what the Apostles preached at first, was afterward by the will of
God set down in the scriptures: it must be acknowledged that they preached no
traditions, seeing we can find no traditions penned by the^ in their Epistles.
And though they had been traditious when they were preached, yet they ceased to
be traditions, when once they were written by them.

Again, the Fathers restrain the words of the Apostle, to the scriptures, as
if he were accursed that would preach any thing not contained in them.
Augustine is most plain Vobis ann^nctauerit praeterqua^ quod inscripturis
legalebus and euangelicis accepistis, anathema sit.
therein. Whether concerning Christ, or concerning his Church, or any other
thing that pertains to our faith or life, I will not say, if we, (for we are
not to be compared to him, who said, if we) but even as he going forward,
added, If an Angel from heaven, shall preach unto you, besides that which ye
have received in the scriptures of the law and the Gospel, let him be
accursed.

Basil likewise teaches, that hearers, who be skillful in the scriptures,
Cont. lit. Petilian. lib. 3. cap. 6.
ought to examine those things which be delivered of their teachers. And to
receive those things which be agreeable to the scriptures: and to reject those
that be Sum. morae. sum. 72. cap. 1.
not. And produces this testimony of the Apostle to prove it: which had been
an impertinent proof, if the Apostle had spoken as well of a word not written,
as of a word written.

The Cardinal mentions both these testimonies, and would avoid Bellarm. de
verbo dei non script. lib. 4. ^0.
them, by saying, that they do not of purpose expound this place, but do
prove by this place, that it is not lawful to avouch any thing contrary to the
scriptures. Yet cannot he deny but that they do allege this place of the
Apostle. And I hope he will not say, but that they do deliver the true sense
of it, and do allege it according to the true meaning of the Apostle? Does
the Cardinal think that such learned fathers would give one sense of it, when
purposely they expound it, and another sense, when they alleged it, to prove
a point which they have in hand: This were to wrest the scripture, to make it
serve their present turn. I hope he will not so judge of such reverend men.

And to say, that they only prove thence, that it is not lawful to avouch any
thing contrary to scripture, is to alter and inuert their words. Does not
Augustine say, praeterquam quod accepistis, besides that which you have
received, but of that afterward. And if by that place, they prove that nothing
must be taught contrary to the scriptures: then must they not hold with the
Cardinal, that the Apostle speaks of each word, as well written, as not
written, but only of the written word. And so the Cardinal makes them to
confute him. Chrysostom purposely expounding the In Galal. 1.
place, says, Paul prefers the scriptures, before angels coming from
heaven. Si vel paulum euangeli zauerint praeter euangelium, quod accepistis.
Quam illud quod continetur in euangelijs and in epistolis and in sacra
scriptura, implicit vel express Thom. in Gal. 1.
As also that Paul does not say, if they preach contrary things, or if they
subvert the whole Gospel, but if they preach but even a little beside the
Gespell, which ye have received, let them be accursed.

Thomas Aquinas their Angelical Doctor, professedly expou^ding that place,
does write, that nothing is to be preached, but that which is contained in the
Gospells and in the Epistles, and in the holy scripture, implicitly or
expressly. Will they say that their Traditions are contained in the scriptures,
either expressly, or by way of implication or consequent? thenare they not
unwritten verities as they term them.

A second answer of the Cardinal is this, that the Apostle by Praeter,
understood Contra. And therefore did not forbid new doctrines and precepts,
which were besides those that were delivered: but only doctrines and precepts
contrary to the former. Yet will not this serve his turn. For in matters of
faith and religion; proeter and contra are both alike. Whatsoever is taught as
necessary to salvation, if it be besides the scripture, must be condemned, as
well as that which is contrary to the Scriptures. The reason is, because the
Scriptures conteyne all things which Ministers are to teach, as necessary to
salvation. And therefore Paul told Timothy, that they were able 2. Tim. 3. 15.
16. 17.
to make him wise unto salvation: And were profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness. Two of which, respect men's minds,
what they are to know and beleeeue as the truth, and what they are to reject
as errors. Two of them respect their manners, what sins they are to avoid,
what duties they are to perform. Is there any things needful to be taught
the people, but these things? And because the Cardinal answers, that the
Scriptures are profitable for all these things, but not sufficient. Consider
the words of the Apostle following, where he declares the end of this
profitablenes: namely, that the man Verse. 17
of God may be absolute, being made perfect to all good works. By the man of
God, he means the Minister of the Gospel. That title had he in his former
Epistle given unto Timothy. 1. Tim. 6. 11.
And Lyra says, the man of God 1. Tim. 6. 11 Homo dei. 1. ad diuinum officium
ordinatus, qualis estu. Lyra in 2. Tim. 3.
was one ordained to the divine office, such a one as Timothy was. If then the
Scripture being profitable for those four uses, will thereby make a Minister
of the Gospel absolute and perfect for each good work belonging unto him: he
is not to teach any things over and besides the Scripture.

Theophylact thus writes on the former place; He does not infer, if In Gal.
1.
they only preach contrary things: but if they preach that which is beside
that which we have preached: that is, if they shall add any thing, that is but
a very little more, they are subject to the curse.

And indeed it may seem strange, that the Papists are so earnest to have
vnwritte^ traditions as well preached, as written truths, seeing the things
written are more cettaine, more excellent and necessary, and require a long
time to be all taught and learned. They are more certain, because all men are
more certainly assured, that the Scriptures, and the doctrines contained in
them, be the word of God, then that unwritten traditions be his word.
Bellarmine confesses De verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that nothing is better known, nothing more certain then the sacred
Scriptures, which be contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles:
that he must needs be most foolish, who denies that they are to be believed.
And produces 5. invincible and infallible proofs, that they are the very word
of God. When De verbo Deino^script. lib. 4. cap. 5.
he comes to speak of traditions, he alleges no such proofs: but only
goes about to prove, by 4. places of Scripture, which have been long ago
answered, that there are some traditions: though neither he, nor any of his
fellows, can tell what they are, nor can make a perfect Catalogue of them; so
uncertain are they. Indeed he delivers five rules, whereby true traditions
may be De vero. Dei non script. lib. 4. cap. 9. Ibid. lib. 4. cap. 2.
discerned from false and counterfeit traditions: yet those rules are grounded
on the authority of men, and do not infallibly prove them to be the word of
God. Yea, he teaches, that al traditions have not the like authority: some
have divine authority, some have Apostolical, some ecclesiastical. And
therefore all of them cannot have the same authority with the written word,
which himself before proved to have divine authority.

And how do they know any thing to be a tradition, but by humane writings and
histories? which as the Cardinal confesses, can breed but De effect. sacram.
lib. 2. cap. 25. fine.
humane belief, wherein may be falsehood.

Neither are they so necessary and profitable as the Scripture. It is able to
make a man wise to salvation. It is the seed ofregeneration. It is the food
of our souls. It is the sword of the spirit, to defend us from the Devil. It
brings us to faith and salvation; as before I proved. Can such profit be
reaped from traditions? Did ever any approved author ascribe such virtue and
efficacy to them? Did ever any Christian obtain these benefits by them?

Moreover, the things taught in the Scripture are not easily learned.
Augustine wrote, that the profunditie of the Scripture is so great, that he
Epist. 3.
might he might daily profit in them, if from the beginning of his childhood,
to his crooked old age, he should with greatest leisure, chiefest study, and
better wit, endeavor himself to learn them only. The Papists will not
gainsay this, seeing they hold the Scripture to be very obscure. Pambo
confessed, that in 19. years he had not learned to Socrat. hist. lib. 4. c.
18.
practice one lesson, taught him out of Psalm. 39. to refrain his tongue from
evil. How many years then may our people require to learn the meaning and
the practice of al things written in the Old and New Testament?

I would therefore wish our Popish Priests and people, first to learn how to
understand and practice all things that be written: and when they have
learned all those, then to begin with traditions. It is no wisdom to contend
much, and busy themselves greatly about traditions, before they have learned
and practiced all things written, which be far more certain, more
necessary, and profitable. If they would take this course, I am assured, that
there is not any one of them, though he lived to be as old as Methuselah, that
would ever trouble, either himself or us with traditions. But it skilleth not
what doctrine Papists hear, if Tollet Si rusticus credat suo episcopo
proponentialiquod dogma haereticum, meritur in credendo. Instruct. sacerdot.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
say truly; That a country man believing his Bishop, delivering heretical
doctrine, does merit by believing.

SECT. IIII.
IN describing the second property of hearers, which was their believing for a
time, to show what kind of faith that was, I taught, that there be diverse kinds
of faith; one proper to the elect, and others common both to them and to the
reprobate. I may justly fear, left that doctrine will not be received of all
my country men and neighbors, because the contrary is taught by many Romish
Rabbines. The Catechism of the Part 1. cap. 1. p. (...).
Tridentine Counsel teaches; That though there be diverse degrees of faith,
yet it is but one in kind. The Annot: in Iam: 2. sect. 11.
Rhemistes hold, that the dead faith, whereof S. James speaks, and the
Catholic faith is all one. Coment. in Mat. 9. 2.
Maldonatus scoffeth at them, who make three kinds of faith; Historical,
Miraculous, and Justifying. De Rom pontif. lib. 3. c. 21. Et de iustificat.
lib. 1. c. 4.
Bellarmine maintains it very stiffly, that there is but one faith: And that
the historical faith, the the faith of miracles, and the faith of promises,
are all one: and that this is the justifying faith.

Lest I be mistaken, I would have you to understand, that I acknowledge that
there is but one faith, in respect of the object, or of the things which are to
be believed. In regard whereof, the Apostle says; There is Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Faith, one Baptism: Meaning, that we all believe the same thing, as we
are all baptized with the same rite: De iustif. lib. 1. c. 4. Sect. Iam. vero
catholici.
as Bellarmine does truly expound it. And in this respect De Trinit. lib. 13.
2.
Agustine taught, that there was but one faith of all believers. Eadem
credentium fides vna: But one faith of all them which believe the same things.
And in this respect the Fathers Leo de pass. Dom. sermon. 14. August. de Nature.
and great. c. 44. and in Ioh. tract. 45.
write, that there was but one faith in all ages: that the believing Jews
under the Law, and believing Christians under the Gospel, had one and the same
faith, differing only in the manner, not in the matter: they Fulg^nt. ad
Monum. lib. 2. paulo postinitium.
believed in Christ, who was to come; and Christians in him, already come.
Augustine De trinit. lib. 13. c. 2.
said truly: Aliud sunt ea quae creduntur, Aliud fides qua creduntur. The
things which are believed, and the faith whereby they are believed, are not one
and the same. The former (says he) consist in things which have been, which
are, and which shall be: but the other is in the mind of the believer. And
therefore, though there be but one faith, in respect of the object, and
things to be believed: yet there may be diverse kinds of faith, differing
much one from another, in respect of the habit, or faculty of the mind,
whereby we do believe them: because all persons do not believe the same
things, after one and the same manner.

Again, I do confess that there is but one true saving and justifying faith
in all the Saints, and in all the elect. Though every one of them have a proper
and peculiar faith of his own; yet it is the same, with the faith that is in
others. The faith of one, may differ from the faith of another in degrees: so
as one is stronger, another weaker: but not in knde, not in nature and
substance. Yet there be in other persons diverse other kinds of faith besides
this, which be not the same with it, but do much differ in substance and
kind; not only from it, but likewise one from another. The difference and
diversity of these kinds, I have in the Sermons going before sufficiently
proved by testimony of holy writ: I will now prove the same by the
testimonies of ancient Fathers, and late Popish writers. And that first in
general, then in particular. In general, that there is not only one kind of
faith, but diverse and several kinds of faith.

SECT. V.
MOst of the Fathers, and many of the Romish writers have distinguished betwixt
these three; Credere Deo, credere Deum, and credere in De^: To believe God, to
believe that he is God, and to believe in God. As namely, De temp. sermon. ^81.
Augustine, Insymbol. hom. 2.
Eusebius, Emissenus, In Romans 3. and in Jacob. 2.
Beda, De sanct. Andr. ser. 3.
Bernard, Sent. lib. 3. did. 23. D.
Lumbard, The In epist. ad Romans 4. initio.
Ordinary gloss, 2. a 2. aequ. 2. art. 2. and comment in 1. Pet. 1. 8.
Thomas Aquinas, Sum. part. 4. tit. 8. cap. (...). sect. (...).
Antonius, Sermon. 6. cap. 2.
Bernardinus de Senis, Compend: theolog: lib. 5. cap: 21. fine.
Johannes de Combis, and Comment in Ioh: 6.
Ferus. And I marvel much, that Bellarmine writing so much of the difference
and unity of faith, did never mention this distinction, being so rife in all
Authors Now these three do so much differ among themselves, as that they
cannot possibly be acts of one and the same faith in kind.

First, they differ in respect of the nature and properties of them. And
therefore De temp: sermon. 181.
Augustine thus distinguished them: Credere Deo, To give credit to GOD, is to
believe that those things are true which he speaks. Credere De^, is to
believe that he is God. Credere in illum, to believe in him, is to love him. So
elsewhere he says of two of them: Multum interest vtrum quisque credat ipsum
esse Christum, and vtrum credat in Christu^. etc. De verb. dom. sermon. 61.
There is great difference, whether a man believe him to be Christ, and
whether he believe in Christ: For the Devils believe him to be Christ; yet did
not believe in Christ. He belieueth in Christ, who both trusts in Christ,
and loves CHRIST. He that belieueth in CHRIST, by believing in Christ, CHRIST
shall come into him; he after a sort is united unto him, and is made a member
in his body.

To the same effect speaks De symbol. homil: 2.
Eusebius Emissenus: Credere Deo, is one thing: Credere Deum, is another:
Credere in Deum, is another: which none is proved to do, but he who devoutly
trusts in him.

The like difference does Bernard put betwixt them: Credere in Deum, est omnem
spem suam in illum dirigere. De sanct. Andr. sermon. 3. in fine.
Credere Deo, is to give credit to his words: Credere De^, is to confess him
to be every where: Credere in Deum, is to direct all his hope unto him.
Bernardine Sermon. 6. cap. 2.
likewise says, that credere Deo, and credere De^may be acts both of a dead
and living faith: but the third only, Credere in Deum, is an act of a lively
faith. Seeing there is a faith, Quacredimus Deo, and a faith, Qua credimus
Deum, and a faith, Qua credimus in Deum, and all these three do so much differ
one from another in their natural properties, how can they al be one and the
same faith? Again, the same Authors show a difference betwixt them, because
some of them be sometime given as well to the creature, as to the Creator:
another belongs only to the Creator. It is to be known, said Augustine,
Sciendum est, quod ecclesiam credere, non tamen in ecclefiam credere debeamus.
etc. De temp. sermon. 131.
that we ought to believe the Church, but not in the Church, because the Church
is not God, but the house of God. And in another place, Credimus Paulo, sed non
credimus in Paulum etc. In Ioh. 7. tra^^. 7.
That we may say of the Apostles; We believe Paul, but we do not believe in
Paul. We believe Peter, but we do not believe in Peter. Ruffinus likewise
observed, Exposit in symbol.
that in the Creed, we are taught not to say, In Sanctam Ecclesiam, I believe
in the Church: for then we should have the same says toward it, that we have
toward God. And further notes; That in all Articles which concern the
Godhead, the praeposition, In, is added: but in those that concern the
creatures, it is omitted. And by it, is put a difference betwixt the Creator,
and the creatures, betwixt divine and humane things.

Though the Rhemistes, finding that they can call on none but in whom they do
believe, do Annot. on Romans 10. 14. sect. 14.
teach, that we may believe in the Saints, that so they my be inuocated. Yet
is that their assertion condemned; not only by the Greg. Nazian. de theolog.
orat. 4. Cyril thesaur sanct. lib. 12 cap. 15. August. in Psalm 77.
Fathers of former ages, but also by their own Lumb. sent. lib. 3. did. 23.
d. Tho. Aquin. in Ioh 6. 29. Coster. enchirid. cap. 14. de venerat. sanctor. p.
467. Feuardent dialog. p. 45. Ferus in Ioh. 14. (...).
fellows of late time, who with one consent do teach, that though we may
believe others, yet we must believe in none but God alone.

As therefore that fear and reverence, that service and worship which we owe
to men, as well as to God, does differ in kind, from that which we do give
only to God. So that faith which we have as well toward men, as toward God,
must needs differ in kind from that which we have in God only.

Lastly, many writers teach a manifest difference of these three, in respect of
the persons in whom they are found. Augustine says, Soli serui Dei, soli
sancti. Dei. soli side filij Abrahae, soli filij dilectionis, filij
promissionis. Homil. 17.
that the says which works by love, (namely, Credere in Deum; only the
servants of God have, only the Saints of GGD, only the sons of Abraham by
faith, only the sons of love, only the sons of promise. And when I come
to speak of Justifying faith in particular, I shall prove, that this
belongs only to the elect.

But the other kinds are found in others: Saint James teaches Iam. 2. 19.
Mark. 1. 24. 34.
that the Devils believe there is a God, and but one God: they knew Christ when
he was, even the holy one of God. Augustine De verb. Dom. sermon. 61.
said, the Devils believed, ipsum esse Christum, that he was the Christ: nec
tamen in Christum crediderunt: yet they did not believe in Christ. Likewise, De
temp. sermon. 181.
Credere ipsum esse Deum, and Daemones possunt. Yea, he further says, De
cognit. verae vitae. cap. 37.
Not only the Devils, but likewise the Pagans, credunt Deum. De sanct. Andr.
ser. 3.
Bernard writes thus; Deum and Deo credunt Daemones non in Deum. Lumb. s^nt.
lib. 3. did. 23. d.
The Master of Sentences, that Devils, and wicked men, and false Christians,
may credere Deum and credere Deo. Ferus, Comment. in Ioh. 6.
that it is not all one thing, Credere Deum, credere Deo, and credere in Deum:
ungodly men can do the two former; but only godly men do the last. Comin 1.
Pet. 18
Thomas Aquinas having distinguished all three, says, the two first suffices
not, because all men credunt Deum: and Heretics credunt Deo, because they
believe those things to be true which be written by the Prophets and
Evangelists, concerning God and Christ. Who then can think, that the faith
which Devils, Pagans, wicked men ungodly men, false and counterfaite
Christians, and Heretics have, is the self same in kind, in nature and
substance, with that faith which God bestows on the elect, on them which be
his children, be holy and just? As they are better beloved of God, and in more
favor with God; so assuredly they be endued with a better kind of faith,
whereby they are made partakers of that his favor and grace.

SECT. VI.
But to leave those Authors, and that distinction, let us come to other
writers, who in other terms set forth diverse kinds of faith. Bernard says,
that there is a fourefold faith; A dead faith, a feigned faith, Fides mortua,
sides ficta, sides peruersa, fides recta. In coena. Domin. sermon. 10.
a perverse faith, and a right faith: which he also called, a Catholic faith.
In the first (says he) are proud men, riotous, covetous, thieves, robbers, and
such like. In the second, are men disobedient to spiritual Fathers,
unthankful for heavenly gifts, who are without brotherly affection, without
peace of charity, accusers-of their brethren, lovers of pleasures more the^
lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof. In
the 3. are Heretics, lifted up against God, proud of their errors, and
blasphemers against God. In the last are meek men, patient, gentle, humble,
chaste, lovers of God and their neighbors, and ready to every good work,
waiting for the redemption of the sons of God. And her eckoneth every one of
these, as a faith of some Christians. Will any man say, that all these are one
and the same faith in substance and kind, and differ only in degrees? he
might as well say that crooked and straight, heat and cold are the same
qualities.

Tollet the late Cardinal, in plain terms acknowledges diverse kinds of
faith. There is one kind of faith, Est vnum fidei genus, quacredimus and
ass^timus dogmatis reuelatis and propositis per ecclesiam vt credantur, etc.
Alteru^ fidei genus est, qua non tanti dogmatis assentimus, sed eti^ id quod
fieri petimus, efficiendum a
whereby we believe and do assent to the doctrines revealed, and propounded by
the Church to be believed, which Cyrill called a dogmaticall faith. There is
another kind of faith, whereby we do not only assent to the doctrines, but
also do believe, that the things which we ask to be done, shall be
accomplished by God: which we call an assurance.

Stella also as plainly makes two kinds of Faith. There is a faith (says
he) whereby we believe whatsoever is to be believed, and this is a theologieall
virtue. There is another faith, which is a certain confidence, to wit, that
whereby we believe, that the Lord will give us that which we ask of him.

I could produce more witnesses speaking to the same purpose, but I Deo
credimus. Quam siduciam etiam appellamus. Tollet. in Luc. 5. annot. 36. Est
fides qua creditur quicquid credendum est, and haec est virtus theologica.
Altera, quae considentia quaedam est, scilicet qua credimus quod denabit
dominus id quod ab eo petimus, Stella in Luc. 5. to cap. 145.
spare them, till I come to speak of the several kinds by themselves, yet
consider that not only the ancient Fathers, but likewise some great Clearkes
in the late Romish Church, have made diverse kinds of faith. Why then should we
be condemned as Heretics, for teaching the same.

SECT. VII.
LEt us now come to the several kinds of faith in particular. And let us first
consider a little, touching justifying faith. It may be you will mislike two
things in that description of it, which I set down in one of the precedent
sermons. The one respects the nature of it, the other respects the persons
that be endued with it, because some of your side teach contrary thereunto.

1. Touching the nature of it, I showed that by it a Christian does apprehend
and apply to himself, all the promises of God in Christ, and all the merits of
Christ, for his present justification, and for his future salvation. I know it
as well as you, that many of your learned me^ teach the contrary: and therefore
I fear, that you will rather believe them then me. The Rhemists say, that to
Annot. on Romans 3. Sect. 7.
apprehend Christ's righteousness by faith, is a ph^ntasticall apprehension of
that which is not. And that it is a false faith. And afterward, that the
Apostle Annot. on Hebr. 11. Sect. 6.
knew not special faith, the forged faith of Protestants, whereby every one
of these new Sect-maisters, and their followers, (as it pleases them in the
meeknes of their spirit to term us) believe, their sins are remitted, and
themselves shall be saved. And elsewhere, that a Annot. on Iam. 2. 26. Sect:
1^.
special faith, is a forged faith, that neither Paul nor James, nor any other
sacred writer, ever knew or spoke of any such faith.

Cardinal Bellermine maintains that Faith is neither Fiducia, an assurance
De iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 5. 6. 7.
of Gods mercy, or the Pardon of a Man's own sins: nor yet Notitia a
cknowledge of such things: but but only a firm and certain assent to the
truth of those things which God has propounded to be delivered. Doctor
Stapleton calls them Heretics, who place Promptuar. cathol. inferia: 5.
hebdo: 1. Quadrages:
the whole nature, property, virtue, and greatness of faith, in a particular
applicatien of Gods geuerall promises to Belieuers.

Indeed that which they say is true, if there were no other faith taught in the
word, nor wrought in the hearts of Christians, then that which is generally
taught and found in the present Roman Church. But they which understand the
word aright, and are justified by Faith, do know and feel another kind of
faith far surpassing that. Bellarmine does much wrong us, and more trouble
himself in this point then needed. He says that they differ Haeretici
restringunt ad solam promissionem miser^cordiae specialis. De instif. lib. 1.
cap. Sect. Itaque tribus.
from us in the object of justifying faith, because we (whom he commonly
calls by the name of Heretics) do restrain it to a sole promise of a
special mercy. And afterward spends many chapters, in proving, that the
object of a justifying faith, is not a special mercy, but all things which God
De iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 8. 9. 10.
has revealed. For we do not hold, that the promise of a special mercy to a
man in particular, is the object of a true justifying faith, under the new
testament we find none such made to any of us: The general promises of mercy
in Christ are the material objects, which being indefinitly propounded, it is
an act of faith, to make a true Christian to apply them particularly to
himself.

But to come to the matter now in question. It may easily be proved, that a
justifying faith, is not only an assent to the truth of things revealed in the
word, but likewise an apprehension, and particular applying of the general
promises of Gods mercies, and Christ's merits, for the remission of sins. In
the scriptures faith is called a receiving of Christ. Ioh. 1. 12. Gal. 3 14.
And a receiving of the promise. Can there be a receiving of a thing, without
application? was Christ received generally of all together, for all together:
and not particularly by every one for himself? When Thomas said to CHRIST, My
God, and my Lord. Did not he especially and particularly apply Christ and his
benefits to himself, who was GOD and Lord to all true Christians? Yet Christ
gave it the name and Title of Faith, saying unto him: Because thou Ioh. 20. 29.
have seen me, thou belieuest: And makes that his faith, the very same with
their faith, who were blessed for believing, when they had not seen. Yea, with
the faith of Gentiles. For Gentiu fidem praedicat atque commendat. (...)* Ioh.
20. Tract. 121. Galat. 2. 20.
Augusti: thinks he did thereby preach and commend the faith of the Gentiles.

When Paul said, Christ has loved me, and given himself for me: Did he not
apply particularly to himself, Christ and his benefits? yet this he did by
that faith, whereof he spoke immediately before, even by that faith in the
Son of God, whereby he then lived.

Is not Christ that bread which must nourish our souls? and is not Faith the
eating of him? as himself declares at large. Ioh: 6. Whereupon Quid paras
dente^ and ventrem, creed, and ma^ducasti Io Io. tract. 25 Credere in Christum,
est ma^ducare pane^ vinum Tract. 26.
Augustine said, What preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe, and thou
have eaten.

And can there be any eating, unless there be be a special Application of the
meat to the person that is fed? Does not every one pray in particular for
special mercy? And is not every one to believe, that what he asks he shall
obtain?

And certain it is, that whosoever does worthily by Faith, receive the
sacrament of the Lords supper, he does by faith particularly receive Christ
and all his benefits, and particularly applies all the promises of Gods
mercies in him.

Bellarmine confesses, that they agree De sacram. in gener: lib. 1. cap. 2.
with us, that Faith is necessarily required for the profitable receiving of
the Sacrament.

And is there not an Analogy betwixt the signs, and the thing signied? Loo^e
then how we receive the outward Signs, so must we by faith receive the thing
signified.

As therefore every one does particularly with his own hand receive to
himself, and for himself, the outward sign: So every one that belieueth,
does particularly receive to himself, and for himself, Christ and all his
benefits.

Let us come to the Fathers. It may be some of you will neither yield to
scriptures alleged by us, nor yet to any reasons, unless you may hear the
Fathers speak as we do.

N^ncredit in Dcum, qui non in eo solo collocat tot^^s f^li^itatis suae sid^am.
De duplut M^rtyr, Sect: 40.
That godly Martyr Cyprian said, that although a man daily rehearsed all the
articles of the creed: Yet he does not believe in God, who does not place in
him only, the assurance of his whole felicity: he holds that faith is a
confidence or assurance, and not in general, of the happiness and salvation of
all Gods children, but in particular of his own happiness. This his assertion
does so gall the Papists, that Est ^ti^m ^te ^endum. A^^^t in Cypr:
Pamelius said, it must be read warily: because he knew that if it were read
in the very sense which the words did bear and the author meant, without some
corrupt gloss contrary to his meaning: it would justify our doctrine of
faith, and make most of the popish crew, who have no confidence of their own
salvation, but an assent to the truth of Gods word, to be a company of
unbelievers. The same Father says, Quantu^ illuc fidei capacis afferimus
tantum gratiae inundantis haurtmus. Epist. 2.
That how much Faith we bring thither to receive, so much we draw of Gods
ouerflowing grace.

This is appointed of God, (said Hoc constitutum est a Deo, vt qui credit in
Christum, saluus sit sine opere, sola side gratis accipiens remissionem
peccatorum. in 1. Cor. 1.
Ambrose) that he who belieueth in Christ, should be saved without works, by
faith only, receiving freely the remission of sins

To the like effect speaks Hesychius, Gratia ex miserecordia, and proebetur,
and fide comprehenditur solasine operibus. In Leuit: lib: 4. cap: 2.
Grace of mercy, is both offered, and also apprehended by faith alone without
works. Quomodo in coelum manum mittam, vt ibi sedentem teneam? fidemmitte, and
tenuist^. In Ioh. 11. tract. 50.
Augustine makes Faith the hand, whereby every one must lay hold of Christ,
now sitting in Heaven. Is not that more then a bare assent to things revealed?
Is not this a special Application?

When the same Father stirred up his own soul with these words, Dicat anima,
omnino secura dicut, Deus meus es tu, qui dicit animae nostrae, salus tua go
sum, dicat secura, non f^ctet in^^riam cum hoc dixerit imo faciet si non
dixerit. In Psa. 32. conc. 2.
Let my soul say, yea, let it altogether confidently say, Thou art my God, who
does say to my soul, I am thy salvation, etc. Did he not in particular
appropriate and apply to himself the general favors and mercies of God, and
made him, who was God over all, to be his God in particular? And when he said,
Ecce cred^mus in Christum, quem side accipimus. In acciptendo nouimus quid
cogitemus: midi^u^ accipimus, and in cord saginamur. De verb. Dom. sermon. 33.
Behold we believe in Christ, whom we receive by faith: In receiving, we know
what we think: we receive a little, and are fed in the heart: he showed the
nature of faith to be rather an apprehension, and application, then an assent.

Chrysostom writing of the promises made to the Patriarchs, and of the manner
how they received them, says thus: Sola autem fide certam de ijs co^ceperunt
siduciam, procul^as videtes ante quatuor generationes, etc. Tam certa de ipsis
erat is persuasio, vt etiam eas salutarent. etc. Vides quod illud (acceperu^t)
est expectare, and de is confidere. Siergo co^fidere est accepisse, nobis
quoque licet accipere, in Hebr. 11. homil. 23. Theophilact. on Ephesians. 6. 16.
Neque vere huius religionis cognotione^ fidem hoc loco dicit, sed eam quae
nihilhaesit a^s, facit vt futura tam certa habeamus, quam habemus praesentia.
They did by faith alone conceive a certain assurance of them, seeing them a
far off, before four generations: they had such a certain persuasion of
them, that they did even salute them, as Seafaring men do a far off see the
Cities desired, which they salute before they enter into them. Thou see that
this (they received) is to expect and have confidence of them. If therefore to
have confidence, is to receive, We also may receive them. Wherein he declares
the nature of faith, not to consist only in an assent given to the truth of
things revealed, but a confidence and assurance of the promises of God made to
man. And that by this confidence believers are said to receive the promises.
And that as they then received the promises, by that their confidence, so also
we now by the like confidence are to receive them.

Damascen, expounding the Apostles description of faith, that it is the ground
of things hoped for, has these words, Indubitabilis and iniudicabilis spes,
tam eorum, quae a Deo nobis promissa sunt, quam assecutionis nostrarum
petitionum. De orthodox. fide. 4. 11.
Faith is an undoubted and vniudge-able hope, as well of those things which are
promised us of God, as of obteyning our petitions. If then any man may
particularly ask the forgiveness of his own sins, and the salvation of his
own soul, he may in particular believe, that his own sins shall be pardoned,
his own soul saved. Bernard is plentiful this way, thus he says; If thou
beleeuest that thy sins cannot be blotted out but by him, against whom only
thou have sinned, thou do well: but yet add more, that thou also believe
this, that thy sins are forgiven thee by him. Is not this a special faith?
Is not this more the^ an assent in Sed add adhuc, vt and hoc credas, quia per
ipsum tibi peccata donantur. In annunciat. Mariae. sermon. 1. initio.
general to things revealed? Is not this the faith so much impugned by our
late papists? And for a special application of Christ's merits unto us, for the
pardon of a man's own sins, and the salvation of his own soul, he speaks
as plainly, Nisi quod non erat de membris Christi, nec pertinebat ad cum De
christi merito vt suum praesumeret; suum diceret quod il^ius esset, tanquam rem
canitis membrum. Ego vero fidenter quod ex me mihi deest, vsurpo mihi ex
viseribus domini, quoniam misericordia effluunt. In cantic. sermon. 61. medio.
But that Caine was not of the members of Christ, nor had any thing to do with
the merit of Christ, that he might presume the same to be his, he would have
called that his own, which was Christ's, as the member does that which is the
heads. Thereby teaching, that the true believer, being a member of Christ,
does call that his own which is Christ's, and does without sin presume, that
the merit of Christ is his in particular. And therefore in the next words he
says thus of himself: Whatsoever is wanting unto me from my self, I boldly
take it unto me, out of the bowels of the Lord Jesus, because they flow out
with mercy.

Let us descend to the Popish writers: we may find many of them to iumpe with
us herein: Ferus was commended by Sixtus Senensis, to be Biblioth. sanct: lib.
4. in Johan. Ferus. p. 265. 14. Non enim semper sides est, quod nos fidem
dicimus: fidem nos dicimus, assentire ijs, quae diuinis scripturis produntur,
and quae ecclesia credenda proponit. Come^t. in Mat. 8. lib. 2.
a man excellently learned in the divine Scriptures, whose equal in the office
of preaching the Gospel, the Catholic Churches of the Germans have not in
this our time. Yet does he in many places condemn the Popish description of
faith, and approve ours. Secundum scripturam fides non aliud est, nisi fiducia
miserecordiae diuinae, promissae in Christo. ibid. Non apprehenditur manu,
corporis, sed manu cordis quae est fides. Ferus in Ioh. 3. 16.
That is not always faith, whith we call faith: we call it faith, to assent to
those things which be delivered in the divine histories, and which the Church
propounds to be believed. The Scripture speaks far otherwise of Faith:
For according to the Scriptures, faith is nothing else but a conside^ce of Gods
mercy, promised in Christ. And he brings Abraham's example for proof thereof.
And of this faith (says he) mention is made in the Gospel, where it is said;
He that believes in the Son of God, shall not be condemned. The faith
which the Scripture commends, is no other thing, then to trust to the free
mercy of God: this is the true faith, whereby the just man lives: this alone
is it which God requires of us. An example of this faith we have in the
Centurion: for we do not read, that he rehearsed the Articles of faith, but
that he came to Christ with great trust. These words make so much for us, that
Sixtus Senensis Bibliothec. sanct. lib. 6. annot. 43.
said of them, that he seems to allude to the error of them, who teach, that
justifying faith is nothing else but an assurance of Gods mercy, forgi^ing our
sins through Christ. And Dominicus Soto took upon him to confute him in that
point: but Michael Medina defended him against Soto. And elsewhere he speaks
as fully for us: Sed est certa firma and stabili fiducia, Christum omniaque
eius bona complecti, eisque toto cord, tota anima, totisque viribus inhaerere.
In Ioh. 6. 29.
To believe in Christ (says he) is not to know his works: for Satan knows
this: neither is it to remember or think with himself, that Christ has
suffered and risen again: for even ungodly men remember these things, and
think of them, and yet are made nothing better. But it is with certain, sure,
and steadfast trust to take hold of Christ and all his benefits: and to stick
to them with all the heart, all the soul, and all the strength.

Pighius in his book of controversies, dedicated to the Pope Paulus, 3. does
teach, that although Faith, as it is usually taken by ecclesiastical writers,
be that habit of the mind, whereby we do certainly, and without any
doubting, assent to those things, which for our salvation, are revealed of God,
to his Church, Huis fidei, and rationis mentisque assensui, quo perfecta fides
dici possit, adiuncta esse debet, etiam animi, certa quaedam, firmaque si^, qua
Dei verbo, veritatique ita in nititur, ita fidit fid^lls anima, vt absque vlla
haesitatione, quicquid illud sit, velut si manibus teneret, certum habeat, etc.
Controuers. 2. de fidet and Iustificat. fol. 40. 41. in 80. Paris. 1542.
Yet unto this faith and assent of reason and the mind, that it may be called
a perfect faith, there ought also to be adjoined a certain sure and firm
trust of the heart, whereby the believing soul does so stay upon, and trust to
the word and truth of God: that without all doubting, whatsoever it is, he
has it, as sure as if he held it in his hands. And he further adds, that
this is the Faith, and not that assent of reason, which the Lord every where
required of them, whom he vouchsafed to heal. Of that he spoke, when he
said, Daughter be of comfort, thy Faith has made thee whole. And this is the
same Faith, which makes prayer effectual, and which Christ and James require
in them that pray.

Didacus Stella, Enarrat. in Luc. 5. Imo etiamsi peteret illa dimitti, si non
confideret and certissi ne crederet, illa sibi aimittenda, nunquam dimitter^^ur.
having distinguished of faith, that there is one to believe, whatsoever is to
be believed, called a Theological virtue: another is a Considence, by which we
believe that the Lord will give whatsoever we ask.

He says, that without this faith, 1. this Confidence, our sins cannot be
forgiven. For although a man believe all things contained in holy Scriptures,
to be true, and all things which the Church belieueth: yet if he should not
trust, and most certainly believe, that they shall be forgiven him, they should
never be forgiven him. And saint James says; Let him ask in faith, nothing
doubting.

To the like purpose does he afterward distinguish of faith, and describe the
later kind: saying, Fides dupliciter accipitur. Uno modo^ pro habitu credendi,
secundum quam assentimur veritatibus sacrae scripturae, etc. Alia est fides
quae considentia vocatur, qua petit aliquis a Deo confidenter, sperans and
credens certissime se consequuturum a Domino, id quod postulat. quae fides
necessaria est oranti, alias nihil vnquam impetrabit. Enarrat. in Luc. 7.
Faith is taken two ways; One way for the habit of believing, according to
which we do assent to the trueths of the Scripture. And this is the Faith,
without which it is impossible to please God. And this is one of the three
Theological virtues. 1. Cor. 13. And by this faith, a belieuer differs from
an Infidel.

There is another faith, which is called a Confidence, whereby a man asks of
God confidently, hoping and believing most certainly, that he shall obtain of
the Lord, that which he asks. Which faith is needful for him that prays:
otherwise he shall never obtain any thing.

If this be the faith required of them that pray aright, it is the faith of all
Gods Saints, and of them which are justified, for they pray often, and are
heard. And if this man write truly, then those who teach, and have no other
faith, then an assent to the truth of things revealed, can never obtain pardon
of their sins, nor have their petitions granted.

Tollet taught, Hoc in loco non accipitur fides promentis assensu, sed pro
voluntatis fiducia, vt recte. Euthymius, quae significatio frequens est in
scripturis. In Luc. 12. annot. 52.
and that out of Euthymius, that Faith in many places of scripture, is taken,
Not for the assent of the mind, but for the assurance of the will. Iansenius
also writes the same, Proinde, rectissime, vt apparet, dicetur nomine fidei in
euangelijs, cum ei tribuitur aut salus aut consecutio omnium quae volumus,
complecti vtrumque, and assensum illum sirmum in credendis de Deo ac Christo,
and fiduciam ex illius bonitate conceptam. etc. Concord. Euang. cap. 32.
Therefore most rightly, as appears, it may be said, that by the name of
Faith in the Gospells, when salvation, or the obtaining of those things which
we desire, is ascribed unto it, both these are comprehended: both that firm
assent in things to be believed, concerning God and Christ: and also a
Confidence conceived from his goodness, etc. For these two do so cleave
together, that neither can there be any Confidence without Credulity, neither
can Credulity without Confidence, obtain any thing of God. And to the same
effect afterward thus. Haec duo, nempe credulatas and siduciasimul videntur
includi in nomine (sides) cum subditur dixisse dominu^, secundum fidem vestram
siat vobis, vt sit sensus, sicut creditis me posse vos sanare, and ob hoc
confiditis me curaturu^ vos, ita fiat vobis. Concord. Euang. cap. 35.
These two, to wit, Credulity and Confidence, seem to be included together in
the name (Faith,) when it is set down that the Lord sa^d: According to your
Faith, be it unto you; That the meaning may be, As ye believe that I can heal
you, and for this do trust that I will heal you: So be it unto you.

If then, by the testimony of these Authors, Faith be often so taken in the
Scriptures; And if this be the only Faith whereby we obtain such things at the
hands of God: Why should we be condemned as Heretics, for teaching such a
faith? Ought not we to have such a faith in Christ, for the salvation of our
souls, that those men had in him, for the curing of their bodies?

Though Stapleton deny this special Considence, yet he acknowledges
propter. hanc fidem, vtramque and internam and externam sanitatem dedit.
Promptuar. domini. 18. post pentecost.
that for one, and the same faith, Christ gave them both outward and inward
health.

Paulus Burgensis says, that Abraham, by the Faith which was imputed to him
for Righteousness, did not only believe that he should be the Father of many
Nations, but rather that he and his seed should obtain everlasting life in
heaven.

In Genes. 15. Addit. 2.

The Divines of Colone taught, that Per fidem verbi Dei, operantis in nobis
veram contritionem and paenitentiam est, iustificamer tanqua^ per causam
qua^dam praeparatiuam and dispositutam. Persidem autem, qua absque dubitatione,
firmiter considemus, nobis peccata nostra propter Christum esse dimissa,
iustificamur tanquam per causam susceptiuam. Ant^didag. Coloni^ns. de
iustificat. hom. fol. 21.
through the faith of the word of God, working in us true Contrition and
Repentance, and other works of preventing grace, we are justified as by a
certain cause, preparing and disposing us. But through the Faith, whereby
without doubting, we do firmly trust, our sins are forgiven us through
Christ, we are justified, as by a cause receiving it.

And also add further, that the Non quomodo extranos in ipso est, sed sicut
and quando eadem nobis (dum tamen side apprehenditur) ad iustitiam imputatur.
ibid.
Righteousness of Christ, is the cause of our Justification; not as it is out of
us in him, but as, and when the same is imputed unto us for Righteousness; yet
so that it be apprehended by faith.

Cassander who was so highly esteemed for learning and wisdom, that two
Roman Emperors, Ferdinand, and Maximilian 2. sent to him for his advise, how
to compound the controversies in religion, approves their opinion, and says,
that Consultat. art. 4.
Book was greatly commended of all the Learned divines through Italy and
France, as a Book that excellently relates the sum of the Ancients opinion
touching religion: out of whose writings, the book is as it were confirmed.
And with great approbation, cites these words out of it.

Fatemur verum esse, ad iustificationem hominis omnino requiri, vt homo certo
credas, non tantum, generaliter, quod propter Christum vere paenitentibus
remittantur peccata: sed and quod ipsi homini remissa sint propter christum,
per sidem. ibid.
We confess it to be true, that it is altogether required for the justifying
of a man, that a man do certainly believe, not only generally, that for
Christ, sins be forgiven to them that be truly penitent, but also that they
be forgiven to the man himself, for Christ, by faith.

He also alleges, out of the Ratisbone book, these words, Vocamus fidem
viuam motum spiritus sancti, quo vere ponitentes eriguntur ad Deum, and vere
apprehendunt miscrecordium in Chry^^o promissam, vt iam vere sentiant, quod
remissionem peccatorum and reconciliationem propter meritum christi gratuita
Dei bonitate acceperunt, etc. Ibid.
We call a lively faith, a motion of the holy Ghost, whereby they who truly
repent, are lifted up to God, and do truly apprehend mercy promised in
Christ; that now they truly perceive, that they have through the free goodness
of God, received remission of sins, and reconciliation for the merits of
Christ, and do cry Abba F^ther.

And thereupon he infers, that rightly and agreeably to the scriptures, it
is said, that this is the nature of a Justifying Faith, that it perceive, that
feeling of Gods favor, which the holy Ghost works in us.

And further adds, that to obtain Justification, Ad^stificationem
consequendam requiritur talis fides, qua h^mo exemplo Abrahae, ad promissionem
Dei, non h^tet per diffidentiam, sed praeter spem in spem credat, Deum credenti
in eum, qui suscitat Iesum a mortuis, imputaturum hanc fidem ad
iustificationem, and peccata nor imputaturum. Cassand. ibid. p: 13.
Such a Faith is required, whereby a man after the example of Abraham, does not
doubt of the promise of God, through distrust, but above hope, belieueth under
hope, that God will impute to him, that belieueth in him; who raised Jesus from
the dead, this Faith to his justification, and will not impute his sins to
him.

An example whereof (as he says,) we have in the cure of corporal diseases,
which bears an image of the inward cure. For there Christ required a Faith,
whereby a man did believe that Christ was endued with that power, that he was
able to heal him: and trusted, that such was his goodness, that he would cure
him.

Cardinal Bellarmine, after he had written very much, to prove that Faith is
only an assent to the truth of things revealed, and not an assurance or
special application of the promises, does at last overthrow all, and yield
to us. For thus he writes of us, Recte dicunt, posse vnu^quemque promissiones
generales sibi applicare per fidem. Nam quemadmodum side catholica credo
christu^ mortuum esse pro omnibus, ita eadem, fide credo mortuum esse prome qui
sum vnus ex omnibus. De iustif. lib. 1. cap. 11. Sect: Denique quod dicunt.
they say rightly, that every one may by faith apply to himself the general
promises. For as I do believe by the Catholic faith, that Christ dyed for
all: So by the same faith I do believe, that he dyed for me who am one of
them. What need we any better witness, then he who before was our greatest
adversary? Does not this lay open the nature of Justifying faith, to be the
same that we teach? Is a particular application of general promises, no more
then a bare assent to the truth of things revealed? By that faith, whereby I
believe Christ dyed in general for all, do I also believe, that he dyed in
particular for me. And yet shall we say, that a special faith is a forged
faith, that it is against the nature of faith, to apprehend and apply
particularly to my self, the promises of God and the merits of Christ?

Yet for all this, the Cardinal will not grant, that any man is to believe
the pardon of his own sins in particular, because the general promises are
not De iustificat. lib. (...). cap. 11. sine.
absolute, but conditional; even with the condition of faith, as we
acknowledge. And therefore demands, how a man can absolutely believe that
his sins are forgiven him, seeing he cannot learn by any word of God, that
he has such a faith, as is required for the obteyning of the pardon of
sins: And says, that none which believe are saved, unless they believe as
they ought to believe. But therein the Cardinal does not only contradict
himself, but likewise many of his fellows, who teach, that there is but one
faith at all: that the dead and Catholic faith are all one: as was showed
before. If some believe as they ought to believe, and some believe not as they
ought; have they all one and the same faith? If some so believe, as by
believing they shall be saved; and some so beleeeue, as by believing they
cannot be saved; shall we say, they have all one and the same faith? Then may
we also say, that Peter and Judas had one and the same repentance. The
Cardinal here shows, that they do indeed believe Si reuera (sicut oportet)
credant, hoc est si fide habeant, quae per dilectionem operatur. De iustif. 1.
11. fine.
as they ought to believe, who have faith, which works by love. Yet
elsewhere he labors to prove that De Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 15.
a true and Christian faith, which by way of disposition, iustifyeth the
ungodly, may be separated from charity, and from other virtues. How repugnant
are these things one to another?

Again, he that believes, may know that he has faith: orherwise Paul would
not have bidden the Corinthians to 2. Cor. 13. 5.
prove themselves whether they were in the faith. Augustine said, Fidem videt
quisque in cord suo esse, si credit: vel non esse, si non credit. De Trinit.
lib. 13. c. 1. Nec fidem quisquam hominum videt in alio, sed vnusquisque in
semetipso. Ibid. cap. 2. and Epist. 112. cap. 4.
Every one does see faith to be in his own heart, if he do believe; or not to
be, if he do not believe. And that no man can see faith in another; but every
one may see it in himself. The Cardinal says, They believe as they ought,
who have faith working by love: yet may a man easily know whether he have love
or not. In Epist. Ioh. tractat. 5.
Therefore said Augustine, Let a man look to his heart, and see if he have
charity, and then let him say, I am borne of God. Yea, let not any one ask
another, let every one return to his own heart; if he there find brotherly
charity, he may be sure he has passed from death to life. Would he have
said thus, if a man could not have known whether he had charity or not?
Michael Medina, as Sixtus Bibliothec. sanct. lib. 6. amict. 215.
Senensis testifyeth, in defending Ferus against Soto, says; There is no man
which doubts but that we may know true love and faith to be in us. Seeing
then that by charity a man may know (as the Cardinal teaches) whether he
believe as he ought to believe: and seeing a man may know whether he have
charity or not, he may also know whether he believe as he ought: and if he
believe as he ought, then by the Cardinals own confession, he may particularly
apply to himself the general promises, and certainly believe that his own
sins are pardoned.

And to conclude this point, seeing this special faith has such testimony,
not only from the divine Scriptures, but likewise from the ancient Doctors of
the Church, and also from the late Romish writers, do not condemn it as
heretical, but seek earnestly for it, as the special mean of your salvation.

SECT: VIII.
THere remains another point to be considered, touching the persons that be
endued with a justifying faith: I taught, that it is proper to the Elect.
Notwithstanding, I know that Cardinal Bellarmine goes about to confute
Calvin, for De Iust^ficat. lib. 3. cap. 14
holdin that Faith and true righteousness is proper to the Elect: Yet does he
not bring any one argument to prove, that it is not proper to them, but only
labors to prove that faith may be lost. Touching this point, we will
acknowl^dge that the best faith which many of the popish prelates do teach, is
common both to the reprobate and Elect. The reprobate may give an assent to the
tr^th of things revealed, as well as the Elect. But there is another faith
besides that, and more excellent then it, as I have proved before, and that is
peculiar to Gods Elect. No marvel though those papists who know it not, or
will not acknowledge it, do hold that there is no faith peculiar to Gods
Elect. If they knew the nature of a justifying faith, they would not contend
with us about the persons who have it. Though many have not written of this
point, yet besides the texts of scripture alleged, we have the testimonies of
some, Hom. 17
Augustine (as was declared before) says, that the faith which works by
love, only the servants (4) Horum sides quae per dilectionem operatur,
profectio aut omnino non d^ficit, aut siquisunt, quorum deficit, reparatur
antequam vita ista finiatur, etc. De corrept. and gratia. cap. 7. fine.
of God have, only the Saints of God, only the sons of Abraham by faith,
only the sons of love, the sons of promise. Will any say that the
reprobate are the servants and saints of God, or the beloved sons of God, or
sons of promise? If once they were such, they should always continue such. For
as the Apostle teaches (...). Ioh. 3. 9. 1. Ioh. 5. 18.
whosoever is borne of God, sins not: yea he keeps himself, and the
wicked touches him not. Is Number igitur Deus pater malorum est? Absit. Epist. 54.
God the father of the wicked? said Augustine, God forbid. The same father
said, that the faith of the praedestinate, either does not fail at all: or if
there be any of them, whose faith fails, it is repaired again, before this
life be ended. But as for those that finally fall away from faith, out of doubt
(says he) at that time when they lived well and godly, they were not to be
reckoned in that number, for they were not severed from that mass of perdition
by the prescience and predestination of God. And therefore they were not called
according to his purpose, and therefore not elected. If therefore the elect
have such a faith, as never shall fail to the end of their life, and yet there
be some who have a faith that shall finally fail, and they be none of the
Elect, it must needs follow, that a steadfast and permanent faith is proper to
the Elect. Feras Fides vera est soloru^ praedestinatorum. In Ioh. 17. 6.
taught that the true faith belongs only to the predestinate. Though
Dominicus Soto took upon him to confute him; yet Michael Medina defended him,
and says peremptorily, that only the Elect have true faith, that the faith
which reprobates have is no true faith, and concludes, that this doctrine is
no heresy, but the sentence of Christ and his Apostles. Sixtus Senensis
Biblioth. sanct. lib. 6. annot. 214.
mentions all this, yet does he not speak one word against Medina, but
leaves him uncontrolled; thereby declaring that he approved his opinion.

SECT: IX.
LEt us now proceed to other kinds of faith. The first kind of faith which I
said was common both to the Elect and reprobate, is a miraculous faith, which I
made to be a distinct faith from the rest. But the Rhemists say, Annot. on 1.
Cor. 12 sect. 3,
it is not another in substance, then the common faith in Christ, but is of
another accidental quality only, that is of more fervor, devotion, zeal,
and confident trust, specially for doing of miracles. And Bellarmine affirms,
that De Iustific. lib. 1. cap. 4. De sacram. baptis. lib. 1. cap. 14. and de
Iustific. lib. 1. cap. 11 15.
all their Catholics hold that the faith of miracles, and the faith of
promises are all one. And he says, that the faith of miracles is no other
thing then a true Catholic faith, but excellent, and justifying after his
manner. Yet they may easily be proved to be several and distinct kinds of
faith.

First, they differ in their objects and acts. The one lays hold of Gods
promises and mercies in Christ, as has been formerly proved, but this has the
power of God for the object, for by it a man believes, that God by his
special power will enable him to work a miracle. And therefore Thomas Aquinas
Fides per quam miracula fiunt nititur om upotentiae Dei. In 1. Cor. 12 lect. 2.
Apertissime videmus sidem miraculorum respicere tanquam obiectum omnipotentiam
and diuinitatem filij Dei. Bellar. de Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
says, that the faith, by which miracles are wrought, does rest and stay it
self on the omnipotency of God. The one rests on Gods promises and mercies,
for the pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls. The other
relyeth on Gods power, in regard whereof, a man is assured that God will enable
him to do some great and supernatural work, to ratify the truth of the
Gospel, and to confirm the faith of others. Can these be one and the same
habit? Can the one be a degree of the other, seeing they differ so much one
from another in their nature, in their objects, and in their acts?

Again, a justifying faith is an ordinary grace bestowed on men in all ages:
for there always were, now are, adn always shall be some endued with it. The
Church always has been, and ever shall continue, to the end of the world. And
it consists of a number of true believers.

But the Faith of Miracles is an extraordinary gift, bestowed on some men, at
some certain time. And 1. Cor 12. 9.
therefore it is reckoned by the Apostle among these extraordinary gifts, which
in his time were bestowed on some in the Church: To another (says he) is given
faith by the same spirit: meaning not the common faith, but that whereof he
speaks afterward, If I had all says, so as I could remove mountains: as
Theodoret and See Bellarm. de bonis operib. in particul lib. 1. cap. 9. sect.
hinc legimus.
others do expound the place. And the Apostle makes it not only an
extraordinary, but likewise a several and distinct grace, as well as any of
those which there he mentions. Many writers teach Gregor. homil. 29. Beda in
Marc. 16. Bernard. in Ascens dom. sermon. 1. Hugo card. in Mar 16. Ferus in Math.
8.
that this gift was needful at the first preaching of the Gospel, and the
first planting of the Church, but not afterward. Even as at the first setting
and planting of a tree, watering is needful, but not afterward when it has
taken deep rooting. Now, can an extraordinary gift be the same with a common
and ordinary? Can an extraordinary gift, long ago ceased, be a degree of an
ordinary gift, still continuing in the Church?

Moreover, their difference may be seen, in respect of the persons who
receive them. The Justifying faith is proper only to the elect, and to the
Saints of God, as before has been proved. Yet they may want this miraculous
faith. A man may be in state of grace, and yet want it. As appears by the
examples of Gods Saints in all ages, who were justified by faith, and yet were
not able to work miracles.

But wicked men may have it. Those had it, who by Christ's Name did cast out
Devils, and work great works, and yet shall hear him profess to them,
Depart from me, ye workers Math. 7. 23.
of iniquity.

Augustine confesses, that Cont. liter. petilian. lib. 2. cap. 55.
the schismatic Donatists had it, as well as the Orthodoxall Christians.
Popish writers teach, that Tho. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 178. art. 2.
wicked men be sometimes endued with it. Ill livers, Rhem. annot. in 1. Cor.
12. 8. Sect. 1.
which have not other graces of God, whereby their persons should be grateful,
just, and holy in Gods sight. Yea, Coster. enchirid. cap. 4.
a man that is out of the state of grace.

Yea, a Tha. Aq. in 1. Cor. 12. lect. 2. Pigh. controu. 2. de side. Bellarm. de
iustif. li. 1. cap. 15.
man that is destitute of Charity. Now how can that be the highest degree of a
justifying faith, which wicked men sometime have, and which godly men often
want? If it be the highest degree of a justifying faith, then none could have
it, but they must have a justifying faith. Though some might be justified
without it, yet none could have it, but they must needs be justified.

Bernard put a manifest difference betwixt them, saying, Parui sermon. sermon. 1.
There is one faith of precepts, and another faith of miracles; that is, qua
credimus in Deum, qua credimus Deum: By the faith of precepts, we believe in
God: Credere autem in Deum: But to believe in God, is to trust in him, and to
love him. By the Faith of Miracles, Credimus Deum, quia talia potest, and omnia
potest. We believe that God can do such things, and can do all things.

Theophylact. distinguishes them Duplex est fides nostra.
as plainly, on Romans 12. 3. saying, that Faith in this place, is to be taken
for the grace of God, whereby they wrought miracles. For our faith is double;
The one, as that, Mar. 10. 52. Thy Faith has made thee whole. Another is the
gift of God, by which miracles are wrought: as that, If you have faith as a
grain of mustard-seede, and say to this Mountain, etc.

Stella likewise distinguishes this, Enarrat. in Luke ^7. to 2. p. 1^3.
from that faith, which Papists make their justifying faith. For he will not
have that faith, whereby the Apostles might say to the Mulbery tree, Pluck thy
self up by the roots, and plant thy self in the Sea: to be understood of
faith, a Theological virtue; to believe all things written; but to be that
Confidence, whereby they were assured to obtain what they asked, though it
were the remoouing of a Mountain. Chrysostomus and Euthymius fidem
miraculorum, non eam qua Christiani sumus, intelligunt. In Math. 17. 20.
Accipitur hic fides, non pro ea virtute, aqua dicimur fideles, quomodo
accipitur a Paulo, cum tres dicit esse vertutes, fidem spem charitatem, etc.
quam fidem habent omnes christiam, and tum habebant omnes ^postoli. Sed
accipitur pro fide signorum, etc. huiusmodi autem sides non est aliud, quam
siducia impetrandi vel faciendi miracula cum opus est, aut vtile, invocato
nomine Dei, Concord. Euangel. cap. 68. Non est hic sermo de fide credendorum,
sed de side agendorum. Illa enim communis est omnibus christianis, haec vero
quibusdum tantum conuenit. in 1. Cor. 12. Est autem haec fiducia toto genere
diuersa ab ea quam in se includit fides catholica, and cui praecipue fides
miraculorum adiuncta erat. etc. Nam illa Dei veritatem proprie, pro obiecto
respicit, haec Dei bonitatem magis, vt iam per mutuum, amorem, quodammodo
nostra facta est. etc. Potest illa fides etiam omnes ac perfecta, in operarijs
iniquitatis esse. At ista iustorum tantum and sanctorum est, etc. Controuers.
2. de fide. p. 42. in 8. An. 152.


Maldonatus says, of that Faith commended by Christ, to his Apostles, for the
removing of mountains, Math. 17. 20. That Chrysostom and Euthymius, understand
the faith of miracles, not that faith whereby we are Christians. Ian^^nius upon
the same words, does in his own name expound it of the same faith, and
distinguishes it from the other faith, saying; Faith is here taken, not for
that virtue whereby we are called belieuers, as it is taken of Paul, when he
says, there are three virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity: which faith all
Christians have, and then the Apostles had. But it is taken for the faith of
miracles, which Paul puts, 1. Cor. 12. among the division of Graces, which
the holy Ghost imparteth to diverse men, diversely, even as he will. And this
kind of faith, is no hing else but a Confidence of obtaining or working
mirac^es, when it is needful or profitable, by calling upon the Name of God.

Caietane does put as great difference betwixt them, writing upon those words,
1. Cor. 12. Alteri fides in eodem spiritu; says thus. There is no speech here
concerning the faith of things to be believed, but concerning the faith of
things to be done. For that is common to all Christians, but this agrees
only to some certain persons.

Pighius also writes, that the faith which is Fiducia, an Assurance or
Confidence, is in the whole kind diverse from that Catholic faith where unto
the power of miracles was adjoined. For the one does properly respect the truth
of God for the object: the other respects the goodness of God, as made ours,
after a manner by mutual love. That goes before the love of God, and is
separable from it: so as the Apostle affirmed, that he might have all faith of
that kind, though he had not love. But this does follow love, and is a bud of
it. That may be even in the workers of iniquity, who at the day of judgment,
shall hear Christ say to them, I never knew you.

But this belongs only to just and holymen, who have already sanctified or
Dedicated their souls to God, through the obedience of Charity. So many ways
does he distinguish them, and so far was he from making them one and the
same kind of faith, or making the one to be a degree of the other.

Consider then I pray you, how the Rhemistes and Bellarmine, are singular in
this their conforming of a miraculous faith, with a justifying faith: having
not only the scriptures, but also all sorts of writers gainsaying them. And
therefore it may well be supposed, that rather a desire to contradict us, then
any consent of their own Church, or any sound reason to warrant them, has
moved them to make that confusion of two distinct gifts. And will you give
credit to such spiteful and partial writers?

SECT: X.
Of Hystoricall Faith.
THe first kind of ordinary faith, which is common both to the Elect and
reprobate, I called an historical, or dogmaticall faith: yet I know there be
many, who neither can abide the name and title of historical faith, nor yet
will acknowledge any difference betwixt the thing signified thereby, and a
justifying faith, but make them both one.

Touching the name, Gregory Martine Discover. of corrupt. translat. cap. 12.
said, that historical and special faith are heretical terms, newly
devised. Cardinal Bellarmine says, that De iustific. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Catholics do not use the name of historical faith, least they should seem
to think that the deeds of the Saints, which are recorded in scripture, are
not believed, but for the authority of the history writers. And that there is
De Romans pontif. lib. 3. cap. 21.
but one faith, which is neither to be called historical, nor miraculous, but
a Catholic faith.

Yet the thing feared by the Cardinal, to arise upon the use of the Name, is
but a vain pretense. If he and his fellows had feared the like danger in the
use of other Names, they would never have allowed the name of
Transubstantiation: lest any should think that they hold a real Conversion
of the substance of the Bread and Wine, into the substance of Christ's body;
for so much does the proper signification of the word import; when as the name
of hystoricall faith imports no such thing as he fears. The only reason
why he and his fellows contemn the title is, because we sometime use it.
Such is their hatred to us, that they are unwilling to use any Term of ours,
though it be never so fitting and proper.

But first, let them know, that we may lawfully use terms and tytles to
express our meaning: if the thing meant thereby, may be proved by the
Scripture, though the Term it self be not expressly found in the Scripture.
The ancient Fathers gave to CHRIST the name and Title of omousios,
consubstantiall, to express the equality of his Godhead with the Father. The
Arians misliked it, because they found it not in the Scriptures. Yet the
Fathers, Etsi fortasse nomen ipsum non inueniretur, res tamen ipsa inneniretur.
August. ad pascent. epist 1 4. Has voces, tame^si in scripturis non
reperiantur, habere tamen eas eam sente^tiam, qua^ scripturae volunt, etc.
Athanas lib. ^uod Nicen. synodus congruis verbis exposuerit Et cyrill. de
Trinit. (...) 1. p^ulo post initium Fulg^nt. object. Arianar. discuss. object.
7 page 192.
one after another defended it, and used it still, because, though the Name it
self were not there, yet the thing signified thereby, was found there. Even as
the Arians themselves gave to the Father the tytles of Unbegotten,
Incomprehensible, Incircumscriptible, Incorporall, and such like: which words
were not found in the Scripture: yet were the things meant thereby. The
Cardinal relates this at large De christo lib. 2. c. 7.
with many testimonies. And acknowledges, that in expressing the mystery of
the Trinity, De christo. lib. 2. c. 2.
they use many names and words, which although they be not found in scripture,
yet their seeds and equiualents are there found. And the Rhemists grant
Annot. in 1. Tim. 6. 20. Sect. 4.
that we may not measure the newness or oldenesse of words, and terms of
speaking in Religion, by holy Scriptures only: as though all those, or only
those, were new and to be rejected, that are not expressly found in holy
Writ; but we must esteem them by the agreeableness, or disagreeablenesse,
they have to the true sense of Scripture.

Now we mean nothing by this Hystoricall Faith, but that firm assent which
men do give to the things written in Scripture; Not only to the hystories of
Acts done, but likewise to all doctrines of faith, and manners there taught.
And therefore we also call it a Dogmaticall Faith: a faith whereby we believe
all the Doctrines of the Scriptures to be true. By which title the Cardinal
confesses, Bellarm. de iustificat: lib: 1. cap: 4. sect: quanquam.
Cyrill and Chrysostom have called this faith. And he himself, Bellarm: de
iustif: li. 1. cap: 11 sect: per vocabul.
calls that a Dogmaticall Faith, which (he says) we call an Hystoricall
Faith. And the faith which we mean, by the Hystoricall Faith, we prove out
of Scriptures, as may be seen in my former Sermons. Yea, the Papists will not
deny, but that there is such a faith taught in the Scriptures. Yea, this is the
only faith which they require. Yea Bellarmine, though he scarce dare use the
name, yet he acknowledges, Si tamen hoc nomine (nempe fide historica)
appellare fas est, assensum quem a^hibemus narrationi reru^ praeteritaru^, non
ob hominum, sed ob Dei ipsius, qui ea reuelauit, authoritatem. De iustif. lib.
1. cap. 5.
that by our Historical faith, we mean that faith, which they call, An
assent which they give to the narration of things past, not for the authority
of men, but of God himself, who has revealed them. And that faith he proves
by Scripture.

If then they agree with us about the thing, why do they wrangle with us about
the name? It is a folish thing says Stultum est, cum de re constet, litigare
de nomine. De eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Bellarmine, to strive about the name, when men are agreed of the thing.

Moreover, not only the August. de vtilit. cred. c. 3. De genes. ad liter.
cap. 2. Hieronim. Eucher. apud. Sixth. Senens. biblioth. lib. 3. p. 133.
old Doctors of the Church, but likewise the Romish Sixth. Senens. ibid. Durand.
rational. lib. 1. c. 1. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 3.
writers do teach, that there is an historical sense of the Scriptures, and
that both simple and figurative, proper and metophoricall: yea, and that this
sense is especially to be believed, and Sixth. Senens. ibid. Bellarm. de verbo
Dei. lib. 3. cap. 3. Widdringt. apolog. pro. iure principium. p. 259.
that no arguments are of any force, but those that be drawn from that sense.
Now may not we well call that an historical faith, whereby we believe all
things to be true, which are taught and proved out of the word, according to
that historical sense? And indeed, the Papists have no more reason to mislike
the title of an historical faith, then to mislike the title of an historical
sense: but that the one is used by us, the other is often used by themselves.
They themselves have invented strange names and tytles, which they give to
faith: as to call one, Faith unformed, an other formed: one Implicitie, an
other Explicit, when as they can prove neither the names, nor the things
signified thereby out of the scriptures. Why then will they blame us for using a
title, the meaning whereof, by their own confession, is warranted in the
Scripture?

Yet was not this Title first invented by xs: Distinguamus ergo quam Fidem
debeamus Hystoriae, quam fidem debeamus intelligentiae, etc. Quaesit stabilis,
fides sieve historica and temporalis, sieve spiritalis and aeterna. De vera
Relig: cap: 50.
Augustine did long ago use the name, and distinguished it from other kinds of
faith; saying, Let us distinguish what faith we owe to the History (or
Hystoricall sense) what faith we owe to the understanding (or mystical sense:)
and which is a steadfast Faith; whether Hystoricall and Temporal, or
spiritual, and Eternal. Ferus, a learned preaching Friar, uses the Title,
and makes this faith to be the same, with th popish unformed faith: for,
writing of the Centurions faith, he says: Non hic loquitur de historica, aut
informi fide, sed de fiducia misericordiae, etc. Comment: in Ioh: 8.
This is not spoken of an Hystoricall, or unformed faith, but of a Confidence
of mercy to be showed thorough Christ.

SECT. XI.
AS there is some Difference betwixt us and our adversaries, touching the name,
so is there greater difference betwixt us, touching the thing. Namely, whether
this hystoricall and dogmaticall faith be the self same with Justifying faith,
or whether it be a distinct kind of it self, differing from a justifying
faith. Many of our adversaries make them both one.

The Annot. in Romans 4. 24. Sect: 9.
Rhemists say, that the Faith which was reputed for Justice to Abraham, was his
belief of an Article revealed unto him by God, that is to say, his assent and
credit given to Gods speeches. And that justice shall be reputed to us, by
believing the art^cles of Christ's death and Resurrection; and not by any
special faith. And that the Catholic Faith, is that, wherewith we believe
the articles of the Faith, which only justifies

And Bellarmine alleges much, to prove De iustifi^ lib 1. cap. 6. 7. 8. 9.
that faith which justifies, is neither Fiducia, nor Notia, but only an
assent to the truth of those things which God has revealed.

And in very truth the Papists must hold, that either this faith justifies, or
none at all: because they teach no better ordinary faith then this, as
appears by their treatises of faith. (3) Tollet. instruct. sacerd. lib. 4.
cap 1. Coster enchirid. c. 4. de fide. initio.


But it may evidently appear that this is not the faith which justifies us.
There is another faith above this, and far more excellent then this, and much
differing from this, which does justify us alone, and none other but it. I
will declare the difference betwixt them, that so you may perceive that they
be not one and the same.

1. First, they differ in their nature. In Sect. 7.
For I proved before, that by the justifying faith, a Christian does apprehend,
and particularly apply to himself all the Promises of Gods mercies, and of
Christ's merits for the pardon of his sins, and the salvation of his soul.
But the Papists themselves acknowledge that this faith is of another nature,
only an assent to things revealed. Compare that which I wrote before, touching
the nature of a true justifying faith, with that which the Papists teach to be
the nature and form of this faith, and you may see great difference.

2. They differ in their essential degrees, and therefore cannot be the same
faith in specie. I know that magis and minus non diuersificant speciem, more
and less do not alter the kind, as the Logicians speak. Yet the want of the
true understanding of that Axiom, and of applying it aright to the matter in
question, has caused some papists to err in coufounding different kinds of
faith. It is true in accidental, but not in substantial and essential
degrees, for there be degrees of both sorts. There be accidental degrees, as
degrees of quantity, and quantitatis continuae and quantitatis discretae. A
great horse is of the same kind with a little horse. And the greatest number of
the same species, with the least.

There be also substantial and essential degrees, as appears in the
faculties of the soul. The sensitive faculty is a degree above the
vegetative, and the reasonable faculty, another degree above the vnsensitiue.

These being substantial and essential Degrees, do alrer the kind, though
not in the same indiuiduo, yet in diverse. So as that creature which has an
higher degree, is of an other kind then that which has a lower degree. Faith
has the like degrees.

Some be accidental, and respect the quantity of Faith. So there is Math. 6.
30. 2. 26. 14. 31.
Eligopistia, a little faith, or weak assurance. And Heb. 10. 22. Romans 4. 20.
Plerephoria tes pisteos, a full assurance, and strong faith. And so faith is
said to be lesser and greater, Extensiue, quando plura credibilia cognoscuntur
and ^reduntur explicit. Intensiue, quando credibilia clarius, cog nos^untur,
and firmius seruentiusque tenentur. Lyra in Luc. 17. 5.
both extensiuely, when more credible things are known and believed
expressly, as may be seen in belieuers, who know much. And intensiuely, when
credible things are more clearly known, and more firm^ly and ferue^tly held.
There be also substantial and essential degrees of faith, which respect the
substance and form, the nature, and natural propert^es of it. When one
b^lieueth all that another does, and also more, and that in an other manner and
form.

So he that has a justifying faith, belieueth all things that he belieueth,
who has an historical or dogmaticall Faith: and that in the same manner. Yet
does he believe more also, and after an other manner. He does not only
believe that all things written in the Scriptures be true, but likewise
belieueth, that God will perform his general Promises, in particular toward
him, for the pardon of his sin, and the salvation of his soul. The one of
these is, Credere Deo; to give credit to God: the other is, Credere in Deum:
to believe in God.

Augustine thus said of them, Sicreditis in eum, creditis ei. Non autem
continuo, qui credit ei, credit in eum. Nam and demones credebant ei non
credebant in eum. In Ioh: 7. Tract: 29.
If ye believe in him, ye give credit to him. But not always he that gives
credit unto him, belieueth in him. For the Devils give credit to him, yet did
not believe in him. Yea al papists do freely acknowledge a substantial
difference betwixt these two, in the very form and manner of believing. And
therefore some do make of them, 2. several kinds of faith, as before I
proved. Others say, that there is no such Degree above dogmatical faith: which
before I confuted: And which here, by the testimony of Augustine, is convinced.

3. They differ in their objects, for the one respects the truth of God,
showed in things revealed: the other respects the mercy and goodness of God in
Christ, offered to penitent sinners. Bernardinus de Senis, Exparte eius quod
creditur, hoc est rei creditae accipitur differentia hoc modo. Nam Deus
credulitate fidei tribus modis accipitur, primo vt veritas, 2. vt potestas, 3.
vt bonitas. Secundum primum modum credere Deo. s^per comparationem adveritatem,
hoc est, vera esse quae dicit 2. modo credere Deum, etc. De euangel. atern.
sermon 6. art. 3. cap. 2. fine.
out of Alexander Halensis, says, that credere Deo, has the truth of God for
his object: and so we believe him, because we think those things to be true
which he speaks: but credere Deum, respects his power, as he is omnipotent,
and the Creator: but credere in Deum, has respect to his goodness, whereunto we
come through love. Pighius naming but two of these three, (for he joins two
of them together) says, Illa Dei veritatem proprie pro obiecto respicit, haec
dei bonitatem magis, vt tam per mutuum amorem quodam modo nostra facta est.
Controu. 2.
the one does properly respect the truth of God for an object: the other does
rather respect the goodness of God, as it is after a sort through natural love
now made Quod syncero pectore fideret illius bonitati. Paraephras. in Hebr 11.
4.
ours. The faith which made Abels sacrifice acceptable to God, was a justifying
faith: yet Erasmus said, God accepted his sacrifice, because he did with a
sincere heart trust his goodness.

And we heard before Concord. Euangel. cap. 32. fiduciam ex illius bonitat^
conceptam.
out of Iansenius, that the faith by which me^ are saved and obtain their
requests, does not only comprehend a firm assent in things to be believed,
but likewise an assurance conceived and arising from his goodness. Can these be
one and the same habit, who differ so much in their special and proper
objects?

4. They differ in their proper and immediate effects. For first the one
justifies, the other does not justify. That there is a faith which
justifies, Paul teaches at large, and in many places. Romans 3. 28.
We conclude (says he) that a man is justified by faith, without the works of
the law. Romans 4. 5.
And to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. And Gal: 2. 16.
know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ. I need not prove this, seeing the papists confess Council:
Trident: sess: 6. cap: 8. Bellarm: de great: and liber: arbitr: lib: (...). cap:
6. De Iustific. lib: 1.
with us, that there is a Faith which justifies, though they contend with us,
about the manner how it justifies.

That there is a Faith that justifies not the Apostle James teaches; Namely,
Iam. 2. 17. 20. etc.
a dead Faith: a faith without works, such a faith as the devils have.
Augustine teaches us, which is the Faith which justifies; Namely, the faith
qua credimus in Deum, whereby we believe in God: and which is the Faith which
justifies not; namely, Fides quacredimus Deo: whereby we give credit to God:
when he says, Credimus apostolo, sed non credimus in Apostolum, non enim
aposto^us iustificat impium, credenti autem in (...) qui in eum qui iustificat
impium deputatur Fides eius ad Iustitiam. In Ioh: 12. Tract: 54.
we believe the Apostle, but we believe not in the Apostle: because the
Apostle does not justify the ungodly; but unto him that belieueth in him who
justifies the ungodly, his faith shall be reputed for Righteousness. As if
Credere Deo, which is an historical and dogmaticall faith, were not sufficient
to ^stifie us, but credere Deum, which is to have a special confidence in God,
as before was declared.

Not only In Ioh. 7. tract. ^9.
Augustine, but likewise De sanct. Andr. sermon. 3.
Bernard, and the Lumb. sent. lib. 3. did. 23. d.
M: of sentences, do teach, that the devils credunt Deo, do believe all
things to be true which God has revealed, which is a right historical faith.
And yet I hope the Papists will not say, that the devils are justified For then
might they hold with Origin, that they shall be saved.

Per hanc fide^ iustificatur impius, vt deinde ipsa sides in^ipiat per
delectionem operari. Sentent lib. 3. did. 23. d.
Lumbard having showed the difference betwixt these three, Credere Deo, credere
Deum, and credere in Deum: does say of the last By this faith the ungodly is
justified, that afterward, Faith it self may begin to work by love. Because
a man is justified by it, and not by either of the other two, and because it
does work by love, not before it justify, but rather begins to work by love,
when it has justified. And therefore does not justify by virtue of charity,
whereby it works. Are you then so simple to believe, that the Faith which
justifies, and the faith which justifies not, are all one? That two men,
having one and the same Faith, the one of them should be justified by his
Faith, and the other should not be justified by his? If they be one (and the
same Faith) whence comes this great difference in their proper, and immediate
effects?

But the other faith is without good works, Iam: 2. 17. 20.
as Saint James teaches; and this is called by him, a dead faith: The Council
of Trent Uerissime dicitur Fidem sine operibus mortuam, and etiosam esse. Sess.
6. cap. 7.
acknowledges, that it may most truly be said, Faith without Works, is dead
and idle. And what faith is this, but even an hystoricall faith?

Ferus wrote, Hanc Scholastici informem, Iacobus mortuam appella fidem, qualis
autem est, qua mortua est, formaque sua substantiali caret? profecto non fides.
sed opinio vana est, Commen: in Matthew: 8. 8.
that by Faith whereby we assent to those things which be delivered in the
divine hystories, and which the Church propounds to be believed; the
schoolmen call unformed Faith, and James calls a Dead-faith. But what faith
is that which is dead, and wants his substantial form. Truly (says he) it
is no faith, but a vain opinion. And then afterward describes a justifying
faith, as being another kind of faith. Though Dominicus Soto went about to
confute his description of a justifying faith, yet did he not mislike any thing
which he spoke of the hystoricall, unformed, and dead faith. And so by his
silence does justify him herein, as may appear Biblioth. sanct. lib. 6.
annot. 43.
in Sixtus Senensis.

Now the faith with works, and the faith without works do so much (27) Iam.
2. 14.
differ, that the one is properly called a faith, and a true faith; the other
is not called a faith, but only by equivocation. Therefore Augustine said, Non
credit Iesum esse Christu^, qui non sic vinit, quomodo praecepit Christus. In
epist. Ioh. tractat. 10.
he does not believe Jesus to be Christ, who does not so live, as Christ has
commanded.

James says, (26) Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my
faith by my works. As if neither of them had any true faith, unless they
could show it by their works. Whereupon Thomas Aquinas gave this gloss; Verba
mihite habere fidem per aliqua certa signa non poteris probare, cum desint
opera, verba non sunt testes sufficientes. In Jacob. epist. cap. 2.
Show me thy faith. As if he should say, Prove unto me by some certain
signs that thou have Faith: thou can not prove it when works be wanting:
words are no sufficient witnesses. And in another place he says, In 2 Thessalonians. (...). 2.
That ungodly men seem to have true faith, when indeed they have not. Gregory
1. (once Bishop of Rome,) tells us, That Fidei nostre veritatem in vitae
nostra consideratione dobemus agnosc^re. tunc cnim veraciter fideles sumus, si
quod verbis promittimus, operibus implemus. Homil. 29.
we ought to make known the truth of our faith by the consideration of our
life: for then are we believers in truth, if that which we promise in words,
we fulfill in works. And from him the Council of Mentz protested, Ille vero
credit, qui ex ^^^et operando, quod credit. Council. Mogunt. can^n. 1.
that he does truly believe, who exercises by working that which he
believes.

If then the one of these be a true Faith indeed, and is truly and properly
so to be called: and the other is not a true faith indeed, and improperly so
called; how can they be one and the same faith? No more then a working horse,
and an idle painted horse are one and the same. Again, these two doc so
differ, as that the one is called a living Faith, the other is called a dead
Faith. That which justifies and brings forth good works, is called a living
Faith. Romans 1. 17. Galat. 3. 11.
So the just man is said to live by Faith. And Paul said Galat. 2. 20.
I live by the Faith in the Son of God. Ferus having described the nature of
a true Justifying faith, that it is nothing else but to trust to the free mercy
of God: Com^t. in Math. 8.
he adds further; This is the true Faith, whereby the just man lives. But
that which justifies not, and is destitute of good works, is termed a dead
Faith by the Apostle: Iam. 2. 26.
Yea, as the body is dead without the spirit, so is faith dead without works.

But the Annot. in Iam. 2. 26.
Rhemists De iustif. li. 1. c. 15.
Cardinal Bellarmine, Enchirid. cap. 4. de fide. object. 2.
Coster the Jesuit, and others, do answer: that the Apostle does not compare
a dead faith with a dead man, but with a dead body. And therefore as a dead
body is a true body, so a dead faith is a true faith.

But they must know, that although the Apostle compare a dead faith not to a
dead man, but to a dead body, yet he compares it to the dead body of a man,
which is no true humane body indeed, because it wants the soul which is the
form of it. The Philosopher will teach them; That when the body is dead,
there is neither foot nor hand, but only by equivocation, for all the parts
of the body, are defined by their office and faculty, therefore when they lie
dead, they are not the same, but only retain the shadow and show of the name.
Though a dead body have the earthly and material parts, yet it is not the true
body of a man, nor the same body that it was before, seeing it wants his
form, life, and actiuit^e, operation and motion. So a dead faith has some
material parts of a true faith, as knowledge, understanding, and assent: yet
it is not a true faith indeed, because it wants special application, which
is the soul of faith. It wants actiuitie, charity, and obedience, which are
the life of it. Didimus Alexandrinus, did oth^rwise take the words of S. James,
then these papists do, for thus he writes, Notandum scilicet, quia cum sides
mortua sit praeter opera, iam neque fides est. Nam neque homo mortuus, homo
est. Enarrat an Epist. Jacob. cap 2.
It is to be marked, that seeing faith is dead without good works, it is now
no faith at all, for a dead man is not a man at all. Their own friend Ferus is
as peremptory against them, and for us. Faith without charity (says he) Sine
charitate fides, totulum quidem fide^ habet: caeterum si non obscure de care
loqui velis, p^rinde si (...) est, quasi corpus exanime, homo: aut extincta
candela, lumen: vel ex isa a^ bor est arbor. etc. Postill. Domin. quinquages.
Sermon. 7.
has indeed the title of faith, but if thou will not speak obscurely of that
matter, it is not in that sort faith, as a body without a soul is a man: as a
candle put out, is light: or as a tree cut down is a tree. What kind of light
is that, which does not shine and give light? what kind of fire is that, which
is not kindled? what kind of man is that, which neither sees, nor hears,
nor feels, nor moves? What kind of tree is that, which has neither roots,
nor boughs, nor brings forth fruit? Such a kind of faith is that, which is
without charity; namely, a dead Faith: as James names it. How then can any
man justly say, that these two are both one and the same faith?

Lastly, they differ in their effects, because the one procures the salvation
of our souls: namely, that lively and special faith, which works by love:
for of that it is said, Whosoever Ioh. 3. 16.
believes in the Son, has everlasting life. And by Ephesians. 2. 8.
grace we are saved through faith, and not of our selves.

But the other, the Historical faith, destitute of works, cannot save Iam. 2.
14.
any man: so teaches the Apostle. And that all those places cannot be
understood of one and the same faith, all writers give evidence. Augustine
said, not that faith of the Devils, (43) De fide and operib. cap. 16.
who believe and tremble, and confess Jesus to be the Son of God, is that
foundation, which suffers none to perish: but that faith which the Apostle
says, works by love. Now what he took to be the faith of the Devils, I have
before showed: Credunt Deum, and credunt Deo, they have an historical faith,
to believe all things to be true which he has revealed: Non credunt in Deum,
they put no confidence in him, and so want a special justifying faith, that
should save them. So Bernard In Deum qui credit non consundetur. etc. Deum and
Deo credunt Daemones, sed in illum non credunt (In quem qui credit, non
confundeter) quia spem suam non ponunt in illum. De sanct. Andr. sermon. 3.
writes; He that believes in God, shall not be confounded: And thereupon
infers, that the Devils, though they believe God, yet they do not believe
in God (in whom, whosoever believes, shall not be confounded) because they do
not put their hope in him. Now who that has any understanding in Religion,
will say, that the faith which is able to save a man's soul, and the faith
which is not able to save a man's soul, are both one in kind, in nature, and
substance? And that those, who are tormented in hell, can truly say, that
while they were on earth, they had the very same faith which brought the
Saints to the Kingdom of heaven.

By that which has been spoken touching this point, you may understand what a
kind of faith is taught by the greatest Doctors in the Romish church, and what
is the best faith, which they require of the people: even an hystoricall faith,
to give assent to the truth of things revealed. Which faith, as has been
proved, may be in wicked men, in Reprobates, in men out of the state of grace,
in men that shall go to hell. Yea, such a faith as is found in the very devils
of Hell. What salvation can be obtained in that Church, whose preachers teach
no better faith? Who would be led by such guydes? I know that they would
make a difference betwixt the faith of their right Catholics, and the faith
of devils: because the one has Charity always accompanying it, the other
wants Charity. But they might consider, that according to their doctrine,
this makes no essential, but a mere accidental difference. Seeing they
teach, that the same assent to the truth of things revealed, is in some with
charity, and in others without charity, it evidently appears, that
according to their doctrine, Charity is not a proper, immediate, necessary,
and essential property of it, but merely accidental.

Indeed we hold, that Charity is a proper, and necessary effect of a
justifying faith; so as faith is no sooner wrought in the heart of any, but
forthwith he is endued with love. (45) Uel quod vna esset de ratione alterius:
vel quod vna necessario nasceretur ab altera, etc. Licet charitas oriatur ex
fide tame^ non oritur vt propria passio, quae necessario fluit a subiccto, sed
vt virtus, adquam alia disponit and inclinat. De Iustif. lib. 1. cap. 15. Sect:
quintum argum.
He cannot but love him, in whom he belieueth, and of whose love and favor he
is persuaded. And therefore charity, though it do not make, yet it may declare
the essential difference, and the nature of this faith. But seeing it is no
such necessary effect of their assenting faith, it can neither make nor declare
any essential difference of it. And therefore he who wants charity, may
have the same faith in substance, that he has, who is endued with Charity.

Bellarmine going about to prove, that true faith, (meaning their assenting
faith,) may be separated from love, draws one Argument from the proper
reason and nature of them both. If they cannot be severed says he, (46) It is
either because the one is of the reason (or being) of the other, or that the
one does necessarily arise from the other. Not the first, because Faith and
charity are not one virtue, but two. And besides that, have diverse subjects,
acts, and obiectes. For faith is in the vnderstanstanding, Charity in the
will. Faith belieueth, charity loves. Faith respects the first truth,
Charity the chiese good. Not the second, because although charity arise of
faith, yet it does not arise as a proper passion, which does necessarily flow
from the subject, but as a virtue, unto which an other does dispose and incline.

And Thomas Aquinas says, Seeing Cum charitas sit extra essentiam fidei, per
^ius aduentum vel re^essum, non ^tatur substantia eius. In Romans 1. ^ect. 6.
Charity is without the essence of faith, by the coming or departure of it,
the substance of faith* is not changed. And although Bellarmine hold with the
schoolmen, that Charity is the form of faith; yet he For^am esse
extrinsecam, and (...) intrinseca^, qu^ det illi non vt sit, sed (...)
moueatur. De Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 4.
tteacheth that it is an outward, not an inward form. And such a form as does
not give being unto it, but motion. How then can it make it make any
essential difference betwixt that faith which has it, and that faith which
wants it?

I know that the Fathers do sometime note love, as a difference betwixt the
faith of Christians and devils, and betwixt the faith of good Christians and
bad. Yet do they not make it the only difference betwixt them: they teach an
essential difference by believing in God with trust and confidence. Again,
they might better make it a difference of their faith, then the Papists can
make it a difference of the faith which they teach, because it was a necessary
and proper effect, proceeding from that their faith, and not from any other.
For those that do so believe in God with hope and confidence, of his mercy and
goodness toward them, cannot but love him. But papists have no such confidence
nor assurance in their faith, which should make them to love God, they may have
all their faith without love. And therefore love cannot distinguish it
essentially from the faith of devils.

So then, to shut up this point, it still remains apparent, that in the
nature and substance, there is no difference at all betwixt popish assenting
faith, and the faith of devils. And surely those that now content themselves
with such a faith, as is no better in substance then the faith of devils, may
justly fear, least hereafter, they shall have no better estate in substance
then the devils have.

SECT: XII.
THe last kind of faith which I mentioned, I called a Temporary faith: which
differs from a dead faith, because while it lasts, it brings forth
outward fruits. And yet is not the same with a iustfying faith, because it
comes short of it by many degrees, does not save any, and continues not unto
the end.

This faith is scarce known to the papists, very few of their writers make
any mention of it: Yet lest any should think, that it is a new coined term,
and a newly invented faith, I will show what authors write of it.

Augustine long ago Quae sit stabilis fides, siuehistorica and temporalis:
sieve spiritualis and aeterna. De verarelig. cap. 50.
used the name and title, together with the name of Historical faith, as
before I declared.

Bernard Mittunt nos ad quandam fidet trifariam diuisionem: vt dicatur sides
mortua ficta, probata. etc. Fictam aute^ ego arbitror illam vocari fidem, quae
suscepta quidem ex charitate vita moueri inchoat ad been operandum, sed n^
perseverans deficit and moritur tanquam abortiua. Eo vtique sensu fictam
dixerim nominatam, quo vasa figuli vocamus fictilia: non quia videlicet vtilia
non sint, quamdiu durant, sed quia fragiliacum sint, diu minime durant. De hac
fidei fictione put o illos notari in euangelio, qui ad tempus credunt, and in
tempore tentationis recedunt. Luc. 8. etc. Tales sunt animae, parvam adhuc and
teneram hahentes charitatem: and ob hoc earum fidem viuam sed fictam necesse
est in tentatione desicere. etc. Epist. 42.
does at large describe it, and shows the difference betwixt it and other
kinds of faith, he makes a division of a threefold faith. There is a dead
faith, a fained faith, and a tried faith. The dead faith the Apostle defines
to be a faith without works, which does not work by love. The fained faith
(says he) I think that is called, which having received life from charity,
begins to be moved to work well: but not perseuering, does fail, and die as
an untimely birth. In the same sense indeed I may call it fained or fashioned,
that we call the potters vessels fictilia non because they are not profitable
so long as they last: but because, seeing they are brickle, they do not last
long. Of this fayning of faith, I think they are noted in the Gospel, who
believe for a while, and in time of tentation go away. When, and whither do
they depart? surely from faith to infidelity. And these (says Christ) have no
roots. He does not deny but they have that which is good: but he rather
blames them that they were not rooted in that which is good. Such are the
souls, having as yet a little and tender charity, and for this cause, their
faith though lively, yet fained (or frail) must needs fail in tentation.
What kind of faith every man's is, tribulation does try. If any man fail, it
is known to be fained. If any man's continue, it is judged to be a tried and a
perfect faith. etc. So likewise, in another place, he having described what is
an unfeigned faith Non ficta ponitur ad differentia^ mortu^ fide^ and sictae
mortua fides est, quae sine operibus est, fides ficta, quae ad tempus credit,
and in tempore tentationis recedit, vnde etiam ficta, id est fragilis ^icitur,
parui sermon. 1.
he adds, that it is called an unfeigned faith, to show the difference of it
from a dead faith and a fained faith. A dead faith is that which is without
works. A fained faith is that, which believes for a season, and in time of
tentation goes away: whence it is called ficta, feigned, that is frail or
brickle. Bernardine has the same distinction, and almost the very same words
with Bernard in the former place, and De Euangel, aetern. Feria 5. post
cineres, sermon. (...). art. (...). cap. 3. fine.
proves the difference of a fained and failing faith, from a dead faith, and a
tried faith, by the words of the Evangelist, Luke 8. 13. they believe for a
time.

Michaell Medina, was so far from thinking that this temporary faith was the
same with a justifying faith, that he accounted it, while it continued, to be
no true faith at all. For this he writes Uera fides tantum electorum est.
Credunt reprobi fateor, sed ad horam: tempore enim tentatioms recedunt, quam
fi^ vt pote quae radices non ^git, veran fidem sancta scriptura non vocat. etc.
Sixth. Senes. biblioth. li. 6. annot. 214.
True faith, is the faith of Gods elect only. I confess the reprobate do
believe, but for a season. For in the time of tentation they go away: Which
faith, because it has no roots, the holy Scripture does not call a true
faith. And that faith which does not bring forth the fruit of glory, is no
faith before Christ.

In this respect, the reprobate are accused of unbelief. Because, although
they seemed in outward appearance to believe, yet they did not truly believe:
because they wanted either true Charity, or Constancy, which is so annexed to
true faith, that in Scripture, faith is taken for fidelity, and that he
proves by the words of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 2. 6.

These words and many more to the same effect, are related by Sixtus Senensis,
yet not confuted, nor condemned: and therefore seem to be approved. Do not
you therefore condemn me for teaching the temporary faith, to be another faith
then justifying faith is.

Thus I hope you plainly see, that there is not one only faith in all men, as
some of your teachers would bear you in hand; but that there be diverse kinds
of faith, really distinct one from another, in nature, in degrees, in efficacy
and operation. And that this has been the ancient doctrine of the true
Church, and still has been taught by some in the Roman Church. I pray God
that you may not deceive your selves with a fained faith, nor content your
selves with that assenting faith, which some do falsely tell you is
sufficient. But that you may seek and also obtain that justifying faith,
which is able to save your souls.

Take heed of giving too much credit to some late popish writers. Their
malice against us, provoke them to speak worse of faith then they ought.
Though it be the most necessary and most effectual grace, which God here
bestows on man, yet are they greater enemies to it, and seek more to
disgrace it, then any other gift or grace whatsoever. Some have thought so
basely of it, as they have taught it was too mean a grace for the Virgin Mary
to be endued withal. Though Augustine Beatior Ma^ia perc^p^^ndo fid^m Christi,
quam concipi ndo car^^m Christi. De virginit. c^p. (...).
said, Mary was more blessed by perceiving the faith of Christ, then by
conceiving the flesh of Christ. Yet Albertus Magnus (who, as Hosius says,
Alhertus quoque non temere magn^s appellatus, de expr^sso Dei v^o.
was not without cause called Gteat) goes about to prove, that she Albert.
Marial. c^p 76 d^fideving. Mariae.
had not faith at all, but a certain kind of knowledge above faith. Such a
knowledge and purity, as never any had in the way: but the Angels have in
heaven.

Oh consider, that this is the D^uels p^llicie and practice, that if he cannot
make men otherwise to think, then that faith is absolutely necessary to
salvation, he then stirs up some to teach them a false and insufficient
faith, because he knows, that will no more profit them, then no faith as
all. Wherefore searce out the true faith, and seek for it.

SECT. XIII.
IN speaking of that Faith, which is called Temporary, and may be lost, I
touched a question, whether true Justifying Faith may be quite lost. And the
rather, because some popish writers allege that place, to prove that it may
be lost. Not to say any thing of those reasons, and texts of Scripture, then
produced by me, to prove that true faith cannot be lost: I will now, for your
further satisfaction, set down the testimonies of diverse learned men,
approved by your side, who consent with me in this point. Augustine taught,
that those who have this faith shall never perish, but shall certainly be
saved. ^id's quae per dilectionem operatur, nemin^m perire permitt^t. De fi^e
and operib. c. 16.
The Faith which works by love, suffers no man to perish, said he. So in
another place, when he Omnes qu^ si^ credunt, tanquam lapides sunt viui, de
quibus t^mplum dei aedificatum est, and tanquam lig^a imputribilia. quibus
a^^ailla compacta est, quae in dilu* uiom^rg non po^^nt. I^ Psa^ 1^0. in^^o.
exhorted men to a true and right faith, so to believe in Christ, as that they
loved him. Not to believe in him as the Devils did: who though they believed,
yet did not love Christ: and therefore said to him, What have we to do with
thee, thou Son of God? But so to believe him, as we love him: and say not,
What have we to do with thee? but rather say, We belong to thee, thou have
redeen ed us. He thereupon infers, that all they which thus believe, are as
lively stones, of which the Temple of God is built, and as those never
putrefying plancks and timber, of whieh the arc was made, that could not be
drowned in the Flood. If they that thus believe, cannot perish, then their
faith cannot be lost: for they are kept and saved by faith. If any will
answer, that if they keep their faith, they shall not perish; but they may
lose their faith, and so perish. Let them hear the same Father, in plain
terms denying that: For speaking of the praedestinate, Horum sides aut omnino
non deficit, aut siqui sunt, quorum defi^^t, r^para^^r, ^^tequem v^a ista
s^^i^tur, and del^ta quae inter currerat iniquitat^, vsque in finem
perseuer^ntia deputatur August. de corrept. and great. cap. 7.
he says; These men's faith which wor^eth by love, either does not fail at
all; or if there be some of them, whose faith fails, it is repaired before
this life be ended: and the iniquity which came betwixt, being blotted out,
they are reputed to have perseverance unto the end. And further teaches, that
they whose faith finally fails, were never of the number of the elect, nor of
the number of Christ's Disciples. Yet more plainly afterward, Pro his igitur
interp^llante Christo, ne d^fi^iat fides eorum, sine dubio non d^fi^iet vsque
in sinem: a^ per hoc perseuerabit vsque ad finem noc eam nisi permanentem vitae
huius inueni^t fi^is. De corrept. and great. cap. 12.
Christ therefore praying for these, that their faith might not fail, without
doubt it shall not fail unto the end: and therefore it shall continue unto the
end neither shall the end of this life find it otherwise then continuing. This
he speaks of them, who were called according to Gods purpose: as the words
immediately going before do testify: In whom (as there he says) the gifts
and calling of God, are without repentance. And in this respect, he there
prefers the state of the praedestinate, above the estate of Adam in
Paradise. And shows that this gift of perseverance is more needful for the
praedestinate now, because they are assaulted with so many, and so great
Tentations. And at last Atque ita homo D^i, non sol^ quia mi^erecordiam
consecutus est, vt sidelis esset, verum etiam qu^a files ips^ non d^t, qui
gloriatur, in domino glorictur. Ihi^ in (...) c^pi^is.
concludes, the faithful man, not only because he has obtained mercy, that
he may be faithful, but also because his faith it se^fe fails not. When he
glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Beda rehearses Sine paeni^ sunt Dona and vocatio Dei, id est, sine mutatione
stabilitur fixa sunt. In Romans 11. 29.
the words of Augustine, touching the efficacy of Christ's prayer, in keeping
the faith of them (who be called according to Gods putpose) from failing,
reckons faith as one of those gifts of God, that are without repentance, and
faith, they are without repentance, because they are stedsastly fastened
without changing. And those who believe, are taught of God, and none of them
shall perish, because Christ loses none of those whom the father has given
him. Gregory the great, did very fitly distinguish of Gods gifts; Alia sunt
dona illius, sine quibus, ad vitam nequaquam pertingitur. Alia quibus vitae
sanctitas pro aliorum vtilitate declaratur. mansuetudo namque humilitas,
patientia, sides spes charitas, dona eius sunt, sine quibus ad vitam homines
^eruenire nequaquam possunt. etc. In h^s igi^ur donis, sine quibus ad vitam
peruenire non possunt, spiritus sanctus in praedicatoribus su^, sieve electis
omnibus sempermanet. etc. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 42.
and showed the difference betwixt them in regard of continuance: There be some
gifts of his, without which a man cannot attain to life. There be others, by
which holiness of life is declared for the profit of others, for meekenes,
bumilitie, patience, faith, hope, charity, are his gifts: but those without
which, men can never come to life but prophecy, the gift of healing,
diversity of tongnes, interpretation of speech, are his gifts, yet such as
show the presence of his power for the correction of the beholders. In those
gifts therefore without which men cannot come to life, the holy Ghost does
always abide in his preachers, or in all the elect. But by the other, he does
not always abide.

To the same effect he likewise speaks elsewhere, In sanctorum cordibus
iuxta quasdam virtutes semper permanet. etc. In fid^spe and charitate, and
alijs do^is, sine quibus ad cael stem patriam non potest venire, perfectorum
corda non deserit. Suoer Ezechiel* homil 5
saying. The holy Ghost according to certain virtues, does always abide in the
hearts of the Saints. But according to other, he does come and go away: go
away, and come again. For by Faith, Hope, and Charity, and other graces,
without which a man cannot come to Heaven, he never forsakes the hearts of the
perfect.

Bernard In caena Domin. sermon. 10.
propou^ ded a question; How any of those who are united to Christ by faith,
can be cut off from him, as unfruitful branches are cut off from the Vine?
Seeing be that is coupled with Christ, is one spirit with him? And answered it
by distinguishing of faith: that there is a dead faith, a fained faith, a
perue^se faith, and a right faith. And thereupon inferred, that he who^ had
any of the three former, might be cut off, but he who had the last, could not
be cut off from that Vine. He shall abide in Christ, and bear fruit, and the
Father will purge him, that he may bear more fruit. Most of the learned
Papists seem to come near unto us in this point.

Though Saepius pec^ando, and saepius recidivando, eo tandem perveniunt, vt and
fidem ipsam amittant. etc. Promptuar. domine. 4. post epiphan.
Stapleton teach, that says cannot be lost by every mortal sin, but by
sinning often, and falling often into the same sins, it may be lost: As the
roots of a Tree will not wither, if only one twig be plu^ked away, but if all
be plucked away, they will dye. Yet is he contradicted by all his fellows.

Thomas Aquinas acknowledges, that faith remains in men, when they fall from
holiness to sin. Tho. 2. a. 2. ae. qu. 4. art. 4.
Whereas some held, that man sinning mortally, after he had received a formed
faith; That faith was lost, and another habit of informed faith, was infused of
God, in steed of it: He thought it was not convenient to say, any gift of God
should be bestowed on man, for the practice of mortal sin, and therefore he
holds, that after mortal sin committed by a Belieuer, the same habit of
faith remains, which was in him before. And how can any of them say
otherwise, who teach (as I showed before) that the faith which is in a man
before grace, before his repentance, and conversion, is the selfsame habit in
number, that is in him after grace and conversion?

The Council of Trent Asserendum est, non modo insidelitate, per quam and ipsa
fides amittitur, sed etiam quocunque alio mortali peccato. quamvis non
amittatur fides, acceptam iustisicationis gratiam amitti. Sess. 6. cap. 15.
decreed, that Faith is lost by infidelity, and by every mortal sin: though
faith be not lost, yet the received grace of justification is lost. As if a man
could not loose his faith by any mortal sin, but only by infidelity. And
that by mortal sin, a man might loose his former grace of justification, and
yet not loose his faith.

And according to that rule Bellarmine writes, De a^ great. and s^ pec^at. lib.
1 cap. 8. sect: quod autem s^cundo.
that there is no sin which does necessarily exclude faith, but that which is
opposed unto it, which is infidelity. And this is manifestly testified by
experience. For we see among the Catholics, many public sinners,
Murderers, Fornicators, Thieues, dru^kards, who without all doubt, give credit
to all those things which the Church propounds to be believed.

Coster the Jesuit, likewise Enchird. los. com. ^ap. 4. (...) in p^oribus. p.
178.
as the best Physicians by intemperancie, breaking the Rules of their art, do
not thereby loose the skill and knowledge of Physic: So a Christian, who
against the testimony of his own conscience, does sin contrary to the laws
of faith: neither loses his faith, nor cease to be Christian. And seeing
that by faith, belieuers differ from Infidels, if sinners want faith they
should be Infidels, and be separated from the Church, after the manner of
Infidels. And yet sinners bel^g to the church, as Ta^es are in the same field
with wheat. Good-fish in the same Net with bad.

But by the way, consider what kind of persons they acknowledge for true
belieuers: even the worst, that almost can be. Public sinners, Murderers,
Fornicators, Thieves, Drunkards: Such as ought for their leawd lives to be
excommunicated: Such as be tares among wheat. A man may find as holy
believers as these in Hell. Is this that faith which S. James would have a man
to show by his works? It is true indeed, that their Assenting faith may be
found in such ungodly persons, for it is found in the very devils Yet a true
saving faith, whereof the question is, cannot be found in any such persons as
keep a continued course in the practice of these sins.

True believers may sometime sin of infirmity. yet not of wilfulness: Though
they fall, yet they arise again, and do not long continue in sin.

Cyprian asks Crederese inchristum quomodo dicit, qui non fa^^t, quod
Christus facere pr^c^pit. De simpl^^. praelat. ^6. vera fides est. qu^ quod
verbis dicit, moribus non contradicit. In Marc. 16. lib. 4.
how any man can say he belieueth in Christ, who does not that which Christ
commanded him to do? As if he had no true faith, who wants obedience.

That is true Faith (16^ said Beda, which does not contradict that in ma^ners,
which it speaks in words. They might therefore better say, Such sinners never
had true faith at all: and so cannot loose that which they never had.

Again, observe what their believers loose by their mortal sins; Though
they loose not the habit, yet they loose the form of faith: Yea, they loose
the life of faith: for now it is become a dead faith, seeing it wants good
works. Yea, they loose the grace of justification, and so become guilty again
of all their former sins.

They might as well loose faith it self, such a faith as is lost, will do
them no good. What an absurdity it is to hold, that a formed faith, and an
unformed faith; a living faith, and a dead faith; a justifying faith, and a
faith that justifies not; are one and the self same faith, has been
sufficiently proved already: Yet to this absurdity are they driven, that so
they may maintain the unity of faith in all sorts of believers. When as they
should rather acknowledge, that their assenting faith, and a true justifying
faith, are distinct kinds, and that those who live and continue in gross
sins, though they may have the former, yet they never had; and therefore
cannot possibly loose the later. Michael Medina one of their See Sixth. See nens
bibliothec sanct. lib. 6. ^nnot. 179. fine and annot. 191. 1. Tim. 5. 8. Tit.
1. 16.
own Church, does stiffely maintain it, that though an unformed faith does
not vanish away by mortal sin, yet that sound faith which Christ requires in
the Gospel, cannot stand with a perverse continuance in heinous offenses. And
proves it by the testimonies of S. Paul. And therefore that they only have a
true faith, who still continue in well doing.

But although that most of our adversaries teach, that faith may not be lost
by deadly sin: yet they hold, it may be lost by Infidelity: (as if
Infidelity were not a deadly sin.) And if this be so, then Bellarmines De
iustificat. lib. 3 cap. 14.
arguments, whereby he would prove that faith may be lost, are altogether
impertinent, and fall to the ground of themselves, seeing they are drawn from
a relapse into sin, not into Infidelity. When the Lord spoke by his Prophet,
That if the righteous man did forsake his righteousness, and commit iniquity,
he shall dye for the same, (which is the Cardinals first argument.) He spoke
not of a falling from righteousness into Infielitie; but of a falling into
mortal sin, as they call it. When Christ said, Eue^y branch that bears not
fruit, he will take away: he understood not of any revolt to Infidelity,
but of the sins of omission, in which men fail in their duties. The like may
be said of Christ's words, that iniquity should abound, and charity wax cold.
And of Paul's beating of his body, and bringing it into subjection, which be
other of his arguments for that purpose. He also endeuourth to prove it by 8.
several examples of persons, who lost their faith. Yet all of them are in the
same manner impertinent.

The bad Angels and Adam, before their falls, had no such faith as now we
have, nor any such promise of perseverance: yet dare he not say that any of
them fell to Infidelity. For the Devils have their assenting faith, as before
I have proved: but it is apparent, touching the rest whom he alleges. Wall
the Cardinal say, that Saul, David, Solomon, Peter, and Judas, fell from faith
to Infidelity? Became they Pagans by their falls? Did they not still prosesse
the same God that they did before? Did they deny the truth of his word? Why
then will he produce their examples, to prove that a man may lose his faith,
seeing he himself De amiss. great. and stat. peccat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
before taught, that faith cannot be lost by any mortal sin, but only by
Infidelity? Let the Cardinal therefore, either alter his opinion, or bring
more pertinent proofs.

But may true faith be lost by infidelity? may a justified believer become an
Infidel, a Jew, a Turk, a Pagan? surely no. A man may quite loose their
ass^^ting faith, and of a professed Christian, become an Infidel; but he who
has a true Justifying faith, cannot quite loose it, he may fall in outward
show only, still retayning faith in his heart: so did Peter in his fall, as
shall afterward appear: but he who falls away indeed and in truth, totally
and finally, never had this justifying faith. Marcellinus Bishop of Rome,
seemed to fall into infidelity, when he sacrificed to Idols, did he then loose
his faith? was he then become an Infidel indeed? Then may the Bishop of Rome,
not only err in matters of faith, but likewise quite loose his faith, and
become an Infidel, yea an Infidel then may be the head of the Roman Church.
To avoid this inconvenience, Bellarmine answers, that he was neither
Here^icke nor Infidel, but only in outward act for fear (19) De Romans
pontif. lib. 4. cap. 8. fine.
of death, did sacrifice to Idols. As if he kept faith in his heart, when he
performed the outward act of an Infidel. De Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 9. sect:
ex quibus.
And of Liberius, another Bishop of Rome, he likewise says, That though it be
true that he subscribed to the Arian heresy, yet he was no Heretic, but
only sinned in outward act, as Marcellinus did. Why then may we not say, that
a Justified believer, though he through fear fall to the outward act of
Infidelity, yet still keeps faith in his heart?

Moreover, the testimonies which I alleged out of the Fathers, are absolute
and general: as well against the losing of faith by infidelity, as against
the los^o^g of it by sin.

But if any did fall to Infidelity, not only in outward act, but also in
heart, totally, in deed, and in truth; they were judged by the Fathers, never to
have had this faith. Augustine Proculdubio nec illo tempore, quo been, pieque
viuunt, in isto numero computandi sunt, etc. De corrept. and great. cap. 7. Ioh.
6.
said, that those who do not persevere, but so fall away from Christian faith
and conversation, that the end of this life find them such; out of doubt, at
that time, when they lived well and godly, were not to be reckoned in the
number of the elect, and of them who are called according to his purpose. So
he writes Quia ergo non habuerunt Perseuerantiam, sicut non vere Discipuli
Christi: ita verae Fi^ij Dei fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur, and
vocabantur. De corrept: and great: cap: 9.
of the Discciples which forsook Christ at Capernaum; That they were called
Disciples, the Gospel so speaking: and yet they were not Disciples in truth;
because they abode not in his word; According to that which he says; If ye
abide in my Word, ye are verily my Disciples. Therefore because they had not
perseverance: As they were not truly the Diseiples of Christ, So neither were
they truly the sons of God, Even when they seemed to be, and were so
called. And if they were not truly the Sons of God, they had no faith. For
by Faith are we made the Sons of God, as the Ioh: 1. 12. Gal: 3. 26.
scripture teaches. Yea, the same Father professedly expoundsng the place of
John, where those Disciples are mentioned, says, Inter non crede^tes, and ipsi
deputandi sunt, quamuis discipuli, dicerentur. In Ioh: 6. tract. 27.
They were to be reckoned among unbelievers, though they were called Disciples.
If any suspect that I wrest his words contrary to his meaning; Let him read
Maldonatus a Papist, who writes, that (52) the Disciples which believed (25)
Augustinus and Beda existimant, nunquam istos, qui retro abierunt, habuisse
fidem, etc. Maldonat: in Ioh: 6. 66.
not, when they followed Christ, were Judas and the murmurers. And that
Augustine and Beda do think, that those which went back, never had faith: no
more then those, which S. Paul said 1. Tim. 5. 15.
were turned back after Satan; But of what faith must this be understood?
What faith did those Disciples, and oath Reuolters want, when they were taken
for Disciples, and Christians? Was it an Hystoricall, or assenting faith? The
Jesuits will not yield that. Castor holds, that Enchirid: cap: 4. De fide.
Sitne fides in peccatorib: p: 179.
all in the Church have such a faith: yea, though they be as Tares among wheat,
bad fish among good, foolish virgins, wanting oil in their Lamps: as the
guest, wanting a Wedding Garment: and like the incestuous Corinthian.
Bellarmine, De Iustificat: lib: 1. cap: 15. sect: quartum Argumentum.
avouches, that all in the Church are such believers, though they be wicked
ones, and instanceth in the forenamed Parables: as if all the persons noted
therein, had that faith, though they wanted charity and good works. Those
Disciples, and other reuolters, before their backe-sliding were in the Church,
and yet wanted faith. As Christ Ioh. 6. 64.
himself, Augustine, and others have taught. And therefore seeing that by the
doctrine of the Jesuits they could not want an historical and assenting
faith, they must needs want another faith, namely, a true justifying faith.

But of all others, Michael Medina is most plain and copious in this point, as
in part I declared, when I spoke of a temporary faith: yet more may be added,
to show his resolute opinion, that none have true faith, but they which keep
it to the end. Veritate Christiana vera Fides tantum illa iudicetur, quae habet
efficaciam consequendae salutis, etc. Uera profecto Fides vera dilectione
constat: vera autem dilectio illa tantum dicitur veritate morali, quae
perseuerantiam habet and permanentiam, etc Deinde rogandus, an fidelis ille
dicatur, aut emicus, qui horaria amicitia, aut fide illi fuisset coniunctus,
quod si non diceretur, quomam de ratione vere fidei and charitatis est
permanentia, and constantia, etc. Apud Sext. Senens. Biblioth. lib. 6. annot.
214.
According to Christian verity (says he,) only that is to be judged a true
faith, which has the efficacy of obtaining salvation. According to that; He
that believes in me has eternal life. And afterward he adds; That true
faith indeed, does consist with true love; but that only is called true love
by a moral truth, which has perseverance and continuance. And that the
Scripture never called the faith of them who believe for a time, to be true
says. And that those who are damned, never had true faith. And in conclusion,
he asked Soto, whether he is to be called faithful, or a friend, who should be
joined unto him for an hour by frie^dship and faith: which if he will not say,
because continuance and constancy is of the nature and being of true faith and
charity; then cannot such offenders be called true believers in Christ.

Cardinal Bellarmine holds against some who then lived, that Christ did not
only Orauit Dominus paulo post pro perseuerantia omnium apostolorum, imo etiam
omniu^ Electorum. Ioh. 17. Pater sancte, serua eos in Nomine tuo, quos dedisti
mihi. De Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect: altera expositio.
pray that Peter might continue in faith, and in the favor of God unto the
end, but that he also prayed a little after, for the perseverance of all the
Apostles; yea also of all the elect. Ioh. 17. Holy Father, keep them in thy
Name, whom thou have given me. How then can the Faith of any of the Elect
fail? Shall we think that Christ's Prayer was not heard? Does not he
elsewhere acknowledge that the Father heard him always? Was his prayer
effectual against the loss of grace and faith, by sin, and not against the
loss of them by Infidelity? Then was his prayer heard but in part. How can
they prove that difference?

SECT. XIIII.
IN prosecuting this point, I produced Peuer, for an Example; who though he
denied his master with an Oath, yet still kept Faith in his heart. And least
any should think, that this was a special privilege in Peter, I showed, that
Ioh: 17. 20.
Christ prayed for others, as well as for him.

Now if there be any, who imagine that Christ prayed for them after a different
manner, and to another end; let them remember what I alleged before out of
Augustine, touching Christ's prayer for all the elect; namely, De Corrept. and
great. cap. 12.
That Christ praying for them, that their Faith might not fail: without doubt
it shall not fail unto the end: and therefore shall continue unto the end:
neither shall the end of this life find it otherwise then remaining. But
because that De Iustificat: lib: 3. cap: 14.
Bellarmine and others do teach, that Peter did quite loose his faith, and the
righteousness thereof; I will let you see the testimonies of all sorts of
writers to the contrary.

Tertullian Sed and cur Petrum? ob vigorem fidei. Aduers. Marcion. lib: 4.
said his name was changed, and he was called Peter for the strength of his
faith: but he ill deserved that name, and Christ erred in giving him a name not
agreeable to his nature, if he quite lost his faith.

Again, he speaking of Christ's prayer for him, thus says of those words,
(That thy faith might not fail) Ne deficeret Fides tua, id est, ne tantum
Diabolo permitteretur, vt fides periclitaretur, quo ostenditur, vtrumque apud
Deum esse, and concussionem fidei, and protectionem cum vtrumque ab eo petitur.
Et vtique Filius Dei protectione Fidei habet in sua potestate, etc. De fuga in
persecut:
that is, that so much might not be permitted to the Devil, that his faith
might be endangered. Whereby it is showed, that both are with God, both the
shaking of faith, and the protection, se^ing both are asked of him. The shaking
is from the Diu^ll, the protection is from the Son. And surely the Son of God
has the protection of faith in his own power, which he asked of his Father,
of whom he receives all power in heaven and earth. If his faith was not
endangered by the devil, but protected and kept safe by God, through the prayer
of his Son, how can any truly say that he lost his faith?

Hillary Comment: in Psalm. 52. 4.
taught (as is testified by Biblioth. sanct. lib. 5. annot. 181.
Sixtus Senensis) that Peter in denying his Master, lost not the firmness of
his faith, because, although, through the trembling of his flesh which he could
not bridle, his tongue burst forth into the denial of Christ: yet a firm
faith of confessing Christ unto Martyrdom, did not depart from his heart.

I might also urge that, which not only he In Math. can. 20. See Sixth. Senens
Biblioth. lib. 6. annot 160.
elsewhere, but likewise Ambrose, Comm^^t. in Luc. 22. lib. 10.
together with him, has written in excuse of Peter's denial: That he denied
him not to be God, but denied, that he was only a man. Though See Sixth Senens.
Biblioth. li. 6. annot. 160. Hieronym. in Math. 26. Theophylact. in Luc. 22.
Jerome and Theophylact do confute them, because so to excuse the Apostle, were
to make his Master a liar, who told him before, that he should that night
deny him thrice. Yet does In Luc. 22. ^2. and in Math. 26. 75. quanquam
possumus Hylarium and Ambrosium ab errore, benigna interpretatione liberare.
Maldonatus excuse them both. And thereby they plainly declared, that they
were far from thinking that he lost his faith. Augustine alleged the
prayer of Christ for Peter's faith, against the Pelagians, who held that man
could not continue in grace and in faith, unless man's free will did concur
with Gods grace.

Dare thou say that Christ praying for Peter, that his faith might not fail,
that it should have failed, if Peter (12) An audebis dicere etiam rogante
Christo, ne deficeret fides Petri, defecturam, fuisse, si Petrus eam desuere
voluisset. etc. Sed quia praeparatur voluntas a Domino, ideo pro illo non
possit esse inanis Oration, quando roga^ ergo ne Fides eius deficeret: quid
aliud rogauit, nisi vt haberet in Fide liberrimam, fortissimam, invictissimam,
perseuerantissimam volut atem? De corrept: and great: cap. (...).
would have had it to fail? (that is,) if he would not have had it to
continue unto the end. As if Peter any way willed any other thing then Christ
prayed for him, that he might will. But because the will is prepared of the
Lord, therefore his prayer for him could not be in vain. Therefore when he
prayed, that his Faith might not fail: what else asked he, but that he might
have in faith a most free, a most strong, a most invincible, a most perseuering
will.

Prudentius, that ancient and Christian Poet, Fleuit ^egator de^que ex ore
prolapsum ^efas, cum ^ens maneret innocens, ^sque ser^aret fidem. Kathemerin.
Hymn. ad Gallicant: paulo post initium.
thus wrote of Peter's denial.

With mouth his Master who denied,
He for that crime did weep:
When innocent his mind remainde,
And Faith his heart did keep.
Leo Bishop of Rome, thus says of Peter, Adsint ^extera Do^ini Jesus Christ's,
qu^ labentem te, prius quam deijcereris, exciperet, and firmit atem standi in
ipso caden* di periculo recepists, vidit in te Dominus Fidem non fictam, non
delectionem auersam, sed constantiam fuisse t^rbatam. De Pass. Dom. Ser. 9.
The right hand of the LORD JESUS CHRIST was present, which took thee up, as
thou was falling, before thou was cast down: And thou receiuedst strength to
stand, in the very danger of falling. The Lord saw in thee, not that thy Faith
was fained, nor thy love turned from him, but that thy Constancy was troubled.
Weeping abounded, when affection failed not: and the fountain of Charity
washed the words of fearfulnes. Neither was the remedy of abolishing deferred,
where there was not judgment of will.

Theophilact, does make this paraphrase Quamuis breu^te^pore concutiendus sis:
sed habes recondita semina fidei. Etiamsi folia abiecerit (Pneuma) spiritus
inuadentis, sed Radix viuet, and non deficiet Fides tua: In Luc: 22.
of the words of Christ to Peter, Luke, 22. 32. Although within a short time,
thou must be shaken, yet thou have the seeds of faith lying hid. Although the
spirit (or wind) of the inuader, shall strike off the leaves, yet the root
shall live, and thy Faith shall not fail.

Bernard said, Etsi Princeps Apostolorum in profundu^ Negationis submergitur,
non est tamen qui de manu Dei p^ssit eruere. Sermon: de tripl: cohaerent: vin:
clau: and glut:
Though David be branded with the mark of horrible crimes, though the chiefest
of the Apostles be plunged into the depth of denial. Yet is there none that
can take them out of Gods hand.

And in an other place, Petrus (...) peccauit, charitatem (...) amisit, quia
peccauit potius in ver^tate^, quam in charitate^, ^^m se non ^sse ^mentitus est
in re, cu^us totus erat in cord. De natura and Dignit. a^or. Dium. cap. 6.
Peter when he sinned, he lost not Charity. He sinned rather against verity,
the^ against charity: when he told a lie, that he was not his in deed, whose
wholly he was in heart. And therefore the love of Truth, did presently wash
away the denial of falsehood.

When he could not be plucked out of Gods hands, when he had charity, and
when he was wholly Christ's in heart; did he even then at that instant want
faith? Surely no. These things appertain not to unbelievers.

Beda ascribed such virtue to Christ's prayer, for the confirmation of Peter's
faith, that he thus expounds them. Ipse ^uam Fidem, (...) Satana tentante,
defi^iat, orando protexi. In Luc. 22. l. 6.
I have by praying kept thy faith safe, that it shall not fail when Satan
tempts thee.

The Master of Sentences, resolving the question, whether Peter had the faith
of Christ's Passion, when he saw with his own eyes, CHRIST as man to suffer?
Answers, Lumb. sent. lib. 3. did. 24. B.
That he had faith of his Passion, not in that he believed that man suffered,
but in that he believed, he was God that suffered: thereby signifying, that he
had not lost his faith, at the time of Christ's Passion.

Caietane said, Def^cit confessio fidei, cum ter Christum negauit, sed non
defi^^ sides, quonia^ timore negauit, non incredulitate. Luke 22. 32.
Peter's confession of faith failed, when he thrice denied Christ: but his faith
failed not, because he denied* through fear, not through incredulity. Tollet
also Petr^^ non negau^t esse Christu^, fidemve eius abiecit, sed negauit se
nouisse eum. In Luc. 12. annot. 23.
that Peter neither denied him to be Christ, nor cast away his faith, but
denied that he knew him.

Catharinus likewise, that Commentar. in epist. ad Galat. 2. p. 260.
Peter could not lose his faith: for the Lord had peculiarly prayed for him,
that his faith might not fail. And least it might be thought that he prayed for
that Sea only, and not for his person, he called him by his old name Simon, To
wit, for thee Simon particularly.

Maldonatus upon these words, All ye shall be offended by me this night: Non
significat fidem apostolos perdituros fidem, enim nemo eorum perdidit, ne
petrus quide^ ipse qui negavit, etc. Comment. in Math. 26. 31.
says, that Christ did not signify that the Apostles should loose their
faith. For none of them lost it; No, not Peter himself, who denied him.
Although some old Authors were wont so to speak, as if he lost his faith.
Not distinguishing the confession of faith, from faith it self: and the
denial of Christ, from the loss of faith, which are far different things.
And so afterward, Comme^t: in Mat: 27. 75.
The vulgar error of them is to be taken heed of, who think that Peter lost
his faith. For he lost not his faith, but denied it, which divines say, is 24)
Ore negauit, animo retinuit. Comment: in Luc: 22. 32.
another thing. And besides this, he says, their opinion is false, who think
that Peter lost his faith by denying. He denies with his mouth, but kep^ it in
his heart, as we have heard Ambrose, teaching on, Psalm. 43.

See then, what a cloud of witnesses we have against Bellarmine. But it would
make any man to wonder to behold his inconstancy in this point. For he plainly
contradicts himself, eue^ like a right Jesuit, holding the affirmative, or
negative, as it best served his present purpose.

When he would prove that faith and justice may be lost, De Iustificat: lib:
3. cap: 14.
he produces Peter's example to prove it, as if he lost both. He sorteth him
with Adam, as if he lost his faith and justice in the same manner that Adam did
at his fall, and brought himself to the same estate, though he recovered his
former state, as well as Adam. Yea, herein the Cardinal equalleth Peter with
the devil, with Saul, with Judas, and with Simon Magus. Though he make him
unlike to them in the recovery of it, because he got his faith again, but
they could not. Yet for the manner of loosing it, and for his present estate,
after it was lost, till it was recovered again, he makes him altogether equal
with them. Yet at other times, and upon other occasions, he teaches the
contrary. When he pleads for the pope, that his holiness cannot err, De
Roman: Pontif: lib: 4. cap: 3. sect. Est ^gitur tertia. At Petro Dominus
i^petrauit, vt non posset vnquam cadere, quod ad Fidem attinet.
he avouches, That Christ by his Prayer obtained this privilege for Peter,
that he should never loose true Faith, though he was tempted of the devil.

Which he makes more then the gift of perseverance, because he is said to
persevere to the end, who falls, and rises again: and so is found
faithful in the end. But the Lord obtained for Peter, that he could not ever
fall, so far as belonged to Faith. And brings in diverse Fathers to testify
this: And afterward answering them who allege Peter's denial, to prove that
the Pope may err; He says, Addo pr^ Christum a Petro negatum fuisse, Ore,
roncorde, ^de per^idisse co^fessionem fidei nonipsam fidem. De Romans Pontif.
lib. 2. c. 8. ^^ct. Respondemus, sanctum.
that Peter denied Christ with his mouth, not with his heart. And therefore
Peter lost the confession of faith, but not faith it self. And confuting them,
who held that Faith was only in the breast of the Uirgine Mary, at the time of
Christ's passion: De Eccles. militant. (...). 3. cap. 1.
He says, it is not probable, that the Apostles then lost their faith, seeing
Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith might not fail.

Is this man to be credited, who is so uncertain in his opinion, and so
contrary to himself? Is there such double-dealing to be found in the great
Oracle of Rome? Did he thus write of forgetfulness, or of wilfulnes and set
purpose? wherein will you believe him? In the negative, or in the affirmative?
Both are taught by him. A wise man finding him so contrary to himself, will
believe him no further, then he soundly proves the thing which he writes.

SECT: XV.
IN the last point of the Sermons, touching the diversity of Fruit, brought
forth by the hearers of Gods word, I confuted the observation of some Papists,
who thence would prove the excellency of virginity, before widow-hood, or
Marriage. As if the hundred-folde belonged to Virgins, sixty-fold to Widows,
and thirty-folde to Married persons. If those 3. reasons which then I alleged,
will not satisfy you, I will add more.

1. That collection cannot be warranted by any word or circumstance in the
Parable, but only from the exposition of some few Fathers. And therefore the
Rhemists Annot. in Math. 13. 8. sect. 1.
sp^ake presumptuously in saying, that this difference of fruits, is the
difference of merits in this life: and that an hundred fold agrees to
Virgins, when as no syllable, nor word in all the Parable does import so much,
and when as all the force of the argument depends on the interpretation of
some few Fathers. And Bellarmine, Demonach. lib. 2. cap. 9.
writing of Evangelical Councels, had no reason to place the argument drawn
thence, among testimonies of Scriptures; but should rather have sorted it with
the testimonies of the Fathers.

2. The Fathers who so expound it, do not give the litterall sense of the
place, but deliver an allegorical or anagogicall exposition of it. As
Maldonatus acknowledged, saying, Non tam interpretando quam conscionando, In
Math. 13. 22.
that Augustine and the Fathers spoke so, not interpreting the Scripture, but
preaching to the people. Now the best learned among the Papists, as Biblioth.
sanct. lib. 3. p. ^36.
Sixtus Senensis, Bellar. de verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 3. sect. Sed quanquam.
Aduers. Iovinian. lib. 1.
Bellarmine, and others do teach, that no forcible arguments can be drawn from
any sense, but only from the literal sense; because that which is gathered
immediately from the words, is certainly the meaning of the Holy Ghost: but it
is not always certain that other senses be intended by the Holy Ghost.

3. There is not any one Father, save only Jerome, who so expounds it as the
Rhemists do; That an hundred fold agrees to Virgins: but either expound it
in the same manner that I did, or otherwise apply those differences of fruit,
then Jerome did. Will they forsake all the the rest of the Fathers and follow
one? Were they not sworn Sess. 4.
according to the decree of the Council of Trent, and according to the Nec
sacram scripturam vnquam nisi iuxta vnanimem co^sensum patrum, accipiam and
interpretabor. Bulla Pij. 4. super forma Iuramenti professionis fidei, Annex:
concilio.
Bull of Pius 4. never to expound Scripture but according to the unanimous
consent of the Fathers? Would they, or will others wittingly and wilfully
forswear themselves, that so they may cross us, and get some show of
patronage for the dignity of their unchaste votaries? And whom do they
follow? Even him, that of all the Fathers, is least worthy to be respected in
this point, being very partial, and no indifferent Judge of this matter.
Beatus Rh^nanus said, Veteres omnes, atque adeo Hieronymius ipse, matrimonto
parum aequi fuerint, virginitatem and castitatem maximi facientes. Certe
constat Hieronymum hac de causa Romae male audisse. Argument, in Tertul. lib.
de exhort. ad castitat.
All the old writers, and especial Jerome himself, were little indifferent to
marriage: chiefly esteeming virginity and chastity. It is certain, that
Jerome for this cause was evil spoken of at Roma. When he had written his
books against Iouinian, in commendation of virginity above marriage, they so
displeased many, as that Pammachius, his old scholesollew, fignifying so much
to him by a letter, Apolog. ad pammac. pro libr. advers. Iovinian.
he was feign to make an apology for himself. And they who found fault with
him for that, were neither mean, nor base, nor few. Impendio semper fav^ns
virginitati, and obid nuptijs ^^qui r^quam episcopi quidam esse vol^bant. Argum
in lib. 1. aduers. ^ou^nian.
Erasmus says, that he always exceeding much favored virginity: and for
that was more unequal to marriage, then certain Bishops would have had him.
Yea, and Multos off^nderant libri, quod proponsior ^deretur in laud^m
virginitatis quam oportuisset, and durior in matrim^m. Argum. in apolog. ad
Pammac.
that his books offended many, beccause he seemed to be more forward in the
commendation of virginity then he ought, and harder against marriage. But
although that he by that his application, did prefer virginity before
marriage, yet does he acknowledge that married persons are good soil, and do
bring forth, one sort of those fruits, namely, thirty fold. And whereas some
in those days, as more unequal to marriage, (as he thought) referred the 100.
fold fruit to Martyrdom, and 60. fold to Virgins, and 30. fold to Widows:
he blamed them for it, saying, Si sunt sancta consortia nuptiarum, cur
excluduntur abono fruetus. Commentor in Math. 13. Erasm. scholia. in lib. 1.
aduers. Iouin. number. 6.
If the conjunctions of marriage be holy, why are they excluded from good
fruit? And so he overthrows the force of Bellarmines argument, drawn from
hence, to prove that single life is an Evangelical council. De monach. lib.
2. cap. 9.
That which Christ does not command (says he) but commend, he counsels. Now
in the opinion of Jerome, Christ does here commend marriage, though not command
it: and it yields good fruit, as well as single life, though not altogether
so great store. And therefore if the one be an Evangelical Council, the other
also is.

But now I will show that the rest of the Fathers do otherwise exopu^d the
words then Jerome did. And therefore he being alone, must not be followed.
Cyprian alluding to the words, gives indeed an allegorical exposition: yet
he says, Primus enim, centerius martyrum fructus est, secundus sexagenarius
vester. De discipline. and habit. virgin. sect. 1.
that the first number, 100. fold, is the fruit of Martyrs: and the second,
60. fold is yours, ye Virgins.

Pam^lius Atqui long aliter D. Hieron. Graeci vero comment. Cypriani se
quuntur, sentent^m. A^^ot. in Cypr. ibid. number. 78.
acknowledges this difference betwixt Cyprian and Jerome: and confesses, that
the Greek Commentaries, do follow the opinion of Cyprian. If therefore
Bellarmine from Ieromes exposition, referring an hundredfold to Virgins, can
prove virginity to be an Euangelical council: we may also from the exposition
of Cyprian, and the Greek Commentors, referring the hundred-folde to Martyrs,
prove that Martyrdom is an Evangelical Council. But herein see the cunning
of the Cardinal, De monach. li. 2. cap. 9. sect. tertium testimon.
who in that his argument, could conioyne these two Fathers together, as if
they both expounded the place alike, and both commended virginity alike.

Though the Cardinal, and likewise the Rhemists, do also for the same purpose
join Augustine with Jerome, yet he differs more from him, then Cyprian does.
In one place Centesimu^ martyrum, propter satietatem vitae vel contemptum
mortis. sexagesimum virginum propter ocium interius, quia non pugnant contra
consuetudin^ caruis tricecimum coniugatorum, quia haec est aetas prae liantium.
Quaest. evangel. li. 1. cap. 9.
he says, the hundred fold belongs to martyrs, for the society of life, and
contempt of death: The sixty fold to Virgins, for their inward rest, because
they fight not against the custom of the Flesh: The thirty fold to
Marryed-folkes, because this is the age of warryers.

In an other place ^uicquid significet foecunditatis illa diuersitas, vid^rint
qui haec melius quam nos intelligunt. sieve, etc. Sieve quod probabilius mihi,
videtur, quoniam divinae gratiae multa sunt munera, and est aliud alio maius
and melius: vnd aicit apostolus, aemulamini autem dona meliora. De virginit.
lib. 45.
he propounds the matter very doubtfully, and scarce dare determine it,
saying thus; What that diversity of fruitfulness signifies, Let them see who
understand these things better then we: Whether the Uirgines life be in the
hundred fruit; the Widows, in the sixty; and the Married, in the thirty. Or
rather, that the hundred-folde fruitfulnes is to be imputed to Martyrdom; the
sixty fold to Continenci^ and the thirty fold to Marriage. Or whether
Uirginitie, Martyrdom being added to it, fulfill the hundred fold: But being
alone, is in the sixty. And Married folks, bringing forth thirty fold, may
come to sixty fold, if they be Martyrs. Or else, that which seems most
probable to me, that there are many gifts of the divine grace, and one is
greater and better then an other. Whereupon the Apostle said, Desire ye the
best gifts. Where you see he propounds fou^e several opinions, makes
Ieromes to be most improbable. But that which I showed to be the sense of the
place, namely, that by the diversity of the fruit, is meant the diversity of
graces and gifts in men, to be most probable.

May not they then be ashamed, that say, he ascribed an hundred fold to
U^rgins? Indeed he elsewhere (19) Augustine. de ^ivit. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 27.
relates an opinion of some, who so understood the diversity of that fruit;
As if it signified, that the Saints for the diversity of their merits,
should at the day of judgment, some of them save thirty, some sixty, some an
hundred. Which he rejects as absurd, Yet has it a good Warrant from the
Text. And is almost the same, with the Rhemistes, who say, Annot. in Math. 138.
sect. 1.
that this difference of Fruits, is the difference of Merits in this life,
and rewards for them in the life to come: according to the diversities of
states, as that the hundred fold agrees to Uirgines professed, etc.
Especially considering, that they Annot. on 2. Cor. 2. 10. sect. (...). and
Annot. on Coloss. 1. 24. sect. 4.
hold, that they may meria and satisfy, as well for others, as for themselves.

Athanasius referred the diversity of these fruits, not to those estates of
men and women, but to the obedience which they yield to the word taught,
saying; Homil. de parabol. sementis. Vbi doctrina opus procedit, and fructus
open4um solid (...), etc.
That we do Till and Sow this Field, that it may yield fruit: Yet do we
not know the condition of the Soil: The likeness of the Leaves does often
deceive the masters of the Tyllage. But when doctrine proceeds unto Work,
and the fruit of works waxes stronger, then is it known who is a Belieuer,
who an Hypocrite.

To the same effect wrote Chrysostom, and Gregory Nazianzene, whose words I
need not to set down, seeing Cardinal Tollet Comment. in Luc. 8. annot. 17.
confesses, that not only Augustine and Athanasius, but like wise they two, do
refer this difference unto their persons; Yet so, as some work well, some
work better, some work best of all in this world. And thinks this to be a
more probable opinion, then theirs who refer it to men's several estates,
because they who are in a perfect state, do not always live perfectly.

Gregory 1. like wise refers them not to any such states of men, but unto
their personal behavior in their estates, whatsoever they be, In Eze^^el.
lib. 2. ho^il. ^7.
saying, that men bring forth thirty fold, when their mind conceyueth the
perfection of Faith in the Trinity. And sixty fold, when they perfectly bring
forth the works of a good life. And an hundred fold, when they proceed to
the contemplation of eternal life. Here is no speech at all of Virgins. Beda
In Marc. 4.
writes to the same effect, and almost in the same words.

As for the Popish writers, the elder sort are doubtfully; Tho. Aquin. Aurea
catena. in Math. 13. Ludolph. de v^ta Christi. part. 1. cap. 64. D.
for they propound many expositions, and will not determine which is the best:
yet the younger sort are peremptory, and hold with us. Ferus relates those
several expositions, delivered by Thomas and Ludolphus: Quod idem verbum Dci
maiorem fructum in vno homine faciat, quam in alio, secundum quod terra ipsa
magis idonea est. Comme^t. in Math. 13.
how some refer the^ to beginners, to proceeders, and to the perfect: some to
Uirgines, Widows, and married persons: some to thought, speech, and deed:
some to them, who expose their goods, their bodies, and their lives for Christ.
Yet (says he) Christ seems here to mean, that outwardly the word of GOD
does convert more in one place then in another: and also that the same word of
God, does bring forth more fruit in one man then in another. According as the
ground is fitter.

Tollet having propounded the different expositions of some Fathers, Dominus de
fructu ipso loquitur, qui non semper statui respondet praeterea loquitur de
fructu seminis dum est in terra, volens significare se loqui de ijs qui in hoc
seculo fructus hosce referunt. Comment. in Luke 8. annot. 17.
says, their opinion is the fittest, who refer that difference of fruits
unto men's persons, as they work well, better and best in this world, in what
estate soever they be; because they do not always live perfectly, who are in
a perfect state. And it often comes to pass, that they who are in a lower
state, bring forth greater and more abundant fruit, then they who are in an
higher: for the Lord speaks of the fruit it self, which is not always
answerable to the state. And he speaks of the fruit of the seed, while it
is in the earth. Whereby he would signify, that he spoke of them, who bring
forth these fruits in this world.

Iansenius said, Centesim^m afferunt, qui perfectam ac sumam vitam agu^t:
sexagesimum vero qui mediocrem, trigesimum qui in feriores sunt, fructum tamen
bonum afferentes pro suis viribus. Concord. Euangel. c. 47.
They bring forth an hundred fold, who lead a perfect and chiefest life. They
bring forth sixty fold, who lead an indifferent good life. And they thirty, who
are inferior, yet bring forth good fruit, according to their ability.

M^ldonatus reckons up five several opinions out of the Fathers, yet will
not stand to any of them: but says, Fructum vocat, aut operabona, quae sidei
and verbi Dei fructus esse solent. vt Math. 21. 43. aut vitam ^ternam. v. 2.
Cor. 9. 6. In Math. 13. 23.
That Christ calls fruit, either Good works, which are accustomed to be the
fruits of Faith, and of the word of God: As when it is said, The kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to an other Nation, which shall bring
forth the fruits thereof. Math. 21. 43. Or else eternal life, as 2. Cor. 9.
6. Galat. 6. 7. 8. Iam. 3. 18.

Do not therefore blame me, though in expounding the variety of those fruits, I
do dissent from the Rhemists, and from the Cardinal, seeing I have the
consent of so many of the Fathers, and of your own writers.

SECT. XVI.
But to conclude, least I might seem, overmuch to exceed the l^ngth of a
Postscript, I know (1) See council. Chalcedon. act. 1.
your Priests do confidently tell you, that they have all the ancient Fathers
on their side against us; Even as Eutiches and Dioscorus insolently bragged, 1.
that the Fathers taught their error. And as the Arians falsely pretended,
Athanas. epist. De sentent. Dionysij, Alexandr. contra. Arianos.
that Dyonisius Alexandrinus was of their opinion. And as the Pelagians
Bellarm. de amiss. great. and statu peccat lib. 4. cap. 9.
alleged, Clemens Alexandrinus, Ambrose, Arnobius, Chrysostom: and others, as
maintainers of their heresy. I have therefore given you a taste of that untruth,
even in those Controversies, touched in these sermons. The like has been done
by others, and may be done again, in other Controversies. Do not therefore
believe those their vain brags.

Again, whereas they boast much of unity, do make it a mark of the Church,
and would thereby prove Bellarm. de notis eccles. l b. 4. cap. 10.
themselves to be the true church: you may by these few points evidently see,
that they have many iarres and contentions about the chiefest points of faith:
As the Arians long ago were Socrat. histor. lib. 5. 22.
noted, not only to differ in opinion from the orthodoxall fathers of the
Church, but likewise to differ much one from another, and that in many points
of religion. So may it now be observed, that the papists do not only vary
from us, but likewise dissent many ways one from another. And that not only
in ceremonies and circumstances, or matters of lesser moment, as they charge us
to contend among our selves, but likewise in the substantial points of man's
salvation, in the very form, nature, and properties of a justifying faith.

And lastly, whereas you all pretend, that you have that true faith in Jesus
Christ, which is able to save your souls: I would wish you to consider, that
all those do deceive themselves therein, who do not testify their faith by
their works as the Apostle teaches. Much has been written, and that by
sundry men, in times past, touching the bad manners of Rome, we who read those
reports, and do know the manner of your conversation, may well imagine, that
sinful deeds are the proper fruits of popery. And that papists wheresoever
they be, whether at Rome or else where, are all alike profane in their
behavior. I know that like pharisees, you are very strict in observing humane
preceps, as not to eat an egg in Lent; not to do any work on one of the
superstitious holydaies, abrogated in our Church; not to go out of the doors,
before you have blessed your selves with the sign of the cross, not to take
the better hand of a cross standing in the high way side: not to speak of a
dead man, unless you say, God have mercy on his soul.

Yet are most of you very careless in keeping Gods commandments. Where may we
find more ungodly swearing, more impious profanation of the Sabbath, more
wilful disobedience to lawful authority, more beastly drunkenness, and
disordered drinkings and swaggering, more filthy whoredom, more wastfull
gaming, more bitter railing, and uncharitable back-byting, then is to be seen
in the Recusants, and noncommunicants of this Country? And so infectious is
sin, that their bad example does corrupt the mind and manners of many about
them. Do these hope to be saved by their good works? Will these be accounted
confessors of their Religion? And yet keep no good conscience in their
conversation? Augustine Boni sunt catholici, qui and fide^ integram sequuntur,
and bonos mores. Quaest. in Mat. ca. 11.
said truly, That they are good Catholics, who follow both sound Faith, and
good manners. Why then should we account them good Catholics, who have
neither sound Faith, nor good manners?

The Lord of his mercy, open your eyes, that you see his truth, and some out
of Babel: And also work true faith in your hearts, that you may through his
Son, inherit his everlasting kingdom.

Amen.
FINIS.

