THE TRAGI-COMICALL HISTORY OF ALEXTO AND ANGELICA.

Containing The progress of a zealous Candide, and Masculine Love.

With a Various Mutability of a feminine affection.

Together with Loves Justice thereupon.

Written by Alex: Heart Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Nich: Vavasour, and are to be sold at
his shop in the Inner Temple near the Church. 1640.

TO THE REAders
IN precedent times when elocution with poesy joying their rival, Juned,
Jnvention bedicious wits, with their works were patronized; And Historical
fictions received favor in the royal Palace of greatest Princes: so
hereditarily descending from the Poets are in these our times applauded, and
delightful to the considerate and true apprehensive Reader, they cherrishing a
young and studious Muse, in future hope of nobler issue, not cropping her by
untimely censures ere she display her Autumn progenies: for nobleness with
virtue mixed, gives the true luster of a studious work, when Clouded ignorance
malings the best inscription. Therefore presuming on this maxim, I am bold to
present unto the worlds eye this book, which has served a prentiship unseen,
since it was penned; And now at my coming into England it desires to depart
from his fellows and to be set up in print, craving pardon for all his faults,
and to be made free by your kind acceptance.

Which shall oblige me yours, ALEX: HEART.

TO HIS RESPECted Friend ALEX: HEART: Esquire.
FEtch me that quill, that first writ Homers style,
Dipped in the standish of Poetic Oil,
With which I Will fix on Gold thy ample praise,
Whose luster there from death, thy Fame might raise,
Had I Mercuriall eloquence (O then)
I Would figure thee, the Mirror now of men!
Had thou Carrous't from Helicon a draught,
Or from wits spiced cup with Muses quaft;
Or had thou sipt of Aganippes Fount,
And after walked upon Parnassus Mount,
Or had thy ears ere heard brave Arcas voice
Philamelon like peculiar thee his choice,
Or had there been presented to thine eye
The bubling brook where gold-plum'd Peacockes lie,
Whence sweet Himelon and harmonious sound
Skales Azure Skies with Echoes from the ground,
Had thou been blessed so far as to have seen
Joves Daughters trace in the Pierian Green,
Whose comely Tresses of disheveled hair
In dangling down, each one rich jems does bear,
Or had thou ever viewed the Delphicke Rock
The Laurel bore, and worn Apolloes socke,
Had thou I say such favors but received
I deem thou had wits of all wit bereaved,
Besides what more performed had thy brave brain
That thus has wrote in such unequal strain,
Which cherish still that thy immortal Fame,
May live augmenting honor to thy name,
When thou art dead, that after age may see
The ample worth, that first did spring in thee.
Thine to command A. H.

IN LAVDEM HVJVS LIBRI Carmen Encomisticon.
COme hither Homer, where is thy sacred quill?
Learned Minerva now declare thy Skill;
Come thrice three daughters of immortal Jove,
Now sound your glorious Trumpet from above
Of never dying fame, Blazon these lines
With golden Caracters, lest Envies shrines
Detract the splendour of their noble fame,
And Carping Momus verify the same;
But why does my unlearned Muse dare sing
Thy noble works, with her unpolished string?
So long as Learning and the learned live,
Thy works to thee Immortal praise shall give.
Ad Authorem.
O Cor Dulce viris! certe tibi fama perennis,
Nomen ab ornatu, convenienter habes.
Ad Lectorem.
Candide, si cupias insignia gesta porentum
Praelia seu technas cognoscere quaeris amoris
Gest aque si ducum quaeris monumentaque regum;
Omnia sunt isto plene contenta libello:
Perlege tunc istum librum; via plana petenti,
Cujus finis honor, quia fine reportat honorem.
JA: NETLEY.

TO THE Blossom of Poetry ALEX: HEART, Esquire.
BE studious still, thy worth I will admire,
In spite of Foe thy fame must still aspire
Unto Immortal glory, and renown.
For thou must wear brave Clios laurel Crown,
O Paradox that fifteen years so young,
Should lay such plots as from thy muse has sprung!
Acute you genious Poets of our time,
Ye' and lost your wits, before they come in prime,
Leave of your Bacchus rimes and rowse for shame,
What shall a Child bereave you of your fame:
Yet do not stain with imputations quill
This tender youth that is innocent of ill,
He needs not care, Apollo's Armor he
Bears on his breast from pen-shot keeps him free
Thine what his own, B. W.

TO HIS LEARNED FRIEND, ALEX: HEART Esquire.
WHo ere thou art, kind Reader, view'st this book,
A wonder rare dropped from a youths first quill,
Whence gravest wits for patterns fair may look,
And with his inventions quaint whole volums fill.
What Is riper age is likely to bring forth,
Let them be Judges who Parnassus hant:
Sure such will cherish early budding worth,
And praises a^e never let his virtues want.
The Admirer of your virtues W.M.

THE HISTORY OF ALEXTO AND ANGELICA, OR Loves Metaphor.
IN Greece there dwelt many Noble men, amongst the which there was one named
Alexto, a Lord of great account and eminency, who was reverenced and honored
of all strangers as well as of his domesticke people, and those which did
inhabit about him, not for the largeness of his Patrimony, or the greatness
of his possessions (though they were such as his neighboring Peers could not
equalize) but the foundation and original of his extolments sprung from his
grave, judicious and matchless counsels, which so liberally he would extend on
all sorts: And also for his charitable Alms and benevolences, with which he
plentifully would store, succor and cherish those, which were in adversity.

But to our intended discourse. This grave Senator had a Son who bearing his
name, disagreed not from his properties, but punctually had his Fathers
heroicke inclinations, which made him as happy as meritorious, and was no less
honored of all men, then the limits of his deserts did reach unto: whose daily
practices were to excel each man in courtesy: but as he was not too much
selfe-conceited, nor too lofty minded: so were not his thoughts fixed on any
base or unworthy object, for they were as magnanimous as he nobly borne, which
always did aspire unto the height of virtue, and no sooner sought but attained
unto. For the comeliness of his pourtraiture it was unparalled, yet had
Venus lived in those days, she would have said that her Adonis did exceed him
far: who, in my judgment, was not worthy to bear the title of this young
Grecians name.

But now as touching his feature and Physiognomy the colors of this my Rural
pencill is to sable to him and figure him in so liberal, lively, and ample
sort, as the genius of the judicious Reader may conceive: And also fearing that
in herauldring forth his worth, some Demosthenes interrupt me as did Aesehines
the Orator: who being sent from Athens to King Philip of Macedon at his return
from the Court to Athens, he much commended and extold the exquisite beauty of
PHILIP, with his admirable elocution and excessive bearing of drink. The which
being related in the audience of Demosthenes, he presently checked Aesehines,
saying, that he made a woman of Philip for his beauty, a babbling Sophister for
his eloquence, and a sponge for his retaining of liquour.

But now this young ALEXTO, was the only joy and comfort of his Aged Sire, who
having a desire to have his Son experienced in Martial Discipline, and also
not ignorant for the courting of amorous Damozels, he sent him to Athens to be
educated in both, and also for his Comrade he sent one Sandrico, a man's Son
of great worth, and no less valiant, then his own Son, for Sandrico's
Courage was apparently manifested, and also proved most eminent.

But in short space these two undanted spirits were landed at Athens, where not
altogether so joyful for their safe arrival, as for the good society of each
other, to whom they linckt their fidelity in a fraternall vow, and bound their
friendship with such a Gordian knot, as the Ass was fastened to the Temple of
Apollo with.

But after they had spent some few years in Athens, the Thracian Emperor
began to overrunne Greece, which stood in need of the aid, power, and
assistance of these two Champions A^lexto and Sandrico.

And speedily they were sent for home, for the succor of their aged Sires. In
which wars they performed exceeding rare deeds of Chivalry, whereby they
became the only blossoms and mirrours of those times: for still the honor of
each day did adorn their Crests. But the acting of their exquisit feats, to
the no small amazement of each spectator, in which behold how retrograde
fortune proved, that these two uncontroled Greeks, became captivated by the
arrival and verbal report, which the shrill Trumpet of fame triumphed through
all the Army.

Which was of the exquisite feature of the Roman Lady Angelica, of whom it was
said, that if all the Goddesses were composed in an Union, they could not
equalize her, the citation here of each particular of her unparalleliz'd
worth^, would appear too tedious. Only conceive this, that the report which
flying fame did demonstrate, did still solicit the Ears of young Alexto:
insomuch, that it was deeply rooted in his heart, and the fruit which sprung
from thence, was his daily squared sighs, whereby he was altogether disabled
to negociate his Martial affairs. And thus was he enamoured of her whom his
eyes were never blessed with the prospect of; yet daily did he surfeit by the
excessive quaffing of the nomination of her name, and did as much adore the
same, as Pigmalion did the senseless Portraiture that he carved, on which he
so much doted, that he made it his bedfellow.

But all this while, we have not treated of the vexation and perplexity which
Sandrico sustained: not that he was entangled or captivated, by the amorous
report of the terrestiall Goddess. But his grief and disability proceeded
from the pensivenes, which he perceived his friend Alexto to be in.

And as he could not conceive the original from whence it sprung, so would not
ALEXTO relate unto him, and divulge the cause of his internal grief, which
was apparently descryed by his external hew, and melancholy gestures, yet
poor Sandrico was not so well read in that loving Philosophy as to conceive
the nature of his unusual passion, for he was more fit for the Tents of
boisterous Mars, then the Temples of amorous Ladies.

So likewise was ALEXTO before he was intrapped with the snare of affection:
But alas! there is no heart so sovereign good, but Love can make simple. And
so it fell out that one time above the rest, Sandrico came into the Tent of his
noble friend ALEXTO, and falling into a deep discourse: at the Catastroph and
period of each sentence, Alexto would still close them up with such a sigh,
that it would seem to rent and cleave in sunder the rafters of his Tent.

At which Sandrico laying fast hold upon that occasion, began to importune and
request him by all the permanent and unfeigned friendship, that so liberally he
had and did show on him, that he would not conceal any longer that in
obstinacy, which might prove his utter ruin, but reveal it unto him, whereby
it might be a mitigation of his distress, vowing to participate of the same,
and also to lend him the propagation of all his future and faithful endeavors.

Have you beheld how Iris struts when as her Mantel's spread? Or have you marked
when as Sol rises with his radiant beams, he does disperse the misty Foggs
and unsavory vapors, which were obscured in the concavious places of the
earth? Even so the true pattern of perfect friendship, which SANDRICO spread
upon ALEXTO partly dispersed the sable Clouds of that his present calamity. For
when Birds sing early, it does betoken a fair day, but when the Sunshine
garnishes it, it prognosticates a shower* but after a storm comes a calm: so
after ALEXTO had turned over the Volumes of numberless sighs, he unfolded his
mind unto SANDRICO in these words.

O unhappy J! Wars have their ends either hour, or death, the Scilian pooles
by sufficient help, may be drawn dry, the Talitian tree in time did wither,
the Stoiticall flood did drown the usurping Tyrant.

But Love, O Love! Thou have no period, neither can J bring thee to a
compromise delay to thee, is the unhappy Headsman, that holding me, neither
saves nor kills, but leaves me to languish in a burning frozen zone.

Sandrico being attentive, by this understood, that an amorous passion had
creep'd into him, and thus began modestly to chide him.

Oh quench these smothering sparks, lest suffered they grow to a perpetual
flame, and like the Amazonian Cell, scorch all that does approach it nigh, and
at last with Mount Aetna consume it self; But (Oh my friend) let the Buckets
of thy undanted courage, draw forth of the noble Well of thy understanding so
much reason; as to quench this unmartiall Agony.

Let not thy brave, heroicke mind, stoop unto so base and ascivious a lure fit
for none but Panicall rusticks, that never were trained in the Trojan Wars,
whose whips and prongs are Spears and Lances; Haycocks, Shields, and Targets,
and blew Bonnets, Crests and Helmets, I blush at thy thoughts, and could take
pleasure to deridefancie: were it not in thee, but now J see the Poets did
well, when as they first fained Cupid, that disloyal Sycophant to be blind.
For had he seen thy worth, he never durst attempt a shaft, as thus rovingly
has light upon thee, the which repulse, and send back again in as many
pieces about his Corpse, as there be sands in the Lydian shores: for what is his
bolt only headed with a voluntary desire, and feathered with a quick consent,
which is shot from a bow of Jdlenesse. Then rowse up thy disordered senses, and
remember the Soldiers Phrase; Dulcior est Mors quam Amor.

Aristotle, Socrates, Nay, had thou taken Lectures from Mercury, and studied
all thy life time for Poems, to feed the variable incredulity of these
insatiable Dames, either they would banish thee, as Caesar did Ovid, or
condemn thee to dye in the height of their displeasure.

As for beauty (their chiefest pride) it is but Times flower which as it is
delicate, so it soon withers; for it is like the Colors which Phidias drew,
which seemed admirable, and to the view most excellent, but did vanish and
impair at every aeriall breath. You know that VENUS the Matron of them all was
fair, the sooner to make a wanton, also HELEN the Mirror of our Grecian Land,
but ask Troy of her qualities.

Therefore when as you have run through the Alphabet of praising fictions, as
in saying Worthiest Mistress, my service lies prostrated unto your acceptance,
the which if you please to command, I shall think of none other happiness, but
in the accomplishment of the same.

Or should thou figure thy Mistress, as the Poets did Venus to ride in a
Golden Chariot, drawn with silver breasted Doves, or as Juno with golden
plumed Peacocks: At the last, when as they are satisfied by drawing the day of
extolments, they will seek to place thee amongst the stars, as Venus did
Pythagentes, for a Flatterer, a very lofty seat but low in reward, and this is
the common course now a days of our Grecian, and Roman Damsels. Therefore use
no physic but the consideration of these, which forth of the seriousness of
my love to thee, I have been enboldned to relate.

After Sandrico had made an end of this discourse, Alexto began to answer him,
as follows, My dearest Sandrico, had Dionisius but ten Platoes to tell him
truth, he had not erred, Agamemnon wished but ten such as Nestor, to vanquish
all his Enemies at Phrygia, and to set our Greeks at liberty: But thou art
both a Plato and a Nestor, unto me, thy counsels are both true and good: But
alas! my heart is filled with such an amorous passion, that it admits no
attentiveness unto thy friendly advertisements. Yet J must confess, I have
heard that a woman's love is like the river Tedocheus, which being tasted unto
some, it proves venomous and banefull, but unto others as their daily
nutriment: Or as the Macedonian Image, which unto some Champions at the triumph
there, it would cast amorous glances, and on others disdainful looks and
frowns. And also as on the Saxtenion Mount there was a Castle enchanted by the
Necromancer Bastellotus, wherein he caused to be tortured his fair Polidarca,
for her cruelty toward him, at the Entry of which he had placed a Brazen Bull,
a fierce Dragon and hellish furies: These were Guardians whereby none could
vanquish nor unloose, but only he, which was the Mirror of Rome, for all
perfection. Alcontiodes and he finished the Enchantment.

Then O Sandrico, suffer me to try my fortune, which peradventure may prove as
these have, and why may not I with Calapassus take a turn in Dancing with
Jove's Daughters in the Pierian Green?

Tush, tush, said Sandrico, remember thy own speeches, wherefore did
Bastelotus cause Pilodorea to be tortured, but for her cruelty toward him, and
may not thy Mistress prove as marble hearted?

Also, remember how long Lodovicus was enamoured of the Lady Dantrissea, and
how unfaithful she prooed unto him; As also when he dyed, he desired that his
heart should be showed unto her, wherein she perceived her own similitude, as
transparent as an object is by the Suns reflection in a Crystal Mirror, yet
she regarded it not, but esteemed it ridiculous: But should thy Mistress prove
so marble-hearted, I would become Santeticus, causing her to be enchanted in
that sort, as he did Dantrissia, for being the death of his friend Lodovicus.

First, he caused her to be placed in a boiling Caldron amongst furies, with
the portraiture of his friend Lodovicus in her view, holding his bleeding heart
in his hand, whereby she should also gaze on her own dissembling Phisiognomy,
and on Lodovicus front was engraven in Capital letters this motto.

Thy base dissembling face, did cause my death,
Thy flattering Tongue, makes this to bleed on earth;
Torments I did sustain in life for thee:
And now in Death thus tortured shall thou be.
Secondly, her nutriment was the excrement of Toades, Adders and Serpents,
which was dish't in the natural Scull of Lodovicus, served her by Satyrs
which were her attendants, with strange deformed beasts.

In this sort she still remained which is too good for all such disloyal
Sycophants. But my Alexto, if this amorous conceit do but once creep into
thee, I do much dread the success, for thou, that art for beauty like the
fair Romans Paramour, for Wisdom like Ulysses, whom Circe could not inchant,
for Courage like a second Hector.

Then seeing thou art adorned with all these graces, bequeath not thy self,
and it, unto so foolish a passion, which allows nothing excellent, but what it
likes, for it shadoweth beggary, in Crates, whom Hisparata thought, and
esteemed rich for his love, but contrariwise, Palperea accounted Croesus a
poor fellow, because she disliked him. Then yield not thy self to this fancy
which is altogether in extremes, and admits no reason, for thou a^t he from
whose mouth flows melody, more enchanting then the Sirens* And in thy lips the
Muses make a new Parnassus, and thy head contains the subtilty of Aristotle.

Remember also thou art a Warrior, whose undanted courage, was never yet
quail'd by any, neither foreign Foe, nor home bredenemy. For the name of
noble ALEXTO is sufficient to vanquish Troops of armed men.

After Sandrico had used all the skill he could to persuade his friend ALEXTO
from the entertaining of his new fancy Alexto began thus to answer him.

My dear Sandrico, as the wounded Dear wringeth forth tears, and as the
Myrtle depressed yields gum, so by the deep impression, which J have
conceived of fair Angelica's beauty, my sighs lead me captive to pick up a
mourner in the time of my own tears: besides, my SANDRICO, the Gods should
do nature too much wrong, if they should place an Adamant heart in a Crystal
face, therefore twit me no more with Vesta, for Venus is she who can chastise
Angelica though she did glory in beauty, as Narcissus, who stooping to kiss
his own shadow in a brook was immediately drowned therein; Besides Lucina is
a Goddess which must be employed, for marriage is honorable, and to live
unmatcht it were a wrong to nature. The Phoenix when she is nigh her end,
builds her neast with all sweet spices, and odoriferous perfumes, as close unto
the Suns reflection as she can, whereby at her decease his splendidious and
Radiant beams should revive a young Phoenix forth of the Ashes of the old
deceased one.

But Sandrico should either man or woman dye without the propagation of Issue,
their Characters and resemblances, could not be left behind, but by a dead
substance as Dostitetius was, whose portraiture was carved ere he died by the
cunning Artist; therefore I say Love is Divine, and Marriage honorable,
especially to those that are the paragons of this terrestrial Paradise.

Also when as the Demetriall King esteemed of Love, as the Barbarian King did
of gold which he sent as presents to his Enemies, Venus cursed him out of her
Temple, wherefore he was hated of all, and thus hatefully dyed.

And when Rossilius would taste no fruit but such as grew in the Gardens of
Hesperides, neither then any Color content his eyes but such as was stained by
the Maureticall fish; that is, he could affect no Damozell but she, which was
accounted the terrestrial Goddess of the Thration land, named Dionela; and
because he was loyally affected to her, Venus suffered him to marry her, and
when as she lackt the assistance of Lucina, Diana also came unto her, and at
the birth of Dionella's son the Goddesses rained Pearl, Jupiter gold* Mars
trained his warlike Legions in the Air. This was to signify that where loyal
affection is, the Gods rejoice tryumphantly, Also when as Doves are matched
young they never sever but by death, so Vines grafted being sprigs they seldom
part, but they decay.

Sandrico perceiving that Alexto would still Cross him, he thus begun again;
I perceive that thy head is not barren of Sophistry to prove this thy Argument
of loving Philosophy: but suppose (my friend) that thy Autumn showers come
too late, and cause not thy Crop to prove.

Besides, a woman will say, she has but one heart, as the Heavens have but one
Sun, but none can find how many tricks and false imaginations are observed
and shrouded in that one heart of theirs. Then look before you leap, and
walk not where no footing can be found, seek not to clime Olimpus before you
consider the altitude thereof neither bark with the Wolves of Cirea against
Endimion.

Settle not too much affection before you know how to be requited, but I
perceive that is true which one relates of a certain person which was so
ravished in his amorous and fond Contemplations, that he had the Image of his
Mistres so imprinted in his thoughts that he seemed always to converse with
her, and perform with her all those actions which lovers use to commit in
embracing of their loves, so you Alexto grow almost desperate for her, whom you
have not seen: Alexto perceiving Sandrico spoke unto the purpose, he speedily
thus answered him. Prithee Sandrico honor me so much as to bear me company
unto Rome; where J will try my fortune with Angelica, and if she prove not so
amorous as I am loyal, I will more exclaim of her then Doronus did of our
Grecian Army, to which request Sandrico consented, perceiving there was no
repulsion but* Alexto would try his fortune with the Roman Lady Angelica he
gave his consent to travail with Alexto. In which Journey Alexto began thus to
pass away the time.

Worthiest Sandrico, beauties arrows are so sharp, and the darts that fly
from women's eyes so piercing that the choicest Armor cannot repulse either of
them, no not the Corslet which Vulcan made for the Didonian Champion, for it
pierces deeper within the tender breast of an Amorous Lover then Canon Shot in
plancke, for shot, either it passes through or sticks, but when Love makes
battery, if it enters not the defendant it tears the plaintiff in a thousand
pieces. It Is also like the Amazonian Armor which being shot at the King of
Phrygia it was repulst in such sort by Magic Art, that it brake about the
Ears of Stonatus, who shot it, that it killd him and five hundred of his
resolute Warri^rs; Or, it has resemblance unto the fireballs and Thunderbolts
which Jove sent at Mars, the one lighting on his Helmet, and the other glancing
on his Shield, were returned with such fury, that the bolts stroke Xantusissius
(loves kinsman) dead, and the balls had well nigh fired Jove himself out of
his throane. So nothing could extinguish the wildfire which well nigh burnt
the Castle of Silotus, but the Milk and Juice of the Stabolian Tree.

So neither will nor can any thing assuage the fervent anguish of a Loyal
Lover, but the true acceptance of the beloved; For what spoke APOLLO, he whose
skill in compounds and simples exceeded all men's (for Galen and Hippocrates,
were not worthy to carry his Drugs, when as an Amorous passion crept into him)
he said, Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis; Besides, Love, that
Divine passion, if it be over rash dealt with, it burns dim, and dies like
the Forge of Dedalus. But if it be moderately treated on, it will quickly flame
with consent like Arnalian sparkles which smothering lay, but being leisurely
blown were soon fired.

But my Sandrico if my fair Angelica would look upon me as the affectionated
mother on her smiling Infant, or with such an amiable countenance as Doranelia
did on Stol^tius her constant lover, who rushed into the battle at Phrygia,
resolutely resolving there to dye, or to set at liberty his fair Mistres, who
after a tedious conflict with expense of blood and the close pursuing of his
enemies, was almost brought unto the period of life, but casting his decaying
eyes about, speedily received such strength and fresh Courage from the feiture
of his beauteous Love which did so replenish his empty veins, that in short
time he subdued his haughty Foes, and brought them to submission* even so an
amorous glance from Angelica, would revive my drooping heart, which is in a
fierce conflict for her sake, and is almost vanquished by death, his deadly
enemy.

But o Sandrico, do but consider what Love is; for as there is no cut to
unkindness; so there is no haughty spirit, but that the quintessence of Love,
can chastise with Celerity.

For great Alexander stood affrighted at the Amazonian beauties, Hector in the
midst of his battle against Alezanto when as he saw the Empress Claria he
instantly was amazed, and sustained the Agony of a Tartian Ague, letting his
Lance drop from his Martial hand, suffering himself to be disarmed,
vnhelm'd, and Captivated by his Foes.

I fear, quoth Sandrico, that this fiction of praising Love will not last
long, for the Nightingale has but one May in twelve months, and whereas thou
have surfetted by quaffing the poisoned Cup of bitter Love, thou shall find
the reward in the bottom thereof, to be but the dreggs of thy counterfeiting
Mistresses hate; yield not too much to the impotency thereof, for you know not
with how much gall and bitterness the honey of Love is tempered with. Est melle
and fell foecundissimus: Besides, a woman has as many minds as the Alphabet
has letters, for the distinction of their fancies are like the difference of
their faces, for Aristes said, that his Alderia had two kinds of faces, the one
dissembling to please him, the other lasciviously to entertain a friend; also
they are merely composed and made of vanity which makes them prove so light.

For Phylistis waighing his Mistress in the balance of equity; found the
longer he kept her the lighter she was, and as the Marble drops tears against
every storm, so a woman will feign weeweeping upon every slight and light
occasion; but that is, because they would be thought of as tender nature and
constitution as their skins be extold for whiteness.

All this while Alexto was very attentive, and was almost persuaded in the same
form to rail against his Mistress ere he was arrived at Rome to try her, but
by this time you must conceive they are somewhat nigh, and to make short,
Alexto thus began to answer him. I suppose (said he) that you Sandrico was
brought forth Minerva-like and not by a woman; for if a woman had bin thy
mother, thou could not thus fervently have railed against their sex. Tush
said Sandrica, Avicenna said. Hominem posse produci naturaliter ex terra, if
you will not believe a woman was my Mother, imagine me to be brought forth of
the Earth; Besides, I am no Scholar unto King Lewis the sixth, as in learning
that sentence which he taught his Son; saying, he needs no more Latin but
this: Qui nesci^ dissimulare nescit vivere; and though truth gets foes, and
flattery friendship, yet I will not sooth thee up in that which I know is
banefull, also I point at no one particular Dame, neither include all in
general, but I speak of the disloyal and inconstant ones: therefore no
virtuous dame will be outrageous but only in reading what I have said, and
viewing the picture which is here drawn find it to bear resemblance unto
themselves, such may dart venom at me that are stung by the worm of
Conscience.

But let me say* what I will, thou provest regardlesse thereof, and with
Rocardus King of Phrisland being by Wolfranius persuaded to be baptized, having
one foot in the Font, the other out, ask't Wolfranius where went the most part
of his predecessors that were not baptized, to Hell, said Wolfranius* instantly
Rocardus drew his foot forth of the font, saying. Rectius est plures quam
pauciores sequi. Extremities and dangers which I relate unto thee of Love, and
what wrong men have sustained yet thou art the more enamoured thereof; by that
time Sandrico had made an end of his discourse they were arrived at Rome at a
Port named, Porta Venetia; the which Port was adjoining to the Palace of the
beauteous Lady Angelica: In which they having arrived, Sandrico for the better
satisfaction of his friend and himself, begun to enquire and demand of the
Inhabitants what they could inform him concerning the heroical inclination of
this Roman Goddess, and whether that her feature was transparent unto that
which the shrill Trumpet of Fame had blazed in such an unparallelized sort,
whose worth by all relatio^s they found rather to be undervalued then exceeded,
at which Alexto's itching ears were still seduced to soft attentio^, which rapt
him in such an ecstasy of pleasure that he could remain silent no longer, but
pulling Sandrico by the Arm, burst forth into this paradoxicall speech; o my
Sandrico, he that by the change of Fortune mounteth higher then he should, must
arm himself with patience to descend lower then he would, as they are not
happy which are poor and deformed, so are they not fortunate that are over
happily endewed with the ornaments of Nature, and largeness of temporal
possessions and patrimonies. Sandrico seeing him so passionate could no longer
refrain, but interrupts him in his intended discourse.

My dear ALEXTO over the greatest beauties hangs the greatest ruin, I could
wish thee to be wise, for the study of wisdom is the readiest ruin of grief
and vexations, the counsel of friends does assuage and mitigate present
perturbations, and also prevents the future ignominy of perilous dangers, but I
confess counsel in trouble gives small comfort when help is past cure;
besides, where fortunes beams shine not propitious, diligence does little
avail nor does it mitigate instant calamities, but me thinks the cause being
your own, do but remove that and of necessity the effect must follow, then
Medici cura teipsum, tu been cognoscis morbis artemque medendi, then seek a
speedy remedy lest thy contagious wounds fester thy whole body; but alas, of
all creatures Man is the most apt to fall, because being stricken with love, he
undertakes the greatest actions; for as I have told thee, do but consider what
this fancy is, a Map of misery, a world of torments seducing man into a
labyrinth of irrevocable tortures; but Alexto interrupting his friend Sandrico,
made reply. When the heart is environed with oppression then the ears are shut
up against all good counsel: for perplexed hearts live with tears in their
eyes; yet often dye with mirth in their looks; security banisheth dolours, but
fear hinders gladness; for grief is a friend to solitariness, foe to
sobriety and heir to desperation. But, O Sandrico, what does it avail if the
mind be generous, the body Warlike, the Joints pliable, and active, all the
dispositions inclined to heroical and magnanimous actions; if he that takes
Arms be unfortunate; But indeed, assiduall prosperity is more hurtful and
obnoxious then adversity, in that the one may be more easily born then the
other forgotten.

Curtius reports, that Darius in his flight drank puddle water polluted with
the dead Carcasses, he at the drinking thereof reported, that he in all his
precident Jollity never drunk liquid substance, that was more pleasant, and
delightful unto his Palate: The reason was, because when he was at the height
of fortune, he used to drink before he was a thirst. So also Artaxerxes who in
a pitched battle was forced to surrender the honor of the day to his Enemies,
whereby he betook himself to flight, in which he being destitute of corporal
sustenance and nutriment, could purchase naught to sustain nature but dry figs
and brown bread, at the receipt thereof he made a long narration: In which he
vowed that such pleasant food did his lips never touch till that instant: then
my Sandrico, those be but false joys which are not intermixed with tears,
perils and disturbances, for necessity and tribulation are the first steps to
honor, thereby a man comes to know himself; therefore let us derelinguish
this discourse, and consult how we may become spectators of that
superexcellent creature.

Sandrico perceiving that it was to no purpose any longer to discourse with
him, until he had glutted his longing eyes with the resplendant rariety of
Angelica's peerlesse feature: wherefore he counseled Alexto for to walk into
the Palace to behold the Lady of his affections, unto this proposition ALEXTO
consented, so both together went there, where no sooner entered but they found
this beauteous creature sitting in State adorned with vnparallellized
habiliments, the splendour of which being accompanied with a Saint-like feature
gave such a glorious luster, as that it seems unto Alexto that some Comet had
been beneath the Roof, the superexcellent Lady was accompanied with diverse
heroicke Peers and Nobility, which resorted thither because of the Justs and
Turneyes, which were to be performed at a speedy solemnization. But as I said,
Alexto's senses being Captivated at the sudden vnequalized object, he being in
this trance begun somewhat to rave, breaking forth into extreme passion,
crying with a loud voice (in yonder throne is fixed Ariadnes glittering Star,
for it is no terrestrial Dame, no mortal wight, but an immortal creature, and
supreme Goddess) but ere he could proceed any further Sandrico clapped unto him
and pacified his outrages, advising him to lay hold on that occasion, and to
prostrate himself unto the Ladies acceptance; the which he willingly embraced,
and approaching unto the Lady Angelica, doing her much homage and reverence, as
he supposed befitted so high a person, framed his speech unto her in this
ensuing form.

Renowned Paragon, you whose illustrious feature needs no silver sockets to
adorn and beautify the Golden pillars of your unvalued worth; then why should
I with Metaphorical phraise adorn the feature of your Authentic self. Which
nature cannot parallel? I Will therefore leave the propagation of such praising
fictions unto the trifling Tymers of our age, whose Courtship does in flattery
consist; For should I herald your Divine presence in such obscure sentence to
be illuminated by the luster of your all-conceiving Genius, it would not only
make my imbecility the apparenter but conduct me to a labyrinth of fond
contemplations; for as an Eye in beholding of the Suns reflection twinkleth
with the lids: so the rays which shines from the Ebon arches of your brows,
has not only caused mine eyes to be beauty blasted, but leads me Captive
unto your royal person, where like the Salamander I request my assiduall
abode. ALEXTO still running on in this sort of Rhetoric the audience of which
did not only drive the noble spectatours to a nonplus, but each one seemed to
be an Orator and to Simpathize his comely gestures and Court-like behaviors:
and as for Sandrico, he through the ecstasy of Joy that he received thereat;
supposed himself to be elevated into the Oriental region Palpasus.

But as for Angelica in her fair face, a comely blush with an ashy pale did
strive for superiority. But have you beheld when as the silver fingred morning
does appear, shaking her plumes from whence pearly drops do fall? Or have you
seen the blushing of the East, when glittering Phoebus does begin his course,
who lifting up his Globall front, from Cinthiaes glittering palm does wash his
face in Thoetis crystal lap. Even so this Goddess did descend her Throne,
taking ALEXTO by his Warlike palm, bespake after this manner. Heroicke Knight,
for your gesture speaks your own, had but your Oratory the A^t of persuasion
as well as of Captivating, I by a thought of fond conceit, should imagine my
self, that which your fiction has strove to figure me, through the which I
with Paulinia should adore the shadow of my own feature, if J were as you
would make me, your Rhetoric had abused my meaning; then worthy Sir, seek not
to praise beauty, when desert cannot equal the limit of reason.

But since Fortune has conducted you unto our Palace, I shall request your
stay until our Triumphs be ended, and that you depart not without the
acknowledgement of your further service, and also with my liberty.

ALEXTO hearing this comfortable speech, thus replied, fairest of creatures; he
were unworthy to clime the height of prosperity, that should voluntarily fall
into desperation, and let me be anatomized to less then nothing, if J deceive
your good opinion.

With these and such like discourses they spent the time until Supper was
ready to be served, at which she caused Alexto to be placed as her opposite,
whereby amorous glances past on both sides: and as for Sandrico he was as
joyful thereof, as if he were a sharer in his friends present happiness: but
while Supper time lasted, there began a demand amongst the Nobility, which should
first enter the lists in the morning, but being they could not decide this
controversy between themselves it was proffered to the Lady Angelica to define
the same, she having the disposing did command ALEXTO the first entrance: he
no little glad thereof seemed loath, yet willing to accept so great a favor,
but he soon perceived a murmuring amongst the nobility, and not without just
cause, that a stranger and Forraigner should dispossess them of their right,
and honor which did appertain unto them, by reason thereof he requested of
the Lady to be excused, and to surrender that favor which she had employed
upon him unto some nobler person, whose deserts might exceed his.

The Lady entering into consideration with her self, did place it, though
unwillingly, of the Lord of Montulus, unto the which all the rest willingly did
agree, and as for the next places they did accord amongst themselves: by that
time they had brought this unto a compremise Supper was ended, where after some
pastimes, Bed time did approach, where each one was conducted, but Alexto and
Sandrico were most sumptuously lodged next unto the Ladies Chamber, to which
they were some part of the way conducted by her own person, then leave being
taken, and sweet rest bequeathed on both sides, the Lady departed, and they
entered their Chamber, the which they found so garnisht with unestimable Jems,
and adorned with such gorgeous hangings, that it seemed rather to entertain
some Monarch then their persons: but the door being closed and none resident
but themselves, ALEXTO began to burst forth as thus.

O fortunate star that thus propitiously has smiled on me, and adorned me
with the beams of unestimable favor, in suffering this Correspondent amity
betwixt Lady Angelica and my self!

She now have I beheld which is the only Phoenix of this Terrestrial
Paradise, and sole Mirror for natures ornaments, Sandrico was stricken dumme,
and was loath to answer in some space, being in an outrage with himself for
his precedent abusing the Feminine sex before he had known any just cause
thereof, and here, judicious Ladies, humbly craves your forgiveness, and so
do I being much perplexed with my self, that my pen should be enforced to
cite his outrageous blasphemies.

And thus he turns unto Alexto in Angelicaes presence, thou did seem to
exceed Cicero the most eloquent of all Orators, can thou now in as ample
sort figure her comeliness? ALEXTO replide, that nothing was so easy, or
performed with such facility; and thus he began.

Now do I love that never loved before,
And for requital largely will implore;
Engaged I am, but to so fair a Dame
Since the Creation Nature could not frame:
First, in her growth she is like the Cedar tall,
Slender as Ewe, or flourishing Laurall:
Her blush to Phoebus may be equaliz'd;
This is the Dame that has my heart surpised:
Her front is like unto the new fallen Snow,
Not made for frowns, and wrinckles scorns to show,
Her eyes exceed rich Caesar's Western Iem's,
Shining like Pearls on the Angelica's Stem's,
For from those eyes shines such resplendent grace,
As if some Sovereign had been in place.
Her lips are like fair Rubies, and within
Her teeth, they seemed as if they Pearls had been:
Her neck in view like polisht Ivory,
She seems like Venus, or a Star in Sky;
There Ebbs, and flows forth from her Silver breasts
Sacred perfumes, as't were the Phoenix neasts
This Diadem is not worth less but more
Then Caesar found beneath the Western shore.
Now my Sandrico how likest thou this description? Is it not punctually? It is
most exquisite answered Sandrico; and after these and such like speeches sleep
did begin to fasten on them both, whereby they resigned the rest of their
discourse until the morning that they did awake, unto which rest we will leave
them being loath to disturb them any further, and return unto the Lady
Angelica, who being in her bed could take no rest, but still her Genius
conceived an apparition, which seemed to be the pourtraiture of Alextos
countenance, thus was she still perplexed, being greedy to be satisfied of his
Parentage, then did she conceive him to be noble, by reason of the rare
perfections that she had conceived in him: these things being considered by
her, she resolved to conceit nothing of him, until she had viewed his feats
of Arms, which were to be performed on the Morn, and with this resolution she
betook her self to slumber, but all in vain, because she could not shake off
her new conceived fancy: but being she is desirous of rest, we will leave her
to enjoy it, wishing her her hearts content, and all other Ladies that are in
her case, and because silence possessed them all for this present we will request
your patience to the morning.

Which being come, the Lady* ANGELICA was the first that was awake, for she was
most perplexed in mind; Alexto and Sandrico were still secure in a sweet
slumber, for ALEXTO had received so much pleasure over night at those
unestimable favors, with the which the Lady did adorn him, that he had turned
all his precedent despair into hope of a good success. But by this time
ANGELICA had beautified her Corpse with her sumptuous and gorgious Vestments,
accompanied with her amiable looks, she went forth of her Chamber and
descending into the Hall, where the Nobility did attend and expect her
approach, in which she was no sooner entered, but salutations being given on
both sides, she ascended her chair of State, where we leave her in discourse
with the Nobility, and return unto Alexto, who by this time had a vision, the
which gave him to understand, that they all were in readiness to enter the
lists, only expecting his coming. At the departure of this Vision he leaps
out of his bed awaking his friend Sand. telling him that they had over-slipt
their time. By the which you must conceive they could have no great discourse,
but the time they had for ye clothing of them, in which Sandrico thus began;
Noble Alexto, you last night undertook to enter into the lists, as one of the
knts of Angelica, in which my prayers shall be that you may return victorious,
gaining the honor of the day and that triumphant glory may adorn thy Crest,
for by the atchieving of this heroic action in the sight of the virtuous Lady,
it will either procure* thee thy hearts content, or make thee Loves vassaile
for ever, if once condemned to dye in the hate of her displeasure, and at thy
return if prosperous, we will conclude in what sort to reveal the nature of
thy apparent passion unto her soft attention.

By this time they both were ready, and coming down into the Hall, the time
was at hand of their departure into the Lists, each one (doing his duty unto
the Lady) took their places after the Lord Mon. who over night was assigned
the first that should enter. So the Lady with the rest of her attendants of
exquisite beauty descending from their seats, and being ready to take places,
Angelica requested Alexto to conduct her* the which he was not unwilling to
embrace, in the mean time Sandrico went to prepare his Horse and Martial
accoutrements, which were prepared for that exploit, ALEXTO having placed the
Lady for her prospect, and doing her reverence, taking his leave, she took a
Scarf, that was most sumptuous to behold, imbrodered with Pearl and Gold, the
which she caused to be tied about his Arm, wishing his happy success and
assiduall prosperity; for she seemed much enamoured of him, but cautious lest
he should conceive any thing thereof.

But how much joy Alexto conceived of this unestimable favor, I want the power
of expression, therefore resign that to the learned judgments, to conceive
of. But in this ecstasy Alexto came unto his friend Sand. relating to him in
brief what had happened between the pierlesse Lady and himself, at the
audience whereof Sandrico conceived no small content: but because ALEXTO would
not be accounted prolixious, he mounted his fiery Steed, being accompanied with
his friend, and by that time, the rest were placed, and after reverence done
unto the Lady, he entered the lists, causing his horse to corvet in that ample
sort that he astonished each spectatour.

And you must conceive if the Lady was enamoured of him before, how much more
was she now surprised by his matchless actions. But the Trumpets warning unto
the first encounter Lord Montulus and Sasetus a Persian Knight met in such a
full Carreere, that Sasetus struck Montulus out of his Saddle upon the Crupper
of his horse, But Montulus loath to pass by without claiming quittance with
him, struck so outragiously on the breast of Sasetus, that his Lance shattered
in pieces, and nimbly clapping into the Saddle again, meeting so furiously
together, dismounted Sasetus tumbling him and his horse unto the Earth, so
Montulus passed by not being further indamag'd, but Sasetus seeing himself
foiled, especially in the presence of the Lady Angelica, unto whose acceptance
his assiduall devotions were bent, imagining that it would have been his
perpetual disgrace courageously drew forth his own Sword, being on his feet,
sheathed it again in his own bowels, uttering these words, Thus nobly will J
dye, rather then live dishonourably* This unexpected stratageme proved an
astonishment unto each Spectator, but especially miraculous unto the Ladies:
but after some pacification, and the cause of this outrage being fully related,
it was very well approved of both by the Ladies and Nobility, whereby the Justs
did still proceed which otherwise had dissolved. But had not Montulus been
animated and recomforted by Alexto and others, he had surely endangered
himself for very anguish and grief that so noble a Spirit should fall by his
feeble Arm.

But having recollected himself, he was ready to encounter with the next that
made against him.

ALEXTO as yet was loath to encounter with Montulus until he had overthrown
most part of those Knights there present, imagining thereby that Montulus
should be exceedingly extold of each spectator, and that the Ladies would
affirm that he was the choicest of all Europe, for Kingly Knighthood, and when
as Montulus should be adorned with these favors, he would instantly entertain
to just with him, being fully assured that having received one amorous glance
of favor from his Mistress eye, he should be able to dismount and captivate
Montulus, and so regaine all honor unto himself.

But as he was ha^mering, and contemplating of this matter, his friend Sand.
perceiving no Knight prepared for the next encounter, doing reverence unto the
Ladies speeded toward Montulus, and encountered with him so furiously, that he
broke his Lance upon the Helmet of Montulus in such outrageous sort, that fire
flew forth of his Beaver, at which Montulus being much amazed, supposed that
Jove had sent a Thunderbolt upon his Crest, that did so startle him. But
meeting both again, Montulus being in the height of his fury, and holding
himself perpetually dishonored, gave Sandrico such a recombendibus upon his
breast, that beat him of one side of his horse, but he speedily recovered
himself, ALEXTO meeting of him embraced him in his arms vowed to be revenged.

But by this time Montulus had recovered himself, and was fitted for the next
encounter, the which was entertained by Alexto, who doing reverence unto the
Ladies, making his pampered Courser fly, as if he scorned to be controlled, and
meeting with Montulus in a full Careere bore him unto the earth with his Saddle
betwixt his legs, causing his horse to tumble on the other side, but Montulus
broke his Lance upon the breast of Alexto who passed on his course still so
upright, as if that none had encountered with him, the which caused such a
general applause, as if he had bin some demi god.

But because Alexto should not vant long of his prosperous success, some of
these ^ts. which were there present, and much enenraged at his actions set
forth together against Alexto being 8 in number, all which he received very
nobly, but to their small comforts* for the first two he run through with his
lance, tumbling them from their horses to measure their length on the ground,
the third being with him ere he could unsheath his furious Sword, he lifted up
his Martial fist, and stroke such a ponderous blow upon his Crest, that he
laid him breathless upon the earth, making his brains fly about his horse
heels.

Then drawing his bloody weapon, with which ere any rescue was made, he had
bereaved three of the other five of life, and left the other two sore wounded
the which spectacle caused no little admiration to ye beholders.

But the Ladies being sore affrighted, forsook their seats, and Angelica being
accompanied with her train entered the lists as Juno among the Gods, to nip this
early quarrel in the bud, as also fearing further outrage. But Alexto no
sooner perceiving her but leapt from his horse, and falling on his knees
presenting unto her acceptance his weapon, and uttered these speeches.

Judicious Lady, I have here committed a heinous fact, unbeseeming your
presence, and indeed beyond the limits of expression, that speedily requires a
just punishment, except your partial censure quit my imbecility in the
perpetrating thereof, for like a malefactor, I expect a co^miserating Sentence
from your blessed lips.

Angelica seemed to sympathize this his passion, and to participate of his
grief, and taking him by the hand raised him from the ground, and refusing his
Sword, said unto him, most valiant Knight, your actions merit fame, deserving
to be recorded in Hectors Register for a perpetual memory, which may survive
after Ages: I grieve to behold the outrage and uncivil affront that you have
sustained in my presence, but every of them have sustained their just deserts
from your Martial hands for their presumptuous fact, with these and such like
words she freed Alexto, requesting that the Corpse of the deceased Knights
should be honorably interred, but especially Hesetus to be entombed in her
own Chapel with a sumptuous monument over him, the charge of which being
committed to certain nobles there extant, she with ALEXTO and the rest
departed into the Palace where she entertained them very royally with Music
and pastimes for the space of three or four days. But ALEXTO was not content
therewith, but still did watch opportunity for a private discourse, but still
his intent was frustrate, the Lady Angelica, on the other side was as much
perplexed for the same opportunity.

But still Alexto's heart did consume, yet was he fixed and constant in the
determination, which is the Nepenthe which who so drinks of, forgets all
care and grief, for Agrippa reports that nothing in ye world sooner remedieth
sorrows then constancy. Thus ALEXTO continues though much perplexed, who was
counseled by Sandrico to write a Letter unto Angelica, he promising to be the
bearer thereof himself, to which Alexto condiscended: for Sandrico thus
animated ALEXTO; Thou know, said he, that Ladies delight in praising
fictions, as hearing their beauties extold though undeserved; and again
Poetry, is a second nature to make things seem more exquisite then they were
first framed by nature; for as the Seal leaves the impression of his form in
wax; so the learned Poet^ engraveth his passion so lively in women's hearts,
that the hearer also is almost transformed into the Author. But should I
practice in poesy unto her, quoth ALEXTO, I dread of an ill success.

Tush, said Sandrico, faint-hearted Lawyers are not admitted to put in plea at
the bar of Love. A cowardly lover without hope shall never gain fair love
with good fortune, besides sadness is the punishment of the heart, but hope
the Medicine of distress; for, it is a pleasant passion of the mind which does
not only promise us those things which we most desire, but those things also
which we utterly despair of.

But for all Poetry, quoth ALEXTO, give me Oratory, for it is the spur to
Arms: for the eloquent Oration of Isocrates was the first Trumpet that gave
Philip an Alarm to the Asian wars, which Alexander his Son without
intermission ended.

But I must confess unprofitable eloquence is like Cypres-trees which are
comely in altitude but bare no fruit, and babbling Orators are the thieves of
time compared to empty vessels, which give a greater sound then those which are
full, but a dry thirsty ear must be therewith watered. Eloquence grounded upon
reason is able to content and satisfy the hearing.

In this discourse we will leave them and return to speak somewhat of the
Lady Angelica, who though she was so superbious, ye like a Faulcon she could
stoop to a goodly Lure, for she much admired their prolixity from her, which
drew her to contemplate with her self what Jesture she might have to surprise
ALEXTO, who was her vowed vassaile, though vnbeknowne unto her. But at last she
calling unto mind his speech unto her at his first approach, which did somewhat
mitigate her passion, Imagining thereby that he was enamoured of her, and also
hoping that he would make the first assault, of which she was desirous, though
modesty was her hinderance. Jn these contemplations we leave her and return to
Alexto, who had pend poetical Verses for his Lady and Mistress delivering
them unto Sandrico for to present unto her, and these are they Worthiest of all
could I thee equilize,
To any she that might thee paralize
In rusticke sort then should my rural quill
Herald thy fame, resounding forth it still.
Yet fairest Dame I deem you will not disdain
To (...) these rough hewne lines whose meaning's plain.
Then by your favor Lady, I presume;
To cast my self beneath your Sacred plume.
I homage must if you a Goddess were
But now a frown from your blessed brow I fear,
To figure you like Venus it were unfit,
She was disloyal, beauty blasted it;
Or say, that you resemble Helen's face
Compared with which 'twould but impart disgrace,
For Troy does know her qualities so well,
That penn's cannot write, nor tongues have power to tell:
Yet thus, I Will say, Arabian Odours sweet,
Distill from your fair cheeks, dear love to Greet;
Lady know this, by knowing which know all,
Your Servant proves obedient to your call.


Now after Sandrico had perused the^, he very well esteemed thereof, promising
to deliver them, which he performed some two days after, finding a fit
opportunity both for time and place at the receipt whereof, the Lady knowing
from whence they came conceived an inward and unspeakable Joy but dreading to
be perceived by Sandrico shrouded this ecstasy beneath the veil of discontent
framing her gesture correspondent unto the stern aspect of her visage, made
this answer.

Dares he presume a Goddess to behold,
Or spot that breast, that is beautifide with Gold?
Dares he the Gods in battle to provoke*
Or from dark Hell, the furies to Invoke?
But what dares he, or dares not for to do
That thus does dare send lines unto our view.
She willing to proceed but fearing that her sharp answer would utterly
repulse his forwardness, and yet loath to seem Captivated at first; thus went
on.

Sir, I know not how to accept these lines, because I deem them to proceed
from presumption and arrogance; and because I favored his person in the lists,
he imagins me enamoured of him, but his hopes fool him, if so he deemes; or
have I shown him some other extraordinary favors that he should thus abuse my
virtues meaning? But I perceive he reaches me to be cautions, and circumspect
in all my actions, confining my looks upon imoveable objects, lest others with
himself misdeeme them.

Sandrico perceiving her still to proceed, emboldened himself to interrupt her
thus.

Thrice illustrious Lady, his perpetual service is offered to your Divine
person; for at your feet he casts the hope of his worlds happiness, uniting
the remainder of his life therewith: for he, and that little, all nature
endowed him with, lies sole at your disposing.

Then seeing you are the first Star that ever seduc't him to study Astronomy,
let him not perish by the reflection of your ingratitude, seeing he is loyally
affected toward you.

The Lady Angelica fearing to be entrapped, requested his unwelcome absence,
adding that by his lines she perceived no forcing effects; besides, that she
had vowed Chastity, and that a Monarch should not cause her infringe her former
passed vows to Vasta. But turning aside, she said, she must give her conscious
tongue yt lie; for though a Monarch should not, yet Alexto could.

So pulling a Jem from her Ivery neck, freely presented it to Sandrico
requesting him to pacify his friend, and so away she past and Sandrico
returned unto his friend Alexto. But Angelica seeing she had Alexto at a bay,
vowed to keep him off to try his constancy and a while to triumph over him
while he was in Captivity.

But by this time Sandrico had met with ALEXTO and relating unto him what
answer he received from the beauteous Lady, which caused ALEXTO to fall into a
second desperation. But Sandrico showing him her favor recomforted him to send
a second Epistle.

My ALEXTO, said, he it is natural for women a while to despise that which is
offered, but death to them if they be denied of their demands. And he that
looks to have the purest Crystal water must dig deep; and he that
delights in sweet Music, and Madrigals must strain Art unto the highest:
So he that seeks to win his Love, must not spare labor nor fear hazarding
his life; for Birds are trained with sweet Calls, but caught with long nets, so
lovers are ensnared with fair looks, but entangled with disdainful eyes.
Then let me be the bearer of another Epistle, for he that gathers Roses must
be content to prick his fingers, and he that would conquer a woman's affection,
must not be repulst by sharp words, and the wisest sort of them are commonly
tickled with self love.

Come then, lay hold of my advise, for it is better to prefer the steadfast
counsel of advised policy, then the rash enterprise of malapert boldness; for
as a Cameleon has all Colors save white; so a flatterer has all points save
honesty. I wish thee to proceed as if the subject was my own.

I never found thee otherwise, answered Alexto, but it is an easy thing for a
man being in health, to give good counsel to another that is Sick, but with
such facility the Sick man cannot follow it; but I Will write once more ere other
exploits I Will try.

The Letter.
ILlustrious Mistress, I never desired to be so good a Scholar as to learn
to love in Cupids School, whereby I should attain the courting of beauty with
flattering phrases or hypocritical Complements, whose oiled tongued Metaphors
so lavish in themselves, do warble. But could the dumb speech of silence
reveal the nature of my apparent passion, or were it engraven in Capital
Letters in my front, whereby the vulgar view of jealous eyes might peruse the
secrets of my Love, then were this inscription needless, but since not* then
equal your inward perfection with your outward excellence, for your apparent
beauty has robbed me of my heart, and either I must accuse you of the theft, or
be accessory to my utter ruin, and for your sake Cupid has taught me what
restless passions are in Love, but fearing my laborious pen, should prove too
sad an Orator. I restless rest, until I fully rest.

Yours, or not his own ALEXTO.


This he having Sealed, enclosed a rich Jewel therein, gave it to* Sandrico to
present unto the Lady, the which he most willingly embraced and at a convenient
time delivered it her, from whose hands she joyfully kissed the contents ere she
had perused the inscription, and well noting each particular, with a modest
blush returned this answer, presenting Sandrico an unestimable pearl wherein
was carved her portraiture; deliver this unto thy friend whereby ingratitude
may not be objected against me; I had rather have a personal appearance then
this dumb apparition.

Sandrico understanding her meaning prolo^ged not time, but with much celerity
posted unto ALEXTO, who expected the sentence of discontent, but perceiving his
friend with such a smiling countenance as the affectionated sire on his
studious child; demanded what news.

Sandrico answered, he had brought him the loadstone of perfection, and so
delivered to him the J em, telling him, that he should not omit that occasion,
but diligently prosecute that proffered opportunity, which was thrown him from
the Lap of fortune, which certifying him also where he should find the Lady in
her Bower.

ALEXTO not having liberty to gratify Sandrico's diligence, departed with much
expedition unto the private walks where he found the Lady alone, melodiously
playing upon a Lute, warbling there unto an amorous Ode, but she no sooner
perceiving him come, but laid aside her Instrument, and discending from her
Bower took him by the hand, being hardly able to dissemble her passion without
appearance thereof, for it is their imbecility not to retain their affection
long without demonstration unto the affectionated, but she thus begun to excuse
her self.

Worthy Knight, I little supposed that your ears should have been auditors of
my uncivil Ode, but let us mount up yonder ^owen and contemplate a while for I
received two Epistles from you, the which being examined; I conceive thereby
that an amorous passion has possessed you, the mitigation of which you affirmed
to be resident within the Center of my bre^^, but I know not how to impose the
assurance of my affection on any Knight, because Lovers oaths are like fetters
made of Glass that glister fair, but couple no constraint; besides love
makes a man that is naturally addicted unto vice to be endued unto virtue,
forcing himself to be applied unto all laudable exercises, that thereby he may
obtain his loves favor; as also coveting to be skillful in elocution that
thereby he may allure her, and to excel in Music that by his melody he may
entice her, to frame his speech in a perfect phraise* that by his learning he
may persuade her. So that which is defective in nature* nurture perfecteth and
the only original of this virtuous inclination; is Love.

Beauteous Lady, answered Alexto, a roling-stone contains no moss, and a
fickle headed lover wa^ts no cause of mourning. There are wanton lovers, Lady,
I must confess, whose lascivious eyes are like the darts of Cephalus that
where it hits, there it deeply wounds; But my meaning is loyal, affection
permanent and both prostrated unto your Divine acceptance. But noble Knight,
answered the Lady, young years make their account only, of the glittering
show of beauty, the mind of a young man is momentany, his affections sick, his
Love uncertain, and his fancy is fired with every new face, and as young
Willowes bend easily, so green wits are entangled by every new fangle.

But by your favor Madame, replied ALEXTO, Cupid allows none in his Court,
but young that can serve fresh, and wise that can talk, faithful to gratify,
and valiant to revenge their Mistresses proffered injuries. And as they that
cannot suffer the light of a Candle, can much worse abide the brightness of
the Sun: So they that are troubled and damnified by each small trifle would be
much amazed to bear the weighty matters which are contained in Love.

For the passionate, Lover if he sail love, is his pilot, if he walk, love
is his companion, if he sleep, love his pillow: pure love never saw the face
of fear, pure loves eyes pierce the darkest Corners, and pure love attaineth
the greatest dangers. Otherwise, fair Lady, had I not presumed in this abrupt
sort to present unto your soft attention the true copy of my perplexed heart,
for as Mountains that have too much hear of the Sun are burnt and Valleys
having scarcity thereof are barren, but such places as continue in a mean, are
most fruitful; Even so gracious Lady* pity your distressed servants, who has
no happiness, but in the beams of your favor.

Now the Lady Angelica waighing ALEXTO's grief: by the perplexity of her own
heart, embraced him in her Arms, uttering these words.

Where the knot is loose the string slippeth, and where the water is shallow
there no vessel will ride, then here dear Knight, take heart and hand with as
true a zeal and perfect love, as thy amorous heart can desire to be requited
with.

Now was Alexto satisfied being confirmed thereof by several imbracements, in
which they spent their time, using ye toying sport yt lovers commonly commit, but
time being at hand of that their present departure, whereby they requested each
other that that might be the place of their daily meetings, which was defined
to be morning and evening. And so she dep^rted into her chamber, and Alexto to
find forth Sandrico being big with Joy; until he had revealed his proceedings
unto his friend, who at the hearing thereof was on a sudden so surprised,
that he presently burst out as thus.

Now by the greatest of my name I am possessed with an ecstasy of joy to see
the pernament affections of the loyal Lady so well concur and Simpathize as
Rivals to thy best wishes, for now could I bless my self to think yt fancy
should be so extravagantly predomiminant over me as to lead me into a
labyrinth of fond Contemplations, that I should urge thy goodness to believe
their sex to be implacable, hard hearted Monster that I was; fair Angelica
thou sole possessor of Europes choicest rarities, I have uttered blasphemy
against thy goodness, and the member with which it was perpetrated may never
accent drop from thence; nay, may it cease to stir within his roof, unless
it be dipped in oil of war by loves right hand, whereby with polisht phraise as
it were from some Mercuriall wit, and by your goodness lycenc't then let it
warble, and with Philomelian notes drown the groves sweet harmony, may it
pierce the skies and make the Gods attentive, nay force their Echoes to
the applause of Feminine loyalty, that the Lower world may stand affrighted to
the rapture, and if J cannot attain unto this ample manner of blazing virtue,
heavenly Angelica Metamorphose me to less then nothing, and may your more then
Saint-like sex conspire to afflict me as you please. Then replied Alexto,
where is wit and policy, where are ye documents you would indoctrinate me with?
I cannot choose but smile to think that my Tutor is captivated.

Not captivated, nor in Love, said Sandrico, but my rash abuses unto the sex
so undeservedly committed, for which I Will conjure up my wits, and raise my
Genius within the circle of this Globall head of mine, to limb Angelica with
poesy as thus.

To his Genius.
MOunt up my Genius, aptly seek to raise
A Roman Dame unto a Goddess praise.
Limb forth her feature, and display her race,
Figure her amply in her active grace.
Call not to aid the Dryades or Satyrs,
High topt Nymphs, or Joves Time measuring Daughters:
These are too common, and so hacknes'd they
To Poets, abortive brats, therefore not may
Be here Corrivall in this Scene of thine,
Which must be guided by a hand divine,
Invoke the Gods, and call the Heavens for aid,
Vesta shall homage, Diana be dismaide,
When imitable Art shall here make known
This Magazen, whose merits enrich her own,
Flame blazon, and reciprocally touch
Each lineament of nature, and think much
Heavens should not echo unto each shrill voice,
That heralds virtue, and makes her thy choice.
Now by my honor, said Alexto, thou have invoked thy Genius in more then
common Phraise.

Tush, replied Sandrico, this is but a flourish, commanding my Genius servile to
my will, while thus I herald forth her fame.

Vncloud the Ebon arches of thy brows
Wherein two Suns are throned, which Heaven allows:
The curious Spinstry of thy tresses dangle
With radiant Pride, thy Lovers to entangle,
And from the superficies of thy face
There flow Arabian Odours which do grace,
The Gods which they embrace, as ch^ice perfumes
And silver pride, do fan it through their rooms:
Two rows of pointed pearl, thy teeth resemble,
From thy blessed Paps, the nutriment of Heaven.
Because such twins and pretty Hilloeks round
With Azure veins on Goddess are not found;
The straight proportion of thy slender waste
Invites the Gods to be by them embraced,
And thy fair hands might I presume to kiss
No more I Would ask, it is too too heavenly a bliss,
'Cause my over greedy lip I fear would leave
Some deep impression, or it self bereave.
Of happiness: I dare no further run,
My unexperienc't Muse commands me shun.
To flatter any but keep time, and place
For she is timorous I should disgrace
Her modesty: if from the wast I fall,
To treat of lower parts I hear her call,
Plead then Angelica thou art the cause
Makes me thus rude, and to forget her laws.
On my life, thy pardon is gained, said Alexto, and thy Genius has nobly
seconded thy will. Whilst they were thus discoursing, and walking toward the
Palace, Alexto perceiving Angelica coming from the walks, cried out to
Sandrico, o unexpected happiness! From yonder heavenly Bower my comet shootes
toward me, it is my Angelica, let us haste with active willingness to prevent
her nimble steps, lest the earth grows too superbious and plains her furrowed
front by her Saint-like footing on it, propitious morn betide my heavenly
Love, their glorious Canopies protect thee still.

I congratulate thy Love, answered Angelica, and no less do my best wishes
return to thee, and thy noble associate, and with my lips I seal my vow on
thine, but prithee tell me, what giddy humor drew you here so soon, J would
have stolen on you as unawares to both, but your too curious eyes prevented my
intent; I kiss thy bounty, love, and may it ever flow with such sweet
goodness toward me, said ALEXTO, then said Sandrico it was this pleasant
morn, but more especially to gaze upon your place of residence, Alexto being
desirous to participate of your Odorous breath, lest the Gods should surfeit by
the gentle winds dispersing of it, and so bereave him of his happiness,
ANGELICA vowed that some poetical fury had possessed Sandricoes breast, which
ALEXTO verified, desiring her to witness how well his morning Muse had
clothed her excellency, so soon as Angelica had perused the precedent lines
of Sandricos, she merrily answered, that if she were not linked in affection to
ALEXTO, she could become amorous of him, but Love, said she, opportunity will
not smile upon us with convenience of longer time, lest my present miss should
prove the unhappy hinderance of our quotidiall meetings, but here before thy
friend, I vow my self as real thine as thy chaste thoughts could wish me, and
ere one mouths Sun should through the Zodiac run Hymen shall celebrate
what our plighted faiths engage us to, Me et te Sola mors separabit. With that
ALEXTO embracing her in his arms, thus answered. Hic est verus amor; qui nos
conjungit in unum, Et ligat aeterna mutua corda fide; and as our laws require,
for the ampler gordianizing of the vow, give me an amblet of thy hair, to tie,
a true Loves knot, ANGELICA answered, he that was owner of her and hers should
not be denied in his request: and so soon as she had presented him a trace of
her hair, she proffered to depart; but ALEXTO requested her longer stay until
he had gratified her bounty.

So tying her hair between them in a true Lovers knot, she put it on his
wrist, and Alexto sung unto her as follows.

Though that my wrist does wear
An amblet of thy hair;
Yet my heart does bear
Such Correspondency,
That of force,
No remorce,
But thou still must lie
Incloseted by me,
Thy portraiture must be
The hourly bliss I see,
So amply is it placed,
That my eye,
May descry,
By what my heart is graced.
A Salamanders urne,
Within whose flames I burn,
The ashes I return
To thee a Sacrifice:
'Cause my heart,
Thy nobler part
Much highly does it praise.
Here may you see the breast
Of him that cannot rest
That is with Love possessed
By sighs anatomized
yet must be
subject to thee
Thou have him so surprised.
Commiserate my zeal,
In which I do reveal,
(Ere it further steal)
A Love Recipocrall,
Which I owe
and bestow
At thy Command and call.
Be not Marble-hearted,
Ere I am departed
Let my boon be granted:
Repentance comes too late
at the Door
I implore
Since it is the will of fate.
If all this cannot move
Thee to grant him Love,
When as he does remove
Thy tears cannot prevail,
In thy prime
Use thy time
And fond passion quail.
Were thy Love a fleeter
And a common greeter
Of affections meeter,
Then thou might disdain.
Since not so,
as you know,
Ease his tortured pain.
Inconstancy to thee
As chief of his degree
He Is vowed for to be
Be not implacable
for of none
but thee one
Is he now pregnable.
If badnesse by his visit
He did ere solicit,
May he always miss it;
His chaster thoughts does scorn
To undo
Him, or you,
So in Hell's flames to burn.
For all that he requires,
And by his hopes desires,
For to allay his fires
Is a chaste embracing:
For you know,
You do owe,
Affections interlacing.
Yet had Hymen but once done,
Those rites we will not shun,
Till then I mourn, I burn,
And am afflicted still,
But o no,
It Is not so.
Cause I shall have my will.
Peace War, where ere I be,
The last I am sure to see:
Because I war in peace for thee,
Then Prayers still be made
For us both,
That were loath,
Virtue to have betrayed.
When Death shall close mine eye,
Thy bracelet then shall lie
As deep enclosed as I,
Let Writers vent their wit
For thy sake,
Which I take,
Death parts not me and it.
After Alexto had thus ended, it pleased Angelica's fancy very much, she making
a reiteration of all her precedent protestation: unto him, vowing what ere she
perpetrated; sprung from that which was enacted in her breast, so with much
amorous daliance as befits Lovers to disport time with, they with a very
willing unwillingnesse, for that time parted, where we will leave her entering
of her Palace, and ALEXTO and SANDRICO to their accustomed Chamber.

You have heard of this their several meetings, and how lovingly they accorded
together, but fortune proved her self envious, as to mix his present joys
with perpetual sorrows, for ere the time was totally expired, the Duke of
Aragon arrived at the Palace, who was very nobly entertained by the Lady and
her attendants, but to cut off prolixity, he became her Suitor, and so
fervently, that nothing could repulse his forwardness.

The Lady being mightily perplexed thereat, knew not how to demean her self,
for feign she would, yet loath she was to condescend, because her vows were
passed to Alexto, and the Worm of Conscience turning round, did solicit her
^ares with the sting of Memento, thus betwixt fear and hope or rather falsehood
and dissembling, she remained the most part of a day, but at last considering
with her self, ALEXTO was but a Lord, the other a Duke, who was esteemed a
potent Monarch, she concluded utterly to renounce ALEXTO, and to entertain the
Duke into her favor, and studied with her self how to accomplish it, without
the impeachment of her honor: at last she resolved not to make a perfect
semblance of rejecting him at first, but by degrees requiting his amorous
glances with coy and disdainful frowns, and to repute his modest embraces
lascivious claspes.

With this resolution she went to meet the affectionate ALEXTO, who expected
her presence in the Garden, musing at her long delay, but when he perceived
her coming, he arose from the bank to meet her proferring imbracement, she
refusing it, answered that, that was Childish play, and fitter for Rurals, then
these of their degrees, at which ALEXTO much marvelled, little conceiving her
drift and policy therein, yet had he no great cause to admire, because Plato
reports that the ferventest mind may be changed between Evening and Morning:
besides how could truth be expected to lie in falsehood?

But ALEXTO rowsing his decaying spirits, thus answered. Lady is your Love like
your beauty, both fading like a Rose in June? You said a sliding knot was soon
loose, and that Lovers vows couple no constraint, but like fetters made of
glass, that glister much but speedily break; your gestures make your words
apparent, yet in your vowing you gave me heart and hand. I mean no other-wise
(quoth she) unto you, if ever I marry your self shall be him that shall Crown
my brows with a laurel wreath, why said Alexto, the time of our marriage is
limited, and is almost expired.

With this discourse they spent their time* Alexto urging her still to remember
her promise, in so much that Angelica flung forth of the Arbor very much
discontented, Alexto after her requesting her stay and further conference, she
neither returned, answered nor looked, but shrowding subtilty beneath the Mask
of anger, went her way, leaving Alexto solitary to himself, who stayed not
long but went to Sandrico, who was the mitigator of his distress: and no
sooner did he meet with him, but he thus began.

To a man in misery, life seems too long, but to a worldly minded man living
in pleasure life seems too short.

Pliny reports, a detestable life removes all merit of honorable burial,
for it is a Pilgrimage, a shadow of joy, a glass of inflrmity, and the perfect
pathway to Death: for Philip King Alexanders Father falling upon the Sands,
and seeing there the mark and print of his Body, said, how little a plot of
Ground is Nature content with! And the life of man fades like a shadow, yet
do we covet the whole World.

Sandrico all this while remained astonished, little deeming his Lady was the
original of this his distemprature, but thus interrupted him?

What unexpected stratagem has thus perplexed thy mind, condenc't your
understanding exiled your judgment, betrayed your spirits to disquiet
passions, and leading your self captive to fond contemplation! O my Sandrico,
answered Alexto, the pinace of my affection is like to sustain Ship wrack on
the waves of her inconstancy: she begins to disdain me, whom formerly she
loved, the World seduceth the eye with variety of objects, the Sent with sweet
confections, the taste with all delicious dainties, the touch with soft flesh,
the body with precious clothings, and all is but the inventions of vanity.

Tush, said Sandrico, admit she does forsake thee, as it is impossible, never
grieve therefore, for that grief is best digested, that brings not open shame,
but now you have no such cause of mourning, then cease these brinish tears.

It Is true, said Alexto, Homer so spoke, but what answered Seneca, we shall
sooner want tears, then cause of mourning in this life, and GREGORY said
tears crave compassion, and submission deserves forgiveness: but I answer
thee as Solon, who, burying his Son, wept bitterly, being requested to the
contrary, cause his tears were in vain, for that cause I weep the more
(quoth he) because I cannot prevail by weeping. Come, come, said Sandrico, to
weep for toyish love thou do impare thy worth; cease then this, which is the
very common Emblem of dissimulation.

For its common in the eye of a strumpet and like heat-drops in a bright
Sunshine, and as much to be pitied as the weeping of a Crocodile, and
peradventure thy Mrs. dropped angry words to try thy constancy, and might act
this with the counterfeite Tragedians of Smyrna, who lifting up their bloody
hands to the skies, and their eyes steadfastly fixed on the earth, cries Coelum,
meaning the Heavens; Come, come, thy Lady is Loyally affectionated toward thee
to my knowledge; then answered ALEXTO, she did disdain me that I should touch
her lips and at her departure she gave me not a word, but went away in silence,
I like not this Muta Eloquentia. SANDRICO then mistrusted the worst; but to
hearten on his friend; thus replied, perhaps more eyes were present then your
own, and that she might fear, or she gave you some private sign by which you
might understand her meaning, and peradventure you did not conceive thereof;
for Caesar writ unto his Captains per notas by marks and notes, lest his
letters should be understood by his soldiers, and Tarquin the proud was sent
unto by his son Sextus, to know what he should do by the Gabians, he brought
the messenger into a Garden and with his staff, Altissima papaperum capita
decussit, the messenger wondered at the strategem, but Sextus understood his
Fathers mind. So he might give some private note and pass away silent.

Then answered ALEXTO, I like not such notes to write as Demetrius did on Sand,
or as Pythagoras did on glass, nor as Damaratus on wood; therefore what will thou advise me to do, to answer her dumb jesture? Sandrico requested him to
write some amorous lines unto her in courting sort, and he would present them.
ALEXTO condiscended thereunto and writ as ensuing: Thy Coral lips and Rosy
Cheeks, my dear,
They were the flame that fired me so near;
In troth they were, nay more, they are indeed
The glowing Coals that first this fire did breed.
Thy eyes also does wound me in such sort
I feign them not, my sighs may well report
Worthyest of all, that seem so lovely fair,
Reject me not, nor cause me to despair.
You are the only motive of my pain,
Then let me not of cruelty complain;
But give relief, for little do thou know
How much for thee, I fettered am in woe:
Pen's cannot write, nor rightly tongues declare
That fervent Love, which to thy self I bare.
Whereof, alas! my young spirit quaft so deep,
That drunk with Love my reason falls asleep;
For I whom Fortune now has blinded so
Did never till now the Art of wooing know:
Then pity me, for it lies in thy will
My loathed life either to save or kill;
Let this suffice, for all the world may see;
The fault's not mine 'cause thou have wounded me.


This being done, he delivered unto SANDRICO, who willingly embraced it
promising to present it, and while he is a seeking of the Lady, we meeting with
her first, will treat with her a while, who remains not much discontented
though for a while she seemed so, for she was sorry that she had bin so rash
with ALEXTO, yet glad that she had so quickly repulst his forwardness, and in
stead of being in the arms of Alexto, she was embraced by the Duke of Aragon,
from whose lap she had no sooner arose but she met with Sandrico, who presented
her the Letter, the which she received, but not so friendly as she was wont,
and breaking it up perceiving it somewhat large, tore it in pieces saying; she
scorned to peruse such tedious Epistles, and in rage she flung away ere
Sandrico could answer her a word, who was amazed to see such a sudden
alteration, then assuring himself, she had forsook ALEXTO for ever, and very
sorrowful bearing the Doleful tidings in his front, returned unto him,
declaring what had happened.

At which ALEXTO fell into a grievous transe, but being somewhat recovered
bursts into this Lunatic speech.

Contorted locks of furies I could tear,
Kick Hercules from damned Acheron,
And make the triple-headed bandog roar,
Pluto confront within his letty throne,
And sink cursed Charon in his ferry boat,
Teach me Narcissus-like who in a brook,
To kiss himself, himself there has forsook.
Teach me with Dicas still in blood to weep*
And with Philistus waking always sleep:
Let me with Dropsy thirsting Astus drink,
The poisoned stuff that ran from Nero's sink,
Or quaffe that potion which Aga^ta made
When he supposed Alphonso was betraide:
If neither drink nor quaffe, then let me sup
My fatal draught from Alexanders Cup;
(...) with Philotus to a Dungeon hye,
Where I Will remain still in obscurity;
And with Bassacus never more behold
Sol's radient beams, transparent to the Gold
O! that I were a Basiliske, that I
Might venom her, or else unvenom'd dye:
Let me work spite on her, as Antoes did
Conjuring her still in her tortured Bed
Put m' on a Robe that may consume to bone,
This flesh of mine, in tomb me in that stone
Where Petius lies in the Elizian green,
Who died for Love, and lives there to be seen;
It is a woman that has wronged me this,
And cursed me now when I expect a bliss.
Then SANDRICO answered, fly not with APOLLO after DAPHNE; DIANA has more
Nymphs as fair, and yet not so coy, use Love, yet wrestle with Cupid and hold
him as a Boy, consider as she is fair, so she is cruel, and as she is well
featured so she is perjured, the curious Herbalists measure not their Plants by
their Colors but by their properties, the Lapidaries value their stones not by
their outward hew, but by their secret virtues; for a Diamond with a Cloud is
cast into the Goldsmiths dust, then let Lillyes wither on the stems, and wear
violets both in heart, and hand, the one is fair but unsavory; the other
black but sweet and virtuous, but have a care lest the impression engender
some exorbitant passion in thee. I could repeat many that have been perplexed
by the heroical passion of Love, but these one or two shall suffice to prevent
the enormities that may ensue, if you proceed in these frantic fits: for
there was one LOCUSTUS that had been served in the like manner, as the Lady
serves you, on which he grew frantic, and meeting a friend of his, requested
him to be his second: his friend condiscending. Locustus carried him to the
Church of St. Mark, at which time the Duke of Venice was resident, who as soon
as this Doterd saw him, he cried out to his companion, see there is he with
whom I have the quarrel, Let us set upon him, pointing to the Duke, and if he
had not been resisted by the Guard, he had committed the outrage; And the
distemperature of Ajax first sprung from Love, of whom we read in our Grecian
Fables; by this and the like discourse he had so well quailed Alexto's passion
that he fell into a fine slumber, but presently starts and being again awaked,
he begun to call to mind the fantasy that had possessed his brain in that his
slumber, and thus cried out, O SANDRICO, I have dreamed that ANGELICA is
married.

Tush, answered SANDRICO, that I cannot believe, and credit no dreams; for
they be fables, and commonly fall out by contraries, as they appear; for
HAMILCAR General for the Carthagenians, laying Siege at Ciracusa, an Image
came to him in his sleep, telling him, that he should the next night sup as
Conqueror in Siracusa, and sup there he did, but as a prisoner and Captive by
the Siracusians, and not as a Captain by his Carthagenians; the like did
JULIUS CAESAR, the night before he was slain, he dreamt that he was sitting by
Jupiters seat, but suddenly he fell flat with his face on the ground;
therefore we must not cocker our Genius and flatter our selves with what we
conceive in such illusions.

But, said ALEXTO, me thought there was great Triumphs at the solemnization
thereof, and that he and diverse other Nobles were presenting of a Masque and
dancing.

Be it so or not, how shall we come to speech with ANGELICA?

Why, said Sandrico, pen another Epistle, and I vow to thee she shall read it,
or I Will ingrave it on her breast, and at the back side of the walks thou shall
be placed, and while we are in parley, hasten to us whereby we shall decide
it, and not letting of it hang in suspense any longer. ALEXTO condiscended, and
went to study, whereat we leave him to speak with the Duke of Aragon, who was
with the Lady Angelica, and after diverse of his Courtings, she thus beg^n to
answer him; Renowned Duke, shame and infamy waits at the heels of unbridled
desire, for as lust, is an Enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a Canker to
the mind, a Corrasive to the Conscience, a weakner of the wit, a besotter of
the senses, and finally a mortal ba^e to all the body. So you shall find
pleasure in the pathway to perdition, and lusting Love, the Lodestone to
ruth, and ruin.

The Duke protested he meant verily to make her sole owner and governor to him
and his, if she would but requite him with her lasting affection: she promised
him, so he would utterly renounce all suspicion, and as having no cause given
by her so he would not lay hold on every frivolous occasion whereby Jealousy
might proceed; for I will relate a jealous humor, and the ill convenience
thereof, said she, and thus she begun.

A jealous man is suspicious ever more, judging the worst; for if his wife be
merry, he thinks her immodest; if sober, sullen; if pleasant, inconstant; if
she laugh, it is lewdly; if she look, it is lightly; So he is still casting
beyond the Moon, and watches as the crafty Cat over the silly Mouse; for if
the heart be once infected herewith, his sleeps are broken and dreams prove
unquiet, the whole night is consumed in slumber, thoughts and cares, the day in
woe, vexation, and misery: besides, my Lord, the jealous man living dies, and
dying prolongs out his life in passion worse then death, none looks on his
Love but (suspicious) says, this is he that would be Corrivall in my favors;
none knocks at the door, but starting up, he imagins them to be the
messengers, of fancy; none talks but they whisper of affection; if she frown
she hates him, and loves others; if she smile it is because she has had
success in her Love, looks she frowardly on any man, she dissembles, if she
favors him with a gracious eye; then, as a man possessed with a frenzy, he
cries out, that neither fire in straw, nor love in a woman's looks can be
concealed; Thus does he live restless, and makes love, that is sweet in it
self, more bitter then gall: consider this my Lord; for should you perpetrate
the like, it would make a woman wanton, if she were borne to Chastity.

But by this time ALEXTO had penned his Epistle, therefore we will leave her
subtilty proceeding in her Rhetoric, thereby yoking the Duke unto her
servitude, and return unto him, who was reading what he had writ unto
Sandrico; and this was it.

Shall I be stabbed with Ponyards of disdain,
Or languish still in my obscurest pain?
For in my heart thy worth is firmly fixed,
My groaning sighs with tears are intermixed;
As Spiders webs hold fast the silly Fly:
Entangled so, by thy fair self am I:
Why planted I Hearts-ease, and Rue must gather,
As I did sow, I should have reaped rather:
This is a Paradox beyond relief,
That I in anguish should prolong my grief.
After SANDRICO had perused these lines, without intermission he prosecuted
the delivery, knowing the Lady frequented the walks in the Cool of the day,
and thither being both come, though unseene, yet they saw the Lady ANGELICA
embraced by the Duke of Aragon, to whom she had newly contracted herself.

ALEXTO being conveniently placed, Sandrico undaunted proceeded toward her,
where she starting up from the Dukes lap demanded the Original of his abrupt
intrusion, SANDRICO said, Lady you must and shall peruse each syllable enclosed
here, delivering her the Letter, at which the Duke begun to storm, but she
having her tricks briefer then her Pater noster, soon pacified the Duke,
telling him, he was a gentleman Sewer to a kinsman of hers, from whom she did
not much desire to be solicited, so craving pardon, and his patience, descended
the Mount and read what was enclosed.

SANDRICO demanded her answer, why that I am otherwise provided, quoth she.
With that ALEXTO did approach, vowing not to be so satisfied, at whose coming
she did sustain an Agony which more tortured her, then if grimme death had
seized each part; then said ALEXTO, Lady will you falsify your vows, she
replied, that she never made any, and demanded his witness, I have none said
Alexto, but Sandrico and your own conscience; otherwise, wherefore did you use
me so respectively, retaining me into your favor, why, as my servant she
replied, for that was your first request at your entering of my Palace, and so I
have counted of you and ever will, if you be resident with me.

Lady answered SANDRICO, you are false and disloyal, you are like the Mandrake
apple, comely in show, but banefull in taste, and for your ingratitude, you are
worse then the Serpent, who has venom to annoy others, but not himself. And
then ALEXTO begun, Lady is this equity and justice? O no; For Justice consists
of Eight parts, Friendship, Concord, Godliness, Humanity, gratefulness,
faithfulness, and vertuousnesse, but you have neither; for it is the badge of
Virtue, the staff of peace, and the maintenance of Honor. O that I were but
some Sorcerer as Cyrce, who altered the shapes of Men and Women, to Bears,
Wolves, Lions, Asses, Apes and the like; whereby I might make some metamorphose
of thee, if your Sex were not worse then ours! Wherefore does Serpents
engender in your Reins, and Toades in dead men's skuls; and so fare you well,
said Angelica.

ALEXTO seeing himself utterly cast off, was desperate, but SANDRICO persuaded
him as follows:

He that bruiseth the Olive tree with hard Iron fetches out no oil but
water, and he that pricketh a proud heart with persuasions draws out nothing
but hate and envy; therefore let her go, as better lost then found; for
Aristotle reports, that a Virgins heart is like a Cotton tree, whose fruit is
so hard in the Bud, that it sounds like steel, and being ripe puts forth
nothing but Wool.

O, said ALEXTO, that I could with Aristotle throw my self into the Euripus,
saying. Quia te non capio tu me capies.

Be not wilful said Sandrico, to destroy thy self; for many happen to dye by
chance, whose causes are unknown and obscured; many by Infirmity, whose causes
are apparent, many by age, whose causes are present, but some dye neither by
chance, Infirmities nor Age, but dye for want of grace to live longer.

Shall I kill her then, said ALEXTO, O no, quoth SANDRICO: how frequent is it,
that such men have been frequented with horrible fantasies and imaginations,
which come into their heads both sleeping and waking.

So Thierie King of Italy being a Goth by Nation, after he had slain
Symmachus and Bo^tius his sons, as Procopius reports, it seemed to him that he
saw in the head of a Fish served on his Table the face of Symmachus in a
horrible shape and fashion, knitting of his brows Gogling of his Eyes, biting
his lip for very anger; the conceit thereof so perplexed the King, that he fell
sick and dyed; this is the usual course of murderers Then replied Alexto,
thou art a Plato unto me, and I like Dionisius abstain from much tyranny by
thy good counsel, then let her live like the Dame in the triumphs of Olympus,
for every Owl to spend a whoope at. And I Will be warned never to fall into such
folly again, and learn that lesson which Socrates taught his Scholars, which
was Reminiscere.

And nothing sinketh deeper nor cleaves faster in the mind of a man, then
those Counsels which he learned in his Childhood, which I will with Augustine
say, Antide me Semen Iuvenes, and well note what I have sustained by a
trothlesse woman. But had I took thy advice, Sandrico, this had not happened;
but as Cipresse trees, the more they be watered, the more they wither, and the
oftener they be lop't, the sooner they dye, so unbridled youth, the more it is
by grave advise counseled, the sooner it falls to confusion. But if youth
blush nor at beauty, and carry not Antidotes of wisdom against flattery,
folly will be the next Haven* he shall harbor in. Experience lets me know so
much; for as the strong bitterness of Aloe takes away the sweetness of Honey,
so evil works destroy and take away the praise of good deeds.

As Wine in Plato's opinion is the daughter of verity: so Love, in Iamlicus
censure, is the fruit of Idleness: For Sophocles being demanded what harm he
would wish to his Enemy; he answered, that he might love where he were not
fancied; I Will therefore discribe what Love is.

For Love's indeed a fury fetched from Hell,
Making thoughts Metaphors where it does dwell;
With Morpheus dreams such always are possessed,
Hunting with sighs to keep themselves at rest:
Love's a madness, a restless agony,
Which makes the Eyes two fountains never dry:
It is a harsh, and uncontrolled desire
Which makes men burn, and live in Cupid's fire,
Then why, say I to burn in Cupids fire,
When none that is wise need's care for Cupids ire?
He is a Child and fears Diana's rod,
At which he stands as Mars to Venus stood*
But Venus unto Love was never a nurse,
Alas, Love's kept by Fancy, which prov's worse,
Fancy breeds Love, Love then breeds doubts and fears,
Ingendring thus, till it is expressed with tears:
Doubts are as perilous as the quick Sand,
And fear makes Lovers in amazemet stand;
These are the Rocks where Loves Boat's cast away,
Making men live, to dye with their delay:
But what is fancy, when it is defined,
Why Love, and fancy, brings men to be shrin'd;
Her Chariot is of a Silke-wormes head,
The Silk-wormes silk within serves for her Bed:
The wheels whereon, this Chariot does run
Are of the motes discovered by the Sun:
Her Nimble whips the fore-rib of a Spider,
Two Gnats do draw and one is the out-rider:
This buzzing runs within a Lovers brain,
Making their vitals stupefied with pain.
Cleobulus meeting with his son Ireon solemnizing the Ceremony of marriage,
gave him in his hand a branch of Henbane, meaning thereby that the virtuous
disposition of a wife is never so perfect, but it is enterlaced with some
froward fancies, but I Will only define what ANGELICA is, my Sandrico, and so
leave her with frantic Love.

Catch me a Star that falls from the sky
Cause an Immortal Creature for to die,
Drive with a wand back Neptun's flowing Seas,
Sail through this Center to Antipodes;
Call time again, and hasten future things;
^ay nutriment the Eastern Bird us brings;
Say that Phoebus is fixed in his course,
And from the skies we have but small remorse;
Infuse long life into a breathless Creature.
Say that we are made but not by Nature*
The winged messenger stop his Careere,
And bring a Satire unto humane fear*
Say Acheron is light, and Hell's not hell,
But a vast Chaos for Salvages to dwell;
Say Jove never thundered Mars his sword never drew,
Venus no wanton, these are all as true,
As to find faith in fair ANGELICA's mind,
Apparent it is that such proves never kind;
But them I Will leave unto their own designs,
Desiring fates, to turn men's amorous minds.
No sooner had ALEXTO ended, but on a sudden he was all surprised; each Limb
was dis-joynted and sought to separate themselves as strangers to their
fellows; But Sandrico cheering him up, desired him to be frolike still, this
sudden Agony (said he) prognosticaters, be it bad or ill, welcome the will
of Fates, we are both armed to stand the hazard, and with each other
participate what fortune shall alot us: but whilst they were thus discoursing,
they perceiving ANGELICA's Squire coming from the Palace posted to meet them,
for so ANGELICA had cunningly contrived, the time being expired of her
appointed marriage to the Duke of Aragon, and to give a full period to ALEXTO's
further solicitation of her love, sent him a Letter to this effect.

Noble ALEXTO
WHat Antipathy Nature could produce, in an affectionate way was still thy
own, and not to make thee proud thine then, is mine now, I relent and crave
pardon for my arrogance, for Love has made a Changeling of me now, and lent
me wings to top the highest plume of amorous conceits thou soarest withal
within this hour, meet me at the Temple where Hymen shall marry us, forget,
forgive, and believe what thou see.

ANGELICA.


ALEXTO at the reading of the Letter was very much surprised with an ecstasy of
Joy, and presently sent his Picture unto ANGELICA, returning this answer; I
send my self, because my self will not be absent, and presently after
himself with his friend, went toward the Temple, and coming somewhat nigh
they beheld ANGELICA with all her train, and Hymen leading them toward the
Temple, but supposing them to be Goddesses; look, quoth SANDRICO, if my
thoughts prove not strangers to my wish, you Gods, are come on purpose with
Masks and revelling to celebrate thy nuptials.

I had thought, quoth ALEXTO; our marriage should have been privately
solemnized, but since it is their wills to have it publicly kept, I Will not
contradict it, but coming nearer into the Temple, they beheld ANGELICA coming
toward them Arm in Arm with the Duke of ARAGON as from the marriage; with
that, ALEXTO burst out into a great fury, cried out. Were my Eyes invited
witnesses to testify against themselves their Masters ruin? What shall I do,
SANDRICO? Shall I with a Poniard give a period to their days of Joy, and make
their grave serve for their wedding Bed? Restrain thy fury, aid SANDRICO, put
off this discontent and let a Masque of pleasure veyle thy face until they are
over past us.

But ANGELICA coming near them, gave them kind Salutation, and thus begun:
Lords you are both welcome to revell with us, J doubt not but you wish us Joy;
your goodness toward us was never less, but for you Alexto, I present this
favor, wear it for our sake; giving him back his own Picture with a wreath
of Willowes about his neck, and so ANGELICA past away toward her Palace,
leaving ALEXTO in his raging fit, but being somewhat comforted by the good
persuasions of Sandrico, ALEXTO was persuaded to go into the Temple desiring
Sandrico to accompany him, where he might devoutly offer at fair Venus Altar
the best of his devotions, and there exasperate his grief in hope her
Goodness would revenge his wrongs, the which being done, he desired SANDRICO
to accompany him to the Palace, and being resolved not to be any way
dismayed, but fortune frustrated their determination: for before they had gone
half the way, they met with an aged Palmer of whom they demanded what news at
the Palace, to whom he bitterly lamenting, informed them that the fair
ANGELICA who was made this morn a happy Bride, when in her Palace she was
throned, a buzzing horror did possess her ears, and nothing else was warbled
by her Tongue, but her ALEXTO, which she so often reiterated, that it caused a
present astonishment to the honorable assembly, and in this frantic fit away
she run, and the Duke after her, but getting up into the battlements of the
Palace, then casting her self from the walls, crying out, Into thy Arms, I
come ALEXTO, and so with the fall was battered all in pieces. Then with
protestation loud, the Duke vowed to be revenged on ALEXTO, and is at present
in pursuit of him, but no sooner had the PILGRIM ended his story, but the Duke
presented himself in person, and after diverse defiances between ALEXTO and
himself, they encountered each other, in which the Duke receiving his mortal
wound, speedily resigned his breath, at which ALEXTO crying out, the Gods were
just, and have at full revenged my injuries; and now, SANDRICO, let us have
away, there be certain Jews in the west part of India called Espi, who will
eat no Flesh, drink no Wine, nor use the company of any Woman, and thither
let us go.

SANDRICO condiscended and so they took their journey, in which we wish them
happiness.

FINIS.

